

?etH 'Pv > fw
A SPEECH
DELIVERED
IN THE PROVINCIAL COUNCIL OF AUCKLAND;
EXHIBITING
A PICTURE OF MISGOVERNMENT AND OPPRESSION IN THE
BRITISH COLONY OF NEW ZEALAND,
PRECEDED BY
A LETTER
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE,
HER MAJESTY’S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OP STATE FOR THE COLONIAL
DEPARTMENT,
JAMES BUSBY, ESQUIRE.
AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND,
1 8 5 3.


V
'
; ; '
• r . ...■•■• <v -
• •
.


To the Most Noble the Duke of Newcastle, Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary
op State for the Colonial Department.
Auckland, 30th November, 1850.
My Lord Duke,
I crave leave respectfully to bring under the -notice of your Grace, as Her
Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Colonial Department, the accompanying Speech,
which was addressed by me to the Legislative Council for the Province of Auckland, on a Motion
for a Committee to prepare a Petition to the Queen and both Houses of Parliament, for the
redress of the grievances therein referred to.
The Council, by a majority of 12 to 8, refused to entertain the question, as beyond their
province. Your Grace will find that those grievances, though local, involve the honour of Her
Majesty’s Government in England, and the national faith j and are, therefore, such as demand
the most serious consideration of Her Majesty’s confidential Advisers. Your Grace will find that
the speech referred to contains the following allegations;—
First.—That the Local Legislature of New Zealand, when it consisted exclusively of nominee
members, subjected a portion of Her Majesty’s subjects to disabilities, under which they are
still labouring, by the enactment of Ordinances which are repugnant to the fundamental
principles of the law of England, and which are consequently illegal, and, in the language of
the Charter and the Queen’s Instructions, "pretended ordinances,” and "absolutely null and
void.”
Secondly.-—That one of these Ordinances contains provisions which are an express violation of
the Treaty entered into by Her Majesty’s directions with the Aborigines of this Territory,
and duly ratified by Her Majesty.
Thirdly.—-That Sir George Grey, in a despatch addressed to one of your Grace’s predecessors in
office, did invent a false and calumnious statement, for the purpose, Ist, of slandering an aged
minister and missionary of the Gospel, to whom previous Governors had acknowledged the
weightiest obligations ) and, 2ndly, of screening himself from the very grave responsibility
of retaining, notwithstanding the remonstrances of the General Officer in Command, a de-
tachment of Her Majesty’s forces in a position which the General and Commanding Engineer
designated as " wholly defenceless and untenable"not defensible at present, and from
its position it is not possible to make it soand, moreover, so situated as to preclude
the possibility of the troops affording any assistance to that town (Kororareka) in the event
of an outbreak.”
Fourthly.—That Sir George Grey did violate the national faith towards a class of Her Majesty’s
subjects in defiance of the express injunctions of Her Majesty, conveyed to him by Lord
Stanley, and reiterated by Lord Grey, in the following words, and in other words of like
import, namely, "to whatever extent the faith of the Crown is pledged to the purchasers, it
must be maintained inviolate, be the consequent inconvenience what it may j” and also, that
this violation of the national faith was carried out with circumstances of such wanton cruelty
and injustice as to be absolutely incredible, were they not susceptible of proof by incontro-
vertible evidence.
These allegations, my Lord Duke, are proved by reference to Parliamentary Papers and other
authentic documents, to which it is in your Grace’s power to refer; and your Grace will see,
by the accompanying report of the debate, that after a fortnight’s adjournment for full considera-
tion of the subject, not one of these allegations was denied.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord Duke,
Your Grace’s most obedient and humble servant,
JAMES BUSBY,
Member of the Provincial Council of Auckland.
* See Despatches and Enclosures in Papers presented in July, 1849, page 72, et seq. See also series of
Despatches relative to Missionary Land Claims, in Papers relative to New Zealand, presented 1848,
page 106, et seq.; also, printed Letter to the Earl of Chichester, and "New-Zealander” newspaper of 30th
November, 1853, enclosed herewith.


o>


MR. BUSBY’S MOTION IN THE PROVINCIAL COUNCIL, NOVEMBER, 1853.
That a Select Committee be appointed to prepare a petition to Her Majesty the Queen and both Houses of Parliament, pray-
Ing that the Executive Government of New Zealand be directed to expunge from the Colonial Statue-book all such Ordinances
or pretended Ordinances of the Local Legislature as, being repugnant to the laws of England, have no legal force or validity j or
which contain provisions inconsistent with the faith of a treaty made in Her Majesty’s name with the aborigines of this territory
and ratified by Her Majesty. Also:—To vindicate the national faith by causing full compensation to be made to all persons who
under the authority of Governor Fitzßoy, became purchasers of land from aboriginal proprietors, but whose lands Governor Sir
George Grey, taking advantage of the defect of law, caused to be sold, in order that the proceeds thereof might be applied to
public purposes, in violation of the express injunctions of Her Majesty, conveyed both by Lord Stanley, and Lord Grey, when
Ministers of State, as well as of the plainest dictates of justice and good faith. And further,—That it be an instruction to such.
Committee to receive evidence of the individual cases in which the public faith has been violated towards the purchasers of land
under Governor Fitzßoy’s authority; as well as of all cases in which Sir George Grey or any other public functionary in New
Zealand has interfered with the rights of others of Her Majesty’s subjects with respect to their lauded property.


I
'
—-
♦


Mr. Speaker,—l am so conscious of my inability to this Council will not shrink from the responsibilities of
dojustice to the various and important questions which
this motion involves, that it well becomes me to bespeak
the utmost forbearance and the most patient attention of
honorable members of this Council.
It is incumbent on me to shew that there do exist in
the Colonial Statute Book Ordinances which are re-
pugnant to the laws of England, and inconsistent with
the national honour;—it is incumbent on me to lay
before the House evidence that certain of Her Majesty’s
subjects have suffered, and are suffering injustice at
the hands of the local Government; and that justice
requires that their complaints should be investigated,
and that restitution or compensation should be afforded
to them.
These, sir, are not party questions. They are not
abstract questions of policy, upon which honest men
may conscientiously differ. They are questions which
go to the foundation of our existence as a community.
The issue of this motion will determine whether the
Council which has for the first time assembled in this
colony, with an independent voice, is willing to
recover for the colonists their inheritance as British
subjects, or whether they are willing that the illegal
and unjust acts of ignorant or self-willed men should
continne to stand between them and their birthright.
If, sir, we believe that “righteousness exalteth a
nation,” —that no institutions can be permanent which
do not rest upon the foundations of justice and truth,—
it is for us to look to it that the foundations of our
future polity should be cleared from the rubbish which
insures the instability of whatever may be raised upon
them.
If others have enacted illegal and unjust ordinances,
and perverted the power with which they were entrusted
for the protection of the Queen’s subjects in this colony
to the oppression of those subjects, let not us become
partakers in their reproach by giving our adhesion to
those ordinances, or in their sin by giving our sanction
to those deeds of oppression.
Sir, it is only what might be expected if honorable
members should feel disinclined to enter into so wide a
question. It is a just as well as a generous feeling
that revolts against the imputation of unworthy con-
duct upon men of high station. But, I trust, sir, that
their station ; and that, such imputations having been
made, they will consider it necessary to sift them to the
bottom.
Sir, in the charters of the early American colonies,
as you are no doubt well aware, as well as in the acts
of Parliament and charters of later date, a restriction
has always been placed upon the legislative powers
granted by those charters to the colonies, “that their
laws should not be repugnant to the laws of England.’
In some charters it was also provided that before any
laws of the colonial legislature should be brought into
operation they should be certified by the Chief Justice
of the colony as not being repugnant to the laws of
England. It is much to be lamented that this provi-
sion was omitted from the New Zealand charters.
In the Act of 3rd and 4th Victoria, ch. 72, which
gave authority for the separation of the colony of New
Zealand from that of New South Wales, of which it
was formerly a dependency, it was provided (clause 3)
that no instructions shall be issued by Her
Majesty, with the advice of her Privy Council for
the guidance of the legislature of New Zea-
land, and that no laws or ordinances of that
Legislature shall be repugnant to the laws of England.
The charter founded upon that Act of Parliament con-
tains the same words; and the instructions to Cap-
tain Hobson, the first Lieut.-Governor founded upon
that Act of Parliament and that charter, state (clause
11) that “any such Ordinances, or pretended Ordi-
nances (that is such as may be repugnant to the laws of
England,) shall be absolutely null and void.
The same provision is made in the Act of 1846,
clause 5; but it is not to be found in the accompanying
charter or instructions. It is also in the Act of 15 and
16 Viet., under which this Council is constituted, the
charter and instructions, accompanying which have not,
as far as I am aware, been published.
It thus appears that the Parliament of England has
taken care to preserve to us the protection of English
laws ; and that in whatever instances these laws have
been violated, such violations have been the illegal
and unauthorised Acts of the functionaries appointed by
the Queen, whether in New Zealand or in England, to
administer the Government of this Colony.


Now, Sir, I shall ask the attention of the Council at thelaws of England but that they violate magna charts it-
this time only, to one Ordinance; roy object at present
being to show to the Council that there is sufficient
grounds for the appointment of a Select Committee.
Should the Committee be appointed, it will be their
duty to bring to tbe notice of the Council such other
ordinances as they may consider to be repugnant to the
laws of England, and consequently absolutely null and
void.
The Ordinance to which I shall then earnestly entreat
the attention of the Council is the first in order as it is
in importance. The land claims ordinance, No. 1,
passed the 9th June, 1841.
The title of the Bill imports that it is “ an ordinance
to repeal an Act of the Legislature of New South
Wales, to empower the Governor of New South Males
to appoint Commissioners with certain powers to ex-
amine and report on claims to grants of Land in New
Zealand; and to authorise the Governor of the colony
of New Zealand, to appoint Commissioners with certain
powers to examine and report on claims to grants of
land therein; and to declare all other titles except
those allowed by the Crown null and void.”
The title of Sir G. Gipps’ Bill, the original New
Zealand Land title Bill, was simply “ a Bill to empower
the Government of New South Wales to appoint Com-
missioners with certain powers, to examine and report
on claims to grants of land in New Zealand.”
An enactment for the purpose stated in this title was
a debt of justice due to the aboriginal inhabitants of
this colony. It was necessary to carry out Her Ma-
jesty’s instructions to Captain Hobson. Such a Bill
was a most desirable, perhaps indispensable preliminary
to the establishment of the rights of property under the
British Constitution, and the administration of the laws
which affect it.
Had the provisions of the Bill been confined to this
object, they would have been perfectly consistent with
Her Majesty’s instructions. They would have led to
tbe speedy and equitable settlement, and record of all
claims to land. They would have preserved the con-
fidence of Her Majesty’s subjects of both races, in the
justice and magnanimity of Her Majesty’s Government.
It will now, Sir, be my duty to prove to the Council
that tbe provisions of that Ordinance are not only re-
pugnant to the laws of England—
Mr. Gilfillan here asked whether the Ordi-
nance had been confirmed by the Queen.
The Hon. member asks if the Ordinance has been
confirmed by the Queen. Ik has been so con-
fiimed, but that is not enough. Though no lawyer, I
believe it is sound law, that an enactment of the Im-
perial Parliament can only be legally set aside by the
same power that enacted it; that is by an enactment
of the Imperial Parliament. 1 repeat, Sir, that the
provisions of that Ordinance are not only repugnant to
self, the very foundation of Constitutional law, that they
are, moreover, a violation of Her Majesty’s instructions
to the Governor; and that, worse then all, they are a
violation of the national faith and the Queen’s honor, as
pledged to the aboriginal inhabitants of this country,
in a solemn treaty, negotiated by Her Majesty’s autho-
rity, and duly ratified by Her Majesty.
Sir, I never had a doubt, and 1 speak after a resi-
dence of twenty years in this country,—l never bad a
doubt that the bad faith of the local Government, with
respect to these lands claims, and in refusing to pur-
chase their lands from the natives, after binding them
to sell only to the Queen, was the real and determinate
cause of the war which ruined the once flourishing set-
tlement of the Bay of Islands, and brought the very
name of the British Government into contempt with
the native inhabitants of that district.
I shall take the propositions I have stated in the order
in which I have proposed them. The 2nd clause of the
Ordinance referred to, enacts, or rather pretends to
enact, as follows
«And whereas it is expedient to remove certain
doubts which have arisen in respect of titles of land in
New Zealand; be it therefore declared, enacted, and
ordained, that all unappropriated lands within the said
colony of New Zealand, subject, however, to the right-
ful and necessary occupation and use thereof, by the
aboriginal inhabitants of the said colony are and remain
Crown or domain lands of Her Majesty, her heir and suc-
cessors, and that the sole and absolute right ot pre-
mption from the said aboriginal inhabitants, vests in, and
can only be exercised by her said Majesty, herheirg and
successors; and that all titles to land in tbe said
colony of New Zealand which are held, or
claimed by virtue of purchases, or pretended pur-
chases, gifts or pretended gifts 4 conveyances, or
pretended conveyances, leases, or pretended leases,
agreements, or other titles, either mediately or
immediately from the chiefs or other individual or
individuals of tbe aboriginal tribes inhabiting the said
colony, and which are not, or may not hereafter be al-
lowed by Her Majesty, her heirs and successors, are and
the same shall be null and void.
Now, Sir, as you are well aware, by the common law
of England, no man can be deprived of his land unless
by the judgment of his peers, that is, by tbe verdict of
a jury of bis country. I quote, from “ Blackstone’s
Commentaries,” chapter Ist, on the Rights of Persons,
page 183 of tbe edition of 1825,—“ Upon this principle
tbe great charter has declared that no freeman shall be
disseised or divested of his freehold, or of his liberties >
or free customs, but by the judgment of bis peers, or by
the law of tbe land. And by a variety of ancient statutes
it is enacted that no man’s lands or goods shall be seised
into the King’s hands against the great charter and that
no man shall be disinherited nor put out of his franchise
or freehold unless he be duly brought to answer and be
prejudged by course of law ; and if anything be done to
t he contrary, it shall be redressed and bolden for null.
So great, moreover, is the regard of the law for private
property that it will not authorise the least violation of
it, no, not even for tbe general good of the whole com-
munity. If a new road, for instance, were to be made
through the grounds of a private person, it might, per-
haps, be extensively beneficial to tbe public - r but the


law permits no man, or set of men, to do this without from the rightful owner by a grant from the Crown, in
consent of the owner of the land. In vain may it be violation of the express assurance of Her Majesty that
consent, of the owner of the land. In vain may it be
urged that the good of the individual ought to yield to
that of the community; for it would be dangerous to
allow any private man, or even any public tribunal to
he the judge of this common good, and to decide wbe.
tber it be expedient or no. Besides the public good is
in nothing more essentially interested than in the pro-
tection of every individual’s private rights as modelled
by the Municipal law.* In this, and similar cases, the
Legislature alone can, and, indeed, frequently does in.
terfere and compel the individual to acquiesce. But
bow does it interfere and compel ? Not by absolutely
stripping the subject of his property in an arbitrary
manner; but by giving him full indemnification and
equivalent for the injury thereby sustained. The pub-
lic is now considered as an individual treating with an
individual for an exchange. All that the legislature
does is to oblige the owner to alienate his possessions
for a reasonable price; and even this is an exertion of
power which the Legislature indulges with caution, and
which nothing but the Legislature can perform.”
Now, Sir, this is the law of England, and in this
pretended Ordinance the Legislature of this colony,
which is bound by the Act of Parliament which gave it
existence, to do nothing repugnant to the law of En°?
land, actually gives directions how the ownership of in-
dividuals to certain portions of land shall be ascertained.
And when sworn Commissioners have reported that the
land has no other owner, proceeds to do what ? Why,
to declare that it is not his unless the Queen shall con-
firm his title to it. And that it shall in no circum-
tances be bis if it has anv particular value to make its
worth while keeping it from him, clause is as follows.
“ Provided, nevertheless, and be it enacted and or-
dained that the said Commissioners shall not propose
to grant to any claimant whatsoever, any land which
may, in the opinion of the majority of the Commission-
ers appointed to investigate the demand of such claim-
ant be required for the site of any town or village, or
for the purposes of defence, or for any other purpose of
public utility. Nor shall they propose to grant to any
individual any land of a similar character which they
may be directed to reserve by the Governor of New Zea-
land, but that in every case in which land of such de-
scription would otherwise form a portion of the land
which the Commissioners would propose to grant to the
claimant, they shall, in lieu of such land, propose to
grant to him or her a compensation in such quantity of
other land as they, the said Commissioners, or a ma-
jority of them, shall deem an equivalent for every acre,
or part of an acre, so required to be reserved either for
the site of a village or township, or for the purpose of
public utility as aforesaid.”
Sir, It is known to many of this community that in one
or perhaps two instances the property of Her Majesty’s
subjects, which had been purchased in this country be-
fore Her Majesty had acquired either dominion or juris-
diction over it—land which sworn Commissioners ap-
pointed by Her Majesty in that behalf bad reported to
have been a fair and valid purchase from the native pro-
prietors —land to which no other person than the pur-
chaser pretended a claim, was actually put up to auc-
tion, and sold to the highest bidder, and conveyed away
• See Appendix.
it was not intended to dispossess the owners of any
land which was not upon such a scaie as to be prejudi-
cial to the latent interests of the community.
Now, all this is so monstrous that it is difficult, even
with the evidence before our eyes, to believe that such
things can be. It is not only so repugnant to the laws of
England, but so revolting to that natural instinct of j ustice
which God has implanted in the breasts of all his ra-
tional creatures, that the natives of this country who
had sold these lands, and had ceased to have any inte-
rest in them, rose against such an iniquity, and declared
that their pakehas should not be treated so, that they
who sold them the land would maintain them in posses-
sion of the land they had sold them.
This, Sir, was the instinct of self-preservation, as
well as of natural j ustice. They said, “ if the Queen treats
her own children so, what are we to expect?” and re-
belling against a dominion under which such enormities
could be permitted, they proceeded to cut down the
flagstaff as the symbol of that dominion. Heke’s war,
Sir, was, throughout, a war of principle. There is no-
thing more affecting than the conduct of the natives to
wards the settlers at Kororareka before they burned
down that town, to prevent its occupation by Her Ma-
jesty’s sea and land forces. In the face of these enemies
they actually assisted their old friends to carry away
tbeir property to the boats, that it might be placed in
security on board ship. The little war in New Zealand
will prove a humiliating episode in the history of the
British Empire. In no instance was it more clear than
in the conduct of that war that God chooses the foolish
things of this world to confound the wise,—the weak
things of this world to confound the mighty. But I will
not pursue this subject further than to add that the con-
duct of the native sellers of these lands was not less
remarkable for its straight-forwardness and good faith,
than was that of the local Government for the opposite
characteristics.
In the appendix to the Report to the House of Com-
mons of 29th July, 1844, page 334, is the following
letter; —
Auckland, 4th May, 1843.
Sm, —In reply to the Memorandum o f His Excellency
the officer administering the Government, addressed to
us this day, demanding,—
“If the conduct of natives in the investigation of
land claims has caused a great alienation of feeling be-
tween the parties, and a disposition, in some cases,
has been manifested to get returned to them land*
which they formerly sold,” «
We have the honour to report that we have now ex-
amined more than half of all the claims, yet have never
remarked such a consequence in any of our investiga*
tions.
In cases wherein the boundaries have been loosely
described in English, nay, frequently confessed to have
been inserted by the purchasers after the signature of
the deeds by the natives; then, indeed, the natives,
although admitting a sale of some portion, have boldly,
and in every instance with apparent truth, denied the
extent of the land alleged to have been alienated ; upou
these occasions they have declared that although they
do not, and never did, understand the boundaries then
read to them from the deeds, they can, however, and


willingly will, point out to the surveyors the tract they 1 from its commencement upon that system of sale, of
actually sold.
We have examined some natives more than ordinarily
dissipated by habits of intoxication, still, even these
never made any unjust attempt to repossess themselves
of their lands,--witness the examination of Pomare, upon
the sale of Russell, which took placeupwards ofayear af-
ter its purchase from Mr. Ciendonby the Government,
and was well known by Pomare to have then become of a
vastly increased value. We do, however, believe that
pretty generally the natives have required some present
to induce them to undergo our examinations, and that
in a very few instances where they had been seduced by
the temptations offered to them by Europeans to sell the
same land to two different parties, they would perhaps
give their evidence in favour of the greatest bribe al-
though offered to them by the later purchaser; but such
cases have been most rare, and only occurred when the
morality of the buyers appeared quite as questionable
as that of the sellers.
Except on such an occasion we can scarcely recall to
to mind a single investigation in which the testimony
given to us by the natives was not deserving of the
most entire credibility.
We have, &c.,
(Signed)
Edward L. Godfrey, 7 Commissioners.
M. Richmond, )
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary,
Ec., &c., &c.
And Mr. Hope, the Under Secretary of State for the
Colonies, in the great debate in the House of Commons
in 1845, says,—l quote from the corrected copy of
that debate, published by Murray, in 1845, page 62.
“It appeared by the papers before the House, that
from 750 to 1000 claims were made by such settlers,” —
that is, by those who bad settled in New Zealand be-
fore it became a British dependency,”) extending to many
thousand acres of land ; and it was a very remarkable
fact that out of that large number of claimants whose
cases were enquired into by a properly constituted tri-
bunal, the claims of only seven or eight were disputed.
I may add, Sir, that this is a fact perhaps unparalleled
in history, and that it ought for ever to have closed the
lips of those who bad slandered the purchasers of those
lands as persons who had taken advantage of their su-
perior knowledge to impose upon the ignorance and
simplici'y of the natives.
But, Sir, I know it will be said that a native title is
not a legal title until confirmed by Her Majesty. And
it will be necessary for me to pray the patience of the
Council while 1 go at some length into this question.
In the Parliamentary papers relative to New Zealand,
of Btb April, 1840. After stating that the title of the
Aborigines of New Zealand to the soil and to the so-
vereignty of New Zealand is indisputable, and has been
solemnly recognized by the British Government. The
Queen’s instructions to Captain Hobson, through the
Marquis of Normanby, amongst other passages, contain
the following :
“ It is not, however, to the mere recognition of the
Sovereign authority of the Queen thatyour endeavours
are to be confined or your negociations directed. It is
further necessary that the chiefs should be induced, if
possible to contract with you as representing Her Ma-
jesty that henceforward no lands shall be ceded either
gratuitously, or otherwise, except to the Crown of
Great Britain. Contemplating the future growth and
extension of a British Colony in New Zealand, it is an
object of the first importance that the alienation of the
unsettled lands within its limits, should be conducted
which experience has proved the wisdom, and the dis-
regard of which has been so fatal to the prosperity of
other British Settlements. With a view to those in-
terests, it is obviously the same thing whether large
tracts of land be acquired by the mere gift of the Go-
vernment, or by purchases effected on nominal consider-
ation from the aborigines. On either supposition the
land revenue must be wasted ; the introduction of emi-
grants delayed or prevented, and the country parcelled
out amongst large land holders, whose possessions must
long remain an unprofitable or rather pernicious waste.
Indeed in the comparison of the two methods of acquir-
ing land gratuitously, that of grants from the Crown,
mischievous as it is, would be the less inconvenient, as
such grants must be made with at least some kind of
system, with some degree of responsibility, subject to
some conditions, and recorded for general information.
But in the case of purchases from the natives, even those
securities against abuse must be omitted, and none could
be substituted for them. You will, therefore, imme-
diately on your arrival, announce by a proclamation,
addressed to all the Queen’s subjects in New Zealand,
that Her Majesty will not acknowledge as valid any ti-
tle to land which either has been, or shall hereafter be
acquired in that country which is not derived from, or
confirmed by a grant to be made in Her Majesty’s name,
and on Her Majesty’s behalf. You will, however, take
care to dispel any apprehension which may be created
in the minds of the settlers that it is intended to dis-
possess the owners of any property which has been ac-
quired on equitable conditions, and which is not upon
a scale which must be prejudicial to the latent interests
of the community.”
Now, Sir, no more full or explicit acknowledgment
on the part of Her Majesty of the property of Her Ma-
jesty’s subjects in lands purchased from the aboriginal
proprietors before the cession of the Sovereignty of the
country than this passage contains could be desired. It
is stated that it is necessary, if possible, that the chiefs
should be induced to contract that henceforward no
lands shall be ceded either gratuitously or otherwise,
except to the Crown of Great Britain. It necessarily
follows from this that till the chiefs did so contract they
were admitted to have the power of ceding or selling
their lands. The reasons why this contract should be
made are then stated and summed up by saying that
even if the crown, when in possession of the land,
should parcel it out amongst Her Majesty's subjects,
by what is called “ the pernicious system of free grants
—such grants must be made with at least some kind of
system, with some degree of responsibility, subject to
some conditions, and recorded for general information
But in the case of purchases from the natives even these
securities against abuse must be omitted, and none
could be substituted for them.” In other words, that
the Government had no right to interfere with the lands
of Her Majesty’s subjects so acquired.
But then Captain Hobson is instructed to issue a
proclamation that Her Majesty will not acknowledge as
valid any title to land which either has been or shall
hereafter be acquired in that country, which is not
either derived from, or confirmed by a grant from Her
Majesty. I perfectly concur in the spirit of this procla-
mation. The rights of justice and humanity required a
searching investigation before these titles should be ad-
mitted, and the object of this proclamation was to bring


about this investigation by a special tribunal which
should at once and for ever decide these questions
rather than leave them to the more cumbrous ma-
chinery of the courts of law. But the Queen is not
the judge of the title of Her Majesty subjects to land.
The constitutional law of England, as I have proved by
the authority of Blackstone, jealously provides against
Her interference with it; and Her instructions to
Captain Hobson nowhere deny the title of Her
Majesty’s subjects to the lands they have purchased in
New Zealand ; though they most properly require an
investigation before affirming or putting that title
beyond dispute by a grant from the Crown.
In the instructions it appears to be taken
for granted that such an investigation and such
a record of title, would be as much for the in-
terests of the purchasers of land, as it was the
duty of Her Majesty’s Government. And the
result proved that this was a correct assumption. The
holders of land under the native title hastened to prove
it before the commissioners, and the result is the as-
tonishing fact mentioned by Mr. Hope that out of 750
alleged titles, only 7 or 8 had been disputed; that,
instead of having acquired territories for a hatchet or a
blanket, as was assumed by Lord John Russell when
speaking on the subject in the House of Commons, or
as history records that one of the North American Pro-
vinces was acquired, namely for “ a pair of trowsers and
a soldier’s old coat,” the settlers in New Zealand had
purchased their estates as estates are purchased in
England and elsewhere, for a valuable consideration
for prices which in most cases, were far beyond their
value, looking no further than the returns capital thus
invested, was capable of yielding.
But there is another sentence of the paragraph I
have quoted to which I must yet advert, the concluding
sentence —Captain Hobson is “ to take care to dispel any
apprehensions which may be created in the minds of
the settlers that it is intended to dispossess the owners of
any property which has been acquired on equitable con-
ditions and which is not upon a scale which must be
prejudicial to the latent interests of the community.”
The proclamation went a step beyond this. For the
words “not upon a scale which must be prejudicial,”
it substituted the words “ not in extent or otherwise
prejudicial,” and this was the first violation of Her
Majesty’s instructions. This alteration was also
adopted in the land claims ordinance. Well then, from
the assurance that it was not intended to disposses the
owners of land not upon a scale which must be pre-
judicial to the latent interests of the community, it is
a fair inference that there might be such an intention in
cases where the land acquired was upon such a scale as
must prove prejudicial to those interests. In this case
also we have an index to the mind of the British Go-
vernment.
In page 27 of the same parliamentary paper (that of
Bth April 1840) there is a letter from Mr. Labouchere,
then Under-Secretary of State for the colonies to Mr.
Hutt, M.P.
[Here the hon. member read the letter referred to.]
This letter discloses the constitutional remedy for such
a public evil as that of an individual Laving acquired
land upon a scale which must be prejudicial to the latent
interests of the community, namely, an application to
the Imperial Parliament, —not the will of the Governor
of a distant colony. On this subject I quote again from
Blackstone, page 160, “ The power and jurisdiction of
Parliament,” says Sir Edward Coke “is so trans-
cendent that it cannot be confined either for
causes or persons within any bounds, and of this
high Court be adds, it may be truly said
Si antiquitatem species est vetustissima ; si dignitatem est
honoratissima ; si jurisdictionem est capacissima. It hath
sovereign and uncontrollable authority in the making,
confirming, enlarging, restraining, abrogating, repealing,
reviving, and expounding of laws, concerning matters
of all possible denominations, ecclesiastical or temporal,
civil, military, maritime, or criminal, this being the
place where that absolute despotic power which must
in all Governments reside somewhere, is intrusted
by the Constitution of these kingdoms. All mischiefs
and grievances, operations and remedies, that transcend
the ordinary course of the laws, are within the reach of
this extraordinary tribunal.”
To this extraordinary tribunal the Secretary of State
intimates that it may be necessary to apply for the in-
vestment in the Queen of any proprietary titles to
territories or tracts of land, which may have been ob-
tained from the natives, but with equitable compensa-
tion to the possessors of such titles.
It is easy, sir, to understand why enlightened
statesmen should be slow to legislate by an ex post facto
law, a measure which is abhorrent to all civilized legis-
lation, and more especially to the genius of the British
Constitution; and the experience of the fourteen years
which have since elapsed, has proved the wisdom of
abstaining from such a measure.
The claimants of “ tracts and territories” which were
indicated by degrees of latitude and longitude
who counted their acres by millions universally failed
to prove that they had derived any valid claims from
the aboriginal proprietors, while the purchasers of
estates of moderate extent have established their claims
without any material difficulty.
Now, sir, what was the course pursued by the
Colonial Legislatures?
It was my intention to have gone at some length into
an analysis of the speech of Sir George Gipps, in in-
troducing the first New Zealand Land Titles Bill to his
Council. But it would be occupying the time of this
Council unnecessarily. That speech was delivered on
the 9th July, 1840, and extends over fifteen pages of
the Parliamentary Blue Book of 11th May, 1841.
But all its ingenious, and not overscrupulous reason-
ings, were set aside by an official memorandum from
Lord John Russell, dated 18th March, 1840, which is
to be found in page 31, of the papers of the Bth April,
1840, from which I have already quoted.
Sir George Gipps set out by asserting “ the Bill
is founded upon two or three general principles which,
until I heard them here controverted, I thought were
fully admitted, and, indeed, received as political


axioms. The first is that the uncivilized inhabi- present century, in three distinct enactments, declared
tants of any country have but a qualified dominion that New Zealand is not a part.of the■Britishdominions;
over it, or a right of occupancy only; and that
until they establish amongst themselves a settled
form of Government, and subjugate the ground to their
own uses by the cultivation of it, they cannot grant to
individuals not of their own tribe any portion of it,
for the simple reason that they have not themse’ves any
individual property in it.” From this dogma Sir
George Gipps was driven by the Bishop of Australia,
who stated that it was an universal proposition to which
he could not agree. “ I would not affirm” said the
Bishop “ that a citizen of Timbuctoo has no right to
sell land to an inhabitant of Abyssinia.” Sir G. Gipps
then took bis stand npon the alleged inability of any
individual to obtain a legal title or permanent interest
in land acquired by purchase from the chiefs of
aboriginal tribes, and cited, passages from the writings
of Marshall, Kent, and Storey, American Jurists of
high reputation, to prove that the powers of Europe
which colonized America, had always reserved to them-
selves, and denied to their subjects, the right of ac-
quiring land by treaty or purchase from the aboriginal
proprietors. And it is true that the colonizing powers
of Europe had always assumed a dominion over those
countries founded upon the right of discovery or the
pretension of conquest; and thus established within
those countries the principle that no land could be
acquired or held, but mediately or immediately from
the respective Sovereigns, who assumed such dominion.
But, towards New Zealand, an opposite course was
pursued. The Queen had “ acknowledged New' Zealand
as a sovereign and independent state,” had “ disclaimed
for herself and her subjects every pretension to seize on
the islands of New Zealand,” and had admitted that
the “ title of its inhabitants to the soil and sovereignty of
their country was indisputable, and bad been solemnly
recognised by the British government,”
Whatever, then, might have been the social or poli-
tical condition of the New Zealanders, the British go-
vernment had acknowledged, and treated with them as
a sovereign and independent state. The titles derived
from them did not come within the category of Indian
or aboriginal titles, which required the assent or the
confirmation of the colonizing power to give them
validity. The lands held by Her Majesty’s subjects in
New Zealand by an undisputed title, were held imme-
diately from the former sovereigns of the country, from
whom the Queen herself derived her sovereign authority.
That authority was neither obtained by right of dis-
eovery nor by pretension of conquest, but by voluntary
treaty. And it is a necessary consequence of that treaty,
that all private rights of property existing before it was
entered into, remain unaffected by it.
The memorandum of Lord John Russell to which I
referred, is as follows :
“ In the preceding letter (Mr. Somes to Lord Pal-
merston, 1839) the right of Great Britain to sovereignty
over New Zealand, is maintained on various grounds,
which it is unnecessary for the purposes of this paper
to controvert or even to notice. The answers which
would be made by foreign nations to such a claim are
two; first, that the British Statute Book has, in the
and, secondly, that King William IV, made the most
public, solemn, and authentic declaration which it was
possible to make, that New Zealand was a substantive
and independent state.”
“ The recognition by the King, Lords, and Commons
of Great Britain, ot the fact that New Zealand is not
part of the British dominions, will be found in the
statutes 57, Geo. 111. cap. 53-4, Geo. IV. cap. 96, sec.
3 and 9, Geo. IV., cap. 83, sec. 4. The following are
extracts from each of these statutes.”
Passing over these extracts, the memorandum pro-
ceeds as follows:
“The recognition by King William IV., of New
Zealand as a substantive and independent state, is
shown by the following narrative.
“On the 16th November 1831, a letter to King
William IV., from 13 chiefs of New Zealand, was
‘ransmitfed to Lord Goderich, praying the protection of
the British Crown, against the neighbouring tribes, and
against British subjects residing in the islands.
“On the 14th of June 1832, Lord Ripon despatched
Mr. Busby as British Resident, partly to protect British
commerce, and partly to repress the outrages of British
subjects on the natives. His Lordship sent with Mr.
Busby a letter to the Chiefs in which the King was
made to address them as an independent people. Their
support was requested for Mr. Busby, and they were
reminded of the benefits which they would derive from
the 4 friendship and alliance of Great Britain.’
“In the month of June 1832, a bill was brought into
the House of Commons for the prevention of crime*
committed by His Majesty’s subjects ‘in New Zealand
and in other islands in the Pacific, not being within
His Majesty’s dominions.’ The Bill was rejected
because Parliament could not lawfully legislate for a
foreign country.
“On the 13th April 1833, the Governor of New
South Wales, in obedience to Lord Ripon’s orders,
addressed instructions to Mr. Busby, in which New
Zealand was expressly mentioned as a foreign country,
and Mr. Busby himself as being accredited to the chiefs.
This document throughout assumes the independence of
New Zealand.
“ On the 29th of April, 1834, General Bourke trans-
mitted to Lord Stanley a proposal from Mr. Busby for
establishing a national flag for tribes of New Zealand
“in their collective capacity,” and advised that ships
built in the island, and registered by the chiefs, should
have their registers respected in their intercourse with
British possessions. Sir R. Bourke reported that he
had sent three patterns of flags, one of which had been
selected by the chiefs, that the chiefs had accordingly
assembled with the commanders of the British and three
American ships, to witness the inauguration of the flag,
at which the officers of H.M.S. Alligator, were also
present. The flag had been declared to be the
“ National Flag” of New Zealand, and being hoisted,
was saluted with twenty-one guns by the Alligator, a
British ship of war.
“On the 21st of December 1834, a despatch was
addressed to Sir R. Bourke by Lord Aberdeen, ap-
proving all these proceedings in the name of the King,
and sending a copy of a letter from the Admiralty,
stating that they had instructed their officers to give
effect to the New Zealand registers, and to acknowledge
and respect the national flag of New Zealand.”
“ If these solemn acta of the Parliament and the King
of Great Britain are not enough to shew that the pre-
tension made by this company on behalf of Her Majesty
is unfounded, it might still further be repelled by a
minute narrative of all the relations between New Zea-
land and the adjacent British colonies, and especially
by the judicial decisions of the superior courts of these
colonies. It is presumed, however, that after the pre-
ceding statement it would he superfluous to accumulate
arguments of that nature, and the rather because they


•ould not be intelligibly stated without entering into
long and tedious details.’’
I hare thus, sir, proved that the Legislature of this
colony has not, and cannot hare authority to pass laws
repugnant to the laws of England. I have shewn that the
enactments of the Land titles Ordinance are repugnant
to the fundamental principles of English law, (hat they
violate Magna Charta itself, and that therefore this Or-
dinance has no validity in law, but is in the language
of the Queen’s instructions “a pretended Ordinance.”
I have so far sketched the history of these transactions
as to show that the colonial authorities acted in opposi-
tion to the Queen’s instructions, as well as to the law.
That whilst these instructions expressly declare that
New Zealand was an independent state, and that the
title of its inhabitants to their lands was indisputable,
the contrivers of this Ordinance denied that New Zea-
land ever had been an independent state, or that the
inhabitants bad such a title to their lands as to convey
them to others ; that while the Queen’s instructions ex-
pressly required the Governor to take care to dispel any
apprehensions that it was intended to dispossess the
turners of any land unless, it should be on a scale which
must he prejudicial to the latent interests of the com-
munity ; providing that in the event of its being neces-
•ary to vest in the Crown, by Act of Parliament,
■uch extensive territorial rights as are herein referred to.
an equitable compensation should he made to the
owners of such territorial rights, the Local Ordi-
nance confiscates all titles; and by an arbitrary scale
restricts the proprietors of Land to a limited portion
of their property, taking care, however, that that
portion shall not include any part to which situation,
or other circumstances, imparted a more than ordinary
value.
Before leaving this Ordinance it still remains to
■hew that it contains a violation of national faith.
The second article of the treaty of Waitangi is in
the following words ;
•t Her Majesty the Queen of England confirms and
guarantees to the chiefs and tribes of New Zealand,
and to the respective families and individuals thereof,
the full, exclusive, and undisturbed possession of their
lands and estates, forests, fisheries, and other proper-
ties which they may collectively or individually pos-
sess. so long as it is their wish and desire to retain the
same in their possession. But the chiefs of the united
tribes, and the individual chiefs, yield to Her Majesty
the exclusive right of pre-emption over such lands as
the proprietors thereof may be disposed to alienate, at
such prices as may be agreed upon between the respec-
tive proprietors and persons appointed by Her Majesty
to treat with them in that behalf.’
Now the second clause of the Ordinance which has
been already quoted, enacts “that whereas it is expe-
dient to remove certain doubts which have arisen in
respect of titles of land in New Zealand; be it there-
fore declared enacted and ordained that all unappro-
priated lands within the said colony of New Zealand,
subject, however, to the rightful and necessary occupa-
tion and use thereof, by the aboriginal inhabitants of the
said colony, are and remain Crown and domain lands of
Her Majesty.” That is, according to the interpre-
tation of Johnson's Dictionary, the estate or property
of the Crown.
Now if this be not a direct and express abrogation
of the article of the treaty which I have just read, I
must confess that I am ignorant of the meaning of the
English language. The treaty guarantees to the chiefs
and tribes of New Zealand—the full, exclusive, and un-
disturbed possession of their lands. The Ordinance
enacts that all unappropriated lands are the property of
the Crown—and lest there should be any doubt what
is meant by unappropriated lands, it reserves for the
aboriginal inhabitants the rightful and necessary occu-
pation and use thereof. No casuistry, sir, can reconcile
the enactment of this Ordinance with the guarantee of
the treaty. It is indeed true that this enactment trans-
cends the authority of the Local Legislature, and has,
therefore, no legal force or validity; but while it re-
mains on the statute book, it is not the less a stain on
the national honor.
Well, Sir, the first settlers in this country—those
who encountered and endured the dangers and priva-
tions of a residence amongst the natives in their savage
state, the pioneers of civilization who prepared a
peaceable habitation for those who were to followmen
who, if they bad settled in New South Wales, at the
time they settled in New Zealand, would have received
for themselves and their families under the protec-
tion of established laws, free grants of land, of
greater extent than they had purchased with their
own money in New Zealand ;*-these men had endured
the persecution of this, and similar Ordinances, they
had seen the men who were sent by Her Majesty for
their protection, come between them and Her Majesty’s
gracious assurance, that they should not be dispossessed
of their land,— they had seen themselves deprived of
the protection of that law which was their birthright,
by the arbitrary and illegal acts of self-willed or ig-
norant men. They had seen, without complaint, the
districts which they had settled, deprived of their in-
habitants by the temptation of an exchange of valuable
land near the seat of Government for land which, in
most cases, was of no value; and to sum up all the bad
faith of the Colonial Government had brought upon
them the dangers of a war with the natives which
exposed them to the violence of the ill disposed
amongst those natives. But a heavier calamity
awaited them still. Tnere remained to them their good
name, and of this also they were to be deprived.
There has, Sir, existed from the first commencement
of this colony, in the administration of its affairs, an
imperium in imperio, a power which fettered, and
controlled, and thwarted, the proceedings of Her Ma-
jesty’s Government so far as they interfered with the
interests of that power.
The vol. which I hold in my hand, is " a corrected
report of the Debate in the House of Commons, on the
17th, lBth, and 19th of June, 1845, on the state of
New Zealand, and the case of the New Zealand Com-
pany.” The report of that Debate extends over 252
pages. It reveals the power and influence of that Com-
pany in a contest with the Government of Sir R. Peel,
• See Appendix,


which was continued during three nights till long after a letter from the Bishop of New Zealand himself, in
midnight, and which ended by leaving the Government
in, I believe, as small, if not a smaller majority than
any other division during the existence of that adminis-
tration.
The various papers laid before Parliament testify
to the interference of this powerful Company with the
Government, and its influence with the Government in
preventing the full recognition of the rights of the pro-
prietors of land acquired before the colony was esta-
blished. It is evident from these papers that the Home
Government was obliged to give way to that influence,
and that no Governor of New Zealand could hold his
ground, who withstood its interference, This, Sir, is
the secret of the policy pursued towards the settlers in
this Province; it accounts for the calumnies with
which they were loaded, for the interference with
the lands the title to which had been con-
firmed by the reports of the Commissioners and by
grants issued in the Queen’s name, and in compliance
with her instructions. And it accounts, also, for the
determination of Sir George Grey to violate the express
injunctions of Her Majesty through Lord Stanley, and
Earl Grey, when Ministers of the Crown, to keep the
public faith, towards those who purchased land under
“ the I Os. and penny an acre proclamations.”
The amount of falsehood and injustice which has
been published and wrought in support of this policy,
pisses all belief. To master it would be the study of
half a life time; fully to appreciate it, would require a
knowledge of circumstances which only a very few
could by any possibility possess.
It is, Sir, or was, until the arrival of Sir G. Grey in
this colony, a new, and a strange thing for a re-
presentative of the Majesty of the Crown of England
to be accused of falsehood. Since that epoch, such ac-
cusations have been as familiar in this colony as house-
hold words. In the papers presented to Parliament in
1848, page 123, there is a petition from twenty-two
persons of irreproachable life and character, sons
of the Missionaries, and catechists of the Church Mis-
sionary Society, in which they complain to Her Majesty,
that Governor Grey bad stated in reference to them
what is injurious to their character and '* repugnant to
the truth.”
In page 75, of the papers presented in July, 1849,
there is a letter to Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of
State for the Colonies, from the venerable Archdeacon
Wi'liams, for twenty-seven years head of the Mission,
which the'Church Missionary Society has maintained
in this country, complaining of the calumnies which
Sir G. Grey had uttered respecting him, and offering to
“ scnLer to the winds ” whatever had been alleged in-
jurious to his character, if the opportunity should be
afforded him. In page 36 of the same papers, there is
which, although he abstains from accusing the Governor
of direct untruth he leaves it difficult, if not impossible,
to acquit him of falsehood.
In November, 1849, a Petition was sent to Her Ma-
jesty, from 520 inhabitants of Auckland and its neigh-
bourhood, praying Her Majesty to remove Sir G. Grey
from the Government of this colony; for this reason,
amongst others that they “ have lost all respect for his
official character on account of the systematic misrepro.
sentation of his despatches.”
In the Parliamentary papers, dated 14th August,
1850, there is a letter from the Chairman of the Settlers’
Constitutional Association at Wellington—forwarding
a series of resolutions, amongst the movers and se-
conders of which appear the names of five Justices of
the Peace.
These resolutions charge the Governor with “ sup-
pression and misrepresentation,” with “ giving a false
gloss and colour to bis proceedings,’’ with “ deliberately
misrepresenting the opinion of the Colonists,” and
with other varieties of the crimen falsi, capping the
climax by saying “ that the despatch of the 291 h
November exhibits a suppression of two facts so fla-
grant, that this Association cannot characterize by any
term which the proprieties of social usage would justify
them in employing.”
Now, Sir, here is a cloud of witnesses to the character
of the Queen’s representative—but one yet remains, and
that one is Sir G. Grey himself.
I quote, Sir, a paragraph from a despatch from
Governor Grey to Earl Grey, dated February 10th,
1849, from the papers dated July 1849, page 74.
,l In order that the difficulties the Government are
placedpn, by the conduct of the Church Missionary Land
Claimants may be seen, I have the honour to enclose
a copy of a letter addressed to me by the Major General
commanding in this colony, and to state, that I cannot
get a proper location for the troops at a point where
their presence is necessary for preserving the peace of
the country, because from the manner in which the
grants to Archdeacon Henry Williams, and others,
have been made, the Government have no knowledge
of the extent or position of the land which they claim ;
and as the whole of it, with the exception of some
trifling patches is utterly waste and unoccupied, we
have nothing to guide our inquiries on this subject.”
The letter alluded to is to be found at page 90 of the
same papers. It is addressed to His Excellency the
Governor-in-Chief, and is signed, George D. Pitt
Major General.
Brigade Office. Auckland,
Nov., 14, 1848,
“Sir. —l have the honour to draw the attention of
your Excellency to the fact of a detachment as per
margin, being stationed at Wahapu, Bay of Islands, in
a situation, which is wholly defenceless and untenable.
The situation is such as to render them liable at all times
to sudden surprise, while the distance from Kororareka
would completely preclude the possibility of the troops
affording any assistance to that town in the event of an
outbreak. 1 have therefore the honour to


request that your Excellency will sanction the with-
drawal of this detachment at the expiration of the pre-
sent least* of the building# from a post which is so ob-
jectionable in a military point of view, as I cannot
teel myself justified in detaining troops in a position the
natural disadvantages of which are so obvious. I en-
close for vour Excellency’s information, a copy of a
report on this subject from the Commanding Royal
Engineer.”
That report is couched in f.*w words—“ in my
opinion, the Post at Wabapu, Ray of Islands, is not
defensible at present, and from its position it is not
possible to make it so.”
The letter which I hold in my hand is signed “ for the
Colonial Secretary, J. Coates,” and is addressed to J.
Busby, Esquire, J.P.
Colonial Secretary's Office, Auckland
March 25'h, 1848.
“ Si Ui 1 have the honour to inform you that the
letter addressed by you to the Surveyor General, under
date the 7th October, 1347, containing three proposals
for the sale to Government of your property at the Bay
of Islands, has been submitted for the consideration of
the Honorable the Executive Council, and 1 am desired
by His Excellency the Governor-in-Chief, to acquaint
you that Her Majesty’s Government cannot entertain
any of the propositions contained in your letier; but as
a suitable place is required in the Northern part ot the
Province, for a military station, and the Eastern portion
of your land abutting on the Bay, being deemed suita-
ble for the purpose, the Government offers to purchase
the whole of your land in that locality for the sum of
£3OOO on your being able to convey a clear and valid
title. Excepting only the parts already sold or pro-
mised by you, as stated in your letters.”
Now, Sir, bad the papers recently moved for by me
been placed upon the table, Honorabje Members would
have seen that the locality alluded to in the above letter
had been chosen by Colonel Despard with the whole
country before him, and occupied by the troops
when military operations were brought to a close by the
capture of Ruapeknpeka—until Sir G. Grey visited the
Bay of Islands, when the detachment was removed by
bis authority from that locality to the position des-
cribed in the letter of General Pitt, and the report of
Colonel Bolton. It would have further appeared—that
there never was any objection to the troops continuing
to occupy the position chosen for them by Colonel Des-
pard. And that it was at any time in the power of the
Government to have procured the fee simple of that
locality, for the money which could be proved by
reasonable vouchers to have been expended upon it, or to
have occupied it as tenants at a rent equivalent to 10 per
cent upon that money.
[Here the bon. Member was interrupted by the
Speaker, who observed that the question of the proper
location of troops was not before the Council.]*
Mr. Busby resumed—l admit. Sir, that this is merely
•[The saving of money is one of the last considerations
which ought to be kept in view in the location of
troops, but it may not be unprofitable to remark what
the papers moved foi would also have shewn that the
whole cost of this locality, including the buildings,
which would have afforded one room to each officer
of the detachment and a mess room for the whole, and
comprising about twelve acres of improved land, would
not have exceeded £l3OO and that any adjoining land
which might have been required for military purposes,
might also h ire been procured at £5 an acre, the
a collateral question—the point to which 1 wish to draw
the attention of the Council is this—that Sir George
Grey having in spite of the remonsf ance of the General
in command, retained a detachment of H.M, forces in a
position which was neither defensible nor capable of
being made so, —in a po-ition so situated as to render
their presence in that part of the country, totally
useless so far as regards protection to its inhabitants,
and feeling himself pressed by that remonstrance,
endeavours to screen himself from so grave a res-
ponsibility by turning round upon Archdeacon William*
and inventing the odious falsehood, that he could
not get a proper location for those troops *' at a
point where there presence is necessary for preserving
the peace of the country, because from the manner
in which the Grants lo Archdeacon Henry Wil-
liams and others, have been made, the Government
have no knowledge of the extent or position of the
land which they claim.”
Now, Sir, this paragraph is not more false than most
of the paragraphs in that despatch or in the numerous
other despatches which be wrote upon the same
but its falsehood is more palpable. Archdeacon Wil-
liams had no more influence in this matter than any
member of this Council. He was never consulted in
it, nor as far as my remembrance goes did be even
know the particulars of the Government’s negociation
with me till many months after. I may add, that to my
knowledge, neither Archdeacon Williams nor any
member of his family possesses a foot of land that would
ever be fixed upon by any sane person for the location of
troops for preserving the peace of the country.-)-
If the Government does not know the boundaries of
the lands belonging to the Settlers in that district the
Government owes its ignorance to its own bad faith ; in-
asmuch as it exacted from the Settlers the fees for tbs
survey and settlement of those lands, and to the great
loss of those Settlers has not fulfilled its obligations to
them by causing those lands lo be surveyed.
Sir, there is scarcely a page in the voluminous des-
patches which have been published by authority of
estimated cost of the improvements upon it. It is
probable that General Pitt’s military correspondence
will shew what was known to have been his intention,
if he could have induced Sir George Grey to sanction
the re-occupation of this locality by the troops, namely
lo have hutted them in whares such as he caused
to be erected for some of the Pensioners who arrived
before houses were provided for them, so that, on
the score of expense, the actual saving to the Govern-
ment would have amounted probably to between
£5OOO to £6OOO, besides leaving them in possession
of the fee simple of the post chosen by all the military
commanders.
f The passage read from SirG. Grey’s despatch is only
one of many calumnies which he has published against
an aged Minister of the Gospel ; a Missionary to the
Heathen—a man to whom his predecessors have
acknowledged the heaviest obligations which a Govern-
ment could owe to an individual; a man to whom the
Aborigines of New Zealand are more indebted than
they ever can be to any o her man for the introduction
of Christianity and civilization into their country,—a
man to whom every colonist in New Zealand is under
Divine Providence more indented than he ever can b«
to any other man for the peace and safety in which «w
dwell in this the land of our adoption.


Parliament in relation to those of Her Majesty’s sub-
jects who have acquired land in New Zealand which
does not contain cammnies as injurious to the character
of individuals, and as destitu.e of truth, as the pas-
gage I have quoted ; but the difficulty is to oring such
conclusive proof of their falsehood. The writer is a
master of ambiguous sentences. The despatch convoys,
and is intended to convey an impression utterly at
variance with the truth. But in one case this may be
resolved into matter of opinion. In other instances a
a falsehood is conveyed in language which is itself true.
Circumstances which are separately true are so con-
nected in the relation, that their union conveys a false-
hood ; then again, part of the truth is related, and
another part suppressed, so that truth itself is made the
exponent of a lie. It would be endless, Sir, to refer
to all the arts of deception which are disclosed and
illustrated by these despatches. And these are to
justify the persecution of this portion of her Majesty s
subjects, in every way which ingenuity could devise, in
order to deprive them of their rightful property. Sir,
these despatches detail proceedings which I cannot re-
concile, and which I believe cannot be reconciled with
any other object, than that of exciting the hostility of
the natives against the settlers, so as to drive them from
their lands. But these and other proceedings of a
similar character have signally failed. The unso-
phisticated natives saw through the deceptions of the
diplomatic Governor, and not even the proffered bribe
of getting back the lands they had sold would induce
them to turn their backs on their old friends.
I now, Sir, proceed to another and the last branch of
my subject. I refer to those lands which were ac-
quired under what have been called the '* 10s. an acre”
and “ the penny an acre* proclamations.” And as most
members of the Council are as well acquainted with
this subject,—some of them perhaps better than myself,
1 shall not trespass upon their attention at any great
length.
Now, Sir, any discussion as to the policy or
impolicy of these measures is beside the question.
They were administrative acts, and like other
administrative acts their policy or impolicy are
open to discussion. But they were a bona fide
exercise of the Queen’s prerogative by Her represen-
tative, and the obligations they incur are binding on the
national faith. No man, I presume, ever dreamt of
imputing corrupt motives to Captain Fiizroy. And
nothing hut a fraudulent collusion between himself and
the parties in whose favour Captain Fitzßoy waived
the lights of pre-emption, could dissolve the obligations
which the Government thus incurred. Sir George
Grey himself waived the Queen’s right of pre-emption
in favour of the New Zealand Company, and the tran-
sactions of the one Governor are as valid as that of the
other.
Sir George Grey, however, denied the legality of
these titles to land thus acquired and raised that ques-
tion before the Supreme Court by a supposititious case.
There could be no doubt in the mind of any one who
understood the question, that the decision would be in
bio favour. There could be no more doubt upon this
point, than that the Court would pronounce any deed
void which wanted the authentication of the signature
of the party. But, Sir, is the Governor of a British
colony, to seize upon the property of a British subject
because there exists in the title a technical defect, which
does not affect the “ real justice and good conscience of
the case 1” The lands in question never did belong to
the Government, though no one else could legally
acquire them from the native population without the
sanction of the Government. That sanction was given
by Captain fiizroy, and acted upon by the purchasers.
And his successor Sir George Grey, violates the faith of
the Government which was thus pledged to the pur-
chasers, by refusing to give them a legal title, and then
taking advantage of his own wrong, confiscates their
property, and makes the public Treasury a receptacle
for the gains of iniquity.
Sir George Grey has said that these titles were not
legal. One of his ambiguous sentences, which have
the appearance of truth, but convey a falsehood. They
could not be maintained by a court of law, and in this
sense were not legal, but they were in no sense illegal.
The transactions were in the nature of a bargain
between the Government, and the individuals in whose
favour the right of pre-emption was waived. By the
payment of their money to the aboriginal proprietors of
the land, and the acquirement of the title from those pro-
prietors, they performed their part of the agreement.
But before the Government had time to complete its
portion of the agreement, Sir George Grey had taken
the place of Captain Fitzßoy. He found that by
putting their trust in bis predecessor, the property of
the purchasers was in his power, and be availed himself
of that power to deprive them of it. Now, we can
illustrate this conduct by supposing the case of a
person of such a station in society as to make any sus-
picion of his probity improbable, who, within a few
weeks of attaining his majority incurs a debt, and
afterwards reluses to pay that debt, alleging lhat it is
not legal, because it could not be enforced in a court of
law ; we will further suppose that this is a man of
boundless wealth, and therefore not pressed by poverty
or inability, but actuated by the mere lust of injustice,
the mere wanlonnessof power. Such an evasion of a
debt of honesty, which because it cannot be enforced by
law, becomes a debt of honour as well as of honesty, is
the best illustration I can think of of Sir George Grey’s
proceedings.
Notwithstanding the extent to which I have
already drawn upon the patience of honourable
members, I must beg their forbearance, while I refer to
the despatch of Earl Grey in which he reiterates the
instructions of his predecessor, I,ord Stanley, that to
whatever extent the faith of the Crown was pledged by
the sanction given to the purchasers made under the
10s. and penny an acre proclamations they were to be
recognised.
The despatch in question is to be found at page 30,
of the papers presented in June, 1847. I shall confine
myself to the following paragraphs.


*• Lord Stanley’s despatch of the 20th November
1840, though disapproving the first of these procla-
mations gave a distinct but reluctant sanction to it. On
the 27th of June 1845, his Lordship in his despatch of
that date to yourself, directed you to recognise any
sales which Governor Fitzßoy might have sanctioned
under his second proclamation.”
« « • •
“ The result therefore seems to be that the first or a
it has been called the 10s. an acre proclamation has been
sanctioned by Her Majesty’s Government in reference
to the particular district defined by Lord Stanley; that
the “ penny an acre’’ proclamation (as it has been
termed) has been sanctioned by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment to this extent, viz., that any sales which Governor
Fitzßoy might have sanctioned under it, were to be
recog.list'd. To whatever txtent the faith of the Crown
is thus pledged to the purchasers, it must he main
tained inviolate, be the consequent inconvenience what
it may. But except to the extent to which any such
pledge ha* been given Her Majesty remains perfectly
tree to take such measures as the welfare of her sub-
jects in New Zealand requires.”
The answer to this despatch is to be found in the
papers presented in 1843 page 43.
Sir George Grey says. —
“ In your Lordship’s despatch of the 10th February, I
found that a point peculiarly relied on, and the force of
which was evident, was, that to whatever extent the
faith of the Crown had been pledged to the purchasers
under my piedecessor’s proclamations it must be main-
tained inviolate. I conceived therefore that this was
the rule of proceeding, wdiich was, in as far as practi-
cable, to regulate my conduct, I was at once, however,
met by serious difficulties.’’
The difficulties to which be alludes, were partly of
his own creation, and partly inherent in the question,
but the propositions he goes on to make to the pur-
chasers, shew that the consequent inconvenience of
maintaining the faith of the Crown inviolate, could all
be resolvtd into that of not having the proceeds of
their lands in the public Treasury.
Tbe sophistry with which Sir G. Grey attempts to jus-
tify his contempt of the Queen’s instructions, is un-
worthy of refutation. He assumes that tbe policy of bis
predecessors in allowing individuals to purchase land
fiom the aborigines, was injurious to the interests of the
public, and therefore calls it injustice to the rights of the
rest of her Majesty’s subjects ; and he then proceeds to
deal with the titles of the purchasers, which had been
sanctioned by his predecessor, —not according to the
express instructions of tbe Queen, but according to the
dictates of his own arbitrary self-will. But, Sir; it is
not only in respect to the titles sanctioned by his pre-
decessor that he has violated the public faith committed
to his keeping. It is also the fact that in cases, where
be has himself sanctioned the preparation of a grant for
a portion of land, and given public notice of such
sanction and of such grant being in preparation, he
has actually sold to the highest bidder the greatest
portion of the lands of which be himself bad sanctioned
the grant, and reserved for the proprietor a mere
fraction of the limited portion of the land which he in
the first instance chose to admit.* I shall only refer to
one case in which injustice presents itself in a form so
abhorrent, so surpassing all belief, that its very enor-
mity seems to piacd it beyond credibility.
I quote from the Southern Cross newspaper of 21st
September, 18 :9:
On Wednesday, in accordance with the proclamation
in the Government Gazette, the Colonial Treasurer of-
fered for sale—to an audience, we believe, of two in-
dividuals —fifty-three Allotments of Land, n«»r the
Pensioner village of Onehunga ; of which he sold three
allotments, amounting to thirty pounds! There is a
voice in this result which may be disregarded, but
must be heard. If there was nothing connected with
the result of this renewed effort to sustain a false and un-
sound system beyond wbat lies upon the surface, it
would be proof sufficient of the paralized state of the co-
lony, and the absurdity of still continuing the attempt to
force the sale of land at exorbitant prices. But whit
must we think of the result of this sale, when we re-
member that even this paltry amount was unrighteously
obtained. It was the proceeds of a part of the inhe-
ritance of the fatherless —the price of part of the por-
tion of a widow! Of all the broad acres that the
Government could fairly and honestly offer for compe-
tition, not one single rood was sold, and but one solitary
bidder—Mr. W. F....—could be found for the stolen
property.
Our local readers are well aware that the allotments
purchased by Mr. F.,.. were not honestly acquired by
the Government; but it may be necessary for the infor-
mation of others at a distance to explain, briefly, bow
this land came into their possession.
Some years back, when the colony was at the lowest
possession, and when Governor Fitzßoy, by removing
tbe land monopoly, inspired new life into the expiring
energies of the colonists; Mrs. Forbes purchased about
* Extract from Government Gazette No. 17, August
10, 1847.
IV/j A # f
Headed— *’ List of claims reported on by the Com-
missioner, and the title deeds for which are now
in course of preparation.”
No.ofPre- No.ofacres Names of RecentGovf.
emption waived on. Claimants. Survey,
certificate. a. h. p.
239 11. 8 2 Robert Forbes. 9 3 25
Literal Copy of a printed Circular.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Auckland, 4th day of June, 1849.
Madam, —I have the honour to inform you by direc-
tion of His Excellency the Governor that a grant has
been prepared in your favour for la. lr. sp. of land,
claimed to have been purchased from the natives under
pre-emption certificate No. 239, upon which fees to the
amount of 2s. fid. are due.
1 am instructed further to add that, unless these
fees are paid to the Colonial Treasurer within one
month from this date, ibe claim will be disallowed, and
the grant cancelled, and the Surveyor-General will be
directed to take possessmn of the property.
I Lave the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) Andrew Sinclair,
Colonial Secretary.
Mrs. M. Forbes, Onehunga.
Mrs. Forbes was a widow with seven children to
maintain, and her memorial to the Council (see Govern-
ment Gazette, August, 1849, page 123), states, that in
order to pay for the Q\ acres which Governor Fitzßoy
authorised to purchase, she was obliged to sell the rings
off her fingers and a watch.


nine acres of land at Onehungs. The claim was ex-
amined by the Commissioners and favourably reported
on; the report was finally ratified by Governor Grey,
and a notice inserted in the Gazette, about two years
ago, that deeds were being prepared for it. Before
they were ready, however, His Excellency, for some
reason or other, altered his mind, and told Mrs. Forhe»
that she had too much land, and would only allow her
two and a-half acres.
The allotments offered on Wednesday, were part o'
the land wh ch had bus been unceremoniously and des-
potically cut off the widow’s claim. Now, we appeal ti
men of honesty and uprightness, is such policy to be
tolerated ? Can it be reconciled with truth an I justice?
If Mrs. Forbes had “ too much land,” it must be pre-
sumed ihat she bad more than she had validly bought
—but did the Commissioner say so ? Quite the con-
trary.
The widow’s claim was found just and good, the
Commissioner’s award was favourable, and deeds were
actually being prepared for it, when the grasping,
covetous, Ahab-Itke policy of the Governor, led him to
conceive and execute this act of spoliation !
We speak of this maiter in strong and indignant
terms—not because we hope to make any impression
upon the local Government; the moral sense of our
present rulers is utterly perverted, and their consciences
so completely cauterised, that we neither expect nor
hope to excite anything like shame or compaction in
their bosoms.
Now I shall not stop to enquire whether this be, or be
not a true statement. If it be not true, the writer who
dared to publish and charge upon the Queen’s Repre-
sentative so atrocious a transaction is little less guilty
than he who could perpetrate it, but I have every rea
son to believe that it is literally true. Ido not agree
Sir, in the opinion that has been lately promulgated
from high authority, that it is for the good of the
community, that a series of libels on the Queen’s
Representative should escape punishment, but on the
contrary, I think that it is destructive of all public
morality. I consider that the community have an
interest in maintaining the honour of the Queen’s Re-
presentative, and that he is guilty of most culpable
neglect of duty, if he allows such charges as this to be
brought against him with impunity. It is, Sir, amongst
the most bitter of all humiliations to live under the
Government ofa man who could act in this manner, or,
being innocent, is so insensible to public decency as to
allow himself to be charged with having so acted.
Sir, I shall never forget the emotions with
which in the solitude of ray retirement I read this
statement. I said within myself is the spirit of Eng-
lishmen extinct in the people of Auckland? if not why
do not they rise tn masse, and tell the Governor peace-
ably, but in words which cannot bo misunderstood,
that they will not have it so. The only explanation of
the matter that can be given, is that these deeds of
injustice have been shrouded in such an atmosphere oj-
falsehood, that it is scarcely possible without half a
lifetime of study to arrive at the truth.
Sir, 1 can imagine—and yet it is perhaps, less an effort
of the imagination than a reasonable inference from
known fact, — I can imagine the apostle of the New
Zealand Company reminding Governor Grey of the
fate of his predecessors, and requiring from him a sign
of his devotion to their cause as the condition of his
continuance in office. As if the great enemy of man-
kind had suggested that the powers and riches of this
world and the glory of them are his, and that to
whomsoever he will he giveth them. And that, yielding
to the voice of the tempter, he replied I will give you
a sign. I will “ remove the land marks” I will “ enter
■nto the fields of the fatherless.” I will “ spoil the
heritage of the widow,” ‘‘Can you ask more.” Sir the
man whom I denounce is the Queen’s Representative
in this country,--a man whom the Queen has delighted
to honour, —a man whom rival statesmen and poli-
ticians of all parties have vied with each other in
-■xtolling. I denounce him as the oppressor and calum-
niator of Her Majesty’s subjects, and the violator of
the nation ! honour. Ido this, Sir, in the name of the
Queen’s subjects whom he has oppressed. I do it in
the name of the national faith which he has violated.
Ido it, Sir, with reverence—in the name of God whose
ministers he has calumniated.
It remains for me now, Sir, to move that a Com-
mittee be appointed for the objects set forth in the
motion, and I trust that notone member of this Council
will be found to oppose the appointment of a Com-
mittee for such objects as these.
Amendment moved
That this Council consider it advisable to abstain from the
discussion of any questions the settlement of which, in th*
first instance, has been delegated by the Constitution to the
General Assembly.
Debate adjourned for a fortnight.
Mr. Busby in reply said, —I hope the members of
this Council will show to their constituents and the
community, that they are men, and can walk alone; —
that they will not listen to the proposal to put them
into leading strings, and then put those leading strings
into the bands of persons who have shown themselves
our bitterest enemies with regard to this question.
Why, sir, wbat have we to expect from an Assembly
with a majority of men, who with Edward Gibbon
Wakefield amongst them, (and who will no doubt be
at their head,) have been the cause of all the injustice
the land claimants have suffered. Now, sir, my
proposal does not interfere with the functions or the
jurisdiction of the General Assembly. I ask this
Council only to do as a Council what each member, and
every subject of her Majesty is entitled to do as a pri-
vate individual; that is to petition the Queen and both
Houses of Parliament for the redress of our grievances.
These grievances are exclusively provincial. They are
confined to the inhabitants of this province ; and no
stranger has a right, or ought to be railed upon to
intermeddle with them. And it is a most remarkable
fact that after a full fortnight for inquiry and considera-
tion not one of these grievances has been denied. Not
one of Sir G. Grey’s friends—if friends he has in this
Council—has ventured to say one word in bis defence
I do not, sir, propose that the Committee should be a
jury upon this question, but that they should prepe^


evidence for tbe judgement of the Queen and Parlia-
ment. But, sir, as 1 have been personally referred to
*9 having been so mixed up with these claims as to
have an “ European reputation”—l think that was
the word—anil then again, as to my unfitness to sit
upon such a committee, as an interested party ; and
after what has been said of packed juries, and the like,
perhaps, the Council will expect from me some account
of my connexion with these land claimants. Sir, more
than twenty years ago, I was sent to this country as
the King's Resident; and, in that capacity it was part
of my duty to assist, as far as lav in my power, the
nego iation of fair purchases of lands from the native
owners hy his Majesty’s subjects who resorted to this
country. When my office was discontinued, the
Secretary of State instructed Sir George Gipps, the
Governor of New' South Wales, to inform me of tbe
new arrangement, and expressed a hope that it would
be in his power to offer me a suitable appointment under
his Government. Sir George Gipps, in communicating
this information, expressed in very flattering terms, his
*ense of my services, and the pleasure it would afford
him to comply with Lord Glenelg’s instruction,which he
on another occasion, said fi amounted to a command.”
When Captain Hobson did arrive, he brought me a
letter from a member of the Executive Council of New
South Wales, informing me that the opinion of the
writer, who was known to be a friend of mine, had
been asked whether I would accept the office of Colonial
Secretary under Captain Hobson, and the writer of that
letter did me the honour to say that from his knowledge
of me, and from what his own feeling would be on the
subject, he would say decidedly that I would not. He
then went on to say, that an officer of high responsibility
would be required as Chief Commissioner to investi-
gate the claims of individuals to land in this country;
and that my experience would render me a fit person
for such an office. Now, air, I am not entitled to say
that this letter was written with the concurrence, or
even with the knowledge of the Governor and other
members of the Executive Council, because it was a
private letter. But I have no difficulty in expressing
my belief that had I been able to accommodate my views
of justice, and right to the measures adopted hv the
Government, I might have had the office of Chief Com-
missioner, and continued to this day in that,
or some other office of high responsibility,
instead of living in obscurity and retirement. Well
•hen, sir, with respect to the land purchased by
myself, Sir George Gipps d'Stinctly intimated to me
that if I were willing to put ray claim upon the ground
of public service, he could recognise it, but that, if I
should maintain it as a legal claim, I had no ground to
stand upon. Sir, I would not abandon the other land
claimants, to whom I had stood in such a relation as gave
them a claim upon me for the protection of their rights.
I peiitioned to be heard by the Council of New South
Wales against the bill which would do injustice to
those land claimants. And as the honourable member
for the Tensioner Settlements has said, I did address
that Council; and, perhaps, at as great length as I did
this Council upon the iniquities of such a measure; and
of the baneful effects the exhibition of such injustice
would have upon the minds of the natives,
who, until that ill-omened measure, relied with perfect
trust upon the uprightness of the British Government.
Well, sir, such being the circumstances the observa-
tions which have been made, or any observations which
can be made as to my judgment being warped by my
interest, are perfectly inocuous. They cannot disturb my
equanimity even for one moment. And I hope the
Council will excuse me for occupying so much of their
time with a matter so much personal to myself. But»
Sir, I do not refer to any member of this Council when
I endeavour to expose so great a fallacy as that it is
impossible for a man to judge rightly wheie his own
interests are concerned. I have no doubt that they are
misled by a fallacy which it suits so well tbe purpose of
some men to adopt and maintain. But, Sir, I think it
is indisputable that there are men who have no faith
in human integrity,—men who, if they can discover a
point at which the path of what they call personal in-
terest (meaning pecuniary gain, or political advance-
ment) diverges from the path of duty, fix upon
that point as the instantium crucis of human conduct.
There is in tbe mind of such men no farther room to
doubt; they assume it as an axiom that tbe path of
duty will be forsaken, and the path of self-interest fol-
lowed. There is nothing more remarkable in tbs
despatches which have been brought under tbe review
of this Council, than the axiomatic adoption of this con-
clusion. Well, Sir, tbe honourable member for tbe
Pensioner Settlements has read to us that Sir George
Gipps issued a proclamation, and founded his ordinance
with respect to these land claims on that proclamation,
in compliance with the Queen’s instructions. Now,
what I have asserted and proved by those instructions
themselves, is, that the part of Sir George Gipps’s mea-
sures which did injustice to the land claimants was an
express violation of those instructions, as well as of the
laws of England. Sir, the honourable member for the
city has enlightened us as to the duty of the Council in
providing sanatary measures for the city ; and he would
lead us to believe that t > entertain these land claims would
be incompatible with what he holds to he the higher
claims of tbe citizens to health and comfort. Sir, lam
ready to unite with the lion, member in every practica-
ble measure which can promote the health and com-
fort of the citizens ; but tbe language of tbe honorable
member would lead us to believe that these land claims
would cause a pestilence in the city. Sir, I fear that
tI»H moral atmosphere of the city, and of the colony, is
polluted by the way in which these land claims have
been dealt with. I have no doubt, sir, that the iniqui-
tous conduct of persons in high places hut seriously de-
moralized this community. [Here the speaker was in-
terrupted by cries of ** order.”] Sir, I must claim the
privilege of using language which will leave no room


for mistake as to my meaning. It is no', sir, a matter
of indifference for me to offend the ears of the members
of this Council, or of others, by the uss of such lan.
guage ; it is not a matter of indifference to me to mee 1
the averted eye. which wonld have turned upon me with
kindness. But, sir, I speak from a sense of duty, to
which all other considerations must yield. Mention, sir,
has been made, in the course of this debate, of impeach-
ment. Why, sir, if providence bad placed me in such
a situation as to make it possible for me to impeach Sir
George Grey, I do not believe I could have slept quietly
without impeaching him. It has been objected to my
motion that it ought to have been divided into three
the old land claims, the pre-emption land claims, and
the crimination of Sir George Grey. My intention,
sir, was to make my motion comprehensive of all cases
where injustice had been done. And, sir, while life and
health is afforded me I shall not give up this question,
till everv one who has suffered wrong, in any shape,
fhall have had justice, I consider justice to
be the paramount object of all govern-
ment. And it is the especial privilege and duty
of a British legislature to sea that justice is done. The
hon. member for the city has drawn a glowing picture
of the beauty and fertility of this district, and has dwelt
upon the importance of constructing roads by which
to bring its exuberant harvests to market. Sir, there
is no one who looks with greater pleasure upon the
beauty of the landscape, and the evidences of prosperity
which it affords, than I do : but 1 cannot forget that I
come from a district that would have smiled in equal
fertility, and perhaps greater beauty, but lor the Go-
vernment, which exposed its inhabitants to the ravages
of war, and drove them away by its injustice. I would
remind the hon. member that, beautiful and fertile as
*bis land is, there is a land which once far surpassed it,
a land which was once the glory of all lands, but
which now lies in desolation and barrenness, under
the curse of the Almighty, because its princes and le-
gislators forsook the paths of righteousness—because
they refused to “ seek judgment, to relieve the oppressed,
to judge the fatherless, to plead for the widow.’’ 1
trust, sir, this will not be the case with us. I trust
the members of this Council will bear in mind that ma-
terial prosperity is not, of itself, sufficient for na.
tional mure than it is for individual happiness.
Now, Sir, there is one point to which 1 must still
advert namely, the magnitude of these claims, and the
labour which it will cost the Council to enter into them.
The Middle and Southern Islands, were taken possession
of by right of discovery, and in them no legal title
could exist but by the allowance of the Crown. These
therefore do not come within the scope of my motion.
And as to the other extensive claims made in this island
they never have been and never can be proved to have
been acquired by a valid title from the native proprietors.
I speak only, sir, ol such claims as were obtained on
equitable conditions fom the aboriginal owners. I again
advert to the fact brought forward and proved from
authentic documents that out of 750 claims which had
been investigated only 8 or 9 were disputed by the
natives. 1 know nothing, sir, in history parallel to this.
I know nothing more remarkable than the straight-
forwardness and integrity of the natives, in maintaining
the bargains they had made, unless, it be the humiliating
contrast afforded by the conduct of the functionaries
appointed by the British Government in dealing with
those bargains. What I propose, sir, is that the Com-
mittee should take evidence in one or two cases of each
class, and make an interim report, with a Petition to the
Queen and Parliament which, if adopted by the Coun-
cil, might be at once transmitted to England accom-
panied with the evidence taken; after which the Com-
mittee might proceed with their labours, during the
sitting of Council, in order to be prepared as far as
possible for the decision of the Queen’s Government, i
have already said, sir, that I consider it absolutely
necessary to go to the very fountain head of justice. I
do not expect justice from any other quaiter. The
| Council may rest assured that though this question may
be delayed it will never be allowed to rest till justice is
done. The Government of the United States, sir, is
still occupied or was till within these few years, with
claims to land which originated half a century ago. So
late as the year 1844 there is an act of congress to
facilitate the settlement of claims to land arising under
the treaty of Paris of 1814. Andas a last resource the
legislature allows the Courts to be opened for such
claimants as were dissatisfied with the decisions of the
j Commissioners, so that their claims may be determined
by a jury of their countrymen, with a right of appea]
from the district courts to those of superior jurisdiction ;
the law offic r for the district and the Attorney-General
for the United States, being instructed respectively to
appear in such cases and defend the interests of the
Public, Now, sir, this is the spirit in which land
claims complicated in their origin and attendant cir-
cumstances, to a degree of which we in this colony can
form little idea, weredealt with by theGovernmentoftbe
United States. This is the spirit in which the rights
of individuals is dealt with by all civ lized Governments.
This is the spirit which pervaded all British laws and
British administration till the baneful influence of the
New Zealand Company, brought the disgrace of injus-
tice and violated faith with their attendant miseries
upon New Zealand.


APPENDIX.
“ The public good is in nothing more essentially interested than in the protection of every individual’s
private rights,as modelled by the Municipal law.’ — BLackttone.
Instances of the regard to this Princile—
-Ist.—Under the Revolution of 1848, in France.
2nd.—Under the Government of the United States of America.
Practice of the British Government in the Alienation of Crown Lands in the Australian Colonies.
In France.
Jules Favre, a “ Red Republican,” after the French
Revolution of 1848, proposed to confiscate for public
uses the property of the Orleans family. But the As-
sembly decreed that it must beheld sacred. Ihe report
upon which was founded the decree pronouncing the
King’s private property inviolable was drawn by M.
Berryer, the most distinguished lawyer in France, and a
gentleman always hostile to the Government of Louis
Philippe, It concludes as follows :
“ In our times, more than at any other, any encroach-
ment on property, any forgetfulness of rights, or any
breach of contract, are precedents of infinite peril to the
security of all ranks of society ; for every Government
ought to be convinced that its dignify its force, and its
influence over the interests of all will be judged and
measured in the estimation of the country by the respect
shown for rights, for justice, and for public honesty.”
In the United States,
The conduct of the Government of the United States
of America towards persons having unsettled claims to
land throughout the territories of the Union is worthy
of all praise.
From the declaration of independence to the
year 1837, eiuhty-one Acts of Congress were passed
lor the adjustment of land claims, besides other acis
giving rights of pre-empiion. These enactments enlarge
from time to time the periods allowed for the proof of
claims, and extend the facilities forbringing such claims
forward. The spirit of these laws, which may every-
where be traced, and which is always predominant is
an anxiety to do justice, and to avoid injustice towards
individuals.
The claims to land throughout the Union were com-
plicated in their origin. They consisted of conditional
promises, the conditions being more or less fulfilled or
altogether unfulfilled; of unconditional promises, but
wanting the confirmation of title necessary to give them
legal validity ; of titles valid by the laws of the coun-
tries or states which granted them, but wanting such
an authentication or registry as would wan ant their
recognition by the New Sovereignty under which they
had passed. They proceeded from the British, French,
or Spanish Governments, and were complicated by dis-
putes of jurisdiction, arising from the uncertainty of
boundaries between States and Provinces.
With a patient determination neither to compromise the
rights of the humblest individual, nor to impede the public
survey and settlement of the Territory, Congress held
on the even tenour of its way, providing, by fresh enact-
ments, for every new difficulty which the labours of its
various Commissioners brought to light, taking cogni-
zance as well of the laws of Florida and Louisiana, while
those Provinces were held under the Governments op
Spain and t rance, as of the usages and customs of those
Governments which might be appealed to as giving a
colour of title. Nor were cases wanting of conflicting
titles to the same land claimed by persons holding
warrants or patents for lands of greater extent than
were contained within their general boundary. And
how were those difficulties met? Not by confiscating
rights which could not co-exist with other rights equally
valid, or by giving for lands of unquestionable value
other lands of litile or no value whatever. But by a
negotiation with the parties whose claims were incom-
patible with other elaims equally binding upon the Go-
vernment, and by a vote of money to indemnify the par-
ties whose claims were the subject of negotiation. So
late as the year 1830, there is an Act of Congress “ to
quiet the titles of certain purchasers of lands,” by which
Congress granted 62,51.9 dollars to enable the President
“to keep the public faith” with one class of Land
Claimants, and to quiet the titles to lands for which
valid but incompatible titles had been issued. Nor,
with all this tenderness for the rights of individuals,
was there any want of vigilance to protect the public
interest. When every opportunity of settling claims by
Commissioners had been tried, those who considered
themselves aggrieved by the decision of those Commis-
sioners, were entitled to appeal to a jury, the United
States Attorney for the district being instructed to ap-
pear for the Government; and from the decision of the
District Court there was, in like manner an appeal to
the courts of superior jurisdiction, the Attorney-General
for the United States being instructed to take measures
for defending such actions as might be carried into such
courts from those below.
So late as the 17th June, 1844, there is an Act of


Is 6
Congress extending over Arkansas, Missouri, Louisiana,
and those parts of Mississippi and Alabama, south
of the thirty-first degree of north lat., and between the
Mississippi and Perdido rivers, an Act of the 26th May,
1814, entitled an Act enabling the claimants of land
in the state of Missouri and territory of Arkansas, to
institute proceedings to try the validity of their claims,”
by which the Courts were opened to decide on claims
under the treaty of Paris, of 1804, of a certain class
which were not perfect, but which might have been
perfected into a complete title under the laws, usages,
and customs of the Government,'under which the same
originated, had not the Sovereignty of the country been
transferred to the United States.”
Practice of the British Government in the Austra
* lean Colonies.
In the earlier stages »f the Australian Colonies, free
grants of land were made to Her Majesty’s subjects
with the utmost liberality. There existed in those co-
lonies the most urgent' cause • why encouragement
should be afforded to “ replenish the earth, and subdue
it.’’ The distance from England and the want of com-
mercial intercourse with other countries, had more than
once reduced the colonists to the verge of starvation.
Accordingly grants of land for agriculture were made
to persons who bad been sent out as convicts, on their
manifesting a disposition to industry and steadiness of
conduct, as well as to discharged soldiers. In like
manner were more extended grants made to the officers
of the Government, and of the military stationed in
the colonies, in proportion to their means of cultivation,
and of stocking the land with cattle and sheep.
Next followed the system of granting lands as an
encouragement to the immigration of free settlers from
England, to whom land was granted in proportion to
their means of improving and stocking it to the extent
of 2560 acres to a single individual. In some few
cases 5000, 10,000, or even it is believed 20,000 acres
were granted to persons, who, by the importations of
valuable live stock or otherwise, had contributed to the
general prosperity of the colony, while in pursuit of
their own.
Throughout the administration of this department
of the pubhc business there was a patriarchal regard
for the welfare of families, as well as for the prosperity
of the whole community. Young men of good char-
acter, natives of the colony, received a grant on setting
out in life, and marriage portions were vested in trus-
tees for young women on their marriage.
But the time arrived when it became obvious that the
Governor must change the character of the father of a
family dispensing to the wants of bis children, for that
of the ruler of a country administering the affairs of
bis people; and, excepting in fulfilment of previous
promises, no grants were made subsequent to the year
J 1831; but on the payment of the highest price which
t could be obtained for the land when exposed to public
competition.
When Western Australia was settled in 182!), the
first Governor, Captain Stirling (now Admiral Sir
James Stirling), received a grant of 100,000 acres on
certain conditions which it was subsequently found im-
possible to fulfil; and the conditional grant of 100,000
was changed for an unconditional grant of 30,000
acres. Other settlers in that colony were treated with
equal liberality, receiving 40 acres of land for every
sura of £3, which they expended in providing for the
passage to the colony of themselves, their families, and
servants, in laying in provisions, stores, implements
9
and live stock, and in freight of the same ; as well as
for the capital remaining to be invested on their arrival.
Even when Port Phillip was first settled by the en-
terprise of some stockholders from Van Diemen’s Land
the Government did not entirely dispossess them of
the lands they had settled, although they had not a
shadow of title; that district being within the do-
minion of the Queen, and the jurisdiction of the Go-
vernor of New South Wales; but made them liberal
grants of most valuable lands.
With the knowledge that such liberality bad been
extended to settlers in the Australian colonies, and that
some of themselves might have been recipients of the
bounty of the Crown, and were actually offered grants
of land in those colonies; the early settlers in New Zea-
land could not be expected to view with other feelings,
than those of astonishment and indignation the at-
tempt to dispossess them of lands which they had pur-
chased with their own money from the rightful owners.
Nor need it excite surprise that such feelings were in-
creased when the pi oof before sworn Commissioners
that their lands were purchased on equitable conditions,
was made a preliminary—not to their confirmation by
a grant from the Crown, according to Her Majesty’s
gracious assurance,-—but to the proprietors being de-
prived of the whole or a part of them at the will of the
Governor.
The Government, as well in England as in New
South Wales, was kept constantly informed that such
purchases of lands were being made by the Qneen’s
subjects, but no intimation was ever conveyed to the
purchasers that such transactions were unlawful or
culpable. On the contrary, every assistance was given
in the negotiation of such purchases by the British Re-
sident. And when an additional Resident was ap-
pointed, it was actually stated in the Secretary of
State’s letter, notifying bis appointment, that he had ac-
quired land in New Zealand, and it was considered that
the conferring of such an appointment upon him would
be of advantage to himself and to others of his country-,
men who bad purchased land in the same district.
