

■Hi








A SPRAY ON THE SHRINE.


THE STATUE OF BURNS,
Domain, Sydney.


A SPRAY
. . ON THE . .
SHRINE
- Of —
THE LAD
O’ KYLE
Culled by
MEDICOS SCOTUS
Haberfield
N.S.W.




A Spray on the Shrine
Of
The Lad O’ Kyle
BURNS’ ANNIVERSARY.
Equality of Mankind.
In spite of torrid conditions, very unlike the
typical raw cold that for so many months in a
year the average Scotsman endures in his Home-
land, a large concourse of kinsmen gathered yester-
day in the Domain around the statue of Scotland’s
poet, to do honour to the memory of Rabbie Burns.
And a typical Scottish crowd it was, in which fine,
upstanding old greybeards—the fathers and grand-
fathers of the ever-growing race of Australian
Scots—predominated, although rosy-cheeked, ro-
bust women, and bonnie children bore testimony
to the splendid national material that for colony
building is without equal in this Empire of ours.


Mr. W. A. Holman, K.C, was the principal
speaker, and, in an eloquent speech, dwelt briefly,
yet in masterly fashion, with the early history and
environment of Burns. The speaker claimed the
poet as the first of Scotland’s men of genius to
seek inspiration in Scotland itself, and in the homely
human surroundings of his own life, and those of
the working class to which he belonged. Mr.
Holman stressed the point that the fact that Burns’
verse was practically in a foreign dialect made it
all the more remarkable that he had succeeded in
impressing his undying poetry on generations of
all nations who followed. His predecessors, Smith,
Robertson, Hume, the great Edinboro literati of
the eighteenth century, though of Scottish birth,
were largely influenced by Continental education,
and voiced the philosophies learned in Paris.
“There is, and ought to be an equality in man-
kind,” continued Mr. Holman, “but it must be an
equality of work. The honest man, says Burns, in
effect, is the true unit of democracy.”
The speaker went on to show how Burns despised
wealth and would not take a penny for his poetical
work. He fought the cause of the poor, the humble,
and the oppressed. To Burns the man of inde-
pendent mind was his hero of democracy.
In a stirring peroration, in which all Mr. Hol-
man’s old fires of eloquence were fully alight, he
exclaimed: “The man of independent mind—that is


what Australia wants to-day. Does a man in Aus-
tralia to-day show an independent mind when he is
insolent to the Governor, whom he thinks repre-
sents some foreign power—and yet cringes and
crawls under the wretched domination of some
trade union authority? Australian democracy that
will claim every privilege and advantage that in-
dustry can bring, and yet will not make any sacri-
fice that is demanded, and which is not prepared
to fight for the prosperity of this country is no
democracy at all.”
Other speakers were Rev. George Cowie, the
burden of whose text was that A Man’s a Man for
a’ That, and Dr. T. G. Campbell (Captain, A.A.M.
Corps), whose speech, full of humour and anecdote,
was vastly to the liking of the audience, who seized
voraciously on each sly sally.
Yet they say, as a race, Scottish folk lack
humour!
The Sydney Thistle Highland Pipe Band and the
State Military Band, rendered enjoyable national
airs.
Mr, W. H. Johnston was chairman. It would
hardly seem a Burns’ Anniversary without his genial
presence in kilts.
In the evening, at the Protestant Hall, a Scot-
tish concert was given, and the artists assisting
were: Miss Jessie Sheath, Miss Lizzie Jamieson,
Mr. R. McClelland, Mr. R. M. Baxter, Mr. Holland,


Burns’ Anniversary Club Society, B.A.C. Strath-
spey and Reel Society, A. G. Johnston, A. Paterson,
and the International Highland Dancers.—“ Sunday
Times,” Jan. 29, 1922.
6 A SPRAY ON THE SHRINE


THE THIRD ADDRESS.
Friends, Scotsmen, and fellow Burnsites, for the
last term I trust includes you all, of whatever
nationality. A hundred and sixty-three years ago
last Wednesday: “There was a lad was born in
Kyle”; and we are here to meditate for a little
while on his life and lyrics, and not to completely
ignore his demerits, for that would make us ridicu-
lous in the eyes of the world.
A charge has been levelled against Scotsmen
that Burns is more praised than read. And the
charge is not always without foundation.
A learned Higher Critic* has asserted from this
spot, on a former occasion similar to this, that
certain charges had been made against Burns, but
that he (the speaker) denied them. Doubtless he
so said from a laudable desire to please his hearers.
In my opinion, this is handling the word of Burns
deceitfully, does not commend itself to the con-
science, and places the person who so manipulates
it outside the category of the Creator’s finest
product.
“An honest man’s the noblest work of God.”
“For sense they little owe to frugal Heav’n—
To please the mob they hide the little giv’n.’
* When Mr. Ramsay asked Burns whether the Edinburgh Literati
had mended his poems by their Criticisms, “Sir” said he, “these gentle-
men remind me of some spinsters in my own country, who spin their
thread so fine that it is neither fit for weft nor woof.” He said he had
not changed a word, except one to please Dr. Blair.


From internal evidence, we are led to believe
that the poet sacrificed at the shrines of Venus and
Bacchus in a measure not quite in keeping- with
the limits of the Mosaic code.
I do not think he was more a superman, or less
a contrite one than Henry Lawson, who wrote; —
“I was human, very human, and if, in the days misspent,
I have injured man or woman, it was done without intent;
If at times I blundered blindly—bitter heart and aching
brow—
If I wrote a line unkindly—l am sorry for it now.”
If we say there are no spots in the sun, we de-
ceive ourselves and the truth is not in us. But a
literary sun is the gift of Providence to the world,
and it is our duty to rejoice in the same, else we
are kindred spirits with the vast multitude of souls
under the Stygian lake, whose sighs ascended to
the surface as bubbles, and whose besetting sin
was, as Virgil informed Dante, that they were sad
in the sweet air made gladsome by the sun.
Many literary stars of the first magnitude have
been glad to make obeisance to our Ayrshire sun.
Not to appreciate is to transgress.
Whether Scotsmen read Burns or not, it is
obvious that the prominent Australian who first
addressed you this afternoon, has done some read-
ing, and that to the purpose, I congratulate the ex-
Premier on having made no gross mistakes in his
allusions, so far as I could see.


It was particularly refreshing to hear him allude
to the family altar scene, in the Cotter’s Saturday
Night, and to hear him apply the familiar quotation
correctly.
Why, what do you think? A year or two ago,
on the 2nd January, I opened a Sydney morning
paper, and under a picture of some young people
dancing, in Highland costume, was this legend:
“From scenes like these, old Scotia’s grandeur
springs.” Of course that is not the original con-
nection, but reporters, like poets, are allowed a
certain licence, and I believe I shall transgress in a
similar way myself before I have done.
A number of people have had the misfortune to
be born out of Scotland. They are not to be
blamed: they are rather to be sympathised with.
But if Mr. Holman is not a Scotsman, he is a
Burnsite, and that is the next best thing. It be-
tokens wisdom and discernment that he should
hitch, at any rate, one rope of his waggon to the
Ayrshire star.
The Laird of Dalmeny has said that Burns is
the “Universal Samaritan,” Well, he certainly has
wine and oil for the wounds of all humanity, and
it should be of interest to know how he struck
these remedies.
Let me here mention two sins of which Burns
was never guilty. Though scathing at gross ex-
amples of Holy-Wully-ism, which are still with


us, he never sat in the scorner’s chair, nor did
his life send others there. Yet I know irreverent
Reverend, and even Right Reverend people who
do both, but they are of the Barabbas School.
“We gently scan oor brither men,
D.D.’s wha’ lee, an’ a’ that;
But gentler think o’ scores they sen’
Tae scorner’s chairs and a’ that.’’
There were three characteristics of Robert Burns
that we would do well to copy. If every Australian
made them his, then this land would soon become
a suburb of heaven.
i.—He was a Close Student of the Bible.
Not only did he paint it in his sublime picture
of “The Cotter’s Saturday Night,” but he read it
from Genesis to Revelation. Father Adam, the
man of Uz, the wisest man the world e’er saw, the
seraphic fire of Isaiah, the Gospel theme, when
guiltless blood for guilty man was shed, the vision
of him who was banished to Patmos, were so
familiar to him that he might be said to have had
a Shakespearian grasp of the book.
I think he would have approved of the Pocket
Testament League, for he had a Bible of his own;
and on one occasion he exchanged this for the one
belonging to Highland Mary, to emphasise the
strength of their lovers’ vows. He meditated on


Holy Writ. On another occasion he sat down and
translated the first psalm into rhyme, likewise the
first six verses of the Ninetieth Psalm. He also put
into metre some of the Proverbs.
He knew the beginning of wisdom, and that the
Bible is a necessary and sufficient chart for making
the voyage of life a success, if its precepts are
carried out.
2. —He Believed in Hard Work.
He claimed to be bred to the plough, and was
independent of any patronage he might secure by
his pen. He was willing to toil, “From sun to sun,”
for love’s sweet sake. He believed that love makes
every labour light, confirming the classical in-
stance of Jacob who toiled seven years for Rachel,
though they seemed but a few days for the love
he bare to her.
He believed in being conscientious and honest
in his work, as continually under the eye of the
Great Taskmaster, as witness the advice the Cotter
gives to his family on Saturday night.
A worthy Christian gentlewoman, who is Prin-
cipal of a grammar school in our suburb, and who
had the needful wit and industry to secure the
higher degree in arts at Sydney University, in-
formed me that on Christmas Day she read about
the Incarnation. On Good Friday she studied the


Crucifixion. And on Easter Sunday she rehearsed
the narrative of the Resurrection. I assured her
that she did well to form the excellent habit of so
celebrating those sublime occasions, but that her
calendar was not quite complete until she annually
opened her soul to receive a fresh tide of inspira-
tion by reading “The Cotter’s Saturday Night,”
every 25th of January,
Of course all you Burnsites do that, from the
great captains of industry and the heads of de-
partments to the down-and-outer (for the Jolly
Beggar is still with us) who will be calling on me
in a day or two to solicit financial assistance—with
indicative breath.
If, peradventure, any of you do not thus cele-
brate the bard’s birthday by giving yourselves this
intellectual treat, which encourages the heart and
leaves no ache of head, then I beseech you—“Tak’ a
thought an’ men’.”
3. —He Believed in Asking and Getting Wisdom
from the Almighty.
Several of his prayers make edifying reading
(especially the one he wrote as a grateful guet at
Dr, Lawrie’s manse) ; although he was conscious
he did not always live up to his prayers. Yho
does ? He says in the “Epistle to a young frieid”:
“May ye better reck the reed,
Than ever did the adviser.”




C/5
0
z
2
Cu
01
D
w
Q
2
<
0 J 5
C/3 Ml
< z
H a
0 ’2
U 3
w S
95
0 2
W S
w O
m u
1 h
H C
ta
3
w
tu
Z
w
u
S
o
cE
cu


When he wrote these lines, I think he must have
had in his mind the conversation between Ophelia
and her brother Laertes.
He believed that the things which are seen are
temporal, but the unseen things are eternal, and
that a man need not be like a rudderless ship tossed
to and fro on the ocean of life.
“And when on life thou’rt tempest driven,
A conscience but a canker,
A correspondence fixed wi’ heaven
Is sure a noble anchor.”
Selah. (Pause and think.)
Then Burns touches our life at many points.
Many people think in terms of Shakespeare, but are
not aware of it until they read the Bard of Avon.
But circumstances arise in my own life in which
terms of Burns leap to the occasion. His words
find many a mark the archer never meant.
It is said that a true prophet speaks more than
he thinks—that he does not grasp the full extent
of his own message. I am certain Burns never
imagined these four modern applications I now set
before you:—
(i) A mother brings her red-haired laddie to me;
he is not well, say, with a sore throat. To have a
look at it, the tongue must be depressed, and the
boy disna like it. What more appropriate com-
mentary than this (mental, of course, we must spare


the anxious mother’s feelings, and are we not re-
minded somewhere to "Aye keep something tae
yersel’ ye daurna tell tae ony”?) ;
“We, modest, crimson-tipped flow’r,
Thou’s met me in an evil hour.”
(2) The scene is changed. The night is dark and
stormy, the wind is howling wild. A telephone or
other message summons Medicus from Blanket
Bay, to attend . . . someone in distress.
“And sic a nicht he tak’s the road in,
As ne’er puir sinner was abroad in;
Weel mounted on his grey mare Meg,
A better never lifted leg.”
Only the faithful “Meg” has four wheels, instead
of four legs, and a tail lamp instead of the historic
appendage that Cutty Sark wrenched so dramatic-
ally from its stump.
The anxious doctor, with possible troubles in
front, and potential affliction beneath, prays to be
delivered from punctures, as he thinks how Tam—
“Skelpit on mid dub and mire,
Despising wind and rain and fire.”
Then on the next visit, let us say it is one, when
morning joy beams in the happy face of the mother
as she fondles her little bundle of love, I have known


thoughtless friends make less complimentary re-
marks than these:—
“He’ll hae misfortunes great and sma’,
But aye a heart abune them a’,
He’ll be a credit tae us a’,
We’ll a’ be prood o’
(Tom, Mary, Dick or Doris, as the case may be.)
(3) Then again, a man has been taking too much
alcohol. The glamour is past, his brain is flushed
and his pulse is bounding. He can’t sleep; so in
the middle of the night he comes to the doctor to
get a sedative. If only he had taken the warning;
“Whene’er to drink you are inclined,
Or cutty sarks rin in your mind,
Think, you may buy the joys o’er dear,
Remember Tam O’Shanter’s mere.”
Think ye may buy the joys o’er dear. We yearly
pay over five guineas a head in this State for the
joys of drinking that which steals the wit and robs
the pillow. My wife and I do not spend anything,
so other two people must pay over ten guineas
a head. More power to the arm of our friend, the
Rev. R, B. S. Hammond, who wishes to reduce this
foolish item of national expenditure to zero if
possible.
Perhaps some of you think the man paid dear
for a midnight professional consultation. As a
matter of fact, after selling his business, my most


recent client in this respect, silently stole away,
leaving his indebtedness in the matter undischarged.
However, I am not without hope that I shall one
day be rewarded when I get to the land where
“Mary in Heaven” at present resides.
I never fully understood why we are to remember
Tam o’ Shanter’s mare, and not his beer or some-
thing else. Perhaps it was to remind us that the
best earthly friend, faithful, willing, able and sober,
is still a fallible and vulnerable refuge in the time
of trouble.
(4) Do you remember when Burns went to
church, and received inspiration to write a sermon
in verse from a short but vital text which he did
not get from the usual repository of texts? No
one can fall asleep while reading the resultant dis-
course, with which you are all familiar, especially
the lines: —
“O wad some Pow’r the giftie gie us
To see oursels as ithers see us!
It wad frae monie a blunder free us,
An’ foolish notion:
What airs in dress an’ gait wad lea’e us,
And ev’n devotion 1”
Now that longed-for “giftie” is often bestowed
on a man when he gets married. A prudent wife is
from the Lord, and not many wives are imprudent
enough to give their husbands cranial enlargement
with flattering words. One man said that he found


the secret of domestic tranquillity was to let his wife
always have the last word, the first word, and all
the words between if she so wished. Perhaps he
was one of those who got Mr. McClelland to sing:
“Oor Auld Wife,” by special request. Another, on
showing his spouse an invitation to address a cer-
tain gathering, heard this comment: “Dae ye think
onybody will listen to a word ye say?”
This, of course, is all in keeping with the saying
that a prophet is not without honour save in his
own country and in his own house. If the wings
of a man’s self conceit are kept wholesomely
clipped, he is not so likely to crash. Faithful are
the wounds of a friend. In the wise dispensations
of Providence, it may be good for the pre-nuptial
charm to get broken, if, as in the case of John
Wesley, it helps to wean him from conformity to
the things of time and sense, and drives him to his
knees for an adequate supply of grace to neutra-
lise the thorn.
Much might be said on this theme, but I will
not pursue the line further, especially when I re-
collect the good advice at times given me by my
own amiable “Giftie” within whose lips wisdom
always resides, namely: “Dinna blether,” so I ring
down the curtain to the tune of “Whistle o’er the
lave o’t.”
But there is for sure, a reverse side to the medal,
when the giftie would rather sing than sting, smile
than scowl, beam than scream. Such was in the


mind of King- Lemuel’s mother when she said to
her son: “Who can find a virtuous woman, for her
price is far above rubies. The heart of her hus-
band doth safely trust in her.” These words occur
in the last chapter of Proverbs.
Now Burns translated the early verses of this
chapter into metre, those about strong drink, but
he did not go on to the beautiful description of the
Excellent Woman, which comprises the latter
verses, from the tenth to the end. He left that for
me to do, and if any of you wish to know how it is
done, let me have your name and address and you
shall see.
A voice: “Wull we have tae pey onything fur it?”
Not a penny, not even the postage. Has not
Burns impressed us with the fact that the mavis
and the lark made no charge for their music, so
he would not. Then what can the man do that
comes after the king of song-writers?
All the world knows that William Burns, the
poet’s father, supplied the model of “The saint, the
father, and the husband” in his masterpiece. In
like manner, the domestic angel, mother and wife,
depicted by your humble servant in The Excellent
Woman, lived and moved and had her being in his
own hallowed spot where charity begins.
I once thought to apologise for appearing before
you in simple work-a-day attire, and not in High-
land costume as some of our kinsmen do with so


much grace. Ido not possess that adornment and
never did, but the lines of R.B. relieve me from any
embarrassment on the sartorial question;—
“What though on hamely fare we dine—
Wear hoddin grey, and a’ that?
Gie fools their silks and knaves their wine—
A man’s a man for a’ that.”
However, let me whisper in your lug, we’ve got
a suit of kilts in the family. My senior brother
Archibald, who is a Glasgow bailie, has the garb
of old Gaul, which he sometimes wears at municipal
functions or at gatherings of the Carlton Burns
Club.
You know that it takes a poet to appreciate a
poet. Now most men and all Burnsites have a poet
within. The pity is that he should so often die
young. Why this early decease ? Because the gods
love him ? On the contrary, it is because we grow
too materialistic: we do not preserve the good
habit of keeping the window of the soul open with
childlike simplicity, to the spiritual and celestial.
Suppose your wildest daydreams were realised.
If you owned the equivalent of a Ben Lomond of
snuff, a Loch Lomond of whisky, a Windermere of
beer, or a Richmond Hill of Turkish delight, what
would it profit you when the mason carves your
epitaph, and Burns wrote a few of these ? What
would be your gain, if you had no saving share in


the benefits of the atoning- sacrifice accomplished
at Golgotha? From that ground blossoms the more
abundant life, which the whole world needs, the
life of the Eternal, which not only gives you the
promise of that which is to come, but which here
and present, opens your eyes and keeps them open
with a poet’s vision to see that:
“It’s a bonnie, bonnie warl’ that we’re livin’ in the
noo.”
You may possess the grace of summer tranquillity
in your soul all the year round, like Brother Law-
rence, though you live to see;
: yon weary winter-sun
Twice forty times return.”
Friends, Scotsmen, Burnsites, you have listened
with commendable patience to my wee bit spout.
Whether it has turned out a sang or a sermon, 1
dinna ken. My late music teacher, the worthy
Carl Volti, himself a bard of no mean merit and a
good Burnsite, might have called it a prose “Fan-
tasia.” He was an expert at making musical ones.
I should dub it a verbal haggis, and if you think
its honest sonsie face has fallen with a few grains
of edifying spice and not been all crackling of
thorns under a pot, I shall in the Tullochgorm
spirit, lay aside any dispute with you as to the
length of Grace it deserves.


There only now remains for me to say, by way
of valediction, in agricultural phrase: “God speed
your plough,” “Ha’e faith and ye’ll win through.”
The scattered hoosie of the timid mouse and the
broken stem of the mountain daisy are not un-
observed by the eye of a kind and benevolent
Creator, whose tender mercies are over all His
works, and who is not too busy to attend the funeral
of the sparrow, just as He never neglected his com-
missariat during life. Gang forward, look upward
for the best is yet to come.
Yes, “It is better further on.” Your patriotism
may be rightly stirred by the idea that: “The Camp-
bells are cornin’ to bonnie Loch Leven,” but this
Campbell is goin’ to a bonnier place, the place where
dwell the worthy
“Scots, wham Bruce 1 has aften led”
in holy communion, as he did in faith before their
works at Bannockburn; and may you guid folk
all be there to see for yourselves when the date
and the hour arrive for your own nunc dimittis,
that—
“The day is aye fair
In the land o’ the leal.” 2
Adieu.
21
A SPRAY ON THE SHRINE


EPILOGAL NOTES.
i. “In the (Dunfermline) church-yard two broad flat stones
marked the grave of Robert Bruce, for whose memory Burns
had more than common admiration. He knelt and kissed the
stone with sacred fervour, and heartily execrated the worse
than Gothic neglect of the first of Scottish heroes, and brightest
ornament of the Scottish throne.”
—From Mr. M. Adair’s letter to James Currie, M.D.
2. That a similar hope was cherished by Burns, may be
gathered from the following brief extract taken from a beau-
tiful letter to his father:—
“Irvine, December 27, 1781.
“Honoured Sir, —
. . . lam quite transported at the thought, that ere
long, very soon, I shall bid an eternal adieu to all the pains
and uneasiness, and disquietudes of this weary life; for I
assure you I am heartily tired of it; and, if I do not very much
deceive myself, I could contentedly and gladly resign it—
“ ‘The soul, uneasy, and confined at home,
Rests and expatiates on a life to come.’
“It is for this reason I am more pleased with the 15th, 16th
and 17th verses of the 7th chapter of Revelations, than with
any ten times as many verses in the whole Bible, and would
not exchange the noble enthusiasm with which they inspire me,
for all that this world has to offer.* .... Present my
dutiful respects to my mother, and wishing you a merry New-
year’s day, I shall conclude. I am, honoured Sir, your dutiful
son,
“ROBERT BURNS.”
* The verses of Scripture here alluded to, are as follows:
15. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve Him day
and night in His temple; and He that sitteth on the throne shall dwell
among them.


16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall
the sun light on them nor any heat.
17. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes.
In view of this youthful confession of faith and hope,
although Burns may have wandered subsequently in the far
country, let us trust the Prophet of Ecclefechan was in error,
when he placed him “In the camp of the unconverted”; just as
the Sage clearly showed bias in his praise of Mahomet, a tree
whose unsavoury fruit may be seen to-day, in the devastation
of Armenia.
23
A SPRAY ON THE SHRINE


The Excellent Woman.
(Prov. 31: 10-31.)
A virtuous woman, leal and true,
Wha on earth can find?
Her worth exceeds the rarest stanes
Or wealth o’ ony kind.
Her guidman’s heart confides in her.
Her way, he kens, is richt;
He needna question her ava’,
When he comes hame at nicht.
She meets him wi’ a cheery smile,
That drives awa’ his care;
He feels as if in Paradise
When in his big arm-chair.
And as she sits and cracks wi’ him,
Her work does weel progress;
That while they speak o’ a’ that’s guid,
She’s still industrious.
She gets her stores frae distant launs
And sees that they are good;
She gie’s the lasses a’ their share
O’ clothing, gear, and food.
She looks out for a piece o’ grun’
Tae mak’ a garden plot,
She plants it weel, and by her haun’
She gets the harvest o’t.


When dealin’ for her merchandise,
She sees that it’s a’richt;
And when her hoose in stillness rests,
Her candle burns at nicht.
The needy folk that come aboot
Much cause her to bless,
Her hauns stretch oot to them wi’ help,
In acts o’ kindliness.
And when the winter season comes,
Wi’ bitin’ wind and snaw,
She’s no dismayed, but deads her weans
In garments warm and braw.
And though the wintry nichts are long,
She disna lanely feel,
For she has sewin’ work on haun,
Or spinnin’ wi’ her wheel.
She decks herself wi’ modest grace,
Her hoose inside has been
Sae nicely hung wi’ tapestry,
’Twould dae for ony queen.
Her worthy husband well receives
Respect on every haun.
He’s welcome aye, and sits among
The rulers o’ the laun.
The present time she always seeks
Hoo best she can employ,
And mony days are yet for her
O’ happiness and joy.
Wisdom resides within her lips,
She deals wi’ loving hand,
The law of kindness is her power,
The strongest in the land.


Her sterling- worth her weans a’ ken,
And hearts wi’ blessing raise.
Her husband, tae, is no’ the last
Tae say a word o’ praise.
Fu’ mony dochters hae done well
And kept in virtue’s way,
But she has far excelled them a’.
And that unconsciously.
Favour and beauty baith are vain,
Deceit has silvery voice.
But a woman’s heart that fears the Lord
With praises shall rejoice.
Printers Limited, Rosebery, Alexandria 480




