

-rm r
. lOfiCuHet .ty/cccU/ r- n
A SPEECH
§flrkr treaties antr Australian Jftkration
DELIVERED AT
A BANQUET AT ALBURY, ON THE 31st OCTOBER, 1876
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR HERCULES ROBINSON, G.C.M.G.
GOVERNOR OF NEW SOUTH WALES
(Extracted from The Australasian, and Published by Request.)
ffieorge Eofcertson
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1876
PRICE SIXPENCE
i ‘ ' . . \ *




BORDER TREATIES AND FEDERATION.
[On the occasion of the visit of Sir Hercules Eobinsou to Albury,
a banquet was given in his honour, at which, in response to the toast
of his health, His Excellency made the following speech:]
Sir, Hercules Eobinsok, who, on rising, was received with great
cheering, said—l thank you, Mr. Mayor, for the kind terms in which
you have proposed my health, and you, ladies and gentlemen, for the
marked cordiality with which you have responded to the toast. I
desire at the same time to express my grateful sense of the loyal and
warm-hearted reception which has been accorded to me on the occasion
of my first visit to the federal city —a welcome which has not been
surpassed in generous enthusiasm by any which I have received in
any part of the colony. (Applause.) I can assure you that I have
lon'g looked forward to visiting this interesting district, which is so
rich in its natural resources, and which is second to none in the
enterprizing and thoroughly loyal character of its population j but I
have always been prevented hitherto, by one contretemps or another,
from carrying out my intentions, until at length I thoroughly made
up my mind that this year should not close without my seeing the
Border districts. I had accordingly determined, during my annual
visit to Melbourne, to take a run up by rail to both Albury and
Deniliquin, so as to see something of this part of the country. As
soon, however, as I informed Ministers of my intention, they sug*
gested that my tour should assume somewhat more of an official
character than I had at first intended, and advised me to travel from
Sydney to Albury and from Deniliquin back to Sydney overland, so as
to become personally acquainted with the residents of the various
localities, and to see and judge for myself of the resources and
requirements of the southern districts. (Hear, hear.) I need not


tell you that I was only too happy to accede to their request, and I
am glad to say that my overland trip, so far, has been one of real enjoy-
ment. With good roads, first-rate teams, and a skilful whip, we made
the journey in great comfort, averaging, while travelling, over ten
miles an hour, which reminded one of early coaching days in the old
country. My friend and most hospitable neighbour, Sir George Bowen
—(applause)—the Governor of the great colony of Victoria, whom I
am rejoiced to welcome here to-day, in a recent excellent speech which
he made at Beechworth, expressed a hope that the bumping which I
was sure to get on the bush roads during my overland trip would
quicken my zeal for the completion of railway communication between
Sydney and Melbourne. (Hear, hear.) lam glad to say that I had
not to undergo any physical sufiering of the kind, the more so as I
did not need a single bump to strengthen my conviction as to the
importance of completing, without one day’s unnecessary delay, the
Great Southern Eailway to Albury, a policy which has always had, and
always will have—for whatever it may be worth —my most strenuous
personal advocacy. (Cheers.) Mr. Lackey, the Minister for Public
Works, who is here, will, I hope, be able to give you a satisfactory
assurance upon this head. Of course, as you are aware, he is only one
in the Cabinet, and must, like Eegina, “ Keep his eye on his father”—
(laughter) ; but in this case, I believe, he will tell you that there is
really “no deception,” and that, as soon as ever the money for the
construction of the railway is voted by Parliament, the works will be
proceeded with with the utmost vigour and despatch. (Loud applause.)
And now, allow me to say that I have been greatly pleased with what
I have seen of the federal city and its neighbourhood. Standing, as I
did on Sunday last, by the Hume monument and the Hovell tree, upon
the banks of your beautiful river, I felt it difficult to realize that but
fifty-two years have passed since those enterprizing explorers first dis-
covered this portion of the country. Looking round, I saw on all
hands abundant evidence of industrial progress and social improvement.
The public buildings, the banks, the mercantile establishments, all bear
evidence of the commercial importance and prosperity of the place;
whilst the churches, schools, and other public institutions testify to
the earnest desire of the residents here to advance the population in
intelligence and morality and in all the qualities which make a nation
groat and happy. (Cheers.) But looking at the river, the thought


more than once obtruded itself upon me Why has Albury been
called the federal city? I presume, because, on the lucus a non
lucendo principle, it presents a striking illustration of the absence of
federation, and of the inconvenience and loss arising from running an
arbitrary line of commercial demarcation through a country peopled
by the same race, and marked by no physical differences. The corn
and wine of this district are thus debarred from access to their natural
market by a prohibitory tax imposed by a neighbouring colony, and
the social commerce and exchanges of communities, separated only by
a stream, are hampered by all the obstructions and restrictions which
a customs barrier and different fiscal systems impose. Various partial
and temporary expedients have, from time to time, been suggested and
attempted to correct this anomaly. It was suggested at one time
that the border should be shifted back to the Murrumbidgee. But I
apprehend that the inhabitants of Eiverina have by this time satisfied
themselves that, although New South Wales may occasionally be a
little slow and sleepy, they would, perhaps, not gain much, on the
whole, by exchanging King Log for King Stork. At another time a
suggestion was mooted of forming Eiverina into a separate colony.
But it is obvious that this would not remove the chief grievance of a
part of the products of the district being excluded from their natural
market in Victoria, whilst existing annoyances and inconveniences
would be enhanced by the establishment of a customs barrier on two
sides instead of on one. Border treaties, too, have been attempted
with the object of permitting unrestricted commercial intercourse
across the Murray, New South Wales and Victoria mutually receiving
in a lump sum the amount which it was estimated they would have
collected on their dutiable imports. The principle upon which such
a compromise was based was scarcely equitable; for whilst Victoria
recovered, in one form or another, from the importers the duties paid
over in a lump sum to New South Wales, New South Wales had to
defray out of her general revenue the amount paid over to Victoria
on the corn, and wine, and other produce of Eiverina imported into
Victoria, and liable to duty under the Victoria tariff. However, the
arrangement effected, at all events for a time, and. perhaps in as con-
venient a form as was practicable, the object desired, of admitting the
products of Eiverina to their natural market, and of putting a stop
to the harassing annoyance of individual collections on the border.


But the treaty necessarily broke down when the tariff of New South
Wales was revised in October, 1873, and the items reduced to specific
duties on only about forty-five articles. The ostensible cause of the
abrogation of the treaty was the introduction into Victoria, across the
border, of tobacco manufactured in New South Wales, such a con-
tingency not having been foreseen or estimated for when the adjust-
ment was agreed upon between the two Governments. But under
any circumstances the treaty must have broken down with the in-
creased dissimilarity between the two tariffs, for with several hundred
articles free on the one side which on the other were liable to duties,
in some cases as high as 20 per cent., the free and unrestrained
passage of commodities across the border was no longer maintainable.
If such goods had been allowed to pass into Eiverina through Victoria
in bond they would have found their way back across the river into
Victoria, to the evasion of the revenue of that colony. If, on the
other hand, I ictoria had refused the free passage of such goods
through her territory in bond the trade would have been diverted from
Melbourne to Sydney, and the commodities might still have found
their way into Victoria without payment of duty, notwithstanding
the additional cost of carriage. The abrogation of the treaty and the
re-establishment of a rigid customs cordon on the frontier was, there-
fore, inevitable; and although there is every now and then a rumour of
renewing the treaty, I am not myself sanguine that any equitable
arrangement can be made which will be mutually acceptable whilst
the tariffs of the two colonies are so widely dissimilar. Intercolonial
commercial reciprocity was next advocated as a panacea for evils similar
to those felt here, and Imperial legislation was invoked to enable each of
the Australasian colonies to admit tfie products or manufactures of other
Australasian colonies free, or on more favourable terms than similar
products from other countries. But nothing has yet come, and I
venture to think nothing will come, of this legislation, for the reason
which I gave at the time, that it is scarcely possible to frame and carry
out such reciprocal tariff agreements in any manner which will operate
with fairness to both parties to the contract. Again, a customs union
has been suggested, under which internal commercial exchanges would
be free, articles imported from without alone being taxed, and the
collections distributed amongst the several colonies composing the
union in proportion to population. But such a customs union as I


pointed out some years ago—and the argument has never been refuted
—would only be practicable on the broad free-trade basis of levying
duties—not on trade, but on consumption; that is, customs duties levied
upon as few articles as possible of general consumption, with a corres-
ponding excise. And when neighbouring colonies are agreed so far as
to be willing to concede so much, their association need not then, I think,
be limited to the mere collection and distribution of customs duties, but
may easily be made to embrace the welding together of these really
homogeneous provinces into one complete Australian dominion. (Hear,
hear.) Thus, as I have shown, all the expedients which have from time
to time been suggested or attempted, to mitigate the inconveniences to
which you are exposed on the border, have failed, as I maintain they
were bound to do; for such inconveniences are merely the natural con-
sequences of dividing a country which is physically one into separate
autonomous sections by means of mere arbitrary geographical lines of
demarcation. The case is one which cannot be satisfactorily met by
any empirical palliative. It admits of but one effectual and permanent
cure, namely, the blotting out altogether of the artificial unnatural
boundary line—in a word, federation. (Applause.) It is, I think,
well that you should realise this here, and instead of wasting your
time in looking for palliatives, which must prove ineffectual, seek rather
for the total eradication of the evil by the adoption of the simple and
natural remedy —a remedy, the attainment of which is, I believe,
merely a question of time. (Hear, hear.) It is interesting and en-
couraging in this connexion to note the fact that all countries similarly
circumstanced to this have, at one period or another of their existence,
passed through the succeeding phases of disintegration and redintegra-
tion. A vast new territory, occupied by a sparse and scattered population,
and with its communications unopened, has at first a circulation which is
feeble towards the extremities. The tendency is to congestion at the
centre, which generally results in, as it were, fatty degeneration of
the heart, whilst the extremities are starved. The development of
the whole under such conditions is for a time accelerated and advanced
by reducing the circles of pulsation and bringing each part as near as
possible to centres of motive power and progress. At a certain stage
of development, however, these separate systems, in their turn, act
feebly and antagonistically, and it is then found that union is strength,
not only against external influences, but also as regards internal


development, the interests of the several sections being more advanced
by bringing the wealth, and credit, and intelligence of the whole to
bear in every part, than by encouraging each in the contracted policy
of taking care of itself, possibly at the expense of its neighbour.
(Hear, hear.) Look, for example, at the early histories of England,
of Germany, of Italy, of Switzerland, of the United States, of Canada,
and even to the recent history of New Zealand. All have passed
through phases of disintegration, and subsequent redintegration. The
impelling motive varies. In some cases it is protection against
aggression from without, in others against dissensions from within,
sometimes merely increased facilities for internal development; but
the tendency of the movement, whatever the impulse which directs
it, is ever in the same direction; and the result is uniform
namely, the closer political cohesion, in some form or another,
of people of the same race and language within the physical
boundaries of the country which they inhabit. Whether Australia
has yet reached the stage at which her safety can be better
secured and her progress better advanced by the substitution of
the federal for the provincial system, is a question which must be
decided by the wisdom and patriotism of her local legislatures. But it
is impossible for an impartial looker-on not to perceive that questions
are now constantly cropping up, the proper settlement of which would
be greatly facilitated by united action, and that resources are being
frequently wasted which might largely promote the advancement of the
country, under a wider community of interest and a more diffused
readiness to co-operate for the general good. (Hear, hear.) Take, for
example, the question of defence. Any danger to Australia must come
from without. An attack on any part would affect the whole, and, like
a chain, the strength of the whole is no greater than that of its weakest
link. The true policy, under such conditions, is as obvious here now
as it was in England in the time of the Heptarchy—namely, the substi-
tution for petty isolated schemes of defence of a union which will
facilitate the concentration, upon the shortest possible notice, of the
whole fighting force of the country upon any threatened point. Look,
again, at the recent growth of questions affecting external, as well as
internal interests —such as the various mail services, ocean telegraphs,
the exploration and settlement of conterminous territory, general immi-
gration, and the introduction of Chinese. These, and similar subjects


of a general character, will assuredly, before long, need to be considered
and treated from a continental rather than from provincial points of
view. So, too, as regards the important matter of internal transit. It
must be obvious that, looking to the probable future of this great
country, the railways should be designed with a view of hereafter
forming links in the chain of railway communication which will
some day extend throughout the length and breadth of Australia.
But the question has never been even considered in this light,
and much that is now being done will, I fear, have to be undone
in the future. Different gauges have been adopted by the
neighbouring colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
and Queensland, and the policy of their railway extensions so far has
been almost solely one of isolation, being directed mainly to the
object of securing, by one device or another, for their rival capitals as
much of the traffic of the country as possible. The fares are mani-
pulated in the same interest. Victoria establishes special rates to the
Riverina districts, in competition with South Australia, for the traffic
of the Murray. New South Wales follows suit in self-defence, and to
secure what she conceives to be her fair share of the traffic of her
own territory. Where this “beggar my neighbour” policy is to
cease it is difficult to say. Mind, Ido not seek to impute blame to
any Government, The result is simply the natural outcome of the
system of disintegration and of isolation under which each colony is
almost necessarily led to seek its own aggrandisement at the expense
of its neighbours. But such aims are not for the common good of
the country. Railways should be designed by the routes best suited
for uniting the great centres of population and for developing the
resources of the country. The fares should be fixed with the view of
encouraging industry to the utmost extent, consistently with the fair
claims of the general taxpayers. With railways over the whole of
Australia projected and managed on these broad general principles, it
would be a matter of as complete indifference to the country at
large whether the produce of Riverina found its way to Sydney,
Melbourne, or Adelaide, as it now is to New South Wales —
whether the wool from Grenfell travels by the Great
Southern or the Great Western Railway, or, as it is to England, whether
the products of Birmingham make use of London or Liverpool as the
port of shipment. Of course such a question affects the personal


interests of the traders of London and Liverpool, and of Sydney, Mel-
bourne, and Adelaide; but it is the interest of the country at large
that traffic should flow through its natural and most economical chan-
nels, and any attempt to divert its course by artificial regulations and
restrictions is simply a waste of wealth and power, and consequently a
common loss to mankind. (Applause.) These and similar considera-
tions can scarcely fail to attain greater prominence as the several
provinces advance in development, until at length a general concurrence
of feeling will be brought about as to the necessity for joint action in
matters of federal concern. Meanwhile, the statesman should always
be looking forward. Like a man riding well to hounds, he should keep
his eyes ever ahead, with a view of avoiding, or, if need be, surmounting
the difficulties which lie before him. All legislation and administration
should be viewed, therefore, not only in reference to their applicability
to the present, but also with regard to their adaptability to the
probable circumstances of the future. The population of New South
Wales is at present but little more than 600,000, whilst that of the
whole continent of Australia is about two millions. The population of
the United States of America at the date of their independence, 100
years ago, was but little above two millions, and now it is over forty
millions. What the future increase in the population of Australia will
be no one can tell, but it will assuredly be very great. The increase in
the population of New South Wales has for some time been steady
at about 4 per cent, per annum. But when one looks to the
increasing pressure of population upon the means of subsistence in the
old countries of Europe, there is every reason to expect that emigration
from thence in the future - will be conducted on a far greater scale than
in the past. Supposing, however, that only the recent New South
Wales increase of 4 per cent, annually be maintained, the population
of this continent at that rate, at the end of the present century —25
years hence —will be over five millions; 25 years later, it will be
millions ; whilst in the year 1950 it will be 31| millions, which was
the population of the United Kingdom by the last census taken in 1871.
(Applause). The Eegistrar-Greneral of England points out, in his last
report, that, at the rate of increase of the 10 years from 1861 to 1871,
the population of the United Kingdom would double itself in 84 years ;
that is, it would be about 63 millions in 1955. It may well be doubted
whether so small an area could support so dense a population. But


here there is room enough and to spare, for all who may wish to come.
(Hear, hear.) I think, therefore, that my estimate of increase for
Australia, which is based upon the recent established rate of increase
in New South "Wales, of 4 per cent, annually, will be found to be
below the mark. Assuming, however, that the recent rate of
increase in the United Kingdom is not diminished, and that that for
Australia is not augmented, the population of Australia will, in 1955,
be over 38 millions, which was the population of the United States of
America at the last census in 1870, and the population of this continent
will then bear to that of the United Kingdom the proportion of 38 to
63, instead of only 2to 33, as at present. Surely such a prospect of
future greatness must suggest the necessity of now laying broad and
deep the foundations for the development of this vast country, and for
its corresponding advancement in civilization. It is indeed, a prospect
which may well enkindle a flame of Australian, as distinguished from
provincial patriotism; whilst it assuredly offers a noble field for the
exercise of the highest capacity for statesmanship. (Loud and
continued applause.)
Walker, May, Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.


