

A SPEECH
DELIVERED BY THE
Pm ?®M. iIEUE JJaLIEY,
nvn, Xj. o.j
A7 7 THE MASONIC HALL ,
ON MONDAY NIGHT, MAY 20,
PRICE,
Sgtmes:
PUBLISHED BY EDWARD F. FLANAGAN, BOOKSELLER AND
STATIONER, 594 GEORGE STREET.
,SiUa




A SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
*S HE Jede Jalley,
AT THE MASONIC HALL,
ON MONDAY NIGHT, MAY 20th, U 72.
Gentlemen, In response to an invitation which I have just
received from a number of influential electors in East Sydney,
some of them old and dear friends of my own for years, I have
done myself the honor of attending this great meeting convened
for the purpose of supporting a candidate for this electorate in
opposition to the Chief Secretary of the present Government,
whose acceptance of the office which he now holds you have
been invited to ratify by returning him again to Parliament.
And I desire, in the first place, to disclaim all sympathy with
the pretensions and aims of that party in your electorate which
arrogates to itself exclusively the title of the « Native Party.”
I am, and always have been, of opinion that all natives of this
colony ought to entertain and manifest the profoundest gratitude
to those gentlemen of culture, of intelligence, of large experience
of affairs, who have indentified themselves with all movements for
the promotion ©f the prosperity of our common country. The
time will, and, at no remote period, must, arrive when the first
places in statesmanship, in the tribunals, in all public offices of


trust and power will be principally filled by those who owe to the
country everything. But at present I regard as an absurdity the
doctrine that we are to limit the intellectual resources of which the
country desires to avail itself to those who have the accidental
advantage of having it as a birthplace. Bather I would ask my
fellow countrymen to direct their energies by co-operation with
all good honest men of all opinions to elevate the character of out
common country, so as to render us worthy of sharing without a
blush in the greatness and glory of the empire from which we
have sprung, and with which it is our ambition to be indissolubly
united;
I come before you, gentlemen, on this occasion with no
object of mine to serve. lam animated by no personal
influenced by no resentment, inspired by no disappointment. I owe
you much \ for at the very outset of my life, almost without solici-
tation on my part, you bestowed upon me the highest distinction
in your power to confer. Tam now, at this moment, as deeply
sensible as I was then of the gratitude which I owe to you for
reposing so great a trust in my honor and truth. Thank God !
1 can again, after the lapse of so many years come before you, who
honoured me, so young, so unknown, so undeserving as I was
then, and with all humility meet you and say I have done nothing
to shame that confidence or impair that trust. And I have come
here this evening with one object, and it is this : to denounce the
candidature of the Premier of the country, and to declare his
occupation of his office a disgrace and a national humiliation.
I for one shall be no party by a criminal silence or a cowardly
acquiescence in the existing state of things either to the dishonor
of our institutions, or to the disgrace of our public character.


I skill tall you notkiug new ; but I shall recall to. your recollec-
tion, and to that of the country, events which ought not to be-
forgotten, and offences which deserve, and ought to obtain no-
pardon. I shall, as far as my voice has weight, raise it in solemn
protest against the occupation of the first office in the country by
one who on a memorable occasion was the chief slanderer of its
character—and whose slanders, had they been believed in England,
would have covered us all with infamy. It may suit the con-
venience-—help the ambition—and promote the fortune of many
who looked upon him a few months ago as an unworthy citizen to-
regard him now as an indispensable statesman. I had nothing to
gain by denouncing hiny when I felt convinced that he was
engaged in a great conspiracy against the peace and freedom of a
large section of the people- of this country (now T learn with
astonishment and indignation, his most enthusiastic supporters).,
and I have nothing now to serve but truth, in repeating before
you what J have, in speech and writing, on many occasions charged
him with.
And my charge- is this ; That he, on the 2:lst of April,.
1868, on the 2,lth of August of the same year, being, on both
occasions, the occupant of the office which he holds to-night—the
Colonial Secretary of this country—made certain public state-
ments concerning the attempted assassination of His Royal High-
ness the Duke of Edinburgh, which were proved to be absolute
and unqualified falsehoods. That on the 10th day of October of
the same year—he having then retired from office—publicly at
Kiama (a place to which he at all events has given an immorts 1
renown, and invested with an interest half ludicrous, half pathetic,
which the lovers of laughter and lying will not willingly let die),.


repeated circumstantially and deliberately these statements :
Ist. That the intention to murder his Royal Highness the Duke of
Edinburgh was known to the Government previous to the arrival
of His Royal Highness in this country. 2nd. That in consequence
of such knowledge extraordinary precautions were taken by the
Government for the protection of the Prince. 3rd. That the crime
of O’Farrell, who attempted to murder the Duke of Edinburgh,
was the result of a conspiracy or organization existing in this
country. And 4th. That some one who was in the guilty secret of
this conspiracy, and whose fidelity was suspected by his fellow-
conspirators, had been foully murdered before the Prince’s life was
attempted.
These were the statements, which, at the time, alarmed
and convulsed the country; which sent a thrill of horror
through our whole political and social system ; which split up into
sections a community that had existed in peace and harmony so
long. These were the statements upon which sprung into exist-
ence everywhere all kinds of associations for the creation and
encouragement of bitter sectarian and national animosities ; for the
importation into this new and free country of the shameful and
effete organizations of an old world, which had won by blood less
than we had obtained by the generosity of the Imperial Parlia-
ment. These were the statements to which we undoubtedly and
directly owe the revival and perpetuation here of feuds which have-
even died out in that beautiful but unhappy country which was
their savage birthplace, and has been for so long their desolate home.
In a word, to these statements we owe our present condition; about
as melancholy a one as we could come to look upon—seeing that Mix
Parkes is Prime Minister of this country.


Let me call yoiir attention to the state of the colony
at the time of his Royal Highness’s first visit.
Could any people in any part of the world give a nobler -a
more affecting reception to the greatest of rulers than this
poor colony offered to a young man of whom we knew nothing
beyond the fact that he was a son of our beloved sovereign 1 From
the instant of his landing to the fatal moment in which he w a g ,
struck down, he was almost the single object upon which the eyes
of the people converged with affectionate interest; and hardly
a person in the country credited that the unhappy creature who
attempted the Prince’s assassination had a confederate or a sympa-
thizer in the colony. But from the moment that these astounding
statements were made, rumours arose, suspicions were excited, the
very air of our social life was poisonous with alarms and apprehen-
sions ; bloody conspirators were suspected in the persons of the
most inoffensive citizens, and organizations dangerous to life,
directed against loyalty, and menacing the Constitution, were
looked for everywhere. This was our condition. There was,
fortunately for us, in this country one man brave and bold, and
persistent enough to seize upon this slanderer and drag him before
the public opinion of the country*, to compel him to show what was
the knowledge possessed by the Government previous to the
arrival of His Royal Highness of an intention to murder him;
what names did those gallant men bear, and where did they live,
who to the number of 500 were to guard his life 1 and who were
the heroic officers who were to ride in a line with his body ? —what
proof had he of a conspiracy to murder, and in what churchyard
rested the mutilated remains of that damnable conspirator who is


now univenally known as the “ Kiama Ghost 1” Mr. W illiam
Macleay was the man who undertook this work, as he alleged
“ for the'vindication of the character of this countiy, and to place
beyond all shadow of doubt the loyalty of its people.” You know
the history of his labours ; and you know that although every
word he uttered in his report could be proved from the evidence
appended to it, that in the excitement and injustice of that unhappy
time, truth was sacrificed to base political resentment; and Mr.
Parkes was then, as he very likely will be on Wednesday next,
triumphant. For I may tell you that I think your opposition to
him is a forlorn hope. And I shall presently tell you why I think
But let us first deal with his statements. Were they stupen-
dous and complete falsehoods, or was there a single element of
truth in any of them 1 Let me bring before you some of the
witnesses who, in the most solemn and impressive manner,
declared them to be the basest falsehoods. Call into court the
Yice-President of the Executive Council, the Honorable Saul
Samuel, who recorded his vote in favor of Mr. Macleay’s resold
tions specifically denying the truth of Mr. Parkes’s charges-
Summon the Secretary for Public Works, the Honorable John*
Sutherland, who adopted a similar course. Call the Chairman of
Mr. Parkes’s meeting, last Saturday night, Mr. Richard Driver
(an honest, able, and sterling son of the soil, whose many virtues,
and kindly qualities no one in this country knows more intimately
than I do), who trod the same path, and who denounced Mr,
Parkes as an enemy of the tranquillity of the country.
above all, call into court the Attorney-General, Mr. Edward Butler^


and ask him. what two years ago was his opinion of the man with
whom he is now associated ; ask him whether to-day he believes
one word of what his present chief then affirmed ; ask him how
often, how vehemently, how persistently he has denounced as an
arch-plotter against the peace of the country the man under whose
brand new Orange and Green banner of toleration and hostility
to religious and sectarian animosities Mr. Butler is, now contented
to serve.
For my part, I look upon this combination as infinitely
the most odious and least pardonable that we have yet witnessed.
Talk of the association of my honorable friend near me (the Hon.
John Bobertson) and Sir James Martin as disgraceful ! Why
these two men had (in their early political lives, when, perhaps
they were both better and purer public men than they have been
since) been colleagues in the same Administration. They were
old political friends, and in spite of “ words of high disdain and
insult,” of these bitter retorts and cruel sarcasms, which in our
narrow little public life are so deplorably frequent, they could
never lose sight of the old time when they were together and
trusted in and helped each other. But Mr. Butler and Mr.,
Burkes ! I should have thought that the mission of each of these
men for some years past was to extinguish the other ; that an urn
mitigable animosity existed between them; that under no c rcum-
stances could they be ever closer than perhaps occupying a seat in
the same chamber or recording a vote in the same division. And
to-day they are colleagues. And it is said, and I believe known,
that my fellow-citizens and co-religionists, the Roman Catholics, of
this electorate and, throughout the country, are to give their utmost


support to the existing Administration. I can say, without the
slightest egotism, and indeed without the faintest apprehension of
being suspected of it by any who know me and know my life, that
I have, during the past five yeirs, done them worthier service
than any one, or any number of persons, connected with them.
When others stood aloof from them; when they were suspected and
scoffed at, and.insulted, I, who owed them nothing, for they were
never political supporters of mine, stood by them, for their cause
then was that of the oppressed. I never joined their
for I had as instinctive a horror of Catholic Lay Protection
Societies as I have of Orange Lodges or Protestant Political
Associations. As I never believed, as a Catholic, that the Holy
Father required for the protection of Catholicism that a few semi-
educated bigots should band themselves together at the Antipodes ;
so, I never thought, as a man of the world, that the great Pro
testant sentiment of Europe required to be supported by the as
sociated virulence of a few fanatics in this or any other country
And I now warn them that this dishonest and scandalous alliance
will prove of no benefit to them, while it will not fail to be pre-
judicial. to the religious liberty of the country. Mr. Parkes will
succeed ; and, in all probability, will have a great triumph, for he
will have the combined intolerance of two hostile creeds ; and then
Irish Roman Catholics, who, yesterday, regarded him with un-
speakable horror, will on Wednesday lift him to power. But their
day of remorse will come again.
Of Mr. Parkes’ other colleagues I have little to say.
Mr. Piddington and Mr. Parnell have been his friends.
Mr. Sutherland, I know, he has treated with all the


hostility that might he expected from so vulgar an enemy. Mr
Sutherland’s peculiarities of expression, from defect of culture—
his educational shortcomings, were held up week after week to
public laughter in a scurrilous publication of which Mr. Parkes
was known to be one of the inspirers, and in which his clumsy
contributions appeared. Mr. Sutherland, of course, in any society
of educated gentlemen would be quite as capable of holding
his own in the character of a person of refinement, as his elegant
critic, whose own manner of speaking our language is known—
and painfully known—to most of you. Mr. Samuel, it is said, is
about to leave the popular branch of the Legislature, and to enter
the Chamber in which I have the honor to hold a seat; and, after
a short purification, is to proceed to England. He makes this
sacrifice of a representative position in behalf of one with whom
he has never in his life been associated—who has uniformly re-
garded him with contempt : a sentiment which most persons who-
know Mr. Samuel thought was thoroughly reciprocated. Of Mr.
Lloyd, I fancy silence is an eulogium—and a courtesy. And of
Mr. Innes, you or I know nothing more than of a dozen other
young gentlemen of his profession equally good and eminent, —
whom you will find in Elizabeth-street, where they are all waiting
patiently to receive any benefactor or patron who will bring them
a guinea retainer or the Solicitor-Generalship of the country; and
who will prove vexy grateful for either fortune.
There is one other gi-ound upon which I come here to protest
against the ratification on the part of this constituency of Mr_
Pai'kes’ acceptance of office. It is also a public ground. It is of a
mature so. public that the leading journal of this country made it the-


subject of a leading article, in consequence of which, as be alleged,.
Mr, Parkes retired for a time from the Legislative Assembly. It is
a circumstance by which he is as much known to the country as he is.
by his statesmanship or his spiritualism—l mean his pecuniary rela-
tionship to the people of this country. There is one thing in which
the supremacy of his ability will be universally admitted. He has
a gigantic genius for indebtedness. But is not his genius dispro-
portionately large for the country 1 If he live long enough, he
will rule over a nation, not of admirers and friends, but of—credi-
tors. Is it safe to have a man of such fatal fascinations in a post
so eminent, with powers so large, adding to his natural talents for
the procurement of other people’s money, the irresistible attractions
of place and distinction 1 You have all read his last schedule !
Was ever anything like it in the literature of public credulity f
From lordly squatter and humble mechanic—from master and
servant—from bankers and poor annuitants—from government
officers—Members of the Legislature—from those enjoying, and
those expecting, place and preferment—were contributions to this
marvellous list furnished. The thing reads like Leporello’s cata-
logue of the amours of his wicked master, or like a parody on the
character of that immortal Churchill who would take, with the-
same grace and the same ingratitude, a million crowns from his.
Imperial Majesty of France and twopence-halfpenny from a
British drummer-boy. All of us (at least, all of 'us whose names;
were not in it) laughed over that schedule ; but what will they
say of us in England if they find out anything about it % There
they have had for some time an old-world, antiquated, offensively
respectable prejudice against this sort of thing. There they believe


in great men paying what they owe ; they do not reverence the
people who prate morality on public questions and borrow money ,
which they can never repay, right and left. The Shendanic age
is past—and is looked upon with very bitter contempt. Gentle*
men, let us pass away from this.
There is more serious matter in this election. -Here
are a number of men come together to govern this
country who have, under the most impressive circum-
stances, and in the most solemn way, denounced their leader.
For ray part, I thank you for your indulgence. I have wished to
; 3 ay what I have now said from the moment I heard of the exist-
ence of this Ministry. Liberavi animam meam. I have done
what I believe to be my duty. And yet I did not come here
to-night willingly. I never wish to say an unkind word of any
living creature; but there are characters so repulsive as to make
Silence upon the part of honest men a crime, and combinations too
infamous to make toleration anything but treason against truth.
Such a character, and such a combination, are now before you.
Support one and ratify the other, and you cover yourselves with
humiliation, and dishonor the Constitution. Something has been
said of the great, honest, far-seeing, and noble statesman so re-
cently called away to his account. His pure and unsullied name
has been dragged in the dust of ignoble triumphs. Think of him
of hi a hatred of a lie—of his immeasurable scorn of impostors
of his great love and worship of eternal truth, and do homage
to his memory by defeating a conspiracy against liberty.


PRINTED BY G-. MATTHEWS AND CO., 96 SUSSEX STREET,
SYDNEY*
3 1508 00074480




