

A STATEMENT* *
OF THE
MERITS OP THE CONTROVERSY
BETWEEN
THE CHURCH OP SCOTLAND
AND THE
FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND,
REMARKS ON UNION.
MINISTER OE THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND,
SHEBBIFF AND DOWNING,' PUBLISHEEB,
256, GEOEGE STREET.
_ .. w: y- >
; ~ ~




A STATEMENT
OP THE
MERITS OR THE CONTROVERSY
BETWEEN
THE CHUECH OF SCOTLAND
AND THE
FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND,
REMARKS ON UNION.
WILLIAM PUEVES,
MINISTER OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND,
KKaitlanH.
SYDNEY:
SHEEEIFF AND DOWNING, PUBLISHEES,
256, GEORGE STREET,




PREFACE.
The substance of wbat will be found in the following pages was
written some years ago, rather, however, for the purpose of giving
clearness and definiteness to the writer’s own views, than in order
to publication ; and he feels that some apology is necessary for thus
seeking to revive what ought to have been, long ago, a dead and for-
gotten controversy. What he has to say for himself, in this way, is,
that he has found, in his intercourse with members of both Churches
in this Colony, a very large amount of unacquaintance with the
merits of the controversy; and just at the present time, when nego-
tiations are going on for union, he thinks that it is of importance
that the principles involved should at least be thoroughly understood;
while, in regard to his own Church, he is desirous that it should be
known by all who take any interest in the subject, what the ground
of principle is, on which it takes its stand. He has made it his aim
to say nothing to wound the feelings 6f Free-Churchmen, for whom,
as a body, he has always entertained a high degree of esteem; and
it will afford him much gratification if any of them (and there are
some among them well qualified for the task) will follow up the
discussion. So far as he is himself concerned he is not aware that
he has any other aim than the interests of right principle, and of
truth.
East Maitland,
October 20 th, 1864,




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Chapter I.
The Principles 7
Chapter 11.
The facts, including Act of the Scottish Parliament, 1592—the Yeto Act—
and Lord Aberdeen’s Act 16
Chapter 111.
The Application and Inference 27
Chapter IY.
Remarks on Union 45




CHAPTER I.
THE PEINCIELES.
The reader is requested to keep in remembrance that the principle
of Religious Establishments is held equally by both sides in this
controversy, and that our argument is not with those who are called
Voluntaries, but with those who, with ourselves, hold that it is the
duty of the Church and the State to enter into a union and alliance
with each other, and, in so far as is competent to them in their re-
spective spheres, to co-operate in the prosecution of all such measures
as may be deemed necessary for promoting the spiritual welfare of
the members of the commonwealth. Whether the principle, in-
volved in such an alliance and co-operation, be defensible or inde-
fensible, is a question which we do not here discuss ; it may be
right for the Church to be in union with the State, or it may be
wrong, as we and our opponents are at one on the subject, both
holding, or professing to hold, that it is the duty of the State to
tender its co-operative aid to the Church on certain terms, and that
it is the correlative duty of the Church to accept that aid on certain
terms, the task which we have undertaken does not require that
we enter on the controversy. The whole train of reasoning, in
which the reader is invited to follow us, is simply a deduction from
the principle referred to—the principle of Religious Establishments
maintained thus in common by our opponents and by ourselves.
In order to arrive at a clear and intelligent view of the whole
question, as argued between the advocates of the Free Church and
ourselves, we believe that nothing is more necessary, than, that there
be kept before the mind a correct and well defined idea of what the
State really is, between which and the Church it is agreed that there
ought to be a union and alliance. It ought not, perhaps, to excite
much wonder that Voluntaries, who are hostile to all establishments
of religion, should be found representing the State as in its nature
opposed, and as functionally exerting an influence antagonistic, to
the Church, but surely it is with the most glaring inconsistency
that such views are maintained, or even in any way countenanced
by Free-Churchmen. Much, however, of the force of their appeals
to the popular mind has been derived from a misconception or con-
fusion of ideas very generally prevalent on this subject, among the
less informed portion of the community—a misconception or con-
fusion of ideas which, as they no doubt often found it very con-
venient, the less scrupulous of them have seldom been loth to take
advantage of. As the “ Church ” and the “ world,” being by
their nature antagonistic, are always rightly placed in opposition to


each other, our opponents have not seldom, in their popular ad-
dresses at least, very adroitly substituted “State” for “world,”
making it synonymous with this latter word as used in Scripture in
such phrases as, “the men of the world,” “the prince of this
world,” “love not the world,” and others similar to these. The
“ State,” however, is not the “world,” and in no possible view of
it can it be properly represented as an institution, which, in its nature
and ends, is opposed to the Church of Christ. The State is the
ordinance of Cod, that is, it is an institution set up and existing by
a Divine sanction, and intended to discharge various important
functions necessary for the good of man in his present condition.
“ The powers that be are ordained of Cod,” “ He is the minister of
God to thee for good,” Horn, xiii, 1, 4. Accordingly the Con-
fession of Faith of the Church of Scotland sets forth, chap, xxiii.,
‘ ‘ that the Supreme Lord and King of all the world hath ordained
civil magistrates to be under Him over His people for His own
glory and the public good.”
It matters not in what way the person or persons, in whose hands
the supreme power is at any particular time deposited, may have
come to be invested with it; whether, for instance, in the way of
inheritance, or in the way of election by their subjects, if they rule
with consent of the governed, having, under the providence of Cod,
been called to occupy the place they do, they are entitled to view
themselves as ordained of Cod, and as being Cod’s “ minister ”or
servant. And as all power is given to the Saviour in heaven and
in earth, (Mat. xxviii, 18,) and the government is upon his shoul-
ders, the State, when rightly viewed, must be acknowledged to be
the servant of Christ, who is therefore its Head and King to whom
it owes allegiance, and to whose Supreme authority it is amenable.
Whatever may be thought of this doctrine, it is the doctrine of the
Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland; and, as the “ Free
Church has not, so far as we are aware, formally renounced this
summary of Christian doctrine as the Confession of its Faith, we
may reasonably assume that it is the doctrine of the Free-Church
also.
If a correct and well defined idea of what “ the State ” really is,
be necessary to an intelligent view of this question, not less neces-
sary is a clear and correct idea of what we are to understand by
“the Church.” Not, indeed, that there exists so much misappre-
hension respecting it as there exists respecting “ the State,” but
there are to be found, in every _direction, proofs that very’ much
unsound and inconclusive reasoning has passed current in the con-
troversy, from the vague and undefined meaning which has been
attached to “ the Church.”
As set forth in the Confession of Faith, chap, xxv , “ The
Catholic or universal Church, which is invisible, consists of the
whole number of the elect that have been, are, or shah be gathered
into one, under Christ, the Head thereof.” Again, “ the visible


Church, which is also catholic or universal, under the Gospel, con-
sists of all those throughout the world that profess the true reli-
gion, together with their children.” “This catholic Church hath
been sometimes more, sometimes less, visible, and particular
Churches which are members thereof are more or less pure, accord-
ing as the doctrine of the Gospel is taught and embraced, ordi-
nances administered, and public worship performed more or less
purely in them.” Now, when we speak of a union of Church and
State, we mean of course a union of the State, not with the Catholic
invisible, or with the Catholic visible Church, but with some one of
those particular Churches which are members of the visible Catholic
Church.
A great deal has been attempted to be made of “ the Headship
of Christ ” by Free-Church disputants in this controversy, and every
one knows with what offensive pertinacity they have maintained
that the Church of Scotland has repudiated this doctrine, and that
it denies, or at least that, in its present position, there is involved a
practical denial of the doctrine, that Christ is the Head of the
Church. What foundation they have for this monstrous charge we
shall see by and by, but in the mean time we would have it par-
ticularly attended to, that it is of the invisible catholic Church, and
not of any one of those particular Churches which are members of
it, that Christ is declared in Scripture to be the Head. He is the
Head of a particular Church only as that particular Church is one
of the many, which, united together, form that body, the catholic
or universal Church, of which He is truly and solely the Head.
The metaphor is taken from the human body, as consisting of living
members and the head. Wo do not speak of the head as the head
of any one particular member of the bpdy —as the arm, for instance
—but we speak of it as the head of the whole body; so, when
Christ is said to be the Head of the Church, the meaning is, that
He is the Head, not of any one particular Church, as if that one
particidar Church constituted the whole body of which He is the
Head, but of the catholic or universal Church, both visible and in-
visible. Hence, it is unscriptural to speak of its being the dis-
tinctive feature of any one Church, that it has Christ as its Head ;
for it is evident that He must be equally the Head of all Churches
—of all that are of sufficient purity to entitle them to be designated
branches of the one catholic Church. It is, for instance, prepos-
terous to say, as is often done, that the Queen is the Head of the
Church of England, but that Christ is the Head of the Church of
Scotland. Christ is as much the Head of the one Church as he is
the Head of the other —that is, if the Church of England is allowed
to be a true Church at all. And He is the Head of either the one
or the other, only as the one or the other is a member of the one
universal Church. The Church of England may stand in some
peculiar relation to the Sovereign of the realm of England, but it is
a relation altogether different in its nature from that in which it


stands to Christ. The two relations, indeed, are such in their
nature as not to admit of comparison. Every Church must have
what we may call a government of some kind or other; no
Church can exist without laws and regulations for the orderly ad-
ministration of its affairs, and this implies legislative, judicial, and
executive authority. This authority must reside somewhere; it
may reside in the whole of its members collectively, or in a Court
composed of more or fewer of its members acting in a representative
capacity, or in some one functionary chosen to be its depositary.
But, wherever the authority resides, there we see what we may
choose to call a head, in the same sense in which the Queen is the
head of the Church of England. The General Assembly, in point of
fact, is the head of the Church of Scotland, in the sense in which
the Queen is the head of the Church of England, and it is a gross
and mischievous perversion of language to speak of either, as being
the head of the respective Churches, in the sense in which Christ is
the Head of the Church, that is, of the Church universal: for it is of
this alone that he is properly and scripturally the Head. Col. i. 18.
Nor is it the Queen, in her individual capacity, ruling as an abso-
lute sovereign, that is the head of the Church of England, but the
Queen as uniting in herself the collective powers of government
committed to her by the nation at large, and exercising those powers,
only in accordance with constitutional law, in her Privy Council,
which has itself also an ecclesiastical element in its composition. The
Queen in Council is the head of the Church of England only in the
same sense as that in which the General Assembly is the head of
the Church of Scotland, in which indeed also the Queen is present
by her Commissioner. The founders of the Church of Scotland,
having adopted the Presbyterian form of government, as that which
they believed to be in accordance with the Word of God—that
Church being thus held to be a true branch of the visible catholic
Church—it may warrantably be affirmed of it, that the authority
by which its office bearers administer its affairs is the authority of
Christ, that in the exercise of their functions they are responsible
to Him alone, and that in this sense Christ is the Head of the
Church of Scotland. But of course he is the Head of all true Pro-
testant Churches in the same sense.
Christ is the King as \v ell as the Head of the Church, but here also
it is of the Church universal, spoken of metaphorically as a King-
dom of which He is the King. Analogy, indeed, would point to
the kingly office of Christ as having to do with the government of
His Church, rather than to His Headship, the latter designation
being more fittingly regarded as referring to Him as the great
source of spiritual influences in the conversion and edification of
His people. The distinction, however, whether well founded or not,
cannot be regarded as being of any significance in the argument.
Hin any professedly Christian country, the particular branch of
the Church which has been formed in that country and the State


desire, on right principles, to enter into a union or compact, it will
be, because each, recognizing its responsibility to Christ—the com-
mon Head of both—believes that it is His will that such a union
should be formed. In arriving at this conviction, neither will allow
itself to be influenced by any other consideration than a regard to
His will. The resolution to unite will have been formed in defer-
ence to the authority of neither, but solely in deference to the au-
thority of Christ. The State may, and ought to, avail itself of the
teaching of the Church, as an aid in its endeavours to obtain sound
and scriptural views of its duty in the matter; but it will strenuously
resist any attempt on the part of the Church authoritatively to pro-
nounce what its duty is. The State does not agree to unite because
the Church declares it to be its duty, but because, as a free moral
agent, forming its own views of duty, and judging independently
for itself, it has seen it to be its duty to Christ so to do. The State
acts in obedience to the authority of Christ, not in obedience to the
authority of the Church. In a similar way the Church must be
free to act an independent part, it will resist to the last any
attempt on the part of the State to coerce it into a union, and, if it
assents, it will do so solely in deference to the authority of Christ
its Head.
Suppose it is settled between them that union is a duty, the next
thing to be done is to come to an agreement respecting the terms
and conditions of it. When two parties propose to unite for any
purpose, stipulations are agreed to by which their actings in rela-
tion to each other are to be regulated; and when the union is
effected, neither party is at liberty to enter on any course of action
which would involve a violation of the stipulations. In fixing
the terms and stipulations, as in originally agreeing to the
union, both the Church and the State act independently —free from the
control of each other and such terms alone ought to be as-
sented to as each believes to be in accordance with the will of
Christ. If they believe that the terms and conditions are in accord-
ance with the will of Christ, in adhering to them they will consider
that they are obeying Christ, while, if they violate the terms and
conditions, they will be justly chargeable with the sin of rebellion
against Him. It is not to each other that the Church and the State
are under obligations of duty. The duty is owed to Christ, and a
failure in the matter of the duty is rebellion against Him, whether
the failure be on the part of the Church, or on the part of the State.
If either violate the terms of the compact, it must be held to have
violated its duty to Christ. In all matters connected with the com-
pact or union, the Church has no more a right to declare authori-
tatively what Christ’s will is than the State has. As the ministers
or servants of Christ, they are, in all things which are essential to
their union, on an entire equality.
But it may happen, that the Church on the one hand, or the State
on the other, may insist on terms and conditions which would be con-


trary to the word of Cod or, which is the same thing, the will of
Christ. What is to he done in such a case ? There must as a matter of
course he no union at all, the parties must stand apart. Should
scriptually unlawful demands he made by the Church, which would
be Popish assumption, they must he resisted, and should scriptur-
ally unlawful demands be made by the State, which would he
Erastianism, equally must they he resisted. If the question is put,
‘To what authority are we to appeal in a dispute as to whether the
demands on either side are scripturally unlawful or not ?’ We re-
ply unhesitatingly, ‘ The appeal lies to private judgment, when every
man is at liberty to act as he may be fully persuaded in his own
mind, and it is to his own master Christ alone, that he stands or
falls.’
But, after the parties have agreed and the compact is formed, it is
a possible thing that one of them may discover that either inadver-
tently, or through the culpable negligence of the immediate negotia-
tors in the transaction, it has been made to accede to improper,
that is unscriptural, terms and conditions. What is the course open
to the party making this discovery ? Its obvious duty is at once to
seek a conference with the other party—its fellow-servant of Christ,
by whom, in the case supposed, it has been overreached, with
a view to an alteration and re-adjustment of the terms and conditions.
If the party agree to such a re-adjustment as is held to be
satisfactory, the union will continue, if not, the union must be broken
up, and the parties must separate. If however the which
makes the discovery referred to in the supposed ease, should, instead
of seeking a conference for the purpose, proceed of its owns au-
thority to alter the terms of the compact, would such a course be
justifiable ? Assuredly not, and the other would be called upon, as
a matter of duty, to resist by all lawful and competent means the
exercise of such authority. As an authoritative dictation of terms
in the first instance at the formation of the union, so an authorita-
tive claim to alter or modify terms subsequently, on the part of the
State, would be Erastianism ; and a similar claim of authority on the
part of the Church would be a plain assumption of Popish power.
The question here would not be, are the terms and conditions bad,
and such as ought to exist no longer, but have you, the party who
entertains this view of them, and desires their modification, a right
to alter them of your own authority. I the other party may enter-
tain precisely the same views as you respecting the character of the
terms, and may not only have no objection to, but may actually
desire, a modification of them, but proceeding as you do, of your own
authority, to make the modification, without consulting me, I am
compelled to reject it, because to assent to it, would be an admission
on my part, that you rightfully possess an authority which Christ
our common Master never gave you. Christ has conferred on
neither of his servants a right to dictate to the other, either as to
what the terms ought to be in the first instance, or as to whether and


in what respect they shall be modified at any subsequent period.
The Reformation from Popery set us free from the dictation of the
Church ; and our Revolution of 1688 set us free from the dictation
of the State. As by the former event Popish assumption was got
rid of, so by the latter, Erastianism, as we believe, received its final
death blow, at least in Scotland.
It is plain that if either the Church or the State desire an altera-
tion of the terms of union, its duty is not to interfere in any way
with them, of its own authority, but to request the other to confer
with it on the subject, that it may have an opportunity to bring the
power of argument and moral suasion to bear on the reason and
conscience of that other with a view to convince it, if possible, that
the objections which it has to the terms are well founded, and that
the modification it proposes is such as, in reason and scripture, ought
to be acceded to. Under a constitutional government such as ours,
it is hardly possible that such a course should not lead to the desired
result. The members of the Church are also the subjects of the
State, or at least they constitute, or where the Church is established,
they ought to constitute a majority of them, and every question of
public interest and importance is freely and fully agitated and dis-
cussed. In such circumstances it is scarcely possible that the ques-
tion, which has reason and scripture on its side, should not in the
long run be triumphantly carried. The Reform Bill, Catholic
Emancipation, and the Abolition of Slavery were all carried in this
way ; and so will always any other question which has reason and
Christianity to support it. But if the advocates of any cause of the
kind in question, in which the terms and conditions of the compact
between the Church and the State are concerned, should, as the first
step they take, set up a claim, which the governing powers must
reject and resist, if they would not abnegate their functions, it is im-
possible that the cause should find favour, and its merits cannot even
be looked at, until the unconstitutional and obnoxious claim has
been abandoned. The governing powers are compelled, with
whatever reluctance to themselves, to refuse even to entertain
the question of the merits of the cause, until the applicants
take up a constitutionally lawful position,—until they abandon a
claim which, on the fundamental principles of Protestantism
and the constitution, must be resisted. It is easy to see, that,
wherever there is an unwarrantable assumption of authority
on either side, the existence of the union of Church and State,
which, according to the principles held by both parties, is an
arrangement of great importance as bearing on the spiritual in-
terests of the general community, is not only imperilled, but the
union may be broken up entirely, and thus irreparable injury may
be done to the cause of religion and morals in the land. Nor will
the guilt of those be small, at whose door the charge of bringing
about such a state of things may justly lie. Those who hold the
civil establishment of religion to be in accordance with, or to be


commanded, by the word of God and at the same time, by an unwar-
rantable course of action, prevent the formation of a union of Church
and State, or imperil its existence, when it has been formed, must
certainly be held to be in no ordinary degree deserving of blame.
Their conduct is no other than justly characterised, when it is
pronounced to be, as, according to their own principles, it must be
pronounced to be, an act of glaring rebellion against the authority
of Christ.
In connection with the principles which we have been endeavouring
to expound, it is of importance that we attain a clear and distinct
apprehension of the true character of Church laws on the one hand,
and State laws on the other, more particularly in respect of their
binding authority. Nothing is more common than to hear a dis-
tinction made between them, to the effect that the former are the
laws of God and that the latter are the laws of man, or of “ Osesar,”
as they love to phrase it. It is difficult to conceive any thing more
.irrational and absurd, although it is not difficult to understand for
what purpose the distinction is sought to be established. Of course if
ecclesiastical laws and ordinances are laws of God and civil laws not,
then obedience must be rendered to the former at all hazards, whatever
may be done with regard to the latter. But where are there grounds
for such a distinction ? The laws of the Church are simply the
enactments which fallible men have made as what they believe to
be in accordance with the Word of God, and to be fitted to promote
the interests of religion, but after all, these enactments may not be
in accordance with Scripture. Such enactments, we know, have
often been in direct opposition to the plain teaching of Scripture,
as, for instance, in the matters of toleration and the uniformity of
religion of an age now for ever passed away. The laws of the
Church are precisely on the same level as the laws of the land in
respect of our obligation to obey them. The latter are human en-
actments doubtless, but the laws of the Church are nothing more.
The framers of these human enactments will tell you, that when
they made them, they also believed that they were legislating ac-
cording to no other principles than those of the Christian code.
There is really no ground for a distinction between a legal and a
moral'obligation, in respect of binding authority. All obligation is
moral in the essence of it—it is of the nature of duty. A man
may be compelled to do a thing by physical force, and he will of
course do it in a sense, although after all it will not be his act.
But whenever a man acts voluntarily the action is moral.*
* The Christian code of duty comprehends and is commensurate with the
whole field of human life and action. There is nothing which men can be called
on to do wiiich is not controlled by it. The question always is, Is this which we
am asked to do consistent with our duty to Christ, or rather is it what Christ
has commanded ? If it is not we must not do it. we must he prepared to give
up all, even life itself, rather than do it. But then we ought to be sure that what we
hold to be Christ's command is really Sis command. We must not hand over the
matter to the conscience before the intellect has discharged fully its duty in regard to


If a man then is under an obligation to obey a law of the land, it is
a moral obligation. He is called upon to discharge a duty—and it
is in obedience to Christ, whose will and command are the source of
all moral obligation, that the duty is discharged. A Christian man
obeys the law of the land as being a law of Christ’s minister, the
State, enacted by fallible men indeed, but by men who are respon-
sible to Christ, and who profess at least to be guided by the prin-
ciples and maxims of His religion. It is doubtless only a profession,
but it may be as sincere as that made by the office-bearers of the
Church, who can do no more that make the same profession. All
else is Imown to the Searcher of hearts only. In our own country,
in the present day, it is granted, that, in the event of a law of the
Church being framed in opposition to a law of the State, the probabil-
ity is that the Church’s law is in accordance with the word of God,
and that the State’s law is not. But probability is not certainty, and
unless there be certainty that the ordinance which the Church has
enacted is really the mind and will of Christ, in the matter to which
it refers, and this involves a claim of Popish infallibility on behalf of
the Church, it cannot take rank in respect of authority with the law
of God. It may be expected that the office-bearers of the Church,
met together to deliberate on the affairs of the Church, and to frame
laws and ordinances for their administration—prayer having been
offered in compliance with the Saviour’s injunction, and in de-
pendence on the promised blessing of His presence —will be guided,
in the main, to the adoption of wise and Scriptural measures ; but to
claim for these measures an authority equal to that of the laws of
God is nothing less fhan rank Popery, and not less rank fanaticism.
In controversies in which the connection between Church and
State is involved, reference is often made to the distinct provinces
which belong to each, and charges are not seldom brought by the
one or the other, of encroachments on their respective provinces.
It must be very obvious that the boundaries of the provinces are
marked off by the terms and conditions of the union as originally
agreed to. The Church as an established Church can have no wider
boundaries than those which were fixed at the formation of the
union. Within these boundaries the authority of the Church is
supreme, but she must not travel beyond them —if she thinks that
her province is too circumscribed she must apply in a constitutional
way to the State, and obtain its consent to an extension of its limits.
it. Nothing is more hurtful to Christian, that is, to true moral character, and
therefore to human welfare, than a distinction which would allow a thing to he
done from any other consideration than a sense of duty to Christ. It is equally
preposterous in morals as hurtful in life to say “ I am doing this merely in
obedience to law—statutory law. Ido it because lam compelled by law to do
it. It is a legal obligation only, not a moral—not a duty to Christ”—There is
no other legitimate necessity in human action than a moral necessity.
“ My poverty but not my will consents”
is human nature, but bad, because not Christian, morals.


Neither may lawfully invade the province of the other; and any
dispute respecting the limits of the provinces must he settled in
mutual conference and by mutual consent.
Nor is it really different with a Christian society or Church which
has no connection with the State. In deciding what the organ-
ization of such a society shall be, and in framing laws and ordinances
for its government, its founders can agree to nothing, and can ordain
nothing, contrary to the existing law and constitution of the land ;
they are restricted in their choice of an organization and rules of
government; and just as in the case of an established Church, such
a Church has only a circumscribed province beyond which it dare
not set its foot. Even a voluntary Church must necessarily have
the sanction of the State to its existence and operations; the sanc-
tion is tacit indeed, but it is not the less real; and after it has been
organized and has entered on its work, let it only try to set at nought
its own state-allowed ordinances in the administration of its affairs,
and it will soon find, that, as an organized society existing for certain
lawful purposes in the land, it is virtually and really neither more
nor less than, what has so often been affirmed by way of reproach
of an established Church, namely, a creature of the State. The
Free Church has recently discovered this in the celebrated McMillan
case, as other Churches similarly situated have long ago discovered
it and “ walk” accordingly. The fact is a Church, or any other
society, with any other than limited powers, will find no place even
for the sole of its foot within the precincts of a Protestant constitu-
tional State. It is only a Popish Church which can possess unlim-
ited powers, and such cannot exist within such precincts.
CHAPTEE. 11.
THE FACTS.
The matter in dispute, between the Church, or rather that portion
of it which ultimately seceded, and formed itself into the Free Church,
and the State in Scotland, which led to what is called the “Disrup-
tion,” was the mode of admitting pastors to vacant parishes or min-
isterial charges, although it subsequently merged in a more impor-
tant question, namely the Church’s exclusive authority to modify
according to its own views and wishes the existing terms and con-
ditions of the union, or, which is the same thing, to define anew,
and, in fact, at any time, the boundaries of its province.
When, at the Reformation, the people of Scotland cast off the
Papal yoke, and formed themselves into a Protestant Church with a
government, according to the Presbyterian form, the Church, thus


formed, entered into a union with the State, and thus became invested
with all the rights and privileges of an established Church. The
result of the negotiations, with a view to a union of Church and State,
was the statute of the Scottish Parliament 1592, which has often been
designated the charter of the Church’s liberties, and in which the
terms and conditions of the compact are embodied. One of the
conditions has reference to the mode of filling vacancies in the min-
isterial charges of the Church. The act is as follows, the spelling
being modernised in order that the document may be more legible.
Act for Abolishing of the Acts contrary to True Ebligion.
Our Sovereign Lord and estates of this present Parliament, following the
loveable and good example of their predecessors, has ratified and approved, and
by the tenour of this present act ratifies and approves all liberties, privileges,
immunities and freedoms whatsoever given and granted by his Highness, his
regent in his name, or any of his predecessors to the true and holy Church pre-
sently established within this realm, and declared in the first act of his Highness
Parliament, the 20th day of Oct. the year of God 1579 years and all and whatso-
ever acts of Parliament and statutes made of before by his Highness and his
regent anent the liberties and freedom of the said Church. And specially the
Ist act of (the) Parliament held at Edinburgh, the 24th, day of Oct., the year
of God 1580 years, with the whole particular acts therein mentioned, which shall
be also sufficient as if the same were herein expressed, and all other acts of Par-
liament made since in favour of the true Church. And also ratifies and approves
the General Assembly appointed by the said Church. And declares that it shall be
lawful to the Church and Ministry, every year at the least, and oftener pro re nata
as occasions and necessity shall require to hold and keep General Assemblies, pro •
viding that the King’s Majesty or his commissioner with them to be appointed
by his Highness, be present at every General Assembly, before the dissolving
thereof name, and appoint time and place, when and where the next General
Assembly shall be held. And in case neither his Majesty nor his said commis-
sioner be present for the time in that town, where the said General Assembly is
held, then and in that case it shall be lawful to the said General Assembly by
themselves to nominate and appoint time and place where the next General
Assembly of the Church shall be kept and held, as they have been in use to do in
times past. And also ratifies and approves the synodal and provincial Assemblies
to be held by the said Church and ministry every year as they have been and
are presently in use to do within every province of this realm. And ratifies
and approves the Presbyteries and particular sessions appointed by the said
Church with the whole jurisdiction and discipline of the same Church agreed
upon by his Majesty in conference had by his Highness with certain of the
ministry convened to that effect. Of the which articles the tenour follows.
Matters to he treated in Provincial Assemblies.
These Assemblies are constituted for weighty matters necessary to be intreated
by mutual consent and assistance of brethren within the province as need re-
quires. This Assembly has power to handle, order, and redress all things
omitted or done amiss in the particular Assemblies. It has power to depose the
office-bearers of that province for good and just causes deserving deprivation.
And generally these Assemblies have the whole power of the particular elderships
whereof they are collected.
Matters to be treated in the Presbyteries.
The power of the Presbyteries is to give diligent labours in the bounds com-
mitted to their charge. That the Churches be kept in good order. To enquire


diligently of naughty and ungodly persons, and to travel to bring them in the
way again by admonition, or threatening of God’s judgments or by correction. It
appertains to the eldership to take heed that the word of God be purely preached
within their bounds, the sacraments rightly ministered, the discipline entertained
and the ecclesiastical goods uncorruptly distributed. It belongs to this kind of
Assemblies to cause the ordinances made by the Assemblies provincial, national,
and general to be kept and put in execution. To make constitutions which con-
cern to TTpenov in the church for the decent order in the particular church where
they govern, providing that they alter no rules made by the provincial or
general Assemblies. And that they make the Provincial Assemblies foresaid
privy of the rules that they shall make, and to abolish constitutions tending to
the hurt of the same. It has power to excommunicate the obstinate, formal
process being led and due interval of times observed. Anent particular
Churches. If they be lawfully ruled by sufficient ministers and session they
have power and jurisdiction in their own congregation in matters ecclesiastical.
And discern and declare the said Assemblies, Presbyteries, and sessions jurisdic-
tion and discipline thereof aforesaid to be in all times coming most just, good
and godly in the same. Notwithstanding of whatsoever statutes, acts, canon,
civil or municipal laws made in the contrary 'to the which and every one of
them these presents shall make express derogation. And because there are
divers acts of Parliament made in favour of the Papistical Church, tending to
the prejudice of the liberty of the true Church of God presently professed within
this realm, jurisdiction and discipline thereof, which stand yet in the books of
the acts of Parliament not abrogated nor annulled ; therefore his Highness and
estates foresaid have abrogated, cassed, and annulled all acts of Parliament made by
any of his Highness’ predecessors, for maintainance of superstition and idolatry,
with all and whatsoever acts, laws and statutes made at any time before the day
and date hereof against the liberty of the true Church, jurisdiction and discipline
thereof, as the same is used and exercised within this realm, and in special that
part of the 7th act of Parliament held at Stirling the 4th day of Nov. 1443, com-
manding obedience to be given to Eugene, the Pope for the time, the Ist and
11th act made by King James the 3rd in his Parliament held at Edinburgh the
24th of February, 1483 years, and all other acts whereby the Pope’s authority
is established. The 47th act of King James the 3rd in bus Parliament held at
Edinburgh, the 20th November, 1469, anent the Saturday and others vigils to
be holy days from even song to even song. Item, that part of the 31st act made
by the Queen Regent in the Parliament held at Edinburgh, the Ist February,
1551, giving special licence for holding of Pashe and Yule. Item the King’s
Majesty and estates foresaid, declare that the 2nd act of the Parliament held
at Edinburgh the 22nd of May, the year of God 1584, shall no ways be prejudicial
nor derogate anything to the privilege that God has given to the spiritual office-
bearers in the Church, concerning heads of religion, matters of heresy,excommunica-
tion, collation or deprivation of ministers, or any such essential censures,
specially grounded and having warrant of the word of God. Item, our said
Sovereign Lords and Estates of Parliament foresaid, abrogates, casses and annuls
the 20th act of the same Parliament held at Edinburgh, the said year 1584,
granting commission to Bishops and other judges constituted in ecclesiastical causes
to receive his Highness’s presentation to benefices, to give collation thereupon,
and to put order in all causes ecclesiastical, which his Majesty and Estates foresaid
declare to be expired in the same and to be null in time coming, and of none
avail, force, nor effect, and therefore ordains all presentations to benefices to be
directed to the particular Presbyteries in all time coming, with full power to them to
give collations thereupon, and to put order to all matters and causes ecclesiastical within
their bounds, according to the discipline of the Church Providing the forsaid Presby-
teries be bound and astricted to receive and admit whatsoever qualified minister pre-
sented by his majesty or other lay patrons.
In the last danse of this Act we have a statement of the terms


and conditions of the compact between the Church and the State, in
so far as the mode of filling vacant charges in the Church is con-
cerned. This clause sets forth that Presbyteries, in all time
coming, shall have full power to give collation —that is to admit to
vacant charges, and to put order to, or settle, all matters and causes
ecclesiastical within their bounds, according to the discipline of the
Church, providing the said Presbyteries be bound and. “ astricted ”
to receive and admit qualified presentees, or persons whom the
Church has declared to be qualified to preach the Gospel, and who
have received presentations to vacant parishes from the Sovereign
or other lay patrons.
As some may read these pages who are not familiar with the de-
tails of the practice of the Church of Scotland, as regards the pre-
paration of candidates for the ministry, it may be as well to explain
that all persons proposing to offer themselves to fill ministerial
charges, must complete a curriculum of study, of at least eight years’
duration, at one of the Universities. During the whole of this
period, both the general conduct of the candidate and his educational
progress are under the supervision of his Presbytery ; and it is only
after strict examination and inquiry that he is declared qualified to
preach the Gospel, when he receives what is called a license, to do
so. It is from this body of licentiates, and from them alone, that
the patron can select a minister for a vacant parish. The Church
has unlimited authority to fix what the qualifications for the minis-
terial office shall be : it can ordain that they shall be many, or that
they shall be few—there is no restriction as to the amount of learn-
ing, or as to proofs of personal piety, or general fitness for the
ministry of the Word, which shall be required of candidates for the
office. When, however, the Church, after due examination, is
satisfied in regard to all these particulars, or any others which it
may tfiinh necessary to be insisted on, the aspirant is admitted into
the class of licentiates ; and whenever he receives a presentation to
a parish from its patron, he is a qualified presentee, whom, by the
terms of the compact, the Presbytery, only, however, after another
and similar examination satisfactorily passed, is bound to admit to
the cure. . . ,
It has been said, that as the Church has the exclusive right to
settle what the qualifications of a licentiate shall be, it would be
competent to it to constitute popular gifts or acceptableness to the
people a qualification to be required. There seem to be no grounds
for this idea. It is plain that the choice is not given to any but
to the patron, and if the patron is to choose who, out of the whole
number of licentiates, is to be the minister of a particular parish,
obviously the people also cannot have the choice. In accepting the
Act of 1592 as embodying terms and conditions of its union with
the State, with which it was satisfied, the Church thereby stipu-
lated that whatever qualifications it might at any future time re-
quire in those whom it would admit to the ministerial office, as long


as that Act remained in force it would not require acceptableness to
the people, as one of them, having in short agreed that acceptable-
ness to the patron should be a qualification, these being two things
which necessarily exclude each other. If in any case they did not
exclude each other, it would of course be merely accidental.
It has also been argued that, as in an Act of Parliament passed
subsequently in the same year, it was enacted, that if, in any par-
ticular instance, the Presbytery should refuse to receive and admit
the presentee, according to the compact, the patron should be
allowed to retain the fruits of the benefice, the Church might law-
fully refuse, provided it relinquished all claim to the temporalities
of the parish. This view we believe to be quite untenable : it pro-
ceeds on the idea that a moral agent has a right of election between
discharging a duty and paying the penalty of refusing to discharge
it—according to which doctrine, he who has suffered punishment
for wrong-doing is on an equality in point of merit with him who
has never done wrong at all, a doctrine which few will be found
willing to uphold, and which we can scarcely believe was a doctrine
held by the founders of our Church.* Suppose, for instance,
that I should enter into an agreement with a' person duly qualified
for the duty, to teach my children, and suppose that, when I en-
quired into the matter, I found that he had not done the duty he
had stipulated to perform, would it free him from all moral blame
if he told me that it was true he had not taught my children, but
he was willing to give up all claim to the stipulated remuneration ?
We by no means intend this to be thought a parallel case with the
one in question—it is adduced merely in the. way of illustration.
What, then, as a matter of fact was it that the Church agreed to
do, when it accepted the Act of 1592, as the “ Charter of its rights
and privileges?” It was, as we think, plainly this, that if the
licentiate whom the patron presented was found unobjectionable
(for before ordination, as already mentioned, he was required to
pass again through a similar ordeal to that through which he had
passed previously to his receiving his license) in respect of learning,
doctrine, life, and general fitness for the ministry, the Presbytery
must give him collation, or, in other words, admit him to the
charge. Whether this was an arrangement or stipulation which the
Church ought to have agreed to is a different question. Upon this
question we do not here enter, our object at this stage being merely
to state what the stipulation was, as a matter of fact.
The Act of 1592, was abrogated in 1649, in so far as lay patronage
* The antecedent original claim of duty remains unaffected, whatever may he?
the amount of penalty which has been paid by the offender ; and as no amount
of suffering endured by him in the way of punishment can expiate his offence,
and vindicate the outraged law of righteousness a Divine sacrifice being
needed for this—so no atonement can ever exempt from the obligation to obey this
eternal and immutable law. There is thus, even in natural reason, both a neces-
sity for an atonement by a Divine Sacrifice, and an unanswerable protest against
every form of Antinomian error.


was concerned, and it was left to the office-bearers of the Church to
elect the pastors of their several congregations. Passing over the
troublous times of the Stuart dynasty we come to the Revolution of
1688, when Presbytery having been restored, the choice of pastors
was still left to the office bearers of the Church. In the reign of
Queen Anne, however, the right of presenting to benefices was
restored to the lay patrons in terms of the original compact of 1592,
and from that period to 1834 the vacant charges of the Church
were filled up in accordance with its provisions.
Of all the ministers who had been admitted to charges in the
Church during the whole of that long period—a period of above a
century and a quarter, it may be said that, with hardly an exception,
they had passed through the door of lay patronage, and every one
without any exception, had solemnly declared, on his admission, that
the Church, as administered in accordance with the law of 1592, was
held by them to be in respect of “ worship, discipline, and govern-
ment founded on, and consonant to, the Holy Scriptures.’ ’ Long before
1834 however, the subject of lay patronage had been before the
General Assembly, and complained of as a grievance ; and although
it was owned, at a later period, that patrons generally had exercised
their rights with far greater deference to the wishes of the people, and
with a more enlightened regard to the welfare and efficiency of the
Church than had formerly been their wont, there was, nevertheless,
more and more becoming evident a growing desire, that the obnox-
ious system should either be greatly modified or altogether abolished.
It was soon found that these views with regard to patronage were
held by a considerable majority of the General Assembly, and it was
resolved, that, as soon as possible, practical effect should be given to
them. The Church had come to see that the terms and conditions of its
connection with the State, in respect of the particular matter of the
appointment of ministers to vacant parishes, to which it was bound
by the law of 1592, were such as it was its duty to get altered and
modified. Instead however of going to the State, and seeking a con-
ference with it, with a view to the attainment of its object, it pro-
ceeded to make the desired alteration of its own authority. Not
even informing the State, its fellow servant, what its views and
wishes were, the General Assembly sought to accomplish its purpose
by passing the celebrated “Veto Act.” The act is as follows.
“That the General Assembly having maturely considered the overtures, do de-
clare that it is a fundamental law of this Church, that no pastor shall be intruded
on any congregation contrary to the will of the people; and in order that this
principle may he carried into full effect, the General Assembly with the consent
of a majority of the presbyteries of this Church do declare, enact, and ordain that
it shall be an instruction to presbyteries that if, at the moderating in of a call to
a vacant pastoral charge, the major part of the male heads of families, members
of the vacant congregation, and in full communion with the Church, shall disap-
prove of the person in whose favour the call is proposed to be moderated
in, such disapproval shall be deemed sufficient ground for the presbytery rejecting
such person, and he shall be rejected accordingly, and the notice thereof forth-;


with given, to all concerned; but that, if the major part of the said heads of
families shall not disapprove of such person to be their pastor, the presbytery shall
proceed with the settlement according to the rules of the Church ; and further
declare, that no person shall be held to be entitled to disapprove, as aforesaid,
who shall refuse, if required, solemnly to declare, in presence of the presby-
tery, that he is actuated by no factious or malicious motive, but solely by a
regard to the spiritual interests of himself or the congregation.”
With regard to this Act of the General Assembly, it is to be ob-
served, in the first place, that although patronage was not expressly
mentioned in it, there was an indirect ecclesiastical sanction given
to the right of the patron to have the initiative in the appointment
of the pastor. This appears more plainly from the regulations, which
were framed at the same time for carrying out the Act, in which it
was provided, that the congregation might reject three presentees of
the patron in succession, if there were sufficient time for the pre-
sentation and rejection of so many in a period of six months, for,
after that, the right of presentation was givep. to the Presbytery.
The vetoists, therefore, whatever views they may have held respecting
lay patronage, evidently were willing to preserve it as the law of
the Church, or at all events they were willing to go on to administer
the affairs of the Church in accordance with that law. And we may
here remark, that it would seem only a fair inference from this,
that lay patronage is not in itself a thing so distasteful to Eree-
Chorchmen that they would not be found in a Church, in which it
was allowed, and that, whatever it may have been, it was not lay
patronage which drove them from the Establishment. Hence, also,
it must be evident that, as Erastianism constitutes—in the estima-
tion of Pree-Churchmen—the “sinful position,” or rather sinful
element in the present constitution of the Church of Scotland, what-
ever they may mean by its Erastianism, they do not mean lay
patronage by it.
But the main thing to be observed respecting the Veto Act, is, that
its provisions are diametrically opposed to those of the Act of the
Scottish Parliamentof 1592, by which the Church was originally estab-
lished. The latter Act declares expressly that the Presbytery must
“ receive and admit ” the person selected from among the licentiates
of the Church by the patron, which means, that the Presbytery'must
“ take him on trials,” as it is called, and if, on due examination as
to his doctrine, life, and learning, as well as fitness in general for
the office of the ministry in the particular charge, he be found quali-
fied, must formally place him in it. As the whole controversy may
be said to hinge on the question, whether the provisions of the Veto
Act were or were not directly opposed to those of the patronage
clause of the Act of 1592, we would advise the reader to turn to the two
Acts (which we have given in full for the express purpose) and
judge for himself. Let him ascertain the point, as he would any
other plain matter of fact; he will then be prepared to form a j uster
estimate of the merits of the controversy.


Vacancies in the Church continued to be filled in accordance with
the provisions of the Veto Act, generally without challenge', for several
years. As early, however, as 1835, a case of vetoing had occurred,
and the patron whose presentee had been rejected, brought the matter
before the Court of Session, the supreme legal judicatory in Scotland,
and obtained a decision to the effect that the rejection was an illegal
act, involving as it did a violation of the terms of the compact be-
tween the Church and the State. The Church appealed to the
House of Lords, but with an unsuccessful result, for that highest
tribunal of the State affirmed the judgment of the Court below.
Thus the Veto Act was adjudged—by the only authority which the
law and constitution of the State—the ordinance of God, recognizes
as competent to interpret the law—to declare in every case what the
law is—to be an illegal Act—an Act which contravened a law of the
statute book of the realm, and which therefore it was not in the power
of the_ Church to pass. The step which the Church next took was to
apply to the Legislature to pass a law to legalise the Veto Act.
The, Government of the day replied, in effect, that as the Veto Act
had been declared to be illegal, it could do nothing in the matter until
that Act was repealed by the Church. This the Church positively
refused to do, and after various unsuccessful attempts to obtain an
enactment from the .Legislature which would either give a legal
sanction to the Veto Act, or which would in some shape or other,
acknowledge the Church’s claim of right to do what it had done
when it passed that Act, the vetoists seceded from the Church, and
formed themselves into a separate body, under the name of the
“Free Church,” having no connection with the State. This
event occurred in 1843, and soon after, a measure, now known
as Lord Aberdeen’s Act, was proposed by the State, and accepted
by the Church, asj a satisfactory settlement of the matters which
had been so long in dispute. By this Act it is provided that if,
not a majority but, any number, however small, of the people of
a parish, offer objections of any kind whatever, to a presentee,
giving the reasons of the objections, if the Presbytery, within
the bounds of which the parish is situated, is of opinion that the
reasons are valid and good, it shall decide against him, and,
while there is of course an appeal to the higher Ecclesiastical Courts,
there is none to the Civil Courts of law. The decision by the Church
courts is final, and cannot possibly be reviewed by a Civil Court.
The following is Lord Aberdeen’s Bill, called also “ The Scotch
Benefices’ Act,” by which all appointments to vacant ministerial
charges in the Church have since been regulated ;
Lord Aberdeen’s Bill respecting the admission op Ministers to Benefices.
“Whereas certain acts of the Parliament of Scotland and of the United King-
dom of Great Britain have declared that the right of collation, in regard to the
settlement of ministers in the parishes to which they may be presented belongs
to the Church, established by law, in that part of the United Kingdom called
Scotland. And whereas provision has been made by these statutes for securing


to the church the exclusive right of examining and admitting any person who
may he presented to a benefice having cure by the patron of such benefice, and
in particular by an act passed in the Parliament of Scotland in the year 1567, c.
7, intituled “ Admission of Ministers of Laick Patronages,” it is statuted and
ordained, that the examination and admission of ministers within this realm he
only in the power of the Kirk, now openly and publicly professed within the
same, the presentation of Laick Patronage always reserved to just and ancient
patrons ; and by an Act passed in the Parliament of Scotland in the year 1592,
c. 114, intituled “Ratification of the Liberty of the true Kirk,” the government of
the Church by Presbyteries, Synods, and General Assemblies, was ratified and
established, and it was ordained that all presentations to benefices he directed to
the particular Presbyteries in all time coming with full power to give collation
thereupon, and to put order to all matters and causes ecclesiastical, within their
bounds according to the discipline of the Kirk, providing the foresaid Presbyte-
ries be bound and astricted to receive and admit whatsoever qualified minister
presented by his Majesty or lay patrons ; and by an Act of the Parliament of
Great Britain, passed in the 10th year of the reign of her Majesty Queen Anne,
(10 Anne, c. 12), intituled “An Act to restore the patrons to their ancient rights
of presenting ministers to the Churches vacant in that part of Great Britain
called Scotland,” the right of the Church to receive and admit persons presented
to benefices, was again recognised and secured; and by an Act of the Parliament
of Great Britain, passed in the sth year of the reign of his Majesty King George
the Ist, (5 G. 1, c. 29), intituled “An Act for making more effectual the laws,
appointing the oaths for security of the government, to he taken by ministers
and preachers in Churches in Scotland, providing that certain oaths should he
taken by ministers and preachers of the Church of Scotland, and for preventing
delays in the supplying or filling up of vacant Churches in Scotlandit is also
delared and enacted that nothing herein contained shall prejudice or diminish the
rights of the Church, as the same now stands by law established as to the trying
of the qualities of any person presented to any Church of benefice ; and whereas
it is expedient to remove any doubt which may exist as to the powers and juris-
diction of the Church as by law established in Scotland in the matter of collation,
and as to the right of the Church to decide that no person he settled in any parish
or benefice having cure against whom or whose settlement, in any such parish or
benefice, there exists any just cause of exception—lt was declared and enacted by
the Queen’s most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal,'and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the authority of the same.
1. That when a presentation to any benefice within that part of the United
Kingdom called Scotland, by the undoubted patron has been laid before the
Presbytery of the hounds, it shall and may he lawful for the Presbytery, as part
and as the commencement of the proceedings in the examination and admission
of the person so presented for the cure of that parish, and of the trial of his gifts
and qualities, to appoint him to preach in the Church of the said parish at such
times as the Presbytery may direct, or as may he directed by any regulations of
the General Assembly to that effect; and after the presentee shall have preached
in the parish Church, according to the direction of the Presbytery, the Presbytery
or a committee of their number, shall meet after due notice, at the said Church,
and shall intimate, that if any one or more parishioners being members of the
congregation, have any objection to the individual so presented, in respect to his
ministerial gifts and qualities, either in general or with reference to that particular
parish, or any reason to state, against his settlement in that parish, and which
objections or reasons do not infer matter of charge against the presentee to he
prosecuted and followed out according to the forms and discipline of the Church,
the Presbytery are ready, either then or at their next meeting, to receive the
same in writing, or to write down the same in their minutes, in the form and
manner which such parishioners may desire.
2. That the objections or reasons aforesaid shall he fully considered and dis-
posed of by the Presbytery by whom they are to be cognosced and determined


on judicially, or shall be referred by the Presbytery to the superior judicatory of
the Church for decision, as the Presbytery may see cause, the presentee and all
parties having interest, being heard in either case on the same ; and the Presbytery,
or other judicatory of the Church, to whom the said objections or reasons shall
he stated or referred, as aforesaid, shall, in cognoscing and determining on the
same judicially, have regard only to such objections and reasons so stated as are
personal to the presentee, in regard to his ministerial gifts and qualities, either
in general or with respect to that particular parish, but shall be entitled to have
regard to the whole circumstances and condition of the parish, to the spiritual
welfare and edification of the people, and to the character and number of per-
sons by whom the said objections or reasons shall be preferred; and if the Pres-
bytery or other judicatory of the Church shall come to the conclusion, as their
judgment on the whole matter, that the said objections or reasons (or any of
them) are well founded, and that in respect thereof the individual presented is
not a qualified and suitable person for the functions of the ministry in that par-
ticular parish, and ought not to be settled in the same, they shall pronounce a
deliverance to that effect, and shall set forth and specify in such deliverance, the
special ground or grounds on which it is founded, and in respect of which they
find that the presentee is not qualified for the charge, and in which event they
shall intimate their deliverance respecting the presentee to the patron, who shall
thereupon have power to issue another presentation, within the period of six
calendar months after the date of such deliverance, if no appeal shall be taken to
a superior judicatory of the Church, or in the event of an appeal being taken to
the superior judicatory of the Church, then within six months after the date of
the judgment of the superior judicatory of the Church affirming the deliverance
of the inferior judicatory of the Church or dismissing the appeal.
3. That if the Presbytery or other judicatory of the Church, after considering
all the objections aforesaid to the presentee, and all the reasons stated against his
settlement in that particular parish shall be satisfied, in the discharge of their
functions and in the exercise of their authority and duty as ministers of the G-os-
pel, and as office-bearers in the Church, that no good objections against the in-
dividual or no good reason against his settlement, has been stated as aforesaid,
or that the objections and reasons stated are pot truly founded in any objection
personal to the presentee, in regard to his ministerial gifts and qualities, either
in general or with reference to that particular parish, or arise from causeless
prejudices, the said Presbytery or other judicatory of the Church shall repel the
same, and, subject to the right of appeal as hereinafter provided, shall complete
the further trials and examination of the presentee; _ and, if found by them to bo
qualified for the ministry in that parish, shall admit and receive him into the
benefice as by law provided. . , - ~
4. That it shall not be lawful for any Presbytery or other judicatory ot the
Church to reject any presentee upon the ground of any mere dissent or dislike,
expressed by any part of the congregation of the parish to which he is presented,
and which dissent or dislike shall not be founded upon objections or reasons to bo
cognosced, judged of, and determined in the manner aforesaid, by the said Ires-
bytery or other judicatory of the Church.
5. That it shall be in the power of the presentee, patron, or objectors to appeal
from any deliverance, pronounced as aforesaid, by the said Presbytery, acting
within its competency as a judicatory of the Church, which appeal shall he ex-
clusively to the superior judicatories of the Church, according to the forms and
government of the Church of Scotland, as by law established.
6. And whereas by an Act of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
of date 29th May, 1835, it was made an instruction to Presbyteries that if at the
moderating in of a call to a vacant parish, the major part of the male heads of
families, members of the vacant congregation, and in full communion with the
Church, shall disapprove of the person in whose favor the call is proposed to be
moderated in, such disapproval shall be deemed sufficient ground for the Pres-
bytery rejecting such person, and that ho shall be rejected accordingly; and


certain regulations were passed for carrying the said instructions into effect. And
whereas it has been found by final judgment of the Court of Session, affirmed by
the House of Lords, that a Presbytery acting in pursuance of said Act of As-
sembly and regulation refusing to take trial of the qualifications of a presentee,
and rejecting him on the sole ground that a majority of the male heads of fami-
lies communicants in the said parish have dissented, without any reasons
assigned, from his admission as minister, acted illegally and in violation of their
duty, and contrary to the provisions of certain statutes of the realm, and parti-
cularly the statute of the 10th year of Queen Anne, (10 Anne, c. 12), intituled
“An Act to restore patrons to their ancient rights of presenting ministers to the
Churches vacant in that part of Great Britain called Scotland. And whereas in
some instances a presentee has in pursuance of the said Act of Assembly and
regulations relative thereto been rejected by a Presbytery because of the dissents
of male heads of families communicants, and a presentation has thereafter been
issued in favor of a second or subsequent presentee who has been settled in the
same benefice, and whose settlement therein and right thereto, has not been
questioned in any Court of law. And whereas it is expedient that such settle-
ment in and right to the benefice should he secured and protected from future
challenge, on the ground of the incompetency of the rejection of the first or prior
presentee. That it shall not he competent to challenge the settlement or right
to the benefice of any such second or subsequent presentee, or to maintain any
proceedings at law against the Presbytery or ministers thereof, or other par-
ties on account of such rejection, unless such challenge or proceedings shall have
been instituted by action raised in a Court of law before the Ist day of May last.
It will be seen, by a reference to the provisions of this measure,
which as embodying the new terms and conditions of the compact be-
tween the Church and the State, as respects the appointment of
ministers, now took the place of the patronage clause of the Act of
1592, that it gives ample liberty to the people to object to the pre-
sentee at the earliest stage of his trials. He no sooner receives the
presentation to a parish, than he comes before the people and affords
them an opportunity of judging of his ministerial gifts and qualifi-
cations, by preaching in the vacant pulpit. The congregation
having heard him, may offer any kind of objection to him they may
think fit. Nor, in order to be effective, is it necessary that the
dissent be by a majority of the congregation, any number, however
small, even one person may dissent, provided reasons be given ; and
if the Presbytery think the reasons of sufficient weight, it can set him
aside, and he cannot possibly be the minister of that parish. The
difference between the provisions of this measure and those of the
Veto Act lies in this—that according to the latter the dissent must
be by a majority of the congregation, while the smallest minority
may dissent according to the former, which, however, requires
reasons of dissent to be assigned—the Veto Act having provided
for a dissent without reasons. It will also be seen that there is no
appeal from the Ecclesiastical to the Civil Courts allowed by Lord
Aberdeen’s Act.


CHAPTEE 111.
THE APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES AND INFERENCE.
In view of the facts which have just been narrated, and, referring
to the principles laid down in our first chapter, the question now is,
what judgment are we to form of the conduct of those who first
passed the Veto law in the General Assembly, and then because they
failed to get the state to admit the Church’s right to alter by its
own authority the terms and conditions of the union, by legalising
that Act—or to admit the right in some other way, threw up all
connection with the Church which, on their entrance into it, every
one of them had solemnly declared to be in their belief a Church,
in respect of “worship, discipline, and government, founded on
and consonant to the Holy Scriptures.” We can hardly under-
stand how any intelligent and unprejudiced person can say that the
judgment ought to be one of approval. We do not say, that the
Church was wrong in seeking some modification of the original terms
and conditions of the union subsisting between itself and the state; but
we do say, that the church was wrong in not, in the first instance, and
before taking any step of its own authority, seeking a conference
with the state, with a view to its obtaining such a modification as it
deemed necessary. The Church would have been perfectly justified
in asking the consent of the State, even to the entire abolition of lay
patronage, and our decided opinion is, that this was the object it
ought to have aimed at. It has always appeared to us, that, what-
ever may be said in defence of its having been submitted to, when
originally introduced into the church, lay patronage is on every
account highly objectionable, and that it ought to have been
abolished long ago. But then it must, at the same time, be admit-
ted, that it was not competent to the church of its own authority to
abolish it, and if not to abolish it, neither was it competent to it to
alter or modify the system in any way. The first false step
which the Church took, and which indeed led to all the others—
that which was in fact the origo mali in the whole matter from
beginning to end, was, not the resolution to which it had come
respecting the necessity of getting patronage modified or abolished,
but its resolution not to go to the state —its resolution to take upon
itself the authority to do what it wanted to be done in the matter.
It is really difficult to understand how the leaders of the move-
ment should have come to such a fatal resolution. The fundamen-
tal principles of a Protestant Established Church bound them to
act otherwise. By these principles it is incontestible, that, as the
Church and the State must be independent parties to the fixing of
the terms and conditions of the union, so both must be independent
parties to any subsequent modification of them.


It lias been said, however, in defence of the course taken by the
General Assembly when it passed the Veto Act, that it had reason to
believe that, in passing it, it was not exceeding its powers ; the Act
itself having been declared, by those competent to form an opinion
on the subject, to be not in opposition to the law of patronage as
laid down in the Act of 1592, and therefore not to involve any inter-
ference with the terms and condition's of State-connection. We
would advise those, who wish to arrive at a sound judgment as to
whether there ever were, or could be, any rational grounds for such a
belief, not to listen to what either side in the controversy has to
say, but simply to turn to the two Acts and to judge for themselves.
When any one tells us, that he believes this or that, our proper course
is to pay no attentton to the mere asseveration, but to ask him for
his grounds and reasons, and to examine and weigh these for our-
selves. We believe it to be impossible for any man, possessed of
common intelligence and influenced by a spirit of fairness and
impartiality, after an examination of all the grounds and reasons
which can be adduced, to come to any other conclusion than that the
belief referred to, if ever sincerely held, was anything else but a
delusion.
The Free Church defenders draw largely from the “Books
of Discipline,” and other Standards of the Church in support
of their cause. They argue that the principle of non-intru-
sion of ministers, or the not placing of pastors over congregations
when the congregations have expressed their unwillingness
to receive them is plainly laid down in these Standards, and
that, therefore, in enacting the Yeto law to secure this prin-
ciple they only did, what the law and constitution of the Church
authorised. It is really unaccountable that they should not
see and acknowledge, that the real question at issue is, not what do
the Standards of the Church contain, but, are these Standards
in their entirety included in the terms and conditions of the
the union as fixed by the statute of 1592. We are not concerned in
our present argument to determine how far or to what extent the
Standards received civil sanction by that Act. It has indeed been
argued, that, because the Act contains the phrase, “ according to the
discipline of the Church,” in the last clause but one which is as fol-
lows, ‘ ‘ and therefore ordains all presentations to benefices to be
directed to the particular Presbyteries in all time coming, with full
power to them to give collations thereupon, and to put order to all
matters and causes ecclesiastical, according to the discipline of the
Church,” the Books of Discipline were thereby sanctioned by the state.
Had the Act terminated with the clause referred to, this interpretation
would doubtless be the right one. But unfortunately for our opponents
it does not end with that clause. Another is added, qualifying it in a
very material way; it is as follows, “ providing the foresaid Presby-
teries be bound and ‘ astricted ’ to receive and admit whatsoever
qualified minister presented by his Majesty or other laick patrons.”


The two clauses beginning with “ and therefore ordains,” and ending
with “ laick patrons,” is only one sentence ; for though, in modern
publications of the laws of the realms, a period, or full point, is gener-
ally found after the phrase “ discipline of the Church,” as if the
clause ending there, formed a complete sentence, it is not so in
original copies of these laws. The last clause, indeed, would be
unmeaning, were it not read in connection with what goes before.
Now it might be thought impossible, that any one should mistake
the meaning of what is here enacted; and we cannot conceive how
any one who wished simply to discover what the meaning is, could
put any other interpretation upon the statute, than, that while
everything contained in the Books of Discipline may be consented
to by the state, as entering into the terms and conditions of
the alliance, that which these books may contain, in reference
to the appointment of ministers to vacant charges, is excepted, and
an arrangement, other than that found in them, is substituted in
its place. We can, however, point out many instances in which the
Free Church Advocates treat the statute in a very different way.
They stop short at the phrase “ discipline of the Church,” and
triumphantly exclaim, See, our Books of Discipline are expressly
mentioned in the Act of 1592, and are in fact enacted and made statute
law by that Act. And, hence, in taking our stand upon the non-
intrusion principle laid down in our Books of Discipline we are only
carrying out the terms of the Church’s compact with the State.’ It
is really impossible to understand, how any person of ordinary candour
and intelligence could ever dream of adopting and defending such an
interpretation. It is as if, on making a purchase of some article
offered for sale, one should say, in offering a price, 1 1 will give you
this pound for it, provided you give me back five shillings of change.’
and the seller should insist, after receiving the pound, that
he was not bound to return the five shillings. He would argue, and,
with as much soundness as Free Churchmen, in the case of the statute
in question.— ‘ Was it not our agreement that you were to give me
a pound? Were not the words ‘I will give you this pound,’ those
which were used ? ” As this; of course, could not be denied his claim
to the whole pound on this principle of interpretation, would be held
to be good. On the same principle our first parents also might have
plausibly enough argued, that they had done no wrong by eating of
the fruit of the forbidden tree—the command given them having run
in the words, “ of every tree of the garden thou shalt freely eat,” —
ignoring of course the prohibitive clause, ‘ But of the tree of know-
ledge, which is in the midst of the garden, thou shalt not eat.’
Everyone must see the absurdity of all this ; it is really too puerile
to be dwelt upon even for a single moment. It shows, however,
to what sorry shifts the supporters of an indefensible cause will
sometimes have recourse.
If, then, according to the terms of the statute of 1592, the Church
could not enact such a law, for its guidance in placing ministers in


vacant charges, as the Veto Act, having decided that it could
not go on any longer with patronage—a decision to which we see
no objection—what, according to the principles of an established
Cliureh, was its plain duty ? Was it not to go to its fellow servant
the State equally with itself a servant of Christ, and under
responsibility solely to Him as its Head—and to ask it to hear
what it (the Church) had to say in the matter, with a view to obtain
its consent to such an alteration of what had hitherto been the
terms and conditions of their connexion, as it deemed necessary?
In not doing this, was not the Church guilty of a plain dereliction of
duty ?
We may here advert to the unaccountable degree of unacquaint-
ance with the facts of the case, which prevails among Free-Church-
men generally, at least in this Colony, in regard to this very matter.
We are always told by them, that the Church did, in the first
instance, and before passing the Yeto Act, seek a conference with the
State ; and that it was only after it had failed to bring the State to
reason, as they put it, that the Church resolved to take its own course.
Nothing can be farther from the truth, as a matter of fact. The
Church did not take any such step : it did not even intimate to the
State what its views and wishes were, but proceeded at once deli-
berately to the work of re-modelling, according to its own views,
the whole terms and conditions of the alliance, as these had refer-
ence to the appointment of ministers to vacant charges, as if it
had been a matter about which there had been nothing fixed and
determined by those terms and conditions. As the matter of fact
cannot be denied, so we see no possible way in which the conduct
of the Free-Church party can be vindicated. Hoes the Word of
God, to wfiieh Free-Churchmen so often, and most properly, appeal,
countenance the violation of a plain contract? We put this to the
conscience of every Free-Churchman who reads this. H you enter
into a contract, believing that it is Christ’s will that you should so
enter, is it not Christ’s will that you should fulfil the contract, or,
if you cannot, that you should seek a consultation with the other
party, with a view to a modification of the terms ? Do you not
resist His authority when you refuse to do so ? Can you thus play
fast and loose with His eternal laws of truth and righteousness ?
We repeat, this is a matter for every Free-Churchman seriously to
ponder, as between his own conscience and that Divine Master whom
he and we equally profess to serve.
We are here forcibly reminded of the treatment, which the moral
law received, at the hands of the Scribes and Pharisees of our Lord’s
day, and cannot help seeing a strong analogy between that treat-
ment, and the way in which the defenders of the Free-Church deal
with plain matters of duty in this controversy. Those ‘ ‘ blind guides ’ ’
made no scruple of setting at nought the plainest duties. Thus, our
Lord tells us that they set at nought without any scruple the duty
of children to support their parents when in poverty. They taught


the children to say “ Corban,” and when they said “ Corban ”
they were, according to this teaching, “ free ” from this eternal and
immutable moral obligation. The Free-Church leaders were morally
bound to consult their fellow servant in the matter in question, but
they plead allegiance to Christ, and they are “ free.” Why—the
duty of consulting the fellow servant is allegiance to Christ—not
to fulfil this duty is a breach of allegiance to Christ. Does, then,
allegiance to Christ justify a breach of allegiance to Christ ?
The sin, of which the Free Church party was guilty, in not, in the
first instance, seeking a conference with the State, with a view to
a re-consideration and re-adjustment of the terms and conditions of
the alliance, must be seen to be the greater, when we view it in
connexion with the obvious duty, which is imposed upon the Church,
as a divinely appointed teaching institution. By not going to the
State, in the way we have insisted on, the Church, in point of fact,
abnegated its function, as appointed by God, to hold forth, for the
instruction of rulers as well as their subjects, His immutable Word
of truth and righteousness. The Church’s duty, in the emergency
which had arisen—that is, when it had come to see that the law of
patronage was an evil, and that, in this matter, there must be an
alteration of the terms and conditions of the union—was, to have
put itself in communication with the State, and plied the men whom
they found administering its affairs, with every argument, drawn
from Scripture and reason, which might have been thought calcu-
lated to convince them, that its proposals were such as ought to be
adopted. The duty of thus teaching the State was a duty imposed
on the Church by its Great Head, and by failing to discharge it
the Free-Church party were guilty of rebelhon against Him. They
were willing enough to dictate to the State, to pass such laws as they
thought proper, without deigning even to tell the State what they
wished and intended to do —and then to demand authoritatively
that the State should receive their ordinances, and give them the
sanction of its authority, but they were not willing to perform, to
the State, the office of a meek and lowly Teacher , of righteousness,
after the example of Him, of whose Headship and “ crown rights,”
nevertheless, if we would believe them, they were the sole guardian
defenders. They call Him Lord, Lord, but they do not the things
which He commands.
It is urged, of course, on the other side, as already stated, that
the leaders in the Free-Church movement did not “consider” or
believe that the Veto Act involved any violation of the terms of the
compact. We have shown, we think, conclusively, that there are
no rational grounds to warrant any such belief. But, granting it
were otherwise, and that it were possible to point out some colour-
able grounds for this persuasion, why was it, that, when they found
that they were mistaken in their belief, they did not immediately
repeal the law ? Why did they not act on the advice given by Dr.
Chalmers, on the receipt of the intelligence that the Veto Act had


been pronounced, by the only competent authority, to be illegal ?
“ What,” said he, with that singleness of eye and instinctive
sense of what is right, by which all truly great Christian men are
distinguished, “ What is now the Church’s proper outgoing from
the position in which she, of course, finds herself? We have no
hesitation in saying that the first step of such an outgoing is to
repeal the Veto law ; there is no inconsistency here, the inconsistency
were all on the other side in persevering with the law.” Another
eminent Free Churchman, Mr. J. C. Colquhoun, M.P., says, “I have
always held this language to the Church, that she ought to repeal the
Veto Act. I need not say that I have the highest respect for the
courts of law. I think the passing of that Act was a trespass beyond
the Church’s bounds, and I am happy to have Dr. Chalmers on my
side because he has stated, that, from the first, he doubted whether
the Church had the power to pass the Veto Act, and, in last
May, I advised him to get that law repealed.” These were
wise counsels, but these wise counsels were not, alas! fol-
lowed—the vetoists resolved to stand by their measure, and
the state, the Church’s fellow-servant of Christ, was set at
defiance. And now at the last the vetoists go to the State—
and this late approach to the State .is represented by them as
a fulfilment of the duty of seeking a conference with it, with a view
to their required re-adjustment of the terms of the alliance. But
they do not go with a respectful request to consider their proposals,
which surely was no more than was due to the Church’s [fellow-
servant—but they go with a demand—a ‘ claim of right.’ And what
does this claim of right amount to, nay, what does it set forth in
plain terms? Not that the State should consent to admit non-
intrusion into the terms and conditions of the Union, (for it is no
longer ‘ the rights of the Christian people' which is the question at
stake, but it is the Church's power) but that the State by an express
civil enactment, should sanction the Church’s power to alter and
modify the terms and conditions of union of its own authority and
as it thinks proper in all time coming. Christ, as the Head
of the Church and the State had, in effect, said to both
(according to the principles they both held), “You are indepen-
dent servants of mine—that is servants of mine independent of
each other —my will is that you should unite —the union is to be
formed at my command. The termp are to be fixed by you only in
mutual conference and consultation; and any alteration which either
of you may think to be desirable at any subsequent period, is to be
made only in mutual conference and consultation. If either of you
claim to interfere with the terms before consulting the other, or re-
solve to stand by any resolutions, come to, in any other way, than
by mutual consultation, you will rebel against me.”
The Headship of Christ over the Church and the State involves
not the indirect and mediate, but thn direct and immediate responsi-
bility of both to Him. The duties of both flow from this responsi-


bility. One duty, in all matters connected with their alliance, is to
do nothing in the way of interfering with the terms of it, without
mutual consultation. Hence for either, of its own authority, and
without such consultation to do any thing whatever, whether by a
veto law or in any other way, by which the terms and conditions
may be affected, is plainly a violation of duty to Christ, and hence
a violation of His Headship. After determining that something
ought to be done in the matter of patronage, to place the whole
arrangement respecting the appointment of ministers on a different
footing, from what had hitherto obtained, the path of duty for the
Church, expressly marked out by Christ, was, to go to the State,
and give it an opportunity, first, of ascertaining for itself from the
Word of God, what its duty was, and next, of adding the contri-
bution of its intelligence and wisdom to the intelligence and wis-
dom of its fellow servant, in order to discover the best method of
giving practical effect to such new views of duty as we may suppose
both had now come to entertain. Has the one fellow servant not
as good a right to have an opportunity of consulting the Word of
God, for its guidance, in all matters connected with the alliance,
as the other ? For the one to deny this right to the other, or to
prevent the exercise of it, is to assume the mastery and headship
over that other; and thus, when the vetoists denied to the State
the right to be consulted, and to form its own views of duty, under
responsibility to Christ alone, they put themselves in the place of
Christ in relation to the State—they dethroned Him and set up them-
selves. The Yeto law and non-intrusion were not rejected by the
State on their own merits, but on the ground that it was not in the
way of proposal , but in the way of demand , that they came before
the State. And when the matter was taken up, the State in effect
said, and said very properly, “We have no objection to agree to
anything, that you can show, by an appeal to Scripture and reason
we ought to agree to, in regard to the people’s rights—but we
cannot agree to that entirely different matter, you have mixed up
with the people’s rights, namely, that which will involve a right of
power and authority in the Church, which, as a Protestant Church,
it does not and cannot possess. The question between us, is, not
that of the popular election of ministers, or non-intrusion, or any
thing in which the rights and interests of the Christian people are
concerned, it is solely a question of the Church s power. And as
the power you claim for the Church is what, by the principles of
Protestantism applied'to the question of State and Church alliance,
no Church ought to possess —as it in fact is Popish power —we must,
in obedience to the authority of Him, who is our common Lord and
Master, resist your demand. We must do so, or abnegate the
functions which He has committed to us; this is the only alterna-
tive.” The question was no longer one which respected the appoint-
ment of ministers to vacant charges, it had now merged in one to
which the vetoists attached far more importance, namely, what they


called “ the independence of the Church Courts,” or in other words
the Church’s power and authority. Certain ministers, who had all
along held that the passing of the Veto Act was ultra vires or beyond
the power of the Church, and who, now that that Act had been de-
clared by the Court of Appeal to be illegal, considered, that, in
discharging their own duties as ministers of the Established Church,
they were bound to disregard it, were deposed and declared to be
no longer ministers of the Church. Their pulpits being thus held
to be vacant, other ministers sent by the dominant party in the
Assembly went to preach in their parishes. The Court of Session
on being applied to, issued an interdict to prevent this. The vetoists
then complained of the encroachments of the Civil Courts on the
Church’s province the interference of the Civil Power in the
administration of its affairs. They said the Civil Courts had inter-
dicted them from preaching the Gospel, administering religious
ordinances, and exercising discipline in the Church. Of course,
when a minister of religion announces his intention to preach the
Gospel in any particular place, it does appear a very heinous
affair for a Civil Court to issue an interdict to prevent him. But
when it is discovered, that it is in the character of a minister of a
Church in alliance with the State, and that he is sent by the
authority of a body which sets the State at defiance which
insists upon occupying the position and enjoying the rights of such
a Church, although it refuses to fulfil the conditions attached to
the enjoyment of these rights,—conditions it had itself expressly
agreed to, —the whole affair presents itself under a very different
aspect. We trust that no member of the Free Church who may
read these pages, will take offence at our employing the illustration
of which we are about to make use. He may rest assured that it is
not employed out of any disrespect to him, or to the Church to which
he belongs, but solely because we cannot find a more apposite illus-
tration. Passing along one of the streets of your city, you are met
by an officer of the police dragging a man along to put him in a
place of confinement. The man cries out bitterly, ‘ ‘ See, how I am.
used ; I am seized in the public streets, deprived of my liberty, and
dragged off to prison. Is it possible that any one in a free country
can be subjected to such tyrannical oppression ?” Now, if this were
the whole of the matter, the case would indeed be a gross infringe-
ment of the individual’s liberty; but, unfortunately for the justice
of the complaint, it is not the whole of the matter. The fact is, as
you find on inquiry, the man had been detected in the commission
of a serious offence, and hence the treatment to which he had been
subjected. A minister, or body of ministers, cannot be allowed even to
preach the Gospel just wherever, and however, he or they may think
proper. If I find on entering my Church for public worship, that my
pulpit has been forcibly taken possession of by one who has no right
there, I think I might be justified in interdicting him from preaching
the Gospel just there and then. The vetoist party had violated


the conditions—which they themselves had voluntarily agreed to
—of the compact between Church and State; so far, therefore, as
that party was concerned, the Church had disestablished itself, and
the compact was at an end. Could it be expected that it would be
allowed, nevertheless, to occupy the pulpits of the establishment, and
to exercise discipline as if it were still in union with the State ? The
thing is preposterous. The moment that the vetoists found that the
State would not accede to their demands, they ought to have con-
sidered that they were no longer ministers of the Church of Scot-
land, or the Church in union with the State, and they should have
ceased to do any thing in the way of exercising their functions as
ministers of that Church. In any other character, and elsewhere,
than within the establishment, they could preach and exercise dis-
cipline as they might think fit, there being none to make them afraid.
These so called encroachments o± the Civil Courts on the jurisdic-
tion of the Church Courts, thus led to a shifting of the controversy,
from the ground of the veto and non-intrusion to the ground of the
spiritual independence of the Church Courts. The controversy, in-
deed, on either ground, was substantially the same, but the latter
was now seen by the vetoists to be by far the more important of the
two; and the truth is, that if they had obtained from the Legisla-
ture all that they held to be comprehended in the claim of spiritual
independence, they would no longer have needed to go to the State
for non-intrusion, or for any other thing they might have wished.
Everything would have been theirs, by the simple assertion of
their right to it —every thing in the way of power or privilege
which they might have set their hearts upon ; for the State itself
would have been laid in abject helplessness at their feet. The
spiritual independence of the Church, as they understood it, was
simply the thin end of the wedge, which the enlightened Christianity
of tfie age alone could have prevented from being driven home, to
the rending asunder of our Protestant Constitution, and scattering
to the winds all those precious liberties, both civil and religious, for
which our patriot forefathers bled and died. It was neither more
nor less than a spiritual despotism, which would have been set up in
the land. We need scarcely say, that it was not merely nor mainly
because the jurisdiction was foreign, that our country cast off the
Papal yoke. It was irresponsible priestly power itself—a plant
which can grow and flourish in any clime, that it sought to
root out. And we all know that there might be Popery in the
Hall at Canonmills, Edinburgh, as well as in the Vatican at Home.
That the independence, which the vetoists claimed for the Church
Courts amounted substantially to a claim of Popish power and
authority, must appear self-evident, if we only consider the circum-
stances out of which the. claim arose—their own declarations respect-
ing it—and the way in which they gave practical effect to it after they
had seceded from the Church, and considered themselves in full
possession of what they thought to be their independence. It was


because they were not allowed to alter the terms and conditions of
State-connexion, or, in other words, to extend the boundaries of the
Church’s province of their own authority, that they went to the
State with the new claim of spiritual independence, and they said
that nothing would satisfy them but a law which would protect them
against any interference whatever from the Civil Courts even, though
they should do wrong. The Church must be empowered by law to
carry out the decisions of its courts, even though these decisions
should be manifestly contrary to every principle of reason, Scripture,
or common sense. If they were asked, if they desired an Act of
Parliament to authorise them to do just what they liked, whether
right or wrong, they said in reply, “ The independence we claim is
liberty to do all that a Church ought to do within its own province.”
When further asked by what authority the boundaries of the province
are to be fixed, their answer was, “By the authority of the Word
of God.” The next question brings out the true character of the
claim, namely, Who is to interpret the Word of God authoritatively
for the fixing of the boundaries ? “ The Church of course.” Thus,
the Church, interpreting the sacred Scriptures for itself—that is,
putting such an interpretation upon them as suits its own views, —
which is simply the Popish claim, —ought to have authority to mark
out, according to such interpretation, the boundaries of its own pro-
vince. The insertion of a few more links in the chain of argument
does not, we see, lead to a different conclusion —the power claimed
is still the same —legal authority to do what they liked. These were
the boundaries of the province, and to protect the Church within these
boundaries—to have exclusive jurisdiction within a province thus
fixed, the vetoist modestly asked a law from the Legislature. Every
one must see that if such a power had been given, the State and all
the interests it protects would have been placed under a priestly
domination, responsible only to itself. No Church, at least no
Protestant Church, can claim any power or privilege on the ground
of the word of God, until it has given its interpretation of the word of
God in regard to the particular matter , by which interpretation also
it is implied that it will abide. A claim on the part of a Church to
put its own interpretation on the sacred Scriptures at any time, and
in every emergency, and to carry out at its discretion the interpreta-
tion to civil consequences, is a claim which no Protestant State can
possibly admit and sanction.
This, then, is what the Free Church says it means by spiritual
independence ; and to show that it was really in earnest in holding
this view, when it thought it had got the thing itself, it proceeded
to act upon it, the moment that an opportunity presented itself. In
the M‘Millan case, to which reference has already been made, it
just put the thing to the test, by way of showing to the world, we
suppose, what spiritual independence really is. We need not
give the details; but we believe the case was substantially this.
In proceeding with the discipline which the case called for, the


Church court violated its own order of procedure, considering,
doubtless, that it was a matter of little moment whether the pro-
ceedings were regular—were in accordance with the rules and
regulations which had been agreed to at its original institution, or
not —now that it was in the full possession of its “ independence.”
It soon found out, however, that it had been mistaken, for the
party who had been thus irregularly dealt with in the way of
discipline, appealed to the Civil Court, which entertained the
appeal, and decided that it must interfere to protect him. Thus the
delusion respecting independence was rudely dispelled, and the Free
Church now finds itself not one whit freer than it was when in con-
nexion with the State.
Had the Free Church party obtained a law to protect the Church
in the unlimited powers which it claimed —such powers for instance
as those it had exercised in the case just referred to—it would have
been doubtless “ free ” and independent; but it would have been
the freedom and independence of Popery. The law, which it de-
manded of the Legislature to pass for it, was one which we can only
truly describe, though most certainly not with any intention to give
offence, as a law to legalise and protect lawlessness. No voluntary
or dissenting Church possesses the power which the Free Church
claims ; all such Churches, indeed all organised bodies of men and
societies whatever, are controlled by constitutional law. They can
neither set up an organization nor carry on operations other than
this law allows. A dissenting Church may interpret Scripture as it
pleases, and carry out its interpretation in the administration of its
affairs as it pleases, aye and until its acts affect the civil things of
person and property —when the only thing which will save it from
civil penalties, will be its being able to show that its proceedings
have been regular, and in accordance with the voluntary compact
by which the members had originally bound themselves. The task
to prove this in a court of law is so difficult, and attended with so
many risks, that it is seldom attempted. Some other device is
generally fallen upon, such as getting the party whose conduct has
called for the exercise of discipline, to resign his office voluntarily ;
and thus extremities are avoided.
Montesquieu defines liberty to be the power to do, not what one
likes, but what one ought , to do. (We quote from memory, not
having at present access to the “ Esprit des lots ”). Gospel liberty—
the liberty with which Christ makes his people free—is defined to
consist in the believer’s being, “ not without law to God, but under
the law to Christ.” Christ’s yolce is His people’s liberty—the ser-
vice of God is their perfect freedom. Liberty without law is not
freedom, but licentiousness. Everything that a moral agent does,
or can do, as such, he does by law, and when he ceases to act by
law, he ceases to be a moral agent.
In what, then, does the spiritual independence of the Church,
rightly viewed, consist ? It consists in a free and unchallengeable


liberty to do whatever it shall deem to be fit and proper to be done
within the constitutional compact. To illustrate this, we have to
observe that in a Protestant constitutional State—that is a State
in which the subjects are governed in a constitutional way—by
law, not by the mere will of a despot, and from which all other
authority, whether called by the name of Popery, or by any other
name, is excluded, a tacit compact has been entered into between
every individual subject and that State ; and if between every indi-
vidual subject, so also between every society or body of men which
exists within its pale. Every Christian man, at least, before giving
in his adherence to this compact, is supposed to have interpreted
the sacred Scriptures for himself, by the exercise of the inalienable
right of private judgment, which Protestantism won for him, with
the aid, of course, of the Church as the Divinely-appointed Teacher,
but not the irresponsible authoritative controller of the consciences
of men. He consents to the compact because he finds, on examina-
tion, that the terms and conditions of it agree with his interpreta-
tion of the Word of God. The terms and conditions of the compact
mark off the precise province within which according to his inter-
pretation of Scripture he ought to confine his actings—a province
which, were it less extended, would deprive him of liberties he
ought to possess, and which, were it more extended, would enable
him to encroach on the liberties of other men, and this, in other
words, would be only unbridled licentiousness. His interpretation of
Scripture, from which his consent to the compact proceeds, may
be said to be embodied in the terms and conditions of the compact,
and as embodied there it is necessarily fixed; and while the
compact lasts, or rather while the conditions of it remain what
they originally were, he is under an obligation to stand by the in-
terpretation. Should new light dawn upon him, as doubtless it
may, and in all likelihood will, and should he feel compelled to
adopt a new interpretation of Scripture, he is at liberty to do it,
but so as not at once, and of his own authority, to tamper with the
terms of the compact. He must seek to get others to adopt his new
views, that by their influence, united to his own, new terms and
conditions—such terms and conditions as his new interpretation of
Scripture may demand—may be admitted into the compact. What
is thus virtually done by every man individually (not that every man,
or perhaps any man, does so actually, but the true theory of a Pro-
testant State implies this), and by all societies and bodies of men,
including Churches, namely, assenting to the compact is the same
thing that is done by a Church when it enters into an alliance
with the State. The only difference, between this last and the
other cases, is, that in the former it is the general compact—in the
latter it is a particular one—a compact made by the State with a
particular body, having distinct and specific terms. And in the
case of the Church entering into alliance with the State it is at
liberty to adopt any interpretation of Scripture which may seem to


it to be the true one, before the formation of the alliance, but when
the alliance has been formed, and the interpretation embodied in the
terms and conditions of the compact, no change in the interpreta-
tion can be allowed, while the compact lasts. Any new interpreta-
tion subsequently adopted can be admitted into the terms only with
the consent of the other party—the State, with whom the alliance is
formed, and this would be substantially the forming of a new com-
pact. The independence of the Church, then, rightly understood,
is its supreme and unehallengable authority within the limits of the
compact, or exclusive jurisdiction within the Church’s own pro-
vince, but the boundaries of that province fixed by the terms of the
compact. Independence in any other sense is only another name
for irresponsible priestly power, and were the legislature to pass a
law to confer such independence on a Church, it would thereby only
create an imperium in imperio —it would set up by law a Popish
power in a Protestant State. The State would thus be constitu-
tional and despotic—Protestant and Popish at the same time !
The claim of spiritual independence and exclusive jurisdiction,
meaning thereby, as we think we have conclusively shown, an au-
thority to do what they liked, let the civil consequences—the conse-
quences as regards person and property—be what they may, put
forth by the vetoists, may be said to be the “head and front” of
their offending ; but the violence with which the demand was made
ought not perhaps to be passed over without notice. In the cele-
brated letter on the Free-Church question, addressed to Lord
Brougham by the distinguished and remarkable Hugh Miller—
remarkable for the possession of descriptive powers superior,
perhaps, to those possessed by any other writer in the language,
but also almost as remarkable for a singular deficiency of the
reasoning powers, that gentleman announces that “ Scotland is
up in rebellion,” —language which could only be justly regarded
as conveying a threat of the most serious consequences to the
country, if the demands of the vetoist were not complied with.
The result showed how far Mr. Miller, if he was in earnest, was
astray in the estimate he had formed of his countrymen. But he
either believed the assertion he had made, or he didnot. If hebelieved
it, he must in candour have allowed that it was the vetoist agitators,
of whom he may be said to have been one of the chief, and certainly
the most effective, who had brought things to that pass in the land,
while it is very evident that it would not have grieved him and them
much, if the worst fears which he had thus endeavoured to excite among
the rulers, had Been realized. Dr. Candlish threatened that if he
were “driven,” as he expressed it, “ from the Establishment,” that
is, if the State would not grant his demands, he would, the moment
he left it, set himself to the work of pulling down the edifice alto-
gether. “It will be our bounden duty,” he says, “to use every
effort that if we be driven out, they” (that is, his brethren who had
the misfortune, perhaps, we should say, the hardihood, to think other-


wise than he did) “ shall be driven out too. It is our bounden duty
to bear this testimony, that the Church ought to be established on
the principles we are contending for” (what the principles are we
have seen), “or that there should be no Establishment in the land at
all. We are bound to testify to this in the ears of the rulers of
this nation, and to give them fair warning. * * * It is a fearful result
for any calm statesman to contemplate, * * * and it is a fearful con-
templation, that we should be driven to take up a false position in
opposition to the religious establishments of the land.” These were
empty threats, and they produced, as might have been expected, no
effect in the quarter to which they were directed. But is it with
such weapons as these that the battle of truth and righteousness is
to be fought ? “ The weapons of our warfare are not carnal.” Dr.
Candlish should not have forgotten that the task which the Great
Head of the Church had assigned to him and his confederates, was
to teach and try to convince the State, not to threaten it; and that if
he failed in his efforts in this way, his duty to Him was to have done,
remembering who it is that has said, “ Yengeance is mine: I will
repay.
We may here sum up the charge which we have to bring against
our opponents in this controversy. We shall do so in three particu-
lars, all of them involving a violation of principles, which, being
comprehended in the general principle of religious establishments,
are professed to be held by them. There was a violation of principle,
first, in not going to the State, the fellow-servant of the Church, when
they ought to have gone; secondly, in going with a demand instead
of a proposal—dictating to the State instead of seeking to teach and
convince it, and in urging the demand with intimations of present
danger and threats of future vengeance; and thirdly, in demanding
what they did, namely, what resolves itself virtually into Popish power
and authority.
It will be seen that our quarrel with our Free Church brethren is, not
that they sought to obtain any privilege or right for the people, such
as the choice of their ministers, or non-intrusion, or anything of that
sort. We consider that they were perfectly justified, and with the views
they professed to hold on the subject, they were solemnly bound to do
their utmost to secure to the Christian people rights which they held
to be inalienably theirs. And had they made the effort in the right
way, and more especially had they not mixed up, with the claim they
made for the people, a claim for themselves of so objectionable a
nature as that of irresponsible priestly power, there can be no doubt
that their efforts would have been crowned with success. They had
a good object in view, and it was right for them to address them-
selves, with all their might and main, to the attainment of it; but like
many in similar circumstances, the very first step, which they took,
was one which rendered it simply impossible that they should ever
* See note at the end.


succeed at all. In preferring a claim which it was quite competent
to the State, and which the State was rather disposed, irrespective
altogether of their solicitations, of itself, to grant, they unfortunately
preferred another claim which it was not competent to the State to
grant—a claim which, as a Protestant State, it could not grant with-
out a culpable abnegation of its functions. That is our case against
the Free Church.
We do not—as probably some may think we would be justified in
doing—we do not bring against our Free Church brethren a charge
of the guilt of schism, and speak of them as being in a “ sinful
position.” If the road which they took to bring them to their pre-
sent position was a wrong one —if they committed sin in the matters
of plain duty to which we have referred—and if it was through those
sinful acts that they were brought into it —we would probably be
justified in pronouncing that position to be a sinful one. But remem-
bering, who it is that has said, “Judge not that ye be not judged,” we
refrain; and as with ourselves, it is to our own Master we stand or
fall, so let it be with them —to their own Master they stand or fall.
As “whatsoever is not of faith is sin,” so what may be of faith it is
not for us to say is sin. In so far, however, as rational argument is
concerned, we maintain, and we will not be able to help maintaining,
for our convictions are strong, until we obtain from them something
more to the purpose in the way of defence than we have yet met
with, that our Free Church opponents have not a leg to stand upon.
But it is time now that we glance at our own position —that of the
Church which still remains in connection with the State. The “sin”
of our position—the sin at least with which we are charged, is that
of having allowed ourselves to fall into the opposite extreme to that
of the Free Church. We accuse them—and we think we have
adduced proof sufficient to support the charge—that they aimed at
the setting up of a popish or irresponsible priestly power, and that
it is not their fault if there is not now existing, and in operation,
such a power in popery-and-prelacy-hating Scotland. And they
accuse us that we not only made it our aim to get, but succeeded in
getting, that dreaded thing Erastianism imported into our Church;
and that thus, if we would believe them, we have made our Church
an unscriptural Church—a Church which “denies the Headship of
Christ,” —which “robs him of His Crown rights,.” —and does or has
done, we do not know how many other terrible things besides.
If we could avail ourselves of the mathematical principle accord-
ing to which the minus implies the plus, our task at this stage
might be greatly abridged; for having proved, as we think, the
untenableness of the position of the Free Church, we ought to be
held to have proved at the same time the tenableness of our own, as
in connection with the Church of Scotland. We must attempt how-
ever a little more than this in the way of vindicating our position.
We are accused of Erastianism, Now what is Erastianism? It
will be found on inquiry that there have been various phases of Eras-


tianism —and, as might have been expected, various sects of Eras-
tians; while it is really not quite certain what the opinions were which
Erastus, from whom the name is derived, really held. Dr. Cunning-
ham, however, we observe, defines Erastianism to be—and he ought
to he an authority on such a subject—“the unwarrantable interference
of the civil power in the regulation of ecclesiastical affairs, and the
unwarrantable submission to this interference by the Church.” We
hope to be pardoned for calling this a very unwarrantable definition, or
rather for holding that it is no definition at all, for it defines nothing —
it settles nothing. The definition sets forth evidently that the civil
power may interfere in ecclesiastical affairs —the interference, how-
ever, must be limited to that which is warrantable —but the precise
line which separates a warrantable from an unwarrantable inter-
ference, it does not draw, and we are just as much at sea as ever.
We had better drop the word altogether, and try to get at the thing.
—ln every country where the Christian religion is professed there is
a Church and a State. If the State proposing to unite with the
Church, or to aid it in any way in carrying out the ends of its insti-
tution, shall take upon itself authoritatively to decide what form of
government, worship, and discipline, the Church shall adopt, without
allowing the Church a voice in the matter at all—or if at any sub-
sequent period, after the Church has been established with a certain
form of government, worship, and discipline, the State shall take
upon itself authoritatively to alter or modify, according to
its own views of expediency, such form of government, worship,
and discipline, as shall be then existing, the Church being-
allowed no voice in the matter—this, as we understand it, would be
Erastianism. Had the English Government in the reigns of the
Stuarts succeeded in getting prelacy rooted in the Church of Scotland,
that Church would have been Erastian. Were the same thing,
or something similar, attempted now—were the State to attempt to
make the present Church of Scotland an Episcopal, or a Wesleyan,
or an Independent, or a Baptist Church, the attempt would be an
exercise of Erastian power, and were it to succeed, that Church
would become an Erastian church. The opposite extreme to Erastian-
ism is of course Popery —which claims a right not only to make the
Church what it pleases, to alter every thing connected with it as it
pleases, but also to coerce the State to execute and to give civil
effect to all its commands, whatever they may be. A right applica-
tion of the principles of Protestantism, as having reference to the
relations between the Church and the State, strikes the proper mean
between the two extremes. The Church and the State indepen-
dently of each other first make up their minds, if we may so express
ourselves, as to what the terms and conditions of their alliance ought
to be ; or, in other words, what kind of aid the State shall tender
to the Church, and on what terms; if they cannot agree, there can
be no union—if a union be formed, then its terms and conditions re-
main fixed, and both parties are bound by them until, if circum-


stances call for it, they are altered by mutual consent. Now, we
maintain, that the Church of Scotland, in the main, has preserved
this mean. The Act of 1592, by which the Church was finally
established, as already repeatedly stated, embodies the terms
and conditions of union as mutually agreed to by both parties,
Church and State. Voluntaries, and those who are opposed to all
religious establishments, no doubt point to the patronage clause of
that Act, and pronounce it Erastian, as allowing a greater amount
of interference of the civil powers in ecclesiastical affairs, than is in
accordance with Scripture. We are not here called upon to defend
the clause against our voluntary opponents; we have to do only
with Free Church assailants. And we ask, what right can they
have to tax us, on this ground, with an Erastianism which
makes our Church an unscriptural Church, when they themselves
not only at their ordination, declared in the most solemn manner,
that the Church they were entering through the very door of pa-
tronage, was a Church which in their view, was ‘ ‘ founded on and
consonant to the Holy Scriptures,” but also virtually admitted the
element of lay patronage into the arrangement sought to be
established by the Veto Act ? We are far from maintaining that a
man is precluded from objecting to lay patronage as a system, and
from seeking to get it even abolished, because he has himself ac-
cepted a presentation to a benefice ; but we do affirm that it is pre-
posterous for such a one to point to lay patronage as an Erastian
element in the constitution of the Church, and that on that
account alone it must be stigmatized as an unscriptural Church.
We do not intend, as we are not called upon here, to de-
fend lay patronage; but there is this, at least, which may be
said for it in the Church of Scotland, that after all, it cannot place
any man as a pastor over a congregation, who has not first been
reared, educated, and trained for the ministry under the Church’s
own supervision, as has already been pointed out by us; and, in-
deed, we have often thought that the patrons had very good
reason to complain, when they were charged with presenting im-
proper or unqualified persons to be inducted as ministers into the
parishes of the Church, that they were not fairly dealt with in the
matter. “If improper persons are presented by us, why,” they
might well say, “were these improper persons admitted by your-
selves into the body of licentiates, from which, alone, we can make
our choice. The fact is, your Church courts, themselves, are the
parties with whom the blame rests; and it would seem as if they
expect that we should discharge a duty—the exercise of proper
caution in appointments to the ministry, which they themselves have
neglected.” We cannot but think that there would be much reason
in such a complaint.
But, whatever may be said of the Church of Scotland, as having
its affairs regulated in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
1592, common candour, we apprehend, will admit that the terras of


Lord Aberdeen’s Act, now in force, are much more favourable as
respects the views of those who may be opposed to patronage. By
the provisions of this Act, the people, as already urged, have the
right of rejecting a presentee on any grounds whatever —on such
grounds even (as has been said by way of illustration, _ though per-
haps, with somewhat of levity), as that he has red hair —so that if
the Presbytery is of opinion that that is a valid ground of objection,
it may decide accordingly; and from even such a decision by the
Church courts, there is no appeal to a Civil Court. If patronage
is to exist at all, we cannot conceive how it could be in a greater de-
gree “ muzzled,” to use an expression of the late Dr. M‘Crie, in
reference to it; any further restriction must be its virtual abolition.
In discussing the question of reasons of dissent, which was all that
thevetoists objected to in Lord Aberdeen’s measure, it should be
borne in mind that the congregation is virtually and actually present
in the Presbytery, which is to decide upon the validity of the reasons
through representation by the lay eldership, and that, after all, the
congregation itself thus joins in the decision ; and to allow objections
to a minister without reasons which may, therefore, amount to
nothing more than a mere “causeless prejudice,” while no discre-
tionary power is permitted to the Presbytery, to say the least of it,
seems to give to the congregation the whole power in the settlement of
ministers, the authority of the Church Courts being entirely nullified.
We all know, too, that many of the best ministers of the Church
never would have obtained admission into the service of the Church
at all, had such a system of admission, as that of objections, without
reasons, been in force.
The conclusive settlement of the question as to there being no
right of appeal from the Ecclesiastical to the Civil Courts, is not the
least important feature in the Act, by which appointments to vacant
cures are now regulated. Prom the decisions of the Church Courts,
however objectionable and absurd they may be, there is no appeal.
Where, then, is the Erastianism of the Church of Scotland, as at
present established ? There can be no interference in the adminis-
tration of its affairs, on the part of the Civil Courts. Of course, the
proceedings of any Church, dissenting or established, as of any
society or organized body of men, when they affect the person or
property of the subject, may be brought before a Civil Court and
reviewed, and a decision pronounced upon them, in accordance with
the law of the land; but it will not be the decision of the Church or
the societies which will be reviewed, and a judgment founded upon,
but the irregularity of the proceedings taken before the decision was
pronounced —a matter with which the decision per se can be in no
way connected. We repeat, that there is no appeal from a decision
of the Ecclesiastical to the Civil Courts in the Church of Scotland, as
at present established ; and if it has been on this ground, that we
have been charged with Erastianism, the charge, in justice to us,
must be at once withdrawn. Let any candid person compare Lord


Aberdeen’s Act with the patronage clause of the Act 1592, and let
him say if he can understand how any man, who could go into the
Church under the former Act, should feel compelled to leave it under
the latter. Surely, a Free Church man need not have strained at this
“ gnat” when he had swallowed that “camel.”
We see then no reason why we should be ashamed of our connec-
tion with the Church of Scotland. We rather see very many reasons
why we should feel proud of the connection ; we look upon her as
occupying the true position of a Protestant Church, in a Scriptural
union with the State ; and at all events, with our present views, we
could never give in our adherence to a Church which, though taking
as its distinctive appellative epithet the name of “free,” is really
not one whit more free than our own, while its testimony, as we un-
derstand it, amounts to a claim of power and authority which, with
our best powers of discrimination, we cannot distinguish from
Popery.
CHAPTEE IV.
EEMABKS ON UNION.
That union among the Presbyterians of this colony is desirable,
and that it is a duty to seek union wherever there is a felt conviction
of its practicability, are propositions which we need not take up here
a single line to demonstrate. The union, however, to be a union
at all in the right sense of the thing, must be an honourable one ;
and, therefore, a union on principle. Now, it may be thought by
some, that proceeding on the conclusion to which we have come in
the foregoing chapter, we are shut up to this other conclusion, that
with our present views and convictions, there can be no union be-
tween ourselves and our brethren of the Free Church, at least,
whatever may be said of union with other bodies of Presbyterians.
We are shut up to no such conclusion. We believe that union with
the Free Church in this colony is quite practicable, and a union on
principle, too ; but the principle on which, we are of opinion, it can
alone be effected, may not at once be admitted by all who are con-
cerned in the matter; and, therefore, we think it right that an
attempt should be made here to shew its soundness. Let us first
state the principle. Being founded on the very important distinction
between things of essential and vital moment, and things of subor-
dinate and non-vital moment in religion, we announce the principle
to be, allowance of a difference of opinion and conviction in matters
of the latter description.
It will, of course, be said that the things in which we differ, are
really things of vital importance. In one sense, every thing what-
ever in which duty is concerned, is of vital importance ; and, as laid
down in a former part of our argument, the whole field of human
life and action is no more than commensurate with the code of duty
which has been prescribed to us. Notwithstanding all this, there


are matters, about which Christians, and even Presbyterian Chris-
tians, maybe allowed to differ. To be sure, popish ( assumption,
which we lay to the charge of the Free Church, and Erastianism,
which is charged against us, are not such matters; but then, we do
not believe —although we think we have proved, that Free Church
principles, aj_ we understand them, when carried out logically to
their ultimate conclusions, resolve themselves into Popery—that our
Free Church brethren are Papists, and we have never said that they
were. People are often better than their professed principles
sometimes, all that is good and praiseworthy, in spite of their
professed principles. In judging of those who differ from us,
we look at the matters of difference from their point of view or
stand-point, (for that is, we believe, the way to speak now-a-days,
there being a fashion in our words as well as in our wear), and
we give credence to them when they affirm, believing, as we do,
in their perfect sincerity, that they see nothing whatever that is
popish in their principles; and so we conclude in the spirit of
the religion which we profess the religion of Him who said
dying for us, too, to enforce it, and giving us His spirit to write
it in our hearts, “Judge not that ye be not judged, condemn not
and ye shall not be condemned” —that they are just as good, and
many of them in all probability even better, Protestants than our-
selves. Thus, we see no abandonment of principle in uniting with
them ; only, of course, they must not insist on our saying that we
see things just as they see them ; they must not insist on our de-
claring that, in our view, and guided by the best light we have yet
been able to get, their principles are not what they seem to us to
be, Popish principles.
Then, the measure which we think we are justified in meting out
to them, we expect —founding our expectation upon the requirements
of the same holy religion, which we both profess—that they will
mete unto us again. Of course, if they really believe that we deny
the Headship of Christ, or homologate any virtual denial of this
important tenet of the Faith by the Church of Scotland, with which
we stand connected, according to the denunciations of the fervent
Free Church orators of a few years ago, it would be monstrous for
them even to contemplate union with us. And in connection with
this episode in the history of our colonial strife, we would here ad-
vert for a moment to the treatment which our Highland Christian
people have received from those at whose hands we humbly conceive
they deserved better things. We must confe&s, at whatever risk to
our reputation for common sense and intelligence, to a considerable
amount of admiration of the character and general bearing of this
class of the Presbyterian public. We admire their conscientious
adherence to what they believe to be vital principles of religion; and
we feel that they are entitled to the most tender and considerate
treatment from those, at least, who direct the councils of their
Church in this very matter of union. We do not forget with what
emphasis these excellent people were told, not so very long ago.


that we of the Church of Scotland were Erastian deniers of the
Headship of Christ, and robbers of the crown rights of the Redeemer
—expressions which could only be excused as having been uttered
in the heat of controversy, by those who generally, at least, knew
what they were saying, but which could not be excused, when taken
up and retailed with such offensive fidelity, in these ends of the earth,
by talkers who neither knew what they said, nor whereof they affirmed.
We do not forget this; and, seeing that these are honest men, truth-
loving men, we do not wonder that, as the Nemesis of this outrage
on Christian decency, these men now turn round on those who think
they can lead them blindfold where they may, and say, with not a
little excusable fire, too, in that fine eye of theirs, “It is only as it
were yesterday, that you told us that these ministers of the Church
of Scotland were in so sinful a position, that even the Gospel
preached by them could be of no validity or avail whatever for the
salvation of sinful men ; and now, although they have done nothing
in the way of recanting, and putting themselves into another and a
scriptural position, you would have us, as a Christian people, without
more ado, to unite with them. ” ±he consciences of these men must not
—the conscience of no man must, be coerced in this matter of union.
For ourselves, we hold that if we cannot succeed in convincing
who are parties to it, that the principle we have laid down as
that on which alone it is to be effected, is a sound principle, there
cannot and there ought not to be any union. But we are very sanguine
in our expectations that this can be done; and when we shew that
the principle, which we plead for—as that which is alone applicable
to the case —is the identical principle so strenuously contended for by
the Apostle Paul, in the 14th chapter of his Epistle to the Romans,
we have great hopes that it will be admitted without gainsaying.
The matters in dispute of which that chapter treats, are entirely the
matters in dispute between our Free Church brethren and ourselves,
mutato nomine —the name only being changed. The matters con-
nected with the mode of appointment to vacant charges, about which
all our “ doubtful disputations,” have arisen, however we may have
taken it upon ourselves to dignify them, are merely the ‘ meats,’
‘drinks,’ and * days’ of that chapter. And how does the Apostle deal
with them. Hear him : “He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
unto the Lord ; and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he
doth not regard it. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth
God thanks ; and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and
giveth God thanks. Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth
not; and let not bim that eateth not judge him that eateth, for God
hath received -bim.” Yes, God hath received him, weak in the faith
though he be, and shall we not? “Who art thou that judgest
another man’s servant ? to his own master he standeth or falleth.
Yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand.”
When will Christians comprehend the Holy Scriptures of the living
God ? When will they pierce the letter, and come at the spirit of


those divine writings ? When will they lay aside these “doubtful
disputations,” on the grand principle, which the Apostle lays down
in that chapter, as that from which the whole of its lessons are a
deduction—announced in these words: “The kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost.” When we think of the wretched strifes and divisions,
which mar the beauty, and impair the usefulness of the Church
of Christ in their petty we think of the ‘ teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men,’ still so rife amongst us, and
all the figments and phylacteries of our Pharisaic day—well may we
sigh for the advent of one whose fan is in his hand, who shall
thoroughly purge his floor, and gathering the wheat into the garner,
burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.
The task before us, then, with a view to union, is, in a humble
and charitable spirit, to get all who may yet need the teaching,
to see that the matters about which we differ, are not vital
matters, and that therefore, we ought to agree to differ about them.
Let the Free-Church-man remain a Free Church man, and the
Established-Churchman remain an Established-Churchman—and,
nevertheless, let us unite. We will, surely, succeed, if we go about
it in the right way—but if we shall not succeed, we will not seek a
union, and thus do violence to the honest convictions of our brethren
in Christ; still, brethren in Christ, though in this imperfect state,
they may, even till both they and we leave it, have to remain apart
from us.
Our task should be gone about with prayer —but it must be prayer
of the right sort. We must not go and pray that we may see “ eye
to eye,” and then go and put out our eyes, or at least put them into
so distempered a state, that we can see nothing —or nothing but in a
distorted and unnatural form. We pray for light for ourselves and
our brother, that we may see eye to eye; and then the next thing
we do is to misrepresent, and decry, and abuse our brother, and get
him if possible to misrepresent, decry, and abuse us in return ; and
in the dust and distemper of all this, we think, we suppose, that we
shall be able to see eye to eye. Of all things, matters of conscience
are not to be handled with the rude hand of personal abuse—and
he who cannot with some degree of humility, brotherly kindness, and
charity, handle these things, would do well to let them alone. “The
light of the body is the eye, if the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness,” Light! there'is no lack of light—it is
the eye which is at fault. “What we need,” says one, “in our
theological discussions, is to allow the unbroken dominion of a spirit
of mutual justice, and of brotherly, considerate, forbearing charity.
The cause of our Church, which our zealots profess to serve, would
be best secured if they would but give the first place to the great
virtues of the Church—Humility and Charity —and abstained from
assuming the office of judges over others, who to their own Master
must stand or fall. * * * * * What is so earnestly to


be desired, so absolutely necessary, is, that when, parties who
differ both aim at a common object, each should endeavour to
interpret the other’s expressions from the other’s circle of thought.
There may be many, to whom, from their natural want of spiritual
and mental elasticity, this may seem an impossible demand. So
much the more urgent is the duty of always taking for grante d that
the writer of whom we complain is in accordance with Catholic
doctrine, and that his views, though expressed in other terms than
those familiar to his opponents, must be taken in an orthodox sense,
unless the opposite is self-evident. I entreat you for the future in
all theological and philosophical questions, to contend only with
scientific weapons, and to banish all denunciations and all suspicions
from our literature, as alike alien to the spirit of our country and
our religion ; and much rather take for our pattern the noble and
truly evangelical mildness with which the enlightened teachers of
the ancient Church, as Augustine in his dispute with Jerome, dealt
with the differing views of their opponents.” These are good words,
and not less so that they are the words of a divine of the Roman
Catholic Church, where it is just possible that Protestant truth may
yet have to flee from her protestant persecutors—wounded and
weeping as she now cowers in the house of her friends.
If not now, let us hope that union is not far distant, and a wider
union than we now are thinking of. It can hardly be that we shall
be disappointed. Far as we are removed from the great centres of
religious life, in this distant part of the world, we cannot surely but
partake in some measure, however limited, of that kindling
which has revived the Christianity so well nigh extinguished
in the age that has passed. Spiritual men are at length awakening
to the true significance of their mission. A trenchant criti-
cism is coming sheer down through the mouldy mass of our
decaying systems, sparing not a shred of the falseness and hollowness
which cleave to them, and the lineaments of the fair form of immor-
tal Truth are beginning at length to show themselves. The Word
of God is being manifested, and it is quick and powerful, sharper
than any two-edged sword, piercing to the dividing asunder of joints
andmarrow, andisa discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
And as speculation and high thought have got at length into a purer
atmosphere, so also the practical Church is beginning to discern,
albeit it be yet but dimly, that her task and mission lie in the works
of beneficence to which she is now girding herself. Let us not then
be weary or faint.
“Weep with her one brief hour, then turn away,
“ Go to hope’s prison, and from out the cold
" And solitary grating, many a day
“ Look forth ; ’tis said the world is growing old,
“ And streaks of orient light in time’s horizon play.”


Note referred to in page 40.
In the state of feeling in which Dr, G. was when he gave utterance to the senti-
ments expressed in the words which we have quoted, we have doubtless an illus-
tration of what he means when he speaks of the delightful “mood and frame’’ in
which he was during the whole of the time of the disruption controversy (see his
speech on the Union Question, as given in the “ Presbyterian Magazine” of Septem-
ber last). The delirium and mad delight of those who ride the whirlwind and direct
the storm in such times, we may suppose to be, according to Dr. C., the normal
mood and frame of the Scottish theological mind. Remembering something of what
that mind was, w'hich was in Christ Jesus, we know that such is not the normal
Christian mnd ; and even in regard to the theological mind we take leave to differ
from Dr. C. We beg to differ from him in this, as well as when he states, as he does,
in the same speech,“ sympathizing with Sir HenryMonerief,” as he says, “from the
bottom of his heart in the recollection, that never was an impulse given to minis-
terial work, and ministerial effort, and pastoral diligence, such as was given during
the heat of the disruption controversy.” We again say we beg to differ from Dr. 0.
But where, let us ask, are the fruits of all this increased ministerial diligence and
effort? Are the people of Scotland now a more God-fearing and moral people than
they were before the “disruption?” We once put this question to a Free Church
friend—one, however, who was truly of the excellent of the earth, and the
reply was, “ No, I do not think they are;” but added, that we were now in the pre-
dicted time of the falling away of the last days, of which the acknowledged
declension of piety was a proof. Strange, that just at such a time we should have
had the advent of the Free Church. We, however, do not believe that there has
been any declension of true piety in our beloved native land. We believe that
a mighty impulse has, within these last few years, been given to the true work
of the Church, in the wide extension in all directions of Christian philanthropic enter-
prise. But we deny that it has been the Free Church controversy which has given
the impulse. If it has been Free Churchism which has given the impulse there, what
is it that has given the same impulse throughout all the broad Christian world over,
every part of which is as alive and busy with works of faith and labours of love as
Free-Church-controversial Scotland. There is also something absolutely ludicrous
in Free Churchmen attempting to dignify their petty quarrel by identifying it
with the great struggle which the theologians of a former age maintained for the
Headship of Christ, and the spiritual independence of the Church against the arro-
gant and nnscriptural claims of a despotic and semi-popish government. That con-
troversy was waged, the whole question was discussed, and conclusively settled,
generations ago. We search in vain among the lumber of this dreary controversy
for any new principle, or even a single now idea which might avail to redeem its
heavy insignificance. The conclusion to which we are compelled to come, after a
survey of the whole, is, that there is really nothing in it. To speak of the Headship
of Christ as being, at this time of day, a great principle for which the Church, in
our land at least, has need to contend, as being its peculiar and distinctive work in
the present age, is to perpetrate, if we may so express it, a gross anachronism in the
history of the times which we are now acting. It is an attempt to mislead by
putting the clock of both the theological and the political world, we do not
know how many hours back. The “ disruption,” when the time arrives
for its true history to be written, and its true significance or insignifi-
cance to be weighed, will, we doubt not, be pronounced to have been, as a general
movement (always excepting the conduct of the leaders, which we here decline to
characterise), a mere out-burst of fanaticism. It was a ridiculous attempt to re-
produce in our day, and on a very diminutive stage, the history of an age
of great significance in the progress of civil and religious liberty; little men
putting on the gigantic armour worn by the illustrious champions of freedom
of that time, and in mimic fight challenging the applause of the world as if
contending in the same great cause. The old watchwords —now empty sounds—
were employed to stir up the people, and an enthusiasm was excited, of which no


cause which they had at stake could ever he an adequate object. The common sense
and intelligence of the country, however, could not long he imposed upon, and those
inflated pretensions soon suffered a collapse. See the admirable expos 6of
the tactics followed by the Free Church leaders, as given by the present fluke of
Argyll in his masterly treatise, “ Presbytery Examined,” a work which we would
earnestly recommend to all who wish to obtain a knowledge of what Presbyterian
principles really are, as distinguished from Popery and prelacy on the one hand,
and Erastianism on the other, and what the practical working out of these principles
achieved, in a former age, for the progress and advancement of human liberty.
We have been not a little amused with a notice of this w r ork of the Duke,
by the late deservedly lamented Dr. Cunningham, in the lately published volume,
entitled “ Discussions on Church Principles,” which has just fallen into our
hands, but particularly with the description with which Dr. C. there favours
us of the prescribed process for indoctrination in Free Church principles.
Complaining somewhat bitterly of His Grace, (who it appears in a previous work
"Letter to the Peers from a Peer’s Son,” had begun well, but who having been
‘‘bewitched ” by some untoward influence, had not gone on,) that he had not cast
in his lot with the Free Church, Dr. C. goes on to say, “ The Duke of Argyll,
how'ever, took a different course, and continued a member of the Scottish Establish-
ment, and we fear, that by doing so he was somewhat influenced rather by some of
the accidents and accompaniments of the subject, than by a deliberate and impartial
investigation of its intrinsic merits. This position and procedure were certainly not
favourable to progress in the clearness and soundness of his conceptions, * * «
If the Duke of Argyll had seen it to be his duty to join the Free Church in 1843,
instead of adhering to the Scottish Establishment, we have no doubt that he would
now have possessed a more assured conviction of the firmness and consistency of his
position, than, notwithstanding the dogmatism and severity with which he frequently
assails Free Church principles, W'e feel called upon at present to concede to him.”
Thus it is with regard to the mode of procedure in order to obtain a knowledge of
Free Church principles. The first step you have to take is to become a Free Church-
man, that is, you must first espouse and profess the principles before you look into
them with a view to an examination of what they are —a rational mode of
procedure truly ! But really when we reflect upon the principles as they can
sometimes be gathered from declarations made by Free Churchmen, and
find that they often sound more like prejudices than principles, the process
does not seem so irrational after all. As an illustration in point —an
esteemed Free Church friend of our own on one occasion, when suffering somewhat
sorelv from stress of argument, which like the “ stress of politics” in the case of the
founders of the “Edinburgh Eeview,” sometimes makes people put into
strange ports (see Sydney Smith’s humorous account), just summed up
his reasoning in the sublime and crushing climax—“ Man, I dinna like
the auld Kirk.” Of course to this “I do not like thee, Dr. Fell,” argument
there can be no reply. But it is clear also that if such be the principles,
if they are rather of the nature of likings and dislikings than plain deductions
from the truths of God’s holy word, which they ought to be, if they are
principles at all, then doubtless the best way to get at a right understanding of
them may be just to put ourselves in juxtaposition with them—to go where the only
atmosphere we can breathe is rife with them. It is thus rather by a sort of mental
endosmose, and not in the way in which the knowledge of all other principles is come
by, that Free Church “principles” are to be understood, and “clearness and sound-
ness of conception” respecting them to he attained.






