

OFFICIAL COPY—NOT FOR SALE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
BUREAU OF METEOROLOGY
BULLETIN No. 38
1947
A Study of Meteorological Conditions
associated with
Bush and Grass Fires and Fire Protection
Strategy in Australia
by
J. C. FOLEY, B.Sc.
Supervising Meteorologist—Climatological Section
U.D.C. INDEX
551.5: 632.187.
J. J. GOURLEY, Government Printer, Melbourne.
Issued under the direction of
H. N. WARREN,
Director of Meteorological Services
By Authority of the Minister of State for the Interior


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
BUREAU OF METEOROLOGY
BULLETIN No. 38
1947
A Study of Meteorological Conditions
associated with
Bush and Grass Fires and Fire Protection
Strategy in Australia
by
J. C. FOLEY, B.Sc.
Supervising Meteorologist—Climatological Section
U.D.C. INDEX
551.5 : 632.187.
J. J. Gourley, Government Printer, Melbourne.
Issued under the direction of
H. N. WARREN,
Director of Meteorological Services
By Authority of the Minister of State for the Interior




FOREWORD.
Bush and grass fires in Australia are of particular con-
cern to the meteorologist in view of their close association
with prevailing weather conditions. The severity of fires
in any particular season, particularly in the more closely
settled south-eastern areas of the Commonwealth, is directly
correlated with the meteorological conditions experienced
in that season and in the preceding two or three months.
The problem of protection against fire is thus one in
which the weather factor must be closely studied in order
to develop a technique of suppression. The aim of such a
technique will be to bring into action the requisite personnel
and equipment at the proper time and place at the lowest
possible cost, and to reduce losses to a minimum.
The systematic study of the influence of weather on the
rate of spread of fires was first undertaken mainly as a
result of great economic losses due to forest fires in North
America. It is only in the last 30 or 40 years that serious
attention has been given to the necessity for an organized
fire protection strategy by the Government of any country.
Rapid advances have been made in the last twenty years
in the United States and Canada in the development of
methods of fire control. In Australia, Bush Fire Brigades
were formed to meet the danger of bush and grass fires
in the early part of the present century, but it was not
until the early ’thirties that these received official recog-
nition. Rapid progress has been made in the last fifteen
years in the study of the problem, development of methods
of attack, and provision of equipment. This work has been
entrusted largely to Forestry Departments and Commis-
sions, since it is in the forest areas that the greatest
economic losses have been sustained.
An important factor in the planning of fire control is
the estimation of fire behaviour. For this purpose, the
establishment of fire weather stations in forest areas is an
essential feature of a fire protection organization.
Meteorological elements which have been found to
influence greatly the behaviour of fires are relative humidity,
wind, and temperature at the time of an outbreak, and a
deficiency of rainfall in a period of some weeks or months
preceding the event. The equipment of a fire weather
station, therefore, includes instruments for the recording
of these elements. At some stations wood cylinders or
“ hazard sticks ” are provided to determine the amount
of moisture contained in fuel of a particular type, i.e.,
dead sticks and twigs on the forest floor.
As far as is known, the first fire weather station in
Australia was set up by W. R. Wallace at the Forestry
Research Station at Dwellingup in Western Australia in
the summer of 1934-35. Similar stations were also intro-
duced into Tasmania in 1935 by research chemists of the
Derwent Paper Company —(Messrs. H. Benjamin and J. L.
Somerville) —after an inspection of the methods employed
by the Forest Service of the United States of America.
Later, several such stations were set up by the Forestry
Department in Tasmania. These provided the Divisional
Meteorologist with valuable information, and supplemented
the normal synoptic weather reports which formed the
basis for the issue of bush fire weather warnings.
The hazard stick was found to give particularly useful
information. The moisture content of the stick gives an
index which represents the combined effects of weather
elements in drying out fuels and so provides a measure of
inflammability. This is of interest to meteorologists whose
task it is to frame bush fire warnings. Meteorologists have
been concerned with the fact that the issue of a warning
of weather conducive to the spread of bush fires when fuel
is not in a condition to burn freely, may create an impres-
sion in the public mind that officials are not in touch with
the realities of the situation. Such an impression may
result in a disregard of warnings when danger conditions
really exist.
During the present year—l946—in order to remove any
such misunderstanding and to keep the public, as well as
fire protection organizations, continuously informed as to
day to day fluctuations in the degree of fire hazard in the
fields and forests, a system of fire hazard forecasts has
been introduced in the south-eastern States of Australia.
These forecasts are broadcast each evening over the radio
stations serving regions concerned. The existing fire hazard
is determined either by hazard sticks or from readings of
relative humidity and temperature during the day, and an
estimate is made of the effect of the anticipated weather on
the following day. The resulting expected hazard is issued
with the regional weather forecast each evening during
the fire danger season. Details of the bases of estimation
of fire hazard are discussed in Part 11. of this publication.
A similar system has been in operation in the south-west
of Western Australia for some years past, (primarily for the
protection of the forest areas of the south-west of that
State, but also serving primary producers and graziers of
the region as a guide to burning off, etc.
The institution of such advices and warnings is rendered
possible only by a close co-ordination of activities between
the agencies which work together in the various States
in the task of fire prevention and suppression. Among
these are the Forestry Commissions and Departments in
all States, the Forestry and Timber Bureau of the Aus-
tralian Capital Territory, and State organizations such as
the former Bush Fire Brigades Association and the present
Country Fire Authority in Victoria, and the Bush Fires
Advisory Committee in New South Wales. Such organiza-
tions have been formed in recent years to co-ordinate
and organize fire control measures and to advise the
Government and promulgate regulations to prohibit the
careless use of fire. The activities of such organizations
are of sufficient interest to merit a section of the present
publication being devoted to them and, if the account of
activities in some States serves as a guide to other areas
or to a better co-ordination between neighbouring areas, a
useful purpose will be served.
The main purpose of this Bulletin is to study the meteoro-
logical factors influencing the outbreak, rate of spread and
extent of bush and grass fires, and the possibility of deter-
mining in advance the near approach and severity of
impending danger. An improved system of weather advices,
and fire hazard reports and forecasts is a necessary
corollary to such a study.
Inquiries have been received from time to time regarding
the possibility of forecasting some months in advance the
likelihood of extensive fires during the coming season. It
should be stated that research into long-range weather
forecasting methods is receiving attention in this and
other countries, but, as yet, no method has been developed
which will provide reliable detailed forecasts for periods
of longer than three or four days ahead.


Attention may be drawn to one important result of the
work done in preparation of this publication, namely, that
the district rainfall for the three months preceding the
month in which fire danger usually becomes acute gives a
fairly good indication of the probable severity of fires in
the particular district or districts in the peak period of
the fire season. In southern and eastern parts of Victoria,
for example, if the mean district rainfall for October to
December is deficient by 30 per cent, or more of the average,
very severe fires may be expected in January !md February
unless the dry spell is broken. There are modifying factors
which apply to this and other States, and these are dis-
cussed in the following pages.
With regard to short-term indications of approaching
fire danger days in south-eastern Australia, a useful table
is given on page 51 summarizing the indications of the
development of dangerous fire weather, based on readings
of relative humidity and hazard sticks and the movements
of anticyclones and depressions, as indicated by the rise and
fall of the barometer. Suggested precautions to be taken
according to the meteorological indications add to the value
of the table. This was originally published in the Bulletin
of the Victorian Bush Fire Brigades, and the secretary of
the Country Fire Authority has stated that it has been a
most useful guide to regional officers of his organization.
In Part 111. of the publication is included a brief sum-
mary by Divisional meteorologists of weather conditions
conducive to the outbreak and spread of fires in the various
States, together with particulars concerning the dissemina-
tion of bush fire warnings. In Victoria, the lighting of fires
in the open is absolutely forbidden on a day on which an
official warning is broadcast of the likelihood of weather
conditions conducive to the spread of fires. In Tasmania,
the lighting of fires in the open is prohibited on a day
declared as a “ fire danger day ” which is defined as a
day on which the relative humidity is 40 per cent, or
lower. A discussion of isobaric types associated with
the outbreak of fires in the various States, together
with historical data with particulars of temperature,
relative humidity and rainfall, is given in Part IV,
These data provide a useful detailed record of
past experience, which may serve as a basis for further
investigations as to particular areas, as well as to indicate
past experience which may serve as a basis for further
investigations as to particular areas as well as to indicate
in some degree the severity of fires which have been
experienced in such areas in the past 30 years or so. Such
a record should also be of local interest to country people
and, together with the introductory paragraphs of the
bulletin, will illustrate to readers the gravity of the fire
problem in this country.
The present study has been undertaken by Mr. J. C.
Foley, B.Sc., Supervising Meteorologist, Climatological Sec-
tion, Central Office. Mr. Foley became interested in the
study of fire weather when stationed in Tasmania where
he held the position of Divisional Meteorologist for sixteen
years, and was closely associated with the development of
fire weather stations by the Derwent Paper Company and
later the Forestry Department.
Maps and diagrams have been prepared by Messrs. P. W.
L. Browne, C. Bloch, and Miss J. Vergar, of the Drafting
Section.
The Bureau gratefully acknowledges the ready co-
operation it has received in the preparation of this Bulletin
from officers of the Forestry Commissions of Victoria and
New South Wales; the Forestry Departments of Western
Australia and Tasmania; the Woods and Forests Depart-
ment, South Australia; the Forestry and Timber Bureau.
Canberra; the Sub-Department of Forestry, Queensland;
the former Bush Fire Brigades Association, Victoria; the
Country Fire Authority, Victoria; the Bush Fires Advisory
Committee, New South Wales; the Australian Newsprint
Mills, Boyer, Tasmania; and the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, who have supplied material and
references to literature, etc., and others who have read the
script and have offered helpful comments on this work.
H. N. WARREN,
Director.


CONTENTS.
Foreword .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ _ # # .. 3
PART I.
Some Preliminary Considerations.
Introductory —Strategy of Protection .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 7
Causes of Fires .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ . # 9
Chemistry of Combustion .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ .. .. .. 10
Influence of Chemical Attributes of Vegetation on Combustion .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
Wind Factor in Forest Fires .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 13
Regions subject to Fire Danger in Australia .. .. .. ~ .. .. . . .. 13
PART 11.
Fire Weather Stations and Measurements of Inflammability.
Functions of a Fire Weather Station .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 14
Hazard Sticks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Value of Hazard Sticks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Fire Weather Stations in Australia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Western Australia —Use of Hazard Sticks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
South Australia—Research at Mount Burr .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 20
Victoria—Fire Danger Meters .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
Tasmania —Fire Weather Stations .. .. .. .. .. .. . • .. 22
Fire Hazard Indices —Canadian Forest Service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
Grass Fire Hazard Tables —Application to Australia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Cromer Hygrothermographic Method .. .. . • .. .. .. .. . • 27
PART 111.
Forecasting Fire Weather.
I.—Seasonal Development of Fire Hazard .. .. .. .. . • • • • • ■. 31
Rainfall in Three Months preceding Fires a Critical Factor .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Provisional Index of Severity of Approaching Fire Season .. .. .. .. .. .. 37
Conditioning Factor .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. 37
Notes on Fire Hazard following Wet Winter and Spring .. • • • • • • • • .. 40
Fires most serious in Drought Years .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • .. 42
11.—Fire Danger Days —Characteristics .. . • • • • • • • • ■ • • • • .. 43
Summary of Stages of Development of Fire Danger—South Eastern Australia .. .. .. .. 51
Use of Pseudo-Adiabatic Diagram in appreciation of Bush Fire Danger .. .. .. .. .. 51
Fire Weather and Bush Fire Warning Services in each State-
Victoria .. .. •• • • • • • * .... .. .. .. .. 53
New South Wales .. • • • • • • • • • * * * ' * ' • * * .. 54
Queensland .. .. • • • • • * * * * * * ’ ' * * * ' * .. 55
Western Australia .. • • • • • • *: * * ‘' '' * ‘ ’ ’ .. 57
South Australia .. • • • • • • • * '' ’ * " ’ * *' .. 57
Tasmania .. .. • • • • • • • • ’ ■ ' ’ ‘ ‘ “ ■ ' * .58
PART IV.
Records of Bush Fires and Associated Weather Conditions.
Discussion and Summaries for each State of Pressure Types, Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall .. ..60
List of Bush and Grass Fires with particulars of Pressure Types, Temperature, Relative Humidity, Wind, and Rainfall 65
Tables—Normals of Monthly Rainfall at Stations listed in Bush and Grass Fire records (pp 65-200) .. .. 201
Normals of Mean District Rainfall all States .. • • • • • • • • • * • • 208


PART y.
Organizations for Protection against Bush and Grass Fires.
Australian Capital Territory (Bush Fire Council) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 213
New South Wales (Bush Fires Advisory Committee and Bush Fire Brigades) .. .. .. .. .. 213
Victoria (Country Fire Authority, Bush Fire Brigades, Forests Commission Organization) .. .. . . 215
Queensland (Rural Fires Board) .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ .. .. 218
South Australia (Fire Control Officers) .. .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. .. 218
Western Australia (Rural Fires Prevention Advisory Committee, Bush Fire Brigades) .. .. .. .. 219
Tasmania (Forests Department Organization) ~ .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 220
APPENDICES.
I. Grass Fire Hazard Tables for use in Australia, with Instructions .. .. .. .. ~ .. 224
11. Survey of Houses affected in Beaumaris Fire (Victoria), January 14, 1944. (Extracts from C.S.I.R. publication) .. 229
111. Estimation of Wind Velocity, Beaufort Scale .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~ .. 230
IV. Glossary of Terms used in Fire Control (U.S.A.) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 230
V. References Forest Fire Literature .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 232
MAPS AND DIAGRAMS.
1. Vegetation Map of Australia.
2. Plan—Fire Hazard Sticks.
3. Graph—Fire Hazard and Moisture Content of Hazard Sticks, Western Australia.
4. Graph—Comparison of Rainfall and Fire Hazard.
5. Fire Danger Meter (Forests Commission, Victoria).
6. Graph—Grass Fire Hazard, Southern Victoria, Fire Season, 1943-44.
7. Alignment Chart, Cromer System of Fire Danger Rating.
8. Graph—Average Evaporation, Saturation Deficit, and Temperature, Melbourne.
9. Fire Danger Station Weather Record.
10. Map —Key to Australian Rainfall Districts.
11. Graphs—Rainfall in Fire Seasons 1938-39, 1939-40, 1943-44.
12. Graphs —Mean District Rainfall in Three Months preceding the peaks of Fire Seasons :
(a) District 39 ; ( b ) District 40 ; (c) District 58 ; {d) District 61 ; (e) District 70 ; (/) District 82 •
(, g) District 85 ; (h) District 86 ; (i) District 89 ; (j) District 91 ; (£) District 94.
13. Residual Mass Diagrams —Progressive Departures from Normal of Rainfall, Districts 58 and 86.
14. Graphs—Fire Damage with Relative Humidity, Wind Direction, and Wind Velocity (February, 1926).
15. Charts—Anemograph, Temperature, and Relative Humidity Traces at Melbourne, 13th January, 1939.
16. Pseudo-Adiabatic Diagram, 22nd January, 1944.
WEATHER CHARTS ILLUSTRATING FIRE WEATHER.
Victoria 3-5.2.32 ; 6-14.1.39 ; 13-18.2.26 ; 6-15.1.44 (11-14.3.40, see Tasmania).
New South Wales .. .. .. 8-11.12.44 ; 4-8.11.44 ; 2-13.12.26 ; 10-15.10.26 ; 26-29.10.36 ; 7-11.1.29
Queensland .. .. .. 29.10.40-1.11.40; 11-14.11.22; 7-10.11.40; 29.9.41-1.10.41; 20-23.9.43; 5-7 841
South Australia .. .. .. 7-14.3.34; 27-30.12.44 (6-14.1.39 and 6-15.1.44, see Victoria).
Western Australia .. .. .. 18-21.1.30; 10-12.2.25; 4-11.2.33; 17-21.12.27; 20-23.2.35,
Tasmania .. .. .. .. 11-14.3.40; 12-15.12.42; 14-20.1.34; 1-6.2.26; 17-19.5.13.
PLATES.
Types of Vegetation (illustrating Map Fig. 1).
Contents — continued.


PART I.
BUSH FIRES IN AUSTRALIA.—SOME PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS.
INTRODUCTORY. —STRATEGY OF PROTECTION.
The bush fire problem in Australia is one which occurs
at intervals every few years, and constitutes a potential
menace to various regions of the Commonwealth every dry
season. Not only is there a risk of destruction of property
amounting to hundreds of thousands, and even millions, of
pounds, but, what is still more serious, many lives have been
lost in bush fires in recent years and large numbers of live
stock have been destroyed.
The greatest calamities have occurred in south-eastern
Australia, notably in Victoria, but New South Wales also
suffers severely on occasions. In Western Australia, the
main risk is to the great jarrah and karri forests of the
south-west, though the threat to property and human life
is only lessened by the comparative sparseness of settle-
ment in that region.
The loss and suffering caused by bush fires is such that
it behoves every individual in the community to be acutely
conscious of personal responsibility in the use or misuse of
fire in the open.
This may be illustrated by the following extract from the
introduction to the Stretton Report on the Bush Fires of
1939:
“ These fires were lit by the hand of man.
“ Seventy-one lives were lost. Sixty-nine mills were
burned. Millions of acres of fine forest, of almost
incalculable value, were destroyed or badly damaged.
Townships were obliterated in a few minutes. Mills,
houses, bridges, tramways, machinery were burned to
the ground; men, cattle, horses, sheep were devoured
by the fires or asphyxiated by the scorching debilitated
air. Generally, the numerous fires which during
December, in many parts of Victoria, had been burning
separately, as they do in any summer, either ‘ under
control,’ as it is falsely and dangerously called, or
entirely untended, reached the climax of their intensity
and joined forces in a devastating confluence of flame
on Friday, the 13th of January.
“ On that day it appeared that the whole State was
alight. At midday, in many places, it was dark as
night. Men carrying hurricane lamps worked to make
safe their families and belongings. Travellers on the
highways were trapped by fires or blazing fallen trees,
and perished. Throughout the land there was day-
time darkness. At one mill, desperate but futile efforts
were made to clear of inflammable scrub the borders
of the mill and mill settlement. All but one person, at
that mill, were burned to death, many of them while
trying to burrow to imagined safety in the sawdust
heap. Horses were found, still harnessed, in their
stalls, dead, their limbs fantastically contorted. The
full story of the killing of this small community is one
of unpreparedness, because of apathy and ignorance,
and perhaps of something worse.
“ Steel girders and machinery were twisted by heat
as if they had been of fine wire. Sleepers of heavy
durable timber, set in the soil, their upper surfaces
flush with the ground, were burnt through. Other
heavy wood work disappeared, leaving no trace. Where
the fire was most intense, the soil was burnt and
destroyed to such a depth that it may be many years
before it shall have been restored by the slow
chemistry of Nature. Acres upon acres of the soil
itself can be retained only by the effort of man in a
fight against natural erosive forces,
“ The speed of the fires was appalling. They leaped
from mountain peak to mountain peak, or far out into
the lower country, lighting the forests 6 or 7 miles in
advance of the main fires. Blown by a wind of great
force, they roared as they travelled. Balls of crackling
fire sped at a great pace in advance of the fires, con-
suming with a roaring, explosive noise all that they
touched. Houses of brick were seen and heard to leap
into a roar of flame before the fires had reached them,
some men of science hold the view that the fires
generated and were preceded by inflammable gases
which became alight. Great pieces of burning bark
were carried by the wind to set in raging flame
regions not yet reached by the fires. Such was the
force of the wind that, in many places, hundreds of
trees of great size were blown clear of the earth, tons
of soil, with embedded masses of rock, still adhering
to the roots; for mile upon mile the former forest
monarchs were laid in confusion, burnt, torn from the
earth, and piled one upon another as matches strewn
by a giant hand.”
One object of this bulletin is to place before the public
a record of occurrences of bush fires in Australia in suffi-
cient detail to indicate the widespread nature of such
calamities. Its main purpose, however, is to present infor-
mation concerning weather factors which must be con-
sidered in planning methods of prevention. Meteorology
plays an important part in all phases of fire development.
Pre-disposing causes of fires include deficiency of rainfall in
a period of some weeks before an outbreak which, together
with a high rate of evaporation in the summer months,
results in a drying-out of grasses or litter on the forest
floor. Fires in dry grass are a danger in almost any
season, but in a season of normal rainfall these do not
extend deeply into bush or timber country.
The spread of fires is also associated with definite meteoro-
logical conditions which arise at intervals in almost any
summer. It is notable that some dry seasons pass without
any serious fire damage, and the main reason is to be
found in the absence of the particular type of meteoro-
logical situation in which fires break out of control. These
situations are discussed in some detail in the following
pages.
In preparing to cope with fires on a large scale, it is
important to have some means of gauging when and to
what degree fire danger exists. For this purpose, it is
desirable to organize special observation posts at which a
record is kept of the meteorological elements which con-
tribute to fire danger, and of the state of material in the
forests, which becomes highly inflammable after a period of
absence of rain. Much has been done in recent years in
developing a technique of weather and fuel observation,
and in formulating a simple index of fire hazard based on
the result of such observations.
The co-ordination of reports and warnings, and the
organization of fire-fighting units, including spotting by
aeroplane or by observers on fire towers at points of
vantage in various parts of the country, is a further stage
in preparing to suppress any outbreak immediately it
occurs.


(By courtesy of Forests Commission of Victoria.)
I.—Rain Forest, Young Mountain Ash.


Australian Capital Territory, 1931-44.
(From Annual Reports of the Bush Fire Council,
Canberra.)
—
Number.
Percentage.
Unknown ..
27
19
Burning off for cattle feed, improved pasture ..
18
13
Cigarettes or matches
20
14
Billy fires ..
9
6
Camp fires
5
4
Lightning ..
9
6
Diesel engine
10
7
Gas producers
5
4
Burning rubbish
6
4
Woodcutters
5
4
Burning out rabbits
4
3
Tractors
Miscellaneous:—Picnic parties (1), boys fishing
(1), lit by youths (1), children (2), drovers (1),
workmen (1), spark from forge in open (1),
blasting (2), spontaneous combustion (1),
wood-cutting machine (1), deliberately lit (1),
persons firing a tree (1), artillery practice (4),
short circuit of power line by plane (1). Total
3
2
miscellaneous
14
New South Wales, 1942-3.
(From Forestry Commission Reports.)
Causes.
Number.
Percentage.
Unknown ..
39
61
Burning off
} *
12
Burning debris
Incendiarism
8
12
Smokers
5
7
Railways
2
3
Revival of old fires
2
3
Burning charcoal
1
1
Lightning ..
1
1
Queensland, 1938-43.
(Supplied by Forestry Sub-Department.)
Causes.
Number.
Percentage.
Unknown ..
435
43
Grass and debris burning
249
25
Deliberate burning ..
147
15
Smokers
30
3
Railways ..
26
3
Camp fires
22
2
Lightning ..
19
2
Miscellaneous
78
7
In this bulletin attention is given mainly to meteorological
aspects of the problem of suppression of bush and grass
fires, but, where information is available on fire-fighting
organizations and precautions adopted in various States,
a brief description of these is also given.
“ It would appear that the most important advances
in fire suppression in the immediate future will be
made in what may be termed fire protection strategy
based upon a scientific knowledge of the natural laws
governing the inflammability of forest fire fuels.”*
* “ Research in Fire Protection,” by J. G. Wright, B.Sc.,
Division of Forest Protection, Department of Interior, Canada.
CAUSES OF FIRES.
Information regarding causes of bush fires has been
gathered from annual reports of Forest Commissions and
Bush Fire Councils, of which a summary is appended.
The causes of the 1939 fires in Victoria are given in
Chapter 11. of the Stretton Report on the bush fires of that
year. The following extracts from the chapter set out the
principal causes of bush fires in general:—
“Immediate Causes.
Almost all fires are caused by man. The experience
of the past shows that the persons who caused the
1939 fires are to be found among the following classes,
which are set forth in a descending scale of frequency
of responsibility for fire; the manner in and reason for
which they cause fire is shortly indicated:—
(i) Settlers. —Burning off for growth, clearing, or
protection.
Graziers. —Burning to promote grass growth.
Miners and Prospectors.—Clearing to facilitate
operations.
(ii) Sportsmen.—Neglect of camp fires, billy fires.
Tourists. —Lighted matches for smoking.
Campers.—Burning to facilitate passage
through the bush.
(iii) Forest Workers. —Misuse of fires used for mill
operations and for domestic purposes.
(iv) Persons using Roads. —Neglect of billy fires;
lighted matches; and burning obstructing
logs on roadway.
(v) Road and Railway Work Gangs. —Billy and
camp fires; careless burning off on railway
property.
(vi) Locomotives. —Defective spark arresters.
(vii) Lightning.—lnfrequent, as generally followed
by rain.
Of these classes, settlers, miners, and graziers are the
most prolific fire-causing agents.”
Contributory causes listed in the report include seasonal
conditions affecting the forests, the condition of the forests
brought about by past action of white men in introducing
fire and breaking down the balance of nature, the lack of
control of people who have followed their various interests
without co-ordination of methods of fire protection or
without any methods whatever. Badly-framed laws
designed for the prevention of fire are stated to be contri-
butory causes because of unsuitability of specific terms,
failure to specify particular areas to which such laws apply,
etc. The earlier law is said to have been unpopular because
it was unreasonable and inflexible. There was, therefore,
no public opinion to check a lawbreaker nor any effective
system of policing the law. Settlers deciding to burn in
defiance of the law have been tempted to leave fires un-
attended in order to escape detection. The Country Fire
Authority Act of 1944, is designed for the better control of
prevention and suppression of fires in country areas of
Victoria.
Among causes reported to Forestry Commissions in other
States, deliberate and mischievous lighting of fires is
sometimes mentioned in addition to the above.
The following summaries of causes of fires are obtained
from sources indicated:


Victoria.
(From Annual Reports of Forests Commission of Victoria,
1940-1 to 1943-4.)
—
Percentage.
Graziers
38
Deliberately lit
9
Land owners and settlers
15
Licencees and workmen
10
Sportsmen, campers, and tourists
11
Lightning
3
Locomotives
4
Prospectors .. .. .. ...
2
Smokers
2
Miscellaneous ; including gas producers, sawmilling, honey-
collectors, log friction, military manoeuvres, &c.
6
CHEMISTRY OF COMBUSTION.
Research into the problem of fire suppression has long
felt the need for information concerning the effect of
vegetation—shrubs, grasses, etc. —on the rate of spread of
fires.
The following is based mainly on a lecture to a Fire
Protection School at Ballarat in May, 1944, by F. R. Moulds
of the Victorian Forests Commission: —
The Theory of Fire.
The theory of fire includes an understanding of the
fundamentals of combustion, the phenomena of fire, and its
extinction. A knowledge of physical and chemical pro-
perties and the reactions which take place is desirable,
together with the effect of various natural influences, under
different conditions.
The fundamentals of fire are (1) fuel, (2) heat, and
(3) air (oxygen). Unless each one of these three is
present in sufficient quantity there will be no fire. Certain
chemical and physical processes enter into the three phases
of the ignition, the spread and growth of a fire and finally
its extinction.
Combustion.
The phenomenon of “ fire ” occurs when combustible
matter, such as vegetable material, undergoes heating in the
presence of oxygen. If the moisture content of the material
is high, the likelihood of fire is lessened, since a proportion
of the heat applied is taken up in the evaporation of water.
However, when the fuel is relatively dry, as is the case
with leaves, twigs, and grasses in summer time when bush-
fire hazard exists, heat supplied to fuel starts a series of
chemical reactions. Of these reactions the ultimate result
is the oxidation, or conversion, of carbon (C) to carbon
dioxide (CO 2 ), a change which is accompanied by the
liberation of a considerable amount of heat.
In its combined state in vegetable matter, carbon occurs
as —
(a) Cellulose, which, for the most part, makes up the
skeletal structure of the plant;
( b ) Plant tissue proteins;
(c) Oils, alcohols, etc., which are in many cases quite
inflammable;
( d) Sundry other substances.
Now, when the fuel, in this case road-side scrub, etc., is
brought into contact with a hot object, e.g., a coal from a
gas-producer hopper, oils, and other volatile substances
are vaporized. These vapors ignite and, in burning, magnify
the heat supplied by the hot object. Heat generated in this
way in perhaps a few blades of grass is sufficient to
vaporize oils in nearby grasses. In a short time, the heat
available in the locality is sufficient to effect the more
complicated chemical decomposition of compounds men-
tioned in (a) and ( b ) above.
Eventually free carbon remains. This, at high tempera-
tures, is oxidized to carbon dioxide (C0 2 ). The oxidation
of carbon to carbon dioxide is an exothermic reaction,
i.e., the reaction is accompanied by the evolution of energy
as heat. The surplus energy arises from the fact that the
“ internal energy ” of carbon dioxide is less than the sum
of the internal energies of carbon and oxygen. The
reaction can be represented by—
C + 0 2 —>- C0 2 -f- 10,890 B.T.U. per 12 oz. of
carbon (1 molecule of each).
(A British Thermal Unit (8.T.U.) is the amount of heat
required to raise the termperature of 1 lb. of water through
I°F.)
The heat evolved then is equivalent to 14,520 B.T.U’s
per pound of carbon. Thus, commencing with a tiny hot
coal, sufficient heat is generated to ignite surrounding fuel,
and so the conflagration expands.
Fire Extinction.
In fire extinction with steam, the chemical reaction is of
the type which absorbs heat. It can be expressed as —
C plus H 2 O —>• CO plus H 2 minus 4,350 B.T.U.
(carbon plus steam) for each 1 lb. of carbon.
This will be referred to again in a comparison of steam
and water in fire extinction.
It has already been said that the three fundamentals of
fire are fuel, heat, and air (oxygen). Fire extinction, in
principle, consists m the limitation of one or more of these
factors, viz.:—
(i) Starvation, i.e., limitation of the fuel supply;
(ii) Cooling, i.e., limitation of the temperature; or
(iii) Smothering, i.e., the limitation of the oxygen
supply.
To take examples of each of these in turn—
(i) Starvation. —This can be achieved by removing com-
bustible material from the neighbourhood of a fire, e.g.,
preparation of fire trails, cutting of trenches in humus!
burning back to a fire, and also, in other circumstances,’
the demoltion of buildings to create a fire gap.
(ii) Cooling. —The principle, of course, is that on which
the use of water is based, i.e., if the rate at which heat is
generated by combustion is less than the rate at which it
is dissipated through various agencies, combustion must die
out. The power of water for fire extinction depends on two
things, (a) its thermal capacity, i.e., the amount of heat
it is capable of absorbing, and (b) its latent heat of vapori-
zation, i.e., the amount of heat which it will absorb during
the transition stage of unit weight of itself from water to
steam. The chemical equation previously quoted referred
to the use of steam to combine with red hot carbon and
remove heat from the carbon. The latent heat of vaporiza-
tion of water is such that 5 i times as much heat is
required to convert a given amount of water from boiling
point to steam as it does from atmospheric temperature to
boiling point. This means that the capacity of water to
remove heat from burning material is much greater when
being changed to steam than when in the liquid form For


maximum results then, water should be added to a fire in
such a way that as much as possible is converted into
steam. The smothering effect due to the steam is a
secondary factor that very likely helps in the extinction.
In the interests of economy of water supply at forest fires,
an understanding of this fact will help to eke out limited
supplies and, at the same time, achieve maximum results.
(iii) Smothering. —There are two methods which can be
utilized in the extension of this principle, firstly, by reduc-
ing the oxygen content, and, secondly, by creating an excess
of oxygen, both of which have precisely the same effect.
The chemical substances most likely to give good results
have been shown to be those which have a fire-proofing
effect on the timber or cellulose material. The use of sand
or earth on a small fire and in covering burning stumps
are examples of the use of the first of these alternatives.
The use of foam is another which may some day find its
way into the inventory of methods of rural fire extinction,
though it has not yet done so. This forms a type of blanket
which excludes air, and so prevents further combustion.
An example of the second alternative, i.e., providing an
excess of oxygen, is the extinguishing of an oil fire by the
blast from exploding dynamite. So much air is passed
across the burning material that the lower limit of com-
bustion is reached, and, because of excess oygen (or, if
preferred, a local fuel deficiency), burning ceases.
Three fundamentals of fire with which we are concerned
in rural fire protection are—
1. Fuel. —It is obvious that there can be no fire without
fuel; it is also self-evident that fuels, because of their
different quality, quantity, and arrangement, will greatly
influence the spread of a fire. Consider first—quality. By
far the most important aspect is fuel moisture content.
The fuel moisture content is probably the best indication
of burning conditions in forest, scrub, or grassed areas. A
proportionately great amount of heat is required to dry out
wet fuel, so that its chances for burning are usually very
remote. As the percentage of moisture becomes less, the
importance of each gram of water present assumes progres-
sively greater significance. Before the usual class of rural
fuel can be ignited, its temperature must be raised to about
600 to 800 deg. F. The exact temperature depends on the
nature of the fuel, its oil or resin content, etc. Long before
the above temperature is reached, of course, water
evaporates, and so before the fuel is ignited all the available
heat is being used for the sole purpose of evaporating the
water, i.e., in drying out the fuel. Reference has already
been made to the relatively large amount of heat required
to change water from the liquid to the vapor (or steam)
phase, and so it can be realized how very important the
moisture content of the fuel actually is. As it has such an
important bearing on forest fires, methods have been
worked out for measuring fuel moisture content. These
instruments are known as hygrometers. Hazard sticks are
particular examples. They give a direct indication of
burning conditions and should be an important adjunct to
protective action. Other aspects of quality which are of
concern are resin and oil content (e.g., Xanthorrhea spp.
gum at base of plant which makes it a very flashy fuel,
also furze due to the oil content). Bracken when dry and
still standing is particularly flashy because of the ample
opportunity for distribution of air while the burning is
taking place.
In the region of 575 deg. F., the reaction taking place
during burning becomes violent and, owing to the liberation
of heat, may cause self-heating with an actual rise of
temperature. This phenomenon is due to the fact that
cellulose is a major constituent of wood, and cellulose
undergoes “ exothermic ” decomposition at about 575 deg. F.
When wood is heated in bulk in charcoal manufacture,
this liberation of heat enables the later stages of carboni-
zation to proceed without external heating. Comparing
wood with coal, we find another difference in two fuels.
In the wood, the volatile matter is usually such that 63-78
per cent, of the air concerned in combustion is used by the
volatiles. In coal, the figure is only 40 per cent. The
volatiles in wood, of course, must travel in search of air
with which to burn, and this means that woods burn with
long flames which are ideally suited for the spread of fire.
2. The second fundamental or essential for fire is heat.
This is a form of energy due to vibration or motion of the
molecules of which a body is composed. Heat is important
to the person concerned with fire protection in two ways,
firstly, because it dries out fuels and makes them easier to
burn, and, secondly, because a temperature of 600 to 800
deg. F. is necessary to secure oxidation of forest fuels,
i.e., they must be heated to a point somewhere between
600 and 800 deg. F. before ignition takes place. There
are several sources of heat with which we are concerned,
e.g., friction, chemical energy, the sun, and electrical energy.
Friction. —This has long been a problem in fire protec-
tion, particularly where forest or rural industry is con-
cerned. The friction of a cable round a dry stump, for
instance, has been known to cause a fire, also sparks from
brake shoes on logging vehicles. A realization of the possi-
bility of fires starting in this way is the best way of
minimizing the risk, so that one is always on the lookout
for them.
Chemical Energy. —This has been explained previously,
and is the heat evolved when oxidation takes place and a
new chemical combination is formed. Most chemical
actions evolve heat when new combinations come into being.
Heat from the Sun. —This has been estimated in the form
of energy to be about i horse-power per square foot of the
earth’s surface. A surface at right angles to the sun’s rays
(because more rays are concentrated on it) receives more
heat than a surface at an inclined angle to the rays. This
is the reason why the earth it hotter at midday, and also
why northern slopes are hotter than southern slopes. On
northern slopes there is more evaporation, earlier drying
of fuels, and greater fire danger.
Heat from Electricity. —Lightning is an electrical dis-
charge either between clouds or between a cloud and the
earth. Intense heat is generated so that along the path of
the discharge the gaseous molecules of the atmosphere are
rendered incandescent. If a green tree is struck, it is
frequently shattered. It is believed that the reason for
this is the sudden evaporation and expansion of moisture
in the tree. Inflammable or easily ignited material may
be set on fire by the direct discharge or by induction effects.
In Victoria, as distinct from, e.g., parts of tropical Australia
or U.S.A., lightning is not a very usual cause of serious
fires because it is usually followed by rain.
Spontaneous Ignition of Organic Matter.
The prinicple constituent of all organic matter —animal,
vegetable, and also mineral fuel —is carbon which seeks to
combine chemically with the oxygen of the air. At normal
air temperature this tendency may be, and usually is, slight.
It is true that the union of oxygen with the organic matter
gives rise to a liberation of heat which tends to warm the
material, but the loss of heat to the surroundings may


normally prevent any permanent rise of temperature.
Should the temperature of the material be raised, the rate
of combination with oxygen and consequent generation of
heat will be increased. If this rate of temperature increase
continues, a point may be reached at which the cooling
cannot keep pace with the development of heat due to the
chemical reaction.
When the cooling becomes inadequate to dissipate the
heat developed, the material will begin to self-heat and
eventually burst into flame. The temperature at which
this self-heating begins is called “ the ignition temperature,”
but obviously it is not a fixed temperature. It will vary
with the conditions at the time. Thus, if the loss of heat,
by cooling is reduced by any means, such as the use of
heat insulation, self-heating will start at a lower tempera-
ture. Anything which accelerates the rate of reaction will
also reduce the temperature at which self-heating starts.
The chemical structure of some materials is specially prone
to oxidation.
Many vegetable oils contain unsaturated bonds and are
well known for their readiness to take up oxygen from the
air, sometimes accompanied by a marked change in
physical character as shown, for instance, by the “ drying ”
oils. Where such oils are used in processing textile fibres,
a product is obtained which is very liable to spontaneous
combustion, for textile materials, especially wool, are among
the best heat insulators. Oily textile material may readily
absorb oxygen and generate heat which cannot readily
escape.
In the case of new-mown hay, the material may undergo
oxidation under the influence of micro-organisms with the
development of heat. If the heat is not dissipated rapidly
enough, self-heating may occur. The structure of a typical
haystack does not favour the escape of heat, and under
certain conditions the temperature may rise until the stack
catches fire.
An example of spontaneous combustion resulting in a
series of small fires was reported from Canberra in the
summer of 1943-44;
“ Examination of the site showed a strip of accumu-
lated debris about 2 chains long, 4 yards wide, and
6 inches deep. It appeared to result from floods about
fifteen to eighteen months earlier. The debris was
laying on clean river sand. It consisted of a compacted
layer about inches thick of partly-decayed vegetable
remains and sheep manure, covered by about 4 inches
of coarse and rather loose plant remains mixed with
sheep manure. The plant remains included eucalypt
leaves and twigs, fruits, sheoak fruits, and other
material in pieces of about i inch long, or less. The
compacted layer was too hot to touch. The mulch
above it was cooler, and the sand below it, while hot,
became cooler gradually, but was warm for 1 foot or
more down. It was too warm to touch for any length
of time. The compacted layer had the sweetish smell
. of fermenting vegetable material.”
Such an occurrence is very unusual, and it can be said
that normally this type of combustion does not need to be
considered in rural fire protection.
INFLUENCE OF CHEMICAL ATTRIBUTES OF
VEGETATION ON INFLAMMABILITY.
Experiments have been made in recent years on the effect
of certain chemical attributes of vegetation on Forest
Inflammability. This is the subject of a paper by Leon. W.
Richards, Associate Professor, Montana State University,
U.S.A,
In this paper is an outline of studies by the Northern
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station into
vegetation conditions, with the object of refining methods
of estimating fire danger ratings. The project is divided
into three phases—vegetation volume and appearance
studies (current and total volume, growth, and visible
physical changes occurring in plants); chemical investiga-
tions; and test fires which are essential for determining
actual behaviour of fires as affected by vegetation volume
and condition. The first two phases should evolve a theory
capable of being proved or disproved by the third.
(By courtesy of C.S.I.R.)
II. — Sclerophyll Forest, Narnalup, Western Australia.
In the chemical investigations with which the paper
particularly is concerned, it is assumed that available fuel
content could be represented by the crude fibre plus the
crude fats and other extractives, i.e., resins, waxes, and
oils. The crude fibre determinations were discontinued
because they failed to show any significant variations
corresponding to fire behaviour.
Moisture content, calorific value, and crude fat content
were measured throughout the 1936 and 1937 fire seasons
Some results obtained were of considerable interest but
some questions were left unanswered. The procedure was
to collect green or curing materials at intervals from a
variety of grasses and shrubs as the season progressed and
to treat them to obtain the required information’ A
variation in the moisture content of vegetation was found
to be one of the dominant factors in influencing the fir P
behaviour of plants through the fire season. Plant moisture
varies considerably with different species not only season* 11 Z
but between specimens growing side by side. Some snec iZ
become inflammable very early in the season comnarod
vmh others Some again hold a high moisture content
right through the season. Observations also revealed


entirely different burning reactions in some species, some
exhibiting considerable fire resistance. Tests were made to
determine the rate of moisture loss at moderately high
temperatures, and quite large differences were found which
could not be explained without further inquiry.
An approximate estimate was given of the quantity of
energy required to rid living vegetation of its water. “On
the basis of the thermal capacity of free water, the heat of
vaporization and the specific heat of water vapour, it is
estimated that to dissipate the 0 • 68 gm. of water contained
in each gram of green snowbush on 20th June would
require approximately 500 calories. “On the same basis,
it is estimated that to dissipate the 0• 53 gm. of water in
the snowbush on 10th September would require roughly
350 calories.” It was found that concurrent with the
decrease in water content there was an increase in the
number of calories available as fuel value, thus indicating
an increase in the potential rate of spread of fire in this
species between 20th June and 10th September.
These results are of interest in indicating the importance
of moisture content in fuels in forests and grass lands.
WIND FACTOR IN FOREST FIRES.
An important factor in the behaviour of fire in a forest
is the wind speed inside and outside the forest and above
the crowns of the trees.
Landsberg, “ Physical Climatology,”* gives a table
showing a comparison of wind velocity in the foliage at
various heights with that outside.
Percentage height of vegetation-
120 100 95 90 80 55 20
Percentage of wind velocity—
100 80 60 40 20 10 8
The table indicates that the maximum wind speed is
found at some height above the crowns of trees. At the
level of the crowns the speed is reduced by 20 per cent.,
and the obstruction presented by the trees rapidly reduces
the movement of air within a short distance of the tops
of the trees.
Example for a forest with trees 60 feet high and a wind
speed of 20 m.p.h. in the open—
Wind speed at 60 feet == 16 m.p.h.
54 feet = 8 m.p.h.
12 feet = 1-6 m.p.h.
These figures are intended to give only a general picture
and are not to be taken as applicable in all cases.
When a wind stream blowing over open grass lands meets
a forest barrier, part of the stream is deflected upward
and part passes within the trees. The speed of the wind
decreases with distance from the point of entry into the
wood, the rate of decrease depending on the obstruction
presented by the trees. This will also influence the propor-
tion of the air stream deflected upward.
The direction of air movement inside the forest becomes
more and more variable with distance of penetration, but
there will be a movement in the general direction of flow.
Wind protection offered by a forest to open spaces in
the neighbourhood has been the subject of limited study.
One observation made by Geiger in a cut 165 feet in width
in a pine forest indicated that even a strong wind above
* Physical Climatology, Helmut Landsberg, Ph.D., Pennsyl-
vania State College 1942. (Gray Printing Co., Dubois, P.A.)
the tree crowns produces only negligible motion if it blows
at right angles to the cut. If the wind blows at a slanting
angle to the cut, the direction in the cut is changed into one
parallel to it, with the highest speeds toward the windward
edge. Near the ground the speed is small, but at 30 feet
above the ground it is doubled.
A small clearing in a forest acts as a funnel on a warm
day because of convection and diffusion resulting from sur-
face heating by the sun. There is an air movement in the
surrounding trees towards a clearing in such circumstances.
On the windward face of a forest a lateral deflection is
also to be expected, resulting in large variations in wind
direction.
The effect of a fire burning into the face of a forest will
be to progressively remove obstructions to wind flow into
the forest. The indraft will be accelerated by the heat of the
fire. Some movement of air in the forest towards the seat
of the fire may also be expected. No definite information
as to the extent of such air movement is available.
Owing to the relatively high wind speeds in the crowns
of the trees, a fire in a strong wind would tend to make
progress more rapidly in the tree crowns than along the
forest floor. The rate of progress would depend, however,
on the inflammability of the fuel in the crowns. Some types
of green timber would offer much more resistance to fire
than others.
REGIONS SUBJECT TO FIRE DANGER.
Areas subject to the most serious danger from bush fires
may be shown most effectively by reference to a vegetation
map, such as that compiled by Prescott, and reproduced
in Fig. (1) by courtesy of the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research. These areas may be said to comprise
the sclerophyll forests and savannah woodlands of sub-
tropical Australia. The nature of these types of country is
seen in the plates accompanying the map.
In Northern Australia, summer is the rainy season and,
if fires occur, they are usually confined to the late winter
or spring months. Loss of life has been reported from
extensive fires in Queensland but, owing in part to the
sparsity of settlement in these areas, damage has not been
comparable with that experienced in the south-eastern
States. The most disastrous fires have occurred in Gipps-
land, the Western District, and north-eastern districts of
Victoria, and eastern parts of New South Wales. To a
lesser degree, the slopes and western plains of this State
have also suffered severely. In the south-west of Western
Australia is a region of valuable jarrah and karri forests
(plate n.). Summer is normally a dry season in this region,
and the danger of fire is more persistent than in the south-
eastern States. In Tasmania there are also valuable timber
tracts, particularly in the western half of the State. These
also are subject to severe damage by fire in some seasons. In
South Australia, the principal danger zones are in the south-
east corner and on the Adelaide hills, and on parts of
the ranges of the north.
Little is known of the Northern Territory and Kimberley
region of Western Australia beyond advice that “ thousands
of square miles of country are burnt off every dry season.”
Fires are most frequent during the winter months, and are
a source of anxiety to pastoralists.
There is some evidence that many fires in Northern Aus-
tralia occur in the dry season as the result of lightning and,
with low relative humidities and strong south-east winds,
these burn fiercely in the tall Mitchell grass.


PART II.
FIRE WEATHER STATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS OF INFLAMMABILITY.
FUNCTIONS OF A FIRE WEATHER STATION.
The principal functions of a fire weather station in a
forest are to develop a means of measuring burning con-
ditions or fire hazard and to furnish weather reports
which will be of value in forecasting fire danger
weather. The latter function may become of primary
importance in areas sparsely served by meteorological
reporting stations.
The importance of using instruments is apparent when it
is considered that personal estimates of fire hazard vary
not only with different persons but with the same person
at different times. Reliable instruments will always give
the same readings under the same conditions whether these
occur in different parts of the country or in different periods
of time. Moreover, they express definite degrees of dryness
or whatever element they are employed to measure.
Principal causes of fire danger apart from human agencies
include certain factors which are constant, or nearly so,
from year to year. Such factors are the character and
volume of fuels and the topography of the
country, which influences the exposure of fuels
and the rate of spread of fire. The weather
factor, however, is perhaps the most critical,
and this varies from year to year and from day
to day. The characteristics of any fire season
are determined in a large measure by the
weather factor alone, as will be seen in later sec-
tions. It is, therefore, necessary to make daily
measurements of the weather elements con-
cerned if we are to arrive at a reliable basis for
estimating the degree of danger from natural
causes in a fire season.
The elements we are principally concerned
with are rainfall, temperature, relative humidity,
and wind. These elements have a direct effect
on the condition of fuels in the forests and on
the rate of spread of fires once they have broken
out. The conditions of fuels, or state of in-
flammability of dead material on the forest floor, may
also be determined directly by measurements of the water
content of representative samples of such fuels.
The instruments used at a fire weather station are of
the same kind as those normally employed at a climato-
logical station.
The maximum temperature during the day and the mini-
mum temperature during the night are obtained from par-
ticular types of thermometer designed for the purpose.
The relative humidity is derived by tables from readings
of dry and wet bulb thermometers.
The thermometers are exposed in a standard “ Steven-
son Screen ” or louvred shelter, which protects them from
the rain and from direct heating by radiation but allows air
to move freely past the bulbs. A thermograph and hygro-
graph may be employed if a continuous record of tem-
perature and humidity is desired. Rain gauges of a
diameter of either 8 inches or 5 inches are also used.
A wind vane correctly orientated is employed to obtain
wind direction. The speed of the wind can be estimated
with a fair degree of approximation by means of the
Beaufort specifications. (See appendix, III.) To obtain
good representative wind records the exposure should be
open and should not be sheltered by hills in the vicinity
or by high trees and buildings in the immediate neighbour-
hood of the vane. To obtain specific information regarding
wind speeds or a continuous record of speed and direction
an anemograph should be employed.
HAZARD STICKS
Forestry research officers have endeavoured to find a
single-value measure of the combined effects of weather
elements on inflammability of dead branches, twigs, and
leaves in various stages of decomposition on the forest
floor.
(By courtesy of C.S.I.R.)
III. — Savannah—Peak Downs, Queensland.
Apparatus has been devised for measuring the amount
of moisture contained in samples of such materials. This
is expressed in terms of percentage of the weight of the
material when oven dry. The drying out of fuels in the
forests is a danger signal that calls for the expansion of
the fire protection organization. Since this may involve
placing men in strategic positions and calling them away
from other duties, or possibly the employment of additional
men from outside sources, it is desirable that the inflam-
mability be closely followed and that its impending changes
be accurately determined in advance.
Methods of determining fuel moisture content are des
cribed by Gisborne in U.S. Department of Agriculture
Circular No. 398 (Measuring Fire Weather and ForP.f
Inflammability).


Fig. 1.—Vegetation Map of Australia.


Fig. 2.—Fire Hazard Sticks.


(By courtesy of Forests Commission of Victoria.)
IV. —Forest Cover of a Water Shed.
One method adopted for measuring the moisture content
of twigs and dead branches in the forest consists of exposing
“hazard sticks ” or cylinders of wood among typical brush
wood or dead limbs. The moisture content is determined
by weighing the cylinders on scales graduated to show
percentage of oven-dry weight. The cylinders in common
use are J inch in diameter. This method was de-
veloped and tested in the United States over a
period of seven years before the experimental station
advocated its trial on a large scale in routine field practice.
C. 8016/ 17.—2
Before supplying samples to field stations, the experi-
mental station exposes large numbers of rods side by side
for several weeks and selects those which prove closely
comparable in capacity to absorb and retain moisture.
Early experiments were conducted with natural samples
of “ slash ” with or without bark, but variations among
specimens were found to be so great that measurements of
moisture content had no comparative value. Ultimately
samples were manufactured from selected sapwood and
cut to a standard length of 18 inches. A single cylinder


of h inch diameter was replaced by three i-inch cylinders
held parallel to each other about I inch apart by dowels
(Fig. 2).
Early experiments in Australia were conducted with
I-inch pinus radiata rods, and 2-inch cylinders of local
woods (red cedar or mountain ash), but the 2-inch cylinders
were found to be relatively insensitive to humidity changes.
Conditions of exposure require careful consideration and
attention so that results obtained at different times and
in different localities may be comparable. Measurements
made with sticks exposed to the sun’s rays would give a
condition of uniformity, but the results would represent
extreme conditions and a higher degree of danger than
would actually exist in the shade. Difficulty was experienced
at experimental stations in the United States of America
in arriving at a standard exposure in the shade, since the
density of shade varies at different stations and at different
times of the day. To overcome such difficulties, wire screens
were issued to be placed over the rods in the open, and
so provide a degree of shade “ approximately equivalent
to that existing in an old growth forest area from which
three-fourths of the canopy had been removed.”
The measurements are made each day, preferably in the
late afternoon, since the sticks may pick up appreciable
moisture from high relative humidity during the night.
Sticks are recalled at the end of each fire season for re-
drying and testing and, if necessary, replacement. A fungus
growth develops on sticks after they have been exposed
for more than one season.
Value of Hazard Sticks.
In Australia, there has been some difference of opinion
as to the value of fire hazard sticks. It is understood that
some forestry officers have great confidence in their utility
while others prefer to use meteorological data alone or else
to use the information provided by the sticks in conjunction
with meteorological factors.
The Woods and Forests Department of South Australia
states that a limitation in the use of the sticks is the fact
that danger is present before it is recorded by the sticks.
The Forestry Department, Tasmania, comments as
follows:
“ Certain failings of fire hazard sticks are bound up
with the fact that they are exposed in the open. Even
so, this practice is advocated because—
(l) if the sticks are placed beneath a canopy of the
forest, comparisons cannot be made because it would
be very difficult (if not impossible) to set standards as
to canopy. Standard installations are essential;
(2) the worst conditions, with exceptions, are given
if sticks are fully exposed. This is thought to be
important as fires first run in open country (whether
poor forest or bracken clearings).
The failings to which hazard sticks are subject are —
(i) Too high a hazard may be indicated in the
first few days after rain. The aggregation
of most forest fuels tends to cut down on
evaporation, whereas there is nothing to
impede the full play of drying factors on
the isolated hazard sticks.
(ii) In the reverse way, a humid change may
cause a greater Increase in hazard stick
moisture than in fuel moisture content,
(iii) The most important factor influencing rate
of spread of fire is wind velocity. Moisture
content of hazard sticks does not give full
weight to this.”
Some objections probably arise from the fact that in a
forest of mixed species in rugged country, the Are hazard
varies very considerably within short distances, depending
on the species of vegetation as well as on the environment.
No single observation, whether of hazard stick or of an
index based on meteorological data can be expected to meet
such a circumstance.
To form a true estimate of the value of the hazard stick
it should be remembered that its function is to assess the
state of fuels, or burning conditions from the point of view
of inflammability. By definition (Appendix, IV.), the
term “ hazard ” relates to fuels only. The moisture content
of the stick is regarded as a measure of the degree
of inflammability, and a scale of hazards has been based
on such measurements. It is advisable to guard against
false assumptions when interpreting the readings and to
be quite clear as to the restrictions imposed by conditions
of exposure. The moisture content in an open situation, such
as in a clearing, or in grass and scrub bordering a forest, will
generally be lower than in the depths of the forest, even
if an artificial canopy is provided. Such an exposure would
give an excessive number of days of high fire hazard com-
pared with the number of days on which fire danger exists
due to weather conditions. This does not necessarily
indicate a weakness in this method of determining fire
hazard. It merely expresses a fact —that the inflamma-
bility of fuels is at the danger level on many days when
weather conditions do not favour a rapid spread of fire
Such information is of considerable value in itself and can
be usefully applied in showing the danger of lighting fires
which with the sudden development of fire danger weather
will quickly get out of control.
It will be realized, however, that in order to determine
the degree of fire danger, further information is required
as to the weather conditions under which a fire will run
This is a function of the meteorologist with the aid of his
observers and his forecasting technique.
To view the matter from the opposite aspect, the deter-
mination of fire hazard is a necessary complement to the
observation and forecasting of fire danger weather There
are circumstances in which a forecast of a fire danger dav
cannot be made without a knowledge of the fire hazard
In summer it is often safe to assume that fuels are inflam'
mable but there are many occasions when, in the absence
of definite information, there must be some uncertaintv
In the early part of the season, before the fuels have dried
out, in a damp season, or even in a dry season after rain
it is likely that the weather conditions may favour a
serious fire but burning conditions will be unfavorable
The meteorologist is concerned with this aspect of the
problem of fire weather forecasting in view of his place in
the fire prevention organization as adviser on the weeVV
factor. Information as to fire hazard is of even zveafZ
concern to the authority charged with the
of fire suppression measures. dUon


Degree of Fire Hazard.
General Scale.
Empirical Scale.
Temperature.
Relative
Humidity.
o p
0/
/o
Nil
0- 1
Low
1- 4
64-80
32-68
Moderate
4- 6
69-86
26-61
Average summer
6- 7
78-94
21-51
High summer
7- 8
80-97
19-45
Severe summer ..
8- 9
87-99
17-30
Dangerous
9-10
Over 92
Under 27
Considering again the question of exposure of hazard
sticks, an observation taken in the open at the edge of a
forest leaves some doubt as to conditions well within the
timber belt under a dense canopy. It may be desirable to
sacrifice uniformity of conditions of exposure in order to
gain definite information as to the hazard in such a loca-
tion. It may be expected that in a thickly-wooded site
fuels would dry out much more slowly, the relative
humidity would generally be higher and the number of days
of high fire hazard would be much smaller than outside.
In some seasons the hazard may never be high. Hazard
stick readings from such an exposure would indicate the
degree of penetration of danger conditions into the heart
of the forest and for this reason are desirable.
A third type of site intermediate between one of open
exposure and one of exposure under a dense canopy would
also be useful in furnishing information as to the pro-
gressive penetration of dry conditions into the
interior of the forest.
The hazard stick can be used to the best
advantage in an exposure under the forest
canopy. For open exposures in grass or scrub
country the use of grass fire hazard index tables
(page 26) would be a more appropriate means
of determining the fire hazard.
FIRE WEATHER STATIONS IN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia —Use of Hazard Sticks.
There are two Departmental fire weather
research stations in Western Australia, one at
Dwellingup and one at Pemberton. Observa-
tions at these two stations are taken at two-
hourly intervals from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. During
exceptional weather, they have been taken
throughout the 24 hours.
Readings include temperature, relative humidity, wind
force and direction, barometric pressure, cloud formation
and density, rainfall, evaporation (Canadian type evapori-
meter and Livingstone porous cup atmometer), and wood
cylinder moisture contents. Half-inch radiata cylinders are
used as hazard sticks.
In Western Australia, single sticks are exposed on a wire
screen in full sunlight 10 inches above the ground. The
moisture content of the wood cylinders gives a very good
measure of the actual fire danger experienced, and they
are used as a standard measure of current fire danger.
It has been found that the hygroscopicity of cylinders
varies according to the density of samples of timber. In
order to standardize the cylinder, a piece of timber suffi-
cient for several years’ supply is set aside.
A comparison of readings of hazard sticks and personal
estimates of fire hazard by foresters is given by Wallace
and Gloe in “ Forest Fire Weather ” (Aust. Forestry, Vol.
111., No. 1).
A statistical analysis and correlation using 8 a.m. or
6 a.m.* wood cylinder readings, and current temperature
and relative humidity readings, has been made, and enables
the hazard at any time to be calculated.
* Former times of observation.
An empirical scale of fire hazard adopted in Western
Australia is as follows:
“ The estimated hazard is based on the intensity, spread
and damage which it is considered would be caused by a
fire burning in two-year-old leaf litter during the worst
(By courtesy of C.S.I.R.)
V. —Savannah Woodland —Riverton, South Australia.
period of the day. The empirical scale ranges from 0— a
day on which a fire will not run, to 10— a day of maximum
fire danger, excluding any days of abnormal extreme con-
ditions of high temperature and wind, and low relative
humidity corresponding to what in America would be called
a ‘ blow up ’ day.”
The graph in Fig. 3 shows the relation between the
moisture content of h inch pinus radiata hazard sticks and
average personal estimates of fire hazard on the above
scale.
Experience in Western Australia has shown that the
i-inch pine cylinders undergo a consistent loss of oven-dry
weight during the season, and this may continue for a
period of years. To allow for this, the fire hazard graph
is lowered periodically during the season.
Causes of errors in personal estimates are briefly set out
by Wallace and Gloe. Some of these will be of interest apart
from the example which they present of the importance
of developing instrumental measurements of fire hazard.
“ Perhaps the most common error in personal estimation
is caused by a tendency to rate a hot humid day as a higher
hazard than a hot dry one, because it is much more un-
pleasant to the human being.” “ There is a general ten-
dency to neglect the definite influence that past weather
exerts on current fuel moisture. The cumulative effect of
a succession of dry days will not be neutralized by cloudy
conditions, while even the effect of light showers moistening
the surface of fuels may be only transient.”


Fig. 3.—Fire Hazard as indicated by Moisture Content of Hazard Sticks.
South Australia—Research at Mt. Burr.
The Commonwealth Forestry Bureau, in conjunction with
the Woods and Forests Department, South Australia, main-
tains a forest research station at Mt. Burr Forest, near
Millicent, in the south-east of South Australia, the most
important forest district of that State. Here has been
established a fully-equipped meteorological station. The
equipment includes hazard sticks, which are turned sticks
of air-dried radiata pine.
Observations conducted at Mt. Burr by J M Field,
of the Commonwealth Forestry Bureau showed a close
re ation between reading of hazard sticks and personal
estimates of four foresters in the Monterey Pine Plant* *
in that area in the summer of 1940-41. Monterey nino •
were used, and the hazard scale subsequently §
use in South Australia is as follows: Y d pted for
•E.M.23. Fire Weather Research. ProgSSl^^lStT


Danger.
Fire Description.
Weather.
Moisture
Pine Rods.
(a) High Quality.
(b) Low Quality.
0. Nil
Fire will not burn
Fire will not burn
18-0 +
1. Very low
Needle litter burns slowly
Litter and some undergrowth burns
Cool winds—W., S.W., S., S.E., E.,
cool gentle N.E., N., or N.W.
13-2-18-0
2. Low
Litter burns readily and a few dead
needles on limbs burn
Litter, most undergrowth, and
nearly all dead needles burn.
A few green needles burn
Wind ditto
9-8-13-2
3. Low medium
Most dead needles on limbs burn.
Green needles almost untouched
All undergrowth burns clean, Most
of green needles burn
Winds ditto, but warmer
7•9-9•8
4. Medium ..
Practically all green crowns partly
burn
Practically all green crowns com-
pletely burn
Winds ditto, but warmer
6-6-7-9
5. High medium
Many green crowns completely
destroyed
Whole plantation swept, crowns and
all
Warm, dry winds, N.E., E., N.W.,
or W. Maximum temperature over
77
5-S-6-6
6. High
“ Crown fire ” —all crowns burn
rapidly
Plantation swept at considerable
speed
Winds ditto ; always fairly strong.
Maximum temperature over 83
4.0-5.3
7. Very high
“ Blow up ” day
“ Blow up ” day
Wind ditto; practically always
strong. Maximum temperature
over 90
< 40
FIRE HAZARD SCALE.
(Mt. Burr, South Australia.)
Daily Fire Danger Classification —New Classification, January, 1941.
South-east of South Australia.
The danger to be recorded is the maximum danger occurring during the day.
The descriptions below are based on the manner a fire would burn in the following Monterey Pine Stands.
(a) High Quality. —Stocking over 600 per acre. Height 40 ft. to 45 ft. ' Green level about 10 ft. All
undergrowth completely suppressed. Only needle litter on the floor.
(b) Low Quality. —Stocking about 600 per acre. Height about 30 ft. Green level 0 to 3 ft. Dense bracken
and undegrowth occurring throughout, and much of it dead.
LEGEND
Dwellingup
Manjimup
Fig. 4. —Comparison of Rainfall and Fire Hazard.
This graph shows the effect of rainfall in lowering the fire hazard.


Fire Hazard Classification.
Class
Number.
Class Name.
Description of Fire.
0
Nil ..
Fire will not burn
1
Very low
Leaves and grass ignite with difficulty
2
Low
Leaves and grass, debris on forest floor
burn slowly. Little tendency to spread
3
Moderate
Some green undergrowth burns. Debris
burns easily. Fire tends to spread
4
Average summer
Undergrowth burns readily. Fire spreads
freely. Lower branches of trees burn
or scorch
5
High ..
Fires tend to rise into tree crowns
6
Dangerous
Blow up condition. Crown fires develop.
All types of forest burn readily
7
Explosive
Conflagration condition develops quickly.
Fires spread from origins with extreme
rapidity.
Victoria —Fire Danger Meter.
The hazard sticks employed in Victoria are of Pinus
radiata \ inch cross section, and are laid up in three laths to
give an oven-dry weight of 100 grams. They have proved
very satisfactory and react rapidly to changing weather
conditions.
The sticks are supported in a wire cradle about 2 inches
above ground level, under a canopy as typical as possible
of the surrounding forest country. They are weighed on a
beam balance, and the moisture content is calculated
directly as a percentage of oven-dry weight.
The “ critical values ” of such moisture contents vary
from locality to locality, e.g., a reading of 10 per cent, at
Tangil Bren indicates Class 7 on the Fire Danger Scale,
whilst at Erica, 15 per cent, indicates Class 7.
Critical values of moisture content also vary with dif-
ferent types of wood. For Mountain Ash {Eucalyptus
regnans ) sticks used in Victoria, 20 per cent, is said to
indicate a degree of inflammability corresponding approxi-
mately to 10 per cent., according to the pinus radiata sticks.
A fire hazard scale adopted (provisionally) by the Forests
Commission of Victoria is as follows;
A Fire Danger Meter is being developed by officers of the
Victorian Forests Commission based on factors—
(a) herbage;
(b) number of days since last rain;
(c) moisture content of the hazard sticks; and
( d ) wind velocity. (Fig. 5.)
In the upper part of the meter, the herbage is divided
into three major categories—green, moderate, and dry—
and three subdivisions —abundant, medium, and sparse.
There are thus nine columns in the table which describe
the state of the herbage. These factors are printed on the
outside of an envelope provided with windows within which
is a sliding scale. On the upper part of the sliding scale is
printed in corresponding columns ranges of days since last
rain of 0-30 points, and over 30 points. The sliding scale
is moved until the number of days since rain is brought
under the appropriate herbage factor. The number corres-
ponding to the fire danger, read off in the lower window, is
found under the appropriate hazard stick reading (graded
in eight steps from 10 to over 50), and opposite the wind
velocity (graded in seven steps from 0 to over 38 miles
per hour).
The meter is still in its experimental stage, and is based
on similar scales which are in use in the United States of
America.
Tasmania—Fire Weather Stations.
Fire Weather Stations in Tasmania are patterned on the
United States Forest Service Stations as described in U.S.
F.S. bulletin “ Instructions for Fire Danger Stations.”
The equipment consists of —
Stevenson screen; Psychrometer; Wind vane; Rain
gauge, i in. x i in. fire hazard sticks, and direct
reading scale for moisture content. Wind force is
estimated according to the Beaufort scale. The
hours of reading are 9 a.m., noon, 3 p.m., 5 p.m.
The readings of each station are studied in relation to
fires occurring in the district the station is intended to serve.
The main aim is to find a correlation between moisture
content of the J in. x J in. sticks and fires that occur. In
this way it is hoped to use the moisture content readings
as a measure of fire hazard.
At present the hazard stick readings are used as a general
indication of fire hazard. When the correlation between
moisture content of the fire hazard sticks and fire behaviour
is established, a fairly accurate idea can be given of the
inflammability of the forest fuels and the severity of fires
to be expected with prevailing conditions.
Fire Hazard Scale.
Until the work mentioned in the previous paragraph is
completed and a fairly precise fire hazard scale can be
drafted, fire danger is divided into three grades.
(1) Slight.—No great risk of fires spreading rapidly.
(2) Moderate. —Conditions are such that any fire may
develop rapidly.
(3) Severe.—Usually following a period of moderate
danger with temperature high, humidity low
and wind strong.
Corresponding stick readings have been fixed for the
1946-47 season at slight—l 3 per cent, plus; moderate-
s'l2 per cent.; severe—7 per cent, and less.
This scale is used mostly as a guide in placing fire nro-
tection personnel from day to day. y
Hazard Sticks.
fire , l i azard sticks first used were supplied by the
U.S. Forest Service, and consisted ol J in. x J in sticks „f
Pmus ponderosa sapwood, and a 2 in. x 2 in. stick of oreo™
Experiments were made with sticks made from locallv
grown timber and at present, i in. x J in. sticks of Pinll
radiata are used. Readings of 2 in. x 2 in. sticks are not
now made, it being considered that they serve no n Jfn
purpose. ui>exuj
Critical Values.
Present knowledge indicates that fires may occur with ,
moisture content of hazard sticks at 15 per cent, or ess
Very rarely, fires have been reported when the
reading 15-16 per cent. Above 12 per cent, however fir"
are almost always associated with poor, open forest ' c.,
coun P t e r y . Cent " C ° ndWOnS beC ° me CTiti -> for tetter trZ


INSTRUCTIONS.
(1) Above upper window select
section showing Herbage Factor.
Herbage is divided into three major
classes—Green, Moderate, and Dry—
indicating state of vegetation. The
minor subdivisions —A = Abundant,
M = medium, S = Sparse—indicate
the amount of such vegetation.
(2) Move slide down until the
number of days since last rain, in the
column chosen in (1) appears opposite
the amount of last rain.
(3) Read fire danger class, in the
lower window, opposite wind velocity,
and below moisture content of hazard
stick.
Fig. 5. —Fire Danger Meter.


FIRE HAZARD INDICES.—CANADIAN FOREST
SERVICE.
While the line of research followed in the United States
has been, so far as information is available, in the direction
of the development of apparatus for the direct measure-
ment of the inflammability of fuels, Canadian research has
been in the direction of estimating a hazard index based on
such elements as relative humidity, rainfall, evaporation,
and types of fuel, which include various species of trees,
&c. Early difficulties were encountered in the handling of
moisture-measuring apparatus by unskilled forest rangers.
It is also stated that, in order to secure reliable information
by such methods, moisture content determinations have to
be made daily in different forest types and sites throughout
the area. The degree of hazard is said to vary with the
type, site, and local weather conditions.
As a result of these and other considerations, investiga-
tions were directed towards developing an index of
inflammability based on the correlation of fuel moisture
changes with certain critical weather factors measured at a
well exposed weather station in the vicinity. Forest fire
hazard tables were subsequently published, and a high degree
of success has been claimed in their application. Steps in
the development of such tables are described by Wright in
an early paper “ Research in Forest Protection.”*
Degrees of inflammability of “ duff ”—the mat of dead
material on the forest floor—were established by means of
test fires. A scale ranges from “ nil ”—a condition in which
ignition will not spread from a match or from a camp fire
1 foot in diameter—to “ extreme,” in which considerable
difficulty is experienced in extinguishing test fires with the
feet or without resort to other means to put them out.
The next step was to identify degrees of inflammability
with “ duff ” moisture. “ Top layer duff ” formed the basis
of such tests as distinct from “ full layer duff.” The moisture
content varies with types of pine and other softwoods
studied. Sources of duff moisture are taken into considera-
tion. These include atmospheric sources and humus or
mineral soil sources.
The hygroscopic properties of dead vegetable matter
result in the absorption of moisture from the air when the
relative humidity is high. If fuel is exposed long enough to
a given relative humidity it will attain an equilibrium
moisture content. In this connexion it is of interest to note
that it is the humidity of the atmosphere rather than the
formation of dew which increases the moisture content of
“ duff ” during the night.
Rainfall is the principal source of “ duff ” moisture, and
the moisture capacity varies with different types of woods.
The duration and intensity of rain is an important factor,
rains greater than 12 points spread over more than four
hours, having a greater wetting effect than the same amount
falling in less than four hours.
Drying Influences.
The only way for absorbed moisture to escape is to the
surrounding air. The dryness or saturation deficit of the
air is, therefore, an important measure of the rate at which
fuels will lose moisture. Relative humidity is used in
preference to saturation deficit because the fuels attain an
equilibrium moisture for a given relative humidity. Relative
humidity normally rises to high values during the night and
*“ Research in Forest Protection” (1935). J. G. Wright, B.Sc.,
Division of Forest Protection, Forest Service, Canada.
drops during the day. It is customary to use values obtained
during the time of day when the lowest readings are
recorded.
Air temperature has an important influence on the
capacity of the air to hold moisture. Solar radiation,
besides raising the air temperature, has a marked effect on
the temperature of the duff exposed to the direct rays of
the sun. Duff temperatures of 148 deg. F. have been observed
in the open. In such circumstances, moisture is driven off
quickly, and fuels attain a high degree of inflammability
much more quickly than those in the shade.
Wind is an important factor not only in the rate of
drying of fuels, but also in the spread of fire. Other things
being equal, the rate of spread of fire once started varies as
the square of the wind velocity. This follows from the well-
known law relating pressure to wind speed. High winds also
cause “ spot ” fires ahead of the main front on which the
fire is burning.
Evaporation.
The rate of evaporation is the greatest single measurable
factor indicating the rate of transfer of moisture from fuels
to the air. It has been found that there is a high degree of
relationship between the rate of evaporation from various
types of atmometer and the higher moisture contents of
duff. Results vary with different types of evaporimeter.
From studies (as yet incomplete), it would appear that duff
evaporation is most nearly proportional to evaporation from
a free water surface. A simple type of evaporimeter used
was a pan 3J inches deep and 5 inches in diameter. The
water level is accurately set g inch below the rim by means
of a pointed spike operating on the principle of the hook
gauge.
As drying progresses, the moisture content of the “ duff ”
approaches equilibrium for a given relative humidity and
the influence of evaporation becomes less marked The
“ fibre-saturation ” point of dead leaves apparently occurs
at a moisture content quite close to the upper limit of
inflammability. Above the fibre-saturation point evapora-
tion records are important. Below the fibre-saturation point
relative humidity exerts a more marked influence upon the
moisture content.
In the early research work on forest fires, the rate of
evaporation was used as a measure of fuel moisture loss
down to a point where the duff becomes inflammable but
m the zones of “low” to “extreme” inflammability the
usefl 6^OCl: ° f eva P° ration and relative humidity was
developed- 3b ° Ve COnsiderations ’ curves were
(1) for certain forest types and sites to show the effect
of rainfall in adding moisture to fuels*
(2) to show the effect of evaporation measured at a
standard site m the open upon the rate of dryinu
of ffiels down to the region of inflammability®
(3) to show the effect of evaporation and relative
humidity within the danger zones. 1 tlve
From these curves, forest Are hazard tables were orenarau
by which it was possible to compute the index of infl? d
bility each day if the daily values of rainfall evanor^™ 3 '
and relative humidity are known. ’ eva P° ratl on,
*art, and
day the actual hazard in any part of his area. anTregutate


[. Rainfall
Tracer Index Table.
♦Depth of Rain in Inches.
* Start ing Tracer
■01
•05
•06
■13
■18
•91
1-26
Index.
•02
to
to
to
to
or
•07
•17
•25
1-25
more.
New Tracer Index
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
45
42
41
41
41
40
40
40
40
50
46
44
44
44
42
41
41
41
125
121
116
99
94
76
73
60
58
140
134
128
108
101
81
77
61
58
II. Dry Weather Tracer Index Tables.
(Based on noon readings.)
Temperature Over 80"
F.
♦Relative
Humidity 25 Per Cent, or Less.
♦Relative Humidity 66-75 Per Cent.
Corrections to New Tracer
•Starting Tracer Index.
Wind Velocity (m.p.h.).
Wind Velocity (m.p.h.).
Index. Add + Figures;
Subtract — Figures :
For Weather Readings at
0 to
3.
Q
O
7 to
9.
10 to
13.
14 to
17.
18 or
more.
0 to
3.
4 to
6.
I
7 to
9.
10 to
13.
14 to
n.
18 or
more.
New Tracer Index.
10 a.m.
2 p.m.
4 p.m.
40
95
104
113
117
122
128
66
81
96
106
117
127
+ 4
- 11
—
9
50
105
112
118
122
125
130
77
91
102
111
120
128
+ 3
- 11
-
9
75
127
129
132
133
134
135
103
112
118
122
127
129
+ 2
- 9
-
8
100
137
138
140
140
141
141
122
124
127
128
129
130
+ 2
- 4
-
3
135
140
141
142
142
142
142
134
134
134
134
135
135
+ 1
- 1
-
1
144
144
144
144
144
144
144
138
138
139
139
139
139
0
0
0
his plans accordingly. If, in addition, he can be supplied
with an accurate forecast of the weather for the next day
or so, he can estimate the effect such weather will have upon
the existing hazard and so project his hazard some days
ahead.
An early form of the fire hazard tables for use in six
different types of pine forest was published in Forest Fire
Research Note No. 5 of the Canadian Forest Service.
To avoid the use of separate tables for each forest type,
use is made of a “ tracer index ” on a scale of 0 to 150,
which includes all moisture conditions from complete
saturation to absolute dryness.
On the basis of the correlation curves referred to above,
the tracer index is modified according to the observations
of weather elements, the type of forest, and the season of the
year and, by working through a series of tables, a “ Hazard
Index ” for the day is arrived at for the particular type of
forest.
In a later edition (1946) of Fire Danger Tables (Forest
Fire Research Note No. 12 —H. W. Beall), the essential
features of the Wright system were retained, but some
important changes were made. In particular, evaporation
readings were eliminated and meteorological observations
were reduced to dry and wet bulb temperatures, rainfall,
and wind.
Separate tables are given for
(1) rainfall —showing the wetting effect of rain on
surface litter;
(2) dry weather —showing the effect of temperature,
humidity, and wind;
(3) drought index —for moisture at a depth in moss
and humus or in large branches and windfalls.
A Hazard Index is arrived at through a “ Tracer Index ”
and the Drought Index, and shows the hazard prevailing in
a particular type or forest or fuel.
A Danger Index is an average Hazard Index for a district
or region and is intended as a guide to general conditions
in a district. It is given by the “ Tracer Index ” and the
Drought Index applied to the region concerned.
These definitions will be made clearer by examples of how
the Hazard Index or Danger Index is arrived at.
Fire Hazard Index Tables are provided for the more
important and dangerous types of fuel—fast-drying forests,
slash, heath, and grass; and Fire Danger Tables for different
regions—eastern, mid-west, and eastern slopes, with correc-
tions for the season of the year and for wind speed.
Examples of the use of the tables are as follows :
This table is used only if rain has fallen since the Tracer
Index was last worked out.
Suppose there was -20 inch of rain during the night and
that the Tracer Index yesterday was 125. Opposite the
“ Starting Tracer Index ” of 125, the new Tracer Index, 73,
is found under -18 to -25 inch of rain.
The Starting Tracer Index is usually the Tracer Index of
the previous day.
At the beginning of the season the Starting Tracer Index
is taken as 135, if rain has not fallen for three days, or 50, if
rain has fallen as specified in the instructions.
* Sample lines and columns from Tables published in “ Forest Fire Research Note No. 12.”


III.
Drought Index Table,
♦Rain (in inches) since Yesterday’s Drought Index was Computed.
♦Yesterday’s
•00 to
•06 to
•19 to
•23 to
■39 to
■43 to
•65 or
Index.
•05
•10
•22
•26
•42
•46
more.
To-day’
s Drought
Index.
0 ..
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
10 ..
11
10
4
2
0
0
0
15 ..
16
15
9
7
1
0
0
20 ..
21
20
14
12
4
3
0
25 ..
25
25
19
17
9
7
0
IV. Fast-drying Forest Fire
Hazard Table.
♦Tracer Index.
Spring and Summer.
Drought Index.
Fall Period.
Drought Index.
0 to 3.
4 to 9.
10 or
more.
0 to 3.
4 to 9.
10 or
more.
H
azard Inde
x.
H
azard Inde
x.
106 or less
0
1
2
0
1
2
126-127
6
7
8
3
4
5
135 ..
11
12
13
10
11
12
142-144
16
16
16
16
16
16
Or
IV. Eastern Fire Danger Table.
Spring and Summer Period.
♦Tracer Index.
Drought Index.
0 to 3.
4 to 6.
7 to 10.
11 to 16.
17 to 24.
25 or
more.
Danger Index.
95 or less
0
1
2
3
4
5
135-136
8
9
10
11
12
13
142-144
13
14
15
16
16
16
Index.
Hazard.
Description.
0
Nil
Generally safe from man-caused fires.
Lightning fires may start and fires already
burning may not go dead out but will not
spread.
1-4
Low
Fires spread slowly from slash fires, camp
fires, and other large sources of heat, but
are quite easily controlled.
5-8
Moderate ..
Fires often start from matches and tend to
spread more rapidly as they increase in
size. Control is not difficult if action is
prompt.
9-12 ..
High
Fires start readily from matches and may start
from glowing embers or cigarette butts.
Rate of spread is rapid and control difficult
13-16 ..
Extreme
r ires may start from small sparks ; they burn
fiercely and “ spot ” readily. Conditions are
often called explosive.
'
Tables 11. are used every day except when rain is falling.
They are divided into sections—(a) according to tem-
perature (below 60 deg., 60-80 deg., and over 80 deg.);
( b ) according to relative humidity (less than 25 per cent.,
26-35 per cent 76-85 per cent., and over 85 per cent.).
Example; Suppose the noon temperature is 85 deg., the
relative humidity 18 per cent., the wind speed 19 m.p.h., and
the Starting Tracer Index, 75,
From 11., opposite a Starting Tracer Index of 75 and
under, Relative Humidity 25 per cent, or less, and wind
18 m.p.h. or more, will be found the New Tracer Index, 135.
If rain fell last night or before noon to-day, the wetting
effect must first be found from the rainfall table (I.), and
the new Tracer Index found in I. is used as the Starting
Tracer Index in 11.
Corrections are provided for readings made at 10 a.m.,
2 p.m., and 4 p.m. in lieu of noon.
This table is used every day except when rain is falling or
snow covers the ground.
Example: Suppose the Drought Index yesterday was 15,
and •21 inch of rain has fallen. Opposite 15 in the left-hand
column and under -19 to -22 inch we find to-day’s Drought
Index, 9.
At the beginning of the season the Drought Index will
evidently commence at zero after a wet period or a day on
which 0-65 inch of rain has fallen.
These tables combine the Tracer Index found in 11. or I.
with the Drought Index found in 111.
Example: The Fast-drying Forest Fire Hazard Table
and the Eastern Fire Danger Table are in similar form, and
give the Hazard and Danger Index respectively.
Suppose the Eastern Fire Danger Table is used and the
Tracer Index for the day (summer) is found to be 135
(11. above), and the Drought Index, 9 (111. above).
We find in the left-hand column 135-136 and in the same
line under Drought Index, 7-10, the Danger Index 10.
The significance of the Danger Index (or Hazard Index)
is given by the following table:—
GRASS FIRE HAZARD.—APPLICATION TO
AUSTRALIA.
Canadian Grass Fire Hazard Tables were originally
based on evaporation (in Livingston Unitsf). number of
effective hours* since last rain of 2 points or more and
percentage of green material in the grass.
II Grass Fire Hazard Tables for eastern Canada T r
and H. W. Beall, Forest Fire Research NMe No 6
Canada, 1938. N - b > ot tawa,
* Livingstone Units. Tho original measurempntQ
tion were conducted with a Livingstone e Y^P° r ?-
U.S. Monthly Weather Review, 1915, p. 127 described in
A Livingstone Unit as measured by the atmumston • 1
centimetre multiplied by a coefficient on th£ a, 1 CUbic
by the maker. Ko a on the apparatus
To reduce readings of the 5-in nan t
readings in cubic centimetres are multiplied bv 0 3 gSt ° ne Units »
t “ Effective hours since last rain ” (hours 8 n m tn q
counted, nor amount of rain of less than 2 points™' * § a ' m ' not
* Sample lines and columns from Tables published in “ Forest Fire Research Note No 12 ”


The following example will illustrate the method: —
Current Burning
Conditions
Index.
Summation.
Danger Rating.
December 30f
- 2
- 4
December 31
- 11
- ii
- 22
January 1 ..
8
- 3
5
January 2 ..
14
n
25
January 3 ..
23
34
57
The relation of hazard stick moisture content to danger
rating and degrees of danger is expressed in the following
table:—
Degree of Danger.
Stick Moisture
Content.
Danger Rating.
Extreme
0/
/o
Under 7
Over 99
High
8-11
51-99
Moderate ..
12-15
7-50
Low ..
Above 15
Below 7
The tables by Beall in Forest Fire Research Note No, 12
(1946) are based on Relative Humidity, percentage of green
grass, and number of days since rain of 2 points or more.
The resulting index is corrected for the season of the year
and for wind speed.
In view of the urgent need for a Hazard Index for grass
fires in Australia, and the almost entire lack of information
as to changes in the condition of grasses in response to
weather changes in this country, the Canadian Tables have
been adopted provisionally as a basis for estimating the
daily Fire Danger in Victoria and South Australia.
The seasonal growth of grass in Canada is entirely
different from that in Australia. In Canada, the percentage
of green material is greatest in mid-summer and least in
the early spring when the snow is melting. In Southern
Australia, the grass dries out completely in summer, unless
the season is exceptionally wet.
Nevertheless, the tables based on Canadian conditions
apply quite well in Australia as might be expected from a
consideration of the factors involved. The effect of relative
humidity and wind on the rate of spread of fires is much the
same in any country. The percentage of green grass
exercises a control of fire danger which would not vary
considerably from one country to another. Different species
of grass may react in a different manner to weather changes
and in susceptibility to ignition and combustion, but the
differences would not be great for common species.
Grass Fire Hazard indices have been worked out for a
number of Australian stations for seasons of severe fires.
Those for Melbourne, Hamilton, Ballarat, Yallourn, and
Sale in Victoria have been plotted for the season 1943-44,
and are shown in Fig. 6. The dates of the most severe fires
are indicated, and it will be seen that periods of a high
danger index correspond well with fire periods.
The tables as adapted for Australian use*, together with
instructions for use and examples of the method by which
the Hazard Index is derived, are given in Appendix I.
The Grass Fire Hazard Tables are suitable for use in
savannah woodland country as well as in grass lands. For
densely-forested country, the hazard stick or the
Cromer Hygrothermographic System of estimating danger
rating would be more appropriate.
CROMER HYGROTHERMOGRAPHIC FIRE DANGER
RATING.
The following is a precis of a paper by D. A. N. Cromer,
formerly of the Forestry Commission, New South Wales,
published in “Australian Forestry,” Vol. X. (1946), pp.
52-71.
The use of the moisture content of hazard indicator
sticks alone does not give the complete picture with
regard to fire danger.
As a result of research work undertaken from
1941 to 1943 by the Forestry Commission of New South
Wales, it has been shown (1) that the inflammability
of forest fuels as represented by the stick moisture
content is correlated with the summation of daily values
of a “ burning conditions index,” which can be obtained
by means of an alignment chart (Fig. 7) from noon
or 3 p.m. wet and dry bulb thermometer readings.
* Revised for season 1947-48.
The basic figure is the noon or 3 p.m. value of the
burning conditions index, and the method of arriving
at the danger rating is as follows: —
Commencing with a day of rain, the danger rating
for that day is twice the burning conditions index.
On each day following the day of rain the danger
rating is the sum of the current burning conditions
index and the summation of the previous indices
(excluding the day of rain).
In using the chart the intersection on the burning
conditions index (centre line) of the line joining dry
bulb temperature (on left) and relative humidity (on
right) on the alignment chart gives the current burn-
ing conditions index. So long as no rain falls, these
indices are summed daily to give “ summation,” then
to each day’s summation is added the current day’s
burning conditions index to give the danger rating.
Summation recommences whenever 5 points or more
of rain is recorded at 9 a.m.
t Day of rain.
The method therefore involves the collection of
noon or 3 p.m. wet and dry bulb readings from
representative stations, converting these observations
to burning conditions indices by means of the align-
ment chart, and deriving the danger rating from the
summation of indices for each day since the last rain
of, say, 5 points.
The broadcast warning could then be given for
each region, e.g., “ North Coast Fire danger rating—
High—rising, &c.”
The Cromer method was developed at the Dorrigo Forest
Station on the north coast of New South Wales. With a
view to testing its applicability to fire danger conditions in
Victoria, the rating has been worked out for several stations
and fire periods in Victoria and inland areas of New South
Wales.
It would appear from such tests that the value of the
system depends in some degree on the locality or region in
which it is used. This is illustrated by examples:—
(1) In an area, subject to long periods of dry weather
and moderate to high temperatures, there is a tendency
for values to be built up far in excess of the range of


Fig. 6. —Graph showing variation in the Daily Grass Fire Hazard, Southern Victoria, Season 1943-44


the scale of danger rating, e.g., Wangaratta, 490 on
10th January, 1944; Canberra, 307 on 10th January,
1944. (The danger rating for the “ Extreme ” degree
of danger is “ over 99.”)
(2) In a region, subject to generally moderate
temperatures and relative humidities with an occasional
short period of high temperature and low relative
humidity, the danger rating may not be built up rapidly
enough to keep pace with the true hazard. This was
the case with danger ratings calculated for Yallourn
and Melbourne on 10th-14th February, 1944, i.e. Yal-
lourn 6on 10th, 19 on 11th, 11 on 12th, 15 on 13th
and 53 on 14th. Serious fires occurred on the 14th.
(3) In the case of Yallourn, a high danger rating was
built up to the Bth February (129), but a fall of 23
points of rain reduced this to zero ( 6 on the 10th).
The effect of rain in reducing the fire hazard is evi-
dently over-estimated, and a reduction of the rating
by 25 per cent, in this case would probably have been
more appropriate.
The method has given good results in a number of other
cases, and with adjustments in the temperature and rainfall
factors its usefulness should be improved. Grass Fire
Hazard Tables, however, seem more applicable to a savannah
type of country such as that for which the above tests were
made.
Fig. 7.—Alignment Chart —Cromer System of Fire Danger Rating.


Fig. 8. —Graph —Average Evaporation, Saturation Deficit, and Temperature, Melbourne.


Table A. Mean District Rainfall (in Points) in Seasons of Serious Outbreaks of Fire (Means of
Less than 25 Points Not Included).
Date of Fires.
District.
District
Number.
For Three and Four Day Periods ended —•
Oct.
13. -
Oct.
20.
Oct.
30.
Nov.
20.
Nov.
24.
Dec.
29.
Jan.
5*.
Jan.
8.
Mar.
16.
Mar.
23.
1926.
February 15-18
1932.
February 5
Gippsland
West Gippsland ..
83
85
83
85
53
81
32
49
45
25
106
152
37
37
52
113
147
30
366
282
For Three aud Four Day Periods ended —-
Oct.
20.
Nov.
10.
Nov.
17.
Nov.
20.
Nov.
24.
Dec.
4.
Dec.
15.
Dec.
22.
Feb.
9.
Feb.
12.
Feb.
16.
Feb.
23.
204
122
49
48
257
207
26
58
25
29
29
68
3i
36
77
68
32
25
76
104
PART III.
FORECASTING FIRE WEATHER.—I.
SEASONAL DEVELOPMENT OF FIRE HAZARD.
The forecasting of conditions conducive to the outbreak
and spread of bush and grass fires may be considered from
two aspects, first, the conditions over a 'period preceding
fire danger days, and, second, the characteristics of a fire
danger day itself. The first of these aspects will be con-
sidered in this section. Elements to be considered are
temperature, humidity, evaporation, and rainfall. The
condition of the fuel on the forest floor, or in grass lands,
with which we are most concerned is the amount of mois-
ture it contains. Grasses do not burn freely until they
have died off and their moisture has dried out. Dead leaves
and twigs and small branches which form the litter on the
forest floor do not become inflammable until their moisture
content has been reduced to a low level. Evaporation
would thus appear to be one of the main factors to observe.
The rate of evaporation depends largely on the tempera-
tures and relative humidity of the atmosphere. Closely
related to relative humidity is the evaporating power of
the atmosphere, or saturation deficit which is the
difference between the vapour pressure of a saturated
atmosphere and the actual vapour pressure. The graph of
the annual variation of evaporation closely follows the
graph of “ saturation deficit ” or drying power, and both
follow the curve of temperature. In southern Victoria
evaporation becomes important in relation to rainfall in
the month of September, and continues so until the fol-
lowing April, the highest rate (over two-tenths of an inch
per day) occurring in January (Fig. 8).
Considerable fluctuations in evaporation as well as in
temperature and relative humidity occur from day to day.
At Melbourne, for example, a range of from 0-1 to over
0-3 inch per day is common in a hot month, e.g. January
and February, 1944 (-415 inch on 14th January, 1944).
Rainfall is another highly important factor in preserving
a balance of fuel moisture. The condition of combustible
materials at any particular time is the resultant balance
between moisture received by rainfall and moisture lost by
evaporation. In a wet season moisture received may more
than balance that evaporated. Grasses in such circum-
stances will not die off completely, and litter on the forest
floor will remain in a damp state. In a period of dry
weather the high rate of summer evaporation rapidly
removes moisture from grasses and from the ground.
Even in the forests, where evaporation takes place at
a slower rate, moisture is steadily lost and a level is soon
reached at which the moisture content of small twigs
varies only with the relative humidity. The increment of
water received from slight showers quickly disappears.
The effect of changes in relative humidity and of light
rains on fuel moisture is illustrated in Fig. 9 and Fig. 4
(page 21).
The length of time required for a condition of high
inflammability to develop at the beginning of the fire season
is of particular interest and importance.
It may be expected that records of temperature, relative
humidity, and evaporation would give an indication in
advance of the development of fire danger weather. It is
found, however, that significant changes in these elements
do not occur until the actual day of a fire or until the fire
danger period has set in.
Conditions of inflammability depend ultimately on rain-
fall, which is the principal source of the moisture content
of fuel. A deficiency of rainfall in the early or mid-summer
months may be expected to result in a high degree of
inflammability in fuel before the fire season ends.
Rainfall is variable in its incidence. In a dry or even
an average season a period of a week or ten days without
rain may be sufficient to reduce moisture content to danger
levels. If the spring or early summer has been wet a much
longer period may be required.
RAINFALL IN THREE MONTHS PRECEDING FIRES
A CRITICAL FACTOR.
An examination of the records of rainfall preceding the
disastrous fires of January and February, 1944, January,
1939, and February, 1926, reveals some interesting features.
In Table A is set out the mean district rainfall for several
districts in Victoria for successive periods of three and
four days during the late spring and summer months for
these particular years. Similar information is given in
Table B for other less serious fire years.
* Week.


Fig. 9. —Fire Danger Station Weather Record, showing the Effect of Relative Humidity and Rainfall on the Moisture
Content of Hazard Sticks.


Table A— Mean District Rainfall (in
Points) in
Seasons of Serious
Outbreaks of Fire (Means
of Less than 25 Points Not Included continued.
For Three and Four Day Periods ended
District.
District
Date of Fires.
Number.
Aug.
Sept.
Sept.
Sept.
Sept.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Nov.
Dec.
Dec.
Jan.
Feb.
Feb.
Feb.
Feb.
30.
2.
6.
13.
16.
20.
14.
1.
4.
2.
13.
17.
3.
17.
24.
28.
1939.
January 13
Gippsland and Central
83
147
39
54
27
37
48
66
49
79
27
150
786
85
88
25
35
43
57
32
105
70
74
60
37
600
86
32
25
39
25
28
63
41
50
51
38
127
42
520
For Week ended—
Sept.
Oct.
Oct.
Oct.
Nov.
Nov.
Nov.
Dec,
Dec.
Dec.
29
13.
20.
27.
3.
10.
24.
l.
8.
22.
1943-44.
December 22
North Eastern
82
56
108
48
27
39
124
January 8-14 and 22
Western and Central,
83
67
101
78
31
73
150
37
February 4-6 and 14
Gippsland
85
83
54
38
40
25
70
81
36
97
86
72
54
31
29
25
91
123
35
61
87
99
40
40
67
52
72
29
89
104
90
29
70
34
41
90
102
109
29
31
63
For Week ended —
Dec.
Jan.
Jan.
Feb.
Feb.
Mar.
Mar.
Mar.
April
April
29.
5.
26.
9.
16.
l.
15.
22.
5.
12.
1943—44 — continued
82
54
22
85
83
46
30
32
115
88
85
25
30
88
31
200
75
77
86
28
81
47
216
68
108
87
85
70
40
39
89
76
44
30
46
31
42
90
49
63
67
68
60
43
Table B. Mean District Rainfall (in Points) in Seasons of Less Extensive Fires than those
of Table A.
Date of Fires.
District.
District
Number.
For Three and Four Day Periods ended —•
Oct.
23.
Oct.
30.
Nov.
2.
Nov.
6.
Nov.
9.
Nov.
20.
Dec.
7.
Dec.
11.
Dec.
18.
Dec.
28.
Jan.
4.*
Jan.
29.
Feb.
1.
Feb.
15.
1929.
January 17
1933.
January 2-3
February 20 and 27
1936.
February 26
March 9 ..
April 1
Gippsland
Western and North Eastern,
North Central and Western
Western,
Western,
Gippsland
83
84
85
82
83
88 .
89
90
85
89
90
133
36
103
70
51
99
•29
63
93
27
68
53
39
32
52
68
35
45
81
85
62
33
51
30
42
64
28
146
33
140
111
For Three and Four Day Periods ended —■
Oct.
14.
Oct.
21.
Oct.
28.
Nov.
1.
Nov.
4.
Nov.
15.
Dec.
2.
Dec.
6.
Dec.
9.
Dec.
16.
Dec.
30.
Jan.
24.
Jan.
27.
Jan.
31.
Feb.
24.
Mar.
7.
Mar
21.
Mar.
31.
108
148
99
99
108
35
59
40
45
51
37
31
32
30
40
45
33
55
73
61
25
72
36
46
63
37
35
28
42
54
83
79
64
40
41
44
48
82
56
52
42
40
74
70
26
25
33
28
45
66
61
89
77
42
25
33
40
26
25
For Three and Four Day Periods ended—
Oct.
11.
Oct.
15.
Oct.
22.
Oct.
25.
Oct.
29.
Nov.
5.
Nov.
12.
Nov.
15.
Nov.
19.
Nov.
22.
Nov.
29.
Dec.
3.
Dec.
6.
Dec.
13.
113
59
71
48
72
73
58
36
44
43
36
51
26
41
136
27
41
45
36
43
56
50
28
38
* Week.
C.8016/47. —3


Fig. 10.—Key to Australian Rainfall Districts.


Table B. — Mean District Rainfall (in Points) in Seasons of Less Extensive Fires than those
of Table A. — continued.
Date of Fires.
District.
District
Number.
For Three and Four Day Periods ended —
Dec.
21.
Dec.
31.
Jan.
3.
Jan.
7.
Jan.
10.
Jan.
14.
Jan.
17.
Feb.
4.
Feb.
11.
Feb.
21.
Mar.
13.
Mar.
17.
Mar.
20.
April
7.
1936 — continued
1940.
January 21
February 15
March 13 ..
1940 — continued
1942.
March 3-4
North Eastern
North Eastern,
Western and Central
South Gippsland ..
85
89
90
82
83
86
87
90
82
83
86
87
90
85
91
166
26
59
28
27
70
24
28
33
38
36
47
83
45
29
46
25
119
31
For Three and Four Day Periods ended —
Oct.
17.
Oct.
24.
Nov.
3.
Nov.
7.
Nov.
17.
Nov.
21.
Nov.
28.
Dec.
1.
Dec.
4.
Dec.
8.
Dec.
29.
Jan.
5.
96
138
73
76
105
163
64
27
64
56
52
26
203
315
177
140
161
71
86
77
126
44
40
71
68
47
28
93
98
38
74
27
52
52
29
38
25
25
For Three and Four Day Periods ended —
Jan.
9.
Jan.
. 19.
Jan.
23.
Jan.
26.
Feb.
16.
Feb.
20.
Mar.
1.
Mar.
19.
Mar.
26.
April
2,
April
5.
83
62
67
51
55
72
31
70
40
37
55
82
29
61
67
31
59
64
48
42
64
47
25
114
102
For Three and Four Day Periods ended —
Oct.
7.
Oct.
10.
Oct.
21.
Oct.
28.
Oct.
31.
Nov.
7.
Nov.
21.
Dec.
5.
Dec.
9.
Dec.
23.
Jan.
20.
Jan.
27.
Feb.
20.
Mar.
6.
Mar.
13.
Mar.
27.
76
35
25
63
27
26
83
151
61
40
113
29
94
62
35
77
—
January.
February.
March.
April.
May.
June.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
District 85—
1943
+ 21
- 16
- 76
+ 1H
- 21
+ 11
- 5
+ io
+ 8
- 55
- 25
- 53
1938
+ 3
+ 29
+ 2
- 39
— 52
+ 23
- 30
- 36
- 62
- 72
- 49
- 34
District 86—
1943
+ 21
+ 4
- 80
+ 39
- 61
- 7
- 8
- 35
+ 4
— 58
+ 1
- 61
1938
- 3
+ 41
- 26
- 21
- 56
+ 50
- 24
- 42
- 60
- 76
- 54
- 61
District 90—
1943
- 27
+ 39
- 67
+ 71
- 25
+ 1
+ 27
+ 24
+ 4
- 35
- 35
- 73
1938
+ 30
+ 84
- 26
+ 34
- 43
+ 42
- 39
- 43
- 38
- 56
- 37
— 22
Three- and four-day means were compiled each Tuesday
and Friday prior to 1942 and weekly means there-
after, but mean amounts of under 25 points were not
reported. The tables thus show successive falls of rain
which occurred during the season in which district mean
amounts exceeded 25 points for three or four days (or a
week).
Monthly district averages are given in Part IV. (p. 209)
and weekly averages may be estimated from these tables.
Thus the average district rainfall per week in the West
Gippsland (85) and East Central (86) districts is slightly
under 1 inch in October, approximately i inch in November
and December, and about h inch in January and February.
The character of a season from the rainfall point of view
may be seen by comparing the means recorded for three-
and four-day periods in the tables for districts 85 and 86
with these amounts.
The graphs in Fig. 11 represent the spread of rainfall in
relation to bush fires in the seasons 1939-40, 1943-44, and
1938-39. The season 1939-40 was exceptional in that the
late spring was rather wet and the fire season was late in
developing, reaching its peak in March.
It will be seen that, in each season, the fires were pre-
ceded by periods in which there were occasional light to
moderate rains and intervals of from about ten days to
four weeks with little or no rain. For some considerable
period before the fires developed, the rainfall was generally
much below normal. This is a significant feature.
Approaching the matter from another aspect, the fol-
lowing table gives the percentage departure from normal
of the mean district rainfall for West Gippsland (District
85), East Central (District 86), and West Coastal (District
90) divisions of Victoria for the twelve months preceding
the bad fire seasons of 1939 and 1944:


Fig. 11.—Rainfall in Fire Seasons 1938-39, 1939-40, 1943-44.


(i)
Season.
December.
January.
February,
March.
Total.
1940-1941—
(a)
6
4
5
15
(b) ..
5(1)
2
2
9(1)
(c) ..
3
1
1
5
1927-1928 (wet from
18th January
onward) —
(a)
7
5
5
5
22
(6) ..
2
5
7
(c)* ..
1
1
2*
1918-1919—
(a)
7
7
9
1
24
(b) ..
6(1)
4(1)
4
14 (2)
(c)* ..
2
2
2
6*
(ii) (Bad Fire Seasons.)
Season.
December.
January.
February.
March.
Total.
1938-1939—
(a) ■ ..
5
7
5
17
(6)
4(2)
5(4)
4(2)
13 (8)
(c) ..
1
3
4
1943-1944—
(a)
2
8
3
4
17
(b)
3(2)
7(5)
3(1)
3
16 (8)
(c)* ..
2
4
2
1
9*
The deficiencies of the last three months of both years
suggest that the departure from normal rainfall in these
months may be critical in determining conditions of inflam-
mability, and therefore the degree of danger to be expected
in the ensuing summer months. This factor is of con-
siderable importance, as will appear in the following
discussion.
Provisional Index of Severity of Approaching Fire Season.
For purposes of forecasting in a general manner the risk
of serious fires in the normal fire season, graphs have been
prepared of the mean district rainfall for the three pre-
ceding months for several districts in Victoria, New South
Wales, Queensland, and Tasmania (Fig. 12).
The circumstances under which fire hazard develops in
other parts of the Commonwealth are somewhat different
from those in the South-Eastern States. In Queensland,
the majority of extensive fires occur in the spring months
(October and November), the summer being humid and
usually moist. On the north coast of New South Wales the
dates of the worst fires of which reports are available have
been mainly in the late spring or early summer (October
to December).
The months for which graphs were prepared were
October-December for Victoria and the southern tablelands
of New South Wales; July to September for S.E. Queens-
land; August to October in the North Coast and Hunter
divisions of New South Wales; and November-December
for Tasmania.
The graphs reveal a feature which is of considerable
value as an indicator of the degree of hazard which may
be expected to develop in the fire season (compare also
Fig. 13).
It will be seen that for the three months preceding some
of the worst fires that have occurred the mean rainfall of
the district concerned has been less than 70 per cent, of
the average.
This was the case in the following instances;
Years 1944, 1939, 1926, 1898 in Victoria.
Year 1939 in Australian Capital Territory.
Years 1926 and 1941 in South-East Queensland.
Years 1926 and 1936 on the north coast of New South
Wales.
Years 1926 and 1934 in Tasmania.
In Western Australia the dry season sets in about October,
and the above remarks do not apply.
A provisional index of the hazard to be expected in the
peak period of the fire season in the eastern States may
thus be obtained from the mean district rainfall for the
three preceding months.
Conditioning Factor.
The provisional nature of this indicator is emphasized.
It will be seen from the graphs that there have been
seasons in which a rainfall deficiency of 30 per cent, has
not been followed by bad fires. It is of interest to examine
the records of summer months in which such has been the
case and to compare particulars of temperature, humidity,
and wind with corresponding records for bad fire seasons
(Tables (i) and (ii)). The records for Melbourne are
selected because it is difficult to obtain sufficient compara-
tive data for country centres or for States other than
Victoria and southern Tasmania. Continuous records of
wind, relative humidity, etc., are available for Melbourne,
and these are approximately representative of a con-
siderable area of southern Victoria.
Experience in southern Victoria should also be indicative
of what may be expected elsewhere in regard to the matter
under discussion.
The following tables give particulars of temperature,
relative humidity, and wind at Melbourne, as specified by
(a), ( b ), (c) below in—
(i) Seasons following a dry spring in which there have
been no reports of serious fires,
(ii) Particularly bad fire seasons in southern Victoria.
Line (a). —Number of days on which maximum tempera-
tures of 90 deg. or over were recorded.
Line (b). —Number of such days on which the relative
humidity fell to 25 per cent, (in brackets 15 per cent.) or
less, recorded usually at 3 p.m.
Line (c). —Number of days as defined in (b) on which
northerly winds occurred of an average speed of 15 miles
or more per hour for at least an hour during the day and
a maximum gust of 40 miles per hour or higher.
* Note. —Owing to changes in wind recorders and exposure of
anemometers, the basis for a comparison of wind for years
1918-9 and 1927-8 has been limited to an average speed of
15 m.p.h. or more for at least one hour during the day. Maxi-
mum gust velocities are not comparable with those recorded
in later years.
It will be seen from Tables (i) and (ii) that apart from
the frequency of occurrence of relative humidities of under
15 per cent, there are no significant differences to account
for the severity of the fires of the 1939 and 1944 seasons
compared with seasons such as 1919. In 1918-19 the


Fig. 12. —Graphs of Mean District Rainfall for the three months preceding the peak of the Fire Season, Districts 39, 40
58, 61, 82, 86.
number of days of maximum temperature above 90 deg.,
and of relative humidity below 25 per cent., in the three
months December to February was actually higher than in
1938-39 and 1943-44.
The 1928 season is of interest because although the rain
fall for the previous three months indicated a hteh flrl
risk, rain set in about the 18th January, and the remainder
of the summer was wet. uex


Fig. 12 (continued)—Graphs of Mean District Rainfall for the three months preceding the peak of the fire season
Districts 70, 85, 89, 91, 94.


—
Maximum Temperatures.
3 p.m. Relative Humidity.
Maximum Wind Gust.
Melbourne.
Essendon.
♦Melbourne.
fEssendon.
Melbourne.
Essendon.
January.
° F.
° F.
%
0/
m.p.h.
m.p.h.
1st
100-6
101-8
18
11
40
47
8th
102-6
103 0
8
6
41
54
14th ..
103-2
103-2
9
7
54
50
21st ..
103-9
101-8
13
12
35
34
22nd ..
104-4
105-0
18
17
49
60
31st ..
93-1
94-3
43
23
37
35
February.
5th
97-5
97-0
13
13
23
27
6ht
97-5
97-8
17
13
45
4;3
14th ..
97-1
98-0
21
21
60
71
26ht ..
87-1
88-2
20
15
50
52
Table
(a),
for Season 1925-26.
( b ), (c) as above.
—
December.
January.
February.
March.
Total.
(a) ..
4
4
9
5
22
(b) • •
4(1)
3(2)
5(1)
4(1)
16 (5)
(c) ..
3
1
2
1
7
The one significant feature brought out by these tables
is the importance of the relative humidity factor. This has
been emphasized in much of the literature on the subject.
In both the 1939 and 1944 seasons there were eight days on
which the relative humidity fell to 15 per cent, or lower.
On four of these days in 1938-39 and two days in 1944
readings of 8 to 10 per cent, were recorded. Such readings
did not occur in any of the other series. Dates of occur-
rence coincided with serious January fires on the 10th,
13th, and 30th in 1939, and the Bth and 14th in 1944.
In estimating the significance of relative humidity figures
quoted in these tables, it may be supposed that these are
influenced to some degree by conditions of exposure in the
city area, and that values of the various elements may be
rather different in a locality which is being swept by fire.
Some comparative readings are given for Melbourne and
Essendon Aerodrome (an open situation) on dates of serious
fires on January and February, 1944, as follows:
♦ Local Time.
Slight local variations in temperature and humidity are
apparent, but with strong northerly winds the city readings
give a close approximation to conditions prevailing in the
country within a considerable radius. The type of air mass
streaming over the country in such circumstances would
not be subject to much local variation near ground level
inland.
The following table gives particulars of temperature,
relative humidity, and wind for the 1925-26 fire season in
a similar form to that given in Tables (i) and (ii) (p. 37) ;• —
In the 1939 and 1944 fires, considerable damage was done
within a few miles of Melbourne, e.g., Warrandyte in 1939,
Beaumaris in 1944.
The fires of February, 1926, were most severe in West
Gippsland (Noojee, Warburton, &c.).
A comparison of the particulars given in the 1925-6
table with those in Tables (i) and (ii), suggests, as may be
expected, that conditions may be somewhat less severe
outside the fire areas, but the figures for low relative
humidities are still of considerable significance in describ-
ing the characteristics of an extremely bad fire season.
t Standard Time (Difl. = 20 min.)
Summarizing —two points of importance brought out in
this section are—
(l) The mean rainfall for a district for the three
months preceding the fire season gives a good indica-
tion of the severity of the fire danger to be expected
in the peak of the fire season. A rainfall deficiency of
at least 30 per cent, of the average indicates a danger
of very serious fire development. The actual occur-
rence of bad fires would depend on continued dry
weather and the development of particular meteoro-
logical situations with which “explosive” conditions
are associated.
(2) The relative humidity factor is critical in esti-
mating the danger for any particular day.
The occurrence of a rainfall deficiency specified in (1)
would warrant preliminary precautions being taken in
advance to combat the worst type of fire outbreak, even
though it were found that in some cases extreme fire
danger conditions did not develop.
The forecasting of actual fire danger days on which the
emperature, humidity, and wind conditions would favour
the rapid spread of fire is the subject of the next section.
Temperature and humidity conditions associated with
particular bush and grass fires are given in Part IV. Lists
of bush and grass fires in Australia over a period of
ars - ISObaric Situations also given
these lists, together with a summary of pressure types
commonly giving rise to fire weather. YP ’
Note on the Fire Hazard following a Wet Winter and
Spring.
hi heW k" S ° me quarters in Victoria that a
= n “ ds , S - - - - - in «ier


Condition of Grass following a Wet or Normal Spring.
District 85.
District 86.
District 89.
Spring
Wet.
Following
Summer
Months
Dry.
Grass.*
Spring
Wet.
Following
Summer
Months
Dry.
Grass.*
Spring
Wet.
Following
Summer
Months
Dry.
Grass.*
1916t
X
{f.
Abundant
1916f
X
{f.
Abundant; green
1916f
X
{?.
Drying off
Green
1917
X
Dry
1917
X
{f.
Some growth
1917
J.F.
{f.
Abundant, dry
1920
X
fJ.
\F.
Plentiful
Dry
1920
X
CJ.
\F.
Plentiful
Drying up
1920
X
{f.
Very dry in parts
Some green
1921
X
r j .
IF.
Doing well; good rains
1921
X
f J-
\F.
Drying
19221
J.F.M.
{f.
Green in parts
1922
F.-A.
Drying
1922
F.-A.
f J-
\F.
Drying inland
Drying
1923t
X
{f.
Green
Green
1923f
[m.
f J-
Becoming scarce
Vigorous growth
1923f
X
f J-
\F.
Green
Green
1924f
M.
{f.
Plentiful
Abundant, green
X
\F.
/J.
Green
Excellent pastoral season
1924f
X
IF.
Green
Abundant, green
1928
X
{ J r.
New growth
1924f
1928
X
IF.
CJ.
Green and plentiful
Dry pastures
1929
J.-M.
f J-
\F.
Plentiful, drying
Benefit by rains
1929f
J.-M.
{f.
Plentiful, drying
Good growth
X
\F.
/J.
Growing
Plentiful, drying
1930
X
/J.
\F.
Good order
Some green
1930f
F.
(f.
Some green
Plentiful
1929
J.-M.
\F.
/J.
Growing
Abundant, green
1932f
x (D.-J.)
f J-
\F.
Drying
Very dry
1932
F.
{f.
Dry feed in abundance
1930f
X
\F-
CJ.
Green
Excellent
1933
X
r j-
\F.
Growing
Some green growth
1933f
M.
{f.
Still green in many districts
Patchy
1932
F.
J F.
Dry feed plentiful
1934f
/J.
\F.
Good
I934t
CJ.
Plentiful, drying
[M.
Dry, somewhat scarce
X
\F.
Some drying off
1933
X
{f.
Green
Green
1935
X
{i.
Plentiful, dry
Mostly dry
1936
X
{i.
Excellent growth
Good
1934f
X
{*
Exceptionally good
1936
F.
{i:
Good pastures
Good pastures
1937f
X
{f.
Plentiful
Plentiful, some growth
1935
X
{i.
Dry in parts
Mostly dry
1937
X
{f.
Mostly dry
Dry in parts, some growth
1939
F.M.
( J F.
Plentiful, drying off
Dry feed plentiful
1936f
X
{f.
CJ.
Growing well
Mostly good
Plentiful, some growth in
1939
X
c
Very plentiful, still green
in parts
Very dry
1944
M.
IF'.
Dry
Coming away well
1939
F.M.
<
parts
1941
/ J.
Plentiful
If.
Dried off considerably
\F.
Plentiful, some growth
r j .
Plentiful, green
1940
X
F.
[m.
CJ.
Some, drying
Good growth
Now good
1942
M.
[_M.
Drying off
Dried off
support of the idea to be found in the records of bush fires
in southern and eastern parts of the State. This may be
explained first by the fact that, after a wet spring, there
is usually sufficient rain and atmospheric humidity during
the summer to prevent the thorough drying out of fuels,
which must occur before widespread fires are possible. It
is also likely that after a wet winter and spring the water
table will remain high and there will be a moderate per-
centage of green grass which will be sufficient to retard
the rapid spread of fires. From an examination of reports
from rainfall observers on the condition of pastures, it
appears that one or two good rains in the summer, followed
by occasional showers, would be sufficient in such circum-
stances to bring on a new growth of grass.
Below is given a table for Districts 85 (West Gippsland),
86 (East Central), and 89 (Western District —Volcanic
Plains), which includes comments on the summer rainfall
and state of grass in seasons following an over-average
rainfall in the spring (October-December). (Compare
graphs in Figs. 12 ( g)-(i ).)
The year in which the “ wet ” spring occurs is shown in
the first column. Following summer months which are dry
are indicated by initial letters in the second column, but, if
the rainfall has been above or near normal throughout the
summer, “ x ” is inserted in the second column.
From the table it will be seen that after a normal or wet
spring the rainfall in the summer is usually near or above
normal, and in many summers there is a considerable per-
centage of green grass. The fire hazard in such circum-
stances would not be very high. The statement in question
cannot therefore be regarded as a reliable guide for esti-
mating in advance the probable degree of danger in the fire
season.
• Notes on grass from Stock and Crops reports which, however, summarize conditions in
x Rainfall in following summer over or near ai erage.
whole districts, i.e., Gippsland (84-85), Central (86 and 87), Western (89 and 90).
t October-December rains well above normal.


Dist. 85.
Dist. 86.
Dist. 89.
1939—
1939—
1939—
J anuary—Scarce
January—Dry to scarce
January—Dry to scarce
February—Good growth
February—Some growth
February—Scarce ; some growth
1944—
1944—
1944—
January—Very dry ; fair quantity
January—Very dry
January—Very dry
February—Very dry
February—Dry feed available
February—Fair to good except where destroyed
...
by fires
Mean District Rainfall in Per Cent, of Average in Months Preceding Bad Fire Seasons.
—
Year.
May.
J une.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
District 89
1918
156
106
113
83
68
113
26
53
„ 84
1922
86
61
77
90
176
125
50
61
„ 88
1925
84
40
97
64
119
25
68
104
13
28
„ 86
66
44
117
77
137
55
„ 85
„ 86
1931
122
122
119
159
127
98
106
110
77
83
73
56
117
159
40
25
„ 85
1938
49
123
72
65
38
29
50
45
68
40
„ 86
44
146
77
57
40
25
„ 85
1943
79
111
95
110
108
45
75
101
76
47
„ 86
39
93
92
65
104
42
„ 89
60
93
120
100
114
70
39
35
Fires are Most Serious in Drought Years.
A statement which is sometimes made in support of the
idea that a high fire hazard follows a wet winter and spring
is that, in a drought year, there is very little grass to burn.
This statement is also not confirmed by an examination of
past records. The following are particulars of the condi-
tion of pastures obtained from rainfall observers’ returns
in the summers of 1939 and 1944, two of the worst fire
seasons experienced in Victoria:—
Even in the driest season in the higher rainfall districts
there is some grass to burn, as must be obvious from the
number and extent of fires which occur.
The most serious fires are usually associated with drought
years. This may be illustrated by the following:—
(1) “Residual mass” diagrams (or graphs of progres-
sive totals of departure from normal of district rainfall)
show that the worst fires usually occur after a period of
several months in which there has been a deficiency of
rainfall. Fig. 13 shows such graphs for Districts 58 and
86 for the period 1913 to 1944. The significant feature of
these graphs is the trend and not the absolute values. De-
partures from average, month by month, are summed, and
the progressive total is plotted. A downward trend indicates
a period of under average rainfall, and vice versa. Approxi-
mate dates of fires are indicated by arrows with a number
of barbs giving a general indication of the severity of fires.
(2) The following table gives the mean district rainfall
in per cent, of the average for the months May to Decem-
ber in each year preceding serious fires in Victoria, viz.:—
1919: In the Western District (89).
1923: In the North-East (84).
1926: In East Central and North Central district
(86 and 88).
1932 and 1939: In West Gippsland and the East Central
district (85 and 86).
1944: In West Gippsland, East Central, and the
Western district (85 and 90).
In only two years out of the six was there an over-
average rainfall in * the winter months, and in every case
the spring and early summer were, on the whole, dry to
very dry.
In conclusion, it may be pointed out that a heavy growth
of grass is not altogether dependent on the winter and
spring rainfall, but may result from a rainy period in the
late summer or early autumn. In 1946, heavy rains from
January to March resulted in an exceptionally heavy growth
of grass. The winter and spring months, with the exSptTon
of July, experienced an under-average rainfall
*Fig. 13 (opposite).—Residual Mass Diagrams—Departures from Normal for successive months Oph
of the average) are added progressively and the resulting totals are plotted for Districts 58 and 8R pi UCed to percentage
in a rise in the curve and minus departures a fall. The general character of the rainfall over asp • US J? epartures result
indicated by the trend of the curve, an upward trend showing a period of over-average rainfall and’ 65 ° f months is thus


DISTRICT 58: — PROGRESSIVE DEPARTURE FROM NORMAL OF MONTHLY MEAN RAINFALL IN PERCENTAGE
OF THE AVERAGE.


DISTRICT 86: — PROGRESSIVE DEPARTURE FROM NORMAL OF MONTHLY MEAN RAINFALL IN PERCENTAGE
OF THE AVERAGE.


FORECASTING FIRE WEATHER. —II.
FIRE DANGER DAYS—CHARACTERISTICS.
The weather conditions with which fire danger becomes
critical are fairly distinctive in character, particularly in
the southern areas of the Commonwealth, and as regards
the worst type of fires.
Much detailed investigation into the meteorological ele-
ments which are most closely associated with the spread
of fires has been carried out, particularly in the United
States and Canada, and considerable literature on the sub-
ject has been published in the last 20 or 30 years.
The importance of weather factors depends on the part
they play—
(1) in creating conditions favourable to the outbreak
and spread of fires, and
(2) in rapidly increasing the size of fires which have
broken out.
Serious fires occur only in a dry season or, if the early
summer be moist, after a spell of dry weather in the late
summer. The relation between rainfall in preceding months
and the outbreak of fires has been discussed in the previous
section.
Characteristics of fire days vary somewhat according to
the region. In south-eastern Australia the worst fires are
associated with —
(1) low relative humidities,
(2) high winds,
(3) high temperatures.
These conditions occur in front of certain types of
southern depression which may affect not only the southern
States but may extend to the north-east of New South
Wales or south-east of Queensland.
Low relative humidities usually (though not necessarily)
go with high temperatures. Not only is the evaporating
power of the air very high in such circumstances, but the
combination of these factors favours combustion. Re-
searches in the U.S.A. indicate that low relative humidities
in themselves favour a rapid spread of fire, and when there
is a combination of low relative humidities and high winds,
the rate of spread tends to become a maximum (Figs. 14).
Low relative humidity appears to be the one factor common
to all major fires in Australia.
The direction of the wind is a critical factor in some
regions. In Victoria the worst fires occur with high
northerly winds. In Northern Tasmania and along the
eastern seaboard from east Gippsland northward to Queens-
land a strong westerly to south-westerly is more serious
than a northerly. Such winds deposit their moisture on
the highlands to the westward and descend on the lee side
Southebk Victoria.
Melbourne —13 th January, 1939.
*3 a.m. 6 a.m, 9 a.m. 12 noon 3 p.m. 6 p.m. 9 p.m.
Temperature (°) .. 62-7 63-8 96-8 113-0 113-0 89-4 86-8
Relative Humidity (%).. 73 70 20 8 8 37 40
Maximum Temperature.—ll 4-1 at 12.30 p.m.
Minimum Relative Humidity.—7 per cent at 2.30 p.m.
(see also Fig. 15).
*3 a.m. 6 a.m. 9 p.m. 12 noon 3 p.m. 6 p.m. 9 p.m.
Temperature (°) .• 71 • 7 78-0 97 • 8 103’0 102 •! 90*8 66 •!
Relative Humidity (%) ..49 39 21 16 18 38 85
Maximum Temperature. —104-4° at 1.15 p.m.
Lowest Relative Humidity.—l 6 per cent, between 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.
of the mountains dry and relatively warm. Some bad fires
have occurred in these circumstances with maximum tem-
peratures no higher than 70 deg., e.g., May, 1913, in
northern Tasmania, and October Ist, 1941, in south-east
Queensland. In the south-west of Western Australia, the
critical direction is north-easterly, though in heat-wave
conditions the fire hazard is often dangerous with little or
no wind. In north-west Queensland and the Northern
Territory the few reports available indicate that extensive
fires occur with the south-easterlies of the dry season.
The worst type of fire weather in south-eastern Australia
is that experienced when a summer anticyclone has moved
off and a depression is approaching from the westward.
In this phase, in many cases, particularly in a dry season,
northerly or north-westerly winds are blowing with low
relative humidities and usually high temperatures. As the
trough of the depression passes a cool change occurs and
the wind blows from some westerly or southerly quarter,
but unless rain falls, the danger is not removed until an
increase in humidity and decrease in wind strength allows
the fire to be brought under control.
It is not always easy to judge visually from the weather
in the early morning whether the day will be a fire danger
day or otherwise. In south-eastern Australia, it occasionally
happens that a hot day with a high wind is preceded by
an overcast sky and light easterly winds. This may be
explained by the movement of what is known as a “ coastal
front ” or boundary between a maritime air mass covering
south-eastern ocean areas and Bass Strait, and a dry con-
tinental air mass over the interior. The maritime air
mass tends to encroach on the land to a depth of up to 50
miles or so during the night, but to recede soon after 9 or
10 o’clock in the morning. An example is seen in the case
of February 14, 1944, when the early morning wind at
Yallourn was light easterly with a temperature of 61 deg.
at 9 a.m. and a relative humidity of 88 per cent. From
other sources it was learned that the early morning was
overcast. In the afternoon a fresh, gusty north-westerly
wind was blowing, with a temperature of 97-8 deg., and
relative humidity of 10 per cent.
The northerly wind sometimes springs up very suddenly.
This is illustrated by the anemograph record for Melbourne
for 13th January, 1939 (Fig. 15), which gives, in addition
to the wind record, the traces of temperature and relative
humidity illustrating the variations in these elements on a
bad fire day.
Types of weather on the worst fire days may be illus-
trated by the following tables giving temperature, relative
humidity, and notes on winds at intervals during the day,
according to the observations available for stations near
localities in which bad fires occurred.
Wind. —Light S.E. to E., 5 a.m. to 6 a.m. ; N.E., 6.15 a.m
to 7 a.m. ; then N.N.E. light to moderate. Fresh to strong
Northerly from 7.55 a.m. tending N.W. by 10.30 a.m.
Many gusts 30 m.p.h. to over 40 m.p.h. from 8 a.m. to
3.35 p.m. when a southerly change occurred.
Melbourne. — 22nd January ,"1944
Wind.—Light to moderate N.E. to N. till 8 a.m. then rising.
Fresh to strong N.N.W. till 4 p.m. with many gusts over
40 m.p.h. Gradual change from N.W. to S.W. between
4 p.m. and 6.30 p.m. Maximum gust 49 m.p.h.
♦ Above times are local mean time —add 1 hour 20 min. for Eastern Summer Time.


Fig. 14.
BUSH FIRE DAMAGE IN EASTERN VICTORIA, FEBRUARY 1926.
ACRES PER DAY BURNT FOR EACH WIND DIRECTION. ACREAGE TOTAL FOR EASTERN
VICTORIA. WIND DIRECTION-WANGARATTA. 51.7% OF DAMAGE WITH NORTHERLY WIND
COMPONENTS AND 48.3% WITH SOUTHERLY WIND COMPONENTS. (H.BARKLEY.)


RELATIVE HUMIDITY
BUSH FIRE DAMAGE IN EASTERN VICTORIA, AND RELATIVE
HUMIDITY AT WANGARATTA; 6 TO 16 th FEBRUARY, 1926.
(H.BARKLEY.)
Fig. 14A.


VARIATION OF FIRE DAMAGE WITH WIND VELOCITY
NORTH WINDS AND CALMS AT WANGARATTA FROM 6t h 1926,
INCLUSIVE. 85% OF THE DAMAGE DONE IN FEBRUARY OCCURRED DURING
THIS PERIOD AND 61% IN THE SEVEN DAYS USED FOR THE CURVE. (H.BARKLEY.)
Fig. 14B.


*3 a.m.
Temperature (°) .. 62-9
Relative Humidity (%) .. 51
Maximum Temperature.—103-2°
Minimum Relative Humidity.—5
6 a.m. 9 a.m.
78-9 88-2
25 17
at 2.55 p.m.
per cent, at 5.50
Melbourne. —14 th January,
12 noon 3 p.m. 6 p.m. 9 p.m.
97-1 103-2 101-2 73-2
10 9 15 38
p.m.
1944.
Wind.—Northerly from 5 a.m.; 20-28 m.p.h. 7 a.m. to 4
p.m. Many gusts 40 m.p.h. to over 50 m.p.h. Southerly
change 7 p.m. with squall of 56 m.p.h.
Melbourne. —1 Mh February, 1944.
*3 a.m. 6 a.m. 9 a.m. 12 noon 3 p.m. 6 p.m. 9 p.m.
SXeSu'iditv IV)" I, 1 Id 7 V 9 1, 6 9 !!i 2 6 5„ 7 Wind-Light to moderate. N.E. to N. wind early morning,
6 Humidity ( / 0 ) .. 53 29 18 15 21 75 79 Northerly from 7 a.m. to 5.30 p.m., 20-28 m.p h Frequent
Maximum Temperature—97* 1 at 1.3 p.m, guste 4( / m .p.h. to over 55 m.?.h. (maximum 60 m p h at
Minimum Relative Humidity—11 per cent, at 1 p.m. 4 p , m .) Southerly change 5.35 p.m. approx. P
* Above times are local mean time —add 1 hour 20 min. for Eastern Summer Time.
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Min.
51-1
North-Eastern Victoria.
Wangaratta. — 22nd December, 1943.
9 a.m. 3 p.m. Max.
64-1 92-8 93-9 Wind.—9 a.m., S.S.E. It; 3 p.m., N.E. 4t
43 16 1
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Min.
60-2
Hamilton, —14 th January,
9 a.m, 3 p.m. Max.
82-1 99-8 100-4
22 13
1944.
Wind.—9 a.m., N.N.W. 5f ; 3 p.m., W.N.W. 7-f.
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Min.
62-3
9 a.m.
79-6
44
Tasmania.
Hobart. —9 th February, 1934.
3 p.m. 9 p.m. Max.
97-0 71-2 99-1 Wind.—9 a.m., N. 2 m.p.h.; 3 p.m., N. 33 m.p.h.; 9 p.m.
• 11 33 •• N.W. 10 m.p.h. Fresh to strong N.W. wind sprang up
about 10.15 a.m. reaching gale force at intervals between
1.30 p.m. and 3.30 p.m. with many gusts over 50 m.p.h.
Gusts of 35 m.p.h. to over 40 m.p.h. frequent also from
5 p.m. to 6.30 p.m.; S. to S.W. change about 10 p.m.
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Min.
52-0
Launceston. — 3rd February,
9 a.m. 3 p.m. Max.
68-0 78-2 80-8
38 39
1936.
Wind.—9 a.m., N.W. 2f ; 3 p.m., N.W. 6f,
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Launceston, —4 th February, 1926.
Min. 9 a.m. 3 p.m. Max.
•• 51-2 64-9 75-9 77-1 Wind.—9 a.m., N.W.2f ; 3 p.m., W. 2f.
• • • • 35 19 • • Low Head Wind.—9 a.m., W.S.W. 4f ; 3 p.m., W. 3f.
(Fires 50 miles to the West.)
(See also notes on Tasmanian List of Bushfires, Part IV., pp. 187-189
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Maximum Temperature.—104-4°.
Western Australia.
Perth ( Maylands). —26 th January, 1941.
5.39 a.m. 9 a.m. 12 noon 3 p.m.
/2 - 6 86-2 98-5 103-0 Wind.—5.30 a.m,, N.E. 15 m.p.h.; 9 a.m., N.E. 20 m.p.h.;
31 16 1° 9 12 noon, N.N.E. 15 m.p.h,; 3 p.m., N.N.E. 8 m.p.h’.
Max. wind gust 36 m.p.h. at 0.40 a.m.
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Visibility
Maximum Temperature.—94-6°.
New South Wales.
Richmond Aerodrome. —10<A December, 1944.
6 a.m. 9 a.m. 12 noon 3 p.m. 6 p.m. 9 p.m.
75-1 88-5 93-3 92-6 89-2 82-5 Wind.—6 a.m., N. 11 m.p.h.; 9 a.m., W.N.W. 35 m.p.h.;
9 L3 p 11 17 23 12 noon, W 40 m.p.h. ; 3 p.m., W. 40 m.p.h. ; 6 p.m. W.
3 3 7 32 m.p.h.; 9 p.m., S.W. 12 m.p.h. Maximum wind gust
76 m.p.h. at 12.30 p.m.
Dense dust —smoke pall.
This was an exceptionally bad day because of dust storms in addition to smoke.
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
Min.
60-3
Australian Capital Territory,
Canberra (Solar Observatory, Mt. Stromlo). —13 th January, 1939.
9 a.m. 3 p.m. 9 p.m. Max.
77" 7 102-3 97-7 103-0 Wind.—9 a.m., calm; 3 p.m., N.W. 4f ; 9 p.m., N.W. 5t.
53 13 14


Fig. 15. —Temperature, Relative Humidity, Wind Speed, and Wind Direction. Continuous record at Melbourne from
4 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Friday, 13th January, 1939.


Canberra (Solar Observatory, Mt. Stromlo).
—14 th January, 1939.
Min.
9 a.m.
3 p.m.
9 p.m.
Max.
Temperature (°) .. .. 87-7
Relative Humidity (%)
92-7
16
98-5
10
88-6
22
99-9
Wind.—9 a.m., W.N.W. 4f ; 3 p.m., W.N.W. 6f.
Queensland.
Brisbane (Amberley). —ls£ October, 1941.
6 a.m.
9 a.m.
12 noon
3 p.m.
Max.
Temperature (°) .. .. 61*0
Relative Humidity (%) .. 29
64-3
30
68-0
24
68-2
18
72-4
Wind.—6 a.m., N.W. 15 m.p.h. ;
12 noon, W. 33 m.p.h. ; 3 p.m.,
9 a.m., W. 30 m.p.h.
W.S.W. 33 m.p.h.
Brisbane. —ls£ October, 1941.
6 a.m.
9 a.m.
12 noon
3 p.m.
6 p.m.
Temperature (°) .. .. 65-6
Relative Humidity (%) .. 27
Maximum Temperature.—69*2°.
Minimum Relative Humidity.—16 per cent.
65-3
38
at 2 p.
68-0
26
m.
68-0
18
69-6
37
Wind. —6 a.m., W. 10 m.p.h. ; 9
12 noon, S.W. 23 m.p.h. ; 3 p.m.,
S.W. 16 m.p.h.
a.m., S.W. 20
, S.W. 20 m.p.h. ;
m.p.h.
6 p.m.,
Brisbane. — 22nd September.
, 1943.
6 a.m.
9 a.m.
12 noon 3
p.m. 6 p.m.
Max.
Temperature (°) .. .. 63-3
Relative Humidity (%) .. 99
911
39
99-0 90-4 89-3
29 42 42
100-9
Wind. — 6 a.m., S.E. 1 m.p.h. ; 9
12 noon, N.W. 21 m.p.h. ; 3 p.m.
N.W. 15 m.p.h.
a.m., N.W. 20
, W. 15 m.p.h. ;
m.p.h.;
6 p.m..
Walgett (N.S.W.). — 23 rd December, 1943.
Min.
9 a.m.
3 p.m.
Max.
Temperature (°)
Relative Humidity (%)
72-0
85-5
37
102-0
13
104-5
Wind. — 9 a.m., N. 3| ; 3 p.m., W. 4|.
Extensive fires 100 miles north.
t Wind on Beaufort Scale : —
1 = 1-3 m.p.h. ; 2 =,4-7 m.p.h. ;
3 = 8-
•12 m.p.h. ;
4 = 13-18 m.p.h. ; 5
= 19-24 m.p.h. ; 6 = 25-31 m.p.h. ; 7
= 32-38 m.p.h.
A feature which will be noted on all serious fire days
is the low relative humidity. Temperatures are usually
high, but winds may not be strong. In the south-eastern
States, however, strong winds as well as high temperatures
and low relative humidities are a feature of the worst days.
On October 1, 1941, serious fires occurred in south-east
Queensland, with comparatively low temperatures. The
relative humidity was low and winds were high, from a
westerly direction.
Upper Air Conditions.
The characteristics of the atmosphere in depth on a bad
fire day are illustrated by the pseudo-adiabatic diagram
for January 22, 1944, at Laverton, Victoria (Fig. 16).
The graphs indicate the variation of temperature and
of dew point with height. The dry adiabatic temperature
gradient (lapse rate)* is represented by straight lines
running diagonally across the paper. These indicate the rate
at which the temperature of a sample of air would fall if
it were lifted and no heat exchange with its surroundings
occurred. The irregular lines represent the conditions pre-
vailing on the 22nd January.
It will be seen that at the hour of observation (2 a.m.
Eastern Summer Time), there was an inversion of tem-
perature in the lowest 2,000 feet, the temperature at that
level being 8 deg. C. (i.e. 14 deg. F.) higher than at the
surface. Above 2,000 feet the temperature “ lapse rate ”
was slightly less than the dry adiabatic.
C.8016/47. —4
The temperature at Melbourne at 3 a.m. was 71 • 7 deg. F.
By noon this had risen to 103 deg. F. (39-4 deg, C.) with
a dew point of 49 deg. F. (9-4 deg. C,). It may be assumed
that the effect of surface heating on the temperature was
confined to the lowest layer of 2,000 feet thickness, and
that by noon the lapse rate was near the adiabatic from
the surface upwards.
There was comparatively little change in the dew point
which, at Melbourne, at noon (local time), was only about
1 deg. C. higher than at Laverton at 2 a.m. (E.S.T.). The
area between the temperature and dew point curves indi-
cates a very dry condition of the atmosphere at all levels
up to beyond 7,000 feet. This may be considered to be a
typical characteristic of bad fire days. A high lapse rate
is also a condition of turbulence and gustiness in the atmos-
phere, The pseudo-adiabatic diagram is discussed in more
detail at the end of this section.
* Dry adiabatic lapse rate or gradient is the rate of decrease
of temperature with height which would occur if a sample of
air were lifted and allowed to expand without the addition or
subtraction of heat.
Temperature lapse rate is the rate of decrease in temperature
with height existing in the atmosphere at any particular time.
The dry adiabatic lapse rate is 5-4 deg. F. per 1,000 feet. The
temperature lapse rate varies, but the mean is about 3 deg. F.
per 1,000 feet.


Fig. 16. —Pseudo-Adiabatic Diagram for Laverton, Victoria, 2 a.m. (Eastern Summer Time). 22nd January,1944.
Graphs of Variations of Temperature (right) and Dew Point (left) with Height.


Danger Phase.
Weather Characteristics.
Remarks and Suggested Precautions.
Predisposing seasonal characteristics
A period of a few weeks of low rainfall and low
relative humidity. Temperatures not necessarily
high
After a dry winter or spring, fire danger may develop
early in the season. After a wet spring, a period
of 5 or 6 weeks of dry weather may be sufficient for
fire hazard to become critical
First indications of fire danger weather
Hazard Stick readings fall to about 20 per cent.
Relative humidities fall to 40 per cent, or lower
Keep all fires under strict control. Guard against
sparks from smouldering logs, &c., starting new
fires
Meteorological conditions leading to fire
Anticyclone moving over South Eastern Australia.
Light no fires in the open. Strict vigilance required.
danger day
Winds light variable or easterly to northerly at
first. Temperature rising. Maxima 80 degrees to
over 90 degrees. Relative humidity falling to 30 per
cent, or lower. Barometer commencing to fall. Low
pressure system over or west of Bight moving
rapidly eastward
Put out fires already burning
Dangerous fire days ..
Barometer falling. Low pressure system approaching
rapidly. High temperatures —90 degrees to over
100 degrees. Low relative humidities —below 20
per cent. High northerly winds or gales for some
hours. Later a cool west or south change and
possibly showers. (N.B. —The depression may be
one of a series as in January, 1939, when there
were three disastrous fire days in one week—on the
8th, 10th, and 13th.)
Extremely dangerous conditions. Fires, if lit, will
break out of control and emergency measures will
be necessary to save life and property.
Summary of Indications of the Development of Fire Danger Conditions in South-Eastern Australia.
The following tabular statement summarizes the stages of development of fire danger in south-eastern Australia.
The statement recapitulates the results arrived at in the preceding section (Forecasting Fire Weather I.), and
outlines in chronological order the phases of development of fire danger with the movement of pressure systems
and the resulting weather cycle. Suggestions for action which should be taken for control or suppression of fires
in the various danger phases are included in the third column.
If the district rainfall for three months —October to December —is less than 70 per cent, of average, very dangerous conditions may develop in January.
USE OF THE PSEUDO-ADIABATIC DIAGRAM IN THE
APPRECIATION OF BUSH FIRE DANGER.
C. Hounam, B.ScAssistant Meteorologist.
The pseudo-adiabatic diagram can be used as a further
aid in the detection of the approach of bush fire weather.
The features usually looked for in the preparation of a
forecast by means of the surface synoptic chart are dis-
cussed elsewhere. The upper air sounding provides fur-
ther information regarding temperature and humidity at
various heights, and from the plotted diagram an estimate
of the probable degree of turbulence can be made. As
turbulence is an important factor in the degree of severity
of bush fires, this is valuable additional data to be con-
sidered when compiling a forecast.
Radiosonde flights are usually made at about midnight
or soon after, so the observations usually show surface
conditions unrepresentative of the free atmosphere. How-
ever, the sounding indicates the condition of the air above
the surface and this information, used in conjunction with
the surface chart, should give a fair indication of the
expected trend of surface conditions during the high sun
period.
The distribution of water content, expressed in grams per
kilogram, is also shown on the diagram (Fig. 16). With a
normally stable air mass very little change in this element
is exhibited at a fixed point. With decreasing stability and
consequently increasing turbulence there will be an ex-
change of water vapour between the various layers, the
effect of which is to decrease the water content in the
lower layers and increase it in the upper layers. This
process is shown up by a day to day comparison of upper
air soundings. It is also an explanation of the supposed
“ drying-out ” of an air mass with passage over a warm
surface.
In particular, when the diagram is to be used in an
estimation of the fire hazard, the following features should
be looked for:—
1. A progressive (day to day) warming of air, particu-
larly in the lower layers, taking into consideration
the unrepresentative character of the surface layer.
2. Although the water content will not change very
rapidly, there should be a gradual decrease due to
mixing. Even if this element remains relatively
constant, there will be a fall in relative humidity
which should be shown on the diagram.
The above features are associated with the trajec-
tory of the air mass, and hence the simultaneous
use of upper wind reports will be of great assistance
in assessing the fire hazard.
3. The possibility of forecasting the maximum tempera-
ture for the day.
It is not intended, of course, that the diagram should
replace the synoptic chart, and in using it as an aid to
preparing the forecast as indicated above, the forecaster
should always bear in mind the possibility of an early
frontal passage, the onset of sea breeze, &c.
The following is an example of the manner in which the
pseudo-adiabatic diagram can be used in this work. The
period covered is from the 17th to the 22nd January, 1944;
on this latter day 52 fires were reported in Victoria, mainly
in central districts.


Date.
Surface
Temperature
Temperature at
2,000 Feet.
Degree of Inversion.
Water Content
in gm/Kg.
at Surface.
Water Content
in gm/Kg.
at 2,000 Feet.
Remarks.
° C.
° c.
17.1.44
14
10
6.3
5
18.1.44
14
5.7
4
19.1.44
13
12
Approximately isothermal to
4,000 feet
7.0
7
Slight increase in water content
since 18th
20.1.44
17
17
6 degrees between 1,000 feet and
3,000 feet
9.8
5
Upper winds backed northerly
21.1.44
22
30
8 degrees from surface to 2,000
feet
6.5
3
Strong winds above inversion
On the morning of the 17th a cold front passed over
Victoria orientated in a north-west-south-east direction.
Strong south-west winds (25 to 30 knots) were in evidence
when the Laverton radiosonde flight was made at 1.400 Z
on the 17th. A mean lapse rate of 11 deg. C. in 5,000 feet
was measured, while above this was an inversion of 4 deg.
C. through several thousand feet. The water content was
6-4 gm./Kg. at the surface, and decreased steadily to 3-6
at 5,000 feet.
Twenty-four hours later the wind had backed southerly
and moderated at Laverton; there was a moderate lapse
rate between the surface and 5,000 feet, but the layer from
this height to 10,000 feet was mainly isothermal. The water
content was 5-7 at the surface, and decreased with height.
The most important feature of the sounding at 1,500 Z
on the 19th was the fact that notwithstanding continued
southerly winds there was, at all levels, with the exception
of the surface layer, an increase in temperature; this in-
crease amounted to 14 deg. C. at approximately 4,000 feet,
and above that level was mainly 5 deg. to 10 deg. This is
noteworthy because a general rise in the temperature of the
air mass had occurred without any corresponding rise at
the surface. With the true conditions being masked by a
surface inversion, the information provided by the upper
air data would enable the issuing of a forecast of warmer
conditions to follow that day. On this day there also
occurred a slight increase in the water vapour content
although, because of the increase in temperature, there was
a decrease in relative humidity.
By the afternoon (E.S.T.) of the 20th, winds were light
to moderate north-east to north over southern New South
Wales and Victoria, and were under the control of an anti-
cyclone centred in the western Tasman Sea. At 1,500 Z on
the 20th, temperatures had risen in the layer up to 7,000
feet —the surface temperature from 13 deg. to 17 deg. C.
in 24 hours, while an inversion of 5 deg. existed between
approximately 1,000 feet and 3,000 feet. Except for a
slight rise at the surface, there was very little change in
the water content. The relative humidity had now fallen
further, and values over the last three days at 3,000 feet
were 80 per cent., 40 per cent., and 20 per cent. Once again
a clear picture of the modification of the air mass must be
obtained from the free atmosphere as surface observations
are unreliable. At this hour also, it can be seen that winds
aloft had turned west-north-west to north-west from
southerly on the previous day.
At 1,500 Z on the 21st a further marked increase in the
temperature aloft was observed, this time extending to
12.000 feet. A maximum increase of 10 deg. F. was observed
in the layer between 1,000 feet and 2,000 feet, although the
surface temperature rose by only 5 deg. The surface inver-
sion consequently was greater, being now 8 deg. C. in
2.000 feet. Above this the lapse rate was fairly constant
and only slightly less than the dry adiabatic. With the
removal of this inversion by turbulence brought about by
surface heating during the day, it can be forecast that the
temperature for the day will reach 37 deg. C. (Actually
the maximum temperature on this day reached 40 deg. C.)
As would be expected, upper winds at the time of this
sounding were much lighter under the inversion than aloft.
With the removal of this inversion an increase in the surface
wind could be expected.
On this day there was also a decrease in the water vapour
content in the layer below 7,000 feet. This was probably
the result of the increased turbulence throughout the air
mass. A further decrease in relative humidity also occurred.
The following table shows the behaviour of temperature
and humidity:—
Summary.
1. A progressive rise in the temperature of the air mass
is exhibited by the diagrams.
2. Although the water content has shown only a slight
decrease (N.B. —none at all at the surface), there has been
a progressive decrease in relative humidity in the lower
layers removed from surface influence.
3. The maximum temperature was forecast to reach 37
deg. C., and actually reached 40 deg, C, on the 22nd.
Conclusion.
Used in conjunction with the early morning surface
synoptic chart and with wind trajectories in the lower
layers, the pseudo-adiabatic chart would have shown in
this particular case that a high risk of bush fire weather
would develop during the day on 22nd January, 1944 . The
n°fnd SS 2 V !f riSe in t6 T ratUre and Crease in humidity
(1 and 2 of summary) would likewise have indicated the
development of Are danger on the previous day


FIRE WEATHER AND BUSH FIRE WARNING SERVICES
IN EACH STATE.
In the following pages are set out for each State
separately statements of meteorological conditions con-
ducive to the spread of fires based on the experience of
Divisional Meteorologists. Details of the organization for
the issue of bush fire warnings are also outlined.
A supplementary study of weather factors associated
with fires is given in Part IV. including a summary of the
main types of pressure distribution associated with serious
fires in past years.
VICTORIA. .
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS CONDUCIVE TO BUSH AND
GRASS FIRES.
H. E. Camm, Supervising Meteorologist,
Forecasting Section, Central Weather Bureau.
In Victoria, the period during which weather conditions
conductive to grass and bush fires may be expected is com-
paratively short and normally is limited to December to
March.
In this State spring rains are usually reliable and fre-
quent, promoting green growth, and maintaining sufficiently
damp and humid conditions to minimize fire danger until
the mid-summer months. Autumn rains are less reliable,
and in some years, long periods of dry weather may occur
until the end of April. Nevertheless, even in dry autumns,
the shorter days and morning dews decrease fire danger
and thus, in Victoria, January and February are the months
of most serious bush and grass fire hazard, and it is in
these months that most fires occur.
In years of low winter rainfall followed by a dry spring,
the floor of the forests may reach a high degree of inflam-
mability at a much earlier stage in the season than normal.
In such years, risk of fires may commence as early as
November and, with continued drought, may last until
April. In Victoria, however, there is practically no bush
fire hazard in the period May to October.
The most important meteorological factor governing the
outbreak and spread of fires in Victoria is wind. It can-
not be sufficiently emphasized that, given the predisposing
condition of dry grass and dry undergrowth, strong winds
from any direction will result in the spread of fires. How-
ever, the condition which is most conducive to the outbreak
of fires in Victoria is the incidence of strong dry gusty
winds from the north or north-west.
These winds, which are associated with the passage of
troughs of southern depressions moving over Australia
south of latitude 20 deg. are extremely dry, bringing in air
from the dry interior of the continent with relative humidity
below 20 per cent., and air temperature exceeding 100
deg, F.
Velocities, at the surface, of these winds are usually of
the order of 20 to 25 miles per hour, with gusts frequently
reaching 40 miles per hour or over. Strength of these winds,
as a rule, increases rapidly with elevation, and between
3,000 and 5,000 feet frequently exceed 50 miles per hour,
and at times approach hurricane force. Thus surface wind
observations may be at times misleading when considera-
tion is being given to the rate of travel of fires. Instances
of burning coals or branches of trees being conveyed from
mountain peak to peak by upper winds are common, thus
causing skips of several miles between fires.
It is therefore imperative that fire-fighting organizations
and those responsible for the prevention or control of fires
should pay particular attention to the wind at levels up
to 5,000 or 6,000 feet. The duration of strong winds asso-
ciated with this type of disturbance is usually 24 hours
or less. On an average they continue for 12 to 18 hours.
As a rule, they back west and south-west as the front of
the new air mass passes, bringing in the more humid and
cooler conditions, and frequently showers, which decrease
fire danger. However, winds associated with the passage
of the front are usually turbulent, and sudden changes in
direction may sweep fires to areas hitherto considered safe.
Thunderstorms frequently accompany the change.
In this State, dry thunderstorms are rare, and lightning
is not, in Victoria, an important cause of fires. The greatest
danger of fire arising from thunderstorms is due to the
turbulence and violent ascending air currents that form
part of the structure of the thunderstorm. Vertical velocity
of the wind may equal the horizontal velocity reaching 20
miles per hour or more. Danger from this source can arise
by coals or burning faggots being swept up by ascending
air and carried by upper air currents many miles from the
source of fire, resulting in outbreaks of fire at unexpected
locations.
In south-eastern Australia the weather cycle is approxi-
mately six to seven days, and during the summer months
bush fire danger usually occurs in a weekly sequence.
Normally, each danger period does not last more than 48
hours, but on rare occasions, when a stationary anticyclone
is located over New South Wales, bush fire weather may
persist in Victoria three, four, or more consecutive days.
Bush Fire Warning Service, Victoria.
Close liaison is maintained by the Meteorological Bureau
with the Forests Commission and the Country Fire Autho-
rity, and a summary of the service arranged for these
organizations is given below.
Immediately the probability of the onset of weather con-
ditions conducive to the outbreak or spread of fires is
suspected, a cautionary warning is issued. Usually such
cautionary advice is issued about 9 a.m,, giving at least
24 hours’ notice of the development of dangerous conditions.
This is followed up by confirmation of the warning (or its
modification or cancellation) as soon as definite conclusions
from synoptic analysis are possible.
If confirmed, the warnings are given to the public through
the press and broadcasting stations.
Bush fire warnings are passed by “ priority ” telegram
to 21 Country District Forest Officers,* who contact working
parties and bush fire brigades by telephone or portable
wireless.
The warnings issued cover expected conditions of tem-
perature, humidity, wind direction, and velocity, for the
area affected.
Once a warning is issued, it is followed at appropriate
intervals by progressive weather statements, the last of
which in any series predicts the close of bush fire conditions.
* List of Forest Officers in Victoria to whom fire weather
advices are telegraphed:—
Stawell. Macedon. Neerim South.
Heywood. Broadford. Erica.
Beaufort. Kallista. Bairnsdale.
Forrest. Toolangi. Orbost.
Beech Forest, Powelltown. Bright.
Ballarat. Mansfield. Tallangatta.
Nowa Nowa. Bruthen. Scarsdale.


In addition, a daily weather advice to the Forests Com-
mission and the Country Fire Authority indicates to these
Departments when bush fire weather is not expected, a
matter of no little importance, since it maintains the con-
tinuity of attention which is given to this matter during
the critical summer months.
The Country Fire Authority is advised by telephone, and
the Forests Commission by a 9.30 a.m. weather forecast for
Victoria in five sections—(viz. north-west and north; north-
east; western; Melbourne to Snowy River; and east of
Snowy River).
During the danger period, the R.A.A.F. provides aerial
patrol for spotting outbreaks of fire, thus allowing fire
fighting parties to be moved quickly to points of danger,
and for safety precautions to be taken by those in a
threatened district.
Types of Bush Fire Warnings.
In framing bush fire warnings, the Meteorological Bureau
endeavours to make a distinction between those conditions
which will maintain existing fires, and those which are
conducive to a rapid spread in the nature of a serious and
general conflagration. Examples of warnings issued are as
follow:
(a) To Forests Commission and District Forest Officers
Only.
“ Temperatures are rising generally and the weather
throughout Victoria will be hot during the day. Winds
generally are northerly but, except in the area from about
Ballarat to Melbourne where speed is 20 to 25 miles per
hour, winds are as yet light to moderate.
Winds are expected to become stronger and more gusty
during the afternoon, and fire hazard to increase during
this afternoon and to-morrow morning.”
(The wording of advices to District Forest Officers may
be varied according to the district.)
(b) For General Issue {Broadcasting Stations, Press, Forest
Commission, State Electricity Commission .)
“ The Weather Bureau advises that hot weather with
north to east winds, gusty at times, is expected to continue
over inland Victoria during the next 24 to 36 hours. Fire
hazards are increasing, and every precaution should be
taken in the use of fire.
A slight southerly change is expected to modify con-
ditions to-night about the coast, and a cool change should
become general in the week-end.”
NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE WEATHER FACTOR IN BUSH FIRES.
B. W. Newman, B.Sc., Assistant Divisional Meteorologist.
The forecasting of bush fires development may be con-
sidered from three main aspects: —
(1) The development of a fire from definite natural
and so humanly uncontrolled sources. Among
these are the lightning discharge from a
thunderstorm; frictional action in loose dry
scrub; focussing of the sun’s rays by broken
glass; and spontaneous combustion. Of these
the lightning discharge is probably the most
potent, but in actual fact the number of bush
fires developed under the natural sources indi-
cated above is probably less than 10 per cent,
of the total occurrences.
(2) The development from local fires such as “ burning
off ” and the unattended “ picnic fire.” Given
the necessary conditions of a very hot day and
even a slight wind, this type of development
probably constitutes the greatest danger.
(3) The renewal of a fire, apparently under control,
due to excessive high temperatures and the
strengthening of a wind. Here is a source of
danger quite material, and it should be empha-
sized that the quarter from which the wind
strengthens is not a necessary condition. In a
dry season, embers can be fanned into flame
again by even a comparatively cool southerly
wind, and if unaccompanied by showers, the
danger of bush fire spread is indeed real.
The chief weather or pressure distribution associated
with bush fires is that of a high pressure system having
over northern and eastern New South Wales an orientation
somewhat north-west to south-east, and even west to east.
Such a type is a concomitant of dry to drought conditions.
This pressure distribution gives north to north-west and
west winds over the State (the west wind being to some
extent unseasonable). In a dry season it is obvious that
such winds are dry, having a very low atmospheric mois-
ture content or, in other words, a very low humidity, and
since they bring inland continental air into the State, they
are also hot. Should there also be southern low pressure
waves of moderate strength moving quickly across the
southern ocean, then between these and the high pressure
to the north and east the wind will develop strength.
A hot, dry and strong wind has what is termed a high
lapse rate of temperature (a rapid decrease with height),
and favours convection and turbulence which causes
rising air currents and eddies. With the extremely low
humidities, rain does not develop despite this convection,
but the action may be likened to an up-draft in a chimney,
and any flame developed in such a wind is fanned to greater
size and spreads into the bush fire conditions. An area of
weak pressure gradients such as a “col” (shallow low
between high pressure systems) or the retreating flank of
P res . sure * s associated in a normal season with warm
an umid conditions, and in a dry season carries heat
wave temperatures, both of which conditions may be con-
ducive to natural bush fire development. The westerly wind
13 featured chiefly in an intense “ low.” probably
reachmg cyclonic form over Tasmania, creating strong
westerly Winds over the south-east quarter of New South
in,ti!n F ° r 8 pe ™ d ° f some 12 t 0 24 hours, such winds are
fire hi W a rm t ?., h ° t ’ and must be considered in the bush
developed I ’ 6 C °° ler southerl y component has
no^h e eriv 0 !n I '/'? Utherl , y Wtad ° f SUmmer differ s from the
vection and hi fl ' e rate ’ anb does n °t favour con-
levelopment to the same extent, but
the snread nf ’ 1 musl stib be considered a factor in
the spread of an existing blaze or the fanninn of an
apparently subdued Are. tanning ot an


Casino
.. (D.F.)
Baradine ..
.. (D.F.)
Urbenville
•• (F.)
Dubbo
.. (D.F.)
Glen Innes
.. (S.F.)
Forbes
.. (S.F.)
Goff’s Harbour
.. (D.F.)
Wagga
.. (D.F.)
West Kempsey
.. (D.F.)
Mathoura ..
.. (F.)
Taree
.. (S.F.)
Tumut
.. (F.)
Wyong
.. (F.)
Bateman’s Bay
.. (F.)
Blackheath
.. (F.)
Eden
.. (F.)
Moss Vale
.. (F.)
D.F. = District Forester.
S.F. = State Forester.
F. .. Forester.
FIRE WEATHER WARNING SERVICE—NEW SOUTH WALES.
When conditions necessitating the issue of bush fire
warnings arise, the meteorologist in charge formulates a
warning which is telegraphed to any or all of the following
Forest Stations:
Telegrams conveying warnings are urgent and free, and
are addressed to the District Forest Officer, Casino, or
Forester, Mathoura, &c., as the case may be. The following
is a typical example of a warning issued in such circum-
stances: —
“ Rising temperatures and strong northerly winds
conducive to bush fires in north coast districts within
next 48 hours.”
Additionally, a copy of such forecast is forwarded to the
Forestry Commission, Margaret-street, with a copy of the
Daily Weather Bulletin, and also to the Secretary, Bush
Fires Advisory Committee.
Such warnings, with wind direction, are issued at least
twice daily to the morning and evening press for the ensuing
24 hours, and are also issued twice daily to National and
Commercial Broadcasting Stations for broacasting over one
network in the morning and evening sessions.
The Sectional Weather Forecasts issued normally from
the Weather Bureau also carry bush fire warnings to the
affected or threatened districts, and dissemination is com-
pleted by posting these forecasts and warnings at Post
Offices and by broadcasting from selected provincial stations.
QUEENSLAND.
BUSH AND GRASS FIRES.
A. S. Richards, Divisional Meteorologist.
Of the four main meteorological elements associated
with bush fire risks, as far as Queensland is concerned, the
average high temperature factor is the most consistent,
but not the most vital. The greater part of inland Queens-
land lies within the average daily maximum 90 deg. iso-
therm from October to May, and temperatures range up
to critical 95 deg. and over 100 deg. averages in western
sections from December to February inclusive. For-
tunately in these months, this adverse factor, during
average years, is minimized or counteracted by the seasonal
rainfall distribution, comprised of variable, moderate to
heavy thunderstorms during Spring, and two or three mon-
soonal summer rains often widespread and of local to
general flood fall intensity. Growth and moisture content
is maintained in pastures and scrub, especially in the more
heavily timbered Pacific slope areas. Average relative
humidities, bearing in mind the high temperatures, are
also above the critical desiccating stage.
In the hot summer months average 3 p.m. humidity
figures of 20 per cent, in the far south-west increase pro-
gressively eastward to 70 per cent, in coastal areas, while
average cloud coverage throughout the day and evening is
greatest in the December-March period. Winds of average
direction; south-east to north-east, are either relatively
cool or more or less moisture laden.
The two to four day periods of unfavourable dry strong
north-west to west winds are chiefly confined to the
winter and spring months, and they decrease the inland
3 p.m, average relative humidity figures which vary from
30 to 40 per cent, in the former, to 20 and 30 per cent, in
the latter months. Dry and hot springs are the periods of
greatest average general risk, and also rarer occasions of
widespread summer drought. Of the three mitigating fac-
tors rainfall distribution is paramount, but unfortunately,
the variability both of incidence and amount is well known.
The rainfall control factors could be roughly classified in
three categories, the first, sufficiently well-spaced spring,
summer, and winter falls, which would make most districts
fire proof, approximately one year in three. In other years,
however, in such an extensive State as Queensland, a second
type of control would have considerable influence. This
type, failure of variable thunderstorms during spring
months, is of the greatest average importance.
Most inland pastures would have dried off during the
normal rainless winter, and with either average or poor
early winter falls in the south-east divisions (the areas of
greatest fire damage risk), pastures and undergrowth
generally would be either drying or dry under the influence
of north-west to west winds of two to occasionally four
days’ duration occurring approximately two to four times
per month. General danger elements would be intensified
by rising temperatures and decreasing . humidity, with
critical periods when 95 to 100 deg. maximum readings
were reached accompanied by lower than 20 per cent,
humidity. . 7 A - - -
Dry hot springs are somewhat similar to dry hot
summer conditions in southern States, but fewer periods
of strong north-west to west winds and somewhat lower
extreme temperatures in the south-east quarter of Queens-
land during September and October decreases risks in
average springs throughout most of Queensland, The third
category, a State-wide failure of summer rains, would be
rare. The tropical coast belt, especially north from Towns-
ville, could be eliminated, but in sub-tropical areas heat
wave temperatures would increase fire risks.
In addition to the three rain distribution categories men-
tioned, it is important to recollect that each separate season
can have a variable distribution. Growth promoted by a
moderate August to September rain, under the influence
of a dry October and November will quickly reach the
critical fire stage. This sub-type of seasonal rainfall control
occurs often enough in inland and sub-tropical districts to
bring the months of December and January into the average
danger period, but incidence risks are less than in the Sep-
tember-November season. Early summer rains without later
supplementary falls can be followed by autumn and even
occasional local winter risks, also after an average but nor-
mally light winter rain in the south-east quarter, rising
temperatures and dry winds of the following spring will
gradually set up the most general seasonal risk of the year
over widespread areas if storm relief is not afforded. Con-
tributory risk factors in the sub-type patchy rain control
category could be summarized as follows: —
A. Previous patchy or light district rain and then a
dry spell of four to six weeks.
B. —Rising temperatures of 85 to 95 deg., at times
reaching the approximate critical 100 deg. mark
in the south-east quarter of the State.
C. —North-west to west winds of 15-30 miles average
velocity lasting for two to occasionally four days.
Winds would reach gale force at times.


—
Number of
Fires.
—
Number of
Fires,
January
16
July
4
February
1
August
9
March
1
September ,.
30
April
1
October
29
May
1
November
26
June
1
December
18
D.—Relative humidities decreasing below 20 per cent,
during dry wind spells.
Regarding B. —Average inland temperatures of 90-100
deg., October to March, are consistently risky in
dry weather.
Regarding C. —Dry north-west winds are most preva-
lent in the cooler winter and early spring months,
occurring on an average twice to occasionally four
times per month. Occurrences in September to
November periods are on the average fewer, but
the higher temperature factor adds considerably
to the risk element.
A fire dampening wind change from north-west through
west, and south-west to southerly, with an evening thunder-
storm, is possible after one day of heat, but more likely on
the second evening. Preceding rainless changes to fire
retarding south-west and southerly winds, two or three
days critical heat might be experienced, and this set of
circumstances would recur at intervals till rain falls.
Occasionally, in exceptionally dry and hot weather, a rain-
less but fresh southerly change maintains existing local
fires in the south-east divisions.
It is also important to catalogue another unfavourable
exception to the average fire retarding capacity of the
Queensland south-west to south-east winds. This exception
applies chiefly in the central and northern interior and
across the Barkly Tablelands to the Northern Territory
during hot and dry spring and early summer months, when
rising and over 100-deg. temperatures have already been
experienced. In winter and spring months especially, these
south-west to south-east winds operate over inland areas
with increased squally velocities during the approach of a
southern high pressure front from South Australia and its
eastward movement across New South Wales. These frontal
winds, as far as the above districts are concerned, are of the
dry or moisture decreasing continental type and, by their
increased velocity, they add to the high temperature factor
mostly because they invigorate existing fires, or risks
generated by the preceding or succession of preceding
trough and southern low pressure combinations with their
adverse cumulative drying effects from warm north to
north-west wind circulation. Wind changes during spring
and early summer are usually of the squall type with local
thunder and lightning and occasional records suggest the
latter as a fire cause in dry changes.
Examination of available press and other reports (in-
complete, as many fires would be unreported) indicates
that, given a partial combination of unfavourable meteoro-
logical elements, local “ bush ” fire risks could occasionally
be experienced in any month of the year over inland and
sub-tropical sections.
Any classification of monthly risk incidence is of neces-
sity arbitrary, but available data for the last twelve years
show that there were general fires of the dry spring and
early summer type in 1935, 1940, and during 1941, the
latter a very bad year in southern Queensland. Fires were
reported during the July to November months, particularly
the last four. This gives a proportion of One year in four
for fairly general seasonal risks. In two years a possible
no-fire record is shown, while other local fire years, for
instance 1939, show two in January, while in 1943, two
periods in March were followed by one each for September,
October, and November, On the average there is an approxi-
mate average for January of danger fire periods one year
in three. In February, March, April, May, June, July, risk
periods were rare, though one or two could occasionally
occur in February and March, to a lesser degree, and of
local nature in April, May, June, and July. In the other
months, figures range from an occasional nil to a general
average of one or two up to four or five critical spells. As
these are the months when meteorological control factors
can make their most adverse departure from normal, the
data for 1941 should be carefully considered as represen-
tative of a bad season of general fire risk. In that year the
number of risk periods were as follows: —July 1, August 5,
September 4, October 4, and November 5.
Records maintained by the Queensland Forestry Sub-
Branch detail the number of observed fires in forestry
reserves, and the average damaged acreage. The number
of local fires observed is confined to those in the reserves
proper, mainly located throughout the south-east quarter
of Queensland. The figures would therefore not indicate
the number of local fires in the respective divisions of the
State, but they establish with reasonable accuracy the
average degree of seasonal and monthly risk. Figures for
the last five years give an average number of observed fires
(small and large) throughout all State reserves as follows:
Forestry officials are normally concerned about fires from
September till Christmas, and of these four months, October
and November are considered the worst, as fires if they
occur are severe. Average figures from the short ’five-year
frf r iQ4i haVe been lnfluenced by the number of outbreaks
m 1941, one of the worst years on record. In that year
there were no observed fires in February, March April
/i° r A June ’ bUt fr ° m then onward the numbers were
July 4,August 11, September 61, October 62. November 34
?q 0 4i em t b h er 44 ’ and the followin S month of January 24. In
1941, the excessive numbers for January and September
over-emphasize the relative risks of those two monthTas
against the average occurrences, over a period in October
November, and December. ’ u ctober,
Fire Weather Warning Service—Queensland
in the news sessions morning or ever, ini ° n ' and
B Class stations co-operate Ihen requesfed" “ reqUeSted '
°whicif da %
ranted, bush fire warning™ mclude ’ when war '
B Class country stations serviced dailv k v «• .
Bureau are Cairns, Townsville, Ayr Mackav RnL f 6
Bundaberg, Maryborough Gviddlp • Rockhampton,
Oakey, Toowoomba, Warwick Roma Kln S^oy,
reach. vvarwick, Roma, Charleville, Long-
Daily weather forecasts u
ings as to increased bush and grass fire Warn ‘


Mutual telephone contact is maintained between the head
office of the Forestry Bureau and the Weather Bureau.
Telegraphic warning messages are sent as necessary to
thirteen District Forest Officers* who, in turn, communicate
with their respective overseers.
Information is also telephoned to the Fire Brigade, Bris-
bane, when occasion warrants.
Meteorological advices apart from fire danger warnings
have been extensively used by the Forestry Sub-Depart-
ment when burning off felled areas prior to planting. Fire
warnings telegraphed direct to Departmental field officers
have been of considerable value and have facilitated reten-
tion of week-end staff to deal with emergencies.
Example of Bush Fire Warning.
“ Increased local bush fire risks to-day and/or to-morrow.
Strong and squally north-west winds or north-west to west
winds 20-30 miles per hour.”
Later messages would, if necessary, contain information
as to duration or likelihood of wind change or thunder-
storms.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BASIS OF BUSH FIRE WARNINGS.
E. Bromley, Divisional Meteorologist.
The basis on which bush fire warnings are issued is partly
seasonal and partly synoptic. For example, a wet winter
and spring followed by a dry and hot summer provide, in
general, the most favourable circumstances for grass fires,
but will militate to some extent against fires in heavily-
timbered country.
The most favourable synoptic situation is any one which
gives rise to a strong hot wind following a rainless period.
As far as South Australia is concerned, this may be realized
in the following manner. An extensive anticyclone is
centred to the eastward, where it has been stagnant for
some days. The advance of a depression across Western
Australia, intensifying as it moves, will provide a warm, dry,
and strong northerly wind. Given a sufficiently energetic
west to south-west stream following the “ front ” in the
“ Low,” there should be sufficient rain to extinguish the
fires, but if the depression should retreat south or weaken
and achieve nothing more than a shift of wind, then the
most dangerous conditions will exist. Fires that may have
started during the existence of the northerly wind and are
travelling under its direction will rapidly change the line of
travel under a north-west to south-west wind, and will
menace unexpected areas.
In the issue of any particular warning, the points to be
considered are as follows; —
(1) How long dry and/or hot conditions have prevailed.
(2) The general condition of grass and/or bush or
timbered country because of immediately past
seasonal conditions.
* List of District Forest Officers receiving bush fire warnings:—
Atherton. Kilcoy.
Kalpowar. Brisbane Valley (Yarraman).
Maryborough. Inglewood.
Imbil. Warwick.
Gympie. Stanthorpe.
North Coast and Brisbane Dalby.
(Forest Office, Brisbane). Clermont.
(3) The strength of the wind and its expected
direction.
(4) Humidity of the air, to arrive at some estimate of
the combustibility of grass, &c.
Bush Fire Warning Service —South Australia.
A typical bush fire warning is as follows;
“ Bush fire hazard, increasing generally with further
intense heat on Thursday and freshening northerly
winds.”
This would be followed by a subsequent warning, more
or less, along the same lines until a forecast of the following
type were issued; —
“ Southerly change expected to-night with cooler
conditions and rain.”
District weather forecasts issued at noon would also con-
tain warnings of bush fires in any particular area.
In periods of fire danger, bush fire warning advices are
issued to the Woods and Forests Department, the Com-
missioner of Police, and the Australian Broadcasting
Commission, and telegrams are sent to forest officers in ten
forestry districts, namely:
Millicent. Wirrabara.
Mt. Gambier. Meadows.
Yahl. Second Valley.
Penola. Kersbroo^.
Williamstown. Jamestown.
The forest research officer at Mt. Burr supplies a daily
forecast to six forest centres in the south-east of South
Australia, This forecast is issued at 4 p.m. each day for
the following day, and is confirmed or revised the following
morning before 8 a.m. A fire danger classification for the
day is supplied with the forecasts, and is used by forest
officers in making arrangements for anticipated possible
outbreaks of fire, and also in selecting suitable days for
burning off operations. The information is made available
to any interested persons, such as private forestry com-
panies, on application.
The fire danger scale provided by the Department is given
in the section “ Fire Weather Stations and Measurements
of Inflammability,” p. 21.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
WEATHER CONTROLS ASSOCIATED WITH FIRES.
A. G. Akeroyd, Divisional Meteorologist.
As regards weather controls associated with seasons in
which there have been specially big losses through fires,
rainfall is not an important variable, as ordinarily the
summer in the south-western division of Western Aus-
tralia (and particularly in the Jarrah region) is dry. The
fire hazard falls to moderate or rises to dangerous mainly
in accordance with the temperature changes.
Almost all heat wave conditions in the south-west of the
State are attended by only light winds, but even then the
fire hazard is dangerous.
On rare occasions, however, strong winds have attended
great heat, and when this occurs serious fire losses are
almost inevitable. Such conditions occur when a closed
curve depression of considerable depth follows a southward
path well to the west of the Western Australian coast.


This movement develops an exceptionally strong and hot
north-easterly wind, which may reach into the extreme
south-west of the State (the Karri region) before the
depression rounds Cape Leeuwin, and the winds change to
westerly.
The far south-west suffers most from this type of heat
wave, as the attendant heat and dryness are abnormal for
the region concerned, and the dense undergrowth in the
Karri region provides more dangerous fuel than is available
in the Jarrah region, where the undergrowth factor is not
nearly so important. The weather charts mentioned here-
under are cited as typical of “ blowup ” days in the south-
west of this State:—
20/1/30 18/1/30 19/1/30 17/1/27
19/1/27 20/1/27 27/1/31 2/2/31
3/2/33 8/2/33
Fire Weather Warnings—Western Australia.
Under existing arrangements, the Bureau broadcasts
every day, and also publishes in the morning newspapers
an estimation of the fire hazard for the day.
The fire hazard is based upon a scale prepared by Forestry
Department experts as follows:
1. Nil. 5. High summer.
2. Low. 6. Severe summer.
3. Moderate. 7. Dangerous.
4. Average summer.
Example: The Weather Bureau advises that the forest
fire hazard in the Jarrah forest areas of the south-west is
severe.
Under normal conditions, two such advices, one relating
to the Karri forest areas of the far south-west, and the other
to the Jarrah forest areas of the lower central south-west
are broadcast each evening, and relate to the conditions on
the following day. Advices are telegraphed to the forestry
officers at Dwellingup and Pemberton.
The basis of the forecasts is firstly the general
meteorological situation and the expected changes during
the forecasting period and, secondly, a special daily telegram
supplied from each of the two principal forestry centres
and communicating an expert estimate of the existing fire
hazard in the forestry office concerned at the time of
reporting.
Actually, the forecast for the day entails an estimate of
the probable temperature, humidity, wind direction and
velocity, and the estimated effect of these meteorological
elements in increasing or decreasing the degree of in-
flammability of the forest fuels.
The broadcasting of the fire hazard every day is in
accordance with the best practice followed in other
countries, where up-to-date forestry services are main-
tained. They are used firstly for the guidance of the
forestry officers who, in the early morning of each day,
arrange for the forestry staff to be allotted tasks according
to the fire hazard prospects. For example, if conditions
were favourable for the development of fires, the staff
would be allotted tasks in positions from which they could
be easily recalled for fire-fighting purposes, whereas, if the
day’s conditions were unfavourable for fire development,
the staff would be permitted to proceed with work in
progress much further afield.
The general weather forecast is used by the Forests
Department during controlled burning operations to decide
the type of firebreak to be burned, or whether it will be
safe to burn at all
Special forecasts of weather expected are obtained from
the Weather Bureau, Perth, during heat waves or when the
suppression of large fires is in progress.
During the summer period, a close liaison is maintained
between the Forests Department and the Divisional
Meteorologist, and the Department has a senior field officer
who has attended two weather courses at the Central
Weather Bureau, Melbourne.
Special warnings are also given from the offices of the
responsible Cabinet Ministers during critical periods.
The fire hazard forecasts have proved of interest and
value in somewhat unexpected ways, and it is of notable
service to the bee-farming industry in this State. It has
also been adopted to a considerable extent as a guide by
primary producers and others in the south-western districts
who are engaged upon or are selecting a time for the com-
mencement of burning-off operations.
TASMANIA.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH BUSH FIRES.
By H. E. Banfield and P. T. Dale, B.Sc.
The meteorological conditions associated with the develop-
ment of bush and grass fires in Tasmania daring the period
October to March are as follows:
(a) Pressure. —A slow-moving anticyclone is centred
over the Tasman Sea, and a southern depression
is centred over the Bight. The systems are
sufficiently well developed to produce a moderate
to steep pressure gradient over Tasmania. The
position is aggravated if the anticyclone be-
comes stationary and either maintains or
increases its intensity, and at the same time the
depression either advances or deepens.
(b) Wind. —The pressure situation described above
will produce northerly to north-westerly winds,
which may vary in force from a moderate breeze
to gales. The more usual are moderate to strong
winds.
(c) Temperature. —The air in this northerly to north-
westerly stream originates from over the
continent which, in the summer months, is hot.
Thus, the air temperature will be warm to hot
and rising. A heat wave will develop in the
aggravated situation.
In considering the situation, it is essential to have some
knowledge of the condition of the forest, in respect to its
dampness. This knowledge can be obtained in two ways:—
(a) By studying the rainfall during the previous two
or three weeks and noting the distribution and
amount, obviously the inflammability of the
forest is greatly affected by the abundance or
dearth of rainfall.
(b) A more valuable tool is hazard stick readings,
which give the humidity of the forest. These
readings, however, are liable to give false im-
pressions during the 36-48 hours following rain,
but the error introduced results in a greater
hazard being forecast than actually exists, i.e.,
t e error is on the safety side and can thus be
regarded as of minor importance.


Stick Readings (per cent.).
Hazard.
13 +
4 . • .
Slight
8-12
Moderate
7 —
Serious
2. Although the highest temperatures, lowest humidity
and strongest winds usually occur in advance of the trough
of the depression, it is wrong to assume that the danger is
past with the arrival of the change, or cold front. Many
fires in northern and eastern parts of the State have been
associated with the development of secondary depressions
to the south of the State, winds in such circumstances being
mainly north-westerly or westerly to south-westerly with
a low relative humidity.
Bush Fire Warning Organization—Tasmania.
1. Fire weather forecasts are issued daily during the
period October-March and, in addition, warnings when
warranted.
Basis of Forecasts and Warnings. —All fire weather fore-
casts and warnings are based on hazard stick readings com-
bined with known meteorological conditions. The degree of
hazard is determined from stick readings, according to an
arbitary scale which is shown below. Daily readings of
hazard sticks are made by officers of the Forestry Depart-
ment in various parts of the State, and the 3 p.m. reading
(which is usually the minimum reading for any particular
day) is telegraphed to the Divisional Meteorological Bureau,
Hobart. Observations are received from Queenstown
(West Coast), Mawbanna (Circular Head), Castra
(northern and north-western), Branxholm (north-eastern),
National Park (Derwent Valley), and Dover (south-
eastern). The scale adopted is:—
The additional word “increasing” or “decreasing” is
added to the forecast when the meteorological conditions
indicate an increase or decrease of hazard respectively.
Warnings are issued whenever the hazard is serious, or likely
to become serious, as shown by the meteorological
situation.
Examples of Warnings and Forecasts. —
(a) Forecast. —Fire weather forecast, hazard moderate,
decreasing.
(b) Warning. —(i) Bush fire danger developing and
risk of outbreaks serious, consequent on rising
temperatures and freshening north-easterly to
north-westerly winds. All precautions should be
taken.
(ii) Bush fire risk increasing to-day with gusty
northerly to north-westerly winds.
Method of Distribution. —All methods depend primarily
on either telegraphic or telephonic transmission:
(a) For the general public, however, warnings are
published in the press, The Mercury (Hobart),
The Examiner (Launceston), and The Advocate
(Burnie) being the newspapers concerned,
( b ) Broadcasting. —(l) National Stations (7ZL, TNT,
and 7ZR) broadcast only warnings. These are
broadcast at least three times daily, and addi-
tional broadcasts are made whenever the
schedule permits.
(2) Commercial Stations (7QT, 7BU, 7AD,
TEX, 7DY, 7HO, and 7HT). The stations treat
warnings similarly to the National Stations.
In addition, a daily fire weather forecast is given
with their ordinal y weather forecasts during the
fire season. This forecast covers only the area
for which the station broadcasts effectively
(usually within a radius of 25-50 miles).
(c) Telegrams (warnings only) are despatched to —
(1) Senior forestry officer at each of the
following localities: —Smithton, Mawbanna,
Oldina, Devonport, Ulverstone, Upper Castra,
Deloraine, Frankford, Launceston, Lilydale,
Branxholm, Avoca, Gould’s Country, National
Park, Taranna, Sorell, Dover, and Adventure
Bay. In addition, the Fire Protection Officer,
Hobart, is advised by telephone.
(2) All broadcasting stations enumerated
above (National Stations and Hobart Commer-
cial Stations are advised by telephone).
(3) Australian Newsprint Mills —telegram to
Boyer and telephone to branch office at Karanja
(Westerway).
Observations taken by—
(a) Forestry Department. —Meteorological observa-
tions are made four times daily (8 a.m., noon,
3 p.m., and 5 p.m.) at weather stations estab-
lished in the north-west, north, and north-east,
Derwent Valley, and south-east of Tasmania.
Three p.m. stick readings are telegraphed to the
Divisional Meteorological Office. Other informa-
tion is forwarded by telephone when warranted.
(b) Australian Newsprint Mills. Meteorological
observations are carried out at Junee, Camp I.
During warm weather spells, readings (9 a.m.,
1 p.m., and 3 p.m.) of wind, rainfall, hazard
sticks, number of fires, and locality are tele-
phoned to the Divisional Meteorologist.
Charts. —A copy of the daily isobaric chart is forwarded
to the General Superintendent, Australian Newsprint Mills,
Boyer, and also to the Chief Fire Protection Officer,
Forestry Department, Hobart, from October to March.


PART IV.
RECORDS OF BUSH FIRES AND ASSOCIATED WEATHER CONDITIONS.
Lists have been compiled from newspaper cuttings of
some of the more serious fires reported over a period of
approximately 30 years.
Difficulty has been experienced in determining exact
dates of occurrence. Sometimes the date is not clearly
stated in the report, or can be discovered only by carefully
reading the text. In extracting notes from newspapers in
the past, more attention has been given to the recording of
the occurrence itself than to noting the exact date and time.
Frequently the date of the report is wrongly assumed to
have been the date of occurrence. This applies to all
records of phenomena copied from newspapers, including
notes printed in rainfall publications, and allowance must
be made for a possible error of one or two days or more.
In the lists below, dates of occurrence since 1921 (inclusive)
have been checked where apparent discrepancies have been
noticed between reported fire days and associated weather.
With a view to correlating outbreaks of fire with weather
conditions, temperature and humidity data and types of
pressure distribution have been included in the lists. Only
very general results, however, can be summarized for the
following reasons:
(a) Uncertainty in some cases regarding dates.
(b) The distance of the nearest recording stations in
many cases from the seat of a fire.
(c ) The lack of readings at the time of occurrence.
(This applies particularly to observations of
wind and relative humidity.)
The lists and summaries, however, give some useful
information.
It will be noted that, in many cases, fires have been burn-
ing for some time prior to the reported dates, so that the
readings of temperature and relative humiditv. &c.. over
a period of some days give a fair indication of fire weather
characteristics. This applies particularly to davs of medium
hazard. In cases of the more serious fires when destruction
has been on an extensive scale, the dates, at least from
1921 onwards, have been checked, and the weather charac-
teristics quoted for such davs can be taken as nuite
definitely characteristics of days of extreme fire hazard.
Some doubt remains as to the extent of damage which
is done after a change of wind and fall in temperature have
occurred. An example of this is seen in the fires of
December, 1926, in New South Wales, when apparently a
change in the weather occurred on the 10th and 11th, but
damage was still reported on the 12th.
Maximum temperatures recorded in bush and grass fire
periods. —Readings are given for several days preceding
the reported dates of the fire. These may be regarded in
most cases as approximately representative of temperature
conditions over the areas in which fires occurred. This
may not be the case if the selected climatological station
is remote from the area of the fire and a fall in temperature
is experienced at this station but not in the fire area.
Some information may be gained from the lists regarding
the occurrence or development of fires with comparatively
low temperature. Cases where fire danger persists after
a fall in temperature are, however, sometimes obscured by
uncertainty as to dates.
The occurrence of strong winds. —Entries are included
of winds of force (4) —(Beaufort) or higher which have
been observed at one, or both, of the standard hours of
observation (9 a.m. and 3 p.m.). The comparatively
few entries would appear to indicate that many fires
occur with light winds. It is probable, however, that
winds recorded at the climatological stations at the
standard hours of observation are, in many cases, not
representative of winds in the fire areas and allowance
should be made for this.
Pressure distribution and Isoharic types associated with
fire weather. The relative positions of anticyclones and
depressions and their movement across the country can be
more precisely correlated with the occurrence of fires than
the elements temperature, relative humidity and wind, and
they serve as a reliable guide in checking dates of reports.
In a number of cases from 1921 onward doubtful dates
have been checked and amended on the basis of the
pressure distribution at the time.
Lowest readings of Relative Humidity recorded during
bush fire periods. The list includes lowest recorded read-
ings of relative humidity in fire periods where such
leadings are available. The entries usually refer to 3 p.m.
observations but many stations do not observe in the
afternoon. Low readings are occasionally recorded at
*■ a.rm but as a rule the morning readings are not repre-
sentative of conditions during the heat of the day.
It will be realized that the readings entered do not
necessarily coincide with maximum temperatures which
often occur at a different hour. Readings at the time of
the maximum temperature would probably be a few per
cent, lower, though a much greater difference would be
expected if a cool change occurred between the time of the
highest temperature and 3 p.m.
No significant information can be derived concerning the
3s rr and Ce ex° f firGS Wgh hUmidities - F ™m observe!
°ns and experience elsewhere these would not be expected.
climato^opdrai^ ,? ome as to how far readings at
tions n X fi nS Sre re P resenta tive of actual condi-
Snce and if areaS ' pa ? icularl y when the Are is at some
Nevertheless the ar6 . a ° ciifferent climatic characteristics,
nevertheless, the minimum relative humidity readines
rwleSe'humid f " eral ““ ° f Prevailing Conditions.
urn , itics usually accompany high temnera-
tures over considerable areas of country. P
statZm U ln rS th°J n Rainfall nearest
the **•
Of light tO federate g dry OT p e™ds
ngm to moderate rams preceding fire days.


Interpretation of Data.
In setting out the temperature, relative humidity, and
wind data, readings are given above the corresponding days
of the month (or preceding month in cases where the period
covered extends from one month into the next).
93° 27% NW4
For example, • are to be read as maximum
11, 29, 16
temperature 93 deg. on the 11th, relative humidity 27 per
cent, on the 29th, wind NW 4 (Beaufort Scale) on the 16th.
The values of Beaufort numbers in miles per hour, &c., are
given in the Appendix 111.
Isobaric types are given according to a numerical classi-
fication set out for each State separately. The index to
these types and statistics of frequencies are given at the
end of each State list.
Notes on Isobaric Types and Other Fire Weather
Characteristics.
(Summarized from Lists of Bush Fires, pp. 65-200.)
VICTORIA.
Here the most common pressure distribution is an anti-
cyclone centred to the east and a depression approaching
from the west. About half the cases of fires listed occur
with a steady movement of the anticyclones, while in an
additional 15 per cent, or so the anticyclone lags over the
Tasman Sea for some days previous to the fire. This
latter feature is commonly accompanied by heat-wave
conditions over south-eastern Australia in the summer
months. In 98 out of 128 cases listed, the trough of a
depression passed over the State on the day of the fire.
Low pressure activity, as seen in the development of deep
depressions or “ secondaries ”, has been associated with a
moderate number of fires. This feature has been a more
common characteristic of fire days in Gippsland and the
north-east than in the central and western parts of the
State.
The majority of serious fires in Victoria have occurred
in January and February, with a moderate number in
December and March.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Two main types of pressure distribution associated with
fires in New South Wales are (1) low pressure activity,
particularly the development of deep depressions to the
south and south-east, and (2) the ordinary sequence of
anticyclones followed by depressions. Occasionally depres-
sions moving over south-eastern Australia from the west
develop considerable intensity. In nearly half the total
number of fire periods listed the trough of a depression
has passed over the State (p. 128).
In the low pressure activity groups are included a
moderate number of cases in which (1) depressions in the
Tasman Sea extend north along the New South Wales coast,
giving rise to a vigorous south-westerly to westerly air
stream in eastern parts of the State, and (2) the develop-
ment of secondary depressions over southern ocean areas.
These types are rather important also in eastern Victoria.
In addition to an analysis for the State as a whole,
frequencies of types have been set out on p. 128 for four
sections, according to latitude. These are Southern (south
of the latitude of Sydney, approximately), Central (in
eluding the Sydney area and Central Tablelands), North
Coast (north of the Hawkesbury), and Northern Inland.
The majority of reports refer to the eastern and southern
parts of the State.
It will be seen that the most important pressure types
in central and northern areas are the “ activity ” types,
with a development of deep depressions around the south-
east of the Continent or depressions over the Tasman Sea
extending unusually far to the northward along the coast.
The fire season in the north commences earlier than in
the south. The months of greatest frequency are October
to December on the north coast, and November to January
in the central section, while in the south the season is
similar to that in Victoria, where January and February
are the months in which most fires occur.
The ordinary sequence of anticyclones and depressions
becomes a more important isobaric type in the south (and
in northern inland areas), though the development of deep
depressions and secondaries is also of some importance,
particularly late in the season.
QUEENSLAND.
The analysis of the frequency of weather types on days
of bush and grass fires in Queensland shows a variety of
widely differing types of pressure distribution and wind
circulation. Few reports of fires have been received from
the outlying northern and western parts of the State, the
majority of those listed being in the more densely settled
south-eastern areas.
With regard to these, the group under the general heading
“ Low-pressure Activity to the South or South-east ” is of
the most frequent occurrence, and in this group a common
characteristic is a deep depression over the Tasman Sea,
which on occasions is of a cyclonic type. Such systems are
accompanied by strong westerly or south-westerly winds
over south-eastern Queensland. Deep depressions over the
south-eastern States extending into Queensland also bring
strong westerly winds, and when there is an anticyclone
over the tropical seas a north-westerly circulation is set up.
The ordinary sequence of an anticyclone moving off the
State and being followed by tropical low pressure extending
into Queensland from the west or north-west is a type with
which hot weather and northerly winds is associated.
This type is characteristic of fire days as far north as
Cairns, the “ high ” in such circumstances being situated
over the Coral Sea. Sometimes in the spring an extensive
low pressure system extending northward from the Bight
covers all inland Australia, including western Queensland,
and gradients for strong northerly winds then develop also
when a “ high ” is centred off the coast.
Another type is a high pressure system over the Bight
and low pressure over Queensland. A south-easterly wind
circulation over southern Queensland favours a spread of
extensive grass fires in the interior with this type. In
winter, with intense “ highs ” passing over southern Aus-
tralia, extensive fires have also occurred with south-
easterlies over the northern interior (Barkly Tablelands
and lower gulf country).


Troughs of low pressure systems passing over Queensland
have been a feature in a moderate number of fire periods
(about 25 per cent.) (p. 150).
As stated elsewhere, the great majority of fires occur in
the spring months, September to November, which is the
latter part of the dry season. A moderate percentage occur
in December. November appears to be the month of
highest frequency.
One point worthy of special note is the fact that fires
caused by lightning appear to be of common occurrence in
the interior. The list of fires (page 130) includes such an
occurrence in September, 1917, at Warenda Station, near
Boulia, in the far west, in which three men lost their lives
fighting a fire caused by lightning. Dry grass is abundant
after a good season, and the low relative humidities in the
interior favour a rapid spread of flames, particularly when
there is a strong wind.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The predominant type of isobaric distribution associated
with bush fires in South Australia is a high pressure system
centred over the Tasman Sea and a depression approaching
from the central Bight, the trough passing over the State
on the day of the fire.
Other types are of little or no significance. Fires are
most frequent from January to March. Few occur in
December or earlier (p. 160).
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The most common type of pressure distribution with
which fires are associated in Western Australia is an anti-
cyclone situated over the Bight for some days and a depres-
sion either over the Sharks Bay or Gascoyne area or
approaching the west coast of the State (p. 180),
These comprise nearly half the total number of cases.
In about 30 per cent, of the fire periods the trough of a
depression passed over the area on the day of the fire or
on the previous day. Another frequent type is a “ high ”
moving over the south-west of the State or along the south
coast with a tropical depression over the Gascoyne area.
The months of greatest frequency of fires are February
and January, with smaller numbers in December and
March.
TASMANIA.
In Tasmania, a common pressure type is a sequence of
“ highs ” and “ lows ”, the “ highs ” being situated over the
Tasman Sea and depressions approaching from the west.
The persistence of anticyclones over the Tasman Sea is not
a prominent feature. In about 60 per cent, of cases the
trough of a depression has reached the State on the day
of the fire (p. 200).
A very frequent type associated with fires in the north
of the State is an anticyclone situated in the Bight and a
depression over the Tasman Sea. This feature has not
previously been recognized. The prevailing wind circula-
tion in these circumstances is west and south-west. Such
winds are dry in the north and north-east of the State,
where the highest number of fires occur with this distribu-
tion of pressure. The development of secondary depressions
to the southward occur in connexion with this isobaric type
and north-westerly to south-westerly winds result.
In the south and west the worst days are those with hot
northerly winds in advance of a depression approaching
from the west.
Summary of Temperatures and Relative Humidities.
The following are brief notes on maximum temperatures
and relative humidities. Highest maximum temperatures
and lowest relative humidities on, or in a few days before,
the reported dates of fires have been plotted on a frequency
diagram and summarized in a general manner as follows: —
NEW SOUTH WALES.
In the majority of cases, maximum temperatures
recorded in fire periods are between 95 deg. and 105 deg. A
moderate number are in the 80-95 deg. range and a few
below 80 deg. New South Wales has been divided into four
sections—north coast, central, south, and north inland,
and the above applies to all sections. A few fires have been
reported in central and southern areas with maximum
temperatures of below 70 deg. Some cases of temperatures
of 105 deg. to 110 deg. have been recorded, but more
particularly in the southern section.
Minimum readings of relative humidity (3 p.m.) have
usually been below 25 or 30 per cent, (lowest 3 per cent,
and 4 per cent.).
VICTORIA.
In the great majority of cases, maximum temperatures
have been between 95 deg. and 105 deg. (the upper limit
being rather sharply defined) with a high number also
between 85 deg. and 95 deg. Comparatively small numbers
fall in the ranges 105-115 deg. and 70-85 deg., but a few are
found between 60 deg. and 70 deg.
In nearly all cases, 3 p.m. relative humidities at the
nearest recording centre have fallen below 30 per cent, in
the fire period. No exact correlation can be made between
relative humidity and the occurrence of fires, owing to the
distance of some of the recording stations from the seat of
the reported fire and the fact that the only readings
available are those made at 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. (often only
at 9 a.m.), but it would appear that approximately twice
as many fires have occurred with relative humidities below
20 per cent, as with values between 20 and 30 per cent.
Minimum readings of 4 and 5 per cent, have been recorded.
QUEENSLAND.
In the case of maximum temperatures, a high percentage
falls within the range 85 deg. to 100 deg., and moderate
numbers between 100 deg. and 110 deg. and below 85 deg.
These figures refer more to periods in which fires develop,
and <they do not give a true reflection of the number of
fires which spread with relatively cool westerly winds.
Insufficient information is available to segregate the latter.
Lowest relative humidity values are mainly between 8 and
25 per cent, (majority 10 per cent, to 20 per cent.).
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The majority of maximum temperatures recorded in the
fire periods are between 100 deg. and 110 deg., but a con-
siderable number are between 90 deg. and 100 deg. A small
number he in the ranges 65 deg. to 85 deg. and 110 deg. to
iis deg. Lowest relative humidities are generally between
30 per cent, and 8 per cent, (majority 15-25 per cent.).


Amount Recorded in Periods Specified.
State.
1 Week.
2 Weeks.
3 Weeks.
4 Weeks.
6 Weeks.
10 Weeks
New South Wales
60 pts.
in.
1£ in.
in.
2i in.
6 in.
Victoria
60 pts.
in.
in.
2 in.
3 in.
6 in.
Queensland
60 pts.
1 in.
1 in.
2 in.
2 in.
7 in.
South Australia ..
40 pts.
| in.
i in.
1 in.
H in-
H in.
Western Australia
20 pts.
40 pts.
| in.
1 in.
H in.
3£ in.
Tasmania
75 pts.
1 in.
Ii in.
2 in.
7 in.
••
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The number of reported fires in South Australia is low
compared with those in other States. Maximum tempera-
tures in the fire periods have been mainly in the range 1
90-102 deg., with small numbers in ranges 103-114 deg. and
75-90 deg. Lowest relative humidities have been mainly
below 30 per cent., more than half being between 8 per
cent, and 20 per cent.
TASMANIA.
While in the majority of fire periods maximum tempera-
tures recorded have been between 85 deg. and 100 deg., an
almost equal number have been in the 70-85 deg. range.
A small number have occurred in a range of 60-70 deg.
The lowest relative humidities range from 10 per cent, to
35 per cent., the higher figure being probably associated
with lower temperatures.
Rainfall and Diminution of Fire Danger.
The rainfall figures have been examined with a view to
ascertaining the amount of rain which will serve to remove
fire danger for periods of one, two, three, &c., to ten weeks.
This again can only be determined approximately, since
rainfall varies considerably in its distribution and has
different effects according to types of vegetation, soil, and
slope of the terrain and duration of fall, which influences
rate of run-off, &c.
In the following table are set out rainfalls of stated
amounts which have rarely been exceeded in specified
periods preceding dates of fires. It would not be wise to
regard these as amounts required to definitely remove fire
danger, but they appear to set a limit to the danger of
outbreak of large fires.
Some exceptions to the above may be noted. An unusual
case is on record in Western Tasmania where 16 inches of
rain have fallen within six weeks of the date of a fire.
This is explained by the very inflammable nature of a
resinous “ button grass ” which covers the plains on the
west coast of that State.
In Victoria, the number of cases of rains of over the
specified amounts in a week or fortnight preceding fires is
found to be somewhat higher than in other States. In some
cases, the fires have been small and local or at some distance
from the recording centre. In one or two instances, the fires
have occurred along the bay front where, presumably, the
moisture would not be retained owing to the sandy nature
of the soil.




LIST OF BUSH AND GRASS FIRES
WITH
PARTICULARS OF PRESSURE TYPES, TEMPERATURE,
RELATIVE HUMIDITY, WIND AND RAINFALL
VICTORIA.
C.8016/47. —5.


Date (Approximate).
Particulars of Fires.
1851—
February, 6th
“ Black Thursday ” — day of terror. From the Wimmera to the sea, and from Portland to the fringe of
Gippsland, practically no area completely escaped. The worst effects were experienced in Plenty Ranges,
Westernport and Dandenong districts, and practically all settled areas thence to the South Australian Border.
1870—
January, 18
Southern and Western New South Wales affected. Bad in Riverina*
1874-1875—
December to February
Widespread in New South Wales and Queensland*
1877—
January, 12
Fire raging for some days in various parts of the Colony. Scrub on each side of Queenscliflf-road and
large area of grass country burnt. Another was burning South-East of Sale towards Tanzil
Fires bad around Kyneton
Fires also at Mt. Alexander, Maldon, Blanket Flat, Deep Creek, and Bullarook, and other places.
1877—
February 8
The Telegraph of this date states : “ Nearly all the timber country from one end of the Colony to the other
has been swept by fires or is burning now. At Colac 12,000 acres of timber are on fire. Bush fires are
burning all round Linton and scarcely any water can be got. A number of fires are burning down the Coast
from Warrnambool in the direction of Curdie’s River, and at Bet Bet some selections have been
on fire and stacks, grain and some houses have been destroyed.”
This was a heavy visitation and did not cease until rain on 14th February, 1877.
1878-79
According to an account given in The Land of the Lyre-Bird, page 142, the summer (1878-79) (’) was
a dry one, and the whole of the South Gippsland country was on fire. Although narrow escapes
from injury from numerous falling trees is mentioned, no actual loss of human life is recorded
1896—
January 6 to 10. .
Bush fires in country. Serious losses reported at Barnawartha, Steiglitz, Foster, and in Gippsland at Heywood
also at Charlton, Bright and Byaduk, Chiltern, Egerton, Ferntree Gully, Gordon, Merino, Macarthur’
Rutherglen, &c. ’ ’
The heat was intense and considerable losses in stock, grass, timber, fencing, and homesteads were
noted. No loss of life reported.
1896—
December 3
December 17
Bushfires at Neerim South, Longwarry, Frankston. Damage to fencing, &c
Disastrous bush fires near Creswick and at Echuca and Hamilton.
1897—
January 3
January 4
Large fires in Tasmania*
B a“t h a1Z™ dam ° ge W “ d0 ” e> 0180 a ‘ “I - the Otway Forest and
1898—
January 11
January 12
January 14 to February 13
December 7
Fires at Euroa, Macarthur, Traralgon, and Wellington
Bush fires near Healesville, Narbethong, Marysville. These were v Pre n XT
from heat and sun stroke ® 7 heaV7 fires - No casualties except
Calamitous bush fires in Gippsland. Two townships destroyed (Neerim and ThnmrlaltA vr j , „ ,
burnt out. Great loss of stock, &c. No loss of fife Referents u Run r dreds of settlers
Bird. These fires were far-reaching and spread over the whole Statl hi; ? m b °° k L J? wl °f the re
outbreak was the most severe on record. The hot spell broke on 14th fIw, m gippsland. The
general rainfall P e ° n 14th February, 1898, when there was a
“SgUtz 8 fireS “ Br “ the “ “ S “ th GiPPsW - >«“». ■*> at Benalla, Kihnore, Seymour, and
1899—
January 10
1900—
January 9
January 17
January 18 to January 28
February 6
February 26 to March 1 ..
December 18
December 31
1901—
January 8
January 10
January 11
January 14
January 21 to January 23
January 28
February 5
Disastrous bush fires at Broadford, Buninyons LancefieW \r,,i,i „„ v-i __
Seymour, Sunbury, Talbot, and Yea. Narrow escape of Kynet ° n ’ Romse y- Sale >
Fires at Casterton and Murchison
Sj iPSSft a“7ove E8ert0 "- K ”“‘. an( t Patenham
Fires at Warrnambool, Horsham, Kilmore, Rushworth Yea
Severe fires in Gippsland
Disastrous bush fires in North-East, Corowa WarwaraHn
Fierce fires in Castlemaine, Horsham, Tatura, m N ° W S ° Uth Wales
Fires in Riverina and at Benalla
Fires at Kilmore, Wagga, Albury, and Tocumwal
Fires at Yalca (Nathalie). Township threatened
Fires at Numurkah, Albury, Cobram, and Warrnambool
Fires at Benalla, Ararat, Euroa, Hay, Horsham, Mansfield Murtoa * «
Wagga ’ Murtoa , Penshurst, Seymour, Violet Town and
Fires at Queenstown, Kyneton, Warrnambool, and Theona
Fires at Beechworth, Corowa. Finley. Horsham, Tocumwal, Wagga, R „3 hworth Md Yea
VICTORIA.
• Lists for 1851-1924 were compiled following the 1926 fires and included items relati^^Ti^


Date (Approximate),
Particulars of Fires.
1901 —
February 6
Fires at Castlemaine, Merino, Benalla, and Euroa
February 7
Fires at Alexandra, Benalla, Berrigan, Broadford, Castlemaine, Maldon, Strathmerton, Violet Town, and at
Longwood
February 12
Heavy fires near Wangaratta and in Western District at Casterton. At Birregurra four casualties occurred,
two men and two boys being burnt to death
February 12
Great losses on all the stations in Western Districts. Fires at Yea and Scarsdale. This was a very
serious outbreak and continued until rain occurred on 10th March, 1901
December 31
Fires in Gippsland. Damage at Neerim North. Destruction of property, homes, &c.
1902—
January 1
Devastating fires at Kilmore and Broadford and in the Glenoroua District, at Lancefield, Lismore, and
Molesworth
November 13
Fires in the Mallee supposed to have been caused by fire balls
1903—
September 19
Bush fires in Gippsland
1904—
December 6, 7, 9
Bush fires raging near Mt. Blackwood, Yeerung, and around Horsham, Gisborne, and Portland, Thoona,
Nagambie, Yarrawonga, Eddington, and on the Adelaide Plains, South Australia
December 10, 15, 23
Fires near Quirindi, New South Wales, and at Bairnsdale, Tarnagulla, and Tungamah
December 27, 28, 29
Fires at Pakenham, Bendigo, and other places, and in many places in Gippsland and Gippsland North,
at Ballarat and Dandenong and near Yass in New South Wales
1904—
December 31, and January 1st
January 5
to
Fires at Coburg, Whittlesea, and Avooa, Berrigan, Seymour, Chiltern, Taradale, &c., and in Southern
New South Wales, including the Riverina
1905—
January 10
Fire at Clunes
January 11, 12 ..
Outbreaks in various parts of Victoria
January 13
Fire at Seymour
January 14
Fire at Macedon and in many other places
January 18
Severe fires in many places in Victoria
January 23
Fresh outbreaks at places before burnt out
February 11
Fires at Morwell, Warrnambool, and in the hills around Adelaide
February 13
Macedon in flames and families burnt out at Mitcham
February 14
Fires burning in many places
March 21
Destruction at Elingamite, &c.
March 22
Fires in many places in Victoria
1906—
January 12, 13 ..
Fires at Alexander, Horsham, Kilmore, and other places
January 19
Fires in Riverina
January 20
Fires at Clunes, &c.
January 22, 23, 24
Fires at Albury, &c., Chiltern and Dunnolly, Bendigo, Benalla, &c., Daylesford, &c. Serious fires; six
children burnt, and twelve in all perish
January 25
Fires at Mount Fatigue, Mt. Best, and in South Gippsland
January 26
Fearful fires in Gippsland. These fires continued to burn up to 1st March, 1908, when the weather
broke and rain extinguished them
1907—
January 8
Outbreaks at Mansfield, Albury, Wagga, and Corowa (N.S.W.)
January 14
Fires at Rush worth, Beaufort, and Nathalia
February 23
Outbreak in Gippsland and at Moe
February 26
Fire at Benalla, Albury, Ararat, Ballarat, Condah, Lilydale, Morwell, Nagambie, Port Fairy, Mirboo Norjh,
Rosedale, St. Arnaud, Warragul, Winchelsea, &c.
February 27
Fire at Queenscliff
March 1
Great fires near Wagga, Goornong, Traralgon, Warragul
March 2
Moe, Wycherproof, and Albury. Some rain 4th March, 1907
April 5 ..
Fires at Dandenong, Frankston, Gordon, Kilmore, &c. The drought eventually broke on 8th April
1907
Fires at Beaumaris, Kyneton, and Linton
December 25
December 26
Fires at Riddell, Avoca
Fires at Fern Tree Gully, Bruthen, &c.
Heavy rain fell on 26th December, 1907
1909—
January 3, 4
Bush and grass fires at Emerald, Kyneton, Trafalgar, Dimboola, Wodonga, Healesville, and Kilmore
January 17
1910—
Bush fires at Chiltern, Rainbow, and Castlemaine
February 24
Bush fires at Bunyip, Childers, Mildura, Toora
February 25
Lightning fires grass at Kerang
Fires at Toora and Wodonga
February 28
Victoria— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type
1912—
February 1
88,
89, 90
Bad grass fires at Ballarat and Casterton
February 2
84,
90
Fires at Bairnsdale, Cressy, Heathoote, Mortlake, Outrim, Portarlington,
Bungaree, Wickliffe, and Whittlesea
1913—
January 13
85,
87
Serious bush fires in Gippsland. Much damage done. Flames a mile and a half
wide. Grass fires near Geelong
February 5
Argus —“ Heat and Bush Fires. Large areas devastated. Homesteads encircled
in Flames.”
1914—
January 9
87,
88
Disastrous fires at Albury, Riddell, and Heathcote
February 16 ..
86,
87
Bush fires between Dromana and Cape Schanck and western Bay side generally
February 20 ..
87,
89,
90, 79
Serious fires near Casterton. Destruction of State Forest at Mirranatwa. Grass
and scrub on fire at Bairnsdale, Hamilton, Frankston, Stawell, Meredith and
Whittlesea ’
March 12
85,
86,
88
La J'8 e /* res Djppsland. Settlers in danger. Flames four miles wide at Mirboo
North. Destruction at Trentham. Hills round Healesville blazing
■
1915—
.
January 20
89
Fire in State Forest at Mirranatwa
February 15 ..
85
Fires in Gippsland near Moe
February 16 ..
86,
87
Fires round Port Phillip Bay
1916—
January 10
82,
85,
86
Gp. m and bush fires at Box Hill, Momington, Eosedale, and Rutherglen
January 17
86,
88
Grass fires at Whittlesea and Greensborough, and Kilmore, Bunyip, Wallan
January 22, 23
86
G “t“ Chel£Xm n0ta% a ‘ D ° nCaSt<>r ’ Malvern,
January 23
86
Fires in hills at Healesville
January 24
81
Fires in hills round Dookie
Victoria — continued.


PARTICULARS OF TEMPERATURE, RELATIVE HUMIDITY, RAINFALL, ETC.,
AND OBSERVER’S
REMARKS.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1912—
Bairnsdale
Colac
Melbourne
2.2.12
2.2.12
2.2.12
84° 100-9° 92° 95° 102°
30 31 1 ~2~ 3
Smoke haze, 30th-31st January, lst-4th February
No rain since 10th-12th January
Rainfall : 95 points January; 291 points December ; 131
points November ; 97 points October
78° 95° 100° 108° 105°
29~ 30 3T T 2
Rainfall : 28 points January ; 386 points December ; 52
points November; 173 points October
82-2° 96-4° 102-6° 106-5° 105-9° 102-5°
32*
JT
15
17
o/
/c
23
S.E. 5
30“
N.W. 5
1913—
Melbourne
13.1.13
29 30 31 1 2 3
Smoke haze, 30th, 31st, 2nd
Rainfall: 47 points January; 367 points December; 138
points November
72-2° 100° 101-5°
1, 3
13
2
20
30
31
N.N.W. 4 N.N.W. 5
Sale ..
13.1.13
11 12 13
Dusty, 12th-13th
Rainfall : 78 points since 12th December (30 points 3rd
January) ; 356 points December ; 237 points November ;
132 points October
74° 74-8° 99-8° 103-4°
12
29
13
20
12
N.W. 8
13
1914—
Hamilton
20.2.14
10 11 12 13
Rainfall : 57 points 3rd January ; 31 points from 12th-31st
December ; 204 points December ; 304 points November ;
140 points October
76° 90-2° 104-8° 103-6° 103-8° 87-8°
HT 16 17 18 19 20
Rainfall; 4 points since 28th January ; 88 points January ;
168 points (4 days) December ; 248 points November
12
5
19
13
10
18
13
17
31
20
13
N.W. 3
19
Melbourne
20.2.14
92 °-97 0 75° 106° 87° 104-8° 95-4°
13-15 16 17 18 19 20
Dense smoke haze, 15th, 18th, 19th
Dusty, 17th-20th
(See 12th March for rainfall)
10
17
11
19
13
14
19
20
N.E. 4 N. 4
15 20
Melbourne
12.3.14
88°-92° 95-7° 94-9°
6-10 11 12
Boisterous, 11th ; dusty, 9th, 10th
Dense smoke haze, 7th
Rainfall; 22 points only since 28th January; 15 points
February; 145 points January; 148 points December;
170 points November ; 147 points October
20
9
25
11
27
10
30
12
N. 6 N. 4
9 12
Sale ..
12.3.14
80-2 91° 88-6° 91° 89-8° 96-2° 98-2°
"6~ 7 8 9 10 11 12
No rain since 28th January
Rainfall; 129 points January ; 21 points December ; 308
points November
23
11
43
12
1915—
Melbourne
15-16.2.15
70-8° 84-2° 94-3° 103-8" 88-4°
12 13 14 15 16
Rainfall; 16 points since January ; 161 points January ;
321 points December; 237 points November
10
15
19
14
N. 4
15
1916—
Melbourne
16-23.1.16
71-2° 104-2° 68 °-75 0 83-2° 94-6° 99-5°
8
20
22
21
N.W. 3 N .3
N. 5
15 16 17-20 21 22 23
Dusty, 23rd
Rainfall; 17 points since 4th-6th January (140 points);
55 points December; 51 points November ; 283 points
October
16
23
17 22
23
* 9 a.m.
Victoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
—
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type
1918—
February 16 ..
79, 82, 88
Grass fires at Clunes, Euroa, and St. Arnaud
1919—
January 5
88
Bush fires in the neighbourhood of Kilmore
February 9
88
Maldon Throughout the week the hills have been almost hidden in smoke
from bush fires
February 10 ..
85
Loch. Bush fires have been burning for past week
1919-20—
November 24-April 13 ..
1920—
89, 90 ..
12 Gr.mpSr { ° f S * ate fbr6S ‘ S a " d Crm ™ laM8 b “™' 1 Otways and
February 16 ..
87, 90 ..
M nefr U I)unkefd in Extensive fires at tendon, Rokewood. Outbreaks
1921—
January 24-25
January 24-25
85, 86, 90
85,
88
K :Sht a ‘4 eyMd ’ E ° Sedale ’ Whi ‘ tle ““' ««• at Roaedale caused by
Glengarry district in flames. Extensive damage caused
Fires in Jerralong and Tyers Hills and Nambrook
Fires at Sale. Eight properties swept at Kyneton
84
Outbreak in the State forest near Orbost
February 11
85 .. ;.
Fierce outbreak near Traralgon said to be caused by lightning
T 25
February 11-13
1
♦ For Ii
85, 88 ..
idex, see end of Victorian
EX U-e -oundToora: houses
•
Section (page 106.) 7Z iTTT — .
3a
T 12 and 14
♦ For Index, see end of Victorian Section (page 106.)
t Supplied by Forests Commission of Victoria.
Victoria— continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &o.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1919—
0/
fo
Castlemaine
2-9.2.19
83° 92° 98° 99° 94°
23
17 19
20
24
3 4 5, 6 7 8
4
5 6
7
8
Smoke haze, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th
Rainfall: 1 point only since 25th December; 51 points
Bendigo
December ; 44 points November ; 83 points October
2-9.2.19
88-1° 92° 87-5° 91° 96° 98° 92-8° 95°
12
39 22
20
N.W. 4
1 2 3 4 5 6, 7 8 9
2
3 4
5
2
Heavy smoke haze, 4th-8th
16 15 19
Rainfall; 7 points January ; 69 points December ; 24 points
6
7 8
November ; 129 points October ; 72 points September
Melbourne
3-10.2.19
91° 68-1° 72-2° 83-4° 90-5°-99-8° 69-8°
25
26 37
S.S.W. 4
1, 2 3 4 5 6-9 10
8
7 9
10
Dense smoke haze, 7th, 8th ; dusty, 9th.
Rainfall: 4 points only since 7th January (63) ; 189 points
December ; 52 points November ; 235 points October
1920—
Ballarat
16.2.20
82-8° 92° 102°
14 15 16
Rainfall : 64 points since December ; 231 points December ;
69 points November ; 121 points October
13
16
18 31
15 14
S.W. 3 W. 3
15 16
Hamilton
16.2.20
78-3° 90-1° 102-7°
16
19
N.-N.W. 4
14 15 16
16
15
16
Rainfall : 24 points 5th-8th February ; 67 points January ;
133 points December ; 41 points November
1921—
Colac
24-25.1.21
84° 85° 103° 105° 95°
21 22 23 24 25
Rainfall : 10 points since 14th January ; 174 points January ;
134 points December ; 186 points November ; 174 points
October
Sale ..
24-25.1.21
84° 91-4° 94° 109°
15
22 37
N.W. 3
21 22 23 24, 25
25
24 23
25
Rainfall : 29 points 3rd-25th January ; 94 points 20th
December-2nd January ; 293 points December; 181
points November ; 363 points October
Melbourne
24-25.1.21
82° 93-9° 107-4° 104-3°
19
32
N. 5
22 23 24 25
25
23, 24
25
Rainfall ; 27 points llth-25th January ; 422 points Ist-lOth
January ; 99 points December ; 321 points November ;
372 points October
Dusty, 24th, 25th
‘
Kyneton
24-25.1.21
92 °-98 ° 103°
37*
N. 3 S.S.W. 4
20-23 24, 25
25
25 26
No rain 12th-24th January
Rainfall: 287 points lst-11th January ; 97 points December ;
342 points November; 437 points October
Melbourne
11-13.2.21
90-8° 97-8° 98-5° 99-9° 83-3°
9 10 11 12 13
Dusty, 12 th
Rainfall: 54 points since 15th January ; 449 points January
(346 points on 2nd, 3rd) ; 99 points December ; 321 points
November
22
IT
24 25
10 9
Light to moderate
southerly
Sale ..
11-13.2.21
79° 96° 93-4° 98° 100°
9 10 11 12 13
Smoke obscured sky, 11th, 13th, 14th
Rainfall : 62 points lst-13th January ; 115 points January ;
293 points December ; 181 points November
17
12
34 46
11 13
Seymour
11-13.2.21
91 °-98° - 101° 102°
7-11 12 13 14
Rainfall : 15 points since 10th January ; 193 points January ;
37 points December ; 143 points November ; 543 points
October
S.W. 5
14
Hamilton
11-13.2.21
84° 94°-99° 100-5° 79-9°
14
21
N. 3
7 8-11 12 13
9, 11 10
12
Rainfall : 20 points 13th ; 16 points 3rd January-12th
February ; 136 points January ; 144 points December ;
196 points November
* 9 a.m.
Victoria— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1922—
January 22
76, 79, 86, 90
Extensive grass fires near Colac ; 12,000 acres burnt, also at Ouyen (19th)
2
btawell, and in the scrub and bush lands on the forshore from Portsea to Mt
T 22 •
Martha, including Dromana
February 7-11
79, 81, 82, 86, 87, 88
Fires near Dividing Range. Forest country near Wallan in flames. Three
mfies of bush fire between Rosebud and Rye. Fires causing great damage
at Benalla, Amphitheatre (7th), Dookie, Euroa and Whittlesea
3
T 7
February 11-13
77, 81, 85, 86, 88, 89
Gr ® a |', f lr !® *l® ar Yea - al , so at Beulah, Kilmore, Leongatha, Mirboo North
Riddell, Upwey, and Wandong, also near Bendigo and Ballarat
February 12-14
85, 86, 88, 89
Outbreaks at Heathcote, Yea Toolangi, Kilmore, Loch, Sale, and on Phillip
Island, at Mt. Dandenong, Neerim South, and Lismore F
3
February 16
88
Fires round Kilmore
T 12-13
3
T 16
1923—
January 14
79, 80, 86, 87, 89 ..
E«?md W Ut ” V6y ; Horshlm . Staweli,
fires caused extend The »
1a
T 14
February 5-6 ..
77, 82, 85, 88, 89 ..
F td r S g “ Mj ' rUef0rd “ d “ Beulah, Daylesford, Mt. Bute
4b I
February 22 ..
85, 86, 90
Belgrave. Morwell threatened, looses hf River' 00 ' 1 a L Sassafras an d
Don Range (Healesville) swept enna. Fires at Lome.
February 22-23
February 21-24
February 24 ..
85, 86, 89, 90
82, 86, 90
79, 87, 88
Upwey, Peushurst, and Ballarat. 70,000 acres of grass burnt at Penshurst
Fires continue. Outbreaks at Euroa iwnr«t w
«**• ° n fire - Fences a nd stock destroyed sT 7 7<^ B) \ Strath bogie
Mhittlesea. Heytesbury forest in danger 7 ’ W mi ls threatened at
Fires still continue. Outbreaks at Mansfield Rmi ,r e ,
sweep of country near Bonnie Doon • Alburv district from 1 bu ms. Clean
mile front of fire at Omeo. Mountains ablaze I S danger - Twelve
at Amphitheatre lc e at Rldde11 and a serious outbreak
1a
T 22, 24
February 22 ..
February 24 ..
Healesville, 86
Euroa, 81 82
Large bush lire devastated a considerable area of the Don Ranges .
in ***■ Bive homesteads, mile.
1a
T 22, 24
February 25 ..
Mansfield, 83
Severe bush Are ruined many farmers , destroyed houses, fences and stoch..
*
* 0r t nde x^eTenr 0 r
* For Index see end of Victorian Section (page 106)
Victoria-— continued.


Particulars or
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1922—
Colac
22.1.22
89° 90° 73° 75° 80° 94°
17~ 18~ llT 20~ 2T 22~
Rainfall; 86 points 5th-8th January ; 65 points December ;
189 points November; 200 points October
0/
/o
N. 10
22
Melbourne
22.1.22
68-2° 79-8° 94-0° 100-6°
29
33
N.N.E.
5-S.S.W. 5
19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 102 points 8th-19th January ; 249 points Decem-
ber ; 261 points November ; 366 points October
(Dromana : 40 points 7tb-8th January ; 11 points 19th-23rd
December; only rain since 6th December)
21
22
22
Benalla
12-14.2.22
97°-99° 103° 102° 82°
6-11 12 13 14
Rainfall: 43 points since December ; 260 points December;
144 points November; 239 points October
Melbourne
12-15.2.22
87-2° 101-2° 103-6° 103-4° 68-4° 92°
23
26
27
N. 5 N.N.E. 5-S. 4
10 11 12 13 14 15
Rainfall: 4 points (14th) only rain since January; 118
points January ; 249 points December ; 261 points Novem-
ber
12
11
15
12
13
S. 5
14
Alexandra
13.2.22
94 °-99 ° 99-8° 101-5° 102-4°
6-10 11 12 13
Smoke haze, 8th-10th and 13th
Rainfall: 32 points only since 8th December (nil since 13th
January); 68 points December; 252 points November;
308 points October
Bendigo
12-14.2.22
92 °-98 ° 101° 104° 103-5° 74°
6-10 11 12 13 14
Rainfall; 22 points since 23rd December ; 85 points Decem-
ber ; 206 points November ; 155 points October
14
6
13
7
15
12
24 18 19
8 9 10
10 20
13 14
23
11
N. 7
14
Seymour
1923—
Melbourne
12-15.2.22
14.1.23
89° 98° 102° 103° 74° 91° 105°
8 10 11 12 13~ 14 15
Rainfall: 20 points since December ; 36 points December ;
146 points November (mainly before 15th); 177 points
October
67-9° 90-9° 100-8°
31*
IsT
13
39
N. 5
11
w.s.w.
S. 5
12
4 S.S.E. 4
12 13 14
Dusty, 14th
Rainfall: 15 points since December ; 202 points December ;
105 points November; 316 points October
14
13
17
15
Horsham
14.1.23
89° 95° 100°
16
N.W. 4
11-12 13 14
Rainfall ; 23 points lst-8th January ; 243 points December ;
26 points November ; 191 points October
13
17
Beechworth
5-6.2 .23
79-9° 85-2° 91° 92-2° 92-5°
2 3 4 5 6
Smoke haze, 5th
Rainfall ; 29 points since December ; 153 points December ;
16 points November ; 276 points October
26
6~
17
4, 5
24
3
S. 3
6
Sale ..
5-6.2.23
78° 85° 89° 85°
26
31
N.W. 3
3 4 5 T
Rainfall: 18 points since 25th January ; 156 points January ;
197 points December; 102 points November; 311 points
October
5
6
6
Melbourne
22.24.2.23
76-9° 101-1° 106-1° 74-6° 79-6°
20
21
20 21. 22 23 24
Thick smoke haze, 21st February ; smoke haze, 23rd-24th
Rainfall : 27 points since January ; 99 points January ;
202 points December ; 105 points November
21
22
Sale ..
22-24.2.23
82° 100° 100-5° 83° 76°
15
20 21 22 23 24
Smoke, 19th-24th
Rainfall : 18 points since 25th January. (See 6th February)
21,
22
* 9 a.m.
Victoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
I * Pressure Type.
1923 — continued
Summary of Major Fires in State Forests and Crown Lands 1922-23. t
(Supplied by Forests Commission.)
December to early May :— 500,000 acres, 265 fires.
Localities : —82, 84, 87, 89, 90.
Counties Croajingalong, Delatite, Bourke, Polwarth, Ripon.
1924—
January 16
82,
Millawa. A fire is reported to be burning towards Greta Hills
h
January 17
87
W fi!L ai V district was thickly enveloped in smoke from an immense bush
fire in the direction of Lancefield
1 i
| T 16
February 3
i
79
A (Sh^LV *3 occurred in the Sandy Creek, Navarre, and Barkly districts.
(A orth-East of Stawell). 2,000 acres of grass, fencing, and a 80-ton stack
Forest W Re d T d an^.jiarness were burnt. A hundred men and the
sf ang ! f ma f ificent work - A big storm on Saturday
checked the fire. Several forest trees were struck by lightning
3
T 3
/s. J
*26
LVr
rx V/ /6.S J6
y. yyj** /n z
1926—
January 26
January 28
January 27
January 29
Violet Town 81, 82
Melbourne, 86, 87..
Wonthaggi, 86
ISTyora, 86
Many sheep destroyed and thousands of acres of grass
Fires to North, South, East, and West
Much damage in Gippsland
Bush fires swept over railway fine
- 2o-2b
January 27-31
Foster, 86
Healesville,
86 ..
Large area of country devastated. Many homes burned
,919 - T, “ *—* «»* b„ r „ tMd many
1a
T 27 anrl 31
■cur inaex, see end
ot this Section (page 106). + a . I __
pp o y Forests Commission of Victoria.
• For Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
UPP 6 by I ’ orests Commission of Victoria.
Victoria — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity,
3 p.m.
Wind.
1923 — continued
Ballarat
22-23.2.23
75-5° 89-5° 97° 101-5° 89-2°
33
23
22
%
17
28
S.W. 4 S. 4
19 20 21 22 23
Smoke haze, 21st
Rainfall: 21 points since 31st January ; 127 points January ;
219 points December ; 152 points November
19
20
21
22
23
22 23
Seymour
24.2.23
87° 97° 98° 106° 98° 102°
TlT 2cT 21' ~22~ 23 24, 25
Rainfall: 18 points since December ; 43 points December ;
53 points November ; 237 points October
Alexandra
24.2.23
88-9° 96° 100-2° 104-7° 99-6° 104-2°
19 20 21 22 23 24
Smoke haze, 21st-24th, 26th. Bush fires in many parts of
the district this month
Rainfall: 60 points since December ; 162 points December ;
46 points November ; 340 points October
>
Albury
24.2.23
94° 97° 100° 103° 103° 110°
18
36
14
15
9
19 20 21 22 23 24
Rainfall: No rain since 25th January (6 points); 49 points
January; 153 points December; nil November; 175
points September
Smoke haze
19
20 21,23 22
24
Omeo
24.2.23
82°-88° 92-8° 92° 96-2°
15
19
N.R, N, 4 N. 6
19-21 22 23 24
“ One or two homesteads endangered, but fires soon controlled ”
Rainfall: No rain since 18th-26th January (117 points);
181 points December ; 91 points November ; 270 points
October
22
23
24, 25 21 23
Stawell
24.2.23
82° 95° 99° 104° 92° 86°
19 20 21 22 23 24
Rainfall: 27 points since December ; 181 points December ;
24 points November ; 146 points October
Benalla
24.2.23
92 °-96 ° 99° 105° 103° 108°
18-20 21 22 23 24
Smoke, 20th-21st
Rainfall: 50 points since December ; 121 points December ;
23 points November; 345 points October
Beechworth
24.2.23
94 °-96•8 ° 103-5°
7
15
22
18
14
20
N. 6
21-23 24
Smoke haze, 19th-22nd
Rainfall: 29 points since December. (See 6th February)
24
25
23
22
21
19
24
1924—
Avoca
3.2.24
81° 88° 94° 90-5° 82
30 31 IT 2 3
Rainfall: 99 points January; 187 points December; 77
points November; 137 points October
1926—
Leongatha
29.1.26
73° 70° 84° 92° 66° 69°
S.W. 6
24 25 26 27 28 29
Smoke haze, 24th
Rainfall: 138 points lst-20th; 33 points on 28th ; 79
points December ; 262 points November ; 291 points
October
28
Strong N. wind
27
Melbourne
29-31.1.26
72-2° 80-2° 104°
29 30 31
Rainfall: 350 points January (8 points after 21st) ; 37
points December; 201 points November; 110 points
October
12
31
48
29
* 9 a.m.
Victoria— continued.


Date.
Location and District
—
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type
1926- — continued
February 1-March 1
85, 86 ..
Disastrous fires (with much loss of human life) in Noojee (Gippsland district)
also Kinglake, Powelltown, Warburton, Gilderoy localities, and on Dandenona
ranges Considered to be the most widespread and disastrous fire since
", calamitous Gippsland fires of January and February. 1898 and as fa.
February 14 ..
as loss of human life is concerned, it was the most calamitous on record
Warburton, 86
through district causing considerable damage and loss
February 14 ..
Noojee, 85
Great destruction Several homes and bridges, miles of fencing, thousands
of acres of timber burnt. Four lives lost
February 14
Erica, 85
BU b™ 5 re 0ver f g 1 reat area > destroying many sawmills and numerous
es. hree people burnt to death. Damage estimated at £100,000
February 14 ..
Pomborneit, 90
Princetown, 90
Gilderoy, 86
Powelltown, 86
Casterton, 90
B "rf p^„d? tr ° yed Sherbrook P™ C™ag. estimated at thousands
Bush fires swept through the district. 600 sheep burnt
Bush fires rages through the district. Great destruction Saw mill burnt
only two survivors out of fourteen men 11 burnt;
Busies raged through this district. Houses and mills burnt.' Several lives
p toorrr;"i w>rr ° ok Estate - io ’ oo thm
2r
T 14
February 17 ..
Yallourn, 85
B rr s op“u fl r causeddamageestimated «.»!
February 25 ..
Daylesford, 88
Kinglake, 86
devasteLgT? Wstrf the^distriet 116 m ° S *
“Stags So/e? 8 th<> laid bare. Many
December 11..
Lakes Entrance, 84
Fires destroyed crops of beans and fences Prince. Wb,
hours • -tvmces-mghway impassable for
2b
Four hundred and twenty
January 29-February
1925—26. —Summary
-six fires burned 976,0(
4 ,.
f of Major Fires in Statv PArro-nc
(Supplied by Forests Commission ) ° R0WN LanDS ‘ t
10 acres, mcluding the following
• • • • 220,000 acres
T 10-11
February 5-11
• • • • 100,000 acres
1a
T 31, 3
February 12-18 ..
• • • • 300,000 acres
4 and 2bc
February 19-25 ..
• • • • 180,000 acres
1 and 2a
February 26-March 11 ..
■ ■ • • 100,000 acres
T,20, 24
1927—
~ ,. -j-, , Localities :—82, 84, 86 88
Counties : — Delatite, Bogong, Evelvn Tam bn
g g, Evelyn, iambo, Croajmgolong, Benambra, Anglesea.
January 26
•
Mansfield, 83
"or Index, see end of this
Several thousand acres of eras. momr a r
destroyed by fierce bush fire which swept over ° f fencin g
Section (page 106).
4a
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
J Supplied by Forests p niYl • ,
9 sts Commission of Victoria.
Victoria — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, Ac.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1926 — continued
Melbourne
14.2.26
83-6° 90-6° 103-8°
11
26
%
N. 4-6
W. 5
12 13 14
Smoke haze, 14th, and dusty
Rainfall: (See 25th February)
14
13
14
17
Leongatha
14.2.26
73° 82° 78° 86° 101°
10 11 HT 13 ~14~
Rainfall: 28 points 9th—10th ; 171 points January. (See
29th January)
33*
14
Hot N.
14
wind
Hamilton
14.2.26
74-9° 83° 101-3°
5
23
N.W. 4
N.-N.W. 8
12 13 14
Rainfall: 44 points since 7th-8th January (72 points Jan-
uary) ; 59 points December; 211 points November; 134
points October
14
13
13
14
Ballarat
25.2.26
67-3° 75° 86-3° 75°
22 24 25~ •
Rainfall: 14 points since 7th-9th January (71 points) ;
32 points December; 194 points November ; 103 points
October
13
24
36
25
37
23
N. 7 W. 5
24 25
Melbourne
25.2.26
67-8° 74-2° 94-1° 84°
22 23 24 25
Dusty afternoon, 24th
No rain since 28th January (8 points)
Rainfall: 350 points January ; 37 points December ; 201
points November
21
24
26
25
N. 4
24
Bairnsdale
11.12.26
81° 92° 94-8° 73°
89 10 11
Rainfall: 22 points since 18th November; 114 points
November ; 152 points October ; 151 points September
18*
10
1927—
Alexandra
26.1.27
74° 90° 95° 100° 90°
22 23 24 25 26
Rainfall: 73 points January; 86 points December ; 140
points November ; 348 points October
Melbourne
26.1.27
68-2° 84-2° 87-3° 78-6° 69-7°
22 23 24 25 26
Rainfall: 51 points ince 23rd December; 127 points
December; 110 points November; 185 points October
35
23
34
24
58
26
Seymour
26.1.27
88° 97° 100° 81°
24 25 2(T
Rainfall; 56 points since 22nd December; 103 points
December ; 92 points November ; 209 points October
* 9 a.m.
Victoki a — continued.


Bate.
Particulars of Fires.
Number.
♦Pressure Type.
1929—
January 15
Myrniong, 87
Bush fires swept country for 8 miles, along 2-mile front. Damage amounts to
thousands of pounds. Sheep, grass, haystacks, and wheat destroyed
January 17
Yallourn, 85
Fierce bush fires. Whole of old cut burst into flame. Powder magazine blew
up
January 17
Orbost, 84
Bush fire comparable with December, 1926. Raged in East Gippsland. Seven
homes lost
> 2ab
January 17
Sale, 85 ..
Alexandra, 88
Fires burned 300 sheep
Disastrous bush fire swept 40,000 acres grazing country between Alexandra
and Eildon Weir. 1,200 sheep perished
January 30
Moyhu, 82
Bush fire wrought havoc in district
1931—
February 13
Wonthaggi, 86, 85..
Kooweerup, 86
Yallourn, 85
Trafalgar, 85
Foster, 85
Bush fire a few miles out
Bush fire encircled township to-day
All day bush fires raged in Haunted Hills
Bush fire burnt fiercely west of town
Pierce fire at Turton’s Creek doing much damage to fern gullies
1
T 13-14
February 17 ..
Ringwood, 86
Mild epidemic of bush fires
'I
February 18 ..
Gem brook, 86
Colac, 90
Bush fire in forest area
Several fires in the Beech Forest and much damage
I — —
j T 17-18
February 25 ..
Lake Corangamite,
90
Fire in barrier country known as Hawke’s Nest
1b
Stawell, 79
Bush fire at Lidcourt spread rapidly
T 26
February 26 ..
Anglesea, 87
iire swept through timbered, country
March 11
Gres wick, 88
First fire of season on 11th
1
March 12
Portland, 90
Pine hedges, orchard trees, and fencing destroyed
T 13
1
Casterton, 90
Acres of grass and stubble burnt
T 13
1
Ballarat, 90, 88 ..
F gLl & G °“ g 8WeP ‘ thr °“ eh 100 stored country and
T 13
1
March 13
Terang, 90
Small amount of fencing and grass burnt
T 13
1932—
1
January 11
Beaufort, 89
Twenty acres grass and timber destroyed
T 13
January 12
Swan Hill, 76, 77
Ballarat, 88
Lome, 89
Fire at Nowie North
Fire in State Forest at Enfield
Fire on 12th burnt much undergrowth
January 13
Wedderburn, 80-81
Bush fire in thickly grassed country. No serious dam a.™ w a ..
“ r6C “‘ «- per^aBnum
* 9 a.m. ——
••
* 9 a.m.
Victoria- — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date. ■
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1929—
Ballarat
15.1.29
70° 74-3° 84°
13 14 15
Rainfall : 26 points since 23rd December; 54 points
December ; 100 points November; 419 points October
24
15
48
14
c
/o
S.W. 4 N.W. 4
14 15
Melbourne
15-17.1.29
75-5° 93° 76-5° 87-2°
14 15 16 17
Dusty, 17th
Rainfall: 38 points since 23rd December; 78 points
December; 120 points November; 217 points October
32
17
37
15
N.W. 5
17
Gusts up to 34 m.p.h
Sale ..
17.1.29
78° 86° 78° 93°
IT 15 ¥ F
Smoke, 15th-17th, also 20th and 24th
Rainfall: 37 points since 23rd December; 95 points
December ; 90 points November ; 231 points October
16
17
28
16
S.W. 3 N.W. 4
16 17
Wangaratta
30.1.29
90° 94° 96-1° 99 ° 76°-81° 70-8° 69°
21 22 23 24, 25 26-29 30 31
Rainfall: 13 points 25th-26th, only rain since 23rd December ;
24 points December; 7 points November; 299 points
October
12
23
14
22
24
25
1931—
Melbourne
13-18.2.31
73-3° 96° 93-4° 72° 70-2° 87-6° 97-3° 98-7°
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Rainfall: 53 points 14th ; 14 points lst-2nd ; 125 points
January ; 506 points December
(Gembrook : 60 points, 14th ; Ringwood : 25 points 14th-
15th)
19
17
23
18
26
16
31
12
N. 6 N. 5
13 18
Colac
18-25.2.31
73° 87° 94° 93° 71° 57° 64° 79° 90°
16 17 18 19 20 21 22 22-24 25
Rainfall: 98 points 19th-21st February; 15 points 27th
January-18th February; 75 points January; 234 points
December ; 289 points November ; 384 points October
(Pomborneit: 90 points 11th—22nd ; 25 points since 15th)
W. 8 S.W. 5
19 21
Ballarat
11-12.3.31
66-8° 83-8° 89-8°
10 11 12
Rainfall: 56 points 2nd-10th March ; 51 points February ;
73 points January
15
12
26
Tl
N.-N.W. 4
12
29.9 *99 22.J
j)' gim
29.6 *9/
w
*94
6 2 32
,.p&, A
do. 0
*9-7
1932—
Charlton
13.1.32
80° 91° 96° 79°-81° 87° 86°
5 6 7 8-11 12 13
Rainfall: No rain since 3rd December ; 176 points December ;
233 points November ; 31 points October
•
Ballarat
12.1.32
67° 73-5° 83° 74°
9 10 11 12
Rainfall: 11 points on 10th only rain since 22nd-24th
December ; 49 points December ; 314 points November ;
112 points October
34
10
33
11
S.W. 5 S.W. 4
9 10
N.W. 3 S.W. 5
11 12
Victoria — continued.


Bate.
Location and District
Number.
. Particulars of Fires.
•Pressure Type.
1932 — continued
January 12
Moe, 85 ..
Bush fires in various parts of the district
2a and 1
January 14-15
T 12
Stawell, 79
Belgrave, 86
Gisborne, 87
Fires in Grampians
Scrub fire
Large bush fire, Blackwood Ranges, traversed about 8,500 acres in eleven days
January 15
Bairnsdale, 84
Bush fires been burning several days in timbered country ; began to assume
serious proportions on 14th. Sheep and grass burnt
January 22 ...
Trafalgar, 85
Fierce fires throughout the district for some days
1a
January 28
Alexandra, 88, 83 ..
Rubicon, hire in heavily timbered country, threatening mills
T 21-22 (I)
1
Whittlesea, 86
Large bush fire in Pheasant’s Creek
> 4b
January 29
Wodonga, 82
Fire in hills higher up Kiewa Valley
J
January 30
Euroa, 81, 82
Much fencing, grass and 170 sheep destroyed
January 31
Traralgon, 85
Dunkeld, 89
Daylesford, 88
Bl Sheep re and W cattle R^ burnt dlStnCt ’ Much dama g e to properties and fencing.
Bush fire raging in Victorian ranges causing much anxiety
Large area scrub and grass burnt
February 3
Beechworth, 82
Fire starting 30th burnt over i.000 acres grass and timbered country
Bright, 82
Fire raging in Black Range. Anxiety for cattle
February 5
Noojee and Powell-
town, 85, 86
orGifdero 1 Whi °, h SWep t throu * h th °
timbe? and gS3and burnt y a “ d Se ™ ral 8a '™ ills - Miles » p valuable
February 5
Erica, 85
Bush fire swept through district. Much destruction. Six lives lost
Gilderoy, 86, 85 ..
Township, mill, and three bridges burnt. One man burnt
1
December 9
Warragul, 85
Three people burnt (two fatally) when trapped in „ wall of flame
T 5 (I)
Frankston, 86
Large area of scrubland burnt near reservoir
February 12 ..
Kilmore, 88
For many hours township of Glenaroua in danger. Oats, grass, and fencing
1
Summary of Major
Fires in State Forests and Crown Lands, 1931-32. t
T 11, 12
December 21-February 6 (“ Blow up ” Day, February 4)
Area burned 510,000 acres ; 307 fires “ )-
Localities 77, 78, 79. 85. 86 89 on '
bounties : Tangil, Evelyn. Kartarooe,' Borung, Dundas, Normanby.
1933—
January 2
Euroa, 81, 82
Between 300 and 400 acres of scrub land burnt
January 3
January 11
January 19
February 13
February 16 ..
Warrnambool, 90 ..
Yarrawonga, 81
Omeo, 83
Wodonga, 82
Kyneton, 88, 87 ..
Yackandandah, 82
SSSETSi 2.000
500 acres of crops and 400 acres of grass lost In™? a-
season ® ass lost m m ost disastrous fire of the
V Omet ‘ i,nber “ d T -S* * a <*« raging ten mile, north of J
b “ rni " S rang “ “parting Mitta VaUey from Sandy Greet
fiercely in Cobaw f Rang e r enl ° Ch ’ ° fr ° m Lancefield , and was burning 'j
varying intensity todays count’ anda S, dah - Bush fires of
Lx„^„ d :v n j d Trtt f r\9°th 18th and heSd ‘"ruth^ity
► — 1
T 3-4
2b
5
„ 2ba
T 13 (I)
For Index, see end of this Section (page 106) + a
• For Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
t Supplied by Forests Commission of Victoria.
Victoria-— continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, Ac.
Relative Humidity,
3 p.m.
Wind.
1932 — continued
Ararat
14.1.32
76°-79° 83° 78° 68° 77°
41
42
37
0/
/o
N.N.W. 4 S.W. 4
8-10 11 12 13 14
Rainfall: 16 points since 3rd December; 101 points
December ; 181 points November ; 53 points October
13
11
14
11 13
Bairnsdale
15.1.32
84° 78°-80° 66° 70° 83°
9 10-12 13 PT 15
Rainfall; 2 points since 25th December; 206 points
December; 111 points November; 246 points October
26*
9~
Melbourne
22.1.32
71-9° 99-1° 108.9° 74-9° 85-5° 74-6°
16
19
21
39
21
N. 4
19
17 18 19 20 21 22
Rainfall : No rain since 23rd December ; 60 points December ;
393 points November
18
Melbourne
28.1.32
—5.2.32
69-5° 80-8° 74-8° 81-3° 67-2° 71-4° 93-1° 86-9°
28, 29 30 31 1 2 3 4 5
Rainfall: 1 point only since 23rd December; 60 points
December ; 393 points November ; 83 points October
18
4
22
30
40
1
N. 4 W.S.W. 4
4 5
Benalla
30.1.32
99-6° 106° 104-2° 86° 89°
26 27 28 29 3(T
Heavy smoke haze, 26th ; smoke haze, 30th
Rainfall; 9 points since November ; 387 points November ;
189 points October
S. 6
29
Beechworth
31.1.32
93°-96-5° 100° 84 °-86 °
3
12
19
16
20
S. 4
24-27 28 29-31
Rainfall: 6 points since 3rd December ; 43 points December ;
406 points November (240 points on 16th) ; 280 points
October
28
31
29
26
27
29~
Ballarat
31.1.32
82° 90° 72-5° 62° 72-4° 72-5°
26
22
S.W. 4 N.W. 4
25 26, 27 28 29 30 31
Rainfall: 16 points January. (See 12th January)
27
26
31 27
Sale ..
5.2.32
81° 68° 74° 84° 86-2°
1 2 3 4 5
Smoke, 3rd-5th
Rainfall : No rain since 23rd January ; 20 points since 23rd
December ; 202 points December ; 288 points November ;
394 points October
27
4
30
5
44
J
W. 4
~5
Seymour
12.12.32
76° 84° 97°
8 ~9~ 11, 12
Rainfall : 39 points since 14th November ; 68 points
November ; 180 points October ; 164 points September ;
445 points August
40*
12
Melbourne
9.12.32
64-4° 81-3° 93-9°
8 9 10
Rainfall : 185 points lst-8th December ; 64 points Novem-
ber ; 515 points October
(Frankston : 242 points lst-8th)
(“ Westfield,” Kilmore : 18 points since 2nd ; 64 points
since 14th November)
17
10
38
9
1933—
Warrnambool ..
3.1.33
63° 65° 95°
T 2~ "3~
Rainfall: 156 points December; 117 points November;
192 points October. (Nil 26th December-3rd January)
40*
3'
N. 4-S.W. 4
3
Beechworth
3.1.33
74° 83° 86-6°
T 2 3
Rainfall : 15 points since 16th December ; 174 points
December ; 139 points November ; 229 points October
27
3
24
2
25
I
Seymour
13.2.33
77° 85° 78° 97° 97°
T 9" kT 1Y 13
Rainfall: 94 points 21 st-31 st January ; 124 points December.
(See 12th December)
S. 5
~W
—
* 9 a.m.
C 8016/47. —g
Victoria— continued.


Date.
Location and District
■■■ '
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1933 —continued
February 20 ..
Mortlake, 90
Fully 15,000 acres swept and miles of fencing, destroyed in most extensive
grass fare of season. Strong South-West wind
4
February 27
Elmhurst, 89, 79 ..
Bl of h sheep SW6pt thousands of acres of valuable land ; destroyed hundreds
>
February 27 .,
Maryborough, 88 ..
Most disastrous fire which has occurred in Maryborough district for several
years broke out at Moolort; 1,000 acres destroyed
► 1c
T 27
February 27 ..
Seymour, 88
A 7 non t mileS ® ast of Seymour swept an area 8 miles long from Yea. About
7,000 acres of valuable grass burnt
J
March 1
Omeo, 83..
Glen Wills threatened (35 mile north of Omeo)
2a
March 12
Gisborne, 87
8 SCSTS ,1afr “ d ” m0 timb6r bur " t in ‘be won* fires in
3
March 23
Wodonga, 82
Fire in Burrowye district late on 23rd spread at a great rate
T 12
1
March 23
Yarram, 85
Balook and Bulga Park threatened. Strong south-east wind (?)
T 23(1)
April 11
Gunyah, 85
"“to gully’ “ fe; f ° Ur ll0meS deStr °J' ed “ • >>ush lire which swept through
October 23
Erica, 85
8 MSy n a Ste"S 8pread rap,dly - Erica by midnight 22„d.
1 and 2cb
Warburton, 86, 85
Mt. Donna Buang and East Warburton troubled by big fires
T 23
November 2
Anglesea, 87, 90 ..
Pyrenees, 89, 79 ..
B Towaris fX: bS w| a d‘ n c g h. a Xd' k mLXX 1 "'"ptoeXXderoyeT SWeP ‘
Bush fire in Pyrenees in vicinity of Ben Nevis raging fu r i„ u8 l y
I
1
T2
♦
For Index, see end of '
* For Index, .see end of this Section (page 106).
VlCTORlA— continued.


Particulars op
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity,
3 p.m.
Wind.
1933 — continued
Beech worth
16.2 33
82° 91° 98° 74°-76°
8-10 11-12 l3~ 14-16
Rainfall : No rain since 27th January (10 points) ; 127
points January. (See 3rd January)
22
IT
23
13
°/c
25
12
24
15
30
16
N.W. 5
13
Hamilton
20.2.33
69°-78° 81-8° 77-5° 61-7°
N.W. 3-S.W. 3 S.W.4
15-17 18 19 20
16-18 19
Rainfall: 14 points 19th February
S.W.-S. 6
20
Hamilton
27.2.33
73-3° 90-8° 99-8°
12
31
N.W. 5
25 26 27
Rainfall: 24 points 19th-25th February ; 95 points January ;
147 points December ; 222 points November
27
26
26-27
Seymour
27.2.33
73° 90° 98°
25" 26 27"
Rainfall: No rain February
Maryborough ..
27.2.33
67° 72° 89° 98°
14
22
36
N.E. 4
24 25 26 27
Rainfall : No rain February ; 79 points 20th-31st January ;
110 points December; 33 points November; 128 points
October
27
26
25
27
Omeo
1.3.33
65° 84° 83°
24“ 26~ T~
Rainfall: 15 points February; 111 points January; 133
points December ; 99 points November
41*
28“
31
1
♦
N. 6
T“
Melbourne
12.3.33
77-6° 89-6° 90-2° 91-8°
28
30
36
N. 4 N. 5-W.S.W. 5
9 10 11 12
11
10
12
10-11 12
Rainfall : 65 points 5th March ; 23 points February ; 174
points January (129 points on 27th) ; 433 points December
(Riddell’s Creek : 34 points 5th March ; 22 points in February)
Gusts up to 44 m.p.h.
Leongatha
23.3.33
59° 62-3° 78° 76°
52*
N.W. 5
20 21 22 23
23
23
Rainfall: 50 points 20th-21st March ; 75 points 5th-18th
March ; 55 points February ; 168 points January ; 250
points December
(Yarram : 22 points 20th-21st March ; 53 points since
25th February)
Windy day
Yallourn
23.10.33
70-5° 87-6° 96°
’ 21 22 23
Smoke haze and dust, 23rd October
Rainfall : 3 points since 15th October ; 202 points lst-15th
October ; 279 points September ; 361 points August
(Erica ; Nil from 11th October ; 164 points since 1st October)
(Warburton : 18 points since 14th October ; 271 points
2nd-14th October)
13
23
N.W. 7
23
Melbourne
23.10.33
77-2° 84-7° 96.3°
29
37
N. 6
21 22 23
22, 23
21
22, 23
Red rain, 23rd October, 5.15 p.m.
Rainfall: 19 points since 10th October ; 90 points 4th-10th
October ; 120 points September ; 205 points August
(Anglesea : 14 points since 6th October ; 82 points since
1st October)
Gusts up to 59 m.p.h
23rd October; south
west change 2.45 p.m
Anglesea
“ Extensive bush fires 22nd and 23rd October. Bush very
dry and burnt fiercely. 260 acres of pine plantation burnt
on 23rd October. Would have been more serious if wind
stronger. Wind never exceeded force 6 m.p.h. and rarely
that ”
♦9 a.m.
Victoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Particulars of Fires.
Number.
♦Pressure Type.
1934—
February 9
Beech Forest, 90 ..
Hepburn Springs, 88
Most disastrous fire in the district for several years destroyed twelve homes,
railway station and P.O. (Swept through Otway Forest from Gellibrand
River round to Apollo Bay)
Bush fires have caused great destruction
Ferny Creek, 85 ..
Severe fires in the bush caused great destruction ..
3
1936—
T 9
January 20
Kyneton, 88
l*iie swept over 6,000 acres land ; destroyed grass, timber, fencing
lA
T20
February 26 ..
Lismore, 89, 90
Worst bush fires experienced swept through the district. Hundreds of sheep
and cattle burnt. Fencing and grass destroyed over wide area
1
T 26
March 9
Camperdown, 89, 90
Disastrous bush fires. Damage estimated at £50,000. Hundreds of sheep
and cattle burned
Portland, 90
Bush fire on 4-mile front sweeping through district. Thousands of pounds
worth of damage to fences, haystacks, &c. Traffic blocked on Port Fairv-
1
April 1
Gippsland, Dande-
nong Ranges and
Western District,
85
Bush fires swept the Gippsland district causing great destruction. Gunyah
wiped out Bush and grass fires have occurred in all parts of State Most
serious in Dandenong Ranges, Gippsland and Western district. Thousands
1b
T 31 (I)
of acres of grazing country and forest plantations swept. Stock perished
homes destroyed 1 ’
November 29 ..
Orbost, 84
Forest fires from Brodribb to Club Terrace
1b
T 28-29
1937—
November 28 ..
Macedon, 88, 87 ..
Bush fires raging throughout district. Much damage being done
1b
1938—
January 10
Kilmore, 88, 87 ..
Fires destroyed 80 sheep; burnt much grass and fencing
T 27-28
1
January 19
Upwey, 86
•Bush fire swept Upwey Hill; two homes burnt
T 9-10 (I)
1
January 22
January 25
Korongvale, 80
Cobden, 90
W «l b „T h gr rbu e r rienCed here for y"- Scrub, fencing, many
Bu |c„ a ?nrn r ;‘ ged ‘ hr ° Ugh diStrict ' Th "* homestead., »beds, machinery,
T 19-20
4
1b
February 3
Lang Lang, 86
Country « — 3 «<ie, a large area of scenic
T 26, 27
1
March 30
Euroa, 82, 81
Much damage to properties in the district
T 3
March 31
North Wandin, 86..
Bush fire destroyed pine plantation, week-end houses & c
April 3
Yackandandah, 82
Fire at Sandy Creek at week-end burnt 3 000 n ■■ >
ever experienced here. Flames 100 feet high Described as worst
Th b„ U r S „T4 S ° f ° f Val,,able grazin S have been burnt, Kre. s.m '
► 2cb and 1
April 5
Walwa, 82
T 31 (1), 3 and 5
lor Index, see end of this Section (page 106). " ■
J
For Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
Victoria— continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station,
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1934—
Colac
9.2.34
81° 94° 102°
7 8 9
Rainfall : 57 points January ; 315 points December (1st-
18th) ; 337 points November (240 points on 30th)
25*
8, 9
0/
/o
1936—
Camperdown ..
26.2.36
73-9° 81° 89-1° 97°
23 24 25 26
Rainfall: 11 points February; 62 points January; 94
points December ; 185 points November
34*
26
Portland
9.3.36
68° 71° 81-5° 92°
6 7 8 9
Smoke haze, 10th March
Rainfall: 22 points since 10th January; 93 points January;
125 points December ; 174 points November
Hamilton
9.3.36
76-4° 92°
19 28
N.-N.W. 5
7 8,9,10
Rainfall: 54 points since 9th January ; 98 points 2nd-9th
January ; 104 points December ; 150 points November
9, 10 8
9
Leongatha
1.4.36
65-2° 70° 72-5° 83-5° 89° 75°
27*
W 4 N.W. 4
27 28 29 30 31 1
Rainfall : 287 points March (190 points on 15th) ; 210 points
February ; 90 points January ; 243 points December
31
28 31
Sale ..
1.4.36
77-6° 89° 92-6° 91°
29 30 31 1
Rainfall : 38 points since 15th February. 58 points February ;
18* 16
T“ sT
54
30
W.-N.W. 7
31
N.W. 6-S.W. 5
120 points January ; 616 points December
1
Bairnsdale
29.11.36
72° 85° 99° 72°
26 27 28 29~
Smoke haze, 28th and 30th
Rainfall: 121 points November; 214 points October; 114
points September
26*
28~
Kyneton
28.11.36
64° 77° 92° 98°
23*
25 26 27 28
Rainfall : 62 points November ; 363 points, October ; 111
points September
27, 28
1938—
Melbourne
19.1.38
68-1° 87-6° 94-2° 95-2°
16 17 18 19
Rainfall : 132 points 1st-16th January ; 142 points December ;
40 points November
30 18
18 19
Light easterly
18
Gusts up to 34
N 15
19
m.p.h
Charlton
22.1.38
76° 88-7° 92-4°
S.S.E. 5
~2l 22 23-24
Rainfall: 122 points 13th-17th January; 13 points 19th
December-12th January ; 186 points December; 11 points
November
(Korong Vale, 50 points 14th-17th January ; 18 points 3rd
January)
21, 22
Camperdown ..
25.1.38
75-8° 90-9° 90-5°
22 24 25
Rainfall: 79 points lst-15th January ; 303 points December ;
97 points November ; 290 points October
Melbourne
3.2.38
67-40° 88-3° 92° 81-2° 103°
30 31 1 2 3
Rainfall: 17 points since 15th January ; 145 points January ;
142 points December ; 40 points November
17
3
N.W. 3
3
* 9 a.m.
Victoria— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Particulars of Fires.
Number.
♦Pressure Type.
1938 — continued
September 26 ..
Mt. Macedon, 88, 87
Fire swept into pine plantations
Bealiba, 80, 79
100 acres forest destroyed
3 (I)
October 4
85, 86, 87, 89
Bush fires reported from Erica, Gisborne, Kalorama, Currajong, Beaufort
October 6
Walwa, 82
Thousands of acres of heavily timbered country burnt
October 7-8
Noojee, 85
Bush fire swept over district. Damage £1,500 to trestle bridge supporting
railway line
Fires also at Erica, Mt. Cole (7th), and South Lyndhurst (8th)
j
3 and 2b
T 4, 7
October 17
Ballarat, 88, 89 ..
One of the worst bush fires for many years raging through Ballarat and
Daylesford districts. Thousands of acres of forest country destroyed One
home lost
1
.
Gisborne, 87
T 17
Bush fire burnt 40 square miles of timber country and many miles of fencing
j
October 17
Creswick, 88
Disastrous bush fire in State forest at Lincoln Hill. Several thousand tons of
1
firewood in stacks burnt
December 11..
T 17
Whittlesea, 86
Bush fire in Plenty Ranges. 200 acres of State forest pine plantation destroyed
2b
December 16 , .
T 101
Gisborne, 87
Bush fire menaced homesteads, destroyed thousands of acres of scrub and
1
T 16
forest, and many miles of fencing
December 19 ..
Brookside, 83, 82 . .
Bush fire caused extensive damage to private property and crown land
1
December 22 ..
Bairnsdale, 84
1,000 acres grass land and miles of fencing burnt
T 19
Eganstown, 88
Serious fire. Pine plantation and much fencing and grass burnt
1
Gisborne, 87
Big fire near Gisborne
T 22
December 30 . .
Maffra, 85
Bush fires raging, Valencia area. Sheds and fences destroyed
Bacchus March, 87 |
Fire swept through wheat crop. Many bags of wheat also burnt ..
2a
6/S9
&/J9 9/39
iOK i\ /TV
2#J y Jo./ 29. 7
//• / S9 /9 /
. \ if ; v2
?9-4 4
ft \ iiiipi
* 9 ' 2 292
S*. /■ 29
29.2 *9 3
* For Index see end of this x ~~
* For Index see end of this Section (page 106.)
Victoria— continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1938— continued
0/
/o
Melbourne
31.3.38
! 71° 73-4° 83°
W so sT
Rainfall : No rain since 17th March ; 116 points March ; 187
points February ; 145 points January
22
31
N 5
31
Gusts up to 57 m.p.h.
Beechworth
3-5.4.38
68° 77° 82° 86° 84-2° 80-4° 74-8°
24
23
28
33
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
8 moke haze 4th-11th April
Rainfall ; 6 points March (52 points since 5th February) ;
175 points February; 86 points January; 162 points
December ; 97 points November
5
4
~7
3
Kyneton
26.9.38
59° 64-5° 69° 73-4°
30*
N 5
23 24 25 26
Rainfall : 69 points 5th-23rd September; ; 106 points
August; 212 points July
26
26
Melbourne
4-8.10.38
67-6° 79-8° 79-4° 68-7° 69-3° 83-1° 68-9°
18
25
30
N 4 N.N.E. 4
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Rainfall : 42 points since 5th September ; 73 points September ;
99 points August; 224 points July
3
7
9
4 7
W.S.W. 4
8
Gusts up to 45 m.p.h.
Yallourn
4-8.10.38
68-5° 72-7° 85-3° 71-4° 74-2° 84-3° 56-8°
28
21
26
29
W. 5
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Smoke haze 4th, 6th, 7th October.
Rainfall: 9 points 17th September-7th October ; 128 points
September ; 230 points August; 237 points July
4
3
6
7
8
Ballarat
17.10.38
68-5° 75-2° 81°
16
21
N.-N.W. 6
15 16 17
Smoke haze, 17th October
Rainfall ; 24 points since 23rd September; 153 points
September ; 137 points August; 201 points July
17
16
17
Melbourne
17.10.38
64-1° 81-5° 87°
i5 i6 rr
Rainfall : 50 points 15th October ; 84 points 1st September-
14th October ; 99 points August
(Riddell’s Creek : 36 points 8th-15th October)
12
17
17
16
N 5
~TT
Gusts up to 41 m.p.h.
Melbourne
11-16.12.38
86-8° 69°-70° 63-7° 66-7° 68-4° 94-4°
10
21
26
31
W.S.W. 4 N 4
9 10-11 13 14 15 16
Rainfall : 68 points lst-14th December ; 147 points November;
118 points October; 73 points September
16
9
10
11
11 and 13 17
Gusts up to 42 m.p.h.
Bairnsdale
22-12-38
77° 84° 70° 67° 81°
l8' 19’ 20 2l 22’
Smoke haze, 22nd December
Rainfall: 28 points since 24th November; 192 points
November; 47 points October; 171 points September
38*
19
Yallourn
30-12-38
71-9° 87-7° 97° 84-6° 71°-76°
~24~ 25 26 27 28-30
Heavy smoke haze, 30th December
Rainfall : 194 points December (129 points on 1st and 2nd) ;
173 points November; 101 points October; 128 points
September
Ballan
30-12-38
71-3° 85° 93-8° 83-5°' 65-6° 64-4° 62-8°
~24~ 25 ~26 27 28 29 30
No rain since 13th December
Rainfall: 25 points December ; 138 points November ; 63
points October ; 69 points September
25
26
N.W. 4
26
Melbourne
30.12.38
85-4° 70-2° 68-6° 65-3°
37
S 3
27 28 29 30
Rainfall: 69 points December ; 147 points November. (See
llth-16th December)
28
30
♦ 9 a.ii).
Victoria— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1939—
January 3
Woodend, 82, 85,
88
Bush fires Woodend district, Kiewa, Gippsland
3 and 1a
January 8
Dromana, 86
B lnJnf reS i haVe SWe ? t thr °! Igh > causin g great destruction. Fourty-four houses
burnt; damage estimated at £40,000
! Bush fires causing widespread destruction. Timber mills burnt; twelve lives
lost; many houses destroyed uves
Almost ringed with fires; much destruction
T 3
3 and 1
Erica, 85
Yallourn, 85
i’8, 10(1), 13(1)
January 10
January 13
January 13
q
a
I
Benalla, 82
Croydon North, 86
Toolangi, 86
Healesville, 85
Narbethong, 86, 88
Nummary. —Most d
uarters of the State,
cres of forest, timber
Ballarat, 89, 88 ..
F ‘SJSon e™^hel°° mbeUUP f0reSt ' T ‘ mber miU a " d razed.
Swept by bush fires. Four houses destroyed. Orchards ruined
B *■*" the “- **** and
Disastrous bush fires sweeping the district. Seventeen houses were destrove.l
Whl “V”? ° f W. sqnare miles - Cows and poultryTost tr ° ye ‘‘
experienced in Victoria swept over three-
mills, and famous ‘ h ° U “ n<l3 ° f
areas - Timb “ — houses, ,
3 and 1
Worst Damage,
Many other centres re
£5,000.
January 14
January 30
1
to
E
\\
W
N
0
M
D
Lc
Ys
W
Er
por
Oi
86
»»augararta,
Lome, 90
Noojee, 85
Wilson’s Promon
tory, 85
Wood’s Point, 83, 8.
Warburton, 86
1 3th January—
ubicon, 83
Mod’s Point, 83
’arrandyte, 86
oojee, 85
meo, 83
ansfield, 83
rornana, 86
>rne, 90
irra Glen, 86
arburton, 86
ica, 85
ed losses of one
meo, 83
,90
1
to
D
B
SSuTforeTt b Tn Wd T in traU - Practicall
forest lu P forest. Enormous damage to famous Cambaton
"as* fire 1,1 hiSt0ry - FoUrteen h ° m « razed, Croat destruction in th
deSroyeiT IPe<1 ° Ut except for hotel “d one railway house. Second tim
Complete'y devastated from neck to lighthouse. Animal, in game reserv
B demS!?.hi U8ed grea ‘ I- three-quarters of an hour, town wa
D ~r„tt Sawmi "- Warburt<> " W “ d » Point. Sixtee
Burnt.
Damage.-j-
•• 100 houses ..
•• .. 143 ‘ ’ • • 25,000
100 ” ” •’ ,35,750
45 ’• •• 25.000
40 houses and shops, hotel ’ ’ oA’nfil
and hospital ’ ‘ “
•• 100 houses ..
43 ’‘ •• 9,835
20 " “ •• 10,750
32 ” •• 12,335
20 ” •• 8,000
16 houses and 6 mills!.’ "
• * lo,o7U
twelve houses, schools, churches, pest offices, chalets, , values rangin
‘ Wept di8t ™‘- H » s P“ al . fmtr shops, hotel, and 27
■Sh fires at Selby, Otway Forest, and Lome
y
g 1
i
e
e
„
g f
T 8, 10 I, 13 (I)
rorn £200 to
1
T 30
Summary of Majc
Janua
* I '' EES IN STATE Fo “ts a KD Crowk Linns, 1938-39.}
' afL' burned" 8 370 Januar y 8, 10, 13.)
lBa • <>,470,000 acres ; 479 fires.
Counties :-Bogong, Benambra, Delatite,
Localities :-82, 83, 85, 86, 88, 90.
onnangatta, Tanjil, Evelyn, Anglesea, Mornington, Heytesbury, Polwarth.
ndex, see end of this Section (page 106) + w
' newspaper reports. ' * , .
t Supplied by Forests Commission of Victoria.
Vi ctoria — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity
3 p.m.
Wind.
1939—
Yallourn
3.1.39
72-2° 78-5° 95-5° 81-4° 86-2°
30 31 1 2 T~
Rainfall ; 194 points December. (See 30th December)
32
”3
0/
/o
Melbourne
31-39
72-2° 99-8° 79-4° 85-5°
31 I 2 3
Smoke haze, 3rd January
11
1
40
3
Light southerly
Melbourne
8-13.1.39
75° 81-2° 109-6° 76° 112-5° 92-3° 78-1° 114-1°
8
9 33
N.N.E. 4 N. 4
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Thick pall of smoke 10th January
Dense dust and smoke haze, 13th January
Rainfall: 10 points since 13th December ; 69 points December ;
147 points November; 118 points October
13
10 8
10 13
Gusts up to 46, m.p.h.,
13th January; 40
m.p.h., 10th January
(see also p. 43)
Alexandra
10-13.1.39
99° 101° 109° 89° 109-6° 100° 95° 112°
5 6 ' 7-8 9 10 11 12 13
Smoke haze, 9th-14th January, very heavy, 13th January,
dense 11th January
Rainfall : 15 points since 14th December; 46 points
December ; 43 points November ; 32 points October ; 72
points September; 184 points August
Ballarat
8-13.1.39
76° 85-5° 95° 104-2° 103° 87° 108-5° 80-5° 84-3°
28
15 19 22
11
29
W.N.W.7 N.4-S.W. 5
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
108°
6 7 8 9
30 9
10
11
13 8
N. 6-S.W. 5
13
Smoke haze, 10th January. Much smoke, 13th January
Rainfall; 8 points since 14th December ; 68 points December ;
115 points November; 45 points October; 153 points
September
12 13
10
Wangaratta
8-13.1.39
96°-101° 102-5° 108-5° 112° 104-8° 113° 113-1°
23
18 26 4
10
14
N.' 4 N.W. 5
1-5 6 7 8 9 10 11
107-2° 114-8° 105-6°
6 7 8 9
16 13 18
10
11
8 13
2 3 14
Rainfall: Only 6 points since October ; 30 points October ;
50 points September ; 173 points August
12 13 14
Yallourn
10-13.1.39
87-2° 93 °-94 ° 106-2° 85°-88° 112-3°
9
21 33
56-78 9-12 13
Rainfall; No rain January ; 13 points since 13th December
(See 30th December)
13
12 11
Omeo
14-1-39
90°-97° 100° 78° 101° 75-5° 103° 101°
16
22 30
N. 5 N.W. 6
5-7 8 9 10, 11 12 13 14
“Fire swept town area of Omeo evening of 13th January ”
Rainfall: 20 points since November ; 174 points November ;
86 points October ; 184 points September
13
8 10
13 14
N. 4 S. 5
8, 10 9, 11, 12
Melbourne
30.1.39
79-3° 78-7° 92-8° 97-3°
27 28 29 30
Dense smoke haze in evening.
Rainfall: 31 points January; 69 points December; 147
points November
10
“30
17 29
29 27
Strong northerly gusts up
to 42 m.p.h. southerly
change 7 p.m. (30th)
Colac
30-1-39
72° 93° 97°
S.E. 4
Squally
30
27 28,29 30
Rainfall: 19 points January; 134 points December; 93
points November; 71 points October
Victoria— continued.


_
Location and District |
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
Date.
Number.
1940—
Church burnt ..
January 3
Ararat, 79, 89
January 4-5 ..
Lakes Entrance,
One of the largest fires in the history of the district, between Colquhoun and
84
Lakes Entrance
January 4-6 ..
Wodonga, 82
Grass fires on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday ..
3 and 1
January 5
Nungurner (Gipps-
Fires swept more than 1,000 acres crown land and grazing country. Damage
T 2, 3, 5
land. Lakes,) 84,85
estimated at £1,500
January 21
Myrtleford, 82
Bush fires destroyed thousands of acres of crops and grass in Myrtleford and
2b
Wangaratta districts
February 15-16
Tallangatta, 82
Tallangatta, 82
Bush fires burning fiercely in Bolga district. On one property 150 sheep lost
Bush fire raging on a 30-mile front .. • • • • • • • •
Myrtleford, 82
Fires destroyed dozens of haystacks, miles of fencing, hundreds of sheep,
thousands of acres of grass
Tanjil Bren, 85 ..
Bush fires destroyed 31 huts, a new home, fourteen cars, trucks, &c.
3
T 15,16
Whorouly, 82
One property, 700 sheep and 800 acres of grass burned ..
February 22 ..
Yackandandah,82..
Bairnsdale, 84
Bush fires caused much destruction in Yackandandah area
Bush fires swept parts of Eastern Gippsland. Much damage. Two people
died from burns
March 3
Lancefield, 88
Fencing and about 1,000 acres of bush and grass country destroyed. Strong
4
south wind. Fires also in Heyfield district (north wind). Reservoir, Keilor,
&c.
March 13
Mortlake, &c., 90..
This week’s disastrous bush fires swept many large sheep stations (Mortlake,
1
Dunkeld, Camperdown districts). Destroyed 70,000 valuable sheep as well
T 13
as some cattle and horses. Seven homesteads and eleven other properties
destroyed. Damage estimated at £200,000
March 13
Torquay, 90
Damage in town and district estimated at £100,000 apart from heavy losses
of stock and grass. One life lost (14th) ; 90 homes and weekend cottages
destroyed.
Summary.— Bush fires cost Victoria more than £300,000 in losses of property, grasslands, and stock.
March 13
Warburton, 86
Black path of destruction from Seville and Woori Yallock through thickly
timbered ranges towards Cockatoo. Eighteen homes burnt
Tangil Bren, 85, 83
Mills burned ..
1
Tl3
March 30
Mt. Evelyn, 86
Euroa, 82
Bacchus Marsh, 87
Five homes burnt
One of the most disastrous fires in the history of the district
One of the most devastating fires to occur in the district broke out on Glenmore
Violet Town, 82 ..
property. Heavy losses
Fires caused heavy losses near Violet Town and Euroa
3
T 30
December 27 ..
Pyalong, 88
Bush fires, fanned by strong northerly winds on an 8-mile front, swept 10,000
acres of bush and grass country. Destroyed at least three homesteads in
82, 86, 87
i
Pyalong district between Kilmore and Heathcote
hires also at East Doncaster, Yarrawonga district, Mitcham, Hurstbridge,
Lancefield
1
T 27
* For Index, see end Q f this Section (page JO6).
Victoria — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity,
3 p.m.
Wind.
%
1940—
Ararat
31-40
79-5° 94-5° 105-5°
1 2 3
Rainfall: 51 points December ; 363 points November; 173
points October
8
3
12
2
Bairnsdale
4-5.1.40
67° 91° 105° 100°
1 2 374 5
Rainfall: 40 points since 6th December ; 88 points December ;
418 points November; 310 points October
17*
5”
20*
4
N.W. 4 N. 5
4 5
Wangaratta
21-1-40
86° 90-5° 102° 101.5° 96-2° 96° 90° 88°
16
20 21
26
S.W. 3-4
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20,21
Rainfall: 8 points 17th, 4 points 6th January ; 41 points
since November; 354 points November; 409 points
October
21
15 16,
18
19
Beechworth
21-1-40
79° 84-5° 94-2° 93° 88° 89° 83° 81-5° 76 4°
17
21 32
25
S.W. 3
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Rainfall : 47 points 17th January ; 9 points 7th December-
6th January ; 72 points December ; 471 points November ;
729 points October. (Myrtleford 86 points 17th-18th
January)
15
16 18
19
16
Beechworth
15-16.2.40
86-5° 91° 95° 81°
~rT~ IT 15 16
Rainfall : 10 points since January 17th. (See 21st January)
11
14
12
15
Melbourne
15-16.2.40
84° 100-6° 100° 75-7°
13 14 15 16
Rainfall : 13 points 6th-7th February ; 198 points January ;
69 points December ; 458 points November
10
14
16* 37
15 13
N.N.W. 4
15
Gusts up to 44 m.p.h.
Yallourn
15-16.2.40
72-9° 87-8° 95-8° 102-4° 71°
10 16
12 13 14 15 16
Rainfall : 46 points since January 25th ; 249 points January ;
290 points December ; 403 points November
14,
15 13
Bairnsdale
22.2.40
69° 88° 93°
11*
N. 6
20 21 22
Rainfall : 24 points since January ; 137 points January. (See
January 7th)
22
22
Kyneton
3-3-40
64° 72° 74-8°
29 T 2,3
Rainfall ; 22 points February ; 171 points January; 80
points December ; 469 points November
N. 4
Hamilton
13.3.40
77-3° 97-2° 101-7° 104-2° 105-2° 103-8° 99-9°
6 8 9 10 11 12
19
6
20 17
~7 1*
19 23
9710 U
N.W. 5 N.W. 6
7, 11 8
97-2°
25
N.N.W. 7
13
12, 13
13
Rainfall: 7 points 2nd-3rd March ; 66 points February ;
155 points January ; 135 points December ; 397 points
November
Melbourne
13.3.40
73-7° 96-3° 102-6° 87-3° 102-5° 107° 104-7°
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
101-7°
13
Rainfall: 7 points since 16th February ; 47 points February ;
198 points January ; 69 points December
10
11
11
12, ISt
14
?T§
22
10'
N.N.W. 20t N. 18t
13 8
Gusts up to 40 m.p.h
8th ; 43 m.p.h., 13th
Yallourn
13.3.40
87-8° 106-9° 103-8° 101-9°
8
10
W.N.W. 4
10 11 12 14
Rainfall : 54 points since 7th February ; 80 points February ;
249 points January ; 290 points December
11
12, 13
13
Euroa
30.3.40
80° 83-3° 95° 94-5° 98° 96°
25“ 26 27 28 29“ 30
Rainfall: 98 points 19th-20th March ; 2 points February ;
15 points January
* 9 a.m.
t m.p.h.
Victoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1940 —continued
1941—
February 18 ..
Avoca, 79, 88
Fierce lire raging for days in forest country between Mountain Hut and
Glenpatrick ; thousands of acres swept; much timber destroyed
3
T 16-18
1942—
January 4
78-80, 82, 86, 88, 89
Bush and grass fires in Bealiba, Ballarat districts, Daylesford, Willaura,
Corryong, Maribyrnong
Temperature on two days, 97° to over 100°.
2b
T4
January 7
Penshurst, 90
10,000 acres burnt. Timboon threatened
• •
Tatyoon, 89
Disastrous bush fires on a 25-mile front burned homesteads, crops, and
pastures, in Tatyoon, Lake Bolac, and Westmere districts
1
T 7
January 24
Rowsley, 87
On®, fire fighter lost his life in bush and grass fire which destroyed thousands
of acres of grass, several haystacks and a house in Rowsley district
1
T 24
March 3-4
Hedley, 85
Yarram, 85
Serious fires over wide area of South Gippsland. One man burned to death ;
Fires raged on 60-mile front from Meeniyan to Balook. Much damage;
Welshpool' 011188 tr ° yed between Toora an fi Yarram and two farms at
Foster, 85
D des£oyed. bU One fi delth eVaStated tniCtS ° f C0Untry - Several homes
1
► T 3
Hamilton, 90
82, 90 ..
Fi dest b rov k ed U f, 0n Monival Station ; swept 3,000 acres,
destroyed about 100 sheep and large quantity of fencing
Range” b ' bwa abe y> Cobden district, Port Campbell, and Otway
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 106,.
Victoria — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1940— continued
0/
/o
24 25 26
30 29 27
Melbourne
30.3.40
79-1° 91-6° 85-6° 100-1° 96-7°
26 27 28 29 ¥
Strong wind with dust
Rainfall : 2 points since 20th ; 51 points 19th-20th March ;
47 points February; 198 points January. Lilydale, 73
points 19th-21st
N.N.W. 24f
30
Gusts up to 56 m.p.h.
westerly change 9.55
p.m.
Ballan
Seymour
30.3.40
27.12.40
80°-88•6 ° 94-1° 91-9°
26-28 29 30
Rainfall ; 54 points since January ; 195 points January ;
94 points December; 504 points November
68° 95° 104°
23 25, 26 ~2T~
Rainfall: 58 points since 23rd November ; 63 points Novem-
ber ; 51 points October ; 250 points September
17 18
29 30
29*
W
N.W. 4
29, 30
Kyneton
1941—
Avoca
1942—
27.12.40
18.2.41
67° 90° 91° 99°
23 25 26 27
Rainfall; 55 points since 23rd November; 154 points
November ; 72 points October ; 332 points September
80° 95° 93°
15 16, 17 18
Rainfall: No rain since 26th January ; 291 points January ;
100 points December ; 64 points November
15* 34*
27 2fT
32*
Ts
N.N.E. 4
27
Ballarat
4-7.1.42
85° 86-5° 101-5° 93-3° 74° 78-8° 92°
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Rainfall; No rain since 22nd December ; 159 points Decem-
ber ; 165 points November ; 220 points October
20 19 16 12
4 2 5, 7 3
S.W. 7 S.W. 5 N. 6
4 5 ~J~
Melbourne
Lismore
4.1.42
7.1.42
74-2° 82-1° 79° 97-2° 101-3°
31 T“ T 3 ~4“
Rainfall : 32 points since 9th December ; 343 points lsb-9th
December ; 166 points November ; 167 points October
89-3° 87-4° 100-3° 92-8° 74-1° 81° 97-9°
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Rainfall : 28 points since 8th December ; 133 points Decem-
ber ; 240 points November; 187 points October
15 20 40
4 3 1
11
T
W. 17f
4
Gusts up to 42 m.p.h. ;
southerly change 3.10
p.m.
S.W. 5 N. 7
5 7
Exceptionally strong gale,
7th
Ballan
24.1.42
61-2° 79-5° 96°
22 23 24'
Dust and smoke haze, 24th
Rainfall : 118 points on 20th only rain since 8th December ;
106 points December ; 104 points November ; 191 points
October
39 41
23 24
Melbourne
24.1.42
66-2° 79° 99-8°
22 23 24
Rainfall : 136 points 20th, otherwise only 2 points since 20th
December ; 375 points December ; 166 points November ;
167 points October. (Rowsley, 70 points on 20th)
14 46
24 23
i
£ 1
Leongatha
3-4.3.42
78° 102° 103° 104° 97-5°
1 2 3 4 5
Rainfall: 155 points February; 148 points January; 297
points December; 174 points November
29* 28* 38*
4 5 r
N. 4
4
Strong wind, 4th, 5th
Melbourne
3-4.3.42
78-1° 101-8° 102-4° 104-8°
1 2 3 ~1T~
Rainfall: 11 points since 20th February (112 points); 314
points February ; 141 points January ; 375 points Decem-
ber ; (213 on 5th December)
13 15 18
3 2 T
Moderate to fresh
northerly ; gusts up to
40 m.p.h.
Hamilton
3-4.3.42
90-3° 102-4° 105-1°
i 2
Rainfall: 68 points February ; 124 points January ; 126
points December ; 100 points November
15 19
3 2, 4
N.N.W. 5-6 N.W. 5
2, 3 4
* 9 a.m.
t m.p.h.
Victoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1943—
January 12
Elmore, 80, 81
A serious fire occurred. 1,000 acres burnt
1c
Tl2
January 27
Carapooce (nea rSt.
Fire burnt 300 acres ; destroyed 70 sheds
January 29-31
Arnaud)
Bush fires over wide areas in many parts of Victoria
Happy Valley, 89..
(Ballarat district). 900 sheep burnt, also some cattle and much fencing
3
- T 29, 31
81, 86, 90
Fires also in Portland district, Bendigo district, Cobden, Mornington Peninsula,
February 3
Lower Dandenongs, &c.
Portland, 90
Most serious fires for some years have been experienced in the Portland district.
(January 27-28)
(Began 27th January and were within 10 miles of Portland on 28th January)
,
February 17
Riddell, 87
Fire caused extensive loss of flax last week
if-
T 17
December 22 ..
Wangaratta, 82
Ten people burnt to death by fire which swept through grass country from
Bowser to Tarrawingee last night. Thousands of acres of grass country
2aI
swept. Damage over £30,000
December 31 ..
Nagambie, 81
Thousands of acres of grass and standing crops and miles of fencing destroyed
..
Bannockburn, 87 ..
Grass and bush fires in district threatened the town of
Lethbridge
1
T 31
4/ 44
S A. 44 S.a.44
9. A. 44
€> pts(
7
/Sr
, ft?
.^4297
29.7,
** Jsr *
296
p. Wmm' WmS/k
297 29#
%
<529. &
/0.A44
//. 7.44 /S./.44
/S./.44
v./ Vs\£^
296
it
29 -7 299 2p s
299 1
29/^
'99
k
29 s
29.3
/4.A.44 /s/44
29.7
: Uj*7 297LJ. I\ /
29.9^
29.4
1944-
Fires reported from—
January 1
South Clayton, 86..
Property, &c., destroyed
2a
Upper Beaconsfield,
86
Mt. Eliza, 86
» »
T 1
99
Tynong, 86
„ „ * * * *
January 2
Myrniong, 87
Hamilton, 90
Home lost in extensive grass fire
Twenty acres of flax destroyed in the district
99
Stonehaven, 87
400 sheep lost on Barrabool Hills. 1 500-9 nnn c '' ,
Fires reported from Mt. Eliza ’ ’ dCres of grass burnt
99
January 4
Mt. Eliza, 86
January 8
Chines, 88
Widespread damage
'S’"* 0 h ° USeS h °“ pital rianies .truck town „„ a «.**,
1 and 2a
Wangaratta, 82
"SI WrSXpZdtSe bUrnt 30 ' <K, ° aCreS ' 8ixte “ twn‘y house.
T 8, 10
99
lor Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
Victoria — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Wind.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
JLveiiitivc Mumiuity,
6 p.m.
1943—
Bendigo
12.1.43
89-3° 99° 78° 83-2° 80° 86° 86-8°
22
25
/o
44
S. 3 N.W. 3
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
T
11
12
10 12
Rainfall : 169 points on 3rd ; 38 points December; 270
points November; 469 points October. (Elmore; 17
points on 12th ; 53 points on 4th January)
Portland
27-28.1.43
72° 81° 104° 105° 103°
16
17
N. 6 W. 5
25 26 27 28 29
27
28
27 28
Smoky, 28th
Rainfall : 92 points January ; 128 points December ; 109
points November ; 175 points October
St. Arnaud
27.1.43
82° 90° 98° 104°
29*
24 25 26 27
27
Rainfall : 80 points January ; 45 points December ; 129
points November ; 298 points October
Ballarat
29-31.1.43
81-6° 90° 99-2° 102° 101° 82° 101-3°
22
14
12 14
12
49
W.S.W. 5 N.-N.W. 5
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Rainfall.- 185 points January ; 87 points December ; 257
25
2]
26
27 28
29
30
25 27-29 "
W S W 5
points November ; 279 points October
3]
31
N.N.E. 19f
Melbourne
17.2.43
68-2° 94-2° 94-1°
20
32
15 16 17
Rainfall; 48 points since 23rd' January (147 points); 283
16
17
17
Gusts up to 51 m.p.h.
points January ; 132 points December
Wangaratta
22.12.43
83 °-93 ° 78-2° 85°-88° 84-2° 93-9°
19
23
36
N.E. 4
6-16 17 18-20 21 22
22
21
20
*“ 22 "
Rainfall : 8 points since 18th November ; 48 points since
5th November ; 68 points November ; 191 points October ;
190 points September
Beechworth
22.12.43
78-4° 84-9° 82-2° 78-4°
10
18
S.W. 3
19 20 21 22
22
21
21
Rainfall : 26 points since 18th November; 172 points
November (130 points on 18th) ; 211 points October ; 325
points September
Shepparton
22.12.43
72-5° 81-8° 87-2° 84-2° 83° 94°
37*
17 18 19 20 21 22
22
Rainfall : 35 points since 18th November ; 40 points Novem-
ber ; 85 points October ; 183 points September
Melbourne
31.12.43
68-4° 103-1° 100-6° 79-8° 74-5° 68-7°
14
18
N. 15f N. 20f
31 1
to
4.1.44
29 30 31 1 2 3 4
31
30,
I
Smoke haze, 30th
Rainfall : 68 points December ; 312 points November ; 84
Gusts up to 43 m.p.h.
1944—
points October
Hamilton
2.1.44
74-2° 94-1° 98-4° 82-1° 68-4°
12
21
N.W. 3
29 30 31 1 2
31
30
30, 31
Rainfall : 49 points December ; 109 points November ; 192
points October
Ballarat
8.1.44
76-2° 90° 97-8°
13
15
N. 5
6 7 8
8
7
T
Rainfall : 56 points 2nd-5th January ; 63 points December ;
172 points November ; 202 points October. (Climes :
3 points on 5th only rain since 18th December)
Maryborough ..
8-10.1.44
68° 82° 92-2° 102° 77-9°
13
16
23
5 6 7 8 9, 10
8
7
6
Rainfall : 6 points 3rd January ; 33 points December ; 68
points November ; 81 points October
Wangaratta
8-10.1.44
77-9° 86-8° 96-2° 103-8° 100-3° 81-5°
5 6 7 8 9 10
16
26
38
N. 8-S.E. 10
7, 8
6
9
9
Rainfall : 8 points December. (See 22nd December)
Beechworth
8-12.1.44
79-3° 81° 88-8° 96-5° 95-8° 76-2° 81-3° 82-7°
35
32
17
N. 5
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
9
6
8
9
Thick smoke, 10th
Rainfall : 2 points on 9th. (See 22nd December)
t m.p.h.
V ictoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of fires.
♦Pressure Type
1944 —continued
January 8
Everton Upper, 82..
Tarrangaville (or
Hotel burnt ..
150 sheep burnt
T8, 10
Terangville), 88
Total losses between December 22 and January 9 amounted to £13,000
January 9
Tarrawingee, 82 ..
January 10
Everton, 82
Nine houses and rail bridge burnt
Beechworth, 82
Beechworth threatened. Fires in forest country-nearest 4 miles from the
„
town
Warrnambool, 90 ..
Grass fire. House burnt
„
Castlemaine, 88
Fire at Sutton Grange to north-east
„
January 12
88 ..
Fires at Baarmutha and Wooragee. (Fires on 50-mile front)
5
January 14
Central and Western
Widespread destruction by bush fires. Nineteen lives lost; over 500 homes
Districts
86-90
Worst areas : Beaumaris, Dunkeld, Hamilton, Woodend, Colac district,
Lismore district, Rokewood, Gisborne, Skipton, Winchelsea, Birregurra.
Damage over £1,000,000
Houses destroyed {Age, 15th January, 1944).
1c
TT4
January 14
Hamilton
Fifty houses burnt, also coal shed, mill, and gun club pavilion
Dunkeld ..
Gisborne
Rokewood, 79
Skipton ; 86-90 ..
Winchelsea - Birre-
gurra
Beaumaris
Daylesford
Tarrington
Woodend
Oakleigh-Clayton ..
Pascoevale
Wattle Glen
Goroke
Penshurst
Thirty-six houses
Twenty houses
Sixty houses ..
Forty houses ..
Fifty houses ..
One hundred houses
Twenty houses
Twenty-six houses (6 miles from Hamilton)
Eleven houses
Six houses
Six houses
Two houses
Two houses
Four houses
January 20
Moyhu, 82
Murringowar, 84 ..
Mirboo North, 85 ..
Cann River, 84
Further fires
Further fires ..
Further fires ..
Further fires ..
lA
T 22
Kinglake, 86
Pheasant’s Creek
Further fires ..
Further fires . .
(Whittlesea), 86
Big River (Eildon),
Further fires ..
88, 83
Cudgewa, 82
Further fires ..
January 21
Dandenongs, 86 ..
Fires reported
lA
Stony Rises (Cam-
Fires reported
T 22
perdown), 90
Sale, 85 ..
4,000 sheep lost in the district ..
Bethanga, 82
Fires reported
”
Gowar (St. Arnaud),
79
Fires reported
"
January 22
Fifty-two fires reported, and add.tional houses destroyed
r ive houses destroyed ..
Cheltenham-Highett
West Heidelberg \
Five houses destroyed ..
Rosanna .. J
Pakenham, 86
Three houses destroyed
Western District, 90
Monbulk
Three h sEks (indU<ling at LesUe Manor ’ near ’ Camperdown) *.! !!
Estimated that over 250,000 sheep destroyed in Western District alone in recent fires.
Darlimurla, 85
Fires reported
Heyfield, 85
Fires reported
Cowwar, 85
(Near Sale). 300 Sheep lost
Molesworth, 88, 82
Fires reported
,,
Mortlake District
Fires reported
,,
(Woorndoo), 90
,,
Hamilton District,
Fires reported
90
99
Avenel, 88, 81
Fires reported
Longwood, 82, 81..
Fires reported
”
For Index, see end of this Section (page IqO).
Victoria — continued.


Particulars or
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1944 — continued
Melbourne
14.1.44
69-8° 91-5° 103-2°
0/
/o
9 15
N. 26f
Hamilton
14.1.44
12 13 14
Dense dust haze. (See 20th January) (See also p. 47)
77-9° 92-4° 100-4°
14 13
13 19 40
14
Gusts up to 54 m.p.h.
W.N.W. 7
Kyneton
Lismore
14.1.44
14.1.44
12 13 14
Rainfall: 24 points, 2nd-llth January. (See 2nd January)
84° 93° 101°
12 13 TT
Rainfall: 49 points since 18th November; 155 points
November ; 124 points October ; 235 points September
67-9° 73-8° 93-9° 104-9°
14 12 13
43*
14
4 13 41
14
N. 4
14
N.W. 7
Ballan
Ballarat
14.1.44
14-1-44
11 12 13 14
“ Grass fires threatened town about 6 p.m.”
Rainfall: 6 points since 5th January; 57 points, 3rd-5th
January ; 58 points December ; 164 points November ;
147 points October. (Rokewood: 40 points, 3rd-5th
January. Skipton : 15 points, 5th January)
67-5° 70-5° 90° 100°
"IT” 12 IT TT
Rainfall: No rain January; 41 points December; 109
points November ; 104 points October
74° 92° 100°
14 13 12
9 18 34
14
N. 10
14
N.W. 7
Horsham
14.1.44
12 13 \T
Much dust and smoke
Rainfall: 67 points since 18th December. (See 8th January)
79° 82° 97° 106-4°
14 13 12
10 11
14
N.N.W. 6
Melbourne
20-22.1.44
11 12 13 14
Rainfall: 5 points on 4th January; 33 points December ;
47 points November ; 102 points October
68-9° 92-8° 103-9° 104-4°
14 13
13 18
14
N.N.W. 201
Orbost
20-22.1.44
19 20 21 22
Smoke haze, 20th
Rainfall: 31 points since 18th December ; 68 points Decem-
ber ; 312 points November; 84 points October
68-3° 83° 95° 108-8°
21 20, 22
14 20 33
22
Gusts up to 49 m.p.h.
(See also p. 43)
N.N.W. 5
Alexandra
Sale
20-22.1.44
20-22.1.44
19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 5 points since 29th December ; 446 points December
(284 points on 5th-6th) ; 197 points November ; 90 points
October; 201 points September
72° 83° 89° 100°
19 ¥ ¥ ¥
Smoke haze, 22nd
Rainfall: 40 points since December ; 47 points December ;
123 points November ; 102 points October
71-5° 84-2° 101° 108°
22 21 20
11 15 39
22
W.N.W. 6
St. Arnaud
20-22.1.44
19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 10 points, lst-2nd ; 154 points December ; 141
points November ; 130 points October
76° 84° 90° 102° 100°
22 21 20
25* 29*
22
N. 3
Camperdown ..
Hamilton
20-22.1.44
20-22.1.44
18 19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 1 point, 3rd January ; 35 points December ; 71
points November; 76 points October
76° 91° 100-5° 100°
19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 92 points, 2nd-16th ; 68 points December ; 134
points November ; 153 points October
77-9° 91-2° 101-1° 97-1°
22 21
26*
22~
13 21 32
22
N. 7
22
N.N.W.-W.N.W. 4
19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 45 points January. (See 2nd January)
21 20 19
21
W. 7
22
* 9 a.m. t m.p.h.
C.8016/47. —7
V ictori A -—continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
•Pressure Type.
1944— continued
January 28
Yinnar, 85
Extensive grass fires.
destroyed
Hundreds of
acres
of
grass
and
several haystacks
1A
T 28, 29, and 31
January 29
Lysterfield, 86
Fire at Lysterfield
99
January 31
Otway Ranges, 90
Fires in Otway Ranges (Forrest)
99
February 1
Penshurst, Yallourn
86
Forrest, 90
Fires in Penshurst, Yallourn districts
Fires reported
99
4A
February 2
Barwon Downs, 87,
90
Mt. Pinnak (Orbost)
84
Fires at —
Macedon, 88, 87 ..
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
I
„
February 4-6 ..
Mansfield District,
83
Mirboo North, 85 ..
Ferntree Gully, 86..
Boolarra, 85
Gaffney’s Creek, 83
Wood’s Point, 83 ..
Cockatoo, 86
Hill End District, 85
Dunolly, 81, 88
Tangil Bren, 85 ..
Big River (Wood’s
Point), 83
Seville, 85
Cobden East, 90 ..
Yarragon, 85
Otway Ranges, 90..
Bentleigh, 86
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
An old man burnt
>»
1
T 6
99
1
T 6
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
February 6
Moe District, 85 ..
Ash forest menaced
99
February 14 ..
Morwell and Yallourn
Area, 85
Big fires in Gippsland. Over 200 houses destroyed and thirteen lives lost
otock losses high. Total deaths this summer now 49
1
f~ a (i)
Yallourn, 85
Fires at —
Morwell, 85
Open cut on fire
Fires reported
99
99
Traralgon, 85
Fires reported
99
Darnum, 85
Hall and two houses burnt
99
San Remo, 86
Three homes lost
Rosedale, 85
Fires reported
99
Boolarra, 85
Fires reported
Wonthaggi, 86
Eight homes lost; seven damaged
99
♦lor Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
Victoria- — -continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
0 bsbrver’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Bate.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <feo.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1944 — continued
Seymour
20-22.1.44
74° 83° 92° 103°
W 2Cf VT 22
Rainfall : No rain since December; 41 points December ;
103 points November; 149 points October
32*
22"
0/
/o
Leongatha
28.1.44
71° 86° 97° 101° 63°-72° 85°
25*
27*
N. 4 N.W. 3
19 20 21 22 23-27 28
“ Bush fires, 21st.” “ Fire raging, 22nd ”
Rainfall: 182 points January (101 points, 23rd-24th) ; 90
points December; 283 points November; 191 points
October. (Yinnar : 56 points, 23rd.)
22
21
20, 2] 26, 27
Melbourne
28-29.1.44
71-7° 88-2° 79-5°
27 ' ’ 28- " 29
Smoke haze, 26th-29th
Rainfall : 50 points, 23rd ; 24 points, 2nd-6th January
(Lysterfield : 114 points, 23rd-24th)
25
28
S.S.W. 16f
‘ 27
Southerly winds. Gusts
up to 31 m.p.h.
Colac
31.1.44
to
1.2.44
83° 89° 94° 66°
29 30 31 r
Rainfall : 88 points January ; 56 points December ; 93
points November ; 132 points October
S.S.W. 4
1
Melbourne
1-2-44
79-5° 78-2° 93-1° 66-1°
29 30 31 1
(See 4th-6th February)
35
3l
S. 16f S. 19f
31 1
Gusts up to 36 m.p.h.
Orbost
1.2.44
73-2° 89-9° 67-4°
38
41
30 31 1
Rainfall : 18 points January. (See 20th-22nd January)
31
1
Kyneton
2.2.44
76° 91° 96° 98° 69° 70°
27 28 29, 30 31 1 2^
Rainfall: 32 points January; 43 points December; 155
points November ; 124 points October
48*
29
S. 4
1
Melbourne
4-6.2.44
72-9° 82-7° 85-3° 97-5°
2 3 4 5, 6
Thick dust haze. Strong gusts
Rainfall : 74 points January. (Nil since 23rd January)
13
5
17
6
N.N.E. 18f
6
Gusts up to 45 m.p.h
Leongatha
4-6.2.44
79° 83° 92-5° 96°
3 4 5 6
Smoke haze in south, 4th-5th
Rainfall : 182 points January. (See 28th January)
36*
6
Yallourn
4-6.2.44
77-5° 83-8° 96° 92-2°
3 4 5 6
Rainfall: No rain since 24th January ; 71 points January ;
90 points December ; 222 points November; 128 points
October
12
5
22
IT
F. 3 E. 4
4 6
Camperdown ..
4-6.2.44
73° 86° 90° 97° 93-5°
2 3 4 5 6
Rainfall: No rain since 23rd January ; 139 points January
36*
6
43*
5
Sale
4-6.2.44
70° 74° 95° 89-3°
3 4 5 6
Rainfall: 46 points January. (See 20th-22nd January)
36
5
S.E. 4 E. 5
4, 5 6
Yallourn
14.2.44
77-6° 79-2° 98°
12 13 T4
Rainfall: 23 points, 9th-10th February; 71 points January
10
14
48
13
N.W. 5
14
Leongatha
14.2.44
70° 78° 73-5° 67° 93°
10 11 12 13 14
Fires on 14th burnt 3,000 acres of grass
Rainfall: 43 points, 8th-10th February. (See 4th-6th
February.) (San Remo: 18 points, 7th-9th.) (Yarram :
16 points, 7th-10th)
20*
14~
N.E. 4 N.N.W. 6
13 14
* 9 a.m.
1 iu.p.h.
Victoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
* Pressure Type.
1944— continued.'
Leongatha District,
85
Frankston, .. \
Langwarrin, 86 .. J
Emerald, 86
Fires reported
Worst fire in peninsula’s history. Homes, two churches, and school burnt ..
Dromana in danger .. ...
Fires reported
1
T 14 (I)
Yarram, 85
Town threatened. Homes lost at Won Wron, North Devon, Mack’s Creek,
and Jack River area
1
T 14 (I)
Sale, 85 ..
Serious fires 6 to 8 miles to south-west ..
Strezlecki Ranges,
85
Sparks travelled 10 miles
99
Details or Houses Burnt (Reported 16th February)^
Morwell .. .. 80 Traralgon .. .. 40 Boolarra .. .. .. 12
onthaggi .. .. 8 Frankston .. .. 7 Heme’s Oak .. ., 15
Kilmany (near Sale) .. 11 Langwarrin .. .. 10 and 2 churches Sale .. .. .. 9
\anam .. .. 7 'N allourn .. .. Several Also 1 to 3 at several other places
February 22
Yarram District
(Tarra Valley),
85
Madalya, 85
Wandin North, 86
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
1
T 22~
99
February 26 ..
Jack River, 85, 86,
87
Jack River threatened. Fires in Ballarat, Coleraine, Geelong, Lethbridge
and Upwey districts 6 ’
1
T 26
March 3
Bittern (Frankston
District), 86
Wonthaggi, 86
South Leongatha, 85
Strath Creek, 88 ..
Crib Point threatened. Losses of sheep and cattle
Fires reported
Fires reported
Fires reported
1
T 3
Emerald, 86
Fires reported
Elmhurst, 79, 89 ..
Damage to grass and fencing, &c.
March 8
Somerville (Frank-
ston District), 86
Emerald, 86
Geelong District, 87
Exhibition Hall on showground and tennis pavilion burnt. Damage £1,000
Fires reported
Fires reported
1
T“8
Anglesea, 87, 90 ..
Fires reported
99
Barkstead, 87, 88 ..
Fires reported
99
Cockatoo, 86
Fires reported
99
Narranda (Port
Campbell), 90
Fires reported
99
99
March 28-30 ..
Foster District, 85
Fires reported ..
3
Inverloch, 85
Fires reported..
T 30
Erica District, 85..
Fires reported ..
”
Cobden District, 90
Fires resorted ..
99
1
Dandenong, 86
Creswick District, 88
Two week-end houses burnt at Kalorama
Fires reported ..
”
For Index, see end of this Section (page 106),
t Newspaper reports.
Victoria- — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1944— continued.
Melbourne
14.2.44
65° 62-5° 85-7°
18
Vo
N. 28f
12 13 14
Smoke haze and thick dust haze
Rainfall: 34 points, 8th-10th ; 50 points, 23rd January;
24 points, 2nd-6th January ; 68 points December ; 312
points November
14
14
Gusts up to 60 m.p.h.
(See also p. 47)
Sale
14.2.44
78° 81-3° 73-2° 101-2°
9
E. 5 N.W. 6
11 12 13 14
“ Most serious fires on record ”
Rainfall: 9 points since 24th January ; 46 points January
14
13 14
Leongatha
22.2.44
68° 69-5° 71°
E. 5 E.N.E. 4
18 19 20-22
Rainfall: 48 points since 24th January. (See 14th February
and 4th-6th February)
21 22
Melbourne
22.2.44
79-4° 81° 79-2°
22
29
W.S.W. 14f
20 21 22
Thick smoke haze morning of 21st. (See 3rd March)
21
20,
22
22
Leongatha
26.2.44
66° 73° 84-5°
W. 3 N.N.E. 3
24 25 26
Rainfall : 9 points, 24th-25th February
25 26
Ballarat
26.2.44
64° 81-8° 84°
24 25 26“
Rainfall: 48 points since 23rd January ; 123 points January.
(See 8th January)
21
26
31
25
N.W. 6
26
Melbourne
3.3.44
72-2° 92-2° 91-3°
23
29
N.N.E. 23f
1 2 3
Rainfall: 5 points since 8th-10th February (34 points) ;
74 points January; 68 points December
2
3
3
Gusts up to 51 m.p.h.
Leongatha
3.3.44
73° 84° 95°
T“ T~ T~
Smoke haze in south, 2nd
Rainfall: 106 points February; 182 points January
35*
3
N.N.E. 4
3
Ararat
3.3.44
83-6° 87° 95°
1 2 3
Rainfall: 122 points February; 119 points January; 58
points December ; 133 points November
9
3
N.E.-N. 5
3
Melbourne
8.3.44
69-5° 77-1° 93-2°
19
N, 19f
6 7 8
Thick dust and smoke haze, late afternoon
8
8
Gusts up to 42 m.p.h.
Camperdown ..
8.3.44
66° 81° 91*
IT” 7 8“
Rainfall: 134 points February. (See 20th-22nd January)
39*
IT
Leongatha
28-31.3.44
62° 77° 83° 85-2° 87° 84-5° 80°
38*
N.N.E. 3 E.N.E. 3
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Rainfall: 220 points March (136 points, 10th)
28,
30
28 29
Melbourne
28-30.3.44
82-4° 83-8° 89-9° 90-2° 89-4°
21
22
26
28
N.N.E. 16f N.N.E. 17f
26 27 28 29 30
Rainfall: 31 points since 10th (121 points, 9th-10th); 39
points February; 74 points January
29
26
28
29
27 28
Gusts up to 41 m.p.h.
Ballarat
28-30.3.44
76-8° 80° 82-4° 87-4° 84-8° 88-2°
24
33
N. 5 N. 4
26 27 28 29 30 31
Rainfall : 184 points March (101 points, 21st); 60 points
February; 123 points January. (Creswick : 35 points,
21st; 24 points, 12th-14th ; 90 points, 9th-llth March)
29
28
26, 27, 28 29
Hamilton
28-30.3.44
71-3° 80-9° 88-3° 78-9° 91-2° 84-9° 80-9°
31
30
27
N.W. 5 W.N.W. 6
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Rainfall: 70 points March; 140 points February; 45
points January
27
26
29
26, 27 29
N.W. 4
30
* 9 a.m. t ni.p.h.
V ictoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1944 —continued
Barwon Downs, 87,
90
Penshurst District,
90
Irrewillipe and
Tomahawk Creek,
90
Lome District, 90..
Yallourn District,
85
Sawmill destroyed
House destroyed. 800 sheep lost and 300 acres of pasture burnt on Banemore
House destroyed
Traffic stopped on Ocean-road 18 miles from Lome (Apollo Bay side)
Fires caused anziety
3
T 30
99
April 7-8
Mt. Macedon Dis-
trict, 88, 87
Sherbrook, 86
Fires reported ..
Fires reported ..
1 and 2b
99
Summary or Major Fires on
State Forests and Crown Lands, December 23, 1943 to March 15, 19444
December 23-March 15 (“ Blow up ” Days—December 23, January 14, 21 ; February 7, 14).
Area burned : —390,000 acres ; 286 fires.
Localities : —79, 82, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90.
Counties Dargo, Tambo, Croajingalong, Bogong, Dundas, Borung, Hampden, Grenville, Ripon, Talbot, Anglesea, Mornington,
Tanjil.
Buln Buln,
September 24 ..
Dandenongs, 86 ..
10 acres of scrub burnt. Checked near Olinda ..
Steiglitz Ranges, 87
Fires 8 miles from Meredith
3
T 24, 25
September 29 .,
Anglesea, 89, 90 ..
Township threatened—fire within f mile ..
3
T 29
October 13
Steiglitz, 87
600 acres timbered crown land swept by fire
lA
Rheola, 81, 79
Fire in State forest
T 13 (I)
November 28 ..
Toolangi, 86
Fires in Toolangi area ..
1
T 28
December 5
Toongabbie, 85
Matlock, 85, 83 ..
Moyhu, 82
Carrum, 86
Kiewa District, 82
Fires in the district
Fires in the district
500 acres of grass and some fencing burnt in the district
50 acres of scrub land burnt
lAC
T~5
December 16 ..
Italian Gully (Bal-
larat), 89
Daylesford, 88, 87
Lome, 90
ravagei'Xfy tholCfco?'toT°o“f Brewood°S ' a " d ’ a " d PnVato ‘ anda
Fire sweeping the forest country about 3 miloo .,
y aDout 3 miles north-west of Hepburn
Fires reported ..
1 and 2b
•
* For In
Smythesdale, 89 ..
dex, see end of this Sectio
Fires in the district
n (page 106). ~ —
T 16
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
+ Supplied by Foresta_Commission of Victoria.
Victoria — continued.


Particulars op
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
| Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1944 — continued ,
Colac
28-30.3.44
82 °-85 ° 90° 80°
Vo
N.E. 4
26-28 29 30-31
Rainfall: 68 points March ; 84 points February ; 88 points
January
31
Yallourn
30.3.44
74-2° 84°-87-7° 89-2°
23
36
26 27-29 30
Rainfall: 3 points since 14th ; 247 points, 4th-14th March ;
72 points February
30
29
Kyneton
7-8.4.44
85° 57 °-67 °
S.S.E, 4
2 3-8
Rainfall: 32 points, 3rd April; 149 points March ; 56
points February ; 32 points January
5
Melbourne
7-8.4.44
66-5° 73-2° 71-4° 87-1°
22
23
31
N. 18f
N. 20f
5 6 7 8
Dust storm, 7th
Rainfall: 91 points, lst-5th ; 162 points March (105 points
10th) ; 39 points February; 74 points January. (Mt.
Macedon : 5 points, 4th ; 52 points, lst-2nd ; only rain
since 7th March (60 points March)
6
8
7
6
Gusts up
7
to 51
m.p.h.
Ballarat
24.9.44
58° 68° 71°
22~ 23 24
Rainfall: 99 points, lst-21st; 103 points August
33
23
38
24
N. 6
Melbourne
24.9.44
62-6° 67-9° 76°
31
N. 23f
24
Gusts up
22 23 24
Rainjall: 137 points, 9th-21st September ; 75 points, 22nd
July to 9th September ; 120 points July. (Olinda : 283
points, llth-21st September)
24
to 47
m.p.h.
Geelong
29.9.44
61-4° 75° 85°
36
N.W. 5
27 28 29
Rainfall: 118 points September; 68 points August; 88
points July
29
29
Ballarat
13.10.44
57° 68-6° 80-3°
11 12 13
Rainfall: 91 points, Ist-lOth October ; 118 points September.
(Meredith : 87 points, 2nd-5th)
40
12
53
13
N. 5
13
Maryborough ..
13.10.44
65-1° 75-1° 89-3°
16
13
13
5
37
12
36
4
W. 8
13
Light
norther
Melbourne
5.12.44
11 12 13
Rainfall: 70 points 2nd-4th October ; 56 points September ;
13 points August; 148 points July
67° 83-9° 98-4°
3 4 5
to
iy
moderate
Sale
5.12.44
Rainfall: 5 points since 21st November ; 112 points Novem-
ber ; 210 points October; 142 points September
77° 75° 90°
3 4 5
Rainfall: 10 points since 16th November ; 85 points Novem-
ber ; 134 points October; 84 points September
35
5
53
4
E. 4
T‘
Wangaratta
5.12.44
78-9° 84-2° 88-3° 94-8° 98°
1 2 3 4 5
Rainfall: 10 points since 6th-9th November (93 points) ;
194 points October ; 47 points September ; 5 points August
13
3
15
5
16
4
18 23
1 2
Ballarat
16.12.44
60° 69-3° 84° 89-3°
13 14 15 16
Dust-laden sky
Rainfall: 142 points, 6th-13th December; 147 points
November; 215 points October; 118 points September
16
16
25
15
N.W.-N.
16
6
Geelong
16.12.44
70-3° 87-2° 97°
14 15 16
Rainfall: 112 points, lst-15th December ; 92 points Novem-
ber ; 184 points October, (Smythesdale: 208 points,
6th-13th. Daylesford : 127 points, 6th-13th)
34
16
N.W. 6
16
9 a.m.
t m.p.h.
Victoria — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
* Pressure Type.
1944 —continued
December 23 ..
Kilmore, 88, 86 ..
Fire caused by carelessness in boiling a billy
2b
December 29 ..
Anglesea, 87, 90 ..
Threatened by a fire 6 miles on Geelong side of township. About 50 acres
1c and 2b
pine plantations burnt and 1,000 acres wattles
T 29
Alexandra, 88
Fire in rough country, 7 miles east of Alexandra
„
Ararat District, 79,
50 acres grass and 50 acres scrub burnt six miles from Ararat
1945—
January 8
Valencia Creek Dis-
Fires in district
1
trict, 85
Ys
January 24
Daylesford, 88
Fires in district
3
Branxholm, 90
Fires in district
T 24
Koroit, 90
Fires in district
Yarra Junction, 86
Fires in district
Yarragon, 85
Fires in district
Index, see end of this Section fu*™
♦IFor Index, see end of this Section (page 106).
Victoria — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued .
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1944—
Seymour
23.12.44
97° 87-5° 82° 87-5° 73-5° 68°
%
W. 3
18 19 20 21 22 23
Rainfall: 68 points December ; 64 points November ; 127
points October; 51 points September
22, 23
Geelong
29.12.44
65-2° 75° 95-3°
27 28 29
Rainfall: 240 points December. (See 16th December)
38
29
W. 6 S.W. 4
27 28
W. 5
29
Alexandra
29.12.44
72-5° 78-5° 88-5°
27 28 29
Smoke haze, 29th
Rainfall; 101 points December (39 points, 27th) ; 80 points
November ; 191 points October ; 89 points September
N.W. 3
28
Ararat
29.12.44
78-2° 89-7°
28 29
Dusty
Rainfall: 293 points December; 106 points November ;
307 points October
N. 6
29
Melbourne
29.12.44
77-4° 82-9° 68-5° 76-3° 94-8°
25
34
N.N.E. 18f
. •
25 26 27 28 29
Rainfall: Light to moderate rains at intervals ; 286 points
on 17 days in December ; 112 points November ; 210 points
October
29
25
29
Gusts up to 44
m.p h.
1945-
Sale
8.1.46
70-5° 74-2° 93° 102°
6 7 8 9
Rainfall: 15 points, lst-2nd January ; 149 points December.
(See 5th December)
36
9
38
8
E. 5 E. 4
7" "'8
Ballarat
24.1.45
85° 86-3° 76-5° 81° 96°
20 21 22 23 14
Dust-laden sky.
Rainfall: 138 points, lst-16th January ; 241 points Decem-
ber ; 147 points November. (Daylesford: 36 points,
2nd-16th January)
19
24
N. 6
24
Hamilton
24.1.45
73-4° 80-1° 74-9° 82-4° 98-1°
12
27
N.W. 6
20 21 22 23 24
Rainfall: 19 points, 5 days lst-16th January ; 282 points
December ; 168 points November ; 348 points October
24
23
24
Melbourne
24.1.45
73-5° 79-4° 82-1° 101-2°
13
30
31
N.N.E. 26f
21 22 23 24
Dust storm
No rain, 8 days
Rainfall: 74 points since 1st January. (See 29th December)
24
22
23
24
Gusts up to 53
m.p.h.
Yallourn
24.1.45
77-2° 77-8° 98°
23
29
S.W. 3 E. 3
22 23 24
Rainfall: 154 points, lst-16th January ; 254 points Decem-
ber ; 133 points November ; 241 points October. (Launch-
ing Place : 68 points, 14th-17th January; 46 points,
2nd-llth January.) (Trafalgar: No rain since 16th
January ; 147 points, lst-16th January)
24
23
23 24
♦ 9 a.m.
m[g
Victoria — continued.


SUMMARY OF PRESSURE
TYPES OVER VICTORIA.
Pressure Type.
Total Number.
1
42
lA
11
1b
5
1c
5
2
1
2a
10
2b
19
2c
4
3
21
3a
1
4
4
4a
2
4b
2
6
I
MONTHLY FREQUENCIES—VICTORIA.
November — March.
Pressure
Type.
November.
December.
January.
February.
March.
1
2
8
12
8
8
lA
1
7
2
1b
2
1
1
1c
2
2
1
2
1
2a
2
5
2
1
2b
5
6
4
1
2c
1
1
1
3
6
8
3
3a
1
4
I
2
1
4a
1
1
4b
1
1
5
2
Seasons Comparatively Free op Fires.
Season.
Area Burnt (Acres).
Number of Fires.
1923-24
5,000
1924-25 .
34
1930-31
13,000
80
1934-35
16,000
77
1940-41
11,000
56
1944-45
22,000
143
33,700
150
INDEX OF PRESSURE TYPES.
VICTORIA.
1. Sequence of “Highs” and “Lows”—
(a) Rapid movement.
(b) Slow movement.
(c) Weak anticyclones.
2. Low pressure activity. Development of —
(a) “ Secondaries.”
(b) Deep depressions.
(c) Extensive low pressure system over Southern Ocean.
3. “High” Tasman Sea for three days or more and Depression over
Bight.
(a) Retrograde movement.
4. “High” over Bight; depression over Tasman Sea.
(a) Tropical depression over Eastern Australia or interior.
(b) Secondaries developed to South or South-East.
5. “High” moving Tasmania. Tropical depression over Eastern
Australia.
Troughs of depressions passed on 98 out of 128 fire days.
Note T (with figures) signifies the date of the passage of the trouah
of a depression over the region. wougn
(I) = Intense low pressure system.
SUMMARY OF MAJOR FIRES.
(Supplied by Forests Commission—Victoria.)
Figures refer to State Forests and Crown Lands and not to alienated
lands.
1851 .. Widespread fires over the entire State,
1898 .. Severe fires in South Gippsland.
1900 .. Widespread fires. Large areas burnt.
1919 .. Severe fires in Grampians. 120,000 acres of State forest and
Crown lands burnt.
1923 .. Severe fires in East Gippsland. 500,000 acres of State forest
and Crown lands burnt
1926 .. An extensive area of Mountain Ash in the Central Mountains
was burnt. Six lives lost. 976,000 acres of State forest
and Crown lands burnt
1932 .. Serious fires in Gippsland. 500,000 acres of forest burnt,
oix fives lost.
1939 .. Three and one-half million acres of forest burnt in practically
all forest areas of the State. Seventy-one lives lost and
extensive destruction of homes, stock, mills, and property
m general.
1944 .. Extensive fires in grass and scrubland in Western and North-
Eastern districts and in South Gippsland. Forty-nine lives
os . orest losses occurred mainly in extreme Eastern
por ion °f State. 390,000 acres of State forest and Crown
lands burnt.
Victoria— continued.


NEW SOUTH WALES.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type
1914—
January 8
Wymah, 72, 74 ..
Bush fires have burnt stock, fencing, hay, and wheat. This is one of the
most serious fires in the district
January 29
Wingham, 60
Bush fires raging all over the district. Miles of country devastated
1915—
March 16
Lithgow, 63
Disastrous bush fires swept the country. Great damage to fences and grass
November 1-2..
Grafton, 58
Murwillumbah, 58..
Dorrigo, 59
Lismore, 58
Destructive fires within 60-mile radius of Grafton. Cattle stations swept bare.
Houses gutted
Bush fires raging in all quarters of the district
Bush fires raging. Cattle burnt
Disastrous bush fires through the district. Damage to sugar and other
crops. Great mortality amongst dairy stock
(Also October 28, fires reported from Bellingen, Murwillumbah, Brunswick Heads, Macksville, National Park.)
November 10 ..
Glen Innis, 56
Newcastle, 61
Bush fires raging all over the district
Bush fires in the surrounding country were very severe
November 16 ..
Katoomba, 63
Disastrous bush fires have been raging in the district. Worst in the memory of
oldest residents J
November 19 ..
Gordon ville (Bel-
lingen), 58
H cfops U3h fireS thr ° Ughout the district doing great damage to dwellings and
1916—
January 18
Holbrook, 72, 74 ..
E nSminZe7otI?LTJdZl C bTiVrf° \ the «“<”* ° f
caused by phosphorous wrapped in rags Istrieta - Four d *‘mot outbreaks
January 24
Howlong, 74
Holbrook, 62
burnt I* 1 * 1 * reat *> wheat crops.
Disastrous bush fire. 30,000 bags of wheat burned
NEW SOUTH WALES.


PARTICULARS OF TEMPERATURE, RELATIVE HUMIDITY, RAINFALL, ETC.,
AND OBSERVER’S
REMARKS.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1914—
Albury
8.1,14
87° 90° 95° 99° 90°
2 3 4-6 7 ~8~
Rainfall: 162 points December ; 198 points November;
237 points October
25
8
0/
/o
29
7
Taree
29.1.14
85° 94° 102° 99° 83°
25 26 ¥ 28 ¥
Rainfall: 4 points since 14th January ; 203 points January ;
112 points December; 70 points November; 143 points
October
1915—
Lithgow
16.3.15
Rainfall: 24 points February; 75 points January; 516
points December
Grafton
1.11.15
83° 90° 95° 99° 81° 85-5°
27 28 29 30 31 1
Smoke haze, 27th October to 10th November. Exceptionally
severe drought
Rainfall: No rain since 17th October or 24th September to
14th October; 4 points October ; 87 points September ;
115 points August
•
West Kempsey
1.11.15
75° 84° 88° 85° 82° 87°
27 "28“ 29 30~ 3f T
All high country burnt out in November
Rainfall: 37 points October; 58 points September; 113
points August
Lismore
1.11.15
84 °-88 0 99° 98° 86° 84°
17*
25* 46*
26-28 29 30 31 1
Rainfall: 14 points, 24th September to 22nd November ; 11
points October ; 108 points September ; 264 points August
29"
25 31
Glen Innis
10.11.15
88° 92° 80 °-84 ° 89°
4 5 6-9 10
“ Drought and bush fires ” (November) ; “ Bush fires preva-
lent ” (October)
Rainfall: No rain, 16th October to 21st November; 48
points October ; 165 points September ; 172 points August
Katoomba
16.11.15
85° 75-5° 86-7° 59° 65°
8
12
W. 6
W.-S.W. 5
10, 11 12 13 15 16
Rainfall: No rain, 26th October to 19th November; 91
points October ; 130 points September ; 123 points August
10,
12 13
10
11-16
Grafton
19.11.15
97° 111° 100-5° 89-5° 82-5° 90° 99-5°
13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Smoke haze, 12th-20th
No recollection of such severe drought
Rainfall: No rain since 17th October ; 4 points October ;
87 points September; 115 points August
West Kempsey
19.11.15
85° 96° 100° 77°-80° 89°
13 14 15 16-18 19
Smoke haze at intervals till 14th, also 17th-19th
Bush fires, 15th. Fearful heat all night. Cool southerly, 5 a.m.
Rainfall: No rain, 16th October to 21st November; 37
points October ; 58 points September ; 118 points August
S.W.
16
5
1916—
Albury
24.1.16
87° 90°-96° 101° 104°
18 19-22 23 24
Bush fires, 24th
Rainfall: 53 points, 16th December to 24th January ; 233
points December ; 19 points November ; 527 points October
29
19
30 31
24 22
N.W.
24
4
Corowa
24.1.16
94° 83-5° 88 °-89 ° 91° 98°
18 19 20-22 23 24
Rainfall: No rain, 7th-27th January ; 50 points 3rd-6th
January ; 70 points December ; 5 points November ; 286
points October
* 9 a.m.
NEW SOUTH WALES.


Date.
location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1916 —continued
1918—
January 12
Hay, 75
Large bush fires have been raging throughout the district. Much damage to
to fencing and stock
December 1
Jerilderie, 75
One of the most destructive fires experienced in the Riverina. Thousands
of sheep burned
1921—
November 2 ..
Dubbo, 65, 51
Huge bush fires passing over the district with a frontage of 300 (?) miles
3*
Outbreaks began a week ago. Properties between Darling and Bogan
Rivers as far as Tranjie threatened. Great damage at Peep o’ Day station
T 2
near Nyngan. Eurambilina Station swept
November 27 ..
Miandetta, 51
One of the largest fires that has occurred is raging over a 20-mile front
Many sheep burnt
1 and 2b
T 27
December 4
Narromine, 51
Seri s°tock bUSh fir6S CaUS6d by Hghting destr °y ed wheat crops, fencing, and
1
CC 2-4
1923—
April 17
Bago, 72
R a C WeTu^t?t h v of vff 8 ITT* de " tr , Uction of 40 ’ 000 acres of grass and
a large quantity of valuable timber. Beheved to be caused by incendiarism
3 (?)
October 11
1926—
Ballina, 58
Kxtensive damage by fire to sugarcane fields at South Ballina Fire believed
to have been started through burning-off operations
2bf
January 13
Junee, 73
Serious bush fires caused by lightning. Thousands of acres of grass destroyed
1
January 28
Rydal District, 63
Rydal. “J of Meadow Flat, Mt. Lambie, west of
y I west ot Lithgow). Great bush fires reported around Wallsend
T 13
2cb
T28
Canberra, 70
fr0nt bey ° nd * h6 Mmrnmbidgo..
February 4
Canberra and Albury,
70, 72
1
T 34
February 10 ..
Wagga, 72, 74
B ToOoTheep VumT 1 thr ° Ugh the district causing great destruction to property.
2ba
February 15 ..
Albury, 72, 74
Bush fires have devastated a big area. Hundreds of sheep have been lost ..
T 8-9
2ba
February 18 ..
October 13
Newcastle, 61
Casino, 58
Eaging bush fires. Thousands ot acres ot scrub country aflame .,
Wh* area surrounding Casino on fire, much damage. Many head ot cattle
T 15
2b
Kyogle, 58
Queensland bolder GroTwT WhoIe A COUIltiy from
houses destroyed aoiaze. Great damage. A number of
2fab
Tl5
For Index, see end of this (ww
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 128)
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars op
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, Ac.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1916 —continued
Wagga
24.1.16
83-5° 88 °-95 ° 98-5° 105-5°
18 19-22 23 24
Rainfall: No rain, 21st December to 27th January ; 164
points December ; 238 points October
12
24
0/
/o
24
20
26
23
1918-
Hay
12.1.18
98° 101° 87 °-88 ° 70°-71°
6 7, 8 9, 10 11, 12
Rainfall ; 15 points December, 278 points November ; 318
points October
17
7
22
~8
Berrigan
1.12.18
90° 73°-82° 90° 95°
25 26-29 30 1
Rainfall : 9 points, 9th October to 13th December ; 21 points
October ; 45 points September
S.W. 5 E.-S.E. 5
27 29, 30
W. 6
1
Deniliquin
1.12.18
89° 75°-80° 85° 97°
25~ 26-29 30 T
Rainfall: 3 points, 9th October to 1st December ; 83 points
October ; 41 points September
5
25
17
30
18
29
N. 6
1 “
1921—
Dubbo
2.11.21
95° 94° 91°
31 1 2
Rainfall: 6 points since 15th October ; 114 points October ;
130 points September; 117 points August
24
33
20
1, 2
Nyngan
2.11.21
91-5° 94-2° 97-4° 99° 93-5°
29 30 31 1 2
Rainfall : No rain since 22nd October
S. 6
2
Nyngan
27.11.21
91° 90-5° 98° 88°
24 25 26 27
Rainfall : 51 points, 7th-21st November ; 69 points October ;
97 points September ; 77 points August
N. 5 W. 6
26 27
Dubbo
4.12.21
85°-90° 92° 82° 81°
24
33
N. 4
28-1 2 3 4
Rainfall : No rain since 21st November ; 130 points Novem-
ber ; 114 points October; 130 points September
T
2
2
1923—
Lismore
11.10.23
88° 80° 81° 93° 88°
T F T F F
Rainfall: 16 points, 6th September to 11th October, 111
points September; 414 points August; 188 points July
W. 4
11
1926—
Junee
13.1.26
85° 89°
N.E. 4
11, 12 13
Rainfall: 123 points, 6th January ; 325 points November ;
113 points October
13
Wagga
13.1.26
73° 82° 90° 87° 93° 95-5°
8 9~ IfT IT 12~ 13
Rainfall: 1 point since 16th December ; 36 points December ;
199 points November; 82 points October
13
13
20
12
26
11
S.W. 4
8, 11
Lithgow
28.1.26
83 °-88•5 °
23-28
Rainfall: 119 points, lst-20th January ; 221 points Decem-
ber ; 398 points November ; 126 points October
18 s *
27
26*
28
Moderate north-w
gale to strong
westerly, 28th
esterly
south-
Canberra
28.1.26
78-5° 84■5 °-86 ° 88° 81°
22 23-26 27 28
Rainfall : 39 points since 14th December ; 11 points Decem-
ber ; 262 points November
18
28
15
27
10
26
W. 8
28
Fierce hot wind
Canberra
4.2.26
97-3° 83-5° 93° ' 92-8°
I 2 3 4
Rainfall: No rain since 9th January ; 49 points January ;
II points December; 262 points November
7
I
4
4
Light winds
* 9 a.m.
New South Wales — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1926 — continued
October 14
Bellingen, 59
Murwillumbah, 68..
Severe bush fires raging throughout the countryside
Severe bush fires raging throughout the countryside. A number of dwellings
destroyed
October 15
Grafton, 58
Great bush fires raging. Farmers burnt out. Loss of stock will be enormous
2fae
T 15
October 19
Goff’s Harbour, 59
Bush fires sweeping through the district
4
T 19-20
October 25-29 ..
Griffith, 75
Destructive bush fires in the district. Over 4,000 acres of grass land swept.
2ab
Valuable fencing and timber destroyed
November 9
Murwillumbah, 58..
Fires all over the district
1
T 9
November 12 ..
Bellringer River, 58
North Coast experiencing one of the worst droughts in history. Bush fires
ravaging the country
November 16 ..
Glen Innis, 56
Bush fires have swept the country to the east of the town on a 30-mile front.
Great damage to grass and fencing
1 and 2b
T 14
December 5
Dubbo, 65
Serious bush fires passing over the district. Enormous damage to houses
Parkes, 65
haystacks, crops. Two men burned to death
Great quantities of wheat in bags burnt and standing crops suffered
Narromine, 60
Great damage to sheep and standing crops. Damage estimated at £100 000
Forbes, 65
Inree men burned to death. Many persons injured
68 kn ° Wn iQ the district -' Wind reached cyclonic force. Great
Peak Hill, 50
Great damage to wheat crops and dwellings. Most settlers lost everything ..
Bogan Gate, 50, 65
H oTtonsTf hay ettlerS ’ HundredS ° f mUeS of fencin g destroyed and thousands
Trundle, 50
Fires and northerly gale. Fifty thousand bags of wheat and thousands of
acres of standing wheat destroyed
December 5-7 ..
Parkes, 65
Worst fires ever known Houses, crops, and sheep destroyed. One man lost
his life. Damage estimated at £100,000
1 and 2d
T 5-6
Trundle, 50 near 65
D we°burn r t Spa ° e ° f time thirt y farmers
were burnt out. They lost standing crops, bagged wheat, haystacks
buildings, fencing, and machinery . 60.000 acres swept. Damage estimated
at IdoOjOOO.
1
Newcastle, 61
Fi smoke bUSh fir6S raging “ thG di8tdCt - Mar ‘y collapsed from effects of
/0./0.S6
//•sa.26 f6
\) &9 V-
\K /s"x sp./s
W
/y Jyi^siC1s\Jy
Jo ' 2 *
> 29-S
S4./0.J>(f X5". /O.
■29 3
as; ..... ;.y
0
A
.r\
I
1
1\ WUViV
£
4
j
♦ For Index, see end of this Section (page 128).
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1926 —continued
%
Wagga
4.2.26
96-8° 96° 102° 99° 93° 100° 94-5°
29 30 31 1 2 3 4
Rainfall; 1 point since December; 36 points December;
199 points November
10
3
9
4
•
Albury
4.2.26
98° 105° 99° 94° 100° 94°
26
15
18
16
S.W. 3
30 31 1 2 3 4
30
2
3
4
4
Rainfall : No rain since 4th-8th January (57 points); 2
points December ; 64 points November ; 70 points October
Wagga
10.2.26
94-5° 90° 101° 106° 102-5° 76° 80°
9
21
24
S.W. 5
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
4
8
5
8, 9
Rainfall: 1 point since 31st December (35 points), and 18th-
21st November (199 points)
Albury
15.2.26
100° 108-5° 104-5° 82 °-93 ° 98°
10
31
23
30 21
N. 4 N.W. 4
7 8 9 10-13 14, 15
9
10
11
12 13, 15
8
15
Rainfall: No rain since first week in January. (See 4th
February, 1926)
Newcastle
18.2.26
99° 86° 103° 79°
15~ IfT 17 IfT
Rainfall: 14 points since 20th January ; 69 points January ;
242 points December ; 202 points November
26
17
N.E. 6
16
W. 6
17
Casino
13.10.26
98° 96° 87°
11 12 dT
Rainfall: Little rain since early July ; 11 points, 5th October ;
92 points September ; 48 points August, 75 points July
N. 6
~W
Lismore ..
13.10.26
83° 94° 90°
High west wind on 12th
10 11, 12 13
caused
great spread of
Rainfall: Occasional light rains since early July ; 26 points,
fire in
the district
lst-5th October; 122 points September; 104 points
August; 197 points July
Grafton
15.10.26
93° 92° 87° 83° 84°
11 12 iT F 15"
Unprecedented bush fires this month
Dense smoke haze, 14th-15th, also 19th-20th
Rainfall: Occasional light rains since early July ; 32 points,
1st—6th October ; 82 points September ; 76 points August;
100 points July
West Kempsey
15.10.26
90° 87 °-89 °
11 12-15
Smoke haze, 5th-15th
Rainfall: No rain, 28th September to 16th October; 64
points September ; 97 points August; 20 points July
Griffith
25-29.10.26
81-9° 93-4° otherwise under 80°
25 29
Rainfall: 120 points, 3rd-26th October ; 106 points Septem-
ber ; 187 points August
42
29
Glen Innis
16.11.26
88° otherwise 81°-87°
N.W. 4
9
14
Rainfall; No rain since 22nd October ; 103 points October ;
145 points September ; 158 points August
Lismore
9-12.11.26
90° 102° 89° 82° 80°
8 t i(T rr nr
Rainfall: 9 points since 18th October ; 134 points October ;
122 points September ; 104 points August
Dubbo
5.12.26
101° 91° 86° 93° 101°
17
25
27
N. 6
29-30 1 2 3 4, 5
T
3
29
5
Rainfall: 42 points since October ; 56 points October ; 155
points September
Forbes
5-7.12.26
94 °-96 ° 103° 102° 102° 70°
1-3 4 5 6 '7
Rainfall : 57 points, 2nd—6th December ; 8 points November ;
112 points October ; 173 points September
13
4
22
5
N.W. 6
3-4
0.8016/47. —g
New South Wales— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type
1926— continued.
December 8
Wagga, 72, 74
Disastrous bush
stock
fires sweeping the district. Great damage to dwellings and
Cootamundra, 73 ..
Big bush fires damaged crops ..
Berrigan, 74
Much damage to dwellings and crops
Albury, 72, 74
Much damage to
property. Several farmers burnt out
Gundagai, 73, 72 ..
Terrific bush fires raging. Great damage to crops and dwellings. Men,
women, and children had to flee from their homesteads
December 10-12
December 10 ..
Goulburn, 70
Brooklesby, 74, 72
Wagga, 72, 73, 74..
District suffering severely from bush fires. Several homesteads were burnt
and great numbers of stock were destroyed
Twenty mile north-west of Albury. Bush fires sweeping through the district.
Dreat damage to crops, bagged wheat, farm buildings, and machinery
Most serious fires ever experienced. Great damage
1 and 2b
T io=n
December 10-11
Coolamon, 74, 73..
Narrandera, 74
Several houses caught fire. Many farms in district suffered
One of the most destructive fires ever known. More than 500,000 acres of
wheat, crops, and grass land destroyed at Euroley
December 10-12
Tarago, 70
Cootamundra, 73 ..
Junee, 73
Dandaloo, 50
Henty, 74
Grenfell, 73, 65 ..
Ooma, 65
Albury, 72, 74
Parkes, 65
1
Many homes burned to the ground
Grea\ d (irml r r S fn bU t u 1)wellin S s burnt ’ Great’loss of'stock !
Ureat damage to wheat. A man burned to death
Huge fares. Five cars abandoned to the fire. One man burned ''
Prcaf fires ail over the district destroying thousands of sheep
Zg/?umSs°° y bUSh fires - K ° nes - cattle ' sh “P priced in
South of Forbes. Soldier settlers practically cleaned out ..
worst fires since 1904. Damage estimated at £50,000
total losses m Parkes district alone totalled £1,000,000
2/226 S./2.26
*9.0
6. /2. 26 /■- /2.26
s. /2.26
* 9.6
/0./2.26
*9.6 TxS- /^X
// < _^226
*9#
r
*9.2
/JT *2. 26
Sgpfe-
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1926 — continued
Condobolin
Wagga
Cootamundra ..
Berrigan
7.12.26
8-12.12.26
8-12.12.26
8.12.26
93° 94° 101° 96° 74° 81°
1 2 3 ~5~ 6~ T
Rainfall: 14 points, 6th December ; no rain November;
7 points October ; 124 points September
95-5° 103-5° 97-5° 93° 100° 76° 77-5°
3 4 5 9 10 11 12
Rainfall : 43 points since 18th November ; 41 points Novem-
ber ; 258 points October ; 177 points September
85° 93° 101° 80°
8 9 10 12
Rainfall: 29 points, 2nd—5th December ; 25 points Novem-
ber ; 143 points October ; 189 points September (33 points
since 13th October)
100° 108° 98° 70° 75°
23
4
16
10
0/
/o
N. 6
4
W. 5 S.W. 8 N. 4
5 10 10
(9 a.m.) (3 p.m.)
N. 6 S.W. 4
Albury
8-13.12.26
4 5 6 7 8
Rainfall : No rain since 18th November ; 12 points Novem-
ber ; 137 points October ; 134 points September
98° 101-5° 98° 75°-84° 96-2° 87° 77°-78°
15
13
11
5 6
N. 5 W. 4—W.S.W. 5
.
3 4 5 6-8 9 10 11-13
Rainfall: 30 points, 6th December ; 57 points November ;
211 points October ; 175 points September
4
9
10
5 ’ 6
N.W. 4
10
Goulburn
Adelong
Leeton
8-12.12.26
8.12.26
12.12.26
100° 97° 88° 96° 80° 78°
~5 IT IT ToT IF IF
Smoke haze, llth-13th
Rainfall: 29 points, 6th December ; 32 points November;
78 points October; 106 points September
99° 65° 73° 80°
4, 5 6 “ 7 8
“ Big bush fires on 9th. Heavy damage ”
Rainfall: 113 points, lst-6th December (67 points, 6th);
94 points November; 303 points, October; 229 points
September. (Gundagai: 47 points on 6th only)
95° 103° 76-5° 78-8°
3
10
4
5
W. 4 W.N.W. 7
6, 7 10
N.W. 4
Trangie
12.12.26
9 10 11 12
Rainfall: 26 points since 18th November ; 13 points Novem-
ber ; 122 points October, 126 points September
96° 104° 89° 88°
10
N.W. 5 S. 4
Dubbo
10-12.12.26
9 10 11 12
“Smoke from fires all day 11th.” Very dry previous two
months
Rainfall: 35 points, 2nd-6th December ; 5 points November ;
18 points October; 125 points September
95° 102° 87° 85°
6
10 11, 12
N.W. 4
Grenfell
10-12.12.26
9 10 11 12
Smoke haze, 11th
Rainfall: 64 points, 2nd-7th December ; 19 points Novem-
ber ; 56 points October ; 155 points September. (Dandaloo :
20 points on 6th December ; 17 points, 23rd November ;
8 points October, only rain since September)
93° 92° 90° 78°-80°
10
10
Hot wind
Forbes
10-12.12.26
8 9 10 11-13
Rainfall : 40 points, 6th December ; 52 points previous
eight weeks ; 92 points October ; 157 points September
94° 104° 96° 89° 89°
9 10 11 12 IT
“ Bush fires raging, 10th ”
Rainfall: Little rain since mid-September ; 48 points, 6th
December ; 8 points November ; 112 points October ; 173
points September
1
New South Wales— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type
1927—
January 15
Junee, 73
One of the most disastrous fires known in the district. Strong wind. Thousands
of pounds worth of property destroyed. Commenced near “ Erinvale,”
Noorla
January 15-16
Bena, 50-75
Largest and most destructive bush fire experienced in the West Wyalong
district for many years. Fencing and grass destroyed represents many
thousands of pounds
Ib and 2a
T 15
1928—
October 8
Sydney, 67, &c. ..
Fires and gales have been experienced in all parts of the State. Cumberland
2cb
Paper Board mill destroyed. Damage estimated at £200,000
November 7
Mittagong, 68
| Bush fires raging on a front of 14 miles. Eighty cottages destroyed
2b
//. 2$
1 1 f Cy—-
2/2? /o./2?
7 Mjt M .
ITS \ \ \ n\3° o /-\ vV \ Z /
294
\ J?" Ai 9
H* ju ** H.o
//. /
Joo
1929—
January 4
Barrallier, 63, 68
“ -“os; w* -
i
T4
January 9
Baulkham Hills, 67
(N d^ag?tr a Z“ards a) and\ S r h ms fireS thousands of P ounds worth of
January 8-11 ..
Bankstown, 66
Bush fire, swept through the district. Farm, and houses destroyed
Tumut, Adelong and
Wagga Districts,
69
Fires raging for nearly a week. Much damage
2b
January 11
Pambula, 69
extraction pint at h £30,OOoTdesfro^d° le VllIagC and Wattle bark
2b
January 17
January 18
Bombala, 70
Albury, 72, 74
Bush fires have r.ged throughout the district causing great damage to stock
Huge fires raging throughout the district
2b
2b
January 20
Jingellic, 72
Great damage done to stock and building. in this district in the last week
January 31
Bathurst, 63
been burneTand huge Th ° Usands of sheep have
2bk
February 6
Coonamble, 51, 54..
banks, and two Si kn ° Wn * Thirt y- fiv e stores, two
December 21-22
Coraki (near Lis-
more), 58
Bush fires have damaged properties in the district
2lf
lor Index, see end of this Section '— —
• For Index, nee end of this Section (page 128).
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, Ac.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1927—
Junee
15.1.27
100° 104°
TT nr
Rainfall : 87 points since 27th December ; 159 points Decem-
ber ; 30 points November ; 160 points October
0/
/o
Wagga
15.1 27
101° 102-5° 106° 106°
23
25
S. 4 S.W. 4
12 13 14 15
Rainfall : 112 points, 6th January ; 8 points, 7th January ;
103 points December ; 41 points November ; 258 points
October
13, 14
15
13 15
(otherwise calm)
Marsden
15-16.1.27
103° 106-7° 110° 113° 110°
12 i3 ~i4 nr nr
Rainfall: 131 points since 28th December (123 points, 6th);
188 points December; 8 points November; 62 points
October. (West Wyalong : 61 points 6th January, only
rain since 28th December)
Forbes
15-16.1.27
100° 102° 107° 110° 99°
N. 6
1928—
T2 13 14 15 16"
Rainfall : 127 points, 6th—7th January ; 359 points Decem-
ber; 8 points November; 112 points October
14
Dust storm, 16th
Sydney
8.10.28
84-5° 98° 84°
12 13
12
W. 34f
6 7 8
Thick dust and smoke haze, 8th
Rainfall: 22 points, 3rd October; 20 points September;
141 points August; 66 points July
5 6
7
7, 3 p.m.
Strong north-west to
west wind
Mossvale
7.11.28
80° 77° 84° 69° 79° 84°
T~ ~Y IT ~4~ T T
Rainfall; 127 points October ; 48 points September ; 150
points August
W. 8
7
Bowral
7.11.28
80°-86° 72° 80° 86°
S.W. 3-4
1929—
1-3 567
Rainfall : No rain since 23rd October ; 94 points October ;
35 points September ; 134 points August
5-6
S.W. 7
7
Goulburn
4.1.29
99° 95° 102°
r x t~
Rainfall: 119 points December ; 63 points November ; 107
points October
19
~4
W.N.W. 7
4
Bowral
4.1.29
103° 89° 98°
~i~ TT X
Rainfall : 81 points December ; 33 points November ; 94
points October
Sydney
9.1.29
74-6° 87-2° 74-5° 76-2° 81-5° 95-7° 106-2°
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Rainfall; 16 points since 16th November ; 94 points Novem-
ber ; 26 points October ; 165 points September
3? 14
8 9
Fresh to strong north-
west wind on 9th
Bega
11.1.29
93° 98° 104° 80°
S.E. 3
89 10 11
Rainfall: 42 points December; 52 points November; 111
points October
10
Bombala
17.1.29
92° 86° 89° 82° 66° 85°-89°
8 9 10 11 12 14-17
Rainfall: 53 points since 11th December (310 points) ; 42
points November ; 107 points October
W. gale
9
Albury
18-20.1.29
94-5° 84° 93° 89° 85° 93-2°
14 16
20
22
W. 6 W. 4
15 16 17 18 19 ~20~
Smoke haze, 19th
Rainfall: No rain since 23rd December ; 15 points December ;
17 points November; 301 points October
17 18
To
To
17 15-16
Bathurst
31.1.29
95° 92° 84° 87° 91° 90° 70°
N.W. 6 S.S.W. 5
1
125 26 27 28 29 X 31
Rainfall : 18 points January ; 138 points December ; 70
points November ; 252 points October
30 31
t m.p.h,
New South Wales— continued.


Date.
Location and District
- '
_
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
•Pressure Type.
1929 — continued
1931—
October 7-8
Menindee and
Ivanhoe, 47, 49
Bush fires raged around the area causing much damage
2c
T 8-9
December 13-14
Cobar, 48
Bush fires raging between Tilpa and Cobar over a 50-mile front
1 and 2e
T 12-13
December 30 ..
Riverina, 74, 75 ..
Several fires caused by lightning. Great areas of pastoral country devastated,
thousands of sheep lost
3
T 30
1
j
1932—
February 20 ..
Canowindra, 63, 65
S tT b " sh fireS in the disW <*- damage exceed, £15,000. Many „heep
lA
December 12 ..
Oaklands (Albury),
72, 74
Grass fire caused by lightning swept 15,000 acres. Many sheep destroyed
T 20
1
T 12
1933—
January 5
Albury, 72, 74
® IlSSJftSS 1 1 ’ 000 a ° reS ° f “ d *— lend, and ,a rg e qu .„ tities
1
January 11
Newcastle, 61
Toronto (South-West
of Newcastle,
South of Maitland)
61
M «rdey“JSd ma KZ ° f th p° U r" dS - I-*
Bridges and property damaged FaSSlfem Station ruined.
Damage estimated at £10,000
T 4
2b
T 11
* For Index, see end of this Section '
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 128).
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars or
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1929— continued
Coonamble
Lismore
1931—
Menindee
6.2.29
21-22.12.29
7-8.10.31
102° 105° 102°
6 5 4
Rainfall : Very light rains since 5th November (63 points)
93° 97° 104°
18~ ~W 21, 22
Rainfall: 101 points since 19th November; 250 points
November ; 588 points October ; 115 points September
90° 93° 86°
6 T~ T~
Rainfall: 66 points September ; 12 points August; 87 points
July
0/
/o
Wilcannia
Cobar
7-8.10.31
13-14.12.31
90° 92° 96°
6 7 8
Rainfall: 93 points, 26th September; 8 points, August;
85 points July
96° 94° 78° 76° 83° 90°
11, 12 13 14 15 16 17
Serious bush fires around Cobar on 16th-17th December
Bush fires commenced in district second week in December,
and despite efforts to subdue them, were still burning fiercely
at close of month. Tops of grass very dry, and it was
reported that fires were started by lightning at the end of
month. Maximum temperatures : —102°-106°, 26th-31st
Rainfall: 14 points since 5th December ; 92 points, lst-5th
December; 221 points November; 32 points October;
66 points September. (Louth : 45 points, lst-3rd Decem-
ber ; 124 points November ; 15 points October ; 23 points
September.) (Tilpa : 103 points, lst-3rd December ; 307
points November)
8 7
7 8
,
Deniliquin
30.12.31
89° 95° 102° 99° 101° 107°
24 25 26" 27" 28 29, 30
Rainfall: 12 points since 3rd (74 points) ; 80 points November ;
129 points October ; 171 points September
15 19
29 26, 28
Wagga
1932—
Canowindra
30.12.31
20.2.32
102° 103° 102° 106° 106-5° 105°
26 27 28 29 30 31
Rainfall: 19 points since 17th November ; 118 points Novem-
ber ; 41 points October ; 203 points September
100° 97° 85 °-92 °
20 19 otherwise
Rainfall: 97 points, lst-17th February ; 11 points January ;
340 points December; 196 points November
21 17
27 30
S.W. 4
26
Chiefly light south-
westerly
Forbes
20.2.32
91-6° 95-8° 85-3°
19 20 21
Rainfall: 65 points since December ; 260 points December ;
134 points November
16 19
20 19
W. 4
20
Albury
1933—
12.12.32
101-5° 97° 96°
12 11 10
Rainfall ; 60 points since 14th November ; 95 points Novem-
ber ; 200 points October ; 133 points September
17 22
12 10
W. 6
12
Albury
5.1.33
83-9° 93-5° 101° 100-9° 81-2°
1 2 3 4 5
Rainfall: Only 6 points since 16th December ; 86 points
December. (See 12th December, 1932)
31 14
3 4
W. 4 W. 5
4 5
Newcastle
Campbell’s Hill
11.1.33
11.1.33
72°-77° 106-8°
6-io n
Hot westerly changing to southerly on 11th at 5.45 p.m.
Rainfall : 22 points, 3rd-6th January ; 158 points December ;
167 points November ; 93 points October
81°-82° 97° 93° 102-5° 111
5-7 "8" 9 ' 10 11
Rainfall : Occasional light to moderate rains since October ;
27 points, 5th January; 220 points December; 136 points
November; 56 points October
10
11
W. 7-S.E. 7
11
New South Wales — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type
1935—
November 26 ..
December 20 ..
Pilliga, 52
Narrabri, 53, 55 .
Fires burnt 40,000 acres of scrub
7,000 acres State Forest destroyed
1
T 28
5
1936—
October 8
October 29
November 6 ..
December 3
Blue Mountains, 63
Casino, 58
Mullumbimby, 58 ..
Glen brook (West of
Penrith, West of
Parramatta) 67, 63
Goff’s Harbour, 59 ..
Fierce bush fires throughout whole of Blue Mountains. Two buildings gutted
Serious fires in the district. Heavy damage to property. Some stock lost ..
“ sks lMses in banana pi —*•
3 ssi? » sssw 5U!r houses -
s Pi®rbaS%t,touot t tu®“ ag<> e “ imatod at th °“ a,id8 ° f
1
T 8 I
2bb
1 and 2b
T 5-6
2bd
Ts
1936-37 ..
t
469 forest fires — 136,922 acres bumf v
18,042; Narrabri, ’ ! ®““>
, v‘ sJ' X./\ ( \ Qs9-8
Ja/ ** &
rr-).)/£\\\ C- Jo.O 1 /~\\1
i
0
1938-
March 6
Killen-Butta, 63, 65
than half destroyed 0 (ab ° Ut Manildra - Cumnock, and Molong), more
1
T 6-7
iu ‘ scc oi t-fus Section (pxa* ioa. —
1 PPlie(1 by Forestr y Commission. New Sn..fn w.„„ .
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 128)
* SUPPlied by ForeStr >' Commission, New South Wales.
New South Wales— continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued .
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1935—
Walgett
Narrabri
Narrabri
26.11.35
26.11.35
20.12.35
101-4° 97° 94-6° 89° 90-8° 92-4° 95°
20 21 22 23 24 25 26~
Rainfall: 7 points since 22nd October ; 108 points October ;
306 points September; 60 points August
103° 90 °-94•5 °
21 21-26
Rainfall: 16 points, 23rd October to 26th November ; 102
points October ; 255 points September
91°-94° 98-5° 104-5° 100°
19
26
11
23
0/
/o
18
20
8
22
S.W. 4
22
N. 8 N. 6 S. 5
20-21 22 ~23~
N. 5
N. 5
“25“
1936—
Katoomba
Casino
Lismore
Condong
8.10.36
29.10.36
29-10-36
29.10.36
13-17 18 19 20
Rainfall: Occasional light to moderate rains; 202 points,
30th November to 20th December ; 58 points November
69°-75° 54° 80° 79°
2-5 6 7 8
Rainfall: 9 points since 26th September ; 161 points Septem-
ber ; 113 points August; 122 points July
95-2° 99° 99-2° 91°
25 27 28 29
Rainfall: No rain since 19th October; 26 points since 5th ;
96 points October (5th-19th) ; 147 points September; 1
point August
90-2° 97° 96° 90°
26 27 28 29
Smoke haze, 28th-31st
Rainfall: 181 points October ; 222 points September ; 13
points August
97° 100-5° 93°
23
7
9
8
19
W. 6
8
Parramatta
Sydney
Richmond
6.11.36
6.11.36
6.11.36
27 28 29
Smoke haze, 24th-30th
Rainfall: 174 points October (5th-16th) ; 156 points Septem-
ber ; 38 points August; 109 points July
96° 96-4° 100°
4 5 6
Rainfall: No rain since 26th October; 75 points October ;
58 points September; 83 points August
72-4° 95-1° 97-1° 99-8°
3 4 T “IT
Smoke haze, 6th.
Rainfall: 115 points October ; 129 points September ; 136
points August
97-8° 97° 101°
4 5 6
Dense smoke haze, 5th.
Rainfall; Little rain since June ; 18 points, 2nd November ;
53 points October ; 63 points September ; 63 points August;
73 points July
13
6
28
~5
41
4
E.-N.E. W.-N.W.
5 6
Gale force 5th, strong 6th,
southerly change mid-
day 6th
Katoomba
6.11.36
83° 83-4° 87-4°
11
4, 6
20
S.W.-N.W. 4
Grafton
3.12.36
4 5 6
Rainfall: 11 points since 30th October; 58 points October ;
161 points September; 113 points August
96° 106° 105°
~P 2 3
Rainfall: 23 points November; 112 points October; 180
points September
5
6
1938—
Forbes
6.3,38
99°-105-2°
16
N.W. 6
1-6
Rainfall: No rain since 27th February ; 114 points February ;
191 points January; 177 points December
5
5
New South Wales — continued.


Location and District
■ ' ■
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1938— continued.
December 11..
Lugarno (Between
Liverpool and
Cronulla) 67
Thirteen cottages burnt. Damage estimated at £5,000
2be
T 9-10 I
December 22 ..
Dubbo, 65, 51
Fires cover an area 15 miles wide ; began three weeks ago ; caused considerable
1
damage to crown lands and three farms
T 22-23
1938-39 ..
.. t
710) bUmt ’ ( Metro Politan 64,107, Coif’s Harbor
••
1939—
January 13-14
Canberra, 70
Serious bush fires in mountains to the south. Worst in history of Canberra
Thousands of acres of valuable timber destroyed
1c
T 13-14 I
December 12 ..
Sydney, 66, 67
Twenty-nine bush fires in metropolitan area
Griffith, 75
Bush fires raging near Griffith ..
1
Bendembah (near
Griffith), 75
T 12 I
December 21 ..
Pullitop (South-West
of The Rock
(Riv.)), 74
A serious bush fire has swept a large area of grassland and timber country
2a
1939-40 ..
f
+
172 forest fires—29,980 acres burnt. (Glen Innes 9668)
1940—
January 5
Roto, 49
«« since let burnt -more than
January 6
Hillston, 75, 49
The meet Citrous b„ s b fire in the Strict tor years has been raging
3
January 14
Boree Creek, 74 ..
A^ss,Tc P , t and n f hundred^ead^/stfck 86 deStr °- vin g 3 ’ 0 °0 acres of oats,
T 5
1
Janauary 22 ..
February 22 ..
Yass, 70
Tarcutta, 72
A bush fire burned about 20,000 acres *.
’ aeres and destroyed much fencing
The worst fire for 30 years. Stock losses heavy ..
T 14
2be
Wagga, 72, 14, 73..
A disastrous bush fire laid waste 9 *no „
Worst fire for 30 years ’ °° S ° f nch ’ cl °sely settled country.
2b
April 4
Tumut, 72
Many serious fires have occurred wid, i
worst fires experienced in this districWam ° f Sheep ’ &C ‘ 0ne of the
Blowenng and Wermatong, jumped the aCr ? SS from Gilmore to
sheep P roba bI y S °m e tim g ’ than aTi and hundreds of
m Adelong district in February.) ' h Apnl 4 ’ dlsa strous bush fires
T 22 I
mis section (page 128) '
I Supplied by Forest™ I
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 128).
lt UPP,ied by Forestr >' ( '<'n>missionr^77^irw^
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1938 — continued
Orange
6.3.38
79° 90°-94°
28 1-5
Rainfall: 2 points since 28th February ; 162 points February ;
272 points January ; 234 points December
0/
/o
Parramatta
11.12.38
96-7° 98-6° 83-3°
9 10 11
Rainfall : 2 points since 21st November ; 107 points Novem-
ber ; 527 points October; 108 points September
16*
lo
Wind of gale force on
10th with heavy dust
clouds
Sydney
11.12.38
76-5° 98-3° 84-3°
11 24*
W.N.W.-W. 28-35f
9 10 11
Rainfall: No rain since 29th November ; 173 points Novem-
ber ; 293 points October ; 189 points September
10 11
10
Boisterous strong north-
easterly on 9th
Dubbo
1939—
Canberra (Acton)
22.12.38
13-14.1.39
102° 99° 106°-109°
22 21 16-20
Rainfall: No rain since 28th November (35 points) ; 134
points November ; 228 points October ; 24 points September
101-7°-109° 103-7° 107-4° 105-4°
6 8
19 18
8 12
S.W. 5
19
N.W. 5
7-11 12 13 14
Rainfall: 75 points, 4th-12th; 14 points December; 114
points November ; 276 points October. (Mt. Stromlo :
31 points, 3rd-12th.) (See also pp. 47, 49)
14 11, 13
13
Sydney
12.12.39
82° 101-9°
11 12
Rainfall: 31 points since 27th November; 205 points
November ; 198 points October ; 291 points September
23*
lT
Parramatta
12.12.39
96-9° 102-3°
IT 12
Rainfall: 15 points since 27th November; 181 points
November ; 254 points October ; 97 points September
22*
12
Hot dry wind
Griffith
12.12.39
91-2° 99-2° 94-8°
10 11 12
Rainfall: 13 points since 17th November; 191 points
November ; 264 points October ; 72 points September
9 14*
11 12
Hot and windy on 12th
Leeton
12.12.39
91° 100° 95°
ItT ft FT
Rainfall: 6 points since 17th November ; 252 points Novem-
ber ; 335 points October; 125 points September
13* 14* 10*
10" FT 12
Wagga
21.12.39
90° 95° 99° 78-8° 88° 85°
10 19 16
N.W. 4r-W. 4
1940—
Mt. Hope
5-6.1.40
16 17 18 19 20 21
Rainfall : 15 points since 21st November ; 311 points Novem-
ber ; 289 points October ; 77 points September
100° 103° 101° 99° 80°
2 3 4 5 6 '
Rainfall: 2 points since November ; 215 points November ;
180 points October
18 17 20
18
N.E.
4-5
Lake Cargellico
6.1.40
103° 104° 103° 102° 92°
2 3 4 ~5 F
Rainfall: 16 points since mid-November; 254 points
November; 197 points October
N. 5 N. 6
3-4 F
Hay
6.1.40
91° 100° 108° 101° 93° 82°
i ~ 2 r ~ y
Rainfall: 187 points November ; 193 points October
16 18 26
3 F ~5
N.W. 4 N. 7
4 5
Griffith
14.1.40
94-2° 84°-90° 98-9°
9 10-13 14
Rainfall: 16 points since November ; 191 points November ;
264 points October
Leeton
14.1.40
94° 84 °-90 ° 98°
9 10-13 14
Rainfall: 35 points since November ; 252 points November ;
335 points October
31* 45* 37*
11 13 14
* 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
New South Wales —continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1940 — continued
November 6
Casino, 58
Legume, 56
Murwillumbah, 58..
Damage estimated at thousands of pounds done to State Forests by huge
fires still raging
At the Queensland border, fires have burnt thousands of valuable pine and
hardwood trees in the Legume, Koorelah, and Urbenville forests
Serious outbreak of fire has destroyed valuable pastures over a wide area
between Uki and Nimbin. Path of fire through the Terragon, Kunghur,
and Mt. Burrell areas (north-east to south-west)
1940-41 ..
1
169 Forest fires—66,212 acrei burnt (including 40,729 in the Casino district)
1941-42 ..
t
288 Forest fi res—87,113 acres burnt. (Metropolitan and South Coast 32,955:
Colts Harbor 28,615; Taree-Newcastle district 13,670)
1942—
January 13
Jenolan, 63
Bush fires in Jenolan district destroyed a large guest house, damaged bridges,
2a
1943-44 ..
t
“e2MT* 16,625 aCreS bUmt ’ includin S 1°’ 568 acres in Riverina
••
1944—
February 15 ..
November 5
Blue Mountains,
66, 67
Rydal, 63
Sydney, 61-67
\ ? Ush fire . s over » wide ‘"''-a ot suburban and near Sydney districts Hues
1 the hi8t0ry “ f the Sngtr„‘d
“ Se c V „wa„“ U T„ t u°X h, hir Jhe h H SeS b at b GMt0 R d “ ed -
menaced. In places, whole mZtSnsSo X)« ft T, R d ?* r ? t
of the Nepean alight “ 1 ’ U0U ffc - U P from the banks
1 and 2b
T 15 I
2aeb
fsT
November 7 ..
November 8
November 16 ..
November 17 ..
Sydney, 61-67
Blue Mountains, 63
Gunnedah, 55
Sydney, 66, 68, 63
Blue Mountains, 63
rt close to syd d^«d -
Jv.urmg-gai, Sutherland, Lawson, and East Cessnock
i^dange/^^ 0116 ’ Valley Hei * hts ’ Hatelbrook,
Thousands of pounds worth of stock feed burnt
Homes ctt i o ,1 i
around Engadine, Menai, and yailey! of the Wings' ntS?"* SWeP ‘ fierC<!ly
T ris e w«r: t? ss tjt x Wood,ord m Biue
Fires in B 1„e fiSS. m „ e8
Many homes endangered,
S Uey %ule„„b??dgr»^Lo S k Pni,8WOOd (2) ’ Ma ™°° < 3 >’
(1) Twevty-two tomes. (2)_<m. home , ( 3)_,„> gamgM
State Forest seriously damaged. 800 acres valuable timber destroyed
2aeb
T5l
2aeb
T 5 I
1c, 2b
T 16, 18, 19
1c, 2b
November 18 ..
Blue Mountains, 63,
67
Manning River, 60..
T 16, 18, 19
1c, 2b
T 16, 18, 19
* * or index, see end of this fW.mn / r ..™ r > 0] '
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 128). + „
. applied by Forestry Commission, New South Wales.
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks— continued.
Station.
( Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
—
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
relative
Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1940 —continued
Goulburn
22.1.40
88-9° 82 °-86 ° 63-5°
22
/o
W. 5
15 16-21 22
22
~~22
Rainfall ; 67 points since 27th December ; 107 points Decern-
ber ; 204 points November ; 319 points October
Canberra
22.1.40
81-9°-87-8° 79° 82-6° 61-2°
23
13
W. 5 N.W.-W. 7
16-19 20 21 22
22
21
21 22
Rainfall : 55 points, 7th—21st January ; 62 points December ;
222 points November ; 241 points October. (Yass : 66
points, 8th—19th January)
Wagga
22.2.40
85°-92-5° 93° 96° 94-2°
13
N. 4 N.W. 5
16-19 20 21 22
22
21 22
Rainfall: 19 points since 18th January ; 33 points January ;
15 points December; 311 points November
Casino
6-11.40
99-5° 92-5° 91-2° 86-2° 87°
N. 5
1 3 4 5 6
T
Rainfall : Very dry July and September (10, 11 points) ;
107 points August; 176 points October
Listnore
6.11.40
97° 93° 91° 82°
1 2 4 5, 6
Smoke haze, varying density, 4th-12th
Rainfall: 105 points, 25th October ; 314 points October ;
14 points September ; 272 points August. (Murwillumbah :
33 points since 16th October)
9
2
12
4
S.W. 4 N.E. 4
4 5, 6
W allangarra
6.11.40
81° 80° 75°—76°
10*
1 2 3-6
IT
Rainfall; Occasional light to moderate rains since 22nd
September (110 points); 26 points, 1st November; 160
1942—
points October ; 141 points September ; 14 points August
Jenolan
13.1.42
99° 91° 100°
IT 12" T3”
Rainfall: 42 points December ; 98 points November ; 328
points October
Katoomba
13.1.42
82° 88° 87-5° 91-8°
8
10 11 12 13
13
Rainfall: No rain since 23rd December ; 353 points Decern-
1944—
ber ; 229 points November ; 238 points October
Sydney
15.2.44
79-6° 99-1°
24
N.W. 24f
14 15
15
9, 15
Rainfall : 9 points since 28th January ; 242 points January ;
282 points December ; 864 points November
Richmond Aero-
drome
15.2.44
83-7° 94-2° 102°
18
N.W. 10-over 20f
13 14 15
15
15
Rainfall : 28 points, 2nd-10th February ; 94 points January ;
235 points December ; 665 points November
Parramatta
15.2.44
100-1°
15
Rainfall: 31 points since 28th January ; 154 points January ;
390 points December ; 513 points November
Sydney
5
-8.11.44
78-2° 68° 82-2° 71°
37
W.S.W. 30f
5 6 7 8
8
8, 3 p.m.
Rainfall : 7 points, 4th-8th November ; 120 points October ;
120 points September ; 461 points August
'
Katoomba
6
-8 11.44
81-5° 72° 52°
5 6,7 8
Rainfall : 32 points since 26th October ; 121 points October ;
94 points September ; 307 points August
60
8
W. 6
8
Richmond Aero-
drome
5-
-8.11.44
98-8° 79° 89-1° 73-6°
16
12
35
W. 20-30f
5 6 7 8
5
7
8
8
Rainfall : 13 points, 4th-8th November ; 74 points October ;
Gusts to 59 m.p.h.
North-westerly, 5th-7th
Moderate to strong at
98 points September ; 289 points August
—
—
times
* 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
New South Wales— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1944 — continued
November 19 ..
Oberon, 63
One of the most serious outbreaks occurred when Oberon, near Lithgow, was
threatened
1c, 2b
T 16, 18, 19
December 10 ..
Blue
67
Mountains, 63,
Great fires swept through sections of New South Wales causing widespread
devastation. Homes gutted, crops lost, stock destroyed. Started in
Blue Mountains beyond Glenbush, spread through Kurrajong. Fires also
in Lower Hunter Valley
61
Many homes in Blue Mountains destroyed. Two deaths reported at Lochinvar
(near West Maitland) and Kurrajong
67
Damage estimated at £100,000. Trail of razed houses and other ruin.
Nineteen houses, two churches, and a school burnt in Richmond district,
seven in Blue Mountains, four near Gosford, and two in the Hornsby-St’.
Ives district. Gusts up to 76 m.p.h. Fires worst near Richmond
63, 67
Twelve fires in Blue Mountains. Seven houses, a store, dairy, kiosks, and
lookouts destroyed. Fires extended from Glenbush to Leura. Worst at
F aulconbndge, Blaxland, and Minnahaha Falls
December 11 ..
Gosford, 61,
67, 63
Damage between Woy Woy and Wyong estimated at £75,000. Gosford now
reported to have lost seven homes, Windsor seven, and Riverstone four
2be
December 29 ..
1944-45
67, 63
t
Fires revived between- St. Ives and Girvan. Power station threatened at
JLithgow
320 forest fires. 106,066 acres burnt, including Baradine, 31 343 • Taree-
Newcastle district, 28,496; Goff’s Harbor, 13,467 ’ ’
1 and 2b
T 29
4.//. 44
S.//44 4.// 44
Z//.44
So.2 & So. 2
n
298
So. 3
79-7 J ° J
<£ /?. 44
S./4.44
...... CS^9.3
& 22" 44 /£,
//■/e.44
294
*
For In
V29-6
fz
29*
iex, see
;nd of this Section fnaue i««\ * .... —
Mbk
29'J
So. £7
%
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 128).
i Supphed . by forestry Commission, New South Wales.
New South Wales — continued.


Particulars op Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks— continued.
Station.
Bate.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
iteiative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1944 — continued
Lithgow
8.11.44
Rainfall : 28 points, 8th and 2 points, 6th only rain since 26th
/o
Cold, strong breeze
westerly
October ; 72 points October ; 130 points September ; 287
points August
Gunnedah
8.11.44
92 °-93 ° 91°-92° 71°
N.W. 6
1, 2 4, 7 8
8
Rainfall : Little rain since August; 3 points October ; 28
points September ; 337 points August
Lithgow
19.11.44
92° 100°
17 18719
Rainfall ; Occasional light rain since August; 58 points, 6th-
9th November. (See 8th November, 1944)
Katoomba
19.11.44
87 °-88 ° 90-5°
29
11
W. 5
16-18 19
19
17
-
16, 17
Rainfall : 8 points, 8th ; 65 points October. (See 8th
November, 1944)
Jenolan Caves
19.11.44
93° 101°
W. 4
17, 18 19
Rainfall : 8 points since 26th October ; 65 points October ;
305 points September ; 466 points August
Richmond Aero-
drome
16-19.11.44
91-8° 102-3° 104-8° 87-4° 87-7°
11
16
W.S.W. 22f
15 16 17 18 19
16
15
16, 3 p.m.
South to south-easterly,
17 th—19 th, moderate
Dense smoke haze, 15th-16th and 18th-19th
No ram since 8th. (See 5th-8th November, 1944)
95° 106° 94°
to fresh at times
Taree
18.11.44
16 FT 18
Rainfall : 20 points November (4th-8th) ; 57 points October ;
11 points September; 730 points August
Katoomba
11.12.44
83° 81-5° 74-8° 78°
8 9 10 IT
Dust storm in distance, 11th
Rainfall : 5 points, 1st—6th December ; 150 points Novem-
ber ; 121 points October ; 94 points September
12
Fl
24
10
W. 8
10
Richmond Aero-
drome
11.12.44
91-8° 99-8° 94-6° 95-7°
8 9 10 'll
Severe dust smoke pall, 10th ; thick smoke haze, 11th, 12th
Rainfall ; 8 points, 1st—10th December ; 29 points Novem-
ber ; 74 points October; 98 points September
(See also page 47)
25
9
12
10
10
11
W.N.W.-W. 35-40f
10
Lithgow
11.12.44
88° 85° 72° 89° 84° 82°
5 6 7 8 IF if
Very dusty, 9th
Rainfall : 1 point since November ; 204 points November ;
72 points October ; 130 points September
Sydney
11.12.44
91-5° 91° 85-9°
20
44*
High west to south-
9 10 11
10
11
westerly wind at times
Dense dust haze, lOth-llth
on 10th
Rainfall; 41 points, 7th December ; 90 points November ;
120 points September ; 120 points October
Campbell’s Hill
11.12,44
93° 102° 98° 96°
W. 8
8 9 10 11
10
Rainfall: 66 points, lst-4th December; and 35 points
November only falls since 17th October ; 195 points October ;
132 points September
Newcastle
11.12.44
99° 94-2° 80°
9 10 IF
Rainfall: 32 points, lst-8th December ; 62 points November ;
81 points October ; 399 points September
10
10
22
9
N.W.6 W.N.W.8 N.E.6
9 10 ~IF
* 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
New South Wales -^-continued.


MONTHLY
FREQUENCY—NEW SOUTH WALES.
October to December.
Pressure
Type.
October.
November.
December.
January.
February.
1
1
5
8
4
2
1a ..
1
1b
1
1c
1
1
2a ..
2
1
1
2
2
2b
4
7
5
6
5
2c ..
2
1
2d ..
3
2e
2
2
4
2
2f
2
1
3
1
1
1
4
1
5
1
" 1
SUMMARY OF PRESSURE TYPES.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Pressure Type.
Total Number.
1
21
Ia
1
1b
1
1c
2
2a
8
2b
27
2c
3
2d
3
2e
10
2f
3
3
4
4
1
5
1
FREQUENCIES OF PRESSURE TYPES IN NORTHERN, CENTRAL
AND SOUTHERN SECTIONS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Each
Month of Fire
Season.
Types.
1.
1a.
IB.
1C.
2a
2b
2c
2d
. 2e
2F
3.
4.
5.
October
November..
1
No
rth
Coas
1
t.
2
1
I
2
1
2
1 ••
1
December ..
January ..
February ..
1
1
2
1
1
October
November..
3
Nor
th /
nlan
d.
2
December ..
3
1
1
1
January ..
February ..
1
1
October
1
C
1 entr
al.
1
i
November..
December..
1
1
1
1
3
3
1
2
January ..
February ..
1
3
i
1
October
November..
December ..
January ..
February ..
'tout
h.
1
1
i
1
1
1
3
1
2
4
1
i
1
1
1
2
2
4
1
1
Totals
20*
i
1
2
8
27
3
3
10
3
3t
1
1
INDEX OF PRESSURE TYPES.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
1. Sequence of “Highs” and “Lows”—
(a) Rapid movement.
(b) Slow movement.
(c) Weak anticyclones.
2. Low pressure activity—
(a) Development of secondaries over southern waters.
(b) Deep depressions to South and South-East.
(c) Extensive low pressure system over Southern Ocean.
(d) Low pressure system extending north over a considerable area
of Eastern Australia.
(e) Depression extending North along or off the New South Wales
coast.
(f) Development of deep cyclonic centre over the South-West
Tasman sea.
3. “ High” Tasman sea more or Jess stationary for three days or more.
4. Low pressure system covering the Bight, extending inland into
the tropics and covering most of the Interior.
5. “ High ” over the Bight. Tropical depression over Central Australia
moving across New South Wales to the coast.
Troughs of depressions passed over the area on 40 out of 84 fire
days.
* 1 in March.
Note T (with figures) signifies the date of the passage of * c
CC similarly indicates the date of the passage of a "do I o' * de!lression th « region.
(I, .-Intense low pressure system, § ° UrVe over the region.
f 1 in April.
New South Wales — continued.


QUEENSLAND.
C.8016/47. —9


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type.
1917— •
July 17
Hughenden (Stam-
ford), 30, 36, 37
Big bush fires have been raging in Stamford district. 10,000 acres burnt on
Stanley Downs
September 28 ..
Warenda Station, 37
Disastrous fire swept over the station, resulting in the deaths of three men.
Others seriously burnt. Fires caused by lightning
1918—
July 9
Lowood, 40
Bush fires raging all round the district ..
September 16 ..
35 or 36..
A disastrous bush fire in Central Division. One western station lost 10,000
sheep, another 5,000 sheep. Thousands of acres of grass burnt
October 6
Charleville, 44
Jondaryan, 41
Bush fires raging all over the district
Serious bush fires doing great damage to stock ..
October 10
Barcaldine, 36
Bush fires continue to rage all over the district, causing much damage to stock
October 20
Warwick, 41
Disastrous bush fires caused great damage in the district. Many valuable
sheep lost J
October 23
Blackall, 36
Goodna, 40
Ipswich, 40
Gr burnt reS are raging the district - MUes of fenc ing and over 6,000 sheep
Bush fires raging, destroying a number of dwellings
Bush fires raging in the district, causing the death of a large number of stock
October 25
Malvern Hills, 36 ..
Isis Downs, 36
Blackall, 35, 36 ..
Barcaldine, 36
Terrific bush fires throughout the district up to yesterday. 40,000 acres of
grass burnt
Terrific bush fires. 11,000 sheep burnt
One of the most devastating fires ever experienced these last five days
Big grass fire started from swagman’s fire, getting away in high wind A
grand sight from Water Tower. Town illuminated g
October 30
Barcaldine, 36
Longreach, 86
EU burnt e SW6Pt through the distr ict causing great damage. Two men badly
Bush fire raging, causing damage to stock
October 31
Saltern Creek, 36 ..
SWeI,t ° Ver the Sto ‘ i0n ’ resulti "B “ ‘>■““■8 "t men
November 1
Hughenden, 30, 36
B 3 S 0 h 0 fi c re o S wrin n | SSSfr* the musing severe losses. At •• Clutha ”,
3U0 cows and 9,000 sheep, representing £12,000, were lost
November 21 ..
Charleville, 44
Fire at Mt. Morris Station on front of 20 miles. Flames 50 feet in height
December 29 ..
Longreach, 36
the a “ dc ‘ d0 “fi ‘0 stock.
QUEENSLAND.


PARTICULARS OP
TEMPERATURE, RELATIVE HUMIDITY, RAINFALL, ETC.,
AND OBSERVER’S
REMARKS.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1917—
Hughenden
17.7.17
86-2° 87-2°
24
0/
/o
N.E. 4
Boulia
1918—
Brisbane
27-30.9.17
9.7.18
16 17
Earlier maximum temperatures from 75°-85°
Rainfall: No rain since May (114 points in 7 days)
101°-105°
28—3 Oct.
Big bush fires all around daily in October. Immense amount
of country burnt
Rainfall: 59 points August; 82 points September
71°-74-5° 67-9° 68-9°
17
19
28
21
39 44 46
8
N. 4
”28
Charleville
9.7.18
5.10.18
5-7 8 9
Smoke haze, 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th
Rainfall: No rain since 9th June ; 20 points June,
points May, 170 points April
70°-77° 69-1°
1-8 9
Rainfall: 20 points June; 97 points May
93°-96° 79°-88°
250
7
6 8 9
Dalby
5.10.18
27-29 1-5
Rainfall: No rain, September ; 229 points August
76°-83°
15
18
Barcaldine
10.10.18
1-5
Smoke haze, 3rd-5th
Rainfall: 3 points November; 60 points September;
points August
85 °-93 °
175
3
24*
5
12*
Longreach
Warwick
10.10.18
20.10.18
3-10
Rainfall: 6 points September ; 25 points August
85°-92°
1-10
Rainfall: No rain since August (51 points)
86° 76°-80° 84-1° 91° 86°
4
17
8, 9
7
14 11
4 6
Blackall
23-25.10.18
12,13 14, 16 17 18 19, 20
Rainfall: 5 points only rain since August; 232 points August
95°-96° 99° 103° 104° 103° 101-8°
17*
15* 17*
N. 5
Ipswich
23.10.18
18-20 21 22 23 24 25
No rain since 16th August
Rainfall : 108 points August; 53 points July
85°-90° 96-1° 89°
22
33*
23 25
25
Brisbane
Longreach
23.10.18
25.10.18
16-18 19, 22 21, 23
Rainfall : 126 points since early August
81-2° 89-1° 74-2° 86-5° 96-5° 80-2° 73°
17 TT To” ~20~ 21 ~22~ 23
Rainfall : 41 points since mid-September
See 31st October, 1918
21
18
21
Light winds
Barcaldine
31.10.18
101 -5°-103° 98° 104° 100°
13*
Blackall
31.10.18
22-26 27 28 30, 31
Rainfall: 6 points, September; 25 points August;
points, 30th-31st October
101-8°-104° 97°-98° 105-2° 103° 91°
30
28
15*
14*
Longreach
31.10.18
22-25 26-27 28 30 31
Rainfall: No rain since mid-August (light)
102°-106° 99°-100° 105-3° 96-4° 103°
28
14
27
12 11
N.N.W. 4
21-25 26, 27 28 29 30, 31
Grass fires on almost every pasture run, numbering six or
seven per day
Rainfall; 87 points, 26th-30th ; only rain since early August
(51 points)
28
25 23
23
* 9 a.m.
QUEENSLAND.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type
1918— continued.
//.//.P3
//:£& /S. // /4. //. 2>2
29.3. L,
• s' 30 ■' —
, 2o./
t&M. c\\ <\\ < vsao .
y;)mm
//2\ Jo./ '‘iff
29-3
'/s/fek
W
29/
29 2 29. S
■29 S
1922—
November 13 ..
Longreach, 36
D t b 7 h fir6S i laVG been raging throu g h the district doing much
damage to fences and grass 6
November 20 ..
Cairns, 31
Chinchilla, 41
Cunnamulla, 44 ..
A Much damnge to fencing
'SWS cX.STcit“ ”*• stocky “ d Crcek ’
Severe bush fires raging. One at Bando station has been burning some davs
and has beaten fire fighters. Several stations threatened g 7
IB
4
T 21
1a
TA
December 5
Cunnamulla, 44
B feL fi r S bave SWept ° ver 30 - 000 doin e great damage to stock and
1923—
September 10 ..
September 15 ..
Cairns, 31
Kin Kin, 40
Big bush fires have covered a large area of country
Bush fires have done much damage to banana plantations
Possibly 2c
2a
Mackay, 33
presenting Sight T
for weeks m the grazing country g * hres have been raging
T 14
2a
fTi
September 29 ..
Baffle Creek, 35 ..
Many holdings burnt out
2b
October 4
Cairns, 31
Bush fires raging in the district
T 27
October 11
November 8-11
Nambour, 40
Jericho, 36
Much damage^ 6 Vifrit wTombye all R? ver the dist rict.
forest ablaze between Mapleton and Kenfiworth ' * ** State
Huge bush fires. Face of fire covers ™ i n .
acres burnt 8 mdes - Great damage. 200,000
2a
T 9-10
2 and 1
December 21 ..
Barcaldine, 36
Tremendous bush fires in the district on * an , .
40-mde front, doing great damage
T 8 and 11-12
6a
* ior Index, see end of this
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 150 ).
Queensland — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
I
Wind.
1918— continued.
Hughenden
1.11.18
100°-107-8° 99-6°
22-31 nr
Rainfall: No rain since 5th September ; 12 points September.
No rain August
20
30
19
29
o/
/o
13
24
Charleville
21.11.18
98° 101-8° 99° 93° 102-5°
15-17 18 19 20~ ~21
Rainfall: 20 points since 1st November ; 33 points October.
No rain September
15
21
9
18
Longreach
29.12.18
100°-106°
13-29
Storms causing grass fires
Rainfall: 68 points only on 4 days since October ; 97 points
October
21
25
15
23
29
26
1922—
Longreach
13.11.22
103°-104° 94°-99° 104° 101°
4-6 7-11 12 13
Rainfall: 48 points only since June
26
11
28
10
19
6
N.N.E. 4
13
Cairns
13.11.22
89°-9l °
7-13
Rainfall : 147 points October ; 44 points September; 54
points August
45
9
Miles
13.11.22
100° 98° 99° 85°-90° 91°-92°
4 5 6 7-11 12, 13
Rainfall : No rain since 26th October ; 164 points October ;
50 points September. No rain August
Cunnamulla
20.11.22
98° 99-2° 104-2° 99° 105-2° 100-8° 105-8°
13
12
6
11
13 14 15 16, 17 18 19 20
Rainfall : 58 points October. No rain August or September
14
15
17
18
Cunnamulla
5.12.22
103°-105° 102° 100° 95° 91° 77°
10
24
23
27-30 12345
Rainfall : 65 points November ; 58 points October
28
~3
2
1923—
Gympie
15.9.23
92° 91° 90-5° 77
11 12 13 14, 15
Rainfall : 121 points, 4th-5th; 83 points August; 169
points 26th-31st July
33
13
Mackay
15.9.23
81-5°-82° 90° 72-2°
24
32
N.W. 6
10-13 14 15
Rainfall: 3 points since 20th August; 123 points August;
119 points July
14
15
14
Roma
29.9.23
82-2° 89-9° 85-3° 93-2° 88-5° 74-2° 83-2°
23 24 25 26 27 28 ~29~
Violent dust storm and cyclone wind, 27th
Rainfall: 2 points since 3rd (108 points) ; 2 points August;
108 points July
8
26
5
24
11
29
Cairns
4.10.23
83 °-88 °
43
28-4
Rainfall: September, 5 points ; 76 points August; 39 points
July
4
Brisbane
11.10.23
83-5° 88-7° 94-1° 90-5°
18
22-
24
W. 17f
8 9 10 11
Rainfall; No rain since 28th September ; 121 points Septem-
ber ; 69 points August; 205 points July
10
8, 9
11
8, 10
Gympie
11.10.23
90-5° 96° 91°
9 10 11
Rainfall: No rain since 28th September ; 161 points Septem-
ber ; 83 points August; 281 points July
17*
n
Blackall .. i
1-11.11.23
92°-98°
7-11
Rainfall: 32 points, 1st November ; 42 points September ;
10 points August
17*
IT
23*
I(T
25*
IT
* 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
Queensland — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦ Pressure Type.
1923— continued.
•
1926—
i
October 13
Brisbane, 40
Large bush fires have been raging in the vicinity of the city
2a
November 4
T 11-12
Toogoolawah, 40 ..
Great destruction in the Glenmaurie pine scrub. Nearly 2,000,000 super feet
o pine destroyed or killed and thousands of acres of grass burnt
2a
T 3
November 8
Blackbutt, 40
The most serious fires are burning throughout the district. Extensive damage
to the forestry block near Benarkin 6
1
T 9
1 and 2
T 14
November 11
Esk, 40 ..
Great damage. Heavy losses of cattle. Many homes destroyed ..
November 12 .,
North Tamborine, 40
Stanthorpe, 41
E “weX Thi> “““ 1902 ' A » f
Extensive damage has been done to orchards and dwellings
”
November 13 ..
Inglewood, 41
Disastrous bush fires. 10,000 acres of the Devine State Forest swept
November 15 ..
Dayboro, 41
Disastrous fire swept through D’Aguilar Ranges. Great damage to forestry
reserve and timber dumps. One dump of 50,000 feet of pine destroyed ‘
November 16-17
Helidon, 40
Great damage to miles of fencing. Plots of Rhodes grass destroyed
Yandina, 40
Much damage has been done to sugar cane and banana plantations
'I
November 17 ..
Ballandean, 41
Warwick, 41
1
1
!
1
D dS;ed‘ Ve b “' 1 bUrnt a,ld much fencin 6 valuable pine ban been
Much damage to Government Forestry Reserves
I 2-2a
f T 17
For Index, see end of this Section fua.™ is/u
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 150).
Queensland — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
1
J Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1923 — continued.
Tambo
8-11.11.23
90°-97°
5
8
o/
/o
S.W. 5 N.E.-E. 6
Barcaldine
Longreach
21.12.23
21.12.23
2-11
Rainfall: 62 points, 31st October-lst November ; 51 points
3rd—4th September; 14 points August, only rains since
June (336 points)
100°-104°
16-21
Rainfall: Little rain this season ; no rain 2nd November
to 8th—9th December (50 points); 21 points November ;
12 points October; 77 points September
112° otherwise 100°-109°
19 11-21
Rainfall: 6 points only since October ; 98 points October
9
10
9 11
W. 6
12
High wind from south
with dust storm, 20th
at 8 p.m.
1926—
Brisbane
Nanango
13.10.26
4.11.26
83-8° 85-8° 96-7° 83-8°
10 11 12 13
Thick smoke haze, llth-13th
Rainfall; 7 points since 28th September (216 points, 25th-
28th September) ; 64 points, 9th July-24th September
83 °-89 0 80-2° 91-9° 97-4° 90°
20
12
29
10
32
13
Hot, dry westerly, strong
to gale force at times,
12 th
Brisbane
Tamborine
Nanango
4.11.26
11.11.26
11.11.26
28-31 1 2 3 4
Rainfall: 15 points since 27th September; 225 points
September; 26 points August
75-9° 84-6° 89-4° 81-9°
12 3 4
Much smoke haze
Rainfall: 47 points, 3rd November; 87 points October ;
241 points September
70°-78° 82*6° 92-2° 96°
4-7 9 10 11
Rainfall: 123 points since September ; 291 points September
79°-82° 91-2° 98° 101-3° 85-3°
64
3
37*
10
65
4
Fresh to strong south
to east wind, 10.30 a.m.
- 4 p.m.
W.N.W. 4
9
Brisbane
11.11.26
5-7 8 9 10 11
See 4th November, 1926
86-4° 77-9° 75-3° 81-1° 87° 96-4° 82-3°
10
51
Stanthorpe
Goondiwindi ..
13.11.26
13.11.26
5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Dense smoke morning of 9th. Thick smoke haze, 10th.
Rainfall: 556 points since 31st October. (See 4th November,
1926 and 13th October, 1926)
90° 73°-79° 89° 93° 91° 81° 79° 86°
3 4r-7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Rainfall: No rain since 22nd October ; 96 points October ;
73 points September ; 145 points August
96° 104° 96-2° 95-2° 92° 96-4°
5
20
10
23
10
15
8
22
Gatton
15.11.26
8 9 10 11 12 13
Rainfall: No rain since 16th October ; 50 points October ;
134 points September
103° 106° 103° 94° 95°
11
9
Ipswich
Gympie
Brisbane
15.11.26
17.11.26
17.11.26
9 10 14 11, 13 15
Rainfall: Occasional very light to light rains October (82
points); 136 points September
92° 100-5° 104° 98° 94° 100°
8 9 10 13 15 17
Rainfall: 19 points since 16th-17th October; 88 points
October ; 115 points September ; 40 points August
94° 95-5°
13 17
Rainfall; 50 points since end of September
80-5° 87° 87-6° 82-9° 94-9°
13 14 15 16 17
26
17
••
Strong wind, 17th
W.N.W. 14f
17
* 9 a.m. t m.p.h.
Queensland — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦ Pressure Type
1927—
September 19 ..
September 20 ..
September 25 ..
Esk, 40 ..
Samford, 40
Toogoolawah, 40 ..
Bush fires have done considerable damage to property, stock, and banana
plantations
Bush fires swept through the district, causing extensive damage to banana
crops °
Bush fires are raging throughout the district. Much damage to farms
1
j- 2c
2a-1c
T 23-24
1928—
October 11
Cooroy, 40
Fires destroyed banana crops ..
2b or 1b
Murphy’s Creek, 40
Serious bush fires
T 9 I
October 29
Samford, 40
rich gracing and dairjLg CXt “ y e d ‘ l0Callty - 30 8qusre of
»
2a-2c
T 26-27
1929—
December 18 ..
Samford, 40
Cooroy, 40
H lTta»h“ n e a s PlaUteti0nS - gra " n « cattle have been destroyed
Serious bush fires swept 2,000 acres of grass lands
1 2a
J T 14—15
For Index, see end of
* For Index, see end of this Section (page l 50).
Queensland — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
Stanthorpe
17.11.26
92° 89° 84° 85°
i4 mr nr rr
(See 13th November, 1926)
31
Ti
°/
0
Warwick
17.11.26
91-6°-97-6° 86-9° 81-9° 96-2° 90-6° 87°-88°
7-10 11 12 13, 14 15 16, 17
Rainfall : No rain since 21st-22nd October (20 points);
80 points October; 125 points September; 41 points
August
33
10
1927—
Ipswich
20.9.27
81°-90°
16-20
Rainfall: 33 points since July
Nanango
20.9.27
80°
19-20
(See 25th September, 1927)
Brisbane
20.9.27
77-2° 71-9° 79-7° 83-1° 88-5° 75-1°
15 16 17 18 19 20
Much smoke haze, 19th-20th
Rainfall: 21 points, llth-14th September; 27 points
August; 52 points July
13
18
14
19
15
17
Fresh to strong westerly
wind, 19th, 2 p.m.-
6 p.m.
Nanango
25.9.27
78°-80° 92-2° 86-2° 69-5°
18-22 23 24 25
Rainfall: 25 points since July ; 55 points July
1928—
Gatton
11.10.28
99° 104° 95-5° 84°
7, 8 9 10 11
Rainfall ; 14 points September ; 63 points August
Gympie
11.10.28
91° 96-5° 87°
N.W. 4
6 8-10 11
Rainfall: 24 points, 11th August to 11th October
10
Toowoomba
11.10.28
87° 90-6° 94-5° 96° 89° 72°
W.-W.S.W. 4
6 7 8 9 10 11
Rainfall : 37 points since 9th August (August, 90 points)
6-8
Ipswich
29.10.28
91° 84-5° 79° 80-5° 91° 83°
22-23 24 25 26 27 29
Rainfall : 133 points October ; 20 points September ; 66
points August
Brisbane
29.10.28
86° 93° 78-4° 76-8° 79-1° 92-5° 87-4° 82-7°
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Rainfall: 106 points, 15th-19th October ; 13 points 3rd
September-14th October ; 78 points September ; 105
points August
13
28
25
29
26
23
30
27
Fresh west—south-west
wind, 28th, 11 a.m.-
6 p.m.
1929—
Ipswich
16-18.12.29
90 °-96 ° 100-5° 89° 92° 96°
11-13 14 16 17 18
Rainfall : 56 points, 2nd-4th December ; 187 points Novem-
ber ; 393 points October; 35 points September
Brisbane
16-18.12.29
86 °-87 ° 97-1° 89-6° 89° 86-1°
12
39
South-west wind on 16th
11-14 15 16 17 18
Thick smoke and dust haze, 16th-18th
Rainfall: 40 points since 22nd November; 125 points
November ; 258 points October ; 48 points September
16
17
fresh to strong, 7.45 a.m.
to 5.10 p.m. ; fresh
east to north-west,
afternoon of 18th
Gympie
16-18.12.29
91-5°-94°
15-18
Rainfall: 149 points, 4th-llth December; 138 points
November
N.E. 5
• 9 a.m.
Queensland- — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1932—
January 28
Wallangarra, 41 ..
Fierce wind. Fires spread rapidly
Is
February 16 ..
Inglewood, 41
Bush fires raging. Thousands of acres of grass lands, pastures, and crops laid
] 6a
February 17
Goondiwindi, 42 ..
Bush fires have raged through the district, causing great destruction
J T 13-15
1935—
■i
November 17-18
Tiaro, 40
Bush fires swept through the district. Great damage done to houses, culverts
and trees
2a
November 21 ..
Augathella, 44
A bush fire with a 30-mile frontage is raging and burning off valuable drv
grass and timber J
November 22 ..
Maryborough,
Thousands of acres swept
November 24 ..
Gympie, 40
Inglewood, 41
Fires have been raging for a week in the State Forest and have destroyed
hardwood timber valued at £1,000
1-6a-4
( T 21-22
November 26 ..
Pelican, 41
Bush fires have been raging in the district and many thousands of acres of
grass have been burnt and fences destroyed
1936—
October 29
Gympie, 39
October 30
Cedar Creek, 39 ..
Gympie, 40
P.»o. westerly wtnd sent bush fires sweeping over flargearea of country !! j
► 2a
• For Index, see end of this
140
Queensland continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1932—
Wallangarra
28.1.32
90°-94° 97° 97-8°
23-26 27 28
Bush fires, 27th. Exceptionally hot month
Rainfall: 8 points since 4th (174 points, 3rd-4th); 170
points December ; 391 points November
0
'o
Goondiwindi
17.2.32
97° 100-2° 95° 89°
11, 14, 15 12, 13 10-16 17
Rainfall: 43 points February ; 30 points January; 71
points, one day, from 13th-31st December (613* points
December)
9
14
12
isTie
Dalby
16.2.32
89° 92° 96-6° 98-4° 99-4° 100° 96-9°
10 11 12 13 14 HT l6~
Rainfall: 5 points since 5th ; 44 points, 3rd-5th ; 96 points
January ; 389 points December
27
14
33*
15
1935—
Maryborough ..
17-18.11.35
84 °-87 • 5 ° 70° 97° 91°-96°
8-12 13 14 15-18
(See 22nd November, 1935)
29
16
19
17
Charleville
21.11.35
93-6° 100-2° 101° 103°
18 19 20 ~2F
Rainfall: 28 points, 4th November; 160 points October;
204 points September
20
19
Gympie
18-22.11.35
90°-92° 83°
16-22 19
Rainfall : 15 points since 22nd October ; 334 points October ;
410 points September
Maryborough ..
22.11.35
93° 88 ■ 6 °-89 °
19 20-22
Rainfall : 7 points since 23rd October ; 19 points October ;
333 points September
E. 4
22
Goondiwindi
24.11.35
91° 98° 102° 82° 90-5° 88°
19 20 21 22~ 23 24*
Smoke haze, 19th-21st
Rainfall: 88 points November ; 64 points October ; 383
points September
15
21
17 7
19 23
Bybera
24.11.35
89° 95° 100° 81° 91-4° 86-8°
19 20 21 22 23 24
Rainfall : 2 points since 4th November ; 43 points November ;
127 points October; 332 points September
35*
19*
39*
21
N. 5
24
Dalby
26.11.35
89-3° 92-1° 97° 91-2° 92° 81°
18 20 21 23 24 25, 26
Rainfall: Little rain since 22nd October ; 172 points October ;
306 points September
, 94° 95° 81-5°
aS ° 12-14 15 16
Smoky from bush fires, 15th and 18th-21at
15
21
2(?)
15
18
23
13
16
1936—
Gayndah
30.10.36
92° 96° 101° 96° 90°
11
8 10
N.W. 4
25 26 27 28-29 30
Smoke haze, 30th, 31st
Rainfall: 162 points October; 55 points September. No
rain August
27
29 30
29
Biloela
30.10.36
92° 96-5° 100-5° 90-3° 98° 91°
W.N.W.
4 S.E. 4
25 26 27 28 29 30
Rainfall: August-September very dry (24 points) ; 100
points, 5th October; 39 points, 12th-22nd October
29
30
Gympie
30.10.36
99° 98° 96° 83°
27~ 28~ 29~ 30*
Smoky. Bush fires around 30th-31st
Rainfall: 92 points October ; 7 points September ; 1 point
August
20*
30
* 9 a.m.
Queensland — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
j * Pressure T
1937-
March 30
October 27
November 2
Hughenden, 30
Cairns, 31
Charters Towers, 34
Hughenden, 30
Bush fire on Lower Valley 18 miles from Hughenden. Destroyed 8,000 acres
ot grass on one property J
Fierce fires destroying jungle stretches ..
An area 50 miles wide and 100 miles long burnt by the worst bush fire
experienced in many years. A trail of desolation left
Bush fires have been raging for days, causing havoc to many cattle properties
m the basalt country north of here y properties
6b
1b
6a
1938—
December 16 ..
December 25 ..
December 26 ..
Landsborough, 40.
Kingaroy, 40
Goondiwindi, 42 .
Bush fires raging, taking considerable toll of grass and pasture lands
Severe bush fire fanned by strong wind
d^L’ett"i“r yed 1,000 acres ° f gr * sa Md d °“
1a
1 and 4
T 23-24
1939—
January 13
January 17-18
Brisbane, 40
Maroochydore, 40 .
Bush fires in Metropolitan division
Severe bush fires. Dense smoke
4
5
J9/0.40
JO. <?
•90. /0. 40 Js) sf S) f
..... :■ 4/. '*■ 40 /. //
VV/
1940—
August 30
September 30 ..
October 8
October 30
November 1
Abercorn, 39
Bundaberg, 39
Gympie, 40
Winton, 37
Palmwoods, 40
Monto, 39
South Coast, North
Coast, 40, 39 ..
j Serious bush fires sweeping the district; much damage
of grass destroyed of Undaber § for da JS- Thousands of acres
Bush fires which have plantation
,-fons from Gympie to the border ' amage stil l ra ging in dry coastal
Grass WaS being boiled b ? drovers.
Flames reached a great height, strong winds ..
Bight-mile front covered by grass fire i* ft
H.g h temperature and etrong westerly winde^Slames Eg'cheetd
S V 8 .mo fr0 “ S °“ them * Briebane. Sun at Bundaberg
1c
2c
T 28
3
4
2a
For Index, see end of this Section 7ZZ -
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 150).
Queensland — -continued.


; OF T.MPRRATURR, RblAT.VR HUMIDITY, EaIRRALL, RTC., AKU ObSKRVRr'S RrmaRKS-C^.W
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1937—
Hughenden
•
30.3.37
91°-95°
20
25
0/
/o
22-30
Rainfall: Some rain, llth-15th March (199 points)- dry
January 11 February (271 P oints February); 467 points
Cairns
27.10.37
83 °-86•8 °
27
20
20-27
Rainfall : 3 points October; 162 points September- 118
points August
Charters Towers
2.11.37
91°-96°
26 2
22
20
19
Hughenden
2.11.37
Rainfall: 67 points October; no rain September; 1 point August
104°-105° 98-8°
27
18
~2
28
1
8
25
23-30 1,2
R August 22 P ° intS ° Ct ° ber ; no rain September ; 12 points
29
1938—
Crohamhurst ..
16.12.38
102-6° 97° 90-4° 86°-89°
11 12 13 14-16
Rainfall: 23 points, 2nd December ; 431 points November;
685 points October
35*
13
Gympie
16.12.38
100° 96° 88°-91°
Nanango
Goondiwindi
25 12.38
26.12.38
10 12 13-16
Rainfall: 186 points, 2nd-13th December; 372 points
November; 312 points October
Landsborough ; 21 points since 30th November
90 °-97 ° 103° 101°
17-23 24 ~25~
Rainfall: No rain, lst-24th; 557 points November; 296
points October ; 95 points September
110-6° 100°-107°
24 18-26
Smoke haze, 25th
Rainfall: No rain December; 402 points November; 285
points October
N.E. 4
22
Fresh to strong north-
east to north-west
chiefly 23rd-26th
(south-west on 25th)
1939—
Brisbane
13.1.39
83 °-86 ° 89-9° 87-2°
6-11 12 13
Smoke haze, 12th
R< 9lT 8 r 1 " baZe a^S ° 1 Gtli, particularly 15th. (Max.
Rainfall: 61 points since end of November, 476 points in
November
68
11
69
12
N.W.-N.E.
12
Fresh at times in
afternoon
Crohamhurst ..
18.1.39
101-8° 103-8° 93 °-97 °
14 15 16-18
Ramfall; 59 points, lst-7th January ; 24 points December ;
431 points November ; 685 points October
1940—
Gayndah
Bundaberg
30.8.40
30.9.40
85° 75°-80°
27 28-30
Rainfall: 6 points August; 81 points July ; 15 points June
80°-81° 84-4° 78-2°
29
28
37
Gympie
30.9.40
23-28 29 30
Smoke haze, 30th
Rainfall : 55 points September; 93 points August; 67
pomts July
83 °-88 ° 79°
25-29 30
Rainfall : 30 points since 2nd (129 points); 76 points August
29
S.W. 4 S.E. 4
28 30
* 9 a.m.
Queensland — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦ Pressure Type
1940— continued.
November 4 ..
Yandina, 40
•
Bush fires have raged on the North coast. Cane farmers have suffered
2a
T 31-1
November 7-8..
Booubyjan
(Goomeri), 40
Boonah, 40
More than 200,000 acres of grazing property destroyed by fires
Serious fires still burning. The Croftby area entirely burnt out and much
country between Milford and Beaudesert swept bare of grass
I 2b
| T9
November 10 ..
Cooyar, 40
Fire covering 6-mile front. Duststorms and hot, gusty, westerly wind
November 16 ..
Dalby, 41
Biggenden, 40
More than 15,000 acres of forest reserve burnt out
More than 7,000 stock died in the Biggenden district, while heavy losses are
reported elsewhere
j* 2c
December 29 ..
Innisfail, 32, 31 ..
Severe bush fires
3
ST//.40
2?. 7 fr
&Z/.40 Z0.//.40
k
1
g
Ife
1
s
%
fts
<2sno;
t
• For Index, see end of this
—
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 150).
Queensland — continued.


Particulars or
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1940— continued.
Winton
8.10.40
86° 90° 92° 96°
1-3 IT IT (MT
No rain since June (171 points)
0/
/o
11 16
5 6, 7, 8
Crohamhurst ..
30.10.40
93° 92° 77-4° 78-8°
27 28 29 30
Rainfall: Light rains at intervals; 171 points October;
42 points September; 401 points August
21
28
Gayndah
30.10.40
99° 100° 86°-88° 98° 100° 88°-90°
23 24 25-26 27 28 29, 30
Smoke haze, 16th-18th ; dense smoke from bush fires, 6th-
10th. (91°, 9th, R.H. 20%)
Rainfall; 8 points October; 111 points September; 6
points August
Biloela
30.10.40
96-7° 97-7° 95-4° 100-3° 92-5° 90-8°
39 43
23 24 27 28 29 30
Hot with north-west winds latter part of month. Atmosphere
laden with smoke and dust
Rainfall: 16 points, 3rd October; 46 points September;
72 points August
24 27
Ipswich
1.11.40
97-5° 94° 83 °-86 • 5 0 98°
26 28 29-31 1
Rainfall: 67 points October; 76 points September; 18
points August
Brisbane
1.11.40
77-7° 84-4° 93-7° 76°-79° 86-6°
26 27 28 29-31 1
Rainfall: 124 points, 25th October ; 99 points, 2nd Septem-
ber-24th October ; 75 points September ; 40 points August.
Bundaberg : 9 points since 3rd October ; 50 points October
24* 56*
w ~r
Winds chiefly north-east-
north ; fresh to strong
at times
Gympie
4.11.40
94 °-98 °
1-4
Rainfall; 59 points since 2nd September (158 points) ; 76
points August; 93 points July
Crohamhurst ..
4.11.40
93° 92-4° 79-7° 85-2°
12 3 4
Rainfall: 44 points, 2nd November ; 171 points October ;
42 points September ; 401 points August.
Yandina : No rain since 25th October ; 74 points October
Gayndah
7-8.11.40
100°-101° 93 °-96 °
34 22 13
1-2 3-9
Heavy smoke haze, 7th
Rainfall: 8 points October; 111 points September; 6
points August
9 7 6
Nanango
7-8.11.40
96-4° 96-2° 87 °-89 ° 90°-92°
N.W. 4
1 2 4-6 7-10
Rainfall: 95 points, 23rd September-8th November; 91
points September; 41 points August
9
Mt. Tamborine
7-8.11.40
76°-81° 86°
9 20
N.W. 4
4-8 9
Rainfall: 18 points, 2nd ; 275 points October ; 147 points
September ; 277 points August
9 4
9
Ipswich
7-8.11.40
90°-94° 84° 92-5°
2-7 8 9
Rainfall: 31 points, 2nd November. (See 1st November,
1940)
Dalby
16.11.40
89°-96° 79-8° 75-3°
8-14 15 16
Smoke haze, 4th-llth
Rainfall: 183 points, 2nd-16th; 126 points, 13th-16th;
60 points October ; 153 points September ; 4 points August
18 10
11 10
* 9 a.m.
Queensland — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
* Pressure Type
1940 —-continued.
1941—
July 20
Julia Creek, 29
Extensive fires
1c
July 29
Nonda, 29
Extensive fires
1c
August
August 7
Barkly Tablelands,
29, 37
Cunnamulla, 44 ..
Richmond, 30
300,000 acres destroyed
Serious grass fires
Large fires covering big area
} •«
September
1 ..
Tangorin, 36, 30 ..
15,000 acres destroyed ..
3
September
5 ..
Cooroy, 40
Heat and strong north wind caused many fires on north coast
2c
September
8 ..
Harrisville, 40
Winton, 37
ConsideraWe damage in the district; at least sixty head of cattle perished in
the Silverdale area. Fires fanned by high westerly wind. Flames reached
50 leet m height
Fires extended through three stations
2b
September
September
8 ..
12 ..
Dalby District, 41 ..
St. George, 43
A fire has destroyed 5,000 sheep and burnt 20,000 acres of grazing land. Fires
have been burning on the Darling Downs for nearly a week
A hSLtaf ■hS P de8troy6d 70 ’ 000 of graas and herbago and bumt sever »>
T 8-9
2a
September
25 ..
Ipswich, 40
Bush and grass fires fanned by westerly winds
2b-1
October 1
Oxley-Corinda, 40..
Brisbane, 40
South Burnett, 40..
Caboolture, 40
S. S 4/
st & r k ' y throu8h he,viiy timbered t-
Ringed by bush and scrub fires to-day
0n exp 0 e f ri t e h nced ° St diSaStr ° US bush fires in the South Burnett district has been
Fires swept through three pineapple farms, causing heavy damage
* 7: s. 4/
y A>. 4 &
T 24-25
2a
*
For Index, see end of this Section (page 150) —
• For Index, see end of this Section (page 150).
Queensland — continued.


p
ARTICXJLARS OF TEMPERATURE, RELATIVE HUMIDITY, RAINFALL, ETC., AND OBSERVER’S
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall. <fec.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1940— continued.
Miles
Innisfail
16.11.40
29.12.40
90 °-97 0 89° 83° 79°
7-13 14 T5~ “l6~
Smoke haze, 8th
Rainfall: 127 points, 13th-16th November; 26 points,
22nd October-12th November; 96 points October; 92
points September. No rain August.
Biggenden: 165 points, 9th; 339 points, 13th-16th ; no
rain 4th October—8th November
92 °-99 0 89°
21-26 27-30
Rainfall : 125 points December (286 points, 26th-28th
November); 328 points November ; 183 points October
13*
6-7
°/
0
1941—
Richmond
20.7.41
85° 85-6° 78° 74-6° 80°-82°
14 15 16 17 18-20
14 19
12 16
20
19
Richmond
29.7.41
79-8° 70°-76° 78-2° 82°
21 22-26 27 28, 29
Bush fires beginning to become a menace
Rainfall: No rain since 8th-14th June (181 points) ; 104
points May
15 16
24 ~27
20
26
S.E. 4
*25726
Cunnamulla
7.8.41
70°-76° 60°
14 19
N.W. 4
4
S.W. 5
6
S.E. 4 E. 4
1 7
1 7 5 6-7
Rainfall : 4 points July ; 76 points June ; 65 points May
4 5
Richmond
Winton
7.8.41
1.9.41
77°-84° 71°
26-6 T~
Grass fires very prevalent in the district; supposedly caused
by rats and wax matches
Rainfall: No rain July-August; 181 points, 8th-14th June ;
104 points May
82 °-84 0
25 18
3 5, 7
19 22
Winton
Ipswich
Brisbane
Tamborine
Gympie
Dalby
8.9.41
5.9.41
5.9.41
5.9.41
5.9.41
8.9.41
27-
Grass fires commencing in parts of the district
86° 88° 91 °-94°
3 4 5-8
Rainfall: No rain since mid-June (249 points on 5 days)
730-770 84 o gg.go 90 o
28- 3 4 T"
69-7° 75-6° 83-2° 74° 90-1°
1 2 3 4 5
Rainfall: 43 points, 1st; 75 points August; 64 points
July.
Cooroy : 32 points, 25th ; 32 points, 31st August, only rain
since 10th July
64 °-68 0 74-8° 76-5° 80-8°
1. 2 3 4 6
Rainfall: 60 points, lst-2nd ; 40 points August; 61 points
July ; 340 points June.
Harrisville : 11 points, lst-2nd September; 37 points, 24th
August, only rain since lOth-llth July
81°-87° 87°
2-10 T
Rainfall: 28 points August; 24 points July
82 °-89 0
28 29
16 20
5,7 1
34*
IT
19 32
5 3
20
5
15 16
W.N.W. 4
5
S.W. 15f
5
High winds on 5th
S.W. 4
5
N.W. 4 S.W. 5
4 5
W.N.W. 5
7
3-8
Rainfall: 6 points August; 75 points July; 104 points
June
5 7
!.8016/47.—10
* 9 a-m. f m.p.h.
Queensland — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
* Pressure Type.
1941 — continued.
October 8
Leyburn, 41
Between 7,000-8,000 acres of grazing country has been affected by fires
2
October 22
Muttaburra, 36
Fairly large fire burnt through three properties on front ..
T 7-8
6a-4
October 24
Longreach, 36
Worst fire for twenty years. Large amount of land burnt over. Flames
Kingaroy, 40
assisted by strong wind
October 26
Bush fires result of extremely dry conditions
> 6a-4-2b
Dalby, 41
Serious fire in the Tipton district travelling 35 miles on a wide front, burning
about 40,000 acres
November 4 ..
Warwick, 41
Grass fire covering 1,000 acres swept best grazing country
( 4, 1 and 1a
November 6
Central West
Fires, started by lightning, put out by rain after 145,000 acres had been
f T 5
destroyed. (See Longreach—October 24th)
November 10 ..
Julia Creek, 29
Serious fire. Large acreage burnt
3 and 1a
December 1
Marooohy, 40
Coolum (Bli Bli,
Lower Maroochy
One of the biggest bush fires in the district’s history has been raging
Cane crops and grass have been ravaged by widespread bush fires. Strong
northerly winds
2a and 1
f T 30-1
Kiver Districts) 40
9.4/
Ja *4/ / /j' 4/
♦
29.4 S9.4
For Index, see end of this i .
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 160 ).
Queensland — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued. .
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1941 — continued.
St. George
12.9.41
81°-87° 88-3° 90-5° 86-9° 68-7° 63°-67°
2-6 7 8 9 10 11, 12
Smoke haze, 7th
Rainfall: 11 points August; 10 points July; 100 points
June
21
7
0/
/€
16
9
N.W. 4 N. 4 S.W.
8 9 10
S.W. 5
11
4
Ipswich
Brisbane
Crohamhurst ..
Pittsworth
25.9.41
1.10.41
1.10.41
8.10.41
82°-84° 91° 92°
20-23 24 25
Rainfall: 21 points September; 62 points August; 45
points July
77-2° 80-9° 82-5° 69-2°
28 29 30 1
Smoke haze, 30th September and 1st October.
Rainfall: 48 points September; 75 points August; 64 points
July ; 137 points June
86-1° 81-1° 68-3°
29 30 1
Rainfall : 55 points September ; 137 points August ; 33
points July
76-8° 84-4° 89-5° 92° 90°
43*
25
16
30
21
30
31*
18
1
34*
Fresh to strong west
south-west wind
1st. Gusts up to
m.p.h.
(Sec also p. 49)
W.N.W. 5 W.N.W. 4
to
on
62
3 5 6 7 8
Smoke haze, 3rd-8th
Rainfall : 17 points September ; 7 points August ; 52
points July
3
7
6 8
Longreach
24.10.41
See 27th October, 1941
Nanango
24.10.41
80 °-83 ° 90° 98° 82-5°-88°
N.W. 4
15-17 18-20 21 22-24
Rainfall : 49 points since 24th August ; 60 points August
21
Dal by
26.10.41
92 °-94 • 8 ° 99-1° 89°-92° 83-2° 67°
15
7
N.W.-W. 4 N. 5
18-20 21 22-24 25 26
Rainfall : 22 points, 14th-18th October ; 14 points Septem-
ber ; 6 points August
23
21
21 26
Longreach
27.10.41
100°-106° 75°
6
8 14
15
18-26 27
“ Bush fires towards end of September did considerable
damage.” (Temp. 89°-95°)
Rainfall : No rain since 31st July
21
22 19
25
Warwick
4.11.41
80 °-86 ° , A 90°
26-4 but 30
Rainfall: 64 points October (54 points on 26th) ; 9 points
September ; 18 points August, only rains
Richmond
10.11.41
105° 101°-103° 93°-97°
20
12
W. 4
29 30-3 4-10
Rainfall : 19 points, 5th-6th ; 10 points October ; no rain
July to September, inclusive
31,
1 2
2
Cloncurry
10.11.41
103° 92°-97°
36
33
S.E. 6
7 '
2 3-10
Rainfall: 155 points, 4th-6th November ; 4 points October ;
no rain August and September
10
2
Crohamhurst ..
1.12.41
89-1° 86° 90° 91°
28 29 30 1
Rainfall: 15 points since 16th November; 367 points
November ; 60 points October; 55 points September
-
Brisbane
1.12.41
82 °-86 ° 87-7°
52
1
N.E.-N.W.
26-30 1
Rainfall: 138 points November; 61 points October; 48
points September
Smoke haze, 24th-28th November
28,
30-1
Some strong gusts
149
Queensland — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
* Pressure Type.
1942—
January 5
Nambour, 40
Fierce fires. Flames 40 feet high. Plantations destroyed
1943—
l
February 18
Goondiwindi, 42 ..
Fire with strong wind. Many sheep burnt
2a
March 23
TTs
St. George, 43, 42..
Several fires in the district
In
September 21 ..
Upper Tallebudgera,
40
D TWr at t , housands 1 of P° und « caused by a fire sweeping through
Upper Tallebudgera banana plantations in South-East corner of Queensland
Began Sunday afternoon, 19th
T 23
September 23 ..
Nambour, 40
W temntatrr r e iC to4 e “ f0rCe 7T Nor * h an d started many fires. Shade
temperature 104 ; westerly wind 40 mile per hour. Fires covered 700
miles of coastlme. Eleven centres reported temperatures of over 100°.
2b
T 22
December 16-20
Dirranbandi, 44, 42
Disastrous fire swept through several properties (Caused by lightning on
December 23 ..
Dirranbandi, 44, 42
Bush fire raging. 110,000 acres of pasture already destroyed. Five nronerties
destroyed J JTtf "JT? 8 "S “p"
oestroyed. JNow m Urandool, travelling towards Mulga Downs. P
6a-2
* tTz
December 23 ..
Culgoa River
Country,* 44
Fi Sati!1o 3 LT hT g h K> “* h ' WeSt ° f Shad, temperature 112*.
SJ.?. * J p
vS\(
29.2
MM
29 S
* For Index, see end of this Section tee isfli
* For Index, see end of this Section (page l 50).
Queensland — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1942—
Crohamhurst ..
5.1.42
84-6 c 95° 99-9° 100-1° 102-4°
1 2 3 4 5
Rainfall: 10 points 1st January ; 218 points December ;
367 points November ; 60 points October
34*
~5
1943—
Goondiwindi
18.2.43
92 °-96 ° 99° 96°-98°
11-14 15 16-18
Rainfall: 2 points since 23rd January ; 452 points January ;
521 points December ; 262 points September
24 33
18 16, 17
N.N.W. 4
18
St. George
23.3.43
99° 102° 92°-97° 101°
39*
17 18 19-22 23
Bush fires becoming a danger
Rainfall : 40 points since 23rd January (466 points January)
23
Southport
21.9.43
65°-76° 86° 93°
~2l 22
Rainfall: Light to moderate rains at intervals. 218 points
lst-13th September ; 139 points August; 13 points July
Tallebudgera : 486 points, lst-13th September
34
21
Crohamhurst .,
23.9.43
80-8° 91° 101-1° 77-7°
36* 38*
N.N.W. 6
S.W. 6
20 21 22 23
Rainfall; Rain early in month. 475 points, Ist-lOth ; 51
points, 17th-18th ; 170 points August; 9 points July
20 22
22
23
Brisbane
23.9.43
77-5° 92-5° 100-9° 80°
19 20 39*
N.W.-W.
20 21 22 23
Rainfall : 146 points, 5th-6th September; 60 points, 1st
September ; 123 points August; 16 points July
Nambour ; 599 points, lst-23rd ; (119 points, 17th-18th)
21 23 22
22
Strong to
0900-1320
evening.
50 m.p.h.
gale force
and in
Gusts up to
St. George
16-23.12.43
103°-109-9° 71°-86° 92-2° 96-3° 101-2°
13-17 18-20 21 22 23
Rainfall; 138 points, 18th-20th December ; 37 points, 19th
November-17th December; 119 points November; 23
points October; 112 points September
Dirranbandi : 10 points since 18th November
N.N.E. 4
n"
Gusty winds
Bollon
23.12.43
109° 112° 110° 73° 86 °-96 ° 100-8° 104-7°
15 16 17 18 19-21 22 23
Rainfall : 21 points, 18th—20th December, only rain since
mid-November ; 64 points November ; 25 points October ;
120 points September
17* 31*
15* 22
N.E. 5 N.
17 23
4
♦ 9 a.m.
Queensland — continued.


ANALYSIS OF FIRE REPORTS, QUEENSLAND.
[Supplied by Sub-Department of Forestry, Queensland).
Year
(July-June).
Numbers of Fires
of—■
i acre
or less.
i-10 acres.
10-100 acres.
Over
100 acres.
Total.
1938-
1939- ..
1940-
1941-
1942- ..
66
29
13
33
11
20
43
55
68
24
50
69
93
113
28
49
100
118
24
136
190
261
332
87
SUMMARY OF PRESSURE
TYPES OVER QUEENSLAND.
Pressure Type.
_
Total Number.
i
8
lA
4
IB
4
1c
5
Id
1
2
5
2a
15
2b
7
2c
6
3
4
4
7
5
I
6
6a
6b
1
Troughs of depressions
on 17 out of 74 Are days.
MONTHLY FREQUENCY—
QUEENSLAND.
September to December.
Pressure
Type.
September.
October.
November.
December.
1
lA
IB
1
2
5
2
1
2
2
1c
1
Id
2
2a
2b
2c
3
4
4
1
5
2
I
3
4
1
1
r
2
3
4
5
1
1
2
1
3
1
1
6a
6b
1
2
2
INDEX OF PRESSURE TYPES.
QUEENSLAND.
1. Sequence of “Highs” and “Lows.”
(la) High oyer South Eastern Australia. Tropical low pressure
or ‘ dip ’ over Queensland or Northern Territory.
(lb) High over North Tasman sea or off the Queensland coast.
Low pressure to the westward over Queensland, &c.
(lc) “ High ” moving over Central or South Australia and Eastern
Australia.
(ld) Trough moving across Eastern Australia.
2. Low pressure activity to the south or south-east. Development of
‘secondaries” and deep depressions.
(2a) Deep depression over the Tasman Sea extending north alono-
the coast of New South Wales.
(2b) Deep depression over South-Eastern Australia extending north
into Queensland.
(2c) Cyclonic depression developed oif South Coast of Queensland
or over the Tasman sea.
Queensknd 1 ” TaSman Sea for three da Y s or more - Low pressure over
4 Extensive low pressure system over the Bight and interior of the
Contment covering most of the Continent. “High” to the east.
o. High oyer Tasmania. Tropical low pressure system over
Queensland and New South Wales.
6. “High” over Bight.
(а) Tropical low pressure system over Queensland.
(б) South-Easterly isobars over Queensland.
of f Spre Jion" the date of the P^ 6 » f <"»*»
fire E p n eSd° f tW ° ° r m ° re typeS indicates the sequence of types in the
I = Intense low pressure system.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1917—
December 3
Burra, 21
A SZd b ip1« mileS ’**’ iS rag “ g “ the Eastem country. Sever*
1918—
February 11
Montacute, 23
A devastating bush fire swept the Adelaide hills. Numerous orchards damaged
1919—
February 14 ..
Mt. Pleasant, 23, 24
A big fire .wept mile, of country destroying fencing, feed, and stock
1920—
February 15
February 16 ..
Adelaide Hills, 23..
Woodside, 23
IXL^tve^ecTneT'• 2 ° -
-
1926—
February 16 ..
Mt. Pleasant, 23, 24
Three disastrous bush fires swpnf in
£140,000. 2,500 sheep perished 10 qUEr6 mile of C0Untl T- Damage over !
IB
1927—
January 20
Lyndoch, 23
Bush fires destroyed Many farm., considerable loss of stock
lA
T 20
1929—
March 12
Mt. Lofty Ranges,
23
Bush fires swept through ftp
over £20,000 ng6s great losses. Damage estimated
For Index, see L
lA
T 12
* For Index, see end of this Section (page i 6O ).
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


PARTICULARS OF
TEMPERATURE, RELATIVE HUMIDITY, RAINFALL, ETC.,
AND OBSERVER’S
REMARKS.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Jteiative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1917—
0/
/O
Yongala
3.12.17
80-5° 91° 77° 80-1° 79°
28 29 30 1 27~3
Rainfall: 39 points November ; 220 points October ; 266
16
18 22
S.W. 5 S.W. 4
30
2 29
29 30
points September
1918—
Adelaide
11.2.18
101° 100-2° 82-3° 78-6° 89-0° 109-2°
16
19
6 7 8 9 10 11
11
6
Little wind
Rainfall : 5 points since 14th January; 40 points since
December ; 102 points December ; 115 points November
Stirling West ..
11.2.18
71° 85° 100°
31
9 10 11
U
Rainfall : 40 points, lst-8th February ; 123 points January ;
186 points December; 195 points November
1919—
Mt. Barker
14.2.19
73° 86° 93° 85° 100°
25
18
10 11 12 13 IT"
14
13
Rainfall : 5 points since 3rd February; 79 points since
December ; 57 points December ; 67 points November
Roseworthy
14.2.19
84-2° 91-9° 97° 91-9° 109°
28
22
10 11 12 13 14
14
13
Rainfall : 15 points since 8th January ; 28 points January ;
10 points December ; 38 points November
1920—
Stirling West ..
15-16.2.20
82° 92° 94° 87° 84° 93°
21
18
10 11 12 13 14,15 16
Rainfall : 6 points from 28th January ; 27 points January ;
16
10, 15
N.W. 4
158 points December ; 35 points November
16
Adelaide
15-16.2.20
99-8° 103-5° 94°-98-4° 107-2°
9
12
11 13
15 16
10 11 12-15 16
Little wind
Rainfall: 26 points since December ; 114 points December •
15 points November
1926—
Mt. Barker
16.2.26
74° 79° 76° 82° 99° 68° 78°
10 11 12 13 14 ¥ lT
9
14
32
11
N. 6
Rainfall; 44 points, 8tb-9th February ; 17 points January ;
14
32 points December; 171 points November
Roseworthy
16.2.26
82° 97° 107° 77° 86°
13
14
20
13
12 13 M l5 nr
W.-S.W. 5
Bush fires noted on 5th and 15th
12, 13
Rainfall: 22 points since December ; 13 points December •
N.W. 7 W. 5
28 points November
14 15
1927—
Rose worthy
20.1.27
107-8° 75°-83° 97°
13
20
17
19
14 15-19 20
S. 5 S. 6 W. 6
“ Bush fires 10 miles east on 20th ”
15, 16 18 20
Rainfall: 37 points since 18th December ; 53 points Decern-
ber ; 91 points November; 217 points October
1929—
Mt. Barker
12.3.29
72° 77° 87° 95°
T To IT H
Rainfall: 38 points, 4th-8th March ; 6 points February ;
66 points January ; 18 points December
14
12
16
11
Stirling West ..
12.3.29
65-3° 72-2° 84-9° 93-2°
9 10 11 ~12~
Rainfall: 26 points, 3rd-6th March ; 2 points February ;
211 points January; 22 points December
N.W. 4
12
• 9 a.m.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1931—
February 25
December 26-30
Kuitpo State Forest,
23
Mt. Lofty Ranges,
23
Bush fire devastated many acres of land in the district of Kuitpo Forest,
Meadows, Prospect Hill, Mt. Compass, &c. Mill burned at Kuitpo
Persistent and serious fires in the Mt. Lofty Ranges
1a
T 25
1933—
February 22 ..
Kangarilla, 23
Bush fires have swept several miles of country in the Adelaide hills. Several
hundred sheep, fifty cattle, miles of fencing and thousands of acres of grass
land destroyed
1
T 22
1934—
February 9-11
March 8
March 9
March 8-11
March 13
1934-35 ..
Port Lincoln, 18
Mt. Gambier, 26 ..
Mylor, 23
Blackwood and
Belair, 23
Eyre Peninsula, Mt.
Lofty Ranges, 22,
23, 26
Mt. Gambier, 26 ..
Mt. Burr, Glencoe,
Tantanoola Dis-
trict, 26
Fires between Port Lincoln and North Shields
Portion of a pine forest destroyed
Serious fires Mylor and Currency Creek districts
"districts 6 bU ? fi wT ever experienced in the Blackwood and Belair
districts has occurred. Thousands of pounds worth of damage. Wall of
flames frequently rose 50 feet ®
Extensive fires in Eyre Peninsula, Mt. Lofty Ranges, and in the South-East
M burnt rChardS ’ mUeS ° f fenCiQg End hundreds of acres of grass have been
Serious fires
consequTnSal damagTj 7 fir8S ’ bUt ° nly t6n entered Forest Reserves with no
lA
lA
T 13
J9-4 999 / 9 ,
* y ' J * J9 J <*9-9 J9-7 y?£
S/-.■S\*24 /J*. .
Z'
S9S
♦ For
19/ Jp.?
Index, see end of this Section (page 160) —-
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 160).
t Supplied by Woods and Forests Department, South Australia.
South Australia — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity
3 p.m.
Wind.
1931—
Mt. Barker
Strathalbyn
Adelaide
25.2.31
25.2.31
26-30.12.31
93° 71° 62° 73° 87° 92° 93°
18 19 20, 21 22 23 2T 25~
Rainfall : 25 points, lst-22nd February ; 156 points January ;
92 points December ; 119 points November
71° 88-5° 94-6° 97-8°
22 23 24 25
Smoke haze, 25th
Rainfall : 13 points, 13th-22nd February ; 102 points
January ; 44 points December ; 29 points November
87° 101-3° 101° 101-7° 107-9° 114-6° 104-3°
20
23
4
0/
/o
16 13
24 18
6 9
9
25
10
W. 5
25
N.N.E.
14f
Mt. Barker
26-30.12.31
24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Rainfall; 22 points, 22nd December, only rain since 17th
November; 87 points November ; 49 points October
83° 93° 97-5° 98° 103° 106-1° 103-5°
29
7
25 28
8 11
26,
12
27
22
25
N. 4
24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Rainfall: 34 points, 21st-23rd December, only rain since 3rd ;
71 points December ; 85 points November; 127 points
October
29
28 25
26
27
29
1933—
Stirling West ..
22.2.33
78° 85-9° 69° 62-1-° 75-3° 85-4°
17 18 19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 5 points February (20th) ; 204 points January;
84 points December ; 160 points November
1934-
Port Lincoln .
9-11.2.34
81° 105° 104° 76° 73° 75°
11
34 46
W. 6
Mt. Gambier ..
9-11.2.34
y ~7 '8 9 10 11
Rainfall; No rain since 26th January ; 19 points January ;
13 points December ; 76 points November
76-9° 99-8° 103° 96° 79°
7
13
8 9
14* 16
7
S.W. 4
Mt. Barker
Adelaide
Mt. Gambier ..
8-11.3.34
8-11.3.34
8-11.3.34
6 7 8 9 10-11
Rainfall: No rain since 10th January; 24 points January;
78 points December ; 261 points November
82° 98° 99-5° 104° 101-5° 97°
IP 7 8 9 10 11
Rainfall: 5 points, 1st March, only rain since 17th February ;
24 points February; 100 points January (3rd-9th); 143
points December
94-5° 105-5° 106-9° 110-5° 107-8° 103-8°
6 7 8 9 10 11
Rainfall : No rain since 17th February ; 14 points February ;
46 points January ; 83 points December
68° 92-3° 100° 105° 106-2° 96°
8 9 7
12 17
8-U> U
7 8 9 12
6 9 8 7, 10
25 30 33
15
11
9, 10
N.-N.W. 14f
10
W.S.W. 6 S.E. 4
Belair
Stirling West ..
Mt. Gambier ..
9.3.34
9.3.34
13.3.34
6 7 8 9 10 11
Rainfall ; 5 points, 1st ; 15 points February ; 24 points
January
96° 88-8° 87-7° 100° 100-3° 104-2°
4-5 6 7 8 9
Rainfall : No rain since 18th February ; 17 points February ;
51 points January ; 60 points December
82° 96-1° 97-9° 101-7°
0 7 8 9
Rainfall : 20 points since January ; 189 points January ;
94 points December
92-3° 100°-108-2° 96°-97° 106-3°
7 8-10 11, 12 13
Rainfall : 5 points, 26th February-14th March ; 15 points
February ; 24 points January ; 78 points December
7 8 9
18 19
P~9 7
23 20
779 8
25 25 32
10
W.S.W.
11
6 S.E. 4
13
7 8
10
11
* 9 a.m. t m.p.h.
South Australia — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type.
1935—
March 9
1935- ..
1936- ..
1937- ..
1938-
January 19
October 18 (or
December 22 .
17)
Mt. Gambier, 26 ..
Wirrega, 25
Mt. Gambier, 26 ..
Mt. Gambier, 26 ..
One of the most destructive fires on record swept 15,000 acres of some of the
richest farm lands in the district. Damage exceeds £20,000
Few fires reported. Eight fires on or near Forest Reserves with light damage
from two of them J
Very mild summer with few fires. Seven fires on Forest Reserves with
negligible damage J
Fairly good season. Fourteen fires in Forest Reserves with no actual loss
of timber J
A fierce fire raged on a front of more than 2 miles. Hundreds of rail sleepers
burnt
Outbreaks of fire in the different forest areas with a heavy toll of young pine
plantations. Between 200 and 300 acres of five-year old trees destroyed
Bush fires believed to have been caused by lightning burned several hundred
acres of pines
lA
T 9
lA
T 17
lA
T 22
1938-39 ..
23, 26 ..
Very bad summer. Numerous fires with heavy losses. Twenty fires on Forest
Reserves. Heavy forest losses in the Adelaide Hills and in the South-East
250 fires reported during the summer months in areas surrounding the
forests f 6
1939—
January 10
January 13
Adelaide Hills, 23..
Mt. Gambier, 26 ..
23
(Meadows Macclesfield, Strathalbyn, Mt. Torrens, &c.). Covering several
hundreds square miles, bush fires, some of the worst in the State’s history
cafseO 7 +hn man J homes > dl s° r ganized telegraph and telephone services!
lT e A th T^ d \° f P °, unds worth of damage to property and pastures and
killed hundreds of cattle and sheep p s ana
BU 20 000 6S haV6 r burnt 2 r 50( ! aCr6S ° f pine trees - 500 head of stock died
destroyed r6S SWept ’ 30 buil dings and 200 miles of fencing
Echunga, Meadows, Kuitpo district. Serious fires
lA
tTo
1a
T 13
1939-40 ..
Mild season with few fires Three fireo in n
reported in the arena auriJtg thTf'L 82
1940-
March 12-13
March 29
23, 18, 26
Mt. Lofty Ranges,
Victor Harbor,
Nararoorte, &c
23, 26
F Mt'oambier^Se 1 )” 808 ’ P ° rt LmooIn dist ™ t and South-East (Kolangadoo,
B of 17 ms points - t — —
2
2 ,
1940-
1941—
January 22
1941-42 ..
Mt. Gambier, 26 ..
of acres of grasslands C °° la Statl0n b y lightning, and swept hundreds
Mild summer with few bad fire davs pw „
fires reported in areas surrounding for2t s . 5 °
lA
T 23
•
For Index, see end of this Section (page 160). ~T
• For Index, see end of this Section (page 160). .
PP 8d by Woods and Forests Department, South Australia.
South Australia — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Wind.
1935—
0/
/o
Mt. Gambier ..
9.3.35
97° 85-6° 74-7° 94-7° 98-3°
18 19
W. 6
5 6 7 8 9
8 5
Rainfall : 1 point from 22nd February-lOth March ; 34
9
points February ; 114 points January ; 71 points December
1938—
Servieeton (Vic.)
19.1.38
79-9° 93° 97-2° 101-9°
16 17 18 19
Rainfall: 28 points, 2nd-14th January ; 280 points Decem-
ber ; 45 points November; 102 points October
N.E. 8
TsTbT
Mt. Gambier ..
18.10.38
66° 77-8° 86-3° 64-2°
15 ~TT ~18~
Rainfall: 72 points, 1st—14th October ; 156 points Septem-
ber ; 189 points August; 239 points July
16 12
I7 Is
N.N.W. 6 W.N.W. 5
17 18~ ~
Mt. Gambier ..
22.12.38
77-5° 70° 67-1° 80° 91-3°
16 37
S.E. 4 N.W. 5
18 19 20 21 22
Rainfall: 79 points, lst-15th December; 168 points
18 22
21 ~22
November ; 98 points October ; 156 points September
1939—
Strathalbyn
10.1.39
83-1° 88-9° 102-7° 102-3° 103-2° 113-5°
12 18
S. 5 N.W. 5
6 7 8 9 10
“Big bush fire in surrounding districts on 10th”
10 9"
8 9
Rainfall: 6 points since 29th December ; 60 points Decern-
ber ; 47 points November ; 53 points October
Mt. Barker
10.1.39
85; 95; 104° 101° 106° 109°
5 6 7 8 1 10
Rainfall: 6 points since 29th December ; 59 points Decem-
ber ; 132 points November
8 21
10 679
Mt. Gambier ..
13.1.39
88° 107-2° 67° 87° 109-9°
15 19
S.E. 4 W. 9
9 10 11 12 13
Rainfall: 23 points, 1st—15th January ; 128 points December ;
10 13
12 13
168 points November; 98 points October
1940—
Adelaide
12.3.40
94-9° 103-9° 107-7° 110-1° 108-3° 107-9° 104-7°
4 5 7 8 13
N.N.E. 15f E.S.E. 16f
12 11
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Rainfall : No rain since February ; 38 points February;
9 8, 10 7 ll 12
120 points January ; 28 points December
Mt. Gambier ..
13.3.40
78° 97-3° 100° 104-5° 105-4° 105-8° 101° 100°
6.7 8 9 10 11 12 ~W
Ramfall : 25 points, lst-5th March ; 76 points February ;
182 points January
10 11 13
10, 12 IT 13
N.W. 4 N.W. 6
12 13
Mt. Barker
12.3.40
97° 101-2° 106° 104-4° 105° 99-6°
8 9 10
7 8 9 10 11 12
10 9, 12 11
Rainfall : 1 point since 29th February ; 54 points February ;
174 points January ; 42 points December
Mt. Barker
29.3.40
90° 73-6° 91° 93-4° 93-2° 94°
24 25 26 27 28 29
Rainfall: 53 points, 19th-20th March ; 54 points February ;
12 16
N.W. 4
29 23, 28
26, 28, 29
174 points January; 42 points December
Stirling West ..
29.3.40
72-5° 87-3° 90° 90-2° 90-6°
9 14
N. 4 W. 5
25 26 27 28 29
Smoke and dust haze, 29th
29 28
28 “ 29
Rainfall ; 100 points, 19th-21st March ; 101 points February ;
275 points January ; 84 points December
1941—
Mt. Gambier ..
22.1.41
68° 85° 97-1°
25 36
S. 4 N.N.W. 4
20 21 22
Rainfall : 6 points, 30th December—23rd January ; 102
22 21
20, 21 22
points December ; 220 points November ; 123 points
October
—
♦ 9 a.m. , -f m.p.h.
South Australia— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type.
1942—
January 7
Mt. Lofty Ranges 23,
Naracoorte, 26
Damaging fire.. . . . . • • • • • • • • \
Disastrous fire.. .. • • • • • • • • • • j
U
T 7
February 11
March 1-3
Mt. Lofty Ranges,
23
Penola, 26
Fires on Mt. Lofty Ranges
Fires, Penola district ..
1942-43 ..
Very mild season. Few fires despite the heavy growth of grass. Four fires
on Forest Reserves and 44 fires reported in areas surrounding forests.
Damage from fires in Forest Reserves was severef
1943—
January 1
January 6
Mt. Gambler, 26,
Caroline, 26
Pewsey Vale,
Adelaide Hills, 23
Serious fires
Serious fires
lA
T 2*
1a
T 6
1943-44 ..
A mild summer, but heavy late spring grass created an acute hazard and
fires were fairly numerous. Thirteen fires in Forest Reserves and 75 fires
reported in areas surrounding forests. Damage from fires entering Forest
Reserves was severe^
1944—
January 7
January 14
March 29
December 29
1944-45 ..
One Tree Hill,
Adelaide Hills, 23
Millicent, Mt. Burr,
26
Millicent, Mt. Burr,
26
Port Elliot, 23
The worst fire in the history of the district destroyed at least 1,000 sheep,
miles of fencing, &c. Fire extended over a 10-mile front
benous fires
Serious fires
Most disastrous fire in history of district burnt four homes, valuable hay-
stacks, grass land, camp sites, and six tents. Began in Hindmarsh Valley
m ° re 1 t . han i, 00 square miles of country to within 1| miles
of Victor Harbour and into Port Elliot
Dr firef re^ n mild summer - , Nine fi res in Forest Reserves. Thirty-one
fires reported in areas surrounding forests. Damage small}
1a
T8
lA
T 4
1
T29
/j. 44 /£
797
'*\%r
V fk
/-rUr 79.*.-:::
©
rsjp o i m) V c c _ Vv—, *?p
j 9-4
'Jo/
)/ ? r
JP-7
* For Index,
see end of this Section (n
ace 1601 4. c.. , , ' —
* S’ ol Index . see end of this Section (page 160). . * 0., , ZZ ~
PP y Woods and Forests Department, South Australia.
South Australia — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1942—
Mt. Barker
7.1.42
90-2° 98° 105° 88° 82° 92° 93°
11
12
0/
/c
31
N. 10
1 2 3 4 5~ 6 7
Heavy dust storm from north, 7th
Rainfall: 6 points since 16th December; 87 points Decem-
ber ; 88 points November ; 186 points October
2
3"
7
7
Adelaide
7.1.42
100-1° 101-5° 112-5° 88-7° 80-7° 99-3° 95-6°
6
11
12
17 26
W.N.W. 37f
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
3
2
6
1 7
7§
Rainfall : 1 point since 16th December; 57 points, 7th
December ; 100 points November ; 143 points October
Kybybolite
7.1.42
94-6° 92-2° 109-2° 88-2° 78-4° 95° 97-8°
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Rainfall: No rain since December, 27th; 53 points December;
36 points November ; 168 points October
25
7
N.W. 6
11
Mt. Barker
11.2.42
78° 94° 96° 78° 81° 79° 76° 73°
XT IT T T T To Ti
Rainfall: 20 points, 9th, only rain since 25th January;
169 points January; 87 points December; 88 points
November
18
5
35
11
36
6
Adelaide
11.2.42
100-4° 87-4° 77°-81 ° 82-8°
32
S.W. 22t S.S.E, 18t
6 7 8-10 11
Rainfall: 15 points, 7th—8th February ; 161 points January ;
57 points December ; 100 points November
11
10
11
Lameroo
1-3.3.42
99-2° 100° 102-8° 103° 110°
26 27 28 1-2 3
Rainfall: No rain since 18th February ; 33 points February ;
86 points January; 34 points December
1943—
Mt. Gambier ..
1.1.43
70° 71° 93-2°
29
S.W. 4 S. 6
30 3l 1
Rainfall: 138 points December; 116 points November;
299 points October
1
30 31
Roseworthy
6.1.43
82° 92-3° 99-4°
T 5 6
Rainfall : No rain since 26th December ; 105 points Decem-
ber; 116 points November; 78 points October
20
Stirling West ..
6.1.43
94-8° 71-6° 66-7° 74-8° 85° 88-4°
1 2 3 4 5 6
Rainfall : No rain since 25th December ; 73 points December ;
222 points November; 272 points October
10
6'
14
5
1944—
Adelaide
7.1.44
73°-75° 84-9° 102-6°
4, 5 6 7
Rainfall : 13 points, 3rd-4th only rain since 17th December ;
71 points December; 39 points November; 119 points
October
6
~7
12
6
W.N.W. 18f
7
Mt. Gambier ..
14.1.44
64-8° 78° 84° 95°
11 12 13 14
Rainfall: 46 points, 2nd-10th January ; 38 points December ;
148 points November; 214 points October
(Millicent; 41 points, 3rd-5th)
S.W. 6 W. 4
10 XT
S.W. 6
14
W.N.W.5
13
Victor Harbour
29.12.44
87° 74-7° 77-7° 73° 94-8° 100-7°
W.N.W. 4 N.N.W. 6
24 25 26 27 28 29
Rainfall : 122 points, 6th-23rd December; 136 points
November; 286 points October; 122 points September
27
29
Strathalbyn
29.12.44
74-8° 92-8° 101°
15
N.W. 7
27 28 29
Rainfall: 79 points, 5th-23rd December; 145 points
November ; 160 points October ; 90 points September
28,
29
29
* 9 a.m. t m.p.h. § N.N.E. 28 m.p.h., 9 a.m. ; W.N.W. 37 m.p.h., 3 p.m., 7th; many gusts 60 to 72 m.p.h.
South Australia — continued.


SUMMARY OF PRESSURE TYPES.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Troughs on Fourteen out of Eighteen Fire Days.
Pressure Type.
Total Number.
1
1
lA
14
1b
2
2
1
INDEX OF PRESSURE TYPES.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
1. Sequence of “ Highs ” and “ Lows ” —
(A) “ High ” Tasman Sea. Depression over Bight.
(b) Low pressure activity.
Secondaries and deep depressions developed over Bight and
South-East Australia.
2. “ High ” over Tasman Sea for three or more days. Depression over
Bight.
Note :—T (with figures) signifies the date of the passage of the trough
of a depression over the region.
I == Intense low pressure system.


WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
C.8016/47.—11


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type.
1914—
February 22-26
Gin Gin, 9
One of the most disastrous bush fires ever experienced. Several thousand
acres of feed, a number of thoroughbred horses, house, and buildings
destroyed
Bush fires raged in this area. Much grass, fencing, and harvested wheat
destroyed
••
February 25 ..
Toodyay and Nor-
thern Districts,
10a
1916—
January 15-18
February 10
Northam, Spencer’s
Brook, 10a
Kojonup, 10a
Bush fires in these districts and at Burlong Estate destroyed wheat crops,
feed, &c.
A terrific bush fire raged south-east of Kojonup. Thousands of acres of grass
burnt. (High wind)
1918—
December 26 ..
December 30-31
Pallinup Estate, 10a
Kondut, Ballidu, 8,
Najading Siding,
9a, Pemberton,
York, &c., Dis-
tricts, 10a
Disastrous fire on the Pallinup 'Estate destroyed sheep, crops, fences, &c.
Over 12,000 acres of the estate burnt
Fires destroyed crops, bagged wheat, station buildings, &c. Disastrous fires
in the York district burnt about 16,000 acres of feed, miles of fencing,
hundreds of sheep, farm implements, &c.
..
1919—
January 4
Denabbing, 10a ..
Destructive fire at Denabbing between Narrogin and Williams ..
February 4
March 4
Katanning, 10a, and
Wongan Hills, 8
Busselton 9a, and
Kojonup, 10a
Large fires. Fire swept right through Wongan Hills township
Fires prevalent. A great deal of country burnt ..
••
1920-
March 8-9
Burekup, Henty
Hill, Australind,
Wokalup, and
Waterloo Dis-
tricts, 9a
B Busselton d h d ne a am ° Unt ° f in theSe districts ’ also alon 8 the
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


PARTICULARS OF
TEMPERATURE, RELATIVE HUMIDITY, RAINFALL, ETC.,
AND OBSERVER’S REMARKS.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
1 Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1914—
Walebing
22-26.2.14
77° 80 °-86 ° 100° 105° 108° 94°
0/
/o
S.-S.W. 4
S.E. 4^5
Guildford
Northam
22-26.2.14
25.2.14
18 19-22 23 24 25 26
Rainfall: 2 points, 13th February; nil, January; 226 points
December ; 23 points November
77° 85° 97-3° 104-3° 106-5° 76-8°
21 22 23 24 25 26
Rainfall: 167 points, 13th—26th February; nil, January;
264 points December ; 60 points November
(Gin Gin : 37 points, 13th—18th February)
82 °-86 • 6 ° 98° 105° 108-8°
19-22 23 24 25
Rainfall: 25 points, 12th—18th February ; 2 points January ;
195 points December ; 47 points November
16, 18, 19, 21
E. 4 N.E. 4
24 25
N.E. 4
23
E.S.E. 4
21
22, 23
1916—
Northam
Katanning
15-18.1.16
10.2.16
93-8° 105° 92°-98-2° 97° 99° 92-8°
11 12 13-15 16 17 18
Rainfall : 10 points, 3rd-5th January ; 8 points December ;
8 points November ; 185 points October
78° 87-6° 100-8°
8 9 10
Rainfall : 1 point 5th February ; 57 points January ; 1 point
December ; 33 points November
20
10
24
T
1918—
Katanning
26.12.18
77-5° 81-1° 93°
24 25 26
Rainfall: 4 points December; 133 points November; 112
points October ; 175 points September
93-2° 102° 109° 90-4° 93° 101° 108-4°
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Rainfall : No rain December ; 35 points November ; 175
points October ; 162 points September
18
20
Northam
30-31.12.18
26
20, 25
1919—
Narrogin
4.1.19
93-1° 105-1° 84-7° 86-4° 92-3° 77-8°
N.N.E. 5 N. 4
31 T
W. 4
30 Jan.
S.W. 5 S.E. 4
31 1
E. 4
T
Katanning ..
Walebing ...
4.2.19
4.2.19
30 31 1 2 3 4
Rainfall : No rain since 8th December ; 6 points December ;
24 points November ; 186 points October
93° 101° 72° 80-2° 92-2° 98°
29 30 31,1 Feb. 2 3 4
Rainfall : 15 points since November ; 133 points November
79° 84° 95° 97°
t y 3 t~
Rainfall : No rain since 17th January (8 points) ; 6 points
December ; 53 points November
13
4
16 21
30 3
Busselton
Katanning
4.3.19
4.3.19
85-9° 86-5° 76° 75-5° 76-2° 82-7° 86°
26 Feb. 27 28 1 Mar. 2 3 4
Smoke haze at intervals, February and 3rd March
Rainfall : No rain since 15th February ; 9 points February ;
54 points January; 11 points December
104° 83° 81° 78-6° 77° 89°
16
30
S.S.W. 4 S. 4
28 Feb. TMar.
26, 27 28 Feb. 1 Mar. 2 3 4
Rainfall: 15 points since November (133 points)
26,
27 4
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
•Pressure Type
1922—
Extensive fires adjacent to the metropolitan area. Singularly dense pall of
1b
March 11-12 ..
Perth, 9 ..
smoke over the city
1923—
February 4
Perth, 9 ..
Unusual number of bush fires in suburban areas and nearby hills, Perth
1a
temperature 107 4°
T 4
1924—
February 12 ..
Waterloo, Boyanup,
Serious bush fires over the whole of the south-west. Heavy damage to pastures
IB
Dardanup, &c.,
and crops. Dense smoke haze affected shipping movements at Fremantle
T 12
9a
and S.S. Benalla went aground at North Mole
February 23 ..
Bunbury, 9a
Serious bush fires raging over whole South-West. Heavy damage done to
1a
thousands of acres of pastures. Worst damage in Waterloo and Dardanup
districts
December 1
Geraldton District,
8
/o22S
vi—N I2*T\) n
Serious fires reported from several centres. Considerable damage to crops
at Nabawa (25 miles south of Geraldton)
2.25 72.2 2S
2c
0&m% * M W€4 I p
1925—
February 11
Katanning, 10a
One of the worst fires in the history of the district. Commencing at Boyerine,
2d-2a
sweeping before a strong Easterly wind, the fire passed through Moojebing,
T 11
Woodanilling and Marracoonda, and entered Katanning on the North and
West sides. Fire advanced on a front of over 20 miles. Over 40,000 acres of
country swept. Total damage probably near £100,000. Many sheep, much
wheat, hay, feed, and fences destroyed. One man burned to death
1927—
December 17 ..
Gascoyne, 6
Big grass fires at Gascoyne threatening Ella Valla, Edagee, Yalbalgo stations ;
by 20th, assumed bush fire proportions. 21st, spread with alarming
rapidly
2b
December 19 ..
Southern Cross, 12
Grass fires
1
December 21 ..
Katanning, 10a
Crops and stacks burnt. Loss estimated at £2,000
1b
77/2.27
72. 72.27 72. 72.27 20. 72. 27
•* S 2*9 29.6 .>97
w
'9
27
29 7
1928—
January 12
Kenwick, 9
Serious bush fires have been experienced. Bush fires around Perth
2c
T 13
January 16
Harvey, 9a
A bush fire did considerable damage between Harvey and Wokalup
2b
January 15-19..
Waneroo, 9
Considerable damage to grass and fences. A man severely burned
2b
* ior Index, see end of this Section (page 180).
Western Australia — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
i
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1922 —
Perth
11-12.3.22
78-7° 84-8° 94-6° 101-3°
0/
/o
25 26 35
W.S.W. 16f
1923—
Perth
4.2.23
9 10 11 12
Dense smoke haze, 13th-15th
Rainfall : 12 points, 1st—2nd March ; 21 points February ;
10 points January ; 78 points December
94°-98-8° 104-8° 107-4°
12 10 11
11 15 26
12
Strong easterly, 11th
W. 22f S.W. 18f
29 Jan.-2 Feb. 3 4
Rainfall : 102 points January; 101 points December;
188 points November
3 4 30
1 2
W.S.W. 15f W.S.W. 18f
3 4
1924—
Bunbury
Collie
11 |
Donnybrook
Bunbury
Donnybrook ..
Geraldton
12.2.24
12.2.24
12.2.24
23.2.24
23.2.24
1.12.24
81-4° 90-5° 89-8° 79-8° 89-5° 84-5°
6 7 8 9 11 12
Smoke haze, 12th
Rainfall; No rain since 14th-15th January (17 points) ;
19 points January; nil, December; 22 points November
86-5° 88-5° 81-8° 84-5° 91° 86° 91°
6 7 8 9 10 11 HT
Rainfall : 3 points, 4th February ; 24 points January ; 10
points December ; 25 points November ; 237 points October
88-1° 90-2° 85-1° 87-8° 90° 88-3° 89-8°
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Rainfall : 14 points, 2nd-4th February ; 40 points January ;
12 points December ; 49 points November ; 235 points
October
85° 93° 81-4° 86° 81° 92° 88-2° 90°
16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Smoke haze, 17th and 19th-21st
Rainfall : 4 points, 13th February
(See 12th February)
78-8° 82-1° 91-4° 87° 92-6°
19 20 21 22 23
“ Bush fires extensive and destructive ”
Rainfall : 16 points February ; 44 points January ; 12
points December ; 49 points November
77-8° 77° 84-3° 97° 103-3° 112°
50
8
17 25
E 6 S.W. 5 S. 4
26 27 28 29 30 1 Dec.
Rainfall; No rain since 10th Nov. 38 points Nov. ; 214 points
October ; 102 points September.
1 30
1 29 30
1925—
Katanning
11.2.25
93-5° 87-7° 80-3° 75° 80-1° 91-7° 72-1°
18 29
N.W. 4 W.S.W. 4
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Rainfall: No rain since 25th January ; 41 points January ;
nil December; 108 points November
11 10
11 12
1927—
Carnarvon
17.12.27
79°-82° 89-2°
57 58
S.S.W. 4
Katanning
21.12.27
11-16 "1 T~
Large bush fires raging in south-east from 2nd to 20th
Rainfall: No rain since October (19 points) ; 34 points
September
79-3° 87-7° 95-7° 99°
14 15
26 27
17
E.S.E. 5
18 19 20 21
Rainfall: 86 points, 6th-15th December ; 27 points Novem-
ber ; 182 points October; 228 points September
20 21
18
1928—
Collie
16.1.28
76-6° 86-8° 84-5° 95-8° 77° 76° 79°
10 11 12 13 14 H5 16
Rainfall : 68 points, 9th January, only rain since 15th
December ; 37 points December ; 20 points November ;
198 points October
(Harvey : 52 points, 9th-10th)
S.E. 4 E. 4 S.E. 4
11 12 15
S.E. 5
16
t m.p.h.
Western Australia — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type
1928— continued.
January 22
Palmyra and Mel-
ville Hill, 9
Extensive bush fires
1b
February 23
Harvey, &c., 9a ..
Bush fires raged throughout the South-West. Cattle and sheep destroyed at
Harvey, while thousands of acres of pastures and hay and much fencing
were destroyed
1a
December 26 ..
Barberton, 8, 9
Extensive fire damaged grass and crops on several properties
2
T 25
1929—
January 4
Tambellup, 10a ..
One of worst fires in history of district occurred between Tunney Town and
Tambellup. Six properties swept. Heavy losses
2b
January 22
Dandalup, 9
Carrolup, 10a
Katanning, 10a
Bush fires swept through the district, causing great damage to stacks of
timber. Thousands of pounds worth of damage done
Fire swept 3,000 acres yesterday
Bush fires sweeping through the district. Great damage to homesteads and
farm buildings. One settler lost 1,000 head of stock
1a to 2a
T 22
December 4
Nabawa, 8
160 acres of crop destroyed, value £400. (25 miles South of Geraldton) ,,
2d
/S./.SO
/S. /.30 20, /. 2/. /. 30
/iMV-
't/Jo-O
** 7
1930—
January 20 .. ..
Boyup Brook, 9a ..
Perth, 9a, 10a, 8
Marradong, 9a
Denmark, 9a
Extensive fires along the railway. Bridge destroyed and serious damage to
the line. Farms swept between Boyup and Dinninup
Disastrous fires causing extensive damage, broke out in various parts of the
State particularly m the South-West. One man lost his life near Northam ;
several injured The fires were the worst in the history of the State. Mill
destroyed at Bridgetown Narrogin, Northam, Moora, centres of fairly
extensive conflagations. District between Cookernup and Harvey suffered
severe damage. Greenbushes endangered P y suitered
Bush fires swept miles of the surrounding country, leaving a trail of
devastation. Much damage to property and stock
caused heavy losses to group settlers and interruptions to telephone
Northam, 10a, 8 ..
Disastrous bush fires have caused extensive damage over a large area
Z ”to M0 °”’ N " r ° gin ’ “ d through the fruit
2d
T 20-21
Manjimup, 9a
dlStriCt ' TerrM ° b "“ h *«■
February 1
Perenjori, 8
A fire destroyed many sheep and large areas of pasturage
2b
T 30-31
• For Index, see end of this Seetinn ionx —
♦ For Index, see end of this Section (page ISO).
Western Australia — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1928— contined.
Donnybrook
Collie
Donnybrook
Walebing
16.1.28
23.2.28
23.2.28
26.12.28
85° 94-6° 90-6° 80-5° 76° 78-2
11 12 13 14 Ts 16
Rainfall : 72 points, 9th—10th January; 34 points December ;
37 points November ; 267 points October
85° 88-8° 86-2° 89° 87° 94° 95-5°
17 18 19 20 2l 22 “23”
Smoke haze, 24th
Rainfall: 7 points February ; 304 points January (on 3 days);
37 points December ; 20 points November
86° 87-6° 92-2° 96-6°
20 21 ” 22 ' 23
Rainfall: 6 points February; 131 points January; 34
points December; 37 points November
87° 90° 94-2° 95° 89°
22 23" 24 25 26~
Rainfall : 84 points, 6th-21st December ; 33 points Novem-
ber ; 140 points October ; 260 points September
Of
/ O
• iI; .■ ■
N.W. 5 S.W. 5
• ;
20 21
S.E. 4
22, 26
1929—
Mt. Barker
Katanning
4.1.29
4.1.29
87-8° 98-9° 70-5° 80-2° 74-8° 67-2° 73-5°
29 30 31 Dec. 1 Jan. 2 3 4
Rainfall: 2 points since 22nd December ; 49 points Decem-
ber ; 73 points November ; 241 points October
97-3° 103-7° 83-3° 89-7° 80° 74° 80-3°
17 20
W.N.W. 5 S.W. 4
1
Collie
Donnybrook
Geraldton
22.1.29
22.1.29
4.12.29
29 30 31 Dec. 1 Jan. 2 3 4
Rainfall: 20 points, 2nd January; 15 points December;
16 points November; 106 points October
75-5° 88-5° 95-8° 99-8° 77-5°
18 19 20~ 21 22~
Rainfall: 3 points January ; 82 points December ; 71 points
November ; 327 points October
77-2° 94-5° 95-5° 98-5° 79-5°
18 19 20 ~21~ IfiT
Rainfall: No rain since 22nd December ; 105 points Decem-
ber ; 59 points November ; 396 points October
82-2° 94° 101-4° 96°
29, 30 1
58 48 61
2 3
E. 4
18
S. 4
17, 18
S. 4
12 3 4
Rainfall; No rain since 15th November; 63 points Novem-
ber ; 27 points October; 65 points September
2 3-4
' ' j
1-3
1930—
Bridgetown
Narrogin
20.1.30
20.1.30
83° 88° 105° 109°
iT I ¥ ¥
Rainfall: No rain January; 74 points December; 223
points November ; 187 points October
89-7° 102-3° 110-6°
'*• .. •'»' ' •• '< ■ ■
Northam
Wandering
20.1.30 „
20.1.30
18 19 20
Rainfall; No rain since 9th December ; 127 points December ;
184 points November ; 75 points October
92-6° 94-2° 110-2° 114-3° , »
17 18 19 20
Rainfall: No rain since 24th December ; 12 points December ;
66 points November ; 130 points October
91 -5°-94° 88-3° 91° 103° 108°,;
j
S.E. 4 N.W. 4
Albany
20.1.30
14—16 17 18 19 20
“ Smoke haze, 21st. Seasonal grass fires ”
Rainfall: No rain since 26th December; 23 points Decem-
ber ; 173 points November; 90 points October
71-5° 75° 106°
ItT 19” 20“
Rainfall: 6 points since 29th December ; 217 points Decem-
ber ; 671 points November ; 206 points October
44 52
20 18
17 20
Hot wind on 20th
* 9 a.m.
W e stern Au stralia — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
• Pressure Type.
1930— continued.
December 27 ..
Northam, 10a
A serious grass fire caused heavy damage to the north of Northam, destroy-
ing a large quantity of grass and fencing
2a
T 27
1931—
January 28
Margaret River,
Fierce bush fires attacked Margaret River township. Around Yallingup
1a-2a
Yallingup, 9a
settlers suffered losses
T 27-28
Carlisle and Welsh-
Extensive bush fires
pool, 9
Janaury 28-29..
Kojaneerup (Mt.
Barker), 9a
Bush fires have been raging in the district. Considerable areas of country
swept and houses and out-buildings burned
-
January 29
Denmark, 9a
Fierce fires, stated to be the worst experienced in district, occurred on North-
West outskirts
December 8
Northam, 10a
Considerable damage caused by fires which swept over miles of country
u
between Northam and Spencers Brook and to the South J
1932—
January 28
Harvey, 9a
Yesterday and to-day fierce bush fires in hills 3 or or 4 miles East of Harvey.
Properties threatened J *
2c
February 8-10..
Wokalup, 9a
A fire swept down from the Darling Ranges desolating a large area of country
1b-2e
February 20-27
Roelands, 9a
Bush fires destroyed crops, pastures, buildings and fences around Roelands and
Brunswick. Damage estimated at thousands of pounds
••
February 29
Fires in South-West have been severe this year following a very dry season
Kwolyin, 10a
Bush fires have been raging several days, covering many square miles of scrub
and grass
1a-2b
T 25
March 2 ,.
Bannister, 9a, 10a
F b»rw^ k of a B h Si,to h “ been raging on * i2 - mite front in a dense arc> ° f
November 18 ..
Arrino, 8
Minginew, 8
More than 10,000 acres affected in the district
Extensive damage at Yandanooka
November 25 ..
i
Mullewa, 8
Fires caused great damage to crops
1
T 25
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 180).
Western Australia— continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1930— continued.
Katanning
20.1.30
85° 91° 101-6° 109-8°
17 18 19 20
Rainfall: No rain since 26th December ; 21 points Decem-
ber ; 355 points November ; 128 points October
8
20
14
IF
22
18
0/
/o
Morowa
1.2.30
103° 106° 112° 116° 100° 103°
W '28' 29 W FT T
Rainfall: No rain since November (106 points)
Northam
27.12.30
85° 91-3° 102° 103-8°
N.N.E.
4
24 25 26 27
Rainfall: 37 points, lst-12th December; 3 points Novem-
ber ; 57 points October; 145 points September
27
1931—
Albany
29.1.31
74° 85° 83° 102-3° 65°-67°
50
51
N.E. 4
W.N.W. 5
24 25 26 27 28, 29
Rainfall: 21 points, 12th-29th January; 107 points
December; 200 points November ; 117 points October
27
26, 28
24
28
Mt. Barker
29.1.31
68-5° 81-5° 90° 95° 102° 66° 64-5°
23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Rainfall: 26 points 3rd-29th January; 120 points Decem-
ber; 127 points November; 118 points October
Busselton
28.1.31
80°-85° 90° 93° 89° 69-8°
S.W. 4
22-24 25 26 27 28
Rainfall: 2 points, 10th January; 28 points December;
100 points November ; 186 points October
28
Northam
8.12.31
97° 100-5°-I04° 105°
2 3-7 8
Smoke haze, 9th
Rainfall: No rain since 3rd November ; 13 points November ;
94 points October; 273 points September
932-
Collie
28.1.32
93-2° 102-2° 92-5° 85-5° 83-5° 89-5° 78-8°
E. 4 N.W. 4 S.E. 4
22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Rainfall: 26 points, 7th-26th January; 118 points Decem-
ber ; 24 points November; 215 points October
22
E. 4
27
24 26
E. 5
~28~
Collie
.. 8-10.2.32
71° 78° 86-2° 93-5° 95° 95-5° 91-5°
S.S.E. 4
N.E. 4
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Rainfall: 20 points, 1st February; 56 points January;
4
E. 4
7
S.E. 4
118 points December; 24 points November
8
10
Donnybrook
.. 8-10.2.32
80° 85-6° 94-2° 95° 96-2° 93°
E.S.E. 4
E. 5 E. 4
5 6 7 8 9 10
Rainfall; No rain since January ; 44 points January ; 49
points December; 23 points November
3
6 8, 10
Collie
.. 20-27.2.32
76-8° 80-5° 86-5° 88° 88-5° 96-2° 99-8° 99-5°
__ 19 — 20 2T 22 23 25
92-8° 87°
N.E. 4
20
S.E. 4
E.N.E. 4
21
E. 5
26 27
Smoke haze, 25th-26th February
(Rainfall : See 8th-10th February)
22
27
* 9 a.m.
Western Australia — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
•Pressure Type.
1932 — continued.
*3.33
S 3.33 6.3 33
7.3 33
Mr
2
297
M| &
O ( 3fJ\ *3 \ \ \ (a?.//
So-4
/ J I ‘ /
J*1 ;o. 0 '2'- - 3
2f? 2 94
3o.o i
29 3
29 s
3. 2. 33
// 3.33
Wfrs Wj
/
29S Jt> >
ufr 7 w
* 29-0
Jo * 39 #
29-0
1933—
January 6
Toodyay, 10a, 9 ..
Fanned by a fierce westerly wind, a bush fire swept over a front of about 4
1a
miles in the loodyay district on Friday. Destroyed
crops and feed
over 2,000 acres of
TT
Wagin, 10a
Large areas of grass country burnt
January 10
Arrino, 8
Another serious crop fire started 16 miles North-East of Arrino, 9 miles East
2 F
ot Yandanooka, swept nearly 2,000 acres of crops and pasture
February 2
Holleton, 10a
Large bush fire broken out 15-20 miles East of Holleton. Another between
Holleton and Narembeen
1c
February 5
Kellerberrin, 10a ..
FI p™ture°&c graSS fireS traVelled about 5 miles - destroyed 1,000 acres good
1b
February 9
9
Bl f? ILL 8 °i t fl ?. nt extend j n g fr om Applecross along North Lake through
to Bilson Lake, thence to South Coogie, since Friday (3rd.) g
1b
February 10
9a
Fl Rockingham 1 H ° Pe Valley ’ ar ° Und Mando g lu P and east of
1b
t~Io
Bridgetown 9a
Surrounded by smoke and, for two days, bush fires
district
everywhere in the
Frankland River, 9a
Fire on 7-mile front
Manjimup, 9a
Westonia, 12
Busselton, 9a
Karridale, 9a
Pinjarra, 9a
Boyup Brook, 9a ..
Damage in several parts of district
Bush fires on 25-mile front
Extensive bush fires in South-West forest country
Losses by some settlers
Large bush fire north-west of Pinjarra
Fire in Nonejup reserve
99
99
99
99
99
For Index, see end of this Section fnasc ism
For Index, see end of this Section (page 180).
Western Australia — continued.


Particulars op Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1932— continued.
Donnybrook
20-27.2.32
91° 85 °-87 ° 78-2° 89° 91-2° 97° 100°
14, 15 16, 17 18, 19 20, 21 22 23 1 tA
100-2° 91-2° 98-8°
25 26 “27
Smoke haze, 14th, 15th, and 25th
Rainfall: 5 points February ; 44 points January, &c. (See
8th-10th) J '
0/
/o
E. 4
~22“
Wandering
23.2.32
to
2.3.32
81°-89-5° 93° 100° 101-5° 89°-96-5" 99° 90°
18-22 23 24 25 26-28 29“ T
84-5°
2
“ Smoke haze, 25th and 29th ; dense on 1st March
Bush fires troublesome ”
Rainfall: No rain February ; 42 points January ; 104 points
December; 26 points November
S. 4 E. 4 N. 4
21 ~22~~ ~2A
Kellerberrin
Morowa
Mullewa
27.2.32
18.11.32
25.11.32
91°-94° 100° 108° 101° 94°
21-23 24 25~ 2fT 27““
Smoke haze, 26th
Rainfall: 8 points, 1st February ; 26 points January ; 51
points December ; 61 points November
76° 88° 93° 99° 87°
i5~ rt rr is"
Rainfall: 4 points since October; 124 points October;
73 points September ; 436 points August
78° 78-8° 88-6° 93-8° 97-6° 102°
20 ¥“ 22 “23““ ~24~ “25“
Rainfall: No rain since 29th October ; 70 points October;
48 points September ; 342 points August
21
26
23
25
25
24
1933—
Northam
Katanning
6.1.33
6.1.33
88° 94-6° 102° 99-2°
3 4 ~5~ “H
Rainfall : No rain since 19th December ; 7 points November ;
351 points October
77° 83° 88-8° 96° 101°
25
31
W.N.W. 4 S.E. 4
2 3, 4
S.W. 4 W. 6
Morowa
10.1.33
2 3 4 5 6
Rainfall: 3 points since 19th December ; 28 points December ;
23 points November ; 209 points October
101° 108° 98° 88 °-89 ° 90° 96°
6
5
2 6
Merredin
2.2.33
4 5 6 7, 8 9 10
Rainfall: No rain since 19th December ; 54 points December ;
4 points November ; 124 points October
92 °-96•5 ° 100-5° 91-8° 91-3°
17
43
E.S.E. 4 E. 4 N.E. 4
27-30 31 1 2
Rainfall: No rain since 17th January ; 24 points January;
31 points December; no rain November
31
2
28 29 31
E.N.E. 4
2
Kellerberrin
2-5.2.33
92 °-98 ° 106° 90° 98° 105° 106°
18
20
22
S.E. 4 N.E. 4 S. 4
Perth
Bridgetown
9-10.2.33
10.2.33
27-30 31 1, 2 3 4 5
Rainfall: 3 points since 17th January ; 29 points January;
11 points December; 4 points November
98° 101-8° 103-8° 111-7° 112-2° 108-1° 104-2°
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Very dense smoke haze, 9th-10th
Rainfall: 1 point since 17th January ; 57 points January ;
20 points December ; 13 points November
108-5° 96° 105-5° 113-8° 115° 112° 99°
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Rainfall: 14 points since 19th January ; 64 points January ;
39 points December; 44 points November
Smoke haze, 9th-10th
30
10
7
31
13
8
4
28 2, 3 5
W.-S.W. 14-20f
6-10
* 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
Western Australia— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
•Pressure Type.
1933— continued.
February 10 ..
Mundaring, 9
Bunbury, 9a
Collie, 9a
Corrigin, 10a
Greenmount, 9
North Dandalup, 9a
Residence (£2,000) burnt
Severe bush fire raging back of Bunbury
Fires in practically every direction. Most serious at Wellington Dam. Some
serious losses
Homestead destroyed ..
House burnt
300 acres scrub clover, &c., burnt
1b
T 10
February 12 ..
Lake Grace, 10a ..
Bush fire raging to east and north for several days
2b
November 13 ..
Gilgoring, 10a
100 acres ripening wheat ignited by lightning
2b
December 13 ..
Yandanooka, 8
One of the largest fires in the district for some time, yesterday. Covered
10,000 acres
2ce
1a
December 22 ..
Pinjarra, 9a
Fires and heavy winds. Considerable damage
1934—
January 11-13
Katanning, 10a ..
Grass fire Flat Rocks did considerable damage in West Broomehill area.
Caused by lightning striking tree
lA
T 13
February 17 ..
Northam (Grass
Valley), 10a
Three Springs, 8 ..
£1,000 damage when fire swept through a farm ,.
Serious grass fire
1b
February 27 ..
Carmarthen
Considerable damage to pastures, &c.
2b
October 17
6
Bush fires yesterday (16th) on boundary of Marron, Wahroonga, Edagee
Stations. About 100,000 acres burnt
T 26
2b, 16th
2a, 17th
December 12 ..
Katanning, 10a
Fire swept the Katanning and surrounding districts. Losses in feed and
fencing
T 17,
2a
T 11, 12
&.2.3S Z/.2.JS 22.23S 23.2.J5
* & 9 29& Jo . 4 J
/ ( i?
Jo-o
1935—
January 20
January 28
February 12 ..
February 21-22
Darling Ranges, 9a,
10a
Southern Cross, 12
Forrestfield, 9
Kojonup, 10a
Gnowangerup, 10a
Broomehill, 10a ..
Cowaramup
Kojanup, 10a, 9a..
Bush fires in various districts, Darling Ranges.
Marradong Fire on 6-mile front, in heavy forest country
Large bush fire in Turkey Hill district since Thursday now reached Wheatley
on 2-mile front. Much damage
tLZT se , ri ° us *> ush in history of district. Considerable
damage Saturday and Sunday. (9th and 10th)
Devastating fires have swept the district, 50,000 acres being burnt
D heavily 8 bUSh fireS haVe SW6pt throu g h the district. Farmers lost
:: ::
- 2MWS-
,
1b
T28
1b
lA
T 23
For Index, see end of this Section (page 180).
Western Australia — continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— c
ontinued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
xveiative Humidity, 6 p.m.
Wind.
1933— continued.
0/
/o
Mandurah
10.2.33
96-2° 109° 108° 103-2° 99°
N.E. 6
6 7 8 9 10
8
Smoke haze, 9th-llth
Rainfall ; 7 points, 2nd February ; 69 points January;
16 points December; 27 points November
Busselton
10.2.33
101° 99° 96-8° 106° 98° 100° 96-8°
4 5 6~ ~T ¥ "9~ ~T0~
Rainfall : 18 points since 26th January ; 73 points January ;
14 points December ; 51 points November
Collie
10 2.33
103-5° 94-4° 104-8° 109-8° 110° 109° 106-5°
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Rainfall : 32 points, 1st—3rd February ; 255 points January
(on 4 days) ; 29 points December ; 63 points November
Morowa
13.12.33
90° 94°-97° 95° 94° 91°
7 8-10 11 12 13
Rainfall : 15 points, 1st December ; 125 points November ;
102 points October ; 56 points September
Mandurah
22.12.33
75°-82° 88° 89 °-96 0 98°
S.E.-N.E. 4-5 S. 4
11-17 ~ If
E. 4-5 E 7
9-14 15 16-19 20, 21, 22
Rainfall: 4 points since 1st November (16 points); 423
points October ; 347 points September
19, 2(T ~22
1934—
Katanning
11-13.1.34
93 °-97 0 106-6° 97° 98-7°
18
26
31
S.W. 6
9-11 12 13 14
12
13
14
IT
Rainfall : No rain since 2nd December ; 28 points December ;
59 points November ; 222 points October
York
11-13.1.34
96° 98° 102° 101-5° 112° 100° 105°
8 9 10 11 12 13 14
16
12
22
10, 14
Rainfall : 4 points, 4th January ; and 8 points November
only rain since October (221 points)
Carnarvon
17.10.34
74-8° 76° 70-74°
51
59
S.-S.W. 4-6
11 12 13-17
Rainfall : 10 points, 26th September-17th October; 10
12,
13
16
11-17
points September; 116 points August; 121 points July
Katanning
12.12.34
88° 92° 101° 100-6° 74-3°
19
29
30
W. 5
8 9 10 11 12
10
11
9
“IF
Rainfall: 21 points, 5th-6th December ; 58 points Novem-
ber ; 77 points October ; 186 points September
1935—
Wandering
20.1.35
86-8° 91-5° 99-5° 103-5° 106°
16 17 18 19 20
Rainfall: 51 points, 6th-15th January ; 20 points Decem-
ber ; 253 points November ; 79 points October
S. 5 N.E. 5
15, 16 18
Southern Cross
28.1.35
90° 102°-109° 111°
19
20
21
W. 4 N.W. 4
23 24-27 28
Rainfall: 59 points, 6th-15th January ; 13 points December ;
28
26
25
26 28
25 points November ; 40 points October
Guildford
9-12.2.35
91 °-93° 100° 76°
6,~7 8-11 12
Rainfall : 5 points, lst-2nd February ; 24 points January ;
33 points December; 116 points November
E. 4 E.N.E. 4
7 9
Perth
9-12.2.35
90°-95-9° 94-9° 75°
7-10 “IF 12
Rainfall : 4 points, lst-2nd February ; 18 points January ;
17
F
18
lo
25
8
S.S.W. 17f S.W. 21 f
10 11
W. 15f
12
35 points December ; 72 points November
1
* 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
Western Australia— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Particulars of Fires.
Number.
* Pressure Type.
1935— con'inued.
March 3
Melville District ..
Beverley, 10a
Large area of Melville district swept yesterday
3,000 acres ravaged
lA
T 4
Bridgetown, 9a
Bush fires swept through district yesterday
Pinjarra, 9a
600 acres burnt; also some stock
Kojonup, 10a
Bush fires prevalent for more than 100 miles, Kojonup to Williams, and for
about 30 miles past Quindanning
99
March 10
Brunswick Junction
Fire swept the forest country east of Brunswick this morning. Been burning
2b
9a
in back country several weeks
]
1936—
February 3-5 ..
Chidlow, 9, 10a ..
Considerable damage near Chidlow
2c
February 28
March 11
T 5
Cowaramup, 9a
Herne Hill, 9
Fire west of Railway
1 ’ 0 from a perth) Urnt “ DarHng Range foothills ’ Wednesday '(11th). ' ‘(15 miles
2c
1b
1937—
February 10 ..
Denmark, 9a
Manjimup, 9a
Kentdale, 9a
BU etr fi m “ eS ar0,md a " d W6r6 the bi ®»‘
damage aMKd a ‘
lA I
March 12
Waroona, 9a
Bush fires sweeping countryside
2a-2b
April 1
Narrup, Boyanup,
Dunsborough, 9a
Bush fires prevalent in district for several days ..
T 10-11
lA
—
lor Index, see end of this Section (page 180).
Western Australia— continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1935
0/
/o
Katanning
21-22.2.35
88° 97° 98-7° 103° 104-6° 93° 64°
8
27
34
W.N.W. 4 N. 4 W. 4
18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Rainfall: 70 points, 1st—2nd February ; 29 points January ;
22
21
20
21 22 24 '
29 points December ; 58 points November
Bridgetown
21-22.2.35
93° 103° 104° 102° 105° 82° 66°
18 19 ~20 21 22 ~23 "24
11 Smoke haze, 11th, 21st-23rd. Large bush fires in February ”
Rainfall : 48 points, lst-16th February ; 38 points January ;
141 points December ; 140 points November
Donnybrook
21-22.2.35
92° 100-8° 101-8° 104° 105° 78-8° 65-8°
N.N.W. 5 W. 4
18 19 20 21 22 23 24
23 24
Smoke haze, 21st—22nd February
Rainfall: 33 points February ; 29 points January ; 78
points December ; 74 points November
Katanning
3.3.35
83° 89-2° 91-8° 89-4° 101° 95-8°
24
29
36
N. 4 N.N.W. 4
27 28 1 2 3 4
Rainfall : No rain since 25th February ; 82 points February ;
29 points January ; 29 points December
2
3 4
Bridgetown
3.3.35
87° 93° 92° 97° 104° 91°
27 28 T Y IT
Smoke haze, 3rd-4th
Rainfall ; 4 points February. (See 24th February)
York
3.3.35
87° 92 • 5 °-98 ° 105-5° 101°
14
17
19
27 28-2 3 4
T
3
2
Rainfall : 6 points since 2nd February ; 88 points February ;
47 points January ; 8 points December
Collie
3.3.35
76-5° 84-4° 92-8° 95° 94-9° 102-2° 85-2°
26 27 28 1 2 3 4
Rainfall : 83 points February ; 59 points January ; 122
points December
Collie
10.3.35
74° 82-8° 87-8° 72-2° 75-2° 79°
S.E. 4
5 6 7 8 If)
10
Rainfall : No rain since 26th February
1936—
Northam
3-5.2.36
85° 91-4° 103-7° 78°
3 4 5 6'
Rainfall: No rain since 18th January ; 19 points January ;
4 points December No rain November.
Guildford
3-5.2.36
86° 92° 104° 74°
3 T T ~6
Rainfall: No rain since 19th January ; 29 points January ;
32 points December ; 16 points November
E.S.E. 4
4
Perth
11.3.36
81°-85-4° 91-2°-93-5° 80-7°
15
20
22
E. 17f S. 10f S.W.15f
10 11 12, 13~
8-10 11-13 14
Rainfall: No rain since 19th January ; 26 points January ;
12
IT
"9
43 points December
1937—
Albany
10.2.37
72-7° 77-8° 81-3° 89-9°
43
60
E. 4 E. 5 S.E. 5
7 8 9 10
10
9
7 8 9
N.E. 4
Rainfall: 2 points, 3rd February ; 140 points January ;
89 points December ; 53 points November
10
Manjimup
10.2.37
82° 86° 94-2° 99-2°
20
25
Hot wind, 10th,
7 8 9 10
9
10
25—30 m.p.h.
Rainfall: No rain since 19th January ; 29 points January;
56 points December ; 51 points November
Donnybrook ..
1.4.37
76° 80° 89-8° 94-2°
28 29 30,31 Mar. 1 Apr.
Smoke haze, lst-4th April
Rainfall : 37 points March ; 86 points February
* 9 a.m. f in.p.h.
Western Australia— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
• Pressure Type.
1937— continued.
1938—
February 7-8 ..
February 15 ..
Gosnells, 9
South Perth, 9
Bush fires are raging through the district, doing much damage
Canning Bridge, several square miles swept
Ibc
2f
1940—
January 9
Kalamunda, 9
Several thousand acres of heavily timbered country swept between South
Kalamunda and foothills at Orange Valiev
1b
February 3
Gooseberry Hill
(near Kalamunda),
9
Two houses destroyed ; 2 or 3 miles of heavily timbered country between
Maida ale and Gooseberry Hill burnt. Damage estimated at £10,000
1b-2e
February 8
Pie&se Brook, 9 ")
Bickley Valley. 9 J
Bush fires are raging through the Darling Range road district. Much
destruction
••
Donnybrook, 9
One of the worst fires ever experienced close to the town..
1b
February 9
Katanning, 10a ..
Albany district, 9a
Pingelly, 10a
Yanchep, 9
Fierce bush fires Tuesday morning at Orchard Valley, 16 miles south-west of
Kojonup Man collapsed and died after working to save belongings
PO T<oUtW at XalTikup - Ha - V River and Lower Kalgan. Darradup
Worst in history of district in timber country east of Pingcllv
Bush fires checked by breaks .. .. . ‘
T 9
99
99
February 28 ..
Greenmoimt, 9
Bush fires menaced six houses. &c., on Greenmoimt Hill, south of Eastern
highway last night. Still burning this morning on 3-milo front
1b-2je
March 9
Mt. Barker, 9a
Bush fires north-west of town yesterday menaced commercial section
2a-2b
March 0-10
Denmark, 9a
Severe bush fires at various points at week end ; considerable damage
“
„
March 17
Albany, 9a
Bush fires on South Coast hills 4 miles south-west of town
• Fur Index. see end of this Section
• Fur Index, see end ol this Section fpage ISO).
Western Australia — continued.


Pa]
BTICULARS OB'
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1937 — continued
Busselton
1.4.37
72-1° 76° 79° 84° 86-5° 87° 83-1°
20 27 28 29 FT 31 MarTTApril
Rainfall: 13 points March ; 52 points February ; 2 points
January
0/
/o
1938—
Kalamunda
7-8.2.38
76-2° 79-8° 89-4° 96-4° 102-4° 91-4°
3 4 5 6 7 T
Rainfall: No rain since 18th January ; 7 points January ;
50 points December ; 61 points November
30 40
6 7
E.S.E. 4
4
Perth
1940—
Kalamunda
8-15.2.38
9.1.40
88-4° 94-9° 99_° 87° 91-8° 92° 83-2° 86° 78-9°
5 6 7 8 9 To “IF 12 “IF
74-9° 76°
14 15
Dense smoke haze, 8th, and over ranges, 7th
Rainfall: No rain since 18th January ; 21 points January ;
17 points December; 76 points November
72° 83-2° 91-5° 96-5° 94-8° 94-5°
4 5 6 7 T ~9~~
Rainfall: 11 points, 2nd-4th January ; 25 points December ;
110 points November; 364 points October
20 27 29
6 J F
43* 48* 47*
T Y T
S.W. 15t s. 21 f
6 7
S.W. or S.S.W. 14-24f
10-15
E.N.E. 5 E.N.E. 4
6 7
E. 4 E. 7
F F
S.W. 20t E.S.E. 14t
5 6
E. 26f E. 18f
8 ~9
Perth
9.1.40
78-9° 93-2° 97-3° 96-2° 96°
5 6“ ~F "T" IT
Thick smoke all day, 10th, 11th
Rainfall: 3 points, 2nd— 4th January ; 15 points December ;
106 points November ; 227 points October
19 20 22
6 8 9
Perth
10-11.1.40
103-2° 101-2°
24 44
Kalamunda
3.2.40
10 11
78° 85-5° 95-5° 101-2° 102-2° 91-5°
29 30 31 1 2 ~3
Rainfall: No rain since 27th January ; 82 points January ;
25 points December; 111 points November
10 II
27* 42*
~2 31
E. 4 E. 5
30 “T~
Perth
3-8.2.40
93-1° 102-4° 103-1° 85-8° 90-6° 100-1°-104° 110-8°
17 19
S.S.W. 14f S.W. 23t
31 2
5.5. 23f E.S.E. 14
3 4
W.S.W. 14f S.W. 17f
5 7
5.5. 19
8
31 1 2 3 4 5-7 8
Rainfall; No rain since 27th January ; 69 points January ;
15 points December ; 106 points November
1, 5 6
Kalamunda
8.2.40
89° 102° 106-7° 108°
4 5, 6 7 8
Smoke haze, 8th
Rainfall: No rain since 27th January ; 82 points January ;
25 points December; 111 points November
18* 24*
T T
E. 6 E.N.E. 6
4 5
Donnybrook
8.2.40
89-1° 103-2° 101-6° 105-1° 109-2°
18* 21* 28*
E. 4
Fs
4 5 6 7 8
Smoke haze, 6th—9th
Rainfall: No rain since 25th January ; 30 points January ;
15 points December ; 226 points November
F F ~T
Katanning
8.2.40
84-2° 100-3° 106-5° 110-5° 109°
4 5 6 7 ~8~
Rainfall; No rain since 25th January ; 29 points January ;
5 points December; 203 points November
14 16 18
8 7 ~6
Bridgetown
8.2.40
88° 102° 104-8° 105° 109-4°
4 5 6 7 8
Smoky on 8th
Rainfall: No rain since 25th January ; 34 points January ;
7 points December; 211 points November
39* 48*
6 5
• 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
C.8016/47.—12
Western Australia— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type
1940 — continued.
1941—
•
January 27
Perth 9a
Bush fires at times assumed serious proportions yesterday (26th) and swept
through several parts of the metropolitan area in vicinity of City Beach.
About 1,000 acres burnt. One of the worst fires for years in King’s Park
lA
T 27
March 9-13
Waroona, 9a
Fire Saturday night in timber country, Harvey forest division. Extended
for 8 miles in a strip 2 miles wide
On Willowdale forestry settlement about 1,500 acres jarrah country burnt.
Valuable pastures near Waroona destroyed
1b
99
Elgin and Manjimup,
9a
Fires at Elgin (Tuesday) and Manjimup (13th)
November 27 ..
8, 9, 10a
Extensive grass fires between New Norcia and Waddington. Considerable
damage to pastures
1 and 2a
T 26, 27 I
1942—
February 19 ..
Torbay, 9a
Fire spread over 5 square miles of fertile country
1a
T 19-20
Kronkup, 9a
Destroyed about 7 acres orchards, &c. ,.
February 25 ..
Cuthbert, 9a
Extensive bush fire outbreaks 6 miles west of Albany
1a
T 24-25
Milbrook Creek and
Lower King River,
9a
Extensive bush fires yesterday ..
••
1944—
January 28
Southern Cross, 12..
Fires spread over 9 miles, destroying grass, &c., in forest reserve . ,
2ab
♦ Eor Index, see end of this Section (page 180).
Western Australia — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s
Remarks — continued.
Station.
1
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative
Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1940 — continued.
Mt. Barker
8.2.40
74-3° 93-7° 107-1° 91-4° 105°
4 5 6 7 8
Smoke haze, 7th-8th
Rainfall: No rain since 29th January ; 63 points January ;
20 points December ; 308 points November
31*
6
0/
/ o
E.S.E. 4 N.N.E. 6
5 6
Narrogen
9.2.40
85-8° 101-7° 106°-108° 108-9°
N.E. 5 N.N.E. 4
456-89
Smoke haze, 6th
Rainfall: No rain since 25th January ; 21 points January ;
2 points December ; 127 points November
6 7, 9
Guildford
28.2.40
96-2° 105° 97° 81-4° 86°
E.N.E. 5 E. 5
23 24, 25 26 27 28
Rainfall ; 9 points February ; 60 points January ; 8 points
December ; 78 points November
27 28
Mt. Barker
9-10.3.40
80-6° 86° 87-3° 78-8°
7 8 9 10
Rainfall: 2 points since 27th February ; 20 points February ;
63 points January ; 20 points December
51
id
N.N.W. 4
7, 9
Albany
9-10.3.40
76-2° 81-8° 83-2° 89° 75° 77°
6 7 ’ 8” 9' 10 IT
Rainfall: No rain since 28th February ; 54 points February ;
96 points January ; 15 points December
35
9
43
7
W. 4 N.W. 5 E. 4
6 7 8 •
N.W. 6 S.E. 4
9 10
Albany
17.3.40
77° 74° 68-8° 66°
54
59
S.E. 6 W. 6 S. 4
14 15, 16 17 18
Rainfall : 13 points, 17th-18th March ; 54 points February ;
96 points January ; 15 points December
16
14
14 15 17
W.S.W. 5
18
1941 —
Perth
26.1.41
87° 92-2° 103° 83-1°
24 26 26" ~27~
Smoke haze at times, 26th, 27th
Rainfall : 3 points since 7th December ; 49 points December ;
12 points November ; 240 points October
12
26
21
25
31
24
S.W. 19t
27
Donnybrook
9-13.3.41
87-8° 90-3° 98° 85-7° 79-6° 76-1° 88-9°
T" 8 y 10 TT 12 13
Smoke haze, 10th and 14th
Rainfall : 2 points March ; 30 points February ; 9 points
January ; 39 points December
37
12
39
9
42
8
E. 4
11, 12
Collie
9-13.3.41
90-1° 97-8° 86-8° 76-1° 77-8° 87-1°
7,8 9 ~10 11 12 13
Rainfall: 3 points, lst-2nd March ; 65 points February ;
9 points January ; 129 points December
E. 4 E. 5
8, 11, 13 12
Walebing
27.11.41
80° 90° 94-5° 103° 75°
23 24 25 26 27
Rainfall: 125 points, 8th-18th November ; 85 points
October ; 286 points September ; 182 points August
(New Norcia : 120 points, 13th-18th November)
S.W. 5
22
1942—
Albany
19-25.2.42
74° 72-5° 74-1° 69-2° 68° 71° 71-5° 99° 84-5°
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Rainfall : 25 points, lst-21st February ; 61 points January ;
25 points December ; 128 points November
49
21
54
24
E.N.E. 4
19
1944-
Southern Cross
28.1.44
99° 104° 111° 107° 109°
24 W 26 27 28
Rainfall : 12 points since 15th December ; 26 points Decem-
ber ; 16 points November ; 9 points October
14
26
16
25
22
28
W.4
25
♦ 9 a.m.
Western Austr a l ia — continued..


SUMMARY OF PRESSURE TYPES.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Pressure Type.
Total Number.
1
3
lA
16
1b
18
1c
2
2
1
2a
10
2b
14
2c
6
2o
3
2e
4
2f
2
Troughs of depressions on the day of the fire or preceding day in 25
out of 79 cases.
MONTHLY FREQUENCY—WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
December to March.
Pressure
Type.
December.
January.
February.
March.
1
1
Ia
2
5
8
1
1b
1
4
10
3
Ic
2
2
1
2a
2
3
1
3
2b
1
3
4
3
2c
2
2
2
2b
1
1
1
2e
1
3
2f
1
1
INDEX OF PRESSURE TYPES.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
1. “High” over Bight for three or more days previously.
(a) Depression approaching the Coast from the West.
(b Tropical depression or “dip” over Sharks lay or Gascoyne
region.
(c) Tropical Depression over Goldfields.
2. Sequence of “ Highs ” and “ Lows ” —
(a) Trough passing over South-West of the State.
(b) “ High ” moving over South-West of the State or to South of the
State. Tropical depression over Gascoyne area.
(c) “ High ” over Bight and tropical depression over Sharks Bay or
Gascoyne area.
(d) “ High ” over Bight. Depression approaching the West Coast
(e) Retrograde movement of “ High ” over Bight.
(f) “ High ” approaching the South-West of the State. Cyclonic
“ Low ” over the interior of the Continent.
Note :• —T (with figures) indicates the date of the passage of the trough
of a depression over the region.
Entry of two or more types indicates sequence of type in the fire period
I=Intense low pressure system.


TASMANIA.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1912—
January 15-16
94
97
Fires around Hobart, Brown’s River, Channel districts, Huon district, New
Norfolk and surrounding districts. Worst for many years. Telephone
communications severed. Same area affected as in the great fire of 1897-98.
(31st December—1st January)
Extensive fires on West Coast. Houses burnt at Rinadeena
February 3
February 11-27
91, 93. 94
Bush fires in South, North, and Midlands and King Island. Thick smoke haze
interfered with navigation on Tamar River. Serious fires in South-East,
mainly around Hobart, caused much damage to homes, fruit crops, &e.
Many fires in various parts of the State
/ZS./J
/S-S./S /f.S./J
2e>. y /
' 29.3
2a. J- : / N ' S " liliP
29 y
1913-
March 7-15
91
Many fires in various parts of the State
May 18
91
Fires in North-West destroyed fodder supplies, equipment, fencing, stables
and horses at Central Castra, South Riana, and Kentish districts and
cottages, also State school and post office at Paradise. West to south-west
gales. Fire travelled with a speed and ferocity never seen in the driest
summer
May 18
91
OaSiuuJay night, 18th, the district was visited by a storm of cyclonic force
Bush fires had been burning in the vicinity of Mt. Roland throughout the
day. The fierce wind caused the fires to rapidly spread. A State school
and post office were completely destroyed, and barns, &e., were burnt
Heavy bush fires raging in Preston, Central Castra, Gunn’s Plains districts!
Gram destroyed at Hagley. No rain at Sheffield from 28th April to 21st
May. Intense depression developed over Tasman Sea, “High”, Bight
1914 —
January 25
93, 94 ..
Bush fires in Midlands, South-East, and South
February 14-21
October 8
91, 92, 93, 94, 97..
94
Fires over extensive areas of the South, South-East, Midlands, North-East,
™ 0 n th ' WeSt - 0rch ards, hve-stock, houses, timber, &c., lost. Fire on
Mt. Wellington considered the worst since December 31-January 1 1897-98
Five houses and church burnt at Kellevie. Much damage in ’ Southern
Tasmania. Fires also m North-West. Fires in parts of Huon district
worse than those of 1898. Orchards, buildings, mills, stock, &c„ lost.
Much timber and several houses destroyed on King Island
Bush fires raging in Huon district
October 9
Zeehan, 97
Extensive bush fires raging
October 24
94, 95 ..
Bush fires on Mt. Wellington, in New Norfolk district and Huon districts
TASMANIA.


PARTICULARS OF TEMPERATURE, RELATIVE HUMIDITY, RAINFALL, ETC.,
AND OBSERVER’S
REMARKS.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1912—
Hythe
15-16.1.12
56° 94-8° 67-2° 61°
16
0/
/o
N.W. 7
13 14 15 16
Rainfall: 87 points since December ; 600 points December
14
14
Hobart
15-16.1.12
70-2° 68° 98-2° 77-8° 65-9°
7
34
High wind on 14th
Fresh, squally north-
north-west on 15th
12 13 14 15 16
Rainfall: 56 points since 1st; 304 points December ; 122
points November
14
15
Zeehan
15-16.1.12
64-2° 89-8° 60-9° 58-9°
13 14 15 16
Rainfall: Light to moderate rain almost daily. 246 points,
2nd-15th January ; 1,371 points December
18
14
N.N.W. .7
14
Launceston
3.2.12
78-7° 83-4° 92-2° 91-9° 101° 100-1°
28
36
29 30 31 1 2 3
Dense smoke haze, lst-4th. Shipping delayed, 3rd
Rainfall; No rain since 22nd January ; 76 points January;
382 points December ; 19 points November
2
3
Hobart
3.2.12
72-1° 83° 87-7° 79-7° 101°
13
34
N. 4
30 31 1 2 3
Dense smoke haze, 2nd-3rd. Moon red
Rainfall: 12 points since 17 th January ; 111 points January ;
304 points December ; 122 points November
3
1
3
1913—
Moina
18.5.13
57-1° 57-2° 47° 53-3°
15 16 17 18
Rainfall: 9 points since April ; 208 points April; 457
points March
(Central Castra : 5 points, lst-2nd May ; 83 points April)
S.W. 5 W.N.W. 5
17 18
Launceston
18.6.13
58° 61-5° 57-5° 60-4°
15" 16 17 18
Rainfall: 14 points since 28th April; 80 points April; 371
points March
N.W. 4
18
Waratah
18.5.13
51®-53° 47° 48°
S.W. 4 W. 6
17 18
14-16 17 18
Rainfall: 118 points since 1st May ; 216 points on 20 days
in April; 677 points March
(Sheffield : No rain 28th April-21st May)
1914—
Hobart
25.1.14
65-8° 82-2° 88°
23 24 25
Dense smoke haze, 23rd-25th January ; bush fires around
hills. Hot gusty afternoon, 25th
Rainfall : 8 points since 27th December; 175 points
December ; 367 points November
26
25
W. 25f
25
Hobart
14-21.2.14
79° 93-2° 60-4° 68-6° 82-5° 67-8° 77-7°
15
N. 15f
13 14 15 16 17 18 20
Dense smoke haze, 13th-15th February. Big bush fire on
Mt. Wellington. Dense smoke haze, 17th-19th February—
bush fires
Rainfall : 29 points since 27th December, (See 25th January)
14
14
Sea breeze of 18 m.p.h. on
19th and 20th
Hythe
14-21.2.14
69-5° 92° 64°-70°
"nr i4 i5-2i
Smoke haze, 15th February
Rainfall : 85 points, 4th-12th February ; 164 points January ;
266 points December
(GlenHuon: 23 points, 5th-llth February; 49 points
January)
15
14
N.W. 5
14
• 9 a.m. t ni.p.h.
TASMANIA.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
Pressure Type.
1914 — continued.
1915—
January 24-25
91, 94 ..
Soutt Eians - Lowana - * o -'' and *
February 15-17
91, 94, 97
the Huon district. Considerable damage
T asm ania— co nfinued.


Particulars or
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Obsbrv er’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1914— continued.
Swansea
14-21.2.14
71-8° 93° 66 °-67 ° 93-3° 71-6° 66-2° 95° 70°
22
26
0/
/o
13 14 15-16 17 18 19 20 21
Smoke haze, 15th and 17th-22nd February
Rainfall: 7 points since 29th January ; 152 points January
(139 points, 28th) ; 123 points December; 243 points
November
17
20
Currie
14-21.2.14
77° 89° 66-7° 75-7° 82-2° 80° 95-2° 71-7° 69-5°
(King Island)
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Dense smoke, 14th, 16th, 17th, 19th from bush fires, also 28th
February
Rainfall: 30 points February ; 178 points January; 235
points December
Zeehan
9.10.14
62-2° 78-2° 80-3° 49°
19
W.S.W. 7
6 7 8 9
Rainfall: No rain since 30th September; 673 points
September
8
8
Hobart
8.10.14
68-7° 80-8° 74-7° 86° 86-8°
4 5 6 7 8
Smoke haze, 8th October ; bush fires on hills
Rainfall: 2 points last 13 days ; 100 points September;
116 points August
19
5
15
1
12
"8
N.W. 38f
8
N.N.W. 24|
5
Hythe
8.10.14
76-5° 84-8°
N.W. 8
7 8
Rainfall: 9 points since 26th September; 297 points
September ; 293 points August
8
Hobart
24-10.14
85° 92°
23 24
Smoke haze
Rainfall : 22 points since 25th September. (See 8th October)
9
23
10
24
N.W. 18f
24
>
1915—
Moina
24-25.1.15
59-5° 71-8° 77-6° 87-1°
22 23 24 25
Rainfall: 75 points, 19th-23rd January; 114 points, 4th-
7th January ; 1,385 points December
(Central Castra : 19 points since 4th January; 51 points
January)
Waratah
24-25.1.15
72° 80-2°
24 25
Rainfall: 339 points, 3rd-24th January; 445 points
December
(Ridgeley: 44 points, 20th-21st January; 93 points,
4th-7th January)
29
25
Stanley
24-25.1.15
65° 78° 82°
23 24“ 25
Rainfall: 99 points January to date ; 413 points December
Hythe
24-25.1.15
70-2° 83-2° 79-5°
23 24 25
Smoke haze, 25th January
Rainfall: 109 points January to date ; 182 points Decem-
ber ; 265 points November
W.N.W. 8
24
Hobart
24-25.1.15
72° 85-3° 92-9°
20
18
N.W. 54f
N.W. 38f
23 24 25
Rainfall: 17 points since 24th December; 269 points
December ; 166 points November
24
25
24
25
Hobart
15-17.2.15
88-2° 64-8° 87-4° 77-9° 77-5°
28
30
35
N.N.W. 14f N.W. 20f
13 14 15 16 17
Dense smoke haze, 15th January
Rainfall: 55 points since 24th December
13
16
17
13
16
Stanley
15-17.2.15
73° 82° 68° 74°
dt dt nr 17
Rainfall: 21 points since 28th January ; 167 points January ;
167 points December
47
15
t m.p.h. (FierceJN“.W. gale, 24.1.15.)
Tasmania— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
* Pressure Type.
1915— continued.
1919—
January 22
91, 92 ..
Fires in North, North-West, and North-East. Damage to fencing, buildings,
and timber mill
February 15-16
Queenstown, 97 ..
Extensive bush fire raging throughout the district
1920—
January 23-24
North-West, 91
Houses burnt Deep Creek and Wynyard districts. School burnt at Black
River. Crops and fences destroyed. Worst fires on the Coast since 1898
and the second worst on record
February 16 ..
Tyenna, 95
Zeehan, 97
Several thousand tons of firewood burnt at Tyenna
Huge bush fires raging throughout the district doing great damage. Railway
bridges burnt
January 23-26
91, 92, 97
North-West, 91
Fires West Coast and North-East. Damage to buildings, bridges, &c.,
particularly in Waratah district
Cattle destroyed with much grass and fencing
• •
1922—
February 15-17
North-East (Tunnel
District), 91
Churches and cottages destroyed. Worst fire on record. Miles of fencing
and acres of feed destroyed
Tyenna, Derwent
Valley, 95
Timber mill burnt
2b
T 16
1926
February 3-4 ..
North-Western Tas-
mania, 91
Bush fires sweeping through the heavily timbered district of North-Western
lasmama. Huge quantities of timber have been destroyed.
Extensive bush fires from Deloraine to the far North-West causing much
damage. Some houses burnt. Strong south-west winds on 4th. Dense
smoke haze over Bass Strait; steamers Nairana and Loonqana held up.
Ashes tell in streets at Ulverstone, &c.
• •
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 200).
Tasmania— continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1915— continued.
Waratah
15-17.2.15
81° 79-5° 58-5° 68-5°
14 15 HT' 17
Smoke haze, 15th and 17th-19th February
Rainfall; 69 points in showers, 3rd-llth February; 352
points January ; 445 points December
41
15
%
S.S.E. 5
16
Hythe
15-17.2.15
84-6° 63-5° 82-5° 64-2° 70-2°
36
S. 6
13 14 15 16 17
Smoke haze, 15th February
Rainfall : 49 points 2nd-10th February ; 128 points January.
(See 24th-25th January)
13
16
1919—
Zeehan
15-16.2.19
73-2° 79-6° 73° 90-3° 72-2°
12 13 14 15 16
Smoke haze, 15th February
Rainfall: 38 points, 10th February ; 54 points, 3rd February ;
603 points January
32
15
W.N.W. 4
15
1920—
Stanley
23-24.1.20
62° 70° 66° 70°
21 22 ' 23 24
Rainfall: 63 points since December ; 200 points December ;
89 points November ; 298 points October
Waratah
23-24.1.20
50° 64° 52-2°
~22 ~W 24
Rainfall: 49 points, 21st-23rd January ; 15 points previous
23 days ; 408 points December ; 315 points November
(Black River ; 43 points, 7th-9th, only rain January)
51
22
S.W. 5 S.W. 4
21 “ ‘22
Zeehan
16.2.20
67° 74-8° 91-9° (also 92)
22
N.N.W. 4
14 15 16 11
Rainfall; No rain since 8th February ; 170 points, lst-8th
202 points January ; 473 points December
16
16
Zeehan
23-26.2.20
71-1° 63-1° 75-8° 84-1° 58°
23 24 25 26 27
Rainfall: 52 points since 8th February. (See 16th February)
38
25
48
26
N.N.W. 4
25, 26
Waratah
23-26.2.20
66-2° 76-2° 60°-61° 69°
41
21 22 23-25 26
Smoke 22nd February. Smoke haze, 25th-26th February.
Thick smoke also 15th-16th February (bush fires). Max.
76-5°, 16th February
Rainfall: 19 points since 8th February ; 102 points, lst-8th
February ; 77 points January
22
1922—
Launceston
15-17.2.22
94-5° 92-1° 84-5° 73-8° 79° 88-8° 80-5°
27
36
29
11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Rainfall: 24 points since 16th January ; 101 points January ;
23 points December ; 185 points November
17
16
14
Eddystone
15-17.2.22
73-5° 91-5° 67°-73°
11 12 13-17
Smoke haze, 12th-13th and 16th February
Rainfall: 73 points, 1st February ; 3 points, 14th February ;
198 points January ; 405 points December
56
12
Winds chiefly light
1926—
Stanley
3-4,6.2.26
70° 71° 76° 67-5° 70° 79°
1 ' 2 3 4 3 6
Smoke haze, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th
Rainfall: 83 points January ; 194 points December ; 109
points November
46
3
i
55
6
W.S.W. 4
3
S.S.W. 4
4
Tasmania — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Particulars of Fires.
Number.
•Pressure Type.
1926 —continued
February 5
South, &c., 94, 95
Fires also in the Huon and Derwent Valley districts, North-East, West Coast,
&c. Considerable damage. Saw mill burnt at Tyenna ; loss, £4,500
February 6
North-West, 91
Renewal of fires in North-West with strong south-west winds
(3)-(2)
T 3
9336
3. 3 36 3 3.36
29 -*-X: \ V-/? *
99-7
f J W$m.
9jP.J "J9/ 99.2
*3/6
63.es
rh 99-29
w. JSMc&mk
So.2 "/y'29 9 J°-2''Sy//Xs>£' Jo.a
J9J
1927—
January 9-12 ..
Adamsfield, 95, 97..
A disastrous fire wiped out the township at the Florentine. Not a store or
hut remained
January 22-23
South Bruny, 94 ..
Bush fires raging in the district. A timber mill destroyed
• •
Sandfly, 94
Post office and school, &c., in danger
(3)-(2a)
February 12 ..
Carnarvon, 94
Disastrous bush fires swept over the town ; great damage done to houses and
outbuildings. Most settlers lost all their crops. Stock burnt to death.
Telephonic communication cut
February 11-13
Bruny Island, 94 ..
Derwent Valley, 95
Terrific bush fires raging on the island, doing a great deal of damage. These
are the worst fires for twenty years
House burnt at New Norfolk and fences in the Molesworth district
Kingston, 94
Worst fire on record. Considerable damage in Huon and channel districts and
lasman Peninsula
1
T12
1928—
January 11
97
Bush fires on West Coast. (Rosebery and Queenstown)
4
T 11th
1930—
February 11
North-West Coast
and North, 91
Some damage to fencing and crops. Timber mill burnt at Edith Creek
1b
T 11-12
1932—
January 2-3 ..
North-West Division,
91
7,000 acres burntf .. ..
3a
T 1st
January 7
Mid. North Forest
Division, 91
Thirty fires reported between Sheffield and Quamby Blufff
3a
January 19-21
94, 95 ..
Fires prevalent in various parts of the State. Six huts burnt at Molesworth,
Derwent Valley. Fires in South-East '
1b
T 19, 21
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 200).
f Supplied by Forestry Department, Tasmania.
Tasmania — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1926 — continued
Waratah
Deloraine
3-4, 6.2.26
3-4, 6.2.26
70° 57° 71° 69°
2, 3 4 5 IT
Dense smoke from bush fires, 5th February. Smoke, 6th-7th
February
Rainfall: 224 points January ; 723 points December ; no
rain 31st January to 7th February
74° 78-4° 79-1° 70-3°- 81-1° 79-2°
1 2 3 4 5 6
Rainfall: 31 points since 23rd December ; 50 points Decem-
ber ; 101 points November
o/
/o
35
5
46*
~5
S. 4
4
Hobart
5.2.26
87-3° 65-8° 71-4° 79-3°
3 4 5 6
Dense smoke haze, 3rd-6th February. Bush fires on hills,
4th February
Rainfall: 78 points since December ; 156 points December ;
73 points November
38 34
4 6
Wind rising, midnight,
5th February
1927—
Hobart
22-23.1.27
66-1° 78-9° 78-9°
22 23 24
Rainfall : 46 points since 14th December ; 132 points
December; 89 points November; 539 points October
(mainly before 15th)
42 35
23 24
N.N.W. 15f N.N.W. 18f
22 23
Hobart
Swansea
Cape Bruny
1928—
Zeehan
1930—
Stanley
Waratah
1932—
Stanley
Moina
11-13.2.27
12.2.27
11-13.2.27
11.1.28
11.2.30
11.2.30
2-3.1.32
7.1.32
88-2° 102-4° 96-9° 66-3°
10 11 12 13
Smoke haze. Bush fires to south-west, 12th February. Dense
smoke haze evening of 14th February
Rainfall: 39 points since 28th January ; 111 points January
69-3° 78-8° 99-8° 96-8°
9 10 11 12
Smoke haze, 12th February
Rainfall: 25 points, 3rd-8th February ; 129 points January ;
72 points December ; 34 points November
11° 89° 91-2° 55°
io TT ~hT 'rT
Rainfall: 93 points, lst-8th February ; 88 points January ;
198 points December
(Ford’s Bay, North Bruny : 32 points since 31st January)
73-3° 85° 86-6° 94-7° 71-1°
8 9 10 12 12
Sky obscured by smoke, 12th January
Rainfall: 3 points since 2nd January ; 257 points, lst-2nd
January ; 427 points December
73° 78° 72-7°
<T 10 TT
Rainfall: 5 points since 20th January ; 101 points January ;
310 points December ; 236 points November
72° 68° 73°
"9 io TT
Rainfall: 33 points since 21st January ; 547 points January ;
871 points December
64-7° 66-2° 67°
1 2 3
Rainfall: 35 points since 17th November (164 points);
301 points November ; 192 points October
59° 81° 78°
5 6 T"
Rainfall: 55 points since 18th November; 300 points
November
22 15 16
10 11 12
33
11'
23
11
W.N.W. 34f
12
Some gusts over 50 m.p.h.
W. 7
12
W.N.W. 7
12
E. 6 S.S.W. 4
9 10
S.S.W. 5
10
S.W. 4
3
* 9 a.m. f m.p.h.
Tasmania— continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1932 —continued
1933—
December 29 ..
95
Damage estimated at £1,000-£1,200 in Derwent Valley (Fitzgerald and Tyenna
districts). Sawmill burnt at Mt. Lloyd
lo
T 29
1934—
January 4
Fitzgerald District,
95
Severe bush fires. Church and mill burnt
lA
January 15-18
91, 94, 95
Extremely severe bush fires throughout Tasmania. Severe losses in Derwent
Valley (Fitzgerald, Lachlan, Tyenna, &c.) ; Huon district; North-West
(Hampshire, Nietta, Takone, Lorinna, Staverton, Mole Creek, Table Cape,
&c.); North (Lilydale) and other districts. One of the worst outbreaks
known in many districts
::
January 16
North-West, 91
Derwent Valley, 95
Sawmill at Takone, school at Lorinna, several homesteads at Staverton, &c.
destroyed. Thousands of acres swept by one of the worst fires in Tasmania
for several years
Timber mill and six houses destroyed at Fitzgerald. 800,000 super feet of
seasoned timber burnt. Great damage to property and stock at Ellendale
Hobart, 94
Dense smoke haze. Ashes and debris fell in the city. Light an intense
yellow or orange in afternoon. Smoke from fires carried to Victoria
4a
T 18
January 17-20
North-West Forest
District, 91
Bad fires at Mawbanna (North-West). Wind south-south-west to west. 20th
the worst dayj
(l)-(3)
T 18
February 9
94, 95
Derwent Valley, 95
fi res again sweeping the State, causing great destruction in the Derwent
valley, Huon, and Channel districts, Mt. Wellington, North-East, West
Coast, &o.
hires from New Norfolk to A ictoria Valley. One of the blackest days in the
history of these districts
4
f~9
February 9
Hu on and Channel
Districts, 94
Hobart, 94
Three factories and numerous houses destroyed, also mills, stock, &c., and
great damage to apple crop
Dense smoke with visibility of 3 miles at 1 p.m., 1,000 yards at 4 p.m., and
less than 100 yards at 6 p.m. Darkness at intervals from 5.45 p.m.
Smoke caused eyes to smart and difficulty in breathing. Light was an
intense orange from about 4 p.m. Ferry and river steamer services
interrupted. Uncanny darkness created a state of panic in some townships
West Coast, 97
Hail bridges over Henty and Little Henty Rivers burnt. Worst fire in the
history of the West Coast. Houses burnt at Strahan
4
T9
—-
♦ For Index, see end of this Section (page 200).
t Supplied by Forestry Department, Tasmania.
Tasmania — continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1932— continued
Hobart
19-21.1.32
74-2° 80-2° 68° 73°
18 19 20 21
Bush fires on hills, 20th January
Rainfall: 38 points since 20th November; 285 points
November; 364 points October
33
20
34
21
0/
/o
Winds light
1933—
Bushy Park
29.12.33
75-6° 82-8° 66 c 75-2° 89° 89-5°
27
38*
N. 6
24 25 26 27 28 29
Smoky, 28th-29th December
Rainfall: 23 points since 30th November; 113 points
November ; 138 points October
28
29“
28
Hobart
29.12.33
61-4° 84-7° 89-7° 57-2°
27 28 29 30
Little smoke haze, 28th December
Rainfall: 5 points since 17th December; 193 points Decem-
ber ; 204 points November; 430 points October, mainly
in first week
20
28
18*
29
1934-
Busby Park
4.1.34
60° 73° 75° 82°
i 2 T“ T~
Bush fires general this month. Much smoke haze
46
2
47
4
S.E. 5 in afternoon, 2nd
and 4th
Bushy Park
16-18.1.34
75° 85-7° 85-5° 92-5° 90-5° 88° 96-8°
13
20
26
N.W. 4 S.E. 5 W. 6
12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Rainfall: 65 points since 30th November. (See 29th Decem-
ber)
15
18
13
13-15 14 18
Hobart
16-18.1.34
67-9° 83-5° 91° 67° 79 u
iT 15 16 17 18
Smoke haze, 15th-18th January, dense at times. Red
sunsets
Much burnt leaf falling, 18th January. Orange light
Rainfall : 71 points since 17th December. (See 29th Decem-
ber)
25*
16~
N.W. 19f
16
Waratah
16.1.34
77-8° 84-4° 84-1°
14 15 16
Smoke haze, 15th and 17th
Rainfall: 123 points, lst-12th January ; 262 points Decem-
ber ; 247 points November
28
16
29
15
Stanley
16-20.1.34
68° 78-2° 72-2° 86-2° 83-6° 77-8° 81-2° 65-6°
36
37
S.S.W. 4
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Smoke haze reported
Rainfall: 63 points since 16th December; 281 points
December; 181 points November
16
19
20
Moina
16.1.34
67° 74-5° 82-2° 83° 88° 87-5° 89-7° 81-5°
S.W. 6
12 13-14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Smoke haze, 17th-18th. Dense smoke haze, 21st January
Rainfall: 71 points, 3rd-9th January ; 276 points December
(Lorinna : 42 points, 8th-9th January)
20
Hobart
9.2.34
75-7° 95° 99-1° 64-3°
21
11
N.W. 33f
7 8 9 10
Dense smoke causing much discomfort.
Rainfall: 83 points, 3rd-5th February ; 100 points January.
(See also 15th-18th January)
8
9
9
Many gusts over 50
m.p.h.
Bushy Park
9.2.34
74-3° 87° 94° 97-8°
12
33
N.W. 4 N.W. gale
6 7 8 9
“ Strange red glow, 5.30 p.m., quite dark. All lights burnt
with pale glow. Gradually lighting till 6 p.m. Red
twilight. Thick smoke haze. Flowers appeared different
colours, e.g., blue violas appeared red”
Rainfall: 71 points since 30th November
8
9
8 9
t m.p.h.
* 9 a.m.
Tasmania — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type.
1934 — continued.
/4. / JV /s. / 3<a /£' / J>4 /jr y
-£, •** yy C -**
/&. / 7* 7 JV /.
r Vrd«x / r ]J^',s*s
m^)r)m-
1936—
January 16-17
Smithton, 91
Bad fires in Smithton district ..
•
January 20
Zeehan, 97
North-West and
Derwent Valley,
95
Fierce bush fires burning over a wide area. Two bridges destroyed
Frres also North-West and West and in Derwent Valley. In the Circular
xieaci area the damage to timber was extensive
lA
January 25-February 20
N orth-W estern
Forest Division, 91
A serious fire which proved difficult to completely suppress. 2,000 acres burnt {
November 4
91, 92, 94, 96
Bush fires in Interlaken district, Deloraine, Geeveston, Swansea. Smoke haze
interrupted air service
2b
1937—
November 26-27
Fern Tree, &c., 94
° f v b n Sh 0n }°Jl r Sl ° pes ° f Mt ‘ Wellington, in Huon district,
November i Sibart) 0 ' ( - 6th - record hi * h maximum temperature for
1
T 26
1939—
January 4-5 . .
January 12-13
Southern Forest
Division, 94
Northern and South-
Eastern Tasmania,
91, 94
930 acres burnt. Three fires, worst on Bruny Island $
Fi rst^r aI Di^”“f fenoes * nd st “ k destroy<!d in the
January 19-20
Mid-North Forest
Division, 91
1,750 acres of forest burnt J
5
January 22-25
North-West Forest
Division, 91
A period of extreme fire hazard. Over 12,000 acres burnt J
3
January 28-February 1. .
91, 92, 94, 95
West Coast, 97
I ires wrought heavy destruction in forests in Derwent Valley and South
reported S “ ? orthern Vision. Seventeen fires
reported by forest officers m the South and seven fires in Central
division. 860 acres burnt. Worst day-30th January
Widespread fires
*>
1
Lachlan, Ellendale,
and Russell River,
95
Sawmills and houses destroyed ..
’ T 30 and 1st
January 30
King Island, &c., 98
Fires in many parts of the State. Extensive fires on King Island. Six houses
two schools and two post offices burnt ’
.
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 200).
t Supplied by Forestry Department, Tasmania.
Tasmania-— continued.


Particulars of Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
| Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1934— continued.
Cape Bruny Light
house
9.2.34
63° 83° 95°
7 8 9
Smoke haze. “ Strong red fiery glow, noon to 4 p.m. Total
darkness, 4 p.m.-6.30 p.m. necessitating exhibition of main
light ”
Rainfall : 45 points, lst-6th February ; 169 points January ;
99 points December; 89 points November
26
9
0/
/o
N.W. 7
9
Zeehan
9.2.34
64-7° 77-9° 86° 90°
6 ‘ T T IT
Smoke haze, 10th February
Rainfall: Very light to light rains nearly every day ; 51
points, lst-9th February ; 350 points January ; 267 points
December
52
9
N.W. 9
9
1936—
Zeehan
20.1.36
68° 67-4° 76-7°
18 19 ~2tr
Rainfall: Little rain (19 points) since Christmas Day; 295
points December ; 810 points November
37
20
N. 4
20
Swansea
4.11.36
67-9° 80-5° 88-6°
T “IT “4~
Peculiar afternoon. Hot south-westerly wind and smoke
from bush fires
Rainfall: 5 points, 1st November; 124 points October;
73 points December
14
y
N.W. 4
3
S.S.W. 7
4
Hobart
4.11.36
79° 84°
3 4
Smoke haze, 4th November
Rainfall: 35 points since 20th October ; 165 points October ;
127 points September
17
3
34
4
N.W. 25f N.W. 20f
3 4
Squalls up to 40 m.p.h.
1937—
Hobart
26-27.11.37
72° 98-3° 77°
25 yy 27
Smoke haze, 26th, and 27th-29th November
Rainfall; 91 points since 19th October in light showers;
263 points October ; 187 points September
12
26
N.W. 16f
26
1939—
Hobart
4-5.1.39
75°-78°
2-5
Rainfall: 227 points December; 224 points November
36
4
Light to moderate north
and north-west winds
Swansea
12-13.1.39
69° 76-9° 72-5° 68-6° 68-5°
IT 10 TT 12 13
Rainfall: No rain since 28th December ; 93 points Decem-
ber ; 225 points November
49
12
N. 6
13
Moina
19-20.1.39
62° 65° 64-5° 70°
rr is i9~ 2d~
Thick smoke haze, 19th-20th January
Rainfall; 34 points including dew since December; 633
points December
Stanley
12-25.1.39
64° 71° 68° 69°
22“ 23 24 25
Rainfall: 19 points since 28th December; 406 points
December ; 208 points November
49
23
Fresh to strong south-
westerly winds
Tewkesbury
>2-25.1.39
63°-71°
22-25
Rainfall: 30 points since late December ; 565 points Decem-
ber (mainly 7th-14th); 252 points November
* 9 a.m. t m.p.h.
C.8016/47. —13
Tasmania — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type,
1939 — continued.
February 7-8 ..
North-Eastern Tas-
mania, 91, 92
Bush fires doing considerable damage. One hundred head of cattle burnt
and pastures destroyed at Pyengana; damage estimated at £1,000.
Approximately 2,000 acres burnt at Myrtlebank; fencing and gates
destroyed
North-West (High-
The worst fires in the history of north-western district. Much damage to
1
clere), 91
valuable timber forest
T 7
February 7-15
North, 91
A period of bad fire hazard in Mid-North Forest division. Ten fires. 5,440
acres burntj
••
West and North-
Large fires Western Forest division, 13th-14th, and fierce fires on the Nietta,
1b
West, 97, 91
Loongana districts, North-West Tasmania ; two homes destroyed^
T 13th
// vf. 40
/£. S. 40 /J. j. 40 /4. S. 40
‘ , *99/
zY
;i TnV &s..r\ /ix A
'-yJo.2
r — ,
'99
99S 997
i
1
1
i
1
1
* For Index, see end of this Section (page 200).
J Supplied by Forestry Department, Tasmania.
Tasmania— -continued.


Particulars of
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1939 — continued.
Zeehan
28.1.39-
68-2° 77-9° 88-5° 63-5° 71-5°
25
0/
/o
S.W. 6
N.E.
7
N. 8
1.2.39
28 29 30 31 1
Rainfall: 67 points January; 1,097 points December
30
28
29
30
Bushy Park
28.1.39-
1.2.39
77° 84° 92-5° 77° 86°
28 29 30 31 1
“ Very thick smoke, 30th January with hot wind.” No
rain since 14th January
Rainfall: 47 points January ; 370 points December ; 137
points November
23
30
N.W. 6
30
Hobart
28.1.39-
1.2.39
64-1° 74-9° 92-6° 72-9° 74-8°
28 29 30 31 1
Smoke haze, 29th-31st January
Fires on mountain, 30th January
Rainfall: No rain since 17th January ; 65 points January.
(See 4th-5th January)
21
30
42
T
N.N.W.
30
20f
Currie, King
Island
30.1.39
70-1° 72-2° 89-3°
~28~ 29~ 30
Smoke haze, 28th January
Rainfall: 19 points since 28th December; 189 points
December ; 139 points November
36*
30
N.E. 6
29
N.W.
30
5
Eddystone
7-8.2.39
72° 87° 71-5°
"6 7 8
Smoke haze, 7th-9th
Rainfall: 9 points since 11th December ; 150 points Decem-
ber ; 93 points November
* •
N. 4
7
St. Helens
7-8.2.39
73-2° 93-2° 72-3°
6 T
Smoke haze, 10th
Rainfall: 34 points since 10th December; 101 points
December ; 119 points November
25
T
Launceston
7-8.2.39
80-3° 87° 88-8°
6 7 8
Thick smoke, 8th February
Rainfall: 21 points since 28th December (15th January);
164 points December ; 229 points November
25
7
33
8
N.W. 4
7
N.W.
8
5
West bury
7-15.2.39
78-9° 90-1° 90-8° 85-3° 83-9° 78-1° 88-3° 90-5°
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
73-9° 79-1°
14 15
Much smoke from bush fires, 9th-13th, and 15th February
Rainfall: 25 points since 28th December; 213 points
December ; 288 points November
* i
Sk-
Waratah
7-15.2.39
79-4° 73-2° 79° 66° 78-8° 81-9° 64° 70-4°
32
34
N.N.E.
4
7 8 9 10 11-12 13 14 15
Rainfall: 100 points, 3rd-5th February; 42 points
January; 1,110 points December
(South Nietta : 20 points, 3rd, only rain since 21st January)
11
9
11
* 9 a.m.
Tasmania — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
♦Pressure Type,
1940—
February 15-16
Southern Forest
Division, 94
1,110 acres burnt}
1
T 15
March 10-17 ..
North-East, 91, 92
4,450 acres burnt in North-East Forest division. Eleven fires. Worst days
12th, 14th. Very bad fire weatherj
March 11-13 ..
St. Mary’s and
Swansea, 92
Midlands, 93
Hu on District, 94..
Several bush fires. Extensive damage to grass lands, fences, &c. ..
2,000 acres of timber and several hundred sheep burnt in Oatlands district
Heavy losses of fruit ..
\
Kellevie, 92
Fierce bush fires swept through the district. Five homes destroyed. One of
the most disastrous fires in the history of the district
King Island, 98 ..
Extensive fires
Bruny Island, 94 ..
A timber mill lost
4
Adamsfield, 95, 97
Bush fires caused great destruction in the district. Five houses and a number
of other buildings burnt
I T 13, 17
March 12-13 ..
North, 91
Bad fire weather in Mid-North Forest division. Four fires
March 11-17 ..
Southern Division,
94
\ ery widespread and bad fires in Southern division. 8,000 acres burnt,
ive started on 11th and 12th. Twenty-eight reported as starting on 13th.
Considerable damage to forests over very large areas (up to 40,000 acres)}
March 13-17 ..
Central Forests
Division, 92, 95
Widespread fires in Central Forests division. 13th, 14th, worst days}
March 15
Wielangta, 91, 92..
Bush fires destroyed a timber mill and train line, value £4,500
Bruny Island, 94 ..
Bush fires devastated almost whole of Bruny Island. Damage will amount
to thousands of pounds
1941—
January 9-17 ..
North-West Forest
Division, 91
Seven fires m North-West Forest division. Over 1,000 acres burnt. Winds
south-west}
3a
December 22-28
North, 91
Bad fire weather m Mid-North Forest division ; six fires ; 1,630 acres burnt}
3-lc
December 24-26
Central Tasmania,
92, 95
80 rep a o C rted)J Urnt “ Central division - Three fires - (Many others not
T 27
3-lc
T 27
1942—
December 6-8 ..
North, 91
Three fires Mid-North Forest division. 3,150 acres burnt}
3
December 13-16
North, 91
Sl day r i3tht d ’ NOrth divisi ° n - 2 ’ 000 acres burnt - Six fires. Worst
3
/S./S42
-3o-7
Jo.2
S?. 0
1943—
>)f\ M
Jp 7
%
SPJ
January 27-29
Mid-North Forest
Division, 91
1,610 acres burnt Mid-North Forest division. Four fires. 28th, a bad day J
4
March 17-22 ..
North-West Forest
Division, 91
Four fires m North-West Forest division. Over 1,400 acres burnt}
T 28-29
3a
* lor Index, see end of this Section (page 200).
t Supplied by Forestry Department, Tasmania.
Tasmania— continued.


Particulars ob
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks— continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, <fec.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1940—
Swansea
11-14.3 40
69-7° 90-2° 99-7° 73-7° 99-2° 75-1°
24
0/
/o
N.W. 6
9 10 11 12 13 14
Bush fires and thick smoke, 8th March
Thick smoke, 13th March. Smoke haze, 9th-18th March
Rainfall: 66 points since 24th January ; 187 points January ;
73 points December
13
13
Western Junction
11-14.3.40
88-6° 931° 90-6° 69-4°
11 12 13 14
Rainfall: 42 points since 1st March ; 78 points February ;
202 points January
29
12
31
13
N.N.W. 30f N.N.W. 25f
13 14
Launceston
11-14.3.40
81° 89-8° 86° 79° 88° 94° 91° 72-3°
27
28
31
N. 4 N.W. 4
7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Smoke haze, 7th-18th March, dense, 9th March
Rainfall; 43 points, 2nd-6th March ; 98 points February ;
180 points January ; 183 points December
12
13
8
13 14
Hobart
11-17.3.40
81-8° 98-9° 79-3° 99-1° 84-3° 64°-65°
10
12
31
N.W. 22f
10 11 12 13 14 15-17
Dense smoke haze, 13th March
Bush fires severe
Dense smoke haze, 16th March
Rainfall: 16 points since February ; 146 points February ;
143 points January
13
n
II
13-14
Oatlands
11-17.3.40
70-9° 95-3° 94° 91° 62°
13
20
W.S.W. 7 N.W. 6
10 11 12 13 14
Very thick smoke from bush fires, 8th March. (Max. 92-1 °-
14 per cent.-W. 7)
Dense smoke haze, 13th March
Rainfall: 68 points since January ; 97 points January
11-
12
13
11 13
W.S.W. 6
14
1941—
1942-
Western Junction
13-16.12.42
65-3° 71-2° 78-8° 77-4°
13 TT 15 16
Rainfall: 38 points since 20th October ; 232 points October ;
372 points September
35
16
N.N.W. 25f
14
Moina
13-16.12.42
58° 67 °-69 °
S.W. 7
13 14 16
Smoke haze, 14th-16th December ; thick, 16th December
Rainfall: 60 points in light showers since 12th November;
210 points November; 456 points October
13
1943-
Western Junction
27-29.1.43
86-3° 99-2° 93-1° 71-8°
28~~ 29 30
Rainfall: 145 points, 3rd-23rd January ; 212 points Decem-
ber ; 35 points November
16
28
23
29
N.N.W. 20t N.N.W. 25f
28 29
Tewkesbury
17-22.3.43
66-5° 60° 70° 64°-69°
T6~ 17 18 19-22
Rainfall: 56 points, lst-7th March ; 357 points February ;
300 points January
Gale blowing, 17 th
March (S.W. 3 at 9
a.m.)
• 9 a.m. t ra.p.h.
Tasmania — continued.


Date.
Location and District
Number.
Particulars of Fires.
• Pressure Type.
1943 — continued.
1944—
January 25-30
North-West Forest
Division, 91
7,170 acres burnt. Three fires, two being of a very serious nature J
3
T 28
January 29-February 6..
Mid-North Forest
Division, 91
2,800 acres burnt in Mid-North Forest division. Ten fires t
3a-1c
T 28
February 8
Marrawah, 91
Extensive forest fires ..
1c
Ys
• For Index, see end of this Section (page 200).
♦ Supplied by Forestry Department, Tasmania.
Tasmania — continued.


Particulars op
Temperature, Relative Humidity, Rainfall, etc., and
Observer’s Remarks — continued.
Station.
Date.
Maximum Temperature in Preceding Week.
Notes on Rainfall, &c.
Relative Humidity, 3 p.m.
Wind.
1943 —continued.
Stanley
17-22.3.43
62 °-68•6 °
17-22
Smoke haze, 18th March
Rainfall: 32 points since 21st February ; 185 points February ;
178 points January
0/
/o
S.W. 6
17
1944—
Stanley
25-30.1.44
73-5° 68°-71°
25 26 30
Smoke from bush fires, 27th-28th January
Rainfall : 29 points since 6th January ; 206 points January ;
126 points December
40
27
Light winds
Waratah
25-30.1.44
88-3° 56-7° 60°-71 ° 71°
~22~ 23 25-30 30
Rainfall: Light showers from 19th January (29 points) ;
525 points January ; 359 points December
34 33
30 22
Light winds
Moina
29.1.44-
71° 79° 68° 64°-72° 79° 80-5°
S.W. 6
6.2.44
29 30 31 1-4 5 6
Thick smoke haze, 31st January and 4th-7th February
Rainfall: 8 points since 1st January ; 380 points January ;
132 points December ; 390 points November
1
Western Junction
29.1.44-
76-3° 81° 75-6° 63°-74° 79-1° 82-2°
Moderate north-north-
westerly, 29th and 31st
6.2.44
29 30 31 1-4 5 6
Rainfall: 44 points on 23rd only rain since 11th January;
395 points, 2nd-llth January; 70 points December; 209
points November
(Sheffield : No rain since 23rd January ; 14 points since 11th
January)
Stanley
8 2.44
61° 66° 69° 71° 72° 69° 68° 65°
T ~2 3 T ~5 ~6 T 8
Smoke, 3rd February reduced visibility
Rainfall : 138 points, 7th-8th February ; no other rain since
18th January. (See 25th-30th January)
S.E. 6
6
* 9 a.m.
Tasmania — continued.


SUMMARY OF PRESSURE TYPES—TASMANIA.
Type.
Total Number.
1
6
lA
2
1b
4
1c
4
2
1
2a
1
2b
2
3
10
3a
5
4
4
4a
2
5
1
Troughs of depressions passed on
27 out of 42 fire days.
MONTHLY FREQUENCY—TASMANIA.
January to February.
Pressure Type.
January.
February.
1
2
3
lA
2
Is
2
2
1c
2
2
1
2a
1
2b
1
3
6
1
3a
3
1
4
2
1
4a
2
5
1
INDEX OF PRESSURE TYPES.
TASMANIA.
1. Sequence of “Highs” and “Lows”—
(a) “ High ” over Tasmania, or moving off. Depression approaching.
(b) Rapid movement.
(c) Slow movement.
2. Low pressure activity over Southern Ocean. Development of
(a) secondaries, and (b) deep depressions.
3. “High ” over Bight. Depression Tasman Sea or New Zealand. Westerly
or South-Westerly weather.
(a) Secondary depression developing South or South-East of
Tasmania.
4. “ High ” over Tasman Sea for three days or more. Depression over
Eight—
(a) “Secondary” developing South of Tasmania.
5. “ High ” over Southern Ocean areas. Tropical depression over Eastern
Australia, (Gradient for Easterly weather.)
Note : —T (with figures) signifies the date of the passage of the trough
of a depression over the region.
Entry of two or more types indicates the sequence of types in the
fire period.
I=Intense low pressure system.


TABLE OF NORMAL VALUES OF RAINFALL
At Stations Listed in Records of Bush Fires and Associated Weather Conditions, also Normal Mean District Rainfall.
(For all Australian Rainfall Districts (1 to 99).)


AVERAGE RAINFALL.
New South Wales.
Stations.
Years
of
Record
January.
February.
March.
Ti
ft
>>
a
4)
fl
3
3
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
Albury
76
153
179
196
211
246
336
280
293
250
257
188
182
2,771
Adelong ..
59
210
159
232
212
251
396
294
321
261
269
196
198
2,999
Bathurst. ..
84
246
207
202
158
166
191
175
167
174
211
213
226
2,336
Bega
60
361
334
371
259
264
316
231
206
210
250
216
305
3,323
Berrigan ..
68
109
114
143
154
164
201
143
175
151
163
119
120
1,756
Bombala ..
58
275
204
221
166
155
229
189
164
181
199
203
265
2,451
Bowral
58
363
298
390
311
273
326
353
232
223
242
251
338
3,600
Campbell’s Hill
28
245
276
338
395
234
265
251
111
270
233
222
369
3,209
Canberra ..
17
205
178
189
214
157
169
159
199
154
233
182
175
2,214
Canowindra
56
205
165
169
177
158
229
191
185
176
193
164
204
2,216
Casino
69
548
556
582
411
306
244
244
177
191
274
363
420
4,316
Cobar
61
132
127
104
105
103
129
87
111
86
107
116
147
1,354
Condobolin
62
162
140
141
129
131
162
122
140
119
137
124
162
1,669
Condong ..
56
860
870
1,070
629
582
437
375
288
279
322
421
574
6,707
Coonamble
63
199
186
193
138
141
157
142
123
128
145
157
173
1,882
Cootamundra
54
180
139
178
182
182
271
214
220
185
202
165
180
2,298
Deniliquin
83
102
106
126
135
158
178
133
145
150
152
107
105
1,597
Dubbo
70
208
170
193
179
172
206
167
167
164
160
195
202
2,183
Forbes
67
173
155
158
158
159
193
157
165
163
164
137
179
1,961
Glen Innis
61
422
302
277
167
166
243
211
185
202
299
310
399
3,183
Goulburn ..
78
257
221
212
177
184
201
174
185
200
217
212
228
2,468
Grenfell ..
57
206
168
192
184
182
268
221
209
191
191
174
216
2,402
Griffith
28
113
92
92
135
126
181
122
170
118
149
108
140
1,546
Gunnedah
63
234
232
226
145
149
187
163
172
154
195
201
256
2,314
Hay
62
90
92
100
119
136
164
119
133
118
122
93
102
1,388
Jenolan Caves
46
294
272
270
276
226
312
369
291
255
278
242
303
3,388
Junee
51
140
143
160
167 ‘
169
236
188
196
171
186
158
153
2,067
Katoomba
57
580
615
646
498
384
413
415
300
308
332
384
521
5,396
Lake Cargellico
60
146
116
123
117
130
162
120
129
120
130
112
151
1,556
Leeton
28
122
86
103
147
138
184
136
167
131
149
126
124
1,613
Lismore
59
615
663
742
518
468
334
347
232
233
265
377
443
5,237
Lithgow ..
53
324
278
327
261
224
295
312
227
229
248
260
308
3,293
Marsden ..
61
199
153
164
156
150
210
161
158
154
164
146
193
2,008
Menindie ..
63
57
77
64
61
89
97
61
75
62
83
79
82
887
Moss Vale
70
364
342
368
338
322
353
379
238
250
289
267
308
3,818
Mt. Hope
57
140
110
114
102
122
151
120
124
102
123
98
145
1,451
Narrabri ..
72
280
264
264
156
182
231
192
154
157
186
228
263
2,557


Stations.
Years
of
Record.
January.
February.
March.
April.
May.
June.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
Newcastle
78
334
388
471
468
473
379
448
301
315
288
255
330
4,450
Nyngan
60
182
165
153
127
122
140
112
118
100
102
127
174
1,622
Orange
71
266
224
247
223
269
405
325
327
284
295
260
266
3,391
Parramatta
76
336
338
405
341
278
281
326
204
209
238
240
288
3,484
Richmond Aerodrome
13
301
321
393
269
141
185
171
139
183
262
253
213
2,831
Richmond Agricultural College
62
326
272
343
259
212
206
215
150
177
199
242
297
2,898
Sydney
86
354
402
495
526
502
461
459
298
287
283
285
294
4,646
Taree .. ,,
59
460
534
505
497
354
339
358
245
269
280
306
426
4,573
Trangie
44
158
132
176
169
123
177
153
134
121
129
156
170
1,798
Wagga
71
150
150
169
165
185
263
186
202
180
202
156
142
2,150
Walgett ..
64
213
191
163
124
149
160
132
106
105
126
148
171
1,788
West Kempsey
60
472
561
525
448
345
342
313
232
260
301
316
404
4,519
Wilcannia
64
89
91
85
69
100
92
62
68
63
88
69
99
975
AVERAGE RAINFALL.
New South Wales— continued.


AVERAGE RAINFALL.
Victoria.
Stations.
Years
of
Kecord
January.
February.
March.
April.
May.
June.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
Alexandra..
65
157
143
203
208
239
304
267
287
263
267
207
187
2,732
Ararat
81
124
119
150
169
231
280
243
256
254
231
177
143
2,377
Avoca
••
59
100
120
116
159
189
262
232
237
216
177
144
148
2,100
Bairnsdale
63
257
214
244
230
193
244
199
183
233
280
232
255
2,764
Ballan
••
15
142
175
148
238
135
166
162
187
166
198
200
193
2,110
Ballarat ..
84
153
147
190
234
261
284
260
282
291
268
217
193
2,780
Beechworth
72
171
194
253
262
332
458
383
384
339
328
231
215
3,550
Benalla
61
157
132
174
203
242
327
271
272
242
240
172
153
2,585
Bendigo
••
••
82
131
121
142
158
205
253
210
217
206
194
143
122
2,102
Camperdown
••
46
148
145
187
221
291
324
297
341
317
261
209
170
2,911
Castlemaine
65
118
118
147
165
216
261
212
229
221
211
160
149
2,207
Charlton ..
••
61
81
93
107
125
164
204
172
178
172
143
103
116
1,658
Colac
44
135
133
186
207
267
318
286
333
290
254
204
166
2,779
Geelong
73
123
131
174
172
188
200
172
176
202
190
182
150
2,060
Hamilton ..
73
128
114
160
213
267
305
285
302
296
256
194
178
2,698
Horsham ..
70
82
91
96
135
187
213
176
187
187
164
131
117
1,766
Kyneton ..
70
151
139
194
221
287
374
309
324
294
261
204
194
2,952
Leongatha
52
235
195
293
342
349
384
338
396
393
373
305
290
3,893
Lismore ..
25
124
142
141
185
178
208
214
261
231
207
192
156
2,239
Maryborough
66
106
110
122
157
185
237
203
209
203
173
147
142
1,994
Melbourne
89
193
179
214
234
211
208
186
187
228
261
226
230
2,557
Myrtleford
40
185
168
236
231
313
456
400
390
329
300
203
221
3,432
Omeo
64
202
209
211
178
185
230
202
209
242
266
214
230
2,578
Orbost
59
286
227
272
278
242
314
263
231
272
301
238
293
3,217
Portland ,.
83
140
136
161
271
363
409
421
423
351
275
195
178
3,323
Sale
73
184
193
215
189
178
203
167
179
218
248
228
208
2,410
Serviceton
••
52
70
70
83
148
198
241
228
235
222
173
119
111
1,898
Seymour ..
63
122
124
159
176
215
290
233
244
216
201
169
143
2,292
St. Arnaud
63
92
97
106
145
199
242
211
216
191
168
128
116
1,911
Stawell
78
105
101
117
151
210
264
219
233
226
194
153
121
2,094
Wangaratta
65
142
152
191
196
215
310
246
253
225
234
169
161
2,494
Warrnambool
46
126
134
172
216
290
298
310
294
281
225
188
155
2,689
Yallourn ..
11
272
254
218
383
210
315
283
344
303 1
329
319
281
3,511


AVERAGE RAINFALL.
Queensland.
Stations.
Years
of
Record
January.
Februar5 r .
March.
1 April.
>»
at
June.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
Barcaldine
56
328
293
267
143
116
118
95
59
66
Ill
145
229
1,970
Biloela
19
456
475
275
198
169
192
132
57
83
174
277
360
2,848
Blackall
63
296
331
264
142
136
123
108
66
74
136
151
250
2,077
Bollon
57
233
192
179
110
119
141
104
89
98
126
148
223
1,762
Boulia
56
169
198
153
59
42
53
32
26
29
53
90
130
1,034
Brisbane ..
93
634
618
567
365
276
258
217
190
195
259
377
505
4,461
Bybera
10
357
207
191
62
95
112
156
80
97
222
336
453
2,368
Cairns
61
1,643
1,630
1,816
1,123
451
289
153
165
165
206
381
853
8,875
Charleville
••
65
254
261
229
131
123
134
121
74
80
123
167
241
1,938
Charters Towers
••
61
535
463
371
154
78
131
67
50
75
71
143
326
2,464
Crohamhurst
••
••
.50
1,178
1,248
1,112
668
504
429
290
217
249
338
455
719
7,408
Cunnamulla
64
142
202
138
103
114
116
86
67
81
88
102
172
1,411
Dal by
73
344
285
274
139
129
163
171
116
161
201
280
349
2,612
Gatton
48
468
350
323
187
147
154
143
96
146
195
295
408
2,912
Gayndah ..
19
430
458
235
168
130
175
144
62
117
251
323
497
2,990
Goondiwindi
64
295
251
253
142
167
172
170
120
146
174
223
292
2,405
Gympie
••
73
657
658
613
343
291
260
207
165
202
273
333
540
4,542
Hughenden
59
452
375
218
104
63
89
47
29
39
83
128
278
1,905
Innisfail ..
62
2,024
2,307
2,681
2,021
1,239
741
475
485
352
312
625
1,116
14,378
Ipswich
73
476
444
405
242
186
196
161
131
171
226
302
367
3,307
Longreach
••
50
229
347
240
95
88
91
76
28
54
94
125
185
1,652
Mackay
72
1,350
1,241
1,209
631
386
274
164
109
160
176
305
686
6,691
Maryborough
72
697
665
590
381
301
293
193
161
184
273
320
505
4,563
Miles
58
383
272
274
143
151
169
162
108
126
200
258
317
2,563
Nanango ..
61
465
393
342
193
155
195
165
129
171
219
286
386
3,099
Pittsworth
56
383
292
267
159
139
174
175
112
156
218
279
368
2,722
Richmond..
53
445
409
227
80
59
74
39
11
24
59
126
255
1,808
Roma
69
320
287
272
128
142
149
143
86
132
173
217
259
2,308
St. George
62
264
239
215
129
141
149
121
91
103
129
175
209
1,965
Stanthorpe
70
368
318
259
170
175
188
200
173
219
250
276
356
2,952
Southport
62
684
694
800
535
518
349
289
200
253
282
377
494
5,475
Tambo
62
289
302
256
141
136
126
116
75
83
133
180
263
2,100
Tamborine Mount
36
796
778
711
559
400
360
334
182
242
290
454
603
5,709
Toowoomba
71
516
453
378
256
214
233
206
158
201
254
333
453
3,655
Wallangarra
54
403
300
261
142
158
202
217
150
185
261
300
369
2,948
Warwick ..
78
358
310
260
160
148
170
180
140
175
232
266
350
2,749
Winton
59
322
322
215
74
63
86
60
21
40
75
126
186
1,590


AVERAGE RAINFALL.
Western Australia.
Stations.
Years
of
Record.
January.
February.
•a
o
N
ce
S
*E
Pi
<
ce
a
d
d
3
=5
be
53
j September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
Albany
66
100
87
161
275
502
547
559
532
410
325
146
118
3,762
Bridgetown
55
57
58
109
172
463
597
582
519
388
290
108
75
3,418
Bunbury ..
66
39
49
95
172
513
710
676
516
350
231
93
53
3,497
Busselton ..
62
42
45
86
147
472
684
647
462
304
227
84
48
3,248
Carnarvon
60
41
70
66
64
149
240
156
68
23
12
3
16
908
Collie
43
56
58
100
195
524
706
753
597
471
308
112
61
3,941
Donnybrook .. .. ..
42
45
62
113
178
572
770
773
615
466
297
114
60
4,065
Geraldton
64
22
29
57
92
272
477
379
279
128
70
26
15
1,846
Guildford ..
63
34
39
69
167
485
681
676
560
348
225
68
48
3,400
Kalamunda
34
46
53
101
216
602
828
835
694
456
301
93
80
4,305
Katanning
51
43
51
105
118
246
297
306
248
187
153
64
64
1,882
Keller berrin
50
33
48
96
79
169
217
218
175
109
85
42
62
1,333
Mandurah
53
24
36
82
167
525
761
694
538
373
223
68
43
3,534
Manjimup
27
81
81
125
224
595
724
707
641
487
351
160
90
4,266
Merredin ..
39
40
46
93
95
155
202
212
156
105
88
45
63
1,300
Morowa
29
60
70
115
92
181
245
222
166
91
64
55
39
1,400
Mt. Barker
56
90
87
149
209
342
387
418
372
334
289
143
109
2,929
Mullewa ..
47
49
51
80
66
184
268
231
179
90
55
28
29
1,310
Narrogin ..
51
38
55
91
111
265
343
369
292
209
140
54
48
2,015
Northam ..
62
33
39
83
83
225
322
340
257
151
100
39
39
1,711
Perth
69
34
39
83
174
502
703
670
570
338
214
76
56
3,459
Southern Cross
53
50
59
96
82
136
135
139
117
72
65
51
49
1,051
Walebing ..
59
37
52
85
88
258
393
366
307
206
128
54
46
2,020
Wandering
54
35
42
97
128
332
461
473
393
285
194
67
61
2,568
York
66
33
45
75
86
239
331
336
281
154
104
44
44
1,772


AVERAGE RAINFALL.
South Australia.
Stations.
Years
of
Record.
January.
February.
March.
April.
May.
J une.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
Adelaide ..
••
106
78
76
100
177
269
301
262
252
208
169
116
103
2,111
Belair
47
108
101
140
238
396
485
402
391
342
221
459
132
3,115
Clare
82
99
89
100
193
279
329
304
311
279
208
130
112
2,433
Mt. Barker
82
114
92
131
230
362
436
417
414
363
266
153
125
3,103
Mt. Gam bier
82
134
103
142
238
333
391
404
386
309
240
172
162
3,014
Roseworthy
56
83
60
78
144
183
235
192
222
197
160
104
84
1,742
Stirling West
59
166
125
184
374
545
767
630
629
517
357
220
184
4,698
Strathalbyn
' 82
84
72
99
146
219
247
248
234
221
169
111
90
1,940
Victor Harbour
60
85
72
94
167
251
311
290
254
239
177
112
87
2,139
Yongala .. „.
62
79
69
64
103
135
173
147
183
152
123
103
101
1,432
AVERAGE RAINFALL.
Tasmania.
Stations.
Years
of
Kecord.
January.
February.
March.
Gk
ci
s
<U
a
3
3
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
Bushy Park
69
181
136
162
176
172
200
182
191
207
230
217
213
2,267
Cape Bruny
71
260
217
281
315
323
357
351
334
303
316
285
300
3,642
Currie (King Island)
34
150
156
166
245
347
400
452
429
345
263
201
217
3,371
Deloraine ..
53
189
176
218
276
334
427
454
420
380
342
249
244
3,709
Eddystone
34
153
191
249
263
340
290
268
247
289
188
236
2,961
Hobart
102
186
151
175
195
182
221
212
183
206
230
241
213
2,395
Hythe
56
284
211
301
352
308
402
368
346
331
368
300
292
3,863
Launceston
57
176
130
167
216
267
328
309
297
289
267
182
202
2,830
Moina
32
300
353
384
528
674
769
931
864
736
614
479
442
7,074
Oatlands ..
56
183
151
172
181
170
219
163
173
169
220
185
222
2,208
St. Helens
52
226
229
285
258
234
365
292
256
244
271
185
217
3,062
Stanley
66
170
161
190
281
336
434
436
393
338
323
241
236
3,539
Swansea ..
58
204
162
208
211
176
280
221
166
162
217
193
229
2,429
Tewkesbury
8
362
305
357
425
560
657
817
871
585
472
319
399
6,129
Waratah ..
58
473
374
510
682
807
912
961
962
911
825
660
584
8,661
VVesbry
42
174
184
201
241
304
361
381
350
330
316
207
211
3,260
Western Junction ..
11
160
159
174
222
192
265
284
322
268
255
170
213
2,684
Zeehan ..
51
582
434
584
852
907
934
1,017
1,010
932
898
735
656
9,541


NORMAL MEAN DISTRICT RAINFALL.
New South Wales.
District.
January.
February.
March.
Pi
ce
a
O
G
3
3
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
46. Western, Far North-West
79
90
73
59
73
81
55
48
48
69
65
98
838
47. Western, Lower* Darling
72
80
66
67
103
112
74
87
78
91
80
80
990
48. Western, Upper Darling
156
142
130
92
105
124
89
78
77
95
121
152
1,361
49. Western, South-West Plains ..
110
102
103
93
115
141
104
114
103
111
97
123
1,316
50. Central Western Plains, Southern
164
142
138
146
137
185
142
142
125
135
129
173
1,758
51. Central Western Plains, Northern
185
158
165
148
135
171
141
126
115
123
152
181
1,800
52. North-West Plains, West
235
203
203
122
136
170
140
104
105
133
175
220
1,946
53. North-West Plains, East
258
223
228
145
163
200
177
135
137
165
209
251
2,291
54. North-West Slopes, North
317
256
251
158
162
204
191
150
160
226
251
297
2,623
55. North-West Slopes, South
281
228
238
165
146
217
193
173
172
214
236
284
2,547
56. Northern Tablelands, Western
395
295
286
180
167
249
221
188
210
278
309
366
3,144
57. Northern Tablelands, Eastern
529
503
507
293
221
221
, 191
123
171
258
343
439
3,799
58. North Coast Upper ..
656
668
755
565
537
396
370
251
247
304
388
483
5,620
59. North Coast Lower ..
619
307
760
632
462
397
342
218
281
369
378
509
5,670
60. Manning
484
561
584
565
468
419
423
289
324
331
345
456
5,249
61. Hunter
313
311
370
329
272
281
314
212
244
239
248
339
3,472
62. Central Tablelands, North
242
202
220
185
176
236
196
192
194
208
229
255
2,535
63. Central Tablelands, South
327
287
317
266
235
302
286
248
243
264
268
310
3,353
64. Central Western Slopes, North
251
221
217
179
160
211
204
165
163
170
211
249
2,401
65. Central Western Slopes, South
211
162
183
177
170
229
188
189
174
183
179
213
2,258
66. Metropolitan East
353
323
453
506
423
348
407
240
266
277
266
335
4,197
67. Metropolitan West ..
306
280
335
282
224
211
261
165
179
207
238
294
2,982
68. Hlawarra
393
356
425
414
366
359
400
248
262
276
266
362
4,127
69. South Coast
379
342
383
317
307
310
261
205
240
260
257
301
3,562
70. Southern Tablelands (Goulburn-
Monaro)
255
201
218
184
190
230
202
197
196
219
198
230
2,520
71. Southern Tablelands (Snowy Mts.)
282
229
258
224
257
330
282
301
320
323
267
281
3,354
72. South-West Slopes, South
199
171
224
218
254
381
299
317
262
274
206
210
3,015
73. South-West Slopes North
192
151
187
187
194
288
233
233
203
211
178
194
2,451
74. Riverina East
128
121
139
143
154
216
162
177
150
165
126
127
1,808
75. Riverina West
102
90
104
107
128
160
115
124
110
119
98
109
1,366


NORMAL MEAN DISTRICT RAINFALL.
Victoria.
District.
January.
February.
March.
April.
May.
June.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
76. Mallee North
78
85
59
76
115
124
114
116
110
118
79
87
1,161
77. Mallee South
66
93
78
90
133
149
133
135
139
129
92
96
1,333
78. North Wimmera
75
87
90
113
164
191
169
171
177
147
114
107
1,605
79. South Wimmera
89
94
100
139
197
232
212
217
211
174
131
119
1,915
80. Lower North
97
97
112
121
161
193
163
166
155
152
108
111
1,636
81. Upper North
119
114
136
151
187
241
195
204
186
181
131
127
1,972
82. Lower North-East
164
169
213
206
264
383
318
315
273
272
192
202
2,971
83. Upper North-East
233
215
287
305
393
564
506
525
429
410
289
279
4,435
84. East Gippsland
274
225
254
238
223
285
253
227
256
286
242
276
3,039
85. West Gippsland
234
215
274
301
295
342
299
335
338
358
292
286
3,569
86. East Central
228
195
268
301
312
354
309
333
338
352
282
277
3,549
87. West Central
140
150
187
193
203
225
199
218
242
228
200
178
2,363
88. North Central
143
143
174
202
258
327
284
294
270
245
194
182
2,716
89. Volcanic Plains
125
134
158
191
227
252
235
258
264
228
190
167
2,429
90. West Coast
139
137
183
229
301
332
330
342
317
265
207
176
2,958
NORMAL MEAN DISTRICT RAINFALL.
Tasmania.
District.
January.
February.
March.
April.
May.
June.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
91. Northern
192
184
223
300
371
459
477
459
400
358
255
256
3,934
92. East Coast ..
202
216
257
270
236
348
277
251
226
276
202
265
3,026
93. Midland
165
137
155
179
160
201
166
164
169
220
170
220
2,106
94. South-East ..
223
182
229
254
218
275
249
233
237
283
236
274
2.893
95. Derwent Valley
200
165
182
214
195
227
227
220
251
272
233
239
2,025
96. Central Plateau
238
221
244
309
304
346
375
363
358
346
274
314
3,692
97. West Coast ..
535
425
545
730
820
839
930
941
885
799
679
580
8,708
98. King Island ..
156
156
181
267
359
418
465
456
367
290
231
223
3,569
99. Flinders Island
178
177
249
265
267
333
291
278
256
251
201
213
2,959
C.8016/47. —14


NORMAL MEAN DISTRICT
Queensland.
RAINFALL.
District.
January.
! February.
March.
>»
cS
a
a
3
>-a
>>
August.
—
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
27. Peninsular North
1,389
1,308
1,219
659
137
58
42
20
13
45
199
702
5,791
28. Peninsular South
935
896
687
164
50
45
24
7
24
70
220
605
3,727
29. Carpentaria Lower
725
617
398
101
38
51
20
10
17
52
148
392
2,569
30. Carpentaria Upper
628
556
344
115
58
83
42
25
36
76
153
377
2,493
31. North Coast (Barron)..
1,328
1,288
1,379
788
300
205
114
114
92
133
298
690
6,729
32. North Coast (Herbert)
1,411
1,477
1,390
822
434
285
179
167
155
178
353
690
7,541
33. Central Coast East
893
792
603
288
165
197
111
77
108
129
206
454
4,023
34. Central Coast West ..
537
475
345
145
81
130
65
50
70
77
161
333
2,469
35. Central Highlands
400
351
279
150
127
159
116
84
102
146
220
316
2,450
36. Central Lowlands
321
310
239
121
87
117
82
48
65
98
148
221
1,857
37. Upper West ..
316
304
197
57
51
67
41
16
29
60
105
184
1,427
38. Lower West ..
170
195
161
80
69
73
51
32
44
71
89
137
1,172
39. South Coast (Pt. Curtis)
658
576
427
249
203
251
178
118
141
208
272
455
3,736
40. South Coast (Moreton)
671
658
637
416
349
297
227
169
206
274
357
509
4,770
41. Darling Downs East ..
375
304
277
161
156
183
181
131
167
223
277
351
2,786
42. Darling Downs West ..
298
233
232
119
143
159
141
88
104
165
232
277
2,191
43. Maranoa
302
282
263
129
137
158
147
91
118
161
211
258
2,257
44. Warrego
214
209
193
110
112
134
107
75
88
110
147
215
1,714
45. Ear South West
191
165
133
86
97
101
69
49
56
86
109
155
1,297


NORMAL MEAN DISTRICT RAINFALL.
Western Australia.
District.
January.
February.
March.
April.
S*
8
June.
July.
August.
September.
October.
November.
December.
Year.
1. North Kimberley
763
632
467
81
24
17
16
3
9
44
190
418
2,664
2. East Kimberley
554
433
292
69
37
26
25
9
16
52
137
316
1,966
3. West Kimberley
568
470
382
106
67
70
27
9
3
7
60
297
2,066
4. De Grey
254
230
287
111
92
105
46
25
5
13
33
93
1,294
5. Fortescue ..
152
162
188
85
109
105
47
29
8
13
22
61
981
G. West Gascoyne
64
79
89
51
138
190
130
67
23
13
7
18
869
7. East Gascoyne
148
124
196
81
106
90
38
29
14
27
37
94
984
7a. Murchison
87
78
112
68
108
133
98
76
27
18
24
44
873
8. North Coastal
42
52
89
90
209
328
284
224
118
75
37
34
1,582
9. Central Coastal
35
45
82
160
486
691
689
556
356
227
72
53
3,452
9a. South Coastal
65
65
119
200
482
619
617
521
376
279
115
77
3,535
10. Central North
41
54
88
90
167
233
229
189
102
87
42
50
1,372
10a. Central South
52
49
107
108
218
257
272
225
157
134
64
57
1,700
11. Eucla
55
54
90
78
97
87
69
81
58
76
66
58
869
I 2. South-East ..
79
71
124
87
116
114
92
93
47
58
58
68
1,007
13. North-East ..
147
111
153
133
109
86
46
37
17
26
31
84
980
NORMAL MEAN DISTRICT RAINFALL.
South Australia.
District.
January.
February.
o5
S3
*c
June.
July.
9
bo
p
<
September.
October.
3
a
<v
>
o
&
December.
Year.
14. Northern Rivers
1,080
913
785
181
29
17
4
5
37
145
392
751
4,339
15. Northern Plateau
271
259
175
62
54
43
30
20
26
64
112
171
1,287
16. North-West Interior ..
87
85
64
35
56
82
54
71
54
74
55
48
765
17. Far North Interior
61
62
52
42
60
80
36
43
44
53
49
57
639
18. Western
50
70
67
83
140
182
171
173
125
102
83
57
1,303
19. Upper North .. .. ...
80
66
67
88
129
166
131
151
125
107
89
84
1,283
20. North Coast ..
68
64
50
51
80
83
53
63
54
72
73
64
775
21. Lower North
80
71
77
129
186
225
194
223
194
151
100
91
1,721
22. Central West
64
64
74
134
204
260
238
229
181
134
91
67
1,740
23. Central East
100
77
101
188
270
341
298
307
270
191
128
105
2,376
24. Murray Valley
70
67
71
95
137
153
133
152
144
115
83
79
1,299
25. Upper South-East
78
71
67
102
154
168
156
173
162
131
89
86
1,437
26. Lower South-East
99
87
112
202
296
374
367
i
337
268
203
139
129
2,613




PART V.
ORGANIZATIONS FOR PROTECTION AGAINST BUSH AND GRASS FIRES.
A brief outline is given of the fire protection organizations
in various States, with a summary of their activities and
references to laws relating to the lighting of fires, and the
use of inflammable material, &c., during the danger season.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY.
Bush Fire Council,
(From Annual Reports of the. Bush Fire Council
Ordinance No. 7 of 1940.)
The severe bush fires which caused widespread damage
in the Australian Capital Territory in January, 1939, were
the subject of inquiry by a Bush Fire Committee appointed
by the Honorable the Minister of State for the Interior
(Hon. J. McEwan, M.P.), and among the recommendations
was one favouring the appointment of a permanent Bush
Fire Council to organize the prevention and suppression of
bush fires in the Australian Capital Territory. The recom-
mendation was put into effect, and the appointment of a
permanent council was authorized. At its inception, the
Council comprised the Inspector-General of Forests, the
Forester of the Department of the Interior, a representative
of the Federal Territory Rural Lessees Association, a repre-
sentative of the Queanbeyan branch of the Graziers’
Association of New South Wales, and the Chief Lands
Officer of the Department of the Interior. The Inspector-
General of Forests was appointed chairman, and the
Secretary of the Forestry Bureau was appointed secretary
of the Council.
An ordinance, No. 7 of 1940, describes the functions of the
Bush Fire Council:—
The Council shall consist of not less than five nor more
than nine members appointed by the Minister.
It may take such action as it deems necessary to prevent
the outbreak or spread of fire and to protect life and
property in any part of the territory other than in the city
area. It may, in particular, acquire fire-fighting equipment,
employ workmen, organize fire prevention associations, and
distribute literature relating to fire prevention.
The Ordinance provides for the territory outside of the
city area to be divided into fire districts, and for the appoint-
ment by the Council of a Chief and a Deputy Chief Fire
Control Officer, and, in each fire district, a Fire Controller,
and one or more Deputy Fire Controllers,
The Chief Fire Control Officer has powers to direct all
workmen employed in extinguishing a fire, including
voluntary fire fighters, to enter any land or premises for the
purpose of extinguishing or checking a fire or for taking
fire-fighting equipment through such land oi premises. He
may, with or without the consent of the owner, remove
stock or take water. He shall, however, notify the owner as
soon as practicable of such action taken, and fences, &c.,
pulled down will be temporarily repaired. Damage shall be
deemed to be damage by fire within the meaning of any
policy against fire covering the property so damaged.
In his absence, the powers and duties of the Chief Fire
Control Officer are vested in the Deputy Chief Control
Officer, and in the absence of this officer, the powers are
exercised by the Fire Controller of the fire district in which
the fire occurs.
It is incumbent for a land holder or employee immediately
to notify the Chief Fire Control Officer of any outbreak of
fire on his land or on any unleased land, the property of the
Commonwealth, which is adjacent to his land, and to use
all means to extinguish the fire if it is on his own land. This
applies to the season of prohibited burning (usually Ist
November to the last day of February).
Watch towers, with telephones connected with head-
quarters, have been installed at various points such as
Oddie Dome, Mt. Aggie, Black Springs, Uriarra, Brindabella
Pass, Bag Range, and 1 mile from Hall township. These,
and lookout points set up by the New South Wales Forestry
Commission, have strengthened the defences against fire
coming into the Capital Territory from the north-west.
Roads and tracks in mountain areas have been and are-
being constructed for purposes of fire protection. Equip-
ment includes knapsack sprays, water tanks on lorries,
pumpers, &c., and portable wireless sets. Equipment placed
in the custody of land owners in different parts of the
territory is subject to inspection at regular intervals.
Telephones have been installed at certain points, and
arrangements are made with the Postmaster-General’s De-
partment to give precedence to calls from and to fire con-
trollers during fires, and have telephone facilities made
available after ordinary hours of business when necessary.
A number of bush fire brigades have been organized, and
close co-operation has been established between these
brigades and the Bush Fire Council.
Fire brigades operating on areas in New South Wales,
adjacent to the Australian Capital Territory, also co-operate
with the Bush Fire Council in the prevention and suppres-
sion of fires which break out on or near the territorial
boundaries.
Regulations relating to the careless use of fire and the
prevention of bush fires are based on The Careless Use of
Fire Ordinance No. 20 of 1936. The original Act, with
amendments and regulations, are published in Common-
wealth of Australia Gazettes of the following dates:—
Ordinance No. 20 of 1936 .—Gazette No. 41 of 14th May, 1936.
Ordinance No. 22 of 1937.— Gazette No. 74 of 16th December,
1937.
Ordinance No. 7 of 1940.— Gazette No. 80 of 2nd May, 1940.
Ordinance No. 1 of 1942 .—Gazette No. of 15th January,
1942.
Ordinance No. 1 of 1943. —Gazette No. of 14th January,
1943.
Regulations 1-4. —Gazette No. 13 of 3rd March, 1938.
Amendments. —Gazette No. of 19th February, 1942.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Brief Outline of the Early Development of Fire
Suppression Organizations.
(From notes supplied by A. G. Kingsmill, Bush Fires
Advisory Committee.)
The origin of rural fire fighting in New South Wales is
to be found in the organization on many of the large
grazing properties, in the early days of their history, of
squads of fire fighters, drawn mainly from the station
employees, for the purpose of preventing the spread of grass
fires.


This practice is still current. For example, “ Boonoke,”
a large station in the southern Riverina, still organizes its
own fire-fighting squads, and provides an elaborate system
for fire detection and prevention.
With the advent of Local Government, Councils were
enabled, under the provisions of section 494 of the Local
Government Act 1919, to make provision for the prevention
and mitigation of bush fires, and the organization of bush
fire brigades. Furthermore, a Council could, under the same
Act, provide, establish, and manage brigades, stations, and
appliances for extinguishing fires and saving life and
property therefrom.
Experience indicated that many Councils were still not
availing themselves of the provisions of the Local Govern-
ment law and, in order to bring about co-ordination of
activities as well as to assist Councils with technical advice,
a Bush Fires Advisory Committee, representative of the
various Government Departments and organizations,* came
into being in 1937.
This Committee has worked in very close collaboration
with the Councils, and to-day the number of brigades
effectively organized approximates 1,000. In some districts
where no brigades were in being, the Bush Fires Advisory
Committee has functioned towards the institution of
brigades, which are under the control of the local police
officers.
The advent of war conditions compelled the Government
to give special attention to bush fire prevention in New
South Wales and, as a result, Order No. 46 was issued under
the National Security Regulations.
The State Government has evidenced a very keen interest
in all problems relating to fire prevention and suppression,
and has assisted the Bush Fires Advisory Committee in its
work by making funds available for well conceived propa-
ganda campaigns and for improving the equipment of the
volunteer and self-supporting organizations. The Railway
Department and the Forestry Commission, together with
other Government bodies, co-operate to the full.
In addition to the functioning of brigades under the Local
Government Act and National Security Regulations, special
provision exists in the Soil Conservation Act 1938 for the
purpose of instituting essential controls in respect of pre-
vention of fires in the major catchment areas of New South
Wales.
The Government has decided upon a policy which results
in fire prevention conditions being inserted in leases, which
are granted by the Lands Department over Crown lands
within the Hume, Wyangala, Burrinjuck, Snowy River,
Burrangong, Keepit, and Warragamba catchments.
* List of organizations, &c. —
Soil Conservation Service of New South Wales.
Rural Bank of New South Wales.
Graziers’ Association of New South Wales.
Board of Fire Commisioners of New South Wales.
Shires Association of New South Wales.
The Rangers’ League.
Education Department.
Police Department.
Forestry Commission of New South Wales.
Public Works Department.
Department of Agriculture.
Farmers and Settlers’ Association, New South Wales.
Second Australian Army.
Department of Railways.
Country Press Limited.
Chief Secretary’s Department, Sydney.
Present Organization for Suppression of Bush Fires.
The following is condensed from “ The Battle of the
Bush,” issued by the New South Wales Bush Fires Advisory
Committee, 1944.
Bush Fire Brigades.
In recent years, the bush fire brigade organization has
expanded considerably. The number has jumped from 600
brigades in 1942 to 1,035 (including 81 police squads) in
1944. In some shires over thirty brigades have been
organized by councils and are functioning actively.
The management and control of bush fire brigades at
the site of a fire is in the hands of a captain. Deputy
captains may be appointed by councils in addition to the
captain. Where two or more brigades are formed in a shire,
the council may appoint a group captain to function in the
event of major conflagrations. The power of captains, group
captains, and deputy captains are wide and extensive. For
the more efficient control or suppression of a bush fire or the
protection of life or property from any existing or imminent
bush fire danger, they may—
(l) cause any road or public place within the vicinity
of a bush fire to be closed to traffic other than
that of the various Defence Forces;
(2) remove buildings and fences, destroy any living
or dead vegetation and cause fire breaks to be
ploughed or burned or cleared on any land;
(3) take or use any water or fire-extinguishing
material from any place whatsoever —
and do all such acts, matters, and things which shall be
necessary for the control or suppression of an existing or
imminent bush fire danger or the protection of life and
property. These powers may be used only when a fire is
burning, not prior to the outbreak thereof.
Methods and Organization.
The bush fire brigades consist generally of between
fifteen and thirty members, many of whom are life-long
residents of the district in which they operate, and are
familiar with every feature of the terrain. Equipment is
stored at strategic centres, ready for loading into motor
transport immediately an outbreak is reported. This equip-
ment consists of fire beaters, buckets, fire brooms, rakes,
hoes, axes, shovels, knapsack spray pumps, and lift and
force pumps of various types. Many of the brigades have
provided themselves with portable power-driven water-
using units, complete with tanks, which are transported on
trucks or lorries to the seat of the fire. The tanks can be
filled by the pumps from dams, water holes, or other
sources of supply, and the water is then played on to the
fire through 1-in. or H-in. rubber delivery hose.
In many cases, shires organize on a joint basis, and
brigades from either shire can go into action across their
common boundaries.
The Bush Fire Advisory Committee believes with shire
councils that the present volunteer fire-fighting system is
the only practical method of dealing with the great national
menace caused by bush fire. In New South Wales, the broad
expanses of territory and the great distances to be travelled,
combined with the seasonal nature of the work, militate
against the setting up of paid squads or brigades, It is


estimated that in New South Wales in normal times there
are upwards of 30,000 members of established bush fire
brigades, and their work is one of the best possible examples
of decentralization.
Since 1942, the Government has assisted bush fire brigades
in improving their equipment, and a considerable quantity
of manual fire-fighting implemets has been made available
free of cost. This equipment included small lift and force
lowdown double acting pumps with hosing and a small
tank fitted in a frame. These units have already proved
their usefulness in actual fire-fighting operations.
In 1942, the Bush Fires Advisory Committee recommended
the purchase of ten modern trailer pumps, which have been
stationed at strategic points throughout the State. These
units are at present situated at Parkes, Goolgowi, Nar-
randera, Temora, Wagga Wagga, Corowa, Culcairn, Yass,
Cowra, and on the Blue Mountains, and are available for
use whenever needed.
In 1944, a system of grants in aid to councils was insti-
tuted, and local fire-fighting organizations are being assisted
in the purchase of equipment, portion of the cost being
met by the State Government and portion by the local
council.
The Bush Fire Advisory Committee is encouraging coun-
cils to use radio communication during fire-fighting
operations. Already a number of localities are equipped,
and more are coming in.
In the summer of 1943-44, for the first time, fires were
spotted from the air, wireless reports from patrolling planes
on training flights being plotted immediately at Air Force
establishments, and telephoned through to the headquarters
of the shire in which the outbreak had been detected.
A splendid body of honorary rangers, numbering many
thousands, also renders voluntary service unostentatiously,
and it is due to their watchfulness that many fires are
prevented during the summer period.
Fire Breaks.
Up to the present breaks have been constructed, generally
speaking, on the boundaries of properties according to the
quarter from which fires originate. Roads, railway lines,
fallowed paddocks, rivers, and other natural obstacles have
not been fully utilized in the past by linking them up under
a master plan with breaks prepared on private property.
The organization early in the season when ground is suit-
able, say just after fallowing time, of a defence-in-depth
system of fire breaks has been strongly suggested to the
Committee as an important defence measure. In such
planning fallowed areas would be integrated to their best
advantage, being joined by substantial and well-maintained
fire breaks.
These breaks would make use of fallowed areas, roads,
railways, highways, stock routes, and creeks, thus dividing
the district up into unit areas and forming prepared lines
of defence. Each fire could then be isolated in a given area
as soon as its outbreak was reported and efforts made to
arrest it at the first strategic break.
Injury to Fire Fighters or Damage to Clothing,
Equipment, &c.
The Workers’ Compensation (Bush Fire Fighters) Act
of 1944 makes provision for compensation to fire fighters,
under specified conditions, for injury received in fighting
fires or compensation to dependants in case of death. In
addition, payments are made in respect of the destruction
of or damage to wearing apparel or personal effects upon a
fire fighter whilst fighting a bush fire, and to any vehicle,
equipment, &c., used at or near the scene of a fire and owned
by or in the possession or custody of a fire fighter.
The provisions apply to New South Wales, and a fuller
summary is set out in a leaflet issued by the Chief Secretary
and prepared by the New South Wales Bush Fires Advisory
Committee.
Careless Use of Fire Act and Bush and Rural Fires
Prevention Order, New South Wales.
A summary of the law relating to the careless use of fire
is given in “ The Battle of the Bush,” issued by the Bush
Fires Advisory Committee in 1944.
Order No. 46, issued under National Security General
Regulations, was published in Government Gazette No. 33
of 6th April, 1944. This Order is dependent on the National
Security Act and Regulations, and will expire upon repeal
or expiry of the Regulations. It will be replaced by new
State legislation which was being drafted in 1942, but which
had to be shelved when the National Security Order was
issued.
VICTORIA.
Bush Fire Brigades.
(Notes supplied by M. Carver, former secretary of the Bush
Fire Brigades Association.)
The history of bush fire brigades in Victoria is an
interesting commentary on the development of public
interest in fire prevention measures in this State.
As far as can be ascertained, the first bush fire brigade
in Australia was formed at Berrigan in 1896. Brigades
were subsequently organized in Victoria and, by 1928,
there were 106 in existence in this State. In that year, the
Victorian Bush Fire Brigades Association was formed.
The Forests Commission provided the secretariat of the
Association, and provision was made in the constitution for
the representation on the Central Council of various State
Departments concerned in fire protection, and also, the
Weather Bureau.
From the organization of the Association, the bush fire
brigades movement made rapid growth and, at the end of
the 1944-5 fire season, there were 768 brigades in operation.
In 1933, the State Government passed the Bush Fire
Brigades Act, which provided for the constitution of a
committee to register brigades, and approve of captains and
lieutenants to enable them to exercise certain powers and
authority for the suppression of fires. The brigades felt
that they should be authorized also to remove fire hazards
and make fire breaks, prior to the occurrence of outbreaks
and, following the disastrous fires of 1939, the Government
passed an Act which gave them these powers, subject to
the approval of the owners of the land on which the
preparatory measures were to be taken.


During the summer of 1944, disastrous fires were again
experienced in this State and, in an endeavour to limit the
damage in future, the Government revoked the Bush Fires
Brigades Act and made the Country Fire Authority Act.
This provided for the constitution of an authority for the
control of fires in the country districts, both in towns and
rural areas. Provision was made for the granting of
equipment and the appointment of officers, whilst authority
was given for prevention measures to be carried out under
the discretion of an officer appointed by each municipal
council.
Country Fire Authority.
Country Fire Authority Act 1944.
(From notes supplied by G. G. Sinclair, A.1.C.A., J.P.,
Secretary, Country Fire Authority.)
This Act contains some new departures in fire brigade
legislation, designed to cope with the specially hazardous
conditions in the rural areas of Victoria.
Whilst the Metropolitan Fire Brigades Board and the
Country Fire Brigades Board had operated successfully,
under the administration of the Chief Secretary since 1890,
the bush fire brigades were placed under the care of the
Minister of Forests by the Bush Fire Brigades Act of 1933,
which represented the first statutory recognition of their
existence. This division of administration led to difficulties,
because the activities of the country fire brigades and the
bush fire brigades are very closely allied in the smaller
towns. The new Act is administered by the Chief Secretary,
who will now be the Parliamentary head for all fire brigades
as well as the police.
The recommendations of the Royal Commissioner (Judge
Stretton), after the disastrous fires of 1939, were taken
into account in framing the Act. In addition, the Bill con-
tains elements relating to the financing of fire prevention
and extinction.
A statutory corporation, known as the Country Fire
Authority, has been constituted with ten members, com-
prising two representatives each from the Minister of
Forests, the contributing municipalities, the contributing
fire insurance companies, the urban (formerly “country”)
fire brigades, and the rural (formerly “ bush ”) fire brigades
It has become the successor in law to the Country Fire
Brigades Board and the Bush Fire Brigades Committee
both of which ceased to exist on 2nd April, 1945.
On the appointed day, the control of the prevention
and suppression of fires in the “ country area ” of Victoria
was vested in the Authority. As the “country area”
represents the whole of the State outside the metropolitan
fire district, excluding State forests and certain Crown lands
for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth a
fire brigade authority is entrusted with the protection of a
continuous area embracing both urban and rural sections.
This appears to be a logical development in the public
interest, as the older system, springing from the municipal
control of fire brigades, which provided protection for towns
with statutory limits to the areas in which the brigades
operated, has proved inadequate to cope with our special
climatic and other hazards, which demand at critical periods
the mobilization of all available resources. Apart from
that a uniform policy of fire prevention is required with
which the fire extinction forces must be concerned
The unit area for fire prevention is the municipality,
comprising, in the case of shires, distinct urban and rural
areas in each of which the appropriate fire brigade will
operate. The municipalities are grouped in 24 “ fire
control regions,” of which three (comprising Ballarat,
Bendigo, and Geelong) are wholly urban. This will simplify
administration owing to the steep descent in population and
value of property between these provincial cities and the
urban areas next in importance.
Each region, except those which are wholly urban, has
its permanent regional officer, who is the local representa-
tive of the chief officer, and assumes the powers and duties
of the latter in his absence. The present officers and
employees of the Country Fire Brigades Board were trans-
ferred. to the service of the new Authority, the chief officer
and deputy chief officer holding corresponding positions
relative to the urban fire brigades, whilst there is a new
chief officer for rural brigades. The secretary of the former
Country Fire Brigades Board has become secretary of the
Authority.
During the “ summer period,” which is fixed by proclama-
tion, fires may be lit to destroy grass, &c., only upon the
receipt of a permit, in writing, either from the “ proper
officer ” of a municipality, from the “ proper officer ” of a
public department, or from the chief officer or officer exer-
cising his powers. The permit is granted with prescribed
conditions and restrictions, but may contain also such
further conditions and restrictions as the officer granting it
thinks fit. The penalities are a fine of not more than f 100
or imprisonment for not more than twelve months, or both.
There are prohibited days during which no fires may he
lit in the open air, and the warning for which is broadcast.
The proper officer of a municipality may, by notice in
writing, require the removal of hazards such as grass,
weeds, rubbish, &c., from land, and in addition to a penalty
of not more than £2O for default, the work may be carried
out in that event by the servants of the municipality, and
the expense recovered from the owner.
Municipalities and public authorities are charged with
steps for the prevention of fire within the areas under their
control and management, and may expend their funds for
the purpose and in the acquisition of apparatus and equip-
ment. The Country Roads Board will thus be authorized
for the first time to expend funds for fire prevention on
main roads.
In the event of failure by the proper officer of a muni-
cipality to carry out fire prevention measures in his district,
the Governor in Council may order a regional officer or an
assistant chief officer to assume his powers and duties, the
expense of exercising and carrying out which may be re-
covered from the municipality.
Neglect by a public authority to carry out fire prevention
efficiently will be referred to the Governor in Council for
appropriate action.
The Authority prepares an annual estimate of expenditure
for approval by the Governor in Council and this, with the
addition or deduction of the difference between the receipts
and expenditure during the previous financial year, forms
the basis for computing the amounts to be contributed


by the Government (one-third), the municipalities (one-
third), and the fire insurance companies (one-third) for
the maintenance of the organization during the relevant
financial year.
The municipalities within a region contribute in the
aggregate one-third of the estimated expenditure within
that region, pro rata, according to the net annual value of
the rateable property in each such municipality.
The fire insurance companies together contribute one-
third of the aggregate estimated expenditure of the
Authority, pro rata, according to the amount of the
premiums received in the country area of Victoria during
the preceding calendar year. It will be observed that,
whereas in the past the companies had been required to
return the premiums received in the metropolitan fire
district and nine separate country fire districts, they now
make returns of the premiums received in the metropolitan
fire district and the country area only, and that with a few
possible exceptions risks not within the metropolitan district
will automatically come within the country area.
The borrowing power of the Authority is £200,000,
including any liability transferred from the Country Fire
Brigades Board, which at 30th June, 1944, recorded a loan
liability of £56,950. The maximum rate at which funds
may be borrowed is 5 per cent, per annum.
Clause 63 of the new Act enables the Authority to charge
for attendances by brigades at fires in uninsured houses or
buildings or uninsured personal property not in any house
or building. This should be an incentive to owners to insure.
Clauses 68, 70, and 71 contain the usual indemnities for
persons carrying out the provisions of the Act. Clause 75
requires a coroner to hold an inquest into the cause and
origin of any fire when requested, in writing, by the
Authority to do so.
The power to contract for the carrying out of aerial
reconnaissance to detect fires, and to engage in publicity in
the cause of fire prevention are believed to be specifically
included in Australian fire brigade legislation for the first
time.
At the 30th June, 1946, the Authority administered 185
urban and 776 rural fire brigades in 170 separate muni-
cipalities. As the result of efforts by the regional officers,
the number of rural fire brigades has since increased to 833,
and will continue to increase until all badly-protected areas
in the fire control regions are covered.
Nearly 60,000 officers and members of volunteer fire
brigades are registered with the Authority, which
administers a scheme of compensation for accidents, the
benefits of which are on all fours with those under the
Workers’ Compensation Acts. Permanent employees of the
Authority, including field officers, mechanics, and the per-
sonnel of permanent fire brigades in the provincial cities
number 64 in all.
The Governor in Council has made regulations with
respect to the payment of compensation in cases of accident
to officers and members of brigades or, where death ensues
therefrom, to their wives and families, and may also make
regulations for the payment of compensation to employees
on their sickness, incapacity, injury, or disablement.
FORST COMMOSSION OF VICTORIA.
Fire Protection Organization.
The aim of the protection organization is prompt detection
and a minimum lapse of time between the outbreak and the
arrival of the fire-fighting crew at the fire.
Measures taken to achieve this include a comprehensive
detection system by towers and aerial patrol, with com-
munications by telephone and radio. Rapid access of men
and transport of power equipment is facilitated by an
increasing roading reticulation of forested areas.
Fire towers and lookouts have been erected in the last
few years in many forest districts, including East Gipps-
land, the eastern highland area between Narracan (Gipps-
land) and Broadford (north-central district) on the Central
Divide and Grampians, in the Otway Ranges and Portland
area, and in other localities. Over 70 towers and lookouts
have been established, and a similar number are projected.
Particulars of fire lines, fire breaks, &c., are given in
annual reports of the Commission. The following particu-
lars give the position at the end of the financial year
1944-45:
Length of existing fire lines —706 miles. New lines —
69 miles.
Length of existing fire breaks —542 miles. New breaks
—25 miles.
Length of forest roads and motor tracks —4,140 miles.
Constructed during the year—396 miles.
Area of strip and patch burning, 1944-45 —92,563 acres.
Length of new forest telephone line created during year
—5O miles.
Length of telephone line in existence —618 miles.
Water conservation dams, existing—79o. New con-
struction —61.
Radio communications include a number of transceivers,
with fourteen base stations and 72 portable field stations.
One central communication system operates from the Head
Office of the Commission in Melbourne. The system works
on a power output of 200 volts, fully modulated, and a
wave length of 61 metres.
Portable pumps play a prominent part in safeguarding
ash forests, and special techniques have been developed in
the operation of trailer pumps and hose line. Dugouts are
maintained in sawmilling and logging districts for the pro-
tection of workers in the event of an outbreak of fire.
Fire Weather Stations.
Six weather stations have been installed by the Commis-
sion at Loch Valley, Tanjil Bren, Bruthen, Rubicon, Powell-
town, and Erica. These stations are equipped with thermo-
meters (dry and wet bulbs, maximum and minimum) ex-
posed in a standard screen, rain gauge and measure, wind
vane, hazard stick, beam balance and weights. Stations in
other areas are projected.
Observations are made at 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. Readings
are telegraphed to the Weather Bureau, Melbourne, each
day.


Copies of the data are forwarded to the Bureau at the
end of each month and also to the Commission’s head office,
where they are used for investigation into fire behaviour
and fire danger.
Fire Banger Weather.
The fire-fighting organization is held in varying degrees
of preparedness during weather leading up to dangerous
conditions, and comes into action upon the receipt of advice
of an actual fire.
The following tabular summary illustrates the use made
of weather information in ordering the measures to be taken
for fire protection:
Weather Conditions. Fire Protection Measures.
1. Falling humidities to 40 Key detection points manned.
per cent. Moisture con- Forest gangs concentrated
tent of forest fuel fall- in accessible localities with
ing to 25 per cent, fire-fighting equipment.
Temperatures rising to
70 deg. or 80 deg.
2. Relative humidity falling All detection points manned.
to 25 per cent, or 30 per Certain forest gangs stand-
cent. Fuel moisture by. All radio stations
18-20 per cent. Winds listening,
light east to north or
variable.
3. Relative humidities 25-20 Detection points in continu-
per cent. Fuel moisture ous operation. All gangs
10 per cent, to 15 per on fire suppression or in
cent. Winds rising— reserve. All reserve equip-
northerly. ment in readiness for fire
suppression. All forest
industries suspended in
danger areas.
Regulations re Careless Use of Fire.
Prohibitions and penalties relating to the careless use of
fire and failure to remove inflammable material, &c., are
set out in appropriate sections of the Country Fire Authority
Act No. 5040 of 1944 and in the Forests Acts 1928-1939.
QUEENSLAND.
[The following notes have been supplied by courtesy of the
Secretary, Sub-Dept. of Forestry, Brisbane.]
The Rural Fires Act of 1927 provides for the appoint-
ment of a Rural Fires Board and officers. At present, the
duties of the Rural Fires Board are performed by the
Forestry Board (which is also the Land Administration
Board), and the secretary of the Forestry Board is also
secretary of the Rural Fires Board, The Act applies in
proclaimed districts only, and approximately half the State
is so proclaimed.
The officers of the Board are likewise officers of other
Departments, e.g., Land Commissioners and Clerks of Petty
Sessions, are Fire Wardens, and there is no staff engaged
exclusively on rural fire work.
The duties and responsibilities of the Board are—
(a) To report to the Minister from time to time as to
the best means of regulating rural fires in the
interests of the community, and for preventing,
detecting, and suppressing unnecessary fires;
( b ) To aid in the dissemination of information dealing
with fire protection;
(c) To perform and undertake such powers, duties,
and responsibilities as may be delegated by the
Minister to such Board, or as may be prescribed;
and
( d ) Generally in advising upon the administration of
this Act.
A report is to be submitted to the Minister each year on
the administration of the Act during the twelve months
ended 31st March, and a plan of rural fire control and pro-
tection may be subjoined, if desired or directed by the
Minister.
Each member of the Board, by virtue of his office, has
the powers, &c., of a fire warden.
Standing committees may be appointed in rural fire
districts to co-operate with the Board in the administration
of the Act.
The Rural Fires Act requires the observance of certain
precautions before lighting rural fires, and prohibits specified
fire-dangerous practices. The giving of notice to neighbours
before firing is provided for.
-The operation of Bush Fire Brigades is contemplated by
the Act, but, as its provisions do not cover the organization
of such brigades, nor are they covered by the Fire Brigades
Acts, any such are informal organizations. In several
districts such exist. Legislation to provide for organization
and constitution of bush fire brigades is under consideration.
Some private individuals (especially pastoralists) con-
struct fire-breaks and maintain fire-fighting equipment.
The Forestry Sub-Department has organized a system of
fire protection for areas under management, covering a
system of fire-breaks, fire towers, roads and communica-
tions, and fire-fighting gangs and equipment. This is by
far the largest fire-fighting organization in the State.
The Sub-Department has the valued co-operation of the
Meteorological Service by the latter’s issuance of fire warn-
ings direct by telegraph to Departmental field officers. These
have been of considerable value, and have facilitated
retention of weekend staff to deal with emergencies.
Lighting of Fires, Ist July, to 31 January.
Prohibitions and penalties are set out in the Act re the
lighting of fires between Ist July and 31st January follow-
ing, and failure to remove inflammable material from land
in a fire-danger locality, &c.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
[From notes supplied by Woods and Forests Dept.,
Adelaide.]
Legislation covering protection against bush fires in
South Australia is contained in the Bush Fires Act 1933-42
and regulations thereunder. These provide for a represen-
tative committee to advise the Minister, and lay down con-
ditions governing the lighting of fires in the open.
In general, the Act is based on the principle that each
local governing district should be responsible for its own
protection from fire. Provision is made for variations of
the conditions set down in the Act to meet the requirements
of different districts according to their local natural factors,


such as climate, while provision is also made for the ap-
pointment within each district of Are controllers, whose
duties are to prevent outbreaks of fire and control and
extinguish any fires which may arise. For this purpose,
they are vested with the powers of a chief officer of a fire
brigade under the Fire Brigades Act of 1936, Officers in
charge of Government forests are ex-officio fire controllers,
with supreme power in the control of any fire upon forest
reserves.
No provision is made for the enforcement upon land-
holders of any obligation to provide against external fires
entering their property. It is considered that this is a
matter in which compulsion would not be effective, and
that education is preferable. The general district organiza-
tion against outbreaks of fire and their control by propa-
ganda, the provision of firebreaks and the training of crews
is often the voluntary work of district fire-fighting
associations.
Country post offices co-operate in advising associate
members of outbreaks of fire and in maintaining communi-
cations and relaying messages during fires. Telephone calls
in connexion with outbreaks of fire have a high priority,
and are free of charge.
Duties and Powers of Fire Control Officers.
Regulations require district supervisors of fire control
officers on the occurrence of a fire, with all possible speed,
to —
(a) Cause adequate provision to be made for the trans-
port of all necessary fire-fighting appliances, fire
control officers, and volunteer fire fighters;
( b ) Proceed to the scene of fire and assume control of
all fire-fighting appliances, fire fighters, &c.;
(c) Cause inquiry to be made as to the safety of
residents in the vicinity of the fire;
( d ) Despatch detachments of fire fighters under the
control of a fire control officer for service at
danger points, and points where fire may be
combated most effectively, and take all neces-
sary measures for the protection of life and
property, and for controlling and extinguishing
or preventing the spread of fire;
(e) Should the number of fire fighters present at any
fire be inadequate to prevent such fire from
spreading and causing a dangerous situation
whereby life or valuable property may be
endangered, cause notice of such danger to be
given to the nearest police officer and postmaster.
Fire control officers may, after consulting with the
occupier of land (if present), exercise any of the appropriate
powers of the chief of fire brigades as may be necessary or
expedient; pull down, cut, and remove fences; cause fire-
breaks to be ploughed or cleared by lighting fires or other-
wise; take and use water; employ any person or use the
voluntary services of any person and give directions to any
fire-fighting organization present for the purpose of extin-
guishing or controlling a fire or preventing its spread or
extension.
Bush Fires Act 1933-1942.
Conditions under which fire may be used and prohibitions
and penalties relating to the lighting of fires in specified
periods, &c., are set out in the Bush Fires Act and Regula-
tions, 1933-1942.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Fire Protection Organization.
[From Notes supplied by the Forests Dept., Perth, and
Bush Fires Act 1937-42.]
After the passing of the Bush Fires Act 1937-42, a Rural
Fires Prevention Advisory Committee was formed on the
recommendation of the then Minister for Lands and
approved by the Governor in Executive Council.
The Committee is representative of all interests con-
cerned, and consists of the following:
Under-Secretary for Lands (Chairman).
Deputy Conservator of Forests.
Under-Secretary for Agriculture.
Chief Civil Engineer of the Railways Department.
An officer of the Rural and Industries Bank of Western
Australia.
A representative of the Fire Underwriters Association
and three representatives of the Road Board
Association, The secretary is an officer of the
Lands Department.
Meetings take place about every three months for the
purpose of discussing the administration of the Act and the
advising of local authorities. With the object of creating
uniformity of dates within certain prescribed districts, the
south-western division of the State has been marked into
six zones.
The Committee recommends the dates between which it
shall be unlawful to set fire to the bush in these zones, and
also recommends the protective periods for the various
road districts in the remaining portion of the State which
are outside the zoned areas.
Bush Fire Brigades.
With regard to the establishment, maintenance, and
equipment of bush fire brigades, each local authority acts
under a set of by-laws approved by the Governor in Execu-
tive Council and, as required under the Act, bush fire
brigades must be registered with the Minister for Lands.
The by-laws provide for the appointment of a captain, a
first lieutenant, a second lieutenant, and such additional
lieutenants as may be necessary. A local authority may
appoint fire control officers, notification of which must
appear in the Government Gazette. Fire control officers
have wide powers under the Act, and their duties are to
take charge of all operations for the suppression and control
of fires, and to direct members of the bush fire brigades.
Not all local authorities in the State have shown interest
in the formation of brigades, but 57 of them have an
aggregate of 264 brigades. The war, of course, has inter-
fered largely with the formation of brigades, but now that
hostilities have ceased it is expected that all will be fully
manned, and that many applications for the registration of
new brigades will be received.
Powers and Duties of Bush Fire Control Officers.
Every bush fire control officer appointed under section 23
of the Act is required, subject to directions given by the
local authority, to take any measures which appear
necessary, expedient, and practicable for preventing the
outbreak of bush fires, protecting life and property in the
case of an outbreak, and controlling and extinguishing any
bush fire.


He is empowered in the exercise of his functions, after
consulting with the occupier of the land, if present, to
enter any land or building whether private property or not,
pull down, cut, or remove fences where necessary for the
purpose of extinguishing a bush fire or preventing its exten-
sion, cause firebreaks to be ploughed or cleared on any
land, take and use water (other than domestic or school
supplies), and other fire-extinguishing material from any
source, give directions to any bush fire brigade, employ
any person or use the voluntary services of any person to
assist him, and do any other thing incidental to the exercise
of his powers.
On an outbreak of a bush fire within or adjacent to the
district of the local authority, the bush fire control officers
of the local authority shall with all possible speed inform
an officer or member of every registered bush fire brigade
in the district, proceed to the place with such equipment
as may be available, and take charge of operations for
controlling and extinguishing the fire or preventing its
extension.
Any two or more local authorities may, by agreement,
join in appointing bush fire control officers, and in
remunerating them.
The captain or next senior officer of a bush fire brigade
has powers and authorities of control and direction of a
brigade at any fire and of any persons who voluntary place
their services at his disposal, and may enter private pro-
perty, remove fences, burn inflammable material, take
water, &c., and, when no bush fire control officer of a local
authority is present, shall take charge of all operations.
Where a bush fire control officer of the local authority is
present, the officers and members of the bush fire brigades
act under the directions of the bush fire control officer.
Fire Prevention and Suppression Organization.
The Forests Department has built up a very elaborate
and efficient fire prevention and suppression organization
along the following lines: —
The forest area is under observation by 29 fire towers
built on commanding elevations, and ranging in height
from 25 feet to 190 feet.
These towers are linked in with the Departmental tele-
phone system connecting all towers, divisional and district
headquarters, overseers’ residences, and, in a number of
cases, neighbouring farmers. In all, the Department has
constructed and maintains over 1,200 miles of telephone
line.
Departmental employees are trained into fire gangs, which
are equipped with knapsack tanks and specially designed
heavy fire rakes for small fires and light controlled burning
or patrol.
For larger fires, more elaborate equipment is used, rang-
ing from 15-cwt. utilities carrying specially designed flat
tanks of 30 gallons to 80 gallons capacity, and semi-rotary
or low-down force pumps with one or more lines of i-in.
garden hose, through heavier vehicles equipped with
400-gallon tanks and small 25 to 50 g.p.m. high-speed
rotary or centrifugal pumps to 5-ton trucks with 600-gallon
tanks and four-engined centrifugals delivering up to
100 g.p.m.
Where copious water supply is available, more powerful
trailer pumps and high-powered self-propelled fire engines
delivering up to 600 g.p.m, are stationed with the dual role
of either handling the major fire as a unit or acting as
relay “ pumping stations ” to keep an adequate supply of
water up to the smaller units at the face of the fire.
Bulldozers have been tried out on fire control work at the
face of the fire and have proved themselves to be eminently
suitable for certain types of country, and it is hoped to
make increasing use of this type of equipment in conjunc-
tion with the mobile heavy-duty outfits.
The protected forest area is surrounded and subdivided
by an extensive system of fire breaks of varying width up
to 10 chains, bounded by trafficable fire lines.
These breaks are burned periodically on a three-year
plan basis, necessitating the burning of over 1,500 miles of
break each year.
In certain plantation areas, breaks of from i chain to
4 chains wide are completely ploughed with power equip-
ment.
A considerable amount of educational work has been
carried out to enlist the aid of neighbouring settlers and
the members of the timber industry working in the forest,
and it is pleasing to note that the very good co-operation
resulting therefrom is increasing every year.
Regulations re the Careless Use of Fire.
Prohibitions and penalties relating to the careless use of
fire are contained in the Bush Fires Act 1937-42, and Regu-
lations published in the Government Gazette of 10th March,
1944.
TASMANIA.
Outline of Measures and Organization for Fire
Protection.
(Supplied by the Forestry Department, Hobart.)
The governing legislation is the Bush Fires Act of 1935.
This gives good general powers. It prohibits the lighting
of fires in summer during a proclaimed fire-danger period
and in a fire-protected area without a permit. The summer
period is 15th October to 31st March.
Fire Danger Days.
A fire danger day may be declared during the summer
period if a forest officer has reason to believe, as the result
of a prescribed test, that the relative humidity of the
atmosphere will fall to 40 per cent, or lower.
No fire is permitted to be lighted or maintained in the
open for any purpose whatsoever on a fire danger day in
the area in respect of which the fire danger day is declared.
Similar regulations apply to a fire danger period, which
may be proclaimed by the Governor when he is of the
opinion that the lighting of fires in any locality would
create an excessive risk of damage.
Patrol Officers.
The duties of fire patrols and officers, subject to the direc-
tions of the Conservator of Forests, are to take measures
and precautions deemed necessary or expedient and prac-
ticable for—
(i) The prevention or suppression of outbreaks of fire
on Crown land or any land within 1 mile of
Crown land.


(il) The protection of life and property when any such
outbreak has occurred.
(in) The control and direction of fire-fighting opera-
tions for controlling and extinguishing such
outbreaks.
At any time during the summer period, any fire patrol
or police officer may require the owner or occupier or any
person in charge of any land within 1 mile of Crown land
to —
(i) Refrain from lighting fire on such first-mentioned
land.
(ii) Extinguish any fire thereon.
(iii) Take such steps as such officer may direct to
extinguish such fire or to prevent the same from
spreading or causing injury.
All the principal Crown forest areas are being brought
within fire-protected areas. Such areas include private
property to the extent considered necessary for the protec-
tion of Crown land.
The system of detection includes lookout towers, mobile
patrols, and voluntary lookouts. Fire towers are con-
nected by telephone to rangers’ or guards’ headquarters.
The Postmaster-General’s Department lines are the principal
means of communication.
Equipment and transport depots are established at divi-
sional, range, and guards’ headquarters, and at other
selected centres. Equipment includes portable and trailer
motor pumps. A limited amount of departmental transport
is available. Arrangements are made with local vehicle
owners for the hire of vehicles in an emergency.
Pre-suppression measures comprise systems of fire lines,
tracks, roads, dams, &c. Publicity is given through the
press, radio, posters, and picture theatres during the
summer period, warning people against the careless use
of fire.
The main objective of pre-suppression is to get men
attacking the fire at the earliest possible moment, and to
hold it in check until the suppression crew arrives. As
regular forest employees are few, local residents, sawmill
employees, wood cutters, &c., are enrolled as initial attack
and suppression crews. Communication is arranged with
all these parties. The nearest men are directed to the fire,
and reserves are sent in from further back.
All the above measures are embodied in a fire plan for
each protected area. The fire plan prescribes all protective
measures to be taken, and is revised each year prior to the
fire season.
Remuneration of Fire Fighters.
Bush Fire Regulations, 1941, provide for the remuneration
of persons employed to assist in controlling or extinguish-
ing a fire at the basic daily rate in force at the time in the
district in which they are employed, provided that any
overtime worked in connexion with controlling or extin-
guishing the fire shall be paid at ordinary hourly rates.
Bush Fires Act.
Prohibitions and penalties relating to the lighting of fires
in the summer period, removal of inflammable material, &c.,
are contained in the Bush Fires Act 1935-44 and Bush Fires
Regulations, 1941.




APPENDICES.
I. Grass Fire Hazard Tables for use in Australia (with
instructions).
11. Survey of Houses Affected in Beaumaris Fire (Vic.),
' January 14, 1944.
HI. Estimation of Wind Velocity, Beaufort Scale.
IV. Glossary of Terms Used in Fire Control (U.S.A.).
V. References, Forest Fire Literature.


The amended Danger Scale is as follows: —
Index.
Degree.
Description.
0
Nil
Generally safe from man-caused fires.
Lightning fires may start and fires
already burning may not go dead
out, but will not spread.
1 to 5 ..
Low
Fires spread slowly from slash-piles,
camp-fires, and other large sources
of heat, but are quite easily con-
trolled.
6 to 10
Moderate
Fires often start from matches and
tend to spread more rapidly as they
increase in size. Control is not
usually difficult if action is prompt.
11 to 14
High ..
Fires start readily from matches and
may start from glowing embers or
cigarette butts. Hate of spread is
rapid and control difficult.
15 and 16
Very High
Fires may start from small sparks
they burn fiercely and are dangerous.
Prompt action required.
Most dangerous. “ Blow-up ” day.
16 (With relative
humidity 20 per
cent, or under
and wind 15
m.p.h. or over)
Extreme ..
APPENDIX I.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,
METEOROLOGICAL BRANCH.
Provisional Grass Fire Hazard Tables.
(Revised October, 1947.)
Adapted from Canadian Fire Danger Tables.*
These provisional Tables are adapted from similar tables
developed by Wright and Beall of the Canadian Forest
Service. They have been revised on the basis of experience
gained in the 1946-47 fire season in Victoria.
In Victoria, weekly reports of the “ percentage of green
grass ” are obtained from District Officers of the Country
Fire Authority through the Secretary (Mr. G. G. Sinclair).
It is recommended that a continuous graph be kept
of the daily hazard during the fire season.
Grass Fire Hazard Tables are suitable for use in country
which is in part covered by grass and in part by trees
(Savannah Woodlands) but for dense forest country either
the Hazard Sticks or the Cromer Hygrothermographic
system would be more suitable.
H. N. WARREN,
{Director).
HOW TO USE THE GRASS FIRE HAZARD TABLES.
1. Separate pages are used for relative humidity read-
ings at 9 a.m., noon, and 3 p.m. Be sure that you have the
right page before going further. Then find the section for
the percentage of green grass as last observed, and in the
left-hand column find the proper line for the observed
humidity. In this line, and in the column for the time
since last rain, the Hazard Index is given. Note that rains
of less than -02 inch are never counted in working out the
Grass Fire Hazard Index.
*Ref. Forest Fire Danger Tables (Provisional). Bv H W
Beall. Forest Fire Research Note No. 12, Dominion Fnrpct
Service, Ottawa, Canada, 1946.
For the months of October, November, March, and April,
the Index must be corrected for the season of the year, by
means of the Seasonal Correction Table on page 228. In the
left-hand column, find the Hazard Index given by the first
Table as described above. In the same line, and in the
column for the proper month, is the corrected Hazard
Index.
Example. —Suppose that on the 16th of March the
relative humidity at noon is 37, the grass is 20 per cent,
green, and the last rain of -02 inch or more fell three
days ago. On the page for noon humidity readings,
in Section 11. headed “ Grass 16% to 25% Green”, and
in the column for three days since rain of -02 inch or
more, we find the Hazard Index 12 in the line for
relative humidity 31 to 40 per cent. Turning to the
Seasonal Correction Table, in the line for uncorrected
Hazard Index 12, the corrected Grass Fire Hazard
Index is found to be 11 in the column headed “ 15th-
31st March.”
2. The corrected Hazard Index should be adjusted for
the effect of wind on fire behaviour by means of the Wind
Velocity Correction Table on page 228.
3. If rain fell yesterday, but stopped before 6 p.m., the
column for 1 day Since Rain should be used. If rain fell
last night* or this morning but stopped before 8 o’clock
this morning, use the column for “ Before 8 a.m.”; if there
was rain after 8 o’clock use the column “ 8 a.m. to noon ”
(or “ 8 a.m. to 9 a.m.).” If there is rain (-02 inch or more)
in the afternoon the Grass Fire Hazard may be taken as 0.
4 .To estimate the Percentage of Green Grass. A good
estimate is desired of the average state of the grass
throughout the district. It is recommended that the
observation be made in a fairly representative patch which
has not been grazed, mowed or burned for two or three
years f.
5. Care and judgement should be exercised in making the
estimate. The best method is to select several small plots
about 2 feet square some distance apart, and examine
each plot carefully and take the average. The grass must
be pried apart to find the amount of green or dead
material. To begin with it will be found helpful to break
off a few handfuls of grass at ground level and sort out
the green and dead grass into two separate piles. If the
amounts in both piles are equal, the grass is 50 per cent,
green. If one-quarter of the grass is in the green pile
and three-quarters in the dead pile the grass is 25 per
cent, green and so on. After a little practice the per-
centage of green grass can be estimated accurately
without picking it up.
6. The plots should be in positions which are fairly
representative of the district and not in unduly moist or
exceptionally dry patches.
* Re paragraph 3.—The time of rain may be estimated if not
known.
t This provision will depend on the nature of the country,
e.g. It would apply in uncultivated, little grazed, scrub country
where normally most of the grass from last year is still on the
ground. In grazed or cultivated land the state of the grass
over most of the country should be taken into consideration
and a section should be selected for observations which repre-
sents the general state of the grass in the district.


I. Grass 15 Per Cent, or Less Green.
II.
Grass 16
Per Cent.
to 25 Per Cent. Green.
—
Relative Humidity.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since
Rain of
02 Inch or more.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
0 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since Rain of 02 Inch or More.
8 a.m.
to
9 a.m.
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
9 a.m.
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
0/
Hazard
Index.
Hazard
Index.
20 or less
11
15
16
16
16
16
16
16
8
11
13
15
15
16
18
16
15
14
21 to 30
10
13
15
16
16
16
16
16
7
10
12
13
14
15
L5
31 to 40
9
12
13
14
15
15
15
16
5
8
10
12
• 13
13
14
41 to 50
8
10
11
12
13
13
14
14
4
7
9
10
11
12
12
12
51 to 60
6
8
9
10
11
12
12
12
3
5
7
9
10
10
11
11
61 to 70
4
6
7
8
9
10
10
10
2
4
6
7
8
9
<)
9
71 to 80
2
4
5
6
7
8
8
9
2
3
5
6
7
8
8
8
81 or more
i
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
—
Relative Humidity.
III.
Grass 26
Per Cent, to 35 Per Cent. Green.
IV.
Grass 36
Per Cent
to 45 Per Cent. Green.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.xn. Yesterday.
Days since
Rain of
02 Inch or more.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since Rain of -02 Inch or More
8 a.m.
to
9 a.m.
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
9 a.m.
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
0/
/o
Hazard
Index.
Hazard Index.
20 or less
6
9
10
12
13
13
15
15
5
7
8
10
11
11
ii
11
21 to 30
5
8
9
11
12
12
13
13
4
6
7
9
10
10
ii
11
31 to 40
4
7
8
10
11
11
12
12
4
5
7
9
9
10
10
10
41 to 50
3
6
7
9
10
10
11
11
3
5
6
8
9
9
10
10
51 to 60
2
4
6
8
9
9
10
10
2
4
6
8
8
9
9
9
61 to 70
2
3
5
7
8
8
9
9
2
3
5
7
8
8
8
9
71 to 80
1
3
5
6
7
8
8
8
1
3
5
6
7
8
8
8
81 or more
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
Relative Humidity.
V.
Grass 46
Per Cent, to 55 Per Cent. Green.
VI. Grass
56 Per Cent, or More Green.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since
Rain of
02 Inch or more.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since Rain of -02 Inch or More.
8 a.m.
to
9 a.m.
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
9 a.m.
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
0/
Hazard
Index.
Hazard Index.
20 or less
4
5
7
8
9
9
10
10
3
4
6
8
8
8
9
9
21 to 30
3
5
6
8
9
9
9
9
2
4
6
7
8
8
8
9
31 to 40
3
4
6
8
8
9
9
9
2
3
6
7
8
8
8
8
41 to 50
2
4
6
8
8
8
9
9
2
3
5
7
8
8
8
8
51 to 60
2
4
6
7
8
8
8
8
2
3
5
7
8
8
8
8
61 to 70
1
3
5
7
8
8
8
8
1
3
5
7
8
8
8
8
71 to 80
1
3
5
6
7
8
8
8
1
3
5
6
7
8
8
8
81 or more
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
GRASS FIRE HAZARD TABLE.
For Use with 9 a.m. Relative Humidity Readings.
C.8016/47.—15


Relative Humidity.
I. Grass
15 Ber Cent, or Less Green.
II.
Irass 16
Per Cent.
to 25 Per Cent. Green.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Bays since
Rain of •
02 Inch or more.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Bays since Rain of '02 Inch or More.
8 a.m
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
2.
4.
5.
0
or
More.
*
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
I.
2.
4.
5.
0
or
More.
%
Hazarc
Index.
‘
Hazard Index.
/ o
20 or less
10
14
16
16
16
16
16
16
8
11
13
14
15
15
15
15
21 to 30
8
12
14
15
15
16
16
16
7
10
12
13
13
13
14
14
31 to 40
6
ID
12
13
14
14
14
14
5
8
10
11
12
12
12
12
41 to 50
4
8
10
11
12
12
12
12
4
6
8
10
10
10
11
11
51 to 60
3
6
7
9
10
10
10
10
3
5
7
8
9
9
9
9
61 to 70
2
4
5
7
8
8
8
8
2
4
5
7
7
8
8
8
71 to 80
1
3
4
6
6
6
6
6
i
3
4
5
6
6
6
6
81 to more
0
2
4
5
5
6
6
6
0
2
3
5
5
6
6
6
-Relative Humidity.
111.
Grass 26 Per Cent, to 35 Per Cent. Green.
IV.
Grass 36
Per Cent, to 45 Per Cent. Green.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since
ltain of •
02 Inch or more.
■02 Inch or
More Bain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since Bain of -02 Inch or More. .
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
0/
1
Hazard Index.
Hazard
Index.
20 or less
6
9
10
12
12
12
13
13
5
7
S
9
10
11
ii
11
21 to 30
5
8
9
10
11
12
12
12
4
6
7
9
9
10
10
10
31 to 40
4
7
8
9
10
10
11
11
4
5
7
8
8
9
9
9
41 to 50
3
6
7
8
9
9
9
10
3
6
7
8
8
8
8
51 to 60
2
4
6
7
8
8
8
8
2
4
5
6
7
7
7
8
61 to 70
2
3
5
6
7
7
7
7
2
3
5
6
6
7
7
7
71 to 80
1
3
4
5
6
6
6
6
1
3
4
5
6
6
6
G
81 or more
0
2
3
5
5
6
6
6
0
2
3
5
5
6
6
6
V.
Grass 46
Ber Cent.
to 55 Per Cent. Green.
VI. Grass 56 Per Cent, or More Green.
Relative Humidity.
■Oil Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Bays since
Rain of
02 Inch or more.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Bays since Rain of 02 Inch or More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
0/
/o
20 or less
21 to 30
31 to 40
41 to 50
51 to 60
61 to 70
71 to 80
81 or more
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
0
5
5
4
4
4
3
3
2
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
Hazard
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
5
Index.
9
8
7
7
6
6
6
5
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
3
2
2
2
2
1
1
0
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
3
Haza
7
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
rd Indei
7
7
6
6
6
6
6
5
8
7
7
6
6
6
6
5
8
7
7
6
6
6
6
5
8
7
7
6
6
6
6
5
GRASS FIRE HAZARD TABLE.
For Use with Noon Relative Humidity Readings.
Noon.


I. Grass
15 Per Cent, or Less Green.
II.
Grass 16
Per Cent.
to 25 Per Cent. Green.
Relative Humidity.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since
Rain of
02 Inch or more.
•02 Inch or
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since Rain of -02 Inch or More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
0/
/o
20 or less
21 to 30
31 to 40
41 to 50
51 to 60
61 to 70
71 or more
10
8
6
4
2
1
0
14
12
9
7
4
3
2
16
13
11
9
6
4
3
Hazard
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
Index.
16
15
13
11
8
6
5
16
15
13
11
9
6
5
16
15
14
11
9
6
5
16
16
14
11
9
6
5
8
6
5
3
2
1
0
11
9
8
6
4
3
2
13
11
10
8
6
4
3
Haza
14
12
11
9
7
5
4
rd Inde.'
14
13
11
10
8
6
5
t.
15
13
11
10
8
6
5
15
13
12
10
8.
6
5
15
14
12
10
8
6
5
III.
Grass
26 Per Cent, to 35 Per Cent. Green.
IV.
Grass 30 Per Cent, to 45 Per Cent. Green.
•02 Inch or
•02 Inch or
Relative Humidity.
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Bays since
Rain of
02 Inch or more.
More Rain since
6 p.m. Yesterday.
Days since Rain of -02 Inch or More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
G
or
More.
0/
/o
Hazard Index.
Hazard
Index.
—
—
20 or less
21 to 30
31 to 40
41 to 50
6
9
10
11
12
12
13
13
5
7
8
9
10
10
11
11
5
8
9
10
11
11
12
12
4
6
7
8
9
10
10
10
4
3
6
5
8
7
9
8
10
8
10
9
10
9
10
9
3
3
5
4
7
6
8
7
8
7
8
8
9
8
9
8
7
0
51 to 60
61 to 70 .
71 or more
2
1
4
3
5
4
7
5
7
6
8
6
8
6
8
6
2
1
4
3
5
4
6
5
7
6
7
6
7
6
0
2
3
4
5
5
5
5
0
1
3
4
5
5
5
5
V.
Grass 46
Per Cent.
to 55 Per Cent. Green.
VI. Grass 56 Per Cent, or More Green
•02
Inch or
•02 Inch or
Relative Humidity.
More Rain since
6 pm. Yesterday.
Days since
Rain of
02 Inch or more.
More Rain since
6 p.m Yesterday.
flays since Rain of -02 Inch
or More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
8 a.m.
to
Noon
Before
8 a.m.
l.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6
or
More.
0/
/o
20 or less
21 to 30
31 to 40
41 to 50
51 to 60
61 to 70 ’ ]
'll or more
1
Hazard Index.
Hazard Index.
4
5
6
8
8
9
9
9
3
4
5
7
7
8
8
8
3
5
6
7
8
8
8
8
2
4
5
6
7
7
7
7
3
2
2
4
4
3
5
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
6
7
7
6
7
?
7
?
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
6
5
5
6
6
6
7
6
6
7
6
6
7
6
g
1
0
3
1
4
3
5
4
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
1
0
3
1
4
3
5
4
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
GRASS FIRE HAZARD TABLE.
For Use with 3 p.m. Relative Humidity Readings.
C.8016/47.—.JQ


Wind Velocity Correction
to the Fire Danger Index.
Wind Velocity (Miles per hour).
l
3
5
7
9
ll
14
18
23
28
35
0
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
or
2.
4.
6.
8.
10.
13.
17.
22.
27.
34.
more
Index.
Beaufort Number.
0.
1.
1.
2.
2.
3.
3.
4.
5.
6.
6.
7.
Cc
rreot
ed D
angei
Ind
ex.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
4
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
6
5
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
7
7
6
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
8
9
7
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
9
10
8
6
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
9
9
10
11
9
7
7
8
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
11
12
10
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
10
11
11
12
13
11
9
9
10
10
10
11
11
11
12
13
14
14
12
10
10
11
11
11
12
12
12
13
14
15
15
13
11
11
11
12
12
13
13
13
14
15
15
16
14
11
12
12
12
13
13
14
14
15
15
16
16
15
12
12
13
13
14
14
14
15
16
16
16
16
16
13
13
14
14
15
15
15
16
16
16
16
16
Seasonal Correction
to the Grass Fire Hazard Index.
Uncorrected Hazard Index.
October.
November.
15th-31st
March.
April.
Corrected Hazard Index.
0 ..
0
0
o
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
1
1
0
3 ..
1
2
2
1
4
2
3
3
2
5
3
4
4
3
6
4
5
5
4
7
5
6
6
5
8
6
7
7
6
9 ..
7
8
8
7
10 ..
8
9
9
8
11
9
10
10
9
12
10
11
11
10
13
11
12
12
11
14
12
13
13
12
15
13
14
14
13
16
14
15
15
14
How to Use the Wind Velocity Correction Table.
l. In the left-hand column, headed “ Uncorrected Danger
Index ”, find the Danger Index obtained from the Fire
Danger Table. In the same line, and in the column for the
observed wind velocity, is the Danger Index corrected for
wind conditions.
Example.— The Hazard Index, from the Grass Fire
Hazard Table is 12, and the wind velocity is 19 miles per
hour (Force 5* Beaufort Scale). Opposite 12 in the left-
hand column, under the heading for winds of 18 to 22
m. is the corrected Danger Index, 13.
* Approximate. For Specifications of Beaufort Scale see
Appendix 111.
Note. — This table applies to Victoria, South Australia,
Southern New South Wales, and Southern areas of Western
Australia.
In Northern New South Wales fires are most frequent
from October to December, and in Queensland from Sep-
tember to November. In these cases it is recommended
that the seasonal corrections be applied only to the two
months preceding the period of greatest frequency of fires,
e.g., the October column above, will apply to July in
Queensland and August in Northern New South Wales.
In Tasmania the months of greatest fire frequency are
January and February and a similar adjustment should be
made in the period of application of the seasonal correc-
tion Table, i.e., October column applies to November in
Tasmania, November to December and the column 15th-
31st March to the whole of March.


Appendix II.
A SURVEY OF HOUSES AFFECTED IN THE BEAUMARIS FIRE, JANUARY 14, 1944.
(This was undertaken by the Division of Forest Products,
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, and the
report was printed in the Journal of the Council, Vol. 18,
No. 1, February, 1945.) The following are extracts:
Introduction.
On January 14, 1944, one of the the worst conflagrations in
the history of the metropolitan area of Melbourne swept
through the bayside resort of Beaumaris. Beaumaris is"
situated on the eastern coast of Port Phillip Bay, 12 miles
from Melbourne; some twenty years ago it featured in a
closer settlement scheme, and an electric tramway service
was extended from Black Rock. The scheme was aban-
doned, and the tramway system, after operating for a
period of five years from 1926 to 1931, was discontinued
and subsequently dismantled. Since that date there have
been no improvements made in the area which, although
subdivided in detail, has been allowed to return to its
natural state. The dwellings in the area are of two main
types—
(i) Small four- or five-room houses of varying con-
struction, built as seaside dwellings either at the
time of the settlement scheme or since; because
of the housing shortage most of them are now
permanently occupied.
(ii) Large homes constructed either by the early
settlers or, in recent years, by residents who
are not dependent on public transport.
The fire destroyed 58 houses and damaged eight others,
and advantage was taken of the opportunity to obtain
general data on the fire hazard in semi-rural areas, and to
determine the influence of the type and details of construc-
tion on the resistance of houses to external fire hazards.
Approximately 100 houses were inspected during the
week following the fire and from these, seventeen were
selected as being representative of the general damage and
conditions. A detailed study of these particular houses was
then made.
Location of the Fire.
The fire occurred within an area of some 1,500 acres,
bounded on the north by Bay-road, Cheltenham, the west
by Reserve-road, the south by the sea, and on the east by
Charman-road, Mentone and Cheltenham.
The main fire area south of Balcombe-road was mainly
dense scrub land covered by a heavy growth of tea-tree
(Leptospermum laevigatum and L. coriaceum mixed) with
scattered groups of manna gum (Eucalyptus viminalis ) and
coast acacia (Acacia sophorae ), and with groups of white
sallow acacia (Acacia floribunda ) further back from the
coast; throughout this area were scattered clearings of
from 1 to 5 acres densely covered with dry grass and
bracken (Pteridium aquilinum), often to a height of 3 feet;
in the lower swamp areas were several acres of swamp
tea-tree (Melaleuca squarrosa ). The houses destroyed and
damaged extended throughout this area, but were mainly
situated within f mile of the sea.
In attempting to retain the locality in its natural state,
the majority of the residents had allowed their properties
to become thickly wooded with native trees and shrubs,
augmenting the natural growth in many cases with exotic
vegetation, thus forming a dense thicket to within 10 to
20 feet of their dwellings, and in many cases in contact
with them.
Conclusions.
The survey showed that, in a fire of the type that swept
Beaumaris, the chances of a house surviving are deter-
mined more by the nature of the surroundings and the
details of construction than by the materials used in the
walls. With two exceptions, all the really destructive fires
started inside the houses, i.e., in the roof space, in rooms,
or under the floors, the immediate cause of ignition in such
cases being the entrance of flame, sparks, and burning
debris through openings such as ventilators, eaves, and
windows. An air-tight house would appear to have much
greater resistance to fire than one in which free circulation
of air is encouraged. Of course, an air-tight house, even
if it could be built, would be most undesirable for other
reasons, but it is necessary in areas such as Beaumaris,
where a serious fire hazard exists, to make a compromise
between fire resistance and ventilation, by completely boxing
the eaves, sealing roofs, &c.
In the two exceptions referred to previously, the houses
appeared to ignite externally due to the high temperature
of the surrounding scrub fires. However, these observa-
tions may not be correct, as under conditions such as
existed at the time, observers’ reports are often unreliable,
and it is quite possible that these houses also caught alight
because of the entrance of flame and sparks.
Experience at Beaumaris showed that the ill effects of
openings can be considerably mitigated by covering them
with J-in. mesh wire netting, or preferably with fly-wire.
The wire netting will prevent the entrance of burning
debris, and fly-wire is effective in stopping sparks. These
coverings, in a number of cases, saved houses from destruc-
tion. Similarly, fly-wire window screens and doors are of
great assistance in preventing the entrance of sparks in
the event of windows or doors being accidentally left open
during the fire.
Badly-fitting Marseilles pattern tile roofs appear to be a
menace, as they provide innumerable openings through
which sparks may enter. Some form of sheet roofing, e.g.,
corrugated iron, fibro-cement, or close-fitting composition
roofing, appears to be much more satisfactory.
Corrugated roofing should be sealed at the eaves, ridge,
hips, and valleys by some such composition as mortar or
fibro-cement.
These simple precautions greatly increase the resis-
tance of a house to fire, with little, if any, increase
in cost, and they are likely to be far more effective than
such methods of protection as the use of non-combustible
materials for walls. The impression gained from a glance
at a completely-gutted brick house in which the walls are
still standing is that the damage is much less serious than
in the case of a timber-frame house, which is usually burnt
to the ground. However, a little consideration will show
that the cost of the walls of a timber house is a compara-
tively small proportion of the total cost, and the cost of
reconditioning a burnt-out brick house is likely to exceed
the cost of rebuilding a timber-frame house.


Specification of Beaufort Scale.
Beaufort
Scale.
Explanatory Titles.
Eor Coast Use.
Eor Use on Land.
Limits of
Speed.
Pressure in
lbs. per Foot.
0
Calm
Calm
Calm ; smoke rises vertically
Less than 1
0
1
Light air ..
Fishing smack just has steerage way
Direction of wind shown by smoke drift,
but not by wind vanes
1- 3
0-01
2
Light breeze
Wind fills the sails of smacks which
then move at about 1-2 miles per
Wind felt on face; leaves rustle;
ordinary vane moved by wind
4- 7
0-08
3
Gentle breeze
Smacks begin to careen and travel
about 3-4 miles per hour
Leaves and small twigs in constant
motion ; wind extends light flag
8-12
0-28
4
Moderate breeze
Good working breeze ; smacks carry
all canvas with good list
Kaises dust and loose paper ; small
branches are moved.
13-18
0-67
5
Fresh breeze
Smacks shorten sail
Small trees in leaf begin to sway;
wavelets form on inland waters
19-24
1-31
6
Strong breeze
Smacks have double reef in main sail.
Large branches in motion ; whistling
heard in telegraph wires ; umbrellas
used with difficulty
25-31
2-3
7
High wind
Smacks remain in harbour and those
at sea lie-to
Whole trees in motion ; inconvenience
felt when walking against wind
32-38
3-6
8
Gale
All smacks make for harbour, if near
Breaks twigs off trees; generally
39-46
5-4
9
Strong gale
impedes progress
Slight structure damage occurs (chim-
ney pots and slates removed)
47-54
7-7
10
Whole gale
Seldom experienced inland; trees
uprooted, considerable structural
damage occurs
55-63
10-5
11
Storm
Very rarely experienced ; accompanied
64-75
14-0
12
Hurricane ..
"
by widespread damage
Above 75
Above 17*0
Recommendations.
The adoption of the following recommendations in areas
where there is a fire hazard would do much to reduce the
risk:
1. In timber houses, the walls below floor level should
be close-boarded, ventilation being provided by
woven wire vents.
2. All vents should be of the woven wire type, or else
covered by a fine mesh.
3. Large ventilators in gable ends should be eliminated
and replaced by a number of scattered small
ventilators with fine-mesh openings.
4. Eaves should preferably be completely boxed, but if
left open should be covered by fine-mesh wire
netting.
5. Badly-fitting Marseilles pattern tiles are a source of
danger.
6. The space under the corrugations of corrugated
roofing should be closed at the eaves, ridges, hips,
and valleys.
7. Fly-wire window-screens and doors are beneficial.
8. Trees and schrubs should be kept clear of the walls.
9. Stacks of fuel should be well clear of the walls, or
stored in properly-constructed sheds.
Appendix III.
COMMONWEALTH METEOROLOGY.
ESTIMATION OF WIND VELOCITY.
Appendix IV.
TERMS USED IN FIRE CONTROL.
(Extracted from “ Art and Science of Protecting
The following definitions refer more particularly to
practice in the United States of America.
It is desirable to avoid confusion in the use of terms, and
the discussion under “ Hazard ” is of particular interest.
The glossary also provides a number of “ pointers ” to
details of interest in the theory and practice of fire control
in the United States,
Forest Lands and Fire ”, by Geo. H. Schroder.)
Atmometer. —An instrument for measuring rate of
evaporation by means of an exposed moist surface.
Measurements of this evaporation show fluctuations in the
evaporating power of the atmosphere.
Crown Fire. —A fire which runs in the tops of or which
burns all or a large part of the upper branches and foliage
of trees.


Danger, Fire, —A general term expressing sum total of
the fire factors —risk, hazard inflammability, liability, con-
trollability, and safety—which determine whether fires will
start, will spread, do damage, and whether and to what
extent they can be controlled. (See discussion under
“ Hazard ”.)
Duff. —In general, the decomposed and partly-decomposed
vegetable matter making up part of the forest floor. More
technically, this matter is litter, duff, or humus. This litter
is the loose debris of dead sticks, branches, and twigs lying
on top of the duff. The duff is the top layer of only partly-
decomposed dead vegetable material forming a mat or
carpet covering the ground. In this layer the unit struc-
tures have not decayed to the stage in which their original
form cannot be recognized. The humus is the lower layer
of thoroughly decomposed organic material found between
the mineral soil and the duff. Decomposition has destroyed
the original form of the unit structure so that they can no
longer be recognized in this layer. (See “ Forest Floor ”.)
Duff Hygrometer. —An instrument for measuring the
degree of moisture of the duff.
Economic Theory. —A theory of forest-fire control which
postulates that the object of control is to keep total cost
(prevention plus pre-suppression plus suppression plus
damage) to a minimum. Often abbreviated as
P -|- P -f S -f D.
Firebreak. —A natural or constructed barrier made before
a fire occurs, designed to stop or check fires that may
occur, or to be used as a line from which to work.
Fire Control. —The entire group of activities, including
prevention, pre-suppression, and suppression, aiming to
reduce the number of fires, their spread, and to confine the
area burned to an accepted reasonable minimum at lowest
possible cost. (See “ Prevention ”, “ Pre-suppression ”.)
Fire Observatory. —A small building on or separate from
a tower, constructed on a lookout peak or point, to be
occupied by a lookout man for purposes of detection and
location of fires, but not for living quarters. (Not to be
confused with “ lookout house ”.)
Fire Weather Warning. —Prediction of weather which
can be expected to increase the danger of fire starting and
spreading.
Forest Floor. —The forest material on top of the mineral
soil, composed of vegetable matter that is more or less
decomposed. It includes fallen leaves, dead limbs, &c.
(See “ Duff ”.)
Forest Protection. —The activities connected with the
detection, prevention, control, or suppression of damage to
forests from fire, insects, disease, trespass, and other harm-
producing agencies.
Hazard. The relative amount, class, character, and con-
dition of the fuels which constitute a part of the fire danger
in any area. ( Hazard concerns fuels only. Inflammability
is the susceptibility of the fuels to ignition. Risk refers
only to the agencies which cause fires. Danger is the sum
of them all, plus damage and other factors.) The above
distinctions between hazard and risk are in more or less
common usage in literature regarding forest fires, and as so
used these terms have that limited meaning which is
required in scientific phraseology. For this reason the use
of these words, as above defined, is preferable with reference
to forest protection. As used by fire insurance companies
and by the general public, there is no distinction consistently
made between hazard and risk.
Head of Fire. —Leeward or uphill side; side which is
advancing fastest.
Light Burning.- —A method supposed to reduce the volume
of inflammable material, whereby fires are deliberately set
to run through forests at a time of year when inflammability
is low and likelihood of damage is at a minimum and
designed to lessen the danger of damage when fires will
run more freely.
Minimum-damage Theory. —A theory of forest-fire control,
which assumes or asserts that the object of control is to
keep fire damage to a minimum.
Preparedness. —Completeness and perfection of work
done to prevent fires from starting, and to facilitate their
suppression when they do occur. The combined prevention
and pre-suppression activities.
Pre-suppression. —The effort in time and money incidental
to the organization, instruction, management, maintenance,
and equipment designed to provide for effective work by
guards, co-operators, and other agencies depended upon for
fire suppression. Includes all fire-control activities between
prevention and actual fire suppression. (See “ Fire Con-
trol,” “Prevention”, “Suppression”, “Preparedness”.)
Prevention, Fire. —The attempt to reduce the number of
fires through law enforcement, education, danger reduction,
&c. Not a part of “ pre-suppression ”. (See “ Fire Con-
trol ”, “ Pre-suppression ”, “ Preparedness ”.)
Risk.—' The relative chance or probability of fire starting,
determined by the presence or absence of causative agencies.
A part of the fire danger on any area. (See discussion
under “ Hazard ”.)
Sectors of a Fire. —On a large fire the logical or natural
division of a fire, each of which is handled as a unit for
suppression purposes.
Slash. —Branches, bark, tops, chunks, cull logs, uprooted
stumps, and broken or uprooted trees left on the ground
after logging; also large accumulation of debris after wind
or fire. (From “ Forestry Terminology ”, Soc. American
Foresters, Washington, 1944.)


Research and Measurements.
Source of
Reference.
Research and Measurements —continued.
Source of
Reference.
“ Forest Fire Weather Research in W.A.”—
C.M.B.
“ The Practical Value of Forest Fire Hazard
C.M.B.
W. R. Wallace. Australian Forestry, Vol.
Records and Forecasts.”—J. G. Wright.
L, No. 1
Canada Forest Service, 1940
“ Forest Fire Weather.”—W. R. Wallace and
( C.M.B.
“ Fire Weather Research Progress Report.”—
C.M.B.
H. L. Gloe. Australian Forestry, Vol. III.,
No. 1
} W.F.D.
J. M. Fielding. Forestry Bureau, Canberra,
(39/156)
30th May, 1941
“ Calculated Estimate of Fire Weather.” —
f W.F.D.
\ F.D., Tas.
“ The Application of Meteorology to Forest
C.M.B.
T. N. Stoate and J. H. Harding. Aus-
tralian Forestry, Vol. V., No. 1
Fire Protection.”—J. G. Wright and H. W.
Beall. Canada. Imperial Forestry Bureau,
“ Forest Fire Hazard Indicator Equipment.”—
C.F.B.
Oxford. Technical Communication No. 4,
J. L. Somerville. Australian Newsprint
1945
Mills Pty. Ltd., 1939
“ Measuring Fire Weather and Forest In-
flammability.’^—H. T. Gisborne. United
C.M.B.
“ Forest Fire Danger Tables.”-—H. W. Beall.
Canada, 1946. Forest Fire Research Note
No. 12
C.M.B.
States Department of Agriculture, Circular
398, July, 1936
“ The Application of Meteorology to Forest
C.M.B.
“ Research in Forest Protection.”—J. G.
C.M.B.
Fire Protection.”—J. G. Wright and H. W.
Wright. Canada Forest Service 1935
Beall. Canada. Reviewed by W. R.
Wallace. Australian Forester, Vol. IX.,
“ Forest Fire Hazard Research.”—J. G. Wright.
f W.F.D.
No. 2, 1945
Dept. Interior, Canada, 1932
\ C.F.B.
[ F.D., Tas.
“ Measurement and Interpretation of Forest
C.F.B.
“ Forest Fire Hazard Tables for Mixed Red
and White Pine Forests.”- —-J. G. Wright.
Dept, of Interior, Canada, 1933
( W.F.D.
1 F.D., Tas.
Fire Weather in W. Adirnndacks.”-—P.
F.D., Tas.
Stickel. New York State College of
Forestry. Technical publication No. 34,
1931
“ The Foresters Dependence on the Science of
C.M.B.
“ Measuring Forest Fire Danger in N. Idaho.”
f C.F.B.
Meteorology.”—E. I. Kotok. Bulletin of
American Meteorological Society, Decern-
—H. Gisborne. United States Agricultural J
F.D., Tas.
ber, 1940, Vol. 21, No. 10
Department. Miscellaneous publication No. 1
C.S.l.R.
29, 1928
W.F.D.
“ Fire Weather and Fire Climate.” —U. S,
C.M.B.
C.F.B.
Monthly Weather Review, Vol. 58, No. 9,
“ Weather and Forest Fires.” —Chapman. U.S.
September, 1930, p. 370.
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927
“ The Effect of Non-aqueous Volatile Matter
C.M.B.
“ Weather and Fire Research.”—S. B. Show.
C.F.B.
in Forest Fire Fuels upon Apparent
U.S. Journal of Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927
Moisture Contents Obtained by Oven
Drying.”—J. G. Wright and H. W. Beall.
Canada, 1938. Forest Fire Research Note
“ Forest Fire Hazard as Affected by Weather
Conditions, Forest Types and Density of
C.F.B.
No. 4
Cover.”—J. A. Mitchell. Wisconsin Uni-
verity, Agric. Experimental Station.
“ Preliminary Improved Forest Fire Hazard
C.M.B.
Research Bulletin No. 91, 1929
Tables for Eastern Canada.”—J. G. Wright
F.D., Tas.
and H. W. Beall. Canada, 1940. Forest
“ The Influence of Weather on the Inflamma-
Fire Research Note No. 5
bility of Forest Fire Fuels.”—J. G. Wright.
“ Grass Fire Hazard Tables for Eastern
1929, Canada
C.M.B.
Canada.” —J. G. Wright and H. W. Beall.
“ Gauging Fire Weather in the Woods.”—W. G
F.D., Tas.
Canada, 1938. Forest Fire Research Note
Morris. Forestry Abstracts, p. 125, Vol. 4,
No. 6
No. 2, 1942. W. Coast Lumberman. 69 (6),
“ Preliminary Fire Hazard Studies on Cut-over
C.M.B.
1942 (18, 20, 67)
Lands of Eastern Canada.”—B. S. Wright.
Canada, 1939. Forest Fire Research Note
No. 7
“ Tables for estimating the Tracer Index from
early afternoon readings. Table for
F.D., Tas.
Diurnal Hazard Variation. List of Forest
“ Preliminary Forest Fire Danger Tables and
C.M.B.
Types of Eastern Canada, showing the Fire
Fire Control Administration Plans for the
Hazard Table to be used for each type.”—
New Brunswick Limits of the Bathurst
H. W. Beall. Forestry Abstracts, p. 70,
Power and Paper Company Limited.”—
Vol. 2, No. 1, 1940. Supp. to For. Fire
H. W. Beall. Canada, 1939. Forest Fire
Res. Note 5, 1939, p. 20
Research Note No. 8
“ An Investigation of the Reliability of Eastern
Forest Fire Hazard Tables in Manitoba and
Saskatchewan.”—H. W. Beall. Canada,
1939. Forest Fire Research Note No. 9
“ Weather preceding Forest Fires in New
Hampshire.” — L. Lansing. Forestry
Abstracts, p. 72, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1940.
Bulletin American Meteorological Society
Vol. 20, No. 1, 1939 (10-26)
C.M.B.
C.M.B.
F.D., Tas.
Appendix V.
FOREST FIRE REFERENCES
Source of Reference.
C.M.B. . . . . Commonwealth Meteorological Bureau.
C.F.B. . . . . Canberra Forestry Bureau.
C.S.I.R. . . . . Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.
F.D., Tas. . . . . Forestry Department, Tasmania.
W.F.D. . . . . Woods and Forests Department, South Australia.


Research and Measurements —continued.
Source of
Reference.
General —continued.
Source of
Reference.
“ Forecasting Weather and Forest Fire Hazard
from Local Observations (Rev.).”—H. W.
Beall. Forestry Abstracts, p. 243, Vol. 2,
No. 3, 1940. For. Fire Res. Note No. 10,
1940
C.M.B.
C.F.B.
F.D., Tas.
“ Differences in Fire Danger with Altitude,
Aspect, and Time of Day.”—G. L. Hayes
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 40, No. 4, p. 318,
April, 1942
C.F.B.
F.D., Tas.
“ Fire Danger Meter for the Rocky Mountain
Region.”—A. A. Brown and W. S. Davis.
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 37, 1939 (552-558)
C.S.I.R.
“ Fire Weather on Clear Cut, Partly Cut, and
Virgin Timber Areas at West Oregon.” —
William G. Morris. The Timberman, Vol.
42, No. 10, p. 20, 1941
f C.F.B.
( F.D., Tas.
[ C.S.I.R.
“ Principles of Measuring Forest Fire Danger.”
—H. T. Gisborne. Journal of Forestry, Vol.
34, 1936 (786-793)
C.S.I.R.
“Solar Radiation and Forest Fire Hazard.” —
P. Stickel. United States Agriculture De-
C.F.B.
partment. Technical Note No. 6, 1930
“Wood Cylinder Method of Measuring Forest
C.S.I.R.
“ Weather Conditions and Forest Fires in
California.”—S. B. Show and I. Kotok.
C.F.B.
Inflammability.”—H. T. Gisborne. Journal
of Forestry, Vol. 31, 1933 (673-679)
United States Agriculture Department.
W.F.D.
“ Measurement and Interpretation of Forest
C.S.I.R.
Department Circular No. 354
Fire Weather in the Western Adirondacks.”
“ Beaufort Scale of Wind Force as Adapted for
C.F.B.
W.F.D.
—P. W. Stickel. Review. New York State
Use of Forest Areas in Northern Rockies.”
College of Forestry, Syracuse, N.Y.
—Geo. M. Jamison. Reprint. Journal of
Technical Bulletin 34
Agricultural Research, Vol. 49, No. 1, 1931
“ Objectives of Forest Fire Weather Research.”
—H. T. Gisborne. Journal of Forestry, Vol.
C.S.I.R.
“ Riskerna for skogsbrand och deras beroende
av vader och klimat. (Fire hazard in
F.D., Tas.
25, 1927 (452-456)
the forest as influenced by weather
“Weather and Fire Research.”—S. B. Show.
C.S.I.R.
and climate).”—A. Angstrom. Forestry
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927 (473-477)
Abstracts, p. 138, Vol. 5, No. 3, 1944.
“ Importance of Duff Moisture Content in the
C.S.I.R.
Svenska Skogsv-Foren. Tidskr. 40, 1942
(323-43)
Forest Fire Problem.”—H. T. Gisborne.
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 21, 1923 (807-809)
“Forest Fire Weather Observations, 1939-
F.D., Tas.
" A Tentative Fire Danger Meter for Long
Leaf—Slash Pine Type.”—C. Bickford and
W.F.D.
1940.”—W. E. Brown. Fox Forest Notes,
No. 24, 1941, p. 1. Forestry Abstracts, p.
72, Vol. 3, No. 1, 1941
D. Bruce. Southern Forest Experimental
Station, U.S.A., 1939
“Fire Weather Forecasts Needed by Fire
C.F.B.
“ How the Wind Blows in the Forest of
Northern Idaho.”—H. T. Gisborne. N.
Rocky Mt. Forest and Range Exp. Station,
Missoula, Montana, 1941, p. 12. Forestry
Abstracts, p. 242, Vol. 3, 1942
F.D., Tas.
Control Executives.” — Hendley. U.S.
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927
“ Weather and Fires from Standpoint of
C.F.B.
“ Sun Spots and Forest Fires in New Bruns-
F.D., Tas.
Meteorologist.”—Burrill. U.S. Journal of
wick.”—J. G. Wright. Forestry Chronicle
Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927
16, 1940 (233-8). Forestry Abstracts, p.
323, Vol. 2, No. 3, 1941
General.
“ De Samenhang Tusschen het Optreden van
F.D., Tas.
Effect of Certain Chemical Attributes of
C.F.B.
Bosch en Heidebranden en meteorologische
Vegetation on Forest Inflammability.”—
factoren in Nederland. (The relation be-
Leon W. Richards. Reprint. Journal of
tween the occurrence of forest and heath
Agricultural Research, Vol. 60, No. 12, 1940
fires and meteorological factors in
Meteorological Conditions Preceding
C.M.B.
Holland).”—A. Stoffels. Ned. Boschb.
Thunderstorms in the National Forests.”
Tijschr. 13, 1940 (89-95). Forestry
W. R. Stevens, United States Monthly
Abstracts, p. 70, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1940
Weather Review, Vol. 62, October, 1934
“ Sun, Wind, and Fuel Moisture.”—G. M.
F.D., Tas.
Meteorological Conditions Preceding
Thunderstorms in the National Forests.”
C.M.B.
Byram. Journal of Forestry 38, 1940 (639-
40)
—-W. R. Stevens. United States Monthly
“ Statistical Analysis of Fire Weather Station
C.S.I.R.
Weather Review, Vol. 63, June, 1935
Distribution.”—W. G. Morris. Journal of
Newfoundland Forest Fire of August,
C.M.B.
Forestry 38, 1940 (318-321)
1935.” Earl B. Shaw. United States
“ Progress in Fire Weather Service during the
Last Decade.”—L. T. Pierce. Journal of
C.S.I.R.
Monthly Weather Review, Vol. 64, May,
1936
Forestry 36, 1938 (916-918)
‘ Pressure Distribution in Relation to Thunder-
C.M.B.
“Air Temperature in Relation to Fire Cost
C.S.I.R.
storm Occurrence on Oregon and Washing-
ton National Forests.”—R. A. Ward.
and Damage.”—L. G. Gray. Journal of
Forestry No. 34, 1936 (779-785)
United States Monthly Weather Review,
Vol. 64, February, 1936
“ Weather and Forest Fire Hazards, with
Special Reference to the White Pine
C.S.I.R.
Long Period Fluctuations of Some Meteoro-
C.M.B.
Region of Central New England.”—P. W.
ogical Elements in Relation to California
Stickel. Review. Massachusetts Forestry
1 orest Fire Problems.”—L. G. Gray.
Association, Boston. Bulletin 153. Journal
United States Monthly Weather Review,
of Forestry, Vol. 30, 1932 (1025-1026)
Vol. 62, July, 1934
“ Weather and Forest Fires.”—C. S. Chapman.
C.S.I.R.
Eorest Meteorology in Quebec.”—G. O.
illeneuve. The Forestry Chronicle, Vol.
Ai N., No. 4, December, 1943
Influence of Altitude and Aspect on Daily
variations in Factors of Forest Fire
S ge V~ L l° yd G< Ha yes. United States
(149) tUre Department - Circular No. 591,
C.F.B.
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927 (457-462)
“ Weather and Fires from the Standpoint of
the Meteorologists.”-—M. F. Burrill.
C.S.I.R.
f C.F.B.
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927 (467-472)
■{ F.D., Tas.
[ W.F.D.
“ Solar Radiation and Forest Fuel Moisture.”
—G. M. Byram and G. M. Jemison. Journal
C.S.I.R.
of Agricultural Research, Vol. 67 1943
(149)
Forest Fire References— continued.


General —continued.
Source of
Reference.
General —continued.
source oi
Reference.
“ Influence of Weather Factors on the Moisture
Content of Light Fuels in Forests of the
Northern Rocky Mountains.”—G. M.
Jemison. Journal of Agricultural Research,
C.S.I.R.
“ Variations in Fire Danger Factors on a
Ranger District in the Longleaf Pine
Region.”—P. Knorr, Journal of Forestry,
Vol. 40, 1942 (689-692)
C.S.I.R.
Vol. 51, 1935 (885-906)
“ Periodicity of Forest Fires in the South.” —
F.D., Tas.
“ Fire Weather Forecasts needed by Fire Con-
C.S.I.R.
(U.S.A.). E. L. Demmon. South Lumber-
trol Executives.” —R. Headley. Journal
man 165 (2081), 1942 (220-2). Forestry
of Forestry, Vol. 25, 1927 (463-466)
Abstracts, p. 246, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1943
“ A Survey of Houses Affected in the Beaumaris
C.M.B.
Fire, Vic., Jan. 14, 1944.” —Journal of the
C.S.I.R.
Fires, Australia.
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, Vol. 18, No. 1, February, 1945
“ The Land of the Lyrebird.”—Fires of 1851,
C.M.B.
“ The Forest Resources of Victoria and Fire
C.F.B.
1878-9, and 1898 in Gippsland, Vic. Com-
Danger.”—Herbert Gepp. Address to the
mittee of South Gippsland Pioneers
Melbourne Rotary Club, 1943
“ Reports on Fires in New South Wales, 1933-
44.”-—Location, number of fires, area
C.M.B.
“ Instructions for Fire Danger Stations.” —
C.M.B.
Based on United States publication (Der-
burnt, &c. Particulars obtained from
went Valley Paper Co. Ltd.)
Forestry Commission of New South Wales
“ Interstate Conference to Discuss Methods for
C.F.B.
Report on Fire in A.C.T., 11-15 January, 1939
C.M.B.
the Prevention of Bush Fires, and for the
Protection of Lives in Forest Areas, Mel-
Annual Reports. —Bush Fire Council, Canberra,
C.M.B.
bourne, 1939 ”
A.C.T., 1940-44
‘‘Statement of Past Fire Protection Policy
and Recommendations for development of
C.F.B.
Newspaper Cuttings.—Bush Fires
C.F.B.
C.M.B.
future policy, as presented in evidence be-
fore the Royal Commission on bush fires
Lightning.
in Victoria, 1939.” —Victorian Forests
Commission
“ Lightning and Forest Fires in N. Rocky Mt.
C.F.B.
“ Fire Control Policy and State Fire Plan, 1941-
42.” —Tasmanian Forestry Department,
1942
C.F.B.
Region.”—H. Gisborne. United States
Agriculture Department. Weather Bureau
publication, 1926
“ Forest Fires, Cause, and Effect.” —A. V.
C.F.B.
“ Occurrence of lightning storms in relation to
C.F.B.
Galbraith. Victorian Forests Commission
forest fires in California, including a dis-
C.M.B.
cussion on thunderstorms and forest fires
Report of the Royal Commission, Victoria:
in California.” —E. A. Beale, S. B. Show,
Bush Fires of January, 1939
and I. Kotok. United States Agriculture
“ The Battle of the Bush.”—Bush Fires
C.M.B.
Department. Weather Bureau publication,
Advisory Committee, N.S.W., 1944
1923
Report on Conference on Bush and Forest
W.F.D.
“ Instructions on the Observations and Report-
C.F.B.
Fires, Sydney, 1926
ing of Lightning Storms.”—United States
“ The Fire Control Equipment Handbook.” —
C.F.B.
Agriculture Department. Northern Rocky
United States Forest Service, 1938
Mountain Experimental Station publica-
C.F.B.
tion, 1930
“ Fire Control Notes.”—A periodical devoted to
the Technique of Forest Fire Control, 1936.
“New Facts on Lightning.”--H. T. Gisborne.
F.D., Tas.
United States Forest Service
Forestry Abstracts, p. 136, Vol. 5, No. 2,
“ Forest Fires.” —Forestry Commission, London.
Leaflet No. 9, 1937
C.M.B.
1943. Res. Note Nth. Rocky Mt. Forest
and Range Experimental Station, No. 24,
1942, p. 3
“Fire in the Forests of the United States.” —
C.F.B.
F.D., Tas.
A. D. Folweiler and A. A. Brown, 1939
“ Sunspots and Lightning Fires.”—A. P.
C.F.B.
Bumstead. Forestry Abstracts, p. 59, Vol.
“ Fire Protection Methods in Canada.” —Ex-
5, No. 1, 1943. Journal of Forestry 41,
tracts from letters made available by the
1943 (69-70)
Canadian Trade Commissioner
“ Review of Problems and Accomplishments in
Fire Control and Fire Research.”- —H. T.
C.F.B.
“ New Lightning Facts Bearing on Western
Forest Fire Problem.” —H. T. Gisborne.
F.D., Tas.
Gisborne. Fire Control Notes, Vol. 6, No.
Forestry Abstracts, p. 187, Vol. 4, No. 3,
2, April, 1942
1943. West Coast Lumberman 69 (8), 1942
(44)
“ Use of Patrol in Prevention and Suppression
C.F.B.
of Forest Fires.” —Harris A. Reynolds.
C.S.I.R.
Journal of Forestry, Vol. 39, No. 9, 1941
“ The Progressive Method of Forest Fire Con-
C.F.B.
FIRE CONTROL.
trol.” —G. H. Schroeder. Journal of
Use of Chemicals.
Forestry, Vol. 40, No. 1, January, 1942
“ The Use of Chemicals in Forest Fire
C.F.B.
“ Snag Felling and Slash Disposal Prime
Factors in Fire Control.”—D. B. Taylor.
C.F.B.
Control, 1939.”—T. R. Truax. U.S. Dept.
Ag. Forest Service, Forest Products
British Columbia Lumberman, Vol. 26, No.
Laboratory, Madison, Wisconsin (Mimeo-
6, June, 1942
graph)
Forest Fire Protection in Canada.” —D. A.
McDonald. Paper read at Empire Forestry
C.F.B.
“ Chemical Methods of Combating Forest
Fires.”—P. P. Serebrennikov. United States
C.F.B.
Conference, 1935
Forest Service, Translation No. 151
By Authority: J. J. Gourley, Government Printer, Melbourne.
Forest Fire References — continued.


