

A STORY OF
MATESHIP
By RANDOLPH BEDFORD
• The Story of Unionism
in Australia .....


READERS!
Buy Only from Advertisers
in
The Worker
• Remember, by doing so you help
your own paper
When buying state you saw the
advertisement in the “Worker”


A STORY OF
MATESHIP
By RANDOLPH BEDFORD
The Story of Unionism
in Australia


#
READERS!
Buy Only from Advertisers
in
The Worker
• Remember, by doing so you help
your own paper
• When buying state you saw the
advertisement in the “Worker”


• A Story of
MATESHIP
By RANDOLPH BEDFORD
13 R I S BsV-N E? * ;
Printed by the Worker NewsgappriProprie'tary'Lnmited, 236 Elizabeth Street
; '£■ V 9 3 6 .




A Story of Mateship
CHAPTER I.
By Randolph Bedford
U’ATEN bread is soon forgotten; and the second
of the two generations that have been since
the struggles of Labor for legislative recognition
40 years ago is apt to forget the stages of ascent
to something like fair industrial conditions; to
ignore the stresses under which progress was
made; to present ignorance to belittle the achieve-
ments of the Labor pioneers; to be tolerant of
the would-be disruptors who seek to replace the
open enemies now disarmed by Labor legislation;
who are in fact merely those old enemies working
under an alias.
Labor in Parliament and Labor Governments
were made possible only by the pioneering unions
The Jack Hammer
of the bush—the miners and
shearers’ unions now combined
in the A.W.U. To those bush
unions representing the real
Australia as the craft unions
could not represent it, belong
most of the credit for the growth
to power of the Australian
Labor Party; whose early essays
in legislation included the forc-
ing of adult suffrage to enact-
ment, the compelling of anti-
Labor Governments bargaining for the support
of Labor men who held the balance of power, to
enact old age pensions, and to make the “White
Australia” policy good in law.


That good democrat, Charles Cameron
Kingston, was the father of Industrial Arbitration
and Conciliation; but it was the Labor men in
the Commonwealth Parliament who forced it into
Commonwealth laws. It was a Commonwealth
Labor Government that first saw the duty of
defending Australia and established citizen ser-
vice and the Australian Navy—although the anti-
Labor opponents, on the preposterous statement
that the Australian Navy was being founded to
fight Britain—succeeded in an amendment auto-
matically placing the Australian Navy under Bri-
tish control “in time of war,” which was any war
that Britain might be engaged in.
From the beginning the bush unions were in
sentiment and aim 100 per cent Australian.
A few years ago a railway guard in the north,
one of the oldest union men in the service, pro-
tested against the mean advantage taken of the
Commissioner by a few lad porters.
Said the old guard: “You have a Labor Gov-
ernment in power—how do you think it got there.
It was elected because it gave Labor a fair deal;
and it expects a fair deal in return. You don’t
know the conditions we suffered a few years ago.”
And the lad of 18 interrupted: “Yes, but WE
have changed all that.”
The Australian bush unions have never ex-
cused bad work, nor condoned the imported
meannesses of sabotage, and irritation strike; nor
of the bad service connoted by such phrases
as “go slow,” “ca canny,” or other of the catch
cries used in despairing retaliation of greedy
sweater and the callous employer; against
whose greed and callousness the worker was
impotent in the open.


The manly methods of the Amalgamated
Miners’ Union and the Australian Shearers’
Unions which had become their habit and con-
tinued into the merging Australian Workers
Union, despised these subterfuges; so that at last
Society had to that union labor is good
labor; and that non-union labor which takes all the
benefits of unionism while shirking its respon-
sibility to unionism, is bad labor.
Labor now finds its only vocal enemy the
incurably discontented incompetent and the
Communist —often a good
worker —as the ally of the
reactionary employer; seek-
ing confusion at any price and
using foreign methods to dis-
count the victories of Aus-
tralian unionists, whose pro-
cedure was made in and of
Australia and its industrial
progress.
There is also in the dis-
In the Big Timber
ruptionist the vanity of the . . .
moron aspiring to power and despairing of e\ e
reaching it; so that he will do anything to win
notice. !
Thus the militant Walsh wins to the direc-
tion of the Seamen’s Union by shouting extrem-
ism. Having arrived and learned, he seeks to
modify himself, and is thrown out for Johnson;
who, going through similar processes, begins to
talk’reasonably and is ejected in his turn.
Australia’s Parliamentary history has many
such examples of appointments of men of not any


fixed principles to tone their selfishness and vanity.
Joseph Cook, Hughes, Holman, M. Reid, Givens,
Blade Shearing
Glassey, Pearce—
and only Pearce was
Australian - born—
were among the
most extreme of
early Labor men,
and all deserted to
Australia’s enemies
as soon as place and
vanity were threa-
tened by loyalty to
the cause that lifted
them from ob-
scurity. They be-
came the allies of
the enemies of Australia and Australian Labor as
surely as the Communist in Australia is the ally
of all the vested interests and reactionaries in
Australia—the bad employers, the monopolies of
private banking and insurance, the tobacco trust
that destroys an Australian primary industry for
the sake of exportable dividends, and the im-
perialist in Australia who would precipitate Aus-
tralia into any war that Britain wages to protect
any one of its two-score colonies.
To state the case clearly it is unnecessary to
review the history of Labor in Australia; the
birth of the bush-born unions; their successful
revolution of industrial conditions; and the attacks,
by foreign dogma and creeds of confusion, that
success naturally attracts to itself.


CHAPTER II.
BUSH BORN
rpHE pastoral industry found an ideal nursery m
*■ Australia; clean pastures free of disease; not
any wild animals but the dingo; and convict labor,
at a cost of food (raised by the convicts them-
selves) and a few articles of clothing. ...
The early pastoralist drove the aboriginal
from his hunting grounds and killed him if he
offered any demonstration by objection, for a
£lO licence fee the squatter found himself pos-
sessed of a principality. The fecundity of the
land precipitated tremendous fortunes. W. J. i.
Clarke brought 2000 ewes to Victoria and saw
the flock grow to 80,000 in five and a half years.
The land was given away in immense areas,
the individual grazier dummying block after block.
As the aboriginals would not settle to the chill
work of shepherding and the convict supply failed,
Chilenos and Kanakas were imported, and they
failed also. The callous treatment of white labor
became more oppressive as banks and joint stock
companies secured control of immense pastoral
areas, and made the relations of employer and
unemployed more impersonal. Scarcity of labor
during the gold rushes had abolished the use of
shepherds; but the employers introduced Chinese
for station work and shearing; and the shearing
strike of 1891 was as much against the importa-
tion of Chinese labor as it was against a reduc-
tion of wages and freedom of contract, which
meant the employers’ freedom to enslave the
laborer. .
In Queensland in 1894, a total of 181 million
acres was held by 18 banks and 27 financial com-


panies. The Bank of N.S.W. held 17 million
acres; the Bank of Australasia 16 million acres;
the Queensland National Bank 10 million acres.
Conditions in the other States were not any bet-
ter. The 1891 strike against wage reduction,
Chinese workmen, and the employers’ freedom to
sweat labor to the marrow, was also, unknowingly,
a fight against the alienation of State land to
foreign bankers financed with Australian money.
The great strike of Eureka Stockade—a
strike against a government that sweated the
prospector of £lB to £36
a year for even the right
to dig—had left its mark
on the goldfields of Vic-
toria, where the first
bush unions were born.
Their work began the
fights in the cities
against sweating manu-
facturers. The “wealthy
lower orders” (so de-
scribed by Chief Justice
George Higinbotham)
had stolen the land, and
the sweating manufacturer was stealing life.
The Masters and Servants’ Act of 1846, that
by its restrictions made Australian labor a kind of
peonage, was invoked against Australian shearers.
Later “Master” and “Servant” were taken out of
the statute and “employer” and “employee” were
substituted. It is to be remembered that the
squatters, having lost convict labor by the stop-
page of transportation, petitioned the Government
to prohibit digging for gold, so that they should
have labor available at their own price. They were


as stupid as the “Sydney Morning Herald,” which
published its hope that gold discoveries would not
be great enough to affect wages. Many Australian
workers still buy the “Herald” and other papers
that did their best to prevent them living decently.
Agricultural labor at Tolpuddle (England);
combined to raise wages from 6s. to 7s. a week,
and the leaders (known to history as the Tolpuddle
martyrs) were lucky enough to be transported to
Australia for their crime of Is. a week.
In 1872 Bendigo quartz miners struck against
the 10-hour day, the use of Chinese labor, wage
reduction, ill-ventilated mines, and the absence
of safeguards for health. They challenged the
mine owners to a month’s trial of the 8-hour shift,
and proved their case by getting as much footage
in the shift as in the 10-hour day. In 1874 the
Amalgamated Miners’
Association was formed.
The new union agitated
for better ventilation of
mines, and the inspection
of mining machinery;
and secured both. At
Creswick the mine
owners attempted to re-
duce wages from 7s. 6d.
to 6s. 6d. a day; although
the miners lost time be-
cause of foul air. Police
were sent to force men to
go below, and the men fought with their only
weapon—the crude weapon of the strike. As yet
they had not awakened to the necessity for mak-
themselves felt politically. Elections were
fought on every principle but urgent necessity;


free. trade or protection; or land alienation or re-
tention; even of sectarianism, the certain politi-
cal armament of the Tories when all else failed.
In 1910 I met at Washington, Samuel Gom-
pers, Chief of the American Federation of Labor.
He had little interest in Australian labor in poli-
tics and said that he would keep American labor
without a political side to it. There were current
many instances of racketeering by labor union
bosses, who blackmailed building and other con-
tractors under threats of strikes.
I replied to Mr. Gompers that Labor in poli-
tics in Australia had prevented blackmail and
racketeering, even if the union chiefs had thought
of it, which I doubted; and that therefore politi-
cal action by Labor might not be welcome in the
U.S.A. because it tended to prevent opportunities
for graft. Ido not think Mr. Gompers approved
of me.
In the event the Creswick strikers won, and
the union stood by the men who were victimised
for leading it. Australia would have been a
Chinese colony but for the diggers at Lambing
P lat, who forced legislative restriction and a poll
tax. When later, the A.M.A. representations
made governments decide that the labor covenants
on mining leases could not be filled by Chinese
miners, White Australia progressed another stage.
Union leaders were boycotted for work in
mines and the pastoral industry; but the unions
stood by them. The black listed shearer was in


worse case than
the boycotted
miner. Put on
the track, he had
long distances to
travel; until the
miner was put on
a parity of hard-
ship by the black
lists of Victoria
being sent to
Broken Hill.
The Shearers’
Union of N.S.W.,
Victoria, and S.A. became, in 1893, the Australian
Workers’ Union; joined by the Queensland
Shearers’ Union in' 1894. From 1886 to 1909
there had been 10,000 strikes —short or long
in the pastoral industry. The Australian
Workers’ Union and the legislation it was able
to promote has made strikes negligible, as great
a benefit to the employer and the industry as to
the worker himself.
In the early pastoral disputes all the advantage
was with the employer. Under the Masters and
Servants’ Act of 1846, the shearer was a prisoner
until the work was done; rebellion from that
meant, for the rebel, fines, imprisonment, and
confiscation of wages, with a squatter as magis-
trate. The squatter controlled the local bench;
the strike camp was an “unlawful assembly,
butchers and other tradesmen were prevented sup-


plying strikers with meat
or other rations. The
shearer was paid 17s. Gd.
per 100 sheep; but there
was a “second price” for
shearers —15s. per 100.
If shearing were unsatis-
factory to the employer,
15s. a 100 was paid for
all the sheep shorn; even
for those already passed
as “satisfactory.” If
one sheep in a pen was
declared “unsatisfac-
tory” none in the pen were paid for. Add to
these tyrannies gold-rush prices for rations, which
must be purchased from the pastoralist. Hawkers
were prohibited, and shearers signed an agree-
ment to buy only from the employer. Some em-
ployers insisted on appointing the cook (the buyer
of the rations), although his wages were paid by
the shearers.
The accommodation for the shearers was
vile, and the cooking was done in the shearers’ hut.
The floors were of earth, often carrying stagnant
pools; and the bunks of rough timber without
mattresses or even straw.
The shed hands were not organised until
1890, and both the Shed Hands’ Union and the
Shearers’ Union merged in the Australian
Workers’ Union in 1893. The bulk of these unions


and their merger and its
spirit represented union-
ism as mateship, guarded
with the jealousy of fana-
tics for their religion.
There were no sabot-
ages, nor loafing on the
job, nor any of the mean
ways elsewhere used to
fight bad and mean capi-
talism.
The passage of the
first Australian Act pro-
duced a bogus union—
the Machine Shearers and Shed Employees’ Union
—formed by the pastoralists to sidetrack the
A.W.U. Under the law it had fathered the A.W.U.
was prohibited from striking. Strike it did in
1902; and an appeal to the Court resulted in the
Squatters’ Labor Union being declared bogus.
The Maritime Strike in 1890 was succeeded
by the Broken Hill Strike in ’92; and in ’94 the
Pastoralists’ Union broke the agreement of ’9l.
It had chosen its time well; there were hordes
of unemployed, resulting from the bank failures
of 1893, the work of the fraudulent bankers who
formed the Pastoralists’ Union and directed the
Employers’ Federation. The newspapers that
lived on the pennies of the workers staged their
usual play; newspapers in Adelaide; and forced
their compositors to sign a three years’ agree-
ment that they would not join any union.


The banker-directed
Employers’ Federation
used any old law, and
stripped it to meet
exigency; using gov-
ernment and military
force to help them, and
putting back the clock
of Australia to convict
times. Here was Aus-
tralia, a new jeweller’s
shop. The burglars
were breaking into the
riches of it; virgin pastures, Broken Hill silver,
and Mt. Morgan gold, and the wealth of Austra-
lian trade; and they still wanted unrestricted com-
petition (except for themselves) and exploitation
of labor, based on the greed of the most selfish
employer of them all. “Freedom of contract” has
never been heard of by the present generation of
workers. It was the staunchness, the mateship,
and the undeviating honesty of these early union-
ists that abolished “Freedom of Contract” and
made the life of the Australian worker endurable.
The Employers’ Federation attempted to deal
with the unions in detail; first, the Maritime
Union. The marine officers struck work; the sea-
men and cooks followed; then the coal miners,
and then the shearers; many of them penniless
when leaving work. That made the Pastoralists’
Union* ask the. Employers’ Federation to grant
the conference with the unions already re-
fused. On the promise of this conference
with the Maritime Unions, the shearers re-
turned to work; and the Employers’ Federation


broke its word, as usual.
The Pastoralists’ Union
then refused to take back
the strikers, and that
breach of honor cost the
A.W.U. £9OOO.
The Maritime Strike
continued. Chief Justice
Higinbotham of Victoria
sent £5O and a weekly
donation of £lO to the
strike funds; and a num-
ber of bank boomers in
Melbourne (who later
stood their trial for bank and other frauds) pub-
licly advocated that the Chief Justice be dragged
from the bench and shot.
Ten thousand unionists marched through
Sydney, and a few days later 260 police and 200
special constables defended wool lorries that
nobody attacked. The pastoralists even called for
the military, but Sir Henry Parkes, then
Premier of New South Wales, refused. The
procession of squatter-driven wool lorries passed
to the wharves through streets empty of men; a
silent procession jeered at by women at shop
doors.
How would these melodramatic direct-
actionists of to-day have handled that situation?
The union leaders of the time stressed the need for
law and order, and their reward was a closely-
guarded squatter-demonstration made ridiculous;
because of the absence of menace,


Here was pastoral Australia made into armed
camps; Nordenfeldts and Gatlings and Nine-
pounders; and melodramatic magistrates reading
the riot act to unarmed men. Shearers’ camps
were “unlawful assemblies” and crimes under the
atrocious laws; these laws, archaic except in con-
vict times, although dead, could not get them-
selves buried and forgotten. The great sheep pas-
tures of the States—held under mortgage to
banks and financial companies, with Australian
names and overseas shareholders, battening on
Australia; the State Government merely mouth-
pieces for the banks and finance companies that
held the best of the State
lands—l3l million acres in
Queensland alone. The full
forces of Government, of the
money power, of police and
military, and of the kept press
directed against these Austra-
lians who asked in return for
good service, a living wage
and conditions of food and
lodging better than that af-
forded by accommodation
equal to that of an over-
crowded slum area in an old
world city. Labor was op-
posed by Government, by the
money power, by armed
force, and the public opinion of the cities manu-
factured by hireling newspapers to defeat it.
And Labor won; by the mateship of labor;
against that united effort and by the selfless
endeavor of every individual for the benefit of all


CHAPTER III.
MATESHIP IN UNIONISM
¥N all these struggles the lawbreakers were the
employers; their creatures of the Government
and the judiciary; their magistrates and the police
they controlled. .
No strike leader proposed violence; it was
left to Colonel Tom Price (son of that Price who
was convicts’ gaoler at Norfolk Island) to address
his military command, giving it the order against
the worker:
“Fire low and lay ’em out. _
And the meeting of 60,000 at Flinders ParK,
Melbourne, kept cool and passed its resolutions of
protest, and the discredited Price’s soldiers did
not fire a shot. Later, Price joined in the Boer
War and assisted in the killing of a number of
Boer farmers.
Police Officers’ Camp, Barcaldine, Shearers’ Strike, 1891


In the Queensland Strike of 1891 the banks
controlled the Pastoralists’ Union, and the Pas-
toralists’ Union directed the Government, which
was only an executive committee of the employers.
Conference was refused; railway men were
ordered by the Government to leave their homes
and serve as strike breakers, and Government
Agents were handy to incite unionists to break
the law. The Union Committee at Barcaldine
were gaoled for three years merely for being a
committee. The Judge (Harding) who tried them
said: “The police had 24 shots. If I had been
there, there would not have been many who
boohooed twice.”
Mr. Lilley: “You can’t shoot men for dis-
orderly conduct.”
The Judge: “Very probably the police could
have found justification for it.”
That trial at Rockhampton was not the trial
of strikers, but of the Government.
Military were sent against the pastoral
workers with Nordenfeldts, Gatlings, and Nine-
pounder guns, the orders were: “Firing to be
effective, ” “Firing to be effective,” on unarmed
men!
The display of force, for all the atrocious trials
and sentences, made the Government again ridi-
culous.
The guarded police and military camp had
two night “alarms” —one when an aboriginal gin
came to the camp to ask for her husband, and a
second when a pig got loose. Yet, on faked evi-
dence, union members went to gaol on six, 10,
and 15 years’ sentences. The N.S.W. unionists,
McLean and Murphy, were shot—and their fel-
low unionists did not retaliate. They certainly
burned the Rodney, after carefully removing the
non-unionists from the, boat; and they certainly


persuaded most of the scab labor that f
of contract” was an evil thing. But that was the
extent of our demonstration of force.
Thirty non-members of the A.W.U. were sen-
tenced to gaol terms of from 18 months to tour
years under a copy of the notorious Bucksho
Foster’s Coercion Act for “Unlawful Assembly ;
which means that they were in a shearer s camp.
Five strike leaders at Broken Hill were sen-
tenced to from three months to. two years;
although their orders had been “no violence, main-
tain law and order.” On the charge of burning
the Rodney a man was sentenced to 10 years
gaol, although he was never within 200 miles of
the Rodney.
Judge Darley of N.S.W. said that union
leaders should be shot down like dingoes. Ruffians
in the cities who attacked helpless old men and
women were fined for common assault; unionists
were outlawed; and yet unionists did not arm.
, Instead, they armed themselves politically.
Bushmen rode 100 or 200 miles to vote Labor.
For the first time in Australian history
elections were fought without appeals
to sectarianism; narrow Toryism found the


fear of Rome
worn out as an
election cry, and
substituted
“Socialists” for
its obsolete ana-
thema.
In Queensland
the union
leaders sen-
tenced to four
years’ imprison-
ment were of-
fered a remis-
sion of sentence
after a year of
gaol, if they
would only peti-
tion for it. Two
did petition and
were released;
the others re-
fused to peti-
tion, despising
the kept Gov-
ernment too
deeply to ask
anything of it.
They served
their sentences
to the full and
Tree Marking Union Strike Camp,
Hughenden, 1891
found Parliament open for some of them as soon
as they had become free by servitude.
In that Queensland Parliament they did line
work for the State. They prevented the giving
away of 200 million acres of the best land in the
State; they have proceeded to the increased bet-


terment of the worker; they have, by the exten-
sion of arbitration and the making a habit of arbi-
tration, given the community industrial peace.
It was largely the work of the A.W.U. that
made the revolution from “freedom of contract”
to compulsory collective bargaining. Society
has learned that union labor is the best labor;
that the most energetic and intelligent workers
are ready to fight for their rights and win by
appealing to reason and ignoring force. The
employer has learned that, even giving in the
conscript unionist and the go-slow man, and the
saboteur, non-union labor gives the poorest and
most unprofitable service. The bad employer can
no longer dictate terms based on the worker’s
economic necessity; the Court makes the terms on
closely considered evidence. And the bad em-
ployer cannot sweat the needy, workless, because
the law treats him as a swindler if he evades
awards.
Industrial legislation has so long endured,
that it is now custom and therefore respectable.
But vigilance will always be wanted. The foes of
unionism are not now open enemies. Established
law and the memory of the costliness of strikes have
convinced even the bad employer of the useless-
ness of open fighting—he now uses bogus unions
and Communism as allies.
Vigilance is necessary—against the greedy
employer, ready to be recalcitrant; vigilance
against the bogus union which seeks to discredit
Labor legislation while thriving on it; vigilance
against those attempting by unfairness and
trickery to raise public opinion against the organi-
sations which have won the present position in
Australian industrialism.


The main attack is directed against the Aus-
tralian Workers’ Union, because it has done most
to better the worker and therefore bring him
closer to content than can any other force under
the present social system; and because it was the
spearhead of attack and is now the strongest of
Labor’s defences. It is the strongest, because it
was founded as much on mateship as on economic
necessity. It represents mateship as against the
confusionist and the “nark”; and mateship wins.


CHAPTER IV.
THE ENEMY IN THE HOUSE
gVERY great movement in the world’s history
has had its open enemies and the more insidi-
ous foe disguised as a friend; mouthing lip service
which is contradicted by the meanness of the
utterer, the Communist Party. Screaming of its
virtuous horror at its own manufactured stories
of the oppression of rank and file unionism by the
alleged oligarchy of A.W.U. management—the
said oligarchy being elected by the rank and file
themselves—its lack of ability is registered in its
acts of stupidity—and its habit of calling a strike
and leading wage earners to defeat; its lack of
honesty recorded by balance sheets that can do
anything but balance.
Sheep Yarded for Shearing


The Pastoralists’ Union’s invention —the
Machine Shearers and Shed Laborers’ Union
—was declared a bogus one, and was deregistered
by the Arbitration Court in 1902—34 years ago.
It did not have any successor until a few years
back when the “Pastoral Workers’ Industrial
Union” made its appearance for a year, and was
then forgotten. This alleged union is directed
from Sydney by the Communist Party of which
it is an offshoot, and the Communist paper, “The
Workers’ Weekly,” is the official organ of the
P.W.I.U.
For a union that intended to be engaged in
the legitimate business of a Labor Union, there
was good work offering in New South Wales.
There are scab collieries at Newcastle supplying
non-union coal; juvenile labor replacing adult
labor; lowered conditions of labor that required
merely energy and vigilance to bring to the notice
of the adequate existing law. But that did not
offer sufficient excitement for the P.W.1.U.; and
attacks on the A.W.U. and attempted proselytis-
ing of an industry already enjoying 100 per cent
organisation under the A.W.U., offered an
opportunity to disrupt the greatest union
and the greatest power for good in the
Southern hemisphere, and the joy of the con-
fusionist at the prospect of successful meddling.
The facts were all against them; but that matters
little to little men with the mind and the vanity
of monkeys.
The A.W.U. provides full industrial protec-
tion to its members at a cost of 25/- a year, or less
than a penny a day. In New South Wales, coaf
mining union membership costs up to £l6 a year
for contract miners and £8 to £lO a year for boys
and day wages men.


The Queensland awards and conditions secur-
ed by the A.W.U. are better than in similar call-
ings in any other part of the world; and it has
secured these at a cost of less than a penny per
day per unionist concerned.
At the N.S.W. Coal Miners’ Convention in
1925 complaints were made of many thousands of
pounds being spent on fruitless attempts at direct
action, and a prominent official showed that
£527,000 had been wasted.
The A.W.U. has 50 years of fine work to its
credit, and for that reason it was the point of
attack for these Communists whose aim is to
destroy Australian working class organisation, and
with it all the benefits secured to Australians by
Australian unionism since the beginning of the
A.W.U. in 1886.
The Communists, for this reason, wish to de-
stroy Arbitration, which has done more for the
worker in the few years of its Australian opera-
tion than direct action had done for the world’s
labor in a thousand years of sporadic rebellion
against tyranny.
When the great fights of Labor in Australia
were in action, these Communists were not heard
of. They are not Australians, and their destruc-
tive policy of despair had not landed on this con-
tinent. The I.WAV. did not make its appearance
in Australia until the spade work of industrialism
had been done by Australian unions; and all these
overseas Communists are but camp followers of
Australia’s industrial army, and often camp fol-
lowers secretly in the service of the enemy.
Aided by the diffidence of the Australian in
the presence of Communists who come from afar
and secure an audience by lying boldly, these ene-^


mies of Australian Labor attempt to embarrass
the most forward country in the world, industri-
ally. Their white-anting policy is allegedly in
the interests of the establishment of a Soviet;
and, judging by Russian action, these Soviet
makers would be the first to lose their lives for
incompetence and stupidity.
The mining and sugar awards of Queensland
are least open to criticism of any industrial awards
in Australia. Yet, partly for the aggrandisement
Canecutters at Work
of these Communist fak-
ers, they have been
singled out for attack.
Until two weeks before
the Queensland State elec-
tions in 1935, there were
not any objections to the
Mt. Coolon agreement,
which had been working
well for two years, with-
out complaint from any-
body.
It was only in the fort-
night before the State
elections, and after it had
been decided to run a Com-
munist candidate for the
Bowen electorate, in which Mt. Coolon is situated,
and only when there was but a few weeks’ ore
to stope—Mt. Coolon then being considered a
worked-out mine—that the strike was opened.
There had not been anything unsatisfactory in
the award or the conditions between June, 1933,
and April, 1935—the only altered circumstances
were the election and the fact of only a few weeks’
work remaining.
Proof of collusion with Toryism and against
Labor in the election exists in the fact that the


Tory Press —as always—was open for Communist
attacks on the A.W.U. One of the Mt. Coolon
leaders of the White Ants took out his
1934-35 ticket on March 14, 1935—less than a
month before the Coolon dispute. He refused to
accept repeated challenges to prove that he had
ever been a unionist or a member of a union until
shortly before the strike. They demanded
a piecework rate that would enable truckers
on piecework to earn 22/- per day when as a
matter of fact the truckers concerned were earn-
ing 24/10 per day at piecework rates. The facts
are that the bungling self-styled militants engi-
neered the strike to injure Labor at the elections,
and it was only when they were forced
to give some reason for the strike that they
claimed they were fighting for an increased piece-
work rate. Utter ignorance of the facts
is disclosed by the claim which they put forward
which would have reduced the earnings of the
truckers concerned by 2/10 per day.
This was the position: A strike against con-
ditions accepted for two years; when the work
was ended, and the elections imminent, and diffi-
Miners Working in Open Cut
dent Australian
miners, some of
whom had worked
in the mine for
years and were
willing to leave be-
cause there was
only sufficient ore
available for a few
weeks’ work, per-
mitting themselves
to be dragooned and
misrepresented by
ignorant narks


whose sole aim was to discredit the union that,
of all Australian industrial organisations, has
done most for the Australian worker.
That these bad immigrants should be able
to sway one Australian for a moment is a com-
mentary on the Australian casualness and toler-
ance. The Communists’ poor knowledge of the
English language gives them an ambiguity of
expression which saves, where a direct state-
ment would be fatal to them. But for the
Australian diffidence and tolerance it would argue
a poor intelligence that could be deluded even for
a moment by Communist vanity and ignorance,
that talks and acts with the carelessness and love
of confusion characteristic of apes—monkey cun-
ning pretending to the cleverness of Machiavelli.


CHAPTER V.
THE ALLIES OF TORYISM
rrqiE Australian employer has been compelled by
Labor organisation and legislation to adjust
himself .to the revolution in industrial conditions
achieved by unionism—and most notably the Aus-
tralian Workers’ Union-first by prompting the
legislative action that liberalised industrial law,
and then by capable advocacy of Labor’s necessi-
ties in the Arbitration Courts. The Australian
has accepted Labor legislation and - Arbitra-
tion Courts and awards, as the settled policy
of the Australian States and Commonwealth. The
Australian employers’ present grievance is the
tremendous taxation resulting from complicity in
Pile Driving
foreign wars, and the injury to
Australian trade by a slavish de-
votion to overseas interests;
which is to say, the foreign
money power.
From that foreign money
power, which is the real cause
of the fall in the prices of com-
modities, he gets only advice of
the impossible sort. That
advice is always to cut costs —
by which is meant the cutting
of wages. It was echoed by the
calamitous Niemeyer, whose
visit to Australia supplied him
with the conclusions that “there
is too much sunlight in Austra-
lia,” that “the people are too


lighthearted,” and that to darken the sunlight and
sadden the cheerful, wages must come down.
Profits—especially the profits of usury, the
interest on “money” invented by the private bank-
ing oligarchy—must be maintained; and therefore
“costs,” i.e., wages, must suffer. But the Austra-
lian employer finds that his best market—the Aus-
tralian market—depends on wages and. conditions,
and he becomes more and more inclined to
attack the money system, or, rather, the
system of private banking credits, which
is his real enemy, that never knows a
depression in the usury trade, and which profits in
good times or bad times—and at all times.
But although the individual employer
accepts arbitration and fixed awards that tell
him at the outset where he stands, and although
he revolts against the high wages of usury, he
is unable to be publicly vocal, for he is controlled
fy a banking system that takes its orders from
the oversea money power. That is the real im-
perialism, which would keep Australia as a vassal;
that is the real utterer of the phrase, “Divide the
unions and conquer Labor, and so cut costs.” In
this, the active allies of the Employers’ Federa-
tion, controlled by the foreign money power, are
the Communists.
These Communists, mostly imported, have
but one aim, and that to weaken industrial unions
and destroy Labor in Politics. To begin a base-
less strike, preferably at election time, to make
confusion and leave the strike in the air—never
settled nor attempted to be settled—is the reason
for their criminal existence. Knowing that Com-
munists must lose their election deposits, careless
of the result they put themselves forward as candi-
dates and are the mean allies of Labor’s enemies.


Consider recent attempts at fomenting
strikes in the sugar districts. Weil’s disease is
a disease caused by rats contaminating the
cane. It was handled by the Australian Workers’
Union, and the State Government, securing the
advice of the best disease research men in Aus-
tralia, and acting upon that advice immediately.
Infected cane was burned, and that gave the
monkey mind of Communism a new cry, and that
was, “Burn all the cane.”
Exploiting the foreign cane cutters’ imper-
fect knowledge of the English tongue, they filled
these puzzled men with baseless fears.
Their crazy proposition to burn all the cane
—the clean with the infected—meant a loss to
the worker of 20 per cent of the total wages bill,
with no other result than to satisfy the Commu-
nists’ monkey lust for confusion and destruction.
At Innisfail they prevented a ballot on the ques-
tion of returning to work by saying that “the
secret ballot is the boss’s weapon.” That was said
to Australians, who knew that the secret ballot
was one of the greatest safeguards of Democracy,
for which Labor in Australia had always
strenuously advocated and fought. At that
Timber Getting


place nearly 600 men were intimidated fiom vot-
ing • 35 did vote; and of these 33 voted for a return
to work. Another ballot, taken four miles away
from the first and outside the region of Com-
munist influence, resulted in 249 men voting for
return to work and 24 against.
Thus we have in Australia, after 50 years of
industrial effort remarkable for its oi dei liness, its
manliness, its patience, and decency, a destructive
agent remarkable for its envy and its malice, and
prevented from succeeding partly by its native
stupidity.
In every country in the world extremist mis-
chief and destructiveness have been recognised as
the real enemy of democracy. The American
Federation of Labor has declared war on them;
their excesses produced Hitler, and made Musso-
lini possible. Wherever they have interfered in
industrialism, the last state of the worker is worse
than the first. To make a strike and leave it in
confusion is their invariable procedure; acting as
the steer that leads the cattle to the gate of the
shambles, leaving the herd to be slaughtered
while the decoy escapes.
And only confusion is right in their eyes.
The Russian revolution, consolidated by wise ad-
ministration, became anathema to them as soon
as it rejected the roaring stupidity that passes
with them for militancy, and the pretentious igno-
rance that is wisdom in their eyes. So they have
deposed Stalin from their Pantheon; and Stalin
continues to govern despite the banishment. In
Australia their attempts are directed mostly to
white anting the most efficient Australian union
—the A.W.U.


Regard the movements of control in the
Seamen’s Union. First Walsh the “Militant.” As
soon as he begins to reason he is ejected for
Johnson the “militant.” As soon as Johnson the
“militant” begins to see things are as they are,
and reason upon them, he is assaulted by a gang
and forcibly ejected; and Keenan is declared
“elected,” although a ballot for the election of
Secretary was pending. It sounds like the elec-
tion of a King in Greece.
And for such things as these Australians are
asked to abandon the work of 50 years, with all
its record of fine achievement; to destroy the
fruits of the victories of real men, so as to begin
all over again in confusion, and under monkey
leadership.


CHAPTER VI.
THE WORK TO COME
HPHE Australian unionist finds himself the object
of continuous attempts to reduce his allegi-
ance to the all-Australian organisation which has
secured for him greater improvement in wages
and conditions than any force in any other part
of the world has done for industrialism at any
time.
A league against “War and Fascism” was one
of the most recently assumed masquerades of
Communism; and it in its turn, has failed to white
ant the Australian Workers’ Union or any other
intelligent body of unionists in Australia. Only
Labor dominant can prevent war, and Australian
Labor is doing its share in the education of men
to that conclusion. Only Labor as we know it in
Australia can prevent Fascism in Australia. It
was Communism in Italy and Germany, and the
exaggerations of the strength of these eonfusion-
ists, that made the Fascists and the Nazis possible;
that blew hot air into Mussolini and Hitler until
they ballooned to greater proportions than are
permissible to sane men; that gave Fascism its
beginnings in England with the fantastic Mosley,
Road Builders Spreading Tar


who lost much of his publicity when the British
Labor Unions declared themselves free of Com-
munists, whom they recognised as the natural
allies of their old Tory enemies. The Australian
recognises the rottenness of imported Commun-
ism, whose success has been the establishment of
Mussolini and Hitler, and whose object is to divide
Labor so that it cannot speak with one voice on
anything.
In the early ’nineties the Employers’ Federa-
tion began the work of defeating unionism in de-
tail, beginning with the seamen and waterside
workers, and then to the shearers and miners, and
lastly to the smaller craftsmen; and that pro-
gramme is the plan of the Communist to-day; has
already begun, in fact, and persists in the face of
defeat.
It was Australian Labor that kept Australia
free of conscription for foreign wars; and Aus-
tralian Labor will almost certainly be called to
do that work again.
The destruction or even the partial weaken-
ing of Labor unions, and especially of the Aus-
tralian Workers’ Union, would not only destroy
the unions, but the liberty of all Australians out-
side the unions. In the 1916-17 fights against
conscription the A.W.U. was the spearhead of
successful defence. And that being stated, let us
read the objective of this imported cult of confu-
sion :
“Object.—The destruction of all work-
ing class organisations as they exist to-day
for the purpose of a general rebuilding on
approved Communist lines.”
“App:~-'ed” by whom, buc by the most voci-
ferous criminal lunatic of them all ?


Read the third paragraph of the letter of in-
structions issued by the Communist Party:
“We draw particular attention to the
fact that this letter and new tactics must
not be loosely discussed with or in the pre-
sence of any person outside the party
ranks. It is apparent that a great many
workers are not ready for the revolutionary
movement, and if they were to gain full
knowledge of our general policy in regard
to the sugar industry, our task would be
rendered extremely difficult, and would
place those who were opposed to us in a
favorable position to combat our line of
action. Comrades must keep this in mind
and see to it that this letter is retained
within the party. On page 1, paragraphs
1 and 2 of the letter, the question of a
break with the A.W.U. is taken up; a line
given as to what our tactics and immedi-
ate objectives must be.”
Any real man who knows himself and knows
human limitations knows the monkey mischiev-
ousness of these mad proposals for action, direct
and immediate; not so many know that the
morons who talk with the decision of these Com-
munists never finish anything. The body and
mind (if any) of their plan is to begin something


—a strike or sabotage or other wanton destruc-
tion—and then leave it unfinished and in confu-
sion, much in the manner of a monkey who starts
taking a clock to pieces and, being half-way
through the job, wearies of it and throws away
the partial wreck and forgets it in the desire for
a new mischief
Every thinking mam knows that all his pro-
gress has been made almost as gradually as a
child learns to walk. Anything won by force
must by force be held; that won by reason and
by the education of the opponent endures, so
strong is the habit of even things at first unwel-
come. And Labor progress already attained in
Australia, the orderly stages of lasting advance,
must brand as a criminal any man who would de-
stroy present
achievement o r
delay further bet-
terment in the
future.
Australian
Labor, which is
the greatest or-
ganised force in
Australia work-
in g single-
heartedly for
Australia, has
greater work
ahead than ever
in its history. It
must not permit
any detracting in-
fluence to mar its
real work. See-
ing that it repre-
sents the major-
Headquarters of A.W.U. and A.L.P.


ity of Australians that real work is the govern-
ment of Australia for the benefit of all Austra-
lians. Government of Australia by Labor means
that the conscription of Australians for foreign
wars shall be so well defeated that no reactionary
will ever again dare to propose it. It means that
the Australian will at last address himself to the
systematised development and protection of his
own country, refusing as a settled plan any com-
plicity in foreign wars.
A Government of Australia by Australian
Labor means that Australian industries shall
have adequate tariff protection, thus improving
the home market, which is the best market the
primary producer can ever know.
It means that industry shall be freed from a
money power (with most of its control outside
Australia) which is slowly smothering the nation,
the employer, and the wage earner, in an
avalanche of debt, public and private. The joint
stock method of control has aggregated Austra-
lian production into the hands of a few bankers
and fiscal agents. The Australian employer
knows his commitments to Labor under awards
and industrial legislation; he does not know from
day to day his obligations to the money power—
that invents money to-day and cancels it to-
morrow; exploiting for its own profit the use of
credit and the manufacture of money—tokens
which it has usurped from the people.
The people of the U.S.A. are fighting the
same battle—whose continuance is dependent on
the re-election of the President, who has chal-


Railway Workers
lenged the money power
and is attempting to con-
trol a stabilisation of
prices; possible only
when Government has a
monopoly of credit and
the manufacture o f
money tokens. The Ame-
rican fight is the more
difficult because indus-
trial unionism is, in Ame-
rica, not reinforced by
the craft unions. The
American Federation of
Labor has a membership
of 3,500,000; but there
are 30,000,000 workers unorganised, or nearly ten
times the number of unionists. Thus there is
not in the U S.A. any -such ..industrial union as
the Australian Workers’ UjploH in Australia; no-
thing that has a similar power of collective bar-
gaining, nor similar and constructive in-
fluence in politics.
Included in the A.W.U., in addition to the
workers in sugar, wool, and mining, the cane cut-
ters, mill hands, shearers, drovers, drivers, fenc-
ers, and miners, are railway construction workers,
bridge builders, timber men, and cotton field and
mill labor. The A.W.U. is continuously increasing
its work and influence, organising new industries
as they arrive, and growing in power, because its
power is based on its government by majority will,
and its execution determined by the votes of its
electors.


In the difficulties already foreshadowed the
Australian Workers’ Union must act even
more decisively than heretofore, its important
part in the organisation of that political thought
and performance necessary if Australia is to set
its feet firmly on the road out of depression and
hopelessness, caused not only by war at a cost of
a thousand millions, but by weak toleration of the
usury that is the basic cause of all poverty and
all wars.
Australia must free itself of that domination
or forego development to real nationhood; and any
attempt to weaken or divide the institutions which
organise Australian Labor should earn punishment
without mercy.
Worker Newspaper Proprietary Limited, 23fi Elizabeth Street, Brisbane








