





A STRANGE LETTER,
A. 11. S
? ESQ.,
tfo Colonists of Jiottih gatssfiptk
Iklitik:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY DAVID GALL,
89, KING WILLIAM STREET.




PREFACE.
The following pages were, for the most part, originally written for
publication in one of the English periodicals. The writer, how-
ever, subsequently embodied them in their present form intending
to forward them here for publication, an intention which, for
reasons not here explainable, was never carried out. A friend of
the writer having, however, been favored with their perusal, and
considering the subjects upon which the letter treats still such as
to awaken interest, has obtained permission to publish them in the
exact form in which they were written two years since. Had they
been written at the present time the events of the last six or seven
months would doubtless have afforded the writer further and even
more strongly corroborative evidence of his assertions and argu-
ments’than that he has adduced.
The additional hardships to which the Squatters have been
subjected in reference to the recent valuations of their runs—the
refusal of the Government to make any concession, or grant them
any appeal—the appeal of the Government to the country to avoid
the prospect of defeat ; an appeal, the result of which was
little less than a foregone conclusion, seeing that it was simply
staking the interests of a small and influential and consequently
obnoxious class, against the interest, or rather prejudices of the
people, of thoste very people too, mark, who were called upon to be
the arbiters—the consequent return, in almost every district, of
members pledged to uphold those valuations in their entirety—and
the subsequent sale of the runs—might well have been brought
forward as additional instances of the unfairness with which this
class have been treated j while the calamitous drought which has


so long’ existed, and still continues in the more noithern parts ot
the Colony, making, as it unhappily has, many of those parts little
else than vast grave yards for our famished flocks, and the loss and
ruin arising from which it is impossible yet to form any adequate
idea of, might well have been adduced as arguments in support of
a kindlier feeling being engendered towards our squatting interests.
The unfair and un-Englishlike attacks too, which have of late
been made by portions of the press and by several members of our
Parliament upon two of our Judges, simply on account of their
judicial decision on an important question not being consonant to
the general wishes —the subsequent action of the Government in
placing itself in direct antagonism with the Supreme Court by
introducing a measure amending and providing for the working
of an Act which had been held by that Court to be invalid—all
this, and more too, might very properly have furnished matter for
additional comment, and may possibly form the subject of a
subsequent letter.


London, 31st October, 18G3.
To the Colonists of South Australia—
A long residence amongst you and the
issession of some stake in your colony, coupled .with a deep
ERRATA.
Page 8, line 44, for ‘ arrainged’ read ‘ arraigned.’
8, last line, for ‘ and on,’ &c., read ‘ and see on,’ &c.
14, line 21, for ‘ having’ re id ‘ had.’
15, “ 34, for ‘is it,’ &c., read ‘is it not,’ &c.
15,’ note, line 4 from bottom, for ‘are to be pulled,’&c., real ‘ are liable to be,’ &c.
20, line 3, for ‘ prejudical* read ‘ prejudicial.’
21, “ 3, for ‘ are,’ in two places, read ‘ is.’ .
23*, “ IS, for ‘ proportionate’ read ‘ proportionately;’ and line 36,/or ‘insurement’
read‘muniments.’ ,
25, lines 3 and 5, for ‘ so’ read ‘ as;’ and line 4, for ‘so great’ read ‘so much greater.
26 line 25, for ‘ which purports, read ‘ which it purports,’ &c.
28 ’ “ 8, for ‘alteration’ read ‘alterations;’ and line 22, f0r ‘depositions’ read
' disposition.’
29 line 28, for ‘ wherever* read ‘ whenever.’ ,
30! “ 18,/or ‘ as,’ in two places, read ‘ more;’ and line 20,/or ‘ ever’ read evep.
31, “ 22, for ‘ desirable read ‘ derivable.’
Pages 31 and 32, for ‘ regime’ read ‘ regime.’
Several of the above errata are in accordance with the original, but the friend of the
writer has deemed it necessary to correct obvious clerical mistakes.
much rankness and gross vitality in the evils to which I refer, to
* T?ie moderate yet firm and manly tone which has hitherto characterised your now
evening paper ‘ The Telegraph,’ should exempt it from these remarks; as I understand
that its existence is at present avowedly probationary I have not treated it as having a
permanent place amongst you.


London, 31st October, 18G3.
To the Colonists of South Australia—
A long 1 residence amongst you and the
possession of some stake in your colony, with a deep
interest in your welfare, will, I am sure, warrant me in addressing
you on a few subjects deserving your very serious consideration.
Before proceeding, however, let me by way of apology, account
for the somewhat singular mode which it has pleased me to
adopt in bringing my views under your notice. It is a custom, and
one the propriety of which I fully acknowledge, for those subjects
of Her Britanic Majesty who desire to give publicity to their
political views or grievances to effect that desire through the
medium of the public press—a medium open alike to the highest
and to the meanest of those subjects who content themselves by
eeping within the bounds of propriety. The privilege conferred
upon the subject, and the salutary influence exercised by its
columns being open to a fair discussion of all matters and by all
classes, have justly acquired for the English press the dignity
of a fourth estate in the realm. But whatever may be
the cause, whether it is that the inherent tendencies of your
press are toward that inverted order which everything around
you, political and physical, assumes in relation to the mother
country, or whatever other reason there may be that will
account for the fact—it is certain that the freedom of dis-
cussion which I have mentioned as characteristic of our
English press is an element wanting in the Press of South
Australia. * It is on this account, therefore, that I adopt my
present mode of addressing you ; for if we solicit the interposition
of your journals, if we complain to them that there are elements in
your present constitution which endanger your security and mar
the beauty of our own glorious Constitution, our complaints are
either ignored or they tell us that the evils which we point out are
only imaginary, mere ‘bodiless creations’—‘the very heat and coinage
of the brain.’ Shall we content ourselves with such a diagnosis ?
Are they to lay the flattering unction to their souls, that not
their trespass but our madness speaks ? Eor my part I see too
much rankness and gross vitality in the evils to which I refer, to
* The moderate yet firm and manly tone which has hitherto characterised your new
evening paper ‘ The Telegraph,’ should exempt it from these remarks; as I understand
that its existence is at present avowedly probationary I have not treated it as having a
permanent place amongst you.


endow them with anything like so lofty a parentage as that of
imagination, and I certainly feel too much method in my own
thoughts to suppose them to be the erratic offspring of a dis-
ordered mind. I turn, therefore, from the empiric who seeks to
hide his own unskilful ness by denying his patient’s power of vision.
I did at one time think of seeking the aid of our own press, but
upon reflection I have come to the conclusion that it is an influence
which operates at too great a distance—it reaches you in a form
more calculated to operate on reason than on passion and prejudice,
those great stimuli to all your actions. I looked to those few in-
stances in which that influence has been exerted, in which the
dangerous tendencies of your political principles and the evils
which must result from the degradation of the suffrage were
pointed out to you, and I saw with what vehemence your modest
Representatives and your Press repudiated the justice of those
warnings and how complacently they held up the dignity of
your Parliament, the wisdom of its legislation, and their own re-
spectability in attestation of the calumnies to which, by implication,
they had been subjected. Now, I do not deny the policy and
ingeniousness evinced in thus boldly evading, by an appeal to
prejudices, the truth of conclusions based on premises derived
from fixed principles of political philosophy. Mr. Shallow, the
respected member of the intellectual constituency of Ballotunga,
will of course vindicate in vigorous oratory the marvellous
perfection of a constitution which has given him what importance
he possesses, and to the aforesaid intellectual constituency the
oratory of Mr. Shallow in vindication of a constitution to which the
majority also owe their influence cannot but be considered master-
pieces of brilliant declamation. We do not say, that Shallow is
altogether to blame, nor do we say, that ‘The Little Pedlington
Record,’ that staunch supporter of Mr. Shallow’s principles is
wrong in following up Shallow’s vindication with one of those
bitterly severe articles for which it is so celebrated. We say, we do
not blame Shallow, because we feel with him that he struggles for
his own political existence, and we do not blame the ‘ Little Pedling-
ton Record,’ because we know that it exists only on the support of
those whose principles it adopts, and the passion for existence is
strong within us. But we do blame them for severally assuming,
as they invariably do, that those noble representatives of our
English press, that occasionally notice your weaknesses and failings
are actuated by personal feelings or- malice in condescending to
instruct, you, in common with the rest of the world, in the true
principles of Government. We of course know, that the existence
of Mr. Shallow, or of the ‘ Little Pedlington Record’ was neither
known nor contemplated, when our English press took the liberty
of protesting against those principles of which the aforesaid worthy
gentleman and still more worthy ‘Recoid’ are stanch supporters,


and that consequently there was no attack, patent or latent,
against the gentleman or the ‘Record’ in question. Nor do
we think it at all likely that Shallow’s vindication in reply, or the
‘Record’s’ cutting articles in support, of which mention has been
already made, are matters with which the leviathans of Journals,
omniscient though they be, are ever likely to become acquainted.
If the knowledge of this last fact be calculated to lessen self-
importance, it should also be remembered how much it is calculated
to impart that boldness which always accompanies a firm confidence
in our own safety. I admit that from my youth upwards I have
always implicitly believed in the truth of the proposition, that
courage increases with the square of the distance from your
adversary, and it is this earnest belief that induces me individually
to step out from the ranks of the aggrieved and boldly 'appeal to
my fellow colonists to redress the evils from £ which they are suffering,
rather than trust my cause to the most powerful advocates that
plead on the side of justice at the bar of public opinion, but who in
this instance would plead at too great a distance from the seat of
judgment.
I confess I have made a strange beginning and a strange
digression, but the .whole of this letter, my friends, will be filled
with such strangenesses as the writer’s conceits may induce him to
adopt. You, who have been accustomed to hear every opinion
uttered with all the deep-toned solemnity becoming the enunciation
of scriptural doctrines; you, who for years have been daily accustomed
to see at ) r our breakfast table a leading paper in which nothing is
ever treated with levity, may wonder at the freedom with which I
shall deal with those subjects upon which I treat, and the non-
observance of those solemn precepts of epistolary propriety which
you have been accustomed to see so sanctimoniously observed.
Remember, however, that solemnity is not necessarily dignity,
any more than ease is frivolity, and that what is made plain to your
understanding is not the more commonplace because not involved
in mysticism. I turn, however, to one of the subjects of my letter,
and as foremost in those ills of which I complain as containing
the germ of all that is antagonistic to the attainment by your
Colony of that dignity and importance to which her vast resources
justify her in aspiring, I arraign at your bar the vicious principle
of Universal Suffrage, and I will point out to you a few of those
practical results, those positive evils which directly or indirectly
have under your own notice sprung from that principle, evils not
unexpected, not unpredicted, but foretold and looked for by all who
base their conclusions on historical evidence', and deduce from
given facts principles almost as fixed and certain as if arrived at
by a purely mathematical process.
From the consequences which in all ages and countries have
been attendant on the preponderating political influence of the


lower classes may be deduced a law for our guidance almost as
fixed and immutable as the laws of nature. Enthusiasm, ambition,
or prejudice may cloud the truth of the warning which it imparts,
but will not avert its fulfilment ; and I see little prospect of that
power, whose actions are never the result of favor or chance, con-
descending to depart from its inexorable laws for the purpose of
exempting the colony of South Australia from the retribution due
to her imprudence. There’s ‘a hoight of foine language entoirely.’
Are you not asking, my friends, ‘ What this can be that roars so
loud and thunders in the index V I know you are, but rest quiet;
it’s nothing of any immediate danger; nothing perhaps, that will
affect you very seriously to-day—to-morrow—this year, or next;
perhaps not in the course ofyour lives, unless they extend over a
very lengthened period ; but it’s something that will affect the
interests and happiness of those near and dear to you, and that
may cause their remembrance of you to be saddened by the painful
reflection of your passive’ indifference in not striving to avert the
ills from which they will inevitably suffer.
Many of you will no doubt be surprised that there is anything
in these apparently untroubled times calling even for thought,
much less action, and still less than all these strong remarks,
dignified by being embodied in the form of a diminutive book.
But, depend upon it, this wonderment and ignorance on your part
is no criterion by which to estimate the importance of events.
Development is as much a function of the body politic as the
body natural. The unwary landsman is often astonished when
with only a few little specs in the horizon he sees the careful
seaman reefing his sails. For a moment, too, the expediency of
such an act is questioned; but the respect due to experience and
wisdom is properly felt when after events prove that the preservation
of the vessel was due to the pilot’s foresight and vigilance.
Your position in relation to those who are constantly warning
you of political dangers is not unlike that of the landsman to the
sailor. The simile is no doubt a trite one, but it will do for my
purpose; now I have no wish to exaggerate those causes which
should occasion you fear, but at present there are little specs in
in your political horizon, small though they be, that betoken peril
in the distance, and I would seriously ask you to take the advice
of those whose intellectual capacity and experience fit them for the
duty of watching over and guiding you, and be governed no longer
by the arbitrary doctrines of Mr. Shallow, or the ‘Record’ of Little
Pedlington. So ends my second digression, which brings me once
more to a little beyond the point where I first started. At that
point where with all due solemnity I arrainged Universal Suffrage
as an evil and a disgrace to your Constitution, fn opening my
case I will for a moment look back to the origin of Universal
Suffrage, and on what ground it is supported. There is a political


maxim which wiser men than you or I are agreed upon as
theoretically perfect, and in which it is laid down that those who are
taxed should be represented. This maxim is made the stronghold
of Universal Suffrage—but how ? By perversion and exaggeration.
That all who pay taxes should be represented may be true, but
does it mean that every man who pays taxes should be represented
without reference to his political status ?
Does it not mean that all who pay taxes shall be represented
according to the amount which they respectively pay ?
Is it meant as a political fiction, so great, as to assume that all
men are equal and have equal rights ? If so, born as all English-
men are, with a deep respect for those who are placed above them
by wealth, influence, and position, can such a fiction be dressed in
the garb of reality 1 Looking np as we do with honest pride to
the powerful aristocracy of England who have outlived the petty
taunts of those by whom they have been so often jeered, and still stand
as one of England’s glories, dignifying and ennobling her as much
by their external grandeur as by their intrinsic worth: I say, looking
up to such a race can we suppose that a maxim that says—all who
pay taxes should be represented, can be intended to give to you,
as in principle it does, political rights equal to those 1 brave Peers
of England, pillars of the State.’
If you reduce all to one common level what stimulus will you
offer to honest ambition, what reward will you hold out to merit ?
Will men strive for that which the meanest can obtain by the arts
of flattery. Reflect upon your Constitution and ask yourselves
whether the goal of intellectual and moral worth has not been
removed. To you who may be in ignorance of how or in what
way the removal has taken place, let me address a few remarks.
By the Constitution Act of 1855-6, you became vested with
Responsible (government, and dignified with two Houses of
Parliament existing under the several names of Legislative Council
and House of Assembly, the former consisting of 18, the latter of
36 Members, these Houses holding, it is supposed, a position in
relation to each other similar to that of the House of Commons
and House of Lords in England.
Let us trace out the resemblance. The qualification of the voter
lor the House of Assembly is simply that he shall be twenty-one
years of age, under Her Majesty’s allegiance, and be on the
electoral roll for six months prior to the time of voting. The
qualification of the representative is the same. It is this House of
Assembly that when duly elected occupies in your Colony a position
analagous to that which the House of Commons occupies at home.
For the Upper House or Legislative Council, the qualification of the
voter is that he shall be possessed of freehold to the value of £SO,
or of leasehold, with a period of three years unexpired, to that value.
The qualification in the candidate is simply that he shall have


resided three years in the Colony, shall be of the age of thirty
years, and under British allegiance. This then is the House that
in your Colony occupies a position analagous to that which the
House of Lords holds in England.
It is this property qualification in the voter for the Upper House
—this qualification which the meanest tradesman in your streets
possesses —that we are told will ensure to the propertied classes a
representation, that will check the levelling and radical principles
which it is admitted the Lower House might possibly adopt, elected
as it is without qualification in the constituent or representative.
It is this qualification that is held up to you as the security which
you possess against any unjust invasion of your constitutional rights.
Now, I ask you, my honest friends, who err through ignorance
rather than desire, whether such a Constitution as this fairly
recognises the right of the propertied classes, the upper classes,
those classes that in your heart you really respect, and feel to be
deserving of more importance in the State than you are; those
whom you know to be so much better acquainted with the com-
plicated rules of Government, and so much more fitted to make
laws for your own welfare than you are yourselves. Mind, lam
speaking now of what you feel and know, when seated quietly in
your comfortable home, when under no morbid excitement, when
that monster Jones is not at your side preaching to you on the
universal equality of men, and putting into your poor silly head
thoughts and feelings foreign to your nature, not only making you
feel that you are a better man than any of those whom fortune has
placed above you, but creating in your mind a feeling of downright
enmity against them. I want Jones, who between ourselves is a
vain idiotic know-nothing, to be entirely away from you and out of
your thoughts when considering the little facts which I am desirous
of impressing on your mind.
I may tell you once for all, that Jones comes or a very ancient
but a very bad family. His first ancestors sprang up in an old
City of Greece, known by the name of Athens, and so upset the
practicability of a form of Government (not wholly unlike your
own) set up there by a wise old gentleman named Solon, that sage
men have always kept aloof from similar constitutions. It was
Jones’ ancestors, moreover, that had a hand in upsetting those
other glorious old states of which some of you have no doubt heard.
Coming nearer our own time, I may tell you it was this identical
family that caused those fearful revolutions, and that loss of life
and bloodshed which have taken place at various times in France.
They are great travellers; they live very little in England;
they have the utmost contempt for the aristocracy of England ;
they hate the Constitution of England; they support the * rights
of man,’ and have an intense abhorrence for all people who possess
more wealth than they do themselves. The atmosphere of England


does not at all suit them. There are a few here, however, but
many more in Ireland and on the Continent, and I fear more than
are necessary in South Australia. But take my advice, Brown,
for I’ll advise you personally for the sake of your own happiness,
for the sake of those who look to you for protection in all danger
and trouble, and all that sort of thing you know, hs you would
wish to keep your hands free from political crime (mind, I say,
political crime, it’s strong language, but I mean it) have no more to
do with Jones; don’t listen to him for a moment; shut your door
in his face when he next comes; don’t let him get even his foot
in, or if he does jam it till he takes it out; otherwise you will be
ruined body and soul. Believe me, Brown, he is the worst man
that in our present state of affairs you can possibly deal with.
And now listen solemnly and attentively, while I tell you that
Jones is nothing less than a Demagogue. Bear it well in mind, tell,
all your friends, and tell them to tell all their friends, and when the
truth becomes known and Jones and his family are no longer
recognized as a portion of the great human family, I will be
inclined even to try what good can be brought out of your present
political Constitution. And now back again to the last point of
divergence, and at the risk of saying what I have already said, let
me ask you whether that is a fair representation that gives to every
member of the working classes or lower orders, or whatever term
we may designate those who are not in the middle or upper ranks
of life, a political right equal to every member of those middle or
upper ranks, a right nominally equal but paramount in reality
through the superiority in number of those lower orders. Doe? it
not seem to you to savour of injustice, that you without one-
hundredth part of the wealth and interest of your neighbour should
be placed on a footing of equality ? . Let me put a simple case to
you, and ask whether by that you consider such an equality
consistent ?
Let me suppose A to be possessed of considerable property.
That with a view to the prevention of disagreements between the
owners of property and their tenants and servants, a law exists which
provides that a person shall be appointed whose duty it is amongst
other things to provide measures for the security of A’s property,
and the general benefit of himself! his tenants, and household.
That the person so to be appointed shall be chosen by the votes of
A, his tenants, and the members of his household, and that the
person who shall obtain the greatest number of votes snail be duly
elected. That there is, moreover, a power to be vested in the
person so to be appointed of borrowing on the security of A’s
property any moneys he may deem necessary for furthering the
interests of A, or that of his tenants or household.
Now against the vote of A will be those of B, C, D, and E,
his tenants and servants who with the strongest prejudices


against wealth have still some little requirements and desires that
render a decrease in rentals, and an increase in wages highly
expedient. Now may we not naturally conclude, that actuated by
that sincere desire to forward their own interests at the sacrifice of
others, so deeply rooted in the breasts of the anti-wealthy portion
of every community, the conditions which B, C, D, and E, will
exact before voting for the representative F will be :—Firstly.
That no others shall be admitted as participators in the privileges
which they enjoy as tenants of A and members of his household.
Secondly. That with a view to the satisfaction of their said desires
for increased wages, and under the power which the Representative
on appointment will have, moneys shall be borrowed on the security
of A’s property for the purpose of erecting buildings and making
other improvements, which by increasing the demand for labour
will increase the rate of wages. Now can it be denied that these
are the relative positions of the propertied classes, the working
classes, and the representatives; that is, does not A represent the
propertied class, do not B, C, D, and E represent the working or
lower class, and F the Representative ; and are not the conditions of
non-immigration, expenditure on public works, and the raising the
money for payments of the sums so incurred by loan or bond,
which members are too often pledged to observe, analagous to those
which B, C, D, and E impose on their representative F.
In this hypothetical case it may be argued that I give no adequate
reasons why B, C, D, and E, should have a vote in the choice of a
person that has power to deal with A’s property in the manner
described, and that it is consequently a case which puts in undue
prominence, the injustice of A’s position. But the ground which
I give for A’s servants and tenants severally possessing a right of
representation in common with A is, I maintain, as tenable as the
ground which the supporters of Universal Suffrage hold in support
of the franchise being vested in every mafl above the age of twenty-
one years. I give as a reason for their (A’s servants and tenants)
possessing that right that the representative is to have power of
enacting measures for the due management of A’s estate and
household, of which B, C, D, & E, are members ; and I maintain
that this right would come as fairly under the doctrine that whoever
is to abide by and submit to laws should have a choice in the
appointment of those who are to make such laws as the right of
Universal Suffrage would come under the analogous and not more
equitable doctrine, that whoever is taxed should be represented.
And again, the power which F has to raise money on the
security of A’s property, is analagous to the power which
your representatives have of borrowing money for any purposes
they may think proper, by the exercise of wdiich all property is, to
some extent, encumbered. For if your land sales fall off, if indirect
taxation be insufficient to meet your liabilities,'will not your lands


and incomes become the source from which the deficiency will be
obtained, and will any one maintain that direct taxation and
Uuiversal Suffrage should he co-existent.
I have no wish, however, to dwell upon supposititious cases. There
are enough hard, tangible, plain matters of fact to deal with without
risking the accusation of drawing upon my imagination. But
before touching on these plain matters of fact, let me for one
moment look back and point out how peculiarly adapted for the
rapid development of your new constitutional principles was the
season at which they sprung. The fever of excitement consequent
on the marvellous discoveries of gold in Victoria had not worn off;
the extraordinary depreciation in currency consequent on the
sudden influx of gold and the increased circulation occasioned by
the Bullion Act, gave a fictitious value to property, enriched a nevv
class of colonists, and changed the whole aspect of your colonv.
But it was an increase of wealth which added little to enjoyment and
nothing to your permanent welfare; it was wealth stripped of its
dignity, divested of its virtue ; wealth, which consequent on its too
rapid acquisition, engendered upstart pride and absurd pomposity.
Gentlemen intended by nature to occupy but a very limited space
in this great globe became inflated to an extent as unpleasant to
behold as it was dangerous to their personal well being. They
discovered, as if by inspiration, that they had existed in the midst
of a grossly artificial state of things ; that everything around them
was disorder and confusion ; that Governments were, and had been
, conducted on wrong principles, principles altogether at variance with
their rigid notions of justice and economy—all distinctions amongst
men were invidious; all were born by nature with equal rights ;
all should be endowed with equal privileges. The new Constitution—
that Constitution which gave to all men equal rights—was to them
a gratifying source from which to derive the means of carrying out
their newly acquired ideas, and of humbling what they termed the
absurd pride, behind which the legitimately wealthy entrenched
themselves. A new class of politicians thus came into existence.
Tradesmen of various grades brought forward the same principles
which had governed them in their respective occupations as those
on which to bass a new polity. Innovation and retrenchment,
fiscal, judicial, and administrative reform, and universal political
equality, were the great cries by which the popular ear was
gained.
Unhappily, too, there was nothing to temper and moderate these
exaggerated notions and levelling tendencies. The Press, insfead
of checking, stimulated them; and, what is still more to be deplored,
the vice-regal power was at that time and for years afterwards
vested in one too ready at all times to seek popularity, not only at
the risk of defacing the beauties of that Constitution which it was
his especial duty to preserve, but at the sacrifice of the esteem of


those whose good opinion should have outweighed a whole colony
of others. Sown, then, as the principles of your New Constitution
were, in a soil so peculiarly suited to their growth, and nourished
under such fostering influences, can we wonder that they have
taken so deep a root as they have.
Wealth and dignity were discovered to be the great obstructions
to national progress. The rights of the working man were to be the
rights to which all others were to give way.
The strength with which a candidate for legislative honours pledged
himself to advocate those rights was the test by which his fitness
was determined. If the candidate Smith was the ‘ Friend of the
working classes/ as he of course always was ; Brown was the
‘Friend of the working classes, and the vigorous opponent of
immigration / Jones, the ‘ Friend of the working classes, the
opponent of immigration, and the advocate for public works / while
Robinson, who was invariably elected, was the ‘Friend of the
working classes, the unflinching opponent of immigration, the
advocate of public works, and the stanch upholder of the new Con-
stitution.’
The number of class measures which the candidates pledged
themselves to support having the same influence with the electors
as the number of children which the several candidates for the
parochial duties of beadle were blest with had upon certain
parishioners, of whom certain further particulars may be obtained
in one of ‘Boz’s’ sketches. Members were returned pledged to
oppose every measure antagonistic to the supposed interests of
the- working classes, and to support every thing tending to their
advancement. Immigration was gradually suspended. One of the
essential principles on which your colony was founded was violated
in order that the rate of wages should not be lowered. Wages of
course rose, and the resources of the colony were cramped. The
people (not the populace) called aloud for additional help to enable
them to continue their respective occupations. The proceeds from
agriculture hardly paid the working and incidental expenses. In
1860 and 1861, the number of farm servants was but about 15
per cent, in excess of the number of farmers. No wonder many
of your poorer farmers sunk under their accumulated misfortunes,
and were driven to seek relief from the ‘lnsolvent Court. But
the principle itself was suicidal. The resources were stagnated ;
the exorbitant rate of wages so crushed all hope of leaving to the
employer that adequate remuneration without which no occupation
can be continued, that agricultural and mineral pursuits, the great
sources from which you had derived your importance were partly
suspended; thus taking from the working man the very occu-
pation which he selfishly sought to monopolize, and driving him
to seek temporary relief from the factitious sources of Government
employ. Here again, too, do we fi-nd his interests studied. The


evils arising 1 from the stoppage of immigration were augmented by
a reckless expenditure on public works. Increasing the demand
for labour but stopping the supply.
To say nothing of the recklessness and mismanagement evinced
in their construction, we find that these public works, these so
called reproductive works, have swallowed up not only those
moneys which should have gone for the purposes of immigration,
but saddled you with a debt of eight or nine hundred thousand
pounds bearing an exorbitant interest of 6 per cent. What are
these reproductive works now yielding ? Have they not hitherto
absorbed about one tenth of your whole revenue in the payment of
interest. And are you not even at the present time paying £35,000
a year towards that interest? at a time when you were led to
expect your reproductive works would, at all events, pay the interest
accruing due in respect of the cost of their construction. I honestly
believe that if a fair estimation were made of the present value of
your railways and waterworks* it would be found to be at least
50 per cent, below the cost of construction, and I believe that if
these works were offered for sale, even in a fair market, that the
amount realised would show even a greater decrease than I have
suggested. Reckoning therefore the amount expended in your
railways and waterworks at £1,000,000, this deterioration in value
forms an important item in your small colony. Irrespective of this
however, and solely in reference to the deficit in respect of
interest, can it be doubted that these works have been premature
and beyond the requirements of the colony. Money, if left to
itself, will always seek a proper channel in which to flow, and
private enterprise is always ready to avail itself of any means to
obtain an adequate profit on its capital without Government
forcing money into a channel for which it was never intended, and
compelling the whole inhabitants of the Colony to contribute to
objects from which the majority derive no benefit whatever.
Have not, moreover, your public lands been forced into the market
to meet the demands which these public works have created ? Is it
useless to conceal the plain fact that your lands have not been
offered in a legitimate market; that the lands have been crammed
down the throat of the squatter, to use his own expressive words,
with no considerations as to his powers of digestion ?
\ * I see by the last report of the Manager of the Waterworks, that he speaks rather
sanguinely of the probability of these works at once paying the interest on the outlay ;
but he forgets to remind you of the compulsion by which the rates in respect of this
costly luxury are obtained, consequent on the works being a Government undertaking,
I speak advisedly when I say that one-third of the receipts in respect of these works is a
forced contribution and from which the payers derive no advantage. Perhaps it is that
your Parliament is studiously regardful of the sanitary condition of the people, and is
anxious to encourage rural pursuits and suburban residence ; but one thing is certain,
that what with the waterworks and that most extraordinary provision in the Municipal
Act, by which all wooden roofs and buildings are to be pulled down by the year 1865,
there is a very fair prospect that many of the holders of town property will be only toe
glad to pay a reasonable sum to any person willing to release them from the burthens
which such property entails.


When I say that these lands have not been offered in a legitimate
market, I mean that they have not been offered in a market where
sales have been effected to meet the wants of the agriculturist, and
have not resulted from that fair competition which such wants
necessarily create. Let me show in what way then the squatter
has been forced to become the purchaser.
In the leases of the waste lands, is contained a power of
resumption by the Crown of the whole or any part of the lands
demised whenever deemed necessary for public purposes or for sale.
The great object in reserving this right was that as your agri-
cultural interests widened, and as their requirements increased, such
portions of the pastoral lands leased to the squatters as might be
sufficient to satisfy these requirements should from time to time be
resumed and offered for sale. To effect an object so beneficial as
that of increasing the fertility of your lands by cultivation, no one
could reasonably complain against the exercise of such a right of
resumption, however impolitic the reservation of such a right may
be. But the resumptions for years past have not been consequent on
these demands or to meet these requirements, ihe runs in all, or in
part, have in most cases been taken, divided into e Hundreds, and to
each block of eighty acres has been annexed a right of commonage
over certain lands set apart for such purpose within the Hundred.
This commonage has invariably been beyond the capabilities of the
soil and a fictitious inducement has been held out to obtain pur-
chasers, an inducement which, if effective, would necessarily
encourage encroachments on the adjacent runs of the squatters
which only constant vigilance and expense could avoid. To avert
these trespasses and annoyances which arise from the adjacent
lands becoming vested in such a class of purchasers, the squatter
is compelled in his own protection, to purchase as much of the land
offered for sale as lies in his power. It is argued that the fact of
the squatter purchasing is a sure sign that there are others who
would purchase, or that the land is intrinsically worth the amount
of the purchase money ; but this by no means follows. Ihe fact of
the squatter purchasing is that others might unw'arily purchase, and
because he foresees in such a case that endless annoyance must be
occasioned.
He purchases to protect himself from the contingency, not the
certainty, of others purchasing. Again, the very lands resumed
and offered for sale are perhaps those, without which his run is
comparatively useless, which derive a value from accidental causes
which he has been instrumental in producing and on account of which
he is consequently compelled to purchase or altogether relinquish
his occupation.* Little do those who look through the accounts of
* Nothinsr can be more unfair than the argument which we constantly hear advanced
that the continuance by the squatter in the occupation of lus , r M r ‘
contradiction of his alleged grievances. It should be remembered that the capital of


your public sales and enviously note down the frequency of the
squatters’ names on the list of purchasers, think of the moral com-
pulsion under whose these purchases are made.
Could they see the bank books of those whose names so
frequently appear; were they but to search amongst the records of
mortgages, bills of sale and preferable liens, and see the amounts
standing to the several debits of your squatters, and the amount of
interest which is paid in respect of their several debts, most of which
arise from these forced purchases, the feeling of envy would perhaps
be supplanted by the better one of sympathy. Out of about
2,000,000 acres of your purchased land not 495,000 are under
cultivation. We may reckon, therefore, that not very far short of two
millions of acres of land have been forced into the hands of the squatter.
Assuming then 2,000,000 of acres to have been purchased at the
upset price, and calculating the interest on the purchase money at
6 per cent., the rate which the bonds bear, and for the retirement
of which most of the land is sold, we shall find that the amount
will be about £120,000 a year, which, with his assessment and
rent, will imke up little short of £200,000 per annum, or more
than a third of the revenue of your colony contributed by the
squatter. Now this is no unfair statement of facts. The squatter
is compelled to buy in protection of his run, as I have before shown,
and the interest on his purchase-money forms part of his rent,
and may be fairly regarded as a kind of supplementary contribution
•towards the revenue. For presuming that the squatter had not
purchased the lands in protection of his run when offered for sale,
would the greater part of this land ha/e been sold at all, seeing that
less than 500,000 acres were amply sufficient for the demands of your
agriculturists, and knowing as we do, except in the very best part
of the colony, the profits from pastoral occupation of purchased
land will not repay the interest on the purchase-money. It
must be recollected, too, that I have put down the purchase-
money at the lowest possible amount, and have put down the rate of
interest on the purchase-money at 6 per cent., the rate of the bonds;
whereas the lowest amount at which the squatter has borrowed
has been 8, and in many cases 10 per cent., thus increasing the
amount from £120,000 to about £160,000 a year. There can be
little doubt that there has been and still is an unfair feeling against
the squatter, and an unjust disregard of his interests. Tou give
him a lease at a fixed rental, at a rental that enables him to render
his land fully productive and profitable. You find that he
has the best of the bargain, and avail yourselves of an
ambiguous clause in his lease to assess his land for purposes
which it was clearly proved before a Committee of the House of
the squatter is unlilcc that of any other class. He has no market to which he can
export his stock, and he must have means for their existence. With him the holding or
relinquishment of his run is simply a question of comparative or absolute ruin.


Assembly were never contemplated when the clause was inserted.
You then crown all by taking from him the whole or such part
of his run as the Government for the time being may think fit,
and for purposes contrary to the intention with which the right of
resumption was reserved. lam not going, however, into the question
of the legality of many of these resumptions, or of many of the
other grievances to which the squatter is subjected, but on the
broad principle of equity, which should regulate the conduct
between man and man they deserve condemnation.
The reservation of a power of resumption in pastoral leases
for any purpose is altogether impplitic. Palev lays down as
fundamental rules to be observed in the adjustment of the laws of
property, that of giving to the occupier all the power over the soil
which is necessary for its perfect cultivation, and of assigning the
whole profit of every improvement to the persons by whose activity
it is carried on. Now the right of resumption is in direct
contravention to these maxims, and operates to deter the occupier
from improving and developing the capabilities of his land under
a tenure so precarious as that by which he holds.
Tenancies at will are always those from which both landlord and
tenant derive least benefit; and, with the existing right of resumption,
the lessee of pastoral lands is little better than a tenant at will.
He has a lease for a definite period, it is true, but what security
has he that it will not be extinguished in a week or a month, if the
arbitrary requirements of the Government for the time being*
demand it.
The Act of last session which provides that a list of all Counties
and Hundreds shall, fourteen days before proclamation, be laid
before Parliament, limits to a great extent the power which
Government has had over the pastoral lands, and will no doubt
serve to prevent lands being- resumed at the mere arbitrary will of
the Commissioner of Crown Lands; but it only meets the evil half
way. The practice, moreover, of setting apart certain lands for
commonage is essentially vicious. It has proved so in England;
it has proved so in South Australia. It is subjecting the
lands set apart to comparative sterility. We all know that the
object of annexing commonage to land was, in its origin, to enable
the occupant of the land to which the commonage is annexed to
fatten his cattle upon the common, while his land was under
cultivation.
This is the only ground on which the principle is at all
supportable, and this ground will seldom be tenable in your Colony.
Will any one at all acquainted with the nature of the land on the
Murray, which was declared Hundreds by Sir R. G. Mac Donnell,
suppose that any of it will ever admit of being used for agricultural
purposes.
Will any one even admit that even the smaller portion of it can


be profitably occupied for pastoral purposes, excepting after
considerable expenditure and risks, which will not be incurred
under the substituted annual leases? Here, then,is an instance of
the injury which Jesuits from the arbitrary exercise of the right of
resumption, not only to the lessee but to the Colony. Out of the
whole of the lands which were declared Hundreds by Sir R. G.
Mac Donnell’s last proclamation, not one twentieth part has, I
understand, been sold to any but the lessees of the runs which were
resumed, and these purchases have, I believe, been made at the
upset price, proving the want of competition. Had it not been for
that resumption, thousands of pounds would have been expended in
developing the resources of lands which will now be comparatively
useless. Thus that which would have been a steadily accumulating
income has been exchanged for a small supposititious capital in hand.
There can be no doubt that enterprise would be encouraged, and
your resources considerably augmented, if your lands were leased
for a definite term at a fixed rent and assessment, and determinable
only by effluxion of time or breach of the covenants in the lease.
As at present there is altogether too narrow-minded a policy on
the part of your Government in the treatment of the lessees, both of
pastoral ana mineral lands, too great a fear that the tenants should
get the best of the bargain, that the transaction should turn out
more profitable than is anticipated, and to provide against which
contingent powers are reserved of annulling, or at least varying the
contract. Jsow, I need hardly say how unfair, how detrimental to
commerce, and how impolitic it would be considered in our
mercantile world to leave every contract in such a form, that after
all risks have been incurred, and the speculation has proved
profitable to one contracting party, the other should be at liberty
to step in and take advantage of the benefit. If such a mode of
dealing would be unfair and unwise amongst commercial men,
whose individual interests are concerned, and where the gain of
one is to some extent the loss of another, how much more so must
it be between a Government and the subjects whose interests are
inseparable, and where the gain of the iatter inevitably tends to
the advantage of the former.
By whatever means your barren wastes are converted into fertile
lands, and your soil rendered productive to the extent of its
capabilities by the development of its mineral resources or other-
wise, you may rest assured of the one fact that they are national
benefits in which you all participate; and if I Tvere a colonist of
South Australia I should feel that although the person through
whose instrumentality any of these benefits accrue might receive a
return of a thousand or twenty thousand a year to mv sixpence,
I would look upon it as impolitic on my part to sacrifice my small
annuity for the mere gratification of depriving him of so dispropor-
tionate a share as that he receives.


Returning, however, to the subject of fixed tenures. If, as will
be said, the granting of leases determinable only by effluxion
of time or breach of the conditions be prejudical to your agri-
cultural interests, by keeping from the market those lands which
their requirements from time to time demand, then you may still
provide against this by a more limited power of resumption, to be
exercised contingent on persons desirous of purchasing any portions
of the land demised, in blocks not less than two or three hundred,
acres, making application to have the same offered for sale by public
auction, and, to prevent vexatious applications, depositing therewith
an amount in the proportion of twenty per cent, on the upset price
of the lands for which such application is made, such deposit money
to be forfeited if the land be not sold, or to be taken as part payment
of the purchase money in case of the applicant becoming the
purchaser; the lessee receiving compensation for all improvements
on any lands so resumed. I fear many years must elapse before
any necessity will exist even for such a reservation as I have last
suggested, for when we find that out of nearly 18,000,000 of
acres contained in counties, about 2,600,000 acres only have
been sold, and four-fifths of these to the squatters, I think it will
be admitted the contingent wants of your agriculturist are amply
provided for without any further sacrifice. I have no wish to
depreciate your agricultural resources or interests, but the quantity of
land capable of being profitably used for pastoral purposes is so
utterly disproportionate to that fitted for agriculture, that we cannot
blind ourselves to the fact of the paramount importance of our pastoral
interest. The dryness of the soil, the intense heat, and the want
of water communication, render agriculture impracticable in most
parts of your colony. Even pastoral pursuits in much of the
country can only be carried on profitably by persons capable of un-
dergoing and encountering such privations and risks as those who
remain cooped up in towns growling with envy at the sight of
accumulating wealth, the honest reward of toil and anxiety, would
be horrified in contemplating. So valueless are portions of your
lands in their natural state, that rather than fettering those willing
to enter upon the arduous task of rendering them fit even for
pastoral occupation, with a prospective assessment and ultimate
resumption, they should be rewarded with a bounty, startling as it
may be to the ears of political economists, upon every bale of wool
and every head of cattle or sheep produced or bred thereon during
the first few years of their tenancy, in addition to a fixed and
extended tenure.
This digression upon the grievances of the squatter has been
made in order to show how injurious to the interests of the com-
munity at large are those laws which, in seeking to equalise wealth,
take from one class the means of acquisition in order to afford
others the opportunity of participating—risking a certainty for an


'uncertainty, sacrificing a positive interest fora contingent benefit—
•and when we find that but one seventh of the lands within counties
has been sold, and that the remainder are either unoccupied or are
held on annual leases which, by deterring the occupier from erecting
improvements or expending money thereon, lessen the capabilities
and limit the productions of the lands, I am justified in asserting
that an actual sacrifice has been made for a contingent benefit, the
contingent benefit being the prospect of sale.
Depend upon it, too, every fresh burthen you impose upon the
squatter will ultimately recoil upon yourselves, and will be felt by
you in the increased prices which you will have to pay for your
beef and mutton. The consequence is inevitable.
I have now done with the squatter. In addition to the objects
which I have just stated, I confess I was unable to resist giving
utterance to a few remarks on behalf of those for whom so few
good words are ever heard in your partial colony.
It is impossible that amongst the interesting topics which I am
endeavouring to bring under jour notice, one so prominent as law
reform should be passed unnoticed, or that so gratifying a piece of
legislation as that of your Real Property Act should be left
without one word of comment. I know it would be a bold man
that would dare to publicly express his disapprobation of an Act
compared to which we are told everything in the annals of
legislation sinks into insignificance; but born as I have been with
a strong predilection for looking at the dark side of things,
and a fearlessness in asserting what I believe to be true, I shall
not be easily daunted in expressing my honest conviction. It is,
however, no more my intention to disavow the opinion which I
entertain of the benefits which will result from that Act, than it is
my intention to maintain that those benefits will be as universal as
its originators and supporters confidently and sanguinely predict.
Looking at the Act without that 'powerfully microscopic aid
with which I fear it is too often viewed, I see in it a simple and
easy method of transferring, leasing, mortgaging, or otherwise
dealing with land when unconnected with the intricacies necessarily
created by complicated devises, settlements, or trusts of any kind.
But, further than this, in its present state I can see little hope of it
being the sole medium of dealing with land. The great object of
our English law has been to afford the possessor every means of
dealing with his property that may be needful to carry out his
wishes. In order to effect that object, and to consummate this power
of absolute disposition, trusts have been instituted which, with
the aid of our Courts of Equit}', have afforded every facility
for the devolution of estates to meet the exigencies of each
particular case, and even the whims and idiosyncrasies of the
respective owners, subject to but one special limitation, which I
must mention for the sake of my professional critics, that the rules


against creating perpetuities be strictly observed, that is, that
land shall not be rendered incapable of being dealt with beyond a
certain time. Now the ‘Real Property Act’ refuses to recognise
any trusts, or allow them to be entered on the ‘ Register-book,’ so
as to limit in any way the right of the ‘registered proprietor’
to deal with the land in respect of which he is so registered.
There is, it is true, a clause by which it is specially provided that
an attested copy or duplicate of any declaration of trust may be
deposited with the Registrar-General, on payment of certain fees ;
but as the same clause also declares that it shall not be registered
or affect the trustees’ right to deal with the property; and, as by
clause 114, no purchaser is bound or affected by any trust expressed,
implied, or constructive, whether with or without notice, it is hard
to conceive for what purpose a provision is made for the safe
custody of such an instrument. It is 'exactly similar to the case
of money being deposited with a banker, to be drawn by the person
to whose credit it is placed, on the happening of certain con-
tingencies, but being against the custom of the bank to allow such
restrictions the former declines recognizing any limitations to the
latter’s power of drawing, but consents to allow the deed in which
these limitations are expressed, to be deposited with him. It is
simply offering on the payment of certain fees a place for the safe
custody of a document which is declaredly ineffective. Why
instruments declaring trusts should not be entered in the register,
it is, indeed, hard to say, unless that by so doing the simplicity of
dealings would be somewhat marred, and set forms could not be
adhered to. But that any law is imperfect that prevents the owner
from dealing other than according to a few prescribed forms cannot
bp doubted. So long as men are content with the mere power of
selling, leasing, or mortgaging, the ‘ Real Property Act,’ with
proper management, will amply meet their wants. It is but
reasonable to suppose, however, that these powers will be inadequate;
that men will have a strong inclination to do as they like with their
own; that they will contemplate the future, and particularly those two
most important events in life, marriage and death; and that to meet
those contingencies they will be anxious to make innumerable
provisions not dreamt of in the philosophy of the Real Property Act.
Your men of wealth, your inchoate aristocracy, may perhaps be
inclined, on the model of their English prototypes, to settle their
property in a somewhat more complicated manner than by a
devise in fee simple or for life. But are-they to do so 1 Are they
to deal with their property in accordance with their own washes, or
in accordance with the provisions of the Real Property Act ?
Is it fair to compel any man to hold his property under a law which
hampers his freedom of disposition ? It would be well that these
questions should be answered, and that these matters should be
seriously considered before a general verdict is demanded in favour


of that Act. It would be well to consider how many new wants will
arise for which that Act makes no provision. Let me here dwell for
a moment on a matter which merits some thoug-ht. Amongst the
numerous persons who commit the very unwise act of laughing at
their own folly there has been, and still is, a strong inclination to
ridicule the multiplicity of English laws and their complications,
and who strongly object to a multitude of contingencies being
provided for in your legislative enactments. They forget that
in proportion to the population to the state of civilization,
and to the freedom which is enjoyed in any state, variety of
laws increases and new questions constantly arise requiring solution.
In your own limited population is it not strange the many dis-
similar cases which are constantly arising, and which have to he
settled either according to existing laws, according to decisions and
decrees already pronounced, or by strict analogy to the principles of
our laws, in order that every similar case that should thereafter
arise may be decided by a fixed precedent ?
Will not these cases increase proportionate to your national
progress ? If you are wise then, my friends, think over this and
don’t substitute feeble abuse for want of comprehension. Take that
man for a dolt who tells you, in the expressive words of Mr. Bumble,
that ‘ the Law is a hass and a hidiot.’ Listen to the words of
a Sir William Blackstone in reference to those who are continually
harping on the subject of the variety of our laws and the necessity
for their simplification. He says ‘ They mistake variety for con-
fusion—they bring us the arbitrary examples of Denmark, Mos-
covy, and Prussia* of wild and uncultivated nations, the savages of
Africa and America, or of narrow domestic republics in ancient
Greece or modern Switzerland, and unreasonably require the same
paucity of laws, the same conciseness of practise in a nation of
freemen, a polite and commercial nation, and a populous extent of
territory.’ What intrinsic worth is contained in these remarks and
how applicable to the majority of your colonists. It sounds, no
doubt, plausible enough to talk of abolishing antiquated customs,
of simplifying laws, of dealing with realty in the same way as
ships, stocks, and horses, and of carrying your insurements of title
in your waistcoat pocket. Unfortunately too, with you practica-
bility and desirability are supposed to coincide, and that which is
pleasing in theory is never doubted to be equally perfect in practice.
The very nature of your Constitution engenders a hankering for
change, a desire of reducing everything to the level of
everyone’s understanding, and we cannot therefoi*e wonder that
any man should become a popular idol who seeks to overthrow laws
♦Mr. Torrens is so frequently referring to the ‘Hanse Towns’ as a proof of the
practicability of the Real Property Act, that 1 had perhaps better state that Mr.
Blackstone lived at a period anterior to the birth of Mr. Torrens; otherwise it will be
inferred, if not asserted, that the great Commentator ha® been actuated by personal
enmity towards the author of the Real Property Act in thus particularising Prussia.


so opposed to the prevailing tendencies for primeval simplicity as
are the laws of England, or that endeavours to reduce everything
to the beforementioned level, and thus humble a class against which
the hereditary antipathies of the lower orders are so strong as
towards that of our legal profession. But, believe me, popular
idols are very dangerous, and during the temporary occupation of
their Pantheon play such pranks, we won’t say l as make angels
weep,’ but as make sensible men very considerably disgusted. I
have seen this to be so. I remember no great time since hearing
some faint whisperings emanating from one of these identical
popular idols, which threatened nothing less than the total over-
throw of the dynasty of the legal profession and the demolition
of the whole fabric of their antiquated dwelling. I remember,
too, how rapidly these faint whispers increased in tone. How the
Press teemed with gigantic ideas of Utopian felicity. How
arbitration was to supplant the whole existing machinery of
judicial administration. How disputes were to be carried on with
the most perfect amicability. Laws were to be invented off-hand
to meet the exigencies of each particular case. There had been
too great a sameness in the working and verdicts of Courts of
Justice; an unnecessary adherence to antiquated customs wholly
repugnant to the progressive tendencies of this marvellously
enlightened age. Lawyers were either to be annihilated, or allowed
to exist as creatures of an anterior period, probably the great
middle period of the geologist, the period of huge sea monsters
and creeping reptiles. Happy, harmonious, but oh, Utopian
state!
Who can help feeling that ( we live in an inverted age, and that
what has gone before us should have come after us,’ when we see
men struggling to push their way back to their original state of
primeval simplicity.
Strange, that that Constitution to which in beauty, dignity and
grandeur nothing comparable exists or has existed, that those laws
matured and perfected by the growth and wisdom of ages should
be deemed obstructive to progress and trammels on freedom in a
colony just casting off her swaddling clothes.
Would that* men could but see the folly of many of their own
ideas! Could but see that the abolition of our Courts of Justice
would be followed by tribunals which the nearer they approached
perfection would the nearer approach those which at present exist.
Could but see that the suppression of one class known by the
designation of lawyers would only give rise to a class differing
only in name.
Till the advent of that millennium to which some fondly look
forward, but which, alas, is as far off now as it has been for many a
longdav, dishonesty and disingenuity willbe practised, contests, dis*
putes, and difficulties will arise; and the only fitting tribunal before


which these contests and disputes should be brought is one similar
to an English Court of Justice, the decisions of which are
grounded on laws fixed and unchanging. So much as our laws
approach nearer to perfection than any others, so great is the
danger of departing from them, and so far as all just laws are
fixed and invariable, so far will it be expedient, on the economical
principle of the division of labour, to retain in all important
matters the services of those who have made those laws their
especial study.
The obloquy which has been cast upon the legal profession by
the originator and supporter of the Real Property Act is an
instance of the extent to which prejudice misleads. Mr. Torrens,
in his speech at the dinner recently given to him here in London,
speaks of the great opposition and difficulties which he has
encountered from the profession. I have no wish to detract from
the merit due to Mr. Torrens for the introduction and steady
support of his Act, hut it is undoubtedly bad taste on his part ta
endeavour to add to his own popularity by maligning others,
particularly when by that so-termed opposition the Act has retained
its existence.
With regard to Mr. Torrens’s remark upon the unfair opposition
which his measure received from the Bench, little need be said.
The man that, at a public dinner, sixteen thousand miles from those
of whom his remarks are made, w-ould go out of his way and
endeavour to degrade men who at all times are peculiarly disabled
from defending themselves from derogatory statements, deserves
only to be mentioned to receive the censure which his conduct
merits and has received. It is impossible that Mr. Torrens can at
the present time be blind to the imperfections of that Act in its
original form. I believe that no man with the least knowledge of
the rudiments of English law (hypochondriacal though he be)
could forbear a smile at the absurdities which characterized his
measure on its first introduction ; and it is a further signal
instance of the inverse way in which prejudice operates,
that whilst the author of that very anomalous measure was extolled
as the author of a marvellous creation, your deservedly respected
old colonist, Sir James Hurtle Fisher, whose careful analysis first
brought to light its numerous contradictions and absurdities, was
regarded by many of you as a factious opponent of reform.
As a writer (Mr. R. Davenport) in the South Australian Register
of August last justly says, those parts of the Act are found to
work best that have been remodelled through this so-termed
opposition.
Is it fair, then, to accuse the profession of inventing difficulties
and factiously opposing, when the removal of those imperfections
was essential to the well-working of the measure. If the interests
of their clients, if the interests of the people at large demanded a


rigorous enquiry as to the validity of an Act affecting so seriously
the security of all tenures, why term it factious opposition ? If an
intending occupant call in an architect to report upon the stability
of an edifice he contemplates residing in, is not the architect in
honour bound to report fully upon all defects and as to the security
of such edifice ? What then is the difference between the relative
positions of the lawyer and his client and the architect and his
constituent?
It is time your Legislature sought in a fair and open way to
bring the Rfeal Property Act nearer to perfection by calling to its
aid the talents and abilities of the legal portion of your community.
That Mr. Torrens will object strongly to such a suggestion no one
will of course doubt, but however much we may be disposed to
honour this deservedly esteemed • gentleman’s whims, this is too
important a matter to allow personal feeling to weigh against public
benefit. Let none but solicitors be allowed to transact dealings
under the Act, and settle and adopt a scale of charges that will
afford a reasonable compensation for the trouble bestowed, and
not such a scale as that appended to the Act for brokers; a scale
which I fear too frequently compels those acting under it to com-
pensate for its inadequacy by resorting to trifling charges in the
shape of commissions and other nondescript addenda. Then, and
not till then, will the working of the Act be conducted in a way
necessary to ensure respectability to its operations, and that
indefeasibility of title which purports to bestow.
I have been informed that titles have been passed through the
Real Property Office the imperfections of which would almost chill
the blood of some of our cute English solicitors.
If I were a South Australian Legislator, not elected under a
universal suffrage Constitution, I would move for a Commission to
report upon the various questionable titles in respect of which
indefeasible certificates have issued, and thus bring to light those
wondrously strange things in titles which it is averred have passed
the scrutinizing gaze of the Real Property Act Commissioners.
To return, however, to the Act and its author, and in justice to the
latter, I unhesitatingly and gratefully confess that Mr. Torrens is
justly entitled to quite as much merit as his peculiar temperament
renders desirable, although he may rest assured that it has only
been through that opposition, against which he so loudly declaims,
that those very necessary amendments and transformations
have occurred which, whilst obscuring the parentage of the Act,
have anomalously not derogated from its legitimacy.
Even at the present time, and with no intention of offering any
opposition, I cannot but point out one or two serious defects which
at times necessarily entail much loss and trouble. By clauses 79
and 80, it is provided, that on the death of every registered pro-
prietor, the heir-at-law, devisee, or tenant, by the curtesy, before


liavino- any power to deal with the land must make an application
to be 'registered as proprietor, setting forth in such application the
quantity of estate claimed, and all equities which in any way anect
the estate of the deceased proprietor; and depositing with such
application the probate or office copy of the will or the evidence of
heirship, as the case may require. At the expiration of six calendar
months from the lodging of the application, supposing no caveat to
have been entered, the person so applying becomes registered
proprietor. Now, I would ask, why six months should have to
elapse before the person making application can deal with his land .
Why is not the ordinary proof in such cases sufficient to entitle
the person interested to be registered immediately on such proof
beino- given? There are certain indubitable proofs of title or
heirship, on the production of which nothing further need be
required, and no delay in vesting the estate need occur. In many
cases it is absolutely essential to realize on the property of the
testator or intestate immediately on his decease; the personal
estate may be insufficient for the payment of the debts due fiom
the estate; creditors may be pressing; the devisees or others
interested might be in a state of absolute poverty; and yet no aid
can be derived, nothing can be done with the property for six
calendar months. Again, why should an assurance fee of a half-
penny in the pound be payable on all property of which a
registered proprietor dies seized. If a registered proprietor leave a
will, which is duly proved, or if evidence of death and heirship be
given, what greater risk is there in transferring the property to the
person so entitled under the will or by descent, than there would
be in accepting an ordinary ‘memorandum oi transfer, and issuing
the certificate to the transferee. There is surely more danger oi
an instrument purporting to be a transfer, and which is simply
handed in for registration with no proof of signature, being a fictitious
document, than of a will duly proved, or evidence of heirship or descent
duly corroborated by the ordinary proof, being fictitious. Considering
the frequency with which property devolves by devise and descent,
and the sum to which the ‘assurance fee’ amounts where the value
of the estate is considerable, I must say such a provision is not in
accordance with the generally supposed economical principles on
which that Act is based.
Many of your landholders have, I believe, property under the
provision of "the Act to the extent of twenty or thirty thousand
pounds, the fee payable in respect of which would be £SO to £OO
in every case of transfer by death, irrespective of the fees attending
registration, and in addition to the serious inconvenience occasioned
by 5 the estate remaining in abeyance for six calendar months;
an expense and delay which, I need hardly say, never arises under
the old system of conveyancing. As I have before said, this is
something more than a trivial defect, although easily remedied, and i


point it out in a spirit of friendly feeling towards the Real Property-
Act, although certainly not in that same friendly spirit which
induces some men to passively watch evils arising rather than
candidly acknowledge a defect in the thing they love. Before
quitting the subject of law reform, and in spite of any opposite
inferences that might be drawn from my remarks, I must disavow
any antipathy to consistent and judicious changes. On the contrary,
I would be the first to advocate any alteration that may be needed
to meet your requirements, and are not repugnant to the general
principles and spirit of your laws.
Those customs and laws which have had a mere arbitrary origin,
or for the continued existence of which no adequate reason can be
given, I would be the first to abolish, provided they either act
unequally or inconsistently. I consider too much can hardly be
said in favor of the ‘Real Estates’ Descent Bill’ (recently under
the consideration of your Legislature) so far as it provides for the
abrogation of the law of primogeniture, and gives to the widow, in
case of the husband’s intestacy, an estate in all realty of which the
husband shall be seized at the time of his death, corresponding in
extent to the interest which she at present takes in his per-
sonalty. Such alterations would, I believe, in many cases do away
with the necessity for any testamentary depositions, and would at
all events prevent the serious injustice to wives and families which
so frequently arises in the absence of wills. I will now quit the
the subject of law reform, and, wearied with contemplating the
useless expenditure on our public works, tired of the squatting
question and of the Real Property Act, I retrace my way to the
point from which I originally diverged. I revert again to the one
great primary grievance, on which I appeal to my fellow colonists,
and in relation to which all else that I have or shall dwell upon
is incidental—the ills of Universal Suffrage. Let me now treat
that principle as regards its adaptability to the moral condition of
the people.
7he calmness and quietude which prevail amongst the lower
classes in South Australia are so frequently held up for our admi-
ration, and used as an argument in proof of their fitness to be
entrusted with an unqualified suffrage, that I cannot forbear con-
sidering to what extent such an argument will hold good, or rather
to what extent this apparent quietude is genuine and likely to
continue. I have no intention of asserting that the lower orders
of your Colony are more susceptible to agitation, or mure fond of
disorganization and disturbances than those of any other; but I
need only recall to memory occurrences within everyone’s remem-
brance, in order to show the love of order and quietude may be
disturbed by the same demagogue acts which have always exercised
powerful influence in creating popular discontents. I refer to what
is. well known to you as the ‘Bootbby question.’


I would not allude to the occurrences to which I have just-
referred if I thought for one moment that by doing so it would add
one painful feeling to him, who has already been the object of so
much unfair malediction; but I feel, that viewed as the whole of
those proceedings now can be in the calm light of reason, unobscured
by passion or prejudice, those only will shudder who originated and
kept on foot that temporary disaffection. I say nothing of the merits
of the question then at issue, but I say, that if the Judge upon the
bench erred at all, it was an error of judgment, demanding nothing
but its reversal by the means which the law provides, and not by
menaces or intimidation; remembering, too, how much more seriously
he would have erred had he sat upon that bench and, under the sanctity
of a solemn oath to administer the laws of his country- with
conscientiousness and integrity, pronounced a judgment which in
his own mind he believed opposed to the principles which he had
sworn to uphold. To systematically assail and insult those who,
in scrupulously preserving inviolate their judicial oaths, have opposed
the wishes of one class of the community, may be a line of conduct
suitable to a degraded state of American society, but it is one
from which every honest Englishman should recoil with disgust.
I attended one of the monster meetings in connection with this
question, which the factions brought about for the consummation
of their obiects, and as an Englishman I felt the indignity which the
national character sustained by the gross virulence there exhibite .
I saw gentlemen, upon whose faces were indeubly stamped
‘Universal Equality/ ‘Universal Suffrage,’ ‘Equal Privileges and
Eights,’ atone momentindulging in the most frightful gesticulations,
hooting, bellowing, shrieking and menacing, wherever a speaker
had the boldness to confront them and to defend the object whom
they had met to vilify, and the next moment I saw these same
stanch advocates of universal and equal rights, hushed, attentive,
and still at the sight of a fresh speaker, one who flattered their
vanity and held up the bench to their execration. I saw too one
of themselves, one whom they had elevated to the position of then
Representative, one who had faithfully fulfilled his promises to
protect their interests, and one far above them in intellect if not m
the soundness of his principles, hissed, hooted, and all but personal y
attacked, because in this one instance he had maintained his own
honest opinion in opposition to the popular voice.
This one instance of the arbitrariness and fickleness of popularity
should have a salutary effect in raising the mind above the meanness
of truckling to the popular cry. lam about to enter into no
digression upon demagoguism, but the events to which 1 am
referring will no doubt recall to many the unfair, unmanly influences
which were brought to operate on the public mind. When we
remember how every possible means were taken to increase the
popular clamor—that.advertisements appeared in the papers, and


placards were posted about the Colony from unknown sources; that'
hired runners were canvassing signatures to petitions for the removal
ot the judge; that men in high positions—men in office—were proved
io have been stimulating their fellow colonists almost to frenzy on a
matter which derived its chief importance from private interests and
personal pique; we cannot doubt that we are in full possession of all
the elements of political disorganization; nor can we help feeling
how insecure must be that Government which depends for its
existence on the vacillating will of those whom faction can always
command. I could ask, had a dissolution taken place at that agitated
period, whether one of those who had supported the dignity of the
bench in that so perilous a time would have been again returned ?
Ido not at all events < fear to say that out of the thirty-six
members of the Lower House thirty would have been returned on
the faith of their avowed support of the question which was then
agitated, and that too without any other regard to their fitness for
such a position. Ihen, indeed, we should have had a piece of
machinery as amusingly complicated in its construction, as whimsi-
cally dovetailed; and composed of more incongruous material
than ever Lurke s celebrated caricature of the Chatham administra-
tmn, anc. utterly useless for other than the one single purpose for
which it was designed. r 1
Fortunately, the public mind, in spite of the continued application
of stimulants in spite of every species of goading, became somewhat
exhausted before the result, in contemplation of which a dissolution
-as urged, became known; and we may congratulate ourselves, and
nose w hose passions are ever above their wisdom, that their wishes
were not realized ; and that our then House of Assembly evinced
resolution enough to withstand the out-door influence and intimi-
dations which ever threatened this question. Can we, however,
always depend on similar occasions being followed by similar
insults . Does it awaken no cause for feai T
Ibind, I am not endeavouring to insinuate that any portion of
your community is in any immediate danger from our present
representative system. I apprehend no violent ebullition of demo-
cratic enthusiasm ; no declaration of non-alleigance to the mother
country ; no law authorising an equal distribution of wealth : but
1 do apprehend from its continuance the gradual subversion and
decay of those parts which, while strengthening, dignify and adorn
ue constitution. I have too much confidence in the integrity of
your present Parliament, and even in the majority of those who
owe their present eminence to the existence of‘the principle against
winch 1 protest, to anticipate any gross violation of your privileges;
and even if 1 had not this confidence, I place too much reliance on
tiie latent resolution and power of the apathetic portion of the
community more liable to suffer from any such violation, to suppose
tiiat tney would calmly submit to any gross degradation. The


class from which danger is most likely to come is comparatively
small, and the majority of your legislators belong either to the old
regime, or are more moderate in their view's than we can reasonably
expect the people’s representatives will always be ; but as the one
class increases the other will die off; the principle is gaining
strength, and the power of re-modelling your constitution is waning.
The importance of some alteration has, I see, been of late urged by
your new journal, the ‘Telegraph,’ which is strongly advocating
the adoption of Hare’s system of representation. I conceive,
however, that such a system would but partially avert the evils of
your own. Here, in England, where the rights of property are so
amply protected by our own hereditary House of Lords, the system
may be the nearest to perfectionin theory that has yet been suggested.
But with you no such security and favor of the property classes
exists. The lower classes must necessarily preponderate, and the
number of their representatives will consequently be greater than
that returned by the propertied class. No doubt the main object
of the system would be obtained in giving to the minor ity a share
in the representation; but why should the property classes, which
ought to be paramount in political importance, be the minority so
represented? So long as all parliamentary measures are carried by
the majority of the representatives, I fear the satisfaction desirable
from such a system would be little more than that the propertied
classes, whom we will suppose to be in the proportion of Id to 20 of
the lower classes, would as a rule in all important matters be only
in that proportionate minority; presuming, as we of course do, that
the representatives would support the measures favorable to those
by whom they are respectively chosen. I do not mean to deny
that though the number of a sectional part of the representatives
be in the minority, it still exercises a very considerable influence in
tempering and equalising measures, and in ensuring some considera-
tion for the constituences which they represent; but in all these
questions in which the prejudice and passions are aroused, and from
which, with you, danger is most likely to arise, I see little likelihood
of any other benefit from such a system than that which I have
before stated.
A property qualification is the simplest and most effectual guard
against the ills to which your present system subjects you. With
the acquisition of property men acquire more stability; they feel they
have something more than that temporary interest in the state
which induces only a regard to their momentary welfare; and more
than this, you give to the honest industrious man a desire to acquire
property by attaching thereto the full political right of which a
subject can be possessed. But if a property qualification be essen-
tial in the elector, I need not say how doubly essential it is in the
representative; and this remark brings me to the consideration of
one, if not the greatest evil attendant on your present system —


the degradation which is likely to ensue in the personnel of your
1 arhament. Now it is no complete answer to this to cite the
present or past state oi your Parliament as evidence in refutation
of any loss of caste. Many of your present representatives are of the
old regime; most of them are moderate, few rash, in their desire for
change; but it requires more than the short space of five or six years
to exterminate one class and substitute another. We must expect
to see them drop offone by one, as we have already watched them. It
is not fair, therefore, to say that the present status of your Parliament
is a type of what it will be; although, even admitting it to be so, I
would ask any honest intelligent man that has attended your
present or previous Houses of Assembly, whether there is not a
something not exactly compatible with that dignity which we look
for in the power that gives us laws; or whether some of those who
now occupy the position of representatives would have even
presumed to have publicly aspired to their present elevation, prior
to the present Constitution. I say nothing of the sincerity and
earnestness of their principles; but I say that it is impossible to
expect men fresh from the counter, the workshop, or the plough,
to bring that knowledge or capacity of mind necessary to enable
them to view the subjects on which they have to decide with that
philosophical acumen which should characterise legislators.
And now, I believe, I have said all that I intended saying, and
possibly a good deal more than there was any need to sav, as my
cynical friend opposite suggests; but be that as it may, I have so
far endeavoured, with. all due fairness and impartiality, to place
before you in a new light some few matters the consideration of
which will I am sure do some little good.
I have been induced to address you from no desire of awakening'
useless fears, and certainly not from any personal feelings
antagonistic either to you or to your Colony ; on the contrary, it is
because I have a kind regard for everything pertaining to the
welfare of your young Colony that I desire to contribute my humble
aid to remove the only obstacles that stand in the way of her
future prosperity.
No one has a higher appreciation of the prospects and the resources
of than I have. With her comparatively boundless
extent of territory—with her vast mineral wealth—with a soil in
many parts unequalled in richness and fertility, albeit, some of
them have passed that infantine and jocund stage when they
laughed harvests with the tickle of the hoe,—with all these
advantages which she certainly has, and with a Constitution (which
she at present certainly has not) that will ensure a due regard to
a . interests and security to all classes, few need hesitate to pre-
dict for her a happy and glorious future. One word more for
mj stif, and I have done. Strongly as my tendencies evidently are
towards the side of Conservatism, do .not suppose that they lean


so much to that side as to lead me to protest against that noble
spirit of reform which meets and, as it were, walks hand in hand
with enlightened progression. It is not this against which I
protest ; but it is that counterfeit spirit of reform—that contamina-
ting spirit of useless innovation that seeks to change the face of
everything only to distort it —against which I protest, and against
which I honestly ask you, one and all, to be upon your guard.
And now allow me to take leave of you and with every wish for
your health and happiness.
Believe me,
Yours very sincerely^
A. H. S.
Gall, Printer, Adelaide,






