

A STRAIGHT TALK
TO HIS MEN
BY
FIELD-MARSHAL EARL KITCHENER,
When Commander-in-Chief in India.
Australasian White Cross League,
56 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
Issued by
WHITE CROSS LEAGUE,
7. Dean's Yard, Westminster, London.


A STRAIGHT TALK TO
HIS MEN
ON his arrival in India, Lori Kitchener learnt
with regret the very serious extent of the
ravages made by venereal disease among
British troops serving in this country, and at once
set to work to combat its growth and spread in
the Army. The results of these efforts, so far, have
been encouraging; but there is a limit to what can
be done in this direction by the authorities to
whom the welfare of the soldier during his tour
of service is entrusted, unless they receive the
hearty co-operation and assistance of the men them-
selves, and it is in order to obtain their help that
Lord Kitchener now addresses to them these remarks
which he desires them to read and to keep in mind.
Lord Kitchener feels sure that new arrivals in
this country, and even those of more experience,
frequently suffer from want of knowledge of how
to protect themselves from the dangers to which
they are exposed in a strange country, and of the
means by which they can best preserve their health
and render themselves a credit to their corps.
The climate and conditions of life in India are,
unfortunately, such as to create temptations greater


than those which exist in countries outside the
tropics. The absence of home associations throws
men more on their own resources and deprives
them of many of those helps towards resist-
ing temptation which surround them in England.
During the cold weather there may perhaps be
enough work, healthy exercise and amusement to
keep men occupied mentally and physically; but
throughout the long months of great heat in the
plains time often hangs heavily on their hands,
and with want of occupation comes the temptation
to excessive indulgence.
It is therefore all the more necessary that
those who are serving their country should
exert to the utmost powers of self-restraint
with which every man is provided in order that
he may keep his appetite in proper control. They
should avoid any excess in liquor; on no account
touch country spirits; take an active interest in
their profession, and do their 'utmost towards
making themselves really smart and efficient
soldiers in every respect. They should take part
in all healthy out-door sports and games, and
always keep themselves in good training and
physically fit. Both mind and body should be fully
occupied, and a lively interest cultivated in all their
surroundings. In this way work will be found
much easier and life generally more pleasant.
Above all things men must remember that they
must do credit to their regiments, for the good
name of a regiment lies in the keeping of every


man belonging to it and must necessarily suffer
if the men become inefficient through venereal.
It is discreditable, and even dishonest, that by
contracting through self-indulgence a disease which
he can avoid, a man should render himself incapable
of doing that work for his country which he
enlisted to do.
Unless pride in their corps and the desire to do it
credit keep men from this, they must be prepared to
see other regiments chosen for active service when
the chance comes, and their own left behind.
It is therefore the duty of a soldier not only to
keep himself clear of disease, but also by his good
example to help his comrades to avoid temptation.
The older men particularly should realise their
responsibilities in this respect. Very much depends
on the tone and example which they set, and even
if they themselves have suffered there is all the
more need that they should do their utmost to
keep their comrades straight, and prevent
them from lowering the good name of the regiment
as a whole. No soldier who is unable to exercise
restraint in these matters can expect to be entrusted
with command over his comrades.
Every man can by self-control restrain the in-
dulgence of those imprudent and reckless impulses
that so often lead men astray, and he who thus
resists is a better soldier and a better man than
the man of weak will who allows his bodily appetites
to rule him and has not the strength of character to


resist temptation and to refuse to follow any bad
example he may see before him.
Remember the better influences in life. What
would your mothers, your sisters and your friends
at home think of you if they saw you in hospital
degraded by this cause? And later on in life, when
you may rightly hope to marry and settle down,
it will make a difference to your own happiness
and that of your family which no words can
express —if you can do so with a body clear of
those loathsome diseases which, if once contracted,
may be passed on to your children.
Syphilis assumes a horrible, loathsome and often
fatal form, through which in time, as years pass on,
the sufferer finds his hair falling off; his skin and the
flesh of His body rot, and are eaten away by slow
cankerous and stinking ulcerations; his nose first
falls in at the bridge and then rots and falls off; his
sight gradually fails and he eventually becomes blind;
his voice first becomes husky and then fades to a
hoarse whisper as his throat is eaten away by foetid
ulcerations which cause his breath to stink. In the
hospitals, and among the suicides, many such
examples are to be found. Gonorrhoea, again,
although it begins as merely a scalding local inflam-
mation, slowly spreads and infects other parts ©f the
body and the blood, and in this way other diseases
follow, such as stricture (which causes excruciating
pain), bladder troubles, and rheumatism of the
joints. Though these diseases do not appear at


once, they all follow in time and increase as the
sufferer grows older.
The only hope for those who have the misfortune
to contract such diseases is to submit to the earliest
possible treatment by a qualified medical officer, for
delay is most dangerous. Nor can any permanent
good result from resorting for aid to quacks
or patent medicines, for the disease will not be
eradicated, but will break out again and again in
the years to come so that the sufferer will infect his
wife, and their children (if any) will be diseased
and weakly cripples.
Lord Kitchener would further point out that,
although the military penalties incurred by those
who contract venereal diseases can only be con-
sidered as of minor importance when compared to
the more dreadful and far-reaching consequences
above referred to, yet men should remember that
they exist and what they are. Promotion may be
affected; first-class service pay is forfeited, for it is
given for efficiency, and men who have suffered
from these diseases remain inefficient for long
periods; guards and duties missed while in hospital
have to be made good, so that the self-indulgence
of those who contract disease may not throw extra
work on their comrades; on their return to duty
they may find all indulgences, passes, etc., withheld,
and the canteen may be closed against them. Should
men be invalided for venereal diseases gratuities
and pensions are liable to be affected.
Further, it must be remembered that it is im


possible for long to conceal the existence of disease,
and that the attempt to do so is an offence which
is very severely punished.
Lord Kitchener asks all the men who compose
the British Army in India, which he is proud to
command, to read and think over these matters, and
to consider whether self-indulgence is worth the
price which has to be paid for it in disease, in
punishment, in injury to the man himself, his wife
and his children, in destruction of the efficiency
of his corps, and in degradation of his own body
and mind.
7


The “White Cross” Obligations.
1. —To treat all girls and women with respect and
endeavour to protect them from wrong and
degradation.
2. To endeavour to put down all indecent
language and coarse jests.
3. To maintain the law of purity as equally
binding on men and women.
4. —To endeavour to spread these principles
among my companions, and to try and help
my younger brothers.
5. —To use every possible means to fulfil the
command, “Keep THYbELF pure.”
Personal advice, or information as to the work of
the League, may be obtained by writing to the
Secretary, Australasian White Cross League,
Box 1280, G.RO., Sydney.
Reprinted for the Australasian White Cross League, 56 Elizabeth St., Sydney,
by William Brooks & Co. Ltd., 17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
