

h i zr/
rev* pvm
- |*aL
■ •
Mil I ~ &
, ' r'l J .- 1 ' &
ifilj I
vs* a Q
$ /s** O d
■^V/<
n- »
!;; i■■ if'iflJ - ■
{i.. 'Hi I S5
M|ij| te
STATEMENT
Ihl A
-i> «ti |
111 • ♦*.*.« ~ frm
J ■■ / Ml k'i •&.
1 • I Jme..
;-"5 kI
CHIEFLY UK LATINO TO>
formation auu SUran&omiwnt
1 I• I M
? } :
OF A
v ii *• i m-
•- . f gill
. .{? , ‘ ' H
f *v i ft
MISSION TO THE ABORIGINES
it •»
, 1 ; ’ i .W
1 Mi
ATrr SOUTH ;
' ' [ I
I ■
p
V ; I ■ OTS
4;i
ADDRESSED to the serious consideration oe the
DIRECTORS OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
I:I - m§
L. E. THRELKELD,
MISSIONARY*
rm
■’■ ■ |||
'
r Mr : f te
Ws&il fi I' M
Butmeg;
PRINTED BY R, HOWE, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1828,


TIIIS Statepicnt being a communication to the Directors individually
which could not bo effected in any other way than by the Press, even uac
the Writer in England, it is requested, that Persons who may accidentally
obtain a perusal, will abstain from publishing its contents ; the cijt d
desired being, f/ictf a more ingenuous mode, of conducting the general cancan.»
of the Society he adopted in future. The serious consideration of the uW*
body of Directors is most earnestly solicited to this statement, to prevent a
more enlarged and general appeal becoming necessary. Should there be an
omission of any Director, it. arises from not knowing the address, or Person t
forming ike Direction for the year ; a few Copies will he left at J. Ni (bet's,
21, Berner s-street, Oxford-street, London, where Directors, not already
supplied, can, on application } obtain a Copy.


STATEMENT, &c.
Jt is a most painful situation to be compelled to submit
to imputation of conduct inconsistent with the high cha-
racter of a Christian teacher; or be obliged, in defence of
reputation, to enter into public explanations, which allord
opportunity to those who are hostile to Christian Missions,
to display their unfriendly feelings toward them. A com-
mittee, at the suggestion of the Directors, was formed m
New South Wales by Mr. Marsden, (himself being .at the
bead) in 1817, which was dissolved by the Directors in the
following year, which occasioned the necessity ot M r. J.
Hayward’s visit to the Directors at home in 1819, to make
representations. A deputation from London, Messrs.
Tyerman and Bennet, whose visit from the Committee
was partly to establish confidence in the Missionaries to-
wards the Directors, shew the necessity of other steps being
taken. The peculiar situation in which I am placed,
having been arrested, and now only out upon bail, for a.
returned bill of o£4oo from Mr. Hankey, drawn by me for
the purpose of establishing and carrying on the Mission to
the Aborigines at Lake Macquarie, formed by the deputa-
tion, and since sanctioned by the Directors, (Mr. Mukden
not feeling himself authorised to sign with me fresh bills)
and the prospect of a prison, until the money is sent out
from England, will, it is most earnestly hoped, be a suf-
ficient plea for my addressing this statement to the Direc-
tors of the London Missionary Society. It any other
apology be needed, it is briefly this:—The printing of
this statement will supersede the necessity oi my return-
ing to Europe, in order, personally, to enter into expla-
nations on the subject; by which much time will
be saved, and the expenditure of several hundred
pounds, for the conveyance of myself and large family to
England prevented, whilst the language can still be attended
y l ,
It:
V- \\
i',: : | f r S ;
• *1;
liri' i
ifili 1
4 : L ' i
:
Bj
■4r
' fell
M
; . W
r K r
( I it
S:;£ !; I!
l . h
; i 1
.
K j I ■;
|
#
: f- mm
• f; : 4 K-A.'f*
-\W&
\\\ : P
i- : m
-1 B
' -i ' W^'
i «
.■{ ~j N'jfe
»s : : !
: ' . ■ i; ,E&
j..,i; * te
■■•Hi: I WS'
’ ;;fe
i, '■ |g§j
i |‘|; ><V
1 . ' [‘


to, until final arrangements take place. Besides i| l( .
public act of dishonoring a bill demands a public exrtk
nation in justification of my proceedings, both in'
Colony, and to the London Missionary Society in Emdau!
on whose good opinion my prospects of usefulness’ as uvi!
as the support of myself, wife, and six children, deneiuk
M issionanes, under the control of agents, whether houonuv
or stipendiary, or residing in distant uncivilized countries
have little, if any, attention paid to their letters or repre-
sentations by the Committee. The long forbearance oi the
Missionaries, as a body in this part of the world, has arisen
puicly from the feartulness ot occasioning injury to that
object for which they separated themselves from their
friends and country, by making known their grievance*
publicly to the Society at large.
On the 16th October 1814, I was directed to prepare
for my future scene of labor in Africa, which was suW
quently changed by the Committee for the South Sea
Islands. Mr. Ellis and myself left England for Eimco in
January, 1816; the illness of Mrs. T. and death of our first
born detained me at Rio Janeiro, and in Novemberlfiiy 1
landed, in company with Messrs. Bourne, BarflT, Darling,
1 Jatt, and Williams, on Eimco. Mr. Williams and my seif
'^ e^ e T coa r^ ll^ors R-aiatea until 1824, when the dcccai»e
ot Mis, I. caused me to leave the Islands for a season in-
tending to visit England. In company with the Depula-
tion, I sailed from the Islands, and landed in the Colony
August 1824, but no vessel was expected to sail quickly
for Great Britain. Circumstances occurred, that I mar*
ned in the Colony, and intended to return to the Island**
A day or two before the marriage, Messrs. Tyerman ami
Bennet addressed me on the subject of a mission to the
Aborigines, to know if I would engage to conduct one at
More ton-bay, to which I consented, and provided accord-
ingly.
A variety of causes occasioned a change as to the scitc
ot the Station, and Moreton-bay was abandoned. I pm*
posed to tae Deputation, they being on the spot, that wo
should seaich for a suitable situation. In January 7>lB*ls*


I wryi
I ISi I II
I 5 I ii
I hh‘ : U‘ :ft
I we sailed to Newcastle, where upon inquiry, we were in-
I formed that many natives often assembled at a place called
I Reid’s Mistake, some twenty miles distant from Newcastle.
I The Deputation obtained much information from the M ‘ H
J Chaplain of the Settlement, but there was not a suitable
f conveyance for them to visit the place. On our return to ' 5 fe
I Sydney, Messrs. Tyerman and Bennet wrote the following
I letter to the Governor; b SIS
I |i f:; |- , ; W
I Ilis Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane , K. CB, Governor
>■ Sir, Your Excellency is aware that we are anxiously desirous of finding an eligible IK" ■ !1 )l FS«
! vitiation in this Colony, at which to commence a mission to the Aborigines oAhis ;
I country, to which we have devoted the Key. Mr. Threlkeld, with a view to instruct ‘ ’
| them in the great principles of Christianity, and the arts of civilized society. With this •
I d l Ml S n h f e J ust P aid a ' iBit t0 Newcastle and its neighbourhood, and arc satisfied " ' * : -
j that a place known by the name of Reid’s Mistake, situate about 15 miles to the south- WV?
I warn of Newcastle, is suitable to our purpose, on account of its bein'*- tiie resort of
; numerous tribes of the aboriginal natives, as well as its local situation. We understand !
that the place to which we refer, is neither surveyed nor appropriated, and we have to
( request the favour that your Excellency will signify your pleasure that the place which ISIB
has been named, may be reserved in trust for the use and benefit of the aboriginal
natives; and also, that the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, or any other Missionary in connexion "
with the London Missionary Society only, may be allowed to reside upon any portion of • V
the said .and that he may judge eligible, who will immediately creel a house there and '
reside amony the natives, with a view to the learning of their language as speedily as ;• «
possible, and prosecuting the great objects which we are assured meet with the benevo * ;
lent views of your Excellency, while they are highly important in the estimation of the ! \W3
•British Government at home. With assurances of the highest considerations
We have the honor to be, * *
your Excellency’s most obedient and humble servants, '
DANIEL TYERMAN,
GEORGE RENNET. - |l
His Excellency was pleased to send the following •
answer:- b 4 iill
au ' s>, '-‘ . .gSlEpg!
Government House, Parramatta, Jan. 20, 182 A <
Gentlemen,—l was unwilling to reply to your letter of the 20th instant until I .
had seen the Attorney General on the subject to which it related; having yesterday • ph
discussed it with that gentleman, I am now prepared to express my wish to meet your
proposal in the fullest extent, in regard to the reservation of a certain tract of land,
near Reid’s Mistake, for the use and for the purpose of bettering the condition of the I. '
Aborigines, in which I feel much interest, and shall be happy to afford the London i i I rill?
Missionary Society, as well as the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, every protection during the
period of his important and valuable experiment to civilize them. It therefore now
remains for you to name what extent of land you consider will be requisite to be re-
served in trust for these natives, in order to enable me to lake steps to give effect to '
the carrying ou the attempt, with the faint prospect of success : when I shall take the
necessary steps to have the same surveyed, and reserved, in order to its being appro- i f ;K
_ * * J r v- • i vvi, in iv us UV lll£ aps
priated accordingly, and with every possible good wish in favourof the undertaking,
Ihave the honour to be, Gentlemen, ° *
Your obedient and humble servant ■
The Rev. Daniel Tyerman, J T. BRISBANE. ;i: T i I
George Bennet, Esq. sc, ■ : r> t
I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, IpPfi
Your obedient and humble servant, f
T. Brisbane. .hi*
fc:’:.
■ y
£ l;S i rf r ISt
■ T- /;


As the time was advancing for inv denni-h,™ r
to-the Deputation thus;—. m y«cpaiture, I , y rote
Dear Brethren w *V T * nmm BennTlU*' ***** *’• '**»
is&ionaiy Society, to whom alone I stand responsible or accounUbZ WUSrUCU ° U lU
1 am, dear Brethren, yours truly, *
The Deputation forwarded me i li« f»ii^ E -' Tmu:u ' i:ui
tions, on February 24, 1825. follow,D S .^truc
Tml r> £ yd ll C , y ' New South trot", l\h Hn
n . . , *o the Rev. Mr. Threlkcld * *♦.
while itAffords cn^oum^merirt^our'hopes of f lab ° Ur now °i ?ens before you s ,* 4
so clearly indicating the DWine wiH it honl ?• t0 see lhe d »S*r of Prov.-C,
with zeal in entering upon this important ° n °? , witll co,,fit kucr m 4
suasion that your exertions shall nof be in vain in Uie Iod°" W, ‘f ° Ur ’, * Uh «*’*
the successor all Missionnrv a ln 1 ,e Bord —While we know u. 11 i; .#
Spirit of God, ityWd. Jnfml?'r‘ T" tl ? 50VCrei « 11 influence, of Z |{ >
your devotedness to your work, and your e^tensVle C * l,n f/ 01,fid<,n » that your
Cross, render yon, in our estimation a suit-i'm* f x P enence as u Missionary of
portant enga geraent. ' ° a SUitable instruraent to be employed 5„ * bJ , ,£
gincs of thll couiitry* ™ChSrn?ly h ntuX Po ‘" V" conversio ' l of Hie dehued AW.I-
Will fix upon you the eye, n" a c , U,strucl,on t''« art, of civili.rd
general, and awaken n, v ra | ; eTt * 1 Cl ‘ risl ™ «»« «
your operation,, alld anticipant ,e "™t ™I a peculiar curiosity Uei.i.,
aware of this, we doubt not tint m. r , 1 of the pending experiment.— tlou
uud patience in your grea’l undertime-I*willin'? 1 *willin'?. ni * activit y. and pmtvmmr,
men, and realize the hopes of 2 Society an n P f Ut „ t ° 1 ,,, f ,1ce «‘e ignorance of f,uU*
while the promises of God, that lie will o-; ve the hi ' Tho ,o y® o,lr ord Jesus ChrUl*
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his no■.. t0 . ,,,850n forhis
encourage your heart, *n a WorTwlXh J -r!’" -I
which these promises encourage you to hope shall aS pecu r h f ly arduou *»
The liberal promise whid, the go unsuccessful,
propnation of a large portion of land for the uln/n 1 ?. ,Untry ,as ,ven (,f
on which you will reside with your family makes the “ atlVCSat Ke,d ’ s hJ
impediment; so that you will ? 56 way open, and removes cmr.
your previous .wangemeiJts and p^epamtion, i° , S001 ! “ >’" u «• • •'«- '
should take a house at the Town of Newcastle for . i V * 11 advisable lint )•«
of your family, while you will use your b L Id '’T° d - for lhe ,
on some appropriate spot within the limits of tht ia™nh“cimias a b U ' tal,IC
Hie best means of building such a house this will oilf?, " lias been given, d, u
of the Society 1ci,, 0 responsible for the elision 1m "T <l,3crcli ' J " ■ ,L ‘l" h
the economy which is consistent with domestic conveSlMei , U IM -' ecssar y 'a u»c ill
Asa knowledge of Hie lam-un-e of th. L.“ ?. nd COmfort-
the success of your Mission, you wfll deem it ( raUSt i V® rc S a, ''le<i nsessenliil l»
118 *“■' «f after you have taken up y„u<• ”bo<Te i.v
acquire it; while it will grcallv ficiiiluo in *’ 1 ““"S your h«l cltofU u
self familiar with their custon s sun •H, '’ ro f, nss . of >'™>' »«k. to nuU ,-mr.
you will sec what the principal difficulties onnv "'" ' ab ‘ tS ' By “ k,lo ' vk > l g“ •'< H«w
acquaintance with their will «„•.?? S,Dff y ° Ur success . are » v/hije an haii. *u
respecting lhe Gospel of Jesus, which will be the ll >1? C ? m^\ l, ‘ icale lhat b»formaiw»» #
and to ensure success. Ibe the Hst adfs P led to remove the oUlnik*


r p«i*i
1 r m
7 i? m !|
il l IS
I
f-
I
illiii
M You k "*f * e > the , •>«P°rtance of condescending lo the capacities and to the
I .jnoraiuc of those degraded beings among whom you will have to dwell; while your
I .xnnplew.il inspire them with a concern to abandon their debasing habit*, and lo
I i,l -° 1 i° SC °/ c J v “* c . d Soca ‘ t . y : Labouring to cultivate their minds, by inslructiuv
I*■ " to 01 r h " S ’ wr *‘ , ; , S> &«• and by communiealii.g to 11, m, knoX g? ? ' iMI
I cl " ,e d “ c, ! ';; c ? au<l P re «l )ls f "'0 gospel, and the duties which they owe to the
I remittent of tins country, and mankind in general, you will at the a me time endea-
!* 'Z'°XZT m r S "r cll ' a " li !' eS3 > tloeeney of dress, industry in cultivating land. . tf. Ip?
f 1 ", 8 themselves houses, and a regard to all the duties of domestic life. Your
knowledge of what has been dona in these respects among the adults of oilier heathen
nations, will forbid that you should despair of success among those who have reached k 7
die years of maturity ; but your special attention will be directed to the children a d
lelhc rising generation, as affording the best grounds of hope. Schools, for .Uc ii,
j •l™'il'<>n »11. will be your first object to establish, and which you will siineri.itend 1 ! If
I with indefatigable care and steal. Amt while your best efforts will he directed to heal
| their mental woe,, your knowledge of medicine will enable yon to remove their bodily
I “‘KV 11 ’? B *. A stea< Jy “ tte " tlon ,u ,hese objects, together with a kind manner a tender
I wl.c.tnde to promote their temporal happinessand comfort, and a glowing ze’,l to ad"
I ranee then eternal salvation, will not fail, we trust, to secure to you their love eonfi-
| toexceltcMek* me “ t ' y °" U '° y wiU "* what a cbrirti “ is . «»<l be led lo emulate
| .I be preachmgof the Gospel being the great means which is ordained of God, lo r i-< I:
I ‘be conversion of sinner*, and to promote their sanctification and mcetness for
| glory and to break down the vile supcislitions which degrade the heathen world your
I ,mmc diatesolicitude will be, to acquire such a knowledge of Hie language of the mmole
| among whom you are to dwell, as to be qualified, as soon’its possible, to preach to the people 7
I is their own tongue the wonderful works of God. To accomplish Ibis, will be indeed
j 1 “. a! duOU3 lask > but the confidence wo have in your talents and diligence, and in that
Divine assistance which you will constantly implore, enable us to anticipate a period
i uot very remote, when tins will be achieved. But, when you have acquired a know ’
lodge of the language of these perishing heathen, while your efforts wil be more "in’ 1 1
mcduite y to promote the welfare of those who reside in your own immediale vicinity •
you will not fail to embrace any. opportunities which may offer, of nrciehh." in,’ - .
Gospel to other tribes, and of promoting the welfare of oilier natives, to the utmost
extent of your power, throughout this vast Island, We rejoice that Providence I '
ihrccled you to a partner in life, like minded with yourself, wo trust, as lo Mi
views and feelings. Her intimate knowledge of the native? will qualify he/lo mil ! y ■ I
active part with you in promoting their welfare, and especially the good' of her own
SPV in \vliif*h mo nrn I'Anfiilnut a. ./■ v • . . • a 1 u " >1 s!
:
g
k
t :
|
! >
K.]
sex to which we are confident, to the extent of her X wll'l
' levotc herself. While as a Missionary, your immediate and principal duties lie amm.
the aborigines of I Ins land, and from which nothing must make you swerve vC "
opportunities offer of preaching the Gospel to your countrymen, we are assured you *
will not fail to embrace them, and lo endeavour to promote the salvation “f those who
have left their native sliorcs, and taken np their abode in this Country. vno j.
A Q f A flwi mno no nT cnKclotliwo 1 • i • . •' X
As to the means of subsisting yourself and family, it must he left to von, - Mi P
discretion. Assured that you will use all the economy which is consistent with vo™
domestic comfort, we pledge the funds of the Society for your support and ~!//. V r
you io draw upon the Treasurer for such sums, from ti n e to time, S Z’y I] ' .-p •
at the same time, we request that, so k soon as you can ascertain what sum will be Zi \
to your annual support, you will name it to the Society at home, persuaded than
fixed annual salary will be more agreeable to all parties. 1 Ulat a
As the Society will take the most lively interest in* your it tvin ,
them the highest gratification to hear of your progress! You wfll, therefore sciufa
I opovt once a year, at leas . to the Secretary, containing a full detail of the slate of your
Mission, and all the important transactions of the past year. ' ur ■ , : \ K
The objects which your Mission proposes to accomplish being those of the rmrr-f flr’lfte
benevolence, the present comfort, and the eternal salvation of immortal souls; youlviH
r. X
s
ft"
m
f i'W ,
x p. n
I f


fed it your bonnclen duly to .void meddling with the politics of the count,., • , ■
you live, on the dm hand; while on the other, you yvill show a n e„. i/,'" * "' ,l
respect to the Civil Authorities of (he land, and endeavour t„,!1„ , ol i
good will towards men, ever demeanin', yourself as anions rini.t- ’ l ’ ea< ' oo . n eartl h"«l
of Society, and a worthy subject of Stale "t"* Christian . » P aa «ful Memb„
tbe Society, wbc„y y ou fust
we **" be haptiy assisl *«* w
Aff t C »eV ,e !? r , eco "™ enJi »!r yo» Mii your partner, and family, to a
*“, “ Go ' 1 ' “ (I fervently praying tiiat great success may attend
' i^"^^^ Promote th ° D, *“ »•"*• *•U of
We remain, dear Friend and Brother,
On the behalf of the Society,
Your Friends and Brethren, for Jesus’ sake,
DANIEL TYERMAN,
I thus acknowledged the receipt of the a^ G f_f N^.
To the Rev. D. Tyerman and G. Rennet, Rsj**"**, 24 > 1825 -
Bear and respected Brethren—l have duly received your kind and eucoura'dni,
ftil ohlLed 4 .™' U ? rMpe<:t ‘ nS f y engagement in the mission to the Aborigines 0 1
feel obliged Ip you for your good wishes, and the confidence you have been nleased to
repose in me. It shall he my earnest endeavour not to abuse that confidence hut to u a
o utmost exert,on for the cause of Christ, iu firmrelianee on that wUho,a
inihe r l , l-1 ” ™.' e ltp antor A i’ o,los invaiu. If convenient, I will wait on you
in tiie morning to have some conversation respecting the Civil Department 5
re the Rev. B. Tyerman,and G. BeZ\ L ' E - THRBLKEU).
The Deputation urged me to go down again to New-
castle and see the spot, which was not before effected. I
proposed that a person, in whom I could safely confide
should accompany me to view the land, being myself per-
feedy ignorant of agricultural pursuits, and in March we
sailed for Newcastle. When we landed, the rain, after a
drought of seven months, set in, and detained us nearly
three weeks at an Inn without having but one opportunity
of visiting Lake Macquarie, at a spot totally unfit for a
residence. .Notwithstanding this disappointment, the long
range of mountains, the vast sheet of water, and its isolated
situation, characterised the place as suitable, provided em-
ployment could be given to induce the natives to assemble
on some other more suitable part on the margin of the
.Lake. On our return to Sydney, it was deemed most ad-
vantageous to procure a house at Newcastle, from which
place journies could be more easily performed to Lake


Dear and respected Brethren,—! have just received intclli to -.:ce that the person who
|| i|j
t I "
f
:; r
made application to me respecting taking charge of the agricultural department, is
waiting an answer from me. Will you have the goodness therefore to favor me with your
Hill:!. :i! I
opinion respecting the plan I have submitted to your consideration. My wish is, to
leave Sydney on Friday fortnight i{ possible, as I am now quite uncomfortable, being at
it
w
heavy expenses, and not in my proper employment.
■
(if-
lam, dear Brethren, &c.
fc if;' 1
f ~'
L. E. TI1RELKELD.
I then received the following reply from the Deputation:
Thursday Morning , April 14, 1825.
Dear Friend and Brother,— Being decidedly of opinion that the disadvantages of
your engaging any agricultural overseer of the kind you mention in the letter with
which we are favored, would very much over-balance any possible advantages that might
result from the measure, we beg to suggest that the person you refer to should not be
o • it
Macquarie, in order to ascertain the most suitable scite for ,J' j 1( ijVjh
a Missionary Establishment. The importance of a know-
ledge in the arts of husbandry to grow the produce for our
consumption, in a place to which no conveyance could be
effected, but by the open sea, through a dangerous bar
harbour, urged me to address the Deputation. !(! t\
On April the 14th the following was sent to the Depu-
tation:— -|;
Sydney, April M, 1825.
li. 'rftth.it f lift nerson who .1
engaged, having no doubt that for a considerable time forward you will be well able to
give the necessary oversight to what government men and mechanics, as well as natives,
you may find it prudent to employ. We remain, dear Brother,
affectionately and faithfully yours,
DANIEL TYERMAN.
GEORGE BEN NET. /
In consequence of ibis communication the person was
not engaged. We left Sydney for Newcastle May the 7th,
1825, taking with us the necessary articles for supplying
the natives, tools for erecting the house, horse-dray, and
many things necessary to form an establishment in the
midst of a standing forest, the trees of which must be
fallen and burnt off/before a single step could be taken to S
reside on the spot. Independent of this, a road was to be
found, and clearance effected before we could convey sup-
plies and tools for those employed. It would swell this
statement to an inconvenient size to state the various diffi-
culties and disappointments encountered during the first , )
twelvemonths in seeking a situation where the Mission |
could be established to most advantage. One place was
chosen, and, after ten acres had been fallen pi forest tim-
ber by the natives, under the direction of an Englishman,
J . : j, V


it was found unsuitable from the wretchedness of ♦ i,„ •,
On the opinion of a friend a,.rl Ir „7T 6 S t!le So|( -
Surveyor, who visited the’ w a ? overn ment Land
goodness, it was deemed orudenf f IB 01 -! er t0 certain its
suitable part of the Lake Kin* ° avail myseif of a more
after, if ‘required. After waiZ 8 be °T^ ,ied
mg that no mechanics could beobtSd Sr^wA” 11 ‘ ind *
nor at Newcastle to at Head Quarters,
opinion ofTespectable ZIT 1 took «'*
bqurhood, frieU to the S"m' J “nflf« h *
entered into for comDletino-« P ‘ ff ”* ar c a contract was
rooms,. 14 by 16 under tK? r f 6 ’ conslstin S of four
by 12 under the vennd.h f> Uv ,° small roo ™s 10
l3s. Gd. My farnilv a'tLbfLt 1 Slde ’ f ° r th , e sum of
persons. It was alio now Requisite tJhlr*s? 18ted f of ninc
sons to carry into effort th 3 i S - 6 to i three freeper-
much time had elapsed that ft wl gn °^, the Mission - So
to take prompt measures tn e 3 f r' U r? tie more necessary
really meant Government, that we
the faith of S° n . 0 » th e grant of land, on
Intimations to tlds effect I tr " st . to the na «ves.
pended much on if’ that iC de *-
grant would be bv the l°“ r , that the
cannot express my
lined until September won P er P ,exit . les which contU
reside in the woods 14 mfj when vve left Newcastle to
exposed to the attack IfT t, fron ? an y civilized being—
vilkd black! This U npSsS!SJ’?r e! L” d ™? U
creased from the knowleKrf £ of “ Ind was ,n-
-by the Directors E r f® olutlon s passed
Platt, Williams, and myself on 5 Bo , urn ,?’ -Darling,
Colony vet their f 1 Clar B' es of every article in this


fs,
with mine for so large an establishment. The ultimate |i|| |V.
A T fUn Pnmmltfpp WHlllfl llJlVti i '
consequence I dreaded, when the Committee would have
to pay for those acts which they fully author-
ised me to perform. To use the language ot their agent-?
I consequence i dreaded, when the upmmiuee womu uavu ;
j to pay for those acts which they fully authoiv
I ised me to perform. To use the language bt their agent-?
I •* I drew the bills with tear and trembling,” My dilemma ; i;' ;j : t*
i was great, to retreat would not lessen expenses already *.|| :■ .
I incurred, to remain idle would be expending three bun- M! .
I drcd a-year, without -.any ■ effort tor the Aborigines, and
I subject me to the censure of enjoying a sinecure. Ha-
| rassed beyond description I re-considered my iustruc- v
| lions; I looked at the state of the blacks; I took up my ; jjA
| residence in the woods determined, if possible, to.ob-
j tain the language of the Aborigines, leaving the event > *
| in the hands of Him who over-rules ail things tor good to A -A'
\ those who love him. ... '
The natives were now employed in falling trees and
I burning oft, so as to clear a portion ot land tor the cui-
I tivation of Indian corn and wheat; we supplying them
1 for their labour with food and slops, tobacco and fish- * 5».
| hooks. They worked well whilst under the direction of
I a free man and his two sons, who were engaged at £65 i ’ i* jy\
I per year, with rations of food, each one taking a
| certain number of Aborigines as his gang ot workmen; * ■
j nivself being among them amidst surrounding fires, and
I under a vertical sun, with my book, collecting words and Ai l '
| phrases, and endeavouring to converse with them in their \
j. own tongue. Twenty-five acres ot ground weic fallen, A by
cleared, and partly sown with Indian corn, which the . :| y’s
I blacks carefully cleared and kept in order under our | Vl
I direction. As the maize ripened the temptation to pluck A.
I and roast the green cobs tor. food could not be resisted
I by the blacks, any more than the in England, could
| . deny themselves whilst plucking the fruit in an orchard m y '■ |y
| but, my object not being to make a gain of the com, but
to associate the blacks at the least cxpence, in oidei to y
obtain their language, the otherwise necessary precaution A] * iV
of watching the corn-field with fire-arms was dispensed
with, and, instead of driving away the Aborigines trom AC
our settlement, we put up with all the inconveniences and # . K


losses occasioned by their close residence, a circumstance
hl?p f pr s U(llc,al t0 the settler who depends on agricuU
irm?.K ° r hIS SLl PP° rt - , Thus matters went on with as
much success as could be reasonably expected from sr>
novel an experiment. That the Aborigines are not in.
capable or judging, the following circumstance is an
evidence. When asked which should be our first erm
P bu | ld huts or to plant corn, they replied we
will help to plant the corn, as it will grow while we
rtUOctobe IU IRo« SU f W3S f he as ? eCt of the Mission
umu Uctobei, 1826, when a letter from the Directors
compelled me shortly after to cease employing the S
on account of the expense. In consequence of wh cb
VVlthdrew t0 Newcastle, and other places
f rvhere then wants could be supplied by their services’
Ihe following letters will fully' explain the nature of
the case and more justly than mere extracts could possi-
b y do. Ihe omission of a clause, or quoting only part
of a sentence might give a view of the subject exceed-
ngy incorrect; for, although the letters were written
under circumstances which excited feelings better con-
°fi t l ian described > whic!l will account for any
passages that may appear in print reprehensible, yet as a
faithful statement of the whole of the transactions is
necessary m order to arrive at a just conclusion, I would
leader VI an *1 J rUSt l &e de,rienc y °f the dispassioned
. , hazaid the suspicion of garbled extracts.
Mr. Marsden s letter to me
you and the Mission, I ani very willing to give it Wi'iV Ca , n be 0< service t0
the Society. 1 shall he verv rL ; V, g V AV 11,1 rcs Pect to drawing bills upon
the absolute necessity for doing this I r^" 81^11 ! 7 Up ° n m > self be > oud
rr• - V‘;r y
The'soctr"'' "i"; 1 1 k " ow
i , ;r d s :.^r: 0 in t r i T^uL? i L r y b ii’;: f n 7. !s ’‘’“Y?**
«ibce, I have understood, it has been paid. Mr. Campbell. I apprehendViTno vr7
SAMUEL MAUSDEK.


KI
13
; [ I
Mmion-house, Austin Friars, London, March Q, 182 G.
Beur Sir,—We wrote you at considerable length under date of the 201 h August last. {{: '$
Our letter was forwarded per the Prince Regent, and the duplicate tiiereof by the : . \\ I
Sesoslris, both addressed to the care of the Rev. Mr. Marsden. that time we hare- . j ... i L
received the following letters•
From Sydney, under dates of 23d and 25th of April, and Ist of June 7 jqo . | ‘ f • 1- ‘
.... Newcastle .... date ~ sth July 1 5 ’
And we think it necessary to inform you that we experienced no small surprise and con- ..
cent to find that you had diawa upon the Society to so very large an amount, for which, i ' |
- w j ”•• kjwvivij vu ov i jr mi uu uiiiu um.) iv/* w< 11 v 11
indeed, we are not at all prepared. We, of course, expected that the establishment of the .! i\
- ” • “ ..ww V««I JM V juw wu, II 0 V| WUI OV»| IV. U kIUU VII V VJtU UliomilVlH VI Uiu
Mission would occasion, for the first year, au extra expenditure, but we certainly did not
anticipate any such amount on this ground, ns that for which you have drawn bills on
the Society, and this it appears is not all, but.that you also purpose drawing bills for
£ 100 or £l5O more, making a total amount of £9OO. Giving you the fullest credit for
the goodness of your motives, we cannot refrain from observing that, while It was yet a
matter of uncertainty whether the Society would sanction the project, and while you
were quite uninformed as to the extent we should be disposed to go, in point of expense,
for any Mission at all in that quarter, to incur obligations to so great au amount as almost
One thousand pounds, does appear to us a procedure by no means to be justified on the i’f;
£ 100 or £l5O more, making a total amount of £9OO. Giving you the fullest credit for
score of prudence, and we doubt not, upon reconsideration, that you will yourself per-
ceive, that it would have been proper to expend, in the first instance, just so much money
as your necessities absolutely required and no more, until you had received communica-
tions from us, containing our views and determinations as to the establishment of the
Mission, and the scale of expenditure on which it was our will that it should be con- ‘ I
ducted, in case we sanctioned the establishment of the Mission itself. 1
But our principal reason for writing to you at present, is to prevent all future immo-
derate expenditure, and in reference to this point, we have adopted the two following
resolutions;— j- ■ ,*
Ist, That the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld be instructed to give no more bills on the Society,
unless drawn with the sanction of the Rev. Mr. Marsden, as -without hi« sanction they
will not be honored,
2d, f I bat the Rev. Mr. Marsden be respectfully requested to sanction the bills drawn |
by the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, only to such an amount as, in his judgment, shall appear
absolutely necessary to carry on efficiently, and with the strictest regard to economy,
the Aboriginal Mission at Reid’s Mistake.
The substance of the foregoing resolutions we transmit by the present opportunity, \i ,
to the Rev. Mr. Marsden, and it is our wish, provided he is so obliging as to comply
with our request, that you will, from lime to lime, make such communications to Mr. ij v^
Marsden in reply to his inquiries as may be requisite to enable him to judge of the pro- i ; |
pfiety of giving the desired sanction to your bills on the Society, and that you will
abstain from issuing any bills which have nut first received his sanction. This sanction
will be transmitted to ns in a letter, from time tu time, to be forwarded, by the first
vessel for England direct which sails subsequently to the bills, respectively so sanctioned, C
-V
|
being drawn. I -
We have requested Mr. Marsden to transmit to us such information as he is enabled < i
to procure relative to the manner in which it is proposed to appropriate the land granted i r , *| ;
by His Excellency Governor Brisbane, whether anj and what advances are expected from
the Society in connexion with such proposed appropriation, and to what extent the pro- ‘
per duties of the Missionary are likely to he infringed by the secular engagements which
the execution of the proposed plan as subservient to the object of the Mission may
require. ‘j!.-Jr rj
We perceive there is no ground to expect that the Colonial Government will render
arty assistance in promoting the immediate object for which the land has been granted;
if this be the case, it becomes the more important for us to know, what advances of I • ; i K
.. mu. ux. vom, it, uvvuuit. viiviuuir important lor us 10 huow, wnai advances oi k .
money will be requisite, before we come to a final determination on the expediency of
applying fora confirmation of the grant by Government at home, for at present we are j! :
by no means \ orsuaded of the propriety of so doing; and it : quest that no expen- i f M
diture, on account of the Society, be allowed to take pUc- sl e proposed locations $ 1'


.v I r 2..JJ
I f I
»Si 14
:r; * l
of the Aborigines and tbe cultivation of the land are concerned,'unless you first receiu
oi f i f specific authority on this point from us. We have not felt any objection to the expen.
: | diturc of a small sum in the purchase of a few agricultural implements, tools, 4cc to a»i»t
tin promoting: the cultivation of the earth, ami the erection of dwellings in the immediate
scileof the Mission, and thus opening the door to civilization on a moderate scale, but
any thing approaching to the expenditure and superintendence required by a plan of
I colonization is quite out o. the question,
: v • I; 1 In order to enable Mr. Marsden to transmit to us (he required information as to the
grant of land, and the possibility of rendering it subservient to the general objects of
the Mission (viz, the intellectual, moral, and spiritual improvement-of the natives)
without involving the Society in a species of expense for which its funds were never
intended, in order that we ourselves may be enabled to come to a proper decision as to
the propriety of retaining it forlhe purposes of your Mission, it is our wish that, in
j answer to his enquiries, or in case of our letters to him of the present date not coining
i to hand, without the proposal of such enquiries on his part, you should give him th«
fi amplest information in your power on this subject.
I f j From the foregoing observations, you will be enabled to judge of our present
; views and wishes in relation to the Mission at Lake Macquarie, under your snperinleo.
dence, and what reason there is in our requeuing that no expenses be incurred by you
| in future, but such only as are absolutely necessary to the personal comfort of yourself
and family, and to the discharge of your ordinary duties as a Missionary to the abori-
gines. The present income of our Society will not admit of any tiling beyond a very
I moderate expenditure on a new Mission ; and we are under those circumstances which
? f v rather suggest the propriety of diminishing the number of our Missions than of adding
$ : ' to it.
We shall be solicitously expecting further communications from you, for we arc
aware that you have undertaken a very difficult enterprise, in which, we are convinced,
you will require large measures of grace and wisdom, and be called to the exercise
of much patience, self denial, and Christian fortitude. May our fervent prayers for
blessingson behalf of yourself and family be answered, and may you be constantly di-
rected by unerring wisdom, guarded by almighty protection, and cheered by the
of the countenance of the Most High, -
While we have felt it quite indispensable to notice, as we have done, the enorrnoui
expenditure which has taken place within so short a period (and for a Mission yet in
I i'| its infancy, and while you were in ignorance as to our views of the propriety of con-
tinuing the Mission, which, with such benevolent intentions, had been commenced) ami
to adopt measures designed lo guard against the recurrence of any thing except wlul
may consist with the most moderate scale of expence—wc feel the greatest desire to
afford you all proper countenance and encouragement, and shall constantly feel a deep
intejest in the personal welfare of yourself and family, and in the proceeding and siu-
f cess of your mission, ”
In making out the accounts of your expenditure, we wish you to be particular in
’■s keeping as distinct as possible whatever relates to the subsistence of yourself and fa-
mily from what relates to the Mission, and to transmit the same half-yearly,
f We now commend you, Mrs. Threlkeld, and your children, to the kind carennd
' | gracious influence of your Heavenly Father, earnestly beseeching him to communicate
to you and them largely of the blessings of Ins providence and the giftsof his Spirit#
f. and are, on behalf of the Directors, Dear Sir,
i- f if Faithfully aud affectionately yours in the Lord,
r I WM. ALERS HANKEY, Treasurer.
; f; V I 'I GEORGE BORDER, Secretary.
I P. S.—-Our latest advices from our friends and colleagues, Messrs. Tyerman and
| Bennet, are dated in September last, at which time they were at Batavia, and on
v j the point of sailing for Singapore.
II
4 i *
.
-


7'o the 11 ev . S. Mars den.
Bahtahbah, Lake Maoquarie } Ocloh*r 31, 1826.
* Dear Sir,—-Your letter, together with the Directors, 1 received yesterday; and it
putties me to reconcile the idea of Deputations being fitted out by the Directors to go
out and embrace the opportunities of usefulness that may present themselves, whilst tht
Directors say, that the state of their annual Income requires that they should retrench,
uil.er Ilian increase, the number of their Missions. 1 have expressed my sentiments in {
ray letter to the Directors on the subject of this Mission as explicitly as possible, ami
request you to have the goodness to act upon that letter, a copy of which I now hand
you, and inform me of the result of your judgment on the subject alluded to. Your
speedy answer will oblige, as my accounts must close in December, and from the com-
munications of the Directors, and the actual experience of what the expense will be, I
f<el assured that £5BO a-year will he considered by them as immoderate, unless you have
my private instructions as to what extent of expenditure you are allowed to go in this
Mission. Accept our kind regards, and I am,
Dear Sir, yours truly, • ;
L. E. THRELKELD.
To the Tle\>. G, Hurler, and lE. A, Ilankey, Esq,
liahtahbah, Lake Macquarie y October 31, 182 G.
Dear Sirs,—Your letter of the 3d March 1826, came to hand three days ago. In
reply to which, I must beg leave to say, that the new resolutions of the Directors having
ninulled the instructions from the Deputation tome, under which I engaged, and have
hitherto acted conscientiously to the best of my ability, for the permanent establishment
of the Mission, 1 cannot think of engaging anew permanently under such restrictions,
tad still undefined mode ©fraction, even by those resolutions which only imply con-
demnation of my proceedings hitherto and in future. 1 consider myself, therefore, now
precisely in Iho state in which 1 was when the Deputation urged me to take the charge of
ibis Mission. That I acceeded to their wish is, it appears now, my misfortune, it having
plunged me into difficulties unforseen. Those instructions being in effect countermanded
by your resolutions, places the Mission under very different circumstances, and such
being the case, I beg respectfully to decline accepting of the Mission under them, and it
depends on the view Mr. Marsdeu takes of your correspondence and my proposal, whether
the Mission will cease next month or not ; in which case 1 shall lake my passage in the first
suitable conveyance to the Islands again, lam confident, by the spirit of your letter,
that you will not continue the Mission at the necessary yearly expense. I can only
Itate the fact, that it is impossible to be conducted under five hundred pounds sterling
peraunurn at present, and that the decreave will not be for years to come of great im-
portance. This includes every expence for three free persons engaged in agriculture, and .
one prisoner; one woman prisoner and girl domestics; the Missionary, wife, ami large
family; slops, tea, sugar, tobacco, fish-honks for the natives who work, paying the
wages for the free persons and prisoners, and the M issionary receiving nothing but only a
decent supply of food and raiment for himself and family. No expense is calculated for
Ihe education of the Missionary's own children in the estimate It is impossible to be
more explicit as to the permanent expense of this Mission, whether to you or to Mr,
Marsden. It is for you to judge of the propriety of applying for a confirmation of the
grant by Government at home, under the full conviction of being at the yearly expense
of five hundred pounds, or not. For my part, I cannot submit to be a kind of machine
for carrying into effect nny plans but what my own judgment on the spot leads me to
conclude would be beneficial for the Mission, limiting them according to the means you
allow. If I am considered incapable of doing this, lam unfit for this station, and it still
ippears that though the plans were formed by the Deputation, or by Mr, Marsden, or
from any olher source, yet, ultimately the onus would be on the Missionary, They would
be complimented, the Missionary disgraced. Ido not conceive, even on reconsideration,
lliatit would have been prudent in me, in the face of the instructions, and other com.
muni cat ions of the Deputation, urging me to commence immediately ray Mission in
1824, to have declined, when the Society had been at the expense of sending out a


Deputation to judge on the spot, and direct accordingly throughout their travel?. J|*4
3 been at all acquainted with the necessity of a ratification from home after the full »nl
explicit instructions received from them, I should not have acceptsd the Mission on mth
uncertain terms. Bui supposing that I had remained still from October 1824, would tU<
reception of your letter of March last, now in October 1826, a period of two years, luvt
made Mr, Marsden or myself, a bit the wiser respecting “ Tbe Scale of Expenditure,’*
which, in order to carry on the Mission on the most saving, yet efficient plan, 1 amevta
now obliged to submit to yon, and wait another 12 mouths for an answer before operation!
commence 1 Would it have been wise, to have been at the expense of four or five pound*
a-week for tbe maintenance of my large family, and I doingaclually nothing 1 Wheriu*.
now a foundation is laid, both respecting the language and slation, sufficient to encourage
any Society to carry on tbe Mission at tbe annual expence already stated. In reply
the resolutions you have been pleased to pass, I beg to decline acting under them. N.,{
out of any personal disrespect to Mr, Marsden, but on account of their being yaiMid
subsequently to the instructions under which I accepted the Mission from the Deputi.
tion. Had any other person than Mr. Marsden been appointed, my conduct would be
the same. A Missionary is worthy of being intrusted with the concerns of his Mission,
or he is not fit to be a Missionary under any patronage or restriction. But suppose
restrictions necessary, how utterly inefficient are’your resolutions to effect them I V< u
say, “ that the Rev. Mr. Marsden be respectfully requested to sanction the bids draw**
by the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, only to such an amount as in his judgment shall appear
absolutely necessary to carry on effectually, and with the strictest regard to economy,
the Aboriginal Mission at Reid’s Mistake,” Now, how is Mr. Marsden, residing nearly
100 miles off, to form a judgment, but by a reference to my judgment who conduct! dm
Mission and resides on the spot l This resolution, therefore, does nothing to remove the
possibility of immoderate expenditure on my part, were 1 disposed to act so unworthily,
but only displays an unhandsome, unjust reflection on me, as being unfit for fulur«
trust. 1 do not merit this from your bands. How much more efficient would it luvt
been, had your communication said, “ that the funds of the Society would not admit of
anything beyond a very moderate expenditure on a new mission, as we are under cir-
cumstances which rather suggest the propriety of diminishing the number of our miMlou»
than of adding to it. Therefore, we cannot devote more limn so many pounds to U*
annual support of that mission; you will therefore consider whether the mean* sue
adequate, if not, the mission must be abandoned.” How different would be the feeling!
then, betwixt the Missionaries and the Directors. How it would unite them as though
they had one interest, one object, one design ; whereas, the present communications*i»
more characteristic of the lordly masters, than of fellow labourers in flic vineyard of
Jesus Christ. And how easily could the mission be translated into the hands of the other
Societies here, who wish to engage in the work, or tendered to the Government for ill*
Archdeacon’s acceptation with small loss to the Society. My impression is, that if your
annual income will not allow of the expenditure already mentioned, that it would U
prudent to abandon tbe mission at once without incurring a fresh expenditure of so U r *«
a sum. It is better, surely, to make effectual a few missions, rather than have many not
half attended to, There is no disgrace in retracing our steps, when we find the annual
expenditure will be more than your funds will allow, considering your numerous other
engagements, especially as the Deputation and yourselves know that disappointment
ensued in the support that was promised by the then Governor Sir Thomas BrUlnur,
and which disappointment involved me deeply in expenses, which otherwise would never
have been incurred. But am lat all worthy of blame or distrust on account of Unit I
cannot but persuade myself you will say, no.
Another effect produced by your present mode of treatment, I feel it my duty
mention.r—Your destroying the personal credit of your Missionaries in this part of U><
globe, compel the whole of us to pay our sterling bills at currency price, making u# pay
from 12 to 20 per cent, more for every thing than the Wesleyan Missionaries do, sue *
premium being always obtained by them for their bills, whilst ours is at par ! I>* ' i.ly
one instance have I obtained a premium, and that was on a £4OO bill, when I was allowed
IB per cent. 1 would recommend, therefore, this to your consideration, as the lw *
x premium must be placed in all my expenditure to your account.


My accounts close in this December, ami it is for Mr. Marsdcn to form his judgment
on the propriety of his sanctioning hills to the amount of £5OO sterling tor the ensuing
year, subject to my disposal, tor the mission or not. Without this, I cannot remain here,
nor conduct the mission. Your communications to him will enable him to decide at
once and jf not, the mission must he at once abandoned in the ensuing December, when
jhv accounts with Mr. Campbell will close on the credit of the Deputation’s instructions.
• 1 send a copy of this to Mr. Marsdcn, as I cannot have a double communication on
the subject. Mistakes would again arise, and no man can please two masters, as my
present situation with yourselves and the Deputation will testify. Not that I wish to
impute blame to you for your surprise at the u enormous expenditure ' in so short a
time, for I really was surprised myself, and had it not been for the documents in ray
hands to vouch for the expenditure, I should have doubted it.
Happy then to serve the cause of Christ in a less exposed situation to suspicion,
I am, Sirs, youis truly,
L. E. THRELKELD.
, Mr. Marsden’s reply :
Sydney , Xovcmher IG, 18*76.
Dear Sir,—l received your reply to my communication, with a copy of your letter
to the Directors. I cannot hut observe your language in this letter is very strong; and
I should apprehend, would give unnecessary pain and offence to the Society. It wants
that meekness of wisdom which St. Paul recommends. In this letter, allow me to say,
you appear to have entertained a very unjust impression against the Directors; they
have not called your integrity in question, but they want to he prepared, as public trus-
tees, to account to the public for the expenditure of the public money intrusted to their
care. You must he aware that your drawing upon the Society for £5OO, will not justify
the Directors in paying your bill, unless you can make it appear plain and clear, that it
was necessary for the good of the mission that you should do so. You seem to think that
I had something to do with the formation of the mission. I can assure you that this is not
the case. It did not originate with me, but with the gentlemen of the Deputation. I n form-
in* the mission, their motives were pure, benevolent, and good. They frequently com ersed
with me on the subject, but I differed with them in opinion, in one important point. I
thought it would be unwise Ur them to give you unlimited authority to draw upon the
funds of the Society, nnd equally unwise in you to accept the situation on such term.,
as this would lay too heavy a responsibility upon you. J his measure I never should
have consented to, at the same time I had no doubt of your integrity . Ihe above was my
opinion, but the Deputation were not obliged to adopt it; they acted on their own
responsibility, and I had no right to interfere further than to givemy opinion, when they
did P me the honor to call for it. lam still of the same opinion, as far as relates to your
duty as a Missionary, the most implicit confidence should he placed m you ; you should
he governed entirely according to your own judgment in acquiring the language ; in-
structing the natives; and in every thing that related to their improvement; 1 hehtve
vou are qualified for all this. On the other hand, I contend you have not the neiessary
experience and knowledge to enter upon building houses, clearing, cultivating, and
enclosin'** land, in a country of civilized thieves and savage natives. You must fall into
serious e°rrors ; you cannot be guarded against the imposition o unprincipled mechanics
ami°labourers such as you must employ in getting what is needful to be done ; and you
not have entered upon those things without the advice and sanction of some
experienced persons in this Colony, who should have approved in the first place what
buildings were necessary; what land to he cleared and enclosed; and the amount of the
sumof mouey that it would be prudent to expend previous to the Parent Society sane,
tioning the mission. Had this measure been adopted, a great weight of responsibility
hereafter, lam great, yat a,css to huow haw to
act to find out the true line of conduct I should follow. You state in your letter, that I
tnus\°sanction bilh to the amount of £6OO sterling for the ensuing year subject to your
This luThe unqualified sense in which you make your demand) I cannot do,
you leave me no room for the exercise of my own judgment, and yet I am to be


sibktotlie tbrectors. In the resolution of the -Directors, 1 am merely re mi ested bv
them to sanction bills only to such amount as in my judgment shall appear absolutely J
eessaty From this resolution I must clearly see the necessity of sanctioning any bill,
before [approve of them ; the Directors have drawn the line for me; it is for vo u to
consider whether you will act under such a regulation or not; I should be very sorrv to
seethe mission relinquished, and trust you will duly deliberate on the subject befun,
you decide; I feel myself authorised to support it to a certain extent, until further in-
structions are received from the Society. At the same lime, t can sanction no bills, unless I
know what they are drawn for; you must make out a statement of your neceswrv
expenses for a given period; if I feel myself authorised to approve of the whole of
your demand I shall approve of it; iff do not, I shall give my reasons. 1 am
tally aware, by doing tins, I may involve myself with you and the Director'-
ll will be impossible for me to meet the wishes of both; let your demand he
moderate; make what statement you think proper to the Society, but do not impose
upon me a duty that I cannot discharge, nor be angry with me if I should not coavi.lv
wth your demands, should they appear unnecessary ; the Directors are the best judges
what funds they have to appropriate to this mission ; they evidently are alarmed at the
expenses; should you continue, make them as low as y6u can until you can hear from
them again, when a better understanding may be established between you and the
Directors. 1 am, your’s very faithfully,
SAMUEL MARSDEN.
With regard to what Mr. Marsden says in the above
letter, relative to the “ Parent Society” sanctioning the
Mission, the following extract of a letter from* the
Directors, dated August 29, 1825, and received by me on
the 25th March 1826, will shew the view the Directors
had taken on the subject of the Mission, and how far such
a plea is just
\ B ™ t] y re i o,cein ' y kat place during the visit of our friends (the Deputa-
tion) at Sydney as to that pitiable portion of the inhabitant*, and perfectly approve of
the sanction which they gave to your continuance in the Colony for the purpose of
furthering the plans contemplated for their benefit. We are,indeed, aware Unit this part
ot the arrangements originated with themselves, which is a pleasing consideration to us.
seeing that it was so cordially approved of by His Excellency the Governor, as well as suit,
abiy met on your own part. We were not apprised of the change, as to the part of the
country in which it is intended you should reside, at the time the former part of our
Annual Report was printed, but you will perceive that we have noticed it in the
Appendix. ’ “We shall open a separate account for the mission, under your superiuten-
To the Llev. S. Marsden,
. . Bahtahhah, lake Macquarie, November 21,1820.
Dear Sir,—l feel it highly needful in my present circumstances to stale plainly my
case, and whatever may be the result, it is a duty I owe to myself to state matters of
fact, although grievous. I would not willing offend, but left as I have hem from the
formation of the mission, after the abandonment of IMoreton-bay, without any guide,
direction) council, or instructions, until repeatedly solicited by me personally from the
Deputation, and obtained at last, only by a written application to them, bearing d a lc
February 22, 1825; and after repeated attempts to obtain advice and consolation on the
subject of the mission, and as frequently disappointed. It is highly unjust to impute
blame to me on the ground of not asking advice. Vou are mistaken in Hie observation
wherein you say, that, “you seem to think ] had some hand in the formation of the
mission, I can assure you this is not the case.” .1 cannot conceive how this idea should
arise in your uiiud, for my part all I have to complain of is, that it did uot originate with


m*s, {*j 11 | ?; v f
~ ' ■ ■ ■■■ i. I
i 9 imm
a m ore united intercut might then have arisen
I ’? zrs I
i Pi} ' 1
! Vb i
f and the Deputation came, but nothing was done AVU I ‘ Mission , the . -
I the conversation from oilier concern* to the cone 11 y no f s „ cw «i: no Mir- |
I remark you were pleased to make was o uUilMtely bend their
I rib™. Tisassa X
1 i.„ i»uh -ear ~>• if... <• ii»« : ;.
i r::?.sr.sxm7 b r:r , is.••.t'.yo,st”V-*
! tt-r^M^sSsias
i both Captain Allman, who hath built for I ‘ l mse^ f * w tDe esUmate aud judged* reason-
I erect buildings for Government, and Mr. . , t ve not trusted my own judgment, I
I able, and it was so. With reaped to agriculture, 11 vt o J
| for I have pone, but to a confidential free man w u t j ie
I Mrs. TVs family, and who left his own little farm on the u^'7n eS c b^ v ;° tiuj; ,Ld, and **J
agricultural department, and to assist the nativ s wa ,, cB of £4O per year,
building themselves houses” (sec my ms rue *® n *V j a trustworthy person, well
• and f2O per year for his sons, with ra tons ,6 miles in woods, a pJey to • |
disposed to teach the natives, 1 would no ‘ , ctil)K wa ;ting for the sanction
every runaway prisoner or vicious black. In a v or■ , S to the Directors,
of the Parent Society from borne, 1 have a y knowing that there was any
! which you have 1«* a copy to yo.
other understanding, but that they were ‘ . now m;l Ue, “ that it was
\ with the rest of the gentlemen in the 1.5.1, > d ime o.ne most ac.
I unwise for me to accept the mission unde such brought a general
I ceplably and seasonably at that tune, I » ~ , . Missionary who was so closely
I my hills to lay
; <. oeeonlmiPP . * v
over for a season for acceptance, . . icm sav no more, I can do no more; I •
With respect to the expense of the mission,llean say 1 cannot lessen it, and
-I ««»« B ;ve " > ou a "efobthc ° v eiM 820 ' Tcer lain! y shall not he angry »Hh you if you do
n,fter the occurrences of the year Ibi), 1 * immediately discharge oar
I not sanction the bills to that amount. allhong mt.rtU.en tm J ftoin b tbese •.
confidential persons, and retne wi imy a 1 Y • nce \ baV e had in common with
woods. lam confident from the much painful «] mnje i cannot be conducted
| other Missionaries, respecting p | acc me in such situations as unfit my
t without much expense, wind / dinicultv because even your sanction to
J mind and body too, to carry on a.work M kh o^ ft 'fDire/tors; they may . f ; .
i „,V I
1 am, dear Sir, yours tiuly, L E TnRELKE U>.
r. v -r vKSia r s
j ill I


Dear Sir,—Yesterday I arrived here *ind waif November 30, 18*20.
place when the business of the Aboriginal Lav L C h nVC, '!?* Ce t0 name 11,1,6 »*»*
YO Ur speedy attention to the
dhle aUcntkm. Sydney^
Dear Sir,—l received vonr nnf/> ii» A i—«. •, - , December], 1820.
Malta this morning on account orsome ( ‘ tl to retllru •» t’arrj.
»heo the eoneerns B ofthe Zb„ Z b Ttak fiMo i°„ ?’ * in S J*“»lp£
letter two or three days ago, which /intended to n consi ‘ ,crat ion. I answered your | a , t
I not learned you were in Sydney. havcsent thencxt opportunity, had
I am, your’s faithfully,
The high state of excitement to hM
been ied brought on a most severe attack o/fever tK
disabled me completely, but I met Mr. Marsden at -t
npnrrt 8 ’ W iCI , e a stateraent was shewn him of the ex-
p icl it me, and to the best of my recollection no f-tnif
me S J^nn d With ? nl 7 Mr< Marsd en thought to allow
me £3OO a-ycai, and that Government ought to sunnlv
t 's i - •'!? sta,e r nt ™ & »n.:a
rlo ni & n 2 T 11 Excellency the Governor Lieutenant
Geneial Bailing sent for me, and the substance of tin-
Sv“n'' Z ,ie S21 4 ? ™<ll
MT.eav° It SSS Secretary the Honorable Alexander
i i in cay. It aiose fiom the mistaken idea, that the land
was given to the Society, instead of beino- { n trust for dm
natives, under which Mr. Marsden also labored •
Memoeatoto * Ten tZ7 Coverno / General Darling.
er -r d by the Kin » * *» ««
«r any othd Missionary. to instructthe T,u * ,k ' M
accompanying this memorandum agreeably to the printed instruction*
J. Oxley, Esq,; Wm,
Hh %«“> fust it remains Or
t,.e l^ e n r^ eaCe tf 1 ‘ r T*“-' >ina ->*•
of the Missionary, lyhmdebvtho." 3 ° , . U “ Said :u,d ’ at ,he
descendants, inalienable. J “ UStCCS to “S' civiliMll Aborigine, or their
that effect being written^thr^ecMtar^on?' abll “doning the mission, a Idler to
State for the Colonic" the land m i S °‘T yta E, ’ s!:md -“> thc Secretary of
CS * Wc “ J “ that case would revert to thc crown, Cumrau-


21 , ?j
: ■' mW
iiicaiiona from tlie Society object to any sums being laid out for the instruction of the
blacks in the cultivation of the land, “ in consequence of the peculiar state cf their funds,
which demand that the number of their missions should be diminished rather than
augmented,"
An abstract of the expenses for the instruction of the natives in agriculture, build-
ing their huts, &c. for a twelvemonth :
Overseer and two assistants’ wages and board £ 122 8 0
For 12 natives, on I lie condition of labour, such labour to be productive to
their benefit, slops, tea, sugar, tobacco, &c 73 0 0
Ppi'nninrv iiccisl.nrA umnM ..,. W— : . . ...t. . n •
Pecuniary assistance would be prejudicial, unless it was vested wholly in the person
of the Missionary, to whom alone the Aborigines must look for assistance and direction
whilst partaking of the benefit of the grant.
Vouchers to be produced by the Missionary, that the pecuniary aid hath been
specifically appropriated. It is anticipated that this sum will be reduced by the growth
of produce resulting from the labour of the Aborigines.
It appears to be essentially requisite that the whole of the disposal of what Govern-
ment may think fit to give in aid of tiie civilization of the blacks, together with- the
choice and appointment of the overseers, assistants, or other persons employed ; and all
communications should be through the Missionary, otherwise the assistance of Govern-
ment could easily be perverted to the annihilation of the whole attempt, in direct oppo-
sition to the purpose for which Government grants its aid.
Mr. Marsden not coming to any specified arrangement,
I wrote the following letter:—
December 5, 1820, \
Hear Sir, —It did not occur to me when you said that I could go on with the mission
asl proposed until December, when my accounts will close, that it is now December,
and that when 1 return on Friday I must certainly make up my accounts.
I therefore beg you will settle this point at once, namely, to what extent am I to
consider myself allowed to go for my family’s support in the ensuing year. On this
subject I beg you (o have the gcodness to meet my friends to-morrow at any convenient
time to yourself, to adjust this matter without my interference.
I am, Sir, your’s truly,
L. E. TIIRELKELD.
M r, Marsden s reply
Sydney, December G, 182G, u
Dear Sir,—l received your note late last evening, in which you wish to know to
what extent you are to consider yourself allowed to draw for your family’s support. In
reply to your request, 1 beg to say, that whatever may be considered necessary for the
comfort and support of you and your family, 1 shall feel myself authorised to sanction
your bills until I hear from the Directors. In the meantime I shall be obliged to you to
slate what you and your friends may consider just and fair, in order that I may com-
municate the supposed amount to the Directors for their information.
I am of opinion that the Colonial Government ought to contribute in some way or
other towards the support of the Aborigines, that this expense should not fall upon the
Society; and I hope the Governor will take this into consideration. As far as I can have
any influence, I will exert it to obtain this point. 1 cannot see you this morning, as wc
have a meeting of the Corporation, but will endeavour to see you before 1 return to
Parramatta, In the meantime make out your statement for the support of your family.
1 ara, dear Sir, your’s very truly,
SAMUEL MARSDEN.
My answer after my return home from Sydney:—
JJahla/ibah, Lake December 17, 1826,
Dear Sir, —My illness and necessity of returning home rendered it imposaibls to
commit to writing an answer to your date of the Glh of December, received by me in
Sydney, in which you wish me to state what land my friends consider just and fair for
the support of myself and family, I enclose the general estimate, and the amount of
what is the smallest possible sum 1 can lake, from the Society’s funds fur myself and
family’s support; not on the ground of its being a just and fair support, for that no


Iff II
.
SI J;
P||
I am, dear Sir, your’s truly,
. E » threlkeld.
cutting-, and agriculture hit o *' m6 burmn «> Postering, stone
•asassKteteafe-;:
»• •
Tinm .' » . *
, —year,,,.,, * —» **• wo * i j v‘ wcck ;
Domestics one woman and girl 83 4 o
JUl.ons, the wo„„ n two-thirds ss. 4d. ll,e ghl'one' hVlf s Ha o
For the natives siv 19 w i„ , ** 1 one * haJ * 45. ; per year ,21-i 1
l>«d a y_t, l) :' t 2^ ; " b »--Ployed i„ ,or k .* c . &c .
i"’- lonacco, at Is. per lb
2lb.sugar.at4d. per ditto.’”” ° 2
o-- ,- . -.u, WCI U11i0,,-..
4.1b. tea at is. per ditto 008
Fwh-hooks for their wives fish* forVi.a 003
Indian corn.'ek-ht'acrts'^ro^' a *f s * 4d< P er 100 0I o
ooi
Slops for them twice a.year. P cr l| ay .... 04 o per year -73 o 0
12 pair trowsers at 5s •
12 shirts at ss. ~,, * 0 0
12 canvass frockVaVis* 3
12 -Bengal blankets at ss, ~,*,’****]*’*** 3
3 0
For si* months j 2 0
£24 o o per year
For myself and family rations.
m;Trn aS .° ne person ' atBs ‘ P" week
J V.?* two-tbirds, at ss. 4d. ditto
24-. 0
f nti; ;/ “ s o « e Person, at Bs. pm- week n _
1? 7 .as two-tbirds. at r» i.i 0 8 0
I .as iwo-tlurds, at ss. 4d. ditto ° u
‘ 1 * ,ve children at one-half, at 4s ditto “*** 0 6 4
vM " 100
I U u
- . :| Ditto clothing. £l 13 4 per year 88 13 i
Myself, one person, 101. per year
$ Mrs. T. as a female ... y * 0 0
| lurs. J. as a female * ,u 0 0
' I Five children, at 51. each ***••••* 7 0 0
I * 25 0 0
■- ■ ■ ■ 4
|
For wear and tear of agricultural tools, blacksmiths k^. 42 •? ° P er {2 0 o
• I stationery, smn i Ulacl£sm, lh » bill, nails, & c . postage,
balance, ' laities, there remains only the
’*”* 30 0 0
t o o
a u
'’ : &
:l
4


n
6
8
A n “:v: , :o:r i " ,,,J sirii w ~ a »-«
I o rc
1 <h
0
5
0
4
14
8
W. the following f
in the estimate, but I will not attempt to th * *. ur ) >osc tbe mission, as staled
jneaus to the extent of the estimate be provided. 1 °‘ l 0,1 such te,m S unless the
Societies or is no . l to he a P rec e«lent for other
to prevent the Directors arising the P plea tL if * r " C allo ' v of ln >’ tl,us acting
sionary the mission must be abandoned Fu tiler Tl, <* the Mis-
grant of land that at all allows of my mal I*u Y Y T™* stock u ' ,ol ‘ «.e
Society, aKrnfe so smalUn allowance from the funds of the
lUtjom f or myself.and family, a s per estimate ....
Clothing for myself and family, ditto 86 13 4 j
I’or soap, candles, and oil, . •••.. 42 o 0 S'
£lBO 0 0
tobe borne by «“ Society as stationery^,"
The following letter Mr. Marsdengave me nersomll v in
Sydney, my illness prevented a written repK ”
that place. It was in answer to the letter page 17
Dear Sir,—l have receive! vm,r ~ .. Parrimalla, November ‘25, 1820.
in no way relieved my difficulty? or N ° Vember 2I ’ but it has
the Directors; you still fix upon a riven sum 'Mini I ." UBr * i loact be t' v ct‘n you and
Uie necessity of such a sum. j| do not mean to awll t I#t,lout 1 # t,lout st f tm ® the particulars of
j cannot Judge from any general statement I v ' #°° Ul , UCb> or 100 3itt!e » because
Directors can clearly understand and see the reasoinM 10 * UC * a SUltomeMl 18 tl * e
iny own conduct. lean see no harmiHu -° f *^ C " M a ****
consideration of the Directors and wait for tlw> rl V\ y te c,fcutnsta »t:e to the
be attended with much any opinio . n -, "° u!d “<*
language until we hear from home. 1 thhik voa are ’ y ° U ?' gh , t be ,earnin S U>e
too hastily. It is a subject of some importance !«!i T’ and niake U}> >’ our
think you could not be iustified ro r .. ? d demands mature consideration, I
Directors have stated, until you have hula'fult'™ 1 n,ere, y from what the
j«ct. It win be mo’re crUJI “J 1 f^'f »« «»»uU.
put up with a little inconvenience th .n satisfactory to your own mind, to
Directors. When tile «nttem,„ off.T' , y ? Ur Stat '°" witilo " l ll “= of the
/(/e the representatives of the Missionary SocictV°a 'I*!? I 1 * 1 * 0 ' 1 f? nsidcretl thcm hon *
in me to have interfered with L vh A"y mic ,t '**
donotwish to blame them for any thin- they did IP.I A . I r .°‘ ,er 10 adl >P‘- I
lion, 1 might have acted as they* did and formed the P aced . iH a s,mi,ar s'tua-
>vith the experience I have had t should not w* / V 1 upon the Siin,c P ,a " J but
haps they had some » *"?
sons would a d the mission sn tn ’, u thou » l,t that the ruling per.
They might " £«• I should have had^one.
IS not always attended with the necessary V P * Ut lnte ® r 'ty of principle
have had no previous experience FvnL * ° 0ll( luct a concern of which we
secular affairs of the mission, and "this the *?' - lhe ,llllla S«;neiit of the
Sydnly.h^TuThelTbeTyiall^ll^,.;^,^


■
•36 J!
’
i::v
; I :
.V
■
ject, or that the concerns of the mission had been previously proposed for our considers,
tion at that time, or at any other, I do not remember we ever had a meeting cm the
subject. I could not force a conversation relative to the mission at your table; had th?
subject been discussed, 1 should have given my opinion freely. U appears something
lias been said at that time at table from your last letter/ You observe, 1 made a remark
41 that it would not succeed,” &c. I have already told you that the mission diet not
originate with me, and that you appeared to think that I had some hand in it. On thU,
you observe, “ 1 cannot conceive how this idea should arise in your mind.” I will tell
you, from the following remark in your letter to the Directors; “though the plain
were formed by the Deputation, or by Mr, Marsden , or from any other source, the onui
will ultimately be on the Missionary.”
You seem hurt that I should observe, that it was unwise in you to accept of the
situation, under the condition you did; in this remark I intended no reflection upon
you; I meant no more than that you were unacquainted with the operations and
labors necessary in forming a new settlement, in such a society as our community i»
composed of. This would be a work attended with 100 much toil, anxiety, and expense,
for inexperience to contest with. I thought you wore’ unwise to bring such a burden
of responsibility upon yourself, and I still think so.
The Deputation left no instructions with me respecting you and the mission, |
have thought, that I must have given some unintentional offence to you personally, u 1
have never seen you once since you entered upon your mission. I have heard of your
being at Parramatta, avid have been at a loss to conjecture the cause why you have
broken off all correspondence with me. lam not aware of giving you any ground t.f
offence. If you have not confidence in ray judgment and experience, or on my
friendship towards you, or Christian feeling to the aborigines, consult any other of
your friends; authorise them to act for you; I will meet with any person or -persons
you may approve of, and consult with any of them. lam anxious to do what is right,
and 1 feel the difficulty of my situation to be very great. 1 shall not take any Imty
step, and unless I can see my way clear, I shall be very unwilling to move. What I
would recommend would be, to reduce the expenses of the Mission as low as possible,
and make a fair, clear, and candid statement for the information of the Directors, and
wait for their final instructions; this would be the most prudent measure. There arc
many weighty matters to be considered relative to your mission, all of which should be
submitted to the Directors, as they arc responsible to the public for the conduct of
their Missionaries, and the expenditure of their funds; for this reason, every difficulty
should be stated to them; every thing that would be likely to involve expenses, Hut
they may determine what ought to be done. In my connection with the diflemit
missions, many painfurcircumstances have occurred, which have given me weeks ami
months, nay, I may truly say, years of anxiety and pain, such as no consideration* of
a temporal nature should induce me to suffer; this you cannot be ignorant of. Those
connected with missions have the unreasonable and wicked men of this world to contend
•with, and there are many Missionaries who are unreasonable also, who give much dis-
tress to those who have to do with them ; and at this distant part you cannot with your
best endeavours satisfy your constituents. They cannot enter into the reasons for All
your measures, and such as they cannot understand they condemn, and this must be
expected, 1 remain, dear Sir,
your’s faithfully,
SAMUEL MARSDEN,
;T
iM.
■;
*--r :
JBahtahhah , Lake Macquarie , Dec, 17,18-0,
Dear Sir,—The letter you gave me, December 4, dated November 25, when I
in Sydney, I weuld have answered long before now, but for my very serious illness, >U«
effects of which lam now labouring under in much debility. The illness of Mr*. 1 .
and my eldest daughter, both confined with myself at one time in bed, since my return
home, has rendered our situation very trying, and impossible for me to reply sooner.
As it is my intention to appeal to the religious public ultimately, if the same hoe of van.


I SKilllM 7’ l " C DireCtore lO r l,S myM "- '« blame to me,
I I , 7 • SO " rmy years ■ 1 sl 'all a "™er but briefly your letter
e y el 11 °‘ k , nowin.. •• the particulars of the necessity of such a
Ui( Imm fl which wTi 1 ' C 'r > ‘ l , l ' l,ahcl y° u a " oslimate to shew the reasonableness of
IZllrli alr> ' a ‘ iy ~erS ° nali >' oobsltlere.l at Sydney. Yon observe in
your letter, that, I t|„ M k you arc 100 warm, and make no your mind 100 Insiitv " It
is enough to make a wise man mad, when goaded on secretlyy The D& ...
n field la, ' o " r “° r •"«
I , , y rustees for the Aborigines, allowing me to graze niv cows 1 nild *
| menT * ® ar^en ’ &c * «» P'« nf ignorance can be set up, or'of disappoint-
| consMentiofnow “ °!!Tn ” 3 !'l‘ mtal “* " 50 broad a basis,” is not a fit subject of
I £ sav " I wan ,7 '’° l l *? , ": derlake " ndsstoa o.t any other terms.
I f t , ,yk wanltd experience in fire secular concerns of the mission ” Now have
| LtttS 4 ? --Aef Where 1 have erred in this respect. I'witrweThave
| the same circumslat "° U d '‘are paul, placed in the same situation, and under
- to the Direct, vq '*« *r 7 , SOrry 10 ll( i 5' OU so strongly disposed to lend yourself
S to , Slf me a d .I sfa f r‘ ,OU ‘ ‘ jusl *>«“*'«•». •* ‘bus endeavouring
4 10 t^ usll nie » and weaken my hands in my work.
I <he lilTfllfr ''aving a meeting, or a' regular discussion on the subject of
I able ■’ it was Lthob it . V ° Ur , fmce a , convl -' rs '“ tio " relative to the mission at mtr
I Be ' , IVo . 8 J , tOUCI ' t ' d l ' l| ’“"’ a " d «>*» absorbed in oilier conversation try Mr.
I mbe; o? 77"' 1 1 y0 . n, " lf, l but Ido latest against the conduct of Mr. to.net.
1 ,7d?f7 ' V ’,° C ° U ' dcvole ti,e ' vhole of his lime to visiting,
3 . } S Z'\\ tX ? hm . ' Vln r ! mca " b * " ,e *»»» falling on the Missionary, it has null,tug to
; fj'l" "l* *"»■» *•»'• >»i«io«. but refers to the Committee, wi,ly, ls . a cUle
I rrr ,* u m passcU ™ .mi* c0..., ,i „,,. y
wDi e ’or, , ex r ct . olher from the same persons in the
s same Uuettorslnp, who are stiil writing in the same spirit
tion. |\Z l L to to y v U n Sll|,| ’ OSil i/‘'’ vhrnyou say, ” I roust Itave given some uniuteu.
h“ « 1 tatlrr lT 7’“ V 7 " cw sfen y°“ »in« y»n entered the
I 1 have lrc.ild of your being at Parramatta, and have been at a loss to coni-eture
, flu Cause why you broke off all correspondence with me.” To lids 1 will very frankly
hi, Twits S °>T" e - ,} Vb ? y r ViM »« n witness
; null 1)1. Doug ass at I arrarnatta, field was returned with from £4O to 4’JO worilt of
: “* «' M i««°nary Society, to form a mi«ii on bisflm fl U«
| , y . blacks, whose tribe was with me at the Government cottage, Newcas le Ids farm
I olulc!!dt Z n! u fr#ra i " ,C Ti‘f ofoUr Hl'Csionary exertions. Had I not previously
! her nl, of ,he P ',7 IM,Ve ,nslau " y “bandoned the spot, and ha e gone to
;„ rt sb' 1 ° [, n '°" y ra h r, tha " " ,e of opposition should exist on ray
■ 10 ViM ' ■■"' yor,! ' u numbers of lite Con,.
| m, “eeof the Chinch Missionary Society, or yourself, being the invent to that Sociotv •
1 lmr 11 ? 11 Ul{o ™* lio ”;} '»<* called on the Ilev. Mr. CowpeV,
I corfidence^bv 'T "f bCeM C,iminal iu Mc to friendship aod
This ,rnl? y T rI V" I™’ ” T r tl,er tlie 0,, c llor the other had any cause to exist.
| W l, U 1 (ll^ not public, because I did not wish to add to the' burthen under
I » you were then suffering, and it is only now, since you have voluntarily joined
D ; J
i


fill!
W " Vi .
■■■
•; ; ?
tm-i* j
:2, ■ ■;
; * •!
■
■
‘‘l
. >
'- ' i
' -I
• , ~
fcjr
V -|g : j
.
Vi
with the Directors in endeavouring to impute blame to my conduct in some shat* or
other, that I feel it necessary to state openly the causes which existed for mycoildmt
whilst 1 stand on my own defence against you and the Directors, to mv friends or mVu
public at large,
I beg to conclude remarking on your last observation, namely, that " there ut
many Missionaries* who are unreasonable also, who gi-ve much distress to those who hav«
to do with them,** Now such being the case, is it just that you and Hie Directors should
barrass me as an unreasonable Missionary, or rather would it not be more scriptural
more to the honor of Christ, and the benefit of bis church, to withdraw ? sucb character*
outof the vineyard, rather than cover their unreasonableness, and so bring the mriU.l
“ distress upon those who have to do with them,” besides acting, towards all upright
Missionaries as though they were rogues too, and thus driving them to other
merits, merely for the sake of peace, is highly unjust, and cannot be pleasing in the°cy«»
of the Judge of all the earth. The bitterest foe to the cause of Christ, could not !u««
chosen,a more effectual plan of operations to drive Missionaries from their engagement*
Hum the Directors of the Xxmdon Missionary Society have done by their proefediu *
with many of their Missionaries, I am, Sir, your’s truly,
n , X*. E, TIIUELKEU).
My letter to Mr. Marsden;—
The Rev . S, Mars den.
Bahtahhah, Labe Macquarie , Feb, 10M, 1827.
Dear Sir,—Agreeably to the resolution of the Directors, I send you two sets of bill*
of exchange, the one for £l9l Is. ijd. to close my accounts with the Society from th*
commencement of the aboriginal missions, October 1824, to December, 1820, the paj ti-
tulars of which will he forwarded in duplicate to you next week ; it would have 4f.
•coropanied this, but Mrs. T*s. confinement last week prevented my being able loarung**
my accounts, and give two fair copies by this time., The other set is for 250/. Uin*
half a year's advance* to Mr, Campbell, who deems it necessary to be paid in ad vatu*.
The particulars of the expenditure have been pointed out to you, of which you
have a copy. l>ut if I can conduct the mission for less the ensuing year, I will do it
with pleasure. Ido not wish it to be understood, that it shall be run to that expniK,
500/. sterling, whether required or not. If you have any doubt on your mind, do not
put your name until the particular account for the last year has reached you, whhh
will be in a week, allowing wind and weather. Out of the 250/. 90/. is to be placed \ j
my account, for the maintenance of my family from Dec. 1826, to June, 1827. Mr.
Campbell will forward the bills to you, and to save time, &c. you can be pleased to fur.
ward them, when signed by yourself, to that Gentleman.
1 am, dear Sir, your’s truly,
L. E. Til HECK ELI),
To the Rev, S, Mars den.
Bahtahhah , Labe Macquarie , Feb.ltUh, 1821:
Dear Sir.—l band you a duplicate copy of my present communications to tbc In.
vectors of the London Missionary Society, with the account of expenditure, £vc, wlmli
could not be forwarded to you last week with the bills. You will have the
after your perusal of them, to forward the whole to the Directors by the first cuu>tv
ance, I am, dear Sir, your’s truly,
L. E, THUELKXLD,
My letter to the Directors: —
To the Rev. C. Burder, and W, A . Hankcy , Esq.
February 13, 1827, Bahtahhah , Lake
Nao South Wales .
Sirs,—Agreeably to your resolutions, I Slave sent up to Mr. Marsden a set of l»d»»
exchange for one hundred and ninety pounds one shilling and one penny halfpenny, w


balance the expenditure account from June 1826 to December iB2rt • •m.i ,i A e t
hundred and fifty pound, sterling in advance, for the Slit months r 'V' V °
i 1827. Without which I could not carry on the u.issmn,
panl in advance, as I will not render myself responsible, when asud lonre sol
Directors may plunge me into the greatest difficulties. These bills 1 Lin- d.a v xIVLI !r
f ll * Campbell, Esq. agreeably to your own resolution*, you will Time Z.
honour them. It is my fixed determination not to act under those resolutions after (hi*
I y Ctir * T° avoid the unnecessary waste of money and tin* inl i.-v n i ■■ ‘ r , «
1 «'?*"• 1 »p «'» mission,at (he ro^,!t of y,E™ S.Z»
1,00 to l 0U ’ Sus j y° u trdatyour Missionaries in print as brethren in vour nrivntn ‘
mum cations as an inferior order of beings, hardly worthy of notice *or at lea' l
£S
*" uicly Mission ai ies who are devoting themselves thnlr ♦< 0 ~ y
e.rt as the Directors themselves, or any other person; and surely they are not to h P
' ade subservient for any other cause than the .cause of Christ Asau individual 1 will
S orrCid wA““ 80 wU " T oat >-a if
Ucct other justifiable measures must be resorted to for relief, whether personal amiJi
cation becomes necessary m England or otherwise. A tacit impeachment of inte«Titv in
tlie resolutions which you have passed will never be submitted to by me 1 therefore
wm >1 r qU i ll,ty r U \l hat in Fcb, : ua,, y> ««. if lam spared, my IdLTdraJv^tils
will be accoiding to the instructions under which! • n .
t0 r °" e,his «•**. «*“ if Jfi£
jietts then conectucss, no objection will he raised • hut if m,, ,■ ,
of the mission is interfered in, it had fur better' be ’under ti,o m£™en?
many. 11 ' V ° Uid bIU ° UC raaster - iu tlje other case there would be too
mv i.nTJn/ elt 'a m r dut r to ivc yotl tirne,y nolice of m y cool final determination of
my mode ol conducting this mission, if lam continued iu it as the Missionary Tt l
explanation of the course of expenditure accompanies this ; ami while I wouhUvish to
correspond with every feeling of respect, lam bound in co,, s ?
odenco betwixt you and me alone, in order that a better spirit may exist hmafter «
0 *" 1, Waiting your speedy answer, (o release modern as“
pciuse,as to the affairs of the mission, which will be carried on, disregarding every com,
umiucation previous to »iy receiving a direct one on the subject of this letter.
I remain, Sirs,yours respectfully,
L. E. i’IIREEK ELD.
EXPLANATION.
It is duo to the Members of the London Missionary Society, that they should be
m>nd i dCqUain ed W, } h / hc pecu!iar circumstances of this mission, occasioning the ex
rJr UUVm uc f ountofwh,cil accompanies this explanation, that both they and the Di
rectors may rest satisfiedas to the faithful application of the monies drawn foratdif.
*icn peuo s for the establishment of this Missionary Station in New South Wales
L L Macquane lms bcc “ Uiiuccupigd by British emigrants, ia crmscaucncs


_. i, *na
of its bring inaccessible by calls or on horseback. A bar cnirancc of „„u!E 11
* f «‘ water throuel. a narrow intricate channel "Zj H ™ HIUm
>. if b/iTr ’rr f’. " lc fores '' or «■« could nol l.avc been be «,,
the Place pointed out by the Deputation, and reserved for that purpose bv the (Vo ,
men. The .».p«|...„, I , e« of this coast, the hazard ot’th. «l"X ih.«iTe.:
TXcS Vu.rs; ,m, *- :
U,e ,CM ’ ° f Lu " od<S co “ ,d bc coustantl y employed
Twelve miles to be cleared, through a thick wood, on a range of high hills bv f.l
Jing trees, and removing impediments, to the conveyin’- ourselves am nrov ! V
’■ I a , dlStanc6 of ’f or 10 niiics > coul(1 no t be effected without persons be in-
ployed, which consequently gave rise lo expense. The natives are not in a slate tiul
they can he obtained when wanted, or depended on a moment for assistance in any ,v„rk
i pi ent, 1 a ! ! persons became necessary to have about us incur secluded situation-
| ?, IU , t lC dlffic, ! l ;! es on the roa(1 continually occurring by the blowing down of trees or
| lll ® m f cail!nn « tlle road to be frequently obstructed, and the doLnew of
. | .the trees, renders it absolutely necessary that two persons should always bo with the carl
in or coming out with the necessaries from Newcastle. It is al*o
nee iful that wo should have persons about us in our insular situation ; were it k„o£
0* V . * /' ve M ’ ere Wlthout » w °uld be an inducement to bushrangers and ill-disposed blacks to
watch such opportunities for attacking and plundering us.
f. ?“ c 1 ) s the state of a M issionary Station fornied°merely to obtain the language of
the aborigines, in order to instruct them in the gospel of Christ; and such arc the uc
arts Of hn P r'"f l ° ■ r to , Cffeet the P ,ans lai(1 dow » ili the instructions to “ teach the
H husbandry and civilized life,” whilst we are aiming ultimately, and makin- thcc
things subservient to their being persuaded to embrace Christianity. - °
. 1 , , obj . cct l . lus a,so been to ‘•euder the services of the persons employed around us M
■ as to be productive of good in lessening the half yearly expenditure. \he growth and
nusingof our provisions on the spot, by those persons, whether blacks or whiles, appear
11 ind nevi vT 1 T 3nd JUSt,fiabl f measure we could l * do Pt- Such has been our pL ,
|l|l ; f.Xli tVrrZ le nn r COrD ? ll , or heat ’ nor raeat i with all its consequent expense of
freightage &c.wil be required. The wheat only excepted, having to be carried lo
M Newcastle for grinding, paying Is. 4d. per bushel. But if the Directors have thought
ht to accede to my request made last year, that a mill should be sent from England, fh e
1 I U fn^fr^riheTtlt T Y - these things °and look!
•!n o " d U 1 1 * 1 iaV , e 1)0 hesitation in saying the mission will decrease rapidly
n 1 mi en f C evei y r ar » P rovi( i e dlam allowed lo use my own judgment, and without tins
iZmTZX • I V>r n expenses for the y™ t Save Warded at £m.
• ’ th C °f-5 th ° >' Car » ™ tiouin e wife, and children at ths
j| . 1 1 J P nsoii ersof the crown. Our peculiar circumstances enable us to do this, but -
it must not be a precedent for your conduct to other Missionaries—it would be unjust;
and I pledge myself not to exceed £5OO sterling, for the whole mission, keeping k ,
much under as I possibly can. The year following I anticipate it will be less, perhaps
¥ ; I fA°*l b ’ ,tund «|‘ that I see no prospect whatever of its decreasing, unless grazing slock
. , r < bought, and fiom the produce the mission receives its support.
H | . , books, Sec. for natives, should they wish to be instructed, is not
Hi mcluded, all such expenses would be extra.)
H. I f. Wl .( e » five chi ! dr . efl » myself, and persons employed, require a habitation; and it
nay attention, as a missionary, is to be directed to the attainment uf the language, a room
tor that purpose must be provided, where ] may have such natives as are required, ami
* J w tere papers, c can be deposited in safety. It was originally intended, when the De-
| u a ion was in the Colony, that mechanics should be obtained from Qovernmcnt, and
j ia urn cr ray superintendence the house should be put up, it being considered a* the
most economical plan. On my application to the Governor himself, Sir Thomas Bri*,
bane, he informed me, that he was sorry that not one could be spared, but that when a
vessel arrived from England then we should have a carpenter. Six or eight month*
- capsec,and the peculiar circumstances of the Colony were such, that no uiuluim*


siSs^^
wm *• «-*
f rf K « “
chased, at a ll ,;,„ ® .f . Ir . V” of J J ""fkiucu, for whom provision must be pur-
.««coio*;:l ar :‘ a 10 them ““"»■**» «••
»"d the house, nitii months -,fter 1h,1h,»’ S ‘’v 1™" ° f “' e contlact " crc '“"suited,
Mas n^;\ i»Vbw™"™.
eatables lot heir e tHbe to “f'T and t,,wir w ‘ ves * bpBides donation* of
their words, and ask ouesHon* • Y allendance i 0 me to collect and arrange
tag's being derived from S f x P ense as it regard, any ad van-
employed in falling and burning off* the but s,llce thal P priod t!, ey have been
& T °w that which we are now ohh*“/I 1 ! t0 ® Uilblc lo cu,t| vate the land, and
have been cleared since Wav f urcl,asc for tbe * r use - Five and twenty acres
nearly ripe • and Kiu! io . i•* oht acres are m cultivation, with Indian corn now
uext ye,,}. Corn r W I ‘ C“ t ' t,lat ' ve nay " ot l' urcll »se Hour
~ w *i-w. tb " #cca “ o,w “ pense of wotkme " «• «>•
Sffent’s to^/p Ce, J*V ° n Ull Casll and hills passed through the
The klndnea. «n? ? tl.e expense of the mission without necessity,
his lady have oh. f I! Commissary General, Wm. VVemyss, |L. (who with
their ac^uaiufanceToblab? s^ 68 Steadyf friends r r iends ever since * have had the pleasure of
"•gotiaETth; 1 c„,“ " e ?, ap ." ln ‘“ m . of £lB P« a £«0 bill, which being
wljo ue'-otiited lh. •-•if , lld w . lt ‘. out cllar K c °f »ny commission by E. H. Scott, E;i>r
(This is the rLv I'l oma 1 acknowledgment of such an act of friendship,
gained £42 to the Sociclv J’l o ."' !'T, r 1 n , for ''“"-Payment by Mr. llankey, althoUgh it
tba"tnow returned! despi,T“’? i(" Society £3O, making
e “ deilTO " V of t » ( to Hen ex’
mu.berry.trees; no shaking of the bones; but all dry, dry, very dry scj fc cd bone
m the midst of a waste howling wilderness. But disre’nmlin- the „r .1 '
It is the duty of Christians to ,U„d still, or sit stiit hcsy .v 'f . c 1
the command of their Lord, whether their personal feclin-a are excitedto n „
.O despair. -To obey is better thin sacrifice, ilttd fct of
BahbJthak,Lake Macquarie, 13 HiFch. 1827. L " J
The accounts are consolidated at the end of this state-
ment.
My letter to Mr. Hankey :
To, }V A, Hankey t Esq .
c?_ . , Take Macquarie, March G/h, 1827,
t 1 be b «° ady.sc you of having drawn, in favour of Robert Campbell Esci
for 200/. sterling, of this date, for the purpose of carrying on the mission until’juue
next, agreeably to an estimate of expenditure handed to Mr. Marsden last December,


Cs; W& ;■ II 3 TiTi :
ytii
which ho approved. Bills to this amount were sent to Mr. Marsden, through Mr,
‘- ; ” ’ < Campbell, but that Gentleman declined signing them, Mr, Campbell informing m *
1 : t[ that Mr. Marsden wo uld himself draw bills of 100/. from lime to time, to the sum he
| agreed. This not being the plan laid down by the obnoxious resolutions of the Dircu-
H | - tors, I decline to consent to the establishment of such bn unsatisfactory mode of con-
ducting the mission. My reason is this, because the principle upon which the Mis.
sionaries in these seas have acted/or the last 4or 5 years, namely, to account for tlu ir
it f] 'W I own expenditure, and draw their own bills is satisfactory jas an individual missionary, I
- i Cl will not consent to any other system. The aggregate sums, which have been placed to the
/. * accounts of our missions, make it appear to the religious public that we arc most
bountifully provided for, whereas the monies have not been spent on the personal wants
of the Missionaries, or their families, but on other purposes connected with the missions,
’-I* whilst we ourselves are taking but the smallest possible stipend for ourselves and fa-
milies.
It was my intention to have submitted, as I have already written in duplicate
through Mr. Marsden, for this year only, to your resolutions respecting Mr. Marsden
’. 1 v | . and the bills ; his adopting a new measure brings the matter to a crisis, and I bare
'|| %■ ’• j taken the responsibility of drawing until your final determination is known.
C % A Your not honoring* these bills would only cause needless expense to the Society,
And further, it is now my fixed and final resolution to have no communication what-
ever with Mr, Marsden on the subject of Missionary transactions, any future comnuml- -|
cations from you,*jnadc through that channel, I shall decline noticing or answering in
any other way thaii direct to the Directors, or publicly to the religious community, by
whose bounty I have been partly supported these ten years. Of course you can adopt
such measures as you may think proper, or form regulations annoying to one's feelings
C or sacrifice twenty Missionaries to the shrine of Mr. Marsden, as one of the Gentlemen of
J the Deputation publicly avowed at Sydney ; or dishonor these bills drawn for the car,
1- lying on of the mission until your final determination is known (your resolution*
•having made no provision in case of Mr. Marsden’s refusal or adoption of other mea-
sures).
s % The wants of a rising family, consisting of myself, wife, and six children, all horn
, y* J | in Missionary service, demand a care, unless the faith is to be renounced, and inficlclity
| I substituted. They ought not to be wafted hither and thither, or scattered us mine lute
been, and are unto the present day, without some consideration, or sacrificed in order to
hold up characters to the world at the whim of private individuals.
I urn, Sir, with respect, your’s truly,
L. E. TiiKDLKI'.LD.
To the Directors of ihe London Blissionary Society ,
■" ', i I through the medium of IV. A. HanVey, £sq, Treasurer,
!0; : I Some of the friends of the aborigines wrote to Mr.
Hankey on the subject of the mission, and my intention ;
I; was to carry it on until the Directors had time to send out
. / y another Missionary, or arrange matters so as 1 could con-
scientiously continue to act under them. In July fresh
communications were received, and Mr. Marsden sent me 1
I the following, with a copy of the resolutions : .
| !;/• ; Parramatta t July 30, I*o7- |
r I Reverend Sir,—l have received from the Directors of Ihc Missionary Society a Ulltr. |
' i;udcr date 22d of March, containing ccrlain resolutions relative to your mission, a I
| of which I now transmit to you for your information and guidance. 1 suppose the 1 -
rectors have communicated their wishes to you. They had not received my hlUr f« * -
lativc to your allowance when they wrote to me, in allowing )on 300/. per annum. 1 t
"■ had exceeded their estimate 50/. You will judge for yourself wliat ought to be done. !»' |
my advice can be of any service to you, I urn ready most willingly to give il, and I* %


lake the responsibility upon myself for any opinion I may think myself warranted to
l*»ve, provided my opinion is acted upon. Something: must he done to arrange the
concerns of the mission, as the Directors have dishonored your bills If yon can settle
tiicse concerns without any reference to me, 1 shall he glad, because the Public at lar-o
who have not considcicd the difficulties of establishing a mission amongst the aborigines
so much as I have done, may widely differ from me in opinion on this subject; you will
inform me what measures, you intend to adopt, tiiat I may communicate them to the Di-
rectors, as they will be very anxious to hear what is likely tu be done.
I am, yours faithfully,
m r, , ' SAMUEL MARSDEN,
The Rev, Mr. Th relied cl.
I received at the same time a letter containing the reso-
lutions of the Directors, dated
t Mission-House, Austin Friars, London, March 22c?, 1827.
Dear Sir.-—After being apprised, by the perusal of the postcript to our letter to you
of the 9lb ultimo, of the painful feelings excited in our minds by your letters, just
then received, advising of your having further drawn on the Society bills to nearly the
sum of 040/. (making a total outlay on account of the proposed mission to the aborigines
of upwards of 1800/. in the course of only tsvo years) you will be prepared to hear, that
we llave resolved to adopt some measure with a’view to put a stop to this exorbitant ex-
penditure, which lias excited in us a degree of surprise and apprehension that wo
should find it difficult to express.
After very mature consideration of the subject, we have deemed it proper to adopt
the resolutions of which we subjoin copies ; viz.
R J Rd it is incompatible with the state ol the Society’s funds to support the un-
looked-for heavy expenses incurred by Mr. Thrclkeld for the mission to the aborigines of
IVew South Wales, and that no advances be made on its account any further extent
than is necessary for the personal expenses of himself and family, and objects strictly
missionary, 3 J
2. That Mr. Threlkcld be forthwith advised of this determination ; and that he be
also informed, that unless he can obtain from the Government of the Colony, by whose
recommendation the mission is understood to have been commenced the necessary means
of providing for all charges beyond the sum of 250/. per annum, which the Directors
are willing to allow, if necessary, for the maintenance of himself and family, and for
objects strictly missionary, the mission must be given up, and Mr. Threlkcld return to
his former station in the South Sea Islands.
3. That the bill for 111/. IGs. be paid, as it may have been drawn for his support, but
that the other bills drawn by Mr. Threlkcld, recently presented for acceptance, amount-
ing to 52//. 12s. be not paid, and that lie be directed, in case of failure of the proposed
arrangements with the local Government, to take the best measure in his power, assisted
by the Rev. Mr. Marsden, for settling those bills by the sale of the property of the
mission, and that the Directors will accept such bills as shall be drawn by the Rev. Mr.
Marsden, jointly with himself for discharging the deficiency, if any,* between the pro-
ceeds of the property directed to be sold, and the amount of the said bills and charges.
4. That the resolutions be communicated to the Rev. Mr. Marsden, with the re-
quest, that he will kindly render to Mr. Threlkcld, or obtain for him, all the assistance
which he may need in carrying* them into effect.
We purpose to write to His Excellency the Governor of New South Wales by the
present packet, handing him a copy of the foregoing resolutions, and adding such ob.
serrations on the subject, as we consider the painful circumstances in which we have
been placed, in regard to your mission, require. We earnestly hope, that His Excel-
lency may be disposed, and find himself at liberty to afford the requisite aid for prevent*
ing the entire abandonment of the mission ; but should no such aid be afforded in the
Colony, we perceive no alternative but that, in concert with Mr. Marsden, you should
* We have it proper to provide against this os a possible contingency,
though wc expect there will be a considerable surplus,


procml to carry the preceding resolutions (wliicli you will observe fully pro.
vole* for your persona! security against ifie bills now returned) into full rflVc f
When this has been done, we wish you to remove, with your family by tI.J
first convenient opportunity, to the Society Island?, to resume your mission,
ary labours there, or in any of the surrounding Islands, where llie gospel bn*
; ,i , t : rn introduced, should that appear to your brethren, the missionaries, most
eligible. 7
We should, in this case, be glad to receive a regular statement of the
particulars of sale of the mission property, which please to transmit from the
I : £ Colony, prior to your return to the islands.
With suitable remembrance to the several members of your family, ue
arc, on behalf of the Directors, . 1
Dour Sir, faithfully and affectionately yours,
WM. ALE US HANKEY, Treasurer.
GEORGE BUKDFiI, Secretary.
I wrote immediately to Mr. Marsden as under
. Sydney i Friday, Aug. 0, 1857.
Rev. Sir.—l have received communications from the Direcrbrs similar to
■ ■'j those which you f»rwnrderi to me. Suffice to sav, that the properly cannot
be sold to lake up those bills of £5*47 12s. in the present stage of ihe bush
ness, which bills the Directors have returned to the waste of the Society •«
funds.
I beg to know whether yon will draw bills with myself, agreeably to their
resolution, founded on the possibility of effecting conveyance with the sale of
properly, to secure my personal* responsibility against a debt contracted
9 agreeably to instructions confirmed by the Directors.
n J W W VM MII I 111 VVI • * •ll V X/ ii r V vlf i) •
I\ly engagements with the persons necessary to lie with us at the station
will terminate in the beginning of October next. My removal from Luke
Macquarie must be eflected previously to their discharge, or any sale of the
property, such as oxen, horse, and implements of husbandry. lint the deed
of trust requires that the Directors should write to the Governor saying, they
have declined the mission, before arrangements can be made to effect a sale
...... - ----- -.y ~ -.w i m i| l9 vuu uu iiiauc iu rurwk a aiiic
i>f the house, and outhouses, Sec. In the mean lime 1 shall retain possession
until the whole business is settled, by leaving a person in care of the house,
| | after my family is removed,
v| v Your early answer, directed to me at the house of G. Allen, Esq. will
much oblige, Reverend Sir, your’s truly,
1 L. E.THRELKFLD.
To which I received in reply from Mr. Marsden, the
following letter:—
■ t S . O
Parramatta, August 13, 1827.
Reverend Sir.—l have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, under
date of the Oil) instant, respecting the communication yon have received from
the Directors of the Missionary Society, relative to the concerns of your mis.
sion, in which yon observe, “ ] beg to’know whether you will draw bills with
ii myself, agreeable to their resolution, founded on the possibility of effecting
9 conveyance with the sale of the property to secure my personal nspoinj-
<l bilify against, a debt contracted agreeably to instructions continued by the
te Directors To this 1 answer, certainly not, for the following reasons -
, Ist. The bills for 527/. 12s. though noted for non-acceptance have not
*1 been returned.
ii: 2d, It the above stun of 527/. 12s. was contracted, as you slate, <f agree-
h-| ahly to instructions confirmed by the Directors,” 1 conceive the Society miut
pay the original bills,
yj I do not understand from the Directors’ letter to me, that I am authorial


1 ,
I
Sydney, August 17,1827.
-p
7o His Excellency General Darling, Governor and Commander
*« Chief, and to the Honorable the Legislative Council of New
r
i
b ■ i
f ; f
Snath Wales. ° y i. j
. TJie Memorial of L. E. Thbblkbld, Missionary, from I lie London
Missionary Society, of Luke iMacquarie, neap Newcastle, in the Colony
i
5 lion during’ I heir employment, in order to associate with them to obtain a
knowledge of their language. That the London Missionary Society have
hitherto honored the bills drawn on the treasurer for the said expenses until
the last set of hills hut one, which has not yet had lime to he returned. That
| certain resolutions have been passed by the Directors of the London Missionary
Society (a copy of which is annexed hereto) directing your memorialist to sell
« the property of the mission to lake up those bills, about to be returned, to the , j -
amount of ±'527 12s. but in consequence of the deed of trust, *no sale of the
| house and improvements can be effected. Your memorialist i* therefore under
; the necessity of being personally attached for the amount of the said bills,
i That your memorialist is desired by the said resolutions to make application
i e sy
| draw bills to retire the übove bills come out, but to julvise with you rela-
I live to the property, or the lund you have occupied on account of the mission, „
ff t0 dispose of that properly to answer the amount of the bills which have - f
I uot been paid, or accepted by the Directors, j l\
As the Society have no legal title to the land, I cm apprehensive the
* moveable property will not amount to very much—of this you are the best l{ j I)
| j»d*re. I waited upon the Governor, and also upon the Colonial Secretary on pfci! : U
I the subject, hut I fear little will he done. The Colonial Secretary would he .
I very willing l to assist, hut he told me Government could do nothing, If you r ~ f.
| • P y <tU out any way in which I can with propriety assist in arranging the
t concerns ol the mission, I shall he very willing to do so. The house may he
| sold, with what belongs to the farm, hut the land on which it stands cannot,
j toi* want of a title. The Society Imre written to the Governor, and His Ex- N• v:
| cellency told me, he would uot he able to attend to the letter at the present.
1 remain, Key. Sir, your’s very truly, ■ *
„ SAMUEL MAUSDEN.
by the advice of a gentleman high in authority, the
; following Memorial was addressed to His Excellency
the Governor and Legislative Council on the subject.
of New South Wales.
Sbbwbth,
That your memorialist left England as a Missionary to the South Scu
Islands, from the London Missionary Society, in the year 1815, and landed on
Kaiutca in the year 1817, where he continued until the decease of his wife in
the year 1524 ; that returning to England from family circumstances, your
memorialist came by way of Sydney, when he was requested to take the
| charge of establishing and conducting a mission to the Aborigines of New
South Wales, on a grant of 10,000 acres of lund, given in trust for that purpose
by His Majesty. Thai the Rev. Daniel Tyerman and George Bennet, Esq. a
1 Deputation from the London Missionary Society authorised your memorialist Y :
| to commence the mission agreeably to instructions, a copy of which is annexed
| hereto, since which time he has been employed in endeavouring to obtain a
knowledge of the native language, a specimen of which is also now laid before
in iuc n.ii iv c uing lliigr, u sflfUlUiril UI IS UISO UOW JUIO UetOIC
His Excellency the Governor, and the Honorable Members of the Legislative
Council.
council. f
That your memorialist has incurred a considerable expense in acting
agreeably to the aforesaid instructions, in clearing a road from Newcastle tu
Lake Macquarie, in building a house, clearing and cultivating about 25 acres
; of ground, and in supporting a number of Aborigines ul the Alissionary sla-


S ' ' ■
“I
i S, &'. S :
4% &, m’
I
.
'■#l% j"\l.
■ ■
.
■■
to the Local Government for aid to carry on the mission to the Aborigines for nil t«.
penses that may be incurred above £250 per year, and that the mission must be
doned unless the extra expenses can be met in some other way than on the funds of the
Society.
Your memorialist prays that His Excellency the Governor and the LegisUthe
Council may, in their wisdom, adopt such measures as to prevent the total abandonment
of the design to obtain the language of the Aborigines, with a view to their moral and
civil benefit. The present pressing necessity of the case in regard to time, urges your
memorialist to pray an early consideration,
L. E. THRELKELD, Missionary,
The following notice was sent me as per date.
Sydney , Aug. 25, 1827.
Sir,—l beg to inform you that I have received advices, stating that your bit!,
drawn Ist August IB2G, on Mr. A. Ilankey, Eenchurch-street, London, in my favor, hu
been protested for non-acceptance.
The answer on the presentment of this bill was, that “ 'the hill could not bo accepted *•/
jpresent l have the honor to be, Sir,
your most obedient servant,
ELLIS M. SCOTT,
My next communication was from Mr. Scott, m
Sunder:—
Australian Company's Office, Sydney , Oct. 10, 1827.
Sir,—Referring to my letter of the 25th August, acquainting you that your bill,
dated Newcastle, Ist August 1826, on W. A. Ilankey, London, for £4OO, had been prv
tested foi non-acceptance, 1 have now further to inform you, that by the “ Alacrity,’
arrived yesterday from Londop. the above has been returned to me protested for noa
payment, and 1 now beg to hand you, on the other side, a note of the same, with
expenses, amounting to 536 1, 16s. 4d. sterling, which sum 1 expect you will take imau.
diate steps for discharging.
Allow me to add, that as it would be very disagreeable to me to be obliged to pul
‘ this matter into a legal train I have to request that no time may be lost in forwarding *
settlement. 1 remain, Sir, your most obedient servant,
* ELLIS M. SCOTT.
The Rev. Mr. Thrclkeld,
E>r. to Ellis M, Scott, Agent for.the Australian Company.
To bill drawn on W, A. Haukey, Esq. London, due 23d April 1827, dis-
honored 400 0‘ i* I
; honored , 460 9’ » |
S . » Protest 24s commission and exchange 4 1, postage ss. Cd, interest 2s. 3d.
postage to New South Wales 3s. 9d. •.... 5 15 6
! £405 15 O
• « Interest on this sum, till paid in Leith, say 10 months, at 5 per cent,.,l6 IS 4 .
- £ 422 13 lw |
£422 13 1« I
♦ . Premium of exchange on 422f. 13s. 10d. at 3 percent. 12 13 fc
S|f :1 £435 7 6 I
.. Re-exchange on 405f. 15s. Cd at 25 per cent, being the charge on re-
-1: turned bills 101 4 ,u
i •——
H| | Sterling .... in i
V s’ vj «
ffii " . ■; I


I
| A copy of which I sent, with the following, to Mr,
I Marsden:—
Caddie, October 15, 1827.
Sir,— Having now received an actual notice of a returned bill far 400/. with expenses,
■f of which the enclosed is a copy, J beg- to address you respecting its discharge.
As some months will elapse before I can make final arrangements respecting the sale
of house and improvements, lam under the necessity of soliciting your joint signature
I to a fresh set of bills, to cover the said amount and expenses.
3 J would not presume to make this application, bm from the Directors’ resolutions,.
| of which you forwarded me a copy, authorising our joint signature to bills, which they
| promise to accept, if necessary, to be drawn to make up the deficiency after the sale of
I property, should such sale not cover the amount of returned bills, they, however, ex-
f peeling a considerable surplus. But the circumstance of the house and improvements
I being on land held in trust for the aborigines, no sale can be effected until the land is
I given up to the Crown, and Government is pleased to confirm the measures already
| suggested. In the mean time, the payment of the returned bill and expenses occasioned
I thereby is absolutely needful. Your immediate answer is most earnestly requested, to
I prevent the unpleasantness of legal proceedings from the party.
Protesting against the injustice of the Directors’ conduct,
I remain Sir, your’s respectfully,
L. E. THRELKELD,
| Mr, Marsden’s reply :
Parramatta , October 19, 1827.
Dear Sir, —The last six days I have been from borne, and your letter did not reach
* me until last night, |am much concerned that your bill has been returned dishonored,
f J had some hope that the Directors would have ordered it to have been paid, as it did
not immediately come out. As the bill has been returned, 1 do not know what can be
i done, as you can give no title to the land or property without the sanction of Govorn-
| ment, which sanction is yet doubtful; the bill cannot be retired on that precarious
ground. The sum of £S3G Jss. 4d. sterling i* a very large sum j 1 could not venture
I io make myself answerable for this amount, from any instructions which I have received
f from the Directors; if I put my name to the bill, I make myself responsible. Not long
I ago J did so for a person who was in the Colony, from my respect to one of the Directors,
"| which bill has been returned, and I have had it to pay with all expenses, and shall never
I receive one penny, though this has nothing to do with the Society. I indorsed another
| bill for a friend for £2OO sterling, tbatl have had to pay, and have totally lost the whole
I amount. 1 feel it would be too much for me to risk at the present moment, until Go-
| vernment say what they will do, or until I hear from the Directors, in answer to my
letters to them in January last, which I may daily expect to hear.
I purpose seeing Mr. Campbell on Monday, and shall consult with him. lam very
I uneasy about bis bills lest they should be returned, which will I know distress him
very much. It is an unfortunate business, nnd I always was alarmed about it, and told
the Deputation what were my views. It is not paying the monc) nt last, that can com-
pensate the merchant for his disappointments, should the Directors do this.
I am, dear Sir, your’s very truly,
SAMUEL MARSDEN.
On the reception of this letter, 1 addressed Mr. Scott;—
Sydney, October 23, 18*27.
Sir, —In reply to your favour of the 101 h instant respecting a bill of exchange for
I £403 sterling, protested for non-payment, I have applied to the Rev. S. Marsden for
| his signature to a fresh set of bills, in order to retire that already returned. That gen-
tleman declines so doing. 1 have attempted oilier arrangements, which have likewise
I failed. The resolutions of the Directors of the London Missionary Society, slating that
1 J must sell the property of the Society to pay the returned bill, cannot be acted upon,


I wrote in reply ; —
; . r ' Sydney, October 27, 1827.
;; M sir, I beg to acknowledge ybur letter of the 2Gth‘ instant, relative to a return**!
■ • j bill of £400 and expenses. I have this day written to Mr. Marsden for his final answer,
V | a ,id will take the earliest opportunity of acquainting you with his determination.
I regret much the necessity of legal step*, but Mr. Scott is perfectly justified in Uw
$ | measures he. has adopted. I am, Sir, your’s respectfully, _
■ :| L. E. TIIRLLKI.U).
& n '
-1 M
'/■ because the house, he. is on land granted in trust to'llie aborigines; as such, I cannot
dispose of it, unless Government slops in and assists, of which 1 have no hope. lam
exceedingly grieved at the circumstance, and am utterly at a loss what measures to per*
Ssue. The 25 per cent. lam informed by my friends 1 ought not to pay, unless a Court
of law decide it should he so. I think that the Directors, having returned the bill on »
| tk mistaken idea respecting the sale of property, would, on a proper representation of the
case, honor my fresh set of bills to cover the amount, with the legal expenses. 1 rx.
oeedingly regret the circumstance of my not being able to efleet an immediate sale of
the property, and at once discharge the bill; and lam utterly at a loss for any other
means to take up the bill. I am, Sir, your’s truly,
1 L.E. THRELKELD,
| ■ The following letter I received from Mr. Scott’s
. 4, solicitor; —
.I k Sydney, October W, 1827.
Sir,—Mr. E. M. Scott lias placed in my hands a bill of exchange, drawn by you on
W, A. Jlankey, for £4OO, which has been protested for non-acceptance and nou-
The charges and re exchange on this draft, amount to £S3G IGs. 4d. to recover
% E j 'which Mr. Scott has instructed me to hold you io bail unless the amount is provided for
'y, • ' .
y Vlr’ Scott regrets the necessity of taking such steps against yon, hut as his intercu
in the transaction is one of trust, he feels compelled to adopt the most ready way of
%§ I obtaining money. I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
JAM Lb iNUili OA,
: : ! T trmrifa In vnnlo •
( Xj, Xj, i imijuui i-u.
I wrote also a copy of Mr. Norton’s letter, with the
i following, to Mr. Marsden :
°
! Sir,—! beg to annex a copy of a letter from Mr. Norton, the solicitor, relative to the
returned bill’of exchange, and to recjnest that you would favour me with your fiml
■ ‘ ; determination as to signing fresh bills to cover the amount, in order to save further
K. i 3 j expenses, and my person from being attached.
I I am, Sir, your’s respectfully,
; , : * L, E. THRELKELD.
Received in reply, from Mr. Marsden:—
Parramatta , October 20, 1827.
Dear Sir, — I received your letter yesterday, with the copy of Mr, Norton’s, relative
. ' M : jo the protested t ill, and 1 am at a loss what answer to make to it. From the instruction*
I have received from the Directors, I do not think I am warranted to draw upon them
for the amount of the bill in question, it gives me much concern to see you placed in
" ;| I s Uc h difficulties. It will be of no use to arrest you for the money, because you have M
i 1 the means of retiring the bill. From lire U.t letter 1 had, the Directors seem to lb oh
the property at Dike Macquarie, on the mission beinggiven up, will, when sold.
» whole or the greatest part of the bill; in this they have formed a wrong opinion. I
H I hope, when they are acquainted with all the circumstances, they will settle the amount .
||i m I I will verv readily join in slating them to the Directors, but 1 dare not venture to un»


myself responsible for so large a sum. lam afraid Government will give no title to Ihft
land at Lake Macquarie, which will prevent the sale of the properly lo n;;y amount. I
expect to hear from the Directors by the very first arrival direct from England, when
J shall be better able to judge of what can be done. I hope Mr, Scott will not proceed
to the utmost extent of the law against you. I see no necessity for his doing this, as you
have no wish to evade payment, or leave the Colony until the matter is settled. It can-
not be settled without the sanction of the Directors, and which 1 trust will be given by
the next arrivals, in reply to my former letters. Jt is very probable the bill would have
been paid, bail it passed through the hands of Mr. Campbell, as the Deputation gave him
authority to honour at! your bills in my presence. From this circumstance I should not
have negotiated any of your bills myself, had you offered any tome; I should have
known that 1 was not authorised to take them. This might never have occurred to you
at the time. I hope Mr. Scott will wait until arrivals from England, and not go farther
than he has done, unless you had the means of retiring the bill; to say the least, if is a
very unpleasant business to all who are concerned in it. It is the fust bill that Ins been
dishonored from this country by any of the Societies that I know of; and the Directors
must have conceived that it was a duty they owed to the trust reposed in them, to refuse
the payment of the bill at the time they did this. When I come lo Sydney, I will en-
deavour lo see the Colonial Secretary, and learn from him if any thing can be doue with
the land; 1 will also endeavour to see Mr. Scott on the subject,
1 am, dear Sir, your’s very truly,
SAMUEL MAUSDEN.
Replied to Mr. Marsden as under:—
Sydney, November 1, 1827-
Sir, Your letter of the 29th I duly received, in which you decline joining in the
signature to fresh bills of exchange. From a passage in your letter, !am convinced you
are labouring under a mistaken idea as to the reason of the bills being returned You
remark “ it is very probable the bill would have been paid had it passed through the
hands of Mr. Campbell, &c. Stc,” In reply to which, I would beg to inform you, that
this plea cannot beset up in behalf of the Directors, for I was not bound to negotiate my
bills through any particular channel, and other bills have been paid antecedently to this
by the Directors, without any remark. My whole conduct h:.s been governed by my
instructions and a sense of duly, endeavouring to make effectual the mission to the
aborigines, and if not, there is a whole Colony who can testfy if there be ought against
me that I should merit the treatment 1 have received,
1 am, Sir, your’s respectfully,
E. K.T lift ELK E LI).
I waited on Mr. Scott and his solicitor, with Mr.
Marsden’s letter, but could do nothing more in the busi-
ness. A vessel was to sail in a day or two for England, I
therefore drew up the following letter, and sent a printed
copy to each of the Directors in London, to many in the
country, and to every person concerned in this Colony, on
the same day as one was addressed to Mr. Marsden
Sydney, New South Wales, November 12, 1827-
To W. Alers Hartley, Esq . Treasurer of the London Missionary Society,
Sir,-.-]n consequence of the resolutions from the Directors, allowing no more than
250/. for the mission per year, I was under the necessity of discharging the persons
already engaged for the secular concerns of the mission, at the expiration of their period
of service, on the ]7lh of October, and there being no prospect of pecuniary aid from
Government, together with the notice of actual protest of bills to the amount of upwards
of 600/. it was necessary to effect sales on what property could be disposed of, and mike
arrangements for the sale of house and improvements, if possible, with Government,


m
yym
when the hand would revert to them on the mission being abandoned* The first step »ur»
cessary was to place Mrs. Threlkeld and six children where we should be safe from per-
xonal danger, which would not have been the case could we have remained in I lie wood*
without the members of our establishment. We left our station on the 17th of Septern.
her, leaving two prisoners in charge of the premises, and arrived in Sydney, alter being
driven back by contrary winds on the 21st. Arrivals from England brought out a 400/.
bill dishonoured by the Directors.—Thus, without previous enquiry into my conduct,
blasting my credit, and injuring that of other Societies, and impeaching rny character
as having drawn unwarrantably on the Treasurer—Legal proceedings have been resorted
to, as Mr. Marsden does not feel himself authorised to join with me in issuing fresh bills
to pay the ones returned. A charge of 25/ per cent, besides other expenses, is demanded,
which must be decided by the Supreme Court of Law in this Colony, as these bills uilj
be made a precedent. I ana detained a prisoner, obliged to state the facts of the case to
exonerate my character as a Missionary to my friends; this becomes public, the Deputa.
tion and Directors are censured, and the cause of missions ultimately suffers through
Viasty acts of persons in authority, living 13,000 miles from the sphere of action, beside*
which my own health and spirils, as well as that of Mrs. Threlkcld’s, suffering from
anxiety ; friends who have assisted in the cause grieved and staggered ; the enemies of
a mission to the blacks triumphing; and all these things occasioned, not from any im-
proper conduct on my part, but arising Lorn that unaccountable policy which lui
driven so many Missionaries from the field, which is still grieving the hearts of those
now engaged in the work, and which is tempting others to leave the Society in disgust.
The expenses attached to the injudicious measure adopted by the Directors, hi returning
the bill, are painful to calculate, the result it j$ impossible to foresee. But for Mr.
Campbell cashing me bills for the support of myself and family here at Sydney, until
final arrangements are made, I must have shipped myself and family on board this con.
veyance for England direct. 1 challenge enquiry— -t* fair open enquiry , into my conduct.
I have attempted most earnestly, to the best of my judgment and ability, to make effec-
tual a mission to the aborigines of New South Wales, hut instead of receiving suppoil
and encouragement from the Directors, I am rewarded with the stigma of a returned
bill, and the piospcct of a gaol.
I am, Sir, your respectful but injured servant,
L. E. THRELKELD.
I had been informed that the sheriff's officer wished to
see me, I therefore called on him and provided bail, and
informed Mr. Ilankey of the circumstance, by a ship which
was to sail in the morning for England;—
, t " Sydney y Nov. 15. 1527
Sir,—l beg to inform you of having been arrested Ibis day for 536/. 16» Id. the
amount of the bill and expenses, but the sheriff’s officer trusted to my word, that 1 will
be at bis house to-morrow morning with bail; fortunately, Mr. Bourne and Hayward
were here and accepled as bail, but you must devise the plan how I am to be liberated
from gaol wh*-n the trial is settled, which will be in February or March next, Un*r»»
missions are conducted upon better principles than they have been hitherto, you will
lose your subscribers and agents, and none will have confidence to venture under the
Society’s patronage, yuur’s respectfully,
I*. E. THRELKELD.
On the 2d of December, I received another letter from
Mr. Marsden, dated November 28th ;-
Parramatin , Nov. 22 1827.
Jlev, Sir,—On my return to Parramatta, I read your printed letter, which I re-
ceived yesterday when I met with you at the Rev, 11. Bill’s.
I regret much that yon had not shewn me that letter before you sent it L"gUnd
in the Elizabeth; had ] received it at that time, I should have recommended you to
■ : ' ; ;
t j
■
J V-|
■ 't'M
: M
k m
I -I
m
I
llllis i
■ >1
t
r I
/ : !
11
.
i
■ : H


have omitted some observations contained in it, which appear to me only calcti-
laled to give offence to your superiors, and can do no good, in my judge* eut it would
have been more proper to have confined your remarks to your own pariuular case, and
avoided all censure upon the conduct of the Directors towards other Missionaries, i f you
felt «grieved by any act of the Directors toward yourself, you had an undoubted right
to make that grievance known, and to seek redress; but i am of opinion that your own
friends will not think you warranted in making such severe strictures upon the measures
adopted by the Directors towards other Missionaries, of whose conduct you cannot be
supposed to be a proper judge. According to my view of the case, there was no necessity
for you to have done this, and that in addressing such a letter to a public body, under whose
authority you were acting, was very injudicious. Had you simply stated your difficulties
in inoffensive language to the Directors, ] have no doubt but that they would have
taken your statement into their favourable consideration, and would have relieved you,
which measure would probably have prevented the existence of any unkindly feelings
between you and your superiors; as it is, I fear this will not be the case, i never had an
idea that Mr. Scott would put you in gaol for the returned bill, nor can 1 persuade my-
self that you thought lie would. In the measure Mr Scott has adopted, I conceive he
only wished tojnstify his own conduct to his constitutes?, until some further informa-
tion was received from the Directors, or arrangements made in the Colony for the final
payment of the bill,
1 am, Rev. Sir, your obedient humble servant,
SAMUEL MARSHKX.
My reply;—
Sydney, December 3, 1827.
Rev. Sir,—Your letter of the 28th of November I duly received last night, and
have carefully perused rny letter to Mr, Hankey, and see uo reason to wish any altera-
tion.
I thought you were aware that the constitution of our Society was in strict con-
formity to the commandment of Him who has said respecting ministers assuming
superiority one over the other, that “so shall it not be among you.” Our Society is
composed of Independents, Presbyterians, Congregationalisms, Members of the Establish-
ment, and some Christians of all denominations, and the persons chosen to be Directors
would never in the face of their constituents assume to themselves the character of
superiors to their Missionaries, whom they always acknowledge to the public as their
brethren.
Fourteen years have I been a Missionary of the Society, and am convinced that its
concerns must in future be conducted with more “ simplicity and godly sincerity,” than
they have hitherto been, to insure stability and success, I am not therefore a novice in
Missionary transactions, and possessing common sense, with the scripture for my autho-
rity, why am I not a proper judge in such measures I The Missionaries are sustaining-
injury in their characters and families, through the Society being ignorant of the real
state of its affairs.
In reply to your observation, namely, “ I never had any idea that Mr. Scott would
put you in gaol for the returned bill, nor can I persuade myself that you thought he
would.” j can only say, that when I wrote the letter, / knew the writ was issued, in
consequence of which I pr ovided myself with bail, one of which was rejected, namely Mr.
Bourne, the sheriff’apprehending that he might quickly return to Ulsstation in the Islands;
Hus took place on the 3d day from the date of my letter, when the writ was served on me
at the sheriff’s house. No untruth or false representation was set forth, as you imply
was the case, but the prospect <>f the gaol, my attorney informs me, is still before me, un-
less the money is paid. You have refused to sign fresh hills with me to pay Mr. Scott;
you have not fulfilled your promise of calling on him respecting lire bills, agreeably to
your letter of October the 29th, when you were in Sydney before ray arrest, and was Mr.
Scott to remain satisfied after such knowledge of the circumstances, and take no prompt
legal steps, a ship being on the eve of departure to England, to recover a just debt to the
company for which he is agent ?.


As to further communications from the Directors, last week I received the ununui
third copy of resolution t, and having-made every effort in the Colony, it remains now f y ,
me to stale the case to the Society in justification of my conduct aud character, both fur
the interests of the Society, that it may he conducted on different principles, and for the
benefit of other Missionaries. I am, Sir, your’s respectfully,
L. E. THUELKELD.
Mr. Marsden wrote again on the subject, to which I
replied as annexed;—
December CM, 1827,
Rev. Sir,— Tn reply to your letter, under date 3d instant, allow me to remark op
the following words; “ you have not fulfilled your promise of calling upon him (mean-
ing Mr Scott) respecting the bills.’* This is not correct, I have several times spoken p»
Mr. Norton on the subject, Mr. Scott’s solicitor, and the last time I was in Sydney, i
requested Mr. Norton 10 go with me to Mr. Scott, and we spoke to him in the commer.
cial room, which Mr Norton could have Informed you of, had you enquired of hiru.
Mr. Norton has assured me more than once, that no steps would be taken in the businm
until March next. I shall not notice any other observation which you have made, though
they appear to me intended to be personal,
1 am, Rev. JSir, your obedient servant,
SAMUEL MARSDEX.
My reply:—
Sydney i December CM, 18*27.
Rev. Sir,—l have just received your letter of this day’s date, and assure you tlul
my remark is perfectly correct as I stated in ray letter, namely, “ you ha\e refused tu
sign fresh bills with me to pay Mr. Scott; you have not fulfilled your promise of calling
on him respecting the bills, agreeably to your letter.of October the 29th, when you
were in Sydney , before my arrest," See. As to seeing that gentleman at ihe commercial
rooms, it was not to make any arrangement with him on the subject. I knew ihe cof.
rectnc-ss of what I affirmed, for 1 enquired of Mr, Scolt in the same hour that you re-
ceived ray letter. My being on tail prevents any further steps being taken until the
term lime, but what yd vantage is that tome, as it respects loss of time and money
besides the annoyance. It is not my wish unnecessarily to give offence, but raiue i»
such a case, that offence can hardly be avoided, especially as the w hole business i>
personal to me. Rey. Sir, your's respectfully,
L. E.THRELKELD.
I cannot avoid remarking, that if Mr, Marsden would
in the face of iacts address me such letters as those above,
what would be the result if a similar communication was
sent to the Directors in England; but, that there was no
necessity lor any immediate steps being taken for my re-
lease; this is certainly one way of accounting for the little
attention paid to the representations made by Mission-
aries. It would be well if all private communications
could with propriety be investigated by the Society, that
confidence might be generated betwixt all parties in fu-
ture. In order to be quite certain, I waited again on Mr.
Scott, and called on Mr. Norton, to know if any arrange-
ments had been proposed before or since my arrest. They


! ] |ljfl . * E&-/
1(jr ■ krf[
-
*V * ;
■>} f/ 1
\ i 1 i- 1: V
I •••.** .
41 :
- • - mM
I said it was true that. Mr. Marsclen had called since I iiad :> i fell
been arrested, but that his conversation was purely de-
sultory, without hinting at any arrangement.—Had Mr.
Marsden really wished to arrange matters, it would not
have been improper to have informed me at what time I
should meet him with the parties; for surely it is a mat-
ter in which I am most personally concerned!
I deferred answering the letter of resolutions Co the Di-
rectors, apprehending that they might see fit to pay the-
biils; but the following postscript shews that they had re-
considered the subject, and coolly determined to act upon
their resolutions. This was received on the 25th of No-
vember with the triplicate It is only necessary to add
to the preceding, that we have accepted and paid the bill
of c£l27 125.; so that it is only the one for <£4oo which
will be returned to the Colonydated April 24th, 1827.
Signed W. A, Hankey.
The reader will be pleased to refer to the resolutions al-
ready mentioned of the 22d of March, 1827, Page3l. The
committee complain of the necessary expenses incurred
for establishing, and carrying on effectually, the mission;
adding the various sums together, and thus calling it an
exorbitant expenditure. Surely , they have experience
enough in missionary affairs to be convinced, that when
a measure is proposed, the expenses often far exceed any
previous calculation made on the subject. But because it
exceeded, is it just to take a retrospective view, and then
censure when no limits were assigned, no calculation
formed? Let the same conduct be pursued towards the
Brethren in the Deputation, and because their expenses
and salary, during their seven years’ travels, amount to
twelve or fifteen thousand pounds, more or less, are they
on their return home to be censured or stigmatised with
the necessity of selling their philosophical apparatus and
books, to take up a returned bill from the directors, pro-
tested for non-payment, because their surprise and appre-
hension at the “enormous expenditure” could not be ex-
pressed in any other way! What an act of injustice would
this be 1 And is it the less so, because the subject of such
Jill I
i mi wm
rS"
;■ ■
■
M
c i
■ «
i - y
}
ri§
if t£
h I
f.
1 H
i ; ' ft?!


■ I
: j,v
W
I
an unhandsome measure is a missionary, with a lame
1 amil y—abroad—in a strange land I There is a want of
equity in concluding that the expenses are an “exorbU
taut expenditure” before any steps are taken to ascertain
whether the particular circumstances of the case de-
manded such drafts on the society. If secret communi-
cations from this Colony have been the cause of raising
such apprehensions, or if they have arisen spontaneously
on the subject, in the minds of numbers of the Committee,
they ought in justice to the society and to the Missionary,
whose conduct they condemn unheard, to have instituted
an enquiry, by a committee formed on the spot, in whose
judgment they could safely confide, and upon which the
Directors would have acted with justice. Every faci-
lity for such a proceeding is afforded in this Colony,
where there are other Missionaries, private characters,
and Ministers, accustomed to the expenses of similar
undertakings. 1
1. In the first resolution, there is a strange discrepancy
in the conduct and assertions of the Directors. It is said
“ that it is incompatible with the state of the Society’s
funds, to support the unlooked-for heavy expences, &c. M
when they are paying £6OO to Mr. Marsden for expenses
incurred by him years ago, a thousand or two a year for
the last seven years to the Deputation, that new Missions
may be founded, .of which one is the Aboriginal Mission
in New South Wales—and, with a fund in the Bank, of
20 or £30,000 they will not take up a bill of o£4oo in En-
gland, but direct me to sell property to take it up at New
South Wales, with all the expenses, occasioned by such
unbusiness-like proceedings. If the funds are low why
oblige me, to sell by auction, property at a loss; and wby
add to expenses already considered large, nearly £2OO for
law proceedings and re-exchange! If the bill was not
drawn for objects strictly missionary, why pay it at all,
either here, or in England, or if poverty compels the aban-
donment of this mission, why not have paid the bill in En-
gland, ordered the sale of what property is saleable here,
and carry it to account for the Society ?
>.v, •
• : :
■
. -j
■ ■
■
i |!-
v. t
m
Sill
•'
?*<*; K p


: 2. The second resolution shews a forgetfulness on the
part of the Committee, or a disregard to the representation
of the Deputation. £250 per annum the Directors are
willing to allow, ‘if necessary,’ for the maintenance of
himself and family, and for objects strictly Missionary,
&c.” One of the Deputation informed the Committee,
by letter, that <£3oo per year would be required for the
support of one Minister, if settled in Sydney. Nowall
my supplies were drawn from Sydney, with, the addition
of freightage, packages, agency, persons and cattle ne-
cessary for land carriage, from the vessel to our station,
a distance of 13 or 14 miles! lam not contending for
o£3C)O a year, for my accounts will shew that they have not
averaged that sum, per annum, for the personal expenses
of the family. But surely if Missionaries require to cat
and drink as well as ministers, and the children of Mis-
sionaries clothing as much as other children, the ex-
penses of a Missionary family can be as easily ascertained
as those of a minister! The Committee must have re-
solved without due reflection, or have been grossly deceived
by misrepresentation of the case.
With respect to returning to the South Sea Islands, in
the present stateofthe Society’s funds, this subject requires
consideration, for how can the funds allow further heavy
expenses for the voyage of our large family of six chil-
dren, for the extra expenses of establishing us in any
island, and for our annual support when there ? The state
of the Islands is far different now in every respect to
what it was; and the barter which used to assi&l the small
stipend we took from the funds of the Society, for our
support, is now completely annihilated.—The annualallow-
ance for a Missionary in the Islands, is 30i.; for the wife,
201.; and s\. per year for each child ; freightage was de-
manded by the Committee out of this stipend, but is now
paid by the Society: and 5 years schooling for each
child, at the academy in the Islands is allowed. Out of
this stipend the Missionary has to pay 5 per cent, to the'
agent in the colony, keep the school-house and his own
in repair, provide large boats and sails, and boatmen to


convey his children, and supplies, from island to island •
pay wages to servants, provide food and clothing for all the’
family besides. We never could have subsisted but for
barter, which in no instance has averaged 201. per year.
I he year in which the Deputation was expected may per-
haps form an exception, when every exertion was made
alter due discussion, to use the hospitality without
grudging, which could not have otherwise been shewn to-
wards them, had we depended on the stipend or presents
received from the Society. This prevented the Deputa-
tion feeling those privations, which We had all, (the elder
Missionaries most especially) suffered.—Love conquered
policy. 1
But what annoys us most, is to he supposed that we
cu Joy princely salaries, and are making our fortunes by
trade, when the contrary is the fact. We shall not feel
any shame if the full amount of our personal expenses is
placed, distinct from other expences, in the yearly report,
and it is not strictly just to be stated otherwise. No in-
dividual, whether Missionary, or agent, or Deputation,
ought to be aided directly, or indirectly, from the So-
ciety’s funds, without it being publicly stated in the ex-
penditure. If Missionaries, or others, take little from the
Society, let them have the credit of such conduct. If any
receive a just recompense for their services, no Christian
would muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn,
3. The third resolution shews the necessity of confi-
dence existing betwixt the Directors and Missionaries em-
ployed, rather than in Agents, or of their being recalled,
if unworthy, as well as the difficulty of legislating in En-
gland, without local knowledge of the whole business.
This is not the first measure that has involved Missionary
families in distress. In this case, the valuable part of tliq
property cannot be sold, as the house and improvements on
the land, because the land is held in trust for the natives—a
part of the moveable property has been sold by auction, at
a loss to the amount of fifty or sixty pounds, and there
remains four bullocks and a dray yet for sale, when posses-
sion is given up. But although this step is taken, Mr,


II • IS
I f <if $ *
i «* ;j: r U ' ifi-
-4o ;
| S|
Marsdeni does not feel himself authorized to dre fresh H
bills with me, and so the saving clause to insure my pcr-
nrUnn Ba !f ty | ,S VBa }°7* am arreste d JI am only out of :! |
puson on bail And whilst this shews the necessity of N
I ZT SW % i l6 bu , Sin f s of the Sockt y on a very different ■. H
I ® be ws the destruction of confidence m Mr. Mars- m -
den also towards the Committee, who, in the face of a ; ; .fel
I pledging to take up the bills signed jointly by i: V i ... .f||
f us ’ y et (ears to trust the Directors of the London Mission- f
: ary Society, even at their particular request. Treating the : i l
Missionaries as worthy of confidence and capable of con- R l
I uc in o Bieir own affairs, would save much waste to the I |{i|i laß
whS and . a ™d ‘lre generating of unpleasant feelings, i iB9
j which under such circumstances, cannot be avoided.
I.ieiefore to return to the Islands under present circum- P-l
stances, is impossible, not only from the observations al-
I rca< ty mentioned on the subject, but from the necessity of Ilf
j a P ro Pe r investigation and explanation taking place before
; new arrangements can be entered into: but if things
I f ret 0 be ca /«ed on upon the old system, nothing but em- W- l\M
| banassment will ensue. Before the reception of the re- 'M i-
| solutions and returned bills, I had no objection to return Nj|
to the Islands, rather than relinquish Missionary em- fi| rlffl
ployraent, or submit to the guidance of Mr. Marsden with
| whom it was well known to the Deputation and to the Md r >lM
Directors I conscientiously differ. But to return to
| the Islands at this time with marks of disgrace undeserved l|!
on my part, is a measure to which no earthly consideration 'Vjfiß
whatever would induce me to consent. To succumb
silently to such resolutions, would be to establish a power n’H
•i in fno no rl c .Ti ji . it. * .
•if!
in the hands of a Committee that would harrass and op- i
press the Society’s Missionaries beyond description. In- *
| dependence of mind would be crushed—independence of
f bought in conveying to the public through the reports • ' U' I
uncolored aspect of Missions would be destroyed while ■ I
| the “state of the Society’s funds,” and other pleas could be H;
j assigned for removal, just as the labourer is about to taste Ml' j
I “J® s weets of his industry and toil,—which, to superficial
} observers would readily pass as plausible, but would break 111 ' ■: 1


down the spirit of Missionaries, and subject them to be
made of all men the most miserable.—But if such neces-
sity really exists for breaking up Missions and removing
Missionaries on account of the state of the Society’s funds,
in that case the Subscribers should be informed of the
state of affairs before such measures are adopted* abroad—
sell all the gods and goddesses of the heavens, all the beasts
of the fields, all the curious things from above, or from
beneath, now in the Missionary museum—Send out no
more deputations at a vast expense to form Missions,
rather than begin Missions and abandon them.—[Tell it not
in the city of Babylon the Great, lest the purple-arrayed
woman sip her golden cup and triumph !—Publish it not
in the streets of Egypt, lest the infidels rejoice 1] —There
is another subject also necessary to be considered previous
to a family removing to the Islands, namely, for how long a
period are Missionaries and their families, now very nume-
rous, to be supported ?—and what is to become of the
families as they grow up ? The reasonableness of this en-
quiry will appearfrom a recent communication, informing
some of the Missionaries in the Islands that they may ex-
pect shortly little more than the best ivishes and prayers
of the Society. Hints also were thrown out by the Depu-
tation on this subject, and from the following extract of
an official letter to the Missionaries, dated Sep. 1, 1818,
and received in 1820, an answer to the above question ap-
pears to be required :
4 ‘ Resolved Uiat the Secretary be requested to write to the Missionaries at Eimeo &c.
unci to state the wish of the Board, that they should occasionally give drafts ou the
Treasurer for such articles as may he considered really necessary, and to negotiate Use
same through tire most favourable channels, always observing the strictest regard to the
Society’s Funds* and this permission is given under the expectation that the barter o /
the produce of the Islands will shortly ALTOGETHER supersede the necessity of drawing on
the Treasurer /’
Signed,
W. ALERS HANKEY, TREASURER.
G. BORDER; Secretary.’*
If such be the intention of the Directors let it be pub-
licly avowed, and then Missionaries with large families in
the Islands and others also will be able to ascertain what is
their path of duty; which under present circumstances is
very much obscured.


* The situation in which I have been placed for the last
two or three years has been peculiarly painful to my feel-
ings— and the impressions that would naturally arise in a
mind unacquainted with all the circumstances, would be
highly prejudicial to me; the dishonoring of a bill of ex-
change by the Treasurer—the breaking up of the Mission
by the Committee—the ordering my return to the Islands
with these marks of disgrace—the refusal of Mr. Marsden
at the request of the Directors to give his signature with
me to save arrest—are marks so unequivocal of the highest
displeasure, and form such a cloud of dark suspicion en-
veloping my character as a Missionary, that to remain
silent under- such circumstances would be a confession of
guilt.
I do most earnestly hope that the candid attention of the
JJuectors, as a body, will preclude the necessity of a more
geneial statement and appeal. I have no other desire than
to clear my character, and prevent if possible similar re-
currences of such an unpleasant aspect, and to devote the
remainder of my years to the service of him whose I am
and whom I serve, whether to the blacks, or whites or to
the copper-colored tribes in the isles of the sea.
Early in January, 1828, a Quarterly Journal edited by a
Clergyman of the Church of England, the Rev. C. P. iST.
Wilton, made its first appearance; in which is reviewed
the specimens of a dialect of the Aborigines of New South
Wales, and remarks on the present state of the Mission,
rendering it necessary on my part, in reply, to explain to
the Australian public the real circumstances of the case.
It becomes needful to quote, as briefly as possible, the re-
marks on dissent, &c. in order that my letter should be
understood, by those who never saw his work. They are
as follow :—“We are by no means the advocates of the
hydia of the present day; far from it—we love and vene-
late our church establishment. Notwithstanding, when
we see an individual, of whatever denomination he may
be, endeavouring to do what, in our consciences, we be-
lieve to be real good, we would impute the exertions of
such an one to the best of motives, and gladly award him


the meed of commendation he deserves. We have been
led to the foregoing observations, by the perusal of a
small publication at the head of this article, which has
lately been handed to us, purporting to have been writ-
ten in this colony, by a Mr. Threlkeld, of the London
Missionary Society, on the language of the Aborigines of
Australia. In taking our leave of Mr. Threlkeld’s spe-
cimens, we are certainly of opinion, that, considering
them as the beginning of a written language for the Abori-
gines of Australia, he has so far not failed of 'success ; he
has laid the foundation, and we think, we need entertain
no fears for the future superstructure. It is surely no
slight reflection upon our church, (query, clergymen ?)
and we speak it with regret, that the only attempt to form
a written tongue for the Aborigines has been undertaken
by a Dissenter, and that so many years have elapsed with-
out her setting on foot a Mission for a similar purpose.——
In taking leave of the pamphlet before us, we have to ex-
press our hopes, that the reports which have been so
industriously circulated, that Air. Threlkeld has been un-
der the necessity of abandoning his investigations into the
language of the Aborigines of this colony, for want of
proper funds, or from any ill treatment he may have re-
ceived from the Society which has employed him, are alto-
gether unfounded. We trust that his exertions are merely
temporarily suspended . We certainly think him wrong in
so hastily quitting the scene of his labours, and in taking
up his abode in Sydney, where he cannot, if he wished it,
prosecute any farther enquires into the dialect of the
natives of Lake Maquarie. (A mistake; the language is
alike.) If he has committed any unintentional error, let him
candidty avow it. If the London Missionary Society have,
(and we are informed such to be the fact) behaved towards
him in a manner, tending to bring disgrace upon them-
selves,—upon himself, as their Missionary,—and upon the
cause of Missions in general, let him separate himself
from them, and let the Church and the Government mag-
nanimously unite to take him under their wing, and to
employ him in pursuing useful investigations,—At all


events, may all parties in the colony eive him their
warmest support. For ourselves, we can assure Mr.
1 hrelkeld, we will stand pledged, to be amongst the first,
to ofier him our annual mite towards the prosecution of
his benevolent undertaking.”
_ In consequence of these observations, the following
Letter was sent to the Sydney Gazette, in explanation ou
my part, and the editor kindly admitted it gratis.
T° Editor of the Sydney Gazette,
Austfa,ian Omirterly Journal, in Ins review of the speci-
mens of a Dialect of the Aborigines of New South Wales, Art. 2, has alluded to the
circumstances of the Mission, in terms which render it necessary to ey plain. The Lon-
don Missionary Society is perfectly ignorant of my unpleasant situation. The Di-
rectors, as a body, are uninformed of it us yet; and the Committee, who have taken
ipon themselves to act in the manner which has plunged me into the most perplexing
difficulues, may have possibly been misled by false representations from this Colony.
I am not conscious of committing any unintentional error, or I would avow it, and any
gentleman may see my accounts and instructions, to satisfy themselves on this subject.
1 have drawn up a statement for the Directors of the London Missionary Society, to be
sent to each individual, demanding investigation ; the result of which 1 must await,
before any new arrangements as to my future employment in this Colony, or the South
oea Islands, can take place.
The Committee returned me a bill of 4001. directing me to sell the Mission property,
and take it up; but, to provide for my personal safety, in the case of the property
when sold,.not covering the amount, they request the Rev. Mr. Marsden to sign with
me fresh bills, which bills so signed they resolve to have written to us both
to that cftect. The house and improvements of land could not be sold without an ar-
rangement with Government, as the ground t« to be in trust for the natives. Such ar-
ticles as were disposable have been turned into cash, and paid into the hands of my
agent. But Mr. Marsden does not feel himself authorised to join with me in signing
fresh bills to pay those returned ; the consequence is a law process against me, to coin”
pel the Committee at home to send out the money. The Committee prohibit* my
drawing tor any more than 2501. per year for the support of myself, wife, and family of
six children, and for objects strictly Missionary; and if the Government does not meet
all other expences beyond that sum for the Aborigines, I am desired to abandon the
Mission, and return to the South Sea Islands.
I had ascertained that Mr. Marsden would not sign with rnc fresh bills before I left
Lake Macquarie. I had information that Government could not assist.—-1 had notice
of the relumed bills from the treasurer; and 1 found by experience that the next
year’s expense would be nearly 5001, Therefore, I do nut conceive myself at ail
hasty in quitting the scene of my labours, surrounded as I was with such overwhelming
difficulties, and taking up my abode in Sydney, where my presence is required for many
reasons, and wait until the Directors and Society in England are acquainted with my
circumstances, and apply a remedy, }
There are a few persons here who have intimated that they would subscribe annually
for the benefit of the Aborigines, rather than the Mission should be totally abandoned.
But I fear that the Editor has, unintentionally, by bis allusions to dissent, prejudiced
the case, which it is evident he wishes to support. To prevent which, 1 will frankly
avow my object, namely, to teach from the scriptures alone, Christianity, independent
of any human system, or human form of Church Government,'leaving those who may
embrace the Gospel, to attach themselves to any Christian church, as may be most con-
sistent to their own views and consciences, guided by the word of God. Such also is
the fundamental principle of our SocUty, which consists of Christians of all denomi-
nations.


annexed letters.
My Dear Sir,—-I have just received Mr, Norton’s reply to the .communication {
made to him, on your account, I beg leave to enclose it to you. By its contents you
will perceive that Mr. Scutt does not feel authorised to consent to the terms proposed,
| and therefore the action will of course proceed. For your information, 1 beg-to stale, |
the trial will take place about the middle of next month ; when, if the verdict be given
against you, and 1 can see no grounds to suppose it will not, the money must be paid
to prevent any farther unpleasant consequences. No person regrets more than I do
that you should be so perplexed about a matter in which you have had no personal ad-
vantage, but have acted merely us the agent of others. I feelassurcd, did the Birecloi*
in England know the true slate of the matter, they would never sutler you to be kept
in such a slate of anxiety and annoyance. I hope, however, that by the lime the dob
must he paid, that something will be done to relieve you from a burthen with which 1
consider you have no right to Lc saddled.
'X$0>h , • , c-
i ; 1 am, my dear air,
M Very truly yours,
' l , ' ; , GEORGE ALIEN.
■ , • ' -1
I lake Ibis opportunity of contradicting the report, that I have refused pecuniary aid
from Government; to say the least, it is a gross' misrepresentation.
Any suggestions tending to the benefit of the Aborigines will meet with prompt at-
tention, if addressed to my residence, No. 20, Pjtt-street, Sydney.
Jan. 14,1838. L. E, TIJKELKELD.
The time approaching when it would be necessary for
me to procure bail again to preserve my liberty until the
| fii action commenced, I wrote to my Solicitor as follows;
‘ To George Allen , Esq, Solicitor,
'.ivS ;? Sydney, Jan. 19, 1828.
Y fj< Dear Sir,—Proceedings are taken against me in law for ft returned bill of exchange '|
for 4001. with expences, the case is in the hands of Mr. Norton, as Solicitor for E. W. I
Scott, Esq. the holder of the bill. The bill was drawn by me agreeably to instructions,
on the Treasurer of the London Missionary Society, but the Committee, laboring under
kv.-C' erroneous ideas, have returned the bill dishonored, Mr. Marsden refuses to sign fresh
bills with me, agreeably to a resolution of the Committee, which promises to honor such
bills, A statement of the circumstances is going home, which will, it is hoped, bring
the matter under investigation, and terminate in the Society’s paying the bills. My I
: t| |f|l wish is to put the Society to as little expense as possible, I have therefore to request |
t 'y you to wait on the solicitor to ascertain what the amount demanded is, including every
v/" ' | expense, and to oiler on my part fresh hills of exchange, which will be accompanied with
a letter of explanation and statement: and I have no doubt of the result, as to the hills
ic ■" | being honoured. If desired, but not otherwise, I will pledge myself to remain in the
; v "| colony until the bills are acknowledged as paid; but this is, as I have repealed before
to Mr. E. M. Scott, all 1 can do. I cannot involve a third person as security, to what
. il|i ;| must be paid by the Society at last. 1 have no wish to evade payment. On the first
of next mouth other bail must be put in, you will please therefore to take the case under
your management, on my behalf, for the Loudon Missionary Society.
%Is-ri • 1 am, dear Sir, vours truly,
.. •' -II P.S. If 25 per cent, re-exchnngc be demanded, then in that case apprise me of it, ami j
V H do not conclude the business until you write to me. .
:
. | On Feb. 7th, I received in answer from Mr. Allen, the
annexed letters.
My Dear Sir,—l have just received Mr, Norton’s reply to the communication I


Copy of Mr. Norton’s letter to Mr. Allen , enclosed to me.
S cot I v. Threlkeld,
To G. Allen, Esq. Sydney, Jon 22, 1828,
Dear Sir,—ln reply to your communication, of the proposal made by Mr. Thrclkcld,
for the satisfaction of the plaintiffs claims, Mr. Scott hus instructed me to express his re-
gret that lie cannot accede to Mr. Threlkeld’s offer.
I am, dear Sir,
your’s faithfully,
J. NORTON.
I ..had on the Ist of February, to goto Court, and give
'bail in double the amount, Mr. Appleton of Sydney, and
Mr. James Hayward, late of qur Society, but now of Syd-
ney, were accepted, and for their disinterested kindness,
every sincere friend to Missionaries, will, on the knowledge
of this fact, appreciate their charity without dissimulation ,
and accord with me in sincere thanks which is most justly
due, and now presented to both—for becoming my bonds-
men.
Every resource having failed, I deemed it most advisa-
I ble to acquaint the Governor with my situation, in order
I to obtain assistance from the Colonial funds.
The following is a copy of mjrletteT'tcrliis Excellency.
To His Excellency the Governor, Lieutenant General Ralph Darling, sc. sc.
2ft, Upper Pitt-street, Sydney, Pelt. M, 1828.
Bi r your Excellency is already acquainted with the resolutions of the Directors
of the London Missionary Society, respecting the Aboriginal Minion, at Lake Mac.
quarie and of the return of a bill for 4001. payment of which was ordered to be made
from the proceeds of sale of the Society’s property at the station. Such property can-
not be sold, it being on Government land. Law proceedings are commenced against me,
and lam under special bail to appear at the Supreme Court next month, when my allot*,
ney informs me, I must be prepared for the hill and expenses, when the verdict is given as
to the amount of re-exchange. The Rev. Samuel Marsden has declined acting upon the
instructions and request of the Directors, in thrice refusing to sign with me fresh hills of
exchange to secure my personal responsibility. Rut the kcv. Gentleman’s pica,
"that he does not feel himself authorised to draw fresh bills,’’ abandons me to that,
against which the Directors’ unbounded confidence in. the Rev. S. Marsden, had most
unequivocally provided.
Your Excellency alone can prevent a long separation from ray wife and family of C
children, for many months, in a prison, until the money can be sent our by the Di-
rectors from England, on their knowledge of my painful situation, and 1 have the fullest
confidence in the Society, that when they are made acquainted with the real circum-
stances, that the amount will then be instantly and promptly forwarded, for I have done
nothing worthy of bonds,
t . I have taken the liberty of suggesting to your Excellency's consideration, whether
1 the loan on interest of a sum sufficient to cover the amount of the said hill, re-exchange,
| and costs, may he allowed from the colonial funds, until the money is sent out by the
| society from England to liquidate the debt. Whatever security 1 can give, that will
| most readily he entered into.


H? ,* f
My lowing necessity will, it is hoped, be a sufficient apology for appealing to vour
Lxctllency« benevolence. 6 * Uf
1 am Sir, with every feeling of respect,
your’s pincerly,
* L. E. THRKLKELD.
■<
On Monday, 18th February, I accidently met Mr
Marsden, who informed me that, Mr, Hankey had mo-
tested the last bills, sent home through Mr, Campbell,"arid
that he had made an offer to the solicitor to pay the 4001.
bill, 8 per cent, and costs, provided the matter went not
into court, which was rejected. In the evening I received
the following letter from Rob. Campbell, Esq. respecting
the bills. ' 1 1 0
r s%
Eev. L. E. ThrclkeU.
Campbell's Wharf, Feb. 1898.
s>ir,—l have to inform yon, that yonr bill dated Lake Macquarie, Jan. 3d, 1827,
for 19*4/. Is, ]d. on William Hankey, Esq. is protested for non-acceptance. As 1 have
remitted this on ray private account, to a friend in England, he was at the trouble to
inquire the cause, and the following is an extract of his letter, received cer Cape-packet
dated Aug. 15, ]g27. *
" I wrote yon on the 3d inst. advising Mr. Threlkeld’s bill being protested, but I
did not then enclose the protest, as I waited an opportunity tp learn from Mr. llankev,
whether the bill would be paid, and urged to him the probable inconvenience that the
Missionaries would be put to. if their diafts were dishonoured ; his reply was they will
leave money enough if they only draw through the proper channel, and desired the
protest to be forwarded to you, 1 hope you will recover the money.”
I am Sir,
Your humble and obedient Servant,
HOD. CAMPBELL.
It would be impossible for me to state correctly the feel-
ings of my mind. Mr. Campbell was the person on whom
we were depending for advances for our support, until this
disagreeable business is settled, and his bills were treated
as unceremoniously as those which had been drawn through
another channel. Fully expecting that myself, wife, and six
children would now be abandoned to the wide world, with-
out further advances from the only source open to me,
since Mr. Hankey blasted my credit by a returned bill,
and with a mind ill at case, but reposing confidently on Him
who is no respecter of persons, I waited for the morning
light.—On the 19th I called on Mr. Campbell, who inform-
ed me that a friend had taken the trouble to wait on Mr.
Hankey, but such was the answer returned. I then re-
quested Mr. Campbell to say how I was to consider myself
■ ■ ' V :' ■'
1
iSiSR
’ 'I
r' V't 1
'


•situated us it respects further drafts of money, as the bill
was protested he could with the strictest propriety decline
any further advances? To which Mr. Campbell most hu-
manely replied, that though the times were hard in the
colony, yet he would certainly continue to supply my
wants until the business was settled. Such highly honor-
able conduct demands acknowledgment, not only from my-
self, but from the Society at large. The managing Directors
in London do not even condescend to answer his official let-
ters on Missionary business, and the spirit which they mani-
fest towards the Missionaries abroad, prevents the thought
of such an acknowledgment emanating from them.
I then waited on the Honorable Alexander M'Lcay, the
Colonial Secretary, to know if there were any communi-
cations for me; I was informed by that Gentleman, that
the Governor had directed him to see the Rev. Mr. Marsdeu
on the business, which he had not, as yet, had an op-
portunity of doing. The Honorable Gentleman most kind-
ly intimated that I should inform him by letter, the mo-
ment the business was broughttojts last stage. I informed
him of the other bills being protested” and shewed him
the letter to me from Mr. Campbell, with the reason of
protest; a copy of which, I was desired to forward to
the honorable Gentleman.—l immediately wrote the fol-
lowing, accompanied with the copy of Mr. Campbell’s
letter.
To the Honorable Alexander M'Lcay,
20, Pitt.street, Sydney, Fib. <), 1828.
Sir,—At your request, I beg: to hand you a copy of the letter from the lion. Rob.
Campbell,-containing the reason of protest for other bills by W. A. Uankey, Esq. J
have also waited on Mr. Norton, the Solicitor, respecting the proposal the Rev. S.
Marsdeu yesterday informed me he had made to pay the 4001. bill, and costs, with
8 per cent, provided the matter was mot brought into the Supreme Court. Mr. Nor-
ton informed me that he accidentally saw Mr, Marsden, at the sale of Church Lands,
and that he just said he had better take that sum, or he would get nothing else* u»
which Mr. Norton replied, that they could keep me in prison until the whole money
was paid, on which he said no more on the subject,
1 am Sir, with sincere respect,
your’s truly,
L. £. TIIELKELD,
P. S. This bill of 1941. Is. Id. I sent up to Mr. Marsden for his signature, and
he declined, saying there was no necessity {or it. Mr. Campbell wrote me the Rev.
Gentlemen’s answer. My letter of advice informed Mr, Iluukey of the circumstances
so that no other channel was available.


When I delivered this letter to the Honorable Colonial
Secretary, he informed me that he would write officially to
the Rev, S. Marsden on the subject, and that I should call
again in a few days. On Thursday the 21st, 1 waited on the
Colonial Secretary, who informed me, that he had seen
Mr. Marsden, that Mr. Marsden had said he did not know
what to do in the business. The Honorable Gentleman
requested me to write to inform him when the trial was
finished, and desired me not to be uneasy as to the result.
Thus it has pleased Providence to avert the overwhelm-
ing effects of maladministration of the Society’s affairs
by the London Committee; the consequence of which,
but for the interference of Government, it is impossible to
be conceived. It becomes now my duty to mention a few
of the ill effects of such illiberal measures f.om the managing
Directors, in order to a thorough investigation and pre-
vention of similar occurrences in future. For a long
period previous to our arrival in the Islands, the Mis-
sionaries had been so grossly neglected by the Directors,
that they were under the necessity of distilling spirits, as
the only medium of barter by which to procure from
ships, the common, necessaries of life, for their wives and
families, —the public supposing that the Directors and
the Rev. Samuel Marsden were attending most carefully
to their wants. On our arrival in the Colony, in 1818, we
were all consigned to the fatherly care of the Rev.
Samuel Marsden, and the Rev. Gentleman informed us
“he had no authority to act.” Thus we were situ-
ated, with no small irritation of feelings, at finding
ourselves almost trepanned in a foreign country; but
to return was disgraceful. A Committee was formed by
Mr. Marsden, of his friends, and the Missionaries Messrs.
Osmond, Barff, Bourne, Darling, Platt, Williams, and
myself were allowed to attend. The conduct of the Di-
rectors to the Missionaries, then in the Islands was repro-
bated, and measures adopted to prevent our subjecting our-
selves to the like system, which the Committee in London
had adopted to the Missionaries in the Islands. A hundred
a year for each Missionary and wife, and ten pounds per


| i . gfe
V i
i ■ p
I>.
■ fe*;'
year each child, was calculated as the least that could be
allowed, by Mr. Marsden, precluding trading. Our minds
were relieved—.we embarked, and the next conveyance
from England, in answer to the communications, annihi-
lated the Committee, censured the Missionaries, compli-
mented Mr. Marsden, and left us to reflect on the mortifica-
tion of being at the Antipodes of our friends, abandoned
to the mercy of whatever Mr, Marsden might hazard to
advance on his own responsibility, having no authority
from the Society, We knew he had about £3OO a year
from our Society, and c£3oo a year from the Church Mis-
sionary Society, to supply, in part, the expenses of his
own vessel, (the Active) which brought supplies, and
traded in the Islands ; the trade being brisk, together with
this bonus from both Societies, we reposed confidence in
Mr. Marsden, and wrote him letters of thanks, &c. to
urge him to supply our wants. This continued until the
brig Haweis was launched and ready for sea; she went
only two voyages to the Colony, and the managing Com-
mittee, as if on purpose to discourage, ordered Mr. Marsden
to sell her, wherever she could be found, and made not
the least provision how we were to obtain our supplies from
the Colony. Abandoned in this cruel way, especially so to
us in the leeward Islands, where no ships scarcely ever
touched, we looked at each other, at our wives, at our
children, at the distant horizon, to our native lands, we
cast down our eyes to the sea sand and wept. Our princi-
ples forbade our leaving Missionary employment, we cast
ourselves upon Him whom we wisheclto serve, and he for-
tified our minds, to bear up against our calamity. The
Rev. S. Marsden, Alexander Riley, Esq. and Mr. Eagar,
jointly subscribed, to fit out the Haweis at their own ven-
ture; and E. Riley, Esq. pitying our destitute condition,
forwarded us two bales of prints, on credit, which the Mis-
sionaries were to pay for, when, and how we were able; had
it not been for this generous and unlocked for advance of
property , many of the Missionaries would have been totally
unable to provide for their households. The Missionaries
had a meeting, we determined to appeal to the Christian
r K
‘ J p
.ife:
!|l
>fe
..
% k
.. <:•
: .
\ ' I
R ?
;4jf
11
> , %
I'


public, but we first proposed half the allowance to be
paid us, which had formerly been agreed to, and then by
barter we could subsist; if the Directors rejected this pro-
posal, then an appeal was to be the last expedient. The
proposal had been agreed to, the Deputation came; they
were informed of our grievances, we hoped for better
days ;—under this impression, I trusted the Directors
would sanction their own Deputation’s measures, and be-
gan this Mission; but the same cruel, tormenting, dis-
honorable conduct has been pursued; the Directors sanc-
tioned the Mission, but when they had to pay the neces-
sary expense, they murmured, and restricted in a way
which they knew I would not act under, for the Deputa-
tion was aware that I would not undertake the vast con-
cern limited by any one in this Colony. They then plead-
ed poverty, and ordered to sell what they ought to have
known was not their own, if they attended to the commu-
nications from the Deputation; they then returned bills pro-
tested lor non-payment; and after pleading the state of the
funds of the Society, the Treasurer affirms in his rea-
son of protest—“ There is plenty of money for Missiona-
ries, if they draw through a proper channel,” when he
was apprised that they were drawn through the only avail-
able channel, and without Mr. Marsden’s signature, for
reasons assigned!
I bus Missionaries are played with, being referred to the
kind care of Mr. Marsden, who, “ has no authority to act
who in turn refers to the Directors for advice; who direct
the Missionary to Mr. Marsden, who refuses “to take
upon himself the responsibility;” the Missionary must
draw money, or starve! and the Treasurer returns the bill,
with, “plenty of money, if drawn through a proper
channel!” I pray God that the same sort of tender-hearted
bowels of compassion, may not be yearning over the poor
Missionaries in the interior of Africa, who have no op-
portunity to tell their pitiable tale. If Directors do not do
their duty and investigate, others must: or the London
Missionary Society will be ruined, by such shameful con-
duct, on the part of the Managing Committee. The cruel


57
; p
policy of the Committee, liavc driven many a Missionary
ironi his work, contrary to his private desire, and the If v|
public have only had the mere intimation that Mr ! -.v*
,is no longer in connection with the Society! I feel fully
confident, that these truths are not known to the body of
Directors: and that the moment they are made known
they themselves, will remedy the evil, without a more
general appeal becoming necessary. T
March lit/;.—The cause came on before the Supreme
1 on rf f a H Af .. . . i 11 « • • _ <■'
March 1 2th, — 1 he Rev. Samuel Marsden addressed to “
me the following letter, which I received on the same date.
ToiheRcv.L. E. Thrclkdd. [}\\
■»•> o- „„ , Sydney, March 1 Qfh. IROQ
Rev, Sir,---Mr, Robert Campbell, Juu. informed-nw-yt-stcrday, that be had a vessel * • 1
Z°'"S t0 tll « Society Islands, if there were any Missionaries or Stores to forward I
shall be £ lad to know what your intentions are relative to your future proceeding
You are aware, that the instructions of the Directors are, that if you can curry on the ? '-i .
Mission at Lake Macquarie, for £250 per annum, you are at liberty to remain there*
if not, you are to return to the Islands. *
lam, Rev, Sir, your obedient, bumble Servant, %
m , . . T . SAMUKL MARSD15N-.
1 o which I immediately replied: — fcf
To (he Bev, Samuel Marsden. : *
formed me, that he had seen my answer to Mr. Marsden’s
letter, of the 12th, and that the business of the bills was [ >
settled; the Governor having written to Mr. Marsden on
the subject. That Mr. Marsden had written that letter,
it
Couit, to determine the amount allowed on the returned
bill or £400; when a verdict was given for .£’4Bo as
pei account hereafter annexed, which, with the expenses
ot costs of suit, are the consequences of the bill bem* re-
turned ; but 25 per cent has been obtained in some cases,
and it depends much on the circumstances connected with
the bill, as to the damages assessed.
~ c . _ , . , . , , Sydney, March 1 Q/h, IS2B. W, v
Rev. Nip,— I have just received your letter of to day’s dare, stating ; “ I shall be
to know what your intentions are relative to your future proceedings, &c.” To
which I would beg to reply, that it is impossible for me, under present circumstances
to mmvop 11 if. t- ..... n . . • . .. t
to answer that question, being us you arc well aware, aprisoneron bail.
1 am, Sir, your’s respectfully,
•n m- j , _ ~ , L, E. TMRELKFJ/D.
March 1 3th. —I called on the Honorable Alexnuder
M’Leay, the Colonial Secretary, to ascertain, if i could
obtain assistance from the Government, before I totally
abandoned the Mission. The Honorable Gentleman in-
TA I ik. , i. I . 1. „ .1 . * t * m « ■>


merely to "know my intentions, as a sanction to his paying
the bills. 1 informed the Honorable Secretary, that I was
■a perfect stranger as to any arrangements having taken
place respecting the <£4oo bill, although Mr. Campbell,
Jun. had informed me, that Mr. Marsden had written to
his father, to say, that he would pay the bills protested by
Mr. Hankey together with £S per cent, the moment the
bills were returned. I then stated the object of my visit,
namely, to ascertain whether His Excellency would allow
me four men “on the stores,” which, whilst it w r ould be
equal to «£l3O expence saved to the Society, would, with
the <£2so, allow me to continue this mission on a reduced
•scale, so as to obtain the language; but the employment
of the natives, together with its concomitant expences,
would be abandoned. That should this measure meet
His Excellency’s approbation I would return to Lake
Macquarie to pursue my studies in the language, after the
bills were settled ; if not., I should feel it my duty to
remain in Sydney until my statement, now in the pi css,
was sent home, investigation bad been completed, and an
answer received to my enquiries; that I had nothing but
character to support me, and that character must not be
impugned without my strenuous defence against imputa-
tion. I \vas desired to attend on the morrow in answer
to ray request.
March 14. —I waited on the Honorable Secretary, who
informed me that His Excellency had acceded to my re-
quest, and that I must address a letter to himself on
the subject. 1 immediately wrote the following:—
To the Honorable Alexander M'Leay , Colonial Secretary .
Sydney , March IS2S.
Sir, —J beg leave to refer you fo the conversation respecting- the Aboriginal Mi?-
■sion, at Lake Macquarie; and to say, that if it meets his Excellency’s approbation, to
allow me four men 4 ‘ on the stores,” 1 will return to the station, after the returned
bills are paid, and proceed iu the attainment of the Native Language.
1 arn, Sir, with sincere respect, your’s truly,
L. K Til HULK ELI).
X sent the following letter on the same day by post, to
apprise Mr, Marsden of the above.
To the Xiev. Samuel Marsden.
Sydney , March I<jM, 7S2S.
Rev. Sir,—As the Governor has kindly acceded to my request, that four prisoner*


1 ————
I 1 p
i ® i
| _ A i |;
of the Crown shall be allowed rae, “on the stores,” it is my intention to return to the'-
Mission, al Lake Macquarie, as soon as possible, after the returned bills are paid.
1 am, Sir, your’s respectfully, |l i
L. L. TIIRELKELD. | \ i /
In the afternoon I called on the Honorable Robert J:
Campbell, to inform liiin of my intention, and the kind- |||.
ness of the Governor. I was informed that his agent in j|> _
England had written to say, that the bill protested by W.
A. Hankey, Esq. for non-payment had since been paid, ;/>
Mr. Marsden wrote the following, which I received on
the 18th, to which-1 replied as annexed;—
To the Rev, L, E, Threlkeld,
Parramatta , March 17 th, 1828.’
Tlev. Sir, —In reply lo your last letter, I beg- to remind you, that I personally com-
| niunlcated to you the offer 1 had made to Mr. Scott's Solicitor, (Mr. Norton,} to pay
your returned bill, for £401), with legal interest, and expenses of protest, before the
cause came into Court; my objection was to pay twenty-five per cent, in addition, a de-
mand made for re.exchange. The offer 1 nude was not accepted. The Court has now
decided, that no more than three per cent, can be allowed for re-cxchange; the sum
charged for negotiating a bill. All bills 1 have ever drawn, whether public, or private
bills, have been of equal value here as Treasury bills; and therefore, the Society will
sutler no loss by the Uuee per cent, should I draw the bill. 1 L-ve culled twice upon
Mr. Norton, since the. decision of the Court, but have not met with him; you cannot
suppose, that lam so ignorant of the common affairs of life, as to believe for a moment,
that you could leave the Colony, until the ctuim—of.JVl£.-Jsicott was settled ; and there-
fore, you would naturally conclude, that it was mj intention to settle Mr. Scott’s claim,
as soon as you informed me that you intended to comply with the resolution of the Soci-
ety. All I want from you, is a specific answer, whether you will return lo Lake
Macquarie, to the Aboriginal Mission, with the allowance of £250 per annum; or, to
your former Mission, in the Society islands, agreeable to the resolution of the Direc-
tors. One or the other of these propositions, you must agree to, or violate your instruc-
tions. If you wish to retire from the service of the Society, there is no power here to
prevent you. In my opinion, you can do no good, by resisting the authority of the
Directors; if you obey their orders, and feel any of them oppressive you will have
good grounds to complain; but if you do not obey, you will not have good grounds to
complain. I can only say, as Agent to the Society, I cannot sanction your remaining in
Sydney, nt the expense of the Society, in opposition to the Resolution of the Directors ;
when proper opportunity offers for your return to one or the other of the two stations
pointed out by the Directors.
I am, Rev. Sir, your obliged Servant,
&
H
V
-
I i
V..
f ;■
SAMUEL MARSDEN.
To the Rev, Samuel Marsden,
Sydney, March 19 th, 18 28.
Rev. Sir,—Your led'er, dated the 15th instant, T duly received last evening. This
morning { had the pleasure of seeing the letters, confirming his Excellency the Gover-
nor’s indention, of which] apprised you in my letter of the I Uh; a duplicate of which
1 now enclose, and beg lo refer you in answer, to your specific enquiry.
If I mistake not the tenor of your letter, lam given to understand, that you now feel
no objection to sign bills of exchange, with me, to pay the amount of the £4OO bill re-
turned, £B4 odd, assessed sum at Court, ambeosts of suit. Under Ibis impression, when
1 am furnished with the taxed account, from* the Solicitor, bills to that amount shall be
; l ' If
r
ir-r
i-:
sr
;■


forwanW for your signature, wliict, will release me, and allow of my immediate return
to my station, 1 am, Sir, your’s respectfully,
v L. £. TIIRELKELD.
Mr. Marsden never informed me of his having offered
to pay the bill until I had written to the Governor on the
subject, who kindly interfered. It was by accident we
met in the street, when speaking of the other bill pro-
tested by Mr. Hankey, Mr. Marsden said he offered 8
per cent, to Mr. Norton forthe £4OO bill, provided it went
not into Court, and that the offer was rejected. The error
of 3 percent, being all that was awarded can be seen on
reference to the account. The Commissary does not
negotiate private Bills of Exchange, but on the receipt of
£lO3 sterling gives in return a Treasury Bill for <£loo in
England,
My bills were of equal value with any other Missionary’s
Bill, had they not been purp'osely depreciated.
The official communication from the Agent of the
Society that, cc if I wish to retire from the service of the
Society there is no power here to prevent me,’’ confirms
the remarks made in a preceding part of this statement on
the conduct of the Managing Committee and Agents
abroad harassing Missionaries instead of encouraging
them in their work. A similar reply was made by the
Deputation when some abuses were mentioned to them
in the Islands. The other observations are not worthy of
notice, for it would be obvious to all, that had Mr. Mars-
den “ felt himself authorised” as agent to arrange the
concerns of the bill, which might have been settled by
arbitration, until Mr. Marsderfs third refusal to interfere,
the expences of my being in Sydney, &c. might have
been avoided. As to resisting the authority of the Direc-
tors and obeying their orders, the whole of my con-
duct has been in strict accordance with the instrut tiousor
orders of, the Deputation, which orders have since been
sanctioned by the authority of the Directors, and since
disanulled by virtue of authority, and endeavouring to
obey their orders has plunged me into difficulties and
trials. But no authority of Directors, or Agents, or De-
putations, or other Authority however powerful, would


induce me silently to submit to imputation without de-
fence, how much soever that defence, for a season, might
involve me. It would be doing the Society and other Mis-
sionaries injustice for me to withdraw silently at the inti-
mation of authority; there are gross abuses of authority ;
and of all the faithful Missionaries, I have had the pleasure
of knowing, there is not. one that would wish to with-
draw, except goaded to it by abuse of authority. I would
not disgrace the Body of Directors for a moment, as to
suppose, that they will sanction such stretches of autho-
rity; and I am confident that the Subscribers to the
Society would cease their subscriptions rather than the
phantom of authority should be used as the spur to action
to the Missionaries of Christ, whose independent principles
lead them to disregard every insult rather than abandon
the employment of promulgating the liberty of the Gospel
to those who are bound fast under the authority of Satan.
If, indeed, the principles of the London Missionary So-
ciety have gradually changed, and “ authority/’ and
“ orders,” and <f superiors,” the watch-words
of a few individuals who can boast of authority, menace
with authority, break up Missions, and insult Missionaries
with intimations of authority, then every Missionary
of independent principles will glory in withdrawing from
such authority. But we hope better things.—You, the
whole body of Directors, to whom this statement is made,
will not surrender your principles, nor the principles of
your Missionaries, nor the principles of the Society ; —you
will feel it your duty to investigate the concerns of the
Society to save it from ruin by rectifying abuses, and then
the Missionaries will arise as giants refreshed with wine.
Union shall be the watch-word instead of authority. Our
lives will cheerfully be sacrificed to the spread of the
Gospel of Christ, and your works also, will praise you
in the gate.
But, if after the prime of life has been spent in the
service of Christ; if after thirteen years absence from our
native land ; it with a large family to support in a distant
and expensive country; if after all these circumstances.


k flfc «<
*
‘S,
■ ' ■
/. ■ 1,1
It :
. .£v •. •■ -r
v
-
~ -.■;
%
*-V,i* ■
IlftES
•■>V :
Ft;-
f® : . ; -1
VaA' '' •
V v| ; - • 5
tts,. : r
•£
-I
'ls :
pf^‘--
« .?
v
sfef *..;
Ml&s
,
■■ ■. .
■ip 3
-■J i
■yrfiii ■ ’
■
v
1
■ '
it is a secret communication to the Agent from the
Managing Committee that he should authoritatively inti-
mate that, “ if you wish to retire from the service of the
Society there is no power here to prevent you,” let it
be publicly avowed as an order by the authority of the
Directors, and let the body of Directors publish to the
Society such a privilege for the encouragement of students?
to offer their services to the London Missionary Society,
whilst to the Missionaries abroad it would proclaim,-
“ Every man to his tent.” I pray God the enemy may
not prevail.
It is beyond expression painful to allude to facts, which
must create unpleasantsensationsbut when liberty and cha-
racter have been assailed, as mine have been,- it compels to
self-defence. Secret instructions from the Committee, in-
stances of which have come under my notice, may justify,
no doubt, the Rev. S. Marsden; and secret communications-
may have alarmed the Committee at home, and in some
small measure, palliate their resolutions ; but nothing can
justify the use of such inquisitorial-like means; the pure
principles of the gospel of Christ cannot flourish in con-
tact with such opposite principles, which only occasion
strife, and “ where strife is, there is confusion and every
evil work.”
The following official communication, in answer to my
request, I received as per date.
Uo the Jiev, L. E, 'lhrclkeld.
Colonial Secretary's Office ,
Sydney , March 20M, 182 S.
Rev. Sir, —I have had tlie honor to receive your letter of the 14th instant, statin",
with reference to a recent conversation, respecting the Aboriginal Mission at Lake
Maquarie; that if it meet* with the Governor’s approbation, to allow you four men on
the stores, you will return to that station, after certain bills, returned by the Directors
of the London Missionary Society are paid, and proceed in the attainment of the native
language.
In reply, lam directed by His Excellency to inform you, that the proper instruction*
for the four men, to be placed at your disposal, and to be victualled by the Government,
have boon given to the principal Superintendent of Convicts, and the Deputy Commis-
sary General, respectively, 1 have the honor to be,
Rev. Sir, your obedient Servant,
ALEXANDER M‘LEAY.
On Saturday, March 22nd, my Solicitor, Mr. Allen,
handed me the account, which amounts to £521 Os. lOd.


Expense of Protest, 14 0
— -Commission* 4 0 0
-Postage, 0 5 0
— — , 5 9 0
10 per cent, for one year and 7 mouths, . . , 64 8 10
3 per cent, to the Commissary, for *|’reasury bills, . __ N 2 0
for returned bill, assessed damages at the Supreme Court,
and lawyers’ bills. Mr. Allen most nobly refused to ac-
cept of any remuneration; tlie sum of five guineas was
offered, to cover positive expenses, which however, that
gentleman politely refused.
1 therefore wrote to him the annexed:—
To G. Allen, Fsq . Solicitor.
Sydney, March Wnd, 1828.
Dear Sir,—Allow me to return you sincere thanks for your kind attention, and
generous refusal of accepting the amount of your hill, for law expeuces, amounting to
f)s« 4cl. in the case ot the returned bill for £4OO, decided in the Supreme Court,
The London Missionary Society being spared through your generosity that sum, will,
1 feel persuaded) induce the body of Directors, to Acknowledge with me, your disinter**
ested conduct. Wishing you ever) happiness and prosperity,
] am, dear Sir, your *s truly,
L. E. Til H ELK ELD.
Law expenses, in consequence of the bill being return-
Ed, in the Supreme Court:—
£ s. d.
Original sum drawn, ...... 400 0 0
£ s. d.
481 0 4
Solicitor Norton's hMl—Plaintiff, . . . . 21 11 3
Solicitor Allen’s bill—-Defendant, - . . .15 9 4
521 0 10
Deduct, Mr Allen’s bill, who lias generously declined charging the
Society, . . . . . . 15 9 4
505 11 0
I therefore drew bills, for that amount, and enclosed in
*a letter to the Rev. S. Marsden, as follows;
To the Jtcv. S, Marsden.
Sydney, March *2if/i y 1828.
Rev. Sir,—ln accordance with the special resolutions of the Directors, rc»p< ctin*'
the returned bill of £4OO, and I lie determination you have expressed in your last letter,
of tbe I3tb instant; I have enclosed sets of bills, for the amount of bill assessed, and
law expenses. Mr. 15. M. Scott has agreed to take our joint bill on the Socie'y • and
will pay Mr. Norton my order for his amount, which isinciuded in the sum, £505 Us. Gd.
out of it. Mr. Solicitor Allen has generously declined accepting of the amount of his
claim. After your signature is put, I will thank you to return them a« speedily as con-
venient, as I cannot arrange for my return , to ’ Lake Maquarie, until the business is
brought to a close. lam, Sir. your’* respectfully,
L. E. TiiIIELKELD.


64
\
Amount of bill, ........ 400 0 0
tfr..’ * ... ‘ r - ii A -«• w r< * «4 4
4 Expenses allowed at the Supreme Court, , 84 0 4
<■:s>)' Solicitor Norton’s bi11,.,.,* ~ 21 ]| 2
iM ‘i Solicitor Alien’s bi11,,.. * ............ 15 9 4
,‘v .!
;>r •
Sterling 1 521 Oil)
Deduct, Mr. Allen’s bill, not charged to the Society, , ]5 9 4
Hi ' £505 11 G |
P. S. The letter of advice, I have sent also for your signature.
About three hours after 1 had sent the letter to Mr.
Marsden, who was in Sydney, the following letter was sent
me, by that gentleman, I will not comment on the sub-
ject, but refer to my letters, page 26 and 29, to the Di-
uuo Itivi UJ 41.1J U-Utio, X.U <UICI lilt AJ’i-
rectors and Mr, Hankey, which shew that I acted strictly
UUU 1 , O.J.U.J.iri.CJ' , VI UIUU OUC.VV UiUl X aULCII
to their resolutions. 1 hope an appeal to the Christian
public will not become necessary.
■f- -n puuiic wmiiui oecome necessary.
' ’"I To the Kev, L. E, ’JhreJlceld.
Sydney, March (828.
- • ■* J Rev. Sir,—l have received from the Directors a letter, dated 14ll» November last;
'v| the only notice they take respecting yon, is the following;
<k P. S. Tlie bill of Mr, Tbrelkeld’s, for £250 lias nut been honored by the Dircc-
** tors; he having neglected to comply with their instructions, as intimated in their letter
'*J <( to hi in of March 1 am your obedient Servant,
rW. .9 a tvitti;» unncniiw
\l . . ... SAMUEL MARSDEN.
■ It was my intention to finish this statement several pages
antecedent to this; but circumstances taking a more fa- ,
vorable turn, through the kind interference of his Excel-
/3 - lency the Governor, induced me to suspend the concluding
sheet, until the state of the Mission was finally determined.
X I The allowance from Government, together with the assis-
tance of the <£2so from the Society, will simplify the un-
*;* ‘ m dertaking, by omitting the employment of natives, and
others, at a heavy expense, and yet allow my family sufli-
d cient protection, in “ the waste howling wilderness/’ whilst
my attention, for a season, will be wholly devoted to the
language. It is now nearly three years, in which I have
been agitated, excited, harassed, opposed, cast down.
■ but not destroyed. I would therefore, publicly acknow-
ledge the gracious hand of a kind Providence, which has
protected, and devised means, by which the Mission is
not totally abandoned, but resumed. So long as I have
health and strength, it is my desire to devote it to the ob-
' $ * '5


?
j i
: I
ject in which I am engaged. To prevent the necessity of
my visiting England for redress, let it be clearly under-
stood, the terms, under which I resume the Mission. Ist,
I cannot be subject to any controul, by any agent, hono-
rary or stipendiary abroad; but to the Directors in
England alone : any innovation on this principle, will oc-
casion an appeal to the Christian public, either in person,
or from the press. 2dy, The sum allowed by the resolution,
of the Directors, for the maintenance of myself and family,
and objects strictly Missionary, sterling per year,
shall not be exceeded; the drawing and negotiating of bills
from time to time, to that amount, being vested entirely
with myself. Sdly, The commencement of this allowance
to take place, from April 31st, 1828 ;by which time, it is
hoped, we shall be removed to our station; and all the
present expenses of law suit, returned bill, and removal,
can be arranged and paid.
It is ardently hoped, that Committees will condescend to
communicate with the Missionaries themselves, as to the
best means ot supplying their wants, and carrying into
effect the designs of Christian MissiDns'abroad. Let con-
fidence but once fairly exist, and appeals will never be-
come necessary.
My only error, if it be indeed an error, has been, in en-
deavouring to confute the avowed sentiments of many,
that “the Aborigines are incapable of civilization and in-
struction.” The Key. S. Marsden himself read me his
own letter on that subject; our sentiments are therefore, op-
posed. But by strictly adhering to my instructions, it has
been proved, that the Aborigines are not “ Baboons that
they have no “ innate deficiency of intellect; but that we
may reasonably expect, in due season, by steady persever-
ance in the use of means, they may be brought to “ sit at
“ the feet of Jesus, clothed in their right mind.”
I he following is a statement of the expenses incurred
by me, in 6 carrying into effect the instructions, given by
the Deputation, and since expressly sanctioned by the Di-
rectors. Bills and receipts of the actual expenditure are
in my posse ssion; I could, if necessary, produce numerous
M
; ; *
11


testimonies as to myconduct, or shelter myself by a phalanx:
of witnesses, capable of forming a correct judgment, in
j this colony, on the business. But I feel persuaded, that
| the simple statement of the whole facts, as they really
| exist, will, to the unbiassed mind, be sufficient to prevent
unfavourable impressions against me, which would other-
wise naturally arise, in consequence of the most strange
I resolution, adopted by the Directors, respecting this Mis-
sion. If I have betrayed my trust, let there be no conceal-
ment; If I have acted unworthily of the high office I sus-
tain, as a Christian teacher, let there be no sheltering
patronage; if I have strongly coloured, or wilfully mis-
represented any thing, or made allusions to that which can-
not be substantiated, let me be banished from the Society, |
as unworthy of credit. But should the Directors, as a
body, be convinced through this statement, that I am.
what is really the case, not worthy of such treatment, then.
whether the resolutions have arisen from misrepresentation
or mis-conceptions of the subject, let the cause be rnade
known, and the concerns of the Society be" conducted in
future on such ingenuous principles, as shall promote mu-
tual confidence betwixt the' Missionaries abroad, and the
managing Directors at home; then shall I, whatever may
be the result to me, as an individual compelled to set
] up a defence against those who have power in their hands,
be fully compensated in such a reward.
Disbursements from June 4, 18*24, to Sept . 21, 1827.
|' | > Expenses for the Mission from June 4, 1824, to June 21,1825. £ s, d.
Passage from RaUtea, and incidental expenses for self and son 30 0 0
i* g Journies, travelling -expenses, and removal to Newcastle on account of
the Aboriginal Mission .............. 118 15
Wages to persons employed 7 15 0
C *■§ Sundries for the aborigines, blankets, slop clothing, tobacco, pipes, fish-
:y Sundries for the aborigines, blankets, slop clothing, tobacco, pipes, fish-
hooks, hatchets, dungaree, hoes, iron pols, frying pans, tin pots,
carbine, pistols for man, powder and shot ... 69 2 5
| Tools for mechanics, carpenter, joiner, plaisterer, sawyer, and sundry
other sorts necessary for building in the woods ...............*.... ■ 61 0 9
UlltCl ncwrppili jf lUI lll VIIU PUUI IO | tHMMf M« • I MMM Wl V
Horse, saddle, &c. dray and harness 60 4 0
Medicines for family use, and for the natives .«.# 24 12 B
Z'T.: a r r.in nt linn Irq r>nn tinnl; m-ii-i i ntf snnlino - wriY nmt
OICUU I nc» IUI laumy uw, uuu mi
I ' l Stationary, account books, copy books, pens, ink, wafers, sealing wax, and
writing paper ..................... r ....... 9 12 6
Household furniture, kitchen utensils, earthen and glass ware, bed,
and bedding for family, with extra supply preparing for Moreton-bay 150 19 10
114 ’ ‘ ' 2 11}
*.>- 4 ■


Personal Expences for the Missionary and Family from June , 1824, to June f 1825r.
i. j. d.
Clothing: self and *on on arrival in Sydney; supplies for my three children
left in the Islands; expenses of marriage 55 0 O-
Two years supply of clothing for self, wife and family, on our iutsnded
voyage to Moreton-bay 61 8
House rent, and every other incidental expense of housekeeping, fur self,
wife, four children, and domestics , 205 19 4§
£322 8 \\
Expenses for the Mission from June 21, to Dec. 21, 1825.
Wages to the person? employed 17 10 6
Postage, If, Is. lOd.; freight of our supplies from Sydney, 35 f. 6d. ...... 30 2 4
Cart, blacksmith and carpenter’s bill ....... 28 10 G
Steelyard, measures, sieve, and pistols for watchman 4 13 0
Boat, belt and horn, knives, large iron pot, and tin one, for the use of the
Aborigines 9 5 4
Indian corn for the horse and natives, 98 bushels • 22 1 7
£llB 9 3
Personal expenses for support of self and family, from June 21, to t)ec.
21, 1825 11* 6 7
Expenses of the Mission from Dec, 21, 1825, to June 21,1826
Tlations of provisions for five persons variously employed 39 17 * 8|
For the Aborigines ditto 26 c 1+
Palling ten acres of timber/ splitting slabs, paling, day’s work at the
station, Lake Macquarie, and yearly wages >•••• 20 15 11
7 17 0
Indian corn
Expenses occasioned by two of my children coming up from the Islands,
from Sydney to Newcastle. 1215 0
Printing reports and stationery 7 13 11
1 UUUllg JCJiuiwa ttUM .?%i*v*w**w J , v v • f ,v . J
Slops, sacks, shot, churn, &c.» 818 Oj
To sawyers for sawing, and sundry repairs. ......... ** * cl 3 0
£l3O 17
Personal expenses for the Missionary and family»-for the same period .««« 116 0 0


PliS * t the Mission f rom Dec. 21, 1856, to Sept.2\ % 1827.
ii '* wages to the tiirce persons employed by the year 51 13 1
I: || 1,511,1 , for fi ni f hin b r the fencing, shingling, and putting up outhouse, paling.
Hations 01 provisions fur the three persons employed by the year two
' «%V- i prisoners, and for the blacksemployed in work 10 i n o3
Freightage of supplies from Sydney, and part of removal to Sydney ou the
. 5 ,**>;•Journeying and 01 her expenses occasioned by removing ..: P 4
Indian corn, seed wheat, barley, and potatoes 22 3 8
Sheet iron, boat, linseed oil, paint, pitch, tar, twine, brushes, and shingle
Mt I nails 1210 10?
. v ?&'•. f Sawed timber, weather, and other boards .... t Pit ir
Postage and s ationery Q 0 0 4
/i Balance of printing specimens of language, Government, and the Auxiliary
Church M issionary Society, defraying the other part Tf , ttft 14 7 rt
UK 4 Salt, boat sails, and blacksmith’s bill . T1 p
t f • Commission of agency paid to the agent ......... , ?it h n
£387 10
ap
i •• 08
Expense* for the Mission, from June 22, to Bee, 21, IB2C.
' - p ltd
Four working oxen, plough, harrow, harness, and bullock driver's wages 80 onl
>3 Fencing, splitting slabs, paling, and day work f 55 ~
- Wa'chman, and persons employed in removing m 7 jf
Wages for the three yearly hired persons, and one mechanic 4-? n S
-r«.
, i . -0..- .u. v.uuu r auv uncu peisiins, ana one mcclmmc 40 n j
|||| .. * Journey expenses twice to Sydney , s ui
Sled mill, smith's bill for horseshoeing, ploughshare, repairs’,‘sawyw for *
boards, rope, postage, and shingles 20 I r > 5 X
S .Freightage account from Sydney to Newcastle, for all provisions, &c. ss*c. 19 o3^
j| Indian corn, and potatoes for seed ~, , j
Slops, tea, sugar, blankets, for the natives who work .* V.V.V.V.V 18 11 4"*
ne k( 'if °J tobacco, partly for workmen, charged to their accounts, and
lIP / r;| partly for the blacks * > 3Q , r _
llations of provisions for the three persons and one prisoner employed by
theyear,,,., . 33 331
# / To'the agent for indorsing and negotiating bills of exchange at 2ip-r *
* - * cent, from February 9th, 1825, to June 1826 28 19 11
nU t0 t,IC a{ * ent °* 5 pcr ceot * on disbursements through his
Paid contract for building the house **’*’’*’]* * ’ * * * * * * * * 2 gg
c#-..
£724 0 Q\
Personal expenses for the Missionary and family for the same period ~, , ]SG
M ;
■
Allowance for self, wife, six children and domestics, as per estimate, for
this year only, being three-quarters, up to Sept. 21, J8v>7, when the
Mission was discontinued at Lake Macquarie, at the rate of ISO/, per year I 'io 0


General
£ 8. d.
Mission axpenscs from June 4,
1824, to June 21,‘ 1825 632 2 ll j
Personal expenses for the same
period ~ 322 8 l|
Mission expenses from June 21,
1825, to Dec. 1825 ~,,.118 9 3
Personal ditto ditto 112 C 7
Mission expenses from Dec. 2*,
1825, to Jane 21, 1820...• 130 17 2
Personal ditto ditto 110 0 0
Mission expenses from June2l,
1826, to Dee. 21,1826 724 0
Personal ditto ditto ........ 15G 0 0
Mission expenses from Dec. 21,
1826, to Sept. 21, 1827 .... 387 10 i|
Personal ditto ditto ......... 135 0 0
Sterling .. £2734 14 9|
*,* The average expense for myself
charged to the Society, is £272 IDs, 7<l.
Statement
£ !». d.
Cash fop bills on the Sociely
through Messrs. Dacre, llainc
and Ramsey, E. M, Scott, and
R. Campbell 2431 14 ij
Surplus value of rations charged
to workmen 18 17 10
Sales of sundries on the sus*
pension of the mission ...... 30 0 I
Premium on bills of exchange 133 0 7|
2713 12 7|
Balance due,, 21 2
£2734 14 91
family on the whole period, per year,
On Thursday, the 28th, the Rev. S, Marsden sent me
the following note; —
To the Rev, L. E, Thrclkeld .
March, 27 th, 1828.
Rev. Sir,—l finally settled the account yesterday, of the returned bill, with Mr,
Richard Jones, and saw Mr. Norton afterwards on the subject; I expect Mr, Jones will
arrange with Mr. Scott, or Mr, Norton to day, at any rate, Mr. Norton will not look to
you for the payment, but to me ; so that you may consider yourself free from all re-
sponsibility, and at liberty to make any arrangements you think proper, for your future
proceedings. If you call at Mr. Hill’s, about 2 o’clock, I will endeavour to be there at
that time, and see you before I go to Parramatta,
lam, Sir, your obedient Servant,
SAMUEL MARSDEN.
At the time appointed I called at the Rev. R. Hill’s, and
waited some time; leaded again, but did not meet with
the Rev. Gentleman. Being anxious to know how the bills
were settled, as, according to the Directors’ resolutions, my
signature was necessary, I went on Friday morning to Mr.
Jones, who informed me, that the Rev. S. Marsden had
drawn himself on the Society, a bill to the amount, for


which <£2 per cent, premium was allowed on the bill. I
expressed my surprise at this circumstance, of now taking
upon himself the whole responsibility, without my parti-
cipation at all in the business, when the Rev. Gentleman
had so repeatedly avowed his having no authority to act.
It is something curious, that when the Rev. S. Marsden
intimated to me the proposal of selling our bill, and when
I proposed that it should be advertised for sale, as usual,
my proposition was rejected, although the bills on the*
Wesleyan Society, are now selling, at percent.
Thus Mr. Marsden has now, quite contrary to the resolu-
tions of the Society, taken the whole - responsibility on
himself, and contrary to my wish; but, it is a pity that
such views were not taken seven months previous to this,
as some two or three hundred pounds might have been
saved to the Society, in expenses of removal, sale of pro-
perty, law expenses, &c.; for Mr. Scott offered to settle the
matter by arbitration, until the receipt of Mr,
second letter, refusing to interfere on the'subject. tSee
page 33.) Why all Mlscinoafy bills, for years back, have
not been sold, when premiums were from 10 to 21, and
23 per cent, is to me perfectly unaccountable; but it is
highly impolitic to depreciate thevalue of the bills drawn
by our Missionaries on the Treasurer, so as to oblige them
to pay s percent, commission, out of their scanty pittan-
ces, and negotiate their sterling bills at currency, to the
loss of all the premiums; the Society paying, in the mean
l ime, precisely the amount, as though the premiums were
allowed. My first bills which alarmed the Directors, was
20 per cent, more than was really expended, in consequence
of my bills not being sold at that time, when the Wes-
leyan Missionaries obtained even a higher premium. My
deviation from this old established rule, and obtaining,
as before observed, a premium of £lB percent, from ano-
:her channel than that patronized by the Rev. S. Marsden,
jave umbrage, from which arose much of my annoyance
in this Colony, respecting the said returned bill. It is a pity
that the funds of the Society should ever be made subser-
vient to patronage or private pique, and the Society stig-


■ } I
71
I ■ • ; &
matised, as it has been with this transaction, when it could
so easily have been avoided,-by the Rev. S. Marsden i [ I
Jointly doing at first, that which he conceived he had no
authority to do, until after I had memorialized theGover-
auiuoruy to ao, until alter i Had memorialized the Gover-
nor, who communicated with the Rev. gentleman on the
subject. Thus as an agent,or a private individual, the Rev.
Gentleman could take gratuitously all the responsibility " J
on himself; after having played with my circumstances for
seven months. See page 32, 35, 36, 39. If it be supposed %
that private communications from them authorised the act;
the Rev. S. Marsden assured me he had received no com-'
- ’ v,va UXV UUU ICtWIVUI IIU V.UUI-
- from the Directors on my business, save the
postscript already noticed. I earnestly hope the body of
■w| Directors will adopt more simplicity in their plan of ope-
ration; or the consequences may prove highly injurious to
the Society’s existence. Missionaries have feelings as sus-
ceptible as those of othermen; those feelings have been re* j
peatedly outraged ; and had not the Treasurer and the Rev.
S. Marsden exhibited me to the public, by their joint pro- : i j
ceedings respecting the bi 11,- tßera__jLvoold.no t have been
I that positive necessity for my publicly defending myself T
here in the papers, against attacks; in doing which, I dis- V,
claim every statement not having my own signature; al-
though a friend of the Rev. S. Marsden cowardly attacked
me under an anonymous signature; impeaching and chat- r
lenging me to " put the whole case before the public.” To •
this I deemed it prudent not to accede, until the body of
Directors had time and notice to remedy complaints; but Hvi
I certainly shall feel no hesitation, on my part, provided h;>j
the body of Directors render it necessary hereafter. At j
present, I rather “suffer wrong,” than defend publicly, i.'A
and so hazard unintentionally an injury to the Society; be- v I
lieving that this statement will excite the whole body of
Directors to act in unity with the Missionaries, in which |k'-
j the Society will flourish; without which, it will languish
and expire.
/ v i . ... 4 , I ilii
I. ■- ;i m
I m


I
; : ■ / ■■ , • .
r ■ v v i i' i} *i *'~ ;
/, ■. j i v- k
■ V. * K ■ V ■ •> ,• . . • . . .
• ... • > vVt* ; :■
: ;; v.’: '!*•;; .
m
' ' ■ :
3 ’
■ '* ii v
FINIS, ■•-.
$
p
i * f> . • ...— s : :..'■■■■ V ' '
M '
I,
,
: % ; ■. '■ * <<. , : v >■ ;■: :; ,;: , ■ ,
t ! ; •
• ’ v i, * t # , • ; . , .
v V*' v , ■ -V ■ * : ' -
Si
’ " • fc .
T ' '■ U '
r*.’ ' ; v. ■ . . fc ' '
m . *
i‘V^ :
’
m
PRINTED BV
R. 110WE, SVDNEV, NEW SOUTH WALES.
. i
I *v ' . : ~ ;;
1 pressed the foljowin/? letter to Mr. Ilankey, to an-
prize him ot my resumption of the Mission, at Lake
Maquane. | ; ;
To Jr, A. Jfankey, Esq.
Sir ThoPov <3 xr a i 'Aforch 29M, 1828, Sydney, New South Wales.
, J f'V, , . S * Marsdftn hasdrawn ol * y° u Grille amount, 1 believe, of theVe*
I turned bill, and law expenses, he declining to join with me in signing bill,of exchange,
according lo the resolutions. However as the matter is now at rest, my future bills will
4 h * diattl \ o, ;. l the Treater, . without the interference of agency as before slated. I
J r um now at liberty, and as the Governor has kindly allowed my request, of four
men rationed on the stores, which together with the 2501. allowed per year, bv the So’ •
ciety, will enable me to returned pursue my endeavours lo obtain the language at Lake
Maquane. 1 hasten to inform you of this rircumsiance. A statement will be shortly
i handed to eyc-ry nidmdual Director and Missionary of the Society, it is private nut
published to the world. -1 mention this lest it should be apprehended that my irritated
slate of feelings might have betrayed me to injure the Society by a public exposure, be.
foie the body of Directors have had tune to .apply a remedy to the evils complained of.
have seen your new resolutions, relative to sick-wives of Missionaries, in your letter to'
the Uev. 11. Bourne, allowing the wives, if afllicted, to remove for the benefit of health
l| but llot t ,Je l |U shaud to attend her on the voyage, where his sympathies would be the
| - most desirable, lie being strictly forbidden lo leave hi, station on any account-’ his own
health excepted 1 Such u cold, calculating, cruel resojptioo, will, when mjblished rue-,
vent married men of feeling, aud respectable women of reflection, from becoming Mis-
B siouaiics to the London Missionary Society. I could not leach such principles to the
heathen, a? Christian principles, ] therefore enter my serious and solemn protest against
their adoption. I am, Sir, your'u respectfully, ° - '


—
& ,
.
■
.
■
.
j
