

A STUDY
ABOUT THE
RIVER MURRAY
With Prominent Notes about the Utilization of
its Potential Energy.
Being a Paper Read before the Royal Society of South
Australia, at the Meeting of the 3rd July, 1883.
By S. POLLITZER, C.E.
FOR THE COMPILATION OF THE HISTORICAL PARTS REFERENCES
WERE TAKEN FROM
Sutherland : History of Australia ;
Rev. Tenison Woods: History and Exploration of
Australia ;
“Adelaide Observer,” 1853, and other Papers. '
COMPLIMENTARY COPY.




A STUDY
ABOUT THE
RIVER MURRAY
With Prominent Notes about the Utilization of
its Potential Energy.
Being a Paper Read before the Royal Society of South
Australia, at the Meeting of the 3rd July, 1883.
By S. POLLITZER, C.E.
FOR THE COMPILATION OF THE HISTORICAL PARTS REFERENCES
WERE TAKEN FROM
Sutherland : History of Australia ;
Rev. Tenison Woods: History and Exploration of
Australia ;
“Adelaide Observer,” 1853, and other Papers.




PREFACE.
The navigation of the Murray being a prominent topic of the
day I could not do better than to obtain permission to lecture and
publish about the observations gained on the Murray, combined
with my practical experiences elsewhere. I beg to be allowed to
state that I hurried on with the publication of this pamphlet for
the very necessary reasons, that there are circulating in Adelaide
very vague and diverse opinions about the nature of the Murray
and the possibility of its being made permanently navigable ; my
informations may, therefore, in the first instance serve as a guide
to the public, who I think are going to ventilate the question
shortly.
The second part of my essay about the utilization of the Murray’s
potential energy is not a part of my official task; I investigate a
theory about the pressure of fluids in motion, which science ■
hitherto almost entirely neglected and which indeed in some time,
soon to follow, will be the main agency of a new resource of an
energy and so creating an industry of the most economical nature.
I found it as well convenient in the general interest to add to
my essay a very short extract from my report, also to accompany
it with two diagrams and the map of the river. v
S. P.




A STUDY ABOUT THE RIVER MURRAY.
Before the Fellows of the Royal Society I have the pleasure of
placing a study about the River Murray, to which I devoted
during many months my fullest and undivided attention and care;
a study, the datas for which I most minutely and carefully
collected whilst being engaged in the survey of the river, so that
I am enabled to treat the subject in all its possible aspects ; a
study, during which I met with so many severe accidents,
which, if I were to tell but a few, would surprise you that
I had yet perseverence and energy enough to accomplish my task
and to supply you with valuable results. Results of laws of
motion, of measures of quantity and dimension, the application of
which has done more within the past quarter of a century to
replace hypotheses by theory, and to make science not only of a
scientific character, but to make science and its main agencies,
original speculation and observation, subservient to practica
wants. In the course of my study I will bring before you
mathematical data, available figures based on observation, their
application has to be invented just the same as a new machine or
a new process has to be invented,. and indeed for the inventive
spirit of genial light, there is secretly still hidden, a virgin soil of
a vast yet undiscovered country.
To give this paper some shape of completeness, allow me first to
proceed with a historical sketch of the River Murray which I
compiled from various authors.
EXPLORATION.
For the first discovery of the Murray we are indebted to the
explorer Hume in 1824, who, by order of Governor Brisbane, went
out to explore the interior; Hume, however, did not follow its
course, but only crossed it.


In the years 1826-28 when Captain Sturt had achieved the
successful exploration of the Darling, he was again in 1829 sent
out with the Naturalist Macleay to explore the interior, and on
this occasion he carried his portable boats to the Murrumbidgee,
on which he embarked his party of eight convicts. They soon
reached the junction with the Lachlan; the stream then became
narrower, a thick growth of overhanging trees shut out the light
from above while, beneath, the rushing waters bore them swiftly
over dangerous snags and through whirling rapids until they
suddenly shot out into the broad surface of a noble stream which
flowed gently over its smooth bed of sand and pebbles. This river
they called the Murray, but it was found afterwards to be only the
lower portion of the stream which had been crossed by Hume
several years before.
After folk)wing the Murray for about 200 miles below the
Lachlan they reached a place where a large river flowed from the
north into the Murray. This was the mouth of the River Darling
which Sturt himself had previously discovered and named. He
now turned his boat into it in order to examine it for a short
distance; but after they had rowed a mile or two they came to a
fence of stakes which the natives had stretched across the river
for the purpose of catching fish. Rather than break the fence and
so destroy the labours of the blacks Sturt turned to sail back.
When they again entered on the Murray they were carried
gently by the current first to the west then to the south, and as
they went onward they found the river grow deeper and wider
until it spread into a broad sheet of water which they called Lake
Alexandrina. On crossing this lake they found the passage to the
ocean blocked up by a great bar of sand, and were forced to turn
their boats round and face the current with the prospect of a
toilsome journey of a thousand miles before they could reach
home. They had to work hard at their oars, Sturt taking hi 8
turn like the rest. At length they entered the Murrumbidgee, but
their food was now failing and the labour of pulling against the
stream was proving too great for the men, whose limbs began to
grow feeble and emaciated. Day by day they struggled on ?
swinging more and more wearily at their oars, their eyes glassy


and sunken with hunger and toil, and their minds beginning to
wander as the intense heat of the midsummer sun struck on their
heads. One man became insane, the others frequently lay down
declaring that they could not row another stroke and were quite
willing to die. Sturt animated them and with enormous exertions
he succeeded in bringing the party to the settled districts where
they were safe. They had made known the greatest river of
Australia and traversed one thousand miles of unknown country,
so that this expedition was by far the most important that had
yet been made into the interior.
When the results were known in Sydney it was hard to
believe that so large a river as the Murray, with so many fine
tributaries, had no other outlet than that seen by Sturt. In April,
1831, Captain Barker entered St. Vincent’s Gulf in search of the
Murray mouth, which, of course, he did not find. He then landed
and ascended Mount Lofty, from which he beheld the magnificent
scenery, and went across our known rich south-eastern country
towards Lake Alexandrina, when, having reached the Lake, he
made his way to the channel through which the Murray drained
to the sea. Barker, wishing to take some bearings from the
opposite sandhills, swam across, leaving his party behind. He was
seen to ascend the sandhills and go towards the beach, and thence
his further course was unknown. His party hopelessly waited for
him; he never returned. By the aid of a native female they
were told of his unhappy fate—he was murdered by the natives.
Mount Barker was named after the ill-fated captain. After this
survey no further hopes were entertained of the sea mouth of the
Murray.
Major Mitchell, or the discoverer of Australia Felix, was sent in
the year 1835 to complete the survey of the Darling. On the
17th March the party started down the Lachlan, for they intended
to reach the Murray and then trace up the Darling, which,
however, they could not accomplish on account of the many diffi-
culties they met with.
On the 10th June he returned to explore the upwaxd course of
the Murray, which he, in the most enthusiastic terms, describes
as the finest country. He explored in this trip many other rivers


—the Edwards, Yanko, Billabong, Loddon —anastemising with the
Murray.
The marvellous reports of Mitchell were succeeded by the
foundation of this Colony under Colonel Light, in 1836, and the
subsequent explorations of the River Murray were of more local
character under Governor Hindmarsh. The first chosen for the
purpose were Messrs. Strang ways and Hutchinson in December,
1837; the result of their survey was, to p rove beyond doubt, that
there was no opening to the river except the narrow channel first
seen by Sturt. On that occasion they discovered the Coorong.
The next sixteen or seventeen years show a gradual and
successful increase of settlers a long the Murray valley, who took
up the river frontages for pastoral purposes; and only in the year
1853 history records the navigability of the river.
NAVIGATION.
It would make my paper a too exhaustive one, were I to tel*
you about the ardent and enthusiastic' speeches delivered in that
year in the infant Parliament of Adelaide, before and after Captain
Cadell’s successful first steam trip on the Murray. Allow me only
to give you a very sketched extract in mentioning those gentle'
men whose names are so closely connected with that remarkable
event, and whose names are unperishable in the annals of South
Australian history.
The warmest and most energetic supporter was the Colonial
Governor of that time, Sir H. E. F. Young, who was also a
passenger on the “Lady Augusta’s” first trip; his fellow-passengers
were J. Grainger, M.L.C., William Younghusband, M.L.C., R.
Davenport, M.L.C., A Kinloch, G. Palmer, G. Mason, E, W.
Andrews, several others, and seven ladies; Francis Cadell, Com-
mander of the “Lady Augusta,” with officers and crew, made a
total of forty-five persons.
E. W. Andrews, who was correspondent of the S. A. Register,
supplied to that newspaper a most minutely kept diary, and from
which I made a few extracts, certainly so far as may assist the
object I have in view. I must certainly admit as well, that his very
careful notes are in most instances not only very truthful, but
show at the same time an enlightened mind, as for instance


the following few lines will show you:—“ The valley of the
Murray appears to be from two to three miles in breadth.
It is bounded on each side by high bare cliffs, or by round lime-
stone hills, the space between which is exceedingly rich in alluvial
deposits. The river winds in most eccentric curves, sometimes
running closely under one of its walls, and occasionally, though
but seldom, pursuing the middle course. The tops of the side
walls are on a level with the ordinary face of the country, which
for miles is scrubby and fit only for pastoral purposes. The
valley of the Murray will probably, before long, become a settled
district, but the back country on either side must continue for
many years sheep and cattle runs.
«As regards the valley, the only difficulty in the way of its
settlement, not removable by the hand of man, arises from the
occasional inundations —but these are not very frequent, one only
of any great consequence having been known since the settlement
of the colony —and their effect is to enrich the land.
“ The Murray and its valley are in reality little known, or such
absurd stories as have been circulated in Adelaide could never
have gained credence—stories of the river running through a
barren desert, of its being fordable in various places, and the like.
According to statements of the officers and crew, they compare the
Murray with the finest known rivers. One it reminds of the St.
Lawrence at and above Quebec ; another terms it a miniature
Mississippi; a third likens it to the Hooghly, adding that it is
broader than either the Ganges or the Samma above their point of
junction; a Chinese mariner says it resembles the Tigris at
Whampoa ; and one of the officers, who has recently been to Cali-
fornia, states that it is broader than the Sacramento.
“ The water of the Murray like that of the Ganges, is generally
rather thick and muddy, especially when, as at present, the stream is
rising. This is said to be chiefly caused by its admixture with the
Darling. It looks in a tumbler as if it had a little milk or chalk
in it, but settles down in a few hours and becomes perfectly bright,
leaving a considerable sediment which may be described as some-
thing between fullers earth and pipeclay, feeling soft and greasy in
the fingers. It is excellent both for drinking and washing.


“ A settler on the Darling, whom we met at the junction, men-
tioned that he had a station on the Murray, near Albury, some
years ago. The land, he says, is most excellent for pasture, and
he has grown as much as 70 bushels of wheat to the acre. I have
since heard that Sir Thomas Mitchell, the Surveyor-General, stated,
some years ago, in a report to the Government, that he believed
the Murray would, at some future day support a large population,
adding that it would irrigate the neighbouring country, and become
eventually the Nile of Australia. All I have seen and heard tends
to confirm his opinion.”
Those, you see, are the notes from Mr. Andrews’s diary, and in
the course of my study you shall have ample opportunity to
compare their exactness with my own observations. When the
navigation of the Murray had thus undoubtedly been proved, the
Parliament of Adelaide decided in the first instance to order from
the royal mint three gold medals, one for the Governor, the other
for Captain Cadell, both as public acknowledgement for their
great merits, the third medal to be kepfi in the archives; in the
second instance a bonus of £4,000 to Captain Cadell in employing
two additional steamers on the Murray for the next two years-
Our first colonial legislators were in no way behind those of the
present day with regard to energetic action. But what was the
public opinion in our neighbouring sister colonies about that re-
markable event ? Let me answer with a short but rather humoris-
tic extract from the Sydney Morning Herald of that time :
“Ye commercial folks of Melbourne, I have great and alarming
news for you ! the River Murray has at last been navigated, I
suppose, ere this, up as for as the township of Albury, and goods
are being sold by the supercargoes of steamers at prices undreamt
of before on the banks of the Murray. The best tea £5 a chest;
the best Adelaide flour, delivered on the banks, £4O a ton; the
best sugar 355. per cwt., and other trifles in proportion. Your
heavy upland and inland carriages can never touch these prices.
The freight at present is only £2O a ton, so you see the Adelaide
folks mean to steam away all our gold, take possession of all your
wool, and supply your settlers with the best of groceries at prices
quite remunerative to them, but which you cannot attempt on
account of the heavy interior carriage.”


CHARTING.
From the Parliamentary papers of the memorable year 1853>
it is only too clear to me that Captain Cadell must have kept
a diary of his first journey, which, however, I could not succeed to
obtain anywhere ; to refer to his notes would be undoubtedly very
valuable; but still lam able to give you some data of his in the
following comparative geographical analysis of the subject.
You see here a map of the River Murray which I sketched
according to Captain Sturt’s first discoveries, next to it there is
the coloured chart supposed to be from Captain Cadell, over that
coloured chart there you find a copy of the chart as at present used
by the various river captains on the Murray, and the roll pf
diagrams with the broad tracing cloth, is the chart which I pre-
pared according to my survey notes.
Of course it cannot be expected that Captain Sturt should have
supplied with anything better than you see, for he did not go
to make careful surveys, but to contest the assumption that the
interior of Australia does not contain a large inland lake. How
Captain Cadell prepared his chart, which is supposed to be from
him, I am at a loss to say, but this is certain, that anyone a little
acquainted with the Murray will affirm that there is very little
likeness between the river and the chart. The next step of im-
provement in that direction is the uncoloured chart, as it is in use
at the present by the various ship captains. Although it is only a
sketch, yet it is nearer the truth than the former, for there the
channel is distinctly shown, and dangerous obstacles are noted on
it. The various small diagrams you see on the narrow roll of
drawing paper are my plotted survey notes, which, on the large
roll of tracing cloth are properly joined together, which according
to the width of the cloth, gives 30 to 40 miles river length in one
continuous stretch. I beg you to carefully examine my chart and
you will find that there is everything shown that is wanted, and
nothing omitted; nay, even Igo farther—that with my chart you
are enabled, at once, to see the defects of the river, and, entirely
independent from my schemes, you can choose whatever you like
to do in improvements; in one word, my chart is prepared mainly
for engineering purposes; but, bear in mind as well, that all this


is the result of a little over than four months’ time. I may as
well state here that, in being allowed by the Honourable the
Commissioner of Public Works to lecture, that I do so with the
distinct understanding of a private person, and all what I am going
to tell you to-night you must look at it, not as coming from an
authorized official, but the opinions of a private engineer, who
is taking interest in the matter worthy of its great im-
portance.
OVERLAND CORNER GAUGE.
The depths shown in my chart are the depths of the river in its
various places below the zero of the gauge at Overland Corner.
That the Overland Corner gauge can be adapted for reference
in preparing a chart of that part of the river I had to do is
evident from the fact that between the termini of my survey of
242 miles there is not a single tributary river to the Murray, like,
for instance, the Murrumbidgee or Edwards, which could make by
its supplies an alteration in its low water ; that is the low water
level 150 miles above Overland Corner can be considered the same
as at Overland Corner ; once this fact is established, the next
critical step is how is one to ascertain low water all along the
river 1 I did it in the following way :—Close to Overland Corner,
I had one of my camps, from which I surveyed 25 miles in
either direction down and up stream; that being finished in the
last instance, before shifting my camps about 50 miles higher up
the river, I read my gauge, which was the same as- that at Over-
land Corner, removed it, and when arrived at the new camping
place the very first thing was to put up the gauge to the same
reading as that of the previous camp; in this way I carried the
gauge from camp to camp, and if there any error may have
occurred, it can be but by the alteration of the water level whilst I
been shifting, which indeed was very little, an inch or so, prac-
tically nothing. But this operation was yet not satisfactory enough
for me, I nothing like more than exactness in work, therefore,
from the very start of my work I thought on the necessity of
checking my soundings; for that purpose I left at each camping
place a substantial B. M. of the high water at the time being ;
when the survey was finished, I returned at low water and


measured the heights of all B. M’s. above low water, which gave
me very accurately always the zero of the Overland Corner gauge.
You see, therefore, gentlemen, that in the solution of this question,
I succeeded perfectly; for in river hydraulics it is one of the most
critical points to refer soundings to a uniform low water level.
GEOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY.
In the next instance I am to give you a geographical and topo-
graphical description of the Murray valley, but as this cannot
easily be done without interfering with its geology you will allow
me to combine them both.
Starting from B. C. and pursuing the Murray up stream to
the boundary, we notice its division in four distinct directions j the
first almost due north to North-West-Bend, the second east a little
by south to Overland Corner, the third south-east to the great
Pyap or South-Bend, and the fourth north-east to the boundary.
We cannot really speak here from a formation of a river like for
instance in Europe and America, where rivers, creeks, and water-
courses in general are natural results of inequality in the levels
of the earth's surface, and where the banks do not rise higher than
some feet above their low-water level. With the Murray it is an
entirely different thing; there are neither high mountains nor
deep valleys, except those at its sources; the Murray country is
for miles and miles a level one, the monotonous face of which is
interrupted by a valley of about 250 feet deep, in which the river
with its innumerable bends is flowing; the shape of the valley
cannot exactly be understood in the enthomological term of the
word, it is something like a gorge, although the latter expression
cannot be applied to it; the valley is composed almost throughout
of two perpendicular cliffs, which gradually vary in their mechanical
and chemical structure; and if we keep the division in four
distinct directions in mind in this case and in all subsequent
references we see the first is composed almost entirely of
the second partly lime and partly sandstone, the third and fourth
sandstone in various shapes, and clay. Only the smaller portion
of the space between the cliffs is occupied by the river, the rest is a
very fine fertile ground, which at the first sight would be called
river-drift, but which actually is a marine deposit. You see on the


map (see Table III.) the mileage according to my rough chainage,
and the cliffs wherever I found the river running close underneath
them 3 in the first division from B. C. to North-West-Bend the river
is sometimes to the right and some times to the left of the cliffs, the
average width of the valley is with a few exceptions 60 chains ; the
length of the direction is 23 miles and the length of the river is 29
miles, or a proportion of 1:1 A very nearly ; in the second division
from North-West-Bend to Overland Corner the river is keeping
more to the right side of the cliffs looking up stream ; the width
between the latter is on an average 100 chains, the length of
direction 38 miles, and the measured length 63 miles, or a propor-
tion of 1 :lf nearly ; the third division to the Great South Bend
the cliffs are still more receding from the left side, and where I
could measure their width I found them to be at least 200 chains,
the length as the crow flies is 23 miles, and the measured distance
is 39 miles, or a proportion of l:lf nearly ; the fourth division to
the boundary there the river is keeping with only one exception
to the right side of the cliffs, their distance varies between
2£ and 5 miles, the straight line scales 42 and my measured
length gives 104 miles, or a proportion of I:2£ very nearly.
All these minute data are very necessary to know, the reason
of which you shall notice pretty frequently.
After the foregoing notes how is the geology of the river
and the formation of its bends explained 1 The Murray
country belongs to the various classes of Miocene origin,
of almost perfect level stratification, and the valley was
formed by some unexplainable interior violent action of
the earth at the Miocene period , when the continent was still
covered by the sea; that it cannot be the action of the later
appearing fresh surface-water is only too evident for the following
reasons: it speaks against mechanical laws; if, even assuming
that flowing water is capable during endless time to wash through
those cliffs, the tendency of the water is to move in a straight line,
hence its action the same ; why should the river have separated
the cliffs at Lake Bonney six miles apart and at Rounka Rounka
Station only three-quarters of a mile ; if some early giant stream
separated the cliffs why are they not parallel to each other, and


why are they not straight, but contrary are running ad libitum
straight and very bended as you can see on the map and on the
chart. That the valley was once a mighty stream covering its
whole breadth is also true, but that was not a fresh but a
salt-water stream formed by the receding sea and on which
occasion the various bends of the river were formed, for if anywhere
you bore a hole in those deposits you will meet with brackish
water in spite of having fresh Murray water within a few inches.
To explain the great number of bends in the river is an easy
matter; everybody a little acquainted with the nature of a river
will know that there is seldom shallow water in a curved part, but
never a sandspit; by the law of tangential movement of the water
the greatest current therefore also the greatest depth is produced
at the concave side of the river; sand, and other floating particles
are deposited at the convex side; now if we take a straight reach
there is the case different, for there is no concentrated current,
but, contrary the latter, is more equally distributed over the
whole width, hence floating obstructing particles are not opposed
by it much, but are deposited in any part of the river, prominently
in the middle ; this is also the reason why river improvements
are effected in slight curves. Now what the case is in a smal 1
scale with the formation of sandspits, that holds good as well for
the formation of bends, for at that prehistoric period when the
whole valley was one salt stream, and can be considered as one
long straight reach, those floating particles were large masses
which could not float much, but were soon deposited, and
if you take above figures to your assistance you will also quite
naturally find that in the same proportion as the width increases
the number of bends is increasing too, and the best proof you
find in the tabular statement of my hydrometric observations, for
from about 150 miles the current meter readings are suddenly
receding, which again will say that the river above that part is
too long, which also agrees with the numbers above.
HYDROMETRIC OBSERVATIONS.
The next object of my study is to make you acquainted with
my hydrometric observations and with the great interest there is
attached to them.


You see here before you an instrument of great simplicity, and
by which still greater results can and have been attained ; it is a
W oltman Wing, or commonly called a Current meter; between the
two screws there, the instrument is freely swinging round the
brass rod; the large brass plate is acting in the water as a rudder,
and so the warped blade is placed opposite the current, the latter
of course causes the blade to revolve more or less according to the
strength of the current; the blade itself in rotating, rotates as well
its spindle, which is provided in the middle with an endless screw;
independent from this part there the lower part consists of two
toothed wheels, which can be brought in contact with the endless
screw by the cord and spring; the instrument is placed in the water?
the blade soon begins to rotate, and it is advisable to let it so for some
seconds of time, until it perfectly acquires the velocity proportionate
to that of the water, then by carefully noting the time, you pull
the string and the endless screw is connected with the wheels, and
the latter by transmission move round their common centre ; when
the time of duration of the observation is over, the string is
slackened, and the spring disconnects wheels from screw; the
instrument is then taken out, and the number of revolutions of the
blade are directly read in feet on one of the wheels which is pur-
posely divided so; thus for instance, if the time of observation
was precisely one minute, and the reading of the divided wheel i s
78, it means that the speed of the water is 78 feet per minute.
But as the case is with any instrument being subject to careful
adjustment, so it is also with the one before us; the more it is
necessary at the current meter, for it is a power-transmitting
machine on a small scale. We all very well know that to transmit
some energy there is always a part of it lost in overcoming
friction and other mechanical defects, and the useful effect, even
in the best constructed machines, is always below the expended
kinetic energy. When, therefore, the current meter is in action,
its direct readings are obviously less than the actual force of the
water is; the correction of those readings is then the main point.
For ascertaining that by experiment, I selected a suitable part of
the river, with a very regular current, on a perfectly windless day.
Along the bank of the river I had two stakes in a distance of


exactly 200 feet; behind each of these stakes I placed two others
in right angles to the river; then I gave a floater with clearly
visible marks to my boatman who dropped it. in the river a good
distance above the upper stakes, where, with the timepiece in hand, I
had been carefully watching and noting its passage across, then I ran
quickly down to the second set of stakes, where I did the same.
This experiment I repeated six times, and the average gave me
the exact speed of the river at that place; next I made 18
experiments with the current meter at the same place, and their
average number, compared with the previous one, determined the
co-efficient with which all my future current meter readings have
to be multiplied
For the purpose of acquainting myself more closely with the
river’s back country, the reason of which I shall have the pleasure
of explaining to you afterwards, I took careful levels, careful as it
can be done with an old and bad instrument; starting from one
point of the river, I levelled across land 1 mile 55 chains till
I came again to the river, and I found its declivity to be by
actual levelling 2£ in. per mile; afterwards I made my current-
meter observations, but which, however, I could not possibly find
time to calculate earlier than about five weeks afterwards. It was
on the 31st December, on New Year’s Eve, when in my tent I had
been carefully working out the mathematical data of above
experiment, and which I have the pleasure to attach to my paper,
the result was three-fourths of an inch less than by levelling
Although it may seem much of a difference to you, not so to me,
for I had at the beginning many defects to consider at the levelling
and at the experiments.
To gauge a river is not so easy a matter as one would think,
on the contrary it is very risky, and a great deal of precaution is
wanted for it. I may say I did it properly, as you will see
from the following:—From one shore I fixed the traverse in right
angles across the river, then I fastened the (in fathoms divided)
stretching-line of the surveying boat to a peg, went with the boat
across by unreeling the line gradually from a log-reel; in the
heaviest current the steamer, which steamed so much against the
stream as to keep steady against the currrent on one spot,


supported the line; in another place a small dingey and a man
was placed to support her again, whilst I with two others stretched
the line straight from the other shore; then rowing back along the
line, at each tenth fathom the soundings and current meter
readings were observed. The whole process, after everybody
being drilled for their parts, did not take me more than 50
minutes. I may as well state here, that previous to my having a
steam launch at my disposal, five able-bodied strong men were not
capable to stretch the line straight. I had to call two fishermen
with their boats to my assistance, to suspend the line from above
the water; you have here a practical illustration of the pressure
of moving water in rivers.
It is not within the scope of this paper, to enter most minutely
into the results of my observations, for I have the honour of being
before a not exclusively engineering audience, besides such investi-
gations are for working out the detail project; also I dare not
impose on your patience too much, so with your kind
permission I will give you in a general way some practical data
and explain to you the various diagrams you see exhibited, but at
the same time pointing out to you various discrepancies as well.
The main scientific and practical value of current meter obser-
vations, is to ascertain the declivity of the surface ; to know that
without such observations, there is no other means of ascertaining
it but by actual levelling. Now if anyone were to do that, and
assuming he is very clever, he would want for 240 miles levelling
and checklevel, I may safely say, a year and a half. With the
current meter one does it in no time, and if the obsevations are
carefully performed, there the same degree of accuracy is obtained
as in the former process.
The declivity is, according to formulae of various mathe-
maticians, a function of the velocity, the acceleration for
gravity, the area of the cross section, the length of the
wetted perimeter, and lastly of a coefficient for friction. The
formula) I used for my calculations is of Rankin, and is of similar
construction as the one used by Neville, Weissbach, and many
others, yet none of those various formula) agree with each other,
for each author adopts a different coefficient of friction; some of


them, as for instance that of Dubuat, may perhaps be very good,
but on account of their complicity are very unpractical to work
with. When I made the above described experiments, I tried the
coefficient of various authors, and I found that the one of
Weissbach, gives me the nearest results, as compared with levelling,
so I adopted it also for all my calculations in connection with my
observations. According to those calculations, which I have the
pleasure to append to this paper, I found that the River Murray
is at the boundary 36 feet higher than at B. C.; that is the fall of
the surface of 240 miles river length is 36 feet, or the average fall
per mile is exactly 1-8 inches.
This number of 36 feet, as you see, is the result of my calculations
and is it really so 1 I cannot answer positively neither pro nor
con; for if you look at the tabular statement, there you see in the
first column the mileage of my observations, and you notice in
many places, the distance of my observations is one mile, in others
they are 7or 8 miles apart. Where I observed in short distances,
there lam sure the result is correct, not so in the other case; for
the Murray by having so many bends, is also in all those bends of
different level. An observation in 8 miles distance cannot there-
fore safely be adopted as the mean declivity of those 8 miles; at any
rate for a preliminary study it is sufficiently correct; the number
of 36 feet tells us that the fall cannot possibly be either 10 feet or
80 feet; there is, perhaps, a difference, but which will vary, pro-
bably, within four to five feet below or above 36 feet. The
reason why my observations are so many times six, seven, and eight
miles apart, is the disturbed atmosphere which prevailed at that
time. Current meter readings are only then reliable when
observed on perfectly windless days, for the least wind either
backs or accelerates the current. Sometimes the wind did not
cease for two or three days, and I could not possibly on this
account alone interrupt my other surveying operations. Another
point to consider is that I was, after repeated requests, refused to
have supplied a very simple and cheap apparatus for ascertaining
the bottom velocities.
A practical and very interesting conclusion is the height of the
summer level above sea at Morgan. It is assumed that Morgan


is about 230 miles above Goolwa; in these 230 miles we may
say the declivity will be less than above Morgan ; if, now, we
assume an average declivity of only one inch per mile, which is
already very little, we find by simple multiplication the height
of Morgan above sea to be at least 19' 2", against 0-02 of an
inch, as shown in the plans of the Engineer-in-Chiefs department,
which latter figure is an impossibility.
The great number of diagrams on the long roll show my gauging
operations drawn to scale, the pinked areas are the areas of the
river’s cross-section at low water; without farther examining you
can perceive at the very first look tremendous differences amongst
those sections ; some of them you see very wide and shallow,
others narrow and deep, and from this alone we can conclude to
the cardinal defect of the river ; “if the width of the river is ex-
ceeded beyond a certain degree, there shallow water must be met
with.” The safe limit for the width of the river I found to be 70
fathoms; beyond that figure shallowness increases in the same
proportion as the width; below 70 fathoms the depth of about
six feet increases as the width decreases. The black figures in
the centre are the miles and chains of the section; the red figures
the areas in square feet; next to it the black figures are the
wetted border, or technically called the wetted perimeter; and
the blue figures are the mean velocities in feet per minute.
From these diagrams, but much enlarged, I prepared the
tabular statement (see page 49) in which is the first column,
M. Ch., miles and chains ; the second F x , the greatest velocity
I observed; the third F u , the mean surface velocity; the fourth F,
the mean velocity of the whole section; the fifth A, the area in
square feet; the sixth b, the wetted perimeter in feet; and the
seventh Q, the quantity of water passing during a minute in cubic
feet. If you take in comparison the figures of any two horizontal
lines, you will find great differences throughout, also differences
in the discharge of the quantity; take for instance -at 49 miles
15 chains, there is V= 52'; A = 5,220 and Q = 271,440, and the line
underneath it at 50 miles 43 chains there is F= 81 ; A = 3,150 ;
and $=255,150 ; what will that say? In the first case
there is a low speed with a great section, in the second there


is a high speed with a small section, hence we conclude a
second law : that a river of small sectional area has a heavier
current than one of greater area, in technical words, sectional area
and velocity are an inverse porportion. But as the product of
both gives the discharging quantity, we arrive for a third law :
“ that there passes through every section of the river the same
quantity of water,” and practically it must be so, for between B. C.
and the boundary there is no tributary to the Murray, if there-
fore the Murray discharges at B. C. the quantity Q., the same
quantity must be discharged at the boundary, otherwise the
equilibrium were destroyed, that is, the water would flow at B. C.
whilst the upper end is dry and vice versa, which certainly is
absurd.
If this law prevails, and so it does, why are there those
tremendous differences; there you find in some lines Q = 440,000,
and in others Q = 92,000, exactly one-fifth of the former, this
evidently cannot be, how is that to be explained 1 In the minuteness
of the observations, you very well recollect I told you above that I
made my observations at each tenth fathom, now that is not
sufficient, as I can see it now; for gauging a river the depths
ought to be taken not more than 3 fathoms apart from each other,
if I had done so there were not so great differences in the areas,
hence also less differences in the quantities. Another reason is, the
sections of too great depths, the mean velocity of the whole
area cannot be applied for the entire depth in very deep water
where sometimes there is no current at all, or even in consequence
of the eddying motion of the water, a back current, therefore that
particular area had to be deducted, if it could be ascertained then
of course the discharged quantities number would greatly be
reduced.
You will undoubtedly be anxious now, to know what does the
River Murray discharge. Before answering, allow me to refer you
to the next diagram, which is indeed the finest of all (see Table II),
and throws a flood of light upon the subject. You see there two
zig-zagged curves, one a pointed line, the other a dotted line,
the former are the areas of the cross sections, the latter their mean
velocities, both I plotted purposely above each other; what I tried


to explain to you circumstantially you can see it on the diagram
without much commentation, where there is a red pick there is
also a black valley, and the contrary where there is a black pick
there is a red valley; in other words the broad principle of it is
this : the product of both balance each other, and where there are
great sections, there are low velocities, and great velocities have
small sections ; and if we draw an average line through all those
points which are the intersections of those two curves, we obtain
the true discharge of the river in cubic feet per minute; and that
line according to the twofold division of the ordinates, is about
2,500x50 = 125,000, that is : the River Murray between B. C. and
the boundary being an equally discharging river, discharges
during each minute 125,000 cubic feet of water.
Gentlemen, if you take only a little part of interest in this
beautiful question it is very complimentary to me, for I can
modestly say then the time you honoured me with your kind
attention was not lost to you, and, jndeed, much more could I say
about this chapter were I not compelled to hasten on to other
matters, yet a few concluding remarks I beg to be allowed. Years
ago I made current meter observations, certainly, but on a small
scale; only Professor Unwin, of Cooper’s Hill, made during the
past year very extensive current meter observations on the
Thames, from Putney to Sheerness, which you can find for
reference in The Engineer newspaper, dated January 26, 1883. If
the results of my observations are of some value, then Professor
Unwin’s are really grand, for his task was not like mine, but he
ascertained what hitherto was totally unknown—the influence of
the tide on the London sewage, and the limit and degree of salt-
ness of the Thames. His paper has no application whatever,
either to South Australian river-hydraulics, or to Adelaide
sewerage, but the deep penetration and the enlightened mind
there is in it makes his notes valuable to anybody.
DEFECTS OF THE RIVER.
I proceed now, sir, from the theoretical to the more practical
part of my programme, that is, to describe to you, in a general
way, the principal defects of the river, and to tell you what
engineering physics are to be applied, according to my diagnosis.


From the notes of my current meter observations, you are now
sufficiently acquainted with the principal defect of the river, viz.,
shallowness on account of too great width ; if my investigations
are teaching that a width of 70 fathoms has deep water with per-
manent channel and 80 fathoms in bends is the limit of safety, so
I am taught as well by observation that 90 fathoms has a shifting
channel with the limit of depth, 100 fathoms and above no channel
at all; I may as well tell you that 90 and 100 fathoms width is a
very frequent occurrence, 120 fathoms I found in several places,
and in some 140 fathoms width.
In my foregoing notes I pointed out to you the great defect of
straight reaches and gave you the reason of it as well, I therefore
need not trouble you any further about them.
Further obstacles in connection with water capacities and
motion are the many islands in the river ; excepting at Hart
Island I found in one of their branches deep water and a heavy
current, but immediately above and sometimes also below th e
island there is complete shallowness; you will easily understand
this appearance by reminding you that the river has in various
places a width of about 120 to 130 fathoms where obviously shal-
lowness must be ; if you imagine yourself now to put an island
in such an excessive river-width, the sectional area of the island
must naturally be replaced by a heavy current which scours in
the river in one of the two branches according to the resultant
force of the upper part; Hart’s Island makes an exception, firstly
on account of its excessive width below it, secondly immediately
opposite to it there the river is not only very wide, but also the
river has to feed a dead branch. By the way, let me tell you,
that the said Hart’s Island is the horror of the Murray navigators;
I really cannot see more horror in the Hart’s Isle, than in Penny’s
Reach or any other of the straight reaches; for if ships could pass v
that place they could not do so at the others.
The feeding of dead branches is, in river-hydraulics, a very weighty
question, happily they are scarce on the Murray; there are innumer-
able creeks fed by the Murray, but only by its high water, at low
water almost all of them are dry. Those few creeks which are fed
by the Murray’s low water I examined, not only by taking soundings,


but my brassen Vade-mecum told me ever the truth in what
relation they are with the river; one of them, for instance, the
Cragg’s Creek, which I think will once a part of the future Murray
be, absorbs the river; another the one which opposite Chambers
Island, about two miles above Thurk Station, connects the Murray
with Lake Bonney, supplies the Murray at its low water.
Above I explained in what way I derived the figures of 125,000
cubic feet water-discharge of the river per minute, I beg you now,
for the purpose of some careful reflections, to have a look at the
tabular statement. You will notice, in keeping the four divisions
in mind, that the first to North-West-Bend at 30 miles, has as
sectional area the absolute greatest numbers, the second to
Overland Corner at 92 miles those numbers decrease with
the mileage, in the third to the South Bend at 130 miles with
few exceptions the same is the case, from 130 to 150 miles there
is a sudden fall, and from 150 miles to the boundary, although
they are far greater than in the last piece, yet less than in
previous divisions and decreasing to the boundary. Bearing in
mind now as well the proportion in each division between actual
river length and direction, the minimal quantity of discharge, we
arrive to the conclusion that the greater that proportion is, the
less is the sectional area, or the worse is the river for purpose of
navigation. That piece between 130 and 150 miles is the Cragg’s
Creek, which more than the half of the flowing water does absorb 1
This excessive length is formed by the many bends and corners.
And are those good for navigation? Not in the least. Both are,
in the first place, the cause that the river length is exceeded
therefore, the sectional area of capacity is diminished; but while
the former keep a channel permanent, and have therefore still
some advantage, the latter are dangerous for navigation.
In reflecting the too great river width, we dare not neglect as well
the zero of the Overland Corner gauge, below which point my
soundings refer. You see here a diagram showing the fluctuations
of the river level at Overland Corner during the last five years, (sse
Table I.) which I prepared according to the official readings of the
stationmaster at Overland Corner, who kindly supplied me with
them; in that diagram you see only in the year 1880 the low


water to be during two weeks at the end of March 5' 6" above
zero, in 1879 it is during a few weeks at the beginning of March
only 6" above zero, in February, 1882, it is during three weeks V
below zero, and the next three months feet above, and this year
it is now fluctuating, since three months, between one and two
feet above it. This diagram compiled from official data is very
important, for it shows at once that the Overland Corner gauge is
not a standard one, and one cannot be too scrupulous to examine
a gauge before doing any scheming; in one word, a gauge is the
Alpha and Omega in river-hydraulics.
Besides above described obstacles caused by the movement of
water, there are in the river obstructions of two sorts, rocks and
snags. The former are only in a very few places but the latter
are innumerable, particularly in the third and fourth division. If
you look at the chart you will find them sketched there and I may
say I have not left out of them perhaps not hundred.
IMPROVEMENTS.
How are those obstacles and obstructions to be treated to make
the river navigable 1
To remove the obstructions let me say first a few words ; rocks
I think will all have to be removed by blasting; snags will partly
only have to be removed, the number to be removed depends
wholly upon the general system which will be adopted for making
the river navigable, for by dyking the river a great number of
the existing snags will materially assist in those operations.
But how are the obstacles to be removed 1 How are we to make
the river navigable 1 Before entering into this discussion allow me
to tell you that in the performance of my task I consider two
points only : the first, I am engineer, and as such it is my duty
to present you my elaborate to the fullest satisfaction of my
profession; the second, I am your fellow-colonist and as such
conscience forbids me to recommend works which I have reason
enough to think will prove a failure. I will illustrate largely both
questions, the public and my competent fellow engineers will have
their final decision.
There are two systems of river improvements :
1. The improvement of the old river bed.
2. To abandon the old bed by cutting a new.


1. Since you are minutely told about the defects of the
Murray River bed and their causes, you easily can conclude that a
channel must in some artificial way be prepared. Since also my
examinations are telling that all those shallow places have not
a rocky but a sandy bottom, we would not try to deepen the
channel by blasting, as on the Danube at the Trayan’s Gate at
Orsova, but we will have to do something else. Very likely you
will think sand being an easy removable matter, to make a channel
by dredging; now this absolutely cannot be done, for all those
shallow places are the consequence of great width, where there is
no concentrated current at all, which has the tendency of keeping
the channel permanent; nay, I even go further in saying, if a
channel is made by dredging, the very first Murray gale would
make the dredged channel level with the average river bed level.
So we see dredging cannot be regarded as the means of doing
much good. As we know great width is the cause of shallowness,
we quite naturally must think to make the river narrrower. The
safest but also the dearest way of doing that is by erecting within
the corrected width, either on one or both sides, solid mason walls
running parallel with the river, and the empty space behind them
to fill out with earth; this scheme condemns itself in reason of its
great cost and need not further be considered.
I suppose many of you will have noticed on rivers if any large
sized piece of timber be projected from the bank into the water it
causes a material rise of the water level above it or it backs the
water, and that the current round the projecting piece sweeps very
smartly on. From this simple phenomenon hydro engineer concluded
that in making an artificial projecting obstruction the current is in-
creased; but you must bear in mind that the current is not sweeping
on, but verbally sweeping round behind the obstruction; if such an
obstruction scours the channel ahead of it, so it does as well
according to the eddying motion behind it, and these obstructions
are not much favoured for they cause an instability in the river bed;
however, they are much in use because they are cheap and can
quickly be made. These artificial obstructions are called “ regu-
lating dykes,” or shortly “ dykes.” Much more are dykes used as
protection for river banks, in which case they are only short, a few


yards, but do splendid service. The construction of dykes is
made of three different materials ; timber, stone, and living plants
or fascines.
Timber dykes are either crib-work or pile-sheeting. Crib-
works are a sort of floating wooden caissons, which are sunk by
loading them with stones ; pile-sheetings are two rows of piles
rammed into the river bed and the space bet ween them filled out
with gravel or stones. Crib-works are used mostly for river bank
protection; pile-sheetings-for deepening the channel.
Stone dykes are stone dams of large-sized stones, roughly
joined together, with rough slopes between 2| : 1 and 1 : 1.
Fascines are hollow cylinders made of fresh willow branches,
and the hollow space filled out with larger shaped gravel. The
dimensions of fascines vary greatly : their diameter is between
9" and 2' ; their length between four and fifteen feet. One row of
fascines is' laid in the river, which, by living pegs, is nailed down
to the river bed, the next row across nailed to the previous one ?
and so on till the required height is obtained. Since willow trees
or any other kindred tree does not grow along the banks of the
Murray they are of no use to us.
We have, therefore, to make our choice between pile-sheeting or
stone dams. To settle this question we take a more concrete case-
Assuming in a depth of four feet of water a dyke had to be
erected, and, as my practical experience in this branch tells me,
for each linear yard sheet-piling I shall want two rows of piles of
7' length driven three feet into the ground within a distance of
18*; the two rows of piles consume 45 cubic feet of wood, on the
Murray must be charged, at least, with ss. per cubic foot, equal to
£ll 55.; for filling the space between with coarse gravel is 2/3
cubic yard, at 155., equal to 10s., or, in total, one lineal yard of
this description will cost £ll 15s. To resist the same water
pressure I will have to make a stone dam of 4 / height, 6 width at
the top, and with slopes, gives 5‘ 3 cubic yards at 10s., the utmost,
is equal to £2 13s. I should think there is no need of arguing
further; there is the choice either of making sheet piles for £ll
ss. or stone dams for £2 13s. per linear yard.
Above you have the summary how to improve the old river bed


and in carrying out a stone dyke scheme ; I have also prepared
the estimates for it, that you may have an idea of its cost. To
improve the Murray in that way between B. C. and the boundary,
will, according to my calculations, cost £130,000; although it is
only a rough estimate I think the figure will not be far from the
truth.
If the public is prepared to spend £130,000, it must have a
guarantee that the money is invested in something safe like a
mortgage ; now that I am ready to contest and therefore to con-
demn dyking with ever the same answer the Overland Corner gauge.
Sir, give me the assurance that the river level will never fall below
zero of the gauge, and I will say, nothing better than dyking.
Would you perhaps couolude to a permanent zero from the last
five years record, then. I say you squandered the money. River-
hydraulic is not a science from to-day or yesterday. I know
where gauges have been carefully observed during 30 years, and
yet engineers made grave errors, let us therefore wiser be and profit
from mistakes of others. I need not really go so far as to
examine what is the atmospheric supply of the Darling, Lachlan,
Murrumbidgee, and all other tributaries of the Murray; one
striking fact condemns the scheme. Australia has no reliable
annual rainfall, therefore her rivers cannot have a permanent
summer level.
2. I have very little more to add to that which you already from
the foregoing study know, with reference to my canal scheme. I
illustrated it largely, theoretically, and practically, T only want to
analyse the figure of £4,000,000 as its probable costs, for this
figure is more a guess than a rough estimate. I told you at the
beginning of my paper, that in one part I took levels of the river
drift banks, and there I found for making a canal it will have to
be 30 feet deep In average ; now in very many places where my
canals are proposed, the depth would be far less than 30 feet ■
100 feet bottom width I assumed as the limit for two meeting ships,
therefore 100 feet could be reduced as well; so we see that the
quantity of 757,000 cubic yards per mile of excavation is capable
of being greatly reduced. I never made trial shafts in those banks
but from the process of their formation I know that the hardest wil


be clay, for which the price of Is. 6d. per yard is far too little ; besides
I left out entirely a considerable amount for clearing the canal area
of densely grown Murray timber. This amount and the small
excavation price I replaced by the removal of greater quantities.
To prepare rough estimate, superficial levels had to be taken all
along, which was not in accordance with my instructions.
Four millions sterling! is a sum which makes it almost prohibitive,
as the Sydney Morning Herald says; but I rather see four millions
spent which will ever answer the purpose, than £lOO,OOO which
will never do any good.
If the canal scheme should be adopted, the river path is reduced
by about 80 miles, and the distance would then be of a length of
about 155 miles. These 80 miles of canal need not be carried out
at once ; their disposition is such that each of them can indepen-
dently be carried out. For instance, before you come to Paringa,
H. S., steamers have to go round a bend of about three and a-half
miles, and the distance across is about fifteen chains only ; why
should not that distance be reduced tenfold if it can be done for a
small amount, and thereby increasing the water quantities of the
lower part of the river 1 One objection could be raised —that
those water-masses could become a fatality for the lower
portions ; but that fatality is only illusory, for there is no Murray
plain properly: the Murray is enclosed by two rows of cliffs of
about 250 feet in height, and to reach that height, Noah’s Biblical
fable of the great deluge would have to repeat itself.
ADDENDA.
I perceive that, in connection with the previous chapters, I
omitted various remarks, which I beg to add now. On account of
the almost perfect level Murray cliff stratification, and the level
face of the Murray country in general, there is very little likelihood
that artesian wells can be obtained. The great number of lagoons
along the Murray have not the least influence in its navigation ;
they are larger and smaller-sized pools, fed by the various creeks,
which, as you now well know, are perfectly dry at the Murray’s
low water. The dykes I described are never carried out higher
than, in maximum, one foot above low water.


ADDITIONAL OBSERVATION.
Most minutely I gave you a description of the Murray; there
you have my carefully-prepared survey notes; there you see a very
fine chart as the result—a chart highly valuable for navigators,
and the fundamental ordinance map for engineering purposes. I
know as well my chart is not perfect. To prepare a perfectly
correct chart, twelve survey parties had to work a year or more,
not like I, with seven men, during four months. There is, also,
another discrepancy connected with my chart—of not being com-
plete. To do that, the survey had to be continued to Wentworth,
for, certainly, if the Murray is to be made navigable the scheme
must be carried out as far as the junction with the Darling ; far-
ther, to make the survey complete, careful gaugings and hydro-
metric observations had to be made at all the junctions of the
Murray’s tributaries —one above, one below the junction, and one
in the tributary. In this way we were enabled to ascertain not
only the scientific value of available rainfall for each creek and
river, but, also, we would obtain a practical, valuable figure as the
supply of each of those tributaries to the Murray. And, lastly, a
study about the Murray mouth is a sine qua non.
RIVERINA TRADE.
There appeared of late in the Register a great many very
well-written articles about the Murray and the Riverina trade,
some ideas of which are, however, not in accordance with my
opinion, although I do not understand much about commerce, and
do not care at all to enter into commercial statistics. However,
this I can say, if Adelaide trading people suppose that Melbourne
and Sydney are more favoured because Riverina traders are their
brother-colonists, is not correct. It may be true in some excep-
tional cases, not so in general. The world’s commerce follows the
easiest accessible routes and highways, and if you look at the
diagram of the fluctuations of the Overland Corner gauge, and you
were to compare it with statistical figures of the Murray trade, I
suppose you would find affirmed that in seasons with high summer
level, the trade up and down the river will have been far greater
than in those with a low summer level.


NOTES ABOUT THE SCHEME OF MR. G. GORDON, C.E.
Since the compilation of my study, there appeared a few days
ago the report of Mr. Gordon, C.E., about the Darling navigation
scheme ; and the chance of its appearance previous to reading my
paper affords me the opportunity of speaking a few words about
that gentleman’s scheme.
Sir, I never visited the Darling, and I know nothing of its
country. All that I know about the River Darling is from reading
and verbal communications of ship captains, and by both I am
informed that the circuitous course of the Darling is still worse
than that of the Murray, and that the snags in the former are
more numerous than in the latter.
Mr. Gordon does not recommend deep canalization, for, as he
says, the present fall being 3" to the mile, and, as he very likely
thinks, by cutting a direct canal this fall would greatly be in-
creased, also its velocity. This reasoning would be perfectly
correct so far, although it had first to be established what is the
safe limit for the fall ?is it 3,4, 5, or 6" per mile 1 On the
Murray I proved that its velocity can be increased to three times
its present rate,
Mr. Gordon and I differ in the following principal points :
1. His scheme is to impound the waters by weirs and locks over
tremendous areas, and so create a dead level; my scheme is just
the contrary —no impounding at all, the least areas and the
greatest velocities ; his scheme is to conserve the water : mine, to
carry it off. In the first instance, I really should like to know
where Mr. Gordon has seen on the continent rivers of similar
circuitous courses, like the Darling or Murray, being locked.
There rivers are locked, I think, after their courses have been
straightened.
2. In my report, with a very few words only, I mentioned the
impracticability of locking the Murray; this impractability becomes,
with reference to the Darling, I venture to say, an impossibility,
and the detriment for the Murray of South Australia. Mr.
Gordon’s first weir, proposed at Wentworth with eight feet lift in
the lock-chamber, will create a level pond of 28 miles, that is,


there will be a large inland lake with an exposed water surface
perhaps 20 times more than it is wanted; this whole area exposed
to the intensity of an Australian summer sun, and considering
further that there will be 21 such large lakes, one above the other,
we have practically a lake of about 350 miles exposed to evapor-
ation. The evaporation in Adelaide is, I think, six feet, there on
the Darling I suppose it will be more than that, and the evapor-
ation is perhaps 80% of the total annual evaporation during those
few months when the rivers are at low water ; hence we can con-
clude, and speaking at the same time with his own words, “that in
dry seasons the river practically ceases to flow,” that the small
quantity of water which from above the 350 miles is supplied to
the 21 lakes, will, perhaps still before reaching Wentworth, have
vanished in form of evaporation; and if even assuming his 21
lakes are kept full, the Murray in South Australia ceased to have
the Darling as a tributary during the summer months; but what
then will become of your Murray I do not like to take upon myself
to say.
3. Mr. Gordon intends to make use of the level ponds for
water supplies, which of course he cannot carry out without the
assistance of artificial works. My water conservation scheme is an
automatic one, and by deep canals where the length is shortened,
the velocity in the same ratio increased, is the pressure of the water
increased in quadratic ratio.
4. In the 368 miles river-length of his scheme, he puts down
the sum of £6,500 for clearing the snags ; I should like to suggest
the S. A. Government to offer him £6,500* for clearing the snags
of the Murray which I surveyed, being only 235 miles, and I am
sure the Commissioner of Public Works could congratulate him-
self of having done a splendid business.
In above few lines I tried to point out to you, if Mr. Gordon’s
scheme is to be carried out, what fatality may befall the Murray
of South Australia; and allow me further to call your
utmost attention to that, what is going on in the other colonies,
with reference to river navigation ; the navigability of the Murray
and its tributaries cannot, otherwise be carried out, than on inter-
colonial conjoint footing.


UTILIZATION OF THE MURRAY’S POTENTIAL ENERGY.
Sir, as far back a time as Virgil, we find noted in the sixth book
of his iEneid —“ same will describe the quadrant of the circles
square .then, ever afterwards and at the present day we find and
still meet mathematicians who devoted their whole lifetime to pro-
blems, the solution of which is by the majority acknowledged an
•impossibility.
The final part of my study if not being a similar impossibility
the novelty of a theory which I am going to propound may seem
to many a fellow-professional an absurdity. I may expect to be
laughed at; I cannot help in spite of that to communicate ideas
and notions which I had from the very beginning of the survey,
and the more time passed on the more those ideas attained per-
manency in my mind, which I think are worthy of careful study
and observation; and if my honest aim endeavoured to do that I
shall have ample gratification in having directed the scientific mind
to the investigation of an existing theory which I cannot possibly
find acknowledged with actual state of things.
I am going to speak how to utilize the Murray’s potential
energy : or in more popular terms, how can we use the force of the
moving water, to raise it, say 300 feet high, for conservation and
irrigation purposes 1 Before ventilating this, for South Australia
so prominent question, allow me for a minute to refer you to Mr.
Goyder, Surveyor-General’s report about the same subject. lam
not here to criticise his report, but to correct it where I find it
contradictory with facts. That gentleman says above Morgan the
river can be tapped to irrigate the now low-laying Murray country j
if he can do that above Morgan he can do it as well below it; Mr.
Goyder is here in the dilmema that the Murray-cliffs don’t go
beyond Morgan; those cliffs are from one end to the other of the
river so far as I have seen, they recede from the river more or less }
but they never leave it. I leave to the Surveyor-General the
palm of having first appeared before the public with his idea of
mooring punts to raise the water by its own force; but what laurels
he will earn from his idea my concluding notes will inform you.
First, I beg to be permitted to give you the meaning of terms ;


also, to give you some notes about it, as being established by all
well-known savants in applied science.
To do work means to overcome resistance, and the capacity of
performing work is called energy. All agencies may be defined as
energy, diftering only in exterior form; heat, electricity, chemical
affinity, and mechanical effects, each of those is energy in different
form. To lift, for instance, a weight suspended by a rope round a
pulley to any height muscular sensible energy is performed, which
is called kinetic energy ; if we keep that to a certain height raised
weight suspended, we are enabled to use it for various purposes at
any convenient time, we have therefore in the lifted weight an
energy which is stored up, and this stored-up energy is called the
potential energy. If put a piece of wood or coal in the fire-
place, there by a chemical process heat is produced, which is
nothing but potential energy; the piece of wood or coal contains
the stored-up or potential energy. A charged Leyden jar, when
discharged, can give rise to changes of temperature, to changes of
chemical composition, to mechanical changes, or to changes of
magnetic and electric condition; the charged Leyden jar contains
electrical potential energy. The water of rivers coming down by
gravitation is a potential energy of the latter. The daily tide is
a potential energy caused by attraction. If we examine any solid,
liquid, or gaseous part of our planetary system we will find that
the very greatest part of them is formed but now our use lost
potential energy, and only the very smallest contains a potential
energy still available for us; it is the coal and the flowing water.
According to the report of the British Coal Commission of 1871,
it has been calculated at the rate of the annual increase of coal
consumption that the coalfields will still last 250 years, when the
last ton of coal will be raised. No one will think to wait till that
happens, but invention will have to come to our assistance, and in
some new yet unknown way will have to discover a new agency for an
energy upon which to fall back. And which is that resource 1
We all know it. It is the all-vivifying energy, our great luminary
—the sun. And is the coal anything else than a stored-up solar
energy in plants which flourished epochs gone by 1 Is the water
of the rivers anything else than evaporated sea water and then


condensed, both by action of solar energy] We need not examine
farther this eternal resource of energy. The physicist Pouillet
stated : —lf the sun had to depend on some external coal supply to
keep him in the same intensity of heat and light, and]if |our earth
were such a feeder for him, of one compact mass of coal, she
would just be enough for thirty-six hours.
We see, therefore, on the one hand that the available energy in
the coal is going rapidly towards its end; on the other that the
sun shall ever our eternal resource be. Science, however, has not
so far advanced yet, although much has been experimented; and
who knows whether our next generation shall not make their
journeys by engines driven by solar energy instead of our present
costly steam engine system. To investigate this solar energy i s
neither my object, nor do I think is my cerebral system strong
enough for its conception ; my modest task is to direct your atten-
tion to an indirect solar energy, which has a constant unceasing
supply : it is the flowing river water ; and to ask you to assist me
in the examination of an existing formula, which I am able to
prove you is not correct ) for it is a formula about the force of
water in motion, which has been obtained by pure abstract
reasoning and never by experiment, at least not to my knowledge.
The law of the force of moving water in rivers has in the follow*
ing way been obtained :
The pressure of a moving fluid is expressed by the same
symbols as that of a column of water. If Pbe the pressure
against a plan of one square foot and II the height of the column
in feet, then is P=<o 2‘4 H where G2‘4 is the weight in pounds of
one cube foot of water ; the height II has, in river water, to be
determined' from its velocity. A body falling from a state of rest
under the influence of gravity alone is symbolically expressed by
V = where V is the velocity per second of the falling body
due to the height H; II the height due to the velocity V; and G
is the acceleration for gravity, and is about 32 '2 feet \ this is
commonly known as the law of the free fall. If, therefore, the
height of the falling body is known, its velocity can easily
be found, and conversely if the velocity is known, the height 0*


V 2
fall can be ascertained, and we obtain from the above R= —— H
2 g
being now a function of the velocity, which is known, and sub-
stituting it in our first formula we obtain, mutatis mutandis ,
P =- V 2 = 0-967 V 2.
%'§
This formula you find in any engineering book, although how it
has been deduced is not given ; according to it you find also
tables worked out, so that, if one knows the velocity of a stream,
he can directly take out the corresponding number of pressure in
lbs. per square foot against a plan-surface ; if for instance as on the
Murray the velocity be two miles per hour, you find in Molesworth,
page 251, the corresponding pressure of B'4 lbs. per square foot.
We know, therefore, now the main thing, what is the amount
of potential energy at our disposal 1 It does little matter what
sort of machines we will employ to utilize that energy ; we know
by this energy we have to try to raise the water, first to the
height of the cliffs say 250 feet, plus at least 50 feet more in tanks
to distribute it by its own pressure, that will say to 300 feet
high we are bound to raise the Murray-water to make it
subservient to conservation, irrigation, or any other purposes.
Knowing to what height the water is to be raised, we want to
know as well what quantity of water is required. We will assume
the water is required for irrigation purposes ; and to produce
wheat, I think a constant flow of one cube foot of water per second
will irrigate-about 40 acres, which is already less than a half of
one-third of an inch rainfall per acre during twenty-four hours, as
reckoned in moist districts for irrigation works in India, or for one
square mile we will want 16 cube feet of water constantly flowing
per second, or 960 cube feet per minute, or 57,600 per hour, or a
storage of 691,200 cube feet of water for a day, reckoned with 12
hours, to irrigate one square mile. We know now we want to raise
the quantity of 691,200 cube feet of water to a height of 300 feet
to be able to irrigate one square mile.
I could demonstrate you now what the number of horsepowers
of a powerful pumping-engine must be to raise the water under
the conditions of our case, but this is not wanted, it would only


obstruct the clearness of the problem before us; we, therefore, will
and can assume that such a pump does her duty, and that she
raised the necessary water quantity where it is wanted, that is, we
assume the necessary quantity of water of 691,200 cube feet to
irrigate one square mile of Murray country be already stored in
tanks to a height of 300 feet.
What is the pressure of this quantity at that height on the square
foot 1 It is 691,200 x 300 x 62*4 = 12,939,264,000 pounds.
This great pressure of nearly thirteen thousand million pounds
has to be generated by the potential energy of the river water.
We still disregard what sort of machine we will have to use, we only
reason for the present with the figures of our case, and we know
we have to generate thirteen thousand million pounds of pressure,
with an available energy of 8-4 pounds pressure per square foot. If
now we suppose to work the intended machine day and night, we
will have an available energy of 725,760 pounds pressure against
a plan of one square foot.
If an undershot wheel be adopted, and we go into its very
extremest size, that is, to make each blade of, say 10 square feet,
which is already three times more than the largest wheel,
we obtain an available energy of 7,257,600 pounds of pressure,
pressure, with which we have to generate a pressure of thirteen
thousand million pounds, which certainly is an impossibility, quod
erat demonstrandum.
Above I have tried to prove to you as clearly and lucidly as I
could that, according to existing laws and formula), there is
practically almost no available potential energy in moving waters
of rivers, although the full section contains a very great amount of
it; but no one would think of constructing machines of such
gigantic size. Machines of ordinary construction are only small
sized, and if we could make one of ten square feet available
exposure to the water-pressure, it would then already be of
tremendous size.
I have to prove to you now that above law and formula
does not prevail. You can trust me when I say that I
devoted much time and thought to it, and that, whatever


I could gather from scientific works, I did not neglect doing. I know
not of one single experiment that has been made in that direction ;
Neville, a great engineer in river hydraulics, and whose book
contains hundreds of experiments about all sorts of water-wheels,
does not record one single experiment performed in flowing river
water. In The Engineer newspaper, dated November 3, 1882,
there is an article, written by Mr. J. Pinnington, about “ Pressure
of Fluids in motion.” In that article Mr. Pinnington shows how
to get an exact formula, but he does not say that he made experi-
ments ; his results, as compared with those of Molesworth, are
so little at variance that, practically, there is no difference between
them. Now, what is the use of Mr. Pinnington’s demonstration
if even his pressure per square foot is nine pounds at a velocity of
two miles per hour, instead of 8-4 pounds, as obtained by
Molesworth 1 If Mr. Pinnington cannot prove it by experiments,
he has proved nothing.
Sir, take a perfect rectangular open vessel, each side being
equal one foot, then each side is one square foot, and
its contents will be exactly one cube foot ; put this
vessel on a level table and fill it up with water, you have one
cube foot of water, which has at average temperature the weight of
62-4 lb.; what do you think is the pressiire of the water against
the four sides and the bottom 1 ? I need not demonstrate it, Paschal,
in his law, demonstrated it, the pressure against the four sides and
the bottom is perfectly equal, that is one-fifth of the weight of one
cube foot of water, or a pressure of 12'5 per sqare foot, being one
side of the vessel; if perfectly still water can exert a pressure of
12 5 lbs. per square foot, how is one to understand that flowing
water whose pressure increases in the same ratio as the square of
the velocity, be less in pressure ? Of course, I can be interrogated
in another way that there is no pressure at all, for if I take a
vessel of exactly double the volume of water and put in vertically
a board of one square foot, there is no pressure exerted against
that board, for by this division the board obtains a pressure from
each partition which is equal but opposite in magnitude, therefore
nil; but in flowing water under the influence of gravity by such
an experiment, if the eddying motion can be avoided, is not the


case, the down stream side does not exert the same pressure on the
immerged board as the up-stream side, hence we will find that the
pressure on a piece of board of one square foot immersed in flowing
water will necessarily be the product of something nearly 12 '5 into
the square of velocity, and into some co-efficient which latter has by
experiments to be ascertained; then of course we will obtain
pressure figures far far greater than those of Molesworth, but I
think nearer the truth as well.
We can make another reflection about the motion of river water;
we all know very well that immediately on the surface there is the
greatest velocity, which gradually decreases as we go deeper; we
can therefore say we divide the whole river depth into an infinite
number of small layers, each of which will have throughout its
infinitely small thickness the same velocity, but a different velocity
than the next layer; we can therefore regard each layer indepen-
dently from the other, and if we divide longitudinally each layer,
we will obtain a physical phenomenon similar to that of a
motion of a body along an inclined plane, the resultant motion
of which Rankine in his applied mechanics demonstrates is the
same, as of an unresisted projectile and is expressed by g. sin 9,
where g is the acceleration and 9 the angles of inclination against
the horizon; certainly we dare not neglect to take into account
the resistance against friction between each layer, or what will be
the same, to ascertain a co-efficient as in the previous case; at any
rate this we can see, the result obtained will be far greater than
by Molesworth’s formula;.
I still could give you various other theoretical examples that the
momentum generated is far greater than shown by either Molesworth
or Pinnington, but I think above two sufficiently explain it.
It remains for me still to prove that Molesworth’s formula is
pratically impossible, for you very well recollect from my current
meter observations that five strong men could not stretch a thin
line of about diameter straight across a riverwidth of about 90
fathoms; the pull of five men is the very least 500 lbs. and the
exposed surface of the rope is the utmost 20 square feet, that
would give 20 lbs. pressure per square foot, in assuming 5 lbs.


of loss against friction; perhaps ten men could have stretched it
and then we would have a pressure of about 40 lbs. per square foot.
On one occasion I tried with the current meter what the velocity
of my steam launch is when going up stream, I found it to be four
miles per hour ; the experiment I could not possibly keep on more
than for half a minute of time, my muscular strength was not
sufficient to overcome the pressure of water for more than half a
minute and that with great exertion. Four miles speed of the
aunch added to 1| miles of the river is 5| miles speed per hour,
which, according to Molesworth, exerts a pressure of about 60 lbs.
per square foot; the instrument you see here before you, is there
an exposure of 1 square foot 1 if I were to reckon it, I would find
it a few square inches, and even by making a great allowance for
friction and considering that I am able to exert a muscular
momentum of 80 footpounds per minute, I will obtain a pressure
perhaps more than ten times as much as given by Molesworth.
Theoretically and practically I proved that the existing laws about
force of fluids in motion are not correct; it would now
be my duty to make a right formula; I may say the task
would not be too great for me, but what would be its solution of
use, if I have not the means of establishing it practically 1
That is, to make a right law, I have to work from right
premises, and right premises are observations made by experiments;
Sir, give me the assistance of performing careful experiments,
and I am sure the money you have spent will thousands of times
be repaid.
South Australia has no resources in coal, she has not a cheap
labour market, then at least with all her power she ought to do
her best, to utilize those few resources she still possesses ; and it
would be indeed an easy matter to construct a powerful self-
raising water machine, if in the first instance it is thoroughly
known that the natural conditions are fulfilled for obtaining
those so much wanted data.
Gentlemen, you have heard my essay, its first and its second
part; Ido not say all you have heard will meet your approval, I
expect criticism, a criticism and discussion on fair footing with


pleasure I accept it; it will perhaps throw more light on the
subject, and that is the very thing I want. 1 did not invite you
to listen only to my various dissertations and demonstrations, but
I want your practical assistance in the solution of questions, which
for science and for Australia at large are of utmost importance,
and if in this I succeeded let me conclude with one of England’s
noblest intellects :
“ If there’s a Power above us,
And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works, He must delight
In virtue.”


EXTRACT FROM THE OFFICIAL REPORT.
It remains for me now to speak about the Overland Corner
gauge, which is assumed as a standard one, and to which my
soundings refer and the chart is to be prepared. The said Over-
land Corner gauge is since some five or six years in existence, and
is based upon the lowest low water recorded during that period.
It is the question, is that gauge reliable 1 that is, is it not possible
that the Murray may have, say a few years hence, two feet still
less water than the zero of the gauge does record. I have reason
to think that this is probable, for the Murray at zero of the Over-
land Corner gauge is still at considerable depth. Assuming now,
the aridity of Central Australia increases, my assumed probability
may become a rather distressing fact; the more so it would be for
South Australia if the river has been more navigable with
reference to that gauge only.
Remedies for Deepening the River Murray.
These can be effected when the nature of the bed is known, and
which I found to be throughout sand. If the river is too wide
then, in that part, regulating dykes will have to be put across to
the necessary dimensions, the action of which will be to limit the
current within narrower bounds, so its force is increased greatly,
and that force will wash out the channel to greater depths, and
will deposit the material behind the dykes, so forming by itself in
time a solid bank. These dykes can be made very cheaply indeed,
for nothing else is wanted but a sort of breakwater, for which the
raw material is abundantly found on the river; but in no way
would I recommend dredging, for that would be useless and a
waste of money. Where there are islands in the river one branch
has to be blocked off entirely, so as to force the whole quantity
of water through the other. The regulating of the channel in
straight reaches has to be made in the same way, and where it is
not possible diversions in slight curves will have to be made. I
many times also thought on the usefulness of locking the Murray in
some parts, but I see now there is not the least necessity for making
those costly works. Whilst surveying there has been suggested
to me the use of pile-sheeting; no doubt it is very good, but think
of the costs; dykes made in the way as described above, from


those huge blocks of the Murray cliffs, will better resist the water
pressure than any pile sheeting, and the cost of those as I
proposed will be very limited. And there is not the least obstacle
in carrying out these works very successfully, and to give the river
the required depth of six feet b elow low water of the Overland
Corner gauge.
Till now I purposely omitted to mention anything about the
incredulous number of bends in the river. If you look at the
map perhaps there are not the half the number of them shown.
Only the chart enables you to see every bend. In what relation are
those bends with the navigation? The narrow banks of the
present river are not its natural banks, but the cliffs in some places
miles apart from each other are those banks. Now, within those
cliffs the Murray has a wide range of play. There it goes some-
times round a bend of three to four miles long, whereas the
distance straight across land is twenty or thirty chains. Take, for
instance, the Cragg’s Creek. The river round the Cragg’s Island
is twenty-one miles long; the Cragg’s Creek in a straight line is
only seven miles long. Another feature of many of those bends
is their rapid turning, some of them in an angle of 30° to 40°.
In all those bends there is very deep water on the one side, sixty
to seventy feet depth : but the other side is nothing but one
extensive sandspit.
Is the Overland Corner gauge infallible 1 No one will venture to
answer in the affirmative ; and could I make the Murray navigable
all the year round, even by assuming that the Overland Corner
gauge is say two feet too high 1 I once more most positively say
yes. For the sake of convenient reasoning let us assume this to
be the case now. The consequences would be that many places
of the river were nearly dry. In that case I again can say that
the certain minimal quantity of water which the river has to carry
is distributed over too great a length. Can I shorten that length
the sectional area of capacity is in proportion increased, and that
is what we want. Again, according to my rough chainage the
distance between B.C. and the boundary is 242 miles, measured
through all bends of the river, whereas if I were to measure along
the cliffs surely I would find it 100 miles less in distance. Now,
this certainly cannot be called a navigable river where its path is


so extremely circuitous and twisted through so many bends and
corners. Here again is the important necessity of shortening the
length to increase and facilitate the trade and to secure once for
always the whole trade of Central Australia. In making propa-
ganda for the idea of shortening the distance I am also prepared
to submit for your consideration a scheme as well a scheme grand
in its notion, grand in its carrying out, and grand in its success ;
a scheme as the only remedy; a scheme which has been most
successfully carried out in various parts of the globe of which I
am going to speak in the next point.
The Murray Canal.
Disregarding at present the national economical point of view, what
is the engineer’s object in proposing a canal from a purely technical
point of view 1 Is it to centralize the water quantities in the
shortest possible distance through uniform sections. In the
question before us, if, for instance, the river path could be short-
ened by one-third of its length, the fatal consequence may occur,
in spite of careful mathematical calculations, that the water would
rush down with a dangerous destroying speed, as experience
teaches on the Rhine and Theiss, for mechanical laws do not
govern Nature, but are only careful deductions from Nature.
There is not the least risk in reducing the river length to one-
third, if it can be done. The river is capable of being shortened
by about eighty miles—that is nearly one-third of its total length
between the termini of the survey. Of those eighty miles, ten
miles are deviations and seventy miles are canals. The general
cross-section of the canal would be : —Width at bottom, 100 feet;
depth for low water, 6 feet \ allowance for high water, 1 o feet;
average height of bank above high water, 9 feet; total, 30 feet
deep slopes, 1 :1 is equal to about 430 square yards, is equal to
757,000 cubic yards per mile, at Is. 6d. per yard is £57,000 pei
mile; or, in round sum, for seventy miles four million pounds,
which certainly is an amount a young colony like South Australia
has no resources for investing yet. But I think there is no need
of doing it all at once; by starting at the most needy places,
gradually in a few years the scheme could be carried out in the
same way as the Transcontinental Railway.


Tabular statement of river length gained by proposed deviations
and canals :
Between Miles.
Length.
Shortened by
At present.
Proposed
Deviations
and Canals.
Chains.
Chains.
Chains.
4-5
125
70
55
6-7
150
100
50
7-8
50
45
5
11-12
80
65
15
15-16
90
75
15
18-21
185
55
130
22-24
70
60
10
23-27
255
155
100
28-29
90
70
20
32-33
120
80
40
33-35
110
80
30
37-38
110
90
20
39-40
105
85
.20
43-45
200
60
140
50-52
140
60
80
54-55
100
60
40
56-57
60
40
20
60-61
80
70
10
62-64
100
80
20
66-69
240
120
120
70-71
60
40
20
72-74
120
100
20
79-84
360
200
160
85-86
80
60
20
86-87
80
60
20
89-90
80
60
20
93-95
160
70
90
95-100
400
190
210
100-103
240
120
120 v
104-108
320
150
170
118-120
200
110
90
124-127
240
140
100
130-150
1,600
560
1,040
150-152
160
90
70
152-153
100
60
40
153-155
180
70
110
158-161
240
130
110


Length.
Between Miles.
At present.
Proposed
Deviations
and Canals.
Shortened by
Chains.
Chains.
Chains.
164-167
240
120
120
170-176
480
190
290
176-178
160
50
110
178-180
120
90
30
180-181
60
50
10
181-185
400
60
340
186-190
340
90
250
191-193
140
50
90
193-200
580
150
430
201-204
210
110
100
207-216
720
240
480
216-218
180
90
90
219-225
440
180
260
225-232
520
210
310
232-233
60
40
20
233-235
160
90
70
Shortened by 6,350 chains, or about 80 miles.


Trial Calculation
To find the declivity from Current Meter observations as compared
with direct levelling.
As study for comparison is taken that part between 18 miles 40
chains, and 20 miles 15 chains.
CROSS SECTION AT 19 MILES 63 CHAINS.
7%<yecnuy rrr iff in, <sha. w ayv
A = Area of cross section.
A 120x42 42 +2B-5 , _ 28-5 + 17, „ 17 +l2
+ 2 120+ 2 - 120 + ~2 - 120
1 9 v RO
6) * =6O ( 42 + 42 + 28 ' 5 + 28 ’5 +17+17 + 12 +
= 60 x 193 = 11,580 square feet.
Surface velocities = 0 + 192 + 224 + 232 + 224 + 0 = 870.
870
Mean surface velocity - - 145 feet per minute.
v = Mean velocity in feet per second = 2 feet per second.
b Wetted Perimeter.
b = J 60 2 + 12 2 + n/120 2 +5-'+ Vl20 2 + 1P5 2 . +
+ \/l20 a + 13'5 2 + \/42 2 +l2 6 2
= V 3,744 + V 14,425 + n/14,5 32-25 + V 14,582-25 +
+ -s/16,164.
= 61-2+ 120-1 + 120-5+ 120-7+ 127-1 = 549-6 feet. v
to = Hydraulic mean depth.
m = A _ 11580.
5 549-6 21 ’° 7 feet
/= Co-efficient of Friction, according to Weissbach is :
, 0-00023 0-0148 + 0-00023 0-01503
/= 0*0074+ 2 = —2”
= 0*00751.


g= 32-2, acceleration for gravity.
• -r. ~ .. c c h loss of head.
i = Declivity of surface - = —^ on gj.^ —
~ . „ , . . h fv* 0-00751 2 2
According to Rankme»-j =
0-007gl 1 _ 0-00751,
21-07 -16-1 339-227 00000221
221 1
= ;orl -4 inch per mile.
10,000,000 45,248 ’
By actual levelling I found the declivity to be 2-"2 per mile,
which gives nearly §" more than by observation.


TABULAR STATEMENT
OF
HYDROMETRIC OBSERVATIONS.
v l = Maximum velocity as observed in feet per minute.
v u = Mean surface velocity as observed in feet per minute.
V Mean velocity of the sectional area per minute.
A Area of cross section at low-water in square feet.
6 = Wetted perimeter in feet.
m— hydraulic mean depth.
g = 32 - 2 acceleration for gravity.
i = Declivity of surface level, expressed lin
h = Loss of head in feet = il; 1 = distance ; M = Mileage.
Q = Quantity of water discharged at L.W. in cube feet per
minute.
f= Co-efficient of friction.
According to Ranlcine :
i
mZg
According to Weissbach:
• v velocity in feet per second.
v ’
M
l
Vl
Vu
V
A
b
m
i
h
Q
Miles.
Chs. Miles.
Chs.
3570
540
6 61
o
0
0
0
133
96
72
204.750
1
53
1
53
232
100
75
2730
42C
6.50
40,650
0.21
5
27
3
54
165
69
51
8976
330
27.18
322,588
0.06
457,776
5
62
0
35
192
93
69
5040
420
12.00
75,252
0.03
347,760
6
05
0
23
206
98
73
4662
420
11.10
70,721
0.02
340,326
11
12
5
07
125
67
49
2412
462
5.25
63,868
0.42
118,188
12
47
1
35
214
111
82
5460
420
13.00
62,507
0.12
447,720
12
72
0
25
221
119
88
5952
360
16.53
62,500
0.02
523,776
13
55
0
63
197
120
90
2700
480
5.62
21,367
0.19
243,000
14
72
1
17
224
119
88
5388
378
14.20
53,763
0.11
474,144
15
35
0
43
168
95
70
3840
384
10.10
62,733
0.04
268,800
18
40
3
05
234
98
73
4536
336
13 50
90,090
0.18
331,128
19
63
1
23
232
145
108
6240
468
13.50
35,714
0.19
673,920
20
15
0
32
189
75
55
8100
480
16.87
208,333
0.01
445,500
20
32
0
17
251
115
85
3360
42C
8.00
40,000
0.03
285,600
21
36
1
04
227
142
106
3696
480
7.70
20,000
0.27
391,776
22
52
1
16
155
96
72
5406
360
15.00
100,000
0.06
389,232
23
20
0
48
217
108
81
3402
396
8.70
50,000
0.06
275,562
29
50
6
30
206
113
84
2628
440
6.00
22,700
1.48
220,752
30
67
1
17
148
112
84
3486
522
6.69
33,000
0.19
292,824
31
68
1
01
139
88
66
3942
480
8.20
52,600
0.10
260,172
33
31
1
23
160
73
54
5460
420
13.00
166,000
0.04
294,840
34
08
0
57
176
85
63
8322
420
20.00
166,000
0.02
524,286
35
06
0
78
205
129
96
3510
420
8.38
25,000
0.26
336,960
36
20
1
14
182
111
82
2730
420
6.50
33,000
0 19
223,860
39
45
3
25
183
91
67
3780
420
9.00
58,000
0.30
253,160
41
08
1
43
205
139
103
3300
360
9.17
29,000
0.27
339,900
42
03
0
75
205
143
108
3456
420
8.21
25,000
0.20
273,248
45
64
3
61
182
108
81
2478
396
6.20
33,000
0.60
200,718


M l v x v xx V A b m i h Q
Miles. Chs. Miles. Chs.
46 45 0 61 185 131 97 2490 540 4.61 14,000 0.28 242,230
49 15 2 50 155 70 52 5220 360 14.50 178,000 0.08 271,440
50 43 1 28 174 108 81 3150 480 6.56 66,000 0.10 255,150
52 66 2 23 187 118 88 2340 420 5.57 21,000 057 203,720
55 49 2 63 173 104 78 4608 420 11.00 58,000 0.25 359,424
57 59 2 10 209 148 111 2214 510 433 11,000 1.02 245,754
59 18 1 39 184 120 90 2442 480 5.09 20,000 0.39 219,780
61 71 2 53 184 113 84 2250 480 4.69 23,000 0.61 189,000
67 65 5 74 187 88 66 4725 348 13.50 55,000 0.56 311,850
71 76 4 11 285 218 163 1890 240 7.87 9,700 2.25 308,070
73 39 1 43 224 155 115 2241 510 4.40 11,000 0.73 257,715
75 57 2 18 181 131 98 2628 450 5.84 17,000 0.68 257,544
77 35 1 58 197 103 76 1995 318 6.22 31.000 0.29 151,620
87 67 10 32 217 125 93 2520 540 4.66 17,000 3.23 234,360
92 63 4 76 245 122 91 2706 360 7.50 28,000 0.93 246,246
94 21 1 38 221 125 93 2352 300 7.84 30,000 0.26 218,736
95 65 1 44 187 117 87 2664 420 6.33 25,000 0.32 231,768
102 69 7 04 224 120 90 2805 288 9.74 37,000 1.00 252,450
108 77 6 08 166 108 81 3570 420 8.50 43,000 0.75 290,170
110 37 1 40 168 100 75 1197 300 3.99 20,000 0.39 89,075
111 76 1 39 179 108 81 1200 360 3.33 16,000 0.49 92,200
114 63 2 67 173 124 93 2136 570 375 14,000 1.07 198,648
119 01 4 18 129 72 54 4752 336 14 14 210,000 0.10 256,608
122 17 3 16 166 95 70 2822 300 9.40 62,000 0.27 197,540
123 60 1 43 131 83 61 3420 360 9.50 83,000 0.10 208,620
127 62 4 02 144 . 79 60 2349 540 4.35 37,000 0.57 140,940
129 45 1 63 149 98 73 2774 510 5.43 111,000 0.08 202,502
137 29 7 64 152 110 82 1296 360 3.58 17,000 2.42 106,272
144 57 7 28 205 123 91 810 264 3.07 11,800 3.29 73,710
149 23 4 46 182 123 91 1623 300 5.41 20,800 1.15 147,693
153 62 4 39 90 64 48 4149 540 7.68 93,000 0.25 199,152
161 44 7 62 83 64 48 3414 540 6.31 77,000 0.52 163,872
170 77 9 33 122 78 58 1980 360 5.50 26,300 1.90 114,840
177 00 6 03 115 71 52 1458 360 4.05 50,000 0.63 75,816
184 32 7 32 77 47 34 3015 438 6.88 277,000 0.14 102,510
193 30 8 78 114 69 51 1950 384 5.13 66,600 0.71 99,450
198 68 5 38 109 61 45 2784 372 7.51 93,400 0.31 125,280
202 27 5 39 71 43 33 3570 402 8.92 416,600 0.04 183,810
206 27 4 00 77 48 36 3807 456 8.28 166,600 0.13 137,052
213 22 6 75 88 49 36 2550 450 5.66 102,000 0.33 91,800
221 25 8 03 121 73 54 1470 300 4.90 60,200 0.70 79,380
227 27 6 02 95 57 42 2330 318 7.01 135,100 0.23 97,860
233 11 5 64 62 36 27 3300 402 8.20 277,700 0.11 89,100
35.94


Fluctuations in THE HW or THE River Murray DURING THE LAST 5 Years
according to the Change at Overland - Corner












Map of th e River Murray from Blanchtown to the E astern Bound
reduced by Pantograph from the Chart
from 0 M. to 235 M.
Scale: FOUR miles to the inch.






