

F4Q\sbb
A STATEMENT
OF THE CASE OF
HERBERT GEORGE JONES,
gjerjeanteatzEato,
LATE HER MAJESTY’S SOLICITOR-GENERAL
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
AS EVIDENCED BY THE OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE AND
OTHER DOCUMENTS RELATING THERETO.
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
Zontion :
PRINTED BY T. BRETTELE, RUPERT STREET, HATMARKET.




54, Chancery Lane,
6th March, 1846.
My dear Serjeant,
In conformity with your instructions, I have
“ perused the voluminous contents of the box of papers
“ relating to your Case, with a view to the preparation of
“ a Narrative for the instruction of the New Secretary of
“ State for the Colonies, in order to counteract, if possible,
“ the consequences of Lord Stanley's refusal to leave behind
“ him, in the Colonial Office, a memorandum of his judg-
“ ment upon your Case, or indeed upon any other case, as
“ signified in Colonel Wilbraham's note to you of the 22nd
“ December last."
In further conformity with your desires, I have endea-
voured “ to form a calm and dispassionate judgment of the
“ entire Case, and to frame such Narrative according to that
“ judgment." The result of my labours I now forward to
you, together with your box of papers.
I have made the Narrative as concise as it was possible.
I have rejected much, for the sake of brevity, which, in
justice to you, I should have been glad to retain. I have
made a Selection, not a Collection, of the instances of wrong.


and the illustrations of character. And yet, with all my
endeavours, I feel that the work has grown upon me to
unexpected, and perhaps inconvenient, dimensions. I cannot
advise a reduction ; — nor, if I could, should I be able to
point out what to reduce. It is so necessary, on the one hand,
to make the statement complete ; and, on the other hand, not
to encumber it with an Appendix, tohich not one in ten would
read. I trust, however, that the inconvenience will not
prejudice you, nor prevent the Narrative from receiving due
attention from those in whose hands you place it. If any
of them require further explanation, you will be ready to
supply it, and to lay before them, as you have laid before me,
the whole of the documents connected with your Case.
Wishing you the success, which every honest man, who
knows your Case, must confess that you deserve.
I remain.
My dear Serjeant,
Very faithfully your's.
T. CIIISHOLME ANSTEY.
Mb. Serjeant Jones,
sc. fyc. sc.
Serjeants’ Inn, Chancery Lane.


STATEMENT, &c.
In the month of February 1838, the office of Solicitor-
General in Van Diemen’s Land, being then vacant by the
promotion of Mr. Edward Macdowell to the Attorney-
Generalship of that island, was conferred by Her present
Majesty on Mr, Herbert George Jones, now Mr. Serjeant
Jones.
He had been called to the bar in May 1828, from which
time, down to the abolition of the Welsh judicature, he
had gone the Oxford and Brecon circuits. After that
event, he confined himself to the South Wales circuit, and
continued to attend it, with increasing reputation and
emolument, until the period of his appointment to the
Solicitor-Generalship of Van Diemen’s Land. During his
connection with that circuit, he had received many gra-
tifying proofs of the respect entertained for his capacity
and acquirements by those best qualified to appreciate
them. He was employed under the Municipal Corporation
Act in 1836, to divide the town of Caermarthen into wards:
from the passing of the Reform Act in 1832, down to his
departure from England, he had every year received the
appointment of Revising Barrister. Numerous testimonials
of a more direct kind from Judges and other eminent
members of his profession, all attesting, in the strongest
terms, the fitness of Mr. Jones for the responsible office


under the Crown to which he was afterwards appointed
are to be found amongst the archives of the Colonial
Office in Downing Street; —they are all to the same effect,
certifying, not only to the high respectability and private
worth of the candidate, but also to his professional ability
and success.
Under such circumstances, it may excite some wonder
that Mr. Jones was induced to forego, for the inadequate
consideration offered in a remote penal colony, the present
and prospective advantages which a good and increasing
practice at home, his long standing at the bar, his private
connections, and his seniority upon his Circuit afforded.
Unfortunately, however, he had sustained a very heavy
pecuniary loss, owing to circumstances not connected with
the present narrative; and, still more unfortunately, he had
heard, and credited, the extravagant reports in circulation
respecting the extent and value of the private practice at
the colonial bar, open to the Law Officers of the Crown
in Van Diemen’s Land. Yielding to the temptation thus
.presented, and trusting thereby to repair, with compara-
tive facility and speed, the loss he had sustained, he applied
for the appointment in question, and obtained it.
Before accepting the office, Mr. Jones was expressly
assured in Downing Street, that, subject to the right of
the Crown to his official services, he was to be at perfect
liberty to accept private practice in the colony as a bar-
rister. In lieu of fees for Crown business, he was to
receive for himself a salary of £.600 a year, as Solicitor-
General, and £.130 a year by way of allowance for his
clerk. The expense of providing the necessary apartments,
and other suitable accommodations for an office, was like-
wise to be borne by the Colonial Government.
Previous to his embarkation, Mr. Jones happened to
learn that the immediate predecessor of Mr. Edward
Macdowell, in the office of Attorney-General, Mr. Alfred
Stephen, (now Chief Justice of New South Wales,) had


been induced to resign the former office, amongst other
causes, by the habitual negligence and inefficiency of that
gentleman, who then filled the post of Solicitor-General.
Anxious, therefore, to protect himself against the possibi-
lity of -too great a share of the Crown business being laid
upon himself by the new Attorney-General, and knowing
that the only way to secure protection was by obtaining
some criterion whereby to ascertain the precise amount- of
official duty to be cast upon him by his acceptance of the
Solicitor-Generalship, he waited upon Lord Glenelg, then
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, and unreservedly
explained the reasons which induced him to recommend,
and to request his Lordship to sanction, a regular Division
of the duties of the Law Officers of the Crown in Van
Diemen’s Land. His Lordship expressed his entire
approval of such a plan, and requested Mr. Jones to see
Mr. James Stephen, one of the Under Secretaries of State,
on the subject;—he did so, and, by that gentleman’s desire,
Mr. Jones recorded his application in writing by a letter
addressed to Lord Glenelg, and dated the 7th July, 1838,
To this letter, he received a reply from Sir George Grey,
at that time the other Under Secretary of State, dated the
18th of the same month, acquainting him “ that the Lieu-
“ tenant-Governor of Van Diemen’s Land, (Sir John
“ Franklin,) would be instructed to arrange with the
“ Attorney-General and Mr. Jones, any plan which might
“ be best adapted for the division of the duties of the
“ respective offices; if such a plan could be arranged with
“ their mutual concurrence, it was probable that nothing
“ more would be necessary on the part of the Lieutenant-
“ Governor than to give his sanction to it. If he (Mr.
“ Jones) could not concur in such a scheme, it would
“ remain for the Lieutenant-Governor to lay down regu-
“ lations for the guidance of the Law Officers, which it
“ would he their duty to observe.”
According to this determination, therefore, it was to be


left to the two Law Officers themselves to make what regu-
lations they pleased for the division of their respective
official duties. The Lieutenant-Governor was to have no
jurisdiction to interfere, until afterwards; nor then, unless
the Law Officers had previously signified to him their
inability to concur in some definite arrangement. The
right, whether of the Law Officers, or of the Lieutenant-
Governor, to effect such arrangement, was to be exercised
before Mr. Jones entered upon the discharge of the duties
of Solicitor-General, or, at all events, contemporaneously
therewith ; and the arrangement, once made, was final, in
this sense, at least, that no change could afterwards be
made without the consent of all parties:—provision was
made for effecting and enforcing such arrangement;—
there was none for setting it aside.
Shortly after receiving this letter, the new Solicitor-
General sailed for Van Diemen’s Land, taking with him
the Clerk who had served him in that capacity when at
the English Bar, and whom, without any remonstrance
or observation either from the Authorities in Downing
Street, or subsequently from the Colonial Authorities in
the Island, he had appointed to the post of Solicitor-
General’s Clerk in Van Diemen’s Land.
On the 16th December, 1838, he arrived in the Colony,
and proceeded with all possible dispatch to enter upon the
discharge of his official duties at Hobarton. For this
purpose, he communicated to His Excellency the Lieu-
tenant-Governor, through Mr. Montagu, then Colonial
Secretary, the letter he had received from Sir George
Grey on the subject of the proposed division of duties
between himself and the Attorney-General of the island.
In consequence, as well of this, as of a Dispatch to the
same effect previously received by the Lieutenant-Governor
himself, from Lord Glenelg, that Law Officer was applied
to by the Colonial Secretary on the subject; and, by a
letter of the 19th January 1839, requested to confer with


the Solicitor-General, and “ report, in conjunction with
“ that Officer, what division of duties he would recommend
“ for the Law Officers of the Crown in that Colony, He
“ (the Colonial Secretary) was to add that the Lieutenant-
“ Governor was extremely anxious to be put in possession
“ of their views without delay.”
The Law Officers of the Crown having conferred accord-
ingly, and agreed upon a final and satisfactory arrangement
for the division of their duties, a joint Report to that effect,
setting forth the terms of such arrangement, and dated
Ist February 1839, was signed by both of them, and, by
the Attorney-General himself, transmitted to the Colonial
Secretary, to be laid before the Lieutenant-Governor.
In his letter of the same date to the Colonial Secretary,
accompanying their joint Report, the Attorney-General
informed him “ that they had agreed to the inclosed
“ Report, from a close adherence to which , should it meet
“ with the approval of His Excellency, he ( the Attorney-
“ General) confidently anticipated the removal of those
“ inconveniences at present complained of in that branch
“ of the public service” The Report was as follows:
“ There exists at present great confusion in the Law
“ department of the Government in this Colony,
“ arising from the anomalous nature of the duties
“ formerly required of, and from the want of
“ proper officers necessarily performed by, the
“ Attorney or Solicitor-General of the day; and
“ although, since the appointment of a Crown
“ Solicitor, the same necessity no longer exists for
“ requiring one Officer to perform the work of
“ another, yet, hitherto, no regular division of the
“ law business has been effected, but which we
“ strongly recommend should take place imme-
“ diately, and that the same shall be apportioned
“ among the three Law Officers of the Crown, as


“ nearly as practicable, in the same manner as it
“ is divided between the same Officers in England;
“ and in the following arrangement we have pur-
“ sued this course, paying due regard to the differ-
“ ence in the systems observed here and at home.
I.—“ In the first place, to ensure regularity and dis-
“ patch, we deem it to be of the highest importance
“ to the public interests that, in the proposed
“ division there shall be so clear and distinct a
“ definition of the proper duties appertaining to
“ each office, that no question can arise as to
“ which office any particular business shall
“ strictly and properly be confided; and the division
“ once made should be rigidly adhered to; and
“ that so soon as the final arrangement for that
“ purpose shall have received the sanction of His
“ Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, we recom-
“ mend that circulars shall be sent to the head
“ of each department of the public service in the
“ habit of communicating with the Law Officers,
“ apprising them to whom their future communi-
“ cations shall be addressed.
2.—“ And in importance scarcely secondary to such
“ division and clear definition of their several
“ duties, we esteem the necessity that an undivided
“ responsibility for the due and efficient dis-
“ charge of the respective duties assigned to each
“ officer shall attach to himself individually.
3.—“ That the Attorney and Solicitor-General, and the
“ Crown Solicitor, shall at all times attend His
“ Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, either in
“ private or in the Executive Council, together or
“ separately, according to His Excellency’s com-
“ mands; and that the opinion of either of the
“ Law Officers be, at all times, at the service of II is
“ Excellency, whenever it shall please him to


“ require the same, direct, without the intervention
“ of the Crown Solicitor.
4.—“ That the Crown Solicitor shall attend the Colo-
“ nial Secretary, whenever required, to receive the
“ instructions of the Government.
5.—“ That from henceforth the Crown Solicitor alone
“ shall have the entfre conduct and management
“ of all such matters as are strictly the business and
“ duties of an attorney and solicitor; and that all
“ communications from the several Public Offices,
“ the Magistrates, and all others who have been in
“ the habit, or, who may have occasion, to consult
“ the Law Officers on any subject, shall, in the first
“ instance, be addressed to him, and that he alone
shall conduct the necessary correspondence result-
“ ing therefrom; that, on receipt of the depositions
“ from the Committing Magistrates, it shall be
“ the duty of the Crown Solicitor to examine them,
“ and to select those as are invariably tried by the
“ Court of Quarter Sessions, in order to be disposed
“of by that tribunal; and he shall, at stated
“ periods, transmit to the Attorney-General the
“ depositions in those cases which appear proper
“ to be tried before the Supreme Court; that the
“ Crown Solicitor shall issue the subpoenas to secure
“ the attendance of such witnesses as ths Attorney-
“ General shall require, and take all other neccs-
“ sary steps in each case previously to the trial, as
“ are usually taken by the attorney for a prosecution.
o.—“ That it shall be the duty of the Crown Solicitor
“ to prepare all commissions, legal notices, pro-
“ claraations, contracts, leases, reports, and all other
“ documents, required by the Government; to re-
“ ceive instructions for all actions, suits, and other
“ proceedings, cither taken, or instituted, or dc-
“ fended, by the Government, and to conduct the


“ same through their several stages in the same
“ manner as an attorney or solicitor ordinarily does
“ for a private client, being at liberty to apply to
“ either , or both, the Law Officers for advice, as he
“ would do to his Counsel in any other case.
7. —“ That it shall be the duty of the Crown Solicitor
“ to answer all inquiries submitted to him from
“ the Magistracy, and the Public Offices, on which
“ he shall entertain no doubt; but that, in any case
“ on which he shall wish assistance, it shall be his
“ duty, after having obtained, and arranged, all the
“ essential information and evidence, to lay a proper
“ case before the Attorney, or Solicitor-General, as
“ the nature of the particular question shall, ac-
“ cording to the hereinafter division of duties,
“ point out as the proper officer for that purpose.
8. —“ We also recommend that the Acts of Council be
“ prepared and drawn by the Attorney-General,
“ who, as a member of the Legislative Council,
“ must be necessarily acquainted with the senti-
“ ments and views of that Body, and with the
“ peculiar objects contemplated in their proposed
“ measures, and is, therefore, exclusively qualified
“ to perform this branch of the law business.
9.—“ The insuperable difficulty of making any appor-
“ tionment of the criminal business without in-
“ curring the risk of great confusion and a divided
“ responsibility, the Attorney-General alone having
“ the power to perform the duties of a Grand Jury,
“ induce us further to recommend that the prose-
“ cution of criminals, including the preparation of
“ the informations, and the conduct of the cases in
“ court, shall also rest with the Attorney-General
“ exclusively, subject to the performance of those
“ duties before assigned to the Crown Solicitor, and
“ to the general reservation herein lastly contained.


10.—“ We likewise recommend that the Solid tor-
“ General shall be alone consulted on all suits in
“ Equity, and that he shall have the sole conduct
“ of the same in court;
11.—“ That the Crown Solicitor shall lay all cases for
“ opinions before him, unless they shall fall under
“ the description of cases already assigned to the
“ Crown Solicitor himself, or which shall have been
“ expressly required by the Lieutenant-Governor
“ to be laid before the Attorney-General, or before
“ both the Law Officers, or unless they shall have
“ reference to draft Acts of Council, either contem-
“ plated or in course of preparation, or to the
“ criminal business of the Colony, which shall be
“ sent in all cases direct to the Attorney-General.
12 and lastly,—“ We deem it of essential importance
“ that a clear understanding should exist that the
“ Crown Solicitor shall be at liberty to require the
“ opinion of both the Law Officers on any subject
“ which he shall deem of sufficient importance;
“ and that either the Attorney, or Solicitor-General
“ shall have the benefit of calling for a consultation
“ with his Colleague on any point affecting the
“ public service, whenever he may desire it; that,
“ in the conduct of all Crown cases on the civil
“ side of the court, it shall, as a general rule, be
“ required that both Her Majesty’s Counsel shall
“ be instructed to attend; and that in all prosecu-
“ tions of importance, or, of great length, a brief
“ shall be sent to the Solicitor-General, and that
“ he shall attend at the trial to assist the Attorney-
“ General.
(Signed) “ EDWARD MACDOWELL,
“ HERBERT G. JONES.”
“ Hobaht Town, Van Diemen’s Land,
“ Feb. 1, 1639.”


The Report was approved by His Excellency, and in
reply to the communication of the Attorney-General, Mr.
Forster, the acting Colonial Secretary—(Mr. Montagu, his
brother-in-law, having quitted the Colony on leave of
absence) —communicated that approval to the Attorney-
General in strong and emphatic terms. By that letter,
dated the 19th March 1839, the Attorney-General was
informed “ the Lieutenant-Governor had given that com-
“ munication, and the whole question in connection with
“ it, his most attentive consideration, and that His Excel-
“ lency concurred in the observation made in the Report
“ of the Ist ult. by the Solicitor-General and himself that
“ it was of the highest importance to the public interests,
“ that there should be so clear and distinct a definition of
“ the proper duties appertaining to each Law Officer, that
“ no question could thereafter arise as to which of them
“ any particular business should strictly and properly he
“ confided.
“ The arrangements which had been proposed by his
“ Colleague and himself appeared to His Excellency
“ generally perfectly satisfactory in that respect , and, with
‘‘ one or two minor provisions, met with the Lieutcnant-
“ Governor's approbation. Their suggestion as to the
“ attendance of the Solicitor-General, the Crown Solicitor,
“ and himself upon the Lieutenant-Governor in private, or
“ in Council, when required, His Excellency approved of as
“ a matter of course, such duty being consequent upon the
“ offices they respectively held under that Government;
“ in reference, however, to their opinions being at His
“ Excellency’s service when deemed necessary by him to
“ be obtained direct, the Lieutenant-Governor begged they
“ would understand that the Colonial Secretary being the
“ proper official organ of correspondence with the Head of
“ the Government, all communications addressed to them
“ by that officer, when so desired by the Lieutenant-
“ Governor, were to be regarded as direct communications


“ from the Head of the Government, and to be replied to
“ through the same channel accordingly, such being the
“ course enjoined by the Secretary of State. The Lieu-
“ tenant-Govemor concurred with them that the Crown
“ Solicitor should, when required, attend, as hitherto, the
“ Colonial Secretary, and also have the entire conduct and
“ arrangement of all such matters as were strictly the
“ business and duty of a Solicitor or Attorney, and that all
“ public officers and others having occasion to address the
“ Law Officers should do so through the same channel ;
“ that all depositions of whatever kind they might be
“ should be transmitted to the Crown Solicitor by the
“ Committing Magistrates, but forwarded, as explained
“ in his (the Colonial Secretary’s) letter of the 28th ult,
“ without consideration of them on his part, to the Attor-
“ ney-General. His Excellency also considered that the
“ Crown Solicitor should issue all subpoenas from his office,
“ for which purpose the Attorney-General would be re-
“ quired to send them to him.
“ Their proposal that the Crown Solicitor should pre-
“ pare all commissions, notices, &c., and conduct all
“ actions in which the Government was concerned, the
“ Lieutenant-Governor was of opinion was involved in
“ His Excellency’s decision that that officer should un-
“ dertake all duty properly belonging to an attorney or
“ solicitor, having, of course, the privilege of applying for
“ advice to his (the Attorney-General’s) Colleague and
“ himself, collectively or individually, (according to the
“ division of duty thereafter explained,) whenever he
“ might find it requisite to do so ; and, in every case, he
“ would, of course, submit the subject to either or both of
“ them in such form and accompanied by such informa-
“ tion as they might deem requisite. The preparation of
“ the Acts of Council would continue, as heretofore, his
“ (the Attorney-General’s) exclusive province ; and, as it
“ would be necessary that he should devote his undivided


attention to his Legislative duties, whenever the Council
might be sitting, His Excellency was of opinion that at
such times he (the Attorney-General) should be relieved
from all criminal business.
“ With that impression, the Lieutenant-Governor ap-
proved of the Solicitor-General conducting all criminal
cases both there (at Hobarton) and at Launceston,
during the sittings of the Council; and, according to the
suggestions in his (the Attorney-General’s) letter of the
9th instant, he approved of a bill being prepared to enable
that officer to file informations in the name of the
Attorney-General whenever the meeting of the Council
might render it necessary that he should do so, as more
fully explained to him (the Attorney-General) in his
(the Colonial Secretary’s) communication of the 15th
instant. The Lieutenant-Governor further approved of
the Solicitor-General being consulted in all suits in
Equity, and of his conducting them in court, as well as
of all cases being submitted for his opinion, if not other-
wise directed, or unless they should have reference to
Acts of Council, contemplated or in course of preparation,
or to the criminal business of the Colony, all which
matters were to be sent to the Attorney-General alone.
He (the Colonial Secretary) was also to observe that the
Lieutenant-Governor quite agreed with him (the Attor-
ney-General) that the Solicitor-General and himself
should, at all times, be at liberty mutually to require
each other to meet in consultation, whenever either of
them might deem such consultation essential to the
interests of the Government; and that it should be
incumbent upon them both to give their attendance on
the civil side of the court in all cases involving the
interests of the Crown.
“ It was likewise material that, in all prosecutions of
importance, the Solicitor-General should receive a brief,
and attend at the trial to assist him (the Attorney-


“ General). He (the Colonial Secretary) was to acid that
“ the division of duties, as recommended by his (the
“ Attorney-General’s) Colleague and himself, and followed
“ in that letter, appeared to the Lieutenant-Governor so
“ clearly defined that His Excellency felt assured that in
“ holding the Solicitor-General, the Crown Solicitor, and
“ himself, individually responsible for the performance of
“ the peculiar course of duty apportioned to each, it was
“ not probable that any misunderstanding would arise. In
“ conclusion, he was to remark, in reference to the Crown
“ Solicitor’s, observations in his memorandum of the 21st
“ ult., viz., that ‘ the proposed arrangements would im-
“ ‘ pose so much additional labour upon him, that he
“ ‘ must look for increased salary and further clerical aid,’
“ that, under the assurance contained on his (the Attor-
“ ney-General’s) letter of the 9th ultimo, that Mr. Iloss
“ (the Crown Solicitor) was labouring under a misappre-
“ hension as to the effect of his (the Attorney-General's)
“ suggestion. His Excellency did not consider it requisite to
“ notice further Mr. Ross' fears on that head.”
“ He, the Attorney-General, would be pleased to fur-
“ nish the Solicitor-General, and the Crown Solicitor,
“ with copies of that communication.”
It will hence appear, that the views and wishes of the
Secretary of State, as expressed in Sir George Grey’s
letter to the Solicitor-General of the 18th July, 1838, and
repeated in his Lordship’s Despatch to the Lieutenant-
Governor, were now fully accomplished. The Lieutenant
Governor had “ arranged with the Attorney-Gcneral and
“ Mr. Jones a plan which was best adapted for the division
“ of the duties of the respective offices.”—That plan had
“ been “ arranged with the mutual concurrence of the
“ Law Officers,” and, therefore, as “ nothing more was
“ necessary on the part of the Lieutenant-Governor than to
“ give his sanction to it,” so, that sanction having been
given, nothing more remained than to carry into effect the


arrangement thus sanctioned, “ which it was their duty to
“ observe,” and which, having now become definitive and
permanent, nothing, short of another unanimous concur-
rence of judgment as to the propriety of altering it, could
henceforward disturb.
It was immediately carried into execution; —The Attor-
ney-General undertook to discharge his allotted share of
official duty; and, whilst the Solicitor-General scrupulously
fulfilled his own, the remainder, which was of a miscel-
laneous character, embracing not only, as suggested in the
letter of the Acting Colonial Secretary, “ all duty properly
“ belonging to an attorney or solicitor,” but also duties
equally belonging to barristers (not being Queen’s Counsel)
and to attorneys or solicitors, but from which Queen’s
Counsel enjoyed, by professional usage, a well established
privilege of exemption, was assigned to the Crown Solicitor.
The offices of Attorney-General and Crown Solicitor were,
it will be observed, at that time filled, the former by Mr.
Edward Macdowell, the latter by Mr. Hugh Ross. Of
these two persons some previous description is necessary
to the correct understanding of what is to follow.
Of Mr. Edward Macdowell, it is, perhaps, sufficient to say
that the was dismissed from the Attorney-Generalship two
years afterwards by Lord John Russell, then Secretary of
State for the Colonies, upon charges of misconduct and cor-
ruption, The particular instance advanced by the accuser, a
Gentleman named Loane,was shortly this: —There had been
made out to a female of bad reputation, under the seal of the
colony, a Crown Grant of lands, previously granted by the
Crown to Mr. Loane himself, and then actually belonging to
him. He presented his petition for a Scire Facias to try the
validity of the grant. The Attorney-General refused the
fiat, without which the writ could not be had. Mr. Loane
preferred his complaint to the Secretary of State, imputing
motives to the Attorney-General of a very serious cha-
racter. Lord John Russell, by the advice of the English


Law Officers of the Crown, immediately ordered the writ to
issue; and, in 1841, after completing his examination into
the case, dismissed the Attorney-General from office. *
But until that event happened, Mr. Macdowell’s position
in the Colony was unassailable. His wife was an illegiti-
mate daughter of Captain Swanston, the Managing Director
of the Derwent Bank at Hobarton, and Money Agent in
Van Diemen’s Land for Colonel Sir George Arthur, for-
merly Lieutenant-Governor of that island, the founder of,
and a shareholder in, the same bank. The Derwent
Bank, to the exclusion of all others, was supported by
Sir George Arthur’s nephews, Messrs. Montagu and
Forster, already mentioned as the Colonial Secretary, and
Acting Colonial Secretary, of the island, —by Captain
Swanston, his agent, who was himself a member of the
Legislative Council, —by Mr. Hugh Boss, the Crown Soli-
citor, —a customer of the Bank, —by Mr. Macdowell,
Captain Swanston’s son-in-law, who united in his person
the offices of Attorney-General, and Grand Jury, of the
Island, —and by other powerful members of the Party
known in the island by the names of “ The Family
“ Compact,” and “ The Arthur Faction,” &c.*; and from
these circumstances, as well as because by the wise
system on which it had been founded and was conducted,
namely, that of levying money upon real security upon
terms sufficiently specious to encourage applicants, it had
become prosperous and influential above all the other
banks of issue and deposit in the Island, none of which had
liens upon so many of its title deeds
* In Sir John Franklin’s “ Narrative of some Passages in the His-
“ tory of Van Diemen’s Land,” this Party are thus styled—“ An
“ agitating mischievous Faction,” p. 50. “ A factious and insolent
“ Party,” p. 50. “ The Derwent Bank Clique,” p. 85. “ The influ-
“ ence of a Family Compact was invariably believed and opeidy dis-
“ cussed in the Colony,” p. 93.
t In the same pamphlet, Sir John Franklin observes, and with truth,


So powerful an interest was well supported by the local
Press; besides the “ A ustralasiatic Review,” owned and
edited by an emancipated, twice convicted, Convict, named
Murray, a customer of the Derwent Bank, and the only
contemporary writer, according to Mr. Forster, who did
justice to Colonel Arthur when Governor of Van Diemen’s
Land, the party possessed, during the years 1839 and
1840, a far more useful organ in the “ Courier” news-
paper, a weekly print edited during that period by a
younger brother of the Attorney-General, boasting openly
of the early and authentic intelligences which that con-
nection insured, and, above all, enjoying thereby a perfect
immunity from indictments and ex-officio informations for
the libels with which its columns, week after week, were
filled, and for which, had almost any other man been the
Attorney-General and Grand Jury of the island during
those two years, it would have been scarcely possible to
escape reiterated prosecutions and signal chastisement.
It may hence be conceived how fearful was the power
which was enjoyed by the Attorney-General during the
years in question. Notoriously ignorant of the principles
and practice of his profession,—indolent to acquire the
knowledge so much needed, —negligent of official duties to
an extent unprecedented there or elsewhere, —perpetually
that “ Mr. Montagu bad also another source of influence. This was
“ his money agencies in connection with the Derwent Bank, a most
“ influential establishment, which, at a later period than that of which
“ I am speaking, and when few estates were not more or less encum-
“ bered, held nearly three-fourths of the mortgages in the Colony;
“ though his official situation in the Colony prevented Mr. Montagu from
“ being a Director of the Bank, yet he represented in it, for himself and
“ others, stock to a very large amount. And it was well understood in
“ the Colony that the Manager of the bank, Mr. Swanston, conferred
“ with him on every important occasion, and that the Bank and
“ Colonial Secretary reflected and augmented each other’s influence.
“ The people of Van Diemen’s Land are well aware that for years the
“ Derwent Bank has held half the Colony in its Thraldom,” p. 8.


assailed with invective on that head, even by his friends
and partisans in office, —improvident and embarrassed, and
scandalous in his habits, such were, nevertheless, the means
by which he was enabled to laugh to scorn all censure from
within the Colony, and, until the notoriety of one of his dis-
orders attracted the attention in England of the Secretary
of State, to retain an office for which he was manifestly
unfitted, and an authority which he had grossly perverted
and misused.
The other person mentioned in Mr, Forster’s letter of the
19th March, 1839, Mr. Hugh Ross, was then the Crown
Solicitor of the Island. His official connexion with the
Party to which the Attorney-General belonged, has been
alluded to; further than that, he had no ties to connect
him with the Colony, except such as a residence of many
years, and the circumstance of his being the brother of one
of the worst members of the convict population, imposed:
he had come almost penniless into the Colony, and had
acquired no property there but what was spent as soon as
realized. In far more embarrassed circumstances than the
Attorney-General himself, his habits were by no means less
expensive, although indulged in with considerably more of
outward decorum and respectability of deportment. His
moral character, however, was in much lower repute than
that of his superior in office. Of his life and conversation
previous to his arrival in the Colony nothing certain is
known. The office he held was conferred upon him long
after his arrival, and not by the Sovereign, but by the
Lieutenant-Governor of the day. But of his Colonial
reputation, there can be no doubt whatsoever. One of
the first persons from whom the Solicitor-General learned
somewhat of the habits and qualifications of his subaltern
was that subaltern’s chief patron, Mr. Forster himself, the
Acting Colonial Secretary, who, within a year after Mr.
Jones’s arrival, “ admitted to him,” he says, “that in any
“ pecuniary matter, the Police Office was the fittest place


“ for Mr. Ross.” Yet, even this man had his use, and those
whom he served were powerful to protect him. Infinitely
more unworthy of his post than Mr. Macdowell was of his,
he enjoyed the same benefit of patronage with that officer,
not so much because the enemies of the one were the
enemies of the other, as that those who accused them were
no friends to the system by which they flourished. Hence,
it happened that, so long as he chose to remain in the
Island, he was able to set suspicion and denunciatiop alike
at defiance. To the last he enjoyed not only the tacit
protection, but much more, the hearty and active vindica-
tion and official support of Mr. Forster, who, nevertheless,
knew that “ in any pecuniary matter the police-office was
“ the fittest place ” for that public accountant!—He lost
that protection at last, —that is to say, he renounced it; —
he withdrew himself from it; —it was not withdrawn
from him. '
Suddenly towards the end of January 1841, he absconded
from Hobarton with several thousands of pounds of public
money in his hands, and fled to Singapore. Nor was this
the extent of his delinquency:—to the amount of thousands
more he had defrauded private individuals; —every one,
indeed, whom he had the opportunity of defrauding,—and,
amongst others, a man in a comparatively humble station
of life, who had been his friend; and to him the kindest
of friends—from him, the Town Gaoler of Hobart Town, the
very day before his flight he succeeded, upon some pretence
or other, in obtaining an acceptance for £.BO, w hich he
immediately disposed of, and then left the unfortunate
acceptor to pay it at maturity.
The obnoxious duty of gazetting him as an Absconded
Felon, was discharged by the Acting Colonial Secretary,
Mr. Forster, and a Reward was offered for his Apprehen-
sion. Before many months had elapsed, the confident
Felon left Singapore and came into Western Australia,
where, as he must have expected, he soon met with those


who recognised him, and delivered him over to justice.
But he was sent down to Van Diemen’s Land to be tried.
His successor in office, the Deputy Solicitor to the Der-
went Bank, gave the necessary instructions to the Law
Officers of the Crown, (Mr. Jones having previously left
the Island) —the trial came on, —the prisoner pleaded not
guilty,—a very palpable flaw appeared in the indictment—
and the judge directed the jury to acquit the prisoner;—
thus discharged, Mr. Ross was enabled to proceed with
what remained of the embezzled public monies to New
South Wales, and afterwards to New Zealand, and he
succeeded in getting himself enrolled amongst the officers
of the Supreme Court of the latter Colony as a barrister
and attorney—and, as it appears, in regaining his place in
society. The last thing that was heard of him in England
being contained in a paragraph, which went the round of
the newspapers, to the effect that he had challenged the
Solicitor-General of New Zealand for having dropped
words to the disparagement of his character, in reference
to the manner of his leaving Van Diemen’s Land, and
that that officer, having the weakness to accept his chal-
lenge, fell at the first fire.
Such were the Colleagues, superior and subordinate,
whom Mr. Jones found in office upon his arrival, and with
whom, down to the period of his suspension from office,
he was doomed to act. He did act with them, so far, at
least, as his duty required. Without interfering with the
separate duties of the Attorney-General, he punctually
discharged his own. He alone prepared every report and
joint opinion which the Attorney-General and himself
were called upon, from time to time, to lay before the
Government; and these were uniformly acquiesced in,
and subscribed by, the Attorney-General without hesita-
tion. The Crown Solicitor invariably sent all papers ad-
dressed to the “ Law Offices” to the Solicitor-General in
the first instance, in order to avoid the delay occasioned


by the notorious difficulty of obtaining conferences with
the Attorney-General;—and, when answered by the Soli-
citor-General and returned to him, and not before, the
Crown Solicitor forwarded them to the Attorney-General
for his concurrence and signature ; —of these papers, Mr.
Jones believes that, with only one exception, the most
hasty perusal in all cases secured the immediate approval
of the Attorney-General, the exception being the case of
Mac Laren’s petition, too well known in the Colony,
where the Attorney-General, being the counsel, and the
Crown Solicitor the attorney, for the wealthy defendant,
the petitioner, a poor man, was denied the remedial writ
of Scire Facias to repeal a second Crown grant, the Soli-
citor-General being of opinion that, the applicant having
shewn ‘probable cause, the writ was of right, and could not
be denied him ; and the Attorney-General, upon whom it
entirely depended to grant it or not, concurring with the
Crown Solicitor in withholding it.
The efficiency and zeal evinced by the Solicitor-General
have been so repeatedly confessed, even by those who
deprived the Crown of his services, that it is needless to
recapitulate the proofs;—the very measure which was to
be the occasion and pretext for his suspension was never
justified but upon the ground of homage to his fitness and
usefulness. The plan of December 1840, to which further
allusion will be made hereafter, for a new distribution of
duties amongst the law officers, expressly laid down the
desirableness “ of rendering available, in the criminal
“ business of the Colony, the Ability and Experience of
“ the Solicitor-General” as its basis.
The unwilling testimony of his opponents had been antici-
pated by the voice of the Colonists at large. “ Very shortly
“ after my arrival, he informed the Secretary of State on the
“ 10th February, 1841,1 got into thechief private practice in
“ the Colony.’’According to Mr. Gregory, a gentleman who
has been actively engaged in the Civil Service of his Country


for nearly thirty years, and whose valuable services have
been several times acknowledged by successive Secretaries
of State, and who, for seven years before, and during Mr.
Jones’s term in office, held the appointment of Treasurer of
the Colony, with a seat in the Executive and Legislative
Councils, and who, writing on the 23rd May, 1845, records
his experience of him for the information of high official
Authorities in these words:—“ His professional attain-
“ ments and services, as one of the Law Officers of the
“ Crown, were of the highest order; his knowledge of law,
“ whether in the civil, the criminal, or the equity side of the
“ Court, were as well known to the inhabitants, as to the
“ Government, of the Colony. Nor were his powers as an
“ Advocate at the Bar of a less distinguished character ; so
“ highly, indeed, were they appreciated by the Colonists,
“ that they came forward in large numbers, with tempting
“ offers to induce him to remain and practise at the Bar
“ after he had ceased to hold the office of Her Majesty’s
“ Solicitor-General.
“ It is unnecessary for me to say how his services were
“ appreciated by the Local Government, for the Governor
“ himself, who must be the best judge, has, I believe,
“ afforded ample testimony upon this point.
“ It may be, perhaps, not entirely useless on my part, if
“ I add that, independently of Mr. Jones’s knowledge of
“ law and his professional skill as a Barrister, he happens to
“ possess habits of order, precision, punctuality, and quick-
“ ness in the despatch of business, to a degree which I have
“ never before observed in my lengthened experience of
“ Local Government; I know full well how seriously Go-
“ vernment may be embarrassed for the want of such habits
“ in their Law Advisers, and, on this account, I venture to
“ allude to the subject.”
Such is the testimony of one most competent from length-
ened official position and experience to render it. It has
been powerfully confirmed by Sir John Franklin himself on


two occasions, both long subsequent to Mr. Jones’s suspen-
sion from office:—On the 21st February, 1845, the cx-
Lieutenant-Governor, referring to Mr. Jones’s application
for the Chief Justiceship of New South Wales, thus writes
to that Gentleman:—“ I consider it an act of justice to you
“ to bear my testimony to my experience of the Ability, Zeal,
“ and Diligence with which you fulfilled your duties in the
“ important situation you held, as Solicitor-General, during
“ my Government in Van Diemen’s Land, and of the high
“ estimation in which your character, private and profes-
“ sional, was held by the respectable portion of the commu-
“ nity in that Colony.
And, on the 18th May, 1845, writing to Sir Henry Wil-
lock, chairman of the Court of East India Directors, Sir
John Franklin, in like manner, bears testimony to Mr,
Jones’s “high legal attainments and abilities, his great
“ application to business, and his zealous performance of
“ his duties as Solicitor-General, during my Government in
“ Van Diemen’s Land.”
The Compiler of this Narrative is able to corroborate, by
his personal experience, the powerful testimony of Mr. Gre-
gory and Sir John Franklin. It may not be strictly neces-
sary, yet, being himself a member of the Chancery Ear, and
having at one period practised at the Colonial Ear, whilst
Mr. Jones was the Solicitor-General of the island, and one
of his competitors, he feels that what evidence he can give
is far from being without importance; possessing, indeed, a
peculiar interest, which the mere circumstance of his having,
at the same period, filled a responsible judicial office within
the Colony, might not of itself perhaps have conferred.
The means which the Compiler of this Narrative had,
whilst in Van Diemen’s Land, to judge of the professional
and official qualifications of the Solicitor-General, and the
nature and extent of his private practice, are, together with
the judgment so formed, fully detailed in the following pas-
sage from a letter addressed by him on the 17th of May,


1845, to a friend of Mr. Serjeant Jones. To every word of
that letter he unhesitatingly and conscientiously adheres.
“ When I practised at the Hobarton Bar, he (Mr.
“ Jones) was the only efficient Crown law officer, and did
“ his work admirably: besides being continually called
“ upon to supply the defects or mal-feazanccs of the
“ Attorney-General, his colleague, and the Crown Soli-
“ citor, their subaltern; his private practice was im-
“ mense; I believe there was scarcely a respectable pro-
“ prietor or merchant for whom he was not retained in
“ preference to every other Counsel then at the Bar; and
“ for most of them he held general retainers; — avc used
“ to say there that one half of the business of the entire
“ Bar Avas his, and that the Attorney-General, myself, and
“ the others, divided amongst ourselves the other half.
“ I had constant relations Avith him, of business and
“ otherwise, and I can safely affirm that even at this bar,
“ where, sur-ely, there is no lack of talent and learning, I
“ have rarely met Avith those by Avhom he has been sur-
“ passed. Every hour of his time in Van Diemen’s Land
“ Avas occupied by clients, Avhen not occupied by the
“ CroAvn, and I am sure that every one was satisfied that
“ he Avell deserved his popularity.
“ I speak of the years 1840 and 1841, in Avhich last
“ year I quitted the Island, having, down to the eve of
“ my departure, held the office of sole Commissioner of
“ Insolvent Estates at Hobarton. The office in question
“ gave me (if that Avere possible) still greater facilities
“ for Avitnessing and judging of the professional capacities
“of our friend; unlike the office of that name with
“ Avhich avc are familiar at home, it embraced the func-
“ tions of a Court of Bankruptcy, as Avell as of those more
“ proper to its designation; it Avas the only court of
“ either kind in Hobarton ; and from my decision there
“ Avas no appeal but to the Judges of the Supreme Court
“ of Van Diemen’s Land.”


With such results obtained, and such prospects opening
before him, there can be but little difficulty in conceiving
that Mr. Jones’ success did operate, as he told the Secretary
of State on the 10th February, 1841, to excite much dis-
pleasure within the Attorney-General’s breast “ at his
“ having deprived him of nearly all the little practice he
“ before possessed;” and that his mortified Colleague
would not fail to make that displeasure felt the first
moment that a plausible “ occasion occurred to afford a
“ pretext for him to cast aside the cloak which had there-
“ tofore concealed it.”
On the other hand, it was not to be expected that the
Solicitor-General, stranger as he was in the island, and
without one previous acquaintance on the spot to direct
him, should know the Colleagues with whom he was called
upon to act. Hence, giving credit to their official rank
for the respectability of their persons, he continued, for
some time after his arrival, not only in harmony, but even
in intimacy with them, until an event took place which, by
making known his character and theirs, revealed to both
the utter impossibility of an alliance.
In the course of August 1839, the Attorney-General
was called upon by Sir John Franklin to support in the
Legislative Council a Bill then prepared for determining
the claims of certain Colonial Distillers to compensation for
the suppression of their distilleries by a Colonial enactment.
The Bill so prepared was called “ The Distillation Issue
“ Bill.”
For some unexplained reason, the Attorney-General
suddenly changed his mind, and in the beginning of Sep-
tember 1839, relying on the strength of his Party in office,
and the comparative weakness of Government House, and
erroneously calculating from a casual conversation which
he had had, some time previously, on the subject with the
Solicitor-General, on that gentleman’s concurrence, —in
which case* it would have been impossible for the Lieu-


tenant-Govemor to appoint a Successor in his room, —
endeavoured to embarrass His Excellency into a with-
drawal of the Bill, by tendering, in the event of its not
being withdrawn, his resignation of the Attorney-General-
ship—his seat in the Legislative Council being simply
appurtenant to that Office.
Contrary to his calculations, the Lieutenant-Governor
accepted the resignation so tendered, and, being deter-
mined to carry the Bill if possible, although vigorously
opposed by the whole Colonial Press, called upon the Soli-
citor-General to take up the Attorney-Generalship, and, in
that capacity, peruse the bill so prepared, and to forward
his official opinion in writing to the Government. Mr.
Jones, who had never before given the subject a moment’s
consideration, nor had even seen, much more read, the
bill, proceeded to comply with His Excellency’s com-
mands. He states, that a perusal of the bill “ satisfied
“ him that the measure was not of the illegal and uncon-
“ stitutional nature denounced by Mr. Macdowell,” (the
Attorney-General); and accordingly that “he had no
“ alternative but to accept the offer, or embarrass the
“ Government still further by his refusal to conduct the
“ bill through the Council.” At the same time, far from
wishing to raise himself on the ruined fortunes of his
Colleague, before he was sworn in, he voluntarily gave a
pledge “ to resign in his (Mr. Macdowell’s) favour as soon
“ as the fate of the bill was decided.” But neither Mr.
Macdowell nor his associates were capable of appreciating
the feelings which dictated such a pledge, nor did their
personal experience, within that Colony at least, warrant
them in expecting its performance.
Hence it was, that, no sooner had Mr. Jones accepted
the provisional appointment, than the mask was laid aside,
and the accumulated hatred of months outpoured upon him.
The “ Courier” commenced the attack in a series of
scurrilous articles from the pen of the editor, Mr. Thomas


Macdowell, but, of which, the occasional introduction of
facts, distorted, indeed, yet founded in truth, and previously
unknow’n save only to his brother, the Ex-Attorney-Gene-
ral, clearly revealed the source.
' The insulting deportment of the latter person himself in
his communications with Mr. Jones, and the pains he took
to vilify him in his communications with others, were
alone sufficient to have satisfied any reasonable man of the
truth and justice of that conclusion.
Eut the strongest evidence is that furnished by the
party himself, in a letter of the 2nd December, 1839,
addressed to Mr. Jones, after that gentleman’s resignation
of the Attorney-Generalship, and the reinstatement of
both the Law Officers in their original appointments. Mr.
Macdowell confesses that he had furnished his brother
with a portion, at least, of the matter of a disgraceful and
scandalous libel upon Mr. Jones, published, out of due
course, in an Extraordinary Supplement of their
the “ Courier ,” dated the 2nd September, on the eve of
Mr. Jones’ appointment to the Attorney-Generalship, and
carefully distributed and circulated by their agents, within
the Council Chamber itself, during the speech with which
Mr. Jones, as Attorney-General, introduced the bill in
question for the consideration of that Body. Indeed, so
little was it esteemed necessary to study concealment of
that connection, that the libel itself expressly vouched Mr.
Macdowell as an authority for its truth*.
* Sir John Franklin, speaking in the pamphlet already referred to, of
this mode of attack adopted by the Arthur Faction, when subsequently
directed against himself after he had emancipated himself from their
“ thraldom,” says (page 30)—“ No one who knows the connection then
“ subsisting between Mr. Montagu and Mr. Swanston, the head of the
“ Derwent Bank, and the dependence of the elder Mr. Macdowell on
“ his father-in-law, Mr. Swanston, but must be aware that any offensive
“ writings of theirs, as far at least as the elder Mr. Macdowell was
“ concerned, could have been checked at either of those gentlemen’s
“ pleasure.”


During the whole of these proceedings Mr. Jones re-
mained silent, if not unmoved, and did his best to conquer
malignity by forbearance. He knew well—almost as well
as Mr. Macdowell and Captain Swanston themselves—that
to the family of the first, and mediately to his father-in-
law, the total loss of the office he provisionally held must
have been attended with most disastrous consequences.
The same sympathy, therefore, which led him, at an earlier
period, to tender the unsolicited promise to resign in favour
of Mr. Macdowell, now operated to produce performance,
nay, more to restrain him, strongly tempted as he was,
from noticing in any way the ungrateful return he daily
experienced. He, therefore, determined not only to redeem
that pledge most punctiliously in all its parts, but also to
bear with patience, and, if possible, without reply, the
unceasing and unworthy calumny, insolence, and abuse, of
which he was made so undeservedly the object.
With equal determination, he applied himself in the
Legislative Council, to accomplish the duty confided to
him, and he did accomplish it in a manner which deserved,
and won, the Official approbation of the Head of the
Government; for, though the Bill was lost on the third
reading, that was owing to no fault of his, —to no change
in the measure, —to no departure from the method followed
till then with so much success in the conduct of the measure,
—but solely to the sudden and unexpected secession of
Captain Swanston, Mr. Macdowell’s father-in-law, who
chose that moment to withdraw his support from the Bill,
and to vote against the Government. If this fact stood
alone, it would be tolerably significant; but when having,
in an unguarded conversation, made known already his
purpose to change sides and vote against the Bill before
Mr. Jones, as Attorney-General, rose to deliver his speech
Upon the third reading, he made that speech his only
pretext for voting against it, his motive becomes too


intelligible—too easily apparent—to need elucidation or
remark!
To the astonishment of Captain Swanston himself, and
his Son-in-Law, Mr. Jones, nevertheless, was mindful of his
promise, and scrupulously fulfilled it by resigning his pro-
visional appointment immediately after the fate of the Bill
was decided, —so soon, in fact, that if we are to believe
Mr. Macdowell’s letter to Mr. Jones already cited, that “ he
“ very much regretted the appearance of the calumnious
“ articles in the Courier” those articles having been written
under the erroneous belief that his own and his brother’s
misconduct towards that gentleman had already driven him
to extremities, and that, however sincere Mr. Jones might
have been in making it, yet, to expect performance, under
such circumstances, of his generous promise, was altogether
hopeless. With reference to Mr. Jones’ official conduct
throughout that transaction, it is quite unnecessary to offer
any justification; his legal opinion and conduct on that
occasion had the good fortune to be in accordance with the
views of the Acting Colonial Secretary himself. What is
more important, Sir John Franklin did not fail to do him
ample justice in his Despatches upon that subject to Lord
John Russell, then Colonial Minister. Between Mr. Mac-
dowell and himself, therefore, there was no difficulty of
selection. But there another personage intervened, whose
influence on the Government of the Colony was equally
unconstitutional in its connexion, and pernicious in its
consequences—the Attorney-General’s father-in-law, Cap-
tain Swanston, the manager of the Derwent Bank. Captain
Swanston had at that time the seat which he still continues
to occupy in the Legislative Council; on the occasion
referred to he was pledged to support the Government
measure, and he actually voted for it through all its previous
stages. Judging, however, Mr, Jones by his own standard
of honour, and being apprehensive that the infuriated


conduct of the brothers Macdowell might lead him to dis-
regard his generous and uncalled-for promise of resignation,
he chose another course, assigning, as has already been
mentioned, a reason which, if well founded, was calculated,
with much probability, to prejudice Mr. Jones, as Attorney-
General, in the estimation of the Lieutenant-Governor, and
in direct opposition to another and less formal statement,
which, before he heard Mr. Jones’ speech, had involuntarily
escaped him, he voted against the third reading, being pre-
viously well aware that the issue depended upon his single
vote ; not only was the Bill thereby lost, but His Excel-
lency was made to feel that, in restoring Mr. Macdowell,
he would secure a second voice in the Council, which the
retention of Mr. Jones in that office would deprive him of.
He calculated rightly: The ex-Attorney-General,
during the discussions of the Legislative Body, had offered
the most strenuous, violent, and undisguised opposition to
the Bill, sitting in the front row of the public benches,
audibly marking his approval or disapprobation of the argu-
ments employed, and openly supplying the opposition
members with written suggestions, in the immediate
presence of the Lieutenant-Governor. Notwithstanding
all this, His Excellency, after an effusion of expressions of
eternal gratitude for the aid Mr. Jones had afforded, and
for the services he had rendered, communicated to him in
private his acceptance of his resignation, and his intention
to reappoint Mr. Macdowell to the Attorney-Generalship,
assuring Mr. Jones, at the same time, that he should con-
sider it his duty to cause the strongest worded Despatch in
recommendation of Mr. Jones to be forwarded to the Secre-
tary of State.
His resignation had been tendered and accepted, not
only at the personal interview with the Lieutenant-Gover-
nor, but also through the ordinary channel of official
correspondence; in reply, the Acting Colonial Secretary, on
the 18th September 1839, informed Mr. Jones that “ he


“ was directed to acknowledge the receipt of his letter of
“ the 10th inst., addressed to the Lieutenant-Governor, in
“ which he tendered his resignation of the office of Attor-
“ ney-General in favour of Mr. Macdowell. He (the
“ Acting Colonial Secretary) was directed, in reply, to
“ signify to him, that the Lieutenant-Governor had been
“ pleased, pending the pleasure of Her Majesty, to accept
“ his (Mr. Jones’) resignation thus tendered, and that His
“ Excellency had also (until the pleasure of Her Majesty
“ was made known) accepted Mr. Macdowell’s Offer to
“ resume his former duties, which he resigned when the
“ Feigned Issue Bill was about to be considered by the
“ Legislative Council. As, however, the Lieutenant-
“ Governor intended to bring all the proceedings in con-
“ pection with the Bill which had given rise to the present
“ state of affairs, in reference to the department of the
“ Law Officers of the Crown, under the notice of the Right
“ Honourable the Secretary of State, the arrangements
“ which His Excellency had now made with a view to the
“ advantage of the public service, were of course only pro-
“ visional. In making that communication he (the Acting
“ Colonial Secretary) was to convey to him (Mr. Jones) the
“ assurance of the high estimation in which His Excel-
“ lency held the disinterested and honourable line of con-
“ duct pursued by him upon the occasion of the office of
“ Attorney-General being offered to him, and which was
“ marked by equal delicacy towards his colleague and
“ consistency with his public duty. At the same time, he
“ was likewise to convey to him His Excellency’s perfect
“ approval of, and his best thanks for, the very able services
“ which he rendered to the Crown whilst the Feigned
“ Issue Bill was under discussion in Council.”
It deserves to be mentioned that, from that time to the
present, the pleasure of Her Majesty with reference to the
appointments in question has never been suffered to tran-
spire. It must have been known to the Local Government


within the twelvemonth ending with September 1840; but,
if so, all knowledge of it was suppressed from Mr. Jones,
the party most interested, who, to this day, has obtained no
information on the subject—a remark universally appli-
cable to every communication addressed to the Secretary of
State by Mr. Jones himself during his residence in the Colony.
It may well be believed that, under the circumstances
detailed, the virulence of Mr. Jones’ enemies, far from being
assuaged by his generous and spirited behaviour towards
them, in so resigning his office, acquired only the more
intensity from the concession. Not only the “ Courier ”
hut, with the exception of one newspaper, every journal in
the Colony, taking their cue from their respective patrons,
and encouraged by having the Attorney-General and Grand
Jury on their side, combined together against the now
defenceless Solicitor-General, and poured forth upon him
with such effect their slanderous invectives, founded some-
times on circumstances with which it was impossible for
them to have become acquainted without a breach of
Official confidence, that that gentleman found it at last due,
no less to his personal safety, than to the office he filled, to
interrupt the silence which he had hitherto, with so much
constancy, maintained, and, where that could be done with-
out the same violation of confidence of which his opponents
were guilty, to make his vindication as public as the slan-
ders to which he was exposed.
To this extent, and no further, he was prepared to act;
and, finding that one of the Colonial newspapers was not
implicated in the conspiracy, he applied to the Editor, and
obtained the insertion in its columns of a long series of
private correspondence, not relating to matters of official or
public interest, but which, as it did relate to the Attorney-
General, his father-in-law, and others of their Party, had
furnished the Attorney-General and his brother, during
some time past, with the subject matter of a long succession
of the most libellous and wanton attacks which had ever


appeared against Mr. Jones in the columns of the family
print, the “ Courier .”
This was the first, and only, instance of the Solicitor-
General’s resorting to that method of defence; nor did he
resort to it now, until painfully convinced of its necessity.
On this account, and as illustrating the views with which
he addressed himself to the Editor of that paper—which, it
deserves to be remarked, was, notwithstanding, most hostile
to the Issue Bill, and had opposed it with the greatest
severity from its introduction—his letter, which accompa-
nied and was printed with the correspondence, and was im-
mediately made by the Attorney-General the ground of an
official complaint to the Lieutenant-Governor, and a corres-
pondence between the acting Colonial Secretary and the
Solicitor-General, is subjoined.
“ To the Editor of the ‘ True Colonist.’
« gij. } “ Heathfield, Tuesday, 2nd December, 1839.
“ It is with the utmost reluctance that I find myself com-
“ pelled to resort to thePuhlic Press for the purpose of setting
“ myself right with the community of which I am at present
“ a member. I do so against a long formed, and hitherto
“ uniformly observed, determination; but my silence
“ during the unparalleled persecution I have undergone
“ for the last three months, has so emboldened my ad-
“ versaries, that, after the publication which gave rise to
“ the correspondence I now enclose, it is impossible for
“ me to conjecture what fabrications may not have been
“ circulated to my prejudice ; and, as you alone have been
“ sufficiently independent, voluntarily and disinterestedly,
“ to raise your voice against a systematic conspiracy, I am
“ induced to request that you will do me the further
“ justice to publish the accompanying letters, which
“ cannot fail to exhibit some of the individuals concerned
‘‘ in their true colours, and to establish the proper degree
“ of credit due to the detailed, circumstantial, and highly
“ authenticated statements of the ‘ Hobart Town Courier;'


“ and, from this one specimen, let the public learn to
“ estimate the veracity of all the other calumnies heaped
“ upon me, which, with those from whom they emanate,
“ are alike beneath my notice.
“ I seek neither favour nor support from the press—l
“ desire only common justice—and I shall ever remember,
“ with gratitude, that the first instance of fair play I have
“ experienced since my arrival in Van Diemen’s Land,
“ was in the columns of the ‘ True Colonist.’
“ I remain. Sir, your Obedient Servant,
(Signed) “ Herbert G, Jones.”
The consent of the Lieutenant-Governor to the publica-
tion of the correspondence in question was not requisite,
nor was it for His Excellency to censure, or interfere with,
what he could not prevent; accordingly, the explanation
afforded by the Solicitor-General’s letter of the 16th
December, 1839, already referred to, satisfied the Lieu-
tenant-Governor that he ought not to take any further
steps in the matter, and the complaint, so preferred by the
Attorney-General, fell to the ground.
Very different were the Solicitor-General’s measures
when the public justification of himself from false and
slanderous charges would involve public interests; with
respect to such, he knew that it did not become him to
proceed •without the previous sanction of the Head of the
Government, of his uniform conduct on such occasions his
proceedings with reference to the daily and increasing
calumnies of his colleagues and their allies of the press
in connection with his provisional acceptance and punctual
resignation of the Attorney-Generalship, afford an in-
structive example.
To such attacks it was obvious that the best, if not the
only, answer would be the publication of the sentiments
expressed by the Lieutenant-Governor himself, the most
impartial and the best informed amongst those privy to
the transaction.


But, feeling that, without Sir John Franklin’s express
permission, this was impossible, he wrote on the 30th
December, 1839, to the Acting Colonial Secretary, re-
questing “ that he would oblige him by obtaining the
“ consent of His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor to
“ his publication of the letter in which His Excellency
“ was pleased to accept his resignation of the office of
“ Attorney-General of that Colony, dated the 18th of
“ September then last (already quoted in pages 33-4).
“ He was desirous of doing so, in deference to the re-
“ peated solicitation of others, who had urged that, in
“ vindication of his character against the unfounded
“ calumnies still unceasingly circulated in private and in
“ public, especially in the newspaper edited by the Attor-
“ ney-General’s brother, he (the Solicitor-General) was
“ imperatively called upon to disabuse the public mind of
“ the erroneous impressions effected with reference to his
“ having undertaken the duties then declined by Mr.
“ Macdowell, in consequence of the weight those reports
“ derived upon the use made of the name of His Excel-
“ lency’s Government to his prejudice, by showing the
“ estimation in which his conduct was held by those not
“ only best qualified, but who, alone, were conversant
“ with the circumstances indispensable to form a correct
“ judgment thereon. He (the Solicitor-General) also
“ solicited permission to publish that letter and his (the
“ Acting Colonial Secretary’s) answer.”
Unfortunately for the Solicitor-General, in publishing
the private correspondence already referred to, he had so
materially damaged the common cause of all the members
of that great Party of which Captain Swanston, figuring
discreditably amongst the members of it, was so important
a manager, and the Derwent Bank, the powerful and
never-failing instrument, that, from that day, those, who
had before seemed to be neutral, threw off the mask, and,
as though their safety was not to be secured but by his


destruction, converged their united energies against him,
and, confident of success, or enraged at the disclosures
already made, did not attempt to disguise from him the
persecutions which they were urging for his ruin.
Amongst others, the Acting Colonial Secretary, Mr.
Forster, now became his open and avowed enemy : it
could not have been otherwise; his close and intimate
relations with the Derwent Bank, sedulously cultivated as
a means of emolument and power, could not brook the
menace offered to an influence upon which his political
existence and his private well being materially depended;
hence, the commencement of an enmity, which the Soli-
citor-General’s independence of mind, combined with the
irascibility and overbearing arrogance of the man’s own
nature, tended even more to foment and exasperate.
It is not wonderful, therefore, however much to be con-
demned, that to the application of the Solicitor-General
for leave to publish the official correspondence, alluded to
in his letter of the 30th December, 1839, that officer
prevailed with the Lieutenant-Governor to authorise him
to send a direct refusal. Indeed, when compared with
other and more important instances of the same ill feeling
which soon presented themselves, that denial of justice
almost seems to lose its importance, and would scarcely
deserve to be mentioned, but that it was the first result of
an enmity from which consequences so mischevious to Mr.
Jones’ rights were to follow.
“ His (Captain Forster’s) increasing energies,” writes
Mr. Jones on the 10th February, 1841, to the Secretary of
State, “ (since then exasperated by my complaints to your
“ Lordship) have been devoted to the removal of one
“ whose temerity was thus to be dreaded. It was even
“ given out that no Attorney who ventured to employ me
“ would be received at the Derwent Bank, a threat which
“ will not excite surprise when your Lordship is apprised
“ that, down to a very recent period, many who received


“ Government appointments had an intimation conveyed
“ to them, as from authority, that they were expected
“ to keep their accounts at that establishment ; a gentle-
“ man, however, who succeeded not long ago to a Police
“ Magistrateship, having ascertained that His Excellency
“ exacted no such tax, resisted, and, having
“ same known, no less than five paid officers renewed
“ their accounts within a few weeks to other banks.
“ The ‘ Courier ’ openly vouched the Government and
“ the Colonial Secretary by name, as authorities for their
“ slanders. I felt that, as the faithful performance of my
“ duty to the Government had been the origin of these
“ attacks, I was entitled to call upon them to allow me
“ to counteract these misrepresentations by publishing the
“ communication I had received from them on my resig-
“ nation. This I did by letter; my request, however,
“ was refused; and, though in private they had been, at
“ the time, unbounded in their commendation of my
“ conduct, I was not allowed to refute the falsehoods cir-
“ culated with the sanction of their name in that paper
“ into whose columns even extracts from private letters in
“ the custody of the Government find their way.”
Of the truth of this last assertion, the Solicitor-General
himself had been an instance.
Having repeated occasion to complain of the treatment
he received from the Acting Colonial Secretary, and being
unable to obtain any redress on the spot, he was more than
once obliged to address his complaint to the Secretary of
State. On one of these occasions, his attention having been
directed to the “ Courier ,” he discovered, to his amazement
and indignation, that his Despatch, after he had transmitted
it, as is customary in such cases, to the Acting Colonial
Secretary, and before that officer had forwarded it to
England, had been communicated to the Editor of the
“ Courier ,” who had used a quotation from it to give point,
if not foundation, to a slanderous libel upon himself. He


also found that another private and confidential corres-
pondence, also of an official nature, to which none but
himself, the Private Secretary, and the Lieutenant-
Governor were parties, had been similarly placed at the
Editor’s disposal, and that the paper in question actually
contained a reference to it!
The Solicitor-General, deeming the case one which
peculiarly demanded notice, and considering himself to be
fully entitled to claim the protection of His Excellency,
addressed a letter of complaint, on the 30th October,
1840, to the Private Secretary of the Lieutenant-Governor,
not esteeming it delicate to make the Acting Colonial
Secretary the medium of communication on a subject in
which it might afterwards, upon an inquiry being granted,
appear that he himself was a party to the breach of confi-
dence complained of.
In his letter, accompanied with a copy of the “ Courier ,”
containing the obnoxious article, he requested the Private
Secretary to lay it before the Lieutenant-Governor;
adding that “ he should not have troubled His Excellency
“ had not the present number furnished additional evi-
“ dence that the slanderous attacks which had, from time
“ to time, been levelled against him (if they had not
“ originated with) had derived assistance and encourage-
“ ment from some secret enemy of his connected with His
“ Excellency’s Government. In confirmation of that, he
“ needed do no more than solicit His Excellency’s atten-
“ tion to the passages he had marked in the fourth column
“ of the second page. In one instance, the words of
“ a Despatch which he (the Solicitor-General) had for-
“ warded to the Secretary of State, through the Local
“ Government, and which had never been published by
“ him, were quoted within inverted commas. In the
“ other, reference was made to a recent correspondence
“ which was confined to His Excellency, his Private Se-
“ crctary, and himself. It was not for him to surmise


“ who furnished that newspaper with the contents of the
“ first, and the misrepresented nature of the latter, of those
“ documents, to which none had access who were not
“ Officers of the Government. But, as the allusions
“ which that slanderous writer made to them would,
“ indubitably, lend to his other calumnies a sanction and
“ authority which could not fail to attach a certain weight
“ to the whole of his fabrications among the unthinking
“ many, he (the Solicitor-General) trusted His Excellency
“ would pardon him for directing his attention to the
“ indisputable fact that Official confidence had been violated
“ by some persons connected with his Government for the
“ malignant purpose of adding poignancy to the shafts
“ of the hireling Editor of that scurrilous publication.”
The only result which so respectful and reasonable an
application ever produced, was a letter of the 4th Novem-
ber, 1840, addressed to the Solicitor-General by the Acting
Colonial Secretary.
In that letter, Mr. Forster, after reprimanding him for
having addressed his letter to the Private Secretary,
instead of “ forwarding it through the proper channel for
“ Official communications,” (namely, himself,) and without
bestowing the slightest notice on the statements in Mr.
Jones’ letter which so clearly demonstrated, from their
exclusive and confidential character, that it was utterly
impossible for the Editor of any newspaper to have derived
a knowledge of the contents of those documents from any
but an Official source, —very coldly and drily proceeded to
inform him that “ His Excellency very much regretted
“ that he should have been subjected to the annoyance of
“ which he complained, but he had no grounds whatever
“ for supposing that any portion of it was attributable to
41 a breach of Official confidence on the part of ‘ some per-
“ ‘ son connected with his Government.’”
The truth is, that His Excellency did not then know,
nor, until long afterwards, did he become aware of, the


method—an ingenious one—employed in the office of his
Colonial Secretary for giving the requisite publicity to such
communications without “a breach of Official confidence”
being chargeable against any particular “ person connected
“ with his Government.”
He has, since his return to England, informed Mr. Jones
that he afterwards discovered it to have been managed
thus:—
At a concerted hour, the Editor of the print selected
was announced. The document happened to be on a
particular table in the room into which he was shown.
The official person—clerk or master—left the room as the
Editor entered it; —after a sufficient lapse of time, and
upon a given signal, he returned to the room, and found
that the Editor had gone, the document remaining exactly
where it was lying on his arrival. The next number of
the print invariably contained either an Extract from
such Document, or, at all events, an Editorial Article,
which could only have been written by one who had
perused it.
When even the most open and palpable violations of
Official confidence could thus be practised, and every
endeavour to chastise or prevent them, mocked to scorn,
it was not to be doubted that other abuses far less flagrant
and much more profitable might be practised with impu-
nity. The weakness to which the Solicitor-General was
now notoriously reduced by the withdrawal of all Official
protection placed him, in the estimation of every man who
meditated aggression, upon his own level, if not even at a
greater disadvantage. The Crown Solicitor, Mr. Eoss,
was one of the first to see this. It was impossible for one
so keen sighted, where his own interests were in any way
concerned, not to perceive that—by injuring and insulting
his Official Superior, the Solicitor-General, he furthered
them in a two-fold sense, directly, as pocketing the imme-
diate prices of the fraud, —indirectly, by gratifying the


vengeance of his enemies, and promoting the objects of
the Derwent Bank.
On this subject, in his Despatch to Lord John Russell of
the 10th February, 1841, Mr. Jones expresses himself as
follows, —
“ Thus, backed by the highest authority at present in
“ the Island, the Acting Colonial Secretary, the Faction
“ represented by him continued to insult and to malign
“ me with impunity. Mr. Ross defrauded me to a large
“ amount, I applied to the Lieutenant-Governor for re-
“ dress, which was extended to me in the form of a
“ reprimand for having allowed my Clerk to wait occa-
“ sionally at my table! until, feeling the utter inutility
“ and hopelessness of seeking for support against any
“ patronized by the Colonial Secretary, I was compelled
“ to lay the whole matter before your Lordship. Anxious,
“ however, to afford as little annoyance as possible to Sir
“ John Franklin, and cramped by my connexion with the
“ Government, I still abstained from that freedom of com-
“ munication which, in justice to myself and others,
“ perhaps, I ought to have used, but the treatment I
“ have since experienced releases me from all trammels.”
The circumstances to which Mr. Jones’ allusion to ill-
treatment relates, are briefly these:—
About two months after his resignation of the Attorney-
Generalship in Mr. MacdowelTs favour, Mr. Jones was
required by His Excellency, in Executive Council, to pe-
ruse the papers connected with the petition of William
M c Laren for a Scire Facias , being the case of “ M c Laren
“ v. Lord ” already mentioned, and to report his opinion
as to the right of the Petitioner to have the writ he
sought.
It should be premised, that, according to the Law of
England, the Writ of Scire Facias, when it issues to
repeal letters Patent of Grant, on the ground of sur-
prise, or mischief, is a Writ of Right; and, although also


a Prerogative Writ —that is to say, a Writ which cannot
be issued, but by the fiat of the Sovereign, first obtained
upon Petition; —the Sovereign cannot refuse such Writ to
any Petitioner alleging probable cause, in other words,
alleging , on the face of his petition, facts which, if proved,
would entitle him to a Verdict. It is not requisite that
he should prove his allegations , but only that he should
allege a probable case.
Not only did the Petition of William M c Laren, in the
Solicitor-General’s judgment, sufficiently allege such a
case, but, being accompanied with some of the proofs, it
went much further, establishing a primd facie case of
fraud and collusion against Mr. Lord, the Defendant, and
his Attorney, Mr. Ross. The Solicitor-General, conse-
quently, came to the conclusion that the Fiat for the Writ
ought to be granted; and further, that it behoved the
dignity of the Crown to examine into the truth of the
allegations in the Petitioner’s Affidavit, imputing fraud
and collusion to the Crown Solicitor, Mr, Ross.
As the Attorney-General and the Crown Solicitor had,
throughout that business, acted as the private Counsel
and the Attorney for the Defendant, Mr. Lord, who had
obtained a grant of part of the premises claimed, and as
the Solicitor-General’s position exempted him from bias,
he paid extra attention to the papers laid before him, and
prepared an elaborate Report for the satisfaction of His
Excellency. Mr. Jones’ opinion was directly opposed
to that of the Attorney-General, who had refused his Fiat
for the issue of the Writ; and the Crown Solicitor, acting,
it is believed, in concert with him, took offence at a portion
of the Report, consisting of hypothetical comments upon
the Affidavits in the Case, which reflected upon that
Officer, and —incredible as it may seem —sent him a hostile
message through another Colonial Attorney, filling the
post of Coroner!
Having by that time acquired some insight into the


state of things in the Colony, the Solicitor-General felt
that his usefulness, as an Adviser of the Crown, would
altogether cease if his counsel was to be moulded to meet
the private views of any man—whether those of the
Attorney-General, by the libellous attacks in the “ Courier”
or those of the Crown Solicitor, by the bravado of an
unprincipled bully. He therefore appealed to the Local
Government for protection.
Perhaps the shortest, and certainly the clearest, state-
ment of this, which it is possible to give, is that furnished
by the Solicitor-General himself in his Despatch to Lord
John Russell, of the 31st March, 1840 (for, as will be
seen, he had here, as in every other instance, failed to
find any adequate justice or protection within the Colony).
“ The case (of M c Laren),” he says, “ appeared to me
“ to be one of gross injustice against the Applicant. The
“ grant, sought to be repealed, having, in truth, issued
“ without any inquiry having been made into the title
“ of the Grantee (Mr. Lord), as affected the Petitioner,
“ although it comprised, inter alia , the whole of the poor
“ man’s property.
“ The Crown Solicitor had acted as the Private Attorney
“ for Mr. Lord, in obtaining this Grant, and the affidavits
“ and documents annexed, disclosed a serious charge of
“ fraud against both him and his client with reference
“ thereto; on those statements, as well as on every other
“ part of the case, I commented, and, after my Report was
“ completed, I transmitted it direct to the Clerk of the
“ Councils.
“ His Excellency, it would appear, directed my report
“ to be laid before the Attorney-General, through the
“ medium of the Crown Solicitor, and that Officer,
“ having, previous to its transmission, perused it, thought
“ proper to make extracts from it referring to himself,
“ which he delivered to Mr. Stewart, the Coroner, who
“ waited upon me to demand satisfaction on behalf of


“ Mr, Ross; this, of course, I refused to give, on the
“ ground that what I had written had been in the dis-
“ charge of my Official duties.
“ Conceiving such an attempt at intimidation to be
“ highly injurious to the public service, I submitted the
“ conduct of these parties to the Government, and the
“ accompanying correspondence shows the result—
The correspondence in question is too voluminous to
be extracted at length, suffice it, therefore, to say—that,
instead of at once dismissing the Crown Solicitor from an
office so disgraced, immediately upon receiving the Soli-
citor-General’s letter of the Bth November, 1839, claiming
protection against the outrage, the acting Colonial Secre-
tary on the next day, simply informed the Solicitor-
General, by a letter of that date, enclosing one from the
Crown Solicitor, dated the 7th of the same month, —
“ The Lieutenant-Governor not having seen his report,
“ His Excellency had called upon Mr. Ross to state the
“ exact points in it of which he complained, at the same
“ time acquainting him that the Lieutenant-Governor
“ highly disapproved of public officers making a personal
“ matter of disputes which might arise on public duty ; and
“ that His Excellency trusted he should not again
“ hear of his pursuing a course similar to that which he
“ (the Solicitor- General) had represented ; and which the
“ Lieutenant-Governor regretted he should have adopted in
“ that instance ; and that, until His Excellency had re-
“ ceived his (the Solicitor-General’s) further report, he
“ could not arrive at any conclusive opinion upon the merits
“ of the Dissension !! which, he regretted to see, existed
“ in that instance, in the Law Department .”—That by the
next letter from the same officer, dated the 14th of the
month, the positions of the parties were entirely reversed,
and the Solicitor-General, instead of receiving the satis-
faction and protection due to him, and alone adequate to
the emergency, was, in his turn, called upon to answer a


recriminatory charge preferred by that person himself, in
that part of his letter of the 7th instant (though dated
the 7th, Mr. Jones had positive information that Mr. Ross’s
letter had been written and sent in after the receipt, by
the Acting Colonial Secretary, of his own complaint on
the Bth) which referred to his (the Solicitor-General’s)
Report having been sent to a convict writer to copy,
agreeably to the custom of the Colony, where free labour,
especially of that kind, was always very rare, a custom
not confined to private practitioners, but followed by all
public officers not having the services of freemen at their
command.—That to a cross complaint of such a nature,
and from such a man, Mr. Jones, suppressing his natural
indignation at being called upon to answer—did, never-
theless, answer by a letter of the 14th of the month, in
which he explained to the Acting Colonial Secretary, that
“ the papers were laid before him on the afternoon of the
“ 28th ultimo, and their number and length prevented
“ him completing his Report until the evening of Satur-
“ day, the 2nd instant; that the following morning, in
“ Church he observed that His Excellency had returned
“ from his cruise, and was apprehensive that he might be
“ disappointed in not finding the opinion which he had
“ ordered before his departure; and having learnt, from
“ the letters addressed to the Colonial Secretary by the
“ Solicitor of the Petitioner then before him (the Solicitor-
“ General), that the Petitioner was extremely desirous of
“ being rescued from the further costs which the fol-
“ lowing Term would entail on him, unless the decision of
“ the Government should be previously made known, he
“ (the Solicitor-General) felt most anxious that no delay
“ of his should prevent His Excellency from determining
“ the question, and that it, therefore, became necessary,
“ with those views, that his Report should be sent in on
“ the Monday Morning—Tuesday, the sth, being the first
day of Term—but this the length of the document


“ would not admitof, unless he deviated from his usual habit
“ and worked on the Sunday—that his recent attention to
“ the subject rendered him ill disposed to copy it himself,
“ and his clerk was not only an indifferent, but a very
“ slow, writer; —to obviate which difficulties, he sent for a
“ man of the name of Riley, who came to, and remained
“in his library copying it from about three o’clock, p.m.,
“ until very near midnight, when he acceded to his desire
“to finish the small portion then undone at his own
“ house, promising to sit up until he completed it, which,
“he concluded, he did, as he brought the remainder to
“ him by half-past eight on the Monday morning:—that
“ this person had been strongly recommended to him by
“ Mr. Allport (a highly respectable Solicitor), and he (the
“ Solicitor-General) knew him to be employed by Mr.
“ Pitcairn, and others of the most respectable members
“of the profession, and had. as he (the Acting Colonial
“ Secretary) was aware, reason for believing that he was
“ occasionally employed in one of the Government Offices,
“ and he knew that the voluminous despatches recently
“ sent home by the Attorney-General, on the distillation
“ question, had been copied by him at his own house,
“ that he had, therefore, the strongest grounds for con-
“ sidering him a confidential and trustworthy person, and
“ was still disposed to think so, as he had every reason to
“ suppose that a recognition of his handwriting alone had
“ furnished the plausible complaint which had been prc-
“ ferred, but that whether he were a convict or not he
“ could not say, having no knowledge on that head bc-
“ yond that supplied by Mr. Ross’s Letter;” —And, finally,
that, upon receiving this very satisfactory explanation of a
comparatively unimportant charge, the Acting Colonial
Secretary, as if studious only how to humiliate the Soli-
citor-General to the level of his disreputable inferior,
availed himself of that occasion to close the correspon-
dence, by writing two letters on the same day (the 16th


November, 1839), one to the Solicitor-General, simply
reprimanding him, and another to the Crown Solicitor,
simply reprimanding him in like manner, —the offence of
the Solicitor-General being, at the utmost, that of not
having had a long, and pressingly required, Report trans-
cribed by his regular clerk, —and the offence of the Crown
Solicitor being that of having violated both official and
professional confidence, in order, thereby, to lay the ground
for the heinous offence which he was contemplating
against the Law T , of which, however inferior his position,
he was still the minister, and, by exposing to odium and
contumely his own Official Superior, to involve that Law
Officer of the Crown in the same offence of breaking the
peace, which, as a sworn adviser of Her Majesty, it was,
in an especial degree, his duty always to guard, and, upon
occasion, to vindicate.—And, lastly, to make the humilia-
tion of the latter the more complete, and that the Crown
Solicitor might not be able to doubt of the sincerity of
their determination to give no advantage, nor even justice,
to the Solicitor-General, so long as Mr. Jones filled the
appointment, copies of the letters of reprimand were
simultaneously forwarded on the day of their date to both
those officers.
It should be added, that the Lieutenant-Governor having
been induced to adhere to the advice of the Attorney-
General and Crown Solicitor in preference to that of the
Solicitor-General, the writ of Scire Facias applied for was
finally refused, and the unfortunate Petitioner, M c Laren,
left to contend at common law against all the advantages
which the possession of his Crown Grant, and the very
peculiar assistance of the Attorney-General and Crown
Solicitor of the Colony as his counsel and solicitor, secured
to the wealthy and powerful Defendant.
At this stage of the proceedings, the official connection
of the Solicitor-General with the case ended; and it is,
therefore, unnecessary to pursue it further; but as the


subsequent history powerfully illustrates the spirit in
which, on the part of the Petitioner’s antagonist and his
official protectors and allies, it had been from the first con-
ducted, a brief narrative of the wrongs which the poor man
was still fated to endure cannot be deemed irrelevant:
Whilst the serious allegations of the Petitioner’s affidavit
were entirely unheeded, and the Crown Solicitor’s conduct
was not made the subject of inquiry as recommended in
the Solicitor-General’s Report, the influence and authority
of Mr. Lord’s private counsel, Mr. Edward Macdowell, in
his triple characters of Attorney-General, Grand Jury, and
Legislative Councillor, were allowed by the Colonial Autho-
rities to be employed against his unfortunate adversary for
the depriving him of what little advantage the law yet
secured to him, and for intimidating him into silence, if
not acquiescence, under the usurpation.
An action of ejectment having been commenced by Mr.
Lord to turn M°Laren out of possession, the latter pleaded
the Statute of Limitations of the 21 Jac. I. The defence
was successful; and a verdict at law was found for the
Defendant. The Attorney-General immediately prepared
a Bill which was brought into the Legislative Council, and
pressed through all the stages, with the vehement support
of the Acting Colonial Secretary and the other Members of
the Government, and passed, for declaring that the statute
of James was not in force within the Colony, and further
for making such declaration Retrospective! The only
unofficial member who voted for the Bill was Captain
Swanston, the Attorney-General's Father-in-Law, himself
claiming to be the owner of an estate, which, if the statute
were in force, belonged of right to another. There was
no concealment affected as to the design of the Bill being
to relieve Mr. Lord from the difficulty occasioned by the
plea of the Statute. Indeed, the only petition presented in
favour of that Bill, was one from Mr. Lord himself, pre-


sented by his counsel, the Attorney-General, and printed
for circulation by order of the Legislative Council!
As the validity of the Bill depended upon Her Majesty’s
pleasure being signified through the Secretary of State, the
unfortunate man, M°Laren, and some others whose claims
were equally affected by its provisions, determined to me-
morialise Lord John Russell on the subject; and, it being
desirable that Mr. Lord’s printed Petition should not be
suffered to be read by His Lordship without the contra-
diction which they were able to give to some of its state-
ments, a very complete narrative of M c Laren’s case was
prepared and incorporated with the memorial, which, for a
similar reason, was printed and circulated in the Colony,
at the private expense of the parties, as Mr. Lord’s Peti-
tion had been at the Government expense.
As it was certainly calculated to impress Lord John
Russell with an unfavourable view of the case that one
unofficial vote had been given in favour of the obnoxious
enactment, the memorialists thought it right to take that
opportunity of accounting for it, which they did in very
courteous terms, by showing the relationship of Captain
Swanston to the Attorney-General, and also the personal
interest he took in the affair.
For this allegation, of which none disputed the truth,
an Ex-officio Information was, for the first time in the
history of the Legislative Council, filed in his Father-in-
Law’s name by the Attorney-General in the Supreme
Court; —“ Only the month before the only barrier,” as Mr.
Jones says in his Despatch of the 10th February, 1841,
“ that did exist against corrupt convictions, had been
“ broken down by the substitution of civil, for military,
“ juries; a measure not desired by the public, but intro-
“ duced for political ends.” A jury, in great part, com-
posed of Debtors to the Derwent Bank, or persons
otherwise under the influence of that political Party, found


the memorialists Guilty, in the face of a very intelligible
direction from the learned Judge to the contrary, and they
were sentenced to Fine and Imprisonment accordingly;
nor could the earnest petition to His Excellency, signed on
their behalf by many hundreds of respectable householders,
obtain the exercise of the prerogative of mercy in their
favour. They paid the fine, and endured the imprison-
ment ; and yet, before the trial came on, the Crown
Solicitor, so deeply involved in the transaction, and to
shelter whom had been the principal object of the Acting
Colonial Secretary, had, by the commission of the Felony
already detailed, removed all shadow of doubt as to his
character, and as such had been publicly gazetted in the
Colony from which he had fled!
But here another grave consideration presents itself in
connection with the whole of the proceedings in M c Laren’s
From a review of all the circumstances, it would appear
that the object which the local authorities had in view
when they required the Solicitor-General’s Report upon
that, or any other, case, was, to obtain his professional and
Official sanction for a course previously determined upon—
not his advice what course to take; —Otherwise, it is hard
to conceive why the opinion of the Attorney-General,
admitted by themselves to be the worst lawyer, or rather,
no lawyer at all, should have been so hastily adopted, and
the deliberate judgment of the Solicitor-General as hastily
disregarded, in a matter of so much importance to the poor
man whose interests were at stake; and, above all, in a
matter where the Attorney-General was actually retained
and engaged for that poor man’s opponent, and, therefore,
unavoidably biased in favour of that course which should
best subserve his client’s interests, whilst the Solicitor-
General, not being concerned for either party, was, on that
account alone, the more trustworthy adviser.
But here, again, though the inference which the facts


of the Case afford is impossible to be avoided, yet, all is
not left to inference; —The Acting Colonial Secretary, upon
another occasion, has himself recorded what view himself
and his Colleagues took of the duties to be exacted from
the Crown Law Officers in that Colony.
A respectable Magistrate had forfeited the favour of
the Government, and an opportunity was sought to justify
his dismissal;
The alleged ground, at length, taken to warrant his
removal, was his having been “ guilty of illegal conduct ”
in having entertained and adjudicated upon, alone, a
charge which required the presence of at least two Justices;
The Case, contrary to the invariable usage and practice,
was first submitted to the Attorney-General, who very
shortly acquiesced in, and sanctioned, the view taken of the
Case by those who sought the dismissal of the Magistrate:
The Lieutenant-Governor, however, required the opinion
of the Solicitor-General before he took so decisive a step,
and the papers were sent to Mr. Jones, who, taking a view
diametrically opposite to that adopted by his Colleague,
and observing that the Case betrayed an evident feeling
against the Police Magistrate—an entire stranger to Mr.
Jones, who, to thepresent hour, has never even seen him, —
in order to afford every assistance to the Lieutenant-
Governor in forming his Judgment, detailed, at very con-
siderable length, the conclusive arguments which supported
his opinion, which was exculpatory of the Magistrate.
It would appear that this conclusion proved distasteful ;
for, on the following day, the papers, with the Solicitor-
General’s own Report, were returned to him by the Acting
Colonial Secretary, accompanied by an insulting memo-
randum, stated to have been directed by the Lieutenant-
Governor, which, setting aside as altogether irrelevant and
unworthy of consideration, the elaborated arguments he
had taken the trouble to advance for the satisfaction and
guidance of the Lieutenant-Governor, amounted in sub-


stance to the taunting inquiry,—and was so justly repre-
sented by Mr, Jones in his appeal to the Lieutenant-
Governor, —“ Pray, Mr. Solicitor-General, do you mean
“ to say that there is anything in the Act you have cited
“ which declares black to be white, or which sanctifies as
“ just that which is manifestly unjust 1 for, if so, an
“ amendment of the law is necessary.”
Naturally indignant at such treatment, the Solicitor-
General was, nevertheless, mindful of his official duty;
nor was it until he had discharged that duty, by recon-
sidering his opinion, and again recording, in a second long
elaborated Report, the reasons on which it was grounded,
and which were confirmatory of his first Report, that he
ventured to claim His Excellency’s protection against his
being for the future exposed to a recurrence of such insults
on the part of the Acting Colonial Secretary. In reply,
however, he was informed by a letter of the 6th August,
1840, that the Lieutenant-Governor, instead of marking
his sense of that officer’s offensive conduct, adopted all
responsibility for the same, and, selecting two extracts from
Mr. Jones’s complaint, His Excellency condemned the one,
as exceeding “ every rule of propriety, when applied even
“ by inference,” (which was the case) “ to any communi-
“ cation emanating from the Official Organ of the Govern-
“ ment,” and the other (which expressed Mr. Jones’s
conviction that the memorandum in question had never
received the sanction of the Lieutenant-Governor, and
which he had submitted as an illustration of the liberties
taken with His Excellency’s name) because it implied a
“ highly injurious charge ” against the Acting Colonial
Secretary, and concluded by saying—“ Taking both pas-
“ sages in connection, they seem to His Excellency even
“ to render it a possible question how far the many quali-
“ fications for Office possessed by you can hereafter with
“ advantage be made available for the public service.”
Mr. Jones was, however, by the same communication


apprised that, after the receipt of his opinion, “ Evert/
“ intention of proceeding against the Police Magistrate had
“ been Abandoned.''
No one who reads even this short abstract of this Case
can withhold his assent to the following observation,
extracted from Mr. Jones’s reply to this unintentional
homage to his value as a public servant, embodied in the
Lecture to which he had thus subjected himself, —
“ Were it necessary to illustrate the paramount im-
“ portance to the Lieutenant-Governor of being enabled
“ to repose the most implicit confidence, as well in the
“ integrity and independence, as in the ability and dili-
“ gence, of the constituted Advisers of his Government,
“ a stronger case than that of Robert Muggeridge ” (the
prisoner in question) “ could not be adduced.”
But, however displeasing to the Local Authorities, he
owed a duty to the Crown, and he was determined to
discharge it. If, in the discharge of that duty, any
impediment occurred which it was within the province and
capacity of the Local Authorities to remove, he never failed
to apply for their assistance. When gross dereliction of
duty, or abuse of influence, came under his official cogni-
zance, which it was not within his jurisdiction to correct,
he invariably made it known to those who had the juris-
diction, accepting, without reserve, for himself the
responsibility of accusation.
Satisfied, above all, from circumstances already detailed,
to use the language of one of his letters to the Acting
Colonial Secretary, (Ist June, 1840,) “ that the interests
“ of the Crown were in the greatest jeopardy, while the
“ office of Crown Solicitor was filled by Mr. Ross,” and
having, from his own position as Solicitor-General, com-
bined with the habitual indolence of his superior in office,
peculiar opportunities of detecting some of the malpractices
of their subordinate, he was especially observant in his
regard, and what lie observed, careful to communicate.


The occasions were frequent, and the results dis-
couraging. It may be safely affirmed, that the greatest
success ever obtained for such communications was, when
the Solicitor-General himself escaped blame for making
them. As to punishing the Crown Solicitor, that was out
of the question; nor was inquiry, in any one instance, so
much as thought of.
Amongst other instances, the following, detailed by the
Solicitor-General in his Letter of the 25th March, 1840,
to the Acting Colonial Secretary, are very significant, and
well deserving of attention, —
On the 26th July, 1839, the Solicitor-General was
required by the Lieutenant-Governor to advise as to the
liability of certain Auctioneers, Messrs. Collicott and
Macmichael, to pay over to the Crown the amount realized
by them upon the sale by auction, so long back as 1833,
of the Government Schooner, “ Tasmania.”
Amongst the papers forwarded, was a report on the
case made by the Crown Solicitor, in which he stated that
the Auctioneers “ could not in any way be made liable for
“ the proceeds of the sale of the vessel in question.”
. The result of the Solicitor-General’s perusal of the
papers was an opinion directly opposed to that of Mr, Ross.
On the following day, 27th July, he transmitted for His
Excellency’s consideration a report to that effect, which
was forwarded to the Attorney-General, with a letter from
the Crown Solicitor, calling his attention to two points,
which, it would seem, he deemed conclusive against the
opinion of the Solicitor-General. On the 15th of August,
however, the Attorney-General returned the papers with
this Memorandum, —
“ Memorandum.
“ I see nothing in the Crown Solicitor’s communication
“ to me to induce me to dissent from the opinion given
“ by the Solicitor-General in this case, and I must add,


“ for this is not the first time this case has come under
“ my notice, that I always entertained the same opinion.
(Signed) “ EDWARD MACDOWELL.”
The positive opinion given by the Solicitor-General, and
thus confirmed by the Attorney-General, with a very in-
telligible expression of his view of the matter, led to
instructions to the Crown Solicitor to proceed for the
recovery of this long standing debt. By a letter, dated
the 17th January, 1840, apparently in reply to an inquiry
by the Colonial Secretary, Mr. Ross informed that gentle-
man that an action had been commenced against the
Auctioneers, to which, he added, they had appeared, “ in-
“ tending to defend the same.”
The action had been, in fact, commenced so long before
as the 26th November, 1839, and the Defendants appeared
to it on the 2nd December, but from the day the writ was
issued, to the date of the Crown Solicitor’s answer to the
Colonial Secretary—namely, the 17th January, 1840, and
from thence to the 28th February following, no further
step was taken in the matter.
Late in the afternoon of the latter day, a draft declara-
tion, of a very anomalous and informal description, was, with
other Government papers, sent to the Solicitor-General for
approval—the very next day, the 29 th February, being the
last day of the Term, and the last day for filing declarations;
The Solicitor-General was at the time confined to his bed,
but he made an effort to draw an appropriate declaration ;
Finding, however, that he could not accomplish it before
the last hour when it could be rendered available, he
addressed a letter to the Crown Solicitor, dated that day,
informing him the “ papers in the case with a draft de-
“ claration for him (the Solicitor-General) to settle, had
“ been left with him the last evening, the draft sent was
“ inapplicable to the facts of the case, which required a
“ special count in assumpsit, and not one simply for money


“ had and received as he had prepared, and that, as that
“ was the last day for filing declarations that Term, he
“ regretted that the instructions had not been sent sooner,
“ as it would not be in his power to prepare a proper
“ declaration before the office closed; nor to obtain the
“ concurrence of the Attorney-General, which, under all
“ the circumstances of that case, he should deem essential.”
On the following Monday morning, the 2nd March, he
sent the Crown Solicitor a new declaration to lay before
the Attorney-General.
Without referring to the antecedent delay of years, it
will thus be perceived that, had the Crown Solicitor acted
at once on the concurrent opinion of the Attorney-General
and Solicitor-General, he might, with only ordinary dili-
gence, have had the cause ready for trial at the Sittings of
the Supreme Court in September 1839; but not only was
that not done, but he neglected to commence the action
until too late to have it tried even at the Sittings three
months afterwards, in December 1839, and subsequently
was guilty of further neglect, in allowing the matter to rest
until it became impracticable to have the cause tried at the
Sittings in the second week of March 1840; for, if brought
on with the pleadings settled in so great a hurry, the Crown
would probably be defeated, as it would inevitably have
been, had the draft, purporting to be a proper declaration,
sent for the Solicitor-General’s approval, been permitted to
have been adopted: As it was, the case had still to stand
over for some future Sittings, the earliest being in the
month of June following, and each successive delay tend-
ing to render a defeat more probable, from a failure in the
necessary proofs: For, in fact, the Crown had now been
upwards of six years out of the receipt of the price of the
vessel sold by the Defendants.
Nor was this, as the Solicitor-General observed, in his
letter to the Acting Colonial Secretary, on the 23rd March,
1840, a solitary instance.—ln two other cases, where actions


had been lately brought against Messrs. Fletcher and Wil-
liams to recover penalties of £.IOOO each, due to the Crown
for breach of Commissariat Contracts, the proceedings on
the part of the Crown Solicitor were so culpably negligent,
so radically erroneous, (for instance, the Attorney-General
had been made to sue in his own individual names, instead
of the Queen’s) that the Defendants demurred, and
Mr, Ross, well knowing the futility of contesting the objec-
tions raised, and to avoid exposure, had allowed judgment
to be signed against the Attorney-General; and the Govern-
ment, instead of receiving the sums sought, would have to
pay costs to the Defendants, unless, indeed, they were to
relieve themselves from that dilemma by leaving Mr. Mac-
dowell to pay the costs himself, to which he was so made
liable.
At the time that the Solicitor-General was commu-
nicating these facts to the Acting Colonial Secretary, he
was entirely ignorant, nor did he, until months after the
correspondence had closed, learn the fact, —that in the
early part of that very month of March, certainly before
the 17th of the month, the Acting Colonial Secretary,
whilst on a visit to a wealthy and powerful member of his
party, in whose neighbourhood Fletcher, one of the Defen-
dant’s in the actions for the breach of the Commissariat
Contract, resided, had, at the solicitation of his host, agreed
to suspend further proceedings; and had promised that the
Lieutenant-Governor should forego all claim on the part of
the Crown, thus actually exonerating the Defendants from
the penalty of the bond for £.lOOO, upon which the actions
had been brought. Thus, as Mr. Jones in his despatch of
the 10th February, 1841, very justly remarks, —“ to the
“ general ignorance and remissness which” he then declared,
“ characterised the attention paid to the interests of the
“ Crown, he might now add something stronger.”
To this respectful representation of matters of grave and
alarming import, the Solicitor-General received no reply,


and was consequently obliged, in justice to the Crown,
whose officer he was, and whose interests were thus
neglected, to forward to the Secretary of State a copy of his
unanswered letter, with an explanatory despatch to his
Lordship, dated the 31st March, 1840; transmitting them,
in compliance with usage, through the Lieutenant-
Governor, in order to give His Excellency the opportunity
of appending such comments as he might think desirable.
Still, no immediate, or direct, reply to his hitherto unan-
swered letter of the 23rd March followed. But on the
9th April, 1840, the Crown Solicitor addressed a letter to
the Solicitor-General, informing him, that “on the 29th
“ of February he had commenced the actions on behalf
“ of the Crown against Williams and Fletcher, upon the
“ bond, to which actions a demurrer was put in. The
“ demurrer in one of the cases being bad, he (the Crown
“ Solicitor) was about to sign judgment, as for want of a
“ plea, but, upon the preparation of such judgment, it had
“ occurred to him that the action had been commenced
“ prematurely, inasmuch as he conceived, upon an assess-
“ ment of the damages, the Crown could recover only what
“ appeared due at the time of commencing the action,
“ the contract extending to the 31st of March then last
“ past; he should feel obliged by the Solicitor-General’s
“ opinion upon the subject and his advice as to the course
“ he should follow.”
These absurdities and mis-statements, both of law and
fact, are too apparent in themselves, or else too clearly
pointed out in the Solicitor-General’s Eeport next noticed,
to need exposition. It may, however, be permitted to
remark, that if the Solicitor-General could have then
formed the suspicion of that which he did not know until
long afterwards—the intention of the official friends of
the Defendant to screen him at any hazard from his
liability, the extraordinary conduct of the Crown Solicitor


on that occasion might well have warranted him in enter-
taining it.
The last-mentioned letter "was only delivered to the
Solicitor-General immediately before he started for Laun-
ceston on that day to attend the Assizes ; and as the
matter could not be expedited by an earlier answer, he
deferred sending one until his return.
In his Report, dated the 20th April, 1840, after stating
the above facts, he proceeded to observe that “ it was the
“ only communication relative to those actions that the
“ Solicitor-General had received from the Crown Solicitor,
“ and would not alone, without even copies of the plead-
“ ings having been forwarded to him, enable him to com-
“ ply with the request made.
“ He had, however, already heard of them elsewhere,
“ having been himself charged with having drawn the
“ defective declarations ; and he was, therefore, in posses-
“ sion of more information concerning them than the
“ Crown Solicitor’s letter disclosed.
“ The declarations in both cases were, of necessity,
“ precisely the same, with the simple change of the De-
“ fendant’s name, and the grounds of demurrer were, also,
“ verbatim, the same in each and every particular. If, there-
“ fore, the demurrer in one case was bad, why was it not
“ equally so in both? Although, perhaps, at the first
“ glance, the Crown Solicitor might have thought one of
“ them was bad, on reflection he must have seen reasons
“ for changing that opinion, as the Solicitor-General had
“ been also informed that he had sent to the agent of the
“ Defendant’s Attorney acknowledging that the demur-
“ rers must be allowed, and soliciting him as a great favour
“ to sacrifice his own client’s interest by allowing him, (the
“ Crown Solicitor,) to deliver new declarations in lieu of
“ those he so admitted to be erroneous.
“ But, supposing that to be incorrect, and that the


“ Crown Solicitor continued, and was still, of opinion that
“ the demurrer in one of the cases might, after the neces-
“ sary argument in Term, be pronounced by the Court
“ bad, nevertheless, those demurrers having been duly
“ tiled and delivered before the time for pleading had
“ expired, how could the Crown Solicitor have been about
“ to sign judgment as for want of a plea 1 a demurrer
“ being tantamount to a plea, and the delivery of one in
“ time absolutely precluding a Plaintiff from taking such
“ a step.
“ The Solicitor-General was, however, of opinion that
“ the demurrers were unanswerable, and fatal to both
“ actions, and that the Crown Solicitor had done right in
“ not unnecessarily incurring additional costs by a joinder
“in demurrer; but, had it been competent for the Crown
“ Solicitor to have decided on the insufficiency of the
“ demurrer in either case, he could not have availed him-
“ self of such an anticipation of the ultimate opinion
“of the Court by signing Judgment. That the Crown
“ Solicitor’s apprehension of the action having been pre-
“ maturely commenced was quite unfounded, as the action
“ might, and ought to, have been brought, if brought at
“ all, if not immediately after the first breach of the
“ condition in the Bond on the part of the Defendant
“ Fletcher, at all events so soon as an ascertained loss was
“ established, for if, in point of law, the Crown was not
“ entitled to the entire penalty, so soon as the condition
“ was once broken, still it was entitled to recover what-
“ ever damages had been sustained up to such date, and
“ the judgment so obtained would, under the Statute of
“ William the Third, have remained as a further security
“ to answer to the Crown such further damages as might
“ be afterwards sustained by any future breach, and it
“ would then only have been necessary to sue out a Scire
“ Facias, and so, to ties quoties, as long as the Bond re-
“ mained in force; and lastly, that it was neither neces-


“ sary nor expedient to resort to a common law action at
“ all, as the Bond was clearly within the statute of Henry
“ the Eighth.”
But the sound opinion of the Solicitor-General was
disregarded, and the error of the Crown Solicitor sanc-
tioned and approved of by the Acting Colonial Secretary,
in the name of the Lieutenant-Governor.
On the 2nd June following, the Solicitor-General was,
for the first time, favoured with a reply to his letter of the
23rd March, so often mentioned. By a letter of that date,
the Acting Colonial Secretary apprised him “ that His
“ Excellency was quite satisfied that, in the Case of the
“ Attorney-General v. Collicott, the blame of the delay
“ did not rest with the Crown Solicitorand that, as for
the case of the Attorney-General v. Fletcher, there had
been “no loss whatever, not even of time; and that, as
“ the Crown never paid Costs, the Solicitor-General was
“ in error when he stated that the Costs were recoverable
“ by the Defendants upon the Judgment signed in
“ demurrer against the Attorney. General.”
After having, by this bold but disingenuous defence of
Mr. Ross, cleared the way for an accusation of his accuser,
the Acting Colonial Secretary proceeded to draw the
Solicitor-General’s attention to the following selection of
passages culled from his various letters to the Local
Government, and his despatches to the Secretary of State,
and reflecting upon the character of that favourite.
Ist.—“ Mr. Ross, for the purpose of maintaining the
“ colour of the deception, attempted to be practised upon
“ his Excellency.”
2nd.—“ Had there been any truth in Mr. Ross’s state-
“ ment.”
3rd.—“ He (Mr. Ross), had resorted to subterfuge and
“ evasions.”
4th.—“ To suppose him actuated by the common
“ principles of respectable society.”


sth.—“ Although I cannot condescend to enter into
“ that minute statement of its (Mr. Ross’s letter) evasions
“ and untruths.”
6th.—“ I must be excused for not considering my.
“ Clerk’s statements, as detailed in my letter of the 31st
“ ultimo, in the slightest degree affected by the positive
“ contradiction they have received from Mr. Ross, espe-
“ dally when I find the credibility of those contradictions
“ supported by representations imputed to myself con-
“ cerning him which I know to be unfounded.”
7th.—“ I am unwilling to allow Mr. Ross the benefit of
“ this subterfuge.”
Bth.—“ Various other shifts to evade a settlement have
“ failed.”
9th.—“ Had not Mr. Ross filled the situation he does,
“ my Clerk would not have trusted him to the extent
“ he has.”
Again, in your letter of the 3rd March you say “ with-
“ out attributing to him, not only a departure from truth
“ in the one case, but a gross and, culpable, dereliction of
“ duty in the other;” and immediately afterwards you
draw the conclusion, “ that the interests of the Crown are
“ in the greatest jeopardy while the office of Crown Solicitor
“ is filed by Mr. Ross."
In your letter of the 25th March you describe the pro-
ceedings on the part of the Crown Solicitor “ as culpably
“ negligent and erroneousand concluded by represent-
ing him as “ an individual whose sense of his own value
“ has enabled him to insult and defraud me, his superior
“ in office, for not having adapted my (the Solicitor-
“ General’s) counsel to the Government, when com-
“ manded, to his (the Crown Solicitor’s) own peculiar
“ views.”
In your (the Solicitor-General’s) letter to Lord John
Russell, you stated “ that the affidavits and documents in
“ M° Laren’s case disclosed a serious charge of fraud


“ against both him (the Crown Solicitor) and his Client
and with respect to the fees you (the Solicitor-General)
“ entreated His Lordship’s attention to the various subter-
“ fuges to which Mr. Ross had had recourse.”
Again, you said “ that a man capable of acting as he
“ had acted towards you (the Solicitor-General) could not
“ be influenced by those principles which would dictate a
“ conscientious discharge of the duties of his station, were
“ he even properly qualified.”
Having culled and gathered these passages, not one of
which, as the Acting Colonial Secretary and every man in
the Island well knew, but was as richly merited as the
events proved them to have been, the writer, solicitous
only to gall and wound the feelings of the gentleman he
addressed, by placing him and the disreputable man to
whom those expressions were so justly applicable upon the
same level, insulted the Solicitor-General with the inquiry,
“ how he would have received such expressions if applied
“ to himself ?” and again, towards the end of his letter,
made use of the same degrading argument, in order to let
in the following reprimand, —
“ The Lieutenant-Governor needed only to inquire what
“ would be his (the Solicitor-General’s) feelings were such
“ language applied to himself by an officer serving with
“ him under the same Government, but, in whatever
“ light he might regard such expressions, so strongly did
“ His Excellency deprecate in Official correspondence their
“ usage, subversive as they were alike of good order in
“ the public service, and destructive of the well being of
“ society, that he would not receive from him (the Soli-
“ citor-General) any more letters couched in similar inde-
“ fensible language.”
Nor was this the only humiliation to which the Solicitor-
General was subjected. From the copy, enclosed, of a
letter to the Crown Solicitor of the same date, it appeared
that that officer had been further gratified by having a


copy of that letter of reprimand forwarded to him for his
perusal.
Notwithstanding this unworthy treatment, and the un-
just determination of the Lieutenant-Governor not to
receive any representation whatever founded upon matters
criminatory of the Crown Solicitor, as signified in the
sentence quoted, by which Mr. Jones was forbidden to
employ criminatory language, he endeavoured at a per-
sonal interview to induce His Excellency to hear his
explanation, with a view to his obtaining some alteration
in that respect; Sir John Franklin, however, persisted in
his resolution, and even refused to hear a word further on
the subject. The Solicitor-General was, therefore, again
reluctantly compelled to state his justification of conduct,
which needed none, in a Despatch to the Secretary of
State.
In that Despatch, dated 11th June, 1840, he stated
“ that he lamented exceedingly that his language should
“ have been deemed too strong by His Excellency, and
“ while he admitted that the selection of passages which
“ had been so carefully made, might, when read alone in
“ detached sentences, appear to merit His Excellency’s
“ condemnation, he could conscientiously assert that they
“ were mildly framed with reference to the abuses to
“ which they related.
“ His answer was simply that had they not been merited,
“ they would not have been employed by him. The most
“ moral and religious work by a similar process might be
“ represented as the very reverse, if sentences were thus
“ severed from the context, and exhibited alone without
“ reference to the subject matter.
“ He had neither professed, nor desired to obtain credit
“ for having been actuated by, any zeal, he had only
“ sought to do what he conceived to be right; and
“ although his efforts there to obtain redress had been


“ unsuccessful, and his representations deemed to have
“ been unfounded, he ventured to hope that a very few
“ words would secure to him an acquittal at His Lordship’s
“ hands of having made them without sufficient cause,
“ which was necessarily implied in the dismissal they had
“ met with.”
The Solicitor-General then applied himself to the duty
incumbent upon him of answering and refuting the falla-
cies which had been set up, and which were pretended to
be grounded upon the maxim of law—“ that the Crown
“ pays no costs.”
He stated “ that the very objection to the proceedings
“ was, that the suit had been brought in the name of
“ ‘ Edward Macdowell,’ (the Attorney-General) to recover
“ a debt due to the Crown, and Judgment had, in conse-
“ quence, been signed against him (Edward Macdowell)
“ individually. lie must pay the costs incurred, unless
“ the Government paid them for him, and further that the
“ fact was that the Crown Solicitor had himself in person
“ applied for, and had obtained, the Defendant’s Bills of
“ Costs in both those actions, and had likewise promised to
“ pay them , before this triumphant refutation of his (the
“ Solicitor-General’s) statement was returned.
“ In alleging that he (the Crown Solicitor) had com-
“ menced those actions prematurely, as the contract did
“ not expire until the 31st March, he had advanced that
“ which was legally incorrect and untenable, and dia-
“ metrically opposed to his (the Solicitor-General’s) opinion,
“ obtained by him (the Crown Solicitor) for his guidance.
“ The insincerity of this portion of the defence,” the Soli-
citor-General went on to say, “ is illustrated by the fact
“ that down to this 11th day of June, no new steps have
“ been taken, though the actual loss sustained by the
“ Commissariat Department, has much exceeded the
“ amount of the bond which was for £.IOOO only, and,


“ for this obvious reason, that he (the Crown Solicitor)
“ knows that he cannot proceed until the costs in the
“ former actions are paid to the Defendants.”
Whatever effects this unanswerable exposition had upon
the Secretary of State, it had not any on the Local Govern-
ment ; —it elicited no reply—it obstructed none of their
determined objects—it- had scarcely left the Island—if
indeed it had actually left it —before Sir John Franklin
ratified and redeemed the already-mentioned pledge of the
Acting Colonial Secretary, staying proceedings without
delay against the Defendant, Fletcher, and releasing, in the
name of the Sovereign, the forfeited penalty of his bond.
Another case—it is the last that will be cited—further
illustrating the extent of corruption with which the Solici-
tor-General had to struggle in fulfilling his duty to the
Crown, is equally instructive as to the methods practised
to annoy and embarrass by those to whom he had a right
to look for countenance, protection, and support.
The proprietor and nominal Editor of the “ Hobarton
“ Advertiser ,” Mr. Edward Abbott, had long preferred a
claim to 210 acres of valuable land in the centre of the
town of Launceston, worth upwards of £.20,000. At the
time of the Feigned Issue Bill, this claimant, who had at
first opposed the Bill, changed sides and lent his paper to
the purposes of the Government, for, as it was publicly
reported, the support given him against a Mr. Sharland,
the original grantee of another lot of land of which he had
already possessed himself, and other considerations of the
kind, but particularly for the support of the Government
on behalf of his asserted rights to the Land at Launceston.
How far they kept faith with him in their representations to
the Secretary of State did not transpire, but that every advan-
tage was afforded to him, in the Colony, to the prejudice of
the Crown was quite apparent.
It was first attempted to cast on the Surveyor-General
(then Captain Boyd, and since, like many other Officers,


dismissed) the responsibility of the then anticipated success
of Mr. Abbott. On his claim to a Grant of that Land
coming before the Caveat Board, Captain Boyd called on
the Solicitor-General for his advice, which made it neces-
sary to direct him to appear on that occasion before the
Commissioners, and support the interests of the Crown.
But no instructions were sent to him, he only received on
the previous afternoon from the Acting Colonial Secretary
an intimation that he was required to attend before the
Board on the following morning (20th November, 1839)
at ten a.m., “ for the purpose of watching, and, if neces-
“ sary, of protecting, the interests of the Crown.” This
note was unaccompanied by a single line explanatory of
the case, to which Mr. Jones was a total stranger; indeed,
he was, on the same day, informed by a letter from the
Crown Solicitor that the correspondence was so voluminous
that it was impossible for him even to frame any abstract
of the case sufficiently explanatory. When the Solicitor-
General entered the room he found Her Majesty’s Attor-
ney-General, assisted by a second Counsel, regularly in-
structed by a Solicitor also present, with a box full of
papers, in support of the Claimant’s Case. His own means
of defence were gathered by himself solely from the pro-
ceedings on the other side, and from some verbal informa-
tion afforded him during the hearing by the Crown
Solicitor, who attended with a mass of papers and folio
volumes of correspondence, of course wholly unavailing at
the moment. Mr. Jones, in his Despatch of the 10th
February, 1841, informing Lord John Russell of these
particulars, adds, “ although my efforts on the part of the
“ Crown proved successful, I have reasons to believe that
“ my exertions did not afford higher satisfaction to the
“ Government than they gave to Mr. Abbott himself, I
“ solicit your Lordship’s attention to them (the letter of
“ instructions) as confirmatory illustrations as well of my
“ former representations, as of the assistance rendered to


“ a Law Officer not possessing the secret confidence of the
“ Government, and of the vigilance displayed in vindicat-
“ ing the Rights of the Crown when they are capable of
“ being bartered for the promotion of private interests.”
It had, probably, been supposed that one very natural
result of such treatment would be, to stimulate Mr. Jones
into the resignation of an office in which his zeal for the
service was so constantly thwarted, and the rather since
the prospects of a large increase of his already large pri-
vate practice might very reasonably operate as a direct
inducement to that course; but, if so, they were disap-
pointed ; —Mr. Jones felt, indeed, that the public business
was neglected, but he also felt that the neglect was not
with him, and that by remaining in office and discharging,
so far as he was permitted, the functions of his own
department, he incurred great mortification, indeed, from
his unworthy Colleagues, but no share in their heavy
responsibilities, he, therefore, retained his post, and, in one
of the Despatches already cited, complaining of the con-
duct of the Local Government with reference to the
Official and personal misconduct of Mr. Hugh Ross, he
informed Lord John Russell, that “ ardently desirous as
“ he was to be relieved from so much and such intolerable
“ persecution, he was, nevertheless, determined not to
“ resign his office.”
It is remarkable that, very soon after this announcement
of purpose, a more direct system of aggression commenced,
having for its object the curtailment of the emoluments
and privileges of his position, together with his own
degradation and that of his Office, by first establishing,
and then obtaining, if possible, his concurrence in a new
scheme of professional jurisdiction and subordination,
instead of the ancient customs and well understood laws
and usages of the Four Inns of Court—abolished for the
purpose, and, by compelling him to sacrifice that—for


which alone, as he had informed Lord John Russell, he
continued to hold so thankless an office under difficulties
so enormous—the opportunity of private practice. The
first measure adopted towards these ends was the fol-
lowing :
On the 22nd September, 1840, Mr. Jones had reported
by a letter of that date to the Acting Colonial Secretary,
that the situation of Clerk in his office had been some
time vacant by the death of his Clerk, whom, as it will be
remembered (see page 8), he had brought with him from
England, and that he, Mr. Jones, had nominated a Mr.
James Daly as his successor, and he requested that the
same might be notified to the Auditor of Accounts ac-
cordingly ; in reply, he was amazed at being informed,
by Mr. Forster’s letter of the 29th of the same month,
“ that the Lieutenant-Governor saw no occasion for
“ placing the appointment of Clerk to the Solicitor-
“ General on a different footing to that of other Clerks
“ under the Government, who were nominated by the
“ Lieutenant-Governor, and, consequently, remained in
“ their situations notwithstanding the death or resignation
“ of the Heads of their Departments, who had not the
“ power, independently of the Lieutenant-Governor, either
“ to appoint or remove them at pleasure ; and that, after
“ that explanation, he (the Acting Colonial Secretary)
“ was to inquire whether he (Mr. Jones) was desirous of
“ recommending Mr. Daly for the appointment of Clerk
“ to the Solicitor-General!” On the Ist of October fol-
lowing, the Solicitor-General addressed a very proper
reply to Mr. Forster’s letter, stating, “ for the information
“ of His Excellency, that, before he accepted the appoint-
“ ment of Solicitor-General for the Colony, he had made
“ special application at the Colonial Office to be informed
“ precisely what the salary and emoluments were, and he
“ was distinctly informed by Mr. Gairdner that he should


“ be entitled to a £.loo* a year for a Clerk, and, on the
“ faith of that representation, he had incurred the ex-
“ pense of bringing out his late Clerk, who had lived
“ with him for many years. He submitted also to His
“ Excellency that a Barrister’s Clerk stood, in relation to
“ his employer, in a totally different position compared
“ -with that in which the Clerks in the various Public
“ Offices were placed with respect to the Heads of their
“ respective departments,—the former filled a confidential
“ position, which was altogether inconsistent and incom-
“ patible with his being placed in that situation by, or his
“ holding his appointment subject to the pleasure of, any
“ individual whatever but his immediate employer; he
“ further added that the course proposed was wholly at
“ variance with the invariable usage of his profession at
“ home, where the Clerk’s rise in the world is a necessary
“ consequence of his master’s success in his profession;
“ and that he did not know of a single Official post, filled
“ by Members of the Bar, where the principal had not
“ the sole appointment of his own Clerk, and that, when
“ elevated to the bench, the Judges invariably retain and
“ promote their own Clerks ; the circumstance of his
“ holding a Colonial appointment, he submitted, could
“ not alter the case; the Clerk of the Solicitor-General
“ had no duties to perform peculiar to the office; —there
“ was nothing which could render it either necessary, or
“ even desirable, that he should be transferred with the
“ Office ; —the evil resulting from such a course had, in-
“ deed, been strongly illustrated there in the case of
“ the then Attorney-General who (whether voluntarily
“ or not) was, for a long time, incumbered with a Mer-
“ chant in the Town as his nominal Clerk, —the same
“ person having filled that situation with his predecessor;
* It was so stated by Mr. Gairdner, but, on his arrival in the Colony,
Mr. Jones found the amount to be £.130.


“ the duties of liis (Mr. Jones’) Clerk, as Solicitor-
“ General, formed a portion only of his other work as the
“ Clerk of a practising Barrister; the salary allowed to
“ him by the Government being merely a commuted allow-
“ ance in lieu of those established fees to which he would
“ be entitled on each separate matter he (Mr. Jones)
“ had to attend to for the Local Government. So utterly
“ irreconcilable, indeed, with his feelings was the doctrine
“ propounded by the Acting Colonial Secretary, that, had
“ such an idea been broached to him before he quitted
“ England, he would have at once abandoned his present
“ appointment; he was led by the Home Government to
“ consider the allowance in question as a portion of the
“ advantages of the office for which he resigned his pro-
“ fessional prospects at home ; with all deference and
“ respect for His Excellency, he must decline to recognise
“ or acknowledge the right of nomination and appoint-
“ ment of his own Clerk in any other person than him-
“ self, claiming, likewise, respectfully, the exclusive right
“ of removal whenever, and as frequently as, he might
“ think proper.”
In confirmation of the correctness of his views, he
added, “ that he was informed, very shortly after his
“ arrival there,' by the best Authority, that the Secretary
“ of State’s Despatch, sanctioning a salary to the Clerk of
“ the Solicitor-General, expressly described it as ‘ an
“ ‘ allowance for a Clerk,' or words to that effect.” This
temperate and conclusive exposition of an unanswerable
case had the fate of its predecessors.
On the very next day, he was informed by a Letter
from the same Officer, “ that the sentiments expressed
“ were not new to the Lieutenant-Governor ; all that he
“ had now urged had been fully weighed by His Excel-
“ lency before the Letter of the 29th ultimo was addressed
“ to him; His Excellency’s view of the matter remained
“ unchanged; the Solicitor-General was allowed a Clerk


“ at the expense of the public solely for the purpose of
“ assisting him in the discharge of his public duties; the
“ salary of the Clerk formed as much the subject of ap-
“ propriation by the Legislative Council as that of any
“ other servant of the Government ; the Lieutenant-
“ Governor could not recognise the principle that the
“ duties of Clerk to the Solicitor-General formed only a
“ portion of liis work, and that he was consequently hut
“ partially paid by the Government.”—(A conclusion
Avhich Mr. Jones never dreamed of drawing.)
“ The claim advanced had never been urged by the
“ Attorney-General, nor allowed to any Officer under the
“ Government. The Lieutenant-Governor was at all
“ times prepared to receive with attention the recommen-
“ dations of the Heads of Departments, but His Excel-
“ lency retained his undoubted right in all cases to
“ nominate their subordinates.
“ As Mr. Jones had not stated the authority upon which
“ he said the Secretary of State had authorised ‘ an allow-
“ ‘ ance for a Clerk,’ it was unnecessary to advert to it
“ further than to observe that, had such been the case,
“ ‘ an allowance for a Clerk ’ would have been proposed to
“ the Legislative Council. That body had, however, voted
“ a salary for a clerk. With respect to that appointment,
“ His Excellency was prepared to receive a recommen-
“ dation, but not prepared to sanction the appropriation
“ of any portion of the Public Money for which he was
“ responsible by any other individual than himself. Mr.
“ Forster had again to inquire whether Mr. Jones recom-
“ mended Mr. Daly for the office of Clerk to the Solicitor-
“ Generali”
This evasive and disingenuous letter was not calculated
either to satisfy or to persuade. Mr. Jones stated, in
his reply of the 3rd October, 1840, “ that the views he
“ had had the honour to submit for the consideration of
“ the Lieutenant-Governor, in his letter of the Ist inst.,


“ remained altogether unaltered, and that he continued
“ under the impression of his perfect right to guarantee
“ to the Clerk so appointed by him the salary voted by the
“ Legislative Council; he was, therefore, reluctantly com-
“ polled to appeal to the Secretary of State, unless His
“ Excellency would be pleased to sanction the payment of
“ the same.”
The answer to this, contained in the Acting Colonial
Secretary’s letter of the sth of October, 1840, was a simple
refusal of Mr. Jones’s application, inviting him, at the same
time, to prefer his appeal to Lord John Russell.
Accordingly, Mr. Jones did appeal to that Secretary of
State. His despatch of the 4th November, 1840, accom-
panied with copies of the entire correspondence on the
subject of the Clerk, was duly forwarded to Lord John
Russell. But the result has never been ascertained; before
an answer could be received from England, Mr. Jones had
already ceased to hold the Solicitor-Generalship. It only
remains to be added that not one farthing of the salary
which, in pursuance of his guarantee, Mr. Jones had
paid out of his own pocket, has ever been repaid to him
by the Government. Once for all, indeed, it has to be
repeated that no notice whatsoever has been taken by the
Authorities in Downing Street of any of his applications
whether upon this, or upon any other subject, upon which,
during his residence in Van Diemen’s Land, he was com-
pelled to seek the protection of the Secretary of State.
This large diminution of Official income as it failed to
induce him to throw up the Office to which such income
was annexed, so it likewise failed to satisfy the designs of
his enemies. Their next measure was of a bolder cha-
racter, and it was crowned with success.
They had now by a dearly-bought experience learned to
know their man; —The same incorruptibility which had
secured him against their first endeavours to influence his
actions might easily be made, if matters could be disposed


before hand, the Lever for expelling him from office. His
zeal for the honour of the service, and of the Bar, —which,
shared as it was by so many honourable men of his pro-
fession in England, was, in Van Diemen’s Land, esteemed
a singularity, and almost a weakness, —might be turned to
his prejudice, if only the honour of that Office and of that
Bar could be made incompatible with his retaining the
first. He had accepted it on conditions. Those condi-
tions might be rescinded, that is, broken by the Local
Authorities. Then, one of two results must follow,
either Mr. Jones would retain it at the expense of honour
and conscience and every moral support which had sustained
him in his, otherwise unequal, conflict with Faction and
Intrigue, in which case, he was ever at their mercy. Or
else—and this they foresaw would happen—and this did
come to pass!—there would be a prompt and explicit
refusal on his part to accede to their terms, so, the pretext
of “ disobedience of orders ” for which, in the judgment of
a Military Secretary to a Naval Commander-in-Chief, he
might legally be suspended from his Office.
These considerations led to the following measures being
adopted. They were prepared with much deliberation,
nor were they made public until the last moment; yet
something of their main purport transpired; “In Novem-
“ ber last,” says Mr. Jones in his Despatch of the 10th
February, 1841, “ it was currently and confidently re-
“ ported that a measure was in preparation by which I
“ should be disposed of, several persons applied to me
“ to know the meaning of the same ; It was said that the
“ Executive Council was engaged in some matter which
“ w ould cause an immediate change in the Law Officers ;
“ The Colonial Secretary did not scruple to urge a friend
“of his to prepare for the Solicitor-Generalship; It was
“ likewise publicly reported in the newspapers that I was
“ doomed to follow Captain Boyd, in the list of dis-
“ missals.”


It was not, however, until the 11th December, 1810,
that anything new was heard of this ominous measure;
and then Mr. Jones received Official Information con-
cerning it from a letter of the 10th December, 1840,
addressed to him by the Attorney-General, enclosing copies
of an Official Correspondence beginning with the 19th
November, and ending with the 7th December, 1840,
between himself and the Acting Colonial Secretary, and
requiring him to prepare for the immediate performance
of his part in the arrangement, to which that corres-
pondence purported to refer, as having been actually con-
cluded, but upon which he had never been consulted,
although his interests alone were prejudiced by it; nor, in
fact, had he until then been so much as aware that any
negociation or correspondence was going on with refer-
ence to that subject.
It will be remembered that, previously to Mr, Jones’s
departure from England, he had taken the precaution, sug-
gested by the current reports of the habitual indolence of
his future Colleague, to obtain from Lord Glenelg an
assurance that there should be an exact division of duties
made on his arrival between himself and the Attorney-
General, —to be determined by themselves, if they could
agree upon such a division, or by the Lieutenant-Governor,
in the case of any variance. It will also be remembered
that, immediately upon his landing, a plan for the division
of duties, was discussed between himself and Mr. Mac-
dowell, —that there was no variance, —that they made their
joint Report to the Lieutenant-Governor, recommending
such plan,—that His Excellency gave it his own sanction,
—that the plan, so recommended and approved, became
the settled and irrevocable order of things—irrevocable,
at least, without the consent of every party to it; —and that
it was immediately carried into effect, and had continued
to be acted upon, without one single exception or objection,
down to the period at which we have arrived.


Now, it was this permanent arrangement which was
directly struck at by the clandestine measure of the
Attorney-General, and the acting Colonial Secretary, as com-
municated to Mr. Jones by Mr. Macdowell’s letter of the
10th December, 1840; —a measure which, it cannot be
too often repeated, was declared to have been already dis-
cussed and adopted, and the communication of which to
Mr. Jones was also expressed to be, not for the purpose
of obtaining his sanction, or even of eliciting his obser-
vations, but for the purpose of binding him to obedience,
active as well as passive, and compelling his immediate
performance of the new duties so unceremoniously, not to
say violently, thrust upon him.
So palpable a proceeding needed colour, and therefore
the vulgar pretext of occasion was put forth. It was said
by Mr, Attorney-General that a question had been asked
in the Legislative Council, by a member of that body—
himself an enemy of Mr. Jones, and withal nominated by
and holding his seat at the pleasure of the Lieutenant-
Governor, though not actually in office—“ Whether the
“ £.lOO paid to Mr. Hugh Ross, the Crown Solicitor, for
“ conducting the prosecutions at the Quarter Sessions,
“ could not be saved ?”—lt may be, that such a question
was put;—it may be that it was put without concert;
but neither such a question, nor the general undertaking
which Mr. Forster is alleged to have eagerly given on that
occasion—“ That, if the Honourable Member would not
“ then object to the item, he (Mr. Forster) pledged himself
“ that it was the last time it should appear in the esti-
“ mates,” could, in any way, justify that Officer, or that
Government, or that Attorney-General, in carrying into
effect such reduction at the expense, not of Mr. Hugh
Ross, but of Mr. Jones, and, least of all, by any measure
to which that gentleman was not a party. —Yet such was
the course they took !
“ Some time after that inquiry was made,” observes Mr.


Macdowell, “ the (Acting) Colonial Secretary renewed the
“ subject to him ” —and a plan was matured between them
for reducing the £.IOO a year previously paid to Mr.
Hugh Ross, for acting as Crown Prosecutor at Sessions in
Hobarton, a reward, certainly, not more than adequate for
the labour of such an office, if diligently and ably per-
formed, insomuch that, but for the office being held with
other offices of better emoluments, it is certain that the
salary in question would not have secured to the Govern-
ment even Mr. Hugh Ross’ services in that capacity.
This reduction being agreed to, a sense of justice, accord-
ing to the Attorney-General, operated both with himself
and the Acting Colonial Secretary to relieve Mr. Ross of
those arduous duties—so much interfering with his valuable
time and extensive private practice—to which the abolished
salary had been annexed.—This was accordingly done.
But, as the presence of some Crown Prosecutor at the
Quarterly General Sessions, not only in Hobarton, the
Capital, but throughout the Provinces, was now, for the
first time, conceived to be an indispensable requisite to
the due administration of the criminal justice of the Island,
it was decided, on the one hand, to appoint some com-
petent person in Mr. Ross’s place, and, as the discharge of
the always important, and now largely increased, duties of
that office, was henceforward to be strictly gratuitous, it
was, on the other hand, impossible to find any person,
competent or incompetent, who would accept it; compul-
sion was, therefore, necessary; but to compel, they said,
Mr. Ross to resume, even in Hobarton alone, the abdi-
cated Crown prosecutorship without the abolished salaries,
would be a gross injustice; therefore, they concluded,
that Mr. Jones might be very justly called to take up the
Crown Prosecutorship at Quarter Sessions, not only in
Hobart Town, but also in the Provinces, although, as
Queen’s Counsel, he was in any case, by a well known rule
of the Bar, forbidden to assume to himself such an office ;


and further, to perform the duties of that office without
fee or reward !!
As such a monstrous arrangement cannot fail to appear
startling and incredible, that there may be no doubt as to
it, the very words of the Attorney-General, in a letter
addressed to the Acting Colonial Secretary, and forming
part of the correspondence so sent to Mr. Jones, are sub-
joined :
“ It having been determined in the Legislative Council,
“ on the consideration of the estimates for the year 1841,
“ that the sum of £.lOO per annum hitherto paid to the
“ Crown Solicitor for conducting prosecutions in the Court
“ of Quarter Sessions, at Hobart Town, should be discon-
“ tinued, and that duty should be performed by the
“ Solicitor-General, in the propriety of which decision I
“ acquiesced, and having subsequently been requested by
“ you to submit, for the information of His Excellency the
“ Lieutenant-Governor, any further measures which I
“ might deem it advisable to propose for the better and
“ more economical administration of justice in the Courts
“ of Quarter Sessions throughout the Island, I proceed to
“ submit to His Excellency in this communication the
“ manner in which these objects can, in my opinion, be
“ best obtained.
“ The Act of Council recently passed, substituting Civil
“ for Military Juries in Criminal Cases, will enable the
“ Chairman of the Court of Quarter Sessions in each
“ district of this territory to try prisoners with as little
“ inconvenience and expense as Criminals in those Courts
“ can now be tried in England. The Jury is summoned
“ from the neighbourhood, the witnesses reside almost
“ without exception within the district, and instead, as is
“ now the case, of sending prisoners for trial often a
“ distance of fifty miles from the place where the offence
“ is committed, the whole of the proceedings can now be
“ conducted from their commencement to their conclusion


within the district itself. I would, however, recommend
at present these trials should be limited to Hobart
Town, New Norfolk, Oatlands, and Richmond. I
should have been desirous also of advising that the same
course should be adopted in the Northern part of the
Island, at Campbell Town and Longford, did I not
know that the Gaols at both these places were utterly
unfit for the reception of Criminals, and therefore my
recommendation must be limited to the places I have
already mentioned, with the addition of Launceston, to
the Gaol of which the Magistrates of Campbell Town
and Longford now commit prisoners for trial, and by
the new Act coming into operation in January, the
charge now borne by the Colony of five guineas a day
for the attendance of Military Jurors will be saved.
“ I intend also, in the event of His Excellency ap-
proving of these my recommendations, to request the
Police Magistrate at Campbell Town, in all those cases
which arise in that portion of his district nearest to Ross
to commit for trial to Oatlands, and by this arrangement
a saving both of expense to the public and time and
trouble to the witnesses, will, as a matter of course, arise.
“ As far as I am enabled to calculate, the saving likely
to be effected by the trial of prisoners as I have proposed,
instead of the practice hitherto, of necessity, prevailing,
cannot amount to less than four, I believe it will exceed
five, hundred pounds per annum; there must, however,
from its reduction be taken the travelling expenses of the
Chairman of the Court of Quarter Sessions, and of the
Solicitor-General to these places; but these cannot, I
conceive, exceed £.150 per annum.
“ I have proposed that the Solicitor-General should
conduct these prosecutions, rather than the Crown
Solicitor, because the presence in Hobart Town of Mr.
Ross, where he has to perform all that portion of the
public business which properly belongs to him as an


“ Attorney, in which capacity the Solicitor-General does
“ not practice, would render his absence from town on these
“ occasions always inconvenient, and not seldom injurious
“ to the public service; and as the conduct of the whole of
“ the Criminal Business before the Supreme Court and the
“ preparation of the informations for that Court, as the
“ Court of Quarterly Sessions devolves upon me, I may, I
“ conceive, without requiring that which is at all un-
“ reasonable from the Solicitor-General, assign to him the
“ duty of conducting this portion of the Criminal Business
“ of the Colony, the more so, because it is known to you,
“ that during the time Mr. Stephen held the office of
“ Attorney-General here, he acted merely as Grand Jury,
“ leaving to me the preparation of all informations and the
“ conducting of all the Criminal Business before the Supreme
“ Court, never having been engaged, as far as I can
“ recollect, in conducting any prosecutions in that Court,
“ more than five or six times during his tenure of office.”
Thus, as it will be perceived, the degradation from rank
and privilege was not the only grievance :
The arrangement, as made by Messrs. Forster and Mac-
dowell, entailed the further consequence of an immense
increase of duty. The Solicitor-General was required to do,
without fee or reward, five times the work previously done
by the Crown Solicitor, for performing which fifth he had
been deemed worthy of the extra salary of £.IOO a year.
This was clear enough from Mr. Macdowell’s own state-
ment. Theretofore there had been Quarter Sessions at
Hobarton—that is to say, Sessions holden only four times a
year, but at Hobarton the Sessions were to be in future
held eight times a year,—at Richmond, distant seventeen
miles from Hobarton, New Norfolk, distant twenty-two
miles, and Oatlands, distant fifty miles, —at none of which
places had Sessions been previously holden,- —there where
thenceforward to he Quarter Sessions every year for each
place, making, in all, twelve Sessions yearly, and, together


with the Hobarton Sessions, twenty Sessions yearly, the
whole burthen of attending which was to be cast upon Mr.
Jones. Lastly, the duty of preparing the Informations (or
Indictments) against prisoners triable at all those Twenty
Sessions was likewise assigned to the Solicitor-General!
And the whole of this, as has been already remarked, with-
out fee or reward!
It must be quite obvious that, had it been possible for
Mr. Jones, having a becoming regard to the dignity of his
Office and profession, to accede to such a plan, one necessary
consequence would have been the occupation of nearly the
whole of what leisure from official labour, he had hitherto
been able to appropriate to that private professional em-
ployment, the opportunity of which had, at first, tempted
him to quit England, and was by far the best emolument
attached to his otherwise ill-paid Office. It would, in fact,
have rendered it impossible for him, surrounded by a
family, in a Colony where the necessaries of life were four
times as dear as in England, to support himself and them
with credit to his position there, or even to support him-
self at all. Thus, if his sense of personal and professional
honour had not deterred him from incurring the loss of
office by his opposition to the proposed measure in the first
instance, pecuniary necessities, superinduced by the un-
worthy compliance, must, as its promoters foresaw, have
compelled a resignation.
The alarming consequences which would have ensued
from so preposterous a measure to the Solicitor-General’s
own private interests, had he been weak enough to comply
with it, as also the result which would, and really did,
follow from his embracing the only other alternative open
to him—that of refusal, are, in other respects, although
very much understated as to distances and amount, well
and clearly set forth by Mr. Jones in his Despatch of the
10th February, 1841, to Lord John Russell.
He says—“ In the first place they,” (the Attorney-Gene-


ral and Acting Colonial Secretary) “ calculated accurately
“ from the correctness of my Professional Practice, my
“ known refusals to attend Quarter Sessions or the Police
“ Office for private Clients, as my predecessors were in the
“ habit of doing, that I would never consent to appear
“ before a Bench in a Penal Settlement, composed of any
“ tradesmen or clerks whose fruition of the Colonial
“ Secretary’s favour, or whose usefulness in a variety of
“ ways peculiar to the early history of this Colony, had
“ secured the dignity of Justice of the Peace ; my refusal,
“ therefore, was a certainty which alone promised to
“ supply a charge of ‘ disobedience to orders ’ which the
“ overbearing disposition of the Military Secretary—
“ rendered tyrannical where he can be so from having so
“ long presided over a Convict Constabulary*—could never
“ overlook. But there was another point which they
“ also secured; the plan proposed that the Quarter
“ Sessions at Hobart Town, for attending which alone
“ Mr. Ross received £.IOO a year, should be held eight
“ instead of, as theretofore, four times a year. That I
“ should also visit four times a year Richmond, New Nor-
“ folk, and Oatlands, being severally distant from henee
“ fifteen, twenty-one, and fifty miles. Last year, the
“ Quarter Sessions in Hobart Town alone sat twenty-six
“ times, including adjournments; at the same rate, the
“ eight Sessions might yield fifty-two sittings, which, with
“ the twelve Country Sessions (not to reckon adjourned
“ meetings there), involving journeys of not less than 688
“ miles, would, of course, completely monopolize the
“ whole of my time; in addition to these, the original
“ plan cast upon me the duty of preparing the Informations
“ for all the Sessions. If, therefore, I should not object
“ to undertake work which, while the Attorney-General
• Until appointed, in the beginning of 1839, Acting Colonial Secretary
during Mr. Montagu’s absence, Mr. Forster had filled for some years
the situation of Chief Police Magistrate of the Colony.


“ filled my place and subsequently, had been assigned to
“ an inferior officer of a lower professional grade, on the
“ score of its being incompatible with my rank, and irre-
“ concilable with my feelings, the scheme, if manfully
“ enforced, would compel me to elect between my Official
“ salary and my private practice, it would be impossible
“ to attend to both ; my salary they knew to be £.600 —
“ reduced to £.470 by the refusal of the Government to
“ pay my Clerk, because I claimed the right of appoint-
“ ment, —and, as even their envy could not assess my
“ private practice at less than three times my salary, it
“ was obvious to them that, if I should not decline the
“ work, so as to afford the Colonial Secretary a pretext for
“ my suspension, actual necessity would compel me to
“ decide in favour of my private connexion ; in any
“ event, therefore, their plan could not fail to dispose
“ of me !”
Immediately upon receiving the Attorney-General’s
letter, already referred to, the Solicitor-General waited on
His Excellency, and explained the reasons why he could
not possibly accede to the arrangement, in order, as he told
him, that his Official refusal should not be attributed to any
improper motive, as he could not there detail so minutely
his objections. His Excellency acknowledged that he had
not regarded the subject in that light, and appeared to
concur in his views. The Solicitor-General also sent in his
Official Answer to the same effect, which was laid before the
Attorney-General, who, with a promptitude and industry
quite unusual in him, returned, in a few hours, thirty-two
pages of observations, disclosing, by their sophistry, weak-
ness, and bitter personality, that the reasons assigned were
very remote from those prompting the change. These
were forwarded to Mr. Jones for his counter observations.
His counter observations were immediately prepared and
sent in; they form the contents of his letter of the 24th
December, 1840, to the Acting Colonial Secretary. The


length of that valuable document precludes its insertion in
this place; suffice it to say, that it reiterated and enforced
the objections already stated, and, moreover, clearly
demonstrated that the alleged motive of economy did not
exist, the expense of the proposed system being, at least,
equal to that of the old.
The Solicitor-General heard no more until Wednesday
the 30th December, 1840, when he waited upon His Ex-
cellency, and expressed a hope that he would, as usual,
permit his absence from Hobarton for a few days, as he
was anxious to attend, according to his invariable practice,
the approaching periodical Session of the Supreme Court
at Launceston, fixed for the following Monday morning,—
a circumstance upon which Messrs. Forster and Macdowell
had fully calculated; His Excellency said, “ Why, the only
“ thing is, my Council advised me yesterday to adhere to
“ my former decision respecting these Sessions, but, besides
“ that, I have no other occasion for you.” The Solicitor-
General expressed his regret at the advice he had received,
and assured him, that he could not change the determina-
tion he had already twice communicated; the Lieutenant-
Governor then said, that he had approved of a draft letter,
which he had directed to be sent to the Solicitor-General
that morning, in conformity with the advice he had so
received. —Mr. Jones requested to be permitted to anti-
cipate its receipt, and to assure him that he could not, for
any consideration, undertake the work, adding—“ but,
“ perhaps your Excellency will allow me to remind you
“ that, even if I could, my absence would not interfere
“ with the Hobarton Quarter Sessions, as the Attomey-
“ General, in his first letter on the subject, announced that
“ those Sessions fixed for the 4th, would be adjourned to
“ the 15th, —before which day I shall return;” upon which,
His Excellency, appearing to correct himself, remarked,
“ I recollect he did, I observed that.” With the single
exception of inquiring after Mrs. Herbert Jones, and ex-


pressing his regret at having heard from his Nephew, that
she had been unwell, to which Mr. Jones replied, that she
was better, and that he had prevailed on her to accompany
him, as he thought change of air would be of service, and
an observation from his Excellency that, “he hoped it
“ would,” nothing more passed on the subject of his going
to Launceston.
But upon the main question, something more did pass;
Mr. Jones finding his former impressions confirmed as to
the nature of the scheme, and the motives of its authors,
frankly made His Excellency acquainted with his views, of
which Sir John Franklin virtually admitted the correctness,
telling him that, “ he (Mr. Jones,) would be very foolish if,”
to use his own expression, “he fell into their trap.” Then,
in reference to the Attorney-General and Colonial Secre-
tary, he volunteered the declaration that, “ nothing could
“ be worse than their feelings ” towards Mr. Jones, and that
he, (the Lieutenant-Governor) “ had frequently to contend
“ against it.” Mr. Jones assured him, not for the first time,
that he would not be driven to a resignation, but that he
feared, if they failed in this scheme, they would have some
other the next week, and would at last succeed in inducing
His Excellency to suspend him from Office; to which His
Excellency, as if fully aware of the machinations of his
Advisers, emphatically exclaimed, “ That I’ll never do! ”
Mr. Jones remained talking on different topics full half an
hour, and then took leave; —lt is scarcely worth remarking
on the circumstances, that they are quite inconsistent with
the supposition of his having been expressly or otherwise
refused the leave of absence he had sought.
He deferred his departure until near four p.m., and no
letter arrived; but, about six p.m. it was sent from the Colo-
nial Secretary’s private house to Mr. Jones’s residence, with-
out date, either to itself, or in reference to the letter to
which it purported to be a reply, disclosing corroborative
proof of the temper which had evidently dictated its con-


struction, and regulated its mission; ’ conformably with
Mr. Jones’ directions given previously to his leaving town,
it was forwarded to, and reached, him the next day on the
road, and by the same night’s post he returned his reply,
repeating his inability to comply;—therefore, on the fol-
lowing morning (Friday,) the Government not only were
in possession of his original written objections to the duty
imposed upon him, adhered to by his personal assurance to
the Lieutenant-Governor on the 30th December, 1840, but
were thus, by his final written reply, aware, as early as the
Ist January, 1841, that he could not undertake the same.
But, to complete a case against him, and, notwith-
standing the predetermined adjournment of the Hobarton
Quarter Sessions fixed for the 4th January, 1841, and not-
withstanding Sessions had been held there as late as the
28th December, a Bench of Magistrates was, with some
difficulty, formed, for the purpose of trying one supposed
Criminal (against whom they failed in adducing a single
tittle of evidence) in order that they might have it in their
power to say that Mr. Jones’s absence had injured the
administration of public justice; although the Crown Soli-
citor was present, his duties, as Clerk of the Peace, were
for the first time, in the history of the Colony, set up as a
pretext for his refusing to act as prosecutor; thus, great
inconvenience might have been made to appear to result
from Mr. Jones’s absence, had not the Sessions been, incau-
tiously, adjourned to so late a day as the 20th February
following, affording pretty plain proof that none actually
did arise, and there being, in fact, no prisoners to try!
Moreover, at the very time that this farce was being
enacted, there was not only a Crown Solicitor in office,
but also a new Solicitor-General on the spot, quite ready
to enter upon the discharge of his functions, although not
actually Gazetted nor sworn in.
On the preceding Friday, Ist January, 1840, Captain
Swanston, and a disreputable Attorney of the name of


Rowland, the convivial companion of Mr. Macdowell, and
the secret Police Agent and confidential friend of the
Acting Colonial Secretary, had communicated to their
respective correspondents in the country the intelligence
which they had that day received from Mr. Forster of Mr.
Jones having been already suspended from his office, and
Mr. Home, the senior partner in the firm of Horne and
Wynne, Attorneys and Solicitors at Hobarton, having
been appointed in his stead. A Gentleman (the only one
amongst the correspondents so addressed) to whom Captain
Swanston made known the fact, was Mr. Anstey, another
Member of the Legislative Council, residing on his estate
of Anstey Barton, about fifty miles from Hobarton, the
Father of the Compiler of this narrative. The object of
Captain Swanston in writing to him on such a subject
may have been to warn him by the terrors of the example
against following the same independent course which had
resulted for Mr, Jones in consequences so painful, or to
dissuade his son from following it, or for any other pur-
pose. Whatever the motive, Mr. Anstey, Senior, was dis-
tinctly apprised that, but for his Son having shown a
disposition not to brook Official interference with any part
he had, or might have, in the administration of public
justice, he would have been the new Solicitor-General.
Mr. Anstey’s son happening to be at Anstey Barton, on
the following day was shown Captain Swanston’s letter,
and perused it several times, and Mr. Jones having his
authority for saying that such was its purport, made the
fact known. An attempt was made by Mr. Forster to
obtain a contradiction ; but Captain Swanston, on learning
from Mr. Anstey, Senior, that the compiler of this narrative
had seen his letter, thought it prudent to deny nothing.
These communications were made on the Friday; yet
the Executive Council, by whose advice alone the suspen-
sion of Mr. Jones, and the appointment of Mr. Home,
could take place; and, by the Official notification of those


measures, are expressly declared to have taken place, was,
in fact, not holden until the day following (Saturday, the
2nd January, 1841).
Nor is this all; —it was thought necessary, for the due
impression of Lord John Russell’s mind with the detriment
to the public service alleged to have resulted from Mr.
Jones’s absence from Hobarton at that juncture, that the
Colony should appear to have been wholly deprived by it
of the services of a Solicitor-General, and therefore the
Official notification of Mr. Horne’s appointment was de-
ferred until the 13th of the month, —twelve days after it
had actually taken place, and had transpired through the
Colonial Press.
On the 14th January, 1841, Mr. Jones received from
the Acting Colonial Secretary, a letter, dated the day pre-
ceding, announcing his suspension from the Solicitor-
Generalship, and assigning two reasons for the step,—
First, that he had refused to obey the directions issued to
him by “ the Lieutenant-Governor in Council,” —and by
which he was required to undertake the duties of a subor-
dinate Officer in the Department of Crown Law, and to
violate an ancient and universal rule of professional de-
corum ; —and, Secondly, that he had proceeded to Laun-
ceston after he had been refused leave of absence by
the Lieutenant-Governor. How untenable that second
ground was, no one who has read the foregoing statement
of what really did take place between the Lieutenant-Gover-
nor and the Solicitor-General on the occasion in question,
as described by the latter Gentleman in his Despatch of
the 10th February, 1841, to Lord John Russell, can fail
to determine. It is, therefore, most important to remark
that no other cause is so much as alleged in the letter of
the 13th January, 1841, or in any other letter, so far as
Mr. Jones or his friends are informed, for the suspension.
The part which Sir John Franklin, against his better
nature and the declared convictions of his mind, was, by


the Advisers, who, at that time, exercised so baneful an
influence upon his judgment and volition, induced to take
in this unworthy consummation of a long formed con-
spiracy, has been, it appears, amply repented of, and, so
far as his present means permit, honourably atoned for.
Moreover, the compiler of this narrative, having regard to
the personal wishes of Mr. Jones in this instance, will
offer no comment upon Sir John Franklin’s conduct on
the occasion of Mr. Jones being suspended from office,
but will merely observe that the moment seized was pro-
pitious,—that the return of Mr. Montagu, the Colonial
Secretary, from England, was hourly expected, and with
it the cessation of Mr. Forster’s provisional authority, and
the introduction of a more discriminating Administration, —
and further, that Sir John Franklin happened, at that
particular period, to be without one single friend to coun-
sel or sustain him. As the Head of the Local Govern-
ment, however, it was, undoubtedly, his duty to protect
virtue and chastise crime;—this truth Sir John Franklin
himself has been the first to admit, and to avow his whole
and undivided responsibility for the consequences.* But,
considering the question with a view to the propriety or
impropriety of the specific passages in the conduct of
* In the Pamphlet already referred to, Sir John Franklin says,
(page 37), “ In the same Despatch, I alluded to several cases of mis-
“ understanding between Public Officers and the Government, or with
“ one another, which had, in more than one instance, obliged me to
“ dispense with the services of individuals who, perhaps, under less
u adverse circumstances than those in which they were placed, might
“ still have served the Government with alacrity and zeal.—lt is not
“ my intention to shift from myself the responsibility of those pain-
“ ful duties, or to exonerate any public servant from blame, by the
“ provocations to which personal hostility, or ill-will, or intrigue, in the
“ individual who formed the channel of communication with the
“ Government, may have subjected him, but, certain it is, that to such
“ sinister influences have those officers almost invariably attributed the
“ results of their indiscretions,”


Mr. Jones which have been relied on as reasons for his dis-
grace, it is, surely, no trivial nor immaterial thing that the
Lieutenant-Governor, who signed the order for his suspen-
sion, and by whom alone it was capable of being effected,
has subsequently repented of and retracted the part he
had in the transaction, and, under his own hand, recorded
the plenary acquittal of Mr. Jones from the accusations of
his detractors and persecutors, and the absolute truth of
every one of the charges ever made by him to their pre-
judice, and for making which he had been so often ad-
monished and condemned under the express sanction of
Sir John Franklin himself, whilst Lieutenant-Governor.
In Sir John Franklin’s Letter to Mr. Jones, of the 21st
February, 1845, there occurs this passage:—“ I have no
“ hesitation in adding that the knowledge I acquired
“ subsequently to your departure from the Colony of the
“ real character of those with whom you were brought
“ into collision, has caused me sincerely to lament your
“ suspension from office. I afterwards discovered that
“ there had existed abundant grounds to palliate, if not to
“ justify, the strong language you employed with reference
“ to them.”
On the 10th February, 1841, Mr. Jones addressed to
the Secretary of State a long and elaborate exposition of
his case, accompanied with a voluminous appendix of the
necessary documents ; —the course which he proposed to
take at that time, was to remain in the Colony and
to await the arrival there of the anticipated relief and
redress; —a course which would enable him to follow, in
the meanwhile, his profession at the Colonial Bar, and
cause a considerable saving besides in point of expendi-
ture. This appears from the concluding paragraphs of
the Despatch:—
“ For the cruel injury,” he tells His Lordship, “ thus
“ done me, —for the wound thus inflicted, —and to remove,
“ so far as can be blotted out, the stigma thus unde-


“ servedly attached to my name, I now appeal to your
“ Lordship. For the expenses which I incurred to take
“ my late Office, and for the unjust persecution I endured
“ for the faithful discharge of my duties during the time
“ I filled that Office, I trust your Lordship will recognize
“ my indisputable title to liberal compensation.
“ I shall not subject myself to the vast additional
“ sacrifice consequent upon the breaking up of my estab-
“ lishment, and the removal of my family, until I receive
“ your Lordship’s decision.”
This last announcement could hardly have been satis-
factory to any one of his persecutors, —the Acting Colonial
Secretary dreaded the always possible, and even probable,
return of Sir John Franklin’s mind to better thoughts, and
the consequent danger to his own and his uncle’s ascend-
ancy. Captain Swanston and his son-in-law, the Attorney-
General, could not but feel alarmed for the professional
and official fortunes of the latter, when they contemplated
the prospect before them of a twelvemonth at least of
competition—and worse, of contrast —day after day upon
the floor of the Supreme Court, between the ignorance
and indolence of Mr. Jones’s former Colleague, and the
learning, ability, and zeal which, even when checked and
cramped by official respects and considerations, had already
made of Mr. Jones so formidable a rival, but which, rid of
those trammels, were now to be felt in their full vigour;
nor could these, nor his other enemies, easily reconcile
themselves to an arrangement which, whilst it at once
arrested the stroke of their malignity, and left him only at
the commencement of the path to ruin, seemed at the same
time to afford to the Secretary of State one reason the
more for awarding to him thereafter the restoration of his
Office; since he would be on the spot prepared to resume it.
Whether upon this, or some other consideration, no
sooner was the Despatch of the 10th February, 1841—
which Mr. Jones, in conformity with the usual practice,


had sent in, unsealed, to the Colonial Secretary, for trans-
mission to England—been perused by that Officer, than a
course was taken so evidently tending to the effect, that
there can be no doubt that it was taken with the de-
liberate intent of involving Mr. Jones in an interminable
series of personal disputes with every worthless satellite of
the Faction in power whose general character or specific
malpractices he had exposed to the Secretary of State, with
the view of throwing light on the system which could
necessitate such instruments. The practice—odious and
infamous everywhere, and everywhere novel, but in Van
Diemen’s Land—of betrayal of Official confidence, was
again resorted to.
It was not merely that complete duplicates of his Des-
patches had been forwarded to Sir George Arthur, then in
England, in itself a gross and scandalous breach of faith,
but it was that select passages reflecting on individuals,
some of them the lowest of the low within the Colony,
were extracted and placed in their hands.
On the 13th March, 1841, Mr. Jones was again com-
pelled to address Lord John Russell on that subject. “In
“ my Despatch,” says he, “ to your Lordship of the 10th
“ February last, I had the honour to announce my inten-
“ tion of not incurring the additional sacrifice consequent
“ upon the breaking up of my establishment, and the
“ removal of ray family from hence, until I should receive
“ your Lordship’s decision upon the subject of my sus-
“ pension from the office of Solicitor-General ; it is,
“ therefore, with feelings of no ordinary nature, that I
“ find myself compelled so soon to inform your Lordship
“ that the provocations I have undergone since the ‘ Der-
“ ‘went’ sailed, in consequence of His Excellency Sir
“ John Franklin’s sense of justice having authorised the
“ publication of certain extracts from my Despatch con-
“ tided to him, for the purpose of being transmitted to
“ your Lordship, has left me no alternative but to take


“ my departure for England by the ‘ Fortitude,’ expected
“ to sail about the 12th of next month.”
The circumstances here alluded to were briefly these: —
A meeting was said to have been privately held between
the Attorney-General and some low people whose names,
or whose friends’ names, were discreditably mentioned in
Mr. Jones’s Despatches ; —at this meeting, the Law-Officer
of the Crown is said to have given some assurance that in
the event of any one resorting, against Mr. Jones, to any
measures for promoting a breach of the peace, he, the
Public Prosecutor and Grand Jury of the Island, would
not institute criminal proceedings against such offenders;
a low, habitual drunkard, of the name of Wynne, an Irish
Attorney by profession, and junior partner of the new
Solicitor-General, in the firm of “ Horne and Wynne” be-
gan proceedings, by sending Mr. Jones a hostile message,
for the avowed purpose of compelling an apology for the
passages allusive to himself, which were contained in that
Gentleman's Despatch of the 10fA February, 1841, to the
Secretary of State. Such a message, of course, having
regard to the degraded position of the man—a degraded
position even in that Penal Colony—he, by the prompt and
unhesitating advice of Major Mainwaring and Captain
Forman, of the 51st Regiment, declined; his refusal was
instantly followed up by his being posted publicly, in the
streets of Horbarton, —an outrage scarcely greater in itself
than that of his having received any message at all from
such a quarter. Personal violence being, likewise, threat-
ened, Mr. Jones, by the advice of his friends, sought the
protection of the Horbarton Police; —the Police Magistrate
bound over the parties to take their trial at the Supreme
Court; the Attorney-General refused to prosecute. Mr.
Jones had, therefore, but one course to take. He had now
learned the determination of the Attorney-General (if,
indeed, he had to learn it), and knowing that, whether for
finding, or for ignoring, bills presented to him in his


capacity of Grand Jury, that officer was totally irrespon*
sible, —he relinquished all hope of carrying on the pro-
secution with effect, or of remaining with safety to his
property, to his reputation, or even to his life, in the
Colony. Hence the determination expressed in his Des-
patch of the 13th March, 1841, a determination which he
carried into effect without more delay.
So soon as his intention became known, every effort
was made by those whose position enabled them to act
independently of the dominant Party, to divert him from
his purpose; the respectable portion of the Colonists
“ came forward,” as Mr. Gregory states (page 25), “ in
“ large numbers, with tempting offers to induce him to
“ remain.”—The following Address, signed by upwards of
ninety of the most influential and respectable Merchants,
Bankers, Traders, and others, in Hobart Town, —amongst
whom are many decidedly opposed to each other in Colo-
nial politics,—needs no comment: —
“ Hobart Town, 16th March, 1841.
“ Sir,
“ We have heard with much regret that you
“ intend to leave the Colony. In addressing you, we
“ consider it prudent to abstain from any expres-
“ sion of our sentiments on the misunderstanding
“ between yourself and the Government, but we
“ cannot suffer you to depart, without making
“ some effort in dissuading you to the contrary.
“ It would be useless, as it would he disen-
“ genuous, to attempt disguising the fact, that our
“ anxiety to retain you in the Colony, arises prin-
“ cipally from a regard to our own individual
“ interest, and that of the Community in which we
“ live. In appreciating the value of your pro-
“ fessional knowledge, and full reliance on your
“ unbiassed opinion and advice, we respectfully


“ and earnestly entreat, that you will reconsider
“ the resolution you have taken in leaving the
“ Colony, where we are certain success awaits
“ your talent.
“ With every respect, we are, Sir,
“ Your most obedient Servants,
[The Signatures.]
“ Herbert Jones, Esq.
“ &c. &c. &c.
Until actually presented to him, Mr. Jones had never
even heard of it, and, with the exception of eight or ten,
he had no other knowledge of the Applicants than that of
holding their retainers, or having been professionally
engaged for them; his health had, however, become so
impaired, and his nerves so shaken, by the incessant per-
secution he had undergone during the proceeding nineteen
months, that, on this account alone, even if the reasons
already stated, or those set forth in his reply, did not
exist, he could not have remained any longer in the
Colony; and, accordingly, resisting all the temptations
held out to him, he returned the following answer: —
“ Hobart Town, 31st March, 1841.
“ Gentlemen,
“ Allow me to offer you my sincere thanks
“ for your spontaneous expression of regret at my
“ approaching departure. Whilst so numerous a
“ body of the most respectable and affluent Mer-
“ chants and Gentlemen of the Colony (with the
“ majority of whom I have not even the pleasure
“ of a personal acquaintance) frankly avow that
“ you seek to retain me among you, from a regard
“ to your ‘ own individual interest and that of the
“ Community in which you live,’ I find myself placed
“ in so proud a position that, I trust, I may, with-
“ out vanity acknowledge that 1 feel highly


“ honoured and gratified by the estimation in
“ which you hold my ‘ professional knowledge'
“ and ‘ talent,' and by the ‘ full reliance' you
“ repose in me.
“ I unfeignedly deplore that I cannot comply
“ with your flattering solicitation, for, conscious,
“ as I am, that all the persecution and annoyances
“ I have suffered, have been occasioned by my
“ earnest endeavours to support, by the uniform
“ expression of my ‘ unbiassed opinion and advice,'
“ the real honour and interest of the Crown in this
“ Colony, I feel that the injuries which have been
“ inflicted upon me can be adequately redressed
“ only by a personal appeal to the justice of my
“ beloved Sovereign.
“ Do me the favour to accept my best wishes
“ that health, happiness, and prosperity may attend
“ each of you, and permit me to assure you that, if
“ any exertions of mine can be beneficially em-
“ ployed elsewhere in promoting the latter, it will
“ always afford me sincere pleasure to exercise in
“ your behalf those humble powers which you so
“ favourably appreciate, and which, during my
“ residence in Van Diemen’s Land, have secured
“ to me your undeviating and gratifying support.
“ I have the honour to remain,
“ Gentlemen,
“ Your faithful and obliged Servant,
“ HERBERT G. JONES.”
To Thomas Yardley Lowes, Esq.
“ and the other Gentlemen w r ho
“ signed the Address.”


At an immense pecuniary sacrifice he broke up his
establishment, and converted his effects into money, and,
leaving behind him a heavy amount of debts owing to him,
of a large portion of which the subsequently depressed
state of the Colony, and the numerous failures there,
has now rendered the recovery altogether hopeless. He
sailed from Van Diemen’s Land in the month of April,
1841, for England, where he arrived in the course of
August in the same year; on his arrival, he heard, to his
great astonishment, that whilst he was on his passage
home Lord John Russell, ignorant of his suspension in
Van Diemen’s Land, and ignorant, besides, of other recent
and more important circumstances of his case, had marked
his official sense of the supposed strength of the language
of Mr. Jones’s correspondence, complained of by Sir John
Franklin, by removing him from his office solely on that
account; at the same time, that he dismissed Mr. Mac-
dowell from the Attorney-Generalship for the act of gross
misconduct and corruption before referred to.
He lost no time in making application to the Secretary
of State for redress, and a correspondence, and ultimately
an audience, with Lord John Russell, ensued; nevertheless,
before any result could be obtained, the issue of the General
Election in 1841 had made a change of Ministry inevitable,
and in the month of September, 1841, Lord John Russell
ceased to be the Secretary of State. But, before he quitted
Downing Street, he had intimated a strong opinion in Mr.
Jones’s favour, and had frankly admitted that for the
strength of Mr. Jones’s language, to which alone, and at a
period when he was not so well informed of the occasion
for it, His Lordship had taken exception, every allowance
ought to be made, having regard to the treatment which
Mr. Jones had received in the Colony.
Lord Stanley succeeded. The investigation of Mr. Jones’s
case was now recommenced, and prosecuted to a termi-
nation. It is not too much to say that the result was the


triumphant vindication of his character, from the un-
deserved stigma which his suspension had cast upon it.
It did more. It showed clearly to Lord Stanley’s mind that
the meritorious Public Servant, whose case it was, had
suffered grievous wrong because of his merits, —and that
his zealous and faithful discharge of his duties in the
public service, had alone brought upon him the indignities,
vexations, and wrongs of which he complained.
On two grounds, therefore, —First, because Mr. Jones’ sus-
pension’from office was simply an Injustice,—and Secondly,
because the public service must have been prejudiced, in
some degree, by the same injustice which had imported
loss and suffering to the immediate victim, —a clear title
to ample and honourable compensation was to the fullest
extent established.
To every righteous mind, the first ground would be
alone sufficient. Wrong had been done to an Officer of the
Government by his superiors in office, and sanctioned by
the Representative of the Sovereign; a simple and evident
case calling for compensation from the Sovereign. But
how much clearer the title here, how much more parar
mount the equity, since the wrong done was prompted
only by a vindictive sense of Mr. Jones’ services to the
Crown, whose interests conflicted with those of his perse-
cutors, and since, in fact, their only method of making
their case intelligible, and of accounting for their conduct,
was by representing him to have been possessed by a de-
vouring zeal for the public service, and intemperate in the
manifestation of it 1
Of this, Lord Stanley, at the close of the inquiry, was
very sensible, and he did not hesitate to express what he
thought. From that period down to the recent date of his
retirement from Office, his Lordship remained of the same
mind; his only difficulty, as he more than once stated, was
the scantiness of the means at his disposal for affording an
adequate compensation.


Mr. Jones had submitted to great pecuniary sacrifices.
There was first, the total and permanent loss of his profes-
sional connection in England, in order to take the Office
from which he was to be in two short years cruelly and
unjustly expelled. Then followed the curtailment of his
clerk’s salary,—the entire loss of his own, —and the sudden
reduction besides of his private professional income, from
at least £.2,500 down to Zero, —superinduced by the cruel
necessity under which he was placed of flying from the
Colony, in order to preserve what was dearer than income.
The frightful and ruinous sacrifice of outstanding assets,
to which he was again compelled to submit, as the impera-
tive and inevitable condition of seasonable departure,
largely increased the enormous aggregate of loss. Add to
these, the yearly outlay necessary to the support of himself
and his family in England, from his return in 1841 to
1846, —during which long period of five years he has been
patiently awaiting the tardy performance of justice,—and,
surely, there will not appear to be any ground, on the one
hand, to impeach the accuracy of the estimate which fixes
the total amount of loss at a sum exceeding £.20,000 —
nor, or on the other hand, to question the sincerity or rea-
sonableness of Lord Stanley’s expression of regret that the
offices in his gift worthy of Mr. Jones’s acceptance were
very few, and that those were rendered fewer by applica-
tions from the spot for promotion, whenever vacancies did
occur.
It is sufficient, however, to say that the very first Judicial
Appointment Lord Stanley had to give away after his de-
cision on Mr. Jones’s case, he did, unsolicitedly, offer, in
the most flattering terms, to that gentleman, and upon the
express understanding that, if Mr. Jones should not, on
mature consideration, be satisfied of the eligibility or
adequacy of the offer, his refusal was not to prejudice him.
Nor was this the only instance, other appointments of the


like nature were placed at his disposal, and only because of
their inadequacy were, as the fact was, declined.
A feeling of delicacy prevents Mr. Jones from stating
what the offers were, or any other particulars respecting
them beyond the mere fact, that they were made, and
respectfully declined; he apprehends however that they
may be easily learned in Downing Street.
In the meantime, the simple fact that Lord Stanley did
consider Mr. Jones an eligible candidate for Judicial Offices,
and other posts of trust, in different parts of our Colonial
Empire, is a sufficient testimony to the truth and justice of
the claims which, for so many years past, he has been
urging in Downing Street, and which remain, nevertheless,
as far from any adjustment, as they were the day that
Mr. Gladstone’s immediate predecessor replaced Lord John
Russell in Office.
*. >~ Ay ,'.'* A /£-*~**/i .**-'%*•*£<.
./&-• /^ r /w i-- a-. *S •^* / ' ,r
“- s t * yA / S?'‘^^s
« s£-J.t *.AyxfA. .<*x- x • 3*Z*e£
A -t-Jy A** - ’^" , -
<Sh*- t -' * - *^-y~
S’- sf~y£z-
/%i ** - t. At »« ''*■ *'


LONDON :
PRINTED BY T BUKTTELL, RUPERT STREET, HATMARKET.
