





A
STATEMENT OF FACTS,
IN
EVIDENCE OF THE CRUEL INJUSTICE ENDURED
BY
Mr. J. D. SHELLEY,
AN EMIGRANT GENTLEMAN
TO
NEW SOUTH WALES,
FROM THE GOVERNOR,
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL DARLING;
WITH
THE MISFORTUNES AND MALTREATMENT OF OTHERS ORIGINATING
THEREFROM, IN BEING COMPELLED TO UNDERTAKE THE
VOYAGE HOME, IN ORDER TO REPRESENT HIS
CASE TO HIS MAJESTY’S SECRETARY
OF STATE.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY W. CLOWES, 14, CHARING-CROSS.
1833.




A STATEMENT OF FACTS.
I left London in October, 1827, on board the bark
Eliza, Capt. Fuze, for New South Wales, to take
advantage of the promulgated regulations of the
English Government respecting the alienation of the
Crown lands of that Colony, and reasonably hoped,
by a skilful appropriation of the promised grant of
land held out to every one on arrival there, to make
amends for early disappointments, and secure a more
ample competence than the remaining portion of my
fortune admitted of realizing at home.
Soon after landing at Sydney, I paid my respects
to the Governor, explained to him my circumstances,
and consequent views in undertaking the voyage.
I appeared before him impressed with a belief that,
as a gentleman, and the Governor of such a Colony
as New South Wales, he would be pleased to advance
rather than retard the views of any one carrying with
him the least appearance of respectability, and dis-
posed to make a reputable member of that com-
munity. His discourteous reception, however, very
promptly undeceived me, and I was desired to com-
municate with him by letter. I accordingly retired,
and handed in the following day, a letter to his pri-
a 2


vate secretary, expressive of my previous personal
avowals. The letter, in substance, was to this effect:
That becoming acquainted with the encouragement
given, and the general wish of the government at
home to promote respectable emigration, I had re-
paired hither at considerable expense, with the view
of bettering my condition, and hoped, that by receiv-
ing the customary indulgence of a grant of land, 1
should succeed, having some available property left;
but at the same time I assured his Excellency that
my former habits, education, and pursuits in life were
so much at variance with those I was about to
embrace, and perceiving the great difficulties which
are made to precurse first settling in the country,
from the delays and confusion of the land department ,
and totally beyond any reasonable calculation , that I
would thankfully rescind my claim to land, it I could
find employment in any of the public offices; and I
would therefore leave this to the favourable consi-
deration of his Excellency.
I was so intimidated and scared at the dexterous
juggling practised with respect to the granting of
land, that I was animated to indite my letter in the
terms just quoted. No one unacquainted with the
character of the colonial executive can form a just
conception of the obstacles placed in the way of the
legitimate candidates. Every officer throughout the
departments of government were scrambling among
themselves, trying how much of the territory each
could engross, to the exclusion of those who were
destined to make the land available. The new comer


was regarded with the greatest jealousy; the chart
of the Colony, showing the located from the unlocated
tracts, was made a secret document, and few besides
the friends of Mr. McLeay or his immediate para-
sites had access to it, so that an emigrant after having
obtained an order to select his grant, which usually
occupied from three to six months, knew not at what
point of the compass to seek it. It has often occurred
that an emigrant with this order in his pocket, after
travelling 1000 miles in quest of an untenanted spot,
has, on his return to the town of Sydney with the
marks and bearings of his selection, received one of
the following excuses for denying him possession of
it—“ that it was a government reserve, church, school
or corporation lands, it might be included within the
boundary of some one else, or he must wait until it
could be surveyed,” thereby creating a delay and
causing an expense more than equal to the value of
the grant when obtained. It will not be surprising,
therefore, that I should have been willing to wave
my claim to a grant, if I could have found any thing
else to do, while such a state of things prevailed
I received no other reply to the latter communication
than a printed formula, as shown to me in the Colonial
Office, Downing-street, transmitted by his private
secretary, being a general reference to a land-board.
To this board I immediately resorted, made a veritable
exposition of my private affairs, and stated that I had
devoted £I4OO for my passage and general outfit to
the Colony, that sum at the time being the balance
of my banker’s book, and that I still had available


resources in England to the extent of £3OOO more.
Out of the balance of this cash account, I had brought,
in gold, above £4OO, and the residue, after payment
of my passage, had been expended in plate, linen,
books, music and musical instruments, guns, &c. &c.,
and a general three years’ supply of clothes and per-
sonal requisites, suited to my habits as a gentleman,
which I brought with me, believing such things were
not easily procurable, and seldom at a reasonable
rate, in that part of the world, and that this equip-
ment was intended only as a means of encountering
the preliminary arrangements of establishing myself
on my land. This representation was embodied in
the form of a report, and placed upon the Governor’s
table. Mr. Busby, jun., younger son of the mineral
surveyor, was the deputed commissioner to enact the
painful ordeal, and to him, as in a commission of
bankruptcy, I delivered a schedule of all that I pos-
sessed, even to my watch, studiously avoiding any
act that might be rationally construed as unwilling
compliance with what were farcically assumed to be
the established regulations. Mr. Busby, at the time
that he took my statement, assured me that he did
not think my property gave me any claim to land, as
no personal effects were ever valued, of whatever
amount, and no less a sum than £SOO in money, or
farming implements and gear of that value, entitled
an applicant to the smallest grant of land (640 acres).
Nothing can be more untrue than such an assertion.
So far from this being the case, hundreds of instances
can be adduced where not only one, but two, three.


and four sections have been assigned without the
parties so receiving it possessing the moiety of this
sum. One instance in particular requires especial
notice, and will of itself be sufficient to show the
principle upon which General Darling acted. A
Mr. Anley, who arrived at Sydney, and was living
at the hotel at the same time as myself, had 2000
acres, accompanied with a large reserve apportioned
him almost immediately upon his arrival: not assigned
to him in the usual way, leaving him to experience
as the rest, the trouble and expense of making his
own selection ; it was pointed out to him on the
chart, surveyed and marked off within one month of
his application. This gentleman, had he been obliged
to pass the examination of a land-board, could have
produced little beyond the garments on his back, and
after living an eleemosynary life on the plains of the
Hunter’s River district as long as he could, was at last
thrown into prison for debt. His extreme poverty
was notorious, yet at the very hour that General
Darling conferred the large grant and reserve upon
him, he deliberately denied me the possession of a
single section, upon the paltry quibble of wanting the
fractional part only of the £SOO in money. To assert
that the regulations alluded to were the invariable
standard of qualification for candidates for land is
one of the grossest impositions that can be practised,
and one of the most inexcusable deviations from
truth. I reasoned with Mr. Busby on the severity
of regulations that would compel me to convert my
property into cash, merely to prove that it was


money’s worth, and this too among strangers, who
would take advantage of the circumstance and subject
me to loss ; that I should immediately require and
be obliged to redeem them afterwards at a price
greatly beyond their value, and it was not difficult to
perceive the effect of such ruinous obligations. He
asked me if I intended to reside on my land, and
whether the money I had was placed in either of the
banks. I rejoined and unequivocally declared my
intention of residing on my grant; and with reference
to the money, as it was designed for immediate outlay
in the usual and unavoidable expenses of primary
location, I had not deposited it in the banks. If I
had placed the gold in the bankers’ hands they would
not have returned it but in the colonial currency,
making the exchange both insecure and inconvenient.
I never had myself, nor did it appear regular to open
accounts with such small sums, with the certainty of
having soon to close them ; but if any doubt existed,
or stronger confirmation than my word was requisite,
hoth the mmey and property could he seen, and in-
spected at the hotel. This colloquy here terminated
by Mr. Busby saying, that it did not devolve on him
to discuss these points; his duty had been done in
receiving my statements, and I might expect a final
answer in a day or two from his Excellency the
Governor.
Receiving no reply for some time, and being de-
tained, living expensively at an hotel, while Mr.
Anley and other individuals in the same house, who
had either arrived by the same ship, or at the very


same time, were disposed of by public situations or
by the immediate assignments of their respective
lands, I waited again on his Excellency, to know my
fate. The General, on this occasion, received me
(although I never could have offended him by word
or deed, for my demeanour was both respectful and
submissive) in a way which no gentleman could have
been prepared to expect; he condescended to acknow-
ledge the receipt of the report of the land-board upon
my application, but stated that he had mislaid and
forgotten it; so that but for this pointed and personal
solicitation, no notice would have been taken of my
application. He further remarked, that upon a hasty
review of my paper, he was induced to confess the
difficulties and state of arrear of the land depart-
ment ; but he feared he could not give me a grant;
and as for public employment, that expectation was
hopeless, from the number of his friends already on
the list. I instantly acknowledged that, as to the
latter, I could have no claim, and from his Excellency’s
representations, would not encourage a hope ; but the
grant of land was my dernier resort, my only depend-
ance. I must make the best of it; it was that for
which I had undertaken the voyage, left my friends,
and wound up my affairs ; that, unless I did receive
land, my condition would, instead of being improved,
be greatly deteriorated. I had complied with all the
prescribed forms of the land-board as far as reason
permitted, and now stood before his Excellency to
reply to such further interrogation as his hesitation
and seeming resistance of my claims disposed him


to put. He still tediously demurred, reiterated the
objection of young Mr. Busby, persisted in consider-
ing me an ineligible candidate for land, notwithstand-
ing my renewed assertions of there being much greater
funds at my disposal forthcoming, and that what I
had at that moment was only for commencement.
No argument, however, that could be urged, and
no fact, however glaring, could move the insensibility
and unyielding caprice of the Governor, and I was
thus, in lieu of the considerate regard and assistance
hoped for in my altered condition and change of
circumstances, treated as though I had been an
obscure individual endeavouring to impose upon him.
I pleaded, before I withdrew, the harshness of this
usage, and earnestly begged to know if any repre-
sentation had heen made to my prejudice or disparage-
ment. He hereupon graciously assured me that none
had either been made or received; but as to land,
even if he were to grant me any, the utmost would he
a section.
Stung with mortification and bitterness of dis-
appointment, I took my leave, telling the Governor
that if, after the explicit manner in which I had
explained myself, and professed a readiness to meet
what further inquiry he thought proper, he offered
me a single section, I would beg permission to leave
it on his table. A single section, in a season of
drought, will not support throughout the year 350,
or a flock of sheep; and would besides, unaccom-
panied by a reserve, have placed me in the lowest
scale of settlers among the poorest cultivators of the


soil, and been totally inadequate to support the stock
which 1 should have been enabled to purchase.
So terminated the hopes of one who had traversed
the ocean, involved himself in a useless outlay of
capital, abandoned his friends, and settled his affairs,
confiding in the integrity and purity of the King’s
executive towards emigrants of respectability. In
this disheartening dilemma and cheerless prospect, a
choice of evils remained. To continue longer in the
Colony, consuming my remnant property, was as
irremediable a loss as voyaging homeward for that
which the Governor’s pleasure withheld, the value of
which, when obtained from the Secretary of State,
would, on my return, be doubly purchased, and
attended with a great loss of time. I chose, there-
fore, in this inextricable predicament, what appeared
the least detrimental to my interests, and retired with
passive submission to a small cottage in the village
of Liverpool, twenty miles distant from Sydney,
where I should be freed from promiscuous intercourse
with the worthies of the little metropolis, and likely
by degrees to obtain a knowledge of the resources of
the country, and its more estimable residents; a
precaution of which experience never justifies neglect
in those who venture to that vortex of the restless
and the ruined, where every grade of human charac-
ter is found. I dwelt with strong expectations on
soon hearing from my friends in England, and being
enabled to rely altogether on my own resources, to
purchase land from private individuals, and ever


avoiding thereby that humiliating process of pro-
curing it, capriciously enforced by General Darling,
when applied for under his peculiarly partial system
of granting it.
A residence of seven or eight months in this way,
and in this state of uncertainty, soon passed. I
became acquainted in the interval with several coun-
try gentlemen and magistrates of respectability, and
to them I explained the peculiarity of my situation,
and the singular treatment of the Governor. They
had had an opportunity of seeing my habits and
mode of life, and judging of me in other respects.
They unanimously acknowledged the injustice of the
treatment, but dared not speak, lest they, having
families, might suffer too; for when the magistrates
have respectfully submitted a proposition to him,
he has frequently and angrily told them that he
would not suffer himself to be dictated to, so in this
case none liked to interfere. The crushing influence
of General Darling’s rule, the immense patronage
placed at his disposal, and the close manner in which
such patronage was dispensed, made the ruin of that
individual inevitable, who, even in his hours of pri-
vacy dared to whisper a discord to the reigning
dynasty, I was advised to try the effect of another
respectful application, accepting a single section
until further funds arrived. I followed their advice;
but before doing so I accidentally rode to Sydney,
and meeting Mr, Berry, a member of the Colonial
Council, the subject of my land became matter of


conversation; at his suggestion, I called on the Secre-
tary, Alex. McLeay, Esq., acquainted him with my
willingness to accept a single section, with a reseiva-
tion of other three until increased resources arrived,
and avert the mischievous consequences ot delay.
The characteristic coarseness and vulgarity of the
Secretary when he chooses, need not he described.
With his usual moroseness he told me it was no use
coming to New South W ales without money; that
if he were the Governor, he would not give me land
at all, and as for reserves, there were no such things
allowed. Why don’t you rent land ?—This was my
first interview with this gentleman, and I in a
modest manner denied having so arrived or without
very respectable means, and better than many who
had received their land. I saw no necessity, 1 con-
tinued, to rent land, while others held it free, and I
could, if he would permit me, remind him of a very
recent deviation from his rule of allowing no reserves.
His confusion was evident, my presence embarrassed
him, and I respectfully bade him good morning.
I can assert of my own knowledge that Mr. McLeay’s
friends and the adherents of the Government were at
all times allowed to have reserves. Mr. McLeay can
be proved to have advised his friends to apply for such,
with liberty to purchase, assuring them they would
never be called upon to pay. With this expectation
he had obtained an enormous extent of territory him-
self. I forwarded accordingly the following letter
to Government House, as well as to his Majesty s
Secretary of State :


[ COPY. ]
“ Sir, — I have made frequent efforts to see your Excellency
“ on those days usually devoted to the public, but have been
“ as constantly disappointed, and I took yesterday an oppor-
“ tunity of visiting the Colonial Secretary, to state to him
" what it was my wish personally to have addressed to your
“ Excellency, with the view of avoiding the necessity of this
“ communication. That interview has not been satisfactory,
« and it remains for me to remind your Excellency that my
“ stay in this Colony has been now about seven months; and
“ that during that interval, from the peculiar and extra-
“ ordinary treatment received here, I have been detained in
“ comparative idleness, exhausting my means, for the want of
“ the ordinary indulgence of a grant of land, for which, on my
“ arrival, I respectfully applied, detailing minutely my ex-
“ pectations and circumstances, in strict accordance with all
“ the prescribed formalities of a land-board. To continue
“ longer in this doubtful position is injuring me most seriously,
" and I see but the alternative of returning immediately to
“ England, and making my representation there, or forward-
“ ing this second application to your Excellency. It is un-
“ necessary for me, I am sure, to mention the utter impossibi-
" lity of commencing in any shape the difficult task of first
“ settling in the country, without the aid of the customary
“ facilities, and I therefore, in the full conviction of being
“ entitled to these, barely urge that land may be apportioned
“ me in proportion to the sum possessed by me on arrival,
“ with a reservation of three sections more for a short time
“ only, encumbered by any restrictions which your Excellency
“ may deem proper, until I can produce available property to
“ the extent asserted in my first communication.
“ Hitherto I have been prevented from making purchases
“ of stock, from the causes just cited, and now that advan-
“ tageous opportunities occur, I trust your Excellency will, in


“ virtue of your discretionary power, accede to my request
“ without my being subject to the ruinous obligation of renting
« land at the outset, as hinted to me by the hon. the Colonial
" Secretary.
(Signed), “ J. D. Shelley.”
" To His Excellency the Governor
Nearly three weeks here again elapsed, and, as in
the former instance, no notice was taken of my letter,
I wrote as under :
“ Sir, —I had the honour of addressing a letter to your
“ Excellency on the 12th inst., to which as yet I have not
“ been favoured with a reply. I trust your Excellency will
“ release me from this state of incertitude, by directing
“ an answer to be given to it,
(Signed), “ J. D. Shelley.”
“ To His Excellency the Governor .”
Then came the final answer, through Mr. McLeay s
office:—
“ Sir, — I am directed by the Governor to acknowledge
“ the receipt of your letter of the 12th ult., addressed to his
“ Excellency, applying for a grant of land, and to inform you,
“ that reference has been made to the report of the land-
« board on your former application, which led to the commu-
« nication of the 9th June last*, and his Excellency regrets
“ that he can only repeat, that under the existing regulations
“ which the Government have found it necessary to adopt, it
“ is not in his power to make any other communication to you
« than that which you have already received.
(Signed), “ Alex. McLeay.”
“ To Mr. J. D. Shelley
* That communication was my first official notification, couched in
(luce lines, and merely “ regretting that he could not give me land.


Here terminated, of course, every hope, and all
further correspondence. Two or three months more
transpired; I made my case generally known among
the respectable residents and land-owners, who,
disgusted and indignant at the variable conduct and
injustice respecting the assignment of lands, spon-
taneously furnished me with evidence of such whim-
sical deviations and disregard at times of the regula-
tions of the land-board, that my next step was then
in the form of an affidavit, to arrange the material
part of the preceding narrative and correspondence,
swear to it before a bench of magistrates, print and
circulate it. I sent home a copy of this sworn state-
ment, with my evidence, to Sir George Murray, the
then principal Secretary of State for the Colonies,
to my friends, and to several Members of Parliament.
An impression was also left at Government House,
in accordance with the regulations, when a complaint
is preferred against the authorities, and I accom-
panied the same with a copy of the letter here an-
nexed :
“ Sir,
“ I forward you herewith a statement sworn at Liverpool
‘ f before the sitting Magistrates, and subjoin seventeen cre-
“ ditable affidavits of individuals, who themselves have re-
“ ceived land under such peculiar deviations, as shall demon-
“ strate to the minds of his Majesty’s Government, and
“ the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the
“ Colonies especially, the singular course your Excellency
“ has thought proper to adopt, in assisting and encouraging
“ respectable emigration. It has been your Excellency’s
“ pleasure to visit me with an unjust, unnecessary, and


“ rigorous exercise of discretionary power. I have been
“ made to endure causelessly every mortification which my
“ spirits can well bear; I have been bantered by every kind
“ of repulsive answer to all my applications, however mode-
“ rate, modest, or respectful. I arrived here as a gentleman
“of character, respectability, and means. I have been long
“ enough in the country to enable me to prove upon the most
“ irrefutable evidence, that grants of land are almost daily,
“ with the privity of the Government, both given and surrepti-
“ tiously obtained; and I am therefore now determined to
“ appeal to higher authority for this undue, cruel, and caprici-
“ ous indulgence of arbitrary power. I have so long been
“ made the victim of untoward disappointments and un-
“ gentlemanly treatment from your Excellency, that I can
" scarce control the pen from an expression of my indignation;
“ but while I avoid the being betrayed into a course which
“ might seem to derogate from your distinguished station,
“ I take this occasion of most distinctly assuring your Ex-
“ cellency, that nothing earthly shall prevent me from seeking
“ compensation in a British court of justice, so soon as
“ you may be relieved from your present appointment. I
“ possess funds, even after a lapse of twelve months, sufficient
“ to command one section according to the existing regulations,
“ and I feel assured that you. Sir, will never be justified
“ in thus outraging the feelings, and destroying the hopes of
“ those whom it is your peculiar province, your public obliga-
“ tion to protect. lam not yet disposed to abandon every
“ just and honest expectation, and when I reflect that a
“ gentleman of your exalted rank can, for the sake of a
“ few acres of a wilderness, valueless but in name, and un-
“ numbered in extent, regard with such cool indifference the
“ ruin of an individual of respectability, I thank God there
“ are others whose minds are attuned to'higher sensibilities,
“ which time shall ere long develop.
“ The conscientious rectitude of my conduct, with the
B


" attested documents in my possession, will fully bear me out
“ in this affair ; and in apprising you of my intentions, I have
“ done my duty. I now leave your Excellency to do yours.
(Signed), “ J. D. Shelley.”
" To His Excellency the Governor .”
I had at this time quitted the cottage at Liverpool,
sold off my remaining property at considerable loss,
and took a small furnished house in Macquarie
Place, with the view of going home, nr directing my
attention to other pursuits. Two days after the
delivery of this last letter, accompanied as it was
with my evidence, or as soon as the Governor, I ap-
prehend, had received it, out ran the porter breath-
less from the Secretary’s Office, which was nearly
opposite to me, and handed in the following letter,
bearing, as he said, good news :
“ Sir, — I am directed by the Governor to acknowledge the
“ receipt of your communication, with its enclosures, relative
“to your applications for a grant of land; and in reply to in-
“ form you, that if you verify your capital before the land-
“ board, you will receive land according to the regulations in
“ the same proportions as any other individual.
(Signed), “ Alex. McLeay.”
“ To Mr. J. D. Shelley .”
Now this communication was not only futile, but
positive nonsense, and could be only intended to
delay my sending home the duplicate copies of the
affidavit and evidence ; for I had previously not only
verified and certified, but sworn to my property, and
offered it for inspection ; and what this letter meant,
therefore, is extremely equivocal. I, however, upon
reflection, even at this late period, after all that had


passed, was disposed to bear with my disappointment
and loss, rather than prolong the contention with
authorities. Nothing could be less in unison with
my disposition, or more opposed to my expectation
in visiting the Colony ; I sought only the possession of
an humble competence, retirement and seclusion, with
opportunities of leisure for study and reflection, to
which my mind was most naturally disposed—-and
with these feelings I once more waited on the land-
board, determined if I could to terminate the business,
and get my land ; but to my surprise, the gentlemen
of the board rose from their seats, and with becoming
gravity informed me they had no instructions. I
waited a few days and called again. The same
answer was returned. I went to Mr. McLeay,
who, in a more civil manner than before, seemed to
feel for once the objectionable nature of this mode of
dealing with me, and remarked, as there had been
some misconception in my affair, he would write to
Busby himself, and requested me to go a third time.
I complied. I found two members in attendance,
and I explained to them satisfactorily my remaining
property. I mentioned personal effects remaining of
about £3OO, and money £2OO, part of which could
only be produced then, as, but the day before, I lent
a neighbour £IOO to stop a gap, as he called it;
and I asked if that statement was not sufficient, for,
excepting that, the rest could be seen. No, it must
be lodged in a bank, and the receipt of the Cashier
obtained, to satisfy them. I wrote a private note to
Mr. McLeay, of which the following is a copy :
b 2


“ Sir/
“ I made my appearance at the land-board, in obedience
“ to your last official communication, and stated that I had
“ remaining of my property, available, a sum of £220, and
“ other effects of the value of £3OO, and with it I intended, if
“ I received my land, to enter on the preliminaries of a farming
“ establishment, and applied but for one section, with the
“ liberty of purchasing the other three. The gentlemen of
" thy land-board absolutely insist on the production of the
“ receipt of the Cashier for the little sum of money here
“ stated, and just now, from two or three private accommoda-
“ tions, it is not exactly in my power to do so ; I am therefore
“no farther than ever. My first statement ought, I think, to
“be sufficient, particularly for so small a grant; and I
“ submit to this arrangement, only as a means of avoiding any
" further controversial correspondence with the authorities.
(Signed), “ J. D. Shelley.”
“ To Alex. McLeay, Esq."
I sincerely believe that this note would have pre-
vented further misunderstanding, and that the land,
though tardily, would at last have been granted, had
not another mishap frustrated it. The Sydney
Monitor, an opposition Journal, published, the day
after this last note was delivered, a copy of my affi-
davit and evidence forwarded home; a measure in
which I took no part, and a procedure which was not
in my power to restrain, but which so disconcerted
General Darling and his Secretary, that all nego-
tiation was from that moment effectually at an end.
Up to this time, a period of fifteen or eighteen
months of unwearying solicitation, without offence,
either by word or act, on my part, for I was retired
in my manners and scrupulous in the choice of my


associates, did the Governor continue to repulse my
applications, and deny me land. On the score of
property, it was indefensible; I possessed more than
enough to entitle me to it; and as to the proof
thereof, I was most explicit, and offered it for inspec-
tion. I went so far even as io propose only a conditional
tenure , to convince him, if I could, that I intended
to reside and expend capital upon it. No, every
proposition was alike abortive. He knew also that
I had no profession, that my well-doing depended
entirely upon the getting of land; and chance of
public employment there was none. Still, in the
face of all this, he cared not for the daily diminution
of my property or the annihilation of my hopes.
He knew also that the paltry quibble or pretence in
which he was insisting on my ruin, had no validity
in reference to his general practice. Strangers
every day furnished me with additional proof of the
evasive artifices resorted to, to give land to some,
and deny it to others, —the partial adherence and
rigid observance of the regulations as occasion suited,
that I became disgusted, desponding, and intempe-
rate, I had tried every means which human reason
could direct, and not the most shadowless pretext of
any kind could be instanced as grounds for the refusal.
I saw pennyless objects, often dependant upon me for
small temporary assistance, procure land in redun-
dance, and offer it jeeringly for sale. I knew many,
who, by sending in false schedules of their property,
cajole the board, and, with their knowledge, receive
the maximum grants. Several of my young friends


informed me of presents of land of 1000 to 2000
acres to them from the Governor, without reference
to property; and there were many others on whom
he would lavishly bestow his acres, for the purposes
of traffic. A frequent repetition of such misuse of
power confirmed, too late, the conviction of the fatal
error I had made, in trusting my fortunes to such a
ruler’s domination.
I regret having delayed my departure from scenes
of these unmerited injuries. I lapsed into acts of
extravagance, which, though the occasion may justify,
Ido not defend. I gave vent to my feelings, in a
violent letter to the Governor, about three months
before I left* ; the former period of my residence
there, it is my pride to be able to say, was faultless,
and it was not until every hope in life seemed extin-
guished, that I publicly denounced the Governor’s
injustice.
My protracted stay neither added fortitude to my
mind, or retained my remaining money in the purse;
my spirits were bad, and I despaired of ever recover-
ing the effect of this mischance. My name had been
unnecessarily introduced to the public, and variously
mentioned. I felt it more than I could bear. In an
unhappy temper of mind I resolved on my own de-
struction, as the most effectual relief from such unjusti-
fiable oppression. In a paroxism of rage I made a
violent demonstration of my state of mind, and it is
only wonderful, from my excited state of feeling at
the time, that I am still numbered among the living.
* I applied the epithet of “ Scoundrel" to the Governor.


This affair gave rise to an unavoidable absence
from the Colony, and I took the voyage home, via
India, that 1 might have an opportunity of explaining
to my relation there that correct and honourable
course of conduct which it is my most earnest de-
sire should be scrutinized by His Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State for the Colonies. I embarked
accordingly on the ship Cumberland, Captain Steele,
for the Malabar coast, a voyage of six weeks or two
months at that season of the year. The ship was
stranded about one hundred and fifty miles to the
southward of the experimental settlement of Swan
River, New Holland. After an exposure of three
nights and two days in an open boat at sea, I landed
at this infant Colony, with the loss of most of my
baggage and money. It is not necessary to dwell
here on the privations or disasters I experienced,
while waiting on that desert for another ship. My
life was providentially saved a second time, and
by the kindness and exertions of Captain Graham
I was soon sestored to health. In about thiee
months I succeeded in engaging a passage on
the Protector, Captain Thomas. This man had no
sooner received payment for my conveyance, than
he contrived, by giving me a false day of depar-
ture, to sail without me, and leave me still there,
taking with him the amount of my passage-money.
The next best offer of shipping was on board the
Bussorah Merchant, to Singapore. The opposite
monsoon had set in, obliging me to pursue this
route. To the master of this ship, Captain Johnston,


I paid more than he demanded, as an inducement
for him to use me well. I reached Singapore safely,
and took a further passage to Madras, in the same
ship, being the only means of reaching my destina-
tion without considerable delay. The ship touched
at Penang on her way, and the captain was induced,
by an absconding bankrupt, and two or three inva-
lids, to make a deviation of the voyage. Here I
was again, in spite of all remonstrances, forcibly put
on shore, and left behind. No other ship, in which
I could engage a passage, offering to Madras, I
went, after four months’ detention at Penang, to
Calcutta. I took shipping again from Qalcutta to
the Malabar coast. I next embarked for Europe on
one of the first ships that offered, paid handsomely
for my passage, but Avas compelled to leave her at
St. Helena—she proved to be leaky. I have at
length, by a fourth payment, safely arrived in Eng-
land, in the Lavinia, having been detained eighteen
months accomplishing a voyage which is ordinarily
done in five or six months, at an expense exceeding
£4OO for the passage-money alone.
I therefore humbly hope that my case will be taken
into consideration by His Majesty’s Ministers.
This statement, accompanied by the letter imme-
diately following, I forwarded within a few days of my
return to Lord Goderich—the evasive nature of the
reply and subsequent correspondence is as follows :
My Lord, 28 th July , 1831.
In respectfully soliciting the attention of your Lordship to


this communication, I have the honour of acquainting yoh
that I arrived in England a few days since, having been
detained upon the voyage by shipwreck and other causes,
eighteen months, at an expense of £4OO.
My purpose in coming home is to submit to your Lordship
the enclosed paper relating to the treatment and its conse-
quences, which I have experienced at the hands of General
Darling, Governor of New South Wales.
In this statement, I beg permission to remark that not one
expression has escaped me with the view either of aggravating
my complaint of the Governor’s injustice, or shielding myself
from imputation of error. I court most earnestly the strictest
examination of the facts I state, and confide in your merciful
consideration of my case.
Four years of the best portion of my life have been lost,
above £2OOO unavoidably and uselessly expended, and every
degree of degradation and humility pressed upon me capri-
ciously, which a mind possessed of honourable feelings could
bear.
It is my intention to return to Sydney with my remaining
means as soon as possible, and I have humbly to beg that
your Lordship will afford me protection from any further
infliction of the Governor’s unexplained austerity, and that
you will be pleased to order me some small compensation for
that loss and disappointment, the nature of which it is thus
my painful duty to obtrude upon your Lordship’s attention.
I have the honour, &c. &c.
Viscount Goderich. J. D. S.
[reply.]
Sir, Downing Street, 16 th Aug. 1831.
I am directed by Viscount Goderich to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of 28th ult. His Lordship has had
under his consideration a report of the land-board on your
case, which was sent home by General Darling at the time


the difficulties to your obtaining the land to which you con-
sidered yourself entitled arose ; but neither from those papers,
nor according to your own showing in the statement which
you have now submitted, does Lord Goderich perceive that
you had any right, consistently with the regulations, to a larger
grant than that which was first offered to you ; for without
deviating from his instructions, the Governor could not have
ordered a grant of greater extent to be made to you than you
were entitled to receive by the capital which you possessed,
and which might be actually available in the Colony for the
purpose of cultivation.
With respect to the losses which you have enumerated in
returning to this country, for which you pray compensation.
Lord Goderich can only express his regret that he can not
hold out to you the prospect of any relief.
(Signed), Howick.
J. D. Shelley, Esq.
My Lord, 19 th Aug. 1831.
I have to make my acknowledgments for your considerate
notice of ray communication of 28th ult. by your reply of
16th inst., which I have had the honour to receive.
Allow me, my Lord, to observe that your letter obliges me
to believe that ray statement has been greatly misconstrued.
The Governor, General Darling, never did offer me a section
of land, and that when I, at the suggestion of a member of
the Council of Sydney, directly applied for the single section,
it was peremptorily refused me. A very little time after this,
it was promised me like every other individual, and when
Alex. McLeay, Esq., manifesting much sympathy for the
harshness of my previous refusals, offered to arrange the
matter, the Governor retracted his promise, and persisted in
withholding it again.
These are facts which I hope will not escape your Lord-
ship’s consideration; for every future hope and plan of life


depends upon the light in which you may be pleased to view
my case. I have persevered in the disastrous voyage home,
and have only outlived my difficulties in the full persuasion
that an appeal to the high honour and sense of justice of His
Majesty’s Government would secure me some relief.
By compensation asked for in my former letter, I intended
only that on my return to Sydney, land of the Colony to a
certain amount might be awarded, and a free passage given
me. This humble and moderate request I hope will, when all
the injuries in mind and purse which I have sustained are
remembered, be readily granted.
Viscount Goderich.
Downing Street, ?>\st Aug. 1831.
I have received and laid before Viscount Goderich your
letter of 18th inst. On reference to the statement which
accompanied your former letter, it certainly appears that a
misconstruction has been put on that part of it which i elates
to your having the offer of a section of land; for both in the
observation of the Governor, which was supposed to contain
that offer, and in your reply, the subject is put hypothetically.
I am directed, however, to state that this misconstruction of
the fact of your having been offered a section of land does not
make any difference in the view which the Secretary of State
is disposed to take of your case, and his lordship can therefore
only repeat that as you did not think proper to conform to the
regulations by adducing to the land-board such proofs of
your being in possession of property as they required, and as
it was usual to call upon all applicants to produce, he cannot
consider that you had established your claim to any land, and
therefore sees no ground for his interference.
1 am, &c.
J. D. Shelley, Esq. Howick.
My Lord, \2th Sept. 1831.
It is with sincere concern I have to acknowledge your Lord-


ship’s letter of the 31st ult., declining interference in my case,
to place which before you I have been voyaging eighteen
months under the severest difficulties, at a very great
expense,
I did hope that the temperate and ingenuous statement
which I had the honour to forward to your Lordship, briefly
narrating the many trials and disappointments to which I
have been wilfully and unnecessarily exposed, with the moderate
kind of recompense prayed for, would readily have been con-
ceded by His Majesty’s Secretary of State, without the neces-
sity of my assuming a more prominent position in the matter.
I made my appeal with the more confidence, that the evils
of which I complained have not arisen from my own miscon-
duct or miscalculation. The regulations respecting lands,
which first lured me to Sydney, are still pendant to the walls
of your public offices, and upon the faith of those regulations
I embarked. My demeanour to the Governor, for the first
fourteen or fifteen months of my residence there, w r as both
humble and submissive; and I think Ido not deserve to be
rebuked for non-conformance to regulations, when I not only
verified, certified, but swore to my property, and offered
such portion of it as I had with me for inspection. I did
more—l requested the grant conditionally, until the money
which I then possessed was really expended upon it, and
further proof of greater available resources arrived. I cannot
therefore conceive, with every consideration of respect and
deference to your Lordship’s judgment, that your summary
dismissal of my case is accordant with reason, justice, or
humanity.
Were I for a moment to admit that a slight irregularity
in my proceedings with the land-board took place on my
arrival, there would be feeble grounds for the Governor’s
rigorous treatment ; but while, my Lord, the land was being
apportioned to the menials of the household, to convicted
felons, and numerous other classes, without any reference


whatever to property or regulations, may I not he allowed to
pronounce on the harshness of that Governor, selecting one
in my situation and circumstances, upon so slight and
slender a pretext, for ruin and disappointment.
I feel the full force of this as much now as I did at that
time, and the maddening consequences to which it has led
no time will ever obliterate or money compensate.
Individually I shall press no further remarks upon the
subject. If your Lordship would but condescend to give
me an interview of a few minutes, I am sure I coidd put
things in a much fairer point of view than they have hitherto
appeared.
Viscount Goderich. D. S.
Sir, Downing Street, 28/A Sept. 1831.
I am directed by Viscount Goderich to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of 12th instant, requesting an interview
with his Lordship, and I am to acquaint you in reply, that
a compliance with your request could answer no useful pur-
pose ; and much as the Secretary of State may lament the
loss which you appear to have sustained, yet in a case of this
nature he cannot overrule the decision of General Darling,
unless it were clearly shewn that such decision had been
made in direct opposition to the existing regulations; this
by no means appearing to be the case, his Lordship can only
recommend that, with a view to induce his Majesty s Go-
vernment to arrive at a different conclusion of your case, you
return to the Colony, and submit to the present Governor any
new circumstance that you may consider as proof of the injustice
complained of, thereby enabling General Bourke to affoid jou
redress, by making to you a grant of the land to which you
considered yourself entitled j but you must distinctly under-
stand, that without further reference to the Colony, the Secre-
tary of State must decline all further interference in your case.
J. D. Shelley, Esq. Howick.


Observation. —I waited for some time, in the ex-
pectation that General Darling would be home.
My Lord, Vlth March.
I have now been home nine months, and in this interval
have been honoured with three communications from your
Lordship—the 16th and 21st August, and 12th September,
the latter deferring your final judgment on my case without
further reference to the Colony, and suggesting the necessity
of my repairing again to New South Wales,-and stating any
new circumstance to General Bourke, to induce him to give
me that which I conceived myself entitled to on my first and
fatal visit to Sydney, in 1827.
I will not trust myself with an expression that can convey
to your Lordship a sense of the intense feeling, to which this
bitter irony gives rise. If, after the ingenuous statement
which I felt it my duty to submit, and the inconsiderable
recompense prayed for—if, after four years of such mental in-
quietude, pecuniary loss, and personal suffering, as I have un-
dergone, imposed upon me, I solemnly in truth aver, without
reason or any justifiable excuse —if, after the perilous and ex-
pensive voyage home, to represent my wrongs, your Lordship
can bid me go and speculate again upon the honour or more
virtuous feeling of another Governor, to obtain that, perhaps,
which, when granted, is of as little value as the paper on
which I write, I cannot repress the truth, my Lord, that the
summons of the executioner will be far more welcome.
I have foreborne unnecessarily to trouble your Lordship—l
have endeavoured to divert my mind, and subdue the poig-
nancy of my misfortunes, and have, with feverish expectation
and full hope, awaited the arrival of General Darling, that I
might have the gratification of convincing even him, if that be
possible, of the little occasion he had for involving me in the
troubles I despair of ever overcoming. Not being able to
learn from private sources, or from your Lordship, through


the inquiries of my professional advisers, if General Darling
is likely to return to this country, and being refused the
advantage of an interview with either your Lordship or the
Under Secretary of State, Lord Howick, and my condition
and circumstances becoming daily further deteriorated from
this suspense, sinking me still deeper in difficulties, I venture
once more to make an impressive appeal to your Lordship,
and with every submission call for your most serious and
compassionate consideration. As an humble individual in
private life, without any ambition beyond that station, as one
who has been deeply, irreparably, and designedly injured,
I trust your Lordship will accord me the little I have asked,
without the necessity of my appearing before the public,
among the crowd of accusers of General Darling; for, though
humble in disposition and unambitious in character, I am
not, my Lord, so abject a being, so devoid of spirit that I can
submit without emotion to be cast, in the very prime of life, a
beggar upon the world, without reason, for no object, or no
end.
I entreat you, my Lord, to bestow a patient attention to
my printed statement, and these subsequent letters. I would
beg to refer you to those who know me—to those who knew
me while living in New South Wales, as well as to those now
in England, who, resorting to the Colony with less means,
but the same views as myself, have been treated so very
differently, and I do not hesitate to affirm that my individual
treatment must stand as one of the most unexampled in-
stances of injustice of a Governor upon record.
I did not originate my present discomfiture. I did not go
to Sydney to contend with the authorities; neither did I, for
the first fourteen or fifteen months, by word or act, aught
that can bear even the resemblance of a charge against me ;
and it is the conviction of this truth, ever present, with me,
that gives to my grievance an acuteness I must long feel;
and the consequences have been so extensive, that it has


almost palsied the hand that pens this humble remonstrance.
[ hope your Lordship will relieve me from my painful state
of anxiety as early as possible—and am, &c.
Viscount Goderich. J. D. Shelley.
Sir, Downing Street, 16 th March, 1832.
I have received the directions of Viscount Goderich to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter to his Lordship of the
12th instant, and to acquaint you in answer, that he sees
nothing in the statement which you have now submitted,
which should induce him to come to any other decision in
your case, than that already communicated to you by Lord
Howick, in his letters of 16th and 31st August, and 28th
September, 1831.
J. D. Shelley, Esq. R. Hay.
Several further letters from me in continuation of
the subject have passed, but as the answers received
to them vary little in their import from those already
given, I think their insertion unnecessary. I have
been for the last nineteen months employing inef-
fectually the language of remonstrance and appeal,
and cannot discover through what medium Lord
Goderich is pleased to view my case. A more un-
merited persecution of an individual, proceeding
purely from the whim of a Governor, it is impossible
to adduce; and I feel bound, in vindication of my
statement, to declare that the reasons assigned by
the noble Secretary of State for denying me any
measure of relief, contain not one syllable of truth.
London : Printed by W. Clowes, Id, Charing Cross.




