

A SURE GUIDE
%x ifontM Imtmcir:
An Appeal to Young Persons just Entering on
the Business of Life.
BY THE
REV. JOSEPH H. ELETCHER,
Newington, Parramatta River.
>XKo«
Sgtmeg:
WESLEYAN BOOK DEPOT, KING STREET,
AND
MR. MADDOCKS, GEORGE STREET.
18G8.


To my Beloved and Venerable Parents,
Now, NOT FAR FROM THE END OF THEIR J GURNEY ;
This Leaflet is Dedicated,
By their Deeply Indebted Son.


A Sure Guide for an Eventful Journey.
“ Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon j
The world was all before them', where to choose
Their place of rest; and Providence their guide.”
Milton Far. Lost.
Teaus are often found upon the cheek when hope
and high courage fill the heart; and the scene which
our great poet has imagined at the gate of the lost
Paradise, is a reality in the history of families. —
Every day young men and maidens leave home with
hope and yet with keen regret, and see the world all
before them, like a stormy sea beheld by the intend-
ing traveller from some calm and embowered retreat
upon the shore. Such a day is memorable through-
out the longest life. He is not to be envied who at
such a crisis shed no natui’al tears. He is to bo
pitied who stepped forth upon his great venture
alone, and spurning away the ancient faith that Pro-
vidence may be his guide.
In some form or other the imagery of our noble
Milton repeats itself in all poetry and all history.
Men of every nation have looked on human life as a
journey, and have confessed that they were strangers
and pilgrims on the earth. And Preacher and Poet
still accept the symbol which pourtrayed the thought


of the princely Abraham in the dim morning of the
world’s history, and which as aptly expresses the ex-
perience of this nineteenth Christian century, whe-
ther we gather it in lowly cottages, or turn to the
volumes in which England’s greatly honoured Queen
has told her people something of her own admirable
domestic life.
It was a truly beautiful modification of this pathe-
tic and universal thought of the world’s heart, which
occurredto that one of our Anglo-Saxon ancestors who
compared the life of man to the course of a sparrow,
which coming out of the dark and wintry night, flies
through a room bright with fire-light and good cheer,
and anon flies out again into the bleak darkness from
whence it came. Christianity has cast her cheerful
sunbeams both ways upon this darkness; yet there
are times, when our life will seem to us hut a bril-
liant flash of opportunity, and even while we gaze
upon it the greedy night has gaped and swallowed it
up.
But I have no disposition to dwell upon the bre-
vity of human life. Thank God, brief as it is, earnest
spirits have found it long enough to be the spring
and sowing-time for magnificent harvests. Life is all
too short for folly, yet is long enough for a traveller
with home before him. The day is long enough for
the day’s work. The journey may be very brief. It
must be eventful.
The difference between an incident and an event
is but a question of measurement. The destruction
of this Earth would be a terrible event to us its inha-


bitants ; but to the rest of the universe it might be
an almost unnoticed incident. Some curious astro-
nomer might ascertain that there is an atom of star-
dust less on the sparkling highways of the firmament;
but that would be no more to the universe than the
loss of a dewdrop would be to the earth itself. Even
so, in the history of the English nation, it may be
nothing that I was born; it may be nothing when
I die. The poet laureate will never hear of it. No
future historian will know of it. Three lines in the
corner of a newspaper, itself living but a day; or a
soon-fading epitaph in a crowded cemetery, may be
all my space in the most perishable page of history.
It matters not. I live ; and of my birthright of
being the proudest monarch cannot rob me. And to
me personally, my birth, my marriage, my death, are
events as momentous as victory to an army or revo-
lution to a state. These every-day matters are great
landmarks which define the path of something more
glorious than planet or sun. They define the path
of an immortal spirit, from a mere point, ever reced-
ing farther into the yesterdays, along an endless line
of to-morrows, upwards and sunwards, or downwards
into ever-deepening shade.
We soon discover that this journey of our life is
no pleasure-trip, which our fancy has chosen, and
which an effort of our will can terminate. The whole
human race moves onward daily at the will of a So-
vereign who commands and is obeyed. It is the
march of a vast army. Hope Avith gay banner leads
the van, but stern Destiny shuts in the rear. On-


ward and yet onward moves the' host, burying its
dead but still advancing. When day departs, an Al-
mighty hand pitches the tents of darkness, and the
stars come forth, like sentinels over a sleeping world.
But at the return of light, the tents are struck and
the host renews its advance. This daily march of
nations the historian beholds, and his unwieldy vo-
lumes multiply, amidst his vain attempts, with the
poverty of human speech and the scant measure of
human life, to record the wealth of instruction which
springs up after the retiring footsteps of mankind,
thicker than corn-ears in some great harvest.
But no history of a nation, however eloquently
pictured, or sagaciously analysed, can interest us like
the story of ourselves. The old men who in Homer’s
time loved to sit in the city gates and chirp out the
summer’s day, like the locusts in the trees above
them, found within themselves the exhaustless ma-
terial of so many complacent colloquies. And the
young men who to-day have been making history
will grow old and talk it. Then, as the shadows of
life’s evening lengthen, still will the sounding epic
run, and they will be sure, that to themselves at least,
life has been eventful.
And every life is eventful, if for no other reasons
than these, that it influences eventfully very many
other lives, and that it comes at last to a most eventful
conclusion. And as the stream which after a thou-
sand windings, rushes at length into the bosom of
the lake or sea which throughout its whole course it
has been seeking, so human life ends, ends but to


begin anew, in that sublime embodiment of all mys-
tery and grandeur, Eteruity. That is an ocean in-
deed ; whose immensity and abysmal depth daunt all
ambitiousness of speculation. And it redeems every
human spirit and every human history from insigni-
ficance, that this stupendous afterworld alone, can
give us room to dilate to our true proportions, and to
put on our immortality. No fleet-winged bird, no
arrowy river speeds on like human life, in haste to
reach eternity. Sometimes amidst the storms of
life, or amidst the deep silences that follow them, we
seem to hear this grand ocean’s voice. Our spirits
feel the shock and answer to the call of its mighty
waves. And to him who thus realizes the powers of
the world to come, all afflictions appear light, and
the longest lifetime shrinks to the dimensions of a
moment.
At length the veil shall be lifted, and with deepest
awe upon our spirits we shall say —Behold Eternity !
But with what different emotions will different indi-
viduals reach this open vision. Like the Greeks in
classic story, who when they emerged from the Mes-
opotamian deserts and saw the blue wave in the dis-
tance, shouted, “ the sea! the sea ” ! —in an ecstacy of
joy and hope, so men of the spirit of the Apostle Paul
reach Eternity with gladness. It is the grand ele-
ment with which their souls have a true affinity, and
which speaks to them of release, of liberty and of
home. But others gaze upon the same prospect with
anguish. They resemble criminals arriving at the
port where they know the officers of justice await


them, and where outraged law has prepared for them
her witnesses, her scourge and her sword. And they
cling to this world, as to the ship that has borne
them to their doom, and which with all its restraints
is less dreaded than the felon’s cell, and that black
beam, which like a narrow bridge over a dark chasm,
often connects the courts of earthly justice with the
dread tribunal of the Judge of all.
Such solemn issues of human life cause us to
study with deep interest the tokens of its progress.
And it is but too plain, that many young people who
have entered upon the business of life with every ad-
vantage of education, of talent, and of social posi-
tion are not only disappointing their friends, but are
awakening their most anxious fears. The moral
thoughtfulness which Dr. Arnold regarded as one of
the true signs of dawning manhood, they have never
reached. Men in years, they are children still in
their impatience of restraint, in their eagerness for
immediate indulgence, in their fickleness, in their
prodigality, and in their want of courage for the
right and the true. The spectacle of such immortal
inanities is the saddest in the world, and experience
assures ns that their life-journey is but too likely to
end in shame and disaster.
Can the human mind picture to itself a scene more
distressing than that of the traveller, who in Austra-
lian bush or Eastern desert has missed his way ?
We may never have heard his dying moan ; but
when some day, we behold his withered form crouch-
ing in the dim forest, over the ashes of his last fire, or


find the white bones heaped where he slept his last
sleep, dreaming perhaps of plenty and of home, to
wake and die in agonies of thirst and hunger,—we
must indeed be obdurate not to pause and to lament.
But what tears are demanded for an immortal spirit
wandering forlorn, like some gallant ship adrift with-
out pilot or helm ? And yet how many men and
women are now living, for whom it would have been
good if they had never been born. All who love
them mourn over them as lost, or near it. They know,
what these heedless ones care not to know, that the
primrose path of pleasure and the “bridge of sighs,” are
not far asunder. Happy the generous father, happy
the fond and hopeful mother, whose spirits God takes
to Himself, before the news of the day has blabbed
out with all its thousand tongues at once, that their
son has gone from the banker’s desk to the prison of
the thief; or like one appalling instance lately, from
the seat of magistracy and high public trust, to the
gallows of the treacherous and perjured homicide.
May human spirits miss their way in this eventful
journey of life ? Alas! we know it. Every asylum
of human misery tells us that. It has been asserted,
that the worst drunkards found in the slums of Lon-
don are, “ persons who formerly moved in respectable,
refined, and even religious society.” The higher the
pinnacle of advantage, the deeper the precipice of
danger below. Many a deathbed is dark with the
gloom of a life which has ended far otherwise than
it once promised. But many a life spent not only
without shame, but even with something of good


repute, has been in the sight of G-od a failure. He
that should have done much for his generation has
done little. He that was born to be a king has
chosen to be a mere lantern-maker. No man can
think too much of his life. It is the sin of us all to
think too little of it.
A grand opportunity given us but once, and on
which eternal issues hang, calls for guidance from
some higher mind than ours. And lips long silent
in the grave have spoken words that can never die,
which assure us that the Great Being, who “ by His
wisdom founded the earth, and by His understanding
hath established the heavens,” offers to us in their
eventful journey of life His own unerring guidance.
He has made His Universe everywhere to lean upon
Himself. The elaborateness of the means speaks the
more loudly of a master, and the universality of law
proclaims the Omnipresent Ruler. It matters not to
us how vast may be Jehovah’s empire, if He who
made it, and who keeps it like some fair garden,
teaches us to look up and call Him, “ Our Father in
Heaven.” How natural and how fitting that the
children should seek their Father’s guidance.—
“ Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, my Fa-
ther, thou art the guide of my youth.”
One of the world’s own poets, a gifted but melan-
choly man, filling all things with himself, once watched
the stars in their midnight splendour and wrote —•
“ Whoever gazed upon them shining,
And turned to earth without repining,
Nor wished for wings to flee away,
And mix with their eternal ray ?”


But an older poet, of loftier song and healthier soul,
admiring the same glorious spectacle has sung a very-
different strain:
“ Lift up your eyes on high, and behold,
Who hath created these things ?
He bringeth out their numerous army ;
He calleth them all by name :
Through the greatness of His might, and the strength of
[His arm,
Not one is missing.
Why sayest thou, oh Jacob! and speakest, oh Israel!
My way is hid from Jehovah ;
And my judgment is passed over from my God.”
Isaiah xl., 26, 27. Dr. Henderson’s version.
In solemn yet eloquent silence each returning
night repeats the prophet’s appeal. These stars, that
came forth like sheep from their shepherd’s fold,
never miss their way in the immeasurable fields of
space. He who made them guides them. Nothing
that Jehovah guides can miss its way. And every
sparkling world above thy head this night, could it
find a voice might say : “ There is as much of God
with you in your world as with us in ours. He that
kindled my lamp of unfading light has given thee a
spirit nobler far than the most glorious world thou
canst gaze upon. He who directs my march across
His universe will much more guide thee; for lam
only the Great Creator’s Servant, but thou art His
Child.”
But better far one promise of God in human
speech, than a thousand mysterious whispers in
“ Reason’s Ear.” He who anchored out all those
islands of light in the great ocean of darkness, is no
dumb deity. He hath spoken, “at sundry times and


in divers manners.” all Jehovah’s speech in
Old Testament and in New, is full of pledges that
He will guide us if we but value and seek His gui-
dance. The most majestic and godlike spirit that
G-od ever made since the world began, changes the
severe and masculine strain of the lawgiver for sublime
poetic rapture, as he thinks of Jehovah guiding His
people :
“ As an eagle stirreth up her nest, flnttereth over her young,
Spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her
wings :
So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god
with Him.”
Very full of compassion are all the tones of our
Father in Heaven where He speaks of His care over
us. “ The steps of a good man are ordered by the
Lord, and He delighteth in His way. Though he
fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth him with His hand.” It is especially our
Divine Master, the Lord Jesus, who, with the great
and pictured volume of nature open before Him, has
shown us that the commonest objects of the landscape
are witnesses to us for God. With the meek lily
blooming at His feet, and the careless birds carolling
above Him, our Saviour spoke those inimitable words
which through more than eighteen centuries have
made so many Christian hearts brave and calm. He
did indeed show to His disciples a path before them,
so full of danger that they themselves would be, “ as
sheep among wolves;” but no sooner does he awaken
a fear than in His own majestic manner He dispels
it: “ Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? and
not one of them shall fall to the ground without


your Eather. But the very hairs of your head are
all numbered. Eear ye not therefore ye are of more
value than many sparrows.”
The Scriptural idea of God’s Providence is some-
thing more than His superintendence from afar. It
is His living and loving Presence in all His worlds.
And gladly will we listen, “ to the strangest philo-
sopher that ever entered Athens,” who proclaims a
God, “ in whom we live and move and have our
being.” There is a subtle and diffused atheism in
the world, seen not so much in men’s books as in
their lives, which is the true explanation of many a
wasted life. He is a daring thief who would rob
God of His universe. But the utmost audacity of
wickedness is his who would rob the Universe of its
God. It seems incredible that in this planet, which
Milton, and Newton, and Brewster, and Earaday,
thought so eloquent of a present God, Atheism should
lift up its head, or Deism proclaim its repulsive creed
of a God too distant to hear my prayers, and too
helplessly tied up by His own laws to answer them.
Not such, is “ Emmanuel, God with us.” He pro-
claims to us that “ all power is given to Him in Hea-
ven and in Earth ; and declares, Lo I am with you al-
ways, to the end of the world.” "With His word,
we fear not to make this momentous experiment of
living. “ The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want:
yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death 1 will fear no evil, for Thou art with me."
But all the provisions and promises of God leave
us room to act. We are “ workers together with


God,” and not even the greatest and most needful
of His gifts will be forced upon us. And the mea-
sure of their fulfilment depends upon our own fide-
lity and diligence. The tiny shell by the shore is
the type of ourselves. When that little chamber is
open the least wavelet can overflow it; yet its
feeble inmate, by contracting a fibre can shut out
the ocean. And we may, if we will, shut out God’s
love from our souls and His gracious guidance from
our lives. There remains then only His wrath,
which we cannot shut out: for “ the Lord hath made
all things for Himself: yea even the wicked for the
day of evil.” And as distrust of God narrows our
nature’s capacity, so faith in Him expands it. And
when this little shell of man’s soul has drunk its
deepest draughts, still that great ocean of Divine
love rolls on in undiminished majesty.
Therefore let young men and maidens with school
and all other preparations behind, and all the long
procession of life’s every-day duties marshalled be-
fore them, bethink themselves of this grand force
slumbering beside them in the promises of God. —
Let them take up such a cluster of sage and venerable
counsels as we find in the 2nd chapter of the Book
of Proverbs, and make life a series of bold expe-
riments with them. There is no law in nature more
to be relied on than the operation of this law of the
moral world—
“ Trust in the Lord with all thy heart,
And lean not to thine own understanding :
In all thy ways acknowledge Him,
And He shall direct thy paths.”


But remember, that as is your acknowledgment of
God so will be His direction of you. And if you
would feel the plenitude and force of His promises,
like some grand billow buoying your spirit up and
bearing it on, commit yourself to them fearlessly and
always.
Take especial care to acknowledge God, and to
seek His guidance, in the beginnings of things. Our
first steps are the most momentous. Like the ax-
ioms of the mathematician, these first steps may be
simple and few. It matters not; the whole geometry
of a man’s life is inevitably built upon them. As the
tiny acorn which an infant’s hand may grasp, con-
tains not only the future oak, but all the forests that
shall spring from it ; so in some insignificant step of
to-day is enfolded an endless succession of ever-
fruitful consequences. The sin, which like a fiery
river has throughout so many terrible centuries
flooded and blasted this world with miseries, was once
the secret thought of a fair and noble woman’s heart.
These beginnings!—take special care of them.
Here indeed we must not lean upon our own under-
standing. It is due to our Divine Guide, and it is
necessary for our own well-being, that Omniscience
should preside over all our beginnings. And
yet, it is just here that many young people,
even among those who fear God and claim His guid-
ance, forget their duty. They take some step which
fixes their social position, such as the choice of a pro-
fession, or the great venture of marriage, and only
after that critical step, bethink themselves of their


Guide. This is to tangle the web of life at the out-
set. The history of Saul the first King of Israel, so
bi'illiant in its morning and so dreary in its close, is
an impressive illustration of the manner in which
self-dependance ends. The history of David on the
other hand, is the history of a man, who amidst many
errors habitually looked up to God. I know of no
more striking illustration in modern times of this
wise waiting for God at a critical period, than is fur-
nished in the life of that kingly man, Dr. Chalmers,
when he was solicited to remove from Kilmany to
Glasgow. Every young man, who has the opportu-
nity, should turn to Dr. Hanna’s biography of this
truly great, yet truly humble man, and read the pas-
sage for himself. Let him mark and never forget
this wise sentence : “ There is nothing like leaving
room for the evolutions of Providence, and it is wrong
to anticipate them.”
And we should be equally careful to acknowledge
and to honour God, in the means which we employ to
reach the ends, which as we believe the Providence of
God is opening before us. Of those who begin life
hopefully, many more go astray through employing
doubtful means, than through directly seeking bad
ends. It is a safe rule to abstain from every expe-
dient concerning which you doubt. In the words of
another verse of this second chapter of the Book of
Proverbs : “ Let not mercy and truth forsake thee :
bind them about thy neck : write them upon the
table of thine heart : so shalt thou find favour and
good understanding in the sight of God and man.”


And now, having conducted this great experiment
of connecting your life with the hand of God with
care in these two important particulars, having
interpreted as carefully and prayerfully as you can
the tokens of the Divine will, and having employed
as diligently and skilfully as you can all fair and right
means of accomplishing your work —then, accept re-
sults. If your efforts begin to succeed, remember the
9th and 10th verses of this chapter : “ Honour the
Lord with thy substance and the first fruits of all
thine increase: so shall thy barns be filled with plenty,
and thy presses shall burst out with new wine.” Such
a promise as this did net become obsolete with the
Jewish economy. God’s blessing still rests, and
often in a very striking manner, on the career of those
who early began, and uniformly continued, “ to ho-
nour God with their substance.” We all value
money, and that is an emphatic reason why we should
wisely and unostentatiously give it away. He who
robs God is the worst of thieves. And we do rob
Him, when we refuse to take from our hoards and
our indulgences, that which is worth giving to Him,
because we value it. Worldly honesty is bare jus-
tice, but Christian honesty is justice joined to mercy,
and borrowing a new charm from the compact; like
some sweet song set to sweeter music.
Now here also is danger. The great experiment is
often marred by unfaithfulness just at this point, “If
any man draw back,” says God, “ my soul shall have
no pleasure in him.” Many who acknowledged God
in all their ways and sought His guidance in the Yal-


ley of Humiliation, and up the Hill of Difficulty, for-
get Him when they reach the Delectable Mountains
of earthly competence, or enter the Enchanted Ground
of wealth and ease. We could understand the heart
which has grown stony under the cold waves of ad-
versity ; but the heart that in the sunshine has turned
to ice is a prodigy of badness. Therefore lest you
some day sit in the sunshine of earthly pros-
perity receiving brightness and projecting shade,
take care that your liberality keeps pace with your
affluence. No greater calamity can befall a man, than
to have built a statelier dwelling than other men, only
to feel more keenly than other men, the vexation of
spirit which belongs to gain without godliness and to
success without gratitude.
But if disappointment attend your efforts, then re-
member the words of the ILth and 12th verses of this
chapter from which we have been quoting: “My son
despise not the chastening of the Lord neither be
weary of His correction: for whom the Lord loveth
He correcteth even as a Father the son in whom He
delighteth.” Now is Faith’s opportunity. These
trials shew that God is taking pains with us. The
patriarch of old never looked so noble in his prospe-
rity, as when he sat amidst the ruin of his house
calmly saying: “ The Lord gave and the Lord hath
taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord.”—
Faith of such majestic aspect would be cheaply pur-
chased with all our earthly substance. There is more
of Heaven in it than of earth :
“ Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.”


The records of the Bible show how long G-on often
waits while He is perfecting an instrument, before
He uses it. Moses was eighty years old before he
was ready for G-on’s work. Thirteen years did Joseph
serve in Egypt before his place was ready by Pharoah’s
throne. “ Quick enough if well enough” was the
maxim which made the most cautious of Lord Chan-
cellors. But then Lord Eldon’s judgments are laws.
Success is to be valued wholly by God’s standard.
If He say, “ well done,” over our life’s work, it will
be glorious success. He is served even by those “ who
stand and wait.” It has been the beautiful work of
many of God’s dear children to be examples of pa-
tience amidst the severest trials. Poor they may
have been, but “ they have made many rich.” “ Hav-
ing nothing they have possessed all things.” Their
lives borrowed no charm from their outward circum-
stances, but they passed over our world like the
stars, making even night beautiful. They remind us
of those lovely flowers which “ skirt the eternal frost”
in some Alpine valley, and bloom, we know not how,
in the midst of winter’s snow and storm. The guid-
ance of our Heavenly Father may lead us into trials,
as it led Israel into a desert. But then it will lead
us out again. And there can be no higher and Avor-
thier acknowledgment of God than always to love
Him.
That which G-od has promised to us is, His guid-
ance and blessing, but not always money and goods.
But the consciousness of Divine guidance
is the pledge of final success. The Divine


promises are reliable, and we may know that they are
being fulfilled to us. Now here is room for wisdom.
We do not expect to be guided by voices from Hea-
ven, or by soothsaying with texts of Scripture. We
do not expect to see the cloudy pillar waiting to
show us the way to-morrow, or that the chariot of
fire shall be staid at our door, and some affable angel
shall appear to instruct us in our duty. The dispen-
sations which needed miracles were introductory.—
But all the dispensations have grown old. Antiquity
is the present time. And this path of following
God’s Providence is now a familiar and beaten way.
It is full of footpi’ints, some of sturdy men, and some
of gentle women. And even the footprints of little
children are there. “We are followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises.”—
Yes, no more extraordinary qualities were needed for
them or for us, than “ faith and patience.” It is
distrust or impatience which misses the way.
It may be difficult to convey to other minds the
manner in which we found the clue through the laby-
rinth of life. But in every case it has been substan-
tially this, that we have prayed for wisdom to take up
the duty of the moment, and then the next and the next.
And many a Christian as he looks backward is cer-
tain that God has guided him. Sometimes there
has been an inward leading in the reasonings and
intuitions of the mind itself. And sometimes, there
has been an outward leading in the closing or open-
ing of the doors of opportunity. There has been
some times error losing the way, and some times en-


thusiasm expecting results without means, but error
has been amended and enthusiasm cast away. And
now a grateful glow comes over the heart as we sit
down to “ remember the way the Lord hath led us.”
It is beautiful to see how the promises of G-od go
down as heir-looms in pious families, and how many a
good man’s recognition of God’s guiding hand
brightens towards the close of his life. We find So-
lomon saying to the young men of his day ; “ In all
thy ways acknowledge God and He shall direct thy
paths.” But in these words he is only repeating the
counsel of his venerable father to himself when a
young man : “ And thou Solomon my son know thou
the GrOD of thy Father, and serve Him with a perfect
heart and a willing mind. If thou seek Him He will
be found of thee, but if thou forsake Him, He will
cast thee off" for ever.” The Hebrew verb translated
“ know,” in the words of David, is the same which
is translated “ acknowledge” in the words of Solomon.
The two words stand to each other as cause and effect.
To acknowledge God we must know Him. And he
who knows Him aright will not fail to acknowledge
Him. And this transmission of the promises of the
Bible continues. Many a Christian recollects when
these very words, “In all thy ways acknowledge
God,” were spoken to him by a gray-haired father,
perhaps at the side of the ship with white sails then
outspread to bear him to a distant land. Or it may
have been that a pious mother, richest gift of God
to man next to the gift of Himself, spoke the words.


And her voice tremulous with tears haunts you still
in quiet hours,
“ like some sweet beguiling melody,
So sweet we know not we are listening to it.”
Many years have gone by since we, by faith in
their faith, sought this guidance. But now, our ex-
perience answers to theirs, and we too are ready to
say to a younger generation, “ He will direct thy
paths.” Every man who trusts these promises tries
them afresh, but the result is ever the same, rejoicing
confidence at last. There may be sharp doubts to
bear, and hard-fought battles to remember, but faith
borrows strength from her enemies. What Ruskin
says of the artist has often been true of the servants
of God : “ Childhood often holds a truth with its
feeble fingers which the grasp of manhood cannot re-
tain, which it is the pride of utmost age to recover.”
Jacob in his youth leaves home with a stain upon the
past and a cloud upon the future, and his language
is, “ If the Lord will be with me and keep me in the
way that I go.” But when Jacob has become Israel,
and the venerable patriarch lies down to die, his pa-
thetic and fatherly benediction for his children is
this: “ The God which fed me all my life long
unto this day : the angel which redeemed me from all
evil—bless the lads.”
A man of our own time whose life was one of ex-
traordinary vicissitude and difficulty has left us a very
memorable testimony. Somewhat more than half a
century ago a mason’s boy fell from a ladder in Ply-
mouth and was taken up injured for life. From that


day he was stone-deaf. Never was poor boy so
knocked about in the world. Neither as barber,
mason, shoemaker, dentist, or printer, could he find a
livelihood or a resting place. After almost unexam-
pled tossing upon the waves of life, he made his ap-
pointed haven in popular authorship and Biblical il-
lustration ; and John Kitto, poor and deaf and alto-
gether wanting in worldly wisdom, became the Doctor
Kitto of the Pictorial Bible, the Biblical Cyclopaedia,
and the Daily Scripture Readings ; books which have
brought great treasures of instruction to many Chris-
tian homes. With the following remarkable words
he closes the latest labour of his life :
“ Thirty years ago, before c the Lord caused me to
wander from my father’s house,’ and from my native
place, I put my mark upon this passage in Isaiah, * I
am the Lord: they shall not be ashamed that wait for
Me.’ Of the many books I now possess, the Bible
that bears this mark is the only one that belonged to
me at that time. It now lies before me; and I find
that although the hair which was then dark as night
has meanwhile become a “ sable silvered,” the ink
which marked this text has grown into intensity of
blackness as the time advanced, corresponding with,
and in fact recording the growing intensity of the
conviction “ that they shall not be ashamed that
wait for Thee.” I believed it then, but I know it
now. Under many perilous circumstances, in many
most trying scenes, under sorrows that rend the heart
and troubles that crush it down, I have waited for
Thee, and lo ! I stand this day as one not ashamed.”


There is not anything, except Q-od Himself, so re-
liable as His promises. But let us take care to ap-
proach this most true and holy Lord God in the way
which He has Himself appointed. Christ alone is
our way to God. When Dr. Arnold was preparing
his pupils for confirmation, he endeavoured to per-
suade them to say, “ Christ died for me,” instead of
the general expression, “ Christ died for us.” In
that little change, lies the secret of salvation and of
spiritual life. To know the Son of God by habitual
reliance on His atoning blood as the sacrifice for our
sin, and to cling to Him as our very life itself, brings
Him near. Then all fear of our missing our way is
gone. We hear His voice and follow Him. We
dwell in Him and He in us, and Death, which hides
so much, reveals Him, whom though unseen we had
long known and loved.
Never did young persons entering on life’s busi-
ness need guidance from above so much as now. —
This is an age of great opportunities, and therefore
of great responsibilities and great dangers. It is a
right glorious time for him to live, who is resolved by
God’s grace to live well. But amidst all the stir and
day light of this nineteenth century, to live a frivo-
lous, selfish, and irreligious life, is a calamity and a
crime dreadful to think of. Happier far would such
sinners have been could they have been buried 5000
years ago under the mud of Noah’s deluge, or have
perished with the less guilty sinners of Sodom, in
their fiery burial under that dead sea which covers
their sepulchres, and which, in its perpetual desola-
tion reminds us of some ghost of dire aspect con-


demned to sit for ever by the memorial of its crimes.
Success to you, young people entering upon the
work of your lives ! Your success will be life to
some who love you, and your failure will cause them
a sorrow more bitter than death. Tor their sakes as
much as for your own, aspire to be something worthy
of yourselves. Aspire to possess at least the poAver
which belongs to consistent Christian example, to
habitualkindness, and to trustworthiness and efficiency
in one’s calling. Be sure of two things, that life will
prove to you eventful in victory or in ruin, and be
sure also that there is but one sure guide through
life, and that is, the God of Joseph and of Daniel,
and it may be also of thy father, and of thy mother.
“ If thou forsake Him, He will cast thee off for ever” —
and what then ?
God’s guidance of His servants stamps a character
of grandeur upon their history. He guided Israel of
old from Egypt to Palestine, and for more than thirty
centuries good men have read the story with undi-
minished wonder and instruction. It shall be so
with ourselves. Here in this dark world Ave are mak-
ing the history, but in Heaven there shall be light
and keen vision to read it. Like the marvellous fa-
culty in the bee, by Avhich she gathers her fragrant
honey alike from thistle and from rose, such is Divine
guidance in the history of God’s servants. It turns
all the elements of life to SAveetness. Then at last,
the mercy-burdened spirit fully furnished for the
songs of Paradise, hastens to its God, like the honey-
laden bee, which lingers no more amidst the flowers,
but flies swiftly home.






