

A SUGGESTION FOR LENT.
A
PASTORAL LETTER
TO THE
CLERGY AND LAITY
OF THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF SYDNEY,
BY
ROGER BEDE
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY AND METROPOLITAN.
SYDNEY.
1881.




A SUGGESTION FOR LENT.
A
PASTORAL LETTER
TO THE
CLERGY AND LAITY
OF THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF SYDNEY,
BY
j3EDE, vVv
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY AND METROPOLITAN.
SYDNEY.
1881,




ROGER BEDE, by the Grace of God and the Favour
of the Apostolic See, Archbishop of Sydney and
Metropolitan, to the Clergy, Secular and Regular,
and the Faithful of the said Archdiocese,
Health and Benediction in the Lord.
Reverend and Dear Brethren, and
Dear Children in Jesus Christ,
If we take the Papal Chair as a centre, and cast our eyes
round the world, we shall find that the Catholic Church
is engaged in almost every country in a heavy conflict
with her enemies. The heresies of the past, which repre-
sented endless independent and antagonistic forces, have
gradually amalgamated, and instead of having to contend
with many, yet isolated foes, the Church has now, practi-
cally. to encounter only one. It is true that this one
differs in different places, as the various tints of the
same colour differ, yet they are but shades of difference,
and represent in reality the same thing.


Men do not occupy themselves, as of old, in denying
this dogma or that; they no longer call in question
isolated pronouncements; they do not think of setting up
purer or more simple creeds. Such methods imply a
certain faith in the supernatural and in revealed Religion.
Now, all this, we may say broadly, has passed away, and
the one aim of “ modern thought ” is to level the Catholic
Church with the ground, and to make a clear way for the
liberty of the passions and the uncontrolled display of the
pride of man.
It is the same in so-called Catholic countries as in
Protestant. Indeed, if possible, the conflict is more
unrelenting in the former than in the latter, inasmuch as
Protestantism has a certain affinity with, and may be said
to be the parent of the spirit of the present age ; whilst
Catholicism is, and ever has been, and must be, diametri-
cally opposed to it. In Republican France, the governing
authorities have been acting as if their very existence
depended on the destruction of religion. Not only have
the Regular Orders been driven out, but,' in some places
the very crucifixes and emblems of Christian faith have
been beaten off the walls and from their pedestals with
sticks, and carted away as so much rubbish to fill ditches
and mend the public roads. The Government of Italy—
that Italy which ought to be the most Catholic country
in the world—treats the religion of the people as an
enemy to the State ; and the action of those in power is
calculated to weaken, and bring to nought, were it
possible, that great civilisation which has placed the
Italian Peninsular, in many ways, at the very head of
European greatness. In Germany, the same policy of
antagonism has been persisted in, and the Imperial
Chancellor imagines, or would make believe, that the
great Empire of Germany cannot be considered safe so
long as the Catholic religion is tolerated in the Father-
land. Even Belgium, which, imitating the liberty-
loving spirit of our race, rejoices in a kindred freedom,
unable to resist the universal pressure, has disgraced the
Catholic name by treating the popular religion as if it


were the greatest enemy of progress, and the main draw-
back to the advancement of the world. What is going
on in Europe is producing its effect all over the civilized
globe. Everywhere the action of “ free-thought,” directed
by the passions, is producing the same result; and the
great tide of human energy, as represented by “ advanced
ideas,” is breaking down old landmarks and threatens
to submerge the civilization of the Cross, and that
venerable creed which has been the consolation as well as
the hope of millions amongst the best of men. The
forces which are operating in the countries at home, and
nre disturbing the peace of nations, are not without their
influx in the land of our adoption. Each year as it passes
adds largely to the army of unbelief. The churches and
sects that sprang out of the sixteenth century are
gradually losing their hold on the public mind : they are
looked upon as possessing no genuine power by the leaders
of modern thought. They are regarded as illogical when
viewed as exponents of dogmatic creeds and supernatural
religions ; and if they are treated with any tenderness it
is because they are said to serve as useful seminaries for
infidelity. With them the powers of the world enter into
no internecine battle. A word of contempt or of com-
passion, a smile of amusement or of incredulity is all they
have to suffer from the leaders of “ advanced ideas,” who
look upon them, at best, as harmless mimicries of some-
thing far more formidable than themselves, and which
exerts a real influence over the consciences of men. There
is but one real antagonist which bars the way to so-called
progress, and that antagonist is the Roman Catholic
Church. If she were once disposed of, the ideas of the
most advanced of modern thinkers would find no
obstacle to their realization, and the old-world notions of
Supernatural Religion, of the Divinity and Atonement of
our Saviour, and indeed, finally, of the existence of God
Himself, would gradually, it is thought, melt away into
the forgetfulness of the past.
Living here as we do, at the end of the world, it
takes time for European thought to permeate amongst


us. Were the public teachings of the leaders of more
advanced ideas in Europe to be paraded amongst our
colonists, much scandal would be the consequence; and
yet our small world is steadily advancing in the direction of
unbelief. It is merely behind the age, but is day by day
making good its steps in the direction of European infidelity.
What a few years ago would have shocked the public con-
science now produces little effect. Lectures are advertised
and delivered striking at the very heart of Christianity
and attended bv large audiences of approving disciples in
the centre of our greatest cities, and the general tendency
proves that public thought, in Australia, is being carried
along by the same wave which is disturbing and sickening
the old countries at home.
In Europe, where the tide is more advanced,
expression is more startling. We will quote one or two
pronouncements, to show you, dearly beloved, the real
direction of “modern thought,” and to unveil before you
the ultimate goal to which that movement points which
exhibits such an intense hostility to the Catholic Church,
and which is already making its presence felt in this
country of our adoption. Take three so-called Catholic
countries where the Church is strongest, and where,
therefore, the opposition of “advanced ideas” is most pro-
nounced and undisguised. “We stand in need,”'
exclaims the deputy Andriotti, in the Italian Assembly,
—almost within ear-shot of the Vatican—“we stand in
need of a revolution made in the name of every religion
against the Catholic religion.’’ Another deputy, Miceli,
says that “all should urge on such a revolution as would
destroy the Papacy which surrounds and catches the
whole world within its net.” Take Belgium. A member
of the Chamber of Deputies exclaims: “ Catholicity is a
madness, and wherever it has placed its foot it has sown
ruin and shame.” Another member, honoured by the
Academy, declares that “all the false ideas touching on
morality which have been propagated in the world, have
been the offspring of Christianity.” Another says,,
that “no one can believe any longer in a religion which


invented original sin and the doctrine of baptismal
regeneration.” Take France: Jules Ferry, the great
leader of practical politics in the Bepublic, declares
“that Catholicism is the amalgamation of all human
follies into one.” But enough of such degrading and
revolting sentiments. We have indicated sufficient to
show you, dearly beloved, the direction and the object of
these modern leaders of the people. They aim at des-
troying the Church, for they believe that if they once
succeed in performing that prodigy, they will soon sweep
away all idea of heaven and hell and Christ and God,
and all that is a restraint on human passion, and a check
on human pride.
And how is it, you may ask, that the Church is so
universally attacked ; The answer is plain and adequate.
Because the Church universally and uncompromisingly
preaches one harmonious Creed, and one unbending
Morality. She will not give way to the passions of men.
She will not fit her doctrine to suit their lax or criminal
desires, nor seal up her mouth when it is her duty to
preach the pure, and, to them, the severe maxims of the
Gospel. In every capital of the world she lifts up her
voice, and proclaims the same one teaching of our Saviour,
and though so violently opposed, she still rules the con-
sciences, and possesses the hearts of the best and purest
members of the human family. If the world, in all paits
of the world, is aiming at relaxing the moral law and
giving licence to desire, the Church throughout the
world must, if she be true to her Divine Founder,
be engaged in vigorously opposing such relaxation.
She knows not the compromises of diplomacy ; she cannot
meet vice half-way. Her existence depends on the
thorough squareness of her position, and on her keeping
herself perfectly free from all suspicion of playing or
practising with the weaknesses and follies of the world.
Her dogmatic teaching is not guided by “modern
thought,” but by the spirit of Truth, which is as old as
the Almighty, and as unchangeable. The world must
accept her with the full orb of her dogmatic creed, and
the unbending code of her morality, or not accept her at


all. It is her genius to stand, like the everlasting
mountains of God, everlastingly the same, and those who
desire to have her must come to her. and accept her, not
as they would like to make and model her, but exactly
as she came down out of Heaven from God. She is the
one witness. Her voice is now what it was in the
catacomb of S. Callixtus. Her glory is the reproach of
“semper eadem .” And since the world, or “modern
thought,” which represents the new-world form of human
passion and pride, cannot convert, or hoodwink, or
diplomatize, or terrify the Church out of her impregnable
position, it is attempting all over the world to weaken
her hold upon the public conscience, and, gradually,
especially by means of the education of the young, to take
the generations of the future wholly out of her hands.
Send a child to a school where religion is not the basis
of education and that child will become a man, without
basis of religion. Send a nation to such a school, and
that nation will be as the man is-—devoid and divested of
the love of Christ and the fear of God. If the leaders of
“ modern thought ” succeed in bringing up a generation
of children to manhood and womenhood, without religion,
they will have done more to corrupt the world than all
the immoralities of the Roman Empire.
Dearly Beloved, you know how strenuously we have
denounced the practically godless system of education for
which we all are taxed, and for which we have all to pay.
You know how much opposition, and what strong expres-
sions of disapproval, on part of our opponents, such a
course of action has been the cause of. You see how
the clear enunciation of the truth has dissipated the cloud
of confusion in which some were lost; and how, now, we
have emerged out of the cloud and out of the sea, and are
determined to let the world go its way, and to make any
and every sacrifice for the preservation of that glorious
religion, which yet may, in God’s good time, conciliate to
herself the affection of our fellow-colonists.
The future of the country is to be found not in Parlia-
ments or great meetings of the people, but in the Schools.
If you would know what sort of Catholicity will reign in


this land in fifty years time, all you have to do is to
interrogate the Schoolmaster, to examine what is the
character of the schools in which the Catholic population
receives its education. If your children are sent to State
Schools, they will become State-children; and, like the
State, their boast will be, when they grow up, that they
are not clogged or hampered by any religion at all, and
that their one object in this life—for they will not believe
in any other—is to enjoy themselves, and to avoid any-
mmg that may be the cause of pain. If they be sent to
-Protestant schools, they will become Protestants ; if to
Catholic schools, well conducted, they will maintain and
be staunch to the religion of their fathers. Pearly
beloved,—We are speaking in general and in the main.
We are not dealing with exceptional cases. There is no
rule without its exception. Some children, who have
been educated strict Protestants, have become Agnostics
later on in life. Catholics who have received a careful
education in the family, at school, and in Catholic Uni-
versities, have before now turned infidels or atheists.
And yet common sense tells us that the only prudent
way to turn out a generation of Catholic men and women
is to give that generation, when young, a careful training
m schools expressly in harmony with, and under the
guidance of the Catholic religion. The desperate effort
per fas et nefas our opponents are making to get
hold of Catholic children, ought to be enough of itself
to convince serious men of the immense importance of
«arly training when there is question of the religious
future of a people. The schools throughout the world
are now the main point of attack. ; and the Church
throughout the world is in harmony with herself. She
may suffer fine and exile, but she may not prevaricate,
ohe was not instituted to make money, but to make
martyrs ; not to divide the spoils of the wealthy, but in
the face of the powerful to proclaim the Truth. So she
gathers her children the closer around her the more the
storm rages; and, willingly suffering persecution for
Justice sake she consolidates her strength, conciliates


the love of Catholic parents, and uses the tyranny and
cruelty of her enemies to strengthen and tighten the
bond of her unity, and the cords of her peace.
Such, dearly beloved, is our case in this country.
Never was the Catholic body in this colony so united as
at present. This comes to us from all quarters. The
traditions of the faith are deeply engrained in the hearts of
our faithful people. In the noisy city and in the distant
bush it is the same. All who have watched the battle with
its confusion of dust, have gradually seen the Church
emerge in her beautiful proportions, and present herself
to the eye of Catholic and Protestant alike as some
thing not of this world or of this world’s policy, but as
some divine Prophetess, who, despising gold and silver
and flattery, announced a great principle, gathered her
children together, and having shaken herself free from
evil, walked the way, pure and undefiled, of God’s com-
mandments in spite of the efforts of her enemies to
make her compromise her position and betray the
essential interests of the faith.
And why, dearly beloved children in Jesus Christ,
have we been dwelling on these thoughts in this Lenten
Pastoral ? Why have we been reviewing the übiquitous
battle that is going on between the Church and “ modern
thought ” all over Christendom ? We have done so, first
because it is an immense help to us to identify our
spiritual position with that imperial universal Church to
which we belong. We are, each of us, one of a vast
society, living by one life, and pursuing one policy. We
are encouraged in our struggles by the thought that we
are not alone in the fray. The great army throughout
the world is actively engaged with the enemy along the
whole line. When we think of this, we feel that we
must not be the first to turn traitors or cowards: but
that we must conduct ourselves bravely, and do our part
to sustain the glorious reputation of the Church of Christ
Militant on earth; secondly, because we are anxious
for you to realise the fact that what we have been
doing has been simply our duty, and an elementary


obligation of our position—one of the main end&
of the Episcopal office, to preserve inviolate the
deposit of the Faith. As the honour of his wife is
dear to a husband, and is jealously guarded by him ; even
more dear, if possible, and more jealously guarded,
if it can be so, is the Faith of the Church, which is
especially entrusted to the protection of the Bishop.
We are not only one of the vast company of Catholics
spread over the world, but we are, also, strictly one, in a
point of vital moment with the teachings of our Supreme
Head, and with the practice of some thousand Bishops
who compose the hierarchy of the Catholic Church.
Thirdly, we are fully persuaded that those very virtues,
which we have more especially to practice during Lent,
are highly calculated to arm us against the tendency of the
present age, to open our eyes to see our duty towards
the rising generation, and to give us strength and self-
sacrifice enough to perform that duty.
Let us, then, often meditate, during these forty days,
on the great Spiritual Empire to which we belong;
encourage in our minds a profound sense of thankfulness
that we are members of so glorious a Society; and think of
how we can do our part towards strengthening its hold and
perpetuating its power in this land of our adoption. Let
us often. reflect on our duties towards the future of the
Church in this land, and towards the immortal souls of
those little children who depend entirely upon our action
as regards their Christian education. Let us identify our
prayers and mortifications and our alms-deeds with these
thoughts. Let our minds and imaginations be purified
and warmed by such holy lenten practices. And let us
all make some good resolution during Lent not only to love
God more ourselves; not only to be more loyal to Mother
Church ; not only to love her better than all the world ;
but to do some substantial, generous action for the main-
tenance and advancement of Christian education amongst
the Catholic children of this Archdiocese.
Dearly beloved, life is short, and it soon passes away ;
friends part, never to return again; the action of the


present soon glides into the history of the past; what was
a few years ago vividly before us, our home, our friendships,
our interests of earlier days, seems, on looking back, as if
it were the tale in a romance : eternity approaches; the
Judge is nearer than He was : we are walking day by day
to meet Him. O that that meeting may be a satisfactory
one for us ! 0 that we may now love, and serve, and
adore, and bless our Maker; so that when He does really
appear to our astonished eyes we may be allowed to kiss
His feet and receive of the fulness which He has pre-
pared for those who love Him ! He loved little children:
let us love them: let us become as little children
ourselves, full of tenderness, and confidence, and faith, and
simplicity, and self-forgetfulness: and He will then
recognize His own image in us, and place us on the
thrones prepared for us from the foundation of the world.
“Be you humbled under the mighty Hand of God,
that He may exalt you on the time of visitation : casting
all your care upon Him, for He hath care of you. Be
sober and watch ; because your adversary, the devil, as a
roaring lion, goeth about seeking whom he may devour,
whom resist ye strong in faith. . . . The God of
grace, who hath called us unto His eternal glory in
Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a little, will
Himself perfect you, and confirm you, and establish you.
To Him be glory and empire for ever and ever.
Amen.” 1
Given at Sydney, and appointed to be read in all
Churches and Chapels of the Archdiocese of
Sydney, on Quinquagesima Sunday, 1881.
t ROGER BEDE,
Archbishop of Sydney and Metropolitan.
i 1 St. Peter chap, v., 6 —li.


DISPENSATIONS.
!• Sunday is a day of neither fasting nor abstinence.
2. Meat is allowed at dinner only, on all days, except
Wednesdays and Fridays, the Saturday of Ember Week, and the last
four days in Lent.
3. On Fasting Days a collation may be taken in the morning
and in the evening. At collation a small quantity of milk may be
used; and those who feel unable to take bread in sufficient quantity
may use a little butter.
4. Cheese and butter are allowed on all days at dinner.
5. In place of butter, lard or dripping is permitted except
on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday.
6. Eggs are allowed on all days at dinner except on Ash
Wednesday and Good Friday.
7. Persons engaged in laborious work, or in delicate health,
or to whom fasting would be injurious are exempt from the law.
8. In all cases of doubt, a dispensation must be obtained
from the Priest.
9. When a dispensation cannot be got without grave incon-
venience, each one may act according to his conscience.
10. Easter Confession and Communion must be made
between the First Sunday of Lent and Trinity Sunday, both days
included.






