

P??3'S i
I
' MAITLAND; I
iuxl L X UxXIX JL/ « f




if 2.5
PRA
A SUPPLEMENT
MOEELL’S
ENGLISH GRAMMAR
J
l/ --
WEST MAITLAND
E. TIPPEB, PRINTER AND PUBLISHES, OFFICE,
MDOCCLXXII.
.* • %
j.A^r


THE ESSENCE OF LATHAM,
BEING A SUPPLEMENT TO
MORELL’S GRAMMAR AND ANALYSIS.
The following pages contain the substance of Latham’s investigations in
English Grammar as shown in his “ Elementary English Grammar for the
Ise of Schools, London, 1866.” Although published as a Text book for the
use of Schools, his Manual is not well adapted for teaching purposes ; for it
lias long explanations of simple facts which are already understood even by
junior pupils, and has needless repetitions which only bewilder the learner
and distract his attention. I consider Morell’s Grammar a much better
one for School use; I have, therefore, extracted the Essence of Latham
and now present it as a Supplement to Morel].
I have also added an Appendix containing matter drawn from various
sources.
JOHN ERASER.
Sauchie House School
West Maitland,
April 1872.


LAI HAM’S ENGLISH GRAMMAR,
PART I.
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.
Up to the middle of the first century of the Christian era, the only inhabit-
ants of the British Isles were Celts. The Romans, who in a.d, 43 began
to conquer and to possess Britain, introduced their own language. From
about the year a.d. 80, when they established their power in the island'
till about a.d.420, when they finallyleft it, Latin was the fashionable language,
while the Celtic or native British continued to be spoken by the mass of
the people. Even before the year a.d. 420, bands of Franks ancf Germans had
settled about London and on the east coast of England. The Saxon invasion,
commencing in a.d. 449, brought in a Teutonic language which soon
displaced the Celtic and became the mother tongue of the present English.
From about a.d. 550, when the invaders had fully established themselves, till
1066 a.d., the date of the Norman conquest, this Saxon language held do-
minant possession of Britain, although Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, Ire-
land and the Highlands of Scotland continued to speak Celtic. The natives
of these parts still call an Englishman a Saxon, and the English language
Saxon. The native British language lasted longest (1) in Cumberland—till
the twelfth century ; (2) in Cornwall —till the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; (3)
in Wales—where it is still spoken.
The invading Teutons of a.d. 449, the Jutes, (with whom were afterwards
associated the Angles and the Saxons) came from the north of Germany.
Their territory lay chiefly in Holstein, Hanover and Westphalia. The
Eyder was their boundary the direction of -o<f?imark, the country of the
Danes. The Angles came probably from the country lying around the
mouth of the Elbe. There is in that quarter a triangular piece of land
which to this day is called Anglen ; it is formed by the Slie, the Flensborger
Fiord and a lino drawn from Flensborg to Sleswick; it was to the Danes a
march or frontier land ; hence the name Ben-marli. Beyond the Elbe the
whole land was occupied by Slavonic tribes, akin to the Poles and Russians
The first Anglo-Saxon settlements were on the eastern and southern
coasts of England ; thence they gradually extended westwards until the
Celtic tribes were cooped up in the mountains of the extreme west where


they ware unassailable. These tribes were called by the Saxons Wealhas
(plural of Wealh, a Celtic form of Gaul) ; hence comes the name Wales, the
name originally of the people, hut now given to the country.
The ecclesiastical historian Bede (circa 730 a.d.) says that the Jutes
occupied Kent andjthe Isle of Wight; the Saxons Essex,! Sussex and Wes-
sex ; while the Angles had East Anglia, Mercia and Northumbria. This
difference of location was, however, merely nominal.
During the period of the Anglo-Saxon domination, the Norsemen and the
Danes made numerous settlements in England, especially on the east coasts,
and for some time were masters of the whole of the territory to the north
nd east of the Thames. We trace their occupation by the following pe-
culiarities in geographical names :
Names # Saxon.
ending in -ton or -town
„ „ -Chester
„ „ -church
beginning in sh-
„ „ cha-
tvorm-
Danish.
-by as New ton, New by
-caster „ Manchester, Tndcaster
-hirh ~ Christ church, Onns/ArA
sk- „ /SAipton, £Aipton
ca- „ Charlton, Carlton
orm- „ Wormshead, Ormshead
lB. In 1066 a.d. a foreign language came in with the invasion of the Nor-
mans whothen eonqueredEngland. Fromthattime till the reign of Henry 111
the English language was in a “Transition” state, the Norman element
struggling to suppress the Anglo-Saxon but ultimately coalescing with it.
From Henry 111. to Richard 11. is the “ Old English” stage; from Richard
11. to Elizabeth, “ Middle English”; from Elizabeth onwards, “ Modern
English.”
Languages akin to the English.
. The Old Saxon Of Westphalia and Osnaburg.
2. Old Frisian, the language of the province of Friesland and the adjoin-
ing districts.
3 Old High German. —Its region was the sources of the Rhine, the Mayne
and the Neckar—the countries now called Bavaria, Alsatia, Switz-
erland, Suabia and Franconia. It was specially strong in such cities
as Constance, Strasbnrg, St. Gall, Worms, Spires, Mentz, Wirtzburg
and Fulda.
4. MoeSO-Gothic. —The Roman province of Mcesia —near the mouth of the
Danube—was in the the third century invaded and occupied by tribes
from Northern Germany. The language thus formed is called Mceso-
Gothic.
5. Old Norse. —These are the Scandinavian dialects—the mother tongue
of the present Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, Icelandic, Feroean.


Kind of
Letter.
Name.
(28)
Represented by
1,34)
Examples.
f a, ai
1 a
at in fate; fail
fat; bat, that
( a, ah
a, au, aw
far; father; ah !
fall; shawl, talk
m
f e, ee, ea
me; feet, seat
o
I o
met; bed, less
£
O
i
i
pin; pity, stick
>
( o, oa
no ; note, boat
0
°
I 0, 00,
f no sign*
not; knot
move : cool
tub; but
u
1 n
full; bull
part n.
ORTHOEPY AND ORTHOGRAPHY.
T 26. Orthoepy deals with language as it is spoken; it determines how
a word is to be pronounced. Orthography deals with language as it is
written ; it determines how words should he spelled.
The Orthography of a language never exactly represents the Orthoepy.
27 —39. A written or printed letter is the sign of a sound. A language,
to be complete, should have a separate sign for every sound used in it. In
the English language there are thirty-four elementary sounds.
simple elementary sounds.
p p pain
f f fane
B 3 seal
tin
t t tin
k k kill
th
eh
b
v
no sign* thin
no sign* shy
b
y
bane
vane
zeal
din
d
g
th
z
d
g
no sign*
no sign*
gun
thine
Semi- f
vowels. \
If
s &
-4-3 Q
3 33
a ® L
f
a
a
a
o
£
-4-»
«3
w the rapid sound of oo will sounds 00-il
y i, >• ee yet » ee-et
Nasal sound
Breathing
OD
*3
o*
3
I r
no sign*
azure, glazier, pleasure
king


Rejecting the modifications of the sounds of a, e, o, u, these elementary-
sounds are twenty-eight in number; of these there are six sounds for
■which we have no sign, viz.: —
*u as in hut; for the proper sound of u is found in hull
th „ thin ; Anglo-Saxon p ; Greek 0
th „ thine „ ft
sh „ shine
z „ azure
ng „ king
Besides these twenty-eight there are
COMPOUND SOUNDS,
six in number ; (i) four, formed by the union of a vowel and a semivowel;
and (n) two, formed by the union of two consonants; thus :
(i) by rv and a vowel l viz - a (3rd sound ) and w ’ in house
w J I % and m „ „ new; muse
vow '1 -f a nd anc * V•’ » pi ne * mind
y " \ a (4th sound) and y„ „ voice, noise
(n) c and h (really tsh) „ „ chest
j ( »> dzh) „ „ jest
The English Alphabet is—(1) redundant: it contains three superfluous
letters, c, q , x ; (2) deficient: it has no signs for the six sounds above enu-
merated; (3) inconsistent: it expresses the sound of dzh by one lottery, and
the single sounds of the first letters in thin, thine and shine by two letters
each.
DETAILS.
Combinations of Letters.
Rule foe the Combination of the Mutes. — When a fiat mute and a sharp
mute come together in the same syllable, the one must be assimilated to
the other, for they cannot both be pronounced. This rule holds good
in all languages, being drawn from a fundamental principle common
to all. In English it affects the Possessives in -s; the Plurals in -s
and the Preterites in -d and -t. For example, stags, tossed, must be
pronounced stagz, tost. In Anglo-Saxon this change of sound was
not required for the -s and the -d formed distinct syllables ; in nouns
the Gen. Sing, had -si, the Nom. Plu. -as, and in verbs the Past Par-
ticiple had -od or -cn. Thus, Nom. end, Gen. endes, Plu. endas ; (so
also, land, word, thing, smith, fa.).
Rule. —Two identical letters cannot be pronounced in the same syllable ; for
instance, miss, must be pronounced mis. Contrast miss and mis-shapen.
Accent.
40. Distinguish between two ways of pronouncing each of the follow


ing words —(Ist) as a Noun (2nd) as a Verb. Absent, abstract, accent,
affix, augment, compound, concert, conduct, consort, contract,
contrast, converse, convert, desert, descant, essay, export, extract,
ferment, import, incense, insult, object, perfume, permit,
prefix, premise, presage, present, produce, project, rebel, record, re-
fuse, subject, survey, torment, transfer, transport.
Quantity,
1 42. The Quantity of a sjdlable is determined either by the length of its
vowel, or by its vowels and consonants taken together. The former
is the method used in the English language.
The Quantity of a vowel is measured by the time taken up in the
utterance of it. A short vowel may be lengthened—(l) by doubling
it, as fed, feed; (2) by adding a second vowel, as red, read; (3) by
adding -e mute to the end of the word, as hat, hate.
Yowels,
% 45. The broad” vowels are a, o, u; the “ small” vowels are e, i, y.
Affinities.
•5 46. The sound of his apt to change into the sound of sor ah (tsh).
The hard sound of g „ „ ~ „ j (dzh).
5O. • Peculiarities of the English Alphabet.
C before a small vowel is sounded S; as in city, cetaceous
„ a broad vowel or consonant „ K; „ cat, craft
„ the letter H „ TSH; „ church
„at the end of a word „ K; „ music
Sin a large number of words „ Z ; „ peruse,
G before a small vowel (generally) „ J ; „ gin, gibe
„ „ broad vowel or a consonant „ hard G; „ gun
„ „ the letter H „ G; „ ghost
II preceded by S SH; „ shine
„T is sounded (either flat or sharp) TH ; „ thin, thine
„ C „ TSH; „ church
Kis rarely found before a broad vowel;, for Cis there used ; but it is used
before a small vowel where C would be apt to sound S.
~ at the end of words is used in preference to C ; as in stick.
I) is used in many words where T is the real sound
The reason why th exhibits two sounds in English is this : the Greeks
bad in their Alphabet two characters, T and Q, the one flat and the other
sharp, but the Latins, in transferring them from the Greek, expressed the
latter by two letters, as they had only the single character t in their Al-
phabet.


PART 111
ETYMOLOGY.
Details of Etymology.
Nouns.
H 67. Composition. —Composition takes place when two separate words
are joined together so as to form a single compound word ; as, day-
light, day-star, foot-sore.
1 68. Derivation. —When a word is modified by the addition of tome non
sound or by the change of one previously existing it is said to be a
derived word or to exhibit an instance of derivation. Thus :
Hunt-er from hunt thrif-t from thrive eastern from east
Gird-le „ gird gos-ling „ goose gooA-ness „ good
Wood-en „ wood drunk-ard „ drunk spinster „ spin
Composition consists in the addition of one whole word to another
whole word. Derivation consists in the addition of parts of words
to whole ones.
U 69. Certain derivations are called Inflections. They constitute the Ac
cidents of the Noun and the Verb.
The Inflection of a noun is called its Declension; the Inflection of a
Verb is called its Conjugation. Nouns are Declined-, Verbs are
Conjugated.
V 71. Difference of Gender is expressed by—(l) a different word, (2) compos-
ition (3) derivation, that is,, change of termination. Examples :
Q.) Boy, girl; (2) man-servant, maid-servant; (3) peer, peeress.
U 76. Case is indicated by a change of termination ; but this change is
distinctly marked only in the pronouns.
The idea of possession, that is, the possessive case, is expressed by
the addition of the sound of the letter s.
Distinguish—This is a picture of John ; This is John’s picture.
Pronouns.
TI 80. All the pronouns have the Neuter in -t, the Possessive in -s, and the
Objective in - m or -n, according to the Gender, In the Scandinavian
languages all neuter adjectives end in -t. It, that , what, are true
neuters.
Demonstratives.
Bl. This applies to objects comparatively near
That „ „ „ distant
Ton „ remote objects.
Certain words which are now Adverbs were originally Demonstrative
pronouns ; as where, then, here. Prom the A-S. Demonstrative Article
se, set, thaet, the, that,, we have :


She, They, Them, There, Then.
She —the Nom. Sing. Fem. of sc, seo, that.
They —the Nom. Plural
Them —the Dative Plural
There —the Dative Sing. Fem.
Then —the Accusative (Objective) Sing. Masc.
There means In that (place); Then means At that (time)
From the A-S. Demonstrative he, heo, hit, he, she, it, we have
He, His, Him, Her, It, Its.
He —the Nom. Sing. Masc. of he, heo, hit.
His —the Genitive Sing. Masc. or Neuter.
Him —the Dative
Her —the Genitive or Dative Sing. Fem.
It —a corruption of hit, the Nom. Sing. Neuter
Its —(the Possessive form of it) seems to have been unknown till
the reign of Elizabeth; his was the word previously used.
The word the, in such expressions as the more the merrier, means by so much,
like the Latin eo in eo mag is ; it is the A-S. py, which was an Instrumental
case.
The following is a view of some of the Anglo-Saxon declensions :
The Noun.
Smith, a smith ; Treow, a tree ; Man, a man.
r Singular •, ,
-Plural.
Nom. — Smith Treow Man Smithas Treown Menu
Gen. ( of) Smithes Treowes Mannes Smitha Treowa Manna
Dat. (to) Smithe Treowe Men Smithum or-cm Treowum Munnum
Acc. Smith Treow Man Smithas Treown Menu
Abl. (by) Smithe Treowe Men Smithum or-onTreowum Munnum
Ihe Demonstrative Adjectives.
Singular. Plural.
Masc. Hem Newt. All Genders,
(Nom. — Se Seo Thset Tha
Gen. Tines Thsere Tines Thara
< Dat. Tham Thsere Tirana Tham
] Acc. Thone (thsene) Tha Thset Tha.
(Abl. Thy Thsere Thy Tham
That
He
Heo
Hit
[ Nom.— He
J Gen. His
| Dat. Him
(Acc. Hine
Heo Hit Hig or Hi
Hyre His Hira or Heora
Hyre Him Him or Heom
Hig or Hi Hit Hig or Hi


H 82. The Interrogative or Relative Pronoun.
Singular and Plural.
( Masc. and Feminine , Neuter-
English. Anglo-Saxon. English. Anglo-Saxon.
Nom. —Who, which Nom.—Hwa
Poss. Wliose Gen. Hwses
Nom.—What Nom.—Hwset
Poss. Whose Gen. Hwses
Ohj. Whom Dat. Hwam Dat. Hwam
Acc. Hwone, Hwsene Ohj. What Acc. Hwat
Ahl. Hwi Ahl. Hwi
Where and When were Dative and Accusative cases from Who.
Why was the Instrumental form hwi, meaning For what {reason).
Whose. The real form of Whose is Who-es, a Genitive case.
Which is a compound of like; it is the A-S. hva-leih (what like).
Scot, mhilk, Eng. which. Whom was originally a Dative.
The Relatives, as far as regards their Etymology, are Interrogatives.
Tf 83. The Simple Pronouns are :
English. Anglo-Saxon.
I lo
We We
Me, my Me, min The forms mine, thine, ours, yours,
Our, us Ere, us hers, theirs are of the nature of
Thou, thee, thy 'Em, the, thin Adjectives The sin some of them
Ye or you, your Ge, eow, earner [>is the sof the Genitive case; thus: —
Be, his, him ] I Ou-r-s, you-r-s, he-r-s, thei-r-s.
Her shown My, thy, our. your, her, their are
It, its > nan . q Possessive cases.
They their, them, on P a 9 e y - |
from this, that. ] j
Tf 85. The Indefinite Pronouns are indeclinable.
Such is the A-S. Smylc. In Old Saxon we find Svaleih, Suite.
Each is a compound of like ; it is the A-S. aelc, ylc, jeglich, igelich.
Hvaleih (which) and svaleih (such) are compounds of like; aelc, ylc
(each) is the Scotch ilka.
Aught (any thing) is from the obsolete Substantive whit found in the
phrase Not a whit. The fuller forms are, dwet, awiht, edwiht. Its
compound is naught. Any is the A-S. aenig, from an, one.
Tf 86. Cardinal Numbers.
These have naturally no Singular; one has no Plural. The word twain
is the only remaining trace of the Declension of the Cardinal numbers; it
is the Acc. Sing, of twd {twa-n, A-S. twegen).
In A-S., the termination for the Acc. Sing. Masc., in Adjectives and
Pronouns, was -n or -ne and for the Dative -m. Thus A-S. He has Acc.
Sing. Uhne ( Hi-ne ) and Dat. Him (Hi-m). Who has Acc. Sing. Hwce-ne
Dat. Hwce-m.
Twain is the only word in which this Acc. termination is now preserved.


Tf 87. Ordinal Numbers,
First is the superlative of Fore.
Second is from the Latin Secundus.
Third is for Thri-th ( three-th), the r being transposed.
Four gives Four-th. Five gives Fif-th, the i being shortened.
The terminations -teen and -ty, as in thirteen , thirty, are both corrup-
tions of ten. But -teen means merely ten, as thirteen, lhat is three and ten,
while -ty (originally -tig) means a collection of tens, just as sixpence means
one coin worth six pennies taken collectively. Thirty thus means three
collections of ten.
U 89. Self, other and one are of the nature of Substantives, and form their
plurals accordingly.
The Indefinite Pronoun one is a different word from one the Numeral. The
Pronoun one is used in English (as in one says ) with an indefinite sort of
meaning =the French on dit, and the German man sagt.
If 90. The Articles are four in number — an, the, no, every. An is the
numeral one, A-S. an, Scotch ane.
If 92. KOTINS (SUBSTANTIVES).
Pules for the Formation of the Plural.
(A). Plurals in S.
I. The Plural is formed by adding to the Singular the sound of s, modified
according to the termination of the Singular. Thus
(1). If the last sound of the Singular is that of s, x, z, sh, the soft ch
or ge, the Plural has the sound of ~ez (spelled -es).
Observe that ch is in sound -tsh ; ge is -dzh ; xis - hs .
(2). When the last sound of the Singular is that of a sharp mute (not
s or sh), the Plural has the sharp or sibilant s.
(3). When the last sound of the Singular is that of a, flat mute (not z
or zh) or of a liquid or a vowel, the Plural has s sounded like z.
11. When the last sound of the Singular is that of f preceded by a long
vowel, the plural has -ves (sounded vz).
This rule applies to all words of Saxon origin excepting muff, turf,
stuff, dwarf, grief, relief, chief with its compounds. Beef takes
beeves (sounded vz) =oxen.
111. When the Singular ends in o, the Plural has -es; as cargo, cargoes ;
but when the o of the Singular is preceded by a vowel, the plural gener-
ally takes the s only ; as ratio, ratios.
IV. When the Singular ends in y preceded by a consonant, the Plural
takes -ies; as lady, ladies.


Y, Penny has the Plural pennies to mean so many separate penny pieces.
and pence to mean « single coin worth so many pennies. Compare
pence (s sound) and pens ( z sound). Pie has the Plural dice (s
sound) used for play and dies (z sound) used for coining.
VI. There are six common Nouns which have Equivocal Plurals.
Two of these are Singular forms.
Alms — from the Anglo-Saxon almesse.
Riches „ the French richesse.
1 The sis thus
I NOT THE SIGN
j of the
j Plural number.
Four are Plural forms.
News —from new used as a Substantive. "1
Means „ the French moyen, plu. moyens j The sis
Pains „ „ peine „ peines I therefore
Amends „ „ amende „ amendes \ the sign
Also Mathematics, Physics, Metaphysics, Politics, I of the
Ethics, Pneumatics, Hydrostatics, Mechanics, Statics, | Plural number.
Dynamics, all from Greek Singulars. J
All the Equivocal forms are in meaning either Singular or Plural.
(B). Other Plural Forms.
Our language has in all five mays of forming the Plurals of Nouns.
(1) By adding the sound of sto the Singular. See Section (A.)
(2) By changing the vowel sound of the Singular, as in the Plurals
of man, foot, tooth, goose, mouse, louse. In mice, lice, the letter c
is used instead of s to preserve the sound of the Singular.
(3). By adding -en or -n to the Singular. The only instance of this in
modern English is found in the word oxen, hut in A-S. there were
such forms as hos-en, shoo-n, ey-ne, iischop-en, eldr-en, arm-en
scher-en, tre-en, doghtr-en, sustr-en, uncl-en, souldr-en.
(4). By adding -er to the Singular. The only instance now is child-er
(provincial English), hut in A-S. we find ccelf-ru, lamb-ru, egg-ru
cild-ru.
(5). By combining two of the foregoing methods, as in
Ey-ne (cow, kye, kyne), a combination of the 2nd and 3rd method
Child-r-en (child, childer, childeren) „ 4th and 3rd „
Breth-r-en (brother, hrether, hretheren) „ 2nd, 4th & 3rd „
Observe—that the Plurals of youth, oath, truth, path have the flat sound of
th before the s of the Plural; —that the Plural of house is houses
(s sounded z); — that the Plural of woman is sounded mimmen.
If 103- The formation of plurals in sis current; all the other formations
are obsolete.


ADJECTIVES,
Comparison of Adjectives.
Good, lad, evil, ill have no Comparative or Superlative.
Worse, worst, letter, lest have no Positive.
111. Comparatives.
Older and Elder ; from A-S. eald, yld-re, yld-est. Elder is used as a Sub-
stantive.
Later or latter ; from late.
More (mo-er) ; from Positive moe, used in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Nether (A-S. from Positive with obsolete. From the same root
come Netherlands, nether regions, nadir. Nether means lorn or lower.
Near ; from A-S. Positive neah, Comparative, nea-rre, nca-r, ny-r.
Nearer is a Double Comparative = nea-r-er.
Further ; from Positive Fore (thus-: fore, fur, furth, further). The
inflexion -th occurs in Old High German words, and in A-S, ford,
Eng. forth.
Farther; from Positive Par . the th being added (as in further). Further
means more forward, more in front. Farther means more far, more
distant.
Former ; from Positive Pore, by the insertion of m.
Worse ; from the obsolete form war.
In Moeso-Gothic the oldest of the languages allied to the English, the
comparative degree was formed by adding the sound of sor z ; thus,
Positive aid. Comp, aldiza. Hence the Comparative form, worse.
If 114. Superlatives.
Best, last are for lett-est, lat-est.
J. Grimm believes that the Comparative termination was, in the most
ancient forms, s (latterly changed into r) and the Superlative t; as nor,
wor-s, wors-t.
Most; from moe, which see. Nearest; from near, which see.
Next is a contraction of nighest, the Superlative of nigh, A-S. neah 4
Thus ;—Positive neah, Comp, nea-r or ny-r. Super, nyh-st or neh-st, the
h having the strong sound of g or h in A-S.
Furthest, farthest, eldest, most, nearest; see their Comparatives.
Vpmost, inmost, outmost, nethermost, foremost, aftermost, upmost, hindmost,
midmost; in these the Superlative termination is as usual -st; the m
is drawn from certain A-S. forms of these words.
Neth-er-m-ost has the st added to the Comparative form.


If 118. VEEBS.
Such words as hunter , cleansing, &c., are called Verbal Substantives or
Verbals. The termination -ing was in A-S. -ung, quite distinct from the
Present Participle which ended in -andc or -ende. The Verbals in -ing
denote actions and results. The Verbals in -er denote agents .
Instead of the Verbal we sometimes use the Present Infinitive of its
Verb : thus : Bathing is healthful; to bathe is healthful.
Verbs are either Transitive or Intransitive. Thus :
Rise, lie, sit, fall, drink are Intransitive.
Raise, lay, set, fell, drench „ Transitive.
The A-S. language had two forms of the Infinitive Mood, the one
ending in -an, the other in -enne; as boernan, to burn, to bcernenne, to
burn. The latter was always preceded by the particle to, and is similar in
its use to the Latin Gerund with ad.
II 126. Mood. Number. Person.
The terminational form to indicate the First Person is -m, now found
only in the word am ; the Second Person -st ; the Third -s or -es (according
to the Pules in n 92) and -eth.
In five words the Second Person Singular ends in - 1 only, viz.: — Ar-t,
mas-t, mer-t, shal-t, rcil-t.
In such forms as I sang, I sung, the A-S. used the form with a in the
First and Third Singular only, and the form with u in all the other Persons,
Singular and Plural. Thus :
Sing. 1. 1c sang, 2, thu sungest, 3. he sang.
Pin. 1. We sungon, 2. ge sungon, 3. hi sungon.
We now use both forms indifferently.
The Substantive Verb to be, is the only one in English that has
peculiar forms for the Plural number and for the Subjunctive Mood.
Thus : For Number it has the forms Was and Were, and for
the Indie. Mood, I mas, thou mast, he mas, me mere, you mere, they mere •
„ Subj. Mood, If-1 mere, thou mert, he mere, „ „ „
Conjugation.
IT 135. The current conjugation makes the Past Indicative and the Past
Participle end in -ed {-d or -t); the obsolete formed the Past Tense by
changing the Vowel Sound of the Present, and the Past Participle by ad-
ding -en to that.
English Verbs form their Past dense in one or other of three mays.
Ist. By adding the sound of -d or -t to the Present.
2nd. By adding the sound of -d or -t and shortening the vowel of the Present*
3rd. „ „ „ „ changing „ „


Examples
1st Division.
2nd Division.
3rd.
Division.
Pres.
Past.
Pres.
Past.
Pres.
Past.
Move
Moved
Flee
Fled
Catch
Caught
Toss
Tossed
Keep
Kept
Seek
Sovght
Serve
Served
Feel
Felt
Till
Told
Cry
Ch'ied
Lose
Lost
Owe
Ought
Etymology.—Veebs.
In First Division—ln some Verbs the -d has an c before it, hut this e is
present to the eye only, as in—Pres. Toss, Past Tossed.
In Second Division —Verbs which already end in -d or -t cannot form their
Past Tense by adding -d or -t. They therefore form it
(1). By adding -ed; as instructed, masted, planted, ended; such verbs
are chiefly of French or Latin origin.
(2). By shortening the vowel ; as met, lit, shot, fed, hied, hred,
sped, led, read.
(3). When the vowel of the Present is already short, the -d of the
Present is merely changed into -t; as bent, rent, spent, sent, lent,
went, girt, built.
(4). Where the Present ends with -t and has a short vowel, the
Past is the same as Present; as cast, cut, hurst, let. In the verb
shed also the Present and the Past are alike.
In Third Division—To understand the changes which occur under this
head, we must observe the affinities of g and h.
(1). —The sound of h (in kin) is allied to the sound of ch (in chest). Thus
the sound of ha becomes (1) hya (2) hsha (3) tsha. Therefore
teach, catch, beseech, are treated as if they were tea h, ca h, heseeA
(2). —The sounds h, g, ng are allied to each other; they are also
allied to the sound of y in yet and of h in hot.
We can now understand how syllables that once contained the sounds of
h, g, ng, ngh, tsh, y or h have first changed these sounds and afterwards
lost them altogether. Thus: —
Present Tense. Past Tense. Nature of change.
Seek Sough-t h into gh.
Teach Taugh-t ch i.e. h „
Jleach Eaugh-t (obs.) ch i.e. h „
Beseech Besough-t ch i.e. h „
Bring Brough-t ng „
Think Though-t k „
Work Wrough-t k „
Orce (A-S. age) Ough-t g „
Buy (A S. byege) Bough-t g „
In Wrought the r of the root is transposed.


141. The following verbs exhibit peculiarities in the Past Tense :
Present. Past.
Make Made A-S. mac-ode
Lay Laid „ leg-de
Have Had „ haef-de
In burnt, learned, spoilt, dealt, dreamed,felt, dwelt, knelt, meant, spelled,
spilled, we find the sound of -t where we expect that of -d.
In left, cleft, bereft, we have the sharp -t in the Past, although the last
sound of the Present is that of flat -v.
Participial Forms.
If 143. Those Verbs which now have the Past Participle the same as the
Past Indicative had an old form of the Participle which ended in -en; as
found, A-S. funden. Thus for the Past Participles, held, struck, smote,
broke, rode, strode, wrote, the old and regular forms are holden, stricken,
smitten, broken, ridden, stridden, written.
The word for-lor-n is a Participial form from lose, the s being changed
into r, as in was, were.
The word frore (i.e. frozen) is a Participial form ; the A-S. form is gefroren.
Ge was the A-S. prefix of the Past Participle, and is still retained in the
English word ycleped called.
Tf 146. Forms apparently Irregular.
Lie (intransitive) Past Participle Lien, Lain.
Lay (transitive), to cause to lie down, „ „ Laid.
Hare is both transitive ( to challenge ) and intransitive {to venture). We
can say, I dared to fight, or I dared him to fight. Durst is intransitive
only, and is used with reference either to Present or to Past time.
Own means to admit, grant, confess ; from A-S. an, Plu. urnon, meaning
I have granted.
Own (originally to owe) means to possess ; from A-S. ah, Plu. agon, mean-
ing, I leave acquired.
Shoul-d, woul-d ; from shall and will.
Coul-d ; from can. The I does not belong to the word; it is inserted
from the forms would and should.
Might ; from may, which in A-S. was mag, Plu. mugon ; hence the g in
migh-t.
Become means to suit ; as, That dress becomes you. From A-S. beqweman.
Become means to begin to be \ as, The weather becomes colder; from A-S.
becomman.
Do, to answer the purpose ; as, That will do ; from A-S, Dedh, Past Dohte.


80, to act ; as. Ho means to do well ; from A-S. 80, Past By do.
Be is used only in commands, in conditional propositions, and in the
infinitive mood.
Am. Here mis the sign of the First Person Sing., the only word in
English in which that form occurs.
Art. The tof the Second Person is found in the words art, mast, rvert,
slialt, milt. In mas and mere observe the change of s into r.
Is. That Is comes from the root of Am, Art, is seen through the allied
languages, thus
Singular. Singular.
Ist 2nd 3rd. Ist 2nd 3rd.
Sanscrit Asmi, asi, asti. Mceso-Gothic Im, is, ist.
Lithuania Esmi, essi, esti Anglo-SaAon Eom, art, is.
Latin (E) sum, es, est. Slavonic Yesmi, yesi, yesty.
148. ADVERBS.
Adjectives are converted into Adverbs by adding the syllable -ly which
is an abbreviation for like. When the Adjective has been formed from an-
other word by the addition of the syllable -ly, the termination remains un-
changed. Therefore we cannot say dai-li-ly but we can say holi-ly, for in
holy the termination -ly is not a suffix hut a part of the German word heillg.
Adverbs from Anglo-Saxon case-endings.
The Adverbs Else, unawares, eftsoons, needs, once, twice, thrice, hence,
whence, are all possesive cases in s.
Eftsoons (from soon and eft) means soon after. Needs means of necessity.
Seldom, whilom are A-S. Dative cases in -urn.
While, whilst mean during the time that. Meanwhile in the mean
time. In the expression to while away the time, to while means to pass. The
root of all the words connected with while is to be found in the Danish hvile
rest or pause.
Here, there, where = A-S. Dat. Sing. Fern, form! r , ...
Then, when = A-S. Acc. „ Masc. „I of this '
Why = A-S. Instrumental case „ ) 010 '
Hither, whither, thither are allied forms from the same roots.
How (= in what manner, for what reason ) is connected with why ; in’
Danish and Swedish we find hvi and hw.
Bather is the Comparative of rath = quick, early, ready, willing. The
rathe primrose means the early primrose. In A-S. the adjective rathe was
thus compared.
Adj —Eathe rath re rath este.
Adv. —Rath rath er ratho«£.


Darkling (an adverb in -ling) means in the dark. In Scotch the affix -ling
becomes -lins ; as blindlins, stomlins, sidelins.
If 151. Tlie adjective in the Neuter Gender may be used as an adverb; as,
The sun shines bright (neuter).
DERIVATION.
H 154. Derivatives are formed from Anglo-Saxon Roots,
(I). By adding a termination, thus:—
Y as (Noun) Bab-y, and, in. Lowland Scotch, dogg-ie, lass-ie, ladd-ie,
mous-ie, wif-ie ; ( Adj ,) Blood-y, craft-y, drear-y, might-y,
mist-y, mood-y, merr-y, worth-y. The termination of these
Adjectives was in A-S. -ig.
L „ (Noun) Gird-le, kern-el; (Adj.) Litt-le, mick-le ; ( Verb) Spark-le.
E „ (Noun) Laugh-t-er, slaugh-t-er (A-S. -er, Masc.); lay-er, fodd-er,
(A-S. -er, Neut.); read-er, sinn-er, harp-er, begg-ar, li-ar sail-or,
law-yer, saw-yer, &c. (A-S. -ere, Masc.); gand-er (A-S. -ra,
Masc.) ; ( Verb) Hind-er, low-er.
N „ (Noun) Maid-en, vix-cn, mai-n; (Adj.) Gold-en, oak-en, ash-en,
flax-eh, braz-en, lead-en. In these Adjectives the termination
-en denotes the material of which the thing is made. Main is
from may by the addition of -n.
O „ (Noun) Shad-ow, mead-ow.
T „ (Noun) Gif-t, shrif-t. thef-t, wef-t, rif-t, drif-t, thrif-t, fros-t, gris-t,
fligh-t, sigh-t, draugh-t, join-t, weigh-t, wrigh-t (from work
wrought); (Adj.) Tigh-t (from tie).
D „ (Noun) Bran-d (A-S. brenn to burn), floo-d (Jloiv), mai-d (may.
Lowland Scotch), see-d (sow), bur-d-en (bear) ; (Adj.) cold
(cool).
Zor S as ( Verb) Cleanse (z sound) from clean. In A-S. clam-s-ian.
ING „ (Noun) Farth-ing (£), rid-ing (J) a corruption of thrith-ing.
R-Y ~ (Noun) Husband-ry, slave-ry, Jew-ry, rook-ery, fin-ery,
found-ry.
E-ED „ (Noun) Hat-red, kind-red.
TH (p) „ (Noun) Dea-th,bir-th (Jc«F),heal-th, leng-th,dep-th,bread-th,
heigh-th, mir-th, tru-th, weal-th, slo-th, fll-th, til-th, ki-th;
(Adj.) Uncou-th (which originally meant unknown, from ken
to know).
TH „ (Noun) Bur-th-en (bear).


Nouns.
LEDGE as Know-ledge.
WICK „ Baili-wick ; (in names of places as) Ain-wick (= town).
STER ~ Pun-ster, spin-ster,- team-ster, Brew-ster.
ESS „ Shepherd-ess, seamstr-ess, mistr-ess.
EE „ Trust-ee, bail-ee, mortgag-ee.
AGE „ Bond-age, till-age, vassal-age,
DOM „ King-dom, thral-dom, duke-dom, earl-dom, martyr-dom
wis-dom, free-dom, Christen-dom.
HOOD I Man-hood, boy-hood, widow-hood, brother-hood, liveli-
V hood, false-hood.
HEAD] „ Maiden-head.
LOCK „ Wed-lock, fet-lock.
SHIP „ Friend-ship, court-ship, judge-ship, master-ship.
RIO „ Bishop-ric.
NESS „ Good-ness, had-ncss, bright-ness.
ARD, ] Drunk-ard, slugg-ard, dast-ard, cow-ard, bragg-art,
lIF VKT >
’ j lagg-ard (implying censure) ; stand-ard, cust-ard; reyn-
ard ; wizard, mall-ard, lenn-ard (demoting sex) ; sweet.
heart.
Simple Forms. "1
OCK, ICK, IE „ Hill-ock,bullock, padd-ock (pad, A-S.atoad),
wind-ow (-ock), shad-ow, mead-ow; wif-ie, &c.,
wif-ick-ie (Scotch),
OT, ET „ Ball-ot, pock-et.
L, N, R „ Satch-el (sack), spadd-le (spade), thimb-le y
(thumb), maid-en, splint-er. §’
ING „ Farth-ing, herr-ing, whit-ing, Brown-ing. y. B
Compound Forms. 5'
O
LING (= L-ING) „ Gos-l-ing, duck-l-ing, dar-l-ing, hire-l-ing, S°
nest-l-ing, bant-l-ing, lord-l-ing, under-l-ing.
KIN («= OOK-IN) ~ Lamb-kin, mann-i-kin, bod-kin, Peter-kin,
(Per-kin), Wat-kin, Wil-kin, Plodg-kin.
REL (= R-EL) „ Cock-erel, piek-erel, mack-erel.
LET (= L-ET) „ stream-l-et, ham-l-et, arm-l-et.
Diminutives of classic origin are ;
(Simple forms). Ferr -ule, cred-«Z-ous, lib-eZ, fab-Ze, ros -ette, lane -et,
charioZ, Senor-iZo.
(Compoundforms). Ret -ic-ule, part -ic-le, vermi -c-elli, violon -c-ello,
front -l-et, chap-Z-cZ.


Adjectives.
Terminations.
LESS = UN
Denote. Examples,
negation as, Thought-less, god-less =
ungodly.
rattier or likeness Child-ish, boy-ish, self-
ish, whit-ish, Engl-ish
(originally -isk).
ERN, ERNLY, direction
WARD
South-er-n, south-er-ly,
south-ward, cast-er-n,
west-er-n, north-cr-n.
ING, ED possessing a quality Glow-ing, left-hand-ed,
(participial). ‘ ragg-ed, freez-ing.
SOME possessing a quality Bux-om (A-8. bug-some,
ready to yield, pliant,
pleasant) ; blithe-some.
„ causing a quality win-some, weari-some,
frolic-some, light-some.
trouble-some.
LIKE or LY resemblance or fitness Life-like, love-ly.
(XI). By modifying (1) a consonant or (2) a vowel.
(1) a Consonant (2) a Yowel.
Noun. Verb, Verb inV'ans. Verb trails.
Trice prize Rise raise
prim Rise raise
Clo tk clothe Lie lay
Use (s) me (z) Fall fell
Grass graze Sit set
Grease (s) grease (z) Top tip
f 155. In the words— Rookery, fishery, yeomanry , Jewry , Englishry , Dan\shry
Welshery, the sufiix is y preceded by the Plural termination r as in childtr.
In these words the idea conveyed by the termination ry is that of an as-
semblage or collection; as also in eyry or eyiie = eggery, a collection of
eggs. In foolery, bravery , slavery, witchery, stitchery, this derivation
does not hold.
% 156. The termination -ster, as in spinster was in the Anglo-Saxon lan-
guage always Feminine, the Masculine being -or ; as sangere, scengstrp ;
baeere, bcecestre ; fidelere, fidelestrc ; webbere, webbestre ; rcedestre ;
saemere, saemestre.


house, light-house, rose-tree, sea-man, collar-
bone, shoulder-blade, ground-nut, earth-nut,
hazel-nut, wall-nut, fire-wood, moon-light,
star-light, torch-light.
Adj. & Noun
Blind-worm, free-man, half-penny, grey-beard.
green-sward, white-thorn, mid-day, mid-
summer, quick-silver.
Verb & Noun
Turn-spit, spit-fire, sing-song, turn-coat.
Verbal & Noun
Turning-lathe, sawing-mill.
Noun & Adj.
— Sin-ful, thank-ful, blood-red, ooal-black, foot-
sore, snow-white, nut-brown, ice-cold,
Adj. & Adj.
Al-mighty, two-fold, many-fold.
Verb & Adj.
Stand-still, live-long.
Noun & Verb
God-send. Rare.
Adj. & Verb
Little-heed, rough-hew. Rare.
Verb & Verb.
Hear-say. Rare.
COMPOSITION (WORD-BUILDING).
Compounds formed by Nouns, Adjectives, Verbs.
107. Compound words are formed by uniting two or more words ; thus :
Noun Sc Noun —Day-star, morning-star, evening-star, land-slip, watch-
Adj. & Pres. Part. All-seeing, soft-flowing, fast-sailing,
Noun & Pres. Part. Fruit-bearing, music-making.
Adj. &Past Part. New-horn, free-spoken, fresh-made, new-laid.
Noun. & Past Part. Heaven-born, bed-ridden, blood-stained.
Noun & Verbal Adj. Mop-headed, chicken-hearted.
Adj. & Verbal Adj. Cold-hearted, flaxen-haired, hot-headed.
Noun. & Verbal in EE. —Man-eater, kid-napper, horn-blower.
Compounds formed by Adverbs.
158. Adverbs that enter into Composition are :
(1) Separable ; as undergo, overdo, wcWbeloved ; or
(2) Inseparable; as be- un- a- in the words Re-hove, bc-fit, beseem, be-
lieve, be-lie, besmear, be-get, bc-labour, be-gin, be-gird, be-Jiold, be-reave.
be-decli, be-think ; Un-bind, un-do, un-loose, un-lock, un-wind ; A-light,
y-rouse, a-risc, a-wcike, a-wukeu, a-bet, a-bide.


f 159. Observe that
(1) Certain words have the appearance of being Derivatives when they
are really Compounds, such as the words Manly, bishopric, friendship ,
manhood, amiss, mistake, where the terminations were originally sep-
arate words.
(2) The ending -most in upmost and the like is an inflexion, not an in-
dependent word. See 134.
(3) The endings in commandment, us age, penetrate, are derived from
Latin or French.
(4) We cannot give a foreign termination to a Saxon word. Thus :
-ess is a French termination ; therefore, we cannot say Fox-ess (a Saxon-
French word) although we can say Tigr-ess (French-French). Shepherd-
ess is an exception, being Saxon-French.
PART IV.
SYNTAX.
The compound words (such as hornblomer, gentlemanlike, midshipman )
lead from the Etymology of the language to its Syntax.
Distinguish—The crow is a black bird.—The crow is a blackbird.
Violations of the Concord of Number or Gender.
Gold whose touch seductive leads to crime.”
The relative “ whose” is either Masc. or Fern., but its antecedent here is
Neuter. We explain this irregularity by taking “ Gold” as personified.
“ The cities mho aspired to liberty.”
Here “ Cities” is Neut. and “ who” Masc. or Fem. The relative follows
the same principle as in the last; or, the relative agrees with the meaning
of “ cities” as consisting of citizens.
“ This twenty years.”
The expression “ twenty years” is here regarded as a single period of time>
just as sixpence is a collective sum of money, although in value equal to
six separate pennies.
“ These sort of people.”
If this expression is allowable, the word “ these” in it agrees with the
meaning rather than with the form of the words.
The same word may he different parts of Speech.
If 166. From the paucity of inflexions in our language, the same word can
he used as a Noun, an Adjective, a Verb, or other part of speech. Thus:—
Ink is black, the sho e.-blacks, the blacks of Africa, the boy blacked the shoes.
In phrases such as ifs and ans, one long now, &c., the words if, an, now,
originally Conjunctions, are used as Nouns, 11 if" being = the noun phrase
cases of doubt expressed by if, and “ now ” = the present time.


PBONOUNS.
Pleonasms.
169. Pleonasms in the Syntax of Pronouns, as The king, he is just; I
saw her, the Queen ; The men, they mere there ; The king, his crown; For
Jesus Christ, his sake. The Pronouns in these sentences are superfluous.
The Possessive in s.
Some writers affirm that the s of the possessive case is a contraction of
the pronoun his, as in, The king, his crown. This cannot ho true ; for (1)
we say, The Queen’s Majesty, The children’s bread, &c., where his is in-
appropriate ; (2) the A-S. Genitive (Possessive case; is in -es, as in endes,
cyninges, smithes, and in all cognate languages the Genitive case ends in
-s ; (3) on this principle his itself must be a contraction for he his, which
is impossible.
The Indefinite use of Pronouns.
170. The expressions r l hey , one, it, there, are used with an indefinite or
indeterminate meaning, as in the phrases. They say, one says, it snows,
there is something wrong.
They means people in general. One has nothing to do with the numeral
one ; it is the French word on, a corruption of om, homme ; Lat. homo= man.
One says is therefore equivalent to man says, men say, the French on dit,
the German, man sugt.
The Articles An, The.
H 171. An is the original form of the article (Scotch ane ) = the numeral
one ; the n is omitted when the next word begins with the sound of a con-
sonant, semivowel or h. We say A ewer, a unit, such a one, because the
Word after a begins with the sound of a semivowel.
We say, The Secretary and Treasurer, when the two offices are held by one
person; but, The Secretary and the Treasurer when the two offices are held
by separate persons.
Tf 174, The vulgar expression, Take them things aWay, may be explained
by referring to the original power of they, them, as Demonstratives.
Possessive Pronouns.
Ti 175. The words, My, thy, his, her, its, our, your, their are possessive
cases. They are used when their Noun is expressed.
The words Mine, thine, ours, yours , hers, theirs are Adjectives. They are
used when their Noun is understood.
If His, her , its were not cases, such expressions as “ Ills mother, her
father” would violate the Concord of Gender.
TI 176. Distinguish—This is a discovery—of Sir Isaac Newton’s—of Sir
Isaac Newton. The former means, Of Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries, this
is one; the latter means, This is how Sir Isaac Newton was discovered.
Each is used elliptically. Supply the ellipsis in, They slew each other.


II 178. In myself, thyself, herself, itself, &c., the words my, thy, &c., are
in the Possessive. Himself, themselves arc irregular and inaccurate. But
when any other word comes between the Personal Pronoun and the word
self, the pronoun is always in the Possessive; as His urn self, your turn
self, their own selves.
SUBSTANTIVES.
II 182. Two Nouns that are in Apposition mean the same thing, as, Croesus,
king of Lydia. Two nouns not in apposition mean different things ; as,
The father's son, = the son of the father.
If 183. Sometimes several words taken together constitute one idea and are
therefore treated as one single word; as, [The King of Saxony]’s army. f
H 184. Ellipsis is something left out; as, This was bought at [Thompson
and Giles]’s (supply shop). I went to St. Paul’s (supply Church'). Pleonasm
means redundancy.
ADJECTIVES.
TI 188. When we compare two objects the Comparative degree should bo
used, and the Superlative when we speak of more than tiro ; as, That is the
hotter of the two, but this is the best of all. The forms more and most are
placed before the Adjective for the Comparative and Superlative when the
Adjective is (1) trisyllabic, (2) compound, (3) not of Anglo-Saxon origin.
TI 189. Expressions such as More serene? 1 spirit, The most straits sect, are
pleonastic.
% 191. The word like is the only Adjective which governs a case; as, This
is like him.
PARTICIPLES,
U 192. The Participle is the link between the Verb and the Noun ; it is
the Verb becoming a Noun.
In expressions like Seeing is believing, the forms in -ing are not Participles
but Nouns.
In Syntax, Participles are treated as Adjectives, but they express actions
rather than qualities. The sun is shining differs from The sun is bright. A
Participle, being apart of a Verb, can govern a case ; as, lam calling him.
The Present Participle.
The Present Participle combines with am but not with have. The Past
Participle combines with both ami and have.
Observe —I have ridden a horse = I have a horse ridden, where ridden
agrees with horse in gender, number and case.
The Past Participle.
194. lam moved is used as a present tense, but should mean lam a person
mho has been moved.


VERBS
The Infinitive.
If 203. When two verbs depend upon each other the latter is put in the
Infinitive with the sign to ; hut this sign is omitted after the auxiliaries
and after certain verbs, as Bid , dare, need , make, see, hear, feel, let, perceive,
and know.
Distinguish—l dare do all that doth become a man,
Who dares do more is none.
And I dare thee hut to breathe upon my love.
The Subject is omitted in ceHain cases.
U 204. In English, from the want of inflexional terminations to indicate
the persons of the Verb, we cannot omit the subject except in three cases,
(1) in the Imperative Mood; (2) in the Optative Past; (3) in the three Im-
personal Verbs. We say, Walk (Imperative) ; Would I could (Optative); and
Methinks, meseems, melisteth (Impersouals).
In Anglo-Saxon there were two verbs nearly alike, tkincan, to think, and
tkencan, to seem; methinks and meseems therefore mean the same thing = it
seems to me. Melisteth =it pleases me.
Explain.—l must speak the truth, impugn it whoso list.
Ihe Verb Quoth,
TI 206. Quoth is the only Verb which always takes its pronoun after it.
ADVERBS.
The Adjective used as an Adverb.
U 210. In expressions like The sun shines bright, the word bright may he
regarded as the Neuter Gender of the Adjective used as an Adverb. We
can say. The sun shines brighter to day, or. The sun shines more brightly
to-day.
PREPOSITIONS.
H 215. All Prepositions in English govern the Objective case ; when they
govern no case, they are Adverbs.
I like you better than him ; caret , I like
I like you better than he; „ likes you.
The Absolute case.
f 218. There are two forms of expression in which nouns stand absolutely,
(1) Nouns denoting Distance or Duration of time or space stand abso-
lutely ; as. We walked ten miles ; he stood three hours ; he was a great
distance off.
These nouns are in the Objective case, and in the earlier stages of the
language had the Accusative case ending.


(2) The noun or pronoun is in the Nominative case absolute in such ex-
pressions as, The sun having arisen, the darkness flies ; or, Whose grey
top shall tremble, he descending.
.Reasoning - from the analogy of the A-S. language and from logic, the
Dative case should be used to express the cause or agency involved in
these propositions; hence some writers would say, him descending.
U 221.
THE SYNTAX OF COMPLEX SENTENCES.
Sentences are termed Complex, when they contain two proposit ions, the
second of which is introduced by a Relative pronoun or a Conjunction. The
second of the two propositions has its verb in the mood called Conjunctive
or Subjunctive or Potential. This mood can exist only in this connection.
In the second of these propositions, the Relative must he of the same gender
number and person as its Antecedent.
Ihe Syntax of the Relative and the Intert ogative Pronouns.
Examine —It is I, your Master, mho command you.
It is I, your Master who commands you.
I who am your Master am coming.
Imho is your Master am coming.
The Relative may he omitted; as The hooh J sent. The word That is (1)
a demonstrative; (2) a relative ; (S) a conjunction; as (V) r Jhat is right; (2)
The man that has just left me ; (3) I fear that I shall be late.
Observe the Syntax of the Interrogative Pronouns.
Questions—Direct . Oblique.
Q. Who is this ? Ans. Ho. Q. Who do you say that it is. Ans. He.
„ Whose is this ? „ His „ Whose „ „ His.
„ Whom do you seek,. Him. „ Whom „ „ Him.
Correct.
Tell me in sadness whom she is you love.
Whom think they that I am.
Him I accuse the city gates has entered.
Ton high a fame when him me serve's away.
Satan, than whom none higher sat, thus spake.
Tf 229. Solomon the son of Daval mho is ambiguous. Grammarians
have laid down the rule that the Relative, to avoid ambiguity, must agree
Avith tne second word. Yet we may say, Solomon, the son of David mho slew
Goliath, or Solomon, the son of David, mho built the temple.


Ihe Conjunction.
«I 281. The word which is used to connect two separate propositions is
called a Conjunction (Con jungo).
Examine the Conjunctions in the following sentence :—I am pleased be-
cause this has happened; hut I should have been disappointed if it had
fallen out otherwise, and I think that, even now, some of my real or sup-
posed friends will he more surprised than satisfied with the arrangement.
*[f 236. When either means one of two it is a Pronoun; when it is used to
express an alternative it is an Adverb.
238. When two or more Pronouns of different Persons and of the Sin-
gular Number follow each other disjunctively we have the following rules:—
(1). Whenever the word either or neither precedes the Pronouns, the Verb
is in the third person ; as Hither you or lis in the wrong.
(2). When the disjunctive stands alone, the Verb agrees with th & first of the
two Pronouns ;aslorhe am in the wrong. He or lis in the wrong.
240. The chief Conditional Conjunction is if; others are except , lest, un-
less, although, HU.
243. The conjunction than follows the Comparative degree ;in respect of
etymology it is the word then. It is sometimes treated as a Preposition ;for
example. You are a much greater loser than me.
The conjunction hut is from the A-S. ic-utan =by out. But used as
preposition means except.
Negatives. Questions.
f 247. Distinguish—He spoke not; not to advance is to retreat.
Two negatives make an affirmative ; as No one has not seen him.
Questions of Appeal are equivalent to a Negative ; as What AM 1 to do ?
= I know not what to do.
In all Questions there is a transposition of the terms of the proposition ;for
example, What is this ? the word this is thesubject of the proposition, is what
is the predicate.
249. dhe Reciprocal Construction.
They killed each other = they killed each (killed the) other. Compare
the French expressions—Hs se battaient —Tun I’autre
11s se battaient—les uns les autres.


APPENDIX
List of Saxon Roots.
The following list, taken from “Angus’s Hand-book,” contains the most
important Anglo-Saxon roots, with a few English derivatives to each, in-
tended to illustrate the changes that words undergo.
Mg, an oak ;
oak, acorn (oke-corne).
Mg, an egg ;
egg, eyry (i.e, eggery).
ABcee, a field ;
acre, God’s Acre,
aEr, ere ;
ere, early, erst.
Bakan, to hake ;
bake, bakster (Baxter), batch.
Ban A, death-blow ;
bane, henbane.
BAnC, a bank ;
bank, bench &c.,
Bae, a boar ;
boar, brawn, brawny.
Beatan, to beat;
beat, bat, battery, battle, beetle,
beetling.
Bendan, to bend ;
bend, bandy-legged.
Beean, to bear ;
bear, bearing, bairn, berry, brat,
barrow, berth, bier, birth, burden,
forbear.
letan, to make better ;
better, best (bettest).
{Bboegan, to bring under cover ;
burrow, bury, harbour.
Buegh, a city ;
borough, burgess, burglar.
Biddan, to bid or pray ;
bid, bidding, beadle, beadsman,
bead, bode, forbode, forbid.
Bigan or Began, to bow or bend ;
a bow, a bower (anchor), bow-
sprit, bow-window, bight, bout, a
bay, buxom (bough-some, easily
bent, lively), elbow.
Bindan, to bind ;
bind, bind-weed, hopbine, bonds,
bands, bound,, bundle, husband
(houseband).
Bixan, to bite;
bite, bit. embitter (like remorse),
bait (a hook), to bait [sc. horse].
Blaec, pale ;
bleak, bleach.
Blawian, to breathe ;
blow, bloom,blossom,blade, blast.
Blow an, to blossom ;
blister, bluster, bloat, blaze, blush,
blnzen.
Bead, broad;
broad, broadcloth, breadth, broad-
side.
B EEC an, to break ;
break, breakers, brake, bracken,
breach, bray, brink (broken edge),
brow.
Bebowan, to brew ;
brew, barley-bree, brewin, broth,
brose, brewer.
Buan, to dwell, to till;
boor, neighbour, bower.
Byenan or Beennan, to burn ;
burn, burnish, brown, brimstone,
brunt, bronze, brand-new, auburn,
brindled, brandy (burnt-wine).
Ceap, to turn, to exchange or sell;
cheap, chapman, chop, East Cheap,
Chipping, Chepstow,
( Ceaecian, to creak ;
\ crack, crackle, cracker, creak.
< Ceachan, to crack ;
j cracket, cricket, chirp (chirk),
[ screach, shriek.
Cennan or Cyn, to produce-,
kin, akin, kind, kindred, mankind,
kindness.
Ceoel, a farmer ;
churl, churlish, carle, carlin, girl
(kirla, young person of either sex).
Clam, a clasp or bandage ;
clammy (what sticks), clemmed
(pinched).


Clifian, to cleave to ;
cleave, clay, claggy, cloggy.
Clufian, to cleave or split;
cleave, cleaver, cleft, cliff, clift,
clove, clover (cloven leaves).
Ceuc or CRYC, a crook ;
crook, crutch, crick, crotchet,
creek, croach, cricket (game of).
Cunnan, to know, to he able ;
can, con, cunning, ken, king,
canny, congor eel (king of eels),
Cunningham, Coningsby.
Dteg or Day, a day ;
day, dayspring, dawn, daisy
(day’s eye).
Deoe, dear ;
dear, dearth, darling, endear.
DeagAN, to draw ;
draw, dr ig, draggle, drawl, di’ay,
dredge, drudge, drain, draught.
Drincan or Drencan, to drink ;
drink, drench, drown, drunkard.
DRYGAN, to dry ;
dry, drought, dru g ( dried plants).
Drypan, to drip ;
drip, drop, droop, dribble, drib-
let, drivel, dripping-pan.
Deman, to judge-,
deem, doom, doomsday, demster.
Fedan, to feed ;
feed, food, fodder, foster-mother
( foodster).
Fengan, to catch ;
fangs, finger.
Fboh, cattle, like Lat. pecunia ;
fee, feudal.
Fleogan, to flee ;
flee, fly, flight, flighty, fledge,
fleet, flicker, flit, flutter, fluster,
flurry.
Flowan, to flow -,
flow, floe (of ice;, flood.
Fleotan, to float ;
float, fleet, flotilla, flush, flotson
(goods found floating).
Fot, a foot ;
foot, fetter, fetlock.
Ful, foul ;
foul, fulsome, filth, filthy, defile.
Gan, to go;
go, ago (agone time gone),
gang, gangway, undergo, Gan-
ges (from the Sanscrit).
Gast, a spirit ;
ghost, ghastly, aghast, gas.
{Geacd, an enclosure ;
yard, garden.
Gyedan, to gird ;
gird, girdle,kirtlc, girth, ungird.
Gla:m, a gleam ;
gleam glimmer, glimpse, glow.
God, good ;
good, gospel (good news), gos-
sip (God-sib = akin in God).
Goest, furze ;
gorse, gooseberry.
Graf an, to grave or dig ;
grave, engrave, the grave, grove
(a place hollowed out of a thick-
et), groove, graft, grub.
Geapian, Ge(o)ipan, to grapple-,
gripe, grapple, grope,“group (a
cluster), grapnel (a small an-
chor), grape (what hangs in
groups), grape-shot, grovel.
Habban, to have ;
have, haft (what is held), hap
(what is had), happy, happen,
perhaps, behave (to have your
self or conduct).
Huslan, to heal, IDee, whole ;
hale, heal, health, hail (to wish
health), holy, (whole morally),
holyrood (holy cross), hallow,
whole (should be, hwole), whole-
Ham, a dwelling ;
home, hamlet, names of places
in -ham.
Hangian, to hang ;
hang, hangings, hinge, hung-
beef.
Healdan, to hold;
hold, a holding, behold (to hold
in view), beholden (obliged),
upholsterer, halt, halter (for
holding), hilt (what is held);
compare Habban.
Hebban, Hefan, to heave, to lift;
heaven (the “ lyft ”), heave-
offering, heavy, head (the ele-
vated part of the body).
Headhian, to hasten;
ready, rathe, rather.
Ing, a meadow ;
names of places in -ing.


LzEdan, to lead ;
lead, leader, ladder, mislead,
lode stone.
Ljet, slow, Lietan, to hinder ;
late, latter, last, let, belated,
lazy.
Leag, a field ;
lea, names of places in -ley.
Liccan, Lecgan, to lie ;
lie, to lay, lair, layer, belay (to
put in secret or besiege), outlay,
relay, law (laid down), lea, ley,
(land at rest in grass), ledge,
ledger (the book that lies in the
counting-house), low, to lower,
lowlands.
Loma. household stuff;
loom, lumber.
Lup, love ;
love, beloved, “ lief.’
Magan, to he able or strong ;
may, might, mighty, dismay
(to rob of might), termagant (a
mighty woman), main (the
mighty ocean), “ might and
main,” mainmast.
Mjengan, to mingle ;
mingle, among, mongrel.
Mere, a lade or sea ;
names in -mere.
PiEDH, a path ;
path, paddle, footpad, foot path.
Pican, to pick, Pic, a point ;
pick, picket, peak, beak, pike,
pickerel, pitch.
Eeaeian, to roh, Eeape, spoil ;
bereave, raven, ravin, ravenous,
rover, rob, robber.
Pecan, to heed;
to reck, reckless, to reckon.
Scacan, to shake ;
shake, shock, shocking.
Scapan, to shape ;
shape, shapeless, “ ship-shape,”
land scape.
Sceadan, to shade ;
shade, shadow, shed, sheathe.
SCEOTAN, to shoot ;
shoot, shot, shout, shut (to shoot
the bolt), shuttei, shuttle (what
shoots the cross threads), sheet
(shot out or expanded), scud,
undershot.
Stoc, Stow, a place ;
stow, stow-away, bestow, stew-
ard, names of places in -stock',
-stow.
Sceean, to cut or separate ;
scar, scarce (cut short), scarf (a
cut piece of silk), score (what
is cut or marked in), shard (a
piece of a vessel), sharded beetle
(having cut wings), share, sharp,
sharper, shroud, shears, sheer
(separated, clear), shire, shire-
reeve, shore, short, shreds, skirt,
Skerries (cut or craggy islands).
Scufian, to shove ;
shove, shovel, shuffle, scuffle,
scoop.
Scylan, to separate, distinguish ;
scale, a shell, scales (thin plates
or shells), scalp, scallop, shale
(found in scales), skill, skull
(the thin shell enclosing the
brain).
Slag an, to slay, to strihe ;
slaughter, sledge-hammer, (a
sledge for ice is from Slidan),
sleight (a quick stroke), sleek
(beaten smooth), sly, sley (the
reed that beats the woof), sleave
(thread ready for the sley, raw,
not spun).
Si.awxan, to he slow ;
slow, si oth, slug, sluggard, slack.
Snican, to creep ;
sneak, snake, snail (snaeg-cl).
Spinnan, to spin ;
spin, spider, spindle, homespun,
spinster.
Steal, a place ;
stall, forestall, instal, pedestal.
)Stelan, to steal ;
Sttelcan, to go stealthily ;
steal, stalworth (worth steal-
ing), stealth; to stalk.
Stepan, to raise up ;
steep, steeple.
Stician, to stick ;
stick, stitch,sting, stickler, stock,
stocks, stockade, stockfish (dried
for stock or store), stake, stock-
still, overstock.
Stigan, to ascend ;
stage, stair, storey, stirrup (rope).


Stye an, to steer, govern ;
steer, stern (where the ship is
steered), starboard (i.e. the til-
ler being in the right hand of
the steersman, the right side).
Syllan, to sell ;
sell, sale, handsel, wholesale.
TAECAN, to take ;
take, teach, mistaken, taught,
token.
Txdan. to betide, to happen ;
“ time and tide.”
Treoav. true ;
true, truism, troth, betroth.
Trewsian, to trust ;
trustee, entrust.
Twa, Twinian, two ;
twain, twice, twelve, twenty, to
twine, twin, between, entwine,
Wanian, to fail ;
wan, wane.
Weald, to wield or govern ;
wold (power). Bretwalda.
Wald, a wood ;
Weald of Kent, wold. Wait-ham.
Weer, waiy, Waeian, to beware-,
wary, beware, aware, ward (to
watch or keep in custody), ward-
en, warder, wardrobe, warn,
wea ■ or weir (for saving water),
warrant (a defence or authority),
warren, (to prese-ve rabbits).
guard, guardian.
Wefan. to weave ;
weave, web (what is woven),
weft or woof (what crosses the
warp in weaving), web-footed,
wife (one who works at the
woof), woman (i e. web or woof
man), housewife.
Weg, away, Wegen, to move ;
wayfarer, wayward, awkward
(i.e. away-ward), waver, wagon,
waggle, wain, weigh (anchor),
wave.
Wen an, to think-,
ween, overweening.
Wissan, Wit an, to know,
wise, wisdom, wizard, witness
(knowledge aud evidence as
known), wit, wistful (full of
thought, earnest), Wittena-ge-
Wise, manner , German weise ;
likewise, “leastways.”
Weecan, to punish-,
wreak, wreck, wrack, wretched,
wretch.
Wring Ax, to wring-,
wring, wrong, wrench, wrangle,
wrangler.
Wtrt. root , German, wurzel ;
Colewort, mangel-wurzel.
List of Celtic Words.
Besides numerous geographical names, the Celtic element in our lan-
guage furnishes thirty or forty words in common use. Among these are :
Basket Cart Darn
Bill Coat Dun
Bran Cobble Fleam
Brat Clout Funnel
Bump Crag Glen
Button Crook Gown
Cabin Dainty Gruel
And, of later introduction,
Clan Flannel Kilt
Gyves Pail Sham
Hap Pert Size (glue)
Kiln Pitcher Smooth
Lad Pranks Tackle
Lass Quay Tarry
Mesh Bail Welt
Mop Rasher
Plaid Reel
Tai’tan


List of Foreign Words.
(FROM ANGUS’S HAND-BOOK )
From miscellaneous sources we have the following foreign words: —
From the Hebrew, ephod, cahala, seraphim, cherubim, amen.
From the Arabic, admiral, alchemy, algebra, almanac, exilir, talisman,
zero, zenith, giraffe, gazelle, coffee, sugar, lemon, mummy, jasmine,
sherbet, syrup, sofa, mattrass, sultan, pasha, assassin.
From the Persian, caravans, deiwishes, scarlet, azure, lilac.
From the Turkish, scimitar, divan, janissary, dragoman, chouse. (Chouse
was the name of an officer in the Turkish embassy, who cheated Lon-
don merchants to a large amount in the reign of James I).
From the Chinese , gong, nankin, Bohea, Hyson, Congou.
From the Malay, bantam, sago, gamboge, shaddock.
From India, calico, chintz, muslin, toddy, curry, lac.
From Polynesia, taboo, tattoo.
From the West Indies, tobacco, potato, maize, hurricane.
From North America, squaw, wigwam, pemmican.
From South America, hammock, jerked (beef).
From Italy, banditti, charlatan, pantaloon, gazette.
From the Spanish, mosquito, negro, punctilio, alligator, gala.
From the Portuguese, palaver, coco, fetish (witchcraft), caste, marmalade.
From the Butch, yachts, sloops, schooners.
From Egypt, Ammonia. From Syria, cyder.
From Lydia, maeander. From Persia, paradise.
Common Nouns are also formed from the names of individuals, as from
names of places ; as
(Persons), Tantalize, from Tantalus, who was surrounded, as the fables
say, by water and the most beautiful fruits, hut the water and the fruits
fled from him whenever he attempted to taste them ; herculean, from
Hercules, the Grecian personification of physical strength ;philippics, from
the name given to the Orations of Demosthenes against Philip of Macedon ;
hermetic, from Hermes, the Egyptian Mercury ; lazaretto, from Lazarus,
who “sat at the rich man’s gate, full of sores;” simony, from Simon, who
thought that the “ Holy Ghost was to he brought with money dunce, from
Duns Scotus, a famous dialectician of the Middle Ages ; pasquinade, from
the name of a Koman cobbler ; negus, orrery, spencers, broughams, dahlias,
tontines, martinets, d’oyleys, mackintoshes, daguerreotypes, talbotypes, sil-
huettes are all named from their inventors ; stentorian, hectoring, guixotico
come from Stentor, Hector, and Quixote.


(Places). Arras and cambric, from Arras and Cambray, to'wns in the
north of France ; bayonet, from Bayonne ; bezant , from Byzantium; cherry
from Cerasus, a place in the north-east of Asia-Minor; currants, from Cor-
inth ; copper, from Cyprus; cordwain, from Cordova, in Spain; damask and
damson, from Damascus ; dimity, from Damietta ; delf from Delft, in Hol-
land ; ermine, from the Armenian rat; guinea, from the Guinea gold ; jalap,
from Jalapa, a place in Mexico; magnet, from Magnesia, in Asia-Minor;
muslin, from Mussoul, in Asia-Minor ; peach, from Persia; parchment, from
Pergamus, in Asia-Minor; spaniel, from Spain; worsted, from Worstead, a
village in Norfolk.
Corruptions in Pronunciation .
The following'are corruptions in pronunciation, the foreign word assum-
ing an English dress ;
Beef-eater, from “buffet,” a small sideboard; sparrow-grass, for “ aspara-
gus Jerusalem artichoke, from the Spanish “ girasol,” turning to the sun ;
oyes, from the Norman-French “ oyez,’’ listen !; sweetheart is for “ sweetard,”
one very dear ; emerods is for “ haemorrhoids” ; liquorice is from the Greek
“ glycyrrhiza,” sweet root ; frontispiece is put for “frontispice sovereign,
for “ sovran colleague, for “ collogue lanthorn, for “lantern;” night-
mare is from “ Mara,” the name of a Finland witch ; Charles’s wain, is the
“ ceorl’s waggon ;” gooseberry is for “ gorseberry ;” and bride-yrocw is from
“ guma,” a man.
The following table illustrates the changes which Latin words undergo
in passing into English through the French. "Where the meaning is not
attached it is the same in the three languages. The sign = indicates that
the words between which it is placed are the same in meaning.
English.
French.
Latin.
Ally, to oilier
Avalanche = avalanche
alligare, to bind to
ad vallem, what rushes to the
Address, to - adresser
Balance balance
valley
dirigere 1, to make straight
bi- (two) lanx (a scale)
blasphemare, to revile
capsa, a chest
Balance balance
Blame, to blamer
Cash, case =• cause
Chamberlain chambre, a chamber = camera
Costume, custom coutume consuetude
Couch couoher, to lie down collocare, to set, to place
Coverlet couvre lit, cover the bed = cooperi lectum
Dandelion dent de lion dens leonis, tooth of lion


Deign, to daigner dignari
Delight delice deliciae
Damage = dommage damnum, loss, harm
Donjon = donjon dominium, 1 , , , .
domnium,) lordshl P
Environs virer, to tack about gyrare, to wheel round
Esquire, equerry ecuyer scutiger 2, a shield-hearer
Fealty fealte fidelitas, faithfulness
Friar frere, brother == frater
Gin, geneva genievre, juniper = juniperus
Gaol, jail geole cavea, a cage ; gahia, gabiola.
Mediaeval Latin
Goal gaule eaulis, a stem or pole put at
the end of the course
Hauteur haut 3, high = altns
Impair empirer; pire pejor, worse
Involve, envoy envoyer, to send; via, a way
voyage, a journey
Lieutenant lieu tenant = locum tenens, place holdin g
Manure main tenure, hand & = manus $ opus
Meagre maigre, thin [work macer, lean
Mushroom = mousseron muscus, moss
Mortice mordre, to bite = mordere
Nuisance nuire, to hurt = nocere
Ostrich autruche avis struthio
People peuple populus
Preach precher prcedicare
Squadron 6 } guar ante, forty = quadraginta
Raisin raisin, a grape racemus, bun
Raisin raisin, a grape racemus, bunch of grapes
Poison poison potio, drink
Route, routine = route rota, a wheel
Royalty royawte regalitas
Surplice = surplis super pellicium i, over the
pelisse
Savage = sauvage silva, a wood
Soldier soldat solidus, a coin given as pay
Tissue tisser, to weave = texere
Tinsel etincelle, a spark = scintilla
Toilette toile, linen tela, a web, thread
Usher huissier = ostiarius 5 , doorkeeper “
Vegetable vegetal vigeo, I flourish -vtaTilS
Venison = venaison venari, to hunt
Volley voice volare, to fly.
1. Italian drizzare, what makes straight.
2. Lat. scutum, a shield & gero, I carry; from scutum, we have Eng,
scutcheon, escutcheon,
3. Like Fr. autre, from Lat. alter.
4. Lat. pellis, a skin; hence Eng. peltry,
5. Lat, ostium, a door.


£ R RATA.
Page 32, Hne 25 For as from Read and from.
38 huettes lunettes.
„ quixotico quixotic,.
35. TTPPBB, PRINTBB AND PUBLISHER, NBAS POST OFFICE, WEST MAiTLAJTC.


jAfp
b(6UO
