

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Department of Health
SERVICE PUBLICATION (Division or Industrial Hygiene)
Number 9.
Survey of Women in Industry,
Victoria, 1928.
MARION I. IRELAND, M. 8., 8.5.,
Medical Officer, Division of Industrial Hygiene,
Commonwealth Department of Health.
ISSUED BY
THE DIVISION OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH
Authority :
H. J. Green, Government Printer, Canberra,




/■fzoyo/tji /<fro/ nL
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Introduction—
General
Area Investigated
Industries Surveyed
Nature of Investigation
Personal Interrogation of Employees
Establishments Visited and Age and
Marital State
Employees —
Working Conditions—
Nature of Processes
Physical Effort Required
Rotation of Jobs
Rate of Working
Skill
Posture
Method of Payment
Hours of Work
Overtime
Factory Environment—
General
Workroom
Ventilation
Temperature
Cleanliness
Lighting
Vibration
Floors
Special Influences —
Dust
Exposure to Special Sources of Heat
Weight Lifting
Other Special Influences
Accidents
Sanitary Accommodation
Lavatory Accommodation
Cloakroom Accommodation
Seating
Drinking Water
Surgery, First Aid and Restrooms
Meals and Messrooms ..
Protective Clothing
Welfare Schemes
Sickness Absenteeism and Labour Turnover
Hostel Accommodation at Country Canneries


Table of Contents — continued.
Personal Interrogation of Employees—
General .. .. • • • • • • • • • • .. 23
General Appearance .. .. . • • • • • • • .. 23
Evidence of Fatigue .. .. • • • • ■ • • • .. 23
Rate of Working Compared with Fatigue .. .. • • .. 24
Posture and Fatigue .. .. • • • • • • • • .. 25
Relation of Complaint of Fatigue to other Symptoms .. .. .. 25
Coldness in Winter .. .. • • • • • • • • .. 25
Varicose Veins .. .. • ■ • • • • • • .. 26
Respiratory Infections .. .. • ■ • ■ • ■ .. 26
Appetite .. .. .. • • • • ■ • • • .. 27
Breakfast .. .. • • • • • • ■ • • • .. 27
27
Constipation .. .. • • • • • • • • ■ • • •
Teeth .. .. ■ • ■ • • • • • 27
27
Dysmenorrhoea .. .. • • • • • • • • • •
Menorrhagia .. .. • • • • • • • - • • .. 28
Chilblains .. .. • • • • • • ■ • • • • • 28
Headaches .. .. . • • • • • • ■ • • .. 28
Weight .. .. • • • • • • • ■ 29
Time taken in Transit to Work .. .. .. • • ■ • .. 29
Exercise .. .. • • • • • • • • • • .. 29
Number of Evenings per week spent away from Home .. .. .. 30
Home Conditions .. .. • • ■ • • • • • .. 30
OA
Dependants .. .. . ■ • • • • ■ • • ■
Special Points —
Monotony .. .. • ■ • • • ■ • • ••.. 30
Noise ' .. .. • • • • • • • • ■ ■ • • 30
■Vibration .. .. • • • • • • • • • • .. 30
Personal Interrogation of Employees in the Fruit Canning Industry
General .. .. ■ • • • • • • • • • • .. 30
31
Perionychia .. .. .. • • • • • • • ■ • •
Sore Finger Tips .. .. • • • • • ■ • • .. 31
Skin Erosions.. .. .. •• •• •• ..31
Injuries of Hands .. .. ■. • • • ■ • • .. 31
Skin Rash .. .. . • ■ • • • • • ■ • .. 31
Summary and Conclusions .. .. .. • • • • .. 32
Recommendations .. .. • • • • • • • • .. 33
Acknowledgments .. .. .. • • ■ • ■ • .. 38
Tables—
I. Industries Examined According to Establishments Visited, and Age and
Marital State of Female Employees .. .. • • .. 39
11. Accidents Reported to the State Labour Department, Victoria, 1926 .. 19
111. Complaints of Constipation According to Posture .. .. .. 27
IV. Complaints of Dysmenorrhoea According to Posture .. .. .. 28
V. Results of Personal Interrogation of Employees According to Industries .. 41
VI. Results of Personal Interrogation According to Age .. .. . .40
VII. Relative Proportion of Juveniles and Adults Employed in the Various
Industries .. .. . • ■ • • • • • .. 40
Appendix I. Women in Industry Survey Form .. .. .. .. 43


INTRODUCTION.
General.
The supervision of the health of women factory workers has been
a matter of interest to the State, employer and employee for many years.
The rapid increase in the numbers of women and adolescent females
employed in industry during late years has emphasized the necessity for
more intensive activities in this direction.
The employment of women has now become inevitable, and it is
agreed that their contribution to the work of the country cannot be
dispensed with when there is so great a demand for increased produc-
tion. “ Productivity is the keynote of the times. Every nation is
calling for increased production to repair the enormous destruction the
Great War has brought upon the world’s wealth, i.e., its surplus produc-
tion. No nation can afford to leave any source of energy unused
and certainly not half its population unless an overpowering racial
reason exists.”*
Since women have permanently established themselves in industry,
working conditions must be so arranged and adjusted that no undue
harm to health ensues. The adolescent girl is the object of special
anxiety, as she is particularly susceptible to such influences as bad
habits of posture, excessive strain and unhygienic working environment.
The problem of making special provision for women in industry is
not only of social and economic, hut also of national importance, in
that the workers of to-day must be considered as the actual or potential
mothers of the next generation.
In connexion with this subject the Health of Munition Workers’
Committee made the following statements
“ It will be generally admitted that in considering the conditions
of employment of women workers as compared with those of men,
account must be taken not only of physiological differences, hut
also of those contributions which women alone can make to the
welfare of the State. Upon the womanhood of the country most
largely rests the privilege of creating and maintaining a wholesome
family life and of developing the higher influences of social life.
In modern times, however, many of the ideals of womanhood have
found expression in industry, and in recent years hundreds and
thousands of women have secured employment within the factory
system. The problems thus raised are numerous, but broadly they
may he considered as chiefly concerned with the wise and effective
organization of women’s industry, in such a way as to protect and
safeguard their unique contribution to the State.”
At the Third Conference of Industrial Hygiene, 1927, consisting of
representatives from the Commonwealth and State Health and the
State Labour Departments, it was resolved that “ This conference
recommends that a survey of female labour in industry in. Australia is
desirable, and this conference recommends that such a survey he under-
taken by the Division of Industrial Hygiene in co-operation with the
State authorities, &c.”
•Tie Health of th» Induelrial Warier, Oollis and Greenwood.


Acting on this recommendation, the author was appointed by the
Commonwealth Department of Health in October, 1927, to undertake a
survey of female labour in industry in Victoria, in conjunction with
Dr. Kate Mackay, Medical Inspector of Factories, Department of
Labour, Victoria.
Area Investigated.
With the exception of three fruit canneries in the Goulburn Valley
district of Victoria, all the factories visited were situated in Melbourne.
Industries Surveyed.
In addition to certain Commonwealth offices and factories, the
following industries were surveyed: —
Rubber.
Manufacturing Grocers.
Jute Bag Manufacture.
Fruit Canning.
Confectionery.
Clothing.
Printing and Cardbox.
Textile.
Metal.
Tobacco and Cigar.
IST at lire of Investigation.
In most industries five or six factories were visited, the general
working conditions noted and the investigation completed by personal
interviews with all or a certain proportion of the female employees.
The form used for recording working conditions is reproduced in
Appendix I. (page 43).
An attempt was made to study the operations performed at the time
•of inspection, and also those done on occasions. In addition, attention
Was given to the question of rotation of jobs. The manager or foreman
was consulted concerning the length of time necessary for an average
worker to attain efficiency, and an estimate of the amount of skill
required obtained. The posture of each worker and any position
considered likely to predispose to postural deformities were noted.
Ho details as to the actual amount of earnings were taken in the
general survey, the method of payment only being considered. Informa-
tion as to daily and weekly working hours, the length of afternoon,
morning and lunch intervals and overtime worked, if any, was obtained.
Under the heading (i) General Statement, (ii) Workroom, (iii)
Ventilation, (iv) Temperature and Means of Heating, (v) Cleanliness
and (vi) Lighting, (vii) Noise, the investigator’s own observations were
made. Ho accurate method of determination was used for any of the
measurable factors. The type of flooring was also noted in each estab-
lishment.
Particular note was made as to the presence or absence of dust and
fumes, and the exposure of employees to special sources of heat. Inquiry
was made into the weight lifting required of females, and as to whether
a definite limit was fixed with regard to this factor. Any other special
influence peculiar to the industry under examination was recorded.


Sanitary and lavatory accommodation was examined, attention being
paid to the number of conveniences per female employee and to the
cleanliness of both types of accommodation and to privacy of access.
Cloakroom accommodation was also inspected. With regard to seating,
the presence or absence of seats and the type of stool or chair were
recorded. In occupations which involve considerable standing, an
attempt was made to estimate the number of seats provided for the
female employees. The presence or absence of footrests was noted.
The manner of meal taking was reviewed in each establishment
investigated, together with messroom provision, &c. The provision
made for drinking water and drinking vessels was also observed.
The provision made for surgery or first-aid room, restroom and first-
aid equipment was recorded. In factories in which working clothes were
used, it was ascertained whether they were supplied by employer or
employee.
In the larger establishments the nature of welfare schemes was
noted. In most factories inquiry was made into the nature of the
sickness and absenteeism records kept. The same procedure was adopted
in the case of labour turnover, and about twelve managers were asked
to supply the data necessary for the estimation of labour wastage.
In addition to inspecting the factory accommodation, the provision
made for housing the female employees at the country canneries was
examined.
Personal Interrogation of Employees.
In most factories all the female employees were personally
interrogated. In one confectionery factory, and in certain factories in
the textile and tobacco industries, one in three or four was interviewed.
In these cases particular care was taken to avoid choosing, an
indiscriminate selection of every third or fourth worker being made.
The employees were questioned- at their work or benches for several
reasons, the most important being the saving of time for the employer,
the employee, and the observer too. Opportunity was also furnished for
examining the nature of the work of each female, and the employee felt
less conspicuous than when leaving her work and w T alking across the
room to the observer. The latter procedure was attempted on one or
two occasions, but abandoned in favour of the former. Before interroga-
tion of each female, the nature of the investigation was explained in a
few words and assurance given that any information gained would be
treated as confidential. The fact that no names were taken helped to
allay any suspicions. It was interesting to find that a. very largo
majority of employees seemed to give their facts without hesitation or
misgiving; many were extremely conscientious as to detail and only
about one-half per cent, or less refused to be interviewed.
The questions asked were framed in simple form, the same question
being asked each employee. By exercising care in this way it was hoped
to obtain accurate statements from the employees. Each employee was
asked a few questions relating to the type of process in which she was
engaged, whether she received time or piece rates, and whether her work
entailed sitting or standing, or whether she might alternate the two
positions. The length of time employed in the factory, the place of
previous employment, the age and marital state were noted.


Special note was made of the appearance of each individual. Any
female of, anaemic aspect was specially remarked.
It was not possible to employ any accurate scientific method of
estimating industrial fatigue, only subjective sensations being con-
sidered. The answers to the question as to fatigue at work were classi-
fied into three subdivisions. The statement of occasional fatigue at
work was indicated by -)-; this group of cases was regarded as com-
plaining of fatigue, which might be expected in any healthy adult
female; daily fatigue relieved by rest was designated by -j- and the
sign -was used to indicate daily fatigue unrelieved by rest.
An inquiry as to whether the worker felt the cold in winter or not
was indicated by -{-or according to the answer. Information was
elicited from each female as to the presence or absence of varicose
Complaints of colds, coughs, or sore throats occurring less frequently
than six times a year were recorded as ; those occurring more
frequently than this as -f- -{-; and almost continuous infections as
+ -j- In the first 949 cases seen these standards were not used, these
complaints being divided into two classes —occasional and frequent.
The answers from 2,244 persons questioned as to appetite were
classified as good, fair and bad according to the statements made. The
type of breakfast taken by 647 employees was recorded, the signs, —,_ +,
_|_ an< i _j_ being used to designate no breakfast, a little
breakfast such as tea and toast or porridge or similar carbohydrate fare,
a breakfast consisting of additional protein in the form of meat or
eggs taken occasionally, and a breakfast always consisting of meat or
eggs, respectively.
ISTotes as to the incidence of constipation in 2,173 females were taken.
The figure is probably higher than indicated by the results, as not
every one was asked whether a laxative was taken to procure regular
action.
The dental condition of 1,396 females was recorded. Ho examina-
tion of the mouth was made, this procedure being a difficult matter in a
workroom. In all probability the incidence is much higher than the
reports indicate, as many employees denied the' presence of carious
teeth until special reference was made to the “ back teeth.”
Dysmenorrhoea "was classed as -{-, -f- +, and + -j- according to
whether it was described as mild, occasionally disabling or invariably
disabling respectively. Inquiries about menorrhagia were made in
establishments in which the females were exposed to strenuous work or
when vibration was present and from 488 employees whose "work was
not attended by these special conditions.
In order to determine any relation between complaints of cold in
winter and chilblains, the incidence of chilblains was elicited; the
answers were classified as -)-,-{ —[-, or -j—|—{-, according to whether
they were described as mild, severe or severe with a tendency to “ break.”
In the first 949 cases they were classed as mild and severe according to
the statements of the employees.
Complaints of headaches occurring once a month or less often were
classed as -(- occurring more frequently than once a month, but not as
often as once a week as -| —and when complained of as a weekly or


more frequent occurrence as -) —| —|-. Before this basis was established
949 cases were classified as suffering from occasional or frequent as
described by the employees.
The weights of 2,060 employees were recorded; 304 were weighed in
the factory. The average weight was 8 st. If lb.
The length of time occupied in going to work was obtained from
2,034 females. The total amount of time taken in transit per day would
be twice the amount stated.
Questions about the amount of exercise taken were asked of 2,080
females; the answers were expressed as -|- if no particular sports or
games were indulged in; as -) —|- if any exercise of this description
were taken for part of the year; and -| —| —[- when sports or games
were played regularly throughout the year. Gymnasium was classed as
sport, but dancing was not included because of the late hours it demands.
The number of evenings per week spent away from home was ascer-
tained from 588 employees. The home conditions were recorded as
good if three hours or less per week were spent in doing housework;
as fair if this work occupied more than three hours, and as bad if the
home duties occupied all the spare time.
In certain factories iu which special influences were operating, where
dust was apparent or where vibration or noise or monotony, or similar
factors seemed likely to affect the health of the employees, the opinion
of each was sought as to the influence of such conditions on the health.
As a matter of interest, 1,396 employees were questioned as to
whether any one depended on her earnings. Those who contributed
over fl a week to the home were considered as assisting in the support
of others.
The persona] interrogation of females iu the fruit industry was
limited owing to the large number of employees who were presented for
examination in a short period before the end of the season. The object
of the personal interview in these cases was to obtain data with regard
to the incidence of perionychia, clean and infected injuries, corns, cracks
and blisters of the hands, and skin rash of face, arms, and hands. Each
employee was asked whether she had ever suffered from any of these
complaints and her face, arms and hands were inspected.
ESTABLISHMENTS VISITED AND AGE AND MARITAL
STATE OF THE FEMALE EMPLOYEES.
Table I (page 39) gives a summary of the industries surveyed,
the number of establishments, the number of females interviewed, with
their ages and marital states. In all 84 establishments were visited,
and 4,341 females interrogated. The establishments visited embraced
three Commonwealth offices, two Commonwealth factories, five rubber
products, eight manufacturing grocery, eight jute bag, six confectionery,
five boots and shoes, ten printing and cardboard, six clothing, four
textile, twenty metal, two tobacco and cigar and five canning estab-
lishments. Of the 4,341 female employees, 1,865, or 43 per. cent.,
were under the age of 21 years. Of these 1,865 minors, 107, or 6 per
cent., were 14 years; 225, or 12 per cent., 15 years; 294, or 16 per-
cent., 16 years; 345, or 18 per cent., 17 years; 317, or 17 per cent.,


18 years; 310, or 17 per cent., 19 years; and 267, or 14 per cent.,
20 years of age. Of the 4,341 employees, 521, or 12 per cent,, were
married, of whom 23 were living apart from their husbands; 146
other women, or 3 per cent., were widows, while eight women were
divorcees.
WORKING CONDITIONS.
Nature of Processes.
In general it can be said that the work in which females are engaged
is easy to perform and of a repetitive and monotonous character. In
only few instances the work entailed a certain responsibility. Even
forewomen in many establishments are responsible to foremen for the
work of their employees.
Physical Effort Required.
In most industries the processes performed by females require the
expenditure of very little physical effort. This is particularly marked
in the boot and clothing trades. More effort is required in the confec-
tionery, tobacco, printing and cardbox, jute and manufacturing grocer
trades, and in the textile, rubber, and metal trades, quite strenuous work
is performed by some of the female employees. The textile workers are
not actually performing heavy tasks, but the fatiguing part of their
work consists in continually standing, walking round the machines, and
stooping frequently. Certain rubber workers are engaged in very active
tasks entailing considerable rubbing with hand rollers and stooping.
The textile employees are largely working at piecework rates and their
looms limit output to a certain extent. The rubber workers are paid a
bonus for work done over a certain output in their tasks; there is no
control over the rate of w T orking. The work considered strenuous in
the metal trade entails frequent lifting and carrying; timeworkers
performing it do not work at an excessive rate. In the tobacco industry
certain pieceworkers are engaged in active work necessitating rapid
manipulation of machines.
Rotation of Jobs.
Many employers are far-seeing enough to realize the importance of
rotating jobs, but as a rule little attention is paid to the advisability of
this procedure. In the larger factories specialization in certain processes
by groups of employees makes for better production, and in arranging
work in this way payment can always be made on the same basis. In
smaller establishments it is frequently noticed that owing to the pro-
duction of various types of articles in small quantities one female may
be given charge of many different kinds of work.
Rate of Working.
The proportion of piece-workers to time-workers seen was roughly
as listo 4. In several factories piece-workers were working at a com-
fortable speed, but in the majority they showed evidence of extreme
haste, a large proportion adding to their work by employing unnecessary
rhythmical swaying and jerking movements of the body. Some
employees paid according to a bonus system were also seen working at a
high speed.


The following list is intended to convey an impression as to the
relative rates of work in the different industries. It is arranged accord-
ing to the proportion of piece and bonus workers in each trade. In
the case of industries in which there are no bonuses or piece-workers
(he., the boot, clothing, and Commonwealth offices) the arrangement is
made according to the observer’s impressions gained from watching
employees at work:—-
(1) Fruit canning.
(2) Eubber.
(3) Tobacco.
(4) Confectionery.
(5) Textiles.
(6) Manufacturing grocers.
(7) Jute.
(8) Cardbox.
(9) Commonwealth factories.
(10) Metals.
(11) Boot.
(12) Clothing.
(13) Commonwealth offices.
Skill.
A large majority of workers interviewed was unskilled. The
opinions gained from factory managers or foremen as to the number
of years of experience required to train the average worker among
more skilled hands were contradictory. A job which in one factory was
considered to require a few months to learn was stated in another to
need five years.
Postubb.
Approximately 1,512 females were continually sitting; 849 were
standing at work, and 1,131 were able to sit or stand at their regular
task, or to perform different jobs, some of which would allow sitting
and some standing.
In many factories it was noticed that some tasks which were always
performed in the standing position, might have been done as well by
females sitting part of the time if seats of the correct style had been
provided; in others seats were provided, but the management did not
insist on the females using them, or else the seats supplied were not of
suitable construction to be comfortably used for the work. A few seats
were seen so badly arranged that the worker could not place her legs
between the stool and the bench; to use the seat she had to sit sideways
in an uncomfortable attitude. This position is considered to predis-
pose to postural deformities. Many females were seen using press
machines or similar apparatus requiring the use of one foot on a treadle
while the weight of the body was supported on one leg; a few frequently
manipulated machines with one hand raised above the level of the
shoulder. This work is also open to the objection that it may pre-
dispose to postural deformities when performed over long periods.
Many machinists and females whose occupations require close
attention, were seen stooping over their work; this faulty position is
partly caused by uncomfortable seats; another factor which may have
some application to this question is the fact that many may suffer from
undiscovered eye defects.


Task system of payment (certain minimum output
required of employees
121
Bonus system (payment on pro rata basis for work
performed over a certain amount) . . ...
236
Piece-work
662
Time-work
2,449
Piece-work or time-work, according to amount of work
available ....
34
Method of Payment.
The figures below with regard to method of payment can only be
considered as approximate estimations only:—
In addition, among fruit-workers, there were 769 piece-workers and
70 time-workers.
Hoites of Work.
In every industry examined, with the exception of the tobacco, cer-
tain types of work in the textile industry, and some of the newer metal
industries, such as gold watch case manufacture, and the assembling of
electrical ware, an award or a wages board determination governed the
hours and conditions of work.
The working week consists of 44 hours in seven of the groups of
factories studied, of 48 hours in four, and 36| and 34 hours in the Com-
monwealth offices visited. Several of the firms did not work the total
number of hours allowed by award or determination, many were lenient
with regard to punctuality, and allowed a few minutes before knocking
off time for the employees to tidy themselves, but one firm was very
punctilious with regard to the employees working conscientiously during
every minute of factory time.
The earliest starting time in the morning is 7.30, and the latest
knocking off time 6 p.m. The 44 and 48 hours are arranged differently
in the various firms and industries. In most, the 44-hour week is
divided into five days, making a working day of 8| hours, with an addi-
tional few minutes in some factories, but in some 5-3,- days are preferred.
The 48-hour week is divided usually into 5-| days of 8| hours for five
days and 4| : on Saturdays, but in a few factories the 48 hours are in-
cluded in five days. When every minute allowed is used, the working
day of 9 hours 36 minutes is a long period; in one factory morning and
afternoon rest periods were not allowed, the hours being divided into
two spells of 4 hours 48 minutes. The length of the lunch interval
varies from half an hour to one hour. A lunch period of half an hour
appears to be sufficient if the meal is prepared and the dining-room con-
venient. Many employees are obliged to prepare their food and make
tea after reaching a distant dining room. Under these circumstances
they complain that 38 minutes is a rush. In many factories breaks of
10 or 15 minutes are allowed in the morning and afternoon for tea.
Sometimes it was found that morning intervals only were given. In a
few no definite period for these breaks is arranged, the females taking
a snack in a hasty fashion at their machines, or leaving work for a few
minutes; in still other establishments the employees are not permitted
to take morning or afternoon tea.


OvEETIME.
Apart from the canning industry, the amount of overtime performed
by females is negligible. It was ascertained that at country canneries
much overtime and week-end work is performed, the total number of
working hours per week sometimes amounting to between 50 and 60.
FACTORY ENVIRONMENT.
General.
The large majority of factories visited occupied an entire building;
in a few town establishments the premises were shared with other firms.
The construction of all .but one or two buildings seemed adequate; some
wore of concrete and steel, others of brick, and a few of galvanized iron
and wood. Fine lawns and gardens enhanced the appearance of a few
larger establishments.
WORKROOM.
In one or two cases only was there any doubt as to whether the size
of the workroom was sufficient for the number of employees engaged
therein.
Necessary attention is not given to spacing arrangements for the
workers. In many factories employees were placed closely together,
2i feet or 3 feet of bench space only being allowed for each. In a few
cases they were facing each other across a bench 2 feet or 3 feet wide.
The large majority of firms are fully aware of the importance of
separating employees as much as possible, or of allowing a minimum
bench space of 4 feet, as recommended by industrial authorities.
Ventilation.
Natural ventilation is used in most factories, being supplemented
in some by electric fans in summer, or air-cooling or air-conditioning
systems in others. Several workrooms visited in summer were
uncomfortably hot, and at some factories seen in winter employees
complained that the rooms w r ere very warm in hot weather. In certain
confectionery factories where artificial heating is necessary, in some
rooms a temperature of about 72-75° F. is maintained in winter, and
complaints were made that the summer temperature is unduly warm;
this excessive heat may be due to the fact that ventilation in dipping
rooms is not always satisfactory. The ventilation is frequently not
controlled by a responsible person. Even when it is nominally
supervised it is not uncommon to find most windows closed. The
question of some responsible individual controlling ventilation gains in
importance when it is considered that many workrooms are now built
without ventilators or fixed open orifices of any description. In one
factory where large groups of machinery were closely placed the
ventilation was fixed and open, but did not seem sufficient. The
humidity of the air of workrooms in two woollen mills calls for comment.
In one, artificial humidification was used, in the other the floor was
merely sprinkled with water, but in both the foremen stated that in
summer the dry bulb temperature is sometimes 100° F., and the wet bulb
a few degrees lower.
Temperature.
Very few firms have installed heating apparatus for use during cold
weather. In two or three factories central heating was used, and in a


few small establishments electric radiators were supplied. In some
factories heating is provided more on account of the work than of
warming the employees. Many complaints were made regarding the
cold of workrooms. It is true that some employees do not dress suitably,
but in one factory, in addition to warm external clothing, they were
wearing woollen gaiters, one or two even wrapping their necks in scarves.
Other factories did not appear to require heating on account of the
presence of machinery which, though producing a pleasant temperature
in winter, no doubt heats the workroom uncomfortably in hot weather.
In one factory several females were performing sedentary work in a
room the temperature of which was 56° ; on account of the nature of
the work, it was the aim of the management to keep the temperature
down to this level. Almost every employee complained of the coldness,
which they stated affected them in spite of the warm clothing they
habitually wore.
Cleanliness.
The cleanliness of factories generally may be described as good, it
was mainly in those in which the nature of the work presupposes dirt
and untidiness that the workrooms were unsatisfactorily cleaned. The
arrangement of stock in many establishments seemed responsible for
difficulty in cleaning and invited carelessness. The sanitary, lavatory
and messroom arrangements were in good order in the majority of
factories, but in some the cleaning was not w T ell supervised. Staffs of
cleaners are in many factories employed to do all sweeping, scrubbing,
and cleaning. Male employees are frequently detailed for this work,
although in certain factories female employees perform all the cleaning.
Two firms own vacuum cleaners. These are used with good effect on
the walls, which in all factories ar.e whitewashed once a year at least.
Lighting.
Natural lighting is used in the great majority of Melbourne factories.
In one small establishment visited artificial illumination was used
exclusively. In many, electric light is necessary in parts of the
workrooms or in certain sections of the buildings during the day. In two
gas brackets were seen as the only source of artificial light; in one
the fish-tail flame was provided, in the other there were incandescent
lamps.
In two factories mercury vapour lamps were used with satisfaction.
In one, a Dakol daylight lamp had been installed as an experiment.
In general artificial lighting is arranged fairly well. Sewing
machine processes requiring good illumination are catered for by small
electric bell lights for each operator in some factories. This method of
illumination seems satisfactory in that the light is cast on the work, not
affecting the eyes of the worker or of her neighbour; the reflected glare
seems negligible also. The same effect is produced by the ordinary
shaded electric ceiling lights pulled by means of an extension balance to
the level of the work bench as is done in one factory. For other
machinists ceiling lights only are provided. Some of these workers
complained of the poor lighting in dull weather.


Natural illumination is derived from roof windows or windows in
the walls of the workrooms. The failure of many firms to insist on
thorough cleaning of windows frequently results in impairment of
natural lighting; excellent roof lighting is supplied in many establish-
ments. In newer factories, consisting of several storied buildings, side
windows are provided as the source of natural light. The disadvan-
tages attaching to this method appear to be, firstly, that the degree
of illumination in the centre of the workroom is not always good, and
some employees in this position are occasionally in shadow, and, secondly,
that placing of the workers is so difficult that it is not uncommon for
groups of employees to be arranged facing the source of light.
Noise.
The degree of noise produced by machinery was deafening in two
or three factories in certain workrooms; in many there was a moderate
degree of noise; and in certain workrooms of tobacco, confectionery,
cardbox and rubber factories no noise was produced. Remarkably few
complaints concerning this factor are made by employees. In factories
where noise seemed considerable, employees were each asked whether it
affected them. The answers to this question are detailed later. (P. 30.)
Vibration.
In most factories in which heavy machinery is used the machines
are built on concrete on the ground floor of the buildings. Many work-
rooms contain machinery which produces a little vibration, in a few a
considerable degree was felt. The employees were questioned with
regard to this factor; and their answers are discussed later. (Page
•30.)
Floors.
Floors of the following types were seen: —-Wooden, asphalt, concrete,
concrete with malthoid covering, tiles, brick, permasite, galvanized iron
covering wood, and linoleum covering wood. In many factories the
females were standing on footboards or bags as a protection from the
concrete, brick, permasite or similar substance; in some no non-conduct-
ing stands were provided, or if supplied were not used.
Special Influences.
1. Dust.
Women were seen working among the following dusts:- —
Inorganic.—Calcium silicate.
Bronzing powder.
Organic. —Dust from jute bags.
Rubber.
Cardboard.
Cornflour.
Starch.
Soap extract.
Cotton.
Wool.
Tobacco.
The contact with bronzing powder, rubber, and cardboard dusts was
occasional and slight. Some females were working constantly in an
atmosphere of calcium silicate, cornflour, starch, soap extract, cotton
wool, tobacco and dust from jute bags.


Bronzing powder is a fine metallic dust used in the process of
bronzing in the cardbox industry. Bronzing can he done by hand or
by machine. Females occasionally perform both jobs for limited times
during the day. The commercial printing award has made special
regulations with regard to women performing this work; it can only he
done for two hours a day unless special conditions are provided and a
higher rate of pay is given while the work is in progress. Samples of
bronzing powder were submitted to the Public Health Department for
analysis, with the result that copper and zinc only were found. There
was no trace of lead or arsenic. The only ill-effects complained of by
the users of this dust were a greenish coloration of the skin, a coppery
taste in the mouth, a stuffed up nose, temporary nasal catarrh, and an
irritable skin rash in hot weather.
Calcium silicate is used to prevent one surface of rubber adhering
to another; it is very finely powdered. Authorities assert that it is
not a cause of pulmonary irritation.
The dust from jute bags is derived from all manner of commodities
such as potatoes, flour, coal, wheat, sugar, &c., and is a mixture of organic
and inorganic dusts. In the mending of secondhand bags this dust is
freely distributed through the atmosphere. Bag cleaning before
mending improves the conditions of work.
Eubber, cardboard, tobacco, wool and cotton, starch and soap extract
dusts are produced in the various processes concerned in the manufac-
ture of these articles. Kouge dust is produced in polishing imitation
jewellery in certain factories in the metal trade. The effect of these
dusts on the health of the individuals working in contact with them will
be referred to later.
Exhaust draughts are supplied for removing the particles of rubber
produced in the buffing of tennis balls balls in the rubber industry.
Polishing articles of imitation jewellery is associated with the pro-
duction of rouge dust which consists of a mixture of quicksilver, iron
and wax. Small hoods and exhaust fans were supplied for this process.
Certain packing machines in the manufacturing grocery industry
are provided with exhaust draughts to remove dust.
It cannot be said that in every case the dust is effectively removed. ■
2. Fumes.
The fumes to which females are subjected are very few. In certain
workrooms where gas burners or rings were in constant use, products
of combustion of coal gas were allowed to pass into the atmosphere of
the workroom in which the ventilation did not always seem adequate.
Employees in these workrooms were interrogated regarding the in-
cidence of symptoms of chronic carbon monoxide poisoning with negative
results in all cases.
Benzine is used mainly as a solvent for cements in the rubber and
shoe industries; no complaints of symptoms suggestive of excessive
inhalation were made by employees.
Benzol was used together with benzine as a rubber solvent in one
factory. One female employee was working in close contact with the
solution, but downward exhaust draughts had been installed in the


room. The female had a blood examination five months before the
visit by an officer of the Commonwealth Department of Health, when
she had shown no signs of benzol poisoning, but since that time she had
suffered from fatigue and frequent headaches.
Ammonia. —ln one factory several females were exposed to ammonia
fumes while filling bottles for an hour or so daily. Hone seemed to be
affected by this type of work.
Amyl Acetate. —In two establishments females were dealing with
solutions containing amyl acetate; in one it was used occasionally and
in the other one employee had just begun on a process involving its
use. There were no complaints from these workers.
Sulphur Chloride. —In one rubber factory fumes of sulphur chloride
from the curing passed into the atmosphere of a workroom in which
females were engaged. It is improbable that the fumes are sufficiently
concentrated to produce a detrimental effect on the female workers.
Hone complained of symptoms of ill health.
3. Exposure to Special Sources of Heat.
It has been mentioned already that numerous gas flames may be
responsible for the close atmosphere in some workrooms; a few em-
ployees complained of the discomfort of working near gas burners in
the warm weather. Other sources of heat which might reasonably be
expected to produce an uncomfortable working temperature, such as
soap and stearine vats and vulcanizers were seen in some factories and
were the subject of complaint. In one establishment a female was
working in a very warm room next to the boiler house, and in others
the artificial heating of rooms for the purposes of the work was the
cause of discomfort to many employees.
4. Weight Lifting.
In four factories it was ascertained that females under 18 years
were in the habit of carrying weights of over 25 lb., the limit of weight
lifting prescribed by the factory acts. The greatest weight carried by
a female of this age was 30 lb. Two women over 21 years were
carrying weights up to 52 lb. in two establishments, and of 45 and 47
lb. in two others.
5. Other Special Influences.
A. Dirty Trades. —Many employees in the various trades are en-
gaged in dirty occupations, the largest proportion being in the jute, bag
and metal trades; others in the manufacturing grocer and printing
industry were exposed to dirt and stains produced by their work. Very
few complained of the association with grease, stains and grime; they
mostly stated that it was easy enough to remove.
B. Occupations entailing Wetting the Garments. —ln two establish-
ments the work of the females involved the risk of wetting the garments.
Several complaints of this factor were made, but no definite evidence
as to its effect on the health of the individuals concerned was ob-
tained.
C. Contact with irritants. — (a) Fruit —Fruit juices alone or mixed
with a solution of sugar in the crystallizing process are considered
responsible for the acute or chronic perionychia of fruit workers. This
condition seems to appear without a preceding history of obvious


injury. The fur of the peach is apparently the main causative agent
of the temporary papular and erythematous rash from which a certain
percentage of fruit workers suifer. These conditions will be considered
in more detail in a later section.
( b ) Turpentine. —ln one factory where turpentine was used as a
cleaning fluid, several employees complained of an irritable rash on
the arms as the result of its use. No cases of skin rash were seen
at the time of inspection; the management had taken steps to treat the
rash immediately after its appearance by the application of a zinc
ointment.
D. Glues, Pastes, Sugar, Chocolate Solution. —A few cases of
cracked palms and fingers were seen among workers dealing with corn-
flour and starch paste. No other ill effects were noticed as the result
of using starch or flour paste, casein paste, glue, sugar or chocolate
solution; most workers engaged in handling these solutions had their
fingers continually smeared with them.
E. Ignition of Matches. —In one match factory visited, almost every
female engaged in hand filling match boxes complained of frequently
burnt hands. Second degree burns were seen on the hands of 7 per
cent, of employees and 7 per cent, exhibited multiple warts not confined
to areas exposed to friction. At another establishment only 0.6
per cent, exhibited second degree burns of the hands and very few
complaints of burning accidents were made.
Accidents.
According to the statements of managers and employees, accidents
among females are rare. In the metal trades numerous small super-
ficial cuts were seen on the hands; fruit workers exhibited a high per-
centage of cuts as the result of extracting the stones and cores by means
of a sharp scoop. Among hoot and white-workers accidents occur
with machine needles and skiving machines; some workers receive
lacerated or incised wounds or occasionally break a needle in the finger.
Gardbox workers are subject to the risk of the wire-stitching
machine clamping on the finger if they are not careful in their move-
ments; the same risk applies to corner staying machines used in this
industry. A protective thimble is designed to guard the fingers of
employees engaged in this type of work; but not one was seen in use
in the factories investigated.
Accidents from press machines in the metal trade occasionally
result in amputations or contusions or lacerations of the hands, hut most
machines appear to he well guarded.
Certain match packing machines may cause abrasions or contusions
of the fingers.
In the textile trade accidents sometimes occur from the spinning
machines and looms, the fingers becoming caught in the caps of the
former or compressed by the shuttles in the latter.
In any factory in which there seemed a special risk of accident each
employee interviewed was questioned with regard to the incidence of
injury; no female complained of having sustained serious injury as
the result of her work.


Table 11. indicates the number of accidents sustained by females
and reported to the State Labour Department, Victoria, during the year
1926. A few of the processes mentioned were not seen in the survey
under consideration, but the table indicates the rarity of accidents to
female employees.
TABLE 11.
Accidents Reported to State Labour Department, Victoria, during thf
Year 1926.
iber of Accidents.
Industry.
Occupation of worker at time of accident.
Juvenile.
Machinery
Bolt washing ..
Power press ..
Screwing
Chocolate couching
Escape of steam
Power press ..
Wrapping
Washing blue press
Crown Seal machine
Cordage making—
Bobbin winder
Food and Drink
Clothing and Textile
Carding machine
Hank winding machine
Felt Hat—
Shafting
Knitting —
Hose machine
Knitting machine
Sewing machine
Shirt making
Collar ironing machine
Revolving shaft
Woollen Goods —
Bobbin
Cloth roller
Drawing machine
Gill box
Spinning machine
Whipping ..
Winding machine
Worsted spinner
Box making machine .
Cardboard Ud machine
Corner staying machine
Doming press
Staying machine
Wire stapling machine
Wire stitching machine
Other—•
Books, Paper, Print-
ing, Cardboard Box
Packet making machine
Envelope machine ..
Washer cutting machine
Guillotine ..
Wire stapling machine
Sand topping machine
(Not covered by machinery)
Minor Wares
Miscellaneous


According to the records of the State Labour Department, the total
number of females engaged in factories during 1926 was 46,218. The
annual accident incidence rate, therefore, was two cases per 1,000
employees.
Sanitary Accommodation.
With one or two exceptions sanitary accommodation was amply
provided for in the factories inspected; the cleanliness of this accom-
modation did not always attain the desired standard, and in a few
cases out-of-date types of closets were still in use. Two country can-
neries had installed earth closets and one a septic tank system. Privacy
of access to the sanitary conveniences was not always assured. In
several establishments it was necessary for the females to pass through
a room in which males were at work to reach the sanitary accommoda-
tion.
Lavatory Accommodation.
The type of lavatory supplied varied from enamel basins to well
appointed troughs surmounted by showers or earthenware basins. The
number of lavatories usually complied with the requirements of the
factory acts. In very few factories it w y as necessary for the females
to use the same accommodation as the males. Soap was supplied by
some firms, towels by others, and some provided both.
The towels supplied were most usually roller or ordinary hand
towels, wliich frequently presented a soiled appearance. They were
changed in some cases daily, in others once a week.
In one factory paper towels were supplied; this was the only
case in which an attempt was made to provide each individual with a
separate towel. One employee volunteered that the firm did not supply
towels, and the girls forgot to bring their own, so frequently they used
their aprons. The apron she wore was particularly grimy. Powdered
soap was also seen in one establishment; elsewhere employees all used
the same cake. Hot water, in addition to cold, was supplied by a few
firms; the means of obtaining hot water varied. In some factories the
water was heated in a makeshift fashion or was brought by male
employees. Under these circumstances it would not be surprising if the
worker left the premises after a cold wash. The nature of the work in
many industries suggests that a good “ clean up ” is necessary before
meals and at the end of the day.
Cloakroom Accommodation.
Cloakroom accommodation varied greatly. Pegs, hooks, or nails
around the messroom walls were supplied by some firms, others pro-
vided accommodation for outdoor clothes around the walls of the mess-
room or at one end of the messroom. Separate cloakrooms supplied
with hooks or pegs, mirrors, lockers, or cupboards were provided in some
factories, in others cramped cloakrooms furnished with closely spaced
pegs were seen. Spacious cloakrooms are necessities in large factories.
At knocking-off time numbers of employees anxious to hurry home run
into the cloakroom and scramble for their belongings. One forewoman
described the scene in the cloak-room at knocking-off time as a positive
stampede, stating that frequently the smaller girls were knocked down
or buffeted in the rush. In one factory every morning the employees


hand their outdoor clothes over a counter to responsible women who
have access to the pegs and shelves; in return each worker is given a
disc and her working overalls. These are worn all day till going home,
when she is given her clothes in exchange for the disc, overall and cap.
Lockers were sometimes provided for employees and were usually
situated in the cloakroom; in many factories they were in the mess-
room or workroom.
Separate provision for working and outdoor clothes was made in a
munition factory, where it was necessary to prevent the transfer of
metallic fragments and dusts to the workrooms. In no other instance
was separate space provided for the two sets of clothing. It is advis-
able to make this provision, particularly in dirty trades.
Seating.
In the majority of factories females whose work entailed constant
sitting were supplied with stools without back-rests as seating accom-
modation ; some used stools to which improvised rests had been added.
It seems that most firms fail to recognize the importance of providing
physiologically constructed seats for their female employees. Some
realize that hack-rests are of advantage, and supply kitchen chairs, the
backs of which are of no use except when the employee leans hack. A
few firms have provided Tan-Sad chairs or similar new types of seat;
but none have appreciated the necessity for supplying seats to suit the
requirements of each individual employee.
It was not common to find women engaged in processes involving
continual standing. In these factories seats were sometimes provided
for rests during slack periods. In one establishment the women seated
themselves for short periods on tins or baskets. In some instances
no provision for seats was made; during slack times or rest periods
women were seen sitting on benches or steps, or even on the floor of the
workroom. Two factory managers declared that the nature of the
work at weaving looms necessitated continual standing on the part
of the females. It was noticed that several employees were able to sit
on improvised seats for short periods while watching their w r ork.
Drinking Water.
About six establishments provided drinking water from bubble
fountains. In most cases females obtained drinks from taps or water
bags, using their own cups. In a few instances it was admitted that
each girl used the same cup, while in others, though the existence of a
communal drinking vessel was denied, a single cup or glass was seen
suspiciously convenient to the source of drinking water.
Surgery, First Aid and Restrooms.
Three large establishments contained medical departments equipped
with apparatus necessary for an up-to-date surgery, together with rest-
rooms comfortably furnished with beds and chairs. In a few others
less pretentious surgeries and restrooms were supplied, but the large
majority of factories were equipped with first aid chests only. These
varied from a cupboard well stocked with lotions, ointments, lint,
bandages, &c., to a small box containing a few stale looking lotions,
powders and bandages.


Six firms employed a fully trained nurse, three of whom, in addition
to managing the medical department, superintended the social activities
and recreations of the female employees. In almost every factory there
seemed to be one employee with first aid experience called upon in an
emergency.
Meals and Messeooms.
Provisions for meal taking varied considerably in different factories.
Excellent dining rooms with cafeterias supplying cheap, hot or cold
lunches were attached to the larger or more prosperous establishments.
Lunch rooms, in addition to dining rooms, were provided by one or two
firms; in the former employees were able to take cold lunch and make
tea. In another class of establishment dining rooms were frequently
used as cloakrooms also, or contained a couch in lieu of restroom
accommodation. It w T as usual to find hot water urns on a gas ring in
such places; pie ovens were often seen.
Meals were taken in the workroom at the work benches in many
factories where there was insufficient dining room accommodation.
Means of heating water was supplied in all factories.
The furnishings of messrooms varied greatly. In four the dining-
room appeared as well appointed as an up-to-date restaurant.
Protective Clothing.
In a few cases the firms supplied overalls and caps for the use of
female employees; in two or three others they were obtainable from the
firm at a very low price, but mainly the provision of working clothes
when necessary was left to the employees themselves.
Welfare Schemes.
Many of the larger establishments had inaugurated welfare schemes
among their employees. These took the form of social clubs, life
insurance, sickness and old-age insurance, banking accounts and
recreative and social functions. Such activities were rare among the
small factories.
Sickness Absenteeism and Labour Turnover.
Two firms provided the necessary details for the estimation of labour
wastage, although about twelve were asked to supply data. Ho satis-
factory records of sickness absenteeism were obtained.
Hostel Accommodation at Cotjntey Canneeies,
At two of the country canneries hostel accommodation was provided
for females at a moderate rate. These buildings house between
100 and 200 women each and were managed by officers
appointed by the Y.W.C.A. and paid by the companies. Both buildings
were satisfactory from a hygienic point of view, but on part of one
adequate provision against the excessive heat of the summer had not
been made, and at the other there was insufficient bedroom accommoda-
tion for the large number of inmates, tents being used to house the
overflow. It is probable that these defects will be remedied before the
coming fruit season.


PERSONAL INTERROGATION OE EMPLOYEES.
General.
In considering the information supplied by females in the various
industries surveyed, it is taken for granted that the incidence of
symptoms caused by extra-industrial conditions is more or less constant
for every trade. It is obvious that differentiating complaints referable
to such conditions from symptoms caused by factory environment is a
matter of great difficulty if not impossibility, when observations are
made from the workers’ statements only, without the aid of medical
examination, reliable sickness absenteeism data, or labour turnover
figures.
An attempt has been made to compare and contrast the incidence
of each system among employees in each trade and to demonstrate the
relation of certain aspects of factory environment in each industry to
the data supplied by the female employees.
This method presents some discrepancies, due no doubt to the
different conditions obtaining in factories in the same trade; whenever
marked, these discrepancies are pointed out.
In considering the incidence of dysmenorrhoea, respiratory
infections and headache, no reference is made to the rubber trade and
Commonwealth establishments, as these were investigated early in the
survey before a definite basis for the classification of these complaints
was fixed.
It is not unreasonable to assume that, given a definite standard of
comparison on which to base observations, the possibility of correlating
complaints with the working conditions found must form a conclusive
argument for the value of this type of investigation.
General Appearance.
The average incidence of anaemia among the women in all
industries was 1.7 per cent. In industries in which the largest propor-
tion of sedentary workers was engaged, i.e., clothing, boot and tobacco
trades and Commonwealth offices and factories the highest incidence of
apparent anaemia was , found. It should be noted that this condition
may be more common than these figures indicate, as many employees
succeed in improving a pale complexion by artificial means.
Evidence of Fatigue.
Of the total number interrogated 7.9 per cent, of females complained
of daily fatigue relieved by rest and 1.2 per cent, of daily fatigue
unrelieved by rest.
It is an outstanding observation that complaints of fatigue were
made mainly by women over 21 years of age. A comparison of the
two groups of figures in Table VI. (page 41) indicates that among
399 adults 9.5 per cent, complained of daily fatigue relieved by rest
(H —|-), and 2 per cent, of daily fatigue unrelieved by rest (+ + +),
whereas in a group of 416 juveniles the figures were 2.1 and 0.2 per
cent, respectively. It is interesting to find that throughout the whole
survey three juveniles and 35 adults complained of fatigue (+ -f- +).
(46.2 per cent, of all were juveniles.) This consideration may he
accounted for by the fact that older wonien are employed almost
exclusively on tasks requiring active work and that about 65.8 per cent.


of pieceworkers are adults. In addition, it must be remarked that most
adults have been engaged in factory work for longer periods than
juveniles.
The highest incidence of complaints of daily fatigue unrelieved by
rest was among employees in the rubber industry; tobacco, jute, textile
and confectionery workers’ complaints were also above average. The
rubber industry was investigated early in the survey, and although the
standards for fatigue were fixed, it is questionable whether the results
are absolutely reliable; there is little doubt that the work performed by
females in certain departments in this industry demands the output of
considerable physical effort, and in the heat of the summer, females
working near vulcanisers might reasonably complain. In addition,
factory conditions were not of satisfactory standard in all the rubber
factories. The high figure obtained in the case of tobacco employees
may be explained by the energetic work which certain pieceworkers
perform; the inadequate ventilation in certain workrooms and the toxic
effect of tobacco dust may also contribute to these complaints.
Textile workers are subjected to the strain of prolonged standing in
a noisy environment, w'hile in some workrooms the over-heated moist
atmosphere may account for their fatigue. In one factory lack of
dining room and seating accommodation for rest during slack intervals
in all probability accentuates the strain of work. Jute bag workers,
particularly those engaged in second-hand bag repairing, in certain
factories are machining rapidly in a dusty atmosphere; many are piece-
workers exerting every effort to make good money. The general hygiene
conditions in these factories, several of wdiich employed under five
females, are of poor standard. Among confectionery employees there
are many pieceworkers engaged in dipping, wrapping, packing and
arranging chocolate fillings. The work is carried out in rooms which
are not well ventilated in every case. In one factory in which the
incidence of subjective fatigue was high the daily working hours wore
9 hours 36 minutes; 38 minutes wore allowed for lunch, the dining
rooms were not conveniently situated, and the service of meals was not
satisfactorily arranged, nor were morning or afternoon breaks allowed.
Conditions such as these may conceivably produce symptoms of fatigue.
It is noteworthy that of the five industries in which most factories work
a 48-hour woek fatigue incidence is above the average in two, namely,
textiles and confectionery, and below r the average in two others. The
fifth industry, fruit canning, was not investigated with regard to the
incidence of fatigue.
From Table YII. (page 40) it will be seen that the percentage
of juveniles in the textile and jute industries is above the average, but
in the rubber, tobacco and confectionery the percentage falls below r the
average. The larger proportion of older women engaged in the three
last mentioned trades may account to a certain extent for the high
incidence of fatigue.
Rate of Working Compared with Fatigue.
In establishing the relationship which the incidence of fatigue bears
to the rate of working, it is found that the five industries in which
fatigue ranks highest are included among the first seven industries
named previously in the paragraph dealing with “ Rate of work ”
(page 10). It has already been mentioned that fatigue was not


investigated among fruit employees, a large proportion of whom work at
a high speed. The higher incidence of subjective symptoms of fatigue
among the workers in the tobacco, jute, textiles, confectionery and
rubber industries would appear to bear a direct relation to the large
proportion of bonus and pieceworkers in these trades.
In the manufacturing grocery industry, in which a large number
of pieceworkers are engaged, the low incidence of fatigue is due in all
probability to the high percentage of juveniles who, in one factory in
particular, are working under extremely favorable conditions.
PoSTDEE AND FaTIGKJB.
The percentage of textile and rubber workers whose work involves
constant standing is greater than in any other industry; jute and
confectionery workers rank below the average, while tobacco employees
are lowest in the list. These observations suggest that constant standing
does not necessarily predispose to fatigue, but that other factors such as
age, rate of working, the type of work and hygienic factory conditions
have a bearing on the subject. It should be mentioned that a large
number of these females classified as constantly standing have
opportunities for rest in the sitting position for short intervals during
slack periods.
Relation of Complaint of Fatigue to Othek Symptoms.
Under the sections dealing with dysmenorrhoea and headache the
relation between these symptoms and subjective fatigue incidence will
be discussed.
Coldness in Wintee.
The average incidence of complaint of cold in winter over all trades
was 41.9 per cent. There is little doubt that the type of building, the
floor, the presence of machinery and the system of ventilation, &c.,
exert an effect on the personal comfort of employees during cold weather.
It seems significant that the incidence of complaints of cold in winter
is highest among employees in the boot and clothing trades. A high
percentage of workers in these trades (87.9 and 80.3 per cent, respec-
tively) are constantly sitting at work which requires very little physical
effort. 90.7 per cent, of tobacco employees perform work of a sedentary
nature, but more exercise is necessary in the execution of their work
and some are in proximity to machinery. Only 36 per cent, complain of
feeling the cold.
Fifty per cent, of textile, metal and cardbox and printing workers
complained of cold in winter. The work of the textile and metal
employees on the whole requires much more effort than the tasks allotted
to tobacco, or cardbox and printing "workers; the high incidence of
complaints among the former may be ascribed to the nature of the
buildings and the situation of certain of the workrooms.
The complaints of jute bag workers are probably due to the
sedentary occupations of some and the nature of the buildings and
draughty type of ventilation in others.
It is to be expected that office "workers might feel the cold to a
greater extent than factory employees, considering the nature of the
work of the former. Only 32.6 per cent, of Commonwealth office
employees made complaints of feeling cold in winter. The offices are
artificially heated in cold weather, whereas among the various industries
heating apparatus is installed only in an odd one or two.


Vakicose Veins.
The incidence of varicose veins among the women interrogated is
low on the whole, 2.5 per cent, making such complaints. This figure no
doubt includes minor varicosities, as well as the well marked variety.
The results obtained from analysing the data concerning varicose
veins show that the incidence among married women, widows and
divorcees is highest, being 13.6 per cent.; 3.3 per cent, of single adults
complain of this condition, and only 0.6 per cent, of juveniles gave
positive answers to the question. It is not surprising to find the figure
higher among the married and widowed as varicose veins persist after
pregnancy.
With regard to posture, it appears that 2.2 per cent, of females who
continuously sit complain of the condition, as compared with 4.2 per
cent, of those whose work entails standing and 1.7 per cent, alternate
sitting with standing. It cannot he definitely stated that constant
standing or sitting is responsible for the production of varicose veins,
but it is very probable that the continual assumption of the standing
position or use of a badly designed seat may aggravate the condition.
The above figures also indicate that continued standing is more likely to
produce or aggravate varicose veins than constant sitting. These data
emphasize the necessity for providing seats of physiological design for
sedentary work and opportunities for rest in work entailing prolonged
standing.
Respibatoby Infections.
The average incidences of respiratory infections for the groups -| —)-
(colds, coughs, or sore throats occurring more frequently than six times
a year) and -) —| —|- (colds, coughs, or sore throats occurring almost
continuously) over all industries were 4.7 and 2 per cent, respectively.
The incidence of the more important group (-j—|—f-) is highest among
tobacco workers (4 per cent.). Xext in frequency are jute workers and
then employees in metal trades. The dust associated with stemming is
considered a possible cause for the high incidence of respiratory
infections among tobacco wmrkers, the dust and cold workrooms among
jute workers and the cold among employees in the metal trades.
An analysis of complaints of respiratory infections made by females
working in dusty occupations shows that 3.2 per cent, of these em-
ployees report almost continuous colds and coughs; the percentage
is raised by tobacco and jute workers; other industries in which the
employee is exposed to dust, such as the textile rubber and manufactur-
ing grocer trades, do not show a percentage of complaints above the
average.
In addition to the above data, figures were obtained dealing with
the presence of catarrh and nasal discomfort among workers in dusty
occupations. Yery few complained of nasal catarrh, but the bronze
dust involved in the process of bronzing and hand gluing of cartons
after bronzing appeared to cause this symptom temporarily in almost
every employee. About 2 per cent, of females working in a dusty
atmosphere complained of a “ stuffed up nose.” This symptom occurred
with greater frequency in starch and cornflour packers than in any
other occupation. Two females, working among soap extract and
tobacco dust respectively, stated that they were subject to frequent
attacks of laryngitis.


Appetite.
Reports regarding appetite are of interest, in that they vary very
little in the industries in which this detail was investigated. The
average figures over all for appetites considered good, fair and bad were
81.9, 16.8, and 1.3 per cent, respectively, the percentages varying from
75.5 to 89.2, 9 to 23.1, and from 0.6 to 3.0 in each group.
Breakfast.
Details regarding the type of breakfast taken were only recorded
in the course of investigating the confectionery and boot trades. The
average percentage figures were for reports of no breakfast 10.2, for
breakfast 30.9, -j—(-, 27 and -j--J —|-, 31.9. The significance of
these signs has already been explained. It is worthy of note that 15.6
per cent., reported no breakfast in the confectionery trade, in which
48 are the weekly working hours, and that 5.9 per cent, of boot
employees working 44 hours a week gave similar information.
Constipation.
The average complaint of constipation was 11.5 per cent., the figure
varying from 6.1 to 17.7 per cent, in the six industries in which inquiry
was made into the subject. An analysis of the reports of 1,383 workers
was made to ascertain the relation between complaints of constipation
and posture. The results are shown in Table 111. hereunder:—
TABLE 111.
Complaints of Constipation According to Posture.
Among workers Among workers Among workers
sitting. standing. sitting or standing.
Complaints of Constipation .. 12.3 per cent. 5.5 per cent. 7 per cent.
It appears that sedentary work predisposes to or aggravates the ten-
dency to constipation.
Teeth.
The average percentage figure obtained from analysis of the answers
supplied to questions concerning the state of the teeth was 22.1 carious.
The percentage varied from 14 in the boot trade to 30.4 in the jute bag
industry. It is highly probable that the incidence of carious teeth is
considerably under-estimated as no thorough inspections of the mouth
were made. This consideration, together with the fact that numbers
of females have complete sets of false teeth, suggests a high incidence of
dental caries.
Dysmenoeehoba.
From the analysis of the information supplied by a group of adults
and another of juveniles, it appears that in all complaints other than
that of invariably disabling dysmenorrhoea the juveniles show a lower
percentage than the adults.
The percentage incidence of dysmenorrhoea among workers in the
various industries studied averages 19.7 mild or +, 7.3 occasionally dis-
abling or -j—|- and 3.1, invariably disabling -| —
It should be noted that complaints of slight discomfort and malaise
are included among the reports of mild dysmenorrhoea, and that some
females whose complaints are classed as occasionally disabling, have
left work only once or twice in years of service.


outcome oi the am
ilysis oi the reports oi 1,84
TABLE IV.
b temaies: —
Complaints of Dtsmenoeehoea Accoeding to Posture. •
Dyemenorrhoea.
Percentage of
those sitting.
Percentage of
those standing.
Percentage of
those sitting or
standing.
Percentage of
total number.
+
+ +
+ + + ..
0/
/o
19.9
4.1
3.5
0/
/o
20.7
6.3
4.1
%
13.7
5.3
2.4
0/
/o
17.3
5.1
3.1
Total (all dysmen.)
27.5
31.1
21.4
25.5
It would appear that constant standing predisposes to or aggravates
dysmenorrhoea more than continual sitting, and that alternation of
posture is advisable to lower the incidence of this symptom.
Among jute, confectionery, cardbox and printing, and tobacco
workers the incidence is above the average. In the jute, confectionery
and tobacco industries the high percentage of dysmenorrhoea appears
to bear a definite relation to the incidence of subjective fatigue and
headache, as these symptoms are also above the average in all three
industries. This fact is of interest in that such correlation might be
expected if subjective fatigue, headache and dysmenorrhoea be con-
sidered suggestive symptoms of industrial fatigue.
The parallel cannot be drawn in the case of the cardbox and print-
ing industry, in which a high percentage of dysmenorrhoea is associated
with a low incidence of headache and complaints of fatigue.
The relation between dysmenorrhoea and posture seems to be demon-
strated more or less definitely in Table IV. hereunder, which is the
outcome of the analysis of the reports of 1,846 females: —
Menorrhagia.
Of the 488 workers questioned with regard to the incidence of men-
orrhagia, 2.2 per cent, complained of the symptom. A group of 68
females, whose work was regarded as requiring considerable physical
effort was also questioned about this complaint, and 4 per cent, gave
positive answers. The great preponderance of adults and older women
in this group may account to a certain extent for this high figure.
Among employees exposed to vibration from floor or bench, 3.2 per cent,
complained of menorrhagia.
Chilblains.
The average incidence of chilblains according to the employees’
reports was 29.3 per cent. Of these 19.9 were classed as mild, 6.3 as
severe, and 3.1 per cent, as severe chilblains which “ break.” In corre-
lating the percentage of complaints of cold in winter with the incidence
of chilblains, it is found that employees in the boot, clothing and cardbox
trades show the highest percentage of each complaint.
Headaches.
The average incidence of headache occurring more frequently than
once a month, but not as often as once a week (-] —[-), was 6.3 per cent.,
and of headache occurring once a week or oftener 6.6 per cent.


The significance of headache as a symptom of industrial fatigue
is supported by the fact that in the three industries in which a high
percentage of this symptom was found, that is, in the tobacco, con-
fectionery and jute trades, the incidence of dysmenorrhoea and subjec-
tive fatigue was also high.
It is noteworthy that these three industries are classified among the
first six in which the rate of working is considered greatest. On the
other hand, among textile and manufacturing grocery employees, whose
rate of work is also classed among the first six, the incidence of headache
is below the average.
The percentage of complaints of headache occurring more often than
once a month, and of headache occurring every week or oftener, is above
the average in the clothing and boot trades. This high incidence is
probably attributable to eyestrain among the employees, whose work
entails close attention and constant watching. Light and posture no
doubt have some bearing on the production of eyestrain and its accom-
panying headache, hut it can scarcely be doubted that many employees
suffer from visual defects which are neglected or incorrectly treated.
In this connexion the quotation of Koher and Hayhurst’s Industrial
Health seems apt: —
“It is a well-established fact that either the over-use of the eyes
or the use of eyes under bad conditions, may give rise to eye fatigue
or to eyestrain; and many eye specialists believe that at least 80 to
90 per cent, of headaches are dependent on eyestrain.”
Legislation in Victoria provides for medical examination, not neces-
sarily including testing of the sight, in children under 16 in all trades
but the boot and clothing industries. Juveniles about to enter trades
which demand fine use of the eyes should be subjected to examination
for visual defects.
Among tobacco workers the incidence of headache is extraordinarily
high, being 10 per cent, for headaches occurring once a week or oftener.
It is possible that to a certain extent nicotine is the causative agent
of this symptom in many cases.
Weight.
It is interesting to note the slight variations in the weight averages
in the seven industries in which this detail was recorded; the average
weight was 8 st. 8 lb., the figures varying from 8 st. 2 lb. to Bst. 121 b.
Time taken in transit to Work.
The average time taken in travelling to work was 24 minutes, the
variations being from 21 to 35 minutes.
Exercise.
The amount of exercise in which factory employees indulge averages
49.2 for exercise -j-, 37.9 for exercise -f- -(-, and 12.9 per cent, for
exercise -| —The Commonwealth office workers reported a much
higher percentage of exercise than any other group of establishments
in which these inquiries were made. (See Table V., page 41.)


Number of Evenings per week spent away from Home.
Employees in the confectionery and boot trades were questioned con-
cerning the number of evenings per week they spend away from home.
The average figure is 2.5 evenings, the juveniles being 2.7, and the
adults 2.3.
Home Conditions.
On the average 74.1 of employees reported good, 24.7 fair, and 2.2
per cent, bad home conditions. The standards used in this inquiry
have been previously defined. The investigation was carried out in
six industries.
It appears that the home conditions of approximately the same per-
centage of juveniles and adults can be classed as “ fair ”. The condi-
tions of 0.4 per cent, juveniles and 1.8 per cent, adults are recorded as
“ bad ”.
Defendants.
In four industries the females gave information with regard to the
amount they contributed to the upketep of the household, or stated
whether any one was dependent on part of their earnings. 29.3 per
cent, of the total number were helping to keep or wholly supporting
other members of the family. This figure appears small unless it is
realized that 46.2 per cent, of the employees seen in all factories were
juveniles, a large proportion of w 7 hom do not earn a wage sufficient to
assist in the support of others.
Special Points.
Monotony.
Three hundred and four females who were constantly working at
simple repetitive processes were questioned as to whether they found
the work monotonous. Positive answers were received in 16.2 per
cent, of cases.
Noise.
In factories in which considerable noise was produced by machinery
162 workers w 7 ere asked whether the noise affected them. Positive
answers were given in 3.1 per cent, of cases; 1.9 per cent, complained
that the noise produced headache, and 1.2 per cent, that irritability of
temper resulted from association with the noise.
Vibration.
In answer to questions relating to the effect of vibration on 184
employees in various trades, 3.8 per cent, complained of occasionally
being worried, irritable, shaky, nauseated, or “ headachy ” as the result
of this influence.
PERSONAL INTERROGATION OF EMPLOYEES IN THE
FRUIT CANNING INDUSTRY.
General.
Eight hundred and thirty-nine females in the fruit canning indus-
try were interrogated with regard to the incidence of occupational
lesions, and the face, arms and hands of each were inspected.


Perionychia—single or multiple, acute or chronic
.. 7.9
Sore finger tips
.. 10.6
Skin erosions
. . 46.0
Injuries of hands —clean
.. 46.9
infected
1.9
Skin rash —arms
.. 24.9
i face ..
.. 3.7
The .incidence of the various complaints from which these employees
were suffering at the time of inspection, or said they had suffered
previously, was as follows:
Per cent.
PkKION YCJLIA.
Perionychia in acute and chronic forms is found among employees
handling lemons, peaches and crystallized fruits. It occurs with greater
frequency among crystallized fruit workers who handle fruits soaked
in sugar solution.
Sore Einger Tips.
Sore finger tips associated with some erosion or wearing down of the
tips of the nails are caused by rubbing the fingers against the bottom
of the receptable holding the fruit ready for canning.
Skin Erosions.
It was decided that the shallow skin erosions seen between the fingers
are probably caused by the constant contact with fruit juice.
Injuries of the Hands.
Corns and Blisters.
Corns and blisters are found among employees using knives and
wooden handled scoops in the cutting process. They are due to the
constant attrition of the instrument against the skin. They cause only
slight disability.
Cracks and Guts.
Humbers of employees suffer from skin cracks which cause
considerable discomfort. Cuts of varying depth are seen, particularly
among fast workers. These lesions rarely become infected, the fruit
juice apparently having some antiseptic action.
Skin Hash.
The rash is practically confined to employees handling peaches. It
appears to be caused by the fruit fur, as the main incidence is amongst
the cutters. It is seen on the face, neck and forearm, and is most
marked in the bend of the elbow. Workers in their first fruit season
are the main sufferers. It causes little inconvenience except for the
irritation and disappears quickly on treatment with a soothing lotion.
Objectively, the rash is characterized by slight erythema and papules.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.
The survey of establishments employing 3,502 females in the
Commonwealth offices and factories, rubber, manufacturing grocery,
jute bag, confectionery, boot, cardbox and printing, clothing, textile,
metal and tobacco and cigar trades revealed that the working
environment —although in only a few cases poor —in many cannot be
considered to attain a satisfactory standard.
Breaches of the Factory Acts discovered in the course of the survey
were few in number, these transgressions being confined to such
conditions as the provision of sanitary and lavatory accommodation,
cleanliness and space in workrooms and weight lifting in four
instances.
In one factory only was a dangerously toxic substance, benzol, used
by females. Only 1.9 per cent, of females were seen working at processes
requiring the expenditure of considerable physical effort.
In several factories sufficient attention is not paid to such factors as
rotation of jobs, spacing of workers and the provision of rest periods
and an adequate lunch hour. The hours in all were 44 to 48 per week
or less. Overtime was performed only by workers in the fruit industry
to any extent. In many factories cloakroom, messroom or restroom
accommodation was not in accordance with hygienic standards, and in
none were all the employees provided with physiological seating
accommodation or foot rests. Ventilation and lighting were not of very
poor standard in any factory, but in a large number the importance of
effectively controlled ventilation was overlooked.
Over-heated workrooms were seen in a few factories. Heating
apparatus was provided in very few.
Welfare work was carried out very well in a few factories,
some firms employing a nurse to assist in this work or to take charge
of medical departments. Surgeries were supplied in one or two
establishments only.
Records of sickness absenteeism and labour turnover arc kept
satisfactorily in very few establishments.
The following conclusions may be drawn from the data supplied by
personal interrogation of employees—
(1) That juveniles are employed in large numbers (46.2 per
cent, of all employees) and that 36.2 per cent, of pieceworkers
(roughly 240). are juvenile, that very few are engaged in processes
requiring considerable physical effort, as this type of work is
performed almost entirely by adults, and that with the exception
of symptoms of invariably disabling dysmenorrhoea, they do not
complain of symptoms of ill health to the same extent as the
adults.
It would appear, that the burden of industry in the trades studied
falls more lightly on the juveniles than the adults, and that
either because their work on the whole does not entail so much
effort or speed, or because they have not been employed for such
long periods, their complaints of ill health are of lower incidence
than those oil the adults.


(2) That a certain relation exists between the rate of working
and the incidence of dysmenorrhoea, headache or complaint of
fatigue, in that in several trades in which the rate of working
seems greatest, the dysmenorrhoea, headache or subjective fatigue
incidence is above the average.
(3) That in the dusty occupations complaints of colds, coughs,
or sore throats occurring almost continuously are higher than the
average, the incidence being raised by the complaints of employees
in the jute and tobacco trades. This observation suggests that
tobacco dust and the dirt from jute bags predispose to respiratory
infection.
(4) That the high incidence of headache in the clothing and
boot trades is in all probability largely due to eyestrain.
(5) That with regard to the effect of posture on the health of
female employees, the following facts are concluded: —
(a) It cannot be definitely stated that posture is responsible
for the incidence of varicose veins being higher among
those who sit or stand continually than among those
who are able to alternate these positions, but it is very
probable that the continual use of a badly designed
seat or constant standing may predispose to or aggravate
the condition.
(b) That the tendency to constipation is aggravated by
constant assumption of the sitting position.
(c) That dysmenorrhoea occurs more frequently among
ivorkers who stand than among those who sit, and those
who suffer least of all are able to alternate sitting and
standing. It appears that posture has a definite
influence on the incidence of this complaint.
(d) That sedentary workers show a higher incidence of
anaemia than females whose work is more active.
(6) That as the result of investigation into the fruit canning
industry, perionyehia is considered a condition of definite industrial
origin.
RECOMMENDATIONS.
(1) That in a future survey of factories accurate observations with
regard to heating, lighting and ventilation of workrooms be made.
It is impossible in a superficial survey to carry out scientific investi-
gations with regard to ventilation, heating and lighting in the many
workrooms of each factory.
In order to obtain an accurate idea of the condition of the
atmosphere in workrooms, it is suggested that the same establishments
should be visited during cold and hot weather, and observations made


regarding air movement, and wet and dry bulb thermometer readings
taken, particularly in workrooms in which artificial heating, cooling,
or humidification is used.
The possibility of the presence of excessive quantities of products
of combustion- of coal gas in workrooms in which open gas flames are
used suggests that air analyses should be conducted, particularly during
cold weather, when in many factories air movement is prevented as
far as possible by closing windows and doors.
Females are engaged to such an extent upon work which requires
close attention to detail that it seems most important for the
illumination of such types of work as boot and shoe machining and
sewing of all kinds to be thoroughly and accurately studied. The
necessity for such an investigation is emphasized by the number of
females employed in this type of work who complain of headache.
(2) That in view of the higher incidence of respiratory infections
among workers in dusty occupations, a detailed investigation involving
physical and X-ray examination of the chests of employees engaged in
this type of work be undertaken.
(3) That the recommendations made as a result of the investigation
into the fruit canning industry be given effect: —
(a) That the fruit perionychias be classed amongst the compen-
satable diseases.
(h) That a first aid room in charge of a trained nurse should be
installed in all the larger canning and crystallized fruit
factories.
(c) That the larger factories should consider the advisability of
engaging the services of a consulting dermatologist.
( d ) That bowls of alkaline solution should be supplied at the
work benches in all fruit factories.
(e) That, where the volume of work would justify it, the
question of the use of machines in which the lemon
squeezers are fed automatically rather than by hand
should be considered. ,
(4) Working conditions of Office Workers. —That an investigation
into the working conditions of female office workers be undertaken.
There is no legislation at the present time providing for the needs
of the large number of females engaged in office work nor has any
investigation dealing with their health been made. The offices of many
of the factories covered by the survey were inspected. The working
conditions of the female employees seemed to be fairly good on the
whole, but in one factory the only sanitary accommodation accessible
was in a neighbouring house twenty yards down the street. Many firms
provide their staff with excellent offices, lunch rooms and recreation
rooms, but others, particularly the smaller establishments, make no
such provision.


Wade Wright, M.D., of New York, in his report, The Health of
Office Workers, states: —
“ Clerical workers constitute a very large part of the gainfully
employed in the country. They are in large proportion young
women presenting health problems of considerable magnitude and
importance. Employers of clerical workers cannot ignore the
importance of the problem of time and efficiency lost through
disease, and it is almost inevitable that they share with their
employees the burden of maintaining some mechanism for the
relief and control of the situation.”
In presenting an analysis of mortality data he says:—
“ Although mortality from pulmonary tuberculosis has notably
declined- during the past fifteen years for both sexes, the reduction
has been more marked among males. It then is still higher for
females, but while female rates for all ages has improved, it peaks
notably among young women, and in the group aged 20-24 is
distinctly higher than among men. It suggests a definite relation
to the recent pouring of young women into gainful occupations
and perhaps to their dress and mode of life.”
These remarks suggest that a wide scope of health research among
office workers exists.
(5) Examination of Juveniles. —That with regard to the
examination of juveniles, legislation should be directed towards
ensuring sight testing, particularly in the case of employees entering
boot, clothing and allied trades.
Among the resolutions dealing with child labour adopted by the
Commonwealth and States of Australia Conference on Industrial
Hygiene, Sydney, 1922, were the following:—
(1) That in the opinion of the conference all persons employed
in factories and workshops should be medically examined before
employment and in each year of employment until the person has
completed his or her eighteenth year.
(2) That a certificate of fitness should be furnished on initial
employment in each case at or under the minimum statutory age for
employment.
(3) That medical examinations should be made more frequently
than annually, if the medical examiner considers this necessary in
any individual case.
(4) That all medical examinations should be made by specially
authorized medical officers.
The Factory Acts of Victoria decree that female juveniles under
the age of sixteen be medically examined before employment; this
examination does not necessarily include eye testing. The stipulation
does not hold for employees in the boot and clothing trades. It seems
reasonable to suggest tbat in addition to the above resolutions of the
Industrial Hygiene Conference, particular attention should be paid to
investigating the condition of the eyesight in juveniles, especially in
those entering a trade in which the eyes are used for fine work.


(6) Special Accommodation. —That more attention should be paid
to the provision of seating, restroom, cloakroom and dining room
accommodation for females.
(a) Seating. —Seats of physiological design should be provided for
females. All work seats should as far as possible conform to the
following principles: —
(1) The weight of the body should be on the buttocks, not on
the thighs.
(2) The back of the chair should support the small of the back,
not the shoulders.
(3) All bending forward should be made possible at the hips,
not at the waist.
(4) The feet should rest naturally and easily upon the floor or
upon a footrest.
The Bureau of Women in Industry, Department of Labour, United
States of America, presented a report on industrial posture and seating,
and reached the conclusion that “ there is no one chair that is best for
all industrial processes. To determine what chair is best for a
particular process the nature of the work to be done, the position of
supplies and finished work, the equipment at hand, i.e. the height of
the bench, chair, place for footrest, &c., as well as the height of the
individual worker—all these must be considered. To provide a good
chair is not encfugh, the important thing is to bring all parts of the
workplace into the best possible relationship.”
In addition to providing seats for females whose work necessitates
sitting, it is important that employers should supply them for those
females who work standing so that occasional rests may be taken when
the operative is tired or the work slack. As these seats are to be used
a few times daily, it is not so essential that they should he of
physiological construction.
( b ) Restrooms. —In any establishment in which females are
employed, provision should be made for restroom accommodation. In
a factory in which no restroom is supplied, it frequently happens that
temporary indisposition leads to the loss of a whole day’s work, whereas
a few hours rest in the recumbent position might, enable an employee
to continue her work. If the size of the factory does not warrant the
employment of a trained nurse, the females should be instructed to
report their indisposition to a senior female employee and gain
permission to retire.
The furnishings of a restroom should be such that comfort and
congenial surroundings are assured. The number of chairs and couches
or beds required necessarily depends upon the size of the establishment.
If it is possible to make such provision an additional large restroom
containing comfortable chairs and lounges is of great advantage to
females who wish to relax during the lunch interval.
( c ) Cloakroom Accommodation. —The provision of a cloakroom is
to be recommended in any establishment employing female labour. The
room should be distinct from any other apartment and sufficiently


.spacious to allow the total number of workers to prepare themselves
for departure simultaneously and comfortably if the knocking off time
for all employees is the same. It should be situated in a position as
convenient as possible to workroom and factory exit.
One peg should suffice each female, unless the occupation requires a
change of clothing, in which case two should be supplied for each
employee.
In factories in w'hich the work involves soiling the clothes, separate
provision should be made for working and outdoor clothing.
Lockers in the cloakroom or messroom are of great advantage, in
that they can be used to accommodate lunches brought from home.
An excellent cloakroom arrangement was seen in a large factory
employing about 300 females. Each worker has a disc on which is
engraved her factory number, this together with her working clothes
is given her in the morning; in return she hands her outdoor garments
and lunch over a counter to two responsible females, who plape them
in the correct bag. At knocking-off time each employee receives her
clothing in exchange for her disc and overalls. She may obtain her
lunch at the midday interval in a similar fashion.
( d ) Dining Boom Accommodation. —A well appointed dining room
is a measure which contributes largely to the well being of employees.
In some establishments the management finds it possible to provide
part of a light lunch free of charge; it does not seem unreasonable to
suggest that lunch might be supplied at cost price in factories of
sufficient size to -warrant well equipped kitchens.
The messroom should be convenient to workrooms, particularly if
the lunch interval is short, or if it is necessary for employees to prepare
their own tea and heat food; the hot water and heating apparatus
should be accessible and easy to handle.
If the number of employees justify the expenditure, a servery in
charge of attendants should be supplied, and tea made and food heated
ready for the lunch interval. Furniture should consist of tables and
chairs in sufficient numbers to make for comfort.
(e) Lavatory Accommodation. —The Factory Acts of Victoria
provide for lavatory accommodation according to the numbers of females
employed (1 to 20), but fail to specify the type, the words “properly
appointed lavatories ” being interpreted in many ways.
The type of lavatory recommended by the Health of Munition
Workers Committee consists of a trough and small hand showers above.
Soap in fluid or powder form should be supplied, and each female
induced to bring her own towel, or separate towels of cloth or paper
provided.
(7) Best Periods and Meal Intervals. —That rest periods and
meal intervals should be so arranged as to minimize the incidence of
industrial fatigue and that factory managers should rotate jobs so that
one female is not engaged for long periods on the same monotonous
task.


When women are employed on eight-hour shifts an interval of
half an hour for a meal may be regarded as normally sufficient,
but where longer hours are worked it is important that they should
be allowed an hour for dinner Indigestion cannot
easily be avoided if a substantial meal is followed by work without
an intervening period of rest. Half an hour, especially in large
factories provides but scant time even for the eating
of a meal. Ten minutes are easily spent in reaching the messroom
and returning to work, certainly another five are occupied in the
washing of hands and the service of dinner. And so but fifteen
remain for the meal Women and girls have
With regard to the importance of providing suitable rest periods
and meal intervals, the Health of Munition Workers Committee
reported as follows :
“ Pauses well distributed and adapted in length to the needs of
women workers are of the highest value in averting breakdown and
in giving an impetus to output.
The Factory Acts permit in textile factories a maximum of
four and a half hours continuous work, in non-textile the limit is
five, but many managers believe that four hours is the longest
period during which a woman can maintain continuous W'ork at
full vigour. Within this period a pause of ten minutes has been
found to give excellent result, and where the spell is continued
for five hours some such pause should certainly be made for a cup
of tea or cocoa. It is particularly valuable in the morning spell
in those numerous cases where breakfast has been hurried or
omitted altogether
frequently dwelt upon their need of a meal time which, for the
principal meal, shall allow opportunity for the comfortable
consumption of their food, and the enjoyment of a short rest
afterwards.”
(8) That whenever possible a medical department in charge of a
trained nurse should be provided.
The importance of the surgery in factories cannot be over-estimated.
A well-equipped surgery in charge of a capable nurse is the means of
saving time, which is frequently wasted by employees attending hospitals
for simple ailments and dressings. The economy of such an arrangement
benefits not only the employee but also the employer.
In addition to her other duties a nurse can assist in organizing
welfare schemes among the employees, and in instigating preventive
measures necessary in certain occupations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
Thanks are due to the many factory managements for making the
survey of their establishments possible, to the Secretary of Labour for
the co-operation of his department, and to the State Public Health
Department for the assistance given in the analysis of specimens
submitted.


TABLE I.
Industries Examined Classified according to Establishments Visited, and
Age and Marital State of Female Employees.
Number
establish-
ments.
Age of Female Employees.
Marital State.
Industries.
Number
females
Juveniles.
visited.
inter-
viewed.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Total.
Adults.
M.
S.
w.
Div.
Living
Apart.
Commonwealth Offices
3
172
2
3
ii
2
5
23
149
164
8
Commonwealth Fac-
tories
2
265
i
5
1
10
8
16
12
53
212
ii
245
9
Rubber Products ..
5
512
2
12
19
36
30
34
42
175
337
33
445
17
3
14
Manufacturing Grocery
8
589
24
46
67
67
62
55
36
357
232
10
565
9
1
4
Jute Bag ..
8
115
4
11
14
10
7
14
4
64
51
5
103
6
1
Confectionery
6
336
3
9
20
18
21
27
30
128
208
21
304
9
2
Boots and Shoes
5
356
22
37
28
29
29
22
25
192
164
17
331
6
2
Printing and Cardbox
10
205
2
13
14
12
9
15
25
90
115
9
191
5
Clothing ..
6
264
3
16
17
30
19
14
22
121
143
10
251
3
Textiles
4
246
13
17
29
25
26
21
9
140
106
33
205
8
Metals
20
292
16
28
38
52
43
32
16
225
67
21
269
2
Tobacco and Cigars
9
150
6
9
15
6
8
5
49
101
8
126
16
Total
79
3,502
90
200
258
307
271
260
231
3,617
1,885
178
3,199
98
6
21
Special Investigation.
Canning Industry ..
5
839
7 '
25
36
38
46
50
36
248
591
320
467
48
2
2


TABLE VI.
Results of Personal Interrogation According to Age.
Total No.
Sitting.
Stand-
ing.
Sitting
or
stand-
ing.
Evidence of
Fatigue.
Cold
Ertrem.
Vari-
cose
Veins.
Respiratory.
Dysmenorrhoea.
Chilblains.
Headaches.
++
+++
+
+ +
+++
+
+ +
+++
+
+ +
+++
+
++
+++
Adults
(399) ..
Juveniles
(416) ..
%
48.5
45.7
0/
/o
19.1
16.4
Of
/o
32.1
37.9
o/
/o
9.5
2.1
%
2.0
0.2
o/
/o
46.6
48.3
%
4.0
0.7
0/
/o
70.9
29.6
o/
/o
3.8
2.6
0/
/o
3.5
1.0
o/
/o
24.1
18.0
0/
/o
7.3
5.5
0/
/o
2.5
3.1
o/
/o
15.3
22.6
O/
/o
6.8
3.8
%
2.8
1.4
%
25.6
23.3
o/
/o
3.8
5.1
0/
/o
9.5
5.8
g*
The Relative
o
TABLE VII.
Proportion of Juveniles and Adults Employed in the Various Industries.
—
Common-
wealth
Offices.
Common-
wealth
Factories.
Rubber.
Manuf.
Grocer.
Jute.
Confect.
Boot.
Printing
and
cardbox.
Clothing.
Textiles.
Metal.
Tobacco.
Total
Average.
Juveniles
Adults
%
13.4
86.6
0/
/o
20.0
80.0
Of
/o
34.2
65.8
<V
/o
60.4
9.6
o/
/o
53.0
47.0
0/
/o
38.1
61.9
0/
/o
54.0
46.0
%
43.9
56.1
0/
/o
45,8
54.2
%
57.3
42 .'7
o/
/o
77.0
23.0
o/
/o
32.7
67.3
o/
/o
46.2
53.8


(Except whore otherwise stated results expressed in percentages.'
Industry,
Total
No. of
Em-
ployees.
Motlu
d of l»a>
meat.
Marital State.
Working Posture.
Length of Service.
Evidence of Fatigue.
Circulatory
System.
Respiratory A if actions.
Appetite.
Breakfast.
Consti-
pation.
Carious
Teeth.
Dysinonorrhooa.
Chilblains.
Headaches.
Weight.
Time Taken in
Transit, to Work.
1
Exercise.
No. of Evenings per
Week Spent away
from. Home.
Home Conditions.
Depen-
dants.
Anaemic
Appear-
ance.
Piece-
Work,
Time-
Work.
Timo-
and
Piece-
Work.
Tusk.
Bonus.
Mar-
ried.
Single.
Widow.
Sitting
Stand-
ing.
Sitting
and
Stand-
ing.
Average.
No.
Report-
ing.
+ 4
+ 4 +
Cold
extrem
ities.
Vari-
cose
Veins.
4
-1-
-1- -I- -1-
Good.
Fair.
Bad.
—
4
+ 4
444
4
4 4
4 4 4
4
*4" “f -
4 4 4
4
-1- -1-
4 H- -1-
Average.
No.
reporting.
Average.
No.
reporting.
4
4 4
4 4 4
Average.
Number
reporting.
Good.
Fair.
Bad.
Commonwealth Offices
172
100
—
34,0
—
95.4
4.6
63.9
9.9
26.2
yra.
7
Mths.
6
169
Not inv<
estigated
32.6
2.3
29.6
7,6
81.6
16.7
1.7
1
Jot invc
stigate
d
16.3
5.3
22.4
5.8
30.2
5.3
st. lb.
8 12
114
rains.
35
115
19.4
52.7
investig
27.9
ated
Not inv(
istigated
80.3
17.9
1.8
2.9
Commonwealth -Factories
206
18.1
47.9
4.1
92.5
3.4
72.8
4.9
22.3
8 3
258
Not invr
rstigated
47.2
4.1
37.7
7.2
75.7
23.1
1.2
Not investigated
17.7
13.6
4.9
4.5
2.3
30.2
4.9
8 9
260
30
92
Not
Not investigated
Not
investig
ated
1.9
Rubber Products ..
512
«•
02.8
37.2
9.8
86.9
3.3
19.6
44.9
35.5
3 7
466
23.4
3.5
20.9
4.9
22.5
2.5
75.5
22,7
1.8
Not investigated
13.5
18.2
2.7
13.7
4.1
41.0
5.9
8 9
442
25
470
54.9
34.5
10.6
Not investigated
80.2
17.4
2.4
1.8
Manufacturing Grocery
58!)
32.4
55.6
5.3
0.8
2.6
95.9
1.5
14.1
31.4
54.5
3
5
580
4.9
0.3
20.0
2.7
53.7
2.4
1.3
83.9
13.1
3.0
Not investigated
6.1
23.4
16.6
5.1
2.9
16.1
5.4
2.0
25.6
4.8
5.8
8 2
541
21
574
49.7
41.0
9.3
Not investigated
79.5
20.0
0.6
27.0
0.7
Jute Bag .,
116
20.1
73.0
5.2
89.6
5.2
47.8
23.5
28.7
4
1
114
9.0
1.7
48.7
3.5
50.4
1.7
3.5
89.2
9.0
1.8
Not investigated
8.7
30.4
15.7
10.4
5.2
15.7
7.8
2.0
36.6
5.2
9.6
8 12
101
23
112
55.7
31.2
13.1
Not investigated
65.3
32.4
2.3
’28.5
1.7
Confectionery
330
42.3
47.0
10.1
6.8
90.5
2.7
49.4
20.5
30.1
2
7
299
0.8
1.6
41.1
3.0
41.4
3.0
1.5
81.7
17,1
1.2
15.6
32.0
19.2
33.2
9.8
25.6
19.3
6.9
6.1
13.4
3.0
2.4
29.2
6.3
8.6
8 11
293
25
3.18
54.8
35.1
10.1
2,3
234
65.0
33.8
1.2
33.8
1.2
Boots and Shoos
350
100
5.3
92.9
1.8
87.9
5.3
6.8
4 3
347
1.4
0.3
66.0
0.8
34.0
3.4
2.2
87.1
12.3
0.6
5.9
31.8
33.5
28.8
15.4
14.0
21.3
2.5
2.0
21.1
9.9
2.8
22,8
6.3
6.2
8 4
309
22
350
51.4
:83.9
14.7
2.7
354
60,0
33.7
0.3
31.2
2.2
Cardbox and Printing
205
23.4
7 0 . 0
4.4
93.2
2.4
24.9
14.1
61,0
3
7
198
3.0
50.0
32.2
3.4
1.9
Not i
nvestig!
vted
1
Jotinv(
;stigatec
13.7
11.2
4k . 4:
26.8
10.7
3.9
33.7
7.3
4.9
Not
investigat
ed
0.9
Clothing ..
264
100
..
3.8
95,1
1.1
80.3
3.8
15.9
5 9
241
1.1
0.4
57.9
1.1
36.3
2.3
0.7
Noti nvestigated
Not investigated
18.1
10.2
2.3
31.4 '
9.0
5.2
35.9
7.0
6.8
Not investigated
••
••
4.2
Textiles ..
240
37.4
02.0
13.4
83.3
3.3
3.3
52.8
43.9
3
6
244
4.5
1.6
60.0
2.0
28.9
,1.0
2.0
Not investigated
Not investigated
19.1
6.7
2.0
17.9
2.4
4.1
24.8
4.1
6.1
Not investigated
Not iuve
stigated
1.7
Metals
202
3.1
04.8
2.1
7.2
92.1
0.7
29.1
40.8
30.1
2
0
284
6.5
0.3
50.0
0.7
43.2
5.1
3.4
Not investigated
Not investigated
27.4
12.3
2.4
25.0
4.8
4.5
25.7
4,8
4.8
Not investigated
1.0
Tobacco and Cigars
160
68.0
42.0
••
5.3
84.0
10.7
90.7
0.6
8.7
6
5
146
3.3
2.7
36.0
2.7
20.7
4.7
4.0
Not investigated
Not investigated
22.7
8.0
3.3
18.7
2.7
28.7
6.3
10.0
Not investigated
..
2.0
Total or Average
3,502
18.0
70.0
0.0
3.5
6.7
5.9
91.3
3.8
43.2
24.2
32.6
4 3
3,348 I
7.9
41.9
2.5
50.8
4.7
2.0
81.9
16.8
1.3
10.2
30.9
27.0
31.9
11.6
22.1
19.7
7.3
3.1
19.9
0,3
3.1
28.0
6.3
0.6
st. lb.
8 8
2,060
mins.
24
2,031
49.2
37.9
12.9
2.5
588
74.1
24.7
2.2
29.3
1.7
TABLE V.
The Results op Personal Interrogation op Employees According to Tndusthibs.
64.-3


APPENDIX I.
Commonwealth Department of Health.
WOMEN IN INDUSTRY SURVEY FORM.
Name of Establishment.
Industry
Work-room or Department.
{Married
Widowed with dependants.
Single (over 18)
Single (under 18)
WORK.
(1) Description and nature of process
(ii) Skill called for
(iii) Posture of operative.
METHOD OF PAYMENT,
(i) Rate (a) time.
„ (6) piece.
„ ( a ) task.
(ii) Incentive (bonus, &c.).
HOURS.
Period of employment, meal intervals and pauses (quote
force)
Award if any in
Shifts: Length daily and number of days per week.
Method of change Over.
Frequency of Change Over.
Overtime: State total hours worked daily and intervals.
Overtime: State total hours worked for Sunday (if any)


FACTORY ENVIRONMENT. (Investigator’s own investigations.)
(i) General statement (good, fair, or bad)
to each
(ii) Work-room, position, approximate size, nearness of workers
other and whether facing across bench, &c
(iii) Ventilation, adequate or inadequate,
(o) System relied on
(i>) Under whose control
(iv) Temperature (in degrees Fahrenheit)
Means of heating
(v) Cleanliness and method of cleaning—
(a) Floor
(6) Walls
(vi) Lighting —
(o) General —Natural —Artificial
(h) Centred on work
natural.
(vii) Noise (classed as little, medium, considerable, tested by whether
loud or shouting voice is required)
Vibration
(viii) Floor
(ix) Special influences —
(а) Dust
(б) Fumes
(c) Exposure to special source of heat.
(d) Weight lifting
( e) Other
(x) (1) Sanitary accommodation.
(2) Washing accommodation.
(3) Cloak-room accommodation
(4) Seats
(5) Foot Rests


(xi) Meals (describe system in practice and state own opinion as good,
fair, bad)
Mess-room (size, cleanliness, ventilation, warming equipment, e.g.,
tables, seats, service—method, result)
(xii) Surgery
Rest-room
Welfare Worker, or Nurse.
(xiii) Sickness and absenteeism.
(xiv) Labour turnover.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
Signed.
By Authority: H. J. Green, Government Printer, Canberra.


LIST OF
SERVICE PUBLICATIONS
ISSUED BY
THE DIVISION OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(The year of publication is given in parentheses.)
Departmental Series No. 20 - The Scope of Industrial Hygiene (1922)
No. 22 - An Index to Health Hazards in Industry (1922)
No. 23 - Reliable Records in Industrial Ambulance Rooms
No. 26 - Hygienic Aspects of Factories and Shops Acts (1923)
Divisional Series No. 1 - An Inquiry into the Morbidity Statistics of the
Victorian State School Teachers (1924)
No. 2 - Industrial Accident Prevention (1924)
No. 3 - An Inquiry into the Morbidity and Mortality
Statistics of the Employees of the New South Wales
Government Railways and Tramways, and of the
Victorian Government Railways (1926)
No. 4 - An Investigation of Certain Health Aspects in
Persons engaged in Wood-Working Industries (1927)
No. 5 - Report on an Investigation of the Pulmonary
Conditions of Mine Employees, Western Australia
(1928)
No. 6 - Dermatitis in the Australian Rubber Industry (1928)
No. 7 - An Investigation into the Health of Employees in
Gas-Making Plants (1928)
No. 8 - Report on an Investigation into the Health and
Working Conditions of Employees in the Mining
Industry of Victoria and Tasmania (1929)
No. 9 - A Survey of Women in Industry, Victoria (1929)
