

Ftdj/6
fl Survey of Christendom:
Its Advance against Other Religions,'
The Strife between different Sections of the Christian
Commonwealth, and
The Revolt against Christianity from within.
.A. TST ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
On Monday, October 19, 1896, by
JAMES JEFFERIS, LL.D.,
Chairman for 1896-7.
PRINTED BY VARDON AND PRITCHARD, GRESHAM-STREET.
1896.




A Survey of Christendom:
Its Advance against Other Religions,
The Strife between different Sections of the Christian
Commonwealth, and
The Revolt against Christianity from within.
_A.ISr ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
On Monday, October 19, 1896, by
JAMES JEFFERIS, LL.D.,"
Chairman for 1896-7,
PRINTED BY VARDON AND PRITCHARD, ORESHAM-STREET,
1896.




A Survey of Christendom
My Dear Brethren —You have honored me for the third
time by placing me in this chair. A whole generation has passed
since you first appointed me. Not many of your suffrages, indeed,
were recorded then. But the corporate life of our confederation
of churches is not dependent upon individuals. Others have
risen to take the place of those who have passed away. In spite
of changes, defections, deaths, we present the same unbroken
front. The gaps in our ranks have been filled up, and we are as
ready now, I trust, as we were then to do the bidding of our
Lord.
This third of a century has witnessed many remarkable move-
ments in Christian thought and life. We do not stand to-day
where we stood three-and-thirty years ago. We are freer from
the domination of great names and great systems of theology.
The Churches generally have come to see that the Gospel is
larger than any creed and that no aggregation of disciples—
council, synod, assembly—can take the place of the Master.
There has been no time since the Reformation, perhaps none since
the days of the Apostles, in which Christians have been more
eager to see Christ face to face and to hear from His own lips
the teachings of life. Tradition still has its claims. The great
creeds are still regarded as expressing common beliefs. But it is
felt that only the Word of Christ can end our controversies, and
only the Spirit of Christ can determine our duties.
It is customary for your Chairman to address you on some
topic of interest and importance. It would not be difficult to fix
on several. The reunion of divided Christendom, the new learning
as it affects the Biblical history, the revival of the hierarchical
principle in Great Britain, the teaching of Christ on the
creation and distribution of wealth—any one of these would
command your attention. For you, too, like the rest of the
servants of the Master, are eager to contribute your part towards
the solution of problems that are pressing heavily on the
Christian mind and heart. I shall not ask you to consider
specifically either of these. I have set myself a different task,
easier perhaps, though it looks more difficult. We are governed
w /of
Z 7-5-77


by our moods. And my mood, during the past few weeks, has
led me to
A General Survey of Christendom.
I have been asking myself, what are our fortunes, what our
hopes, and what the omens of our future ? I think of the forces
of Christianity as drawn out in battle array, as actually engaged
in the war from which there is no discharge, and I think of our-
selves as upon some commanding height overlooking the field,
gazing as spectators upon the conflicts being waged below. With-
out pressing the metaphor unduly, let me ask your attention to
the following points, which at all events are worthy of our
thoughtful consideration;—l. The advance of Christianity
against other religions. 2. The strife between different sections
of the Christian commonwealth. 3. The revolt against Chris-
tianity within the borders of Christendom.
First—
The Advance of Christianity Against Other Religions.
For nearly 20 centuries Christianity has been in conflict with
Paganism in all its varied forms. In its early strength it stood
confronted with Roman and Grecian idolatries, and the subtle
and debasing forms of religion which prevailed in Western Asia,
and the valley of the Kile. All these succumbed to its daring
onset. Jupiter of the Capitol was vanquished ; Zeus of Olympus
was dethroned ; Diana and Astarte were driven into the far
East; Isis and Isiris were buried beneath the ruins of temple
and pyramid. Passing westwards to the homes of savage
freedom, it conquered the deities of Gaul and Germany, Britain
and Scandinavia, making Europe its chosen seat, and gradually
excluding heathenism from the countries between the Mediter-
ranean and the northern seas.
But the Christian history is not a record of unbroken victory.
There has been defeat as well as triumph, retreat as well as
advance. The land trodden by the feet of Christ is under the
dominion of the false prophet. The seven churches of Asia are
no more. Of 700 bishoprics in North Africa not one survives.
On the uplands of Persia and among the blood-stained swamps
of India Christianity sickened and died. The great church of
St. Sophia, of Constantinople, is a Moslem Mosque.
But I will not measure the advance of the Gospel by a geograph-
ical standard, nor even by its progress among nations and races.
Let us think rather of the great systems of Paganism w r hich
confront us to-day, and ask how far the religion of Christ is


prevailing against them. A distinguished preacher not long ago
advised the ministers of Birmingham not to speak in their
churches about Mohammedanism, Buddhism, or any other ism.
Ido not think it was wise counsel. If we want to win the
world for our Lord we must know something about the enemies
that oppose Him. To me it seems the bounden and imperative
duty of every Christian minister to have an intelligent accquain-
tance with those great Eastern faiths which are,exerting so
powerful an influence on the lives of men. Some five-and-
thirty years ago the Rev. Charles Hardwick, in his capacity as
Christian advocate for the University of Cambridge, gave us a
complete panorama of existing religions. He wrote so favor-
ably or, as we should now say, so justly of “ other masters,” that
some good but timid men were inclined to regard him as “advo-
catus diaboli.” Somewhat the same thing had been said ten
years before of Frederic Denison Maurice for his Boyle lectures
on the “ Religions of the World and Their Relations to Chris-
tianity ” —lectures of singular analytic power. Since those days
Christian people, with some remarkable exceptions, have formed
a much more generous estimate of the great religions which
divide with Christianity the empire of the world. Perhaps the
danger now is that we should regard them as a necessary
outcome of religious evolution, and so look on them as allies
rather than foes. Brahma, Buddha, Mahomet, these are “other
masters,” who, from their graves, still wield the sceptre of a
potent sovereignity over uncounted millions of our race. But
however much of elementary religious truth may be embodied
in the Vedas, the Tripitaka, and the Koran, we, who believe in
Christ as the world’s great Teacher and Saviour, are not in any
doubt as to our attitude towards them. The debasing idolatry of
the Hindoos, the godless, hopeless, fatalism of the Chinese, the
sensual superstition and infernal cruelty of the Turks, compel us
to remember Christ’s words : “ I came not to send peace on the
earth, but a sword.” In loyalty to our leader, in love for our
race, we are doing battle with these great Eastern religions.
But what of the tight ? What successes have been achieved ?
What prospect is there of the victory that will swallow up the
•strife 'I Believing, as we do, that Christianity is destined to
universal empire, we may be humbled and saddened by the
thought that in Anno Domini 1896 we are where we are. If
■Christ be indeed the one Redeemer and Prince, if the faith
enshrined in the New Testament be indeed the true gospel for
men, we may well marvel at the persistence of these antagonistic
-forces. Hinduism, from 3,000 to 4,000 years old, still keeps in
subjection the teeming multitudes of India. Buddhism, between
2,000 and 3,000 years old, maintains the chief sway in China


and Japan, and among the restless hordes of Tartary and
Tibet. Mohammedanism, the youngest of the three, and
counting only 12 centuries of duration, is supreme in Turkey and
Persia and Egypt and North Africa, and in the thousand isles
of the Malayan Archipelago. All these belong to the old world.
On the other hand, Christ is Master of the new world.
Throughout Europe and in America, the new great nations of the
West with whom are the quick-creating energies of the race, the
vigor of its manhood, the promise and potency of its future,
acknowledge Christ as their Sovereign Lord. And away to the
South, but Westward still, beyond the golden gate of the Pacific,
this great Continent of Australia, slowly peopling with the
Anglo-Saxon race, uplifts the standard of the Cross. Who talks
of the decadence of Christianity ? What adventurous missioner
is this who has visited England to convert it to the Mussulman
faith ? What daring Hindu monk is this who in Chicago declared
that the doctrines of the Shasters are better than the doctrines
of the New Testament ? What fatuous mystics are these who in
the very heart of Christendom are looking for divine enlighten-
ment to the Lamas of Tibet ? Is the appeal made to numbers ?
Men of the West have not always counted heads in battle with
the East. Miltiades did not at Marathon, nor Themistocles at
Salamis, nor Alexander at Arbela. Shall soldiers of Christ show
less courage and daring? Christians who are fearful and afraid,
like the followers of Gideon by the well of Harod, may be com-
forted by one who knows well the contending hosts. Sir Monier
Williams (and a higher authority could scarcely be cited) declares
on a general survey of the religions of the world that Christianity
is numerically at the head of all, followed in order by Hinduism,
Buddhism, Mohammedanism. And there are other considerations.
Think of the out-populating power of the Christian stock—of the
United States increasing by 50 millions in a single century, of
the Greater Britain in Canada, South Africa, Australia, New
Zealand, each of which may at the present rate of progress out-
number the mother land in a hundred years. And now look at
the marvellous advance of Christian missions during the past
century, and especially during the past quarter of a century.
Heathenism has been attacked at every point. Hie proclamation
of the gospel has been made in almost every language ; 15,000
copies, whole or in part, of our sacred books are being printed
every day in England and America. "VV e have thousands of
Christian teachers in India. China trembles lest Christ should
prove stronger than Buddh, or Confucius, or Laotze. Japan,,
with its 30 millions, seems inclined to embrace the Western faith.
Madagascar, till France absorbed her, promised to be entirely
Christian. North Africa presents an unbroken line of new


Christian stations from Tangiers to Alexandria, and from the
West and South and East the Dark Continent is being pene-
trated by Christian pioneers. In the South Seas the native
Churches are strong enough to send well-trained teachers to New
Guinea and the Malay Archipelago. Since the early centuries
there has not been such enthusiasm, such devotion, such energy.
You cannot measure the advance of Christianity by the number
of converts actually made, though this might fill us profound
encouragement. Heathenism is mightily moved and influenced.
Each individual missionary represents the advent of the ideas
and moral force of the Christian world. Eastern thought,
Eastern life, so long torpid and unprogressive, are being
quickened by the truth, the righteousness, the love, which form
the motive power of the Gospel. A great expansion of truth
may speedily be looked for. The forces of Christ are gathering
in strength, and the powers of darkness are quailing. The ad-
vance of Christianity is accelerating every year. But there are
other and sadder thoughts. Look with me.
Second—
The Strife Between Different Sections of the Christian
Commonwealth.
We speak of Christendom as if it were one, and of its advance
as though it were the result of mutual and united action. Alas
we know too well that it is divided into hostile camps. Let us
think of it as upon the whole, united both in spirit and polity,
till the beginning of the fifth century, when the Roman Church
became dominant in the West. Somewhat later the Greek
Church under the patriarch of Constantinople assumed an inde-
pendent existence. For a thousand years the Popes ruled with
despotic authority over the greater part of Europe, and then as
the result of a prolonged struggle for freedom the Protestant
Churches came into being. Now for nearly 500 years Christen-
dom has been separated into three irreconcileable factions. The
Greek Church, metaphysical, dogmatical, conservative, has
maintained her place, with little of the sacred rage of proselytis-
ing, anxious only to expel all heretics from her borders. The
chief stress of conflict has been between the ecclesiastical despo-
tism enthroned at the Vatican, and the free Christian spirit
which prevails in Germany, England, and the Greater Britain,
including the United States. Save in the countries beyond the
seas that wash the shores of Europe, Protestantism has scarcely
enlarged its boundaries since the times of Luther. But the New
England in the United States, and Canada, and Australia, and
South Africa may be said to be in complete antagonism to the


Papal power. Popes still issue their Bulls, aud Roman Arch-
bishops even in Australia promulgate the mandates of the
Vatican, but the youth and strength of the great nations are
against them. The Reformation was a revolution. The human
mind, emancipating itself from thraldom, waged and is waging a
ceaseless war against the hierarchy.
The issue cannot be doubtful. Cardinal Moran, of Sydney,
talks and writes in the grand old style, as though he were a
prince of the Church under Gregory VII., but he knows that
though we listen we laugh. And yet it may be that the Papacy,
appealing as it does to mysterious yearnings, subtle passions, and
•craven fears in our complex nature, will long hold its influence
among men. Rome bates none of her old demands. She treats
those of the English clergy who seek for reunion with her with
an insolence which ought to bring them to the better mind.
•“ What are you,” asks the Pope in a recent Encyclical, “ if you
will not obey me, but a lawless and disorderly crowd ?” And yet
in spite of this immeasurable contempt for Anglican orders, the
fascination to many of the clergy seems irresistible. Freedom,
reason, faith are alike forgotten. The glamour of this “ heir of
the purple robed Cjesar” is irresistible.
And it is perhaps in these ecclesiastical ambitions that just
now one of the chief dangers to Christendom lies, at least within
the British Empire. The spirit of the hierarchy has risen once
more in the Anglican Church. If on the one side there has been
a shameful subserviency to Rome, on the other there is haughti-
ness and pride towards their fellow-members of the reformed
■communions. The strife between ritualist and evangelical in the
Anglican Church itself has reached a stage in which the ameni-
ties of honorable warfare are set aside, while that between the
ritualist and every other section of English Christianity is marked
by intolerance and scorn. Christ is wounded in the house of His
friends. The higher qualities of the Christian life are lost in the
wrangling of brothers. At the Birmingham Church Congress
held during my late residence in England the Bishop of Worcester
was hissed and hooLed and stigmatised as traitor because he said
he was prepared to recognise other corporate Christian bodies as
within the federated commonwealth of Christendom. To this
pass we are come at the close of the nineteenth century, that in
the most democratic city in the Empire, in a congress of Chris-
tians, the very idea of reunion with other Churches except Rome
was denounced as treason, and the President of the Council, a
prelate of honorable standing, was insulted as an enemy of the
■Catholic faith because he favored it. We have no quarrel with
this section of a sect because it believes in what Ruskin calls
■“ dramatic Christianity.” Let those who prefer to appeal to the


soul through the senses be allowed to try their own method. The
senses and the soul are both from God. But if these same
Christians by their shibboleth of doctrine, by their claim to
exclusive and supernatural gifts, by their denial to other Churches
of the right to exist, by their intolerant condemnation of
■ministers, who are as pious and learned as theirs—if they thus
divide the body of Christ, and rend asunder the household of
faith, they stand convicted by their own act and deed. They are
the dissenters. They are the separatists. They cut themselves
off from communion with the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church
—a Church founded not on human creeds and dogmas, not on
the figment of apostolic descent, but on the divine word and the
living Christ. Reordination ? It is the High Church clergy
that need to be reordained, not by the hands of their brethren
whom they have forsaken, but by the hands of Christ, whose
spirit they have grieved.
What is to be the issue of it all ? I confess to painful forebod-
ings. The drift of English Christianity is towards sacerdotalism
These clerical assumptions are permitted and yielded to. Evan-
gelicals in and out of the Episcopal Church are branded as
socially inferior. Opportunities of advancement in the higher
education of the country are increasingly lessened for those who
differ. The party of exclusion has entered upon a crusade to
recover for clerical and sectarian uses the public schools of the
country.
The Hag of denominationalism has again been carried to the
front. But the jubilant prophecies of Lord Salisbury and the
Balaam-like blessing of Mr. Chamberlain have happily been
followed by a serious reverse. The new Education Bill was
found to be acceptable neither to Parliament nor the country.
After a few skirmishes which betrayed their weakness the Go-
vernment withdrew the Bill. They were saved from serious
disaster by undignified retreat. The truth is that the British
people have outgrown ecclesiastical control in secular education.
Let the shoemaker stick to his last. The English Government
was not as wise in its generation as the Government of South
Australia. Here, too, there are sectional Christians, seeking for
State aid to religious schools. And it looked very much as if the
Ministry were inclined to favor it. But instead of testing the
matter in Parliament, where defeat would have been dangerous,
they resolved to gauge public opinion by the referendum. You
know the result. By a majority of more than 3 to 1, in some
electorates by a majority of nearly 10 to 1, the people of South
Australia refused to imperil or destroy our national system. The
attempted revival of denominationalism by a capitation grant
was indignantly rejected. It is a matter of common observation


that the colonies often express the gathering convictions of the
Empire. Here the denominational principle is as dead as Queen
Anne. The inference may be safely made that it is dying in
Great Britain.
But meanwhile great evil is being wrought by these unseemly
contentions. The Christian Church, which ought to be the chief
means of welding together differing parties, has become the in-
strument for cleaving English society into antagonistic sections.
If this continues the need will be felt in the motherland of calling
in the new world to redress the balance of the old. The new
England beyond the seas will become more and more the chosen
home of those who look for the upholding of Christ’s true Church.
For myself, let me say that my recent four years’ acquaintance
with the Christianity of England revived within me the spirit of
the Pilgrim Fathers. I resented the intolerance which deprived
me of ray Christian national birthright. I declined to submit to
degrading subservience. Thank God there is a Greater Britain
in which clericalism is not a dominant factor—a Britain in which
there are many churches, an equal citizenship, and social
courtesies which are the efflux of the Christian spirit. And we
in Australia may rejoice that all the chief sees of the Episcopal
Church are filled by men of large and liberal thought. Ihe Bishop
of Sydney has recently shown by his address in Synod, and his
speeches on the platform of the London Missionary Society and
the Christian Endeavour Convention, that he deplores the narrow-
ness of spirit which aims at comprehension rather than com-
munion. And the Bishop of Adelaide has not only proved
himself to be a zealous Churchman, but as Catholic a Christian
as he is an accomplished scholar. In other directions the omens
are favorable. The dissident Presbyterian Churches are again
united. The Baptists, ashamed of past separations, have become
one. The Methodists have proclaimed by an overwhelming vote
in the referendum that they are resolved no longer to be divided.
It seems not at all unlikely that the first overt steps towards the
reunion of English Christendom will be taken in the Colonies.
Third-
Revolt Against Christianity Within the Borders of
Christendom.
The strife of which I have been speaking is that of Christians
against one another. But I have now to speak of revolt in
Christendom against Christianity itself. Let Europe and the
new Europe beyond the seas be regarded as Christendom within
its geographical boundaries, viz., all the great nations of the West


together with the colonies they have founded in different parts of
the globe. In this larger Christendom there are 400 millions of
people joined by national and social ties to the Christian faith.
But of these there are many who deliberately reject the Christian
faith, and can no more be included among the followers of Christ
than those of other religions who are naturalised subjects of
Christian nations. The forces thus in rebellion against Christi-
anity are a motley host. Into Europe and America g,s the intel-
lectual centre of the world come all the varied thinkings of the
race. The old mythologies of Greece have their votaries to-day.
Thales and Democritus, Plato and Aristotle, Stoics and Epi-
cureans, Neo-Platonists and Gnostics have followers and inter-
preters. The gigantic systems of the East nave adherents and
expounders. If Mrs. Annie Besant is to be believed, the Chicago
“ Parliament of Religions ” demonstrated the underlying unity
of all the faiths, the identity of religious ideas. She has found
in America an “eager hunger, as of starved souls, for spiritual
teaching,” and “a surprised and hesitant pleasure” that the con-
ceptions put forth by the Easterns proved “ the reality of their
consciousness of the spiritual life.” Indeed, there are not a few
who are looking forward to a period in which Christianity shall
contentedly take its place among the thousand and one systems
of religion. Theosophy is to be the universal faith, and in its
pantheon we are to rear altars to all the leading persons and all
the powerful ideas associated with the religions of the ages.
But without attempting to specify the beliefs or superstitions
of this rebellious host there are several phases of modern unbelief
which claim our attention. Science is sometimes said to be in
revolt against Christianity, but it is not and cannot be. True
science marshals the forces and phenomena of the universe,
showing their nature and their relations. She concerns herself
only with that which comes under our observation and upon
which we are able to form a judgment of our own. She has
nothing whatever to do with the kingdom of the invisible. But
many scientific men are not content with this narrow sphere.
They strive to penetrate into the back ground of mystery; they
invent systems connecting the known with the unknown. Their
science may be right. It is their philosophy that is wrong. As
philosophers it is that they come into conflict with Christianity.
How many there are, e.g., that rally round the standard of
evolution, uttering their war cries, and how many in the
Christian host look upon that standard from afar as the flag of
rebellion. But scientific evolution is in harmony with Biblical
teaching. It is philosophic evolution that denies the Christian
faith. Look at Herbert Spencer’s views. Spencer says that
there is one eternal reality distinguishable in thought and fact


from all else. So does the Bible. Spencer says that this eternal
reality is the origin and cause of all else, the base of all
phenomena] being. So does the Bible. Spencer says that this
one eternal reality has brought the universe into its present state
by continuous and progressive advancement. So does the
Genesis of the Bible. An eternal reality, separable from all else,
absolutely unique, the origin and cause of the universe, working
by progressive stages from the monad up to man. What could
be better 1 What more scientific ? What more in harmony with
the Christian idea ? But Spencer goes beyond this. He affirms
that this eternal reality is eternally related to an eternal
universe, and that it is moreover absolutely inscrutable and
unknowable. Here we part company with him. We Christians
say, taught by revelation, that “in the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth.” We say that “the heavens declare
His glory, and the firmament showeth His handiwork.” We say
that in His word He has revealed to us His divine perfections,
and His purposes of mercy to our race. Spencer’s earlier propo-
sitions constitute scientific evolution, which is Christian. His
later propositions constitute philosophic evolution, which is anti-
Christian. Darwin’s evolution is scientific. If he accepted
Spencer’s philosophic evolution he did not teach it. It forms no
part of his expressed belief. The revolt then with which the
term evolution stands unfairly connected is a revolt against the
central ideas of Christianity. It denies creation as we under-
stand it. The universe is an eternal process, moving on, no
beginning, no ending, eternal force, eternal matter, eternal
weaving and unweaving. It denies the Creator as we understand
Him. Life, personality, faculty, character, it says we cannot
affirm these of God, for He, or it, is shrouded in darkness never
to be pierced. This destroys the basis of all religion. It brings
us perilously near to atheism. It deliberately teaches an agnosti-
cism which is practical atheism, for if you know nothing of God,
how can you worship, how can you pray, unless, indeed, your
prayer is of this sort —“ Oh God, if there be a God, save my
soul, if I have a soul.” I have dwelt too long upon this form of
the revolt against Christianity, but I am addressing brethren
who, like myself, have been much plagued by it. Upon others I
must dwell briefly.
The agnosticism created or fostered by philosophic evolution
has spread far and wide. The press has greatly favored it.
Many of our young men have embraced it. But there are
signs that its influence is upon the wane. Negative belief,
basing itself on ignorance, can never satisfy the requirements of
the human mind. Faith contenting itself with transcendental
emotion can never supply the need of worship in the human soul.


But what shall we say of the band of literati, who, lirst in
Germany and then in England, have been critically investigating
our sacred books. They have been counted among the forces in
revolt. Some of them, no doubt, have formulated axioms and
drawn conclusions contrary to prevailing beliefs. By some, too,
the veracity as well as the inerrancy of Scripture has been im-
peached. And none of them have produced a satisfactory theory
of inspiration in place of those which have been atta<sked. But
the majority of these critics (in Britain at least) are among the
most earnest friends of Christianity, and they accept the great
underlying verities of the Christian faith; Let no attempt be
made to intercept the progress of enquiry. In Christ are hid all
the treasures of knowlege. Learning is the handmaid of faith.
To my mind the most ominous revolt against Christianity is that
of the wage-workers. Think of the artisans and laborers in
Vienna, Berlin, Paris, London, Chicago, New York, and even,
though in a lesser degree, in Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide,
Brisbane. Think of the apathy, the impiety, the dreary, the
hopeless irreligion which pervade large masses in these great
cities. Think of the avowed antagonism of the socialistic party,
the bold defiant atheism of the anarchists. The alienation of the
working classes in Christendom itself is upon so vast a scale that
we may well modify our rejoicing at the success of the gospel
elsewhere. The gage of battle has been thrown down to the
church. “ For 17 centuries,” say these workers, “Christianity
has held European civilisation in the hollow of its hand, with
the result that we are where we are to-day.” The contention is
that religion has been on the side of the wealthy, at all events in
the sense in which Providence lias been on the side of the big
battalions, that Christian capitalists have dictated their own
terms to labor, with the result, taking the whole world of Christ-
endom, that the rich are growing richer and the poor poorer, and
that, in fact, the workers are to a large extent plunged in
poverty, or deeper still in pauperism. And the workers do not
stand alone in their contention. Many thoughtful men are saying
with Bomney Leigh—
And rich men make the poor, who curse the rich,
Who agonise together, rich and poor,
Under and over, in the social spasm
And crisis of the ages.
War, it is, in fact, with entrenched camps in all our cities, with
armies drawn out in battle array, and strife bitter and deadly.
That Christianity is not chargeable with this diablerie is clear to
all honest thinkers. But the fact remains that a large proportion
of the workers are in revolt against it, and that the fratricidal
strife promises to be severe and prolonged. We have had wars


between capital and labor before this, but we have never, T
think, had labor in such wide-spread opposition to Christianity.
Indeed, the history of Britain amply proves that the enfranchise-
ment of labor is due to the Christian spirit. It conquered slavery.
It put an end to serfdom. The peasants’ revolt under Wycliff
was a religious i’evolution. John Ball and William Longland
appealed to religion against dogma, to heaven against the in-
justice of earth. During the Commonwealth the Puritans up-
lifted the laboring classes of England for a short twenty years to
a higher position than ever before or ever since. As the historian
Green told us, “ The meanest peasant felt himself ennobled as a
child of God. The proudest noble recognised a spiritual equality
in the poorest saint.” But it has been during the past 150 years
that the influence of Christianity has been most powerfully felt.
Benjamin Kidd in his masterly book on social evolution has
shown how the teachings and example of Christ have provided
the real motive force behind the onward movements of our age,
giving birth to the multitude of humanitarian undertakings which
so pre eminently characterise it. Mr. Stead has lately declared
that after a careful examination into the philanthropic work being
done in England for the benefit of the laboring classes, he has
been astonished to find that more than 90 per cent, is the result
of organised Christian effort. We may add that much of the
remainder is due to the influence of the Christian spirit which
powerfully affects even those who stand aloof from Christianity.
And this fact ought to be borne in mind by the Labor Party,
that their most honorable victories have been won under the
leadership of champions who have come from the property-hold-
ing classes against whom its chief efforts have been directed.
Grant Allen says “ most ©f the best Radicals I have known were
men of gentle birth and breeding.” We can go further than this
and say that these leaders have nearly all been Christian men,
acting at the behest of Christian principle. The signal uplifting
of the many in our own Empire, the recognition of common
rights, the relief from intolerable burdens, the widening of
suffrage, the increase of wage, have been gained chiefly through
the social and legislative efforts of pronounced disciples of Christ.
Wilberforce and Clarkson, and Sir Thomas Powell Buxton for
the liberty of the slave, Howard and Elizabeth Fry for the relief
of prisoners, the Earl of Shaftesbury for the rescue of women from
mines and little children from factories, Samuel Plimsoll for the
deliverence of seamen from shameful conditions and unnecessary
labors, General Booth and Dr. Barnardo for saving gutter
children and submerged adults, Bright and Gladstone for helping
on every measure of legislative reform which equalised oppor-
tunity and secured justice for the sons and daughters of Britain—


what names in the golden book of England’s chivalry shine with
a brighter lustre than these ? And they are all men of God.
They learnt their lessons of the brotherhood of humanity, not in
the schools of Lassalle or Karl Marx, but while sitting at the
feet of Jesus of Nazareth. The cause of the worker is bound up
with the kingship of Christ, with the socialism of His gospel.
May we not hope, may we not believe that this modern revolt is
but a passing phase of the national life. Possibly, 'probably, it
is directed more against clericalism than Christianity.
Our survey has been partial and hurried. But what of the
outlook ? What are the omens of the future? What prospect is
there of the reunion of Christendom and the triumph of Chris-
tianity? If you ask me, as men of old asked the sentry on Dumah,
“ Watchman, what of the night ?” I shall reply as he did—“ The
morning cometh, and also the night.” Darkness and the dawn,
that is the Divine order. The evening and the morning make
the perfect day of God. If on many hearts and in many lands
night still broods, the day will come with morning flush and
meridian glory.
The world’s old ;
But the old world waits the hour to be renewed ;
Toward which, new hearts in individual growth
Must quicken, and increase to multitude
In new dynasties of the race of men—
Developed whence, shall grow spontaneously
New churches, new economies, new laws
Admitting freedom, new societies
Excluding falsehood. He shall make all new.
Vardon & Pritchard, Printers, Gresham-street, Adelaide.






