





'jOU.
VC
' U >
s^rr^rroWi^”'
jrf>r‘C ...
_3 <s b 5 V _


I %lfs


n
A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
AR distant from the many other
islands with which the Southern Pa-
cific Ocean is studded, one stands alone,
rich in natural beauty, and with a
climate almost unrivalled. Constantly
fanned hy cool breezes from the sea,
its green hills and deep ravines abound
in graceful pines and shady fern-trees.
The wild jasmine and convolvuli climb
the stems, and reach from tree to tree,
forming bowers and walls of exquisite
beauty. The rich soil maintains a per-
petually luxuriant vegetation, and birds
of brightest plumage rejoice in groves
of the abundant guava, or amid the
delicate blossoms of .the golden lemon.
This lovely island was visited by Captain Cook in 17/4, and
named by him Norfolk Island 5 it was then uninhabited, and the
party who landed were probably the first human beings who had
ever set foot on it. Neither the vegetable nor the animal world
had been disturbed. For about two hundred yards from the
shore, the ground was covered so thickly with shrubs and plants
as scarcely to be penetrable farther inland. The sea-fowl bred
unmolested on the shores and cliffs. The account given by Cook
led to an attempt at settlement on Norfolk Island; but this was
attended with difficulty. The island is small, being only about
six miles in length by four in breadth; and was therefore un-
available for a large or increasing population Lying nine
hundred miles from Port Jackson, in Australia, it was incon-
veniently remote from that country; and, worst of all, its cliffy
and rocky shores presented serious dangers to mariners attempt-
ing a landing. There are, indeed, only three places at which
boats can effect a safe landing, and at these only with certain
winds, and never in gales, which are frequent in this part of
the globe. Its general unsuitableness, however, for ordinary
colonisation was considered to adapt it as a penal settlement,
subordinate to New South Wales, and to which convicts could
be sent who merited fresh punishment while in course of servi-
tude. Thus one of the loveliest of earthly paradises was doomed
to be a receptacle for the very worst —or shall we call them the
most unfortunate and most wretched—of malefactors. It might
be imagined that the beauty of Norfolk Island, and the fineness
of its climate, would greatly tend to soothe the depraved minds
of its unhappy tenants, and reconcile them, if anything could,
to compulsory expatriation. That such effects may be produced
by considerate treatment is not improbable; but hitherto, or at
least till a late period, one sentiment has overruled all others in
the minds of the Norfolk Island convicts, and that has been a


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND,.
desire for restoration to liberty. Impatient of control, and re-
gardless of all consequences, they eagerly seize upon every oppor-
tunity of making their escape—with what fatal consequences let
the following narrative bear witness. Written by a gentleman
for some time resident in Norfolk Island, and handed to us for
publication, as a warning to “ those who go astray,” the whole
may be relied upon as a true relation of facts.
“ On the northern side of Norfolk Island the cliffs rise high,
and are crowned by woods, in which the elegant whitewood and
gigantic pine predominate. A slight indentation of the land
affords a somewhat sheltered anchorage ground, and an opening
in the cliffs has supplied a way to the beach by a winding road at
the foot of the dividing hills. A stream of water, collected from
many ravines, finds its way by a similar opening to a ledge of
rock in the neighbourhood, and, falling over in feathery spray,
has given the name of Cascade to this part of the island. Off
this bay, on the morning of the 21st of June 1842, the brig
Governor Philip was sailing, having brought stores for the use
of the penal establishment. It was one of those bright mornings
which this hemisphere alone knows, when the air is so elastic
that its buoyancy is irresistibly communicated to the spirits. At
the foot of the cliff, near a group of huge fragments of rock
fallen from the overhanging cliffs, a prisoner was sitting close to
the sea preparing food for his companions, who had gone off to
the brig the previous evening with ballast, and who were expected
to return at daylight with a load of stores. The surface of the sea
■was smooth, and the brig slowly moved on upon its soft blue
waters. Everything was calm and still, when suddenly a sharp
but distant sound as of a gun was heard. The man, who was
stooping over the fire, started on his feet, and looked above and
around him, unable to distinguish the quarter from whence the
report came. Almost immediately he heard the sound repeated,
and then distinctly perceived smoke curling from the vessel’s
side. His fears were at once excited. Again he listened; but all
was hushed, and the brig still stood steadily in towards the shore.
Nearer and nearer she approached; until, alarmed for her safety,
the man ran to summon the nearest officer. By the time they
returned, the vessel had wore, and was standing off from the land;
but while they remained in anxious speculation as to the cause of
ail this, the firing was renewed on board, and it was evident that
some deadly fray was going on. At length a boat was seen to
put off from the brig, and upon its reaching the shore, the worst
fears of the party were realised. The misguided prisoners on
board had attempted to seize the vessel. They were but twelve
in number, unarmed, and guarded by twelve soldiers and a crew
of eighteen men; yet they had succeeded in gaining possession
of the vessel, had held it for a time, but had been finally over-
powered, and immediate help was required for the wounded and
dying.
2


Hjt-eos/ hzy
A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
June 21, 1842.—My duty as a clergyman called me to the
scene of blood. When I arrived on the deck of the brig, it
exhibited a frightful spectacle. One man, whose head was
blown to atoms, was lying near the forecastle. Close by his
side a body was stretched, the face of which was covered by a
cloth, as if a sight too ghastly to be looked upon; for the upper
half of the head had been blown off. Not far from these, a man
badly wounded was lying on the deck, with others securely
handcuffed. Forward, by the companion-hatch, one of the muti-
neers was placed, bleeding most profusely from a wound which
had shattered his thigh; yet his look was more dreadful than all
—hate, passion, and disappointed rage rioted in his breast, and
were deeply marked in his countenance. I turned away from
the wretched man, and my eye shrunk from the sight which
again met it. Lying on his back in a pool of blood, the mus-
cular frame of a man whom I well knew was stretched, horribly
mutilated. A ball had entered his mouth, and passing through
his skull, had scattered his brains around. My heart sickened
at the extent of carnage, and I was almost sinking with the
faintness it produced, when I was roused by a groan so full of
anguish and pain, that for a long time afterwards its echo
seemed to reach me. I found that it came from a man lying
farther forward, on whose face the death-dew was standing, yet
I could perceive no wound. Upon questioning him, he moved
his hand from his breast, and I then perceived that a ball had
pierced his chest, and could distinctly hear the air rushing
from his lungs through the orifice it had left. I tore away
the shirt, and endeavoured to hold together the edges of the
wound until it was bandaged. I spoke to him of prayer, but
he soon grew insensible, and within a short time died in frightful
agony. In every part of the vessel evidences of the attempt
which had ended so fatally presented themselves, and the pas-
sions of the combatants were still warm. After attending those
who required immediate assistance, I received the following
account of the affair:—
The prisoners had slept the previous night in a part of the
vessel appropriated for this purpose; but it was without fastening,
or other means of securing them below. Two sentries were,
however, placed over the hatchway. The prisoners occasionally
came on deck during the night, for their launch was towing
astern, and the brig was standing off and on until the morning.
Between six and seven o’clock in the morning the men were
called to work. Two of them were up some time before the
rest. They were struck by the air of negligence which was
evident on deck, and instantly communicated the fact to one
or two others. The possibility of capturing the brig had often
been discussed by the prisoners, among their many other wild
plans for escaping from the island, and recently had been often
proposed by them. The thought was told by their looks, and


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
soon spread from man to man. A few moments were enough;
one or two were roused from sleep, and the intention was hur-
riedly communicated to them. It was variously received. One
of them distrusted the leader, and intreated his companions to
desist from so mad an attempt. It was useless; the frenzied
thirst for liberty had seized them, and they were maddened by
it. Within a few minutes they were all on deck; and one of
the leaders rushing at the sentry nearest to him, endeavoured
to wrest from him his pistols, one of which had flashed in the
pan as he rapidly presented it, and threw him overboard; but
he was subsequently saved. The arms of the other sentry were
demanded, and obtained from him without resistance. A scuffle
now took place with two other soldiers who were also on the
deck, but not on duty, during which one of them jumped over
the vessel’s side, and remained for some time in the main chains;
but upon the launch being brought alongside, he went down into
it. The other endeavoured to swim ashore (for by this time the
vessel was within a gun-shot of the rocks); but, encumbered by
his greatcoat, he was seen, when within a few strokes of the rock,
to raise his hands, and uttering a faint cry to Heaven for mercy,
he instantly sunk. In the meanwhile, the sergeant in charge
of the guard hearing the scuffling overhead, ran upon deck, and
seeing some of the mutineers struggling with the sentry, shot
the nearest of them dead on the spot. He had no sooner done
so than he received a blow on the head, which rendered him for
some time insensible. Little or no resistance was offered by the
sailors; they ran into the forecastle, and the vessel was in the
hands of the mutineers. All the hatches were instantly fastened
down, and every available thing at hand piled upon them. But
now, having secured their opponents, the mutineers were unable
to work the brig; they therefore summoned two of the sailors
from below, and placed one of them at the wheel, while the other
was directed to assist in getting the vessel off. The coxswain, a
free man in charge of the prisoners, had at the first onset taken
to the rigging, and remained in the maintop with one of the
men who refused to join in the attack. At this moment a
soldier who had gone overboard, and endeavoured to reach the
shore, had turned back, and was seen swimming near the vessel.
Woolfe, one of the convicts, immediately jumped into the boat
alongside, and saved him. Whilst this was the state of things
above, the soldiers had forced their way into the captain’s cabin,
and continued to fire through the gratings overhead as often as
any of the mutineers passed. In this manner several of them
received wounds. To prevent a continuance of this, a kettle of
hot water was poured from above, and shortly afterwards a
proposal was made to the captain from the prisoners to leave
the vessel in the launch, provided he handed up to them the
necessary supplies. This he refused, and then all the sailors
were ordered from below into the launch, with the intention of
4


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
sending them ashore. Continuing to watch for the ringleaders,
the captain caught a glimpse of one of them standing aft, and,
as he supposed, out of reach. He mounted the cabin table, and
almost at a venture fired through the woodwork in the direction
he supposed the man to be standing. The shot was fatal; the
ball struck him in the mouth, and passed through his brain.
Terrified at the death of their comrades, the remainder were
panic-struck, and instantly ran below. One of the leaders sprung
over the tafferel, and eventually reached the launch. The sailor
at the wheel, now seeing the deck almost cleared, beckoned up
the captain, and without an effort the vessel was again in their
possession. In the confusion, a soldier who had been in the
boat, and was at this moment with the sailors returning on deck,
was mistaken for one of the mutineers, and shot by the sergeant.
The prisoners were now summoned from their place of conceal-
ment. They begged hard for mercy; and upon condition of
their quietly surrendering, it was promised to them. As the
first of them, in reliance upon this assurance, was gaining the
deck, by some unhappy error he received a ball in his thigh,
and fell back again. The rest refused to stir; but after a tew
moments’ hesitation, another of them ventured up, was taken
aft by the captain, and secured. A third followed, and as he
came up, he extended his arms, and cried, ‘I surrender; spare
me.’ Either this motion was mistaken by the soldiers, or some
of them were unable to restrain their passion, for at this instant
the man’s head was literally blown off. The captain hastened
to the spot and received the others, who were secured without
further injury.
When we reached the vessel, the dying, dead, and wounded
were Iving in every direction. In the launch astern, we saw
the body of one wretched man who had leaped over the tafferel,
and reached the boat badly wounded; he was seen lying in it
when the deck was regained, and was then pierced through with
many balls. Nothing could be more horrible than his appear-
ance; the distortion of every feature, his clenched hands, and
the limbs which had stiffened in the forms of agony into which
pain had twisted them, were appalling. The countenance of
every man on board bore evidence of the nature of the deadly
conflict in which he had been engaged. In some, sullenness had
succeeded to reckless daring, and exultation to alarm in others.
Nothing could have been moi’e desperate than such an attempt
to seize the vessel. The most culpable neglect could alone have
encouraged it; and it is difficult to conceive how it could have
succeeded, if anything like a proper stand had been made by
those in charge of her when it commenced.
The wounded were immediately landed, and conveyed to the
hospital, and the dead bodies were afterwards brought on shore.
The burial-ground is close to the beach. A heavy surf rolls
mournfully over the reef. The moon had just risen, when, iu


A TALE OE NORFOLK ISLAND.
deep and solemn silence, the bodies of these misguided men were
lowered into the graves prepared for them. Away from home
and country, they had found a fearful termination of a miserable
existence. Perhaps ties had still bound them to the world;
friends whom they loved were looking for their return, and,
prodigals though they had been, would have blessed them, and
forgiven their offences. Perhaps even at that sad moment
mothers were praying for their lost ones, whom in all their
infamy they had still fondly loved. Such thoughts filled my
mind; and when a few drops of rain at that moment descended,
I could not help thinking that they fell as tears from heaven
over the guilt and misery of its children.
On the morning following the fatal occurrence, I visited the
jail in which the mutineers were confined. The cells are small,
but clean and light. In the first of them I found George
Beavers, Nicholas Lewis, and Henry Sears. Beavers was
crouching in one corner of the cell, and looking sullen, and in
despair. Lewis, who was walking the scanty space of the cell,
seemed to glory in the rattle of his heavy chains; while Sears
was stretched apparently asleep upon a grass mat. They were
all heavily ironed, and every precaution had evidently been taken
to prevent escape.
The jail is small, and by no means a secure one. It was once
a public-house; and notwithstanding every effort to adapt it to
its present purpose, it is not a safe or proper place of confinement.
It is little calculated to resist any attempt to rescue the men,
whose daring conduct was the subject of high encomium among
their fellow-prisoners, by whom any attempt to escape is con-
sidered a meritorious act. In the other cell I found Woolfe and
Barry, the latter in much agony from an old wound, in the leg,
the pain of which had been aggravated by the heavy irons which
galled it. All the prisoners, except Barry and Woolfe, readily
acknowledged their participation in the attempt to seize the brig;
but most solemnly denied any knowledge of a preconcerted plan
to take her; or that they, at least, had attempted to throw the
soldiers overboard. They were unwilling to be interrupted, and
inveighed in the bitterest manner against some of their com-
panions who had, they seemed to think, betrayed them, or at
least had led them on, and at the moment of danger had flinched.
The names of the surviving mutineers were John Jones,
Nicholas Lewis, Henry Sears, George Beavers, James Woolfe,
Thomas Whelan, and Patrick Barry.
The depositions against them having been taken, all the men
I have mentioned, with the exception of Jones and Whelan, who
were wounded, were brought out to hear them read. They
listened with calm attention, but none of them appeared to be
much excited. Once only during the reading, Beavers passion-
ately denied the statements made by one of the witnesses present,
and was with difficulty silenced. His countenance at that


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
moment was terribly agitated ; every bad feeling seemed to
mingle in its passionate expression. They were all young,
powerful, and, with one or two exceptions, not at all ill-looking
men.
From the jail I proceeded to the hospital, where the wounded
men were lying. They had each received severe wounds in the
thigh, and’were in great agony. The violence of Jones was
excessive. Weakened in some degree by an immense loss of
blood, the bitterness of his spirit, nevertheless, exhibited itself in
passionate bursts of impatience. He was occasionally convulsed
with excessive pain; for the nerves of the thigh had been much
lacerated, and the bone terribly shattered. His features were
distorted with pain and anger, and occasionally bitter curses
broke from his lips; yet there was something about his appear-
ance which powerfully arrested my attention —an evident marking
of intellect and character, repulsive in its present development,
yet in many respects remarkable. His history had been a
melancholy one, and, as illustrative of many thousand others, I
give it as I afterwards received it from his lips.
At eleven years of age he was employed in a warehouse in
Liverpool as an errand-boy. While following this occupation,
from which by good conduct he might have risen to something
better, he was met in the street one day by the lad whom he had
succeeded in this employment, and was told by him how he
might obtain money by robbing the warehouse, and then go
with him to the theatre. He accordingly took an opportunity of
stealing some articles which had been pointed out, and gave
them to his companion, who, in disposing of them, was detected,
and of course criminated Jones. After remaining some weeks in
Jail, Jones was tried and acquitted; but his character being now
gone, he became reckless, and commenced a regular career of
depredation. In attempting another warehouse robbery, he was
detected, and sentenced to twelve months’ imprisonment. By
the time he was released from this, he was well tutored in crime,
and believed that he could now adroitly perform the same
robbery in which he had previously failed. He made the
attempt the very night of his release from jail, and with tem-
porary success. Subsequently, however, he was detected, and
received sentence of transportation for seven years. He under-
went this sentence, and an additional one in Van Diemen’s Land,
chiefly at Port Arthur, the most severe of the penal stations
there. From this place he, with Lewis, Moss (who was shot on
board the brig), and Woolfe, having seized a whale-boat, effected
their escape. During three months they underwent the most
extreme hardships from hunger and exposure. Once they had
been without food for several days, and their last hook was over
the boat’s side; they were anxiously watching for a fish. A
small blue shark took the bait, and in despair one of them dashed
over the boat’s side to seize the fish; his leg was caught by one
7


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
of the others, and they succeeded in saving both man and hook.
They eventually reached Twofold Bay, on the coast of New
South Wales, and were then apprehended, conveyed to Sydney,
and thence sent back to Van Diemen’s Land; tried, and received
sentence of death; but this was subsequently commuted to trans-
portation for life to Norfolk Island.
Jones often described to me the intense misery he had under-
gone during his career. He had never known what freedom
was, and yet incessantly longed for it. All alike confessed the
unhappiness of their career. Having made the first false step
into crime, they acknowledged that their minds became polluted
by the associations they formed during imprisonment. Then
they were further demoralised by thinking of the glory —such
miserable glory!—attending a trial; and the hulks and the
voyage out gave them a finished criminal training. The extent
of punishment many of them have undergone during the period
of transportation is almost incredible. I have known men
whose original sentence of seven years has been extended over
three times that period, and who, in addition to other punish-
ment, have received five thousand or six thousand lashes!
After many solemn interviews with the mutineers, I found
them gradually softening. They became more communicative,
and extremely anxious to receive instruction. I think I shall
never forget one of the earliest of these visits to them. I first
saw Sears, Beavers, and Jones. After a long and interesting
conversation with them, we joined in that touching confession
of sin with which the liturgy of the Chui*ch of England com-
mences. As we knelt together, I heard them repeat with great
earnestness —‘We have erred and strayed from Thy ways like
lost sheep/ &c. When we arose, I perceived that each of them
had been shedding tears. It was the first time I had seen them
betray any such emotion, and I cannot tell how glad I felt; but
when I proceeded afterwards to read to them the tirst chapter of
Isaiah, I had scarcely uttered that most exquisite passage in the
second verse— ‘ I have nourished and brought up children, and
they have rebelled against me’—when the claims of God, and
their violation and rejection of them ; His forbearance, and their
ingratitude, appeared to overwhelm them; they sobbed aloud,
and were thoroughly overpowered.
For a considerable time we talked together of the past, the
wretched years they had endured, the punishments, and the
crimes which had led to them, until they seemed to feel most
keenly the folly of their sad career. We passed on to contrast
the manner in which their lives had been spent, with what God
and society required from them ; their miserable perversion of
God’s gifts, with the design for which He gave them, until we
were led on to speak of hope and of faith ; of Him who ‘ willeth
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from
his wickedness and live; ’ and then the Saviour’s remonstrance


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
seemed to arrest them —‘ Ye will not come to me that ye might
have life;’ until at length the influences of the Holy Spirit were
supplicated with earnestness and solemnity. These instructions,
and such conversation, were daily repeated; and henceforth
each time I saw them I perceived a gradual but distinct unfold-
ing of the affections and the understanding,
August. —The wounded men are much recovered, and the
whole of the mutineers are now confined together in a large
ward of the jail. They have long received extreme kindness
from the commandant, and are literally bewildered at finding
that even this last act has not diminished the exercise of his
benevolence. That anybody should care for them, or take such
pains about them after their violent conduct, excited surprise—•
at first almost amounting to suspicion; hut this at length gave
place to the warmest gratitude. They were, in fact, subdued
by it. They read very much, are extremely submissive, and
carefully avoid the slightest infringement of the prison regu-
lations. At first, all this was confined to the three men I have
mentioned; but their steady consistency of conduct, and the
strange transformation of character so evident in them, gradu-
ally arrested the attention of the others, and eventually led to a
similar result.
They will be detained here until the case has been decided by
the authorities in Sydney. They will probably be tried by a
commission sent from thence to the island for the purpose.
Formerly, however, prisoners charged with capital offences here
were sent up for trial; but (it is a horrible fact) this was found
to lead to so much crime, that, at much inconvenience and
expense, it was found absolutely necessary to send down a judi-
cial commission on each important occasion, in order to prevent
it. The mere excitement of a voyage, with the chances con-
nected with it, nay, merely a wish to get off the island even for
a time, led many men to commit crimes of the deepest dye in
order to be sent to Sydney for trial.
Two months, therefore, at least must intervene between the
perpetration of the offence and their trial; and this interval is
usually employed in similar cases in arranging a defence but
too commonly supported by perjury. In the present instance,
I found not the slightest attempt to follow such a course. They
declare that they expect death, and will gladly welcome it. Of
their life, which has been a course of almost constant warfare
with society, ending in remorseful feelings, they are all thoroughly
weary, although only one of them exceeds thirty years of age.
In addition to the ordinary services, Captain Maconochie each
Sunday afternoon has read prayers to them, and has given
permission to a few of their friends to be present. Singular
good has resulted from it, both to the men and those who join
in their devotions. At the conclusion of one of these services
Sears stood up, and with his heart so full as scarcely to allow
9


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
him utterance, to the surprise of every person there he addressed
most impressively the men who were present. ‘ Perhaps/ said
he, ‘ the words of one of yourselves, unhappily circumstanced
as I am, may have some weight with you. You all know the
life I have led; it has, believe me, been a most unhappy one;
and I have, I hope not too late, discovered the cause of this. I
solemnly tell you that it is because I have broken God’s laws.
I am almost ashamed to speak, but I dare not be silent. lam
going to tell you a strange thing. I never before was happy; I
begin now, for the first time in my life, to hope. lam an igno-
rant man, or at least I was so; but I thank God I begin to see
things in their right light now. I have been unhappily placed
from my childhood, and have endured many hardships. I do
not mention this to excuse my errors; yet if I had years since
received the kindness I have done here, it might have been
otherwise. My poor fellows, do turn over a new leaf; try to
serve God, and you, too, will be happier for it.’ The effect was
most thrilling; there was a death-like silence ; tears rolled down
many cheeks, which I verily believe never before felt them ; and
without a word more, all slowly withdrew.
This man’s story is also a common, but painful one. At fifteen
years of age he was transported for life as an accomplice in an
assault and alleged robbery, of which, from circumstances which
have since transpired, I have little doubt he was entirely inno-
cent. During a long imprisonment in Horsham jail, he received
an initiation in crime, which was finished during the outward
voyage. Upon his arrival in New South Wales, he was assigned
to a settler in the interior, a notoriously hard and severe man,
who gave him but a scanty supply of food and clothing, and
whose aim seemed to be to take the utmost out of him at the
least possible expense. Driven at length to desperation, he, with
three fellow-servants, absconded; and when taken, made a com-
plaint to the magistrate before whom they were brought almost
without clothes. Their statements were found to be literally
correct; but for absconding they were sent to Newcastle,
one of the penal stations of New South Wales, where Sears
remained nearly two years. At the expiration of that time he
was again assigned, but unfortunately to a man, if possible,
worse than his former employer, and again absconded. For
this offence he was sent to Moreton Bay, another penal settle-
ment, and endured three years of horrible severity, starvation,
and misery of every kind. His temper was by this time much
soured ; and, roused by the conduct of the overseers, he became
brutalised by constant punishment for resisting them. After
this he was sent to Sydney, as one of the crew in the police-boat,
of which he was soon made assistant coxswain. For not report-
ing a theft committed by one of the men under his charge, he
was sentenced to a road party; and attempting to escape from
it, he was apprehended, and again ordered to Moreton Bay for
10


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
four years more. There he was again repeatedly flogged for
disobedience and resistance of overseers, as well as attempting
to escape; hut having most courageously rendered assistance to
a vessel wrecked off the harbour, he attracted the attention of
the commandant, who afterwards showed him a little favour.
This was the first approach to kindness he had known since
when, years before, he had left his home; and it had its usual
influence. He never was again in a scrape there. His good
conduct induced the commandant to recommend him for a miti-
gation of sentence, which he received, and he was again employed
in the police-boat. The free coxswain of the boat was, however,
a drunkard, and intrusted much to Sears. Oftentimes he roused
the men by his violence, but Sears contrived to subdue his pas-
sion. At length, one night returning to the hut drunk, the
man struck at one of the crew with his cutlass, and the rest
resisted and disarmed him. But the morning came; the case
was heard; their story was disbelieved; and upon the charge and
evidence of the aggressor, they were sent to an ironed gang, to
work on the public roads. When Sears again became eligible
for assignment, a person whom he had known in Sydney applied
for him. The man must be removed within a fixed period after
the authority is given. In this case, application was made a
day beyond the prescribed time, and churlishly refused. The
disappointment roused a spirit so untutored as his, and once
again he absconded; was of course apprehended, tried, and being
found with a man who had committed a robbery, and had a
musket in his possession, was sent to Norfolk Island for life.
This sentence has, however, for meritorious conduct, been reduced
to fourteen years; and his ready assistance during a fire which
recently broke out in the military garrison here, might possibly
have helped to obtain a still further reduction. He never, during
those abscondings, was absent for any long period, and never
committed any act of violence. His constant attempt seems to
have been to reach Sydney, in order to effect his escape from the
scene of so much misery.
For some time past I have noticed his quiet and orderly
conduct, and was really sorry when I found him concerned in
this unhappy affair. His desire for freedom was, however, most
ardent, and "a chance of obtaining it was almost irresistible. He
has since told me that a few words kindly spoken to himself
and others by Captain Maconochie when they landed, sounded
so pleasantly to him—such are his own words—that he deter-
mined from that moment he would endeavour to do well. He
assures me that he was perfectly unconscious of a design to take
the brig, until awoke from his sleep a few minutes before the
attack commenced; that he then remonstrated with the men;
but finding it useless, he considered it a point of honour not to
fail them. His anxiety for instruction is intense ; he listens like
a child ; and his gratitude is most touching. He, together with


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
Jones, Woolfe, and Barry, were chosen by the commandant as a
police-boat’s crew; and had, up to this period, acted with great
steadiness and fidelity in the discharge of the duties required
from them. Nor do I think they would even now, tempting as
the occasion was, have thought of seizing it, had it not been
currently reported that they were shortly to be placed under a
system of severity such as they had already suffered so much
from.
Woolfe’s story of himself is most affecting. He entered upon
evil courses when very young; was concerned in burglaries when
only eleven years of age. Yet this was from no natural love of
crime. Enticed from his home by boys older than himself, he
soon wearied of the life he led, and longed to return to his home
and his kind mother. Oftentimes he lingered near the street she
lived in. Once he had been very unhappy, for he had seen his
brother and sister that day pass near him, and it had rekindled
all his love for them. They appeared happy in their innocence;
he was miserable in his crime. He now determined to go home
and pray to be forgiven. The evening was dark and wet, and as
he entered the court in which his friends lived, his heart failed
him, and he turned back; but, unable to resist the impulse, he
again returned, and stole under the window of the room. A rent
in the narrow curtain enabled him to see within. His mother
sat by the fire, and her countenance was so sad, that he was sure
she thought of him; but the room looked so comfortable, and
the whole scene was so unlike the place in which he had lately
lived, that he could no longer hesitate. He approached the door;
the latch was almost in his hand, when shame and fear, and a
thousand other vile and foolish notions, held him back; and the
boy who in another moment might have been happy ■ —tvas lost.
He turned away, and I believe has never seen them since. Going
on in crime, he in due course of time was transported for robbery.
His term of seven years expired in Van Diemen’s Land. Released
from forced servitude, he went a whaling voyage, and was free
nearly two years. Unhappily, he was then charged with aiding
in a robbery, and again received a sentence of transportation.
He was sent to Port Arthur, there employed as one of the boat’s
crew, and crossing the bay one day with a commissariat officer,
the boat was capsized by a sudden squall. In attempting to save
the life of the officer, he was seized by his dying grasp, and
almost perished with him; but extricating himself, he swam back
to the boat. Seeing the drowning man exhausted, and sinking,
he dashed forward again, diving after him, and happily succeeded
in saving his life. For this honourable act he would have received
a remission of sentence; but ere it could arrive, he and five others
made their escape. He had engaged w r ith these men in the plan
to seize the boat, and although sure of the success of the appli-
cation in his favour, he could not now draw back. The result I
have already shown. There were two more men concerned in
12


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
the mutiny, who, with those I have mentioned, and those killed
on hoard the brig, made up the number of the boat’s crew. But
neither of these men came under my charge, being both Roman
Catholics.
At length the brig, which had been despatched with an account
of the affair, returned, and brought the decision of the governor
of New South Wales. He had found it extremely difficult, almost
impossible, to obtain fitting members for the commission, who
would he willing to accept the terms proposed by the government,
or trust themselves in this dreadful place, and therefore he had
determined that the prisoners should he sent up for trial. The
men were sadly disappointed at this arrangement. They wished
much to end their days here, and they dreaded both the voyage
and the distracting effect of new scenes. They cling, too, with
grateful attachment to the commandant’s family, and the persons
who, during their long imprisonment, had taken so strong an
interest in their welfare. I determined to accompany them, and
watch for their perseverance in well-doing, that I might counsel
and strengthen them under the fearful ordeal I could not doubt
they would have to pass.
The same steady consistency marked the conduct of these men
to the moment of their embarkation. There was a total absence
of all excitement; one deep serious feeling appeared to possess
them, and its solemnity was communicated to all of us. They
spoke and acted as men standing on the confines of the unseen
world, and who not only thought of its wonders, hut, better still,
who seemed to have caught something of its spirit and purity.
November. —The voyage up was a weary, and, to the prisoners,
a very trying one. In a prison on the lower deck of a brig of
one hundred and eighty-two tons, fifty-two men were confined.
The place itself was about twenty feet square, of course low, and
badly ventilated. The men were all ironed, and fastened to a
heavy chain rove through iron rings let into the deck, so that
they were unable, for any purpose, to move from the spot they
occupied; scarcely, indeed, to lie down. The weather was also
unfavourable. The vessel tossed and pitched most fearfully during
a succession of violent squalls, accompanied by thunder and
lightning. I cannot describe the wretchedness of these unhappy
convicts : sick, and surrounded by filth, they were huddled to-
gether in the most disgusting manner. The heat was at times
unbearable. There were men of sixty—quiet and inoffensive old
men—placed with others who were as accomplished villains as
the world could produce. These were either proceeding to Sydney,
their sentences on the island having expired, or as witnesses in
another case (a bold and wicked murder) sent there also for trial.
The sailors on board the brig were for the most part the cowardly
fellows who had so disgracefully allowed the brig to be taken
from them; and they, as well as the soldiers on guard (some oi
them formed a part of the former one), had no very kindly feel-
-13


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
mg' towards the mutineers. It may be imagined, therefore, that
such feelings occasioned no alleviation of their condition. In
truth, although there was no actual cruelty exhibited, they
suffered many oppressive annoyances; yet I never saw more
patient endurance. It was hard to bear, hut their better prin-
ciples prevailed. Upon the arrival of the vessel in Sydney, we
learned that the case had excited an unusual interest. Crowds
assembled to catch a glimpse of the men as they landed; and
while some applauded their daring, the great majority very loudly
expressed their horror at the crime of which they stood accused.
I do not think it necessary to describe the trial, which took
place in a few days after landing. All were arraigned except
Barry. The prisoners’ counsel addressed the jurors with powerful
eloquence; but it was in vain; the crime was substantiated; and
the jury returned a verdict of guilty against all the prisoners,
recommending Woolfe to mercy.
During the whole trial, the prisoners’ conduct was admirable;
so much so, indeed, as to excite the astonishment of the immense
crowd collected by curiosity to see men who had made so mad
an attempt for liberty. They scarcely spoke, except once to
request that the wounded man, who yet suffered much pain,
might be allowed to sit down. Judgment was deferred until the
following day. When they were then placed at the bar, the
judge, in the usual manner, asked whether they had any reason
to urge why sentence should not be pronounced upon them? It
was a moment of deep solemnity; every breath was held; and
the eyes of the whole court were directed towards the dock. Jones
spoke in a deep clear voice, and in a deliberate harangne pointed
out some defects in the evidence, though without the slightest
hope, he said, of mitigating the sentence now to be pronounced
on himself and fellows. Three of the others also spoke. Whelan
said, 1 that he was not one of the men properly belonging to
the boat’s crew, but had been called upon to fill the place of
another man, and had no knowledge of any intention to take the
vessel, and the part he took on board was forced upon him. He
was compelled to act as he had done; he had used no violence,
nor was he in any way a participator in any that had been
committed.’ At the conclusion of the address to them, Jones,
amidst the deep silence of the court, pronounced a most em-
phatic prayer for mercy on his own soul and those of his fellow-
prisoners, for the judge and jury, and finally for the witnesses.
of death was then solemnly pronounced upon them all;
but the judge informed Woolfe that he might hold out to him
expectations that his life would be spared. They were then
removed from the bar, and sent back to the condemned cells.
I cannot say how much I dreaded my interview with them
that day; for although I had all along endeavoured to prepare
their minds for the worst result, and they had themselves never
for a moment appeared to expect any other than this, I feared


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
that the realisation of their sad expectation would break them
down. Hitherto there might have been some secret hope sus-
taining them. The convulsive clinging to life, so common to all
of us, would now perhaps be more palpably exhibited.
Entering their cells, I found them, as I feared, stunned by the
blow which had now fallen on them, and almost overpowered
by mental and bodily exhaustion. A few remarks about the
trial were at length made by them; and from that moment I
never heard them refer to it again. There was no bitterness of
spirit against the witnesses, no expression of hostility towards
the soldiers, no equivocation in any explanation they gave. They
solemnly denied many of the statements made against them; but,
nevertheless, the broad fact remained, that they were guilty of
an attempt to violently seize the vessel, and it was useless debat-
ing on minor considerations.
In the meantime, without their knowledge, petitions were
prepared and forwarded to the judges, the governor, and exe-
cutive council. In them were stated various mitigatory facts
in their favour ; and the meliorated character of the criminal code
at home was also strongly urged. Every attention was paid to
these addresses, following each other to the last moment. But
all was in vain. The council sat, and determined that five of
the men should be hanged on the following Tuesday. Whelan,
who could have no previous knowledge of a plan to seize the
vessel, together with Woolfe, was spared. The remaining four
were to suffer. The painful office of communicating this final
intelligence to these men was intrusted to me, and they listened
to the announcement not without deep feeling, but still with
composure.
It would be very painful for me to dwell on the closing scene.
The unhappy and guilty men were attended by the zealous
chaplain of the jail, whose earnest exhortations and instructions
they most gratefully received. The light of truth shone clearly
on the past, and they felt that their manifold lapses from the
path of virtue had been the original cause of the complicated
misery they had endured. They intreated forgiveness of all
against whom they had offended, and in the last words to their
friends were uttered grateful remembrances to Captain Maco-
nochie, his family, and others. At the place of execution, they
behaved with fortitude and a composure befitting the solemnity
of the occasion. Having retired from attendance upon them in
their last moments, I was startled from the painful stupor which
succeeded in my own mind, by the loud and heavy bound of the
drop as it fell, and told me that their spirits had gone to God
who gave them.”
Our reverend informant, in closing his narrative, adds some
reflections on the painful nature of the tragedy in which he
was called to lend his professional assistance. He laments the
is


A TALE OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
general harshness of penal discipline, and attributes the last
fatal crime of these men to the recent arrival of orders which
shut out all hope of any improvement being- effected in their cir-
cumstances, however well they might behave. Previously, he
says, while hope was permitted to them, they had conducted
themselves well. While agreeing in his humane views, we
would, at the same time, avoid appearing as the apologists of
crime under any circumstances. Our main object in laying
the foregoing narrative before the world in its present shape,
is to impress those who may be tottering on the verge of crime
with the danger of their situation—to show them that a course
of error is a course of misery, ending in consequences the most
afflicting.
It may be seen from the history of the unhappy men before
us, that transportation is at the best equivalent to going into
slavery—that the convict loses, for the time, his civil rights. Torn
from his family, his home, and his country, he is placed at
the disposal of the crown and its functionaries; can be put to
any kind of labour, however repugnant to his feelings; dressed
in the most degrading apparel; chained like a wild beast if
refractory; and on the commission of any new offence while
in this state of servitude, he is liable to fresh punishment by
transportation to such penal settlements as Norfolk Island, It
might almost be said that no man in his senses would voluntarily
commit crimes which would expose him to the risk of so terrible
an infliction as that of transportation even for the limited period
of seven years. But, alas! men who have entered on a course
of error, forgetful of every duty which they owe to themselves
and society, can scarcely be said to be in possession of a sound
mind; and they go on floundering from one degree of vice to
another, till brought into the condition of transported and per-
sonally enslaved convicts. Should the present narrative fall
accidentally into the hands of individuals who are in danger of
falling into a course of vice, we would hope that it will help to
restrain them. The unfortunate men whose death has been re-
corded were once as they are: they went over the golden line of
honour and duty—and behold the consequences; a short life of
hardship, misery, and a violent and ignominious death.


Date Due
S & M SUPPLY CO 3005




