

A THRILLING TALE
OF REAL LIFE
IN THE
WILDS OF AUSTRALIA.
BY
Mounted-Constable Willshire.
FREARSON & BROTHER, PRINTERS, NORTH TERRACE, ADELAIDE.
1895.




DFJ
A THRILLING TALE
OF
REAL LIFE
IN THE
WILDS OF AUSTRALIA.




A THRILLING TALE
OF
REAL LIFE
IN THE
WILDS OF AUSTRALIA.
BY
W. H. WILLSHIRE,
Mounted Constable, First-class;
Officer in charge of Native Police.
Adelaide :
FREARSON &■ BROTHER, PRINTERS, NORTH TERRACE
1 8 9 5.




THIS LITTLE BOOK
(INSPIRED BY LIFE IN THE BUSH OF AUSTRALIA)
IS
DEDICATED
TO
A LIGHT-HEARTED GIRL, WHO LOVED THE FREE AIR OF THE RANGES
AND THE EXCITEMENT OF THE CHASE. WHEN DARK CLOUDS
OVERSHADOWED OUR TRACKLESS WAY, THE SUNBEAMS OF HER
HEART DISPELLED ADVERSITY ; WHEN SURROUNDED BY SCENES
OF THE DEEPEST HISTORICAL INTEREST, AND SCENES OF
DESOLATE WILDNESS, I WAS ASSISTED TO RECORD ITEMS
OF ABORIGINAL LORE, THAT WILL BE HANDED DOWN
TO POSTERITY. WHEN APPREHENSIVE OF NATIVE
HOSTILITY BY MY WHILOM FOES, IN THE MIGHTY
CENTRE OF A MIGHTY REALM, SHE DID NOT
DESERT ME, BUT RETURNED WITH MY PARTY
INTO CIVILIZATION ON THE FINKE RIVER,
AND DIED AS SHE LIVED. CHASTE AS
THE MORNING DEW, SHE HAS NOW
GONE TO THAT UNDISCOVERED
COUNTRY FROM WHENCE
NO TRAVELLER RETURNED.
THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE.
In introducing a work of this character, some preparatory
remarks are needed. Ido not expect everybody who reads it
to laugh, as at a burlesque, neither do I expect them to treat it
contemptibly, by taking it to the creek and leaving it in the
ti-tree.
I am aware that the contents will not please the ultra-
fastidious, who would quickly find defects. The subject is a
rough one, and, speaking figuratively, the author himself is a
rough diamond, with no pretensions to literary merit; therefore,
when it is criticised I hope it will escape the cynic. I would
like the critic to be a countryman of my own—a South
Australian—and then judge it on its merits, not as an aspiring
literary effort, but as a work giving some information regarding
the aboriginals of an almost unknown and unexplored portion
of Central Australia.
I would be strangely constituted did I not love the freedom
that the bush imparts to those who traverse it.
During its compilation no house offered shelter; but in the
wild bush, and principally on a camel pack-saddle for a table
did the author dot down the facts and experiences which are
now given to the public.
Is it inconsistent with morality for a man to wander through
the bush of Australia, with a black gin for a guide ? Immorality
does not begin until immorality is committed.
No one is infallible, and the information this little work
contains about the natives and their habits is recorded for the
benefit of those interested ; and was written for the amusement
and pastime of the author to relieve the monotony of bush-life.
As I found things so have I written of them, boldly, yet not
with presumption or arrogance.
The aboriginals are not virtuous, hence, I have not been able
to write them down an undejiled community.
The heroine, “ Chillberta,” was found in all her native purity.
Ah ! I forget, this is the preface. I thought for the moment
I was writing a chapter about “ Ananias,” and inclined to spread
myself a bit. Every now and again the reader will come on a
chapter of true aboriginal life, recorded as the result of actual
observation by the author, as well us items recited on the
testimony of the aborigines.


There is no vanity or conceit in my stating that a man
accustomed to the vicissitudes of bush-life is not easily dejected.
Travelling for many years with blacks only, hardened by
disappointment, travelling by night a wild, devious, and
untrodden track to reach water I once knew, to find the hole dry
—these are the experiences that make the bushmen of Australia.
Often when our worn-out faculties demanded rest, and our
animals of burden refused to travel, have we slept on the dew-
moistened earth, surrounded by a horde of wild savages of
treacherous ferocity, and followed my migratory tribes.
Still, all that is nothing to the horrifying and disgusting sights
and ceremonies of the natives ; ravishing, violence, and the knife
—all resorted to to satisfy their unholy desires.
Notwithstanding, I liked the life, enraptured by scenes of
desolate wildness ; of picturesque beauty, gorge and glen where
the wild holly and oranges wafted their perfume over the camp
of the weary white-fellow.
From many a craggy eminence I have seen the wild
aborigine keenly observing my movements, and while meditating
on these wild scenes I have fallen asleep, whilst my blackboys
have prepared the usual repast of tea, kangaroo, iguano, &c.
Savage life, stripped of all its fictitious ornaments has its
natural and entrancing beauties, but the darker shadows of its
vices dim the lustre of its virtues.


NATIVE IMPLEMENTS, &c.
1. Poona for carrying water —piece of the bean-tree scooped out.
2. A Stone Knife —sharp on one side only—used for ceremonies.
3. A Stone Tomahawk.
4. This stone lubras must not see—it is used on them once.
5. This is a piece of Shell or Skull for a covering.
6. This is a Hank of Native String—called “ Oleara.”
7. A Tam Stick—for digging anything out of the ground.
8. A Stone Knife —sharp on both sides —flint.
9. A Kangaroo Bono for putting through the nose.
10. Shoes made of feathers and string—leave no impression.
11. Large Poona for carrying the baby in.
12. Two Spears and two Wommeras, that give the Spears impetus.
13. Tassel made of human hair - for a cover[?]


A THRILLING TALE OF REAL LIFE IN THE
WILDS OF AUSTRALIA.
Chapter First.
WEELOORARRA.
the Western territory of Central Australia, and on
X the northern shores of Lake Amadeus, lived a maiden
whom nature had endowed with a most sweet
disposition. Her name was Chillberta, which, in
the aboriginal tongue, means “ Falling rain.”
Chillberta lived with her father, who was one of
fthe most powerful chiefs of Weeloorarra, or “ The
Land of the Curlew.” They led the life of
nomads, as do all other aboriginals, wandering
here or there in search of game and wild fruits.
I will not attempt to trace their ancestral line,
or I might have to go so far back as the tribes of Israel.
Chillberta had a face of unaffected simplicity ; sixteen years
of age, budding into womanhood, the admiration of the whole
tribe, especially the young men, who thought her comely and
amiable, which, undoubtedly, she was.
There were many virgins besides Chillberta in Weeloorarra,
which is a territory of many thousand square miles, covered
with salt- and cotton-bush and flowers lovely beyond description.
It is a beautiful land, where very few white men have been, and
where, in all its luxuriant lusciousness, flourish the ever-welcome
quondong and wild orange.
I must here state that all the natives indigenous to this
country of Weeloorarra wear no clothing of any sort, knowing
nothing different. The word “ shame ” comes in only with
civilization
Chillberta and her father gathered their stock-in-trade,
consisting of some spears, wonnas, and poonas, and walked with


several others towards Allenyarra, which means North. After
toiling over large sandhills they entered a beautiful meadow
with clay-pans full of water.
Here Chillberta and her parents stooped to drink, and then
walked to the shade of the capparis (orange tree ) and sat down
to rest. Marloo —the name of Chillberta’s father—addressed
his daughter thus : —“ When you were a little girl, one year
old, three white men came into our country. They had animals
with them, laden with food. When we saw them first we were
frightened, and ran in all directions. One of them rounded us
up, and I climbed up a desert oak (casuarina).
After some persuasion I came down, and he put on my wrist
two strong bands of iron connected together, and led me to
where they had pitched their camp for the night. He made
motions, by raising his hands every now and again to his mouth,
and, at last, I understood he wanted water. So I showed him
where it was, and he then gave me something to eat, and the
next day they started and made me accompany them. For
many days they travelled west, and, at last, they turned back
and travelled east.
The animals I spoke of were horses, and, every now and then,
one was killed and cut up into pieces and put into a bough
wurley and smoked. This was the meat these white men lived
on. They treated me very kindly, because, whilst we were in
the country I am acquainted with, I was able to show them all
the waters, because the horses wanted water every day. The
head man or master is what they call an explorer. His business
was to find a track that would take them to the westward until
he came to a wide expanse of salt water, on the shores of which
lived thousands of white men, like himself. He made me
remain with him two moons, and then I left him acad went in
search of your mother and yourself. My reason for telling you
this is, that I heard to-day from some of our tribe, that they
saw the tracks of some strange animals, and we suppose there
are some white fellows travelling our country at the present
time.
The animals they have with them are called camels, for
Chuperinna, who has been with the whites a short time,
recognizes the impressions as camel tracks. Chuperinna states
that should we be surprised by these white men on no account
were we to run away. lam of opinion, from the little know-
ledge I have of white fellows, that they are, as a rule, very good
to aboriginals. I have heard that hundreds of our class are
employed by the whites to assist them in all kinds of work
where horses and camels are used.”
While Marloo was interesting his daughter with his descrip-
tion of the white men Chuperinna returned from a hunting
expedition, and reported to Marloo and others that he thought
some strange people were camped at Banalee.*
* Called Mount Udor by Ernest Giles in 1874.


He had seen smoke, and had heard the report of a gun, which
he (Chuperinna) had become acquainted with during his short
term with the whites.
All the male aboriginals held a meeting and consulted one
another as to the advisability of clearing out or going up to face
the white intruders. They were aware that, whoever the whites
were, it was certain they could not stop long at Banalee as the
water would soon be exhausted.
The tribe made a few bough wurlies and retired to rest, but
did not sleep much, owing to their superstitious feeling about the
strangers in their country.
Chapter Second.
BOUND FOR THE TARN OF AUBER.
*7yPHEN the day broke Marloo and Chillberta, with all the
VV members of their party, started for Banalee, and got within
200 yards of where the white men had a tent erected.
The white man observed them all standing on a sandhill, yelling
and making unearthly noises and flourishing their spears. The
blacks could see there was only one white man and six well
dressed aboriginal boys or young men, who stood side by side
beckoning to Marloo and his tribe to come nearer, which they
did very reluctantly.
One of the civilized boys belonging to the white man went
alone with a revolver in his belt, and began making enquiries
about water and the direction of the Tarn of Auber. It appears
he was soon satisfied, for he came back to his master and told
him all he had heard about the country and its waters, adding
that, “ one ugly old nigger, with one eye and a ten inch smile
across his countenance, wanted to know if he were a book agent
trying to squeeze the ‘ Aldine ’ History of South Australia into
an illiterate and unwary nigger.”
This boy’s name was Ananias. He was given to romancing,
hence his master allowed the proverbial grain of salt to mix
with most of his tales.
The white man’s blackboys soon became on good terms with
the wild aboriginals, and they mixed together freely.
They ought certainly to have been fumigated, judging by the
not altogether nice cannibalistic emu-gut stuffing fragrance they
emitted, and which reminded the white fellow of a little
reminiscence: He was once employed disinterring two China-
men for the City Coroner,


He did not know whether they were Chinamen or dead dogs
—things got so mixed—and, swooning, he was removed to an
hotel in the same cart as the dead Chinamen, and the inquest
was commenced on the wrong man.
As the night was coming on, and the white man knew he was
in a country where the natives are hostile and treacherous, he
called his blackboys together and informed them they would
have to keep watch.
To his great surprise his leading boy told him that arrange-
ments had been made whereby they had agreed to reciprocate
with Marloo, Chuperinna, and others, and sleep with young
women, whom the chief and others had pressed upon them to
take for the night.
To the white fellow this seemed only consistent and natural
as he had long been accustomed to aboriginal love and doctrine,
therefore he knew them well. But, by the great land of
Grampus, he never expected a deputation, headed by Ananias
and backed up by several others, including Marloo, asking if he
would accept of Ohillberta as his mistress.*
The white man refused point blank, but told them to bring
her up to him so that he could talk with her. She was escorted
by her father into the presence of the white man, and in her
hand she bore a bunch of wild orange blossom, and round her
neck hung a necklace of large quondong stones. Her father
told her to sit down, which she did on a camel pack-saddle.
He bade her talk to the white man, who could speak their
language nearly as well as themselves. After Marloo and the
others had left, the white fellow and Ohillberta began to
converse freely.
From this out, all through this story, the white man will be
known as Oleara.
Ohillberta named him that from the start. The white man
happened to be making at the time nose strings for camel nose
pegs, and he seemed so persistently working with string that
Ohillberta called him String, which, in the native language, is
Oleara, and he became well known as Oleara all through the
country.
Ohillberta told him of a beautiful country to the southward
—a perfect fairyland of palmy foliage with mountain waters.
This inspired Oleara so much that he resolved to accompany
Ohillberta to this Austral paradise. Ohillberta was anxious to
return there, and, on the way, they would call in at the Tarn of
Auberand several other places that Ohillberta knew well.
Oleara was now out of danger and suspense. His camels
would have water almost every day, if they cared to take it.
With such a cicerone as the lovely Ohillberta, who voluntarily
guides the hitherto almost uninformed Oleara, as she said she
would, from place to place all through her father’s dominions—
a wild region, lovely, romantic and full of wild fantastic scenery
—he was exultant.
* Ni-you-100 Yeu-too coo-rie.


In the morning the camels were saddled np and an early
start made for the Tarn of Anber, which bore from Banalee, by
prismatic compass, south-east.
Oleara and Chillberta rode the leading camel. Ananias and
a lubra, named Ungullean, rode together on the same camel,
the others following in rotation ; whilst Marloo and thirty-seven
other aboriginals came on behind on foot.
The distance from Banalee to the Tarn of Auber is 60 miles,
so Oleara did not intend to compass it in one day. After
travelling 25 miles on the first day they camped at Orralee.*
It was here that Chillberta asked for some clothing, so Oleara
gave her a new cotton shirt. She put her legs through the
sleeves and became entangled, until Oleara came to her
assistance and relieved her from her predicament.
There were several other girls besides Chillberta, but none so
prepossessing; yet all were amorously inclined. Some of them
were of irregular shape and poor looking; nevertheless, Oleara’s
civilized blackboys took to them very kindly and helped them
to that with which nature had endowed them.
The aboriginals of these parts are taught from their infancy
bad and wicked things. They are a wild and savage race,
practice unlawful commerce with the sexes and enjoy matters
as they stand. So the reader will see it was no use Oleara
trying to teach them better at this juncture, the civilized idea of
the proprieties was a dead letter to them.
They gave Oleara a virgin of sixteen summers, which, in
accepting, was a marriage, and the blacks thought it was
consummated and perfected by Oleara because Chillberta ate
with him, but she slept by herself.
Oleara never intended to instruct the blacks like a missionary
in what was right or wrong.
It was his intention to live and wander about with them,
observing what was to be seen in the Western territory of
Central Australia; to make himself acquainted with their
habits, to cultivate friendly relations with them, so that they
would let him know how they performed their ceremonies and
why they performed them.
Chillberta is, undoubtedly, the heroine of this story, and the
longer she was in the company of Oleara the more gallant and
courageous she became ; she saddled her camel alone, washed
Oleara’s clothes, and kept herself and him clean and tidy.
* Called Mount Peculiar by Giles in 1874.


Chapter Third.
GLEN EDITH.
PFTER enjoying a good night’s rest, Oleara and his party
packed up their five camels and left Orralee for the Tarn
of Anber.
Rather an amusing scene occurred whilst saddling up the
camels. One garrulous and loquacious old nigger, who had
never seen a camel pack-saddle before, had the temerity to tell
Oleara that the camel pack-saddle was of very primitive
construction, that he thought it an antiquated encumbrance,
and that it reminded him of the days when the Israelites used
wooden ploughs. Oleara told the old cannibal to sit down,
and in his dotage the old savage prated away into a lengthened
detail about the pack-saddle.
Chillberta led the way through the desert, over sandhills,
and through the horrible spinifex (triodia irritans). Occasion-
ally they crossed a fertile spot of small extent, arriving in the
evening at the Tarn of Auber.
It was here that Chillberta first made bread. She mixed the
flour into a dough, flattened small pieces out, and threw them
on the coals. They are called Johnny Cakes.
The old nigger who argued with Oleara in the morning about
the pack saddle was very tired after the day’s walk, so Oleara
led the old gentleman away about two hundred yards, advised
him to sequester himself, review his life and purify his heart.
It wanted purifying, for, in his time, he had been a party to
the eating of twenty-three sable individuals cooked in a hole by
placing hot coals on the poor unfortunates. This old black-
fellow was apparently 70 years old, and all that time he had
lived in idleness. He assured Oleara that his life had many
times been in imminent peril.
“ When I was a young man,” he said, “ I stole a lubra from
another blackfellow. He found me asleep and shoved a spear
right through me.” He showed Oleara the wound, adding, “ I
lived, and stole two more lubras lately, that accounts for my
having three wives now.” Concluding with, “you know,
Oleara, I am a true believer in polygamy.”
Just then Ananias came up with the fumigating machine
and the old fellow was put through his facings. He had his
body purified, and the smoke curled thickly under the old
fellow’s nose. He tried to get away, but he was leg-ironed on
the two ankles. He complained of suffocation, but Ananias
was busy stuffing some vapour in his ear-holes and otherwise
cleansing his body. It was at Ananias’s suggestion that the
fumigation was resorted to, although neither knew the reason
for its application.


Ananias suggested to Oleara that they should make a hole
in the old fellow’s nose and put a nose peg in as an ornament,
which Oleara declined to allow. The old fellow was released,
and the fumigating apparatus, which had now become a science
and an art with Ananias, was carried back to the camp.
During the night the old fellow got very bad, when Ananias,
who was attending him professionally, told Oleara that “ the
old fellow was suffering from carbonic acid gas on the stomach
caused by a noxious vapour.” Whilst Ananias and Oleara
were talking the old man died. “ There now,” said Ananias.
Oleara left Ananias and went back to Chillberta, who was
learning to sew. The quart pots were boiling, the tea was
made, and the tucker served out to the boys and girls at the
Tarn of Auber in the wild region of Central Australia.
Ananias, the anatomist, returned, and informed Oleara that
he had separated the old fellow into constituent parts, and
that the cause of death was too much fumigation. So the old
man was put together again in a bag and buried, while Ananias
was censured for not mixing the vapour properly.
The Tarn of Auber is close to Glen Edith, and a very pretty
place it is.
Chillberta was speaking to-day of a lovely place to the south-
ward of Glen Edith, called Gochintin by the blacks on account
of its great beauty Giles, the explorer, called it the Yale of
Tempe. A valley in Thessaly, called by that name, was
immortalized by the poets as tbe most delightful spot on earth,
and according to Chillberta Gochintin will well repay a visit.
Oleara informed the party that they would start in the
morning for the Yale of Tempe. Chillberta was pleased to be
going back to the land of yams and sugar-ants, porcupines and
wallabys, all of which are good nourishment for the body. In
such a prolific soil the natives are happy and contented ; their
progeny come with nature’s regularity, but with the advent of
the white man with his grog, pickles, sauces and contaminating
disease maternity ceases, and our boasted civilization ends by
exterminating them.
Chapter Fourth.
VALE OF TEMPE.
PT dawn of the following morning the camels were brought
up, the billy boiled, breakfast served put, and a start made
for the place known as Gochintin. Previous to starting
Marloo killed an iguana four feet long.


Chillberta and Oleara rode the leading camel, and crossed
some magnificent pastoral country where kangaroos were
plentiful. Chillberta states that by-and-bye, if Oleara will not
mention it to any of the natives, she would show him a lot of
large caves with corrobboree drawings on their walls, each rude
drawing representing a ceremony or rite that had been
performed on young men and women.
The natives call young girls between the age of 13 and 20
“ Qucon Buntors,” therefore, Chillberta was one, and Ananias’s
lubra, Ungullian, was another. The other civilized boys who
belonged to Oleara’s party also carried young women with them
on this memorable trip. Nolens volens, they would come ; they
would follow in spite of any and every objection, and, as for
Chillberta, to her it was a picnic, and at any price she would
insist on being one of the party.
Oleara, with his rifle, contributing kangaroos, emus and other
game to the larder every day, —they were fed like princes and
princesses, and, never before Oleara’s coming, had they fared so
sumptuously, and with so little personal effort.
Chillberta was fast adopting the habits of a refined white
woman, using a comb and looking-glass with, no doubt, as much
vanity and self approbation as her fairer sisters. On asking
for a hat, Oleara supplied her with an old cabbage tree, which
she declared was eighteen carat.
Intercourse with the white man induced the desire for
information as to the habits and peculiar characteristics of the
white lubra, and it was no easy task to satisfy the inquisitive
Chillberta.
All Australians are aware that the aboriginals are not
restrained by law or morality, therefore their natural born
ignorance produces licentiousness and wantonness.
Chillberta’s conversation with Oleara drifted, naturally, to
unhallowed and impure words, hence she would be checked,
much to her wonder, and the talk would drift into a description
of the country, its vegetation, its fauna and flora, &c. They
were now crossing some fine clay-pan country, and as the night
was setting in they resolved to camp.
When the camels were unpacked Ananias was itching to
fumigate somebody. He turned the apparatus over, carefully
examined it, wishing for an infected case, and then sat down by
his dusky inamorata and lavished upon her all his blandishments.
They both bore equivocal reputations, and no harm was done.
Ananias knew he was a rogue, and the annexation of the
lubra Ungullian he felt was redeeming his hitherto failing
reputation, and he thought he had risen in the estimation of
Oleara, inasmuch as he was the only one of the party who could
manipulate the fumigating machine.
The native name of this day’s camp is Whyhoota Erinar,
which means opossum trees —all hollow, stunted box-trees of
the eucalyptus order, and called in Queensland, “ coolebah.”
The male aboriginals caught several opossums, which are


excellent food, sweet and nourishing. If the blacks would be
content to leave opossum, wallaby, kangaroo and euro stand
over night it would be much better and not so rank, but they
cook them at once with the skins on. Nothing is so rank and
oily as the emu, yet the natives cook it immediately they get it,
greasing their limbs with every bit of fat, throwing the rest to
the dogs. I have often wondered why the dogs don’t get sick ;
they must have stomachs like Ananias, able to keep down
anything. It is very seldom that Ananias gets a spasmodic
affection of the stomach ; all things come alike to him ; there
is a lot of the animal in him ; he chews his cud quite com-
placently under the desert oak, and invents some fresh roguery.
The aborigines are not at a loss for words, for in their own
language they speak upon all subjects as do the whites, although
not with the finished style of Carlyle or Bailey’s Festus ; still
the dusky Australian has a name for everything, real or
imaginary.
Here is a sample of their refined words : —Pretty —endoota ;
kiss—neen-jeiveny ; frightened —oloorin-in; pain—picca ; sleep
—uncoo ; liver —allue ; mouth —tar; tongue —tarlinba ; lips—
tar-bim-bimba ; teeth —carteeta. I will stop at that, as I do
not intend to give a vocabulary of the language in this work.
All the aboriginals joined in a corrobboree, called by the
natives, “ Incarnie,” probably derived from carnival or festival.
In the morning we packed up for the Vale of Tempe, and,
after travelling all day across good grass country, we arrived at
Gochintin, called by Giles, Laurie’s Creek.
Chillberta told Oleara that she knew this country well, and
in a few days would show him some dark and wonderful caves,
where once the aboriginal ruffian and murderer sought refuge ;
where a band of them lived, and came out in large numbers to
steal lubras and murder their countrymen.
Chapter Fifth.
CAMPED.
RHOM Chillberta, I learned that the robbers had long
since died or reformed, and that now the caves are kept for
private business, such as the performance of rites and
ceremonies on the young of both sexes.
Oleara then proceeded to look round the camp, and came
across a poor old man with one eye and frightful sores all over
his body. Oleara got some Holloway’s ointment and made
Ananias apply it to the sores. He did not like the job, and


suggested that it would conduce to the comfort of the party if
that sore old man would withdraw into obscurity for about two
hours, so that the fumigating business might be carried out.
Oleara would not have the sick man meddled with, much to the
chagrin of Ananias.
Oleara returned to Chillberta, who was making a necklace
out of the red beans that fall from the bean-tree. Shields and
poonas are made from the bean-tree. The poona is used for
carrying water in as well as babies, and is shaped a like little
boat.
Whilst Oleara and Chillberta were attending to their
respective work a squealing noise was heard about two hundred
yards away. It appeared that Ananias had disobeyed orders.
He had marched the squalid old gentleman into the bush, tied
him up, smoked him dry like a bullock’s tongue and purified
him. He afterwards white-washed him with gypsum slush.
When it dried on the old man it began to crack like a sea
biscuit; the stucco fell off in places, and the old fellow’s
stomach looked like a map of Australia with Chambers’ Pillar
in the distance.
“ There now,” said Ananias, “ you won’t die, and when you
return to the bosom of your family you will be sweeter by far,
as I have dispersed all the infection that you have hawked
round the country. Had I not done so you would have been
the cause of your brethren shuffling off this mortal coil much
quicker than they ought.” The old chap remarked that
Ananias was the “ boss fumigator ” of Central Australia.
Grochintin is a pretty spot, and Oleara intimated to the blacks
that he would camp there for three weeks or, perhaps, more
Chillberta was delighted at this, because, she said, it would
give her plenty of time to show Oleara over the country.
Perhaps it would be advisable here to inform the reader that
the aboriginals are divided into four distinct sections, viz. :
Pultarra, Coomarra, Ferula, and Aponunga. This was, no
doubt, resorted to in the first instance to obviate the evils which
arise from close intermarriages.
A Pultarra blackfellow must take a Coomarra lubra for his
wife, and a Coomarra blackfellow must take a Pultarra lubra
for his wife, and the same applies to the Ferulas and Aponungas.
The offspring of a Pultarra mother are Ferulas, and the off-
spring of a Comarra mother are Aponungas. How, should a
Pultarra blackfellow cohabit with any lubra but a Coomarra it
would be tantamount to incest. This causes terrible distur-
bances among the blacks, and sometimes the wrong-doer is
killed. If a lubra sins in this direction three times she is
considered the guilty party, and, in the country now referred
to, she would be killed and eaten, which that reprobate
Ananias designates “cause and effect.”
It is hard to forget repulsive things. I once went into an
old lubra’s camp forty miles west of the Finke Mission Station,
where, on the floor of the newly-made wurley, I saw portions of


a cooked child of about six years of age. Sitting alongside of
this cooked human flesh was an old hag of a black gin in a
most ghastly condition.
I knew her language fairly well, and, as I sat there talking
with her, I began to remonstrate with her against such practices.
I worked myself to such a pitch that the tears rolled down my
face. She saw it, and cried and roared and beat herself on the
head with a stone until the blood flowed. I ordered my black-
boys to bring the shovel up, dig a hole and bury what remained.
When the old woman saw what I had done she became excited
from a sense of guilt, and in anguish and pain laid herself
down and wept. But until it brought tears from the white
man that poor savage woman was insensible to distress, unpity-
ing and cruel. That white man was born under the Southern
Cross, and there are plenty more like him in the bush ready to
lend a helping hand where required.
When Oleara found out that Chillberta was a Ferula he said
he was an Aponunga. Oleara took in the situation —he was up
to the business—and Chillberta laughed heartily. It just
suited her to be on intimate terms with an Aponunga. Oleara
was then eligible for a Ferula lubra although he was a white
man, and with such desirable company the ship must sail well.
Chillberta, who was now well clothed, fat and happy, went
off into a rhapsody of song, wild and rambling. The words
when translated were :
"We have the life so free from care,
O’er hill and valley everywhere.
No matter where we roam ;
We go to water, fresh and clear.
Of one another have no fear.
And anywhere’s our home.
Mid’ desert oaks and sandhills high.
Beneath a hot and sultry sky.
We hunt our daily food ;
Eeturning when the sun is low.
To water and our camp we go.
And cook what we pursued.
We grease our limbs and body, too.
With emu fat and kangaroo.
And come shining to the play ;
The lubras smile, with looks they steal.
And reckon us their beau-ideal.
And heroes of the day.”
Translating that lot was no easy task for Oleara; but, with
the assistance of the lovely and pure-souled Chillberta, it was
successfully brought into English, and is now placed before the
public as original from Chillberta.
It was only characteristic of the uncontaminated dusky virgin
that she did all in her power to assist Oleara to observe, preserve,
and record, the customs and habits of her own race, which are
strange beyond description.
Chillberta asked Oleara when he would start west to the
caves. She said, “we have been here four days now, and.


nothing' much has been done, except the lessons in English you
have taught me. Marloo and Chuperinna went away yesterday
in search of food; they are expected back to-night. My father
will have an emu, I think. He is a good hunter; when he is on
the job he does it well.
A blackfellow requires a lot of patience to wait behind a
brake for a kangaroo to come along on the pad. Kangaroos
have their roads as well as other animals.
We have a poison bush in the sandhills, called Chilla. We
pick a handful, or more, of the leaves and dry them. Then we
put them in a small hole of water where we know emus come
to drink. Then we watch, and when the emus have taken a
drink they become giddy, stagger and tumble about. Then the
natives go up and kill them. I have known them to get ten
emus in one day at the same water-hole. If the emus are left
alone, they sometimes recover from their drunkenness.”
Whilst the aboriginals were spelling at Grochintin the men
were making weapons and native utensils.
The wommera is what they use to throw the spear with. In
the end of the wommera is a sharp stone fixed in with resin,
which they obtain from the root of the spinifex. This is used
as a chisel for scooping out the wood. The barb on the spear
is fastened on with the sinews from the legs of the kangaroo
and emu. The fur of the kangaroo is used to make native
string ; sometimes it is made from human hair.
They use sharp pieces of stones for cutting straight lines across
their chests and on their arms. These cuts are filled in with
ashes, and when they heal they look raised and embossed, as in
relievo. They obtain red ochre, pipe-clay and other things,
wet the powder, and ornament their faces and bodies with rings
and stripes. Then they go to the corrobboree, and stamp their
feet, making unearthly noises, repeating the same until daylight.
The lubras enjoy this theatrical performance, because immorality
is the order of the night.
Chapter Sixth.
TWO ARE COMPANY.
aHILLBERT A and Oleara left Gochintin together, each riding
a camel. They travelled west fourteen miles, stopping for
dinner at a rock-hole, called Cumrella Cobby, which means
Euro’s water. Here they saw some tracks of blacks, which Chill-
berta recognized as some of the natives belonging to Lake Amadeus.


The tracks led west, so, after dinner, they got on their camels,
and Chillberta ran them np, and overhauled two old women,
two young girls and three young men. Chillberta asked them
where they were going, and they replied to Marloorie Buntor,
which is Lake Amadeus.
One of the young men was carrying a large snake over his
shoulder, with a turn round his neck, the two ends hanging
almost down to the ground.
The Australian boa-constrictor is not venemous, but crushes
its prey, licks it and swallows slowly, sleeps and digests the
skin, claws, teeth and all. It is like the iguana and other
saurians ; when cooked the flesh comes off in long white layers,
and to the white man it is not bad, for once having overcome
the repugnance, it is delicious.
Scarcely had we gone two miles, and entered an ancient forest,
whose sombre depths were, perhaps, the most magnificent and
stately sights I had ever seen, when a bird of paradise struck
my view. I raised my gun to shoot it, when Chillberta begged
me not to do so, as there were not many of these birds in the
country, and they only frequented the most lovely spots of
Weeloorarra.
Whilst going along leading our camels we were followed by
the natives we had just seen. I will not forcibly depict the
character of this far western tribe of natives, sufficient for me
to state they are cannibals, very treacherous, and perils
encompass the white man who camps alone in their midst.
Night was approaching, and Oleara was warned by Chillberta
to keep his weather-eye open, lest they should invade the camp
to obtain knives, tomahawks, blankets, &c. Just as the sun
was setting seven male aboriginals emerged from a belt of
mulga and quondong on the edge of the forest, and joined the
few natives who had been following Chillberta and Oleara.
They began their unwonted gush by offering presents of
spears and emu eggs —generally a bad sign. One fat, greasy
rascal began to exhibit his skill by throwing his two spears at
a gum-tree with unerring aim. This looked like an attempt to
overawe, but to outdo all, he waltzed up and stood by the side
of Chillberta’s rife and stately beauty. Oleara thought that
was indeed a hazardous proceeding, and indicated either courage
or bravado by that delectable individual.
“ Frailty, thy name is woman.” Just as Oleara with a smile
ironical, was drawing a Colt’s revolver from his belt Chillberta
told him loudly in his own tongue to move quickly as danger
was near.
The unwelcome intruder scraped gravel in the waning sun-
light like a flying fox. But whilst Oleara was camped, and at
midnight, most of these blacks were prowling about with the
intention of making an attack, and murdering Oleara, and
confiscating his property. Chillberta never slept — ever faithful,
she kept watch till daylight. She well knew that if these
black demons got hold of her what a horrible life she would lead.


So, in the morning, she told Oleara, in a clear, prudent and
charitable way, that it would be no use in such a hostile country
for one white man only to visit the caves, and that we had
better return to our depot.
One of the most striking features of the customs of the
aborigines in their nomadic state is the immorality practiced on
their young women. It is also wonderful how, stoic-like, they
endure pain when they quarrel, the cause generally being about
lubras. They close, cut one another with stone knives into the
bone ; the favourite cut being the thigh, and the idea to ham-
string your opponent. They are like the Spartan in ancient
history, who suffered silently, without a murmur. The reason
they recover is that the plain, common food, such as bush fruits,
yams, &c., keeps their blood in a healthy, vigorous condition.
Like Henry YITI. they like a change of women; conse-
quently, take young girls to satisfy their unholy desires, and
the prime movers in these iniquitous proceedings are the
profligate old men.
I lived between six and seven years at Alice Springs, but I
never knew the blacks there to indulge in such revolting
practices, or it may be I did not then know as much as Ido now.
In my time I have gone out of my way, and sacrificed many
comforts to watch and learn wrinkles about the blacks, and I
have always found them ungrateful and unchaste. There is
one line in an advertisement of Pear’s soap as follows:
“ With base and rude ingratitude and unbecoming slight.”
Whenever I read that I think of my dear friends, the
aboriginals. Be as kind as you will there is an absence of
appreciation until they get hungry, and then, when you have
fully satisfied their physical necessities, that “ baser and ruder
ingratitude ” asserts itself; the animal at once predominates,
and they seem totally oblivious and indifferent as to the source
from which the tucker came. Ananias is not so inappreciative
as others, for not long ago, on noticing the ungratefulness of
some lubras, he became so disgusted that he thought seriously
of resigning his portfolio.
In recording facts truthfully about the blacks’ customs a
person is almost obliged to adopt a style unbecoming and nearly
bordering on the indelicate. It would take a man possessed of
better descriptive powers than I to reduce their dirty habits into
flowery and elegant diction.
Here is a complaint the white men on stations make against
some blackfellows.—They point out a blackfellow, and tell you
how shamefully he treats his lubra, beating her so brutally that
the blood flows from her head. If those who make the complaint
knew as much about lubras as I do they would think they
deserve all they get. Most of them are stubborn, obstinate and
lazy, and their husbands are compelled to resort to extreme
measures to get them to do anything. In a paroxysm of temper
they will tear their apparel into ribbons, and throw their tucker
away in the sand. The savage instinct is more largely


developed in the woman than the man. With bitter and
sarcastic reproaches they taunt the men to kill cattle ; with
upbraidings and revilings they drive their husbands to stand
out and fight another blackfellow until they cut one another
almost to pieces with knives. Old women are more the cause
of cattle-stealing than anyone else. They so rail at, and
persistently incite the males, until from sheer madness they
start on a trip of killing, for which the females laud and
magnify them until they get hungry again.
In one place I was in I saw plenty of euro, iguana, snakes
and wallaby. With a stick I could have got several in a few
hours, and, when I went into the camp and told the lubras
what I had seen, and how easily obtainable, they had the
impudence to tell me that, “blackfellow no want ’em, him get
plenty bullock now,” and, in a tone of perfectly unembarrassed
tranquillity informed me that “ bullock, him better than
kangaroo, and easy got.” This was said with the calm precision
of a scientific demonstration to show me that they were not
afraid to let me know that they liked beef better than their
natural food.
The night before Chillberta and Oleara arrived at Gochintin
they fell in with a camp of natives at Tichewa, who extended
to them a royal hospitality, for in their camp they had two
euros and an emu cooked, also some quondong and mulga apples
A most intensely amusing incident occurred here. Chillberta
found her sister, a girl of twelve, whom she had not seen for
two years. With an expression of deep tenderness, and an air
of gentle gravity, Chillberta said, as she kissed her, “ I am so
glad to see you, and you must come away with me when the
morning sun appears. She then told Oleara she had found the
“child of the west.”
Chillberta’s magnetic eyes, licentious smiles and flowing hair
quite dazzled the eyes of the wild virgin of the far west. She
was quite nude, until Chillberta gave her a shirt, then the two
sisters went to sleep in their wurley, which afforded only
primitive accommodation. Oleara was informed by Chillberta
that he need not fear, but sleep securely as these natives were a
peaceful tribe from the land of the Our-bell-detta, which means
orange.
At daylight Chillberta and her wild sister brought the camels in,
although the assistance of the wild girl was not requisite, for
Chillberta alone could bring them in if necessary. Chillberta and
her sister returned to Gochintin with Oleara, and found Ananias in
charge and all well, except two cases of fumigation, which had been
disposed of by the indefatigable “ boss fumigator,” and two he had
in quarantine.
Oleara now leaves Chillberta a virgin in ripe womanhood.


Chapter Seventh.
WHICH WAY SHALL I GO ?
O r OME months passed away and ’Oleara never saw nor heard
jfe} anything of Chillberta or her country ; but he had a presenti-
ment that all was well, and that she was at Gochintin with her
parents, with whom Oleara had once sojourned ; or, perhaps,
wandering about, in their nomadic mode, from water to water in
their own country in search of pastures new.
In Chillberta’s country there are boundless hills and forests,
beautiful meadows covered with lovely flowers, indifferent to human
care. Here the lordly savage of the hills roams in freedom, leading
the veritable life of a Pasha.
At the base of these gigantic masses lie their native villages ; in
the gorges and glens sparkle springs of water ; whilst on the sides
of the mountains the wallaby and euro are prolific, affording
abundant food to the natives.
It was here that the writer beheld an isolated, lofty eminence,
rising in solitary grandeur from the centre of a wide plain, distant
12 miles from the native village of Okeeleebeetanna.
The writer had been warned not to go there by two or three
vindictive looking savages, who boiled with hostility at the thought
of the white man approaching this particular spot.
The project appeared rash, dangerous and impracticable ; but,
with heroic firmness, he started on his perilous mission, armed with
carbine and revolver and a good stock of ammunition.
In three hours after h aving the little village of Okeeleebeetanna
he put his camel down within 200 yards of the mouth of a large
cave. Coming towards him were 50 male aboriginals, armed with
spears and boomerangs.
Let it be understood that I was conversant with their dialect.
As they approached one said, “ How dare you come here ?”
They remained implacable talking together while the writer was
trying to pacify them, telling them how many natives had been shot
dead in Australia by white men. Just then, with his rifle, he shot
a crow which was perched on a tree about 100 yards away. Tbit
mightily astonished them, and, on being asked to repeat the effors,
he again dislodged another crow.
The writer beckoned them to draw near, asking them to allow him
to see the interior of the cave, and telling them how he had frequently
seen their rites and ceremonies performed by their countrymen on
the young of both sexes.
After about half-an-hour’s conversation with each other—of which
every word was heard by the white man—they agreed to allow him
to see a part of the interior only. Six of them marched in front,
the remainder following behind the white man.


On entering the cave he was met by a young women, perfectly
nude ; around her head she wore a wreath of orange and lilac
blossoms, from her neck hung an unique necklace of quondong stones,
through her nose stuck a snow white bone, and her ribs and thighs
were adorned with stripes of red ochre, bordered with pipe-clay and
charcoal. She was called the Duenna of the Harem.
The males remained at the entrance of the cave, while I advanced
under the escort of the imposing Duenna.
She told me she would show me a nice lot of young girls, and
hoped I would not be infatuated with any of them, which I assured
her was quite foreign to my thoughts.
Traversing the subterranean passage I noticed the walls were
covered with rude drawings, and on coming to some hanging boughs
we stooped to enter a large well-lighted cave, containing 25 native
girls from 12 to 20 years of age.
After a few haughty expressions from the Duenna ten of the nude
natives came, with fawning servility, into the presence of the white
man.
One maiden recognized him as Oleara, the white man, who was
continually wandering about from water to water in Weeloorarra.
She said, “Yes, I know you, you were accompanied by The
Flower of the Lake ; she has, also, another name, Chillberta, which
signifies “ Falling rain.’’
As she appeared to know Oleara so well, and became so chatty,
the Duenna ordered them all back to their couches of meadow grass.
Leading the way to another cave, where were three little black
maidens sitting by a fire, Oleara thought this was the nucleus of
another harem ; but, on going into another apartment, Oleara
observed five young women, two with children at the breast, and
taking their noonday siesta.
In exploring the recesses of these mysterious caves Oleara had
felt some violent sensations come over him at seeing so many pretty
girls, all smiling with captivating sweetness, and hiding their blushes
in luxuriant masses of hair. They quite knew Oleara by this time,
and, on his return with the Duenna, he found they had adorned
themselves with flowers and feathers.
Their dazzling charms threw a glamour of enchantment around the
gloomy walls of the caves, which were adorned, with drawings of
corrobboree meetings, each of which pictures meant a drawing had
been executed for every boy who had been circumcised, and for every
maiden who had been made a young woman.
The chief at this juncture came in, and informed the Duenna that
the white fellow had better go away now, as he thought he had had
a pretty fair insight into matters.
Still, he had not seen half of their mysteries, for far back in their
dark recesses the Duenna herself had only heard of them, not
knowing more of their contents than she knew of the mystery of
Freemasonry.
The Duenna asked the chief if a few of the girls might “ incarine,”
that is, sing a song to the white before he left. The chief agreed,


when four of the girls, including the one who knew Oleara, came
forward and sang a most weird and passionate song.
When they had finished singing Oleara thanked the chief and
Duenna for their kindness in entertaining him, and begged of the
chief to allow him to pay another visit.
The chief, whose brevet rank was Brigham of Weeloorarra, 1 old
Oleara that he might do so on condition that no other white man
accompanied him.
Then, in a raging maelstrom of he called on his
subordinates to escort Oleara to his camel, at the same time taking
a drink of water to fortify his system.
Oleara then mounted his camel, bid them all good Jay, and left
for Okeeleebeetanna, arriving there at sunset, and wrote up the day’s
work thusly :
I have to-day visited a harem in the Western territory of Central
Australia.
I saw nothing revolting or horrible ; there was no listless despon-
dency about those dusky beauties ; to me they all appeared exceed-
ingly happy. There was no sadness as they fixed their large black
eyes on me, nothing suggested wretchedness or discontent, and, for
a moment, I could not resist the thought that this absence of modern
civilization had its charms and attractions peculiarly its own.
But go back to Europe in 1845 ; consider the slavery in
Constantinople, and the barbarity of the Ottoman Empire, and then
one might well say that the aboriginals are well off in their wild
state, and should be left alone.
It is the impious villain —called missionary—who contaminates
the innocent, and, hitherto, unwary blacks, and I know that the
natives from their innate hatred would, if they could, expel them
ruthlessly from their land.
It being a fine moonlight night two untutored children of the
rangbs begged of Oleara to walk and shoot some rock wallabies for
them and their friends. Followed by quite a bevy of boys and girls,
who anticipated a gorgeous feed, Oleara went forth, and, by 11 p.m.
had succeeded in bagging eight large marsupials, much to the
satisfaction of his followers.
That night I lay pondering while the aborigines were cooking
wallabies and singing and dancing around the camp fire Watchful
they were, although their gratitude was not long-lived, and ready to
warn the white man of any danger.
Thus soliloquizing, I thought what does the Government intend
to do for these natives ? Mission stations are a failure, and the life
of the native, male or female, is not unalloyed pleasure. T have
known several to die while undergoing the process of conversion, and
I unhesitatingly affirm that the blacks are better left alone. No
sooner does the missionary loom up than the trouble commences,
and, unwary as he is, is soon trapped by the glamour of the
missionary’s special pleading.
lam reminded here of those words of Tennyson :—“ Do not, as
some unrighteous teachers do, show me the steep and thorny path
to Heaven.”


Warmly as I feel on this subject I will not indulge in expletives,
I leave the reader to conjure all I mean in my wholesome contempt
for some of these canting hypocrites.
Chapter Eighth.
F"\EXT morning Oleara took his rifle, and, accompanied by a
Xy young man, named Pin-pan, which means lightning, he
® commenced the ascent of the steep sides of the ranges.
On the way we saw some caves large enough to receive a waggon,
and magnificent festoons of beautiful flowers hung over the rocky
ledges.
On arriving at the table top I was surprised to find such a large
area of country, with grass-trees and desert oaks. We came to
large rock holes and places that looked like the ruins of old castles.
Time and rain had made their mark upon the sandstone, so much so,
that every conceivable shape and form of things was there ; huge
pillars, bowls, pipes, archways, &c., containing many tons of sand-
stone. No one could see such and not be struck with wonderment
at the immensity of the Creator’s handiwork.
Pin-pan saw a fellow native, and called him. When he came up
I noticed he wore in his hair a crest of feathers from a black hawk’s
wing. I asked him to tell me where I could get some euro, but he
wanted Pin-pan and myself to visit his camp and see his wife and
family.
After walking through washed-out tunnels, gorges and under
archways we came to a camp of happy natives.
One, a girl of about thirteen, bore the same traditional beauty
that is characteristic of the aborigines of this part of Australia.
Pin-pan told them we had a camp at Okeeleebeetanna, and if they
wished to go there they would be welcome.
In the distance t could see the isolated mountain on which was
the harem.
Being tired, I lit my pipe. I had a chat with Pin-pan and the
other natives to try and discover some particulars of the harem and
its denizens.
The elder native, named Intoo (hawk’s wing), said, “ Oh, you
have been there, have you ? I wonder the chief let you see the
inside. Nearly all the girls belonging to Weeloorarra go there at
first to be shown the rudiments of married life, and from there they
are selected by men of their own country for wives. There is a
supply kept also for the chief and his friends. I have no hesitation


in saying that if you visit the chief again he will ask you if you
would like to have one of the girls for a companion.”
I can assure you, [ntoo, that 1 shall not deviate in the slightest
degree from the straight path of virtue, and shall refuse all those
brilliant inducements the chief may offer.
I have been there only once, and, from what I saw, I came to the
conclusion that the older females were jealous of the younger because
of the greater attention paid to them by the fighting band and the
hunters. I think, Intoo, I said, that a plurality of wives is a
mistake, and that these harems are only a wretched refuge for the
vicious. “ Oh, jealousy, thou cruellest of pains to the female heart, for
which there is no cure.”
When I was at the harem a few days ago the girls favoured me
with a song called the Flower of the Lake. I noticed one girl rather
better looking than the general run of them. She had a band of
silver round her neck, riveted on. Do you know her ?
“ Yes,’’ replied Intoo, “ that is Marma-truer, or the Passion
Flower of Love.
A white man, who was lost in the bush, brought that thin silver
band, 1 think he called it a dog’s collar. Before he died he fastened
that on the Passion Flower’s neck, because she was the dark-winged
messenger of peace who saved him from being killed by a horde of
wild savages, who sighted him coming towards a stream of beautiful
water. At the urgent request of Marma-truer, the Passion Flower,
the white man was saved, and lived with that particular section for
about two years, when he died of grief at not being able to get away
from such a wild and inhospitable region, as he called it.
Two days before he died he riveted that silver band on the neck
of the Passion Flower of Love, and if you were to examine it care-
fully you would see some white man’s writing on it, and it might
lead to his identity.”
Yes, said I, when I go again to those caverns I will ask the chief
to let me have a conversation with the Passion Flower, so that I
may cause this dusky beauty’s name to be emblazoned on the pages
of Australian history as a virgin heroine, who, when danger was
imminent, and peril environed the lost white man, came as a
deliverer and saved from a terrible death the man, whom the natives
subsequently loved.
Courageous virtue, followed by devoted love, is far more than I
expected would emanate from one of Australia’s dusky daughters,
who, clothed in her native modesty, walked backwards in front of a
savage mob, imploring for the life of the white stranger and succeeded
in obtaining it. “ Well done, good and faithful servant,”
“But,” said Pin-pan, “you ought to know that the Passion
Flower once travelled about the country with a white man, named
Wallace, and it was through her unbounded love and admiration for
Wallace that she saved the white man, for she thought it was no
other than Wallace coming back to her.”
Pin-pan said he was present when her countrymen were going to
kill the approaching white-fellow, and the thought of such a
diabolical proceeding made the cheeks of this undaunted heroine


tingle with the blush of shame. When she asked the white man if
he knew Wallace he replied that he knew Wallace well, and that he
was coming back to his bower-bird by-and-bye. Wallace always
called the Passion Flower his bower-bird as an endearing term.
Pin-pan, Intoo and Oleara then went on ; two euros were shot,
and the three returned to Okeeleebeetanna and had a good feed.
Next morning Oleara and Pin-pan saddled up two camels, and
started for the isolated mountain to try and obtain an interview with
Marma-truer, the Passion Flower of Love.
On arriving at the huge mouth of the cavern Oleara was met by
the chief Brigham.
He was told that he might go in with the Duenna and make
enquiries about the white man ; “ but,” said the chief, “ she is
breaking her heart for another white man named Wallace, who
found her at Kameran’s Well when she was lame and had been left
by her uncle and others.”
“ I never,” said the chief, “ saw Wallace ; the last man, who died
at Or bind a, was the only white man, except yourself, that I ever
saw. Marma-truer saved him from being impaled on spears, all for
the love she bore Wallace. In fact, I think, she thought it was
Wallace, as he promised to return at a certain time ; anyhow, you
can walk in and see her, she is a good girl and will sing to you if
you care about listening to her.
The Duenna then led the way, followed by Oleara, who carried a
parcel of native fruit to give to Marma-truer.
As Oleara was passing through the subterranean passages he
noticed some fresh made cabalistic hieroglyphics on the walls.
Oleara could see by this that there bad bean some ceremonies
performed since his last visit.
We stooped low under fresh misletoes and beautiful creepers, which
had recently been hung in the doorway, and on rising again I found
myself in the presence of about 30 girls.
I was filled with admiration, and enchanted with the way the
Duenna ordered them to manoeuvre. With garlands of wild flowers over
their shoulders, and necklaces of white shells around their necks,
they circled right and left, finally resuming their seats smiling.
I asked the Duenna if she would allow me to have a chat with
Marma-truer, which was graciously granted. The girl was called,
and went with the Duenna and myself into a small cave adjoining
the large one in which they dined.
I first looked at the inscription on the silver collar, and was sur-
prised to find the name of a man I knew left Charlotte Waters
searching for country with water on it, and, as he never returned, he
was mourned for as lost in the bush.
I got all the information I required from the Passion Flower about
the white man who died. She asked me if I knew her Wallace,
where he was then, and would he ever come back.
I replied that I knew him, that I thought he would come
back to see her, and that at that time he was located at
amongst another tribe of aboriginals, whom he little cared for ; but


that she could rest assured that he would return one of these days,
and receive a royal reception from both blacks and whites.
The Duenna and Marma-truer then led the way into the large
cave, when Marma-truer asked me to take her for a week’s spell to
Okeeleebeetanna.
I replied, “ yes, with the chief’s permission.” The chief was called,
and granted the desired leave, so long as it was the wish of Marma-
truer, but on no account would he have them intimidated.
The chief then called on Marma-truer and four others to sing the
song they composed, the two white men, viz : —Wallace, the absent
one, and the one who died at Orbinda.
I was pleased at the enthusiasm of the other girls in helping poor
little Passion Flower through the song.
It was not until I returned to Okeeleebeetanna
The chief then took me away to underground places, where I saw
some fine specimens of young men, who were recovering from the
rites that had been performed on them. I was surprised to see so
many cavernous hollows used as places of refuge and abode. In one
cell I saw the skeleton of an old warrior lying on a level slab of
stone, and on each side of the warrior were spears and boomerangs.
I then intimated to the chief that it was getting late, and that I
would leave for Okeeleebeetanna with the Passion Flower of Love.
Chapter Ninth.
SHE LOVED WITS A WILD AND PASSIONATE LOVE.
iyi ARMA-TRUER and Oleara rode together on one camel across
I the wild and boundless prairie on the way to Okeeleebeetanna.
When Oleara called the caves, where the Duenna and chief
resided, a pandemonium of vice and sin, Marma-truer flew into a
furious rage, and made Oleara apologize in a kind of way.
Marma-truer said she and all the girls liked the caverns, and
would not like to leave them, unless Wallace came back ; and then,
said she, “ I would go through fire and water to touch his hand once
more. We do not stay in those caves like prisoners ; we wander
about the boundless hills and forests of this our native land, collect
emu and pheasant eggs, and in their season we have abundance of
wild fruit. Of course, there are times when we must meet at the
caves. We are told by the Duenna, and chief, that every full moon
the girls have to be there ;it is also done by signals. We make a
large smoke arise at noon on certain mountains.
Another thing, when we are at the harem we have our food brought


to us. A certain number of young men are told off for hunting each
day, and they return with kangaroos, euros, wallabies, snakes, and
any number of eggs.
But should I ever see Wallace again I will never leave him ; not
all the blacks in Weeloorarra could part him and me again. I
worshipped Wallace with a sublime affection, and in him I placed
a never-dying confidence.
What made me love him more than ever was that I had a rival—
a voluptuous beauty, who is now one of the girls in the harem. She
saw Wallace and me together, and she tried to win him from me.
She gave him rubies, opals, emu eggs and beautiful shells. She did
more ; she followed him one hundred miles, when he had left me
behind for the time. Wallace brought her back and handed her
over to the natives, and they annexed her as a demi-monde for the
harem. She is very pretty, and you might have noticed that she
helped me to sing that song about Wallace. She has almost for-
gotten him now, but I have not.”
We were now getting close to Okeeleebeetanna, and Marma-truer
was chatting all the while about Wallace and her pretty country.
On our arrival all the girls in my camp went out and kissed the
Passion Flower, and the next greatest sign of friendship is to offer
food, which was done in this case.
Pin-pan’s riding camel began flying round and kicking up ;
Pin-pan came down a buster, and, having no trousers on, the
anatomy of the rudder part became sadly demoralized. When the
lubras saw that Pin-pan was in trouble they began to gammon sorry.
It is really wonderful how they can assume a tremendous display of
well-feigned horror.
Pin-pan made use of some terrible objurgations in his native
tongue, and began wiping some gravel out of his ears, mattering
something about the bull camel being utterly unscrupulous, and
scowling at Marma-truer for her laughing. lam trying to express
the sentiments of Pin-pan, and not of myself, because he was the
sufferer from the “ cropper.”
I commenced to write up my daily record, and then went to the
water where a weeping willow touched the surface.
The night was beautiful and still, and I disrobed for a swim, I
say disrobed ; well, so I did, no one else could do such a thing,
because I was the only one for hundreds of miles around who wore
any clothes.
On some occasions I discarded my habiliments, painted my bread-
basket with red ochre and charcoal, just to be in the fashion, and to
please the natives. At the special request of some male aborigines,
on one occasion, I stripped, and they painted me all over with red
ochre and charcoal, and stuck feathers and down on my chest, and
then marched me to the corrobboree.
I did not expect to see such a large audience present, but, when
it came to my turn to stamp down the race to where the black
beauties were sitting, I blushed beautifully, I must have appeared
supremely attractive. I noticed the ladies could scarcely restrain
their genuine admiration.


The love of admiration is inborn in the sex that I nearly succumbed
to their seductive charms. I laughed so much that two natives had
to remove me from the stage.
Marma-truer, in her pensive languor, looked seductively beautiful
and, with many others, encored me ; in fact, one lubra threw a
bunch of wild flowers to me. I picked the bouquet up, bowed, and
then left to get some clothes, as mosquitoes and sand-flies were
helping themselves to my “ too solid flesh,’’ much to my discomfiture.
1 re-appeared on the stage at the special request of a deputation
of ladies and gentlemen indigenous to Central Australia. I had to
be re-adorned with more feathers and gum leaves, the rudder part
had to be painted by an artist ; the whole aspect of the thing
seemed, at first, ludicrous in the extreme, but it was not so with the
natives, for they never laughed so much in their lives.
I made a corrobboree while I was on the job, thus : —Jackurri,
Jackaree, chinky, wall-lar-mar. Eepeating and singing through
my nose for five minutes, and slapping my thighs to keep time.
While 1 was naked, adorned and painted by themselves, they
remarked that I was their beau-ideal of manly beauty. I then
resumed my shirt, as the mosquitoes—“ those industrious creatures,
singing as they toil ” —had, uninvited, attached themselves to my
body with the tenacity of the parasite. I adjourned sine die.
My thoughts were many and varied on the subject of polygamy,
as there were no less than seven men at this performance who owned
the modest number of four wives apiece. I recommended they
should send any superfluous wives to the harem.
1 made enquiry as to eunuchs, and they assured me there were
none in the country.
I have been camped at Okeeleebeetanna a month, and I thought
it was time to move on to some other place.
As these natives, with their wives and families, were bound next
morning for the harem caves I sent Marma-truer back with them.
I packed up the camels, and left with Pin-pan, Intoo, and twelve
others, mostly females, for Arbinda, the place where they buried the
white man who riveted the collar on the neck of the Passion Flower.
Just before Marma-truer left for the harem she began to shuffle
about going back. I could see she had a wild yearning to roam
with me, and, when she saw I would not take her, she said, “ good-
bye, my gay and festive rover.”*
1 then steered the leading camel into the quiet of the primeval
forest solitude for Lake Amadeus, via Arbinda and Gochintin, with
the object of furthering my knowledge of the aborigines.of Australia.
Among the fourteen natives who accompanied me on the trip west
were four men, four women, two babies and four girls ; named,
Ernuity (turkey), Okerry (green), O-long-ga-ra (palm), Nor-reely
(zig-zag). Turkey, Green, Palm, and Zig-zag, they are the names
and the definitions in the native language of those four girls who
were modest and virtuous, as far as I knew.
They informed me they had never resided at the harem, but
Moric-nurra you-loo Coo-rie Oleara Neen-jieveny.


walked about with their parents mostly. They were all good blacks,
from Intoo, the eldest, down to the babies ; still, the palm for beauty
must be given to Nor-reely, for she was the flower of the family, and
the most talkative.
She told me her lover was killed by the Lake Amadeus tribe in a
close fight. She said she witnessed it, and, when he fell, she took
the knife and spear from the falling hand and fell unresisting on his
breast. Now we are going with you to the Lake we all have a sweet
feeling of safety: but, she added, our men hold an unabated
vengeance towards them through the death of my sweetheart, who
was a young man of indomitable courage.
We arrived at Arbinda, which is only twenty miles from
Okeeleebeetanna ; unsaddled the camels, prepared the camp, wrote
up my journal, and visited the solitary grave of one of the white men
who perished in the unknown wilds of Central Australia ; where no
sable pall, no waving plume stands over the grave of the long-lost
traveller.
As a youngster, I imbibed a love for roaming in solitary places—
a desire I shall never lose.
Chapter Tenth.
“BUT I’LL NOT FORGET YOU, DARLING!”
T"\EXT morning we left Arbinda at sunrise, and, at 9 a.m., we
I / arrived at a native well surrounded by green rushes and
munyeroo.
Here we noticed fresh tracks of some natives, which were identified
by Nor-reely and Okerry as some of their friends and relatives.
These tracks were making westward ; so, after having a cool drink,
we made another start on our journey ; Zig-zag riding on the same
camel as myself in the lead, chatting all the time about her country,
which she loved with all her heart.
At noon we were passing through park-like scenery, on either
side flanked by large rocks echoing the merry music of prattling
rivulets of clear water, I noticed the absence of native wurleys ;
there was an unbroken stillness, which added an indescribable charm
to the scene. Nor-reely hung down her head, and there was an
absence of conversation among the blacks.
Ah, said I, there is some superstition about this locality, and I
must make enquiry, when Nor-reely’s grief is assuaged. I could
now notice they were all, more or less, anxious to get through this
pass, which, subsequently, I ascertained was the Yale of Tears.


A white man, travelling about with aborigines, acquiring infor-
mation for his country’s sake, exploring unknown regions, and
causing his discoveries to be published without fee or reward for the
pure benefit of his countrymen is just what the author of “ Tie and
Trick ” says :—“ Even now the hero of a score of tough tussles is
passed over for the drawing-room dandy, who lives his little life* of
eyeglass, ignorance, arrogance, superciliousness and failure.”
I decline to write up the horrible affair connected with the Vale of
Tears on' account of it being indecorous—murder was the effect,
incest the cause.
We were now through the Yale of Tears, and Zig-zag began
singing a song about some sweetheart of hers, perhaps the young
fellow that was killed. I could make out enough of it to understand
something tantamount to “ I’ll not forget you, darling,” so I added,
for my own amusement, “ In the land I’m going to.”
It was nearing sundown, and we were approaching a sparsely-
timbered gum creek. Here we camp, because Nor-reely tells me
there is permanent water here, called Warroo Pulley, meaning “the
wallaby ranges.”
As my commissariat is looking low I will send Pin-pan with the
gun to get us some wallabies.
We put the camels down at a large water-hole and unsaddled.
Pin-pan returned in less than an hour with four rock wallabies
and a snake. These they commenced cooking, with the sky for a
canopy.
After a refreshing meal, thoroughly enjoyed by all, notwithstanding
its native simplicity, we laid down to sleep, with the exception of one
old fellow, who sat at the fire. He was munching ferociously at a
wallaby with his large mouth : judging from the size of it, I thought
it belonged to a syndicate. He then calmly closed his grurnmet-
hole eyes, and in ten minutes he was snoring stentoriously on the
sand, without covering of any kind.
As the mosquitoes were still actively industrious I went to the
camp-fire, and wrote up my log-book.
Nor-reely also woke up and came to the fire, as the mosquitoes
were also troubling her. She told me of a large rock, only about
ninety miles south of our present camp. She said it went towering
to the skies, and there was plenty of fresh water on its sides.*
This, I presume, is Ayers’ Rock, known to explorers, therefore, I
will not visit it, but continue in the dark corners where whites have
never trodden.
This portion of country may be regarded as unknown ; the only
man who has been anywhere near it is Mr. Ernest Giles, in 1872,
and he passed from east to west. He had no time to look about
him.
Nor-reely went to her wurley, or rather, a bit of a breakwind, and
I went to my bunk on the sand.
At 7 a.m. we left Warroo Pulley for Moora-Moora, which means
“ jawbone.”
* Pulley Bunt—or, Pulley Ec-nurru.


A man requires to know the value of foresight. On a hill this
morning with my field-glasses I could see, stretching away to the
west as far as my eye could reach, sandhills and desert oaks.
When I came down I ordered the camel water-bags to be filled,
and continued my journey.
About noon I was in the midst of a scene of surprising desolation,
spinifex and desert oak predominating.
At 3 p.m. we came to a tortuous belt of mulga scrub almost
impenetrable ; but, after about two hours’ travelling, we got through
it, our bodies torn and scratched generally. An oasis now welcomed
us, but the well had no water in it.
This is Moora-moora, and a good job I had plenty of water with
me. Once again was I convinced of the danger of relying on natives
for reliable information as to water, &c., they know but little of the
changes affected by time, nor how long water will last in a given spot.
We camped here for the night, and, on overhauling my plans for
scaling distances, I came across a copy of that famous little paper,
Quiz. The cartoon showed a sketch of David Lindsay, the quondam
explorer, sitting in a palanquin carried by a couple of Australia’s
dusky savages, with a host of others behind carrying water.
On my explaining in their language it became positively amusing ;
some of them laid down on their bread-baskets on the sand and
laughed extravagantly. One old gin in her shirt was secretly
giggling in anticipation of my fetching something more funny out
of the plan case, about David Lindsay, and to soothe her dog she
threw a stone at him and broke its jawbone.
At Jawbone camp the soothing act was followed by jeers of
indignation, while Nor-reely gave an expressive sniff of enjoyment,
and remarked “ when ’tis done, then ’twere well it were done quickly.”
She looked undeniably lovely just then, and her exuberant spirits
seemed to enliven the whole camp.
The old woman, who owned the dog, came up with a yam stick to
chastize Nor-reely for laughing, and, in sheltering the friendless
maiden from the storms of a cruel world, I incurred the displeasure
of some older natives. It was soon forgotten and forgiven, and we
had tea.
I wrote up the log-book, had a stimulant of rum—what bushmen
call a “Jimmy Woodser,” that is, drinking alone.
Next morning we left Moora-moora, striking due west towards
nay destination, Lake Amadeus.
We travelled until 4 p.m. across bad and inhospitable country,
and camped for the night at Yalka, which means seeds or small nuts
dug out of the ground. There were plenty here, and I liked them
very much indeed.
We started again next morning, and at noon we sighted the Lake,
and got plenty of fresh water in little ti-tree swamps. I was rather
impressed with the beautiful sheet of salt water extending as far as
the eye could reach.
Just before dark we were visited by twenty-one aborigines of all


sizes and both sexes. They knew some of my party, consequently
commenced a conversation —all talking at one time.
One very dirty-looking old fellow began pitching to me about the
climate and the symptoms of approaching rain, and would I favour
him with the latitude of Mount Unapproachable. When he broached
the subject of Federation I wished Ananias was here so that the old
rooster could be fumigated and revivified.
Chapter Eleventh.
THE QUEEN OF A TROPICAL LAKE.
TT7HE next morning I was awoke by hearing a row in the camp.
® There was only one old woman that had a shirt, and that was
the one, who, a few days before, was going to beat Nor-reely.
To get at a solution of the embroglio I went to their camp with a
whip, and ascertained that the old woman was indignant because
Pin-pan had slept with Okerry. This was against their tribal
customs.
I had the maiden, Okerry, and the young man, Pin-pan brought
before me, and heard the case. It was not altogether a case of
incest, but Pin-pan had been guilty of sleeping with his aunt.
I dismissed the case, as the aunt went to Pin-pan’s wurley of her
own free will and accord, so the old lady with the shirt lost the day.
She gave Okerry a welting with a yam stick, and left her hors-de-
combat on the shores of the beautiful lake. Then Zig-zag and I
attended to her professionally ; salts, pain-killer, &c., were
administered, much to Okerry’s relief.
During the afternoon I sent the girls out in search of native
pheasant’s eggs (leipoa), as this locality is famed for this luxury.
They returned before sundown with over forty eggs, nearly all of
which were good. Those that were very bad I gave to the old fellow
who spoke to me about the atmosphere and barometer. He smelt
them, looked sideways at me, and sniffed in a contemptible fashion.
At 7 p.m. a deputation, consisting of aboriginal ladies, waited
upon me, stating that the Queen of the Lake, an old woman, would
like to see me. I replied, “ all right, trot the old geyser out,”
With fawning servility the poor parched up old gin came close.
I extended my hand to her, and said, “ Queen of the Lake, I
presume al Stanley) ; what do you want ?”
“ Oh,” she replied, “fourteen years ago a white man was on this
spot, and his horses got bogged in hot blue mud down on the arm


of the lake. He could not cross it there, he had to go round. I
will show a tree that he marked, any time you like to walk out.”
She then began a story about the blacks of her own country, who
had killed and eaten her little daughter during hard times. It
brought tears to her eyes, and, when the girls heard this and saw
the old queen’s face, they wept also. I recognized always the germ
of that profound sentiment, which expands in the matured breast of
youth into the passion flower of love. How Nor-reeiy, Okerry,
Ernuity and the others felt for the poor old lubra, just shows that
they have some affection in them.
1 have watched, in mingled alarm and admiration, when a death
occurs. They beat their heads with stones and pieces of wood, until
the blood flows down their cheeks, to exhibit their deep sorrow. It
is a highly practical if painful method of displaying sympathy.
When 1 feel cut up I don’t whack my cocoanut with a stick.
I called the dirty old queen to come to me, told her not to be so
impetuous and impulsive ; for, said I, Christianity teaches to bear
and forbear ; and, as I caught hold of the lobe of her left ear, I said,
“ now remember, old woman, you must endeavour to cultivate mutual
forbearance and toleration.” As I gave the ear an extra squeeze, I
remarked, “ you arrogantly pride yourself in whacking other gins
with your yam stick ; you are like the old woman over there
giggling in her shirt, the only virtue she possesses is the belabouring
others with a big stick. Now, you can go and fetch me a bough of
wattle blossom, I like its perfume, and remember it is emblematical
of our native land.” In a few minutes she returned with the wattle
blossom, with which I adorned my old cabbage-tree hat in the moon-
light of an autumn night.
I took the pain-killer bottle, and went out to a bough wurley to
soothe and cure, if possible, a pining, lackadaisical invalid in the
wilds of the western territory of my beautiful Australia.
I cannot depict here all that I have seen. These poor creatures
amuse me, in fact, they take no notice of me, and, I suppose, think
I am taking no notice of them ; their simplicity and superstition are
incongruous in the extreme. They think me a duffer in their hearts,
and I think them a very innocent lot of savoury-smelling duffers, with
no more sentiment than a lump of putty.
It takes five old gins to make a felonious assualt on a snake ;
whereas some white men would pick it up by the tail and jerk its
head off like the crack of a whip.
I remained a fortnight on the eastern shore of Lake Amadeus,
during which time I interviewed different small groups of natives,
some from Ayers’ Rock and Musgrave Ranges, others from the
north end of the lake. I collected a pretty good assortment of
weapons and emu eggs, &c., and returned to Okeeleebeetanna with
more natives than I took out with me.
At some future date (D.Y.) I hope to revisit Lake Amadeus, and
hope to better myself by the discoveries I made on this trip.
I am now at Okeeleebeetanna, 220 miles south-west of Alice
Springs, and in a few days I shall visit the harem at the Peak of
Tempests.


I did intend writing about the blacks of the creeks Deering and
Rebecca. These two water-courses are on the southern extremity of
Lake Amadeus, and are well worth seeing.
After three days’ camping at Okeeleebeetanna I left with Pin-pan
and Nor-reely for the harem.
I was invited inside by the second in command, as the old chief
had left for Ayers’ Rock on one of his nomadic visits.
I saw the Duenna, and introduced her to Nor-reely. Then I saw
Marma-truer, the great beauty of the dusky order, but she is a
terrible coquette. I walked about like a sultan in his seraglio, and
took stock of their habits.
It was now dinner-time, and Nor-reely and I shared the generous
hospitality of the kind-hearted inmates of these wonderful caves.
I forgot to mention that whilst I was at Lake Amadeus I sent a
a young man into the chief of the harem with a message stating
about the time I would revisit him. The young native relied on me
with the affectionate confidence of boyhood, and he delivered the
message with punctilious accuracy, after six days’ walking through
the bush. Their enduring fortitude is, at times, surprising, anyhow,
I subsequently did him a good turn.
He told me he would like to have Nor-reely for his lubra, and
through me he got her. I used all the influence I had with Nor-
reely’s father and mother. He was eligible for her according to their
tribal laws, and I felt happy when I saw them doting on one another
so affectionately.
Having no white man with me for such a long time I relished
the companionship of Nor-reely and her young husband.
We have been invited to stay here to-night to witness some
dancing and singing. Marma-truer and all the girls asked the
Duenna and the young chief to press us to stay, to which I consented.
I hope I won’t have my backbone and bread-basket painted on
this auspicious occasion. I don’t want to appear as a clown again,
especially before such select company as those who live at the Peak
of Tempests.
I noticed to-day at the entrance to the large cave an old black-
fellow that took a prominent part in the Erldunda attack. The
exalted old vagabond occupies a position at this harem similar to
that of a Government whip. He is chairman of committees that go
out to distant parts to steal lubras. I saw that he recognized me
by the way he slunk behind some large boulders.
During the evening I went into the large cave with the officers of
the harem. Fires were burning all round ; it was a gorgeous
spectacle ; it gave a beautiful and cheerful lustre to the walls of the
receding caves ; in fact, it was a resplendency of gem work. Parts
of the large cave were embellished with flowers and maple boughs,
and in the centre, overhead hung a magnificent eucalyptus misletoe,
festooned with bunches of ripe red quondong, and on the eastern
walls hung their spears, wommeras and shields, which were
emblazoned with figures of love.
It might sound something like the embellishment of romance in
stating this, that, at a sign from the Duenna, thirty girls, all adorned


with flowers, shell and quondong necklaces, came lightly tripping
one behind the other, and then circled slowly with graceful posturing
and clasped hands. Nor-reely and Marma-truer were the last half
section, and, at a word from the Duenna, they commenced a wild
galloping dance round and round.
Here was I, with a dozen young men, surrounded by a vignette
group of dancing girls entangled in wreaths of flowers, and some
shrouded in palm leaves.
It was an imposing sight when the young men and girls left the
cave and walked outside to inhale the refreshing breeze of that lovely
autumnal moonlight night.
Then the corrobboree was resumed, and they paired off for love,
as is the custom on such occasions.
In the distance I could see an array of huge ranges, whose frowning
grandeur 1 loved to pourtray. At the base of these gigantic masses
lie the native villages, where the happiest of all mortals drive dull
care away.
Whilst the natives were dancing and enjoying themselves I gave
myself up to a profoundly intricate and gloomy reverie.
Whilst in this quiet position I was gently tapped on the shoulder,
and, on looking round, I saw Marma-truer beckon to me. I was
surprised when she suggested a clandestine departure for Okeeleebee-
tanna.* Of course, I most emphatically refused ; she gave me a
look of spiteful asperity, and, with an assumption of haughty self-
assurance, she walked away.
Soon after she returned, accompanied by her brother, who tried to
intimidate and force me into mutual dealings with his sister.
Had I left the Peak of Tempests with the Passion Flower
clandestinely the whole of the natives would, henceforward, be against
me, and, had I succumbed to the combined blandishments of
Marma-truer and the intimidation of her brother, it might have
ended worse still.
So I sat there and watched the corrobboree till nearly daylight.
Marma-truer I knew to be rather loose in her morals of late, and I
knew also that she had a young man who thought a lot of her. It
would not do for me to incur his displeasure in such a wild region,
at such a time the exercise of self-denial was imperative.
At daybreak the old chief, who had been absent, returned from
Ayers’ Rock with six men, and sixteen lubras, and a few children.
He was glad to see me again, I introduced him to Nor-reely and the
others who came back with me from the lake. I told the chief that
this would he the last time I would visit the harem for a long time,
as I was bound in for the Overland Telegraph Line. He then made
me a present of two hundred-weight of native weapons of all sorts
I left Nor-reely and Okerry with him, and ordered my camels to be
brought up.
* Go-(li>.rru by-oule yau iiing Okeoloobeehnma.


Chapter Twelfth.
“ OMNIA VINCIT AMOR”
JUST as I was leaving, Nor-reely and others stood on a grassy
knoll waving branches of wattle blossom and calling me back.
When I left the harem no one there knew that Marma-truer
was absent. It appears she had absconded half-an-hour before I
left, and had travelled with marvellous rapidity through the scrub
towards Okeeleebeetanna.
It was in the dark shadows of the mountains, and at the base of
a frowning precipice that I beheld Marma-truer with my field-glasses
looking back towards the Peak of Tempests to see if I was coming.
I knew now that Marma-truer had deserted, and, as failure
involves disgrace, perhaps death, it would be my duty to protect her,
so I called her to my side and took her with me to Okeeleebeetanna.
She regarded me with renewed intensity, and smiled with an evil
satisfaction, as much as to say :—“Ah, I found a way of clearing
out, and now you will have to take care of me.” Thus in the lively
role of an absconder, the debutante was favourably received at my
depot.
She humbly petitioned me not to give her up to the blacks if they
should come over from the harem, as they had enough there to
satisfy their lascivious desires.*
No one came for her, so we packed up and started between the
ranges—a labyrinth of winding glens and vales for ten miles. Then
it opened out into a beautiful salt and cotton-bush plain, with large
clay-pans upon it,
I was now travelling to the eastward, and, knowing the country
well, we camped for the night at a rock-hole, called by the natives,
Wol-coo-roo, meaning “stone tomahawk.” It was here that 1 filed
the silver collar from the neck of Marma-truer.
In calling the roll this evening I find I have Ernuity, O-long-ga ra,
Marma-truer and seven others, three men and lour women ; that is,
ten belonging to the country, besides three of my working blacks.
I laid down to sleep in this glorious southern land, under the
Southern Cross, and, by the glare of the fires, I could see the
athletic natives of both sexes enjoying themselves, and talking about
Marma-truer’s escape from the harem.
I had a good night’s rest, and in the morning I called the boys
and girls and sent them out for the camels.
I went up to the rock-hole with a tin of black paint and a brush,
and was just exercising my artistic skill by painting a bull camel on
the flat rock when an old fellow came up to criticise it. I daubed
him on the naval with a brush-ful of paint, and it almost made a
* Wee-umpa Im-bye bnrtoo ar-coona.


white mark upon him. He adroitly avoided all further remarks, as
the unexpected preliminaries were very distasteful to him.
I smiled with no little complacency when I saw another old black
coming up with a ten-inch grin on his countenance. He came close,
just as I was putting the finishing touch on the camel’s hump. He
got a brush-full right in his mouth, which caused him to wince with
irrepressible dismay.
I found painting on the flat rocks a very congenial occupation.
I could hear the last old fellow spitting out paint a hundred yards
off, and could see Marma-truer laughing in a towel in the distance.
In this world of disappointment, and under a sinister sky, Marma-
truer says the denizens of the encampment afford me amusement.
Well, it is essential is some diversion in this monotonous life of
picnics we have been leading. In a languishing attitude she lay
back, and asked me to daub some old women with the brush. Two
or three were standing about, and in a playful raillery I gave one a
brush-full, much to her chagrin and the amusement of Marma-truer,
who said, “ Well done, my elegant cavalier, more make ’em.”
It is manifested by a large consensus of the blacks that they enjoy
foolery.
I used to translate whitefellow anecdotes to them, and they would
sit round the camp-fire and laugh for hours. Tradition points to
the fact that the natives were once better than they are now. During
the present century they have deteriorated in moral worth, and, if
I don’t take them in hand they will be worse than ever.
If I were provided with the means I could raise them all to a
better condition by diplomacy and kindness. But no, the government
would rather give a thousand miles of country to imprudent
missionaries, who violate the popular rites of the aborigines. Header,
think me not uncharitable, if I denounce the mission work in
Central Australia. What I mean, is, they do not possess the
necessary tact to deal successfully with the aborigines,—they do not
do the right thing at the right time.
It is well known that after rain the natives want to wander about
in search of bush-tucker. I watched the graceful undulations of the
bewitching Marma-truer, who went out with the others to get
quondongs. We met here an old gin, with a bone stuck through
her angelic proboscis. She told us she had recently come from the
Mission Station, and that the missionaries’ soothing influence could
not get over her, or her lovely daughter who was out getting bush-
tucker. She would be in at sundown with her father, who was out
with her. When they returned, the old man had an emu on his
back, and on perceiving me he manufactured a fagged-out grin on
the starboard side of a mouth like an entrance to a cave. He flopped
the emu down, and then sat upon it, and opened the conversation
with some remarks about the symptoms of approaching rain.
He then commenced to cook the emu, whilst a galaxy of wild
beauties stood round and watched the modus operandi. This is,
indeed, an enchanting spot; spring and gorge, wild, yet, in all its
natural simplicity, fascinating and seductive. Here, one cannot fail


to realize the intense feeling which prompted Edgar Allan Poe to
sing :
“ This world is full of beauty.
As other worlds above ;
And, if we did our duty.
It might be full of love.”
I lie, and revel in the thought that here I could remain, all that
there is to me of life, by you a silver rivulet of dancing spring water
flows, like Tennyson’s brook, “ for ever,” and on it, for your path are
flowers of every conceivable hue, inviting you to inhale their delicious
perfume ; the ripe fig, the native peach and orange almost speak
their invitation of welcome ; and, above all, here is freedom in its
truest, grandest form, emancipated from the restrictions of feudalism,
no fence of wire, no dominating, crushing landlordism, no game
laws, land laws ; but a spot unfettered, divinely free, where every one
can stand and cry like, William Tell, “ This is the land of liberty.”
The camels are all in sight, some wallowing in magnificent feed,
while high aloft on a craggy eminence of the George Gill Range
sits the lordly eagle. Wallabies and emus can be seen all the time,
whilst a bevy of smockless and unblushing girls were breaking down
boughs to make a wurley.
I speak the true sentiments of my heart, when I say if I were a
Silver King, the possessor of a princely income, my truest happiness,
eh, the acme of my ambition would be to fit out the necessary party
for the exploration of these unexplored, unknown spots of Central
Australia.
I would collect specimens of the fauna and flora of this Central
and Western Territory, and assisted by experts in the mineralogical
and geological sciences would give to the country, which I glory in
calling my native home, the results of our individual and collective
efforts.
I camped at this beautiful spot for three days, and informed the
natives that I intended to leave them now in their own country; that
I would start next morning with my black-boys and camels for the
telegraph line.
They were surprised and would not believe it; they thought I
was going to wander about with them for the rest of my natural
life. That night I addressed the old, infirm, and budding beauties
in as an effective speech as my limited vocabulary would allow. I
said, “ My dear countrymen and sisters, I have been roaming about
with you for some years now ; those who were babies when I came
among you are now young men and women. I love you all, and it
is your presence in this little-known part of that great Empire upon
which the sun never sets, that I am indebted for the happy times
I have experienced, and for the position I hold under the Crown.
I have sometimes written of you as lazy, ungrateful, and treacherous,
but I did not mean all of you ; some of you are faithful, kind,
obedient, and always ready to teach me your dialect. For all these
things the white man is more than thankful. All the clothing,
blankets, knives, and tomahawks will be divided amongst you to-
morrow morning.” At this juncture the tears rolled down the cheeks


of two of the audience ; then, I added, “the rations I can spare shall
be divided amongst you. If God spares me I will come back to
see you all, and when the wattle blooms again you must remembe.r
me ; how I adorned my hat and my camels with that emblem of my
native land, and how I taught you to adorn yourselves wit h it,
because we Australians cherish it, as do our fathers the oak.”
Those susceptible of kindly feelings began to perspire, and one
old fellow rose to make a few remarks. He first divested himself of
of his trousers, as though it were an encumbrance restraining his
native eloquence. He had no shirt, and thus “unadorned, adorned
the most,” he, on behalf of himself and the ladies present waxed
eloquent in appreciation of the white man. His acrobatic efforts
to convince me that I was appreciated induced a fervid perspiration
that distance might enchant, but a close acquaintance was not all
violets. I was glad when I heard the last word of the swarthy
fellow’s preroration.
Then the most modest and sensitive of all the girls rose and
expressed her sentiments, evidently consciously acknowledging the
white man’s human efforts—l say this without egotism, lam relating
facts.
Then came another old man, who said they would all miss the
kangaroos and emus the white man had shot for them ; and,
apparently, unused to public speaking he suddenly collapsed.
Overcome by the effort he had made he unconsciously flopped himself
down wallop on an old gin, who began to squeal, he angrily
exclaiming—“ What are you squealing about, eh F”
Next day I bid them all good-bye in the classic vernacular of the
whites.
Piccaninnie time me come up nother one side, more farther, or
rather “Bartoo Coon - ga-endoota ni-you-100-nar-tuck-albyn-nung-
hung-ee-Erra-benie-uc-kill-ya kon-ga-roo.”
Midst crying and laughing my camels glided through a troop of
dusky children ; sensible of the effect of the separation, and who, in
grief called out vociferously—“ Come back! Comeback!” —native
Pichi-malla, Pichi-malla.
“ Oh ! when amongst their native fields I wandered in the sun.
It seemed as if my morn of life had only just begun ;
So deep a rapture thrilled my heart as while I gazed around —
I recognised a thousand charms upon Australian ground.”
—Literary Leaves.
Oleara little dreamt that the native “good-bye,” so earnestly, so
feelingly, and so emphatically pronounced was to be a prolonged and
forced separation from those he loved, and for whom he had felt
always an interest intensified the more he knew of them and the
longer he remained among them. When he heard the spontaneous
lamenting of his dusky friends break forth in their exclamation of
regret, so forcibly exhibited in their native eloquence, “ Pichi-malla,
Pichi-malla,” nothing was farther from his thoughts than the
impending disaster which was so soon to overwhelm him.
Overwhelm, did I say ? ah ! Oleara had too long been accustomed
to the ills of life ; had suffered hardships infamiliar to the city man ;


and, indeed but few bushmen could produce a record of such stirring
incidents—such personal sacrifice and hardy martyrdom to duty as
his years of service show.
Stanley saw Africa ; he had his fellow white men, and the
enjoyment of social intercourse was thus maintained unbroken.
What that means let those who have suffered its deprivation
say. Stanley was welcomed back to civilization with the acclamations
of the world, praised by princes, made the familiar of kings, idolized
in the drawing-room of savants, and for the time was exalted as tbe
greatest hero of the nineteenth century.
All honor to the indomitable pluck and energy which characterized
Stanley’s work. But in this fair land of Australia, the pioneer, the
explorer, the officer of the Government goes forth with one aim only
—to do his duty. He anticipates no princely reception on the
completion of his arduous work, and though the laurel of well-earned
victory be denied him, he is content in the calm consciousness of
having done the right, and successfully accomplishing that which was
demanded by his country from him.
Well, Oleara’s work was performed in the execution of duty as a
public officer; that, and that alone was his guiding star, and
faithfully did he follow it. It will corneas a staggerer to the reader,
to know that Oleara met with no such gratifying reception, at the
hands of his country. The flattering address took the form of a
warrant on the charge of murder.
Oleara was arrested, underwent all the indignities of an ordinary
prisoner of the Crown ; was manacled, ironed, and without warning,
hurled remorselessly into a prison cell. Here, in solitude and cruel
restraint he groaned in the bitterness of his heart, and thought of
those words of the “ Prisoner of Chillon,” immortalized by Byron—
“ My hair is grey, but not with years ;
Nor grew it white
In a single night.
As men’s have grown from sudden fears :
My limbs are bow’d, though not with toil.
But rusted with a vile repose,
For they have been a dungeon’s spoil.
And mine has been the fate of those
To whom, the goodly earth and air
Are bann’d and barr’d —forbidden fare.”
Thus soliloquizing Oleara threw himself on the hard bench in his
cell, and allowed his thoughts to wander back to the happy freedom
of his life among the natives. Recalling the scathing words of
Dumas—“ Farewell to kindness, humanity, and gratitude, farewell
to all the gpntler sentiments of the heart ; I have been heaven’s
substitute to recompense the good ; may I also be the substitute of
an avenging Providence to punish the wicked thus meditating
Oleara felt acutely the meaning of “ Man’s inhumanity to man.”
Unjustly—a mild term in this case—robbed of his freedom ; his
property left to the mercy of thieving blacks ; escorted by one of
his own cloth evidently gratified and exultant at his downfall, Oleara
felt he had still one reliable never-failing friend in the consciousness
of his own rectitude, and in the midst of this his severest trial he


prayed—“ Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass
against us.”
Accustomed to adversity ; travelling for years, with blacks only
for companions, across sandhills and spinifex deserts of Central
Australia ; living mostly in scenes of desolation ; hardened to
disappointment, he yet was free.
Now, a prisoner charged with the worst of crimes, instigated most
undoubtedly, by a spirit of revenge, his experience was bitter, and his
thoughts cynical, for he exclaimed in the words of Pasquin —“ Ino
longer despise humanity, the world is full of rogues and ruffians,
and I love them. Faith and hope have I none, but charity is greater
than all. This virtue envelopes my system and embraces every
vagabond under the sun.” Still there were some who could discern
the moving spirit in this unrighteous prosecution ; and it is but just,
fair, and reasonable that the following clippings from the press should
accompany this unpretending sketch of a man whose only fault was,
that he served his country too well.
“ Had I but served my God as I served my king,
He would not thus have left me in my misery.”


THE FINKE RIVER TROUBLE.
APPREHENSION, TRIAL, AND HONOURABLE
ACQUITTAL OF M.C. WILLSHIRE.
LETTERS AND EXTRACTS FROM NEWSPAPERS.
MR. WILLIAM WILLSHIRB.
Sir —No doubt the subject I am about to touch upon is a very
delicate and serious one, and I, being a woman, admit feeling
almost at a loss to know in which way to approach it, but being
fully determined I at the same time consider it almost a duty
that I, with many others should speak of, and make known all
that we know in Mr. Willshire’s favour. I may safely say there
are many men in the Mac Donnell Ranges who hope to see him
a free man again soon. He is one of our earliest pioneers of
Central Australia, having lived in and about the Mac Donnell
Ranges, lam told, for over fourteen years. He has borne his share
of hardships, combined with exposure, hunger, thirst, and
misery; he has proved himself to be always a courageous,
good-natured, thoughtful and honourable man whilst amongst
us. In many instances his worth has been tested and appreciated
here. He was always the poor man’s friend. His greatest
pleasure appeared to be derived in giving and helping others
whom fortune had frowned upon, help from him always being
extended in a gracious, kind, and exemplary manner; a poor
man himself he, unlike many others, sympathized with others
still poorer, and never hesitated to put his hand in his pocket to
assist them when he could ; a pleasant companion at all times,
albeit his duty almost forced him to adopt the natives of Central
Australia for the last fourteen years as his sole companions,
the best and most beautiful years of his life have been spent
almost in isolation, and more or less amongst the natives. In
my opinion let a man be as vile and contemptible as he may, he
could never desire these creatures to be his constant associates.
Probably this shocking state of affairs could not be very well
avoided. I cannot pretend to know whether it could or not.
I am led to believe that M.C. Willshire was placed at the head
of the black police corps for the purpose of preventing the
natives from cattle killing, and, perhaps, also to protect the


various cattle stations and occupants from likely attacks by
blacks. He and bis subordinates appeared to be alway s provided
with a good and large supply of firearms and ammunition. If
the S.A. Government deemed it necessary that we should have
native police protection in the interior, did it follow that one white
man—even if it were his express desire— should be allowed to
camp alone with them as their leader ? I might here remark
that any other persons but those whom fate decreed should live
in the bush the better part of their life will never understand
what a wretched existence it is. It will be beyond their
imagination to ever realize the life some bushmen are compelled
to lead; it is a miserable, wretched life, God knows, at best.
The monotony is sufficient to drive men to despair and wrong-
doing ; their pleasures are very few, if any. When two or three
white men are in camp they can then relieve their pent-up
thoughts by sitting around a camp fire with the pipe as the
chief consoler, and indulge in what we term camp talk; but
when one white man alone has no one else but the blacks to
talk to for days and weeks together, the only wonder is that the
man does not commit suicide or something worse, and 1 ask is
it reasonable to expect that a man, even without the instincts
of a gentleman, which I and many others can answer Mr.
Willshire possesses, could live with these miserable, dirty,
cunning creatures without becoming deteriorated to an extent.
Some little while ago complaints were being mad© by the
missionaries concerning Mr. Willshire, and many hard and
bitter things were written of him and others, which led to a
Special Commission being sent up here to make enquiries into
the matter. However, the enquiries eventually ended, I should
say, satisfactorily as far as Mr. Willshire was concerned, or
doubtless he would have been removed. Ho doubt it was deemed
advisable that he should be allowed to remain in the same
miserable position as heretofore.
I am, Sir, &c.,
Alice Springs, May 30.
T. BENSTEAD.
BLACKS AND WHITES IN CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
After spending several wf»eks in the work of enquiry and a good
many days in reducing to writing the results of their investigations the
gentlemen appointed to examine into the alleged ill-treatment of natives
in the far interior have presented their report. It is a comprehensive
and interesting document, dealing with the charges made by the
German missionaries of the Hermannsberg Station against the police and
the settlers, and with the accusations brought by the police and the
settlers against the German missionaries. In effect the report white-
washes the accused all round. No such barbarities and immoralities have
been practised by troopers and settlers as the missionaries allege them to
have been guilty of ; and although the missionaries are blamed for
“ measures showing a lack of judgment ” they are practically acquitted
of the charge of cruelty and of allowing their station to be a harbour
for cattle stealers. So far this is satisfactory. It will be reassuring to
the public to be informed upon the authority of two competent, and, we


believe, thoroughly impartial, judges, that the harrowing accounts put
in circulation of revolting inhumanity and wholesale immorality are
not based upon fact. The record ot atrocities inflicted upon the
natives in some parts of Australia is black enough in all conscience
without the addition of any such stories as those which it devolved
upon Messrs. Swan and Taplin to examine into.
But there is another side of the picture. If the accusations made
are not true, what about the culpability of those who have made them ?
How can they clear themselves of the stigma of having borne false
witness—of having charged the persons against whom their allegations
were directed of committing offences rendering them unfit to associate
with humane and honourable men ? The implication clearly is that
they have slandered their fellows, and one is curious to know what they
will be able to say in extenuation of their conduct. The Commissioners in
their abundant good nature and their anxiety to make things pleasant have
suggested excuses, and in the case of the charges brought by the police
and the settlers against the missionaries they are fairly substantial.
But how about the allegations of the missionaries, men who by reason
of their calling should be scrupulously careful to keep within the
bounds of truth ? All that is said for them is—“ We think the
missionaries have made their statements without careful consideration,
and acting upon reports from the natives without testing their accuracy.
We have intimated that the report whitewashes all concerned, but, in
truth, this is almost as heavy an indictment as that brought against the
missionaries by the police and settlers. They ought to have given the
statements made by them careful consideration. Knowing the romancing
tendencies of the blacks they ought to have taken pains to verify their
reports before founding upon them such serious accusations as those
embodied in Mr. Schwartz’s speecn. By laying themselves open to
the adverse verdict passed upon them by the Commissioners, they have
done to themselves and to the cause they represent injury which is well
nigh irreparable. The report certainly lets them down very easily,
and its recommendation that the station should receive the Government
subsidy for two years longer without any guarantee that the agents
will be changed errs on the side of liberality. If the facts are as
stated it is hard that M.C. Willshire should be subjected to even the
mild indignity of being removed from his present location. If any
alteration is made it should surely be in the personnel of the missionaries,
for it is evident that the zeal of some of the gentlemen now on the
station is not tempered by discretion. Seeing that the State grants
900 square miles of country to the mission rent free, and pays besides
£2OO a year in hard cash to help in its maintenance, the Government is
certainly entitled to a voice in the management of the station. That
there is an ample field for the judicious labours of devoted missionaries
is evidenced by the fact that there are at least, 1,000 natives in the
area included within the sphere of the mission’s operations, but the
labours must be judicious or it would be better for them not to be
performed at all. The presence of the station should be of incalculable
benefit to the natives and to the settlers, and those who are responsible
for its establishment should see to it that it discharges its proper
functions in a thoroughly effective way.
As to other matters dealt with in the report it cannot bo too strongly
impressed upon the Government that it is its duty to see that the blacks
are properly attended to. As the Commissioners forcibly point out,
the fact that the natives have made no organized resistance to the
usurpation of their country by the white man, so far from relieving the
State of responsibility to them, affords a strong argument in favour of
dealing generously with them. The existing arrangements for the


relief of those resident in the far interior are the reverse of
satisfactory, and.as the report points out, it will not meet the case to make
the several head stations distributing centres for rations and clothing.
The proposal to establish reserves under proper supervision has much
to recommend it, and there should be no delay in organizing an
experimental station. All experience points to the probability of the
aboriginal race becoming extinct in the course of a generation or two,
but meanwhile it is incumbent upon those who have dispossessed it of
its natural hunting grounds to deal liberally with it. A few thousand
square miles may very appropriately be set aside for the maintenance
of those who remain, and it is eminently desirable that the reserves
should be under proper control. As to the suggestion that the rising
generation of blacks should be taught English, and not be allowed to
learn their own language, it is to be hoped that it will not be carried
out in its entirety. By all means let the little natives be instructed in
English, but why should their mallifluous and picturesque language
become a thing of the past. Surely while the process of extermination
is going on each succeeding generation should be enabled to converse
with that preceding it in its own proper tongue. On the whole the
report of Messrs. Swan and Taplin while giving reasonable assurance
that the natives are not being inhumanely treated in South Australia
supplies strong arguments in favour of their being dealt with after more
rational and systematic methods than are resorted to at present.—
Adelaide Observer , September 27th, 1890.
THE ALLEGED ILLTRB ATMENT OF ABORIGINES.
CHARGES WITHOUT FOUNDATION.
On June 13, 1890, Messrs. H. C. Swan. S.M., and C. E. Taplin were
instructed by the Government to enquire into the charges and counter
charges which had been made as to the treatment of the aborigines of
the southern part of the Northern Territory by the police, pastoralists,
and missionaries. Their report was presented to Parliament on
Tuesday, September 23, and stated that they had reached the Lutheran
missionaries of Hermannsberg on the Finke River, and opened their
enquiry on July 21. Several witnesses from the surrounding stations,
and officers in charges of the missions being present. They received
written evidence from the Manager of Erldunda Station who was unable
to attend, and they also took further evidence at Owen’s Springs, Alice
Springs, Stuart, Heavetree Gap Police Station, and the goldfields. In
all twenty-one witnesses were examined, including the Rev. Messrs.
Schwarz, Kempe, Schulze, and M.C. Willshire, all persons suggested
by the missionaries, and all but two of those suggested by the police.
The latter two were not available, but their statements were annexed to
the evidence. The journey covered more than 1,200 miles, and the
Commissioners acknowledge the great hospitality they received. They
met with about 600 natives and verified the existence of fully 500 more.
Commenting upon the documents which accompany their return, they
first refer to the statement made by the Rev, Mr. Schwarz at a meeting
in Adelaide in January, 1890, and reported in the Register at the time,
and they stated that all the evidence obtainable did not support the
charges therein made that “ the desire of the whites was to exterminate
the natives, especially the men,” and he then went on further to say
“It was a question of cattle versus blacks, and if the squatter wanted the
country the blacks had to go,” that owing to the absence of any large
number of water-holes in the interior it became a matter of importance
in many cases to the leaseholders that the blacks should be kept away
from them, as cattle would not approach water beside which blacks were


camped, and for this reason the natives were ordered off their hunting
grounds, but there was no evidence to lead them to suppose that any
violence was practised on such occasions. On the contrary, they had
evidence that the blacks were persuaded to move with little trouble.
The report then went on. As regards the case cited by the Rev. Mr.
Schwarz in Adelaide of a black coming to the mission station covered
with shot wounds, we find that his statement is not supported by the
evidence of his brother officials who were living on the mission station
at the same time. Mr. Schwarz further states “ that three blacks were
taken away in chains from the mission station by a policeman, and a few
days later were found shot dead, and still chained together.” We were
unable to get any direct evidence of what took place on this occasion,
but the whole matter was reported to the Commissioner of Police at the
time (about five years ago), and we have seen this report and it has
fully satisfied us that there is nothing in the charge, and, further, a
deputation consisting of the Rev. Mr, Heidenreich (the General
Superintendent of the Lutheran Missionary Society), the Manager of the
Hermannsberg Mission Station, Rev. Mr. Kempe, the Protector of
Aborigines, and others waited on the Minister immediately after the
report was f urnished by the constable, with which report the members
of the deputation also expressed themselves as fully satisfied. Another
statement of Mr. Schwarz’s that “as to the treatment of the aborigines
in the interior the boys who were useful were fairly treated, but the
men were maltreated,” is, as to the last sentence, incorrect, both from
the evidence of numerous witnesses and our own observations ; and,
also, as there is every facility for the blacks going away from the
station when they pleased if they were severely handled by the whites.
We are of opinion they would do so, but they seem content to remain,
and as a matter of fact there were a number of blacks on every station
we visited who appeared happy enough, and all there employed were
both well led and clothed. Mr. Schwarz further states that—“On
almost all the stations a number of women were kept, and were well
treated, the motive of course being an immoral one. As many as ten
or fifteen girls were kept on a single station, and the girls were known
as Mrs. So-and-So, according to the names of the whites with whom
they lived.” We are of opinion that this statement is calculated to
give a wrong impression of the state of affairs in Central Australia, as
whilst there is reason to suppose a considerable amount of immorality
does exist, the fact that several young women are on each station
solely for immoral purposes is not proved. Those who are kept on the
station are employed in housework, milking, &c., and there is evidence
in each case that has come under our notice that it is for the performance
of these duties that they were kept, and in several cases they are the
wives of the black men who are also employed on the station, A
charge is also made by Mr. Schwarz against a policeman at Alice
Springs in the following words :—“ There was a policeman at Alice
Springs who was sent out to arrest blacks, but he shot them instead,
and brought in two girls with whom he lived, and one of whom he
believed had come to Adelaide with the trooper.” This statement of
shooting blacks is entirely unsupported by the evidence, but we have
evidence that M.C. Willshire, the trooper referred to, did on two
occasions take native women to Adelaide. On both occasions he was
accompanied by native trackers, and there is no evidence that he has
been guilty of immorality with the natives. As to the statement that
half-castes are numerous, also made by Mr. Schwarz, we can say from
our own observation and the evidence of reliable witnesses that such is
not the case. We did not see nor ascertain the existence of a dozen in
the whole district over which we travelled. Mr. Schwarz again says


“ One of the most serious complaints was that whenever they had black
girls at the mission stations who behaved themselves properly, they
were seduced by the whites. Only recently three ran away and were
now living with the policeman to whom he had previously referred as
having captured two girls. With reference to the first part of this
statement neither Mr, Schwarz nor his brother officers at the mission
station could bring any evidence to support the charge. The case
referred to of the three girls running away was one in which some
Afghans, who went to the mission station for wool last year, were
concerned, and it was in endeavouring to follow them that the girls
got to the police camp, from which place M.C. Wiltshire, the policeman
referred to, actually assisted the missionaries, according to their own
evidence, to get the girls back to the mission station, and there is no
evidence that the police had anything to do with their running away,
nor is there any evidence that the girls in question ever lived with the
policeman as alleged, but on the contrary in one case at least one of the
women in question was legally married by the missionaries to a native
tracker employed by M.C. Willshire, and both were living together at
the police camp.” With reference to a letter from the Revs. H. Kempe
and L. Schulze, published in the papers of April 1, 1890, the charges
therein made that “ some whites have gone into a black camp and shot
down everyone they could reach with firearms ” is quite unsubstantiated
by the evidence. The following passage from the same letter ; —‘‘ I
consider that to treat the natives like wild dogs by shooting them down
and to use their wives and girls for immoral purposes as everybody can see
everywhere, and of which the people are not ashamed at all, but boast
of it is indeed a curse to the Northern Territory ” is also unsupported
by the evidence of either the missionaries who made it, or of any of
the numerous witnesses we have examined, and we find the state of
things as described has no existence in fact. We find in regard to the
reports of M.O. Willshire, in which he makes certain charges of cruelty
to the blacks against the missionaries, whilst there is evidence that on
one or two occasions they adopted measures showing a lack of
judgment on their part, chains being used to detain certain of the
natives prisoners on the station, and thrashing was resorted to as a
punishment, still in no case did their action towards the blacks amount
to cruelty, and we believe them to have been prompted by the kindest
motives. There is some truth in the statement that the blacks do not
like staying on the mission station, but we are strongly of opinion that
it is not from any cruelty practised upon them, but for the want of tact
displayed by the missionaries in dealing with them. Regarding the
reference made to the mission station being a harbour of cattle-killers,
there was only one case in which we obtained any evidence where a
man who was employed shepherding for a short time at the mission
station afterwards took to cattle-killing, but we are of the opinion that
the mission station is no more a harbour for natives who kill cattle than
any other station. A great deal of colour has been given to the idea
that such was the case by the fact that all natives who came from the
neighbourhood of the Mission Reserve have been called by the
surrounding settlers mission blacks, but the reserve being an outside
run many blacks come in from the westward, who have no connection
with those under the direct influence of the mission. We wish to say,
in respect of the police who are stationed in the interior that the
consensus of opinion of the various witnesses is that they do their duty
well, are generally well conducted, and give satisfaction to the
majority of the public in every respect. In regard to M.C. Willshire
we are of opinion that while native troopers are required he is the right
man for the work, which requires immense energy, and is an extremely


rough life. We are convinced there is no foundation for any charge of
his being guilty of shooting down the blacks, yet we think it would be
desirable, if possible, in view of the fact that he and the missionaries
are somewhat at a variance, and from the proximity of his head-quarters
to the mission station (only twenty-two miles distant) he should be
changed to some station at a distance from the Hermannsburg Mission,
or, what would probably be a more satisfactory course shift Wiltshire's
camp from Boggy Waterhole, and put it somewhere on the western
boundary between Tempe Downs and Erldunda Stations if a suitable place
can be found. We think the missionaries have made their statements
without careful consideration and acting upon reports from the natives
without testing their accuracy. For the future treatment and protection
of the mission aborigines we suggest that the present £2OO per annum
subsidy to the Hermannsburg Mission be continued for two years longer
on the following conditions :—That the old and infirm natives be more
strongly encouraged to make the mission their home by being regularly
supplied with rations. That the natives immediately connected with
the mission be more decently clothed. That the girls and boys
attending the mission school have dormitories provided for them, to all
of which the subsidy would be a great assistance. At the end of two
years the subsidy should be discontinued, as the station ought by that
time to be self-supporting, in view of the fact that the reserve of 900
square miles is granted to the mission rent free. We would beg to
point out that at the time of our visit to the mission there were six
white men, four women, and twelve children all maintained at the
expense of the mission, and we consider this an unreasonable number
as compared with the blacks immediately under their control, and it
would be to the great advantage of the blacks if their labours were more
utilized. The cost of the mission to the Society for the jear 1889 was
in round numbers £7lO, exclusive of the £2OO subsidy. Of this £7lO
a sum of £425 was obtained by sale of produce and stock from the run,
and the balance by public subscription. A constant supply of meat is
obtained from their run valued for last year at £SOO, but we think the
sum derived from annual sale of stock and produce might be easily
doubled under proper management, and thus give the Society the
income required.
In regard to future provision for the natives generally, on which we
are also asked to report, we have come to the conclusion that there are
three courses open for adoption, 1. That the present system of
treatment be continued. This we decidedly do not recommend, because
there is no provision made for the aged, infirm, or the children. These
classes are the first to experience the pinch of hard times and the last
to feel the return of plenty. All the stations recognise this fact and
supply them with food occasionally, as much as can fairly be expected ;
but what the natives receive in this way, owing to their numbers, is
not sufficient, and is often most deficient where most needed. 2.
That all the stations be supplied with rations, to be distributed under
the supervision of the managers. This course, for the following obvious
reasons, is hardly possible, as managers are necessarily often away
from their head-quarters, and the distribution would be left to those who
might be careless of the blacks receiving their food at proper times,
which to be most effectual must be issued daily. This would entail an
amount of work that could hardly be expected of the stations, but
should this course be decided upon we would recommend an officer be
appointed under the Protector of Aborigines, and entirely unconnected
with any other department whose duty it should be to continually visit
the stations to see that the rations were properly distributed, and direct
to whom they should be issued. The final course that seems open to


us is that reserves be selected at distances not less than 200 miles apart
of an area of from 500 to 1,000 square miles. These reserves should
be stocked, and each placed under the charge of a manager and
schoolmaster. But as the adoption of this policy would involve a
considerable outlay, in its initiation it would be desirable for only one
reserve to be so dealt with in the first instance, say at about Crown Plant
Station, and whilst we think the other reserves should be selected and
set apart with a distinct view of their being eventually stocked, if a
year or two were allowed to elapse after the establishment of the first one
the initial cost of the others would be spread over a length of time, and
profiting by experience some useless expenditure might be saved. We
are strongly of opinion that the adoption of this course the blacks could
in the course of a few years be entirely self-supporting ; that whilst
the welfare of the natives was being cared for considerable expenditure
on them in the future would be saved, and the necessity of a good deal
of police protection done away with. — Observer , Sept. 27th, 1890.
INQUIRY INTO THE SHOOTING OF DONKEY AND ROGER.
The enquiry which was recently started concerning the deaths of two
blackfellows in the Finke River district, alleged to have been shot by
native trackers, has resulted in the disclosure of some very startling
features. On Monday afternoon, April 27, the Attorney General (Hon.
R. Homburg, M.P.) received a telegram from Mr. Gillen, J P., at Alice
Springs, who is conducting the enquiry, intimating that the case was
serious and revolting, and advising that the police should be instructed
to immediately arrest Mounted Constable Willshire. Mr. Gillen reports
that the two blacks who were alleged by M.C. Willshire to have been
shot by the trackers in self-defence at a native camp upon which the
trooper said he and the trackers had come at daylight were, in fact,
shot by instructions of M.C Willshire, within 100 yards of the kitchen
of the station; that “Donkey” was shot while asleep ; and that the
other black, Roger, hearing the report of the firearms on awaking, was
shot down as he arose from the group and started to run away. M.C.
Willshire, who reported that the blacks had removed and burnt the
dead bodies, is now said to have removed and burnt the bodies himself,
and to have been instrumental in influencing the black trackers to
corroborate some of his statements concerning the affair, and which
statements are now said upon investigation to be disproved. Acting on
the advice of Mr. Gillen, the Attorney-General instructed the police to
arrest and proceed against M.C. Willshire. On Tuesday morning the
Attorney-General received a telegram from Mr. Gillen, J.P., of Alice
Springs, stating that he had completed the enquiry into the
circumstances attending the shooting of the two blacks on the Finke
River recently, and that his full report would leave for Adelaide on
May 3. Our correspondent at Alice Springs telegraphed as follows on
Tuesday evening : —“ Acting under instructions from the Attorney-
General, Mr. Gillen, J.P., has held an enquiry into the shooting of the
two natives, “ Donkey ” and “ Roger,” at Tempe Downs on February
22. Mr Gillen visited the scene of the shooting, examined a number
of natives, and returned yesterday. The enquiry closed last night.
Mounted-constable Willshire was arrested and charged with murder.”
On Wednesday the Attorney-General received a telegram from Mr.
Gillen, J.P., of Alice Springs, stating that the trial of MC. Willshire
for the murder of the two blacks on the Finke River recently was
proceeding. Willshire has affirmed on oath that he shot the blacks
while attempting to arrest them on a warrant issued by Mr C. Gall,
but Mr. Gall denies having caused the warrant to be issued. The
evidence of the native police at the trial went to show that the blacks


were shot by Wiltshire’s orders while in their camps, and that he
directed the burning of the bodies. Wiltshire was committed for trial
on a charge of murder
M.C. WILLSHIRE COMMITTED FOR TRIAL.
William Henry Willshire, mounted constable, charged with murdering
two natives named ‘‘Donkey” and “Roger” at Tempe Downs on
February 22, was brought before Mr. F. J. Gillen, J.P., to-day, and
committed for trial to Port Augusta at the July Sittings.
Native Constable Jack deposed—l went with Willshire to Tempe
Downs, and camped close to the station. At daylight next morning
Mr. Willshire instructed Native Constable Thomas and me to go to
Roger’s camp and shoot him. We went close to the camp, when Roger,
hearing a shot fired in the direction of Donkey’s camp, started running
towards Thomas, who was behind a bush, and who shot Roger in the
chest. Roger fell dead, and I then shot him with a revolver in the leg.
I did not see the shot fired that killed Donkey, but I heard the report.
After the shooting we all went to the station and had breakfast. Then
Mr. Willshire sent Thomas and me for the camels, which we brought
to the station. Then Willshire, William Henry Abbott, Archie (a
native constable), and I took one camel to where Donkey’s body was
lying, placed it on the camel, took it to a sandhill, and burned it. We
then proceeded to where Roger was lying, and took him across the
creek in another direction and burned him. We shot Donkey and
Roger because they shot an old man named Naimi, who was Larry’s
father. Do not like shooting blacks. Willshire told us to shoot them.
Cross-examined by Willshire —You (Willshire) had one bad foot, and
only had one boot on. I did not see any neck chain in your shirt.
Native Constable Thomas corroborated, also stating that about noon
the previous day Willshire told them he wanted to shoot the natives.
Donkey, Roger, Dick, Chuckychuck, and Peter, and that he heard
Willshire instruct Larry and Archie to go to Donkey’s camp and shoot
him. At the same time he instructed Thomas. Was afraid to disobey
Willshire’s instruction, thinking he would shoot them (the native
constables) if they did not do as ordered.
Cross-examined by Willshire—Donkey killed my brother. I did not
kill any blacks on the missionaries’ country. I speared a black after
the Tempe Downs blacks had killed my brother.
Eentereerie, otherwise “Friday,” deposed—Work at Tempe Downs
Station. Remember policeman coming and shooting Donkey and Roger
at daylight one morning. Heard the shots fired. Early in the morning
went with Blue Jacket to look for the station horses. We brought them
up and put them in the yard after the whites had had breakfast. I saw
Mr. Willshire and Archie, Thomas, Larry, and Jack at the station after
breakfast I went close to Donkey, and saw a bullet wound in his chest.
After I came back I saw Willshire and the others take the bodies away
and burn them. I did not go to the fires, but saw the smoke.
Cross-examined—Saw Donkey after he was dead. You (Willshire)
were at the storekeeper’s wurley when I went to camp.
William Garnet South deposed —Am a mounted constable stationed
at Alice Springs. Was at Tempe Downs on the 23rd inst. Proceeded
to the scene of a fire about 400 yards south of Tempe Downs Station.
There had been a lot of wood cut in the vicinity of the fire. There was
a lot of ashes, which I searched amongst and found some small pieces of
charred bones (produced). I then went to the scene of another fire
about 4<oo yards north-east of the station. I searched amongst the
ashes, where I found several more pieces of charred bone (produced).
Native Constables Billy and Thomas, the lubras Mary Ann and
Chinchewarra, and the native men Numbuki and Thinaree went with
me. The two last named pointed out the fire south of the station as


the place where Donkey’s body was burned, and the spot to north-east
as where Roger’s body was burned. Arrested Willshire about 6 p.m.
on the 27th inst. Told him the charge and warned him in the usual
manner. He made no statement.
After hearing the evidence Willshire stated that he had nothing to
say.
The police applied for a committal on the grounds lhat a primd facie
case had been made out, and said there were several other witnesses
who would be examined at the higher Court, but who could not be
produced at present. They would have to ask for an adjournment if
the committal was not granted.
The Bench thought the evidence sufficient and committed the prisoner
for trial accordingly.
M.C. W. H. Willshire has been in the force for a number of years,
but is still an active young man. For a considerable period he was
stationed in the Far North, and has had great experience with the
natives. On the subject of their customs he is regarded as an authority,
and has published one pamphlet, and is preparing another about the
native manners. It will be remembered that he was implicated in the
charge made by the Lutheran missionaries on the Finke River against
the police, which charge was fully investigated by Messrs. Swan, S.M.,
and Taplin, who went into the interior for that purpose. The result
of the enquiry showed, however, that the accusation against the police
had not been sustained. Mr. Willshire, whose father lives at Norwood,
is a member of the Australian Natives’ Association, and has contributed
to the Society a number of interesting memorials of tribal life with the
blacks. Having been gazetted as a mounted-constable of the first-class
he was sent to Alice Springs in December, 1881, to take charge of the
then newly-formed police camp at that place. When the Daily River
murders took place in 1884, the authorities decided to form a native
police corps in Central Australia, which Mr. Willshire organized.
Afterwards he, in company with some of the native troopers, proceeded
to Port Darwin and worked them on the Roper and Daily Rivers for
ten months. In 1885 he went back to Alice Springs, and in the same
year the police camp was moved from the telegraph station to the
Heavitree, four miles south of Alice, where it has since remained.
Shortly after the publication of his pamphlet on “ The Aborigines of
Central Australia ” in 1888, Mr. Willshire visited Adelaide for surgical
treatment, owing to his thumb having been badly injured.
TREATMENT OF ABORIGINES.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir —I notice a statement in your issue from Messrs. H. Kempe and
L. Schntze, missionaries on the Finke River, to the effect that they
have a Tempe Downs native at the Mission Station who is afraid to
return to his own country, simply because I threatened to shoot him
down if ever I caught him on the run. I wish most flatly to contradict
this statement, as the blacks come and go as they think proper, and are
not interfered with in the slightest. I very much regret to see that the
missionaries believe all such statements made to them by the blacks,
and may say that if I were to believe the reports the blacks tell me of
them, they would make the missionaries blacker than the blacks. As
regards their statement about their blacks not killing cattle, I may say
that I came on a mob of blacks who had just killed two of Willonby,
Gordon. & Co.’s cattle which had been dropped out of a travelling mob
at the Finke Running Waters, and the missionary blacks were amongst
the party. —I am. Sir, &c ,
Tempe Downs, May 6. R. F. THORNTON,
Manager Tempe Downs Station.
— Observer, June 7th, 1890.


THE FINKE MISSIONARIES AND THE POLICE.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir—Seeing by an article in a late issue of your paper that there is
some probability of the Government not appointing a Commission to
enquire into the disputes between the above parties, it seems to me a
pity if they do thus decide, and I also think that it would only be fair play
(that we as Englishmen are always so proud of giving) to allow the
missionaries some voice in the choice of the persons who are to make
the necessary enquires, and more especially is this so when we remember
that they are not of our nation and are supported by the Lutheran
Mission. Just as we should like any English missionaries under similiar
circumstances to have a voice in the matter so we should grant them,
and it would be an act of courtesy that I feel sure would not be lost on
many of our esteemed fellow-colonists who hail from the same country.
It may have some influence in that country itself, hence I hope that a
Commission will be appointed, and that the missionaries be allowed to
nominate at least one of the number. —I am. Sir, &c.,
Hindmarsh. A. BURNELL.
THE BLACKS IN THE INTERIOR.
TO THE EDITOR,
Sir —A letter appears in your issue of this date signed “ Ben. Rogers.”
The writer of this letter gave evidence before the enquiry of which I
was a member last year. It is only right to warn the public that in
examination he proved a most unsatisfactory witness, and the only fact
he was able to disclose, notwithstanding his long experience, was of an
occasion on which he claimed to have been attacked by the blacks when
acting as a cook on a station. The motive of the blacks was—by his
own evidence —to obtain possession of a black woman who was living in
the station kitchen with him, thus pointing to the probability of what
has been so often stated, “ That many of the troubles with the natives
are the results of the existing relations of the white men with the
native women.” As regards M.C. Willshire’s case, I think it is
undesirable for “ Ben. Rogers ” or anyone else to express an opinion
on it, as it is sub judice. With the weight of evidence that is before
them in one form and another it is a pity our Government cannot see
their way to do something to improve the condition of the blacks in the
interior. I am. Sir, &c..
Gilbert-place, Adelaide, June 23. C. EATON TAPLIN.
TRIAL OF M.C. WILLSHIRE AT PORT AUGUSTA.
THURSDAY, JULY 23.
[Before His Honor Mr. Justice Bundey and Jury.]
William Henry Willshire was charged with the wilful murder at Tempe
Downs, on February 22, of two aboriginals. Donkey and Roger. The
Crown Solicitor (Mr. J. M. Stuart) prosecuted, while Mr. T, Gepp
appeared for the defence. The defendant pleaded not guilty.
The Crown Solicitor, in opening, stated that there was no dispute as
to the fact that the two blacks were shot by two native constables in
the interior. The only question to be considered was whether Willshire
gave the order for the shooting. Willshire made a report to Inspector
Besley on the occurrence, and sent a second report making certain
statements as to their being cattle killers, but in neither of these
reports did he mention that the bodies had been burned.
The first witness called was Jacky alias Tualpa, who stated that he
was at Tempe Downs under the command of Constable Willshire, with
other native police, Thomas, Larry, and Archie. Willshire told him to
go to Tempe Downs to shoot Roger and Donkey, who were near Wood’s


camp. Larry and Archie went along a creek, and Thomas stopped in
the bush. Larry shot Donkey. Roger got away, but Thomas shot him.
In reply to the Crown Prosecutor, witness said Roger had nothing in
his hand when he ran towards Thomas. Thomas was behind a bush ;
he had a gun, and shot Roger in the leg, and he lay down, but was not
dead. Willshire told witness to shoot Roger. Thomas and Archie were
there. After breakfast he, Larry, and Thomas, took Roger’s and
Donkey’s bodies to a sandhill and burned them. Mr. Willshire and
Billy Abbott (a whiteman) were present and made a fire at a dead tree.
Cross-examined by Sir John Downer—The witness said he did not
know Mr. Holder or Mr. Caldwell; he saw two white men on camels on
the road to Alice Springs, and told them that he shot Roger ; he also told
them that he had handcuffs. That Willshire said, “ You catch ’em
Roger, put on handcuffs, no shoot him,” and that Roger threw two
spears at Thomas, but that was a lie. Then said Thomas shot him,
but that was a lie. Remembered Mr. Gillen coming up, and told him the
same. Told Mr. Gillen these lies first, because Wiltshire told him to.
Donkey and Roger had stolen cattle and killed an old man, Naimi, at
Willshire’s camp. Naimi was Larry’s father. Roger also killed
Thomas’s brother. Did not see a bullock dead on the road to Tempe
Downs. Told Mr. Gillen he had, but it was a lie. They wanted
Donkey and Roger for cattle stealing, and got on their tracks at
daylight. Willshire did not offer them a saddle and bridle if they
caught Donkey and Roger. He told them they would get a trip to Port
Augusta if they caught Donkey and Roger. If a blackfellow killed his
brother or any of his tribe, and he caught him he would kill him. He had
been a black tracker about 12 months. Thomas, alias Jakway, a native
constable, said he was at Tempe Downs about three months ago with
Larry, Archie, and Jacky, Larry shot Donkey; witness shot Roger. Shot
Roger because Willshire told him to do so. Heard him tell the other
black troopers that he wanted Donkey and Roger taken. In reply to Sir
John Downer the witness said Donkey and Roger had killed his brother.
He fired only one shot, and Roger was running away when he shot him.
Archie, a native trooper, gave evidence of a similar character. Under
cross-examination by Sir John Downer, he stated that he told Mr.
Gillen that he wanted to kill Roger and Donkey because they had
killed the blacks at his camp. Larry, another black tracker, also gave
corroborative evidence. In answer to the Judge, Larry stated that his
first statement to Gillen was not true, and after a subsequent
conversation he altered his story. Wm. Henry Abbott, prospector at Alice
Springs, stated that he was at Tempe Downs on the day it was supposed
the blacks were shot. Mr. Willshire was there, but had nothing to do
with the burning any bodies. M.C. South deposed to having found
two fires and charred bones. Arrested Willshire, who made no
statement. In answer to Sir John Downer he said he knew Donkey and
Roger as desperate characters Willshire had always been considered a
very able officer, and had given general satisfaction. This closed the
case for the Crown. No witnesses were called for the other side, but
Sir John Downer addressed the jury, arguing that the evidence for the
prosecution was most flimsy. The jury after retiring for a quarter of
an hour returned with a verdict of not guilty, a rider adding that there
was not a tittle of evidence to criminate Willshire, who was discharged.
Tuesday evening.
The Commissioner of Police has handed the Chief Secretary a report
of Mounted-Constable Willshire’s case. It is believed that the constable
will be retained in the Police Force-
HONOURABLE ACQUITTAL OF M.C. WILLSHIRE.
NO CRIMINATING EVIDENCE.
It was with much satisfaction we received this news last evening
direct from Port Augusta, and the result of the charge was just what
we expected. Had we the same system here of submitting cases to the


consideration of Grand Juries, as they do in England, this case would
never have been sent on for trial.
As we have been in possession of the true state of the case for some
weeks, we only wonder how any proceedings could have been ventured
upon with what appeared a determined attempt to bring into disrepute
a long-tried, brave, and humane officer, such as M.C. Willshire is
acknowledged to be. There is little doubt but he has friend-* among
men of sufficient public spirit who will insist upon Government making
a full investigation of the case. If there is any class or party in this
province who imagine they can trump charges against the officers of
Her Majesty, without a tithe of evidence, and meet with no reproof, the
sooner that fact is substantiated the better, as the public will then
know what our settlers have to cope with.
The whole case arose from tribal customs —of which townspeople
know so litt'e —one of which is, to take the lives of any of their tribe
who aliege themselves to the whites—so those black trackers are
marked men. The men who were shot had murdered the fathers of two
of these men It was the duty of Willshire with his troopers to run the
murderers in. Another custom bound those sons to avenge their
fathers, and being well armed, they took the opportunity of shooting
those two murderers. Some ingenious scribe, upon this foundation,
elaborated that horrible charge which appeared in the Register some
weeks ago, which was quite sufficient to convince the weak minds cf
numbers of good people that this officer, who had been proverbial for
manly kind-heartedness, had all at once developed into a ruthless savage
murderer of those poor innocent aboriginals, whom the dear missionaries
were so anxiously trying to protect.
ABORIGINAL MEETING AT FINKE RIVER.
A correspondent in the interior of Australia sends us the following
amusing notes. The distance from the city must be accepted as an
excuse for the fact that a meeting in reference to the defeat of the
Cockburn Ministry is old news :
An enthusiastic meeting was held by the natives of Central Australia
at Parke’s Punning Waters to take into consideration the defeat of the
Cockburn Ministry. Mr. Lamerta, the chief of the tribe, presided over
a fair attendance. The first resolution was proposed by Mr. Illpilla,
and seconded by Mr. Illarra —“ That in the opinion of this meeting the
policy of the Cockburn ■ is the best that has come under
our notice, as it contains selection before survey, and a progressive land
tax (at this juncture the Chairman began gnawing a piece of emu), and
we consider a change of Ministry totally uncalled for, as they had not lost
the confidence of the country.” Whilst Mr. Yerra-Munkera was speaking
in eulogistic terms of the late Government, he stopped to light his pipe
with a firestick, when Mr. Illitra took advantage of the pause, and cut
out the running by alluding to the Opposition as political traitors,
clamouring after better positions.
As the Chairman was the only man at the meeting that owned a pair
of trousers it was resolved that he should wait upon the Governor and
request a dissolution of Parliament. He was also requested by the
meeting to consult Dr. Yerco in reference to the “ Barcoo ” or summer
sickness, which is now very prevalent and disagreeable. It was also
suggested at this meeting that for the future polygamy and cannibalism
be abandoned. “It is not conducive to the interests of our tribe (it
was remarked) to have a plurality of wives, or roast mother-in-law for
dinner.” The next proposition put to the meeting was “ That Mr.
Otonga forms himself into a deputation of one and wait upon Wiltshire
of Black Police notoriety, and ask him to form a black branch of the
Australian Natives’ Association, the banner to contain the initials
f 8.8.A.N.A. ’ ” Those initials are not meant for the tropical fruit


banana. It was also suggested that our black poet forward a sample
of his poetry for criticism.
We have the life, so free from care,
O’er hills and valleys everywhere,
No matter where we roam.
We go to waters fresh and clear;
Of one another have no fear,
And anywhere’s our home.
’Mid desert oaks and sandhills high,
Beneath a hot and sultry sky,
We hunt our daily food.
Returning when the sun is low
To water and our camp we go
And cook what we pursued.
We grease our limbs, and body too,
With emu fat and kangaroo,
And come shining to the play.
The lubras’ smile with looks they steal,
And consider us their beau-ideal
And heroes of the day.
The black poet recited the above for the edification of his nude
brethren, and then suggested that Mr Playford be asked to declare
Deception Creek as a polling-place, so as all the aboriginals might exer-
cise their electoral franchise. Mr. Larrapinta said he would like to make a
few remarks. He said that the geographical education of some of us
niggers had been sadly neglected ; it was a deplorable fact that half the
niggers under this gum-tree were not aware that there was a place
called Alice Springs, only one hundred miles north of this meeting,
where there were mobs of white men living in stone houses ; he also
attempted to explain about the telegraph line, but owing to the
denseness of the audience he failed. He then informed the Chairman
that the whole lot were as compact as a cake of blacking, and had no
more sentiment in than a bar of soap. He then adjusted his boomerang
and stone knife, brushed his ears back, and awaited the result. The
meeting now began to get disorganized, as one member was hooking out
a large white from the bark of a tree, whilst another adjourned
to give his lubra a thrashing with a yamstick. Matters altogether were
feeling unpleasant, so the Chairman slung his trousers on one side, and
waded in a la Peter Jackson. When matters were quiet again the
Chairman put on his pants, and called upon the dusky poet to spread
himself a bit and let the meeting hear what beautiful country there
was to the west of the Pinke. The Poet took a drink out of a wooden
'■ pichi ” in a kneeling position, and then rose and commenced—
There’s a land in the west, with big ranges high,
And gorges full of water, almost hidden from the sky,
Where the emu and kangaroo and wild natives roam,
’Tis a land that I love, the land of my home;
Where salt and cotton bush and lovely flowers grow,
And water from the Ranges to the southward it does flow;
Where the quondong and mulga and wild orange-tree
Flourish in profusion in my own country;
Where dusky virgins live, who are all free from guile,
As they roam through the wild wood in their own happy style ;
Where they’re clothed by dame Nature, and roam wild and free ;
Australia, you’re my darling, and the only land for me.
At the conclusion, the black poet received enthusiastic cheers, and
was the recipient of a lump of fresh beef, some of the party during the
day having killed a bullock belonging to the adjoining cattle-station.
Things in general were assuming a very agreeable aspect, when some
rising dust was observed to the eastward, and the native police hove in
sight. “ The house will now divide.” In a few minutes nothing of the
meeting remained but footprints, a fire, and some bones. Not even an
adjournment was suggested. At that critical moment each sable
individual attended to himself personally ; the Chairman and poet did
the mile something under three minutes —“ Sic transit gloria mundi.” —
Observer, Dec. 27th, 1890.


THE CASE OF M.C. WILTSHIRE.
TO THE EDITOR
Sir—Although several letters have already appeared in reference to
the case of Mounted-constable Willshire I would crave a little space to
mention a few little facts, which may awaken some public sympathy on
his behalf. It has already been stated that Mr. Willshire wa,s the
organizer of the Native Police Force in the Far North, and had got his
men into a fine state of efficiency, &c. Well, after many years of hard
and excellent service he is accused of the horrible crime of murder, on
the testimony of native blacks, who are notorious liars, and whose
evidence, contradictory and inconsistent as it was, would never have
convicted any man of the charge. Twelve natives were brought down
to Port Augusta as witnesses against him but only four were examined,
it being evidently useless to expect a conviction from such evidence as
they could give. Nor was the one white man called as a witness able
to give any criminating evidence. The late Mr. W. H, Abbott went
with that witness (his own son) to Port Augusta, as he felt so deeply
for his friend Willshire, and after his acquittal Mr. Abbott shook hands,
and with deep emotion congratulated him. None of Mr Wiltshire’s
friends who have known him for many years believed him guilty, and
it is worthy of note that since his acquittal nearly fifty telegrams of
congratulation were sent to him from friends in the North, most of
them from the neighbourhood of Alice Springs, near the scene of his
alleged misdeeds The case utterly broke down, but Mr. Willshire has
suffered severely both in mind and in purse. To provide funds for his
defence he was obliged to sacrifice much of the little property he
possessed. To give an idea of how things were sacrificed, seventeen
horses belonging to him were sold for about ,£7O. Surely it would not
be too much to expect the Government to recoup Mr Willshire for the
loss he has sustained in defending this false yet damaging accusation.
I have reason to believe that the squatters in the North, also his
superior officers in the police, are quite satisfied of his innocence I
regret to add that Mr. Willshire is at present very ill owing to the
terrible mental strain to which he has been subjected.
I am. Sir, &c.,
A COLONIST OF 1844.
MOUNTED CONSTABLE WILLSHIRE AND THE
CROWN.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir —Kindly allow me to point out the great injustice that
has been done to Mounted-constable Willshire. This trial has
caused great excitement from Adelaide to Port Darwin. He
has been honourably acquitted, to the great joy of the Northerners
and his many friends. I should like to know what the
Government are going to do with Mounted-constable Willshire.
If the Government decide on disbanding the patrol party, and
turning these blacks adrift, then we shall have a more dangerous
class of cattle-stealers than ever the late Donkey and Roger
were. This has been proven for years in Queensland, that most
of the discharged black trackers in Western Queensland have
been the most determined blacks to deal with, e>s they have not
only their natural cunning ways, but they are further educated
to all the moves of the whites. Whole of Western Queensland
to the Gulf of Carpentaria are regularly patrolled by parties of


black trackers under European officers ; they are trained, and
do their work handsomely, and give the Western Queensland
squatters great security by their rapid movements when they
are wanted. Having travelled some hundreds of miles with
Mounted-constable Willshire to the interior I was astonished
to see the perfect way in which he handled those boys. They
were quick and obedient to his command, and they were clever
at packing their camels and getting off their camps in a
wonderfully short space of time. Mounted-constable Willshire
himself I consider a very smart man with his camels. It seems
a pity, after the expense the Government have gone to and the
many great difficulties in which Willshire has had to contend
against in raising such a fine body trackers together, that they
should be disbanded as soon as he has completed his organization,
and made the outlaw blacks know that they shall not murder,
burn stations, and spear cattle with impunity. Willshire’s life
in the interior has been full of hardships and privations. His
duty was to patrol the country from the Musgrave Ranges to
Barrow’s Creek —a distance of 600 miles north and south—all
lying to the west of the Overland Telegraph line, all unsettled
country ; and it is well known to the North-Western people
that all bad blacks and outlaws make for the West on account
of the almost inaccessible nature of the country, Barren ranges,
large strips of dry, desolate, waterless country, with small native
waters a long distance apart, it is in this inhospitable country
that Mr. Willshire has spent some of the best years of his life.
Sometimes they leave a waterhole and take four or five days to
get to another, slow travelling with camels under a tropical sun,
hunting up the outlaws for outrages done, and often they find,
to their disgust, that the lookout blacks have signalled perhaps
twenty miles away by smoke, and these active blacks have
made a rapid movement in some other district. These blacks
can cover some terrible long stages without water. The usual
mode of travelling is for one to take the lead and go a mile or
two, and then another will shove in the lead, one behind another,
and so on, until they reach their secret watering-place. I have
known blacks to strike camp and do fifty miles in a night. I
ask all disinterested people to think what must have been the
feelings of this unfortunate man, after ten years hard life, doing
his duty against all sorts of difficulties in our interior, to be
dragged a distance of 800 miles like a felon. Mark, this was
seventeen days in custody coming down and nine days out of
that in leg-irons ; was seventeen days in Port Augusta Gaol and
thirteen hours every night in a small cell by himself; was
released on £2,000 bail, which was no easy matter to find,
considering the various charges he was arrested for. This man
had over three months’ anxiety and suspense, coupled with
many restless nights. And what about his aged parents and
sisters, bitterly deserted by their friends whilst this horrible
charge was hanging over the head of their son and brother, who
they knew in their hearts was innocent. Thank God there are


men in the land who will do justice to a white man. Australians
to a man I believe are above Star Chamber business, and it was
with great pleasure I read Sir John Downer’s powerful and elo-
quent defence of an innocent man. The Government employ M.C.
Willshire for a certain duty, they supply him with revolvers,
rifles, and ammunition in abundance, and immediately the time
arrives for these weapons to be used for the benefit of the
country the officer in charge becomes a felon. las a Northerner
ask the Government to reinstate Willshire to his old position.
He is a thorough master of the native tongue ; he thoroughly
knows the country ; he is still in the prime of life ; and has the
universal respect of the whites in the interior. And more, he is
most peculiarly qualified for the position. I say let the
Government do their duty, Willshire has done his in the past,
and put this unfortunate man, who has been put to an enormous
expense, in his rightful position in Central Australia again.
I am, Sir, &c.,
Red Lion Hotel, July 25. TOM C. FOWLER.
THE TEMPE DOWNS TRAGEDY.
One turns with a sense of pleased relief from the persistent
ttempts of a spurious morality to convict Mounted-Constable
Willshire. The charge against him, practically of being a
double-dyed murderer, broke down quickly, for in the face of
the evidence of native troopers, who themselves confessed to
havingbeen the murderers. What else could have been expected ?
It is well known that at a trial in Court the aboriginal of
Australia is ready to swear to a statement, or to even a
succession of statements, and finish up by giving the most
perjured denial to his evidence. Has the argument of history
no weight with the authorities or must we in the theatre of
life always indulge in the inevitable finale of a farce ?
The evidence, if it proved anything, showed that Willshire
did not kill the culprits Roger and Donkey ; that, in fact, these
runaway murderers were shot by native constable Thomas and
native constable Larry; that these constables themselves
admitted it ; and that the statements obtained by Mr. Gillen,
J.P., upon whose report the prosecution was based, were denied
by the native troopers who made them. It is far better,
however, that Willshire should have been acquitted by a Jury
than that any stigma, even by implication, should rest upon
him ; for the Crown evidence tells us that Roger and Donkey
aggressively opposed capture and defied the troopers, authority.
Any white man knows that such conduct places the delinquent’s
life in danger, and what wonder that two such desperate fellows
paid the penalty of their temerity.
In these colonies the history of civilized advancement, even
to the extermination of the native population is well known.
No one, though swayed by the profoundest evangelical sympathy,
would advocate a policy of Quaker meekness, or of unmanly
impotence. We whites are here for a purpose, and, while


preserving law and order, we must be careful to protect those
who are charged with that duty. In the less-known portions of
this continent the treachery and blood-thirstiness of the natives
are known to every bushman. Must we refer to the Miria
massacre on the south-eastern coast; to the Port Lincoln
tragedies ; to the murderous deceit of the natives on the Byre
expedition ? Are not the colonies full of stories of the sanguinary
butcheries and torture endured by helpless women and children
at the hands of the natives P This fiendish disposition is not
restricted to the lowest forms of human life, for the Maoris till
recently, and the Soiux, even to this day, add the refinement of
cruelty as a greater punishment to the victim, and a more
abiding pleasure to themselves.
Unfortunately there has always been a sentimental section
of people who can indulge in the rhetoric of rodomontade, but
this class never allies itself now to the practical party of action.
Its predecessors belonged to that school of morality which
preached obedience and contentment to the poverty-stricken in
England, but invoked the law which transported them to Botany
Bay, Yan Diemen’s Land, or Western Australia for pouching a
hare or snaring a rabbit. Even crime is comparative, for what
were justifiable homicide under certain conditions were murder
most foul under others. Had the troopers at Tempe Downs
not been engaged in the direct execution of their duty, or had
pompous dignity at Alice Springs acted with more discretion
and less misguided zeal, Willshire would not have been subjected
to the pain of arrest and trial. It is a good thing for the
colony that the maintenance of order in remote and unattractive
districts is entrusted to such as he. As an author and a savant
Willshire has shown that his mind is far above the common-
place level of his detractors. Much of what is known regarding
the ethnology of the natives of Central Australia is due to the
labor and care which he has brought to hear for years upon his
favourite study. —Kadina and Wallaroo Times , July 29, 1891.
EXTRAORDINARY POWERS OF J.P.’s.
The case just now brought before Parliament has disclosed
a most extraordinary state of affairs, such as no Englishmen
would ever dream of being within the bounds of possibility, in
any part of the British dominions. It appears that the law in
South Australia is so constructed that an executive officer of
the Queen in full command of a detachment of police can be
seized upon a warrant issued by a single Justice of Peace,
removed from his command, sent away in irons, committed to
take his trial as a murderer without the least legal evidence of
guilt, upon the bare statements of blackfellows made in the
absence of the accused. It has been explained to us that
according to the law as laid down in the Justices' Manual this
can be done by any country J.P , and all the responsibility rests
with the Attorney-General, who stands in the stead of the Grand
Jury, which existed in English counties. In confirmation of the


above we give a copy of Sir John Downer’s speech in his defence
of Mounted Constable Willshire, first-class officer in charge of
native police, at Alice Springs, Central Australia.
Sir John Downer in his speech said it was positively shocking
to see how the minds of the hearers had been deflected in the
course of this most disgraceful case, one of the most disgraceful
that had ever been brought into Court. Here was a man of
high character and responsible position, performing arduous
and dangerous duties, practically carrying his life in his hand,
an officer of noted energy, integrity, and ability, brought down
from the far interior, hurled into gaol, and put in the dock to
answer on peril of his life a charge of murder, because he had
thoroughly done the difficult work entrusted to him. The
extraordinary character of the evidence brought forward by the
Crown almost made one at times look upon the case in a
humorous light but for the fact that a man’s life was at stake.
He characterised some parts of the evidence as impudent. There
was no proof whatever that Willshire killed the blacks, but he
was put to the risk of being hanged on the testimony of two
self-convicted murderers, whose statements were of the most
extraordinarily contradictory character. Sir John then
dealt with the evidence, and commented upon the plain,
straightforward report given by the accused, and which was
supported by the testimony of the very persons who committed
the fatal deed. Speaking of the examination conducted by Mr
Gillen, he said it was carried out in the good old Star Chamber
style in the absence of the accused, and he ridiculed the idea
that the admission in favour of accused had been suggested by
Willshire and given by the black under intimidation. The
only point the prosecution had was that Willshire did not report
the burning of the bodies, but the only evidence that he had
anything to do with it was that of the very men who were
concerned in the crime. While there was no reason why
Willshire should want to kill the men, there was no reason that
the trackers should sacrifice them in pursuance of a tribal
vendetta and a native law. He called upon the Jury to say
that this was a monstrous prosecution and entirely unjustifiable.
As was pointed out in the columns of this paper several
weeks ago, the evidence of the aboriginals does not stand good
in law unless corroborated by circumstantial evidence, which law
was clearly laid down fifty years ago by the Supreme Court judges,
which is recorded in the life of Captain Tollmer, who organised
the police troopers of this colony, yet in the face of this no less
than fifteen native women were brought down a distance of 700
miles at an enormous expense, not one of whom were present
at the shooting of the blacks. However, a gentleman like Mr.
Gillen, J.P., who had lived so many years among these blacks,
and must have known that their words were about as reliable
as so many lunatics, could have been so far deceived we cannot
think. At any rate, the Attorney-General, surely, ought to
have been more cautious in allowing the Government to be put


to such an expense for nothing. It is rumoured that after
Mounted Constable Willshire was arrested Mr. Gillen received
the appointment of Protector of Aboriginals. There is certainly
something so strange in the whole proceedings, that we cannot
but feel a little suspicious that all the facts have not yet been
brought to light. We hope, in justice to Mounted Constable
Willshire, and the public at large, that a most searching enquiry
will be made into the whole proceedings. It is possible that
there has been any underhand attempt to get this efficient
officer removed from this district ? We have known instances
in this colony where officers who remained faithful to their
duties, have been shifted by secret wire pulling of local cliques
who had influence in town—not that we insinuate that any
such motive could have been at work in this case —but whatever
there is a possibility it oftens happens that a probability comes
to light. At any rate, we draw attention to certain conflicting
accounts from Finke. The extraordinary statements which
have appeared before the public since the Missionaries’ report
appeared, leading people to believe that this was such a miserable
region that with an area of 900 square miles, and stock to the
amount of 500 horses, 1,000 cattle, 3,000 sheep, and 400 goats,
the station could not be made to pay without a subsidy from
Government, seems now strange indeed, since another report,
which appeared in last Saturday’s Register gives quite a different
impression as to the nature of the land in that district. Under
the heading of “ Our Undeveloped Territory ” a special
reporter of the above journal gives one of a series of articles,
which decribes the country which for many years has been
under the supervision of Mounted Constable Willshire and the
black trackers.


NAMES OF ABORIGINES—
MEN AND WOMEN—
IN THE
EMPLOY OF
W. H. WILLSHIRE,
ON THE FINKB RIYFR.




NAMES OF ABORIGINES—MEN AND WOMEN—IN
THE EMPLOY OF W. H. WILLSHIRE, ON THE
FINKE RIVER.
APONUJSf GAS.
Women.
Ar-til-ka
Rhan-gee-nie
Nee-punta
Hee-yow-a-dee
Ole-ga-lene
O-ticha
PEBTJLAS.
Men.
Yed-na-ca
Chnpa-iima
APONUNGAS.
Men. •
Rem a-lie
A-cork-nil-shi-ga
Hy n - ga - Gy n - ga
PPBULAS.
Women.
Nap-er-oon
Ole-a-mun-ika
Ty-hung-a
Al-ba-binnia
Ni-mi
Youda
Nap-berry
Ar-rin-illia qui
The observer will note by the classing of the above, that an Aponunga woman must
have a Perula man for her better half, and a Ferula man must take unto himself an
Aponunga woman according to their tribal laws, the offspring of an Aponunga mother
are Commaras, and the offspring of a Perula mother are Pultarras. By securing their
spouses in the above order, they are eligible and qualified for each other.
PULTABBAS.
Women.
Cumber-rdl-yer-qui
Ole-munda
Ad-mooka
Charit-oonga
COMMABBAS.
Men.
Cbick-illia
Jorra-ja-rinya
01-deara-booka
Quolpa
P ULTABBAS.
Men.
Um-piit-ima
Taig-wa
COMMABBAS.
Women.
Tuck-a-rin-ya
Quiet-umba
U-bee-in-ica
Earbj-abba
Hong-boi-tee
Oura-ka lerriga
Ar-rat-rer-ka
Nuck-a-dilly.
By the above classification, the reader will observe, that a Pultarra woman must
have a Commar’ a man for her husband, and a Pultarra man must take a Commarra
woman for his wife, and the children of a Commara mother are Aponungas, and the
childrenof a Pultarra mother are Perulas. It is proper and desirable and characteristic
of their customs and laws, that they should take their wives in that order, to prevent
in breeding and incest.


ENGLISH WORDS WITH ABORIGINAL MEANINGS.
Altogether —Chon-onie
Altogether —Erra-benie
Ants—Al-kurrika
Ashes —June-pa
Aunt—O-currie
Bat—Pinta Pinta
Belching—Cal-durra-boin
Black —Mar-roo
Blowfly Cartil-ka
Blowing Poo-ney
Bread—My-hee
Crying— O-lannie
Clouds —Nun-carlie
Come back—Nar-tuck-al-bin
Cohabiting—Mo-rannie
Cooked— Hon-mee
Dog—Pup-pa
Dead—lll-loong
Drinking—Chick-innie
Don’t know —Wob-ri-ka
Emu—Cur-lia
Eagle—W 01-lowra
Enough Pook-anna
Feathers —Bn-too
Father—Oar-too
Family-way —Wee-lally
Full belly—Put-cha
Peeling—Bum-boonie
Finish —W ee-arring-oo
Grass —Putta
Gro wl —Pickering
Green —O-kerry
Hands —Murra
Hair —Hoo roo
Hat—Loong-gi
Hungry—Un-ma-terra
Holding —Wet-tinnie
Idle—Hetra-kee
Ibis —Un-gee-burra
I see —Hung hung-hee
Joke —On-till-yen-en
Jaw-bone —Moora-moora
Kiss—Neen-jeweny
Kangaroo —Mar-100
Laugh —In-carnie
Liver —Al-luc
Lame —Too-nar-car-din
Maid —Ho-karra
Moon —Peer
Mid-day—Cull-lella
Me —Un-nna
Me —Ni- you-100
More—Pee-hooka
Navel —Bull yee
Nails Milltee
Nostrils—Ol-too
Oak Ko-karra
Orange —Ombell-ditta
Path—U-worra
Peach —Mong-arta
Pressing— Poo-roany
Pinching —-Minn-tin
Palm—O-long ga-ra
Quiet —Putie-putie
Quick —Para-par-too
Rainbo w —Je wdy-ung
Rain—W or-rall
Raw —Wonka
Ribs —Col-too
Sun —Chintoo
Star — Pin terry
Stomach ache —Nar-roon
Stomach ache—Nar-roo-reen
Shoot him —Cun-deenie
Smell —Pun-deenie
Swallowing —Coal-ju-nan
Spitting —Dole-boin
Shame —Pan-to-o-kringing
Stone tomahawk—Wol-coo-roo
Sunrise —Chintoo-buckance
Smelling—Bun-deenie
Sundown —O-carling-in
Seeds —Yalka
Sundown—Moong - ar-j er-in
Tail —Whip-po
Tree—Er-nar
Tired—Tant-a-nar-in
Turkey—Br-nooty
Thumb —Marma-truer
To-morow —Mong-al-yer-oo
To-day —Gio-arry
That way —Nurra-ta
Talking—Why-tannie
Take —Mun-gee-li


Ugly - Que-ar
Uncle—Kam-a-roo
Virgin —Que-on-bu n- tor
Vomit —01-coppa-tune-in
Wind—W 01-pa
Woman—Coong-ga
W ater—Cobby
Which way —Yalla
White—Lill-lill
What name—Nun-un-a.
You—Yen-too
Yolk —On-oil-koo
Yawning — Wot-tunej
Yesterday—Moong-ar-too
Youth —Pee-berry
Zig-Zag —Nor-reely


FREARSON AND BROTHER,
PRINTERS,
ADELAIDE.




