

<K, <H>« O-C^O-O-O-e-^-C-O^
| A THOROUGHLY EFFECTIVE PROCESS j
I FOR THE |
I DESTRUCTION OF RABBITS |
I AND OTHER |
NOXIOUS ANIMALS, I
I INVENTED BY I
| J. A PARKER, |
| Sole Patentee for all the Colonies. |
■I : l
W. M. Maclabdy, Printer, 319 George Street, Sydney. |
1885 |
I |
<>O<HXHX~O ->O-0-0'




A THOROUGHLY EFFECTIVE PROCESS
FOR THE
DESTRUCTION OF RABBITS
AND OTHER
NOXIOUS ANIMALS,
INVENTED BY
J. A. PARKER,
Sole Patentee for all the Colonies.
cSgbtwa:
w. M. Maclardy, Printer, 319 George Street, Sydney.




.*♦
In bringing under the notice of the Squatters, Selectors, Farmers,
and Landholders of Australia ray method of destroying rabbits
and other animals injurious to their land and its productions, I
will illustrate the advantages of my system by quoting one case
of many which are well known, and which show the enormous
cost of keeping down the rabbit pest. I shall also endeavour to
show how by means of my process the pest may at comparatively
small cost be entirely annihilated. An estate of 6500 acres,
situate in the Oolac district, Victoria, employed 18 men at 20s.
per week in trapping and killing rabbits, the men getting sd. a
pair besides : the wages sheet alone amounted to £936 a year.
I propose to charge for the use of my patent process, which I
guarantee will be effectual, a royalty of one penny per acre, that
is, £2 13s. 4d. per square mile. To provide 16 of these fatal traps
for every 640 acres of country the cost of apparatus and material
will be only 10s. Bd., and such effective means of destruction
sown thus broadcast cannot fail to exterminate within one week
every rabbit upon that area. If on a particular run rabbit-
infested one man is employed to each square mile, at a salary, say,
of even £3 per week, he will fill up the small burrows, and
operate only on the large warrens with his 16 traps. Say that
it may take him a week to place these traps, the cost of extermi-
nating the rabbits off a square mile of country will be £6 4 s., —a
charge which will include royalty, apparatus, material, and labour.
Referring to the instance already quoted, under my system it
would cost £62 to exterminate the pest; whereas at present the
proprietors expend £936 a year in trapping, and even then can
only just keep the rabbits down. By the adoption of my system
it would only cost £62 to remove the pest from their estate
altogether. It is difficult to see how, if my system were adopted
upon any estate, however thickly infested with rabbits, it could
fail to be effectual in entirely destroying them. I explain
subsequently the construction of the apparatus and operation of
its deadly charge. If, as I said before, one man is employed to
attend to each square mile on an infested run, I have no fear of
the result. 16 poison generators will be at work in 16 different
warrens or burrows, and when once these traps are charged with
the cheap chemicals which create the fatal gas, they go on forming
it for a week without any necessity for supervision. It is utterly
improbable that any rabbit on that area of 640 acres will not
within that week visit one or other of these 16 burrows, and as
soon as the animal enters and inhales the poisonous gas with
which the passages are tilled, its death is certain. There is no
possible chance of it surviving : it may live an hour or a day,


but its death is inevitable. 1 need not point out the immense
expense to which Victorian, New Zealand, and New South Wales
landholders have been put in their efforts to keep down this
rabbit scourge ; and in estimating expenses under my system I
have fixed them at the highest rate, stating men’s wages for
example at <£3 per week. Even at these rates, any one who
enquires into the subject will see that tho system I propose will
be at once entirely effectual in the work of extermination, and
immensely cheaper than the method now adopted in dealing with
this great and rapidly growing plague. For the sake of the
colonies generally, it is to be hoped that squatters and landholders
will adopt the method I have indicated of destroying rabbits, and
that they will either personally superintend the work or get
reliable men to follow out the instructions contained in this
pamphlet. With simultaneous and universal action, the colonies
may thus be saved from what is fast becoming a national calamity.
INVENTION OF APPARATUS FOR THE DESTRUO.
TION OF RABBITS AND NOXIOUS ANIMALS AND
BIRDS.
Co Kill Rabbits in Burrows.
Having selected the entrance to the burrow in which you
intend to operate—


Ist,—Dig a hole as far inside the burrow as you can con-
veniently reach, deep enough to set the bottle or apparatus into
within two inches of the top of the neck.
2nd.—Fill the bottle with water until level with the lower
mark a ; next add a sufficient quantity of sulphuric acid until the
liquid rises up to the mark B, which must not cover the raised
bottom higher than this mark; shake the bottle so as to mix the
acid with the water and let stand a few minutes to cool, as mixing
the water and acid generates great heat ; then place the bottle
in the hole already dug and surround with earth to keep it from
falling or being knocked over ; next insert the bar of prepared
alloy, and at once cover up the entrance to the burrow so as to
prevent the poisonous gas from escaping outwards. The gas will
begin to generate in ten minutes, or as soon as the “ resist ”
coating has been dissolved, according to thickness of same.
3rd.—ln using this apparatus in large warrens, it may be
necessary to place several of them in different entrances, so as to
insure the gas permeating the passages, and it will be advisable to
close a number of the openings, leaving a few for the rabbits to
enter in. N.B.—ln this case, always close up the burrows you
intend closing before you generate the gas, putting in the alloy
after all other preparations have been made, thus allowing ample
time to cover up the apparatus.
To Destroy Rabbits on the Open Country.
4th.—Dig a hole 20 inches in diameter, and sufficiently deep
to admit of the bottle being placed so that its mouth is six inches
below the surface of the ground. Prepare the water and acid as
described ; place the bottle in the hole, and surround the neck
with hay, oats, carrots, or other attractive bait; place the
prepared alloy in the apparatus, and leave the spot, having first
placed hurdles or other suitable barrier to keep cattle and sheep
at a safe distance ; also post up notice to warn travellers of the
danger of interfering with the apparatus,
sth.—Dishes (or other small vessels) of water may be used
to attract the rabbits on the open country by sinking them in the
ground, and placing the bottle so that the neck or mouth is just
above the surface.
6th.—For Marsupials, this apparatus must be similarly
placed, with the exception that no hurdles or barrier can be used,
for what would prevent sheep from entering would also keep away
kangaroos ; so in the case of Marsupials it would be necessary to
remove all stock for a week, or while operating with this poisonous
gas. Hares can be similarly dealt with.
7th.—For the Destruction of Native Dogs, the same
method of setting the apparatus, with a bone of meat for bait,
and fastened to a stake in the hole, to prevent it being carried
away.


Bth.—For the Destruction of Sparrows, place small
boxes, buckets, or other vessels of grain in trees, poles, or elevated
positions, and set the apparatus so as the mouth is just above the
grain. The birds attempting to eat from these vessels will inhale
the poisonous gas, which will quickly destroy them.
9th.—ln Gardens this apparatus must be so placed that
children cannot reach it. With simultaneous action in a neigh-
bourhood, all birds destructive to fruit might be destroyed in a few
days, during which gardens should be closed. It may not be safe to
eat the fruit growing on the trees when using this, as some of
the poisonous gas might condense and lodge upon it.
10th.— Flying Foxes : Place a number of bottles charged
as described in the habitations of the Flying Foxes, and so that
they will inhale the gas. Boxes or baskets of wind-fall fruit can
be used to attract them.
11th.— Cockatoos : Dig a trench or plough a furrow three
or four inches deep, and 30 or 40 yards in length, bury a number
of the bottles in this trench, with their mouths about one inch
above the bottom of trench, and one yard apart; put a few hand-
fuls of wheat or other grain round the mouth, the birds will thus
be drawn within breathing distance of the gas, and be killed.
12th. —Rats, Mice, and'Cockroaches : Dig a hole in
the ground, so that the mouth of the bottle will be level with the
surface, and surround the top of bottle with cheese or other bait;
the vermin will smell the cheese, and thus be drawn into the
proximity of the gas.
Cover the mouth of apparatus with perforated lead (tea-chest),
or thin sheet lead, which can be perforated with an awl, sail needle,
prong of fork, or other instrument ; this prevents insects from
falling into the bottle. N.B.—This gas must not be generated in
a room barn, stable, tents, holds of vessels, or other closed in places
which are frequented by people, as it would be most unsafe to
inhale the atmosphere for some days after the apparatus had
worked itself out.
Domestic Cats and Dogs must not be allowed to approach
these traps or they will be killed.
It is unknown what effect this gas will have on snakes entering
burrows, but it is probable that it will kill them.
General Remarks.
The prepared alloy is made in such quantities that the gas
may be generated for one or several days or for more than a week.
The acid must in all cases be poured upon the water, not the
water on the acid, to prevent the possibility of an explosion.
In mixing the water and acid, great heat is generated by their
combination.


Clothes are instantly destroyed by drops of this acid. _
Should any accidentally get on the skin, wipe off with some dry
material, or rub the parts with carbonate of soda. Do not
attempt to wash it off until first wiping dry.
Until the apparatus has exhausted its power of making the
poisonous gas, it will be prudent not to interfere with its opera-
tion, —better to allow one day to elapse before removing or
re-charging it,
In recharging the apparatus, great care must be exercised in
case it contains some of the unexpelled poisonous gas ; but to
prevent any danger or risk, it is advisable to insure safety by
covering the mouth and nostrils with a respirator of cotton wool
saturated with a solution of sulphate of copper, as this completely
decomposes this gas, and prevents it from being inhaled.
Always stand to the windward when pouring off theworked-
ouf acid. Fill the bottle w ith water when cleaning, as this will
force out any residue of gas. You can then remove the respirator,
and begin replenishing the bottle as in the first instance.
The specific gravity of the gas is 2.695, or more than two
and a half times heavier than the atmosphere, so that in the open
air there can be no danger to human life, unless a man stoops
down to the apparatus and inhales the gas. In closed rooms,
burrows, or holes in the ground, the gas by its own volume will
fill the spaces. Where the apparatus is used in holes in the open
country, as described for the destruction of rabbits, marsupials,
&c., the gas can only rise to the surface, and mixing with the air
close to the ground, its area of action will be very limited.
If necessary an india-rubber tube may be conveyed any
distance under ground in large warrens and attached to the
apparatus, so that the gas will only be liberated at the end of
tube. To carry the tube into the burrow, fasten one end of it
with a piece of twine in a half bow-knot to a rabbit’s neck
(which can be trapped for the purpose), tie another knot inside
the slip one, to prevent the loop choking the rabbit, and hold the
slip end of knot in hand, paying it out as far as the length of
tube, then pull the end of twine, when the rabbit will be free,
leaving the tube the required distance. Insert other end of tube
to perforated cork, and press in apparatus.
To keep the apparatus continually generating the gas for
one week the cost of bottle, acid, and alloy will not exceed Bd.,
and for this sum it is possible to kill thousands of rabbits or other
noxious animals.
The cost of apparatus and material of four (4) of these fatal
traps placed upon one square mile of country, lasting for one week,
will not exceed 2s. Bd. per mile.
Upon no account must this alloy be used with acids but in
the apparatus, and in the manner described.


In adhering to these details, any lad or man of ordinary
intelligence can apply this destructive element without the least
danger or risk.
All materials, apparatus, respirators, and instructions how
to use process can be obtained from the Patentee.
Printed Notices of Caution will be supplied.
The Patentee is prepared to deal liberally with the land-
holders whose estates are infested with these animals, and will
charge royalty for use of patent at so much a head for sheep and
cattle, or per acre or square mile of country, as may be agreed
upon, according to capabilities of country, number of stock,
position of station, &c.
My process is the cheapest and most effectual ever discovered.
It alone will destroy life in burrows with some of the entrances
left open. All Chemists have recognised that the gas secured by
my patent is the best for the purposes set forth in this pamphlet,
but they failed to devise a safe method of applying it. My method
is safe and efficacious.
J. A. PARKER,
Sole Patentee for all the Colonies.
N.B.—Address of Offices will be advertised so soon as supply
of material manufactured.
W. M. Maclardy, Printer,
eorge Street, Sydney,




HARLES BATH & C 0„
WHOIESALE
Wine and Spirit W|ei , Gliaqts
OFFICES
2 BRIDGE STREET,
STORES
QUEEN’S PEACE, SYDNEY
SOLE AGENTS FOR—
JAMES SWORD & SONS'OLD-SCOTCH WHISKEY,
IN BULK AND CASE
P. MELCHER’S “JUNIPER TREE” GENEVA.
E. DESSANDIER & CO.’S BRANDIES
IN BULK AND CASE.
CAMILLE HERMAN-BORDEAUX CLARETS
