

31
di
fel'g
B
Tour in America
I*
$ 3
Sm
%*
<£• c»
$H
jj-i>
#\t
Ut
%\-p
•4'jp
*11
Oj’5>
*|
MS
*S
v\ -i>
By
T. IKI. DOW,
Special Commissioner of H The Australasian*”
(Published by permission of the Proprietors.)
|£
|N
if!
C&U
<t -
i
is
$13
SI?
*
C> *
2
*
<!>
5>
$
t
*)
O
•3>
f> % '
(Published by permission of the Proprietors.)
i
$
H
M
•4>
*>
<j>
>w<
*
i
S
o
9
0*0
<x>
<t-
ct-
«
*
KTT5te. aam&a. si£raa vaEIISa ‘ ■ *r-tri<9 • >r ttx.? »>r7r;a
*1 i
# J ■s> <*-• Ltf
<£•}*
| A $W
i .A. «m
h|2 «H
*l| |£
£| FARMS, VINEYARDS, ORCHARDS.
h| SAN FRANCISCO TO NEW YORK. |S
*S|| IRRIGATION AND RAILWAYS. $?
M* <*; *
THE MORMONS. |H
jjjl OVER THE ROCKIES TO NIAGARA.' S jj
rl THE SOUTHERN ROUTE. %*
THE SOUTHERN ROUTE.
i s
M % £
r-b PRTPR OMR ST-TTT T IMP, S ?
PRICE—ONE SHILLING.
jojrg Jr Kit, —UNH, brilJLjL,l IN C_r.
f It?
M 11%
m ■ jg
SUclfaournc:
m “THE AUSTRALASIAN” OFFICE . Sm
SI 1884. |1?
Kr§ <• k
‘♦'fcs.JLKi’ *>l3oLj<* »>t cx,JDi


co
IPTION.
I old Medals,
r Portable
facine, U.S.,
CHAS. Li.
IKSTONB,
Churns, &c.;
lig and Har-
fN & SON,
i'CKSLEY,
Towers, &c. ;
REENS, &b. ;
RY of every
” Vertical
yidii jiMwiiH.i oiiauctttterß, oiiwn uowcvs. Double Fnr-
B^w '. rachln f s Cambridge Press-wheel Rollers. row, Pirie’s Pit' '-nt
B^LP^ teB a ” d r Du P hcatesf o r Engines—Pmtable & Vertical. Reapers* Mowcl V Bnokeve
ErWa" h» a f d I'T/r lit, Drills. Hammers,&c Steam Cross-CuttiW Machine's
Leather S 8 Jteld Gates, Garden Rollers. Thrashing Machines, various
jearner. Hour Mills, Grist and other, makers
•kc' w s&xjsts?*
Machinery supplied on very Liberal Terms to suit Purchasers
Stores-MORAY STREET, FALLS BRIDGE.
ZW Send for Catalogue. offices ~ 28 STREET, MELBOURNE


JOSEPH NICHOLSON & CO.’S
Winners of the First Gold Medal—Melbourne International Exhibition, FIELD TRIAL , 1881,
and have defeated all Competitors at recent FIELD TRIALS of any note.
Price £6O, extra large £65.
PATENT SPUR-GEARING STRIPPERS,


PORTABLE ENGINES
(All Sizes on Hand) by
DAVEY, PAXMAN & CO.,
COLCHESTER.
TRACTION ENGINE & WAGGONS,
Complete, LATEST IMPEOYEMENTS, by
McLAREN, Leeds.
NEW STEAM PLOUGH
With LATEST IMPEOVEMENTS, For Sale.
This Machine has given a most Satisfactory Trial.
CORN-CLEANING AND WEED-SEED SEPARATORS.
QUOTATIONS FOR MACHINERY OF EVERY DESCRIPTION GIVEN,
GIBBS, BRIGHT & GO.,
36 FLINDERS LANE WEST.


R. COCKERELL Sc SONS
Manufactories: 22 Elizabeth Street North, Melbourne;
Yarrow Street, Invercargill, N.Z.; South Road, Timaru, N.Z,
This diagram repre-
sents our PATENT X
CULTIVATOR, fitted
with, steel teeth and
otherwise, for breaking
up rooty and rocky
land. Price list and
particulars may be had
post free on applica-
tion.
This diagram repre-
sents our Patent Flex-
ible Spring-Backed
Harrows. The many
advantages of this Har-
row are very consider-
able, as there is no
jumping on hard land,
which renders it a very
severe cutter and mould-
maker, owing to its ad-
vantages in fitting the
land m every direction.
The back section being
swung from the centre,
allows it to make the
thorough zig zag cut.
The check-chains at each
side are left a little lon-
ger than the centre, the
checking of which causes
the Harrow to keep con-
tinually wracking, and
by such means the teeth
are kept clean.
Price per pair, to cover 9ft., £7 ss. Drag Harrows, plain tooth, cheaper,


JOHN BANKS & SON,
Brass founders Engineers,
42 BOURKE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE,
Manufacturers of
GAS-FITTINGS, GAS AND WATER WORKS PLANT,
LEAD, COMPO., and TIN PIPE, ENGINEERS’
and PLUMBERS’ TOOLS, do.
Iron & Brass Steam Valves, Pressure Gauges, Boiler Mountings,
Gresham’s Injectors. Suet Lubricators, Antifriction
Metal, Phosphor Bronze, Ingot Copper.
Screw-cutting Lathes, Drilling, Shaping, Slotting Machines.
PUMPS, Single, Double, & Treble Barrel,
With Horse-powers, &c.
BRASS WORK OF EVERY DESCRIPTION MANUFACTURED TO DESIGN.
MANUFACTURERS OF THE
MOISTITOR IPTJIMIIPS,
Suitable for Farmers and others, for lifting quantities of water.
33. WHITLEY & CO.,
9 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE,
GRAIN and FLOUR MERCHANTS,
COMMISSION AGENTS, See.
Account Sales rendered promptly. Drafts on demand against
Consignments duly protected. Calcutta Corn Sacks and
Bran Bags always on hand.
BUTTER & CHEESE.
J. BARTRAM AND SON,
8 Queen Street, Melbourne,
Are Cash Buyers of all Dairy Produce at Highest Market Bates.
Consignments received. Account Sales promptly rendered.
Advances if required.
Extract from Australasian Trade Review: —
“ Messrs. Bartram and Son, besides being the largest exporters of butter
in the colony, are also the largest exporters of cheese, and agents for several
leading cheese factories.”


BRISCOE & COMPANY
HAVE ON SALE :
COMPLETE IRRIGATING PLANTS,
COMPRISING
GWYNNE’S INVINCIBLE CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS.
HORNSBY’S MODERN PORTABLE ENGINES, &c.
HOT-AIE PUMPING ENGINES.—No Danger—a Child Can
Manage Them.
HORNSBY’S REAPERS AND BINDERS.— A Strong, Faith-
fully-made English Implement.
PARAGON MOWERS.—Absolutely the Best in the World.
THISTLE, FERN AND HEDGE CUTTERS.
VINEYARD PLOUGHS.
TOMLINSON, HAYWARD & CO.’S GLYCERINE SHEEP
DIP.
And Every Requisite for the Farmer and Grazier.
37 & 89 LITTLE COLLINS ST. WEST, &172 QUEEN ST.
WOOD & COMPANY,
9 MARKET STREET, MELBOURNE,
EECEIVB Consignments of Butter, Cheese, Bacon, Honey, and every
Description of Farm and Dairy Produce.
Account Sales rendered promptly. All Goods covered by Insurance as soon as
they reach our Stores. Liberal Cash Advances made on Goods consigned to us
for .-‘ale.
Sole Agents for “Walton’s” Famous Golden Derby Paste and
Liquid Annatto, justly celebrated for the beautiful cowslip tint it imparts
to the cheese; “Visser’s” Liquid Annatto; also for “Visser’s”
Artificial Rennett, highly recommended and extensively used by the
leading cheese-makers of the colonies. See testimonials.
We also import, specially prepared, Cheese Bandage, Cheese and
Butter Cloth.
E. D. GARDNER & CO
PRODUCE MERCHANTS,
81 FLINDERS STREET WEST,
MELBOURNE.
Farm and Dairy Produce Bought and Sold on Commission.


GRICE, SUMNER & CO.’S
FRIGE LIST, Season 1884-85,
MALDEN ISLAND GUANO,
SUPERPHOSPHATE OP LIME,
AND COMPOUND MANURES.
Manufactured from Directions obtained from R. W. Emerson MdVOK, Esq.,
F.1.C., F.C.S.
MALDEN ISLAND GUANO.
7 0 0
Cash, if paid within one month per ton £6 5 0
Credit, twelve months ,» 7 0 0
SUPERPHOSPHATE.
9 10 0
Cash, if paid within one month per ton £8 10 0
Credit, twelve months ~ 9 10 0
COMPOUND MIXTURE, No. I.
(Consisting of Superphosphate, Potash, and Sulphate of Ammonia.)
1 cwt. about equal to ten loads farmyard manure
Cash, if paid within one month per ton £l3 0 0
u to o
Credit, twelve months » 14 10 0
COMPOUND MIXTURE, No. 2.
( Consisting of Superphosphate, Nitrate of Potash or Sulphate of Ammonia,
and Potash Salts )
1 cwt. about equal to ten loads stable manure.
Cash, if paid within one month per ton £l3 10 0
Credit, twelve months ~ 15 0 0
15 0 0
COMPOUND MIXTURE, No. 3.
(Consisting of Superphosphate and Ammonia, containing similar constituents
as Peruvian Guano, but more soluble, being specially prepared )
Cash, if paid within one month per ton £l2 10 0
iU. 19 IK A
Credit, twelve months ~ 13 15 0
COMPOUND MIXTURE, No. 4.
(For Peas, Beans, Lucerne, Clover, &c.; consisting of Superphosphate and
Potash Salt.)
Cash, if paid within one month per ton £lO 10 0
Credit, twelve months „ 11 12 0
11 12 0
Also, ON SALE.
Sulphate of Ammonia. Potash Salts
Delivered in Melbourne (bags included.)
Apply GRICE, SUMNER & CO.,
24 FLINDERS LAKE WEST, MELBOURNE.


TOUR in AMERICA.
T. K. DOW,
f|otntttisiiotujt of "ffljt
(Published by permission of the Proprietors. )
FARMS, VINEYARDS, ORCHARDS.
SAN FRANCISCO TO NEW YORK.
IRRIGATION AND RAILWAYS.
THE MORMONS.
OVER THE ROCKIES TO NIAGARA.
THE SOUTHERN ROUTE.
PRICE-ONE SHILLING.
ftfUlbournt:
“ THF\ \A USTB ALA SIAN ” OFFICE.
1884.


T. EOBINSON & CO.,
Agricultural Implement Makers
And IMPORTERS OF MACHINERY.
SOLE AGENTS EOK
The only Binder of its kind in the world doing away entirely with
all Canvas Elevators, and not having half the gear of the ordinary
Eeaper and Binder. Simple, strong and reliable. Patented in all
the colonies.
ALSO SOLE AGENTS EOE
MARSHALL, SONS & CO.’S
CELEBRATED PORTABLE ENGINES & MACHINERY.
and Mowing Machines, Horse Power Threshing Machines, all P s izes Double
Presses Three Furrow Ploughs, Disc Harrows, Horse Powers,|Wool
Address; 247 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


PREFACE.
The following notes of a reporting tour in the United
States of America have appeared in the columns'! of \The
Australasian , and are published in the present form byfthe'
kind permission of the proprietors of that journal.
The progress of American agriculture is one of the wonders
of modern times, and it is almost impossible to over-estimate
its influence upon the trade of the civilised world. What
American competition means has of late years been brought
home to the farmers of England in a surprisingly forcible
manner; and how the land of the old country is to support
the three classes of labourer, farmer, and landlord, when
vast tracts of virgin soil owned by the men who till them
are, through rapid steam communication, filling the markets
with cheap produce, is a question which is puzzling the
wisest economists. When foreign grain began to reduce the
profits of English agriculture, it was thought that grazing
would afford a remunerative employment for the land in the
British Islands, but the transatlantic trade in meat and live
stock, as well as in dairy produce, soon developed to such
magnitude as to leave the outlook of the English farmer
gloomy enough even from this standpoint. Commissioners
were appointed to visit the American continent, on behalf of
the English agriculturists, to report upon the situation, and
but little comfort was derived from their investigations. Ta
the farmers and graziers of the Australasian colonies the
subject is of the first importance, inasmuch as the London
market is the chief outlet for their surplus produce. With
an area of land about as large as the United States, and


a limited population, which must necessarily increase but
slowly, while production is likely to expand rapidly, an out-
side market for the products of the soil is an absolute
necessity of our progress. The question with us, therefore,
is not so much what the fate of the English farmer is likely
to be as whether we are able to compete successfully in the
markets of the world, against the farmers and graziers of
America. For some time the want of complete and reliable
information concerning the system carried out in the most
successful farming country in the world had been extensively
felt by the occupiers of land in all parts of Australia and
New Zealand, and it was to supply that want, as far as
possible, that the proprietors of The Australasian despatched
the writer on a reporting tour throughout the United States.
It was believed that an Australian, who had travelled
extensively in the colonies as an agricultural reporter, and
thus gained experience of the condition of our various rural
industries, would be able to give such descriptions of
American operations as would be of special value to the
numerous readers of the journal in all parts of Australia,
New Zealand, and Tasmania. It need scarcely be stated
that, being entrusted with a mission calculated, if well per-
formed, to confer such important benefits upon the great
Australian group of colonies, I entered most zealously upon
the work.
Although investigating agricultural subjects was the main
object of the tour, the writer’s impressions of all that he
saw of the country and the people have been recorded ; and,
as the experiences and observations of a passing visitor, it
is hoped that they will not be without interest to the
general reader.
T. K. DOW.
The Australasian Office,
23rd August, 1884.


" (Tlif Gratis.'
PRICE - TWOPENCE.
See THE ARGUS for Full Parliamentary Reports.
See THE ARGUS for All Mining News.
See THE ARGUS for All Country News.
See THE ARGUS for Commercial and Market Reports.
See THE ARGUS for Fullest Weather Telegrams.
See THE ARGUS for All the News of the Day.
Twopence Daily, One Shilling per Week.
"Cjj t Australasian.”
THE BEST FARMING NEWSPAPER.
Sixpence per Week.
“ C| t Illustrate ”
CONTAINS INTERESTING
ILLUSTRATIONS of all the Events of the Month.
PUBLISHED EVERY FOUR WEEKS.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


IT WILL PAY YOU
TO PURCHASE YOUR
Drapery, Clothing, and Furnishing Goods
OF THE
(fymh C impair
Who sell any length or a single article. Their PALATIAL WAREHOUSE
is situated in
BRUNSWICK STREET, FITZROY
IT WILL PAY YOU
Ist.—BECAUSE their Prices are much lower than ordinary retail drapers.
2nd,—BECAUSE they make no display of Goods in the windows or at the
doors, consequently the Goods are always in perfect condition.
3rd.—BECAU SE their Stocks are so immense, that you can always get the
article you require.!
4th.—BECAUSE they do not compel customers to keep Goods purchased
which do not suit, but will return the money without fuss or annoyance.
Sth.—BECAUSE they divide the profits with their clients on a novel co-
operative principle.
6th.—BECAUSE their Goods may always be depended upon as being the
very best of their several kinds, and fully up to what they are repre-
sented to be.
7th. —BECAUSE they always have on sale genuine Bargains in all depart-
ments of their very extensive trade.
Bth.—BECAUSE residents in any part of Victoria can be served as cheaply
as if resident in Melbourne.
9th.—BECAUSE they send samples of all kinds of Soft Goods post free on
application.
10th.—BECAUSE they send parcels of the value of £5 and upwards,
carriage paid, to any railway station in Victoria.
11th.—BECAUSE their Dressmaker is one of the most talented in Victoria,
and their prices for Dressmaking very moderate.
12th.—BECAUSE they will send samples of Dress materials and self-
measurement instructions post free.
13th.—BECAUSE their Gentlemen’s Order Cutter guarantees the newest
style, unerring fit, and superior workmanship.
14th.—BECAUSE they will send samples of Woollens and self-measurement
instructions post free.
The undersigned, Managers of the U. S. G. Co., respectfully invite inspection.
Visitors shall be treated with the utmost deference and respect, and shall not
be annoyed by solicitations to purchase.
A. S. WILSON.
J. C. WILSON.


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Introduction ix.
CHAPTER I. —On the Broad Pacific 17
ll. —lnside the Golden Gate 21
lll. —About San Francisco 25
IV. —Through China Town 29
Y.—The Sacramento Valley 34
Vl.—The Biggest Farm in the World ... 37
Vll.—General Bidwbll’s Ranch 42
VIII.—An Orchard of 1000 Acres 46
IX. —A Vineyard op 2500 Acres 52
X. —Among the Politicians 55
XL—Hubert Howe Bancroft 59
Xll. —Harvesting Hay 62
Xlll. —Harvesting Grain 64
XlV.—Over the Sierras 69
XV.—On Lake Tahoe 74
XVl. —The Nevada Silver Mines 78
XVll. —Salt Lake and the Mormons 84
XVIII. —The Latter Day Saints 89
XlX. —Over the Rocky Mountains 95
XX.—lrrigation in Colorado 103
XXl. —Canals and “Ditches” 106


CHAPTER page
XXll. —lrrigation Laws 11Q
XXIII. —The Mississippi Valley 114
XXIV. —The Chicago Crain Trade 118
XXV. —The Chicago Cattle Business... ... 123
XXVl. —Chilled Meat at Chicago 124
XXVll. —Fixing up the Hogs 128
XXVIII. —From Chicago to Niagara Falls ... 130
XXIX. —An Agricultural College 133
XXX. —Niagara Falls 138
XXXl. —Vermont Merinos 143
XXXll. —Cheese and Butter Factories ... 140
XXXlll. —Creameries ... 153
XXXlV. —Shipping Live Stock and Produce at
New York 15g
XXXV. —Cane Sugar igg
XXXVl. —Sorghum and Beet Sugar 161
XXXVII. —Maize or American “Corn” ... ... 164
XXXVlll. —Western Ranches ... ... ... 167
„ XXXlX. —Westward to Kansas 171
„ XL. —The Southern Route 177
» XLl. —lrrigation in California 182
„ XLII.—Hop Culture _ jgg
» XLlll. —Fruit Canning Factories ... ... 137
>» XLlV. —Vineyards of California ... ... 191
» XLV.— Drying Raisins 194
XLVl. —Summary jgy


M‘CALMAN, GARDE & CO.,
Makers of the Celebrated CHAMPION DOUBLE and
SINGLE FURROW PLOUGHS.
We would respectfully call attention to one of the special features of the above,
viz.:—THE PATENT PLOUGH WHEEL, with which all our Ploughs
are fitted.
The accompanying woodcut being a representation of it, the white lines in
the Boss showing the Chill. The Cap shown on the Point excludes the dirt
and retains the oil.
With NEW CHILLED BOSS; Unequalled for Strength and Durability;
Wearing Three Times longer than ordinary cast wheels.
Descriptive Catalogues at the Works, or sent Post Free.




A TOUR IN AMERICA.
CHAPTER I.
ON THE BROAD PACIFIC.
It was a favourite argument of the evangelical divine
whom I “ sat under” for many years that an unregenerate
man, even if admitted to heaven, would be incapable of
enjoying its holy pleasures, and I think the venerable old
gentleman was getting well down into the subsoil when he
turned up that truth. Our ability to enjoy anything in
nature or art depends upon the training we have had, and
to appreciate some things a real inward change is
necessary. To the natural man with ordinary English
tastes the ecstasy produced upon a Highlandman by the
squealing of 20 bagpipes is a mystery, while Allister
APAlister would as signally fail to get up any excitement
under the influence of an Italian opera. lam led into
these reflections by noting the wide differences of opinion
in regard to America expressed by those who have
travelled in the country. I don’t wish to assert that
America is like the heaven referred to by my old spiritual
teacher ; but having met a number of English tourists
whose experiences and impressions were the reverse of my
own, I have come to the conclusion that the differences
were in ourselves and not in the men or things which came
under our observation. My experiences were pleasant,
and my opinions in the main are favourable, results which
I am inclined to attribute to my being an Australian.
The strange new life of the young, vigorous nation in the


United States is too dissimilar to be agreeable to those
who have the fixed habits of the Old World ; but the man
who has lived for a lengthened period in the Australian
colonies has experienced a kind of conversion and a
probationary training which fit him for falling easily into
American ways, and enable him to see much that is
admirable where those who do not possess this inward
light see nothing but unmeaning strangeness. Although
travelling pretty extensively in the Australasian colonies,
I had never seen any part of the northern hemisphere
until last April, when I crossed the line en route for San
Francisco in the Pacific Mail Company’s ship City of New
York. To compare the New World with the Old will
therefore be impossible in these papers, but some account
of how things appear to an Australian may not be
altogether without interest to readers beneath the Southern
Cross.
“ And I have loved thee, Ocean.” Like every one who
is not “ a good sailor,” I have always disagreed with Byron
in this sentiment, and I cannot yet adopt the quotation,
taking “ ocean” in its unlimited sense. In regard to every
ocean but one there is a suspicion and want of implicit
trust which is destructive of love, but the Pacific I shall
always cherish with the tenderest feelings. Any man who
knows what the sea is able to do with him must
appreciate good treatment when he gets it, and I should be
basely ungrateful if I did not for ever remember the
kindly consideration shown by the Pacific in carrying me
so gently twice across its surface, a distance of 15,000
miles. Sea-sickness was not unknown in our ship during
the first day or two after clearing the Sydney Heads, and
one or two very poor sailors did not feel quite happy until
we reached Auckland, but the cases were very few for an
ocean voyage. I have generally seen more sea trouble on
the coasting steamers, and our voyage was not an
exceptionally favourable one. It appears that this ocean
really deserves the name of Pacific, and such a consideration
will not be without weight in estimating the advantages of
the American route to Europe.
The day at Honolulu is written in the reddest of letters
in the calendar of every passenger by the Pacific mail
route. The ship has not yet been built that is not quickly
deserted on touching land after even a short voyage, and


when the land is an island of the Pacific with tropical
fruits and a population of coloured inhabitants, there are
but few tourists who can conduct themselves according to
a high standard of decorum and dignity, A youthful
spirit of hilarity seems to take possession of all, and the
ruling sentiment seems to be, “ Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we shall be again at sea.” A delightful hour is
spent in sailing up to the harbour, viewing the high peaks
of the island, which seem to have risen like immense blue
waves from the sunny sea, and become fixed as a part of
the cumulous clouds that join them from above. Every-
thing is so still in the morning sun, and the hazy atmos-
phere throws such a charming veil over the whole scene,
that the imagination is encouraged to revel in all kinds of
fairy pictures. The town of Honolulu looks pretty from
the sea, lying peacefully at the foot of a mountain range
some 4000 feet in height, but when the enchantment which
distance lends to the view is taken off much of the beauty
vanishes. All that nature has done is admirable, but
man’s work, while indicative of wealth and progress, is
wanting in beauty. The streets are neither wide nor
straight, and the large and imposing buildings are too
heavily handicapped by small contemptible hovels to pro-
duce a good general effect. A Kanaka, even when taught
to go to church and drink whiskey, is content with a very
modest residence, and a Chinaman could not under any
circumstances breathe freely in a large house. When it is
stated that about a fourth of the population are Chinese,
that there are only 2000 Europeans in the town, and
that the remainder of the 16,000 or 18,000 are Kanakas,
moderate developments of the beautiful and a sub-
dued diffusion of “sweetness and light” are all that can
be expected. The suburbs, however, are altogether lovely,
and there are numerous delightful drives in different direc-
tions from the town.
About a score of Kanaka boys surround the ship as soon
as the pier is reached, and their expertness in diving for
coins thrown into the water by the passengers would be
sufficient to interest anyone much harder to please than
the average voyager by an ocean steamer. Those who feel
interested in the natives will also see enough of them
without missing the drive in the country. They are to be
seen in the streets, the well-dressed policeman being the


most attractive portion of the population, and along the
roads native women, wearing gay-coloured dresses, may he
met riding on horseback in the manner only practised by
men where civilisation is less recent. The much-praised
dress of the Kanaka ladies is disappointing. It falls from
the shoulders in lines too straight to be graceful, and its
chief merit consists in being the opposite of what it is
generally represented. I had read that the loose robe
hung gracefully over the statuesque figure of the dusky
maiden, bringing out the beautiful modelling in bold relief,
but it entirely conceals the architecture, like the garments
given in with a shilling doll, and this was no doubt the
object of the missionary who designed it. The Hawaiian
lady is not beautiful in features; her olive complexion has
an oily glow, and her rather squat and decidedly stout
figure is much better suited by the wisely-designed overall
of the missionary than anything that sculptors are capable
of providing. The men are neither so handsome nor
so powerful as the New Zealanders, although they
somewhat resemble them. King Kalakaua, who bears
more resemblance to the African race than his subjects,
has a burly figure and a good-natured countenance. We
gave him three cheers from our hurricane deck as he
sailed in his royal yacht, a compliment which he acknow-
ledged by raising his straw hat and commanding his crew
to return the cheers. His Majesty’s salary is £6OOO per
annum, with an allowance of £2OOO a year for household
expenses, and the whole cost of the past and present reign-
ing families amounts to £17,000 per annum. The Hawaiian
kingdom has a free constitution, every male adult native
voting for representatives in Parliament, and one of the
latest reforms has been admitting the natives to the right
of drinking intoxicating liquors. In 1823 the population
numbered 142,000, so that even without a legal right to
the Christian privilege of whisky the extinction of the race
was proceeding rapidly enough. The bananas and musk
melons, however, are good, and if leprosy were not so
common among the natives there are few places where a
month’s luxurious life could be better enjoyed.


CHAPTER 11.
INSIDE THE GOLDEN GATE.
An ant-hill that a flock of sheep have passed over
presents a scene of considerable activity, and so does a
passenger ship on nearing land after an ocean voyage.
There is a donning of long-tailed coats, a vigorous play of
clothes-brushes, walking-sticks come out from their long
hiding place, and you learn for the first time that some of
your comgagnons die voyage are possessed of hats as well as
smoking-caps. A wonderful revival suddenly takes place,
and all are affected with a zeal to do something extra-
ordinary. Field glasses and opera glasses are turned upon
the blue mountain wall that now stands up high against
the horizon, and disputed points, such as the height of the
hills and the distance of the land, are debated with a
warmth that is proportionate with the innocence of
knowledge on the part of the disputants, and the trifling
character of the subject. The bold bluff on each side of
the Golden Gate, as high as Sydney Heads, though not so
iron-bound, commands respect, and you feel interested in
the theory that this gap in the coast range was made by an
earthquake at a recent period, before which the Sacramento
and San Joaquin were one vast river flowing into one of the
southern gulfs. No respect, however, is commanded by a
two-story brick building like a small pork factory or a very
large toll-house jutting out under the portals of the Gate.
This, you learn, is a fort, and an American passenger
tells you that it is about as respectable a thing as the
United States navy. You pity the navy and think that
the turf banks at Williamstown and Queencliff are
respectable “ fortifications,” after all, if such ginger-bread
structures as this are considered “ strong enough to be
polite to.”
There is much in first impressions, and the hilly site on
which the city is built sets the buildings off to advantage,
making the view from the bay near the mail wharf very
attractive. As the long covered wharf is approached _ the
first impressions are likely to be too striking, for American
enterprise fires a volley of photographs and business circulars


at the close file of passengers on the deck. A tall thin
figure under a fashionable silk hat, and behind a large
diamond breast-pin, leads the attacking party, and it is soon
brought forcibly to mind that the railways are not managed
by Government, for this wiry, electrical, yet polite and
persuasive young man, requests you to remember the C, B. and
Q., which he explains “stand for Chicago, Burlington and
Quincey, and also for cheapest, best and quickest,” and when
he also advises you in a friendly, and apparently dis-
interested way to travel by the Denver and Rio Grande, the
new scenic route, first calling at 32 Montgomery-street to
get properly “ fixed up,” you become aware that the influence
of Mr. T. D. McKay, the successful railway agent, has
already been thrown over you. It is gratifying to find so
much attention paid you simply because you are supposed
to be an intending traveller by rail. I suppose it is because
in Australia the railways are considered to be for the con-
venience of the Government officials, and that the payment
of a fare does not absolve the public from the obligation
which getting a rough ride involves, that the attentions of
the American agent are so much appreciated. In no other
way can I account for the fact that our most prominent
citizens have their portraits hung in McKay’s office, and
send him back letters of thanks after they have crossed the
continent.
The noise at the Tower of Babel must have been
great if it equalled the roar and din produced by the
hotel touts, hack-men and express agents when the mail
steamer reaches the wharf. No man with a weak voice
could make a living at this touting business, but good
lungs and a shrill harsh voice to crack the volume of
confused sound, must be a source of wealth to their
possessor. The custom house officers do their work
expeditiously, although they have every trunk and port-
manteau opened, for there are opium-smoking Chinese by
the thousands in San Francisco and China is not far off.
If you give your baggage to the first express man that
wants to hook his labels to your trunks the charge will
probably be half a dollar “ apiece,” hatboxes or umbrellas
being counted as pieces ; but another man wants to stick
on his parchment checks at half the price, and by a little
judicious delay a dollar will be found sufficient to trans-
port quite a large lot of luggage to your hotel. It will also


;cost a dollar to ride up in a “ coupe or carriage,” the only-
kind of cabs; but you will never require to be so extra-
vagant any more, for the horse tramways and cable roads
will take you anywhere for 2^d.
“ Rattle his bones over the stones ” is a bad enough
sentiment when applied to the unfortunates who used in
the good old times to receive the benefit of it, but the man
who pays a “big American dollar” for a ride naturally
expects more respectful treatment. So rough, however,
was the journey from the wharf to the hotel that I coulcl
imagine the hackman to be humming passages of the old
song. I first thought it bad policy to have the street so
much out of repair at the entrance to the city, owing to
the “ first impressions ” aspect of the question ; but I soon
found that the board of supervisors, as the city authorities
are called, had not been guilty of treating this street
unfairly, for the neglect was impartially extended to all
the rest. Instead of the even macadamised roads of
Melbourne, I found in all parts of San Francisco streets
that can only be described as abominable. Rough “ cobble
stones,” or round water-worn boulders about the size of
Laucefield potatoes, are embedded in the sandy soil, and
over this uneven roadway the vehicles rumble and the
horses hobble in a manner that is distressing in the highest
degree. These blue cobble stones are the same as pave the
shore all along the New Zealand coast, and the beach at
some parts of that coast would form just as good a road-
way as the best streets in a city which in other matters
shows so much progress and prosperity. No explanation
seems sufficient to justify so fine a city in being content
with such extraordinarily bad streets. Edmund Burke
says something pretty about the French queen being so
shamefully treated among a nation of cavaliers, and I think
as good a point could be made by another Burke in regard
to Americans, who are such admirers of a good horse,
allowing streets to exist that are so cruel to horses, and so
destructive to valuable property.
The San Francisco hotels had been exhaustively discussed
on board the City oj New York , and, as among the first-
class establishments the Baldwin was said to be the most
comfortable and the best managed, my rumbling convey-
ance was directed to jerk me in that direction. A number
of porters, both black and white, surround the four-wheeled


carriage which is your cab, and when yon enter the hotel
by the large plate-glass folding-doors, you find yourself in
a spacious hall with marble floor and walls hung with oil
paintings. Away on the right is a book-stall, behind which
is a hoy selling the daily papers, on the left a telegraph-
office, with two young lady operators, while in front there
is a long counter made of marble and Californian onyx, the
whole chiselled into a highly ornamental design. Behind
the counter are two or three clerks, the chief of whom is
surrounded by telephones, fire-proof safes, letter-racks, a
revolving thing like a lighthouse for holding the room keys,
and various other requisites of an American hotel office.
After making sure that this, after all, is not the Bank of
California or the Mint, the Australian visitor approaches
the counter, and puts his name in the book. The clerk
gives the orders to the porters, one of whom takes the guest
to the elevator, and instructs the conductor of the elevator
to stop at the required floor. The waiter of the floor in
question receives the guest as he steps out of the elevator
and conducts him to his apartments, where he finds the
luggage porter unbuckling the straps of his trunks.
The electric bell in the room brings the “ floor boy” at
the shortest notice, so the porters can be dismissed, and you
can explore your new home. It was understood that the
charges were four dollars a day, and the only question
asked by the bank manager, or rather the clerk, was as to
whether you wanted a bath. Well, here is a bathroom
with hot and cold water laid on, and all other conveniences,
and the bedroom is large and airy, while the parlour is all
that could be desired. Elegant chandeliers, large pier-
glasses, luxurious arm chairs and lounges, a rich carpet, and
gilt china, all help to make your private parlour attractive.
I had been accustomed to getting a bedroom, and a small
one very often, in the best Australian hotels, and I
naturally thought the fine suite of apartments was too
much for any ordinary man. They must, I considered,
have taken me for the agent-general, Sir Henry Parkes, or
some State ambassador, and given me apartments accord-
ing to my supposed rank, so I resolved to inquire next
morning how much a day I was paying. When I found
that the whole business, with all the pleasures of the table,
was only four dollars, or “ dallars,” as the Americans say, I
took the elevator and went up to smoke a fresh cigar and
pronounce a silent blessing upon the American hotel system.


The time for each meal extends over about three hours,
so that one is hardly ever too late or too early to find
admittance to the dining room, and the dishes cover a wide
range. There are pork and beans, of course, green corn,
hot cakes, and other purely American dishes, but there are
plenty of others from which any one can choose. lam not
an expert in the science of dining, but as far as the opinion
of an amateur goes I should say the cooking was good and
the table altogether first-class. I have _ met Englishmen
who could not get a good square meal in America, but I
could and did, and I look upon those who are incapable
of enjoying the meals at such an hotel as the Baldwin more
in pity than in anger. The dining room,_ in which 200
guests are comfortably accommodated, is handsomely
decorated, the ceiling painted, the walls also where there is
room between the large mirrors, and the floor is beautiful
mosiac work in tiles. Each square table accommodates
eight guests, and a smart negro waiter attends to each table.
Two white overseers show guests to seats and keep the
waiters to their work, also assisting the waiters in placing
the chairs under the guests. A guest at a first-class
American hotel who had to draw in his own chair would
have a just cause of complaint, and it is somewhat amusing
to observe how the resources of the establishment are drawn
upon when a large company of ladies and gentlemen are to
be seated at one time. It reminds one of “ backing up
at cricket to see the waiters from neighbouring tables gather-
ing round to push in the chairs, as if the reputation of the
establishment depended upon the success of the operation.
Ice water is the first thing served at every meal, and every
breakfast begins with fruit.
CHAPTER 111.
ABOUT SAN FRANCISCO.
In the last chapter I touched upon the important subject
of meals, and got the hotel “ guest ” comfortably seated at
the table with Ids “ nigger” waiter in attendance. On


coming out lie will get his hat handed to him by the plea-
sant-looking old grey-haired or grey-woolled negro in the
hall, who is, curiously enough, called the “ hat boy,” and
he will not be so much surprised at the custom of calling
waiters of all ages “ boys ” as at getting his own hat
promptly handed out from the scores of others ranged
along the shelves. The hat boy never makes a mistake, no
matter how many guests may be dining, and the ancient
boy at the Baldwin is no phenomenon, for every large hotel
in the States possesses a functionary whose duty requires
the performance of a similar feat of memory. Nor is taking
care of the hats the only business in which the memory is
highly trained. Railway conductors, hotel clerks, and
many others are obliged to exercise this faculty in a
remarkable manner. One hears much about the wonderful
performances of the American hotel clerk, but when he is
seen in the flesh he far exceeds expectation. He would
evidently lose all self-respect if he failed to give the right
answer to any question in regard to the starting of trains
or boats, the routes of street-cars, and the hundred and one
matters upon which travellers want information. He knows
the number of every guest’s room, and can remember faces
for long periods. When I returned from the East, after
being absent between two and three months, the hotel was
overcrowded, but the clerk, who must have seen me enter
the door, held out my letters as I approached the counter.
Our hat boy caused some amusement one day by a reply
which he gave in his single-minded attention to his busi-
ness. A visitor from Arizona, thinking to puzzle the
venerable old “ nigger ” and give his companions some
amusement, pretended he had got the wrong hat, when the
following dialogue took place : —Arizona man —“ Jest give
me my own hat.” Hat boy—“ I guess that’s your hat,
sar.” Arizona man —Are you sure that’s my hat?”
Hat boy—“ I ain’t sure it’s your hat, sar; but I’m sure it’s
the hat you gave me.”
If the meal we have been discussing is breakfast, and the
guest has not already been down stairs, he will, on reaching
the ground floor, turn into the barber’s shop to have his
boots polished. Taking his seat on a chair, and placing
his boots on two supports provided for the purpose, he
either glances at a newspaper while the two black boys do
the polishing, or takes an interest in the score or so of


gentlemen rolled up like mummies, and occupying almost
horizontal positions on high chairs, while the barber
operates upon them with the skill of an artist. Going
through the hands of the barber is one of the pleasures _of
an American’s life, and the dollar that he pays for shaving
and hair-cutting in a first-class San Francisco establishment
is paid without grumbling. When your boots are polished
you come down off your perch, and the boys brush your
clothes with a short-handled American broom, taking care
to fold back your coat in order to do your vest justice, and
then they put the finishing touch upon your hat with the
proper kind of brush. If you are an “ Englishman, or a
“ foreigner,” (and the distinction is universally made,) and
have put your shoes outside of your door on the previous
night, they will be found brushed in the morning in most
of the hotels, but this is an innovation, and the “ boot boy”
will have to be settled with. It will be found better to go
through the process in the barber’s shop, pay the ten cents
and walk out to meet the world with the feeling of having
conducted yourself in first-class American style.
Before going out, however, let us walk across the vestibule
and look into the reading-room. It is a very large room,
and the plate-glass windows nearly reach the floor, so that
the occupants of the arm chairs can either read the papers
or study the stream of busy humanity which passes by in
the street. This arrangement, which is a feature of all
hotels, is comfortable enough to those inside, but the view
from the outside strikes a stranger as peculiar. It is so
natural to look into a shop window, but it is somewhat
embarrassing to find, perhaps, that you are inspecting the
“high-toned” guests ot a leading hotel, and looking for a
ticket with “This fine suit only 30dol.” on the portly
front of some silver king. It may be that the hotel pro-
prietors by this arrangement are aiming at getting one of
those good advertisements which “stick out like a sore
thumb ; ” but the proportion of spare, lanky guests, that
fill up those extensive show-cases, and work wooden tooth-
picks with vigorous rapidity, is somewhat to
the supposition. Those who are reading the morning
papers have purchased their favourite journal at the
adjoining stall for 2|d., or 5 cents, as the advertising sheets
on the tables, and the pyramid of illustrated “ folders of
the various railway companies do not supply the daily


news. Perhaps it is that newspapers are too numerous, or
the tastes of the guests too varied to admit of an adequate
supply of reading matter being provided by the conductors
of the establishment ; but however this may be, the man
who wants a newspaper in any hotel in America pays his
5 cents, and takes his choice.
Passing along a wide corridor between the reading-room
and the commercial-room you enter by a glass door into
the spacious and elegantly-fitted up billiard-room, and if
you walk across this quarter-acre block of marble flooring
and through another glass door, you will discover for the
first time that there is such a thing as a bar in your hotel.
Like the adjoining cigar-stall and the news-stand, the bar
is generally sub-let by the proprietor or lessee of the hotel.
Marble, plate-glass, mirrors, and gilt mouldings make the
bar, or “ saloon,” as it is always called, an attractive resort,
but only such guests of the hotel as have inward promptings
leading them to explore for its discovery need ever become
aware of its existence. In Australian hotels much less
earnest searching will suffice to give a traveller a clear and
definite idea of where the bar is to be found. If I had got
into the saloon at first, instead of into the office vestibule, I
should certainly have begun negotiations with the barman
about securing a bedroom. He is a barman, not a barmaid,
and as one travels all over the country and finds that
women are nowhere required to serve out intoxicating
drinks, one wonders why it is that in the colonies we
cannot find something better for our girls to do. Good
girls are surely too good for such a business, and when one
sees a great nation managing its drinking without their
assistance, a hope springs up that public opinion may yet
demand for our daughters a sphere more in keeping with
their nature. The barman is an artist in the mysteries of
mixing drinks, but, as it is early in the day, we had better
not test his skill, but take our rather long-delayed walk
into the city.
Melbourne and San Francisco can fairly be compared, for
both obtained an infusion of new life by the discovery of
gold about the same period, and both are marvels of modern
progress. California has a population equal to that of
Victoria, and a territory nearly twice as large. There are
over fifty-three millions of people in the United States,
upon a territory about as extensive as Australia, while the


Canadian Dominion and the Republic of Mexico are upon
the same continent. China and Japan are close to San
Francisco, and through the Golden Gate a stream of traffic
with Europe flows from Australia, Japan, China and India.
If Melbourne needed an apology it could be urged that it
is isolated from the great centres of population, and is not
a highway of the world’s trade ; that San Francisco had an
existence long before Fawkner or Batman was horn, and
that “ the flush times ” of gold digging came to California
a few years before the discovery of the precious metal began
to draw population to Victoria. But there is no necessity
to apologise for Melbourne. San Francisco is a wonderful
place, one of the wonders of the world, but Melbourne is a
still more marvellous example of rapid growth and substan-
tial progress. Melbourne has more permanent and solidly
constructed buildings, far better streets, and a larger popu-
lation than San Francisco, so that it has no equal in _ the
world among cities of nearly the same age. San Francisco,
with the suburban city of Oakland, containing about
35,000 people, comes about as nearly up to the 300,000 as
Melbourne and its suburbs, but the 32,000 Chinese included
in the estimate can scarcely be considered equal to a similar
number of Europeans or Americans, and would certainly
not be so considered by a Californian. These points are
sufficient to place Melbourne in the leading position, and I
n.m such an admirer of America that I imagine myself to
be quite impartial in making the comparison.
CHAPTER IV.
THROUGH CHINA TOWN.
One of the most interesting sights that a traveller sees is
the new view which he obtains of his own country. Travel
supplies new standards of comparison, and much that was
formerly unnoticed and taken as a matter of course assumes
a position of importance, while some things which were
considered of great moment become “ trifles light as air.”
A hansom cab or hackney waggonette I always looked


upon as deriving its form and structure from the nature of
things, but when I found a striking difference existing in
the conveyances used in San Francisco, I began to see that
some Carlyle might be able to propound a philosophy of
hackney coaches. The street conveyances are heavy-
wheeled, sombre-looking equipages, like a cross between an
old English carriage and a mourning coach, but the han-
som cabs of Melbourne and Sydney are equally interesting
to visitors from California, and I met one gentleman in
San Francisco who has started a philosophical theory upon
the subject. He discovers a resemblance between a hansom
and a kangaroo, and the system of carrying the passengers
in front he connects in some way with the fact that there
are many marsupial animals in the country.
The people in the streets of San Francisco look different
from the men and women one has been accustomed to
meet; but it is difficult to describe the innumerable little
points that make up the difference. The mixture of races
is very striking, the increasing German element and the
influence of the Spanish conquest are both observable in
the population. Fairhaired Dutch and swarthy Mexicans
are prominent among the promiscuous representatives of all
nations, and the native population shows the varied effects
of commingling of nations. The climate seems favourable
to the growth of the human species, and as the blending of
different tribes frequently produces happy physical results,
there are among the natives many handsome and well-
developed men and women. The only thing wrong with
the men is their hats. They generally dress well, with
good cloth, well cut, and with square or parallelogramic
studs and sleeve-links, but the hats are contemptible. The
choice of a hat is a matter in which the democratic principle
is allowed to operate. All men are free and equal to wear
hats as ugly as they wish. There is a great variety in the
hats, and one might say much individuality, but a small,
straight-brimmed, straw hat is allowed to cut off and
render ridiculous many a fine, well-dressed man. The
silk hat, however, one rejoices to find, is even in America,
the livery of a gentleman. Your stylish Californian wears
the little, mean, straw hat for comfort, but he does not
consider himself dressed until he gets under the stiff,
uncomfortable “stove pipe,” so dear to the hearts of
civilised men all over the world. No liberty is allowed in


regard to the shape of the dress hat. Yon can do what
you like in regard to trifling little straw hats or sweeping
Mexican sombreros, but your “ stove pipe ” must be the
latest fashion from Paris, with low crown, wide at the top,
and the sides of the brim turned up. As this style is no
doubt coming to Australia immediately, by way of the
Suez Canal, I should advise my friends who keep one
of the three-decker kind for deputations and funerals to
sell out before it is too late. At any rate, do not hawk
the precious article across the Pacific as I did, or you will
regret it. I took mine out for a walk, in blissful ignorance
of the razeeing process that fashion had been carrying on,
and I was a long time in finding out what was the matter
with my towering headgear. I felt an inward consciousness
that it was not commanding the accustomed amount of
respect, but I was down at the foot of Montgomery-street
before I made the discovery that 215., and much anxious
care on the voyage, had been entirely thrown away. There
was nothing for it but to sneak up through China Town
and by way of back streets home to the hotel, ram the
sugar-loafed tormentor into its leathern coffin for ever, and
get a Market-street hatter to place me in harmonious
relations with the Test of mankind.
China Town had been visited before I carried the burden
of that hat through its strange-looking streets. The
32,000 Chinese occupy several blocks of the city, the four,
five, and six story buildings and their cellars being entirely
given over to the Celestials. The space occupied would
accommodate about 5000 Europeans or Americans, but it
would evidently kill off the Chinese if they spread
themselves over a wider range. The air would become too
pure, the cloud of opium smoke in which groups of 20 or
30 men luxuriate would not be dense enough, and it would
be impossible to generate the mixed and condensed stench
which floats over the town if there were a less intense
concentration of the sons of the Flowery Land upon one
point. The present arrangement attains all those ends, so
necessary to Chinese comfort and happiness, in the most
effectual manner. All the pictures that ever I had seen in
the illustrated papers from the time of the China war came
into my mind, and there can be very little of Chinese
manners and customs that could not be learned in this
corner of San Francisco.


The industry of the Celestials strikes one almost as
forcibly as the effluvium which is their native air. I hey
seem to be always working, except when they are getting
shaved. The shaving operation is done openly, in view of
the passers-by on the street, and the barbers always seem
to be at work, picking the ears of their customers being,
apparently, an important part of their business. The whirr
of sewing machines and the hammering of various factories
is heard both night and day, but at night the dismal,
monotonous, and feeble piping of the Chinese musical
instruments mingles with the din. There is no trade that
they do not carry on, and I need not dwell upon the vvay
in which their industry and skill came into competition
with the Californian workman in such a way as to cause the
principles of the constitution in regard to all men being
born equal to be departed from and prohibition to be intro-
duced. While negroes and all other nationalities are
allowed to vote, the Chinese are prohibited, the contention
being that Chinamen cannot be made American citizens.
Germans, Italians, and nearly all nationalities soon become
Americanised, and are thoroughly American in the second
generation, but a Chinaman is always a Chinaman, and
hence he is treated in an exceptional manner.
The feeling against the Chinese is very strong in Cali-
fornia, and no popular politician would dare to say anything
in their favour. Their vices and peculiarities are painted
in the blackest colours, but I am of opinion that it is their
virtues which give most real offence. They are industrious
and ingenious, and can support themselves upon little.
These are not vices, but they are the real cause of the
Chinaman's unpopularity. The heathen Chinee is peaceable
and law-abiding, and his vices are not such as have much
influence upon the community. The scores of Chinese
women in Chinatown are not wives, but they do not mix
with the American population, and there is scarcely an
instance of a European or American woman living amongst
the Chinese. The Asiatics are a community by themselves,
and if they were not a menace to labour would scarcely be
objected to. Whatever the effect of unrestricted Chinese
immigration would have been there is no doubt that the
existing number are beneficial in a country where labour is
scarce. Theynotonly doall the laundry work,and muchother
house work, thus keeping the servant-girl or “ house-help”


nuisance within bounds, but render valuable assistance
to farmers, vignerons, fruit-growers, fruit-canners, and other
persons carrying on rural industries.
When I visited the Chinese theatre I think I must have
heard both a drama and an opera. The great part of the
performance was evidently dramatic, for the dialogue was
spoken, and it must have been tragic, for the hideous-
looking hero, some great emperor, cut off about a score of
heads in bringing the piece to a close. There was no
attempt to make the scene realistic, the emperor pretended
to strike with his sword, and the victims pretended to be
killed, and jumped up all right in half a second, as children
do in play. There is no scenery, but the costumes are
gorgeous, and the orchestra is terrible. There is a weak
piping and a villainous strumming of catgut for the most
part, but when the heads are being cut off the blowing of
trumpets and the clanging of cymbals is alarming. I rather
enjoyed the comic opera, for some of the performers seemed
to act well, while the singing in a weak falsetto voice was
musical, although moving by quarter tones over a limited
range of sounds. The parts of women were taken by men
dressed up well, to suit the characters, and what was most
interesting was to note how the attention of the audience
was held. There was a full house, and about forty women
occupied side boxes. The women wore dresses and hair
queues, such as are seen on tea caddies, but they were
much uglier, and also uglier than the men. The whole
half-acre of Chinese faces was not only kept constantly
turned towards the stage with interest and delight in every
feature, but every now and again the whole area ripple
into smiles, and three or four convulsions of a laugh would
follow. There is no doubt that the actors were good, but
some master mind must have composed the play, which so
generally and effectively appealed to the faculties of that
sombre mass of strange humanity.


CHAPTER V.
THE SACRAMENTO VALLEY.
Setting out for a tour among the large farms of the
Sacramento the valley is reached, after travelling about
fifty miles from the Pacific coast. The climate of California
is very much like that of Australia, the northern portions
of the State being as moist as Gippsland or Warrnambool,
and the southern portions varying in dryness to a point of
rainlessness unknown at Kerang, Sw r an Hill, or perhaps even
beyond Goyder’s line in the northern parts of South
Australia. In the northern half of the State the records
of annual rainfall vary in different districts from 34iu. to
20in., and in the south from lOin. to 3.15 in. The great
grain-growing area of the State is in the Sacramento and
San Joaquin River valleys, a tract of country 400 miles
long from north to south and from fifty to sixty miles wide
from east to west. This vast basin is bounded on the east
by the Sierra Nevada Mountains, and on the west by the
Coast Range. The Nevada Mountains are about eighty
miles wide, rising to a height of from 6000 feet to 14,000
feet above sea-level, with summits of perpetual snow, and
the Coast Range, which is sixty miles in width, varies in
height from 2000 feet to 4000 feet. The Sacramento River,
a navigable stream about 300 feet wide, runs through the
valley from the north, and joins at about the latitude of
San Francisco with the San Joaquin River, which flows
along the basin from the south, the two rivers entering the
bay of San Francisco by a short western channel. My first
journey was up the valley of the Sacramento, where the
average rainfall is about 20in., making a climate somewhat
more favoured with moisture than the principal wheat-
producing areas of Australia. There is no rain during the
harvesting season, and the temperature reaches as high as
115 in the shade.
The soil is of three kinds, which vary from fair barley-
growing land to a rich alluvial deposit, capable of producing
the most abundant crops of either cereals or roots. The
whole of the vast basin is overlaid with soil from the
surrounding mountains, which are formed chiefly of granite.


slate, and volcanic basalt. For two or three miles on each
side of the river and its tributary streams there is a rich,
friable alluvium, from 15ft. to 20ft. deep, like the soil in
the valley of the Hunter or Mitchell. This is called the
“first bottom.” On the “second bottom,” which is only a
few feet higher than the first, there are grey and chocolate
soils of medium fertility, and a black, clayey loam difficult
to work, but very productive, and calculated to endure
severe cropping for a lengthened period. The chocolate
and grey soils are called poor, but good barley crops are
obtained from them, as well as fair yields of wheat. The
“foot-hills” are an area of hilly country near the mountains,
with a shallow soil, until recently thought to be worthless,
but now discovered to be valuable for the production of
vines and fruits of the finest kind. The Sacramento Valley
is the finest stretch of country of equal extent I have ever
seen. It is what the valley of the Murray would be from
Albury to Swan Hill if flanked by high mountain ranges,
intersected by living snow-fed streams, and annually watered
with 20in. of rain. The foot-hills are clothed with a light
forest of oak trees, interspersed with a few pines and shrubs,
the grass being nutritious but not plentiful. This region
forms fair pasturage for sheep during winter, the flocks,
which are owned by farmers and graziers, being put on to
the stubble in the valleys during the summer and autumn.
Most parts of the valley are also studded with the beautiful
green and shady Californian oaks, the trees becoming more
plentiful as we travel northward. Excepting near the rivers
the trees are not so numerous as to require removing in the
interests of agriculture, and when the land has to be cleared
of the smaller timber, the expense of clearing is less than
the value of the trees for firewood, the river boats giving
cheap carriage to the cities. Above Sacramento the grain-
fields present a novel appearance with numerous oak trees
standing among the crops, the farms being really fine parks
put under cultivation without destroying the trees. The
sight is very beautiful, and the crops under the trees seem
to be as healthy as the rest.
Large farms were the general rule along the valley, very
few being under 1000 acres in extent, and several reaching
an area of 10,000 acres under cultivation. While the state
was under the Mexican Government grants of large tracts
of land -were given to pioneering settlers, and when the


United States Government purchased the whole country for
a lump sum in dollars, it was agreed that all existing titles
should be recognised. Hence the origin of large landed
estates under a Government which gives every citizen the
right to purchase only a homestead holding of 160 acres ot
the public domain. It was difficult for American citizens to
understand that after Uncle Sam had paid American dollars
for the state to the Mexicans, the right to settle on any ot
the land could be denied. The lands granted by the
Mexicans were called Ranchos or ranches, and upon these
the Americans began to settle or “ squat,” and hence began
endless litigation between the “ squatters _ and the
« ranchers.” It will be seen that the Californian squatter
was a free selector, thus reversing the order of things
existing in Australia. Many of ranchers were ruined
in endeavouring to prove their title, and remove the
squatters, and many of the squatters were equally unfortu-
nate in the struggle to seize_ upon a farm. None of the
lawyers, however, lost anything in the contest. Land was
cheap at the outset, and_ many of the ranches _ were
subdivided into farms, while those that were kept intact
constitute the large farms of to-day. Near the cities and
towns, and in other districts, there are numerous small
farms’hut taking the Sacramento Valley as a whole, large
farms are a characteristic feature, there being several with
from 5000 to 15,000 acres under cultivation.
Mules cannot he overlooked in stating the striking
features of my first journey into the country. Mules in
the gang ploughs, mules in the mowing machines, mules in
the hay rakes, mules in the waggons, and horses and mules
hitched in the same team are observed all along the line,
and the sight is sufficiently important to require some
explanation. One might at first suppose that the people
use mules because they cannot afford to buy horses, but
when it is found that weight for weight about one-third
more has to be given for a mule than for a horse, the long-
eared animal begins to command respect. As this class of
stock is preferred for all kinds of work except fast driving
and heavy lorry work in towns, there are, no doubt, good
grounds for the choice. The American has a keen appreci-
ation of dollars and cents, and it is owing to the utility of
the mule as a working animal that it is preferred to the
horse. It is found to be more hardy, requiring less


attention, and more docile than the horse. _ The mule never
“ baulks,” as the American term is for jibbing, and he is
easily managed, not being spoiled by being driven by
different and inexperienced drivers. All these qualities
render mules very valuable for farm work, and hence their
more general employment than horses. I frequently saw
ten mules in a team, “ five span,” working gang ploughs in
the summer fallow, and they seemed to move quickly and
regularly, being easily managed by a single check rein. A
good “Jack ” for producing mules is a necessary part of
most farm studs, and I have heard farmers speak with more
pride about the character of their mules than any other
of their stock. The climate and other circumstances of
Australia are so similar to those of California that the
breeding of mules for use in all kinds of country work
would no doubt be of great advantage to the colonies. The
fact of previous attempts to make mules popular having
failed does not prove that there would not be advantage
derived from their introduction.
CHAPTER VI.
THE BIGGEST FARM IN THE WORLD.
Dr. H. J. Glenn, whose immense farm at Jacinto on the
Sacramento River I visited, came to California in
1849, immediately after obtaining his medical degree
in Missouri. He had a farm in his native State, but
his first business with the Pacific coast was buying large
mobs of cattle in the east and south, and bringing them
into California, to meet the demand which the influx of a
mining population had created. In 1867 he heard that the
ranch of a Mexican grantee was for sale, and visiting the
spot, made the purchase at a dollar a half, or 6s. 3d.
per acre. This formed the nucleus of his big farm, and
some time afterwards he bought an adjoining property at
3 dollars, or 12s. 6d. per acre, extending his holding from
time to time at higher rates, until the estate reached its
present size, 65,000 acres. These purchases gave him


twelve miles of frontage to the Sacramento River and the
use of an extensive area of grazing land running back to
the Coast Range. The State land was soon settled upon,
however, and the cattle run becoming circumscribed, Dr.
Glenn began to turn his attention to farming. Beginning
extensively at the first, the area cultivated increased from
year to year until last season 55,000 acres were ploughed
and sown. By this time it had been found from experience
by numerous farmers in the valley that more profitable
results were obtainable from cropping every second year
and fallowing in the intervening summer, and so Dr. Glenn,
whose land had been continuously under grain for many
years, resolved to adopt the new system. In order to
summer fallow a considerable area without too far reducing
the extent of his grain crop, 16,000 acres of adjoining land
was rented, so that 35,000 acres could be sown, 25,000
acres ploughed in the summer for fallow, and enough land
remain for depasturing the sheep, horses, and cattle. The
extent of the farm which we have to inspect is therefore
81,000 acres.
The surface is level, and there are but few trees in the
grain fields. Portions of the estate consist of grey soil of
medium fertility, but an extensive tract in the centre is
strong, black, clayey loam. The rainfall seems to have
been lighter this season than on the eastern side of the
river, and last year the register was less than 14in.
Towards the end of March or in the early spring a stretch
of dry weather threatened to destroy the crops in the whole
valley, but three inches of rain soon followed, reviving the
growing grain and justifying the expectation of an average
yield. Although the crops at Jacinto will be below the
average of the valley this season, 10,000 acres promise to
yield from 20 to 25 bushels per acre, and the remainder
from 10 to 15 bushels per acre. The barley and oat crops
are intended chiefly for hay and horse feed, and the wheat
crop for market. About 2000 tons of hay is required for
the working stock, and this was being harvested at the time
of my visit. There were 25 two-horse mowing machines at
work, and the hay was being quickly raked into wind-rows,
“bunched” into larger parcels corresponding to cocks, and
carted to the stacks. The mowers and wind-row rakes are
of the kind familiar to Australian farmers, and the bunching
rakes are large wooden implements somewhat resembling


our pea rakes, but having a single row of long teeth and a
bow like that of a cradle to keep the hay forward and
facilitate tilting over.
Operations are conducted from one main centre, and 14
or 15 minor centres in different parts of the estate. At
each of these points a gang of men is stationed with their
teams, and here are stables, barns, houses, work-shops,
collections of machinery, lucerne paddocks, and supplies of
horse-feed. There is an overseer or “boss” at each of
these points, who directs his gang of men, and keeps
everything in working order. These overseers take their
instructions from the general manager and his assistant.
Dr. Glenn, who was unfortunately shot last season by a
drunken bookkeeper with whom he had quarrelled, was his
own manager, and he devoted his entire attention to his
gigantic operations. In his light buggy, behind a pair
of quick trotters, Dr. Glenn was here and there, and
everywhere over the farm, seldom driving less than 70
miles a day during the busy season. The foreman in
charge of the chief centre of operations is a mechanic
with an extensive knowledge of machinery, and all the
other overseers are smart men about machines. A daily
mail and a telegraph office in the immense farm store are
necessary parts of such a business. There are two railway
lines, each within sixteen miles of the farm, and the boats on
the Sacramento River carry the grain to the ships in the
bay for from Bs. to 10s. 3d. per ton.
The central homestead is like a machine factory. Long
rows of waggons, headers, mowers, gang ploughs, and other
labour-saving appliances, with steam engines and threshers,
crowd the large yard, while seven blacksmiths’ forges,
and circular and band saws are in operation in the work-
shops, setting machines in order for the grain harvest.
There is also a forge with workshop at all the out-stations,
but here there are appliances for making and setting up
every kind of machinery required on the farms, with the
exception of the castings. There is also a saddler’s shop
here, and a tradesman constantly at work upon the harness.
Two men with a mule attend to the large stable with its
200 stalls, keeping the horses and mules fed and the stalls
in order. A mule, which being blindfolded, requires no
driver, w r orks the horseworks which pumps water for the
establishment, windmills working the pumps at the other


stations. As this farm is purely a money-making concern,
there are no ornamental improvements, but a large number
of buildings are required for carrying on the business.
When it is known that the working horses and mules, 1000
in number, are all stabled, it is realised that for this purpose
alone a good deal of building is necessary. All the buildings
are of wood (pine and redwood, which is a kind of cedar)
and the plainest structure of this timber looks better than
one built of colonial hard-wood. Much of the wheat is
sent away to port direct from the field, and during the
summer months large quantities can be stacked up on the
river bank without covering, but even for storing the
balance, which cannot be sent away before the rainy season,
large barns are required.
The largest is a building capable of containing 100,000
sacks, and close to it are two others, each having room for
half that quantity, so that the three barns hold 200,000
sacks, the sacks weighing from 130 lb. to 140 lb. Sacks of
this size are used in California for the reason that they are
easily handled by one man. They are made of a light
material, like rice-bags, large numbers of them coming
from China and India, besides those made up in the
country. It is not only in the size of the sacks that
labour is saved, but the waggons for carting them also
contribute to the same end. Low-wheeled, long, narrow
waggons are used, 10ft. long by 3|ft. wide. Two of these
waggons are hitched together, and one man easily puts
30 sacks on each without assistance, and drives his four
mules smartly to the river bank, where he as easily unloads
and stacks the grain. Every man’s labour saved is a gain
of two dollars and rations on this large farm, and it is more
on smaller farms, for harvest men’s wages run up as high
as 10s. and 12s. a day, the average being from 6s. 3d. to
Bs. 4d.
Double-furrow gang ploughs are used on this farm,
although ploughs turning three and four furrows are also
employed in the state. Teams of from six to eight horses
or mules are yoked to the gangs, and from 4to and 5
acres a day are ploughed. From 300 acres to 400 acres
are ploughed in a day, and harrowing and sowing are
carried on at the same time. Broadcast-sowing machines,
capable of doing from 100 to 150 acres a day, are carried
upon waggons over the fields, and harrows, 12ft. wide.


drawn by eight mules, cover in the seed. The wages of
farm labourers in the winter season vary from 4s. 2d. to
6s. 3d a day with board. For Chinese the standing rate is
a dollar, or 4s. 2d., a day, and they find themselves. On
this estate, however, they are only employed in a few
departments of farm work in addition to cooking and
cultivating the 100 acres of vines at the main homestead.
Although wages are high the men work well. They
understand their work, are quick in their movements, and
occupy all the daylight in labour. Breakfast is over and
the men in the field by daylight, while they do not return
to the camp until after sunset. All the teams, except
those working near their stables, are kept in yoke all day,
being watered from a watercart by a man while the
teamsters are eating their lunches. The trouble with
Australian farmers is not so much the rate of wages as the
deficient supply of effective labourers.
There are very few reaping and binding machines used
in California, and the header is employed exclusively on the
Glenn ranch. Heading, threshing, and carting to the river
bank is all carried on at the same time, but as the heading
goes on faster than the threshing there is much grain
stacked, which the threshers continue to deal with until
late in the season. There are five steam threshing-
machines kept at work in the fields during the harvest, and
these machines each keep four or five headers in operation.
As there are fifty headers working on the farm, about half
the number are emptying into the threshers, and the other
half harvesting grain which is stacked up until the threshers
are ready to deal with it. The average capacity of the
threshing-machines is 1000 sacks each, or over 2000 bushels
per day. The headers cut from 12 to 16 feet wide at a
time, and average 20 to 25 acres a day each, or about from
1000 to 1250 acres a day in all —although this is a large
day’s work it is small enough when a crop of from 35,000
to 55,000 acres has to be managed. In a 12-foot header
six horses or mules are used, and from eight to ten in the
larger machines. Two waggons are required to cart the
grain from each header to the thresher or stack, so that
with drivers and stackers five men are needed to each
header. Large nets are placed in the header waggons, and
the whole load is lifted out and on to the stack by block
and tackle and a derrick worked by a span of mules, demck


forks being similarly used when the grain is taken to the
threshers, so that there is no such expensive work indulged
in as hand-pitching. Everything is designed to save labour,
and yet the paymaster informed me that last harvest he had
on his list 720 names.
The straw remaining on the field is, after being grazed
upon by stock, burned off before ploughing time, and that
which is turned out by the thresher and not used in top-
ping up haystacks is treated in the same way. Continuous
grain-growing and burning straw has been quite as common
here as in Australia, and in both countries the system can
only last for a time.
CHAPTER VII,
GENERAL BIDWELL’S RANCH.
The estate of General J. Bidwell has the reputation of
being the most interesting and the best-conducted farm in
California, and I am sure it would be difficult to find in any
part of the world an estate upon which so many varied
industries are carried on. The immense farm which I
described in the last chapter was an example of wheat-growing
upon a gigantic scale, for the immediate acquirement of
dollars and cents, and grain-growing is frequently carried on
by large and small farmers in different parts of the world
exclusively for that purpose. There are landowners, how
ever, who do not sacrifice everything to the immediate
making of money, and General Bidwell is one of them. An
inspection of the Rancho Chico and a study of its manage-
ment soon convince a visitor that the proprietor, while
seeking to work his estate at a profit, values some things in
the world more highly than money. The ranch of this
pioneer of California must not only make dollars, but it
must also teach the people how varied the productions of
the state are ; it must be a “ thing of beauty and a joy for
ever,” and not even the all-powerful American dollar would
be able to bring about the destruction of a favourite oak,
an avenue, or a bit of charming scenery. Not only have
the natural beauties of the country been preserved, but


heaps of the gold derived from its productiveness have been
expended upon developing and increasing the pleasing
appearance of the estate. The property of 25,000 acres is
like a group of delightful parks, and one drives for hours in
every direction along charming avenues, past farm-houses,
orchards, vineyards, grain-fields, _ and pastures, among
browsing cattle and sheep, and seeing busy fruit-gatherers
as well as quickly-moving harvesting machinery, without
ever losing the sense of rural beauty.
General J. Bidwell, who commanded the northern division
of the State army, which, however, was not called into
action during the war, explored his way into the Sacramento
Valley in 1841, coming with a party of thirty-two by way
of Mexico. In those times the business was to keep cattle
and kill them for their hides. The general first saw Chico
in 1843, and in 1847 he occupied it under a grant from the
Mexican Government. With the influx of population after
the discovery of gold, about 1848, the old order of things
changed, and for many years past Rancho Chico has been
developing into its present condition. The ranch abuts on
to the railway town of Chico, extending to the banks of the
Sacramento River, to which it has a frontage of four miles.
From the large two-story residence, with its wide verandah
and open balcony, and its internal arrangements (apparently
designed for entertaining visitors,) a system of winding
carriage-ways, fringed with trees whose branches meet over-
head, leads to the various sections of the estate. The
points of interest cannot be taken in at one morning’s
drive or two, for there are 6000 acres of grain crops,
the sheep, the cattle, the horses, the hogs, the bees, the
vineyards and orchards (1000 acres in extent,) including
the cherry orchard, peach orchard, almond orchard, apple
orchard, and general orchards with currants and straw-
berries and other fruits, as well as the nursery ; and then
there are the flour-mill, the fruit-drying place, the raisin-
curing apparatus, the establishment for making cider
vinegar, and the fruit canning factory. Not the least
important section of the farm, as far as the state is con-
cerned, is the experimental plots, where there are some
forty different kinds of cereals grown under various condi-
tions of agriculture. There is little of agricultural interest
in California that could not be learned at Rancho Chico, if
one could only shake off the influence of the charming


scenery and go to work, but you must first accompany the
general and the excellent lady, his wife, on delightful
driving excursions along endless miles of avenues formed of
planted trees or cut out of the natural forest, and when
you have taken a drive or two you are as willing to have
another as your host and hostess are to take you. You
are less inclined than ever to talk of practical details of so
many industries, and if you were you could have the
heart to rob the general of his delight in his winding roads,
which have been all laid out under his personal direction.
A farmer is generally a man who has no time to tell you
what o’clock it is, especially if he is a large farmer, and
therefore you wonder how it is that this lover of trees and
natural beauty, who seems to have plenty of time to spend
in entertaining his visitors, can manage so extensive an
estate with such varied interests. The truth is the general
was in his office talking over matters with his managers,
writing letters, and arranging the business of the day before
you came down stairs to the ice-crowned heaps of straw-
berries and cherries which constitute the first course at
breakfast. There are managers in charge of the different
departments, and overseers under the managers; and the
general has been able to organise matters so as to relieve
himself of much personal supervision. There are five
gentlemen in charge of sections, who constitute a kind of
board of management, with the general as president. Thus
there are the head bookkeeper, the miller, the manager of
the vineyards and orchards, the manager of the agricul-
tural branch, and the manager of the stock. These
gentlemen meet in General Bidwell’s office every Monday
morning, and oftener if needful, and discuss whatever
business there is to be dealt with, and whatever is agreed
upon is carried out by each individual. The arrangement
only holds good during the general’s pleasure, but he made
it when he found he had obtained the services of men he
could trust, and there is an understanding that, in addition
to salary, the members of the board will obtain a bonus in
the event of the estate turning in a certain amount of
profit. I found the managers entertaining a very high
idea of the general’s treatment of them, and it is probable
that the emulation created will cause more profit to be
derived from the different departments of the estate than
if General Bidwell ceased to take pleasure in his trees and


■drives and worried himself with responsibilities he was too
suspicious to entrust to others.
One reason why there is so much variety and an absence
of any tiring sense of vastness in driving over Rancho Chico
is the fact that the estate is arranged into 18 or 20 distinct
farms, each with its dwelling-house, barns, and orchard.
The dwellings are neat two-story houses, and as there is a
family living in each, the places have a comfortable, home-
like appearance. If at any time the estate should be cut
up, it would be easily divided into about twenty fine farms,
each with its homestead, orchard, and other improvements
complete. California is not without its agitators against
those who own large blocks of land, but I imagine they do
not use Rancho Chico as an example of evil, for the land
would have to be occupied by a superior class of small
proprietors under existing circumstances to be more fully
developed and to employ more labourers than at present.
The wages fund annually distributed in the district from
the estate amounts to £12,000. There is good lodging
.accommodation for the men, and as there are married
people at all the homesteads, the employes are surrounded
by civilising influences, which are absent where large
numbers of men are herded together by themselves. The
whole of the estate, also (even the orchards and grounds
around the mansion,) are open to the public, and in the
afternoons the avenues are busy with townspeople riding
and driving in every direction.
The flour mill, which is driven by a water-wheel and by
steam, is capable of grinding 150 barrels of flour in the
twenty-four hours, there being about five bushels in a
barrel. Near the mill, which is about a quarter of a mile
from the mansion, there is a wooden water tower 90ft. in
height, supporting a tank of 9000-gallon capacity, from
which a supply is laid on to the main homestead, work-
shops, canning factory, and other adjacent establishments.
The water is pumped by steam power from a well about
30ft. deep, the other homesteads being supplied by similar
wells with horse-pumps or windmills. Good fresh water is
obtained in any part of the Sacramento Valley at from
20ft. to 70ft. in depth, and water towers with windmills
form a striking feature of the landscape.
The stock department requires three or four separate
homesteads for its different branches. There are about


1000 head of cattle, being chiefly what are called “ graded”
or improved stock. Good shorthorn bulls have been kept
for some time, and the cattle are becoming gradually raised
in quality. The dairy farm is a branch of this department,
and it produces milk for the town, and butter, cheese, and
milk for the farm. A pig farm, or “ hog ranch,” is also an
important feature of the estate, the hogs numbering about
1000 head. As an old friend of the pig, and one who
believes that he is not sufficiently appreciated by our
farmers, I am glad to see that he has an important place on
most of the farms in the portion of California at present
under notice. There is poultry at the different houses on
the estate, but the “ bee ranch ” is a single establishment,
which, however, has only been partially successful. A large
number of working horses of a light, clean-legged kind, and
apparently about as many mules, constitute the working
stock, and the sheep number about 7000. The sheep are
also graded, the use of good Spanish merino rams having
improved upon the barelegged breed kept by the old
Californians. It does not appear that the natural pastures
are very luxuriant, but the stock are fed well on the
stubble land after the crops are taken off. For some cause
or other the sheep have to be shorn twice a year in this
country ; and, altogether, although the land is so good for
agriculture, it does not equal Australia for the keeping of
sheep. About 8000 acres of the estate consists of the rich
friable loam already described as river bottom land, and
the remainder is red soil of medium fertility, with some
portions of very shallow soil, suitable only for sheep pasture.
The orchards and green fields are on the deep alluvial soil,
and the remainder is in natural pasture.
CHAPTER VIII.
AN ORCHARD OF iooo ACRES.
In the last chapter 1 gave an outline of General Bidwell’s
model farm at Chico, near the Sacramento River, about
235 miles from San Francisco. The 1000 acres of
orchard and vineyard are not all in one block, but grouped
around a number of the homesteads in different parts of the


property. One homestead has its apple and pear orchard,
another its almond orchard, and so on, a system which enables
the main work of fruit-gathering to be conducted at the various
centres in turn. The supply of water for irrigation is avail-
able for several of the orchards, and could easily be extended
to all of them, but it is rarely used except in the nursery
and vegetable garden. Owing to the absence of droughts
and to the satisfactory yields obtained without irrigation,
water is seldom used even upon those portions of the
orchards which are adjacent to the supply, so that while the
great bulk of the fruit in California is raised by the assist-
ance of irrigation. General Bidwell and most of the growers
in his district are able to cultivate successfully by depend-
ing upon the natural rainfall.
The peach orchard, which is the largest, consists of
12,000 trees, and the recorded produce in 1881 was
980,0001b5. of marketable fruit. There are 5000 plum
trees, and the fruit sold in the same year was 359,09 libs.
The apple orchard contains 3000 trees, producing in the
year under notice 259,871ib5. Of apricots there are 3000
trees, giving 19,5201b5. of fruit, and 2000 pear trees, yield-
ing 48,9161b5. The cherry orchard of 1600 trees yielded
43,0341b5., and the 2200 blackberry bushes 39,2881b5. There
are6o,ooo grapevines, yielding 268,5001b5. of raisins,and the
other fruits sold in the same year were 57,2881bs of almonds,
4561b5. English walnuts, IGOOlbs. black walnuts (Californian,)
500 quinces, 200 lbs. pomegranates, 3231b5. figs, and 6861b5.
strawberries. The only large towns in the state available
as markets are San Francisco (with less than 300,000
inhabitants) and Sacramento (with 26,000,) while, as these
cities have extensive areas of fruit gardens in their
immediate vicinity, much of the supply from Chico must be
sent to the more distant centres of population. A quantity
of green fruit is sent by rail to cities in the eastern states,
reaching as far as Chicago, New York, and New Orleans,
thousands of miles from Chico, while the canning establish-
ment puts the surplus in a condition to be transported to
any part of the world. When it is remembered that the
population of California is less than that of the colony of
Victoria, and that fruit production is extensively carried on
in all parts of the state, it will be easily understood that
exportation is largely resorted to in order to dispose of the
supply.


Without canning factories, fruit-drying, and railways
charging lower freights than Australian lines, the orchards
of California, instead of extending in every direction,
would have to be abandoned or rooted up, to give place
to some other industry. The cheapest labour in the
country costs 4s. 2d. per day, this amount being paid to
Chinese (where they are employed), and to women and
girls in canning factories, while white men receive from 6s.
to Bs. Gd. a day. It is, therefore, neither the rate of*
labour nor the home market that makes fruit-growing
profitable in California, but the enterprise of the people in
canning and drying fruits, and the existence of railways
that carry produce at a low rate instead of running empty
owing to a stupidly high freight tariff. It may be well to
point out at this stage that nearly all the railways of the
state are in the hands of a single company, a gigantic
monopoly, and that the freights are considered so high as
compared with rates upon Eastern lines that anti-monopoly
meetings are now being held all over the state to protest
against the alleged extortions of the Southern Pacific
Railway Company. There is no doubt that freights and
fares will have to be considerably reduced in consequence.
We shall see as we proceed how the freights charged by the
monopoly compare with those exacted upon the Australian
lines, which are owned by the people.
All the work of cultivation is done by means of ploughs
and scarifiers drawn by horses and mules. In preparing
the land for fruit trees or vines it is first ploughed shallow
to kill the weeds, and then ploughed to a depth of lOin. or
12in. The apple trees are planted 33ft. apart, the other
trees 25ft., and the raisin vines 10ft. This wide system of
planting gives plenty of room for working the teams between
the trees, and experience has proved that better yields
are obtained than by means of close planting. In many
orchards 20ft. by 20ft. is the distance adopted, and this
suits very well, but any closer is generally found to be
unsatisfactory. I was much struck with the thorough
manner in which the orchards were cultivated on Rancho
Chico, not a weed being allowed to grow in any part, and I
have since found that the same remark will apply to most
of the orchards of the State. Although labour is dear,
there is no attempt made to economise by letting weeds grow.
Even to one accustomed to the rapid growth of trees in


Australia, there is something surprising in the wealth of
vegetation throughout the Sacramento Valley. The lower
branches of the fruit trees at Chico were high enough to
enable us to drive under them in a buggy without incon-
venience, and we employed a long hooked stick to bring
the cherries of the top branches within reach, while the
stem of one of the largest cherry trees was so thick that in
reaching as far round it as I could my hands were 3ft. 6in.
from meeting on the other side. These trees were planted
in 1863, and eucalyptus trees fifteen years old were over
100 ft. in height, the thickness of the latter, however, not
being so remarkable.
The fresh fruit which is sent to market is gathered and
placed in small boxes in the orchard, the fruit being graded
or assorted to some extent upon the spot. A light waggon
gathers up the boxes and takes them to the fruit-house,
where they are evenly filled and closed up ready for trans-
portation to the railway station, about half a mile distant.
The box factory in the town gives a suitable supply of cases
of all kinds. It is only such fruit as pears, and large, hard
varieties of plums that can be sent across the continent to
eastern pities. Fruit intended for such distant markets is
packed in a special way. Each pear or plum is wrapped in
a piece of paper before being placed in the box ; a China-
man, at a dollar a day, being very expert at this kind of
work. The freight from Chico to San Francisco, a distance
of 235 miles, or as far as from Horsham to Melbourne, is
per 1001 b. by goods train, double that amount by
express train. The freight to Chicago is only about Id. per
pound, and last season 400 fruit cars, of ten tons each, were
sent from California to Eastern cities, the cars being designed
to keep the fruit from spoiling.
The prices of fruit vary, but the average to the producer
is not high. Peaches at Chico are worth from fd. to
per lb., plums the same, apples from |d. to Id. per lb.,
apricots from Id. to 2d. per lb., and table grapes from fd.
to 2|d. per lb. The average price of dried fruit on the farm
isFor prunes, sd. to 7|d. per lb.; apples, 3d. to 4d.;
apricots, 7d. to lOd. per lb.; dried grapes or cooking raisins,
2d. to 3d. per lb.; and table raisins, from sd. to per lb.
The produce of the orchards and vineyard is disposed of as
fresh fruit, canned fruit, and dried fruit, while a large pro-
portion of the apples are made into cider vinegar. After
D


the cider has been made it is converted into vinegar by a
process which only occupies about fifteen minutes. _ A three-
story building has been erected, in which there is a long
wooden tower or barrel, reaching from the bottom to the
top. The barrel is packed with corn cobs (maize cobs,)_ and
a stove at the bottom causes a current of heated air to
ascend through the tower. The cider is elevated to the top
story and poured into the tower, from the top of which it
percolates through the corn cobs to the bottom, the current
of air acting upon it in its course, and when it is drawn off
from a tap on the ground floor it is vinegar. This method
of making vinegar is practised in many parts of the United
States. The quantity made in one year at Chico was
15,000 gallons.
The only part of the fruit-drying business in operation
during my visit was the drying of cherries. The best kinds
were being gathered and sent to market; but other kinds,
and those that had become too ripe, were being dried in
the sun. By simply spreading the cherries upon trays and
exposing them to the sun the drying operation could be
completed ; but as the process would be slow, appliances
are adopted to save time. The drier used was constructed
on the farm, and it is designed to render the sun’s heat
more effective. The appearance of the apparatus is that of
one side of the roof of a house covered with window glass.
A platform about twenty feet square is set at an angle of
about forty-five degrees, and upon this trays 2ft. Gin. square
are placed. The fruit is spread upon the trays, and there
is a covering of glass over the whole, the glass being about
three inches from the fruit. As the whole apparatus is set
upon a pivot, it can be moved round when required, so as
to keep the fruit at all times under the direct rays of the
sun. The effect of the glass and the slope of the surface
toward the sun is to produce a high degree of heat, which
greatly hastens the drying of the fruit. Provision is made
for the escape of steam, and in working the drier the only
skill required is to know how long to leave the fruit exposed
to the heat. A little experience soon enables the operator
to tell by the appearance of the fruit wdien it is “ suffi-
ciently ” dried. Not only cherries, but also apples, peaches,
prunes, pears, and figs are dried in this way. The apparatus
is simple in construction, and could be made by any
practical man with a clear idea of the object intended to be


served. _ Not only is time saved by such a contrivance, but
the fruit is always protected from dews and rains.
General Bidwell’s system of drying raisins is to complete
the process by means of artificial heat. ; The grapes, which
are of different varieties, the best being muscats and
sultanas, are placed upon trays and allowed to dry for some
time in the sun. Instead of waiting, however, for the slow
be completed in this way, the trays are placed in
the artificial drier. The drier is a wooden building about
20ft. long by 15ft. wide, fitted up with supports to hold
the trays set one above the other. When in position the
trays are like the drawers of a large cabinet, and they are
closed in by folding-doors. Under the system of drawers,
ranged one above another to a height of Bft. or 10ft., is a
heating apparatus. This consists of a brick flue embedded
in a mass of cobble stones as wide and as long as the cabinet
of drawers. The heat, which is disseminated throughout
the stones, rises through the trays and dries the fruit. It
should be stated that the trays are simply square iron
frames fillecHn with netting-wire. These trays, which are
used both in the raisin-drier and the sun-drier, much
resemble the riddle of a winnowing machine or thresher.
There is no mystery about the art of drying raisins, com-
mon sense alone being required, and the drier is of simple
construction. It takes from 3lbs. to of grapes to
make one pound of raisins. The yield of muscat grapes at
Chico varies from one and a-half to three tons per acre, and
of sultanas fully double that quantity. No stakes are used
in the vineyard, the gooseberry-bush system being adopted.
General Biddle formerly made wine, but now raisin-making
varieties of grapes are being substituted, and no wine is pro-
duced. It is believed by many that raisin-growing is more
profitable than wine-making, but this consideration has not
been the General’s object in changing his procedure. He
came to the conclusion that the making of wine contributed
to intemperance, and therefore devoted his vineyard to the
production of raisins. The canning factory was not at work
when I called, but I inspected the establishment, and found
the whole plant complete for putting the fruit into cans,
labelling it, and putting it into cases ready for market, the
tins being made in the factory. The average number of
men employed in connection with the orchards is 100, and
everything is managed in a systematic manner. I may say,


in conclusion, that the orchards are considered a fairly
profitable branch of the various industries carried on upon
General Bidwell’s estate.
CHAPTER IX.
A VINEYARD OF 2500 ACRES.
Ex-Governor Stanford’s vineyard at Vina, in the Sacra-
mento Valley, must be regarded in the light of an
experiment; and if one has doubts of the financial success
of working so large a vintage under one management, it is
comforting to know that the owner is too wealthy to feel
any loss that may be sustained. Mr. Leland Stanford is
one of the railway millionaires of California. He was the
leading spirit in constructing the Central Pacific Railway,
which joins the Eastern and Western States together, and
his marvellous wealth has come suddenly upon him. The
Vina experiment is only a trifling matter to him, hut it is
one of several other ways of spending his money which do
the state some service. If a gigantic vineyard can be
made successful at all, it is understood that the promoter
of the overland railway has determination enough to do it.
It is only a little over two years ago since ex-Governor
Stanford purchased his property at Vina. An old vineyard
of seventy-five acres, which had attained considerable
fame, owing to the character of its wine, formed part of
the purchase, and it was probably the existence of this
vineyard that suggested to the new owner the idea of
going into wine production. The owner of the old vine-
yard was named Gerke, and “ Gerke wine” had attained a
considerable standing, not only in California, but also in
the Eastern States. The “Gerke” wine was made from
the “ mission” grape, a variety planted all over the state
about 100 years ago by the Franciscan missionaries. The
grape was brought from Spain, but there is a great difference
of opinion as to the identity of the variety. By some it is
regarded as one of the sherry grapes, and by others as
probably the Val de Pania. However, it is a small, black
grape, good for the table, but as a wine grape it has not


given general satisfaction. In nearly all the new vineyards,
which have been so extensively planted during the last two
years, the mission grape has been discarded, and European
varieties adopted. It was considered that Gierke’s success
with the mission grape indicated a special suitableness in
the soil and climate of Vina for the wine-producing interest,
and hence the planting of the great vineyard in this
locality.
The season before last a commencement was made, and
1000 acres were planted, and last season an additional
1500 acres were set out, making a total of 2500 acres of
new vineyard. The original design was to plant 3000
acres, but it is uncertain whether the remaining 500 acres
will be planted or not. The magnitude of the undertaking
is beginning to be felt, and it will probably be found that
the present vineyard, when it comes into bearing, will be
quite extensive enough. Much of the oest Californian wine
is sold, both in the state and in the eastern cities, under
the name of French wine, and consequently the name of
the home-made article does not stand as high as it ought.
Governor Stanford’s idea in starting out was to mature his
wine, and have it put on the market under its own name,
and thus vindicate the character of the Californian product.
It is just here that the vastness of the undertaking is
realised, for to provide cellar room and casks for four or
five vintages of 2500 acres of vines will be one of the
biggest things in America or elsewhere. To contain one
year’s wine from the old Gerke vineyard of seventy-five
acres requires a cellar 150 ft. long by 30ft. wide, and from
this some idea can be formed of what the cellars for the
new vineyard will have to be. The casks in the present
cellar are made of red-wood--a kind of cedar which grows
in the state. They contain 1200 galls, each, and cost from
to sd. per gallon of capacity. The red-wood, which is
being introduced by some Australian wine makers, is said
to do well for red wine, but it is apt to colour white wine.
In the meantime the great work has been that of
planting. The land was prepared by ploughing to a
depth of from ten to twelve inches, a wdde roadway
being left around every block of 552 ft. square. After
the soil was harrow r ed down ready for planting large gangs
of men were set to work in marking off the ground and
putting in the vines at the same time. A chain 552 ft. in


length, with a mark upon 'it at every eighth foot, was
stretched across the land, and holes were at once dug at
the marks, in which the rooted vines or cuttings were
planted. The holes were made twelve inches deep, and
overseers were employed to secure that the earth was
properly filled in round each vine. The employment of
the marked chain resulted in considerable saving of labour,
and the straightness and evenness of the rows show 7 that
the system answered the object intended. Keeping down
the weeds has been the principal work since planting was
completed, ploughs and horse hoes being employed for this
purpose. After the ground has been ploughed or scarified
very little has to be done with the hand hoe in the way of
removing the weeds which are close to the vines. It is
expected that the vineyard will average from four to five
tons of grapes per acre, and when the supply of water for
irrigation is taken into account the estimate no doubt is a
moderate one. Many growers claim to get from five to
eight tons of grapes per acre without irrigation, and the
appearance of the old Gerke vineyard helps me to believe
the extraordinary statement. The main vines in this old
vineyard are about six inches in diameter, and the crown is
about three feet above the ground, so that the vineyard
has the appearance of an orchard of cherry trees. The
use of stakes or other supports for old vines seems to be
unknown in the country. Both rooted vines and cuttings
were planted, and the former had done the best, while the
bulk of the vineyard consists of different European
varieties.
Irrigation would seem to be unnecessary in this part of
the state, as all lands of crops grow well with the natural
rainfall. An irrigation scheme, however, has been provided
for this vineyard, but its chief use is to assist in propagating
the young vines. The first 1000 acres planted were
watered twice, first soon after planting and again in the
following summer, which has secured a good start, and
prevented the necessity of replanting. Last season’s
planting _ would have been watered had not seasonable
spring rains rendered it unnecessary, but during the present
summer water will be put on if required. This, indeed,
is one of the great advantages of irrigation, that it
introduces an element of certainty into agriculture.


CHAPTER X.
AMONG THE POLITICIANS.
Sacramento is the State capital and the second commercial
city of California. With a population of 26,000, it occu-
pies a central position in the State, being situated on the
Sacramento River, not far from its junction with the San
Joachin. The city does not appear to gain much from
being the political capital. A fair-sized colonial town can
exist upon one or two good Government institutions, and,
being a political capital, would be a decent start in life for
a city, but a State capital as such is not much of a place
in America. Strange as it may seem, there are less politics
in this democratic country than in Australia.
I had to give up the task of trying to understand
American politics. I met with many willing teachers, but
the matter was so simple to them that they assumed a
knowledge on my part which I did not possess, and conse-
quently used language which I did not understand. “ The
party meets and decides on the ticket; those that are run-
ning for office are put on the ticket, and the ticket is voted
as a whole. You first of all get a nomination, at least you
can run without a nomination, but you haven’t got much
chance.” This is about all I could gather. It may be
information to the reader, but it conveyed no intelligible
idea to my mind. I found, however, democracy to be much
more democratic than I had imagined. Manhood suffrage
in Australia elects its representative and leaves all the rest
to him, the appointment of executive and other officers
resting with the politicians. American democracy not only
elects its representatives, but its executive officers also, and
the representatives have nothing to do with the officers.
The leading members of the civil service in the State are
elected by the people, and are responsible only to their
constituents. There is, therefore, no Ministry to be put in
or put out, and I must be excused for being unable, under
the circumstances, to understand how they get alpng. How
could a colonial Parliament exist without a Ministry to put
out ? Is not the ousting of Governments the principal
work of colonial legislators ? If the people’s representatives


in the State Legislature have no officers to appoint or dis-
miss, and no Government to overthrow, what, it may be
asked, can they find to do ? Nothing but to pass acts of
Parliament, and this they succeed in doing in a session of
two months, once in two years. Parliament meets every
two years, and the session is limited by law to sixty days.
The Governor can call a special session in case of emergency,
hut he is generally too sensible a man to commit such a
folly. Upon inquiring why calling a special sessioq was so
unusual I was told it was always “dangerous.” “The
Legislature, when specially convened, could sit as long as it
liked.” Members are paid by the sitting.
The Governor is, of course, elected by the people. I
called to see Governor Stoneman at the Sacramento
Capitol, and but for the fact that the apartments were
more spacious, the visit did not differ in the slightest from
a business call at any merchant’s office in the city. Upon
asking a clerk in an anteroom off the Governor’s apart-
ments if that _ high officer of state were in, I received the
answer “He is right in his office now.” The clerk took in
I ,an . n kw' o minutes returned with the invitation
Walk right in sir.” After being received by the Governor
and introduced to a friend with whom he had been con-
versing, who, of course, was a “general,” I was asked to
sit right down. I did so, the indispensable cigars were
produced, and soon, beneath three ascending curls of
tragi ant smoke, a pleasant conversation was carried on.
Once the Governor had to excuse himself in order to deal
with a lady who had “come right in” with a petition,
which, when unfurled, spread for some yards on the carpet.
Like a shrewd politician, the Governor returned congratu-
latmg himself that he had shunted the lady on to some of
the officials. I found the Governor, like nearly all intelli-
gent Americans, well posted in regard to Australia. “ I
guess your territory is about as big as the United States
A “ TW a X? U raise a considerable quantity of
W nnpnpd Aus f, ralian S old trophy at the Centennial
jest opened my eyes. Such were the kind of questions
and statements I met with every day, telling of an interest
in and a knowledge of Australian affairs. Frankness in
giving information I observed to be a national characteristic,
as well as an equal freedom in putting questions in return
As I had to be asking for information every day, I am well


qualified to speak of American frankness, and while I found
nothing offensive in American inquisitiveness, I had to
study Hayter’s Year Booh pretty closely in order to be
prepared with the statistical figures that were always
required.
It was not only the election of the Governor and the
•other executive officers by the people that impressed me
with the extreme democratic principles of the country.
There was the absence of any property qualification for
voting, and of any exemption from taxation in favour of
the “working man.” The millionaire has to register his
vote as well as the negro labourer, and both have an equal
voice in the election of representatives and officers. Man-
hood suffrage operates in local or parochial government as
well as in state affairs, and every man enjoys the privilege
of being pretty heavily taxed. Every man pays a poll tax,
and every man is taxed upon his real and personal estate.
There is no such thing as exempting the small farm, or the
working man’s cottage. Equality in the franchise seems to
cover equality in the payment of taxes. Everything is
taxed ; but what may be called a man’s tools of trade, a
doctor’s library, a surveyor’s instruments, and a carpenter’s
tool-chest are exempt from taxation ; but a house, furni-
ture, jewellery, money, and all else that a man possesses
pays an annual tax. A tax, too, not upon annual value,
but an annual tax upon real or assessed value, and there is
much in this difference. The annual value of a vacant
allotment may be nothing, but it has a real value, and
under the American system the tax-payer can easily
calculate how long it will take the tax to completely
swallow up the property. The rate of taxation varies in
different states, and in different counties and cities within
the states, from 1 dol. to 3 dol. in the 100 dol. In country
districts it averages about a dollar in the hundred, and in a
city a dollar and a half. About two-thirds is retained for
local purposes, and one-third goes to the state revenue.
Paying from £1 to £1 10s. annually upon every £IOO
worth of real or personal estate is a pleasure not enjoyed in
any part of Australasia that I am acquainted with, and yet I
think any of the colonies has more to show in the shape of
public works. While I was in San Francisco the gas was
cut off from the city lamps, and had been so for several
weeks, the city fathers not being able to pay their gas bill.


Very little inconvenience resulted to the general public, as
the streets were kept brilliantly lighted with gas and electric
light by private enterprise. There had been what was called
a “ leakage ” in the funds under the previous set of officers,
and_ the existing city government washed to show their
straightforwardness in refusing to use gas until they had
the money to pay for it. A “ leakage ” is a well-known
phenomenon in America, being rather frequently met with.
It is the disappearance of more or less important sums of
public money, which go into the hands of the officers, the
representatives, or somewhere else than to their legitimate
purpose. I found honesty and uprightness to be the rule
amongst business men, and I cannot account for roguery in
public life. The American is ever ready to defend what he
thinks worthy of praise in his country or its institutions,
hut he is equally free to confess what he believes to be their
faults. He will not always agree with you as to what are
faults, but there are two things which find no defenders
among the people, viz., the honesty of public men, and the
working of the judicial system.
Those who have the strongest faith in the honesty of
officials and politicians believe in giving them as little
money as possible to handle, and the election of judges is
generally acknowledged to work badly. No one denies that
it works just in the unsatisfactory way which might be
expected when all the judges except those of the Supreme
Court of the United States, are elected by the people for a
term of only four years. It can be imagined what evils
would result, and the imagination will picture nothing worse
than any intelligent American will relate. In the well-
settled eastern states it is said that there is but little to com-
plain of, public opinion having a proper check upon the
system, but in the west the election of judges is among the
worst of the bad things. Just as generally as the American
judicial system is acknowledged to be bad the English
system is praised as being good. The purity of English
justice, I should say, is better appreciated in America than
in England or any of the colonies. It is not only the
English judicial system that the Americans admire, but
much more that is English. I had no idea until I travelled
through their country that the Americans were at heart so
friendly to the British nation. I met several Americans
who took great pains to trace their genealogy back to


English ancestors; I heard more admiration expressed for
the character of Queen Victoria than I ever did before, and
altogether I found what I did not expect —a feeling of
genuine friendship existing towards the mother country.
We hear of Fenian movements in New York, and attribute
the circumstance to America, but it is a great mistake.
The Fenians are not New York, and New York is not
America. Fenianism has seen its best days in America,
and it is quite as offensive to Americans as it is to subjects
of Her Majesty.
When I failed to grasp the mysteries of state politics, it
need scarcely be mentioned that I am hazy in regard to the
national politics of the country. As a want of knowledge,
however, does not prevent one from being a partisan, I
became a sound Republican and an opponent of the Demo-
cratic party. This is the proper place for discussing the
difference between a Republican and a Democrat, but I am
unequal to the task. I am not ashamed to make this
confession, for I could not find a politician in the country
who could give a clear idea of the distinction between the
two parties. There was a distinction before the war, but
now the parties suffer a worse fate than the babies in
“ Pinafore,” for they are not only “ mixed up,” but destined
never to be again identified. I should state that in the
absence of principles to fight for, the parties fight for office.
The Republicans have had a twenty years’ innings, and the
only question is as to whether the Democrats could rule
better. The Democrats point to all the bad things that
have been done by the Government and cry “ Put the
rascals out.” The Republicans point to the corruption and
misgovernment in Democratic cities and states, and cry
“ Keep the rascals out.”
CHAPTER XL
HUBERT HOWE BANCROFT,
Hubert Howe Bancroft, the historian of the Pacific coast
of North America, will live in the memory of humanity
long after the politicians, the Great Bonanza, the Central


Pacific Railway, and all connected with them, have been
forgotten. Bancroft is a millionaire, but his fame does not
rest upon his wealth. Money has enabled him to carry out
his work upon a gigantic scale, but it is the work itself and
not the money that will preserve the name of Bancroft
throughout the ages. The populations of the old world
are pouring into the new continents, and the new nations
will one day become of the first importance. The man,
therefore, who connects himself inseparably with the history
of one of the great nations of the future is sure of enduring
fame. This, I think, Hubert Howe Bancroft has succeeded in
doing. He is only fifty years old, but has accomplished
three things. He has made a fortune, founded a library,
and written a history. The fortune is a small matter, for
many others have amassed much more wealth ; but the
library and the history are not small in any sense. The
library alone would be sufficient to give the founder a
secure place in the temple of fame. The fireproof two-
story building in Valencia-street, San Francisco, with its
terraces of volumes, its maps and manuscripts, and its
company of busy literary workers, was a place to spend
weeks of study in rather than to visit, as I did, for a few
hours; but even a hurried inspection of the institution is
calculated to make a powerful impression on the mind. I
had been visiting large factories of every kind, and here I
seemed to have found a completely-organised history
factory, ‘‘run” upon labour-saving principles, but not for
the making of profits. There were American enterprise
and American methods, but the whole was being directed
to the un-American object of spending money rather than
making it.
In 1852 young Bancroft came to California to establish
a branch of the bookselling business for his employer, and
he soon commenced a business for himself, which close
attention made profitable, realising a handsome fortune in
a comparatively short time. California and the other
Pacific Coast states possessed a history, not only dating
back to the Spanish conquest, but away beyond to the dark
times when strange races built the cities whose ruins excite
the wonder of the traveller. This history excited the
interest of Bancroft, and he soon began to collect books
and manuscripts bearing upon it. The appetite for histo-
rical documents grew on what it fed upon, and as wealth


began to accumulate a larger and larger portion of it was
devoted to the gratification of this commendable taste.
The result was that, either in person or by agents, Bancroft
was represented at every book sale where anything was to
be offered bearing upon Pacific Coast history. Several trips
were made to Europe, Mexico and all parts of Central
America were scoured, and neither money nor labour was
spared to add to the completeness of the library. Hun-
dreds of men who had taken part in or been eye-witnesses
of important events were interviewed by shorthand writers
who took down their evidence. Thus matters went on for
many years, until the library reached 35,000 volumes,
every volume containing something connected with Pacific
Coast history, and two years ago a fire-proof building,
detached, from other buildings, was erected for the preser-
vation of the valuable collection. Half a million dollars,
or something like £IOO,OOO, was expended in the formation
of the library, and the whole enterprise was carried out by an
energetic and enthusiastic man. Surely there is no country
the materials for whose history has been so effectively
collected, and if nothing more had been done the man who
devoted so much money and so much untiring labour to
such an undertaking would have established his claim to
rank among the benefactors of the race.
Writing a history was a second idea in Bancroft’s mind,
for he had been collecting materials ten years before he
resolved to attempt authorship. He resolved, however, to
write a history from the materials which he was collecting,
and the work was carried out with the same industry and
zeal that had characterised his business career. Taking Ms
brother, Mr. A. L. Bancroft, into partnership, and handing
over the management of the extensive publishing business
to him, the historian devoted his entire attention for the
remaining fourteen or fifteen years to the writing of his
history. During most of the time from fifteen to twenty
assistants have been employed in connection with the work.
The volumes had to be indexed, and such a system of noting
and arranging carried out as would enable the author to
read the innumerable references to the different parts of
the history. The historian speaks in the highest praise of
his assistants, and seems to wish them to have credit for
their share of the work, and I found the assistants ready to
disclaim any merit to themselves, being, evidently imbued


with a feeling of affectionate admiration of their chief.
Nearly the whole of the history has been written by the
author himself, and the less important parts, which have
been written by assistants, have been carefully reviewed
and moulded by his hand. A vast area is covered by the
history, including Central America, Mexico, New Mexico
and Arizona, California, Utah and Nevada, the North-west
Coast, Oregon, Washington, Idaho and Montana, British
Columbia and Alaska, and thirty-nine tolerably bulky
volumes are required to treat of all these states and terri-
tories. The last volumes are now issuing from the press,
and a work of gigantic proportions has been accomplished.
I have not read the history. Literary men of mark and
leading reviews, however, have spoken in high praise of the
matter and style of the volumes already published, but
apart from the literary merits of the works, the formation
of the library and the years of incessant labour directed to
so commendable a purpose excite the greatest admiration.
CHAPTER XII.
HARVESTING HAY.
A general idea of the system of harvesting adopted in
this part of America will have been formed from the
description already given of Dr. Glenn’s large farm, and it
only remains to give a few more particulars in order to
enable the Australian farmer to compare the various
methods employed with his own. There are but few of the
machines or methods which are capable of being adopted in
our country, owing to differing circumstances; but the
principles in a good many cases, it will be seen, can be
applied with advantage. The leading principle is not to
use manual labour where horse power can be applied ; but
in carrying out this end there is a great variety of con-
trivances. In dealing with the hay harvest it will he borne
in mind that the hay is not put up into stacks permanently,
but only as a preliminary step to being pressed into bundles,
and packed into barns. The stack is narrow, so as to save


pitching, and it is not high, for the same reason, the length
being extended as required. In some cases the hay is
pitched into waggons by hand, and in the same way pitched
on to the stack, these stacks being made only a little higher
than the frame of the waggon. In the vicinity of large
towns, where hay is grown for market, hundreds of low,
long stacks without tops are to he seen in the fields. These
will later on be sent to market before the rainy season, or
pressed and put into barns. It never rains during the
summer months, but it is thought necessary to have hay
under cover before the end of autumn.
In conveying hay from the field to the stack, a common
method is to employ a large wooden rake, with very long
teeth, or a large “ bunching rake.” This rake, which is
drawn by one or two mules, according to the size of the
hay-cocks, is driven under the bundle of hay, forming a
sledge for it, and by this means it is drawn to the stack.
In other cases a rope is passed around the hay-cock near
the bottom, and thus the whole is drawn over the field to
its destination. Raising the hay on to the stack, or
directly into the barn, is generally managed by some
arrangement of block and tackle. In one case it will be a
projecting beam from the ridge-pole of the barn, to which a
block is attached, a mule drawing the load to the hay-loft;
while, again, it is a derrick erected for the purpose and set
on wheels, so as to be easily conveyed to any part of the
field. A very common plan is to pitch the hay into
waggons in which a rope netting is laid. The loaded
waggon is drawn under the derrick, a hook attached to
both sides of the net, and a span of mules raises the whole
load above the stack, a man guiding the swinging mass to
any part of the stack required, and setting loose the
tackling by means of a check-line. There is nothing
difficult or mysterious in any of these contrivances, and
.many of them are already partly adopted on some
Australian farms. A clear idea of the end to be attained,
and the application of well-known mechanical principles,
alone are necessary. The saving of labour is the end in
view, and that is an end which we wish to attain in the
colonies. The more general adoption of such methods by
Californian farmers enables them to make greater profits
than are made by the bulk of the farmers in Australia.
The substitution of large barns and hay presses for stacks


and our system of trussing would, probably, not result in
gain, owing to the difference in the price of timber. A
hay barn for a medium-sized farm can be erected here for
from £lOO to £l5O, a sum which would not do much in
the way of building in the colonies.
CHAPTER XIII.
HARVESTING GRAIN.
The header is the almost universal harvester of California,
reaping and binding machines only being used in special
circumstances. It has come into existence owing to scarcity
of labour and the large size of the farms, and the way in
which it answers the purpose and stands against every other
machine should not be overlooked by those who cultivate
grain extensively in those parts of the colony where the
stripper cannot be used. I cannot account for the Adelaide
stripper not having been successfully introduced into this
country, especially as an attempt was made to do so some
years ago. The heat and dryness of the climate should
render the crops in excellent condition for stripping, but
the machine has never been heard of by the great bulk of
the farmers and machine makers. The harvester of the
future is just being introduced into California in the shape
of a header and thresher combined. The machine cleans
the grain fit for market, and the sacks, already sewed up,
are thrown off as the work proceeds. For two or three
years experiments have been tried in this direction, and
more or less success has been attained, but last year the
experiments were quite successful.
Shippie and Grattan s improved combined header and
thresher is the machine that I saw at work, and the original
of which competed some years ago for the Government
premium in South Australia. The present owners were not
the original inventors, but before perfect success was
obtained machine and its patents were purchased by
them, and improvements were added until the presen'-
result was reached. Mr. D. Young and Mr. D. Houser,


both of Stocton, as well as Messrs. Shippie and Grattan,
have produced machines which have worked with practical
success for four years, and this harvest an excellent machine
has been invented by Mr. Thomas Powell, of Stocton,
which has given great satisfaction. There are also two
other combined machines in the district, concerning the
merits of which I have no information, and altogether
there were at work in California this season between 60 and
70 harvesters, made after one or other of the above
inventors’ designs. Although the six machines are
protected by patents, the difference between them is not
great. They are all Californian headers with threshing
drum and cleaning apparatus attached. There is nothing,
apparently, new in the cleaning appliances, being just the
straw-shakers, fanners, and riddles of an ordinary threshing-
machine. I failed to observe any new feature that might
guide colonial machinists in producing such a harvester.
The colonial inventors have in the machines which
competed in South Australia all that is in the improved
combined header and thresher, and what is required is
simply to arrange known appliances in such a way as to
make them work satisfactorily under the peculiar conditions
of a harvest-field. The header, as most people are aware,
is a kind of reaping-machine which cuts off the heads of the
grain with more or less straw, as required, so that a
threshing-drum has to be attached as well as a cleaning
apparatus ; but the Australians having a stripper to begin
with which threshes the grain, were only required to add
the cleaning machinery.
In the ordinary header the revolving web travels in an
outward direction, carrying the grain to a boxed waggon at
the side of the machine, but in the new harvester it travels
the opposite way, or towards the machine. At the end of
the travelling web there is a short threshing drum, a spiked
one, as in all American threshers. From the drum the
grain and straw are carried in an elevating straw-shaker,
the position of which is in the centre of the machine, and
from this the grain passes through a set of riddles under
the blast of a fan in the transverse portion of the
machine. A small platform, something like a chair at the
side of the machine, is for the man to stand on who attends
to filling and sewing up the hags, and there is a double-
mouthed spout from which the bags are filled. The pole


to which the horses are yoked and the steering gear are
behind the machine. It is a large and somewhat cumber-
some-looking machine, but it works very smoothly, being
easily steered, and there are no special conditions to account
for this result. The land at Stocton is not more favourable
for such a harvester than the wheat-growing districts of
Australia, while some of the “ tule” or swamp lands in the
vicinity upon which the machine ■ has been successfully
worked are much less so.
The knife is lift, in length, and the machine at the time
of my visit was harvesting a 35-bushel to the acre crop of
wheat, reaping, threshing, and cleaning the grain, and
throwing the sewed-up bags off at the side. Ten medium-
weight draught horses were drawing, or rather pushing, the
machine, and only two men were employed, one driving the
horses and steering and the other sewing up the bags. The
driver stood on a platform, and straddled the helm or steer-
ing pole, which he worked with his legs while he attended
to the reins and regulating levers with his hands. This
would probably be too much for an ordinary man, but three
men are all that are employed to do the whole of the work
of harvesting with any of the combined machines. The
ten horses were doing the work right enough, but twelve
would no doubt have done it easier, and one horse for
every foot of the knife is not too much to allow. Houser’s
machine, with 14ft. knife, is drawn by fifteen horses, and
there is a still larger machine to which eighteen and up to
twenty horses or mules are attached. The smaller machines,
however, are quite large enough to suit an Australian’s
taste, and there is no reason why a machine taking a shorter
cut and fewer horses could not be made for smaller farms
than the vast wheat ranches of California. The average
work of the machines is from twenty to twenty-five acres
per day, and when I was there 205 bags of 2j bushels each
had been turned out between 9 in the morning and 6in the
evening. The crop was a clean one, so that although the
sample which I took from the spout was a good one, the
test was not very severe. There is not generally so much
wild oats and foreign grain in the wheat fields of California
as in those of Australia, and the result is that in the
majority of cases the sample is turned out by the machine
fit for market. It is not to be supposed that all the
appliances adopted in a first-class thresher are in the


combined machine, but there are sufficient to make a good
sample out of a fairly clean crop of grain.
To work a 12ft. header six horses were required, and for
the two header waggons and the derrick forks eight horses,
or fourteen horses in all. Two horses less, therefore, are
needed to reap and thresh a crop by the new process than
were required to get it to the stack or threshing-machine
according to the old. Seven men were employed also,
instead of three, so that there is a saving of two horses and
four men in the new process, and the wheat is in the bag
instead of being in the straw. Threshing costs from
to 4d. per bushel, and this is entirely saved by using the
combined machine, as well as the four men and two horses
mentioned above. It is not surprising, therefore, that the
whole cost of putting the grain of a good heavy crop clean
into the bags is now covered by 2doh, or Bs. 4d. per acre.
For a crop of from ten to fifteen bushels the cost is only
6s. 6d. per acre. Those are the rates paid to owners of
machines who contract to do harvesting for farmers, and they
include carting the bags to the barn. Of course farmers who
purchase machines of their own can do the work cheaper
than the contract rate, and I met two farmers who said
that the cost to them for harvesting light crops was only
3s. 6d. per acre, but they had evidently not made allowance
for wear and tear of machinery and interest on capital.
The price of the machine is from £320 to £360, or about
£l2O more than an ordinary header with waggons and all
appliances for carrying out the old system. Taking the
contract rate, however —which certainly covers everything,
and allows wages to all employed, and interest on money
invested —we have a saving equal to the entire cost of
threshing. The saving of horses and men, in having no
Carting-in to do from the field, more than makes up for the
extra strength required to work the machine ; so that the
single operation is cheaper than heading and stacking, and
the second process of employing a threshing-machine is
entirely dispensed with.
Mr. Thomas Powell drove me out to see his rival’s
machine at work, which indicates that competition is
carried on in a friendly manner. Dr. Grattan said that
Powell’s machine was a good one, and that the district was
proud of the clever young inventor; and Mr, Powell
praised the machine of the doctor and Mr. Shippie.


We also went to inspect Mr. Powell’s machine, which was in a-
field that it had just finished harvesting. Although I did not
see it at work, I was assured by several disinterested persons,
as well as others who might have been considered as opposed*
to Mr. Powell’s success, that it had given every satisfaction.
These two machines—and, indeed, Mr. Houser’s and Mr.
Young’s, and the two others—have their respective admirers,
who decide to their own satisfaction which is the best; but
there is no doubt that they all succeed in practically com-
bining the three operations of reaping, threshing, and
cleaning the grain. Mr. Powell’s machine is drawn by the
horses in the same way as a stripper, and it has an appliance
for catching the straw and depositing it in heaps instead of
scattering it evenly all over the field. The Houser is also
drawn instead of being pushed like the other machines.
Whether the machine is drawn or pushed, the hitching-up
of the team is a simple matter. There are two rows of
horses, containing five or six each, or whatever number the
size of the machine requires. The Powell machine takes a
12ft. cut, and was worked during the harvest by twelve
horses, doing an average of about twenty acres a day, and
turning out as much as 300 sacks of bushels each in a
day. One man drove the horses, one sewed up the bags,
and one oiled the machines and kept a general look out.
The charge made in a 25 or 30 bushel crop was Bs. 4d. per
acre, the farmer finding food for the men and horses.
Without troubling ourselves about the larger machines,
which are said to cut up to thirty acres a day, it may be
concluded that the new invention, which will be the Cali-
fornian harvester of the future, effects a saving of at least
fifty per cent, in the work of taking the standing grain from
the field and putting it clean into the bags.
Scattering the chaff and short straw over the field (for
the machine is a header, and not a reaper) will tend to
render the land foul with weeds ; but this objection could
be removed by an attachment for carrying the refuse from
the riddles and shakers to points in the field, as the stripper
carries both chaff and grain in Australia. In considering
the practicableness of introducing such a machine to Aus-
tralia, itl should be remembered that the conditions are
specially favourable. The climate is suitable, and in the
Australian stripper we have a machine easily adaptable to
the new system. The Californian inventor had to provide


for the threshing of the grain ; but, without the trouble of
reaping, the stripper threshes the grain, and all we have to
do is to clean it by skilfully attaching the cleaning
machinery with which we are acquainted.
CHAPTER XIV.
OVER THE SIERRAS.
When I left Sacramento on the 3rd of July, to join the
train which was to take me up the sides of the Sierra
Nevada Mountains, the city was literally covered with flags.
The “ Glorious Fourth” was to be celebrated next day, and
the ‘‘star-spangled banner” spread over every building, and
festooned every street. I never saw such a thick crop of
flags before. We could not plant them so thickly in Aus-
tralia. With us the flag is a luxury possessed only by a
favoured few, but with the Americans it seems to be one of
the common necessaries of life. It is so cheap that “no
family should be without one,” and neither families nor
individuals attempt to dispense with such an important
article. Thin calico, printed with stars and stripes, serves
to express the national feeling of the common people, and
better material is used by the wealthy ; but all classes
exhibit an equal area of flag. The cheapest flag will last a
year, and it comes in handy, not only on “ the Fourth,”
hut on other public occasions, such as Decoration Day, and
at picnics. Although this universal display of banners is in
colour too much like the decoration of the barber’s pole to
be altogether beautiful, it produces a striking effect, and
that no doubt is the object intended. One of our Agents-
General, well-known for his sarcastic wit, gave no little
offence by affecting to sneer at the decorations which
remained in San Francisco for some days after a Fourth of
July demonstration. He said the city appeared to have
“ broken out into a red rash of flags,” and when told of the
cause, his remark was “one would have thought that when the
disease had abated, the symptoms would have disappeared.”
Judging from the “symptoms” as I left Sacramento,


the attack of Independence Day fever was likely to
he a severe one, but I could not stop to witness the result,
as arrangements had been made for crossing the mountains.
Leaving Sacramento by the morning immigrant train, I
enjoyed a day’s pleasure such as no overland tourist should
miss. As before explained, the first-class express train from
the west crosses the mountains in the night. Coming from
east to west, the Sierras are seen by day, but on the east-
ward journey you must either miss the sights or do as I did,
hook in the third class or immigrant train. I had made up
my mind to suffer much discomfort in order to see the
wonders of this part of the route, but I cannot in honesty
pose as a martyr. I really sacrificed nothing but cushioned
seats. Wooden seats from which you can rise at pleasure
and walk about the train are much softer than cushions
upon which you are compelled to sit for hours without
moving, and hence it is that an immigrant train in the
States is more comfortable and less fatiguing than first-class
railway travelling in Australia. The supply of ice-water is
in every car, and there is the inestimable privilege of walk-
ing from one end of the train to the other. The speed is
slow, and long stoppages are made at the stations, but these
are rather advantages than otherwise to one whose object is
to see as much as possible of the country. When a station
is arrived at you can walk round the township, or explore
the neighbouring forest, gathering specimens of flowers and
shrubs. After the train begins to move slowly forward to
the solemn tolling of the engine-bell it is time enough to
run for the hand-rail of the car and pull yourself aboard.
“The sound of the church-going bell” many hundred miles of
these valleys and rocks never heard,” but the bell attached to
every engine, which is rung on crossing roads and streets (for
there are neither gates nor gatekeepers on American rail-
ways,) forms an excellent substitute. In the cities the
church bells do not ring in a solemn, religious manner at
all, but from each church belfry three or four business-like
bangs proceed at certain intervals. It is only the railway
engine bell that in measured tones rings like the_ “ bells
that knolled to church.” The first section of the journey
is up the Sacramento Valley in a north-eastern direction to
Auburn on the foothills of the Sierra range, and thence
throughout the day the train climbs up the mountain’s side.
Soon expansive views are obtained of the wide fertile valley


with its farms, orchards, and vineyards, and the westward
horizon is bounded by the bold outline of the Coast Range.
For a treat in the way of grand scenery the tourist should,
before leaving the valley, take the branch railway as far as
Chico, and get a view of Mount Shasta. He had better go
further, and, should he be of the climbing kind, ascend this
wonderful snow-capped peak, with its glaciers, cascades, and
underground rivers. The ascent is not dangerous, but it is
tedious and difficult, which will recommend it to many.
From the top the view is said to be the most expansive and
beautiful in America, while the cascades and glaciers alone
repay the toil of the traveller. To those who enjoy such
adventure the ascent of Shasta can be recommended. My
chief delight, however, is to study such scenes from below,
and Shasta from the plains of Chico, 130 miles distant, is
a soul-filling sight. It is an isolated cone, 14,444 ft. in
height, standing at the head of the Sacramento Valley,
between the Sierra Nevada and the Coast Ranges, and
forming the most impressive sight in California. Its vast
conical pile of eternal snow seems to rest on a base of dark
pines, and there the silent sentinel for ever stands overlook-
ing the changing valley, but changing not except when its
pale face reflects the blush of the setting sun. To see
Mount Shasta once is to remember it and love it for ever.
The trees are a great source of pleasure to an Australian,
being all different from the kind he has been used to.
Pines of different kinds are the principal varieties of timber,
and to see them growing in their native forests is a pleasant
experience. They are very beautiful, and, although there
is not much variety of form or foliage, and the beauty is of
a somewhat solemn kind, a visitor from the southern
hemisphere does not soon tire of studying the charms of
“ the forest primeval.” The Californian oaks of the valleys
and foothills have now disappeared, and the region of pines
and firs has been reached. We have the company of trees
all the way, as only the highest peaks of the Sierras are
above the timber line.
“Cape Horn,” the great object of interest in the day’s
journey, is at hand as evening approaches, and passengers
crowd upon the platforms at the ends of the cars to “ take
in ” the view, as the Americans say. A looming mountain
immediately in front, and a deep gap in its battlements,
suggest that there the successful assault was made by the


army of the Central Pacific Railway, and so it is, for we
have already reached the elevation of the gap, and only
need to leap across a yawning chasm, find a ledge in the
opposite perpendicular mountain, and run like a cat along
its steep brow until safe ground is reached. Stanford and
his army have scaled the heights, and we can easily follow
in their track.
First we take the leap of 878 ft., but as the original
storming party have left a trestle-bridge 113 ft. high, we
get over without asking our engine to jump, and find it
dizzy enough to be so far away from the solid earth or the
rest of the world. We not only cross Rice’s Ravine on this
delicate trestle-work bridge, but we pass over another rail-
way which has its own to do with ravines and trestle-
bridges far in the valley below. It is an American joke to
call this awful cavernous abyss a “ ravine,” but we need not
complain, for we are safe at the other side. Nearly all the
ravines are crossed by trestle-bridges, but they have been
afterwards filled in with earthwork. I suppose Rice’s
Ravine is a little too deep to be filled in. Now we have
struck the mountain’s brow, and have to imitate the fly in
travelling for about a dozen miles on a vertica] wall. When
Stanford’s band of Chinamen started to chisel out a ledge
for the railway to rest upon at this point, they had to be
swung in ropes from the cliffs above. When a railway is
made upon the principle of cutting out a shelf in a precipice
the process is expensive and the cost is per cubic foot.
There is therefore no waste of space. Land along the side
of the track is too valuable even to grow potatoes upon,
and hence there is nothing to interrupt the view of the
tourist who wishes to look downwards.
It is travelling along this ledge that is called “ rounding
Cape Horn.” The north fork of the American River winds
like a silver thread at the bottom of the dark gorge, 2500 ft.
below the railway track. On the left there is a wall of rock
closing in the view, on the right the shoulder of a bold
mountain range, dark and gloomy with pines, obscures
a quarter of the sky, while downwards the scene
stretches to a bewildering depth. The bluff or inland
promontory which we are rounding is nearly vertical,
and it seems to be overhanging. Standing upon the
platform of the car, holding fast by the handrail,
and leaning over as far as one can reach, it is


impossible at one point to get a glimpse of the hill below.
Nothing is seen but the river and its white silt shining
through the sombre fringe of pines, and the railway track
seems to be hung in mid air directly over the stream, which
is about half a mile below. Some trucks belonging to a
freight train once took a header from this convenient jump-
ing-off place, but there has never been an accident of any
kind to a passenger train. This section is, in fact, as safe
as any part of the line; the gradients and curves are not
more dangerous than in ordinary cases. There would, of
course, be trouble if the train ran off the track, but such a
contingency is not provided for anywhere. There is much
to excite one’s feelings in coming round Cape Horn, and a
nervous person, instead of stretching his neck over the
■ outside platform, would probably go inside and hold fast to
the arm-rest of a seat, but there is nothing to create fear
in a cool head. The solidity of the line inspires perfect
confidence. One feels certain that the train will keep the
track, and sure of sudden death should it run off. An
American young lady, who was rounding the Cape for the
first time, and giving free expression to her feelings,
exclaimed as she looked down the chasm, ‘'What would
become of us if the cars run off right here ?” “That all
depends, miss, on the kind of lives we have led,” was the
reply of the polite conductor.
We are now in the land of wonders, and even Cape Horn
does not rob succeeding sights of their grandeur and
peculiar charms. Expansive views of mountain ranges,
glimpses of mirror-like lakes, and the eternal peaks of snow
keep the attention on the stretch until all too soon the
summer sun, a ball of fire, is quenched in the cold grey of
the hazy horizon, leaving the moon to light us over the
summit of the Sierras. The silver livery of night, however,
is a becoming dress for the bare, or snow-covered peaks
above the timber line, and when the long tunnels and
longer snow-sheds admit of a view being obtained, the effect
is dreamily and weirdly pleasing. When the groaning
engine whistles in these solemn ghostly solitudes, it is like
a sacrilegious invasion of holy ground. _ It is right enough
for every mountain to find a tongue during a thunderstorm,
and “ echo from its misty shroud ” back to some peak “ that
calls to it aloud,” but the shriek of the engine whistle seems
strangely out of place in the region of everlasting snow.


The snow sheds are strong wooden erections over the railway
line to keep the snow, which sometimes lies 20ft. deep, from
covering the track. There is one continuous shed twenty-
eight miles long, and shorter ones which make up a total
length of forty-five miles. The sheds are not beautiful,
and you might as well be in a tunnel as far as seeing any-
thing is concerned. You appreciate the scenery all the
more, however, when you get out, and at the summit
station there is time to get out and have a view of the bare
piles of granite and the masses of snow. At this point we
are 7042 ft. above the sea, or as high as the top of Mount
Kosciusko, and the peaks which rise on either side are from
3000 ft. to 4000 ft. higher. The distance from Sacramento
is about 140 miles, a short space in which to attain such an
elevation. We shall ascend no higher in the Sierras, but
descend rapidly to a plateau about 4000 ft. above the sea,,
which will carry us across to the Rocky Mountains.
CHAPTER XV.
ON LAKE TAHOE.
If you leave California without seeing the famous Yosemite
Valley, with its big trees and waterfalls, you must be content
to “ hold your manhood cheap whilst others talk who ”
have visited that beautiful wonderland. It was only
because I had visited Lake Tahoe that I was able to main-
tain a decent position among the travellers with whom I
associated at different times during my tour. A single day
will suffice to sail around the lake and get its wondrous
beauties photographed for ever on the mind, and so this
delight comes within the reach of the busy traveller who
cannot afford ten days to explore Yosemite. It is, perhaps,
because the lake can be so easily and quickly reached that
the necessity of visiting it is not imperative upon the
professional tourist. It is, however, an additional reason


why every Australian traveller by the overland route should
see one of the grandest sights in America.
Truckee is the small town on the Central Pacific railway,
at which we branch off for Lake Tahoe. The train which
brought us round Cape Horn and over “ The Summit ” of
the Sierras arrives at Truckee long after nightfall, and the
attendants at the hotel waken those guests who are bound
for the lake in time for a six o’clock breakfast. You can
always get a good breakfast before you start on a journey
in America, a circumstance which, together with the excel-
lent meals always obtainable ar the railway refreshment
stations, gives one a favourable impression of the country.
In the clear air of the morning the little Alpine town looks
picturesque, although its houses are only very new-looking
wooden structures. The hills all round are clad with
pines, and pine branches also cover the entire front of the
buildings, for the “ Glorious Fourth ” has to be celebrated
here in the mountains as well as in the city which we left
yesterday in the great valley.
The coach is an open one, and well calculated to let the
passengers have a good view of the interesting scenery which
continues all along the route. The road is smooth, and
there is nothing to excite the fears of the most timid, while
as the track follows up the course of the Truckee River to
the shores of Lake Tahoe the scenery is delightful. The
Duke of Wellington is one of the features of the Truckee
valley pointed out by the stage driver, about four miles
from the lake, and the leading feature of the Duke, is, of
course, his nose. The gigantic masses of rock thait crown
the lofty brow of the range along the river assume all kinds
of shapes as our onward journey brings new profiles out
against the clear sky. The/* Indian Chief ” and the “Old
Woman ” are ordinary specimens of the stony giants which
look out from the battlemented castles, 2000 ft. _ above
the river; but there is only one Duke of Wellington.
Thousands of years ago the forces of nature sculptured the
vast mountain into a form destined to be made famous by
the hero of Waterloo, for there in true but rugged outline
are the well-known features of the Iron Duke, large enough
to dwarf the biggest sphinx in Egypt. What other hero
has such a grand monument as this ? He heeds not us,
but looks down the valley as if intently watching the
fortunes of some contested battlefield, while we wind out


of sight, following the tortuous course of the river, until at
its source the splendours of Tahoe burst upon our astonished
vision.
Here, among the snow-capped peaks, is an expanse of
blue water twenty miles long and fourteen miles wide.
The mountains that rise from the water’s edge slope
enough to let a thick forest of pines grow upon their sides,
and the dark green beneath the snow forms a charming
setting for this sparkling gem of the Sierras. Going on
board the small steamer Governor Stanford, named in
honour of the master mind in the Central Pacific Railway
scheme, we are soon out on the glassy surface of the lake.
Tahoe city, with its hotels and cottages for the accommo-
dation of visitors, attracts but little attention, and but
little notice is taken of five or six other settlements of a
similar kind, at which the boat calls in its voyage round the
lake. There is, no doubt, good enough accommodation at
these places, and they are probably pretty enough resorts
in their way, but there is so much to admire in the wonder-
ful lake and its surrounding scenery that one sees or
remembers nothing of the human habitations which nestle
:among the pines along the shore. Yesterday we were
simmering in the Sacramento valley, with the thermometer
at 106 degrees ; to-day we are sailing on an inland sea
6216 ft. above the level of the ocean, gazing upon the
eternal snows, and breathing the light, keen, mountain air.
The business man in San Francisco or Sacramento works
long and works hard, with few holidays throughout the
year, but he generally “goes right away to cool off” for a
few weeks in the summer, and if he finds he wants a longer
rest than usual, he says he is going to “cool right through.”
Tahoe is the proper place to cool the overwrought machinery
of mind and body, and it is an inestimable boon to the
people who live in the close, hot valleys at the foot of the
Sierras.
Everything is lovely. It matters not whether you take
as wide a view as the eye can compass or frame off small
sections in detail, the effect is always and altogether charm-
ing. First you revel in the grand expanse of “ clear, placid”
water that stretches away in every direction to the base of
the mountains, and then the eye never tires of ranging
along the pine clad slopes, following them round crescent
bays and pointed recesses. The snow on the crest of the


ranges and on the towering peaks fascinates the sight with
its varied splendour, an infinitely delicate fretwork leading
up from among the bristling pines to the clear, pure white-
of the crowning mass and the unbroken cloud-like summit
of the mountains, changing from cold clear white to amber
and gold in the reflected rays of the sun. The lake is com-
pletely surrounded by mountains. It is like Lake Wakatipu
in New Zealand, widened out to give expansive grandeur, and
its gloomy bare rocks robed in forest green. The surface
of the lake is over 6000 ft. above the sea, and the surround-
ing mountains rise to a further height of from 2000 ft. to-
5000ft. The Rubicon Mountains on the right are 9284 ft.
above the sea ; Mount Tallac, rising from the southern edge
of the lake, is 9715 ft. ; there are several other peaks over
9000 ft. high, and the angular top of Pyramid Peak is
10,052 ft. above the level of the sea.
The depth of Lake Tahoe is 1700 ft., and its water is as
clear as crystal. It must be also on account of some
peculiarity of the light that one is able to see so far down
into the clear depths. The stony bottom can be clearly seen
at a depth of 100 ft., and it is one of the pleasures of the-
excursion to watch the fishes over the bulwarks of the ship.
The lake is famous for its large quantities of trout and
other kinds of fish, and angling is a favourite amusement
of visitors. To live for a few weeks in the pure air, fishing
and eating the fresh trout from the lake, would, I have no
doubt, give a new lease of life to many a dying man.
There is something in the clear light that makes the
sparkling water wondrously beautiful. The gentle ripples
on the surface are reproduced on the bottom of the lake in
all the glories of prismatic colours. Before the vessel takes
us out into the deep blue water, the whole bottom of the
lake seems a tessellated pavement, wrought into gorgeous
mosaic, with all the colours of the rainbow. Every object
in the water, from the huge pine log to the smallest twig
is also decorated in the same array of flashing colours.
Out in the deep the pale blue becomes dark, and at times
it seems purple, while the ripples made by the ship’s prow
sparkle like myriads of diamonds, or like the stars on a
frosty night.
The reflecting power of the lake is not least among its
enchanting effects. In turn the whole of the surrounding
mountains are pictured in the clear water, and about half


is subject to this photographic process at a time. The
reflection is perfect, and makes the lake seem as deep as
the loftiest pinnacle is high. Sailing on the glassy surface
of the lake, with the pines and snowy peaks above, and the
same inverted peaks and pines below, you seem to be soar-
ing in mid air, and the lightness of the atmosphere,
together with the clear sparkling light which plays on
everything, all help out the illusion. The Truckee River
is the only outlet of the lake, and several streams of
greater volume flow into it. Where the water goes to is a
mystery not yet unravelled by science. A wonderful dis-
covery had been reported in the newspapers a few days
before my visit to Tahoe. A petrified forest had been
found standing at the bottom of the lake, with every
branch and delicate twig as perfect in solid stone as when
the trees were alive. I asked the captain of the Governor
Stanford if we would sail over the petrified forest and have
an opportunity of seeing it. “ That forest is in the paper,”
replied the captain, and upon further enquiry whether we
should see it, he explained, “ That forest is not in the lake,
it is only in the paper.”
CHAPTER XVI.
THE NEVADA SILVER MINES.
I was recommended to take the coach from Glenbrook on
Lake Tahoe as the best way of reaching Carson, en route
for the celebrated silver mines of Virginia city. “ The
scenery is much more interesting than on the road from
Truckee,” I was told, and I can testify to the correctness
of the information. The only fault I had to find with it
was that it was too interesting, and I would not recom-
mend ladies or any but those having the strongest kind of
nerves among the sterner sex to attempt the journey.
The six-horse team is a fine one, the driver inspires your
confidence, but the winding track over the mountains is so
narrow, and the awful gulches over which you twist and
turn are so deep, that the nervous system cannot be con-
trolled. Retail tourists, except those seekingwild adventure,


return from the Lake to Truckee and take the branch
railway from the next important station, Reno, to Virginia
city.
“ Guess you’ll have to excuse the milk, as our cow’s
keepin’ the Glorious Fourth,” says the landlady of the
small hotel at Glenbrook, where we have a late lunch
before taking the Carson coach. It is afterwards explained
that the want of milk did not arise so much from the cow’s
patriotism as from that of Patrick Dunovan, whose duty it
was to extract the lacteal fluid, but who, in honour of the
“ day we gained our indepindence sure,” had devoted his
entire attention to the consumption of Bourbon whisky.
The six-horse coach is crowded, and the only available seat
is at the back on the outside. In one’s innocence of
what is to come, regret is felt that the “ interesting ”
scenery will not be so well seen as from a front seat, and
one soon finds that his nervous system is less easily
governed when having to go into danger backwards. The
coach is soon on a narrow ledge, and every turn of the
wheels takes us higher and higher up the mountain side,
giving wider and grander views of the beautiful lake.
When we are high enough to revel in the splendours of
the lake scenery, one look downwards over the ledge into
the jaws of the yawning canon puts an end to all your
joy. The scene of beauty vanishes as if by magic. Adam
and Eve on leaving the Garden of Eden could not have
suffered such a sudden change of feeling, and if Satan had
viewed Paradise from the top of the Carson coach, Milton
would have had to tell a different story. A long farewell
to all thoughts of scenery, and let calculating the chances
of reaching Carson in safety engage the entire powers
of the mind. Will the team get safely round the
horseshoe curve, around the lip of a chasm 2000 feet deep?
And will stones which have been built up to save cutting
further into the hill support the weight of the coach ?
Can the driver balance the coach perfectly upon the loose
planks of the narrow, bare, unguarded, trestle bridge ?
Such questions occupy the mind, while the whole of your
physical strength is exerted in pressing against the coach
to keep it from tipping over. The questions are answered
in the affirmative ; your efforts to support the coach are
successful, and you reach the top of the mountains in
safety, experiencing a pleasure which is, however, marred


by the thought that you have to descend on the other
side, while it is far from reassuring to hear the driver
remark, “ I guess it’ll be kind o’ awkward if they’ve not
repaired the washout on the down track.”
The range which we have mounter!, and the others which
rise one above the other in the distance, are bare and
desolate. There are masses of decaying granite without
any vegetation but stunted shrubs, and contrasting unfa-
vourably with the pine-clad slopes on the other side of the
range. Before we descend very far we meet with water
flumes carrying timber from the ranges in the direction of
the mines, and we pass a narrow gauge railway line which
curves about up here in the mountains. The coach drive
down the mountain side is as exciting as the ascent, and it
is with a feeling of relief that we reach level ground and
bowl over the plain sandy road into Carson city. In the
hotel there is a portrait of Monk, the celebrated stage-
driver of the Sierras, whose fame rests upon his having
driven Horace Greeley. I believe our driver was as good
as Monk, but for all that I look upon coaching in Nevada
as a good thing to avoid. There is something admirable in
the practical adaptation of means to an end, which is
observed everywhere in America. Everything is designed
to serve its purpose in the handiest way. A ledge in a
mountain is not made seven feet wide when six feet will
do. You can admire the principle in many things, but
fail to appreciate the application of it to the road over the
ranges. There were several ladies in the coach and one on
the box seat, who seemed to enjoy the drive very much,
but I would, nevertheless, not recommend it to Australians
travelling for pleasure.^
Carson city, the capital of Nevada state, is a well-built,
clean little town, of about 4000 inhabitants. The chief
show place of the city is the state prison, owing to the
extraordinary geological discoveries which have been made
in the court-yard. The prison is built at the foot of a low
sandstone hill, and the prison yard is being levelled by
removing several layers of rock. About an acre has been
levelled, and the face of the quarry is now nearly 40 feet
in depth. On the surface of the court, from which from
15 feet to 40 feet of sandstone has been removed, there are
thousands of clearly-marked tracks of birds and animals.
The tracks are as distinct as if made but yesterday on the


muddy edge of the lake. The elephant tracks are deeply
sunk in the rock, and fossil bones of these animals have
also been found. The most interesting features of the
place, however, are the footprints of a biped which extend
across the bottom of the quarry and disappear under the
wall of sandstone at a depth of about forty feet from the
natural surface of the ground. They are the footprints of
a biped, and your feet fit naturally into them as you
submit them to this test, taking a somewhat long stride.
Dr. Harkness, of San Francisco, who was one of the first to
study the subject upon the spot, and who made a careful
analysis of the footmarks, believes them to belong to a
human being, who wore some kind of shoe to keep himself
from sinking in the mud. The extension of the quarry,
which is now being carried on in the interests of
science, will probably reveal some further evidence on the
subject.
The railway takes us from Carson to Virginia city in
twenty-one miles, and although there is plenty of winding
about on ledges in the hill-sides, there is nothing to fear.
You can trust the rails to guide you round the curves, and
keep you on the narrow shelf, as you could not trust Monk,
or any of his compeers. At Gold-hill, two miles from our
destination, we pass over the town, looking down upon the
narrow streets, and even upon the tops of the highest
chimneys of smelting works. Virginia city does not look
attractive. Its buildings crowd upon the slope of a bare
hill which rises above it to a height of 500 feet, and the
city itself is over 6000 feet above the level of the sea. It
has the air of a town that has seen better days. A few
years ago it was a centre of bustle, excitement, gambling,
and all kinds of wild life. It is now quiet, unprogressive,
and respectable. There are still those who indulge in their
old taste for gambling at faro, but the piles of money on the
tables are not what they were. The gambling takes place
upon a section of the saloon which is raised about a foot
above the bar floor. This is in deference to a state law
which prohibits gambling upon the first floor of a licensed
house. The raised dais is called the second floor ; so
difficult is it to enforce a law that is not in accord with the
sentiment of the people. Immediately below the city is a
line of mines, from one of which the untold wealth was
obtained, which made the fortunes of the four silver kings,


Mackey, Fair, Flood, and O’Brien, In seven years these men
were transformed from ordinary mortals into millionaires.
A half mile straight down into the earth is a considerable
depth, and yet I had to make this journey before I left
Virginia city. One mine is down 3000 feet, and another,
which has ceased working, got down a depth of 3100 feet, but
the bottom of the one which I explored was only 2800 feet
deep. It was deep enough and hot enough for me, however,
and the experience was most pleasurable after I regained
the upper surface of the earth’s crust. The lode has all
been worked on the original level down to about 1700 feet,
where all the rich ore was obtained, and as the lode dips
with the hill, fresh shafts have been put down further out
to strike it at a lower depth. This is why the mines are
so deep. For two years the expensive work of sinking for
the lode at a deeper level has been going on, and, as no
silver has been obtained, the outlay has caused a great
depression in mining matters. The mining exchange in
San Francisco is almost deserted, and a large section of the
public have lost hope of the Comstock ever “ booming ”
again. That many still have hope, however, is evidenced
by the extensive operations which are being carried on at
Virginia City. There are fifteen large claims being worked,
eight or nine have stopped, and they are all down over
2000 ft. without finding payable ore. The expenses are so
heavy in working at such a depth that if the lode does
not turn out to be rich there must soon be a collapse of the
entire undertaking.
At the 2400 ft. level I found the men working in heat
that was almost insupportable. The water is so hot that a
man who gets scalded by falling into any body of it never
survives. _ Although the thermometer only registers 112 deg.
in the mine the heat is far more oppressive than the same
degree would be above ground. The heat is caused by the
hot water, which continually flows into the mine, the
supply of fresh air forced down by the engines being good.
There are chambers walled off from the drives, which are
kept cool by fresh air pipes and ice water, and in these
breathing places the men spend half of their time below
ground. One hour’s work at a time and one hour in the
“cooling-off room” is the rule in the mine, so that only
four hours work is done in the shift, for which 16s. Bd. is
paid. The Miners’ Society, a powerful organisation, fixes


the wages at 4dol. a day. The men who work in such
heat, with nothing on but trousers and boots, and cool
themselves by drinking ice water, say that the occupation
unhealthy, but it must be very exhausting; while in
winter, when there is plenty of snow on the ground, the
change from the mine to the surface must be trying to the
health. _ 6
The pumping work is very heavy, and the machinery for
dealing with the water is said to be the finest in the world.
From the mine which I inspected the water raised every
twenty-four hours amounts to 3,300,000 gallons. It is
not brought to the top of the mine, but to the 1700 ft.
level, from which it runs by gravitation into the Sutro
tunnel. The tunnel was made to drain a number of mines,
and has been a very successful undertaking. It comes
from the valley of the Carson River, a distance of four
miles, and strikes the mines at a depth of about 1800 ft. I
found a tramway and mule teams in the tunnel, so that it
is large enough for traffic of this kind, as well as for drain-
ing the mines. The water is raised to the 1700 ft. level by
means of a double Cornish pump, with 15in. plungers,
worked by steam, and a hydraulic pump, which is, alto-
gether, a splendid piece of machinery. It is a double 1 din,
pump, with 16in. shaft, and is worked by water, which is
taken from the reservoir on the side of the hill, 400 ft.
above the level of the top of the mine. The plant of this
mine has cost £600,000. It gave good yields when the
lode was in the old level; but there has been nothing but
expenditure for the last two years.
It is no. uncommon occurrence for visitors to be overcome
by the heat of the mine ; but although I felt oppressed and
experienced a burning sensation in my eyes, I reached the
top in safety, and, after I had a cold bath and exchanged
my miner’s suit of blue flannel and oilskin for my own
clothes, I was none the worse for my underground adven-
ture. The lode has been traced for forty miles, and the
quartz is found in porphyry backed by granite. The rich
ore is found in lumps or patches in the lode, and where the
great find was the mass of valuable stone was 800 ft. long,
from 50ft. to 300 ft. wide, and 400 ft. deep. From the Con-
solidated Virginia on this part of the lode about forty
million pounds sterling was obtained, and £1,200,000 was
taken out in a single month. It is not generally known


that both gold and silver are obtained from these mines,
but it is the case that 40 per cent, of the precious metal
found is gold. On leaving Virginia city one cannot help
hoping that so much enterprise will be rewarded by the dis-
covery of another bonanza.
CHAPTER XVII.
SALT LAKE AND THE MORMONS.
Leaving Virginia City before daylight, after dreaming of
silver kings and their toiling subjects in the infernal
regions of the mines, the train “ wound about and in and
out ” with us until, in a distance of fifty-two miles, we
reached the main overland line at Reno, which is only
fifteen miles, as the crow flies, from where we started.
At Reno, a town of some 1500 inhabitants, engaged in
business connection with the mines, I take up my quarters
in a Pullman car on the overland express, and make myself
comfortable for a day and a night’s travelling. We are
between 4uooft. and 5000 ft. above the level of the sea,
travelling over desert country relieved only by occasional
patches of cultivated land along the edges of insignificant
streams which force themselves through the stretches of
greyish-white sand. The sage-brush, a shrub like Australian
salt-bush, and also capable of feeding stock, gives a grey
appearance to the desert, and isolated mountain masses of
bare rock rising from the plains in all directions relieve the
monotony, and give a weird interest to the desolate scene.
Such will be the character of the country from this point
to Salt Lake, more than 600 miles. The railway seems to
have been made along the course of the streams in order to
find the most level surface. Soon after leaving the
Truckee River we strike the Humboldt, which we follow
nearly all day. These rivers, after winding about among
the mountains and over the deserts disappear into lakes,
which are called “ sinks.”
In the afternoon the desert becomes more of a desert,
and we got a touch of “alkali dust.” We pass through


low-lying flats, on which rests a kind of salt, which mixing
with sand, forms a dust that irritates people who have
tender skins. I suppose my skin is thick, for I did not
feel the irritation. The negro attendant adjusts the
windows and dusts the carriage, and when you feel inclined
you walk to the lavatory and wash, also drinking the ever-
present ice water at will. The camel is now only a ship of
the desert, and it does not carry ice water and a negro
with brushes. Towards evening we reach the Palisades, a
rocky canon 15 miles in length, by which the Humboldt
River has worn its way through a mountain range. The
train follows the winding of the stream, and the rocky
sides of the canon rise perpendicularly on each side to a
height of 500 feet. As darkness closes in, the conductor
informs us that nothing of much interest will be passed
during the night, and we enjoy our first experience of
sleeping in a Pullman car, those running between Sydney
and Albury being twenty years behind the times.
Early in the morning a glance is got of the Great Salt
Lake, which lies to the southward, but we find we have a
long way to go before reaching the city of the Mormons.
At breakfast time we reached Ogden, the end of the
Central Pacific Railroad, and there we make a change.
Instead of proceeding by the Union Pacific, which continues
on in an easterly direction to Omaha, 1 had booked by the
“New Scenic Route,” on the Denver and Rio Grande
railway, only opened about six weeks previously, which
would take me southward through Salt Lake City, and over
the Rocky Mountains. The territory of Utah was entered
during the night, and, after changing cars, we are travelling
southward among the small farms of the Mormons. There
is nothing attractive about this part of the country, as the
people are trying to live by “ dry farming,” a system which
is distinguished from the irrigated farms upon the rest of
the territorjr. The mountains, however, which rise above
the plains near Salt Lake City come into view, and we are
soon among the green fields of the Jordan Valley, the
richest part of the promised land of the Mormon saints.
It is Sunday forenoon, and the baggage-man tells us that
the service in the Tabernacle is held at two o’clock. I
anticipate a treat in seeing the peculiar people worshipping
in the New Jerusalem. The baggage-man takes the two
brass tokens, which I give him, together with two shillings,


and returns me a receipt, together with a carriage ticket to
take me to the Walker-house Hotel. I find the Walker-
house a first-class American hotel, the clerk receives my
receipt, and soon after going up to my rooms the trunks
arrive, which I last saw in my apartments at the Baldwin,
ban Francisco.
The modern character of Salt Bake City is the first thing
to attract attention and cause surprise. Streets twice as
wide as those of Melbourne, long ranges of fine substantial
buildings, churches, and other striking edifices, street
tramways, newspapers, telephones, electric light, show that
the Latter Day Saints are up to date. The footpaths are
twenty feet wide, and along the side of each a stream of
clear water runs, cooling the air, cleaning the city, and
nourishing the trees, which make avenues of all the streets.
Stretching away in every direction from the business centre
of the city are wide tree-planted avenues leading to the
attractive residences and gardens of the well-to-do
inhabitants. The lake, some miles distant, can only be
seen from the highest positions, bur the Wasatch mountains
look down on every part of the city. These mountains are
a delight. Unlike the bare, dark-coloured ranges which
have been passed ever since we left Lake Tahoe, the
Wasatch mountains are covered with a stunted vegetation,
which gives them a green appearance all the way up from
the plain to the glittering fretwork of eternal snow which
rests lightly upon the rugged peaks. The winding Jordan,
a small clear stream, flows on the opposite side of the city
from the mountains, and its valley, green with small farms
and orchards, forms a pretty landscape. First impressions
of the appearance of the city and its surroundings are
favourable, and the longer one stays in the place the° more
the conviction grows that beauty and loveliness are the
outward surroundings of Mormon abominations.
The tabernacle, although not presenting an imposing
appealance, is a model of utilitarianism. Nothing could
be better for the purposes intended, viz., the assembling of
large numbers of people to see and hear. It is like an
immense dish-cover supported upon short pillars, being an
oval building 250 ft. long by 150 ft. wide, and capable of
seating 13,000 persons. The forty sandstone pillars which
suppoit the roof are only 9ft. high, but the domed roof is
75ft. from the floor. There is a gallery running round three


aides of the building, which will seat 4000 people, and at
one end there is a large platform, at the hack of which
stands an organ 33ft. by 35ft., and 58ft. high. The acoustic
properties of the building are complete, and there are
numerous wide doors between the pillars through which the
Tabernacle could be emptied in a few minutes. The Temple
in course of erection promises to be a grand building, the
walls of white granite being now about 40ft. in height.
Another fine granite building is the Assembly-hall, a portion
of this being the private apartments of the Endowment-
house, in which the polygamic marriages are celebrated.
Among the business places the largest building is Zion’s
Co-operative Institution. It is built of brick, three storeys
high, with 100 ft. frontage, and over the centre door an eye,
under the superscription “ Holiness to the Lord.” It does
a business of £600,000 annually, and the eye, being only
one, makes the building appear to be winking at the pious
swindle being carried on.
At the service there was something in the vast building
and the assembled multitude to produce a religious feeling,
but the want of reverence, and the business-like manner of the
whole performance soon dispelled all solemnity. The open-
ing hymn, led by the organ and a choir of over 100 voices,
produced a good volume of harmony, but during the other
parts of the service you could not feel that you were in a
church. The eight bishops and apostles, who occupied
raised seats between the choir and the floor, were dressed
in their business suits, not even wearing a white necktie.
They were the business men of the city. One looked like a
saloon-keeper with a good practice, another had the appear-
ance of a barber, others might have been bankers or
accountants, and one had a weather-beaten face and a rough
tweed suit suggestive of a farmer. One offered a prayer in
provincial English, another prayed in more correct language
with all the fervour of a Methodist revivalist, and singing,
preaching, praying, electing officers, and dispensing the
communion were carried on alternately in varying styles,
but without any pretence in tone or manner at what are
generally regarded as indications of reverence. At one
time eight men got behind a table at the front, upon
which were baskets of bread and large pewter jugs of wine
or water. While the preaching of one and another was going
on these men were as busy as nailers breaking the bread up


into very small pieces. At the end of one of the sermons
addresses a well-to-do-looking storekeeper rose up and
said, “Let us bless the bread.’’ He blessed it accordingly,
after which about twenty men of the well-to-do working
class came forward, seized baskets, and proceeded to distri-
bute bread among the miserable pauper-looking men and
women in the main body of the building.
Apostle Snow, an old white-beaded man, who came over
with the first Mormons in 1847, gave a long and tedious
address. He was far from fluent, and his language showed
that education had not been the source of his power. His
doctrine was the efficacy of good works done for the dead.
He was very severe upon the Protestant churches, who
said “ there was no wisdom in the grave, and all that sort
of thing.” A fervent address was given by a dark, nervous-
looking Englishman, who was choice in his language, correct
in his pronunciation, and possessed many of the elements
of eloquence. He was glad, after a two years’ mission to
Great Britain in the Lord’s service, to be again with the
saints in the city of Zion, Divine power had accompanied
him, and he had been enabled to save many. Results were
enumerated as proof of his creed, and his peroration was,
“ I believe that the doctrine of the Latter Day Saints is
truth, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.—
Amen.”
The elections that were conducted related to both church
and state. Officers of the church, and officers of the city
government were appointed, for there is no distinction
between secular and holy things among the saints. Utah
has the privileges of a territory, and the form of election
has to be gone through, the Gentiles voting but not affecting
the result as settled in the church election, at which I was
present. A smart young man rose and said, “It is moved
that we sustain Brother So and So in such and such an
office. Thbse in favour signify by holding up the right
hand.” All hands of men and women are held up. *' Those
of a contrary mind, in the same manner.” No hands held
up. The elections must have lasted an hour, and every
one was unanimous. While the service was going on, a
bishop rose and said, “A child has been lost in the
Tabernacle. The parents will wait for it at the north
door.” And at another time some functionary announced,
“ So and So is wanted at the south door of the Tabernacle.”


Such was the character of the service. It was disappointing,
and so was the appearance of the women. I expected to
see the average number of good-looking women among the
Mormons, but, much to my surprise, they were all, without
exception, lacking in beauty, and, I am sorry to say, nearly
all possessing features positively disagreeable to look upon.
There must, I suppose, be good-looking ones somewhere in
the city, but I looked along row after row of miserable,
wrinkled, sunburned creatures as they sat apart from the
men in the Tabernacle, and saw nothing that was ordinarily
comely. It was the saddest sight I ever saw, and I was
glad to come out and look on the beautiful city and the
snow-capped hills.
CHAPTER XVIII.
THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS.
The men’s side of the Tabernacle is not more attractive
than that reserved for the women, but there is less disap-
pointment, for no one expects Mormon men to he good-
looking. Here it appears as if all the “ Chawbacons ” and
“ Hodges” that have appeared in London Punch for half a
century bad congregated after cultivating shaggy beards
and letting their hair grow. The miserable-looking objects
in the body of the Tabernacle, and the sharp, business-
looking individuals managing the different parts of the
service on the platform, suggest that there are two classes
of saints, viz., the operators and those operated upon.
The operators are keen business men, and impress you
as highly with their ability and intelligence as any leading
citizens you meet in other parts of the United States.
They are, moreover, remarkable for their easy, affable
manners, and their willingness to give information. Prophet
Taylor I did not interview, for, unlike Brigham Young, he
is a man of no force of character. He has neither educa-
tion nor natural ability, and consequently he is only the
nominal head of the church, while Young was a born
leader of men. Without wasting time, therefore, in listening


to this nonentity dropping his h’s, I busied myself in inter-
viewing the bishops at the heads of the different church
and territorial departments. These men constitute the
church of to-day, and seem well qualified for the work they
have in hand. As, however, the church is in reality a
despotism, its apparent strength in having several shrewd
rulers may prove its weakness. A single directing mind,
and the strong hand which characterised the regime of
Young, constitutes an element of strength which may not
be compensated for by the ability of Taylor’s counsellors.
Already a schism has taken place, resulting in a sect of
non-polygamic Mormons being formed, and this, no doubt,
is the beginning of troubles. In the meantime, things
work smoothly enough, and the genial, affable, wide-awake
operators gaily carry on their highly lucrative business.
Those operated upon are the reverse of their masters.
They are recruited from the lowest stratum of society in
Europe, and they remain in the same substratum. The
church maintains at all times from 70 to 100 missionaries
operating in different parts of the world. These men
being religious enthusiasts are but a slight cost upon the
church, and they work harder and better than if they were
only earning a salary. They are armed by the wide-awake
gentlemen with whom I conversed with a mass of such
statistical information as these obliging gentlemen favoured
me with, besides other information which I did not obtain.
To the poor, the wretched, and the hopeless in large cities
and distressed mining and agricultural districts in European
countries, these enthusiasts offer not only peace and rest in
the world to come, but houses and lands, plenty and
pleasure, in a land flowing with milk and honey. Every
Gentile who passes through Salt Lake City writes something
complimentary of the place. These writings are all printed
in the form of Mormon tracts, and what may be compli-
mentary is sure to be embodied in the “ Opinions of the
Press,” or as the testimony of “ an unfriendly Gentile ”to
the fertility of the farms which are given to every proselyte.
What he has to pay the church for his land, for irrigation,
and a tenth of his annual income besides, is not likely to
be definitely stated to the convert. With so much to offer
to the ignorant and the hopeless, it is not wonderful that a
constant stream of Mormon immigrants pours into the
territory of Utah. A draft of 700 from Europe arrived at


different ports while I was in America, and on the Sunday
of my visit 300 arrived in Salt Lake City by train. Immi-
gration is the great source of Mormon success ; without it
the thing would die, as it is too bad to hold its own natural
increase.
Why does the United States Government permit such an
abominable system to exist within its territory? The
answer to this question is that the Government does not
permit polygamy, but finds exceptional difficulty in putting
it down. The Mormons were in Utah when the United
States obtained the territory from the Mexican Govern-
ment, andif we had found a Salt Lake City at Bourke or
elsewhere in our territory, it is difficult to see how we could
have done better with it than the rulers at Washington
have done. Polygamy is a violation of United States law,
but the difficulty is to prove a Mormon to be a polygamist.
The marriages are not legal contracts. They are celebrated
in the Endowment-house, into which no Gentile enters, and
there are no records of the marriages. They are not
marriages at all, but religious or irreligious ceremonies, of
which the law can take no notice. Notwithstanding the
absence of evidence, the Government have been so zealous as
to prosecute Mormons for bigamy, but no convictions have
been obtained, as the women swear in court that the men
are not their husbands. Implicit obedience to the church
is the first duty of a Latter-day saint, and especially of a
saint’s wife. That the end justifies the means is almost as
important a doctrine of the church, and, under the circum-
stances, there would be great difficulty in enforcing any
special law in regard to polygamy. Moreover, as a terri-
tory, Utah has the making of its own laws, and as long as
their law is not in contravention of United States law, the
Government of Washington has but little excuse for inter-
fering.
In passing the Edmunds Bill, Congress showed its
abhorrence of polygamy, and certainly used the iron hand
as much as any free Government would be justified in doing.
This bill disfranchised all polygamists. Thus the Central
Government prevented a polygamic Mormon citizen from
having a voice in the local government of his own terri-
tory. The Mormons call this tyranny, and a good deal
can be said in support of this charge. Many years ago,
however, long before the passing of the Edmunds Bill,.


Young, with a forethought consistent with his character,
had taken a step which nullifies the law of dis-
franchisement. He had a hill passed in the Terri-
torial Legislature giving the franchise to women,
and he got a pliant governor, whose name I forget, but
who will ever be gratefully remembered by the Mormons,
to sign the measure. All Mormon men and women who
are not yet married, and all who have not yet married more
than one person, are entitled under the Edmunds Bill to
vote, and these are sufficient to carry every election in
every district, leaving the Gentiles entirely unrepresented.
The new rolls under the bill were being made up at the
time of my visit, and the polygamic Mormons were not
registering. The Gentiles were hopeful of getting some
representation, but I notice that the Mormons easily
carried every seat at the subsequent election.
Polygamy works so badly that it does not grow in favour,
even with the Mormons themselves. Although it is an
essential part of the church system, and no true Mormon
can refuse to support and practice polygamy, the system is
secretly disliked by many of the church members. Mention
has been made of the sect which denies the authority of the
polygamic doctrine. These people have completely left
the church, but there are many who could not well afford
to leave so good a commercial concern, but who, none the
less, are opposed to polygamy. The decent and respectable
citizens find it expensive to keep up several separate
establishments, and to provide properly for several wives
and families. Many of these only live with one family,
sending the other wives away to the country, where they
can be cheaply provided for. Many others defer taking a
second wife as long as they safely can without offending
the church, and a large proportion of the young people,
children of Mormons, leave the church on account of the
obnoxious principle. The fact is that the abominations of
polygamy cannot stand against the light of civilisation to
which it is exposed since the opening of the railways. It
is only maintained by the vigorous exertions of the
missionaries. As the Government has gone so far .as to
exclude Chinese from the country, it might be justified in
preventing Mormon converts from being brought from
different parts of the world. The editor of the Tribune
says that the measure could not be carried out, as the


church would direct the converts to enter as non-Mormons.
The system, however, is worth a trial, as it would, in a few
years, be certain to break up the obnoxious institutions of
the Latter-Day Saints.
Implicit obedience to the church once established, the
Mormon has little difficulty in leading the convert into all
the mysteries of the* faith. The industry of the people
springs from the principle, aided by the vain hope of some
day acquiring property. It is right to settle where the
church directs, to work upon the canal which is to supply
water for the irrigation of the farm, and it is right that all
the capital which the church has advanced should be paid
back with interest, while a tenth of all one makes should
be given to the Lord. In order to pay off all these arrears
the Mormon settler has to work hard, and he needs wives
many to help him. The poor Mormon tiller of the soil
finds that the more wives he has the more land he can
irrigate and cultivate, and he finds one small house is
enough for several. In the city the Mormon is troubled
with considerations of decency. Wives do not agree in
one house, and different families do not dwell together in
unity. The son of Abraham must, therefore, either build
separate houses or pension off the wives, and he frequently
atlopts the latter alternative. With these considerations
the poor average Mormon has nothing to do. A small hut
or a “dug out” viz., an excavation covered with a roof —
does very well for as many wives as are required to work
the farm. Nowhere in America are such miserable huts to
be found as those in which the Mormon agriculturist
keeps his female slaves. He is a slave of the church him-
self, but he does not know it. His wives are slaves, and
they are all well aware of the fact, although lacking the
power of escaping bondage. The source from which the
women are gathered, the hard work in the open air, and
the sense of degradation, account for the scarcely human
faces which are seen in the women’s department of the
Tabernacle.
If you do not look at the women, and only look lightly
into the working of the Mormon system, you will have a
good time at the Salt Lake. There is the city, the
mountains, and the wide stretches of farms and gardens
forming charming landscapes. A bath in the Great Salt
Lake is one of the most luxurious treats obtainable in


America. The bathing place is nearly twenty miles from
the city, hut trains run for the purpose quickly, convey the
citizens to the pebbly shore of the wondrously beautiful
lake, with its pale blue water and its mountainous islands
looking dreamily majestic in the hazy atmosphere of a
warm afternoon. There are about 500 bathers in the
water, and my nerves get the first shock from seeing the
sexes bathing together. The shock was less than I
expected, and I soon joined the happy, promiscuous shoal
in a dress for which I paid a shilling, but which I would
not describe for twice the amount. I afterwards saw
thousands of New York men and women bathing together
at Coney Island, and I failed to discover any just cause for
the English custom, bathing in seclusion. I think we deny
ourselves a great deal of enjoyment by our system of
bathing, and, after seeing how the European method is
practised by the Americans, I consider that in the water
“it is not good for man to be alone.” The Mormons and
Gentiles had an enjoyable bath that afternoon, at any
rate. The water is so salt that you cannot sink if you try.
You can get a mouthful of salt water, however, and a few
such would spoil your bath. The bathing costumes were
not elegant. Brown wincey w T as the prevailing colour, and
the shape was such that I concluded people did not go to
bathe as they go to church, “to see and be seen.” The
dull monotony of brown wincey, cut too large to fit, was
relieved, however, by a pretty Gentile maiden from some
city in the east, who had brought her blue, neatly-fitting
suit with her. She lay on the surface of the water while
two young men took turns at pushing her along like a boat.
Lying thus on the buoyant water seemed to be her favourite
way of taking her bath,
But when she chose to sport and play,
No dolphin ever was so gay
Upon the tropic sea.
The bath is enjoyable, sends you back to the city with a
good appetite, and will keep pleasant in the memory for a
long time.


CHAPTER XIX.
OVER THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS.
The Denver and Rio Grande Railroad is a ramification of
lines crossing the Rocky Mountains between Salt Lake
City and Denver, and opening up communication from the
east and west with the important mining districts in the
mountainous regions of Utah and Colorado. The company,
which, like so many other American enterprises, is largely
-supported by English capital, has made 1650 miles of
narrow-gauge railway, and, owing to the difficulties pre-
sented by the mountainous character of the country, the
engineering works are probably the most wonderful in the
world. Leland Stanford, in carrying his railway over the
Sierra Nevada, will no doubt retain the honour of being
the pioneer of mountain-railway makers. Of the wonders
he achieved, his sympathetic biographer, Mr. Edward
Curtis, of San Francisco, writes “ Other men may
improve upon what he has originated or accomplished, but
they can never eclipse his fair renown. No railroad of the
future, however grand, will take anything from the glory
and honour of the first, and there never will be but one
Leland Stanford. His was the energy that never wearied,
his the patience never exhausted, and his the faith that
could never be shaken The next 100 miles
lay across a chain of mountains, the most difficult to
pierce, grade, and subdue of any in the world. Imagine a
series of lofty cones rising one above another till in a
distance of seventy miles an elevation is reached ot 7042
feet above the' starting-point, and that the proposition
was to build a railroad up and across those mountain peaks
and down the other side into the valley, 3000 feet below,
and some idea can be formed of the magnitude of almost
the first work commenced by the Pacific Railroad Com-
pany. Many engineers examined the proposed road, and
declared it impossible to construct, and Governor Stanford
himself once, having climbed to the top of one of the
snow-capped sierras, exclaimed, ‘ls it possible a railroad
can be built here V But his depression was only momen-
tary, for his penetrating eye quickly saw that those


lofty piles of clay and granite when cut up, could be made
available in filling the chasms and precipices that yawned
between. Besides, his was a faith that could, as it
literally did, ‘ remove mountains,’ and he never allowed
himself to doubt afterwards. And so', armed with shovel
and pick, powder, and steel, did his army of working men
go forth to battle with the everlasting hills that towered to
the clouds above them. Greater than the army with which
Caesar, ‘ The foremost man in all the world,’ achieved his
most brilliant victories, was that which for four long years
incessantly by night and by day laid siege to the Sierras
until they were bound in irons.” There were political as
well as engineering difficulties to overcome, and perhaps
those of a practical character were greatest of all, for
Stanford and his companions, the millionaires of to-day,
were then comparatively poor men. The Denver and Bio
Grande Company had no politics to trouble them, for they
obtained no land grant, and they had no financial embar-
rassments to fight, but in the Bocky Mountains they had
to “ bind in irons ” greater giants than the Sierras.
Stanford required the faith which literally removed
mountains, but faith is no longer required. Capital and
skill alone are necessary, and both are forthcoming when
profit is to be gained.
The journey of 700 miles from Salt Lake to Denver
occupies a day and a half and a night, and one’s interest
in the grand scenery never flags on any part of the route.
There is beauty and grandeur and infinite variety, which
keep the mind delightfully employed all day long, and
make you struggle against sleep in viewing the moonlight
scenes far into the night. For fifty miles the line runs
through the agricultural settlements of the Mormons, over
irrigation canals, and past small cultivated farms. The
Wasatch Mountains, 6000 ft. above the plain, and tipped
with snow, are on the left, and the dry sage-brush desert
stretches away to other distant mountains on the right.
Small streams issue from the foot of the mountains, and
each one is bordered by fertile farms and orchards, the
sage-brush desert having been transformed to luxurious
productiveness by irrigation. Fertility extends as far as
the water reaches, and white sand with scanty sage-brush
abuts abruptly upon the irrigated fields. The canal which
supplies Salt Lake City with water is crossed on the way.


and its white hanks tell of the sandy soil through which it
is constructed. It is 20ft. wide, carrying a depth of 3ft,
of water, and 21 miles in length, the cost being £30,000.
The supply is obtained from the Jordan River, near where
it issues from Lake Utah, a sheet of fresh water 30 miles
long, by five or six miles wide. Small farms, varying
from 10 to 50 acres in extent, seem to be the rule in Utah,
and although the fields look productive, the houses are
small and miserable. Log huts, and huts of sun-dried bricks
or mud, with here and there a “ dug-out,” or excavation
roofed over, form the dwellings of an industrious, but
down-trodden peasantry. The fruits of the soil go to swell
the wealth of the “apostles” and “bishops,” whose fine
residences and fast-trotting horses one admires so much
in “ Zion,” and whose “ Co-operative Institution,” under
the sign of “ Holiness unto the Lord ” and an emblazoned
eye quite wide awake, carries on such a thriving trade.
It is only in this part of America that people live in poor
dwellings, and it is only here that women are seen working
in the fields. We get a good midday dinner at Provo, a
town of 4000 inhabitants, at the foot of the mountains,
where there are timber mills, a woollen factory, and a
dense agricultural settlement, and we leave the plain as
we begin to wind our way up the canon of a mountain
stream never to see level country again until we
emerge from the foot-hills on the east side of the Rocky
Mountains.
We are soon up among the dark, green pines, and our
train, like an enthusiastic explorer, seems determined to
search out the source of the stream. Those who have
travelled in New Zealand will understand the means by
which the Denver and Rior Grande railway threads its way
through the mountains, and the scenery is also very like
that met with in the “ Britain of the South.” The timber
has a stunted appearance, but it seems to be of value, for
the train stops at several lumber stations. There is pretty
good grass on the side of the mountains too, and several
shaggy Mormons are seen tending considerable herds of
cattle and flocks of sheep. At one station we see a number
of Ute Indians dressed in their curious half-savage, half-
civilised costumes. Both men and women wear blue flannel
trousers ornamented with yellow braid, and a red blanket
for a cloak. They were just mounting their horses, and I


noticed that the women rode astride like their sisters in
Honolulu, and that they seemed to experience no difficulty
in carrying their babies on horseback. I have seen European
women carrying children on horseback in Gipps Land, but
it was an awkward-looking arrangement owing to the side-
saddle difficulty. The Ute women, however, appeared
“ native and to the manner born.” These Indians, like the
many others we had seen in Nevada, were extremely ugly,
the women being worse-looking than the men. The babies,
however, were rather good-looking, and seemed never to
cry. Crying babies are a product of civilisation, and
probably result from the want of an Indian crib. A small
wooden trough, like the tray upon which the butcher carries
a leg of mutton, is employed by all the Indian women to
hold their babies, and the babies lie as quiet as the mutton.
Castle Gate, reached early in the afternoon, is the first of
those natural wonders which are so numerous on this
journey. Having climbed over the Wasatch Mountains by
following up one stream, and begun descending by making
along the tortuous course of another, the Castle Gate bursts
into view as something entirely different to what has been
already seen. The Price River has cut its way through a
spur of the mountains, making a gap about fifty feet wide,
and the portals of this cavernous inlet are huge masses of
rock, five hundred feet in height. As we enter the gate,
the train stops to let the passengers have a good view of
the vertical walls which tower above, and seem to almost
overhang the line. The water-worn rock has the appearance
of built masonry, and the crest of the wall looks like the
battlements of a vast castle. Upon a dizzy height some
daring spirit has set a flag, to mark the point to which his
courage had carried him, but there are still thirty feet of
more dangerous space reserved for the flags of other lunatics.
As the train moves from under the looming walls of the
Castle Gate, the view of this wonderful natural feature
becomes less impressive, but more beautiful, and it is soon
found that it is the “ gate ” to a long series of bewilderingly
strange productions of nature.
The valley of the Price River is a wonder-land which
keeps the mind at a tension all the afternoon. Castle Gate
was the entrance to a canon abounding in sights even more
wonderful than itself. Military operations are suggested at
every turn of the winding train, for the stratified rocks, as


clearly water-worn as the cliffs of the sea coast, are like
vast masses of solid masonry, and the mountain sides are like
fortifications built upon the most magnificent scale. There
are long lines of solid wall built up under the everlasting
hills, battlements here perfect, and there as if battered
down by the cannonade of the enemy, van dyked buttress-
ments, and jutting turrets, while here and there all has
been thrown into confusion by the explosion of a mine.
The gigantic rocks are arranged in military order, but one
cannot imagine a race of giants large enough to man such
terrible fortresses. It must have been in such a place, or
in the sky above this, that Milton’s angelic hosts fought
against “ thrones, principalities and powers,” when—
Their arms away they threw, and to the hills,
Light as the lightning glimpse they ran, they flew;
From their foundations loosening to and fro
They plucked the seated hills with all their load,
Locks, waters, woods, and by the shaggy tops
Uplifting bore them in their hands; amaze.
Be sure, and terror seized the rebel host.
When coming towards them so dread they saw.
The bottom of the mountains upward turn’d.
The rest in imitation to like arms
Betook them, and the neighbouring hills uptore;
So hills amid the air encountered hills.
Hurled to and fro with jaculations dire.
Just before dark we got out of the canon and on to the
strange tableland which forms the valley of the Green
River. The Green River is a branch of the Colorado, the
Grand Canon of which is the most celebrated in the world.
It has been only partly explored, but is described as a vast
chasm cut in solid rock a mile deep and 400 miles long.
The Green River forces its way through a bed of shifting
matter that is neither sand nor soil. It is as barren as
sand, but is of a dark blue colour, like powdered slate.
This desert of blue loose earth extends for hundreds of
miles. It is blown into mounds by tornados, washed into
awful channels by floods, and presents the most desolate
appearance. Its desolate aspect is not altered, but an
interest is given to it by the curious hills with which it is
studded. The tops of all the hills are as flat as a table,
their sides are as vertical as a wall, and they are all either
quite round or, at least, circular. Some have sloping


sides, which make them look like pyramids in the distance,
and the whole aspect of the country is strikingly
unnatural. This vast elevated plain seems to have been
once at the bottom of a lake or inland sea. The bottom of
the lake must have been at the tops of the hills, which are
over 1000 feet in height, and the whole original plain has
evidently been washed away, leaving the water-worn and
table-topped hills to mark the work of nature, as cores are
left by contractors when excavating a railway cutting.
The angular form of the hills gives the country an
Egyptian appearance, and the changing scenes brought
into view by the fast speeding train look weird and strange
in the deepening twilight.
Soon after crossing Green River the evening meal, which
the conductor calls “supper,” is partaken of at a station
which appears to be maintained for the purpose, as there
are no other habitations for scores of miles around. Early
in the afternoon the conductor had asked us if we intended
to take supper, and had telegraphed the number to provide
for. Hence the meal in the midst of this desert was all
that could be desired. After studying the scenery in the
moonlight for a time the conductor’s negro assistant made
up our beds, and we had an opportunity of experiencing
how comfortable the Pulman sleeping car can be made on
a narrow gauge line. There is not so much room in the
berths as on the ordinary broad gauge, but they are quite
as comfortable, all the appointments of the car being first-
class. Although we are still in the desert, the curious
scenery is so interesting that I draw up the curtain of my
berth and gaze upon the towers, pyramids, and flat-topped
hills until sleep closes the panorama. The conductor had
told us we should miss nothing of importance in the night,
provided we were up by times in the morning to see the
Rainbow Waterfall. We think conductors always tell the
same tale when putting their passengers to bed, and we
resolve to be up in time for the Rainbow Fall.
Early morning finds us high up on a pine-studded range,
with snow-capped peaks all around, and the train still
labouring upwards. We ask for the Rainbow Fall and for
breakfast. The fall is promised first, and breakfast soon
afterwards. Soon the Black Canon is entered, and scenes
as j g ran d as those of yesterday afternoon are presented,
while the Rainbow Fountain is added as a new kind of


delight. A small stream of water pours over the rocky
sides of the canon into the river, 150 ft. below, and forms a
beautiful spray in which the sun has ample material for
making rainbows. The breakfast station is a more than
ordinary object of interest in such keen mountain air, and
as the breakfast is up to the standard of an American
railway meal, one feels upon again entering the car
thoroughly prepared to meet the promised grandeur of the
Marshall Pass and the Grand Canon of the Arkansas. The
process of winding along the rocky courses of tortuous
mountain streams continues, and there is no lack of inter-
esting objects all the forenoon, but one’s attention gets
more and more excited as the pass is approached and it
becomes known that the summit of the Pocky Mountains,
over 10,000 ft. above the sea, is being reached. At one
point the train travels ten miles to gain one mile in advance,
and at another place we look down upon three parallel
railway tracks, which are, in reality, but different portions
of the one line, over which we have travelled. We next
pass through long snow-sheds, and emerging from these find
we are on the Pass. There is no snow on the railway
track or on some adjoining peaks, which raise their bare
and rocky summits above the timber line, but the snow-
covered cones of higher peaks are seen in the distance.
Immediately around this point, 10,760 ft. above the sea,
there is nothing but a wilderness of grey granite blocks and
stunted pines, many of the trees being dead and broken by
the winds.
Going down is much the same kind of serpentine process
as getting up, except that strong brakes are substituted for
thepullingof the two powerful engines which made theascent.
On our way down we came out on to beautiful wooded plateaus,
surrounded by snow-capped peaks. The rivers now flow
towards the Mississippi, and at the pleasant town of Salida
we strike the Arkansas, one of the tributaries of that
magnificent stream. Those who are on pleasure bent
should take the branch line here to Leadville, a mining
town 10,000 feet above sea level, and cross the Fremont
Pass at an elevation of 11,540 feet, the highest railway
track in North America. There are deer, antelope, buffalo,
and the grizzly bear, too, for those who have time for sport,
but we must get into the “ observation car,” and take in
the Grand Canon without waiting to turn to the right hand


or to the left. The observation car is just an ordinary
railway carriage with the top taken off at the level of your
arm rests, and presenting no obstruction to a full view of
the scenery. There is much looking upward to be done,
and the proprietors of the “ Scenic Route” provide this car
in order that the passengers may enjoy the views to the
full. The Grand Canon of the Arkansas is at once entered,
and the journey for some hours is delightful. Although
you have been on the stretch of admiration and delight all
the way, the sights in this canon are so grand and so far
eclipse what you have seen that you are sent into fresh
raptures. Bolder bluffs, more high-reaching walls, and sky-
piercing pinnacles, and greater masses of jutting rock than
anything on the route, call up new feelings of amazement
when the mind, satiated with sightseeing, is not easily
excited. The crowning glory is at a point where the walls
of the canon close in to a width of only thirty feet, and
through this narrow gorge both the river and the train
pass. There is not room for more than the river, and to
slice down such a mass of rock, to take a ledge in the
ordinary way, would be impracticable. An iron bridge is,
therefore, made parallel with the river, the structure being
partly supported and partly hung above the rushing
stream. Massive steel beams are mortised into the solid
rock, and extending across from one side of the canon to
the other. Upon these beams the bridge is hung. In
making the line at this point the workmen were hung in
ropes from the top of the cliff. The walls are perpendicular
for a height of 1500 feet, and from the top of this foundation
a similar terrace of vertical rock rises as high again, making
in all about 3000 feet. In looking up, but a narrow strip
of sky is visible, the towering masses of rock seeming to
overhang. The passengers take a long breath as the train
winds out into milder scenes. And as the plains of Pueblo
are observed stretching away in the distance we become
aware with a feeling of regret that we are over and out of
the Rocky Mountains.


CHAPTER XX.
IRRIGATION IN COLORADO.
Although I have travelled 1500 miles westward from
San Francisco, I find myself now in the extreme “ Far
West.” Colorado 2000 miles from the Atlantic, is the
furthest out of the Western states, and it is separated by
over 1000 miles of mountains and deserts from the fertile
country on the Pacific Slope. There is a tract of exceed-
ingly dry country along the foot of the Rocky Mountains,
being about 300 miles wide, and reaching from the confines
of British America on the north to Mexico on the south.
The fine agricultural country of the Eastern states lies on
the east of this dry region and the Rocky Mountains on
the west. _ Very little rain from the Atlantic reaches so far
west as this point, and the rain-clouds from the Pacific are
drained of their moisture in passing over the intervening
mountain ranges. The State of Colorado occupies a
central position in the dry belt, and as it only has an
annual rainfall of about 12in., agriculture is impossible
without irrigation. The soil is a grey sandy loam upon the
rises or bench lands, and a strong clayey brown loam on the
flats or creek and river bottoms, granite and sandstone being
the geological formation of the adjacent mountains. About
two-thirds of the rain falls in spring, which makes the grass
grow and the grain crops to germinate, but the dry summer
is fatal to cereals if not assisted by irrigation. There are a
few mountain valleys and small table lands, called “ parks,”
where “dry farming” can be carried out, but on the plains,
where the great bulk of the farms are situated, agriculture
without irrigation is never attempted.
Colorado is a new country. Its history commences in
1857, when a party of Cherokee Indians, en route for
California, discovered gold at the foot of the Rocky
Mountains. If the history of the state is short, that of its
agriculture is still shorter. It is only some fifteen or sixteen
years since the first few farms were established, but nothing
like systematic settlement began until 1870. I have just


completed a tour of nearly 200 miles through the principal
farming districts on the plains to the northward of Denver,
going by one_ railway route and returning by another, and
after travelling nearly all the way through productive
farms with comfortable homesteads, and heavy crops
of wheat, oats, barley, maize, potatoes, lucerne, and
meadow grass hay, as well as past thriving towns of
from 1000 to 2000 inhabitants, it is difficult to
realise that only thirteen years ago the whole country was
a dry uninhabitable region. The settlements have the solid
appearance which might be expected to result from long
years of labour, and the vegetation in the fields, orchards,
and plantation of trees, suggests a climate as moist as that
of Lancefield, Maitland, or any of the coast districts of
Australia. And yet all was an open wild thirteen years
ago, and not even the hardy wheat crop can be grown
without irrigation. The plains along the Campaspe, Loddon,
Avoca, and rivers in Northern Victoria were settled upon
about the same date, but alas, with what different results.
The soil along those rivers is more evenly fertile than on
the South Platte of Colorado, and the difference in the
condition of the farmers is entirely due to irrigation.
The Greeley settlement on the Cache la Poudre, a
tributary of the Platte River, and Fort Collins, about
twenty-five miles further up the same stream, are the
principal points of interest in the area of farming country
under notice, these localities being watered by two of the
largest canals that have been in operation for a number of
years. There are numerous other agricultural settlements
in this and other parts of the state, but the essential feature
of them all is a canal for irrigation as a first step. When
the colonists settle upon public lands, they each obtain a
homestead farm of 160 acres for nothing, and the farms in
irrigation districts are nearly all of this size. A joint-stock
company is formed at the outset to construct a canal, and
agriculture is evenly progressive from the date of the water
being laid on to the land. In addition to this system of
colonisation, a great deal of settlement has been promoted
by a powerful English company, viz., the “ Platte Land
Company Limited.” This English company, which is chiefly
Scotch, both in regard to capital and management, owns
over 100,000 acres of land, which it provides with water
and sells to settlers. The Union Railroad Company that


built the line from Ogden, near Salt Lake, to Omaha on the
Missouri, as well as other railroads, obtained extensive
grants of land from the United States Government, the
grants amounting to every alternate section for twenty
miles on each side of their various lines. A large area of
this land is in Colorado, and it is from the railroad company
that the Platte Land Company has purchased its large
estates. Without the construction of canals the lands
could not be sold to settlers, for there are adjoining public
lands which can be settled upon for nothing. The plan
pursued by the company, therefore, is to make canals and
sell farms with water rights, and thus make a profit upon
their speculation. That the company’s former speculations
have been successful is shown by the fact that they have
just now completed the construction of the largest canal in
the state, being eighty-two miles long, to water about
100,000 acres of the plains near the city of Denver.
The general system is to tap a stream up in the foot-hills
of the mountains, and conduct water in a ditch along the
steep sides of the canon until it is brought out on to a high
point of the open country. If the farming land were flat it
would not be necessary to go to this expense, but as there
are hills and hollows varying in elevation from 300 feet to
500 feet, the canal must be carried along at a high level.
Obtaining this elevation is the most expensive part of the
work, for dams have to be erected in the mountain torrents,
channels frequently cut in the precipitous walls of rock
along the stream, and fluming is sometimes needed to
cross branch watercourses. Once out from the foot-hills of
the mountains, the work of excavating the channels is not
more difficult than similar work would be on the plains of
Australia. The undulating character of the country not
only makes the canals more expensive than upon more
level country, but gives additional trouble to the farmer in
leading the water to his land and distributing it on the
surface —for this the farmer has to do in addition to paying
in one form or other for the water at the edge of the canal.
The summer days are warm in Colorado, but the nights are
cold, while in winter the temperature is sometimes four
degrees below zero. These are a few not unimportant points
in which the Colorado irrigating farmer has less natural
advantages than are available in the dry districts of
Australia.


CHAPTER XXL
CANALS AND “DITCHES.”
Fort Collins district, adjoining the Greeley colony, is
irrigated from the Cache la Poudre River by means of the
Lorimer and Weld Canal. A dam across the river, which
raises the water about 4ft. from the bottom, diverts a
portion of the stream into the canal, which winds away to
the north-east, leaving a tract of land about five miles in
width intervening between the river and the canal. This
intervening tract of land is the area supplied by the canal.
The canal is 45 miles in length, 30ft. wide at the bottom,
and deep enough to carry sft. of water, the grade being
to the mile. It is intended to supply 30,000 acres of
land, and at the time of my visit it was irrigating 24,000
acres, the last irrigation of grain crops before harvest being
carried on. This was in the second week of July, and the
wheat was out in ear, harvest in this State beginning about
the middle of August. At the offtake of the canal the
Cache la Poudre is a clear snow-fed stream, 150 ft. wide,
and an average of 3ft. deep at its lowest level, being 200 ft.
■wide and sft. or 6ft. deep at its highest in summer. The
fall at this point is about 25ft. in the mile. Although the
full drain of the irrigation season had been upon it for
some time, more than a foot of water was flowing over the
dam, while the canal was also kept full. In regard to this
stream it may he stated that the canals taken from it are
numerous, using about the whole of its supply in dry-
seasons, so that the limits of irrigation from it without
having recourse to storage reservoirs has been reached.
The construction of the canal is the same as in Utah, being
simply an excavation with the earth heaped up on the
lower side when carried along a sideling, and on both sides
when on level ground. The system of making a “surface
canal,” with the water running on the surface instead of in
a channel, I have not met with either here or at Utah. Small
aqueducts on farms, intended to carry the water over
depressions in distribution, are met with, but the method
of making a canal upon the plan of which we have heard
so much from certain quarters in Victoria is not acted upon.


The idea is no doubt quite original, and has never yet been
put into practice.
A number of important sub-canals, or “laterals ” as they
are called, have been constructed by the company, but as a
rule these are made by the farmers themselves. Farmers
near the canal make the laterals individually, but when a
group are some distance away they co-operate in the work;
but as far as the company are concerned they deliver the
water at their own canal, the farmers directing it afterwards
as they choose. In connection with this canal, or “ ditch ”
as canals are termed, no water is sold apart from water-
rights. Those who wish to irrigate have to purchase per-
petual water-rights, which become a permanent attachment
to the land, A water-right is an allowance for watering
eighty acres of land, and a man must purchase as many
rights as will cover the area he intends to irrigate.
Very few of the farms exceed 160 acres in extent, and
there are not many farmers who require more than one
water-right. Small, highly productive farms are the rule,
and this would no doubt become the case in any place
where a system of irrigation was adopted. A water-right
could formerly be obtained for £2OO, but now from £230 to
£240 has to be given. As this right covers eighty acres of
land, the cost was until recently £2 10s. per acre, and is
now from £2 17s. 6d. to £3 per acre. The right, in con-
sideration of this payment, attaches to the land for ever,
the only additional payment required being an annual sum
of £2 for every water-right, or equal to 6d. per acre towards
the maintenance of the canal.
Land is sold by the company within irrigating reach of
this canal at from £2 to £3 an acre, and as a water right
must also be obtained at from £2 10s. to £3 per acre, the
land to be cultivated costs in all from £4 10s. to £6 per
acre, according to quality, and then there is the annual
payment of 6d. per acre for working expenses and main-
tenance. Details differ upon different canals, but the
actual cost of water amounts to what it is under this
system. Nearly all the value the land possesses is given
to it by the water privileges, for there is plenty of land
that can be bought above the reach of the canals for 10s.
per acre, while land of the same quality below the canal,
with its water-right, cannot be bought for less than £lO and
£l2 per acre.


How much water can a rightholder use is the next
question to be considered. Practically as much as he
likes. His stream is only of a given volume, but he can
have it running as often and as long as he chooses. He
cannot use it upon more than the area which his right
covers, and a law of the state prevents him from letting it
run to waste, but he can use it in irrigating the land for
which it is purchased as often and as long as he pleases.
If he should spoil his crop with too much water that is his
own concern, and no one limits him in the matter ; but he
must be guided by certain regulations. When he wants to
irrigate he leaves a notice in his box on the canal, at the
off-take of his lateral, stating when he wants the water.
The officer who travels over that section of the canal every
day turns on the water in the quantity represented by the
right, or rights, which the man holds. The water keeps on
running until the irrigating farmer sends another note, to
the effect that he has finished for the present. The officer
now shuts the water off so that it is not wasted, and he
likewise sees that the farmer is not wasting or applying
water to more land than is covered by the right. Stealing
as well as wasting water is an offence punishable by law.
Without some system of measurement it would be
impossible to regulate the supply in the canals so as to
supply all the farmers promptly without taking much
more out of the stream than necessary. With hundreds
of farmers applying for water at once, and no two
days bringing an equal number of orders, no system
of guesswork could be depended upon. There are
different methods of measurement adopted in the State,
but the English company’s system is considered a good one.
It is being adopted by other companies, and will probably
become general owing to its fairness and practicability.
This system is to measure the water by means of a weir-
dam. The water is let out of the canal into a level sluice-
box about 20ft. in length, in which there is no pressure.
At the outlet of the sluice-box there is a stop-board
provided with a notch 6in. deep. The measured depth and
width of the water as it falls over the notch in this board
forms the basis for calculating the quantity passing over
per second of time. The quantity fixed upon as sufficient
for irrigation is one and forty-four hundredths (1 44-100)
cubic feet per second for a water right covering 80 acres.


This is the head of water decided upon, and which the
purchaser of a water right is entitled to.
A farmer suits himself as to when and how he shall
irrigate his different crops. In irrigating wheat the
flooding system is adopted, that is allowing the water to
flood over the whole surface of the land. A small canal,
about a foot wide, with the excavated earth hanked up on
each side, is carried along the higher side of the field, and
from this furrows are run across the land in different
directions, the distance of the furrows apart varying from
2 chains to 10 chains, according to circumstances. One
man, as a rule, can attend to the distribution of water over
about 25 acres of wheat crop in a day, so that a farmer who
has the assistance of two men could irrigate 75 or 80 acres
in one day. It is seldom, however, that there is any need
for hurrying over this work, and the farmer who has only
the help of one man takes the longer time, but keeps on
until his crop is watered. The rule is that a farmer with
a single water right does the whole of his work all the
year round, with his son or one man in the winter and
spring, and the assistance of an extra man during summer
and autumn, the irrigating and harvesting part of the year.
The grain crops are generally irrigated twice a year, and
occasionally three times. As a rule the early spring rains
are sufficient to bring the crops up, and carry them without
check through their early stages. In the exceptional case
of the early spring being dry water has to be applied at
once, and the two subsequent irrigations make three in the
season. But the first irrigation is most frequently given
after the crop covers the ground, which secures rapid growth
until the ears shoot out; while the second, about five or
six weeks before harvest, secures the continued progress of
the crop and the filling of the grain. Owing to the cold
winters which prevail, autumn sowing has been found
unprofitable, and the rule is to sow the wheat in the spring.
The same system is followed by the Mormon farmers at
Utah. Farming by irrigation in Australia would not have
the disadvantage of a cold winter, consequently the experi-
ence of irrigating farmers in Southern California will, no
doubt, prove of special interest to us on this account.
In regard to the quantity of water used it is important
to state that experience here goes to show that a large
quantity is not necessary. In the irrigating districts the


most successful farmers use the least water, and crops suffer
more from too much than too little water. Some farmers
use a quantity in the season which amounts to over two
feet in depth over the surface of their fields, but others use
less than 12in. Two irrigations of 6in. each, or three of
4in. or sin. each, may be regarded as calculated to give the
best results in Colorado, and from the open character of the
most of the soil I am inclined to believe that more water is
required here than would be necessary on the clayey loams
of the wheat-producing portions of Australia.
The wheat crops range from 25 to 35 and up to 40 and
50 bushels per acre. Three cuttings of lucerne, giving two
tons per acre at each cutting, are commonly obtained. A
fair crop of maize is 50 bushels per acre, and good yields of
oats and barley are obtained, while potatoes and other root
crops also grow well.
CHAPTER XXII.
IRRIGATION LAWS.
The largest scheme in the State is the Platte Land Com-
pany’s “ High Line Canal.” The Lorimer and Weld Canal,
at Fort Collins, is owned by the same company; but the
High Line Canal is a new undertaking, and the fact that
such an extensive scheme has been gone into constitutes the
best kind of proof of the profitableness of the original
venture. With its chief branch, the High Line Canal is
eighty-two miles in length, 40ft. wide, and designed to carry
a body of water 6ft. in depth. It taps the South River
Platte River, twenty miles above the city of Denver, and
extends across the dry plain upon which the capital
of the State is built. A dam is constructed across the
river, pretty high up in the mountains, and the water is
carried along the canon in channels, flumes, and tunnels
for many miles, until it is eventually brought out on the
plains at an elevation w r ell above the level of the land to be
irrigated. One of the tunnels is 600 ft. long, and one of the
aqueducts is 1000 ft. long, 36ft. wide, and 7ft. deep. The


aqueduct is built of timber, and the dam is strongly con-
structed of timber and stone. Excavation work costs from
6d. to lOd. per yard, according to the formation; the
plough and “ scraper,” or scoop being used in all cases.
Ihe scheme, although capable of further extension, is now
so far completed that farms are being irrigated at different
points along the course of the canal, and the expenditure
has reached to more than £500,000.
In managing the High Line Canal a different system is
adopted than in the case of the Fort Collins scheme. The
High Line Canal is to be retained by the Company, and an
annual cJiarge to be made for the use of the water. Farmers
using water from the canal are charged at the rate of l£dol. V
(or 6s. 3d.) per acre annually. The allowance of water is the
same as at Fort Collins.
A new scheme on the North Poudre River is being
carried out by Mr. Carter Collins, the manager of the
Lorimer and Weld Canal, who is a partner in the concern.
The North Poudre at the off-take of the canal is 150
feet wide, and from three feet deep in the winter to six feet
m the summer. It has a fall of 25 feet in the mile, and in
order to secure a sufficient elevation for the canal a dam
28 feet in height has had to be erected. In forming the
dam three wooden cribs, 15 feet square, and filled with
stones, were put into the stream, and these were buttressed
with loose stones. Cross timbers were supported by the
cribs and the rock sides of the river, and the whole dam
was faced with sheet-piling. The dam has already stood
some severe trials, and is now considered safe. Fringing
the canal along the canon of the river for six miles, through
tunnels and flumes, was an expensive piece of work, one
mile and a half costing £14,000, while the cost of 14 miles
was £24,000. The canal is, soon after leaving the dam, /
90 feet above the river, and when it emerges from the
mountains it is ,451)0 feet above the river bed. It is
common in Colorado to irrigate land 500 feet above the
level of a strQam, but this canal is capable of supplying
water to land 1000 feet higher than the valley of the North
Poudre.
The Colorado farmer does not yet manure his land, but
manure will ultimately be needed. Some people would
have us refrain from irrigating because manuring will
become necessary. If, however, we can through irrigation get


heavy crops long enough to exhaust the land it will be a
comparatively easy matter to adopt a system of manuring,
but with poor crops we cannot afford manure. It is the
heavy crops obtained by irrigation that make manure
necessary and not the irrigation itself, for the water, as a
rule, adds to the fertility of the soil. The comparatively
clear snow water of the Colorado rivers brings down more
or less sediment, which fertilises the soil ; but the muddy
waters of the Murray and its tributaries bring down more,
and would have a more fertilising effect. Drainage will also
become necessary in time. At Fort Collins and other places
where irrigation has been carried on for years, a considerable
extent of land on the lowest flats has become saturated with
water which has soaked from the more elevated fields.
These lands have had to be turned to pasture, being too wet
for cultivation. The next step will be to drain these lands,
and bring them again into cultivation. This fact shows that
less water is required for irrigation after the land gets once
well soaked. Where there is a gravelly subsoil the same
quantity is used year after year, but in other cases, both in
Colorado and Utah, it has been found that a less and less
quantity is required as time goes on. This would be
certainly the case on the plains along Australian rivers.
It would obviously be impossible to carry on such an
extensive system of irrigation as that of Colorado without
the enactment of special laws for its regulation. The vexed
question of riparian rights has to be dealt with before the
streams can be tapped, and before water can be conveyed
across private property special facilities must be given for
legally securing a right-of-way. Riparian laws which work
well in countries where irrigation is not practised fail to
meet the circumstances of dry countries where agriculture
must be accompanied by irrigation. The circumstances of
our British forefathers did not require irrigation to be
extensively practised, and as English common law has force
in the United States, it is not surprising that special enact-
ments are necessary in order to regulate matters under the
new conditions which exist in Colorado. In California the
want of legislation upon this question has been severely
felt for many years.
In a dry country, where agriculture is extensively carried
on, the supply of water in the streams is likely to be
severely drawn upon, and many of the rivers in Colorado


are already subjected to as much draining by canals as they
can bear, while there are small watercourses that cannot
give a full supply to the settlers along their banks. It will
be readily understood, therefore, that defining the rights of
the various landowners in regard to the water in the streams
is not only of great importance, but a matter requiring
special treatment. Judge Macmorris, of Colorado Springs,
an ex-judge, who is now practising his profession as a
barrister, and who has had much to do with cases in which
riparian rights are involved, was good enough to give me
much valuable information upon the subject, and the
Secretary of State kindly presented me with the session
laws of the Legislature relating to irrigation. From these
sources, as well as from other inquiries instituted in the
state, I was enabled to obtain a general idea of the system
of irrigation as regulated by law.
What right has an occupant to the water of a stream
upon which his land is situated ? According to my
informant named above, he has under English common law
the right to have the natural stream undiminished, and any
water permanently diverted from the stream is an infringe-
ment of his right. Persons higher up the stream can use
the water for driving mills or flooding meadows, but the
water must be returned to its natural channel, and it is
unlawful to take a portion of the water permanently away
in a ditch for irrigation. Before irrigation can be legally
carried out, therefore, riparian rights must be differently
defined, and this has been done in Colorado. Priority of
right is recognised, but a right does not cover the whole
stream. A man cannot claim the undiminished stream, but
only what portion of it he has been in the habit of using.
If he has used the river for stock and domestic purposes, he
is entitled to such use still, and no canal company can
legally turn off the whole stream above him. If he has
irrigated fifty, one hundred, or any other number of acres
of land, he has a prior right to sufficient water for irrigating
such quantity of land. Thus, instead of having a right by
priority of settlement to the whole of the stream, a man
can only claim to have as much water as he has been in the
habit of using. It is easy to see that difficulties would
arise in determining how much a man was entitled to under
this provision, but difficulties occur in the working of all
laws. It is not to be inferred that there is no work for


lawyers in Colorado, but there is a fundamental difference
created in the riparian rights of the people which renders
extensive irrigation possible.
Another fundamental change which is necessary in the
carrying out of irrigation is that in regard to the right of
“ eminent domain,” by which the carrying of canals and
water ditches over private property is facilitated. The
Victorian Water Supply Department recommended one of
the water trusts to interview all the owners of land through
which a proposed canal was to pass, with the view of induc-
ing the owners to accept reasonable compensation for the
land taken, otherwise the compensation would absorb most
of the funds provided for the works. It was recommended
by Mr. Murray, the engineer to the trust referred to, that
rights should be given to the trusts to obtain easements
over the land required, instead of ownership in fee-simple.
The above difficulty has been overcome in Colorado, and in
the way suggested by Mr. Murray. To take a canal
over a man’s field it is not necessary to acquire a strip
of his land. All that is wanted is the right to carry on
the work, and free access to the canal. This right is
given by law, and so effectively that it is seldom necessary
to go through any legal formality in the matter. Should
any landholder object to a canal company or a neighbour
constructing a canal or a water ditch through his land, a
simple and expeditious process is provided for “condemning”
the required strip of land, in the same way as land is
condemned when required for railway purposes. Such are
some of the leading principles upon which irrigation laws in
Colorado are founded. For want of such laws the progress
of irrigation in California is seriously impeded, and no doubt
some of the principles involved will have to be adopted in
Australia if irrigation is to be adopted upon an extended
scale.
CHAPTER XXIII.
THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY.
Pueblo, at which we arrive immediately after clearing the
Rocky Mountains, is an old half-Mexican, half-Indian town,
which has been electrified into bustling activity by the


restless spirit of American progress. The adobe huts of a
past age are seen standing side by side with the smoking
chimney-stacks of newly-erected iron and steel rolling mills
and ore-smelting furnaces. At this point the traveller can,
by taking a branch line of the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa
Fe Railway Company, make a straight cut to St. Louis,
branching thence in any desired direction; or he may, on
the same company’s wide-reaching system of railways,
explore New Mexico, Arizona, Texas, and Old Mexico
itself, but, as our route is by way of Chicago and Niagara
Falls, we keep our seats in the Denver and Rio Grande
cars, and travel for about two hours northward to Denver,
the capital of Colorado. We crossed the border-line of
Utah some time last night, and all the grand scenes which
feasted our eyes since early morning in the Rocky Mountains
must be credited to the state of Colorado. We have been
travelling over mountains and deserts for several days, and
looking back through all that we have seen, the distance
between us and the Pacific seems long. We have been
“ going east ” all the time, and, although we have covered
1600 miles, the extreme west has only been reached, for
Colorado is in the far west. It is here that the wave of
settlement flowing westward breaks against the Rocky
Mountains.
As the train speeds northward between Pueblo and
Denver you can rest your eyes, which have been kept so
long on the strain between Castle Gate and the Grand
Canon, and get the crick worked out of your neck, for you
have been holding your head too high all day. An open
plain nearly as level as that of Werribee or Canterbury is
being passed over, and the eye, without effort, can trace
the even expanse away to the horizon on the right, or,
turning to the left, rest upon the ranges and peaks of the
Rocky Mountains.
Denver is a busy city of some 50,000 inhabitants. It is
the outcome of mining enterprise, and like the two mining
cities of Victoria, Ballarat and Sandhurst, looks new, not-
withstanding the substantial character of its buildings.
With its brick buildings and tree-planted streets, Denver
looks much like Sandhurst, although the sandstone, granite,
and marble obtained from the Rocky Mountains give a
more wealthy aspect to its hotels and public buildings.
There were less than 5000 people here in 1870, while


Leadville and other populous mining centres of the state
had not been heard of at that date. Like all western
mining cities, Denver has its millionaires, and one of these,
ex-Governor Tabor, has put some of his millions into a
grand opera-house, a magnificent hotel, and in imposing
business blocks, these buildings alone adding much to the
architectural merit of Colorado’s capital. The water supply
was not good, being obtained from the Platte River, a
somewhat muddy stream, but at the time of my visit Tabor
had just bored an artesian well, which spouted up before
the Opera-house a grand fountain of the purest water.
Two other wells tapped water at a depth of 400 feet before
I left the state, and I have no doubt that by this time the
city is rejoicing in a fine supply of artesian water.
One-third of the state consists of the mountainous
region, and the remainder of open plains in one of the dry
belts of the continent. A tract of country, about 300
miles wide, upon which the annual rainfall varies from four
to twelve inches, extends from the Gulf of Mexico into
British America, and upon this dry belt are the small
farms and extensive cattle ranches of Colorado. The
ranches keep, after a fashion, at the rate of a head of stock
to 25 acres, and the farms are brought into existence by
means of irrigation. Cultivation is not attempted without
irrigation, but by means of its canals and ditches the state
has developed an important agricultural interest, which, in
the short space of fourteen years, has reached the position
of producing a surplus of wheat and supplying most of the
food of the people.
As I am making for Chicago, and have been booked by
the Great Burlington route, I take my place in the Pulman
cars of the Burlington and Missouri Company, which will
carry me through the north-east of Colorado, along the
south of Nebraska, and through lowa and Illinois. The
irrigated farms and the cattle ranches of Colorado, which
had been visited during my stay in the state are not seen
now, for it is time to go to bed when I leave Denver, and
when I take breakfast next morning I find I am past the
dry belt and among the maize fields of Nebraska. “ Corn”
the maize is called, and as we travel on all day it is
observed that this crop is a leading one upon all the farms
along the route. The farms are from 160 to 320 acres in
extent, and the appearance of everything indicates new


settlement. There are oats, wheat, and rye also upon most
of the farms, and a few head of swine and cattle, all
indications of a mixed system of farming. We cross the
wide, shallow, muddy Missouri before evening upon a
magnificent iron bridge, and travel onward through lowa
along the trunk line of the Chicago, Burlington, and
Quincey railway.
A palace dining-car is one of the most interesting objects
met with on this part of the tour. Along the Burlington
and Missouri line the meals had been highly satisfactory,
and, my appetite being healthy, I began, soon after cross-
ing the Missouri bridge, to inquire as to what station we
should stop at for supper. “You can have it right now if
you like ; the dining car’s hitched on,” was the consoling
reply of the conductor. The inward peace I felt as the
result of this announcement gave my mind a bias in favour
of the dining-car system. lam ready to champion the
cause of the dining-car against all opponents henceforth,
but I cannot claim to be altogether impartial. I became a
partisan from the moment I felt the delightful security
which followed the conductor’s announcement, and before I
saw the dining-car at all. The assurance that you could
order your meal when you chose enabled you to wait with
composure until the smart-looking mulatto with the Pulman
uniform walked through the apartments with the tidings
“ supper is now ready in the dining-car at the rear of the
train.” Then, with dignified leisure, as if you were not
hungry, you walk through the cars until the dining-room,
with its clean, well-appointed table, is reached. You read
the menu, which contains a sufficient variety of dishes, and the
negro waiter takes your order, while in a remarkably short time
you find yourself dining comfortably along with about thirty
fellow-passengers. You dine so well at any railway refresh-
ment-room that the travelling caterer has to be up to the
mark. The extra claim he has upon your affections is in
being able to supply you just when you feel inclined, and
doing away with the anxious half hour before meals.
Dining-cars do not pay. They have been abandoned upon
many lines, and are only retained by other companies as a
means of popularising their roads. Night comes on, and
we pass Burlington and cross the Mississippi under cover of
darkness. Next day we travel through the small farms of
Illinois, the cornfields which we met with in Nebraska


continuing all the way, and in the afternoon we reach the
great city of Chicago on the shores of Lake Michigan.
CHAPTER XXIV.
THE CHICAGO GRAIN TRADE.
Chicago is the greatest railway centre in the world. There
are 116,000 miles of railway in the United States, and
nearly all the lines connect, directly or indirectly, with the
second city of America. Its central position in relation to
the extensive and fertile States of the West, its frontage to
the great lake system of the country, as well as its railway
connections, place the city in the first rank as an entrepdt
for all kinds of produce. At the census of 1880, Chicago
contained 503,000 inhabitants, and the present population
probably reaches nearly 600,000. Its live-stock business is
extensive; its lumber trade is on a gigantic scale, and its
imports and exports of grain of different kinds swell into
astonishing figures. In addition to its numerous railways,
terminating in the heart of the city, and its frontage to
Lake Michigan, a navigable river and canal winds for over
thirty miles among its grain stores and lumber-yards,
greatly facilitating the business in heavy commodities
which is carried on. This great commercial centre is not
only the chief gathering and distributing point for the
United States, but it also carries on an important direct
trade with other parts of the world.
The “elevators” are the most striking features of the
city, for they are new to the traveller from the West, and
their great height gives them prominence. The name
“ elevator ” is given to a large grain store fitted up with
appliances for handling grain in bulk. The appliances
which carry the grain into the stores are also called
elevators, but the name is generally used to designate the
whole establishment. Hence “the quality of grain in the
elevators ” means the quantity held in the grain stores.
There are in the city over twenty of these elevators, each
capable of holding from 600,000 to 1,500,000 bushels of


grain, and the total storage capacity is estimated at about
28,000,000 bushels, They are very high brick buildings,
narrow, and with only a few small windows. The walls
have to be strongly constructed, and they are sometimes
buttressed on the outside, for there is great pressure from
within. In nearly all of the western towns, as well as
others as far east as New York, these high and somewhat
unsightly buildings are observable, indicating the universal
adoption of the system of shipping grain in bulk. On the
Pacific coast, as I have already stated, grain is put into
bags holding about two and a-half bushels each, but every-
where east of the Rocky Mountains the bulk system is
adopted ; the grain is shot loose into railway cars, or canal
boats, or river steamers, and in the same condition it is
transferred from one place to another, no bags being used
even in sending it across the Atlantic to England. Bags
are used in California because loose grain is not considered
a safe cargo for the long sea voyage from San Francisco ;
and I suppose the same objection will prevent us from
shipping in bulk from Australia.
Filling a store with grain by this system is a simple
matter, and unloading into trucks or boats is still more
simple. Large “shovels” or scoops swung on chains are
used for shifting the grain on to the foot of the elevating
machinery, and once there it is carried up in a constant
stream which pours into the scales. From the scales, after
being weighed, it runs down spouts into the bins. To load
trucks or boats is a simple process, for the grain runs by
gravitation from the weighing machine into which it is
elevated. A “leg” or long spout which hangs on the
outer wall of the store is lifted and placed into the truck
or boat, a slide is drawn, and the grain runs from the scales
direct to its destination. The spout or “ leg” is on. a
swivel, and can be placed at any angle. “Floaters” or
floating elevators, which we shall afterwards see at work in
New York Harbour, have two of these “legs,” and one is
placed in the laden canal boat, the other in the ocean-
going ship, the machinery is set in motion, and the grain
passes in a continuous stream from the one vessel to the
other. Some of the elevators have a capacity of 1,500,000
bushels, with machinery of corresponding power.
Wheat, maize, barley, and grain of all kinds are passed
through the elevators, and kept apart in the different bins.


Like a flour-mill, the elevator does not give a man back
the same wheat he puts in, but it gives the exact equiva-
lent. All grain is “ graded” before going to the store, and
the grading system is a necessity of handling grain in bulk.
A consignment of wheat —say of 5000 bushels— is placed
by the inspector,_ for instance, in the first grade. The
owner gets a receipt from the proprietors of the elevators
for 500() bushels of No. 1 wheat, and he can demand at any
time a similar quantity of the same kind of wheat. The
whole system of grading is conducted under State law, and
so are all matters connected with the grain trade. The
Governor of the State appoints the chief grading inspector,
and he in turn appoints his assistants. Either at the rail-
way depOts in Chicago or other important centres of trade,
the inspectors examine the grain in the railway trucks.
Wheat, for instance, is placed by the inspectors as red
winter or white winter No. 1,2, 3, or rejected. Spring
wheat is similarly classed, and maize and other grain are
divided into three or four grades. No. lis the best quality,
as decided by the opinion of the inspector, and all grain of
a certain grade brings the same price in the market.
The charge for taking in grain and storing it for ten days
is a cent and a quarter, or five-eighths of a penny. For
each additional ten days after the first charge is half a cent,
or a farthing per bushel, and this goes on until the winter
months are reached, during the five months of which, from
November 15 to April 15, the charge cannot exceed four
cents or 2d. per bushel. Thus if grain remained in the
elevator from one harvest to another the storage would not
be more than 7|d. per bushel. As showing what a cheap
s} r stem of handling grain this is it may be stated that on
the lake and canal boat route between Chicago and New
\ ork the transfers by means of elevators and floaters
are included in the freight charges, and the whole is less
than 4d. per bushel. By this route the grain is taken in
large vessels through the lakes to Buffalo, where it is trans-
ferred by means of elevators into the canal boats, and by
the Erie Canal the boats reach the Hudson Baver and thence
New York harbour. From Chicago to Buffalo the charge
is three and a-half cents, including transferring into the
canal boats, and from Buffalo to New York, including trans-
ferring on board the ocean vessel, the charge is four cents,
or seven and a-half cents for the whole journey including


transfers. As this is less than fourpence per bushel, it will
be seen what a saving the system is, and what an important
part it plays in the export grain trade.
The railway route is much used owing to the saving of
time, and the closing of the canal route during winter. By
the canal route the time occupied varies from sixteen and
a-half to eighteen and a-half days, and in the winter months
the water is frozen. By railway, which is much quicker,
the freights vary ; but owing to competition with different
lines and the canal route, they are remarkably cheap,
ranging from to Bd. per bushel for a distance of more
than 1000 miles. As showing the proportion of wheat sent
by the different routes, it may be stated that in 1882
55.672.000 bushels came to New York by rail, and
33.500.000 bushels by the canal during seven months’
navigation. A “floater” in New York harbour will trans-
fer grain from the canal boats to a ship for quarter of a
cent per bushel, or one-eighth of a penny, and at Buffalo
elevating and five days’ storage cost three-quarters of a cent,
these charges being included in the statement given
above. It will be seen that the highest freight paid by rail
between Chicago and New York is less than what has to be
paid in Victoria between Dimboola and Melbourne, while
the American farmer is relieved of the heavy transfer
charges between the railways and the ships. It has been
said that the Atlantic steamboats have practically brought
America alongside of England, to compete with English
farmers, and it is also true that American railways have
brought the far Western States close to the seaboard.
Practically, Illinois and lowa, 1100 miles from the Atlantic,
are nearer to port than the Wimmera. If Australian
farmers cannot get the advantages of shipping grain in bulk
and handling it by elevators, they should at least be able
to obtain reasonable railway freights.
The produce exchange of the Chicago Board of Trade is
like a dozen Australian mining exchanges rolled into one.
In an immense room 1200 men engage in the exciting busi-
ness of speculating in grain and all kinds of produce. All
is bustle, excitement and noise, as if a score of quartz reefs,
yielding 20oz. to the ton, had been discovered, but the men
who are shouting so loudly and waving their pencils and
pocketbooks so frantically are only buying or selling wheat,
corn, lard, or some other unexciting commodity. When


grain is put into an elevator a receipt is received which
when registered is negotiable paper. The receipts are
bought and sold in the same way as mining scrip, and may
change hands several times in the same day. The members
of the Exchange must deposit a substantial sum of money
before they can transact business, and the payments are
nearly all made in cash. It is surprising to find how little
credit is given in all branches of the Chicago produce busi-
ness. The keen competition that is always kept up by the
speculators tends, as a rule, to keep values up, so that the
farmer generally gets the full value of his produce, although
powerful operators sometimes are able to depress prices for
a long time. Future-delivery sales are a feature of the
Exchange operations ; and, altogether, the scene presented
gives one a good idea of the magnitude of the American
farming interest.
CHAPTER XXV.
THE CHICAGO CATTLE BUSINESS.
I have already referred to the many advantageous
circumstances which contribute to make Chicago the
greatest centre in America for gathering and distributing
farm produce of various kinds. It is owing to the same
circumstances that Chicago is the leading market for live
stock, carrying on an extensive business in cattle, hogs,
sheep, and dressed meat with different parts of the states,
as well as with foreign countries. There is a constant
stream of live stock from the central states and from the
far west pouring into the city by way of the numerous
railway lines, and after the wants of over half a million
people are supplied, there is.a large surplus in the shape of
live stock, frozen beef, pork and lard to be sent away to
distant markets. As many as 12,000 head of cattle have
been received in a single day, besides a large number of
other stock. The largest number of hogs received in a day
was 64,643, of sheep 6000, of calves, 1428, and of horses
1490. Last year 1,582,530 cattle, and 628,887 sheep
entered the sale-yards; in 1880 there were 7,059,355


hogs, and the value of live stock which passed through
the yards last year was estimated at forty million pounds
sterling. To handle so much live stock extensive and
complete arrangements are necessary, and the centre of
those arrangements is the “ Union Stockyard.”
The yards are subdivided by good wooden fences into
sections of various sizes to suit the different kinds of
stock, and there is generally a foot-wide board on the top
of the fence, so that one can walk around any of the yards.
A long manger for hay and maize and a long water-trough
are features of every yard, cattle, hog and sheep yards
having these conveniences made suitable to the requirements
of the stock. And this is a point worth noting. Starving
animals and famishing them with thirst are not practised
in America. Whether on railway journeys or in stock-
yards a supply of food and water is always provided.
Twice or three times on the journey from Colorado,
Montana, Kansas, or Texas, the cattle are taken out of the
cars, put into yards provided for the purpose, and supplied
with food and water for from twelve to twenty-four hours,
and twice on the journey from Chicago to the Atlantic
ports a similar rest for feeding is arranged for. Providing
such yarding accommodation and supplying food at a
published price are necessary parts of a railway company’s
business. lam not aware whether law regulates this
matter, but I am certain that competition among the
railway companies would do so of itself. Each railway
company is compelled to bid for trade by offering all the
inducements in its power to the public. The company that
had no accommodation for feeding and watering cattle simply
would get no cattle to starve and otherwise ill-treat. With
a Government holding a monopoly of railways the case is
different. The cattle have to be sent by the only railway,
no matter how inhuman the treatment or how much value
is lost. It is not that the Americans are more humane
than Australians. Their principal interest in a steer or a
hog is the dollars they can make out of him, and I am not
prepared to say how the Chicago people would act if they
thought dollars could be made out of a little starvation;
but happily they act upon the sound policy that good
treatment of animals is profitable.
The system of selling by weight is at the foundation of
the good treatment which the stock receives. When a lot


of cattle have been bought they are yarded on to one of
Fairbanks live stock scales, the weight is ascertained, and
the buyer pays, as a rule, cash to the agent, who in turn
pays cash to the owner, through a local bank. The large
scales, several of which are fitted up in the yards, weigh
about forty head of cattle at a time, the cattle being driven
on at one side, enclosed until weighed, and run off at the
other. Upon the weigh-bill the account is made out. This
exact system of doing business by weight must have many
advantages, and the Chicago stockmen were much surprised
to learn that in Australia transactions in live stock were
carried on by a system of guesswork.
When a cattle man sends stock to Chicago, he orders
what food he wants to be supplied by the railway company
at the appointed feeding places. The railway trucks run
into the Union stockyards, and the cattle are received, fed,
and sold by the agent to whom they are consigned. The
agent charges commission, and also for the food supplied
to the stock. The feeding in the yards does not cost more
than sd. per head, and as it puts 50lbs. extra on the scales
it is a profitable investment. Yardage fees are 25 cents.,
or per head on cattle, and 4d. on sheep. The
commission to salesmen is half a dollar, or 2s. id. per head
on cattle, and the railway freights 20d. per 1001 b. for about
1000 miles. It is estimated that freight for the distance
stated, and feeding along the road and in the yards, does
not cost more than 30 pence per 1001 b., or about 30s. per
head upon steers weighing 12001 b. In comparing these
charges with those in Australia, it is well to remember that
in return for feeding the owner receives increased weight in
the scales. It will be seen that in the cattle business, as
well as in that of grain, the railways play an important
part in bringing the western prairies comparatively near to
the Atlantic seaboard.
CHAPTER XXVI.
CHILLED MEAT AT CHICAGO.
The distribution of the cattle supply in the shape of dressed
meat and live animals is interesting and important to an
Australian visitor. I visited the first establishment at


hand in which cattle were being slaughtered upon an exten-
sive scale, and spent some hours in inspecting its different
departments. The capacity of the establishment was 1000
head of cattle a day, and on the day of my visit 1100 were
being put through. It was strange to find away out on the
shores of Lake Michigan, more than 1000 miles from New
York, large quantities of “the roast beef of Old England,”
being dressed to supply the tables of the dwellers in the
British Islands. But such was the fact. Mr. Gr, F. Swift,
with his staff of about 550 men, was butchering for the
people living across an ocean and half a continent. Steam-
ships had bridged the ocean, and railways had made the
centre of the continent a shipping port.
Like an immense woolshed was the plan of this slaughter-
ing establishment and its yards. The yards were at one side of
a long building, and they led up to a system of pens, each
having doors opening into the building. The pens reminded
me of those provided for the shorn sheep, out of which each
shearer’s tally is counted. They were provided for cattle,
however, and instead of shorn sheep jumping out of the
sliding doors, killed bullocks were being drawn in. Instead
of counting tallies, the man outside was walking along a
platform on the top of the fence pithing the bullocks with
a heavy steel spear. Men were driving the cattle up into
the pens, each pen holding one beast; and the cold-blooded
spearsman was moving along like Samson slaying his
thousand. Inside on the long floor there were two men at
work beside each of the sixty-eight pen doors. As soon as
the men had skinned and opened one bullock they pushed
up the well-balanced door and attached tackle to the next
pithed beast, hung him up, bled him, and proceeded to
skin him. As soon as skinned and opened the carcase
moved off on its own account across the apartment to two
other men who divided it down the middle, washed it, and
made it ready for the cooling-room. Immediately behind
these men was a thick, blank wall, and, when all was ready,
a door was opened and the two halves of the beast moved
out of sight into the cooling-room.
There was no carrying or lifting of the carcases, but they
moved about by gravitation. The hook upon which a
carcase, or half, or quarter of beef is hung is attached to
what may be called an overhead railway. Iron rods extend
overhead, and the hook is something like a rope-block,


the roller of the block running upon the iron rods.
A touch of the hand sends the hanging weight away in any
direction, and thus the carcases travel about as required in
all steps of the slaughtering process. Every carcase has a
certain routine to go through, from the skinning to the
refrigerating car on the opposite side of the building, and it
goes through the whole on wheels, thus saving labour and
keeping the meat in good condition. The meat is of good
quality, although nothing extra, being the best obtainable
in quantity in Chicago, and the carcases averaging about
lOOOlbs. or llOOlbs. Prices I have already dealt with.
The building is a wooden one, but the walls of the cooling
rooms are double, very thick, and the space between filled
with sawdust. The cooling of the storing chambers is
effected by means of ice. I have already referred to the
lake being frozen in winter. It is therefore only necessary
to cut out blocks of ice and store it up in ice-houses. From
the ice-houses the blocks are brought by rail to the
establishment, raised by elevators to the top story or loft,
and packed there in order to cool the chambers below. By
the arrangement of the ice in this loft it is possible to
produce a different degree of temperature in the various
chambers beneath. Thus the first cooling room is not so
cold as the second, so that the danger of stiffening the
outside of the beef before the animal heat leaves the inside
is avoided.
The meat is stiff or hard, but not frozen. In the second
cooling room, or final storing room, where it remains two
days before being sent away, the temperature is 36 degrees,
and in the railway cars it is 40 degrees. The cars are built
especially for the trade, and in this case are owned by the
transporter of the meat, who pays for their haulage to and
fro. They have double walls and roof constructed of wood,
and there is a layer of charcoal in the space between the
walls. At the ends of the cars, the space between the
walls is taken up by iron tanks, which are filled with ice
and salt. Punning up through the tanks from the bottom
of the car to the top there are iron pipes for air. The iron
pipes open into the car at the top, and air can enter the
pipes at the bottom outside. Thus a current of air is
produced in the car, and as it passes through the pipes
which are surrounded by ice, the air is cool. Twice between
Chicago and the port of Chicago, Boston or Montreal, the


tanks containing ice and salt have to be supplied in order
to be kept full. On the steamships which convey the meat
across the Atlantic, the chambers are also kept cool by
means of ice. The cars are of various sizes, carrying from
28 to 35 carcases each.
Before leaving the establishment the half carcases are
divided into quarters and sewn up in calico coverings. Each
quarter is then hung on a separate hook from the roof of
the car. No part of the beast is wasted, and Mr. Swift’s
establishment contains appliances for utilising everything.
The bones, the hair, the blood, the tallow, the oil, and the
offal are all dealt with, and sent to market in various
shapes. I need not dwell upon the tons of dried blood,
the barrels of neatsfoot oil, the tallow, and the artificial
manures turned out from the establishment, but there is no
doubt that the system of turning these things to account is
an important element in the profitableness of the business.
A large proportion of the live cattle sent across the Atlantic
in steamers and sailing vessels is obtained in Chicago.
The cattle sent to market are nearly all fattened on maize,
for out of the one and a half million cattle yarded very little
more than a quarter of a million are fattened upon the
natural grass. It will be observed, in regard to the shipping
of live cattle, that steers which have been fattened on
“ corn ” and hay, fed on the same food during transit to
Chicago, and also on the way to Montreal, Boston, New
York, or Baltimore, are not likely to lose much weight on
ship-board, where, of course, they are also fed. The send-
ing of dressed carcases from Chicago is extensive and
progressive, but it has in some degree to suffer in compe-
tition with the live-cattle business. Railway companies
having first made extensive arrangements for carrying live
cattle, can undertake that trade cheaper than the newer
business of dealing with dressed carcases, while the com-
panies also favour live stock, owing to its giving them more
to do. In live cattle they carry at per pound the whole
weight, including offal, while in dressed meat the railway
company only carries the valuable portions of the animals.
Notwithstanding the disinclination of the railway people
to encouraging a business which tends to diminish their
trade, the dressed-meat business is progressing, and now
employs four extensive establishments such as that which I
have described.


CHAPTER XXXII.
FIXING UP THE HOGS.
“ The hog business” is one which the Chicago people
“guess” is considerable. Large fortunes are made in
different branches of the hog trade, and you hear of men
who “got bu’sted in trying to make a corner on lard.” I
have already referred to the way in which the hogs are
fattened along with the cattle, and how the pig utilises the
corn which is imperfectly digested by the cattle. The
pigs come to market from a distance ranging up to
more than 1000 miles by rail, and, like cattle, they are
taken off and fed at feeding stations along the line. They
are, of course, sold by weight, and those which are not
sent away alive to other cities are put through immense
packing establishments and turned out in the form of
“ barrelled mess pork,” “ green hams loose,” “ green
shoulders loose,” “sweet pickled hams,” “green hams
loose,” “ long-cut hams boxed,” “ dry-salted shoulders
loose,” “short-ribbed middles,” “short dear-middles, “long
clear middles,” “Cumberland middles,” “steam-rendered
lard,” “ common grease,” and “ prime grease.” The trade
of last year, although not the largest, was upon an exten-
sive scale. There were received 5,817,000 live pigs and
36,778 dressed carcases. Of this number 1,747,900 were
sent away alive and 40,000 dressed, leaving over 4,000,000
which were packed in the city. The average weight of
hogs received during the year was 2321 b. each,
I visited one of the packing establishments where 700
pigs a day were being put through. This was one of the
places where the Chicago people are delighted to tell you
the pigs go in hogs at one end and come out pork at the
other. Like the cattle in Mr. Swift’s establishment, the
hogs here go through a well-arranged routine, and a strik-
ing feature is the manner in which all parts of the animal
are made use of. Nothing is wasted, but everything is put
into marketable form. “ Yes, sir,” the manager remarks,
“ I guess we utilise everything about a hog but the squeal,”
and it is no doubt a matter for regret with the Americans
that so much force as that expended in squealing cannot


be employed in driving some kind of machinery. The hair,
the blood, the offal, and the bones, all pass through some
process and are turned into dollars. There are steam
boilers for lard, saws for cutting up bones into pieces for
knife handles, and appliances for turning all other parts of
the hog to account, except the “ squeal,” of course. The
different parts are not sent away to separate factories, but
there is a branch for every purpose connected with the
one establishment. The large packer who buys hogs
undertakes to make all the profit possible out of them
without the intervention of another party. As this is a
feature of both the cattle and hog establishments, it no
doubt is an essential element of success —the same concen-
tration of operations is observed in the fruit-canning
factories of California.
The hogs are run into a catching pen at one end of a
large slaughtering-room. In this pen two men are engaged
in catching pigs and putting a noose around their legs.
The noose is put round the hind leg, and as quick as
thought the pig is hoisted into mid-air. He hangs and
squeals as he travels on the railway hook a few yards to a
man who stands with a long knife doing the “ sticking.”
The sticker performs his operation quickly on the pigs as
they file past, keeping back the train with his left arm if
the hogs come too quickly. As quickly as the knife is
withdrawn the pigs sail away, pouring forth blood instead
of “ squeal,” and they quickly arrive at a large tank of
warm water, like our sheep dip. Pigs keep trooping in at
one end of the tank, and men are employed in drawing
them out at the other, raising them on to a bench. Chain-
belting, worked by machinery, is moving along the surface
of the plank, and as soon as the hog is landed he is drawn
along at a quick pace and taken through an exceedingly
ugly-looking machine. The machine consists of revolving
flexible scrapers turning with great velocity, and as the pig
shoots through most of his hair is taken off. He goes in
black and comes out white, and two men with handscrapers
soon complete the cleaning of the carcase. It is hooked up
again, travels to the men who open it, and then it sails
away on a journey of about thirty yards along a passage to
the cooling-rooms. Here is an extensive area of hanging
room, and the carcases remain long enough to cool and
stiffen before the next step in the process is taken. The


carcases are afterwards cut up and put into the forms
already mentioned.
When it is considered how little attention Australian
farmers pay to the pig business, the magnitude of this
branch of industry in America is astonishing. In addition
to the packing done in Chicago, there are other cities
engaged in the business, which brings the total for the
State of Illinois up to two-and-a-half millions annually,
while last year the State of Missouri packed 804,000 hogs,
lowa 627,000, Ohio 618,000, while Wisconsin, Indiana, and
Kentucky packed about 800,000—giving a vast total for
the valley of the Mississippi alone. Prices in Chicago for
packers and shippers of heavy hogs range from 255. 6d. to
355. lOd. per 1001 b. live weight, the average being about
275. For light bacon hogs the range of prices is from
225. 6d. to32s. 6d. These prices are not high, and point to the
conclusion that much more might be done with hogs in the
colonies. Pigs are raised in greatest number where maize
is grown, but even in California, without the assistance of
this crop, large profits are made out of the hog business ;
and Australians might do likewise.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
FROM CHICAGO TO NIAGARA FALLS.
Every stage travelled eastward brings us into a thicker
network of railways. I lost count of the lines back at
Denver, and it is quite impossible now to tell how many
routes may be taken from Chicago. Even when you decide
to go by way of Niagara Falls, you have to choose between
several routes, but the overland passenger is generally
saved all trouble in the matter by having been duly
fixed up before leaving San Francisco. I take my
place at night in a Pulman sleeper on the Michigan central
line, and in the morning find myself breakfasting at Jackson,
in the state of Michigan. The train had continued on in
the direction of the falls, leaving our sleeper, which was
destined for Lansing, quietly waiting on a siding for the


northern train, which was to take us on to the state capital
after breakfast. This arrangement suited the convenience
of the Lansing passengers, and perhaps I was the only
occupant of the car who was astonished to find the con-
venience of passengers considered. Two hours’ travelling
brings us to Lansing, the state capital of Michigan, and at
night I am again in a Pulman, sleeping myself into the
Dominion of Canada. What a saving of time this night
travelling is, and what a boon it must be to business men!
But to one travelling through the country for the first time,
it is a severe lesson in self-denial this continual rushing
away from things beautiful and interesting. Each day is
spent at some city or in some other interesting locality, but
each night swallows up 250 miles of the earth’s circum-
ference, making a blank that must always be regretted.
Lansing is a bright spot between two blanks in the chart
of my journey, and the portion of Michigan which I shot
through in daylight will literally keep “ green ” in my
memory, for, although it is midsummer, everything bears
an emerald hue. The green fields are surrounded by darker
green woods, while the numerous streams and springy
marshes also tell of a climate quite new to an Australian’s
experience. One wonders how such comfortable-looking
homesteads can be maintained upon such small farms, and
it is equally puzzling to understand how the farmers can so
successfully cope with the difficulties of the cold, frozen
winters. The clearing of the land, too, for cultivation
must have been a laborious task, and yet, with all these
drawbacks, the farmers are a prosperous, independent class,
producing 35,000,000 bushels of wheat, 32,000,000 bushels
of maize, 18,000,000 bushels of oats, besides other cereals
and large quantities of butter and cheese.
• The people’s hearts are warm up in this cold climate. I
had got well accustomed to American hospitality before
reaching Lansing, but the kindness of the people of this
city was still striking. We are pretty good at looking after
visitors in the colonies, but I do not think we can come up
to the Michigan folks. Their attention to visitors is the
most remarkable I ever met with. Here I felt some desire
to enjoy a new pleasure, viz., that of a northern winter.
A citizen who drove me around the pretty suburbs of the
city apologised that owing to it being summer he could not
give me a sleighing trip on the broad river. “ The river’s


the best driving track we’ve got,” he remarked, and I could
feel all the delight of the sleighing without the cold.
Skating, too, would be something to give variety to life,
and then how jolly it would be to see these genial folks in
their homes, and having their “ good times ” at their social
gatherings, husking bees, apple bees, and such like. But
instead of a northern winter I must move on to our Aus-
tralian summer, my third summer in succession, having
missed a winter by my travels. An inspection of the Agri-
cultural College, where I see an Australian wattle-tree and
a New Zea'and fern in a hot-house, a drive round the city
and a short visit to the Capitol, gives one a highly favour-
able opinion of Lansing, and on. leaving the friends that
were strangers so short a time before I'think that hospitality
must be one of the cardinal virtues. I invited the Michigan
people and the inhabitants of several other States to give
Australia a friendly visit. I hope they will come, and that
they will get a kindly reception in all the colonies.
Detroit, the commercial capital of Michigan, a city of
170,000 inhabitants, is passed in the night, and none of its
beauties are seen. At Lansing the obliging agent of the
Detroit, Lansing, and Northern Railway handed me a well-
printed and beautifully-illustrated guide-book, which gave
me an idea of what I was missing by leaving Michigan so
hurriedly. What a list of pleasure resorts, streams and
lakes for fishing, pleasant nooks for camp meetings, and
delightful resorts for picnics ! Michigan is situated between
Lake Michigan and Lake Huron, being surrounded on three
sides by those inland seas, and the railways are busy all
summer with excursions to the various watering-places on
the lakes’ shores. The comfort of the lines tempts people
to travel, and illustrated books such as I have mentioned
are published by the railway companies to attract excur-
sionists to different resorts. I thought of all this last
Good Friday morning since my return, when I fought
with men and women for more than half an hour in order
to obtain a ticket at the Prince’s-bridge station. Apart
from the stupidity of this window system from a business
point of view, is it not demoralising to compel the sexes
to enter into these brutal struggles ? And then there is
the splendid economy which charges twopence for a time-
table in contrast with the books and pictures given away
by American railway companies. Australian railway


managers do not keep a poet to describe the attractions of
Lome, Mount Victoria, or the Gipps Land Lakes, but some-
thing like it is done in America, for Petoskey, one of the
Michigan resorts, is the theme of seven stanzas in my
guide-book, of which the following are a sample :
“ The August heat was rising fast
As from his home a pilgrim passed
Who waved at parting twice or thrice
A kerchief wrought in strange device :
f Petoskey.’
“Beware the forest’s tangled snares,
Beware the wild cats, wolves, and hears !
As through the dark the headlight glowed,
A voice replied far down the road:
f Petoskey.’ ”
CHAPTER XXIV.
AN AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE.
There is an agricultural college in nearly all the farming
states of America, and the liberal support which these
institutions receive from the State and Federal Govern-
ments is a striking feature in a country where so much is
left to private enterprise and so little is attempted by
governing bodies. The college is generally endowed with a
grant of land from the United States Government, and as
the income from the endowment is seldom sufficient to
meet the requirements of the institution, liberal appropria-
tions are made by the State Legislature. Instruction is
free to the pupils, the college is generally popular and well
attended, and the Legislature passes the necessary appropria-
tions freely. I refer to agricultural colleges properly so
called, for there are others which are agricultural only in
name. When an agricultural branch is connected with a
general college the result is not satisfactory. The agricul-
tural students feel themselves as occupying an inferior rank
to those who are studying for the learned professions, and
naturally lose pride in their studies. Farmers find that


their sons, instead of being made enthusiastic agriculturists,
become “ dudes and as this is an undesirable result, the
agricultural branch sinks into insignificance, and the
agricultural endowment is stretched to the extent of
subsidising the training of doctors, parsons, and lawyers.
It is the appropriations to such institutions that provoke
discussion, and it is such agricultural colleges that are
failures. The purely agricultural colleges are successful,
and popular with the farmers.
The Michigan State Agricultural College occupies a
leading position among the three or four first-class purely
agricultural institutions in the United States, and, as I
heard, it is highly prized among the farmers of the western
states, as well as by the conductors of newer colleges met
with in the course of my journey, I resolved to pay it a
visit. The college is situated on the banks of the Red
Cedar River, about three miles from Lansing, upon a farm
of 676 acres. Originally the farm was covered with a dense
forest. The fields have been cleared, but the buildings are
embowered among the oaks, maples, and other beautiful
trees, with green lawns and winding roadways, making the
undulating site one of the most charming. Instead of one
large building there are several neat brick structures,
detached from each other, and surrounded by well-kept
grounds, the whole group having an exceedingly attractive
appearance. In these buildings are the rooms of the
students, the apartments of the professors, and the various
lecture-halls and laboratories, the botanical laboratory with
lecture-hall, professor’s study, museum of vegetable pro-
ducts, &c. ; the chemical laboratory is completely fitted up
with necessary appliances ; the zoological laboratory has its
lecture-room, apartment for anatomical study, library, &c.;
there is a general museum, a museum of mechanical inven-
tions, a small astronomical observatory, and a library of
6000 volumes and over 100 periodicals.
Of the farm ten acres are devoted to experiments, 180
acres to the cultivation of field crops, and there are 110 acres
of woodland and pasture. Barns, stables, stock-sheds, and
piggeries are provided, and the stock kept are shorthorn,
Ayrshire, Devon, Hereford, Jersey, Holstein, and Galloway
cattle; merino, Cotswold, and Southdown sheep; Essex,
Berkshire, Poland-China, Suffolk swine. There is an apiary
with Italian and Syrian bees kept in different kinds of


hives, and provided with the various kinds of shrubs for
food. The green-house, flower-garden, botanic-garden,
orchard, sample grounds for timber trees, hedges, &c., and
the arboretum, of native and foreign trees are all interest-
ing and instructive departments of the institution. As in
addition to engaging in the various departments of farm
work the course of study requires the students to observe
and experiment, under the direction of the teachers, all
these branches of the establishment are made use of,
imparting a sound education, and giving a practical
training to the graduates of the college.
Labour on the farm is one of the most important branches
of the college training. The course occupies four years,
and work has to be engaged in throughout each term to the
finish. It is calculated that withdrawing a lad from
association with agricultural industry, and from participa-
tion in manual labour at a time when habits are most
easily formed unfits him and disinclines him for a farmer’s
life, and hence the college course is made to resemble, as
far as possible, education on the farm. Three hours every
day, or from one o’clock to four, are devoted to farm-work,
the remainder of the time being taken up with study and
leisure. The students rise at six o’clock, have breakfast at
half-past six, attend prayers at a quarter to seven, hear
lectures, conduct experiments in the laboratories, or attend
to other forms of instruction from eight to twelve. From
twelve to one is the dinner hour, from one to four farm
work is engaged in, from four to six the library is open,
and studies are resumed after seven o’clock in the evening.
The system of teaching, as far as I had an opportunity of
observing it, seemed to be an excellent one, being designed
to encourage the student to think and inquire ; and the
laboratories, museums, and the field of nature being made
use of no less than books. Degrees of bachelor and master
of science are granted to the students who sustain the
required examinations; and in addition to the large
number of graduates who become practical farmers, many
of the teachers of younger institutions of a kindred nature
have received their training at the Michigan Agricultural
College. Fully 50 per cent, of the students trained in this
institution are said to be engaged in pursuits directly and
indirectly connected with agriculture, and this measure of
success is mainly attributed to its making agriculture the


main feature of its curriculum, and insisting upon the
labour clause of its regulations.
In 1850 provision was made in the state constitution for
the formation of an agricultural college, and the existing
establishment was opened in 1857. An Act of Congress
passed in 1862 gave to each state an endowment amounting
to 30,000 acres of land for each of its senators and
representatives in Congress, according to the census of
1860, for “the support and maintenance of at least one
college where the leading object shall be, without excluding
other scientific and classical studies, and including military-
tactics, to teach such branches of learning as are related to
agriculture and the mechanic arts.” Under this provision
the Michigan College received 255,673 acres of land. The
land has been placed in the market, and 104,612 acres
sold, the remainder being still for sale. From 3s. 6d. to
20s. per acre was obtained for the land, and the sum
invested at 7 per cent, constitutes the permanent income
of the institution. In addition to this income the State
Legislature has made appropriations from time to time for
buildings and other purposes amounting to about £112,000.
Over £IO,OOO was granted in 1881, and more than £3OOO
in 1882. The liberal grants made by the State Legislature
may be taken as the best test of the effectiveness and
popularity of the college.
The college is under the management of the State Board
of Agriculture and a biennial report is published by that
body, giving a large amount of information consisting of
the results of agricultural experiments conducted on the
farm, papers by professors, and such like. The leading
staff and salaries are : —President, £6OO per annum ; secre-
tary, £3OO ; six professors, £360 each ; one professor at
£240 ; assistant in chemistry, £l6O ; one instructor, £l2O
superintendent of horticultural department, £240; gardener,
£150; farm foreman, £120; steward, £l2O. The build-
ings have cost nearly £26,000. It may be pointed out that
the publication of the biennial report and the delivery of
lectures by the professors to “ granges” and farmers’ clubs
is an important part of the work done by the college, and
that which is looked upon as a more immediate return to
the public for the money expended by the State. The
experiments conducted upon the farm are not only made
instructive to the students, but the results, with the


deductions of the professors when published, become impor-
tant information for the public.
Candidates over fifteen years of age, upon passing _ an
examination in grammar, geography, arithmetic, reading,
and penmanship, are admitted to the college, the average
age of students admitted being nineteen years, and those
who remain for four years and pass the different examina-
tions are granted degrees. There is no charge for instruc-
tion, but board, books, and other requisites have to be paid
for, in addition to an entrance fee of 20s. The annual cost
to the student, exclusive of clothes and travelling expenses,
does not amount to more than from £2O to £35, and this
sum is considerably reduced by the payment received for
farm work. Although the three hours’ work is compulsory,
the student receives a small payment, reckoned at so much
per hour, which materially reduces his annual expenses.
There is also a three months’ vacation in winter, which can
be employed by students in teaching a school. There are
generally from 170 to 180 students in attendance, and when
it is considered upon what easy terms an education can be
obtained the popularity of the institution is not to be
wondered at.
The scope of the college work may be inferred from the
branches already referred to, and it will be understood that
the various subjects are only dealt with as far as is neces-
sary to impart a practical education. Under the head of
Practical Agriculture are embraced general principles of
drainage, laying out and construction of drains, drainage
and sewage of buildings, breeds of domestic animals —their
characters and adaptation to particular purposes, history of
agriculture, principles of stock-breeding, _ farm economy,
mixed husbandry, rotation of crops, feeding of animals,
management and application of manures, planning and con-
struction of farm buildings, care of farm premises, farm
implements, cultivation of farm crops, selling of farm
products, farm law, and agricultural literature. Botany
receives a large share of attention, and forestry,
landscape gardening, and field surveying are impor-
tant branches. Veterinary science is also dealt with,
while agricultural chemistry, zoology, geology, mathe-
matics, grammar, history, political economy, mental
philosophy and logic are also included in the curriculum.
Students are allowed to make a choice of subjects, so that


each is able to obtain a special training for the business he
intends to follow. There is no avoiding of the labour
clause, however, for this is regarded as of great importance.
Professor Abbott, who showed me over the college, is
strongly in favour of keeping the students well acquainted
with manual labour. In Australia the undue preference
for “genteel employment ” has already been observed, and
it has been asserted that education too often unfits the
possessor of it for work. Farmers, especially, in educating
their sons are in danger of creating in them a distaste for
their own business. Institutions like the Michigan State
Agricultural College, unattached to a classical university,
and in which a practical acquaintance with farming industry
was maintained throughout the educational course, would,
no doubt, confer a great benefit upon the colonies. Some
years ago I visited a college of the kind in Christchurch,
New Zealand, but Australia has done scarcely anything to
establish such an institution.
CHAPTER XXX.
NIAGARA FALLS.
I not only missed Detroit in the night, but about 150 miles
of Canadian scenery, for we had been skirting the northern
shore of Lake Erie for many hours before the black boy
began to get us up and ready for taking the branch line
fronp near Buffalo to Niagara. In another hour the
terminus near the falls is reached, and after taking break-
fast at the Cliff House, I begin the delightful work of
visiting the different points from which the best views of
the world’s great waterfall are obtained. A man had come
along the train some miles back, and had advised me to
take a carriage from him for the day, and as the charge
was reasonable for the carriage and the driver, who acted as
guide, I ventured to make the arrangement, and I had no
cause to regret this step. I had the usual trouble with
photographers and vendors of curios, but I absolve the
hackman from all blame. It has been frequently said that


the falls are so fenced off by mercenaries, who make a
living by showing them, that no one can get near without
paying dearly. Now, this is not the case. You will
probably spend a lot of money at Niagara, hut it is not
because you are compelled to. The great falls, in all their
natural grandeur, can be seen for nothing. It is only when
you employ guides to take you under the falls, or railways
to take you down to some part of the river, or elevators to
take you up to some point of vantage, that the dollars
begin to get loose. There are traders of all kinds that you
will buy from, but that is your own fault. They persuade
you that you want things you have no need for, but their
skill well deserves its reward.
I should have put the reader at ease before this by
explaining that I am not going to attempt a description of
the falls. It is not because so much has been written upon
the subject that I refrain, but because the best descriptions,
and there are many splendid word paintings of Niagara, give
but a poor idea of tiie theme; the physical geography of
the place can be conveyed to the mind by description, but
the falls themselves must be seen to be appreciated. All
that I had read upon the subject had given me but a faint
outline of a great, cold, lifeless picture, quite unlike the
living beauty of the grand reality. The descriptions I had
been familiar with would not have made me travel far out
of my way to see the falls; the reality I would not have
missed for anything I had seen before. It is like the ocean,
it is like the firmament, it is like all that is grand in nature.
It can be seen and Jelt, but not described. Let all who
have not seen it look forward to their visit with all the
expectation they can command, for they will not be dis-
appointed, and all who have gazed upon it will cherish the
memory as “ a joy for ever.”
My first expedition is to Clark Hill Island, and one or
two other delightful islands above the rapids. The islands,
with their groups of pine, cedar, and maple trees, are
pretty, but “ the rapids ” attract the most attention, being
as impressive a sight as any part of the cataract. The water
of the river here, over two miles in width, falls 87ft. in two
and a quarter miles, thus forming “ the rapids,” before
taking its final leap over the falls. This expanse of foam-
ing breakers, so like the sea on a rocky coast, is grand and
beautiful, and helps the mind to grasp the magnitude of


the falls themselves. Coming back to the falls, I resign
myself into the hands of a man who dresses me like an
Esquimaux in a suit of oilskin, takes me down a circular
flight of steps to the level of the river below the falls, and
along a slippery path under the great volume of falling
water. You cannot hear the guide speak for the noise of
the water dashing into the chasm below, and you cannot
get breath to speak owing to the wind and spray that rush
upward, forcing you against the wall of jutting rock over
which the water is falling. I look up and see the sun
shining through the thin edge of the water, and I have no
desire to go onward into the darkness. The circular stairs
in the wooden tower bring me again to my hack, and after
divesting myself of the oilskin suit, I proceed to the next
part of the programme. I had noticed that the suits were
ticketed up at a dollar, “ including the guide,” and when I
was emerging from the oilskins, the proprietor of the
establishment explained that the dollar included the guide’s
fee, but “most tourists gave him something additional.”
As the “something additional” is generally as much as the
original charge, I have no doubt the guide has to share it
with his employer.
The next stopping-place is the Whirlpool Rapids, two
miles below the falls. Here you go down the bank on a
cable tramway, one car coming up as the other goes down.
The whole of the water which pours over the falls has to
get away in a chasm about 240 feet wide, and at this point
we are at the edge of the rushing torrent which scathes and
foams as it forces its way along at the rate of 27 miles an
hour. Captain Webb had made his foolish adventure before
my visit, and parties were searching for his body. He had
got safely through these rapids and come to grief in “ The
Whirlpool,” a few miles further down. Having finished the
Canadian side, I next crossed the river on the suspension
bridge and attended to the American falls. Going down a
cable tramway like the one on the other side, I was beset
with offers of oilskin suits and guides to take me under the
American falls. A view far enough away to keep from
getting wet was enough, and returning to the tramway I
reached the surface again and finished my day’s exploring
by viewing the falls from Prospect Point. At this point a
wall has been built along the face of the gorge to the edge
of the falling water, and you can look over the wall and


down upon the great volume of water pouring into
the boiling flood 164 feet below. The American fall is a
quarter of a mile wide, and the Canadian or Horseshoe Fall,
separated from the other by Goat Island, is 2376 feet wide,
the water falling 158 feet. The height of the falls is
dwarfed by their width and the volume of water that pours
majestically over them. Greatness and eternity are the
ideas impressed upon the mind by this wonderful production
of nature. It is an easy matter for Tennyson’s brook to
“go on for everbut to think that the great Niagara will
be calmly pouring forth its awful volume of blue water
throughout the ages, carries the imagination into the region
of wonders.
Many travellers have expressed disgust at the human
surroundings of the world’s great waterfall, but I am not of
that number. I spent three times as much money as I
intended, but a good deal of it was for services rendered,
and the rest was for experience. I don’t think you could
get so much experience elsewhere at the same price. One
colonial traveller complained that he could not “blow his nose
under a dollar,” at Niagara, but he failed to understand the
inward meaning of all we passed through. You can see
the falls for nothing, but the scores of clever people who
make money amid the roar of the cataract know you better
than you know yourself, and for this knowledge I consider
they are legitimately entitled to receive remuneration.
There is no charge for going into the various side shows
which you don’t want to see, but you go in nevertheless,
and pay before you come out.
The young girls who sell nick-nacks, “ all the work of
the Indians,” in such quantities as to keep large factories
busy in Boston, have apparently graduated at church
bazaars, and the result is what might be expected. My
companion was a hard case, and he resisted a surprising
number of skilful attacks, but the pleasant young lady
whose zeal at bazaars had been rewarded by promotion to
Niagara, joyfully, went on sounding all the depths and
shallows of his nature. His last struggle over an Indian
smoking-cap I thought would be triumphant, for he some-
what ill-naturedly said, “ The fact is I am Scotch—awfully
Scotch, my wife’s still more Scotch, and I can’t afford it.”
“The Scotch are our best customers, sir,” she replied, “and
let me show this beautiful table-rock necklace. The only


one left • just the same as the one the Princess Louise
bought from me. The Princess bought it because there was
nothing just like it to be got anywhere. Look, it’s truly
pretty, and Pm sure your wife would like to have one as
well as the Princess. It’s only ten dollars.” He bought
that necklace, and, as it would be impossible to complete
the set afterwards, he took the bracelets too. As I had
long before surrendered, and feared the ridicule of my
Scotch _ companion, I enjoyed the sale of the Princess
Louise jewellery perhaps as much as the clever little church
bazaar graduate. I had laughed with Mark Twain at the
supreme impertinence of the man who could get photo-
graphed with Niagara as a background, and I felt like
throwing the fellow into the rapids who proposed to give
me a picture in “this style for two dollars.” I carried
away one of these abominable pictures, however, with the
grand waterfall simply as a setting to my noble self. Ido
not mention this to bring ridicule upon myself, but as a
jest tribute to the talent possessed by the traders of
Niagara, and as supporting the opinion that they give you
value for your money. Josh Billings thanks the Lord for
fools, because without them honest men would not be able
to get a living. The Niagara people would say amen to
this, and they have every reason to be thankful that most
men are foolish—at least, to the extent of a few dollars.
If I have put matters right in regard to the traders of
Niagara, there is nothing more to do in establishing the
opinion that the human surroundings of the falls are
unobjectionable. I saw no advertisements of St. Jacob’s
Oil, Holloway’s pills, or liver pads on Goat Island or on the
rocks about the falls. The most striking works of man in
the vicinity are the bridges, and these are not contemptible
even in view of such a wonderful production of nature.
Some of the trestle bridges in the canons of the liocky
Mountains or the Sierra Nevada look mean in comparison
with their natural surroundings, but not so the magnificent
suspension bridges over the Niagara river. Even when
your eye is filled with the magnificence of the great cataract,
you can admire the iron roadway hung in mid-air, which
carries the railway train across the gaping chasm of the
river. Above the falls the river is about two miles wide,
but the crescent cataract pours its water into a deep
channel cut in the rock about 1000 feet wide. It is over


this channel below the falls that the railway and other
traffic is carried by means of the suspension bridges. The
railway suspension-bridge is about 822 feet in length, an
iron roadway for trains and ordinary traffic hung 200 feet
above the water of the river, and the new suspension bridge
for foot passengers and vehicles only is 1268 feet in length,
being 190 feet above the river. On these bridges you seem
to be above the falls themselves, and you experience a
feeling of security apparently inconsistent with the situa-
tion. It is only ten months since my visit, and yet a new
railway bridge, of which there were no traces then, has
been built and used for some time. The two bridges which
I saw were in keeping with the grandeur of surrounding
objects. From the edge of the whirlpool rapids the smaller
bridge looked like a spider’s web thrown across the vast
expanse from one of its piers to the other, a delicate and
finely-proportioned structure. If Niagara made you feel
the littleness of man, the bridges showed how man could
triumph over the powers of nature. No unsightly or insig-
nificant human productions here. Niagara is so grand that
man, in carrying out his purposes in connection with it,
has been compelled to imitate its magnificence. Travelling
in the train from Niagara Falls to New York only occupies
fourteen hours, and as there are night trains with sleeping
cars you can spend a day at the cataract and awake next
morning amid the din and bustle of the “ Empire City.”
CHAPTER XXXI.
VERMONT MERINO SHEEP.
Ever since I visited, some years ago, Mr. Sise’s pure flock
of Vermont sheep near Dunedin, N.Z., I have felt an interest
in the celebrated American merinos, and finding that all
the available space in the Pacific mail steamers had been
engaged for twelve months in advance to transport sheep of
this kind to Australia, I concluded that a trip to Central
Vermont would have to be included in my programme. To
reach the Michigan State Agricultural College I had made


an extensive detour to the northward, and now I found
that the Vermont expedition would involve a still further
deviation from the route to New York. Vermont is the
centre of the merino sheep interest, but there are also a
large number of pure flocks in the adjoining New York and
New Hampshire States, as well as a few in other parts of
the United States. I determined to visit Mr. George
Campbell’s celebrated flock among others, as I had become
interested in it from knowing Mr. Sise’s New Zealand sheep
which were imported from it, and had heard Mr. Campbell’s
“ Old Grimes ” spoken of in connection with one of our
best Riverine flocks.
The introduction of the Spanish merino sheep to the
United States dates from about the beginning of the
century. Colonel David Humphries made the first impor-
tation of any importance from Spain in 1802, consisting of
25 rams and 75 ewes, which were brought across Portugal
by Spanish shepherds with proper passports, and escorted
by a guard of Portuguese soldiers. It is not definitely
known from what cabana these sheep were obtained, but
the best authorities assert that _ they were “ probably
Transumantes,” and a manuscript letter of Colonel
Humphreys says that they are “ extracted by me from
Spanish Estramadura, and ascertained by their pedigree to
be of the purest and best race in Spain.” In 1809, the
Hon. William Jarvis, at that time American consul at
Lisbon, purchased through the United States Minister at
Madrid 200 sheep from the Escurial Cabana and sent them
to the United States, and then followed frequent and
important shipments by different parties of sheep from the
best flocks of Spain. The publishing committee of the
Vermont Sheep Breeders’ Association in the official register
state that in the years 1810 and 1811 no less than 17,197
sheep arrived in the United States from Spain, “ and this
number, large as it is, does not include nearly all that came
to ports south of New York.” The same authorities state
that the cabanas drawn upon were the Paulars, the
Negrette, the Montarcos, and the Aquines, and “we have
evidence that over 2000 of the Infantado and large numbers
of the Guadaloupe Cabanas were also purchased and brought
to the United States in 1810 and 1811. As there were a
number more cabanas than those named it is easy to see
where the large numbers of pure merino sheep that were


imported in the years 1810 and 1811 could have been
obtained, and we do not share the opinion of many who
have written upon the subject that a larger portion of the
importations of those years were not of the noted and best
flocks of Spain.” Importations of merinoes were also made
from France and Germany, but these branches of the
family seem never to have come into public favour, and the
Vermont breed is claimed to be of pure Spanish descent.
The Vermont Sheep Breeders’ Association was organised
at Middlebury in March, 1876, and its main object was
to “ preserve the purity of the Spanish merino race
of sheep, encourage their further improvement, and,
as a means to these ends, to provide for the registration of
the histories and pedigrees of the flocks of Spanish merino
sheep in Vermont and elsewhere.” The Register is
managed by the Committee on Pedigrees, and breeders are
required to furnish information regarding the history of
the flocks, “ giving, as far as possible, the families and
breeders through which their lines of ancestry are traced
back to importations from Spain.” The price for registering
sheep is equal to £1 for every flock of fifty, and sd. for
each sheep over that number. The evidence in regard to
the purity of flocks is investigated by the committee, and
the flock is accordingly accepted or rejected, the breeder
having an appeal to the society.
“ Wrinkles” and “oil” are points that American breeders
have aimed at, and have been successful in a very marked
degree. These points have been sought after, not for their
own sake, but because they have been regarded as essential
to the production of a heavy fleece. The wrinkles give
trouble in shearing, and the “oil” is not paid for by the
wool buyer, so that these peculiarities have no attractions
in themselves, but as breeders believe it impossible to
obtain heavy fleeces without them, their development has
been the aim of American sheep-breeders, and is so still.
There are enthusiastic breeders who hold that fineness is a
leading feature of American wool, but the balance of
opinion is against them. A heavy fleece is the main object,
and has been so for many years. A strong, serviceable
wool is produced, which is only of medium fineness, but of
great weight.
The oiliness of the fleeces is such that the wool frequently
loses eighty per cent, of weight in the scouring, and


sometimes more. It must be remembered that the sheep are
housed during winter, and kept from the autumn rains.
This fact, along with the aim of the breeders to produce
sheep with a very yolky wool, accounts for the large pro-
portion of “oil.” Notwithstanding the loss of weight in
scouring, the fleeces are heavy. There are many instances
on record of rams’ fleeces giving over Blbs. of scoured wool,
and the proportion of wool to the weight of the sheep
is also large. Rams weigh about 120 lbs. of live weight,
and frequently cut over 30lbs. of wool in the grease, the
per centage of greasy wool to live weight of rams and
ewes ranging from twenty to twenty-four. In attaining
such results the production of wrinkles has been considered
as important. Many of the sheep are covered with folds
and wrinkles all over the body, the aprons on the breast
and neck being ten or twelve inches in length. The
moderate school like to confine the wrinkles to the neck
and legs, leaving the body plain, but the wrinkly school
believe you cannot have too much of a good thing, so
breed for folds and wrinkles all over the body.
Lustre and the other beauties which go to make up what
we call “ quality ” are not only sacrificed, but what is of
more importance, “ evenness ” is not, in my opinion, com-
patible with wrinkliuess. Increased weight of fleece
may compensate for loss of quality and fineness of fibre,
but evenness in the character of the different parts of the
fleece cannot, I should think, be dispensed with without a
serious depreciation of value. The wool on the wrinkle is
not so fine as that on the plain skin. It is comparatively
coarse and wanting in all the characteristics of merino
wool. A fleece made up of alternating bands of varied
quality of wool cannot be so valuable as even a lighter clip
of uniform quality. Enthusiastic supporters of the wrinkles
in sheep would like to deny the existence of this uneven-
ness, but, like most enthusiasts, they are mistaken.
Moderate men, who acknowledge the coarseness of the
wool on the folds and wrinkles, hold that there is no
necessity for it, but that the coarse wool and “ hairs ” can
be got rid of without dispensing with wrinkles. In this I
think the moderate men are also mistaken. There is no
doubt, however, that little has been done to avoid this
unevenness. Breeders, as a rule, seem to have aimed so
much at weight of fleece in the grease that other qualities


have received comparatively little attention. I believe
that coarse wool is inseparable from wrinkles and folds, and
that unevenness is therefore a necessity of breeding wrinkly
sheep. How far it is profitable to sacrifice evenness to
weight of fleece is an important question.
The development of “ oil” or yolk has been looked upon
as necessary, and hence the extraordinary quantity of it
present in the wool. Plentifulness of oil has been regarded
as giving weight and quality of wool, and authorities
contend that the greatest weight of scoured wool has been
obtained from the most oily fleeces. The committee’s
report says that “ breeders do not believe we can dispense
with any of the average amount of oil without running a
risk of serious loss from the deterioration of the amount of
wool, as well as the strength, fineness and evenness of fibre ;
they believe it is absolutely necessary to retain these most
desirable qualities of the merino fleece. The majority of
them believe it is not so easy to retain these qualities as it
is to breed any light fleeces with twisted dead ends with an
uneven fibre that may not waste so much in the scouring
tub as in the cards, and devoid of that elastic strength and
felting quality that gives merino wool its great value.”
There is a wide difference between “ dry fleeces” and the
oily ones produced in Vermont. A moderate quantity of
yolk is no doubt desirable, but it is difficult to see what
good purpose is to be served by the extreme oiliness sought
after by the American breeders.
The late Mr. Campbell’s flock is one of the largest in the
state, consisting of 300 sheep. Many of the stud flocks contain
less than fifty, and there are few that number more than
100. The sheep-breeder in Vermont is a farmer who culti-
vates a rotation of crops, keeping a stud flock as one branch
of his business. In addition to the returns obtained from
producing wool, fat lambs, and fat sheep, profits are
obtained from selling stud rams, which are always in
demand to improve the flocks in various parts of the United
States. The farms in many cases are not more than from
100 to 200 acres in extent, and the Messrs. Campbell’s,
consisting of 600, is one of the largest. Only a small
proportion of each farm, as a rule, is fit for cultivation.
Notwithstanding these facts, the houses are large and
comfortable ; the “ barns,” as all outhouses are called, are
extensive, and everything indicates the existence of a


prosperous population. It is difficult to understand how
prosperity is attained upon such small unfertile farms, in
such a rigorous climate. Without being able to solve the
problem, one easily comes to the conclusion that there is
something potent in thoroughly cultivating a small area,
and in keeping well-bred sheep upon the farm.
Oil and wrinkles are less in favour upon this farm than
upon the majority—hence the sheep are below the average
in these particulars. The late Mr. Campbell believed, and
his sons are of the same opinion, that the results obtained
justify the choice of type which has been made. It must
be pointed out, however, that those who favour a great
development of oil and wrinkles are rather upon the increase
than otherwise. It has been ascertained that the wool of
the Messrs. Campbell's sheep does not lose more than from
60 to 62 per cent, of weight in scouring, while 80 per cent,
of loss is not uncommon in more wrinkly flocks, this figure
being also sometimes exceeded. The clip last season
realised 14d. per lb., and for the three previous years the
range was between 15d. and 17d-perlb. Yearling ewes
average 1 Olb. of wool in the grease, two-year-old ewes about
121 b., and three-year-old rams shear from 16lb. to 221 b.
The live weight of full-grown ewes is from 1001 b. to 1201 b.,
and of rams from 1251 b. to 150 lb. and up to 1651 b. In the
spring and summer the sheep are grazed upon the artificial
grass, the stubble fields, and the natural pastures of the
hills ; but during the winter they are fed under the roof of
the large barn, all stock having to be so housed during the
continuance of the cold weather.
The Vermont sheep possess many points of excellence,
but I consider the aims of the breeders have been ill-advised
in some points. In seeking to develope wrinkles, folds,
and oil as means to good ends I think they have been
mistaken. Their system has been different from that of
Australian breeders, and I do not think the latter would
gain by imitating them in the points referred to. Not that
something cannot be learned from them, however, or that
their sheep may not be useful in our flocks. We can learn
to what a great extent the merino can be changed to suit
the ideal of the breeder, and can obtain increased
encouragement to seek after our ideal. Stud sheep from
Vermont may also be useful to work certain changes in
individual flocks. In these sheep w r e have a pure branch


of the merino family possessing marked characteristics
widely differing from our own flocks. They have heavy
dense fleeces of strong wool ; they are w r ell clothed to the
hoofs; they have square shapely frames of medium size,
with short legs, and they have, I believe, vigorous
constitutions, while the type is so well established that any
stud sheep used would be likely to quickly impart their
characteristics to our flocks. We may not desire all their
characteristics, but we might be able to choose those we
want.
CHAPTER XXXII.
CHEESE AND BUTTER FACTORIES.
I have already mentioned that, before going up to visit the
stud sheep farms of Vermont, I inspected some of the cheese
and butter factories of the Utica district in New York
State. Utica is in the centre of the dairying portion of
the State, and constitutes the leading market for cheese
and butter. The State of New York produces more than
twice as much cheese and nearly twice as much butter as
any other State in the Union, and hence Utica bears the
same relation to the dairying interest as Chicago does to
the grain and live stock trades. There is more or less
dairying in all the States and territories, but a visitor who
wishes to understand the best system saves time by going
to the head-quarters of the industry, and to the district in
which it has been systematised for the longest time. It
was in this region that the first cheese factory was started,
and the produce of the State shows that the leading posi-
tion has been maintained. Cheese factories, butter
factories, and creameries, in which both butter and cheese
are made, are met with every three or four miles, and the
private dairy is a thing of the past. There are numerous
private dairies in different parts of the State still existing
under certain local conditions, but wherever dairying is
carried on upon an extensive scale the factory system is
predominant. It is also somewhat strange to find the
centre of the dairying interest 240 miles from the seaboard.


and extending fully fifty miles still further inward. If we
had dairy factories at Dimboola, Deniliquin, and Wagga
Wagga, what should we do with the butter and cheese?
The produce would simply be worthless. The carriage
would absorb all the profit, and the cart-grease market
would be glutted to such a degree by the spoiled butter
that it would be valueless when it arrived in Melbourne.
Dairy produce raised at a similar distance from the coast
in New York State is a great source of profit, and is fit to
send to the markets of the world. It is the railways that
the difference. Railways run for the purpose of pay-
ing dividends to private companies develope the dairying
and every other farming interest of New York State, but
railways owned by the people and run by the people’s
representatives effectually choke these industries in Victoria.
The factory system of dairying was commenced by Mr.
Jesse Williams in 1851 at Rome, some twenty or thirty
miles from Utica. Mr. Williams had attained a reputation
as a cheesemaker, and could command a higher price than
his neighbours for his manufacture. His son commenced
business in the same neighbourhood, but not being able to
obtain as high a price as his father, an arrangement was
entered into by which the advantage of the family name
might be made available. Mr. Williams took the milk
from his son’s farm, made it into cheese with his own, and
allowed him a proportionate share of the proceeds of the
sales, making also a charge for manufacturing. This was
found to be profitable to both parties, and soon one
neighbour after another, anxious to obtain a similar advan-
tage, sent milk to Mr. Williams’s dairy, and the result was
the establishment of the first cheese factory in the United
States. The system soon spread, until now it may be con-
sidered the distinctive feature of American dairying. The
leading principle is that a whole neighbourhood gets the
advantage of the best skill within its limits. It is not every
farmer who _is a skilful dairyman. Special qualifications
and extensive experience are necessary to manufacture
butter or cheese of a thoroughly sound character, capable
of being sent to any part of the world. These qualifica-
tions are rare, but by the associated system the whole
district gets the benefit of the best man available. Thus
the butter or cheese of a whole district is brought up to
the standard of the best in the locality. The produce is


not only raised in quality, but it gains the valuable pro-
perty of evenness. Large quantities of an even sample can
be put upon the market, and thus higher prices can be
obtained than for separate parcels of mixed quality. The
saving of labour is also an important consideration, and by
the factory system the general character of a whole district’s
produce is not only raised, and a higher price realised, but
the expenditure upon labour is reduced to a minimum.
As in many other branches of farming industry, I was
unable to find anything in the natural conditions of the
country to account for the prosperity which was everywhere
manifested. The extension of dairying seemed to be more
due to the adoption of a good system of working than to
specially favourable local circumstances. Prices obtained
for butter and cheese were not sufficiently high to account
for such a development of dairy farming. The prices at
New York, 240 miles distant from the dairying district
under notice, would average for the present year about
for cheese and lid. for butter. In 1881 the range of
prices for butter was between 6d. and Is. 3d., and for
cheese between 3d. and 7d. In 1880 prices were about
the same, and from 1875 to 1880 the average value of
dairy produce was considerably less. The range of prices
given includes not only the difference of the market during
the years referred to, but the variations in quality. During
the last six years the average price of first-class cheese has
not varied more than a halfpenny, the value being from
to 7d., and first-class fresh butter has not varied more
than 3d., the range being from Is. 3d. to Is. per lb. The
steadiness of the market and the absence of violent fluctu-
ations may be explained by the fact that the article, being
fit for export, does not unduly glut the home market.
The cultivated pastures in the valley of the Mohawk are
fairly rich, but, judging from the greyish-looking soil, not
more than ordinarily productive. A good show is made
with the rye-grass, timothy, and clover, but a medium soil
in a moist climate will always do as much. The pastures
are good, but nothing extra, and therefore give the dairy-
men of this region no special advantage. And when we
come to consider the climate, it is difficult for an Australian
to understand how the farmers get on at all. Prom four
to five months in the year the severe winter reigns. Many
of the factories are closed, and cows have to be kept alive


by being fed in the “ barns.” It is not a little food that is
required to keep 50 or 100 cows for four or five months in
the stalls, but it has to be found. It is produced upon the
farm, and it pays the farmers to keep dairy cattle under
such circumstances. The absence of cold winters and
freedom from the necessity of feeding stock during such a
long period of the year are advantages which must be of
great value to the Australian farmer. It is neither from
prices_ of produce, from climate, nor soil, that the
American dairy-farmer gets his advantage, but from the
admirable system which he adopts. A system which has,
in a _ comparatively short time, worked a revolution in
American might with advantage be more generally
adopted in Australia and New Zealand.
There are upon the farms pure herds of Jerseys, Ayrshires,.
and Holsteins ; but the pure herds are in the minority’
crosses of these breeds being most generally kept. The
Jerseys or Alderneys are fancied for their butter-producing
qualities, and the Ayrshires for giving a large quantity of
milk better suited for cheese than butter, and the Holstein
is a breed much esteemed for general dairying purposes.
These cattle, which are black and white, are large, with
square frames, and they give a great quantity of milk,
which is said to be better adapted for cheesemaking than
for butter. Various crosses of these breeds are met with,
as well as a strain of the shorthorn, and the cattle are well
calculated to yield a profit to their keepers. The owners of
pure herds contend that nothing is so good as the pure
breed ; but the majority of the farmers consider themselves
well served by good cross; “ well-graded cattle,” as they
are called.
After visiting some of the leading factories and creameries
in this part of New York State I came to the conclusion
that the slowness of Australian dairymen to adopt the
American system could not be attributed to a want of
acquaintance with the machinery and appliances to make
use of. While there are a few recent improvements to be
noted, the leading features of the system have already been
introduced into different parts of Australia and New
Zealand. The improvements referred to do not affect the
system as a whole—for they have been introduced only in
a few places—so that, as far as appliances are concerned, by
making use of the patterns w T e already possess in some of


our best factories we might in the colonies be as far forward
as the bulk of the New York dairymen. One of the most
important improvements recently introduced into cheese-
making plants is an arrangement for cutting the curd in
the cheese-vat. This is generally done by hand with knives
made for the purpose, but in some of the best establishments
the work is done by a cutter worked by the small engine
which drives the other machinery. The vat is circular, and
the revolving knives cut up the curd without any assistance.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
CREAMERIES.
A “creamery” is a factory in which either butter or cheese
is made, or both ; and this kind of establishment is more
commonly met with in the dairying districts than the
factories devoted to turning out one kind of product.
The characteristic feature of the creamery is not so much
its apparatus for making butter or cheese at pleasure, as
the carrying on of both operations at once. As a general
rule, the daily supply of milk brought to a creamery is made
to produce a certain quantity of both butter and cheese.
First-class butter is made from the cream, and cheese is
made either entirely from the skim milk, or partly from
skim and new milk. It may be said that the creamery is a
development of the factory system, brought about by the
ascertained profitableness of butter-making. A certain
quantity of good butter is made in the creamery, and the
cheese-making comes in as a means of utilising the skim
milk. In some establishments as much cream as possible
is taken off without souring the milk, and an inferior class
of cheese is made from the skim milk ; while in others as
much cream only is taken off as is compatible with
producing cheese of good or fair saleable quality. The
rapid increase of the butter-producing industry is significant,
and the position of the creamery in relation to the
factories producing butter or cheese separately should be
duly considered by colonial dairymen.


The leading features of the butter-making process are
the treatment of the milk and the working of the butter.
Cooling milk to raise the cream is universally practised.
No matter how large or how small the dairy, deep cans and
some method of keeping the milk cool seem to be regarded
as indispensable. In the case of the vats already referred to
the milk was not set deep, for there w 7 as a large body of
milk to be cooled ; but cold water was applied in the space
between the double bottom and sides. The object sought
is to produce a difference of temperature between the milk
and the surrounding atmosphere as a condition favourable
to the rising of the cream. In those creameries which did
not produce a large quantity of butter I always found what
is known as the “ cooling system” in operation. The main
feature of this system is the placing of the milk in deep
closed cans submerged in cold water. The cans are about
twenty inches deep, and they are placed in a tank of cold
water, the water rising to about two inches above the top of
the can, so that the whole is submerged. There is gene-
rally a small stream of water flowing into the tank from a
tap, and an overflow pipe to take off the surplus, so that
the temperature of the water is kept at from forty to forty-
five degrees Fahr. Although this system involves less
labour than the usual method of setting milk in broad
shallow dishes, a still more labour-saving plan is adopted
in the large factories, viz., setting the milk in the vats.
Cooling, however, by means of water is carried out in all
cases.
Working the butter is simple enough, the main object
being to extract the buttermilk without touching the
butter with the hands. The wooden butter-workers are
simple, and do not differ materially in design from those
with which colonial dairymen are acquainted. We don’t
want to learn what a butter-worker is, but to use those
with which we are acquainted. Large circular butter-
workers are worked by the steam-engine in extensive
factories, but hand-machines are employed in many of
the creameries. Both the hand-workers and those driven
by steam are of the kind with which Australian dairy-
men are already acquainted. The purest salt is put
into the butter, and the hands are never allowed to take
the place of wooden workers in any part of the manufac-
turing process. Barrel-churns, working horizontally, are


most frequently used, and these are worked by the small
steam-engine which is attached to every factory or creamery.
In putting up butter for market all kinds of plans are
adopted—that is, all except the dirty “gin case” system
that obtains in some parts of the colonies. Whether the
packages are boxes, tubs, or barrels, they are all clean and
neat, having been made for the purpose. When butter is
printed, small printing machines are used which economise
the labour and prevent the necessity of using the hands;
but in the butter factories and creameries, the butter is
generally put into barrels or tubs containing 55lbs. each.
The system of putting the butter up in rolls, wrapping
each roll in cloth, and placing them in barrels among salted
liquid, is also carried out in some establishments.
Some of the factories and creameries are managed by
joint-stock companies, the milk suppliers being share-
holders ; but, as a rule, they are worked by private indi-
viduals, who either buy the milk or make a charge for
manufacturing, A charge of from 4s. 2d. to 4s. 7d. per
1001 b. is made for manufacturing where the milk is not
purchased at the factory, and the whey is carted home by
the farmers for their pigs. The milk is weighed and tested
as it is brought into the factory, and the farmer is allowed
a certain quantity of cheese or butter in proportion to the
milk supplied. The cheese or butter is sent to market by
the conductors of the factory ; 10lb. of milk is generally
equal to lib. of cheese, and the average price obtained at
the weekly market in Utica by the ten best factories is
taken as the ruling price for the payment of the milk
suppliers. The cheeses are each placed in a box made of
thin wooden shavings. The boxes, which cost each,
are supplied by the factory. The combined system of
dairying carried on requires some confidence and mutual
trust among the parties concerned, and the advantages to
be derived are great enough to put petty jealousies aside
and produce united action. The combined system of
dairying is the one which should be extensively adopted in
Australia. With a limited population, a favourable dairy-
ing season soon gluts the local market, and the surplus is
unfit for sending abroad. The combined or factory system,
by furnishing a good article suitable for export, would pre-
vent prices from falling below a profitable rate.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
SHIPPING LIVE STOCK AND PRODUCT
AT NEW YORK.
In describing the Chicago trade in grain, cattle, hogs, and
dressed meats, I gave some notes upon the method of
handling produce and live stock in that great gathering
centre; and a visit to New York enables me to see some-
thing of the arrangements for placing these various articles
of commerce upon the ocean-going vessels. On the Hudson
River long trains of canal boats, loaded with grain and
drawn by steam-tugs, are seen, as well as other lines of
barges, returning to the Erie Canal, which connects the
Hudson River with the North American lake system. It
takes from fourteen to twenty days to reach Chicago from
New York by the canal route, and navigation is entirely
suspended, by up, in the winter season; but still
it is the cheapest freight-route, and does much to keep
down the charges upon the railway lines.
The “floater” is an interesting object in New York
harbour. These are the floating elevators, which cheaply
transfer grain from the canal boats into the ocean-going
ships. A description of an elevator has been already given.
A floater, therefore, does not require to be described in
detail. A broad, low hull of a large boat carries the elevating
machinery, and the engines to w'ork it. The whole concern
is not unlike one of the dredging boats used in the Yarra
or Hobson’s Bay. There are two systems of elevating
pockets, and these are called “legs.” One “leg” is placed
in the canal boat, the other in the vessel to be loaded. The
machinery is set to work, and the grain passes in a constant
stream from the one vessel to the other. In an elevator
the grain is stored, but in a floater there is no storage-room
—it is simply a transporting-machine. A single fact will
be sufficient to show the cheapness of the system. For the
charge of 4jd. per bushel grain is taken out of the elevator
at Chicago, put into a lake vessel, carried along the lake to
Buffalo, taken out into an elevator store within five days,
put into the canal boats, drawn along the canal and down


the Hudson, taken out of the boats and put into the out-
ward-bound ship. When all these operations can be gone
through for such a cost, the cheapness of elevating and the
advantages of the bulk system are apparent.
The beef trade has not increased during the last three
years, but on the contrary has declined. In 1880 it
amounted to 129,940,0001 b., in 1881 it was 146,703,0001 b.,
while in 1878 and 1879 it was about 92,000,0001 b. Neither
has the exportation of live cattle from the United States
increased the last few years, although it is still upon an
extensive scale. The number of live cattle exported last
year was 108,110, and the number in 1881 was 185,707.
The decrease in the meat and live cattle trade may be
accounted for by the rise in the price which has taken place
in the American market. I mentioned the high prices paid
for beef in Chicago during my visit, at the same time as an
extensive slaughtering business for the English market was
being carried on. The export trade was not commenced
nor developed in such a high condition of prices, and it is
doubtful whether it can be extended or maintained under
such circumstances. Between 1876 and 1879 there was a
gradual decline in value of beef and live stock, which
amounted to twenty per cent, for the three years. It was
then that the export trade developed, and at the same time
had its effect in hardening prices. The rise in three years
following the period of depression amounted to about forty
per cent., and the exports have apparently been checked by
the high prices. It is not considered that the export trade
was the principal cause of the increase in values, but it is
mainly attributed to the great loss of cattle in the Western
States, in the vicinity of the Rocky Mountains, through
cold and starvation in the winter of 1880-81. The failure
of the “ corn,” or maize, crop in the same year is also a
contributory cause, this staple crop always having an effect
upon the cattle trade in America.
The shipping of live cattle to England is an everyday
business, and some of the extensive dealers send over
cargoes of dressed meat or live cattle, according to circum-
stances. Nearly all the leading lines of Atlantic steam-
ships carry live cattle, and large numbers are sent over at
irregular intervals by other ships. When one has seen the
cattle feeding upon corn and hay in Nebraska, Illinois,
Kansas, at the Chicago yards, and at feeding stations along


the railway lines, shipping them alive to England does not
seem so strange. Si:ch a large proportion of the cattle are
fattened upon manger food, and especially those good enough
to send abroad, that it is not a difficult matter to keep them
in condition on shipboard.
The charges for taking cattle across the Atlantic vary
from £2 to £3 ss. per head, at least such were the rates
last July, when I was at New York; but they sometimes
have reached £6 per head, including insurance. An allow-
ance of 14lb. of hay and 101 b. of maize in the cob is made
of each head per day, and the voyage is calculated to take
within fourteen days. In addition to the live cattle sent
away from New York, there is a heavy trade done at
Baltimore, while some are also shipped at Montreal and
Boston. As the charges are per head, it does not pay to ship
small cattle, so that there is always a good demand and
a high price for large, well-bred steers. Cattle of this class
are difficult to obtain, owing to the large proportion of
mongrel Texans coming into the market. I should have
stated that the cattle are always well fed for about a
week at New York, after coming off the cars from
Chicago or elsewhere, before being put upon the ship.
Meat sent from Chicago and other long distances in
refrigerating cars is put into stores, which are kept at a
•temperature of from 32 to 40 degrees, and the same
temperature is maintained in the ship. The trade in
exporting sheep and mutton from America is crippled for
want of a supply of good sheep. We have not only better
cattle, but we have plenty of good sheep, with pastures and
climate which make the production of both kinds of stock
economical; we only want to apply our brains to discussing
means of managing railways, and generally handling
properly the produce which we raise.
CHAPTER XXXV.
CANE SUGAR.
As compared with the requirements of the country, the
production of sugar in the United States is insignificant.
There are extensive refineries for treating the sugar grown


in other countries, but the quantity produced within the
territory of the United States is surprisingly small in
comparison with the extensive demand for home require-
ments. The annual importations of sugar and molasses
into the United States are valued at £15,300,000 —sugar
amounting to £13,387,200, and molasses to £1,912,800.
The sum annually paid for imported sugar and molasses
amounts to considerably more than the value of all the
gold and silver produced in the mines of the country.
While the demand owing to the increase of population has
rapidly increased, the production has not yet reached the
quantity attained before the civil war. The State of
Louisiana continues to produce the great bulk of sugar
grown in the country, and within that state the quantity
annually raised is not greater than it was in 1844, while
there has been no material extension in the other states
and territories. The fact is that within the United States
the area of land under a suitable climate for growing
sugar-cane is extremely small.
St. Louis, in the State of Missouri, on the Mississippi
River, is one of the sugar-refining centres of the country,
and here it is possible to learn a great deal about the
location of the chief sugar-growing districts. It is found
that Louisiana is the only state where the area of sugar
plantation is extensive, and that New Orleans is the chief
seat of the refineries. The area planted with sugar-
cane is not more than 250,000 acres, and the
whole of it is situated near the Gulf of Mexico.
The cold winters which are experienced all over that portion
of the United States which is east of the Rocky Mountains
are fatal to the sugar-cane, and it is only on the shores of
the Gulf, where the frosts are moderated by the influence
of a warmer sea, that sugar-growing can be successfully
attempted. The land in nearly all parts of the vast
Mississippi Valley is fertile enough for the sugar-cane, but
the climate, except upon the favoured spot referred to, is
too severe.
The state of Louisiana occupies the western side of the
Mississippi River, and has some hundreds of miles of
frontage to the Gulf of Mexico. Its area is 48,700 square
miles, or over 31,000,000 acres. The extent of land under
sugar-cane amounted to 181,592 acres, according to the
latest available returns, yielding 171,706 hhds. of sugar


and 11,696,248 gallons of molasses. Georgia is the second
sugar state, with 15,000 acres of plantation, and the state
of Texas, adjoining Louisiana on the west, comes next in
order as a sugar-producing state, the progress of late years
having been rapid. The area of sugar plantation in Texas
reached 10,224 acres in 1879, and has increased considerably
since that date, the plantations being near the shores of
the Gulf. Florida is the fourth sugar-producing state, with
7938 acres, and then follow Alabama with 6627 acres,
Mississippi with 4555 acres, and South Carolina with 1787
acres. The present season’s produce of Louisiana is expected
to reach 200,000 hhds., or about 100,000 tons of sugar, the
remaining states only producing about 5000 tons. The
consumption of sugar in the United States varies in different
years from 638,000 tons to 918,000 tons, and the consump-
tion of molasses from 39,000,000 to 45,000,000 gallons.
The sugar refineries of the United States, therefore, draw
but a small proportion of their supplies from within the
country. The refineries of St. Louis obtain a large quantity
of sugar from Louisiana, and those of New Orleans largely
supplement their local supplies from the West Indies, while
those of San Francisco obtain sugar from the Sandwich
Islands, the raw product of that kingdom being admitted free
under treaty with the United States Government.
The work upon Louisiana plantations is done chiefly by
negroes, who accept a low rate of wages. Many of the
plantations are worked upon shares, but whether by the
month or upon contract, the southern negro appears to be
content with low wages. The average, with rations of
pork and corn, is about 13 dollars per month, or without
board 18 dollars per month, while white men receive about
Ij dollars per day without board. The soil is fertile, and
in a good season heavy yields are obtained. The average
crop is from 16 to 20 tons of cane per acre, yielding about
lOOlbs. of sugar to the ton, and as high as 40 tons per acre
is obtained in exceptional cases. The cane is planted in
continuous rows, 7ft. apart, any time during the autumn or
winter, and a cutting of cane of light weight is obtained
the following season. Two full crops are obtained without
replanting, and it is the custom to plant anew about 40
per cent, of the land every season. The principal means
of fertilising the land is by growing peas for green manure.
During the last year of cultivation peas are sown between


the rows upon the land to he planted with cane next year.
The plantations range in size from 150 to 200 and up to
2000 acres in extent. Small growers generally sell cane to
the owners of large plantations who have extensive mills,
fitted up with vacuum pans and all the latest machinery.
First-class plantations with improvements change hands at
£l2 per acre, and good unimproved sugar land is said to
he obtainable for £5 per acre. With such a comparatively
small area of land suitable for growing cane, it is not sur-
prising that the people of America should be endeavouring
to make sugar from other products of the soil.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
SORGHUM AND BEET SUGAR.
The production of sugar from sorghum has been receiving
a great deal of attention, and although but little advance
was made for several years, results have now been obtained
which are likely to lead to a rapid extension of the industry.
The cultivation of the plant has been carried on without
difficulty, and for some time excellent syrup has been
obtained from the sorghum in large quantities. The con-
vertion of the syrup into a good quality of sugar, however,
has been a matter of difficulty. So many failures were
met with that the project was almost abandoned, but the
persistent energy of a few men, assisted by the enlightened
policy of the Washington Bureau of Agriculture, pursued
the subject until what may be considered a fair prospect of
success has been attained. Colonel Colman, of the Rural
World, St. Louis, has been one of the foremost in advo-
cating the interests of the sorghum sugar industry, and his
journal has done much to keep attention directed to such
an important subject. This gentleman gave me a sample
of sorghum sugar which was of first-class quality, and
which afterwards won the compliment from a Louisiana
planter, to whom I showed it, of being considered cane
sugar, and not the product of sorghum at all. First-class


sugar can now be made from sorghum, and as to its econom-
ical production there is much favourable evidence.
Upon the grounds of the Department of Agriculture, at
Washington, 38 varieties of sorghum were cultivated last
year (1882,) and 10 other varieties grown in the neighbour-
hood were also made use of for the purposes of investigation.
Since then there were 48 varieties of sorghum analysed, and
the results of over 4000 analyses were published in the last
departmental report. Among the numerous varieties
planted, Early Amber, Early Orange, Early Golden, White
Liberian, and Sink’s Hybrid may be mentioned as giving
upon the whole the most satisfactory results. The rainfall
during July, August, and September amounted only to
4'93in., nearly half of which fell in September. As the
crop had got a good start during May and June, when
7‘s7in. fell, it was not injured by the drought in July and
August.
The analyses of the sorghum show a proportion of
sugar which compares favourably with that contained in
sugar-cane. The average available sugar in seven of the
best varieties was 12A3 per cent, of the juice, and the
average crop of cane from the same varieties was 26,6671b5.
of stripped stalks per acre. Mr. Peter Collier, the chemist
of the department, states that “a good mill would give
60 per cent, of juice, or 16,0001b5., and 1253 per cent, of
this amount would give 2,0051b5. of sugar per acre as the
average product to be expected from the results obtained.”
The same authority makes the following remarks in regard
to the comparative analysis of sugar-cane and sorghum—
“ Twenty-five samples of sugar-cane juices from the many
varieties of this plant grown in Louisiana, Cuba, Jamaica,
Martinique, Guadelope, and the East Indies, analysed by
several chemists, give the following average composition:—
Sucrose, 13’28 per cent. ; other solids, 271 per cent. If
now, as in the case of the sorghums, we subtract the sum
of the solids (which was made up of ash, glucose, and other
undetermined substances) from the sucrose we have as
available sugar in these juices an average of 10‘57
per cent., an amount even less than that found present in
the average of thirty-five kinds of sorghum for long
periods.”
The experience of several growers and sugar manu-
facturers confirms the estimate of the value of the sorghum


juice, and equally heavy yields have been obtained in some
cases, but the average is not quite so high. The average
yield obtained in different parts of Missouri, Kansas,
Nebraska, and Illinois is from 10 to 12 tons to the acre.
The Champagne Company of Illinois, in 1882, planted 244
acres, which averaged tons to the acre. It is significant
that the season was considered too wet for the crop. The
rainfall in May was B'ssin.; in June, 9‘93in.; July, 2’44in.;
and August, 4‘B7in. ; or 25 79in. during the growing
season. In 1881, when better results were obtained, the
rainfall was for May, 3’63in. ; June, 47lin. ; July, l'o7in. ;
August, 0 - 64 in. ; or 10‘05in. for the principal growing
months. In 1881, the sorghum gave cane sugar 12'08
per cent. ; grape sugar, 2 47 per cent., while the specific
gravity was T 070; but in 1882 the analysis showed,
cane sugar, B‘2o per cent. ; grape sugar, 3 - 66 per cent.,
and the specific gravity was TOGO, demonstrating that
the drier season was the more favourable to the
crop. Upon a plot of acres, however, a better yield
of cane was obtained last year. This plot yielded
tons per acre, showing by analysis 1077 per cent, cane
sugar, and 2 - 48 per cent, grape sugar. From the product
of this allotment 96001 b. sugar was made, and 1450 gallons
of molasses, the yield per acre being 7681 b- of sugar and
116 gallons of molasses. The sugar, at 8|- cents per lb.,
realised 816 dollars, and the molasses, at 40 cents per
gallon, 580 dollars, or a total of 1396 dollars. The cost of
the cane and the expenses of working amounted to
653’43 dollars, leaving a profit of 742 57 dollars, or a
profit of £ll 16s. per acre. The seed of the sorghum
plant is also of considerable value. By analysis, and also
by the experience of growers and stockfeeders, it has been
shown to be about equal in value to maize. As the seed is
fit for gathering before the cane has to be crushed, it can
be produced in connection with sugar-making. The yield
of seed is from a third to a half that of maize, 20 bushels
per acre being a good average crop. When the value of
the seed is added to that of the stalks or cane, the sorghum
crop becomes a very profitable one. Sowing the seed is
generally done towards the end of April or the beginning of
May. This is, of course, the beginning of spring in the
northern hemisphere, corresponding to August and Sep-
tember in the colony of Victoria.


The manufacture of sugar from beet has also been tried,
with but indifferent results. Congress has appropriated
£2OOO towards experimenting in the matter, which is being
expended in machinery and in the distribution of seeds.
A factory in the state of Maine, which worked for three
years over a million pounds of sugar per annum, ceased
operations last season for want of beets. From 20s. to 255.
per ton was given for the beets, and the farmers obtained
an average of 10 tons per acre, but the crop was not
considered profitable. The two factories established in
California, however, have realised profits from the first,
and are extending their operations. The Alvarash factory
in the Santa Clara Valley had the season previous to my
visit made a profit of £BOOO. The works and land only
cost £4OOO, and the company had grown their own beets,
making a million and a half pounds of sugar. A still
larger factory near Sacramento has been worked successfully
for four or five years, and it is likely that an increasing
area of the rich valley lands will be devoted to the
cultivation of beet. Since the discovery by eastern growers
that first-class sugar can be made from sorghum, some
attention has also been turned to sorghum culture in
California, and as heavy crops can be obtained by means of
irrigation, the state will no doubt soon take its place along
with Kansas and Illinois in the manufacture of sorghum
sugar. The large quantity of sugar imported by the
United States shows what a wide field there is for the
farmers if they can produce the supply.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
MAIZE OR AMERICAN “ CORN.”
Maize —or “ corn,” as it is called—is the leading crop of
the United States. It is ahead of all others in area under
cultivation, in yield, and in value. The annual yield of
“ corn ” is about four times that of wheat, and it is worth
more than twice as much as the cotton crop. It stands
unrivalled among the products of American agriculture ;


and America not only has no rival in the cultivation of this
crop, but probably produces more than all the rest of the
world. Single States produce more maize than large
European countries. One State nearly equals the product
of the whole of Europe, and the entire European maize
harvest is not equal to a third of that of the United States.
Notwithstanding this enormous production of maize, there
is but a small proportion available as a surplus for exporta-
tion. Less than 6 per cent, of the crop, upon the average,
is exported, the great bulk of the corn being consumed in
the country. It is not only extensively used as human
food, but it is the staple fodder for stock. Horses, dairy
cows, swine, sheep, growing steers, and fattening beeves, in
fact all kinds of farm animals, are fed upon the grain or
stalks of maize. The value of all kinds of food is, there-
fore, affected by the price of maize, so that it is in every
way the most important crop in the United States. The
largest corn crop was that of 1879-80, while that of the
next year was a light one, the aggregate yield of 1882-3,
however, coming nearly up to the year of greatest produc-
tiveness. Reviewing the large crop of 1879-80, the area
sown with maize is found to have been 62,317,842 acres ;
the yield, 1,717,434,543 bushels; the average, 39’6 bushels
per acre ; and the valuation about £136,000,000.
In regard to the methods of cultivation there is nothing
novel or mysterious. Australian farmers know how to
cultivate a heavier crop than the average obtainable in
America; but this knowledge does not seem to lead to a
general adoption of maize as a standard agricultural pro-
duction. The average in the United States for the last
twelve years has been 26 bushels per acre. This is much
less than what is obtained in any of the maize-growing
districts of Australia. The range of prices in the principal
markets during the last ten years has been from Is. lOd. to
3s. Bd. per bushel, the average being about 2s. 6d. per
bushel. When such are the prices in central markets it
will be easily understood that in the far West, many
hundreds of miles from large consuming centres, the value
of corn is frequently very low. A few years ago prices
were so low in the Western States that corn was cheaper
than fuel, and large quantities were used instead of coal
and firewood. Now, however, although prices are not
high, a profitable value can always be obtained by feeding


the corn to stock. It is neither the yield obtained nor the
price that enables the American farmer to succeed in a
business which Australians are afraid to take hold of, but
the system of growing the crop not so much for market as
for feeding pigs and cattle, and as pork should be an exten-
sive article of export from the colonies the cultivation of
maize should be greatly extended.
In threshing or shelling the maize the Americans apply
labour-saving machinery, which affects the cost of produc-
tion. Only a small proportion of the crops, however, is
shelled at all. It is a general custom to give the unshelled
cobs to cattle, pigs, and nearly all kinds of stock. There
are farmers here and there who both shell and grind the
corn for the stock, but the rule is to feed upon the unshelled
cobs, the cattle and hogs between them utilising the bulk
of the nutritive constituents. Such corn as is sent to
market for the purpose of going to other states, or being
exported, is shelled by large machines driven by horse or
steam power. Hand shellers are used upon very small
farms, but when any considerable quantity of shelling is
done horse power is employed. One of the smallest horse-
power machines in use—“the Duplex”—is worked by one
horse, or, if required, by two men. The cobs are carried
into the shellers by a revolving apparatus; the cobs and
corn are separated after being shelled, and the corn is
carried up by an elevator to a bagging spout. When
worked by one horse, the machine shells and cleans about
600 bushels per day. Such a machine would cost to the
American farmer from £9 to £lO without the horse-works.
The Keystone Manufacturing Company, of Sterling,
Illinois, do a large business in turning out corn-shellers of
all kinds. Some of the machines are four or six horse
power, and are capable of shelling as much as 2000 bushels
a day, the only labour required being to shovel the cobs
into the elevator which carries them into the stripping
gear, and to bag up the shelled corn from the spout.
There is seldom any bagging, however, for the spout
generally runs the corn into a waggon or a railway truck,
corn, like wheat, being handled in bulk and stored in
“elevators.” Husking the corn involves a good deal of
hand labour, but at this work the men are expert. A
short sharp-pointed pin called a husking-pin, fixed to a
leather strap, is worn on the right hand. With the left


hand the cobs are taken off the stalks, and the husks are
ripped off rapidly with the husking pin, the husked cobs
being thrown into a waggon to be carried to the barn or
crip. A man can husk about an acre a day, or equal to
from 50 to 70 bushels of shelled corn.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
WESTERN RANCHES.
A cattle ranch in America is nothing like an Australian
cattle station. If there were any points of resemblance I
should state them first, but there are none. I was going
to say that the only similarity is that the stock have horns,
but then the horns are different also, being longer in
proportion to the animal than in Australia. The wide
dissimilarity results from differences in the land-laws, in
the pastures, and in the climate. As a general rule, the
cattle raiser in the west has neither ownership nor lease of
his run. The land is owned by the United States Govern-
ment, by whom the ranchero is not recognised except as
the occupier of his homestead block of 160 acres. Local
state laws regulate his ownership of his cattle, upon which
he pays a property tax ; but his run, or “ range,” is only
held by mutual consent. His improvements, therefore, are
not extensive, and the pastures and climate are such that
improvements would be of greater benefit than in Australia.
There are freehold ranches, large and small, in most of the
western states ; but the system for the most part is that of
homesteading” the head quarters, and taking what local
public opinion will allow in the way of run or “ range.”
Cattle ranching in the Western States may be divided
into three classes, viz., “ the fencing system,” “ close herd-
ing,” and “loose herding.” The fencing system is that
which differs least from squatting in Australia, for the run


is enclosed with wire fences. Fenced runs are generally
private property, the land having been purchased from
college trustees, railway companies, from Spanish grantees
or what may be called the Mexican States ; or from the
state Government in Texas. The large cattle runs managed
under this system are generally in the hands of powerful
companies, consisting in most cases of English and Scotch
capitalists, the Duke of Manchester and other well-known
names being connected with the enterprises. Upon these
estates there is generally an improved breed of cattle, more
01 less improvement of the property, and greater or less
success attained in the way of fattening the cattle for
market. The lands have been obtained at various prices,
ranging fiom 2s. to 20s. per acre, and the profitableness of
the business may be gathered more from the increasing
amount of capital that is being yearly put into it than from
the exaggerated statements of those who have land for
sale.
-I he Western Land and Cattle Company, of which Lord
Geoige Campbell is the most prominent member, carries on
a ranch upon the fencing-in principle in Central Kansas. The
estate consists of 33,000 acres of purchased land, all fenced
in and subdivided. Two railway grants overlapped each
other at mis point, and made a solid allotment of alienated
land which could be purchased. It is the aim of Mr.
J. R. Hilston to make this property keep 3000 head of
well-bred cattle, and fatten the surplus stock for market
Ihe estate is in what may be called the prairie belt, as
distinguished from the buffalo belt. There is a tract of
country, about 300 miles wide, along the foot of the Rocky
Mountains, which was the haunt of the buffalo, and upon
which buffalo grass is the chief pasture. Eastward of the
buffalo belt are the prairies, rolling, open country of the
same kind, but producing prairie grass, blue grass, and other
herbage, constituting very fine pasture in the spring and
summer. Although the pasture on the prairie country is
much more abundant than upon the buffalo belt, it has the
drawback of entirely disappearing when the frost and snow
o winter The buffalo grass, though not growing
more than 4m. in height, is cured into a kind of hay by
the frosts, and constitutes food for stock in the winter. An
extensive range of buffalo country, for which nothing is
paid, is profitable enough as a place for raising store stock;


but in working purchased land in the prairie country, where
there is no grass in winter, something more than merely
herding store cattle is required to bring in profits.
As the Western Land and Cattle Company’s ranch is
within the prairie belt, Mr. Hilton has to provide food for
his stock in winter, and, under the circumstances, finds it
unprofitable to sell store cattle. The snows in this region
are not severe, and, as the snow is generally dry, it falls off
the cattle instead of sticking to them and chilling them.
Shelter from cold winds, therefore, without roofing, is all
that is needed for the stock. High stone walls in the
vicinity of clumps of trees are provided for shelter, and in
the feeding paddocks so arranged that cattle consume their
winter food. A large quantity of hay is made in the
season. The prairie grass naturally produces about a ton
of hay to the acre. Mowing machines and large hay rakes,
with horse-power stack elevators, are employed in cheaply
providing a supply of hay for the winter. Maize can
be obtained from the neighbouring farms as cheap as it
could be grown, say from Bd. to Is. per bushel. Maize
stalks can be bought for about 2s. an acre for the carrying
away, and frequently the crop is purchased standing, and
both corn and stalk given to the cattle. With this supply
of food the stock is kept through the winter, and put
fat on to the market at the best time. “ Graded ” short-
horns are kept, that is native cattle improved as far as
possible by the use of shorthorn bulls. Steers are thus
obtained weighing from 1200 lbs. to UOOlbs. at three years
old, and by the system of feeding they are sent to market
in a condition to fetch 3d. to 4d. per lb. at a time when
Texan grass-fed light-weights are selling for per lb.
The bulk of the western grass-fed cattle are also sent to
market in the autumn, whereas by the system under notice
fat stock can be sent in to obtain higher prices as Christmas
beef in winter.
In the close-herding system mounted stock-riders, here
called “ cow-boys,” look after the cattle and keep them
upon the run. Upon ranches of this kind there is generally
no provision for feeding stock in the winter. In the buffalo
country, however, there is cured grass or buffalo hay for the
cattle that are hardy enough to stand the coldness of the
climate. There must be hills, gullies or belts of timber on
the range for shelter or it is useless for winter. If there is


shelter, and the cattle are Texans or descendants of Texans,
they will find it. The hardy Texan cattle know how to
rustle, that is, seek for shelter as well as food in winter,
while the English pure breeds would starve for want of food
or perish with the cold. This need of acclimatised cattle
for the western ranges makes the improvement of the breed
a slow process.
Loose herding is the system of allowing all the cattle of
a district to roam at large, the cow boys of the different
owners only attending to the boundaries and joining in a
general “ round up ” when the owners have their respective
brands put upon the young stock. There is a “ round up ”
in the spring for branding and counting, and another in
the autumn for picking out marketable stock. In some
territories, and especially in Montana, a large number of
cattle are fattened upon the grass, but the rule is that only
store stock is raised upon the western ranges.
A large capital is not required to go into the cattle
business, from £3 to £6 per head, according to circum-
stances, purchasing both cattle and range. Freehold runs
can be purchased for from 10s. to £2 per acre. There is a
good market for stock, and the cattle business is generally
considered one of the most profitable in the country. While
it will have been gathered from the foregoing that, as far
as natural capabilities for grazing are concerned, America
cannot compare favourably with Australia, the cattle
business is, and is likely to continue, profitable in the
country. The stocking-up of available country has been
progressing briskly for some years, and although it received
a check from the great losses during the winter of 1880,
it has reached a point from which the extension must be
slow. There are 53 millions of people in the United States,
and only 35,890,000 cattle. The price of meat is now
high, and as the population is rapidly increasing, values
are more likely to range higher than become lower. There
is therefore good reason to believe that cattle raising in
America may continue to be profitable without that
country being a dangerous rival to Australia in the expor-
tation of beef. Sheep-keeping under similar climatic
conditions can only be carried on with indifferent success.
Americans are well satisfied with the result, but admit that
they cannot compete with Australia. There were only
45,000,000 sheep in the United States in 1880.


CHAPTER XXXIX.
WESTWARD TO KANSAS.
Travelling at night in a Pulman sleeping-car, that
system so excellent for saving time and missing objects of
interest which I commenced on setting out from New
York is continued, and my first feat after leaving Washing-
ton is to sleep myself over the Alleghany Mountains. All
my ideas of the beautiful scenery of these mountains are
obtained from the illustrated little volume presented by
the agent of the “B. and 0.” Railway Company, and
Western Virginia, and a large section of Ohio, are only
represented by hours of slumber. Small farms with “corn ”
and tobacco, interspersed by beautiful bright green woods
in undulating country, are all I see until, amid a confusion
of railway tracks, our train steams into Cincinnatti.
This busy, smoky, gloomily-picturesque city, of 255,000
inhabitants, situated on a high bluff above the broad Ohio
River, is only glanced at. The proportion of negroes
among the people in the streets, the numerous river steam-
boats at the piers, and the old-fashioned appearance of the
city make me long to stay, but, like the young man in
“Excelsior,” I cannot be tempted. “Porkopolis” is the
nickname of Cincinnatti, owing to its share in
the hog business, but the name of “ Queen City ” is claimed
by the inhabitants, while they also hold that Longfellow
referred to Cincinnatti when he speaks of
“ The Queen of the West
In her garlands dressed
On the hanks of the Beautiful Elver.”
Another sleep disposes of the State of Indiana and most
of Southern Illinois. The few hours travelling in the
morning before reaching St. Louis gives a favourable
impression of the fertility of the Mississippi Valley, and
the action of the conductor in providing us with hot
coffee and biscuits on the train creates a friendly feeling
to the Chicago and Alton Railroad Company, on whose
line we are travelling. Where he got the coffee I know
not, but I know I never paid ten cents more freely in my


civ ility and obliging character of the railway
n Seem iu IIICrCc T from da y to day, and the
remembrance of them makes one feel inclined to shoot off
the whole army of barrier keepers and ticket-nippers with
whom he is tortured daily in Victoria. 1
„ city °f St Louis is approached by crossing a
f r aod bridge over the Mississippi. The approaches of the
onllft are -fi mi 0 m en sth, and the iron structure itself is
V a C6n l re i Spai ? °t 550 ft > carr y in Z the railway
tram 55ft above the level of the water. St. Louis is the
great rival of Chicago but the young city on Lake
qvnnnA ll f aS th t beSt °^-i ti 10 contest. The population is
350,000, not much more than half that of Chicago, and it
is neither so new looking nor so busy. I stay at the
rlanters -house, where the wealthy slave-owners, with their
tram ol attendants, used to lounge and discuss the nigger
question, and I see the block of new buildings which takes
the place of the old slave market. Negroes are plentiful
enough, but there is nothing to indicate that slavery was
once practised m the state. One is interested most of all
m the strange-lookmg steamboats, and somewhat surprised
that railways have well-nigh destroyed the river traffic. I
sleep now more frequently in railway-cars than in hotels
and, as night comes on, I retire to rest, slumbering through
the state of Missouri, and taking breakfast at Kansas city.
Kansas is a lively place. Everything is new, and all is
bustle and business. The city has been “booming” for
some years growing rapidly with the settlement of Kansas
state and the opening up of the south-west by the Atcheson,
I opeka, apd Santa Fe liailway. Its business is hogs, cattle
corn gram and the supply of lumber, and all that is
wanted on the western prairies. Although the commercial
centre of Kansas state, the city is in Missouri. A new
section of the town is across the border line in Kansas
state, and so we find that on one side of a wide street
Missouri law prevails, and Kansas law on the other. As a
prohibitory liquor law exists in Kansas state and a licensing
laW - 1 ? L I , SSOUn traffic across the dividing street is
considerable. Kansas is too far west yet for the Maine law
to be a success. Drinking saloons are met with everywhere
carrying on business in defiance of the law. “ High licence”
is much more successful, for in those states where the system
is introduced the number of public-houses is diminished.


and a large revenue obtained at the same time. I was told
in Maine that if I “ gave the wink ” I could get a drink in
any drug store. I did not try the experiment, but concluded
that there could be less drinking where people were com-
pelled to go round winking than where a licensed publican
stood winking at every corner.
Topeka, the capital of Kansas, is reached after travelling
sixty-five miles westward over the fertile valley of the
Missouri River. “ Corn ” fields all along the route, and
more abundant crops than I have seen on the Mississippi.
Luxuriant growth everywhere, and where there is no
“corn” there are abundant crops of wild sunflowers and
other weeds. State capitals are generally slow, sleepy
places in America. Topeka is not as large as Kansas city,
but it is neither slow nor sleepy. The town is “ booming,”
the building blocks are spreading over the adjoining farms,
everything looks as new as at Horsham, on the Wimmera,
and there is an air of progress everywhere. This is
different from most state capitals. While in the colonies
being a political capital would be as good as ever so many
rich quartz reefs to a town, it does not count for much in
the States. As a local writer says : —“ The sale of hash to
a legislature is at best a fleeting resource, while state
institutions, as a rule, purchase their supplies by contract
at commercial centres, and do little for the sleepy towns
in which they are located.” Topeka, happily, has resources
of a less fleeting character in its rich farming land, and in
being an important railway centre.
The great railway corporation of the south-west, the
popular and enterprising Atcheson, Topeka, and Santa Fe
Railroad Company, has its headquarters at Topeka, and
this fact is evidently of more commercial importance than
the biennial meetings of the Legislature. About a dozen
years ago this was the wild far west, reached only from the
south or east, but the A. T. and S. F. has rapidly “grid-
ironed ” the State with railways, and connected it with the
mines of Colorado, the varied interests of Mexico, Texas,
and New Mexico, and with the Pacific Coast, making it an
important point upon the great southern route between the
Mississippi Valley and the sea and between the two oceans
which wash the shores of the continent. There are other
railway companies in Kansas and the south-west, but the
Atcheson, Topeka and Santa Fe is the leading and


controlling corporation. It has embroidered the State with
its main loop and “ cockspur ” lines, and sent long branches
out through the adjoining States and territories. In
Colorado it connects with the Denver and Rio Grande,
opening up to its passengers the grand scenery of the
Rocky Mountains and the rich mines of Leadville and
other districts, while through the same avenues Utah,
Nevada, and northern California are reached. On the east
it connects with the Mississippi, the Missouri, the Gulf of
Mexico, and the Atlantic coast by way of the Chicago and
Alton, the Baltimore and Ohio, and other lines. On the
south it traverses New Mexico and Arizona, tapping
Texas, and joins the Southern Pacific, which runs to San
Francisco harbour, and by means of two main lines, the
second of which will soon be completed, it reaches the city
of Mexico and the port of Guaymas on the Gulf of
California, The unpopularity of a corporation generally
increases in proportion as its power increases, but owing, no
doubt, to the evident good done by the Atcheson, Topeka
and Santa Fe, and the way in which it has conducted its
business, its popularity is as far reaching as its lines.
Guaymas may yet be an important name in Australia
and New Zealand, and the A. T. and S. F. may play as
important a part in sending a population to the Southern
Hemisphere as it has done in settling Kansas and New
Mexico. The port of Guaymas is said to be a good one,
and it is nearer to us than San Francisco. From Guaymas,
by way of Topeka and Kansas city, would be the shortest
across the continent by at least twenty-four hours, and in
these days, when time is such an object, it is not unreason-
able to suppose that the claims of the old Santa Fe trail as
a mail route will receive consideration. I have no doubt
that Mr. W. F. White and his colleague in the management
of the A. T. and S. F. Company have their eyes upon the
chances, and should there be a show of success,
they are the right kind of men to “ take hold ” of the
business.
I set out westward from Topeka, but unlike the railway
company when it set out, I know where I am going. The
company began making a railway westward without know-
ing their destination. Kansas was a State worth settling
upon, and the railway line marched westward, inducing the
population to follow it. In Australia the people settle upon


the land and afterwards pray and beseech railways to Come
to them, and nothing better can be expected of the
“ Government stroke.” Mr. White, whose genial manner
throws no suspicion upon his truthfulness, assured me that
a few years ago it was no uncommon occurrence for the
herds of buffaloes to stop the trains. There is still plenty
of buffalo-hunting in the western territories, but I only
saw the animals in menageries, Mr. White’s railways having
substituted cattle, sheep, and hogs upon the Kansas
prairies. It was some time after the line began to go out
west that it was decided to strike south, and join the
Southern Pacific Railway in Deming, at Arizona.
The prairies are as boundless as I expected, but not so
level. The waving grass, 2ft. in height, is a pretty sight,
but the fact that the farmers and ranchmen are making it
into hay reminds us of the severe winter, against which
food has to be provided for stock. In mild winters and
level plains the prairies cannot compete with Australia.
When we get into western Kansas we reach the dry belt of
country which was described in treating of Colorado, the
adjoining State, and here, at Garden City, settlement is
taking place in irrigation colonies. Canals or “ ditches ”
with sufficient capacity to irrigate 200,000 acres have been
made near the Arkansas River, and the success of the
system has been assured. There are millions of acres yet
to be taken up in all parts of Kansas, but settlers are
pretty thickly studded all along the line for more than
300 miles. The railway townships are new, the hedges and
plantations around the homesteads are young, and the
recent character of the settlement is everywhere apparent.
The railway company has good farming land for sale at
from 16s. 6d. to 325. per acre, and grazing land at from
6s. 6d. to 14s. 6d., while agents are employed in the leading
cities of Europe to bring the attractions of the State under
notice. The lands department of the company is an
important bureau, issuing maps, statistics, and illustrated
pamphlets. People in the old countries are allowed to find
out the attractions of Victoria from their own inner
consciousness, and one wonders that so many discover our
hidden treasures. When we consider what America is doing
to attract population, it is surprising that anyone at ail
takes the trouble of searching out information concerning
the far-off and silent Australian colonies.


Dodge City, in central Kansas, had a “ hard name ” a
few years ago for wild western lawlessness. “ See that
wooden saloon there,” said a young ranchman, who was my
travelling companion, pointing to one of the numerous
saloons and dance-houses which supply the “cow boys”
with bad whisky and other degrading indulgences. “Well, it
was from that flat roof that the marshal shot the cow boy
last week. The cow boy had got the draw on the marshal,
and taken his revolver belt from him. He was galloping
off on his mustang, and had reached that bridge, when the
marshal, borrowing a Winchester, mounted the roof and
brought him down.” And yet Dodge is respectable now to
what, it was. About thirty lives were lost in restoring the
place to the present ordinary condition, and the cemetery
is called “ Boot-hill,” owing to the majority of the occu-
pants having been interred with their boots on. There is
at present in existence a fund subscribed by the cow boys
for the support of the wife and family of the next man who
shall “ act mean as between the cow boys and the
authorities. The marshal, however, is at present master
of the situation, and is likely to remain so, as the cow
boys cannot well get the upper hand when there is rapid
railway and telegraphic communication.
The cow boy is, after all, a harmless character. He is a
young bushman of the ordinary type, neither better nor
worse naturally than other lads, but he lives on the ranches,
associating exclusively with his class, and visiting civilisa-
tion perhaps once a year. He carries revolvers to protect
himself from Indians, and from anyone else who may
interfere with his rights. He is not specially brave, but
puts very little value on life, and his recklessness passes
for courage until he meets with a determined opponent,
when he quickly gives in. The specimens met with in the
south-west look innocent enough in themselves. It is only
their belt bristling with pistols that looks formidable.
“ Clearing out a town,” when the cow boys get “ shewtin’
round,” is generally attended by loss of life ; but it is easily
done by an officer whom the boys know to be really “on
the shoot.”


CHAPTER XL.
THE SOUTHERN ROUTE.
We get through Kansas, and cutting across the south-
eastern corner of Colorado, enter New Mexico at the foot
of the Rocky Mountains. Travelling southward the train
crosses a spur of the Rockies through the Raton Pass into
the valley of the Rio Grande. Extensive cattle ranches
and the mud huts of Mexicans and Indians, with their
ever-present accompaniment of goats, dogs, and burros, are
the chief objects of interest. The burros are scruhby-
looking little donkeys, the colour of an old man kangaroo,
but they carry burdens twice their own bulk, and patiently
allow themselves to be ridden by the lazy Mexicans. The
sheep and the goats have got hopelessly mixed, and one
cannot imagine how they are to be separated, while the
same may be said of the Mexicans and Indians. It is
difficult to say where the Indian finishes and the Mexican
begins in many instances, and the one race seems as good
as the other. Both are lazy and both dirty. The mud
houses of the Mexicans are a copy of the pueblos of the
Indians, and the people lie around among the dogs in both
cases. A Mexican woman with a black shawl over her
head looks out from every mud house, and there is a fixed,
ancient look about the dingy dwellings. Inside, the house
is as dirty as that of the woman in the Scriptures, who,
when she lost a piece of silver had to sweep the floor to
find it. Perhaps cleanliness is a modern virtue.
Les Vegas, the most attractive pleasure and health resort
in the south-west, is arrived at soon after crossing the
Raton Pass, and happy is the traveller who can rest a few
days amid so much that is interesting and enjoyable. To
this delightful spot, from the mines of Colorado, the
•ranches of Kansas, and from the vast territories of Texas
and Mexico, gather all in search of health or pleasurable
change. Almost as many brides are to be seen at Las
Vegas as at Niagara Falls, and there is a perpetual
succession of honeymoons at the Montezuma Hotel. The
attractions of the place are this grand hotel, the hot
springs, and the delightful situation, 6000 feet above the


sea, on the foot-hills of the mountains. The hotel is mag-
nificent. It was built by the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa
Fe Railroad Company, and is so furnished and conducted
that every guest shall be impelled to speak well of the
Montezuma, and recommend all his friends to visit it.
There is accommodation for 200 guests, and all that
furniture, plate glass, gildings, carpets, electric bells,
pianos, billiard-tables, pictures, and civil attendants can
do to produce luxurious comfort has been brought into
requisition. With such an hotel to live in, the warm
medicinal springs to bathe in, and plenty of swarthy
Mexican and peculiar races of peaceful Indians to study,
not to speak of ruined pueblos, and the strange natural
features of the country, it is not easy to leave Las Vegas
hurriedly. From a hill near at hand Montezuma is said to
have ascended, and the Pueblo Indians are still looking for
his return. When he comes he will, no doubt, stay at the
hotel which has been named after him, and one feels
inclined to wait a week or two to give him a reception.
When I travel in Eastern countries I expected to be
reminded of New Mexico at every turn, for I am constantly
meeting with the originals of illustrations in Dr. Kitto’s
Bible. There is the bullock-dray with wheels made out of
a solid log, the crooked stick for a plough, with the oxen
yoked by the horns, women grinding at a mill as in the
beginning, irrigation works, sheep, goats, asses, and every-
thing to complete an ancient picture. The mustangs, or
Mexican ponies, are hardy enough to be Arab horses, the
Indian rider dashing across the plain is sufficiently pic-
turesque for the Bedouin as seen in books. The mud
houses of the Indians are flat-roofed, and some of the
family sleep on top, as it is a cool place, and they can watch
their flocks by night. Ruins of ancient cities and exten-
sive irrigation canals are found along this valley of the
Rio Grande, and it is not surprising that philosophers are
endeavouring to connect the Aztec or Toltec predecessors
of the present Indians with the ancient Egyptians.
Santa Fe, one of the most ancient cities in America, is
not far south of Las Vegas, and is reached by a short
branch line from the main track. It was a city long
before Columbus was born, and possessed a history when
entered by the Spaniards in 1640. The old San Miguel
Church, which is one of the sights, was built in 1640, partly


destroyed by the Indians who drove out the Spaniards in
1680, and restored in 1710. Like everything else in New
Mexico, the church is built of adobe, and it looks like the
shell of a brick-kiln. Inside it is narrow, and a dim, reli-
gious light is thrown upon the wooden effigies of saints, and
upon oil-painting decaying with age. A grand stone
cathedral is being built over another such mud church, for
Archbishop Lamy rules from Santa Fe a vast spiritual
kingdom of Mexican and Indian subjects, scattered over
many hundred miles of country. With the mud that was
left after finishing the churches they built the town, and
there must have been a building law to secure uniformity
in the design of the houses. You could build where you
liked, but your house had to be an exact copy of the other
man’s, and you had to avoid leaving a wide street, or lead-
ing the street more than two chains in a straight line. The
streets are wide enough to let two burros loaded with fire-
wood or carrying long-legged Mexicans with projecting
knees pass each other; and every crooked thoroughfare
leads to the plaza or open square in front of the palace.
The palace is one of the mud houses made bigger for the
use of the Governor, and many a different flag waved over
it until the star-spangled banner got put up to stay. A
strong detachment of Uncle Sam’s army has cool mud
quarters in the town, as the capital of New Mexico is a
military post from which to fight the Apache Indians and
other disturbers of the peace.
The blocks of buildings present a dead wall to the street,
without windows or doors. There is a large gate in each,
leading to an inner open square, or placita, and from this
all the surrounding houses are reached. Long lines of
blocks join each other, and a common verandah on the
street side serves a whole series. This is the original plan,
but the Americans have got in, and are rapidly spoiling the
ancient simplicity. There are 9000 inhabitants, and every
train brings its band of Yankee “ drummers ” (commercial
travellers.) The drummers book orders, and the smart
men who have come from Boston to run stores in Santa Fe
must sell the goods. These traders could not wait until
they got a customer into a placita, so they have punched
holes in the mud walls, inserted doors and plate-glass
windows, and generally lined the streets with canned vege-
tables and slop suits. There is a thriving business also in


ancient pottery taken from the ruins of Toltec cities —at
least the models, from which the Yankee manufacturers’
work were soon obtained. The servant girls of the ancients
did not leave enough crockery unbroken to supply the
modern demand for curios. The filagree work, however, is
genuine. The art, brought over by the Spaniards, has been
retained in great perfection, and in one establishment
Mexican men and women can be seen working gold and
silver into the most beautiful designs in filagree. Harps,
guitars, violins, gondolas, and other fanciful articles are
shaped in hand-wrought filagree of the finest kind, and the
articles are sold at a reasonable price, much cheaper than
anything at Niagara Falls. Boys in Yankee accents vend
the evening paper, and altogether Santa Fe presents that
strange mixture of ancient and modern development met
with all over the great south-west.
Joining the main line again, our journey is along the
valley of the Rio Grande, and the train passes Indian
villages, Mexican towns, and crosses irrigation ditches, with
their accompanying patches of maize, potatoes and wheat
as long as the light serves, and far into the night the moon
reveals a similar condition of things. It is a dry region,
and the old canals show that the ancient inhabitants, as
well as the modern Pueblo Indians, had to cultivate by
means of irrigation. The morning brings us to Doming, on
the Southern Pacific railroad. Here the track runs in one
direction to San Francisco, and in the other through Texas
to New Orleans. For a look at Texas and Mexico I strike
away to the south-west, and after 250 miles travelling over
a barren desert with sage bush and cacti I again strike the
Rio Grande at El Paso in Texas, and crossing the river get
a glance of El Paso del Norte in Mexico. El Paso is
another old mud town galvanised into modern American
life by the railways, and El Paso del Norte shows that the
Yankee “ drummer ” has made an attack on old Mexico.
A good deal of Spanish is spoken all over the south-west,
but here you must go into an American store or beer
saloon if you wish to speak English. The Mexican
dollar is current coin, and the notice-boards tell you to
‘Took out for the engine” in Spanish. Looking out for
the engine is a more lively exercise than looking for Monte-
zuma, and the Mexicans will have to hurry on or be
hurried off by the irrepressible Americans, For 200 miles


in every direction from here there is little else than desert
country ; but there are rich mines of gold and silver, and
there are grand pastures in Texas, Mexico, Arizona, and
New Mexico. These are bringing the locomotives and the
Americans.
Westward from Doming through Arizona is the next
movement, and heat, mosquitoes, and sandy deserts are the
chief objects of interest. At El Paso and El Pasodel Norte
the heat and mosquitoes were well-nigh intolerable, the
nights being as hot as the days, and more lively with
mosquitoes. So it is through Arizona. We cross the
Arizona desert, which is 266 ft. below the level of the sea,
where there is nothing but sand, bare rocks, and gigantic
cactus plants. The cacti are worth going through the
desert to see. One variety is like a beautiful branching
eperyal, 20ft. in height, bearing bright red flowers on every
delicate limb, and the “ boss cactus ” is more strange than
beautiful, being like a telegraph pole 50ft. in height. A
complete specimen has one or two straight limbs sticking
out like the wings of a railway semaphore. The bare rocky
mountains on the north are rich in gold mines, and con-
siderable operations are carried on around Tombstone, the
capital of the territory, the Epitaph being the appropriate
name of the leading journal. At Port Yuma, on the banks
of the muddy red Colorado River, we arrive early in the
morning, and the people are asleep on the roofs of houses,
and upon bedsteads standing out in the yards and gardens.
Such is the heat of the nights that the inhabitants prefer
to lie outside and fight the mosquitoes.
The railway train is the true ship of the desert. In
your Pulman, with its supply of ice water, and the black
attendant to adjust the windows, and do the dusting, you
cross this sunken desert in midsummer without serious
inconvenience. The “ Atlantic and Pacific” is a new line
now open, but not quite completed last year, by which all
the advantages of the southern route can be obtained
without crossing the desert. It strikes off at Albuquerque,
between Santa Fe and Doming, and passes through grand
mountain scenery, coming out into California about 300
miles south of San Francisco.


CHAPTER XLI.
IRRIGATION IN CALIFORNIA.
From what has been said in regard to the climate of
California, it will be understood that irrigation is a
necessary accompaniment of agriculture in most parts of
the San Joaquin Valley. Towards the head of the valley
the annual rainfall is not more than four inches, the
precipitation increasing on the districts to the northward
until a fairly moist climate is reached at the junction of
the Sacramento below Stocton. In the Sacramento Valley
and in the coast districts irrigation is practised to some
extent to increase the productiveness of soil which yields
good crops under the natural rainfall of from 14in. to 26in.,
but in the driest parts of the San Joaquin Valley agriculture
is not attempted without the artificial application of water
to the land. Like the State of Colorado and the Territory
of Utah, these portions of California are incapable of
cultivation without irrigation, and the development of
agriculture depends upon the supply of water.
The King’s River, which rises in the snows of the Sierra
Nevada near the source of the San Joaquin, runs through a
tract of rich land in a region where the annual rainfall is
only six inches. This river supplies water to more irriga-
tion canals than any other stream in California. The San
Joaquin perhaps supplies as many at different points of its
course, but the irrigation districts of King’s River being
closer together make this part of the state the most
important centre of irrigation in California. Where the
King’s is tapped by the principal canals it is a swift-
running shallow stream, flowing between low banks over a
stony bed about 80ft. wide. Its volume, I should judge,
is much less than that of the Goulburn, but greater than
any other of the northern rivers of Victoria, while, like the
Goulburn, it is a permanent stream, rising highest in the
summer, when water for irrigation is most required. The
agricultural land commanded by the canals from this
river is more level than that of Colorado, but much more


uneven than the valleys of the Goulburn and Murray, and
it has a fall in different parts of one foot to five feet to the
mile. The soil is a rich friable loam, from three feet to six
feet deep, upon a kind of porous sandstone, the loose
alluvium being more like the loamy pine ridges than the
stiff clay flats of the Murray Valley.
Although it is not eleven years since the first ditch was
made to take water from the King’s River, several important
colonies have already been formed, and as many canals
constructed. Among the canals constructed the following
are the most important : —The Fresno Canal and Irrigation
Company’s, with a right to take 1000 cubic feet per minute;
the King’s River and Fresno Canal Company’s, with a right
to 250 cubic feet; the Kingsburg and Canterville
Irrigation Ditch Company, with 200 cubic feet ; the
Emigrant Ditch, 50 cubic feet ; the Liberty Ditch,
30 cubic feet ; and the Fowler Switch Canal, designed
to carry 1500 cubic feet. The Fowler Switch Canal
has only just been completed, and has not yet begun
to draw a supply, while some of the other ditches do not,
as yet, take all the water they are entitled to. Whether
there is water enough to supply all these canals in an
unfavourable season is a question upon which there are
differences of opinion. Canal owners say there is plenty of
water, but there are others not connected with these enter-
prises who say more rights have been taken up than the
river can supply.
There is no better proof of the profitableness of irriga-
tion than the value of land. Brought to this test, irriga-
tion in Utah and Colorado was shown to be profitable, and
in California the proof from this source is still more con-
clusive. Irrigated land in California is worth about twice
as much as irrigated land in Colorado. At Fresno I found
bare land under canals selling at from £lO to £ls per acre.
There was no watered land in the market at a lower price
than £lO per acre, and some lots had changed hands at £2O
per acre, while it is on record that as high as £6O per acre
has been given for bare land at Riverside. Land of similar
quality to which water cannot be brought can be bought at
from 12s. 6d. to 20s. per acre. That land should command
high prices in a country which contains large areas of good
public land in moist regions, and where farms can be
obtained from the Government for nothing is surprising,


and the values obtained in irrigated districts show how
profitable irrigation has proved itself to be. The difference
in land values in the irrigated districts of California and
Colorado is owing to a diversity of climate. In California the
climate is warm, like that of the valley of the Murray or
Darling, fruit and vine growing is being carried on, and it is
the profitableness of these industries under irrigation that
has forced up the value of land. In Colorado the climate is
cold, with freezing winters, so that ordinary farming has to
be followed, and for this purpose, even with irrigation, land
is not so valuable as for fruit growing. Irrigation has been
successful in Colorado, but it is only in California that a
sample can he seen of what irrigation would be likely to
do in Australia —for it is only California that enjoys an
Australian climate.
The rate at which water is supplied varies in the different
districts, but the average price seems to be lower than in
Colorado, and less water is supplied. At Fresno a perpetual
water right is obtained for £2 per acre, and an annual rate
of 2s. 7d. per acre has to be paid in addition for main-
tenance and working expenses. Water is supplied at the
rate of a cubic foot per second for every 160 acres of land,
while in Colorado a water-right gives a cubic foot per
second for every 53 acres. It must not be forgotten that
this is only the measurement of the stream to which a
right-holder is entitled. He can use the water as often or
as long as he chooses. It does not follow that more water
is used in Colorado than in California, for the fruit-grower
in the latter State may and does irrigate oftener than the
grain-grower of the former. In flooding water over the
surface of the land a greater flow is needed than for run-
ning water down furrows between rows of trees or vines.
However, the allowance at Fresno is found to be sufficient,
and it is well understood that after being once soaked the
land requires less water than at first. There are parts of
California where water costs as high as 10s. per acre ; but,
as far as I could ascertain, the average cost, including
water-right, amounts to about 6s. per acre, or about 6d.
per acre less than in Colorado.


CHAPTER XLII.
HOP CULTURE.
Californian hops have been sold in Australian markets at
a price so low as to make all competitors despair, but those
connected with the industry will be pleased to learn that
the hops were not produced at the rates accepted. Four or
five years ago, when hops from this state were landed in
Australia and sold at such trifling prices, there was a
glutted market, many hop-growers were ruined, and many
plantations were rooted up. The business improved again,
and last season 3s. and 4s. per pound were obtained, while
the effect of the “ boom” has been that the area has more
than doubled in a single year. This will probably produce
another glutted market, and if so, the area will again soon
decrease, for the Californian farmer works for dollars, and
will not continue a business that is not profitable. The
chief hop-growing county of California is Sacramento,
situated upon the river of the same name, and Mr. Flint,
of Sacramento, is the pioneer hop-grower of the state,
having begun in 1858 and kept at the business ever since.
The soil is a deep alluvial deposit, such as is found in the
valleys of the Mitchell, Clarence, and other rivers on the
Australian coast, and its fertility is proved by the heavy
yields which it produces. All kinds of wild statements as
to the yields of crops are found in the Californian news-
papers, but there is no one better able to speak with
authority upon hop-culture than Mr, Flint, and his state-
ments can be relied upon. This gentleman assures me
that a ton to the acre is only an average crop upon a pro-
perly cultivated plantation. Upon a portion of his plan-
tation that was irrigated with liquid from the city sewer,
Mr. Flint states that he obtained the extraordinary yield
of SOOOlbs. per acre. What is equally surprising is the
early maturity of the hop plants. From yearling hops as
much as 2000 lbs. per acre has frequently been obtained,
and an average of lOOOlbs. per acre can generally be relied
upon as a first year’s crop. These yields are obtained from


yearlings without irrigation or manure. This early maturity
seems to be followed by early decay, for the plants require
renewing every fifth or sixth year.
It is the custom to place the hills 7ft. apart, with two
plants to each hill, the bulk of the work of cultivation
being done by horse ploughs and scarifiers. Different
methods of poling are adopted, but the most approved is to
train two bines on each pole. The average cost of poles is
X 8 per 1000, although the price this season was much
greater, owing to the great increase in planting. Some of
the growers obtain poles at a cheaper rate, owing to having
willow forests upon their land. There are large tracts of
land along the Sacramento and its tributary streams that
have been destroyed by a deposit of sludge from the
hydraulic mines in the mountains, and upon these tracts
the native willow grows very rapidly. Manuring is only
beginning to receive attention. Year after year the rich
soil of the valley has been producing heavy crops of hops,
and vast quantities of leaves and bines, without receiving
anything in return ; but it is being discovered that this
system must come to an end.
The picking process is one of the most important in
regard to the cost of production; and here we are met
with the fact that there are no women or children employed
in the work. Very few boys, either, seem to be available
for this department of field labour, and Chinamen are
chiefly relied upon. There is nothing surprising in finding
that the Chinese are very good at this kind of work, but it
is surprising to learn that the cost of picking does not
exceed about 2d. per lb. of cured hops. The rate is 3s. 5 jd.
per lOOlbs. of green hops, and, upon an average, lOOlbs. of
green hops make 301bs. of cured hops. Kilns and pressing
appliances of all kinds are employed, hopgrowers, like other
farmers in California, being inclined to find out methods of
their own rather than to imitate their neighbours. As a
rule, however, the drying kiln is of brick, at least, upon the
best plantations, while the cooling, pressing, and storing
rooms are of wood. The floor of the drying kilns, in some
cases, instead of being covered with haircloth, is overlaid
with large trays of fine wire, upon which the hops are
spread, and which are removed, carrying the hops with
them, when the drying process is completed. This system
has been adopted in order to save time and labour.


More than half of the hops grown in the United States
are produced in New York State, where the average yield
is not more than 500 lbs. per acre, and, in California, where
the yields are so heavy, Mr. Flint considers the crop will
not pay at less than lOd. per pound. Lower prices would
soon reduce the area of plantations and lead to a return of
profitable values.
CHAPTER XLIII.
FRUIT CANNING FACTORIES.
There are in San Francisco and its suburban city of Oak-
land seven large canneries, as well as several others in the
various irtiit-producing centres of the State, and as those
surrounded by a good supply of fruit seem to be in the
best circumstances for carrying on operations effectively,
I selected the San Jose Fruit-preserving Company’s
establishment for my first visit. San Jose occupies a
central position in the Santa Clara Valley, and the factory
is built on a corner lot in the town. In 1865 the Joint
-Stock Company was incorporated, and the best proof of its
success is the fact that the business has steadily increased,
necessitating an enlargement of the premises from time to
time. Last season one and a half million cans of fruit were
turned out, and the manager expects, with his present
facilities, to put up three million cans of season s crop.
A can represents so that last seasons output was
3,700,0001b5., and this year’s is expected to be 7,400,0001b5.
of fruit. Canning companies have been known to fail in
business like other corporations, but with proper manage-
ment they are generally profitable concerns. A range of
two-story buildings, occupying an allotment 550 ft. by 137 ft.,
constitutes the factory. The fruit is first received and
weighed in a large room on the first floor, ihis is
rendered cool by having double walls filled in between with
sawdust, and it is capable of storing a large quantity of
fruit. From the store room the fruit is taken into the mam


canning room, a large square apartment, where all the pro-
cesses are completed as far as closing up the cans. Two
streams of fruit pass through this room, one down each
side, graduating from hand to hand and receiving treatment
at each step until, on reaching the bottom of the room, the
cans are soldered up and sent to the next apartment, where
the heating process is carried out.
First, the fruit goes to the pickers, about thirty or forty
women and girls, who pick off the stems and assort or
“grade” it. Grading is an important work, for, as the
manager points out, the smallest apricot or cherry in a lot
is the selling standard of the whole. A man would give
more for five medium-sized peaches than for four of the
same size and one much larger, and on this account the
fruit is all assorted and the different sizes sold separately.
The women sit at large tables upon which the fruit is placed,
and with their quick-moving fingers assort it into three
qualities, removing the leaves and stems at the same time.
The fruit next passes to women who put it into the cans,
and the cans are moved along to other women who pour in
syrup from taps. The women who fill the cans with syrup
pass them on to others who wipe off all the syrup from the
outside with cloths, and render them fit for being soldered
up ; the stream of cans by this time having arrived at the
bottom end of the room, when a transverse line of China-
men attend to the next part of the business. The pickers
and graders work by the bushel or pound, but those who
fill the cans and conduct the subsequent processes are paid
by the day. Everything is arranged to save time and
labour. A small tramway runs along in front of the women
who fill the cans, and upon this the picked fruit is brought
to them and the filled cans conveyed to the workers at the
syrup taps.
Soldering the tops on the cans is very quickly accom-
plished. The tongued and grooved can tops need not be
described, as they do not differ from those in general use;
but the method of soldering is not generally known. A
soldering-iron of steel, so constructed as to perform the
operation effectively and quickly, is used. The iron is
round, and exactly the same size as the rim of the can lid,
being hollowed inside somewhat like a horse’s hoof. There
is a guiding rod in the centre of the iron, upon which it
slides up and down. The guiding rod is put into the centre


mark of the lid, and the iron then comes down exactly on
the rim which is to be soldered. One set of Chinamen
adjust the lids, putting on a ring of solder wire at the same
time, and another set work the soldering irons. The process
is about as quick as branding cattle, and very similar.
Putting the point of the guiding rod into the centre mark
of the lid, the iron is pressed down upon the ring of solder,
turned round once or twice, and the process is completed.
Two or three small furnaces, each holding four or five irons,
keep the soldering irons hot. So quickly is the work done
that four or five Chinamen can deal with the double stream
of cans which flows in from the sides of the building.
As the cans are closed up they are placed upon large
square wooden trays, and these trays are moved along upon
a truck into the heating-room. A hook from a crane is
inserted into the eye of the iron rods which gather in
from the four corners of the tray, and the whole load of
80 or 100 tins is raised and swung over a large square
tank of hot water. The tray is lowered into the water,
and the whole of the tins submerged, being left there for a
longer or shorter time, according to the kind of fruit in the
cans. After remaining in the water for the required time the
tray is raised and a Chinaman pricks the tops of the tins
with an awl. The next process is to close up with solder
the holes thus made in the lids, and the tray is again
submerged in the hot water. After coming out of the
water the second time the tins are passed on to the women
who affix the labels, and the final process is putting the
tins into cases ready to be shipped to any part of the
world. Great care is taken in filling the cans, and only
reliable hands are employed in this work, and the tins all
pass through the hands of experienced workpeople who
inspect them to see that they are properly sealed A
choice of good fruit, and great care in assorting, as well as
in carrying out the canning process, are necessary when a
company intends to do a large and increasing business m
distant markets.
The cans are made on the second floor, and it is m tins
department that the most striking labour-saving appliances
are employed. There are ingenious machines for perform-
ing every operation, and no skilled labour whatever is
required in turning out the fruit cans, which, without
machinery, could scarcely be made at all. One machine


cuts the tin into the lengths and widths required for the
sides of the cans, and another rolls them into shape. A
very ingenious machine cuts out the round tops, punching
the mouth and stamping the fluted rim at one operation.
When the various parts have been formed by the machines,,
very little hand-work is required to put them together.
The only hand-work of any importance is soldering up the
side seam of the cans. This done, the tops and bottoms
are rapidly banged on, and the tins sent off on a soldering
expedition by themselves. They are laid at an angle in a
kind of horizontal spout, in the gutter of which there is
melted solder. A revolving chain touching the tins from
the top makes them run along, the edge being in the
solder. The solder, which is heated from beneath, does
not extend all along the spout, so that after revolving for
a time in the solder the tins complete their journey by
running into the dry trough. This completely solders the
bottoms on the tins, and then they are brought back and
sent on a second trip to solder the tops. A boy at one
end of the trough puts in the cans as quickly as he can,
and another at the other end receives them, placing them
on trucks, in which they are carried away and stacked up
for use. Elevators are used for conveying tins and material
between the top and bottom floors. From this factory
canned fruits are exported to Australia and other parts of
the world, but the chief foreign market is London. The
greater proportion, however, is sent to the extensive
mining regions in the states and territories to the east-
ward, in the Nevada and Rocky Mountains.
It is difficult to find any good cause for the non-existence
of such establishments in the different fruit-producing
districts of Australasia, or why, instead of importing canned
fruits from California, the colonies do not supply their own
market and export a surplus abroad. When Australian
farmers are getting poor at growing five or six bushels of
wheat to the acre, and those in California are getting rich
at raising fruit for Australian consumption, there is '
evidently something wrong. If labour were dearer or
prices higher in California these circumstances might explain
the difference, but neither the one nor the other is the case.
The women who work in the factory obtain a dollar, or
4s. 2d. a day, and those who do piece work make similar
’wages, while the men are paid from 6s. 6d. to Bs. 4d. a day.


Coming to the matter of prices, it is easily seen that the
first cost must be small to enable the goods to bear freight,
commission, and retailers’ profits in distant markets. It
is obvious that the price of fruit must be regulated
partially, and perhaps chiefly, by the extent of the can-
neries’ demand. The several companies entered into an
arrangement a year or two ago by which one company was
invested with the business of buying all fruit and vege-
tables required for the whole number, and this plan appears
to have worked well. The average wholesale price of
canned fruit at the factory is from 11s. to 12s. per dozen
tins of each. This is the price of peaches, apricots,
pears, plums, and such fruit, but small fruit, such as
cherries and strawberries, sell for 12s. 6d. per dozen, and
cannot be produced for less. Such fruits as peaches,
apricots, plums, apples, and pears, average about a penny
per pound, and cherries 2d. per pound, while raspberries
and strawberries are dearer, and blackberries cheaper. The
prices stated are those at which both the growers and the
canners can make good profits, any variation up or down
being to the advantage of one class and to the disadvantage
of another.
CHAPTER XLIV.
VINEYARDS OF CALIFORNIA.
Although the introduction of the vine into California by
Spanish monks from Mexico dates nearly as far back as
the Spanish conquest of Mexico, and the missionaries
planted vineyards as far north as San Francisco over 100
years ago, the vinegrowing industry as a modern commercial
business, is not so old as it is in Australia. Before the
opening of the transcontinental railway California was a
sparsely-populated region, isolated from the rest of the
world, where agriculture received but little attention. The
opening up of speedy communication with the great popula-
tion of the eastern states, and the falling off in the yields
of the mines, have brought agriculture into a leading
position. Vine culture was not the first branch of rural


industry to receive attention, and, consequently, it was
not until about thirteen or fourteen years ago that an
interest began to be awakened in what has since so rapidly
developed. The vintage of 1882 was just being gathered
when I left California, and it was expected to exceed
twelve million gallons of wine. In 1881 there were between
60,000 and 70,000 acres under vines in the state, producing
in a poor vintage nine million gallons, besides a large
quantity of raisins.
This extraordinary extension has taken place in the face
of low prices, and the existence of phylloxera. Most of
the increase of area has taken place since the discovery of
phylloxera in 1873, and the value of grapes has not
averaged more than half what they are worth in Victoria.
The value of grapes will form a better guide to the results
obtained by the grower than the price of wine. Grapes
sold to the wine-makers have during the last two vintages
averaged about £4 per ton. For good grapes, consisting of
European varieties, more has been obtained, but less has
been accepted for ordinary mission grapes. The mission
grape-is the variety introduced by the Spanish missionaries,
and it is a poor variety, making indifferent wine, although
yielding prolifically. From £3 10s. to £4 per ton were
the prices paid for mission grapes during the vintage
of 1881, and from £4 to £5 for other varieties, while a
choice lot of Mataro and Carbono fetched as high as
£6 10s., the latter being quoted as an extraordinary price.
The prices of new wines at the vineyards vary from Is. to
2s. 6d. per gallon. In August, just as the vintage was
beginning, the wine of the previous vintage was worth for
mission 13d., and for wine made from foreign varieties of
grapes the range of prices was from 14d. to 2s. sd. per
gallon. It is worthy of note that the prices are considered
satisfactory and profitable to the grower. The best autho-
rities on the subject warn growers that present prices
cannot be maintained. Owing to the large profits made at
the prices quoted the rapid extension of the vineyards has
taken place, some 40,000 acres having been planted within
the last two years; and the warning is given to those who
are rushing into the business, that they must be prepared
to accept a lower market value for their produce.
The extraordinary yields obtained form the chief cause of
cheap production. Five and six tons of grapes to the acre


are commonly obtained in all parts of the State without
irrigation, and from eight to ten tons per acre yields are
frequent upon irrigated vineyards. At Los Angeles I
found practical vignerons averaging the yield of the whole
district at five tons per acre—a district in which there are
over 9000 acres of vines. In the San Joachin Valley, where
irrigation was more general than at Los Angeles, and in the
Sacramento Valley, where there was a good deal of irriga-
tion and a good natural rainfall, higher averages were
expected; and even in the hilly districts north of San
Francisco from four to four and a half tons to the acre was
reckoned a low average. As five tons to the acre is
regarded as an extraordinary yield in Victoria, it is evident
that the Californians have an advantage in productiveness,
although they cannot command such a high price.
The attention of the Californian vignerons seems to have
been chiefly devoted to extending the area of the vineyards,
and the process is still going on, and new plantings of from
100 to 500 acres in extent are frequently met with in all of
the vine-growing districts. There are many vineyards con-
taining more than 500 acres, several over a 1000 acres, and
I have already described ex-Governor Stanford’s at Vina,
where 2500 acres were planted in two seasons. Compara-
tively little attention, however, has been given to the art
of wine-making, or to obtaining a standing for the wine in
the market. The result is that a great part of the wine
of California is of inferior quality, and that which is
undoubtedly good does not command its true value.
Although large quantities of Californian wine are sent to
the eastern states, it is not sold as such, but under false
labels it is passed off as French or other foreign vintages.
The Californians have made a mistake in not giving more
attention to this department of their business, and Austra-
lians, while not neglecting it, should have also continued
the planting of vineyards.
One of the greatest drawbacks to the production of good
wine in California has been the existence of the mission
grape. I have no hesitation in saying that the average
quality of wine in California is inferior to the average in
Australia. There is some wine in California equal to our
best vintages, and large quantities of good wine will, no
doubt, yet be produced in the State, but the great bulk of
it is at present below the Australian average of quality.
N


Experienced men from the first have discouraged the plant-
ing of mission grapes, but in addition to all the available
cuttings from the imported vines being planted, large
quantities of mission grapes were also put in. The progress
of grafting French and German vines upon the mission
stocks has been considerable, hut still this variety forms or
taints a large quantity of the wine made in the State. The
flavour of the mission is almost as distinctive as that of the
muscat, so that a small admixture of these grapes will give
their character to a large quantity of wine. It is a produc-
tive grape, considered to be a degenerated variety of the
sherry grape. A sweet, strong wine called Angelica is made
from it, a wine which has some local consumption. One of
the most successful varieties is a Hungarian grape, known
in California as the Zinfandel. It is a hardy, good bearer,
and produces the best and most popular claret in California.
All the familiar European varieties of grapes are now being
extensively planted in the states, as well as being grafted
on to the mission stocks, but it will take some time to raise
the general character of the wine.
CHAPTER XLV,
DRYING RAISINS.
In addition to the large quantity of wine produced in
California great quantities of grapes are made into raisins,
and the supply of ripe grapes consumed within the State
and sent to Eastern cities is already extensive. It is only
about five years ago since raisin making began to receive
attention, but the industry has already assumed large
dimensions, and it is rapidly increasing. Many vignerons
consider raisin making more profitable than growing grapes
for wine, and hence a considerable proportion of the new
vineyards are being planted with varieties suitable for
raisins. I met with very few raisins of first-class quality,
and saw many that were inferior to the experimental
samples frequently exhibited at shows in Victoria. An


industry that is so new necessarily requires the introduc-
tion of improvements. The Californian growers are rapidly
improving, and they will not stop until their raisins are as
good as those of Spain. The limited character of their
knowledge has not prevented the Californians from going
extensively into the industry. While we have contented
ourselves with experiments they have been extending their
operations until the annual production of raisins has
reached the value of £50,000. The raisin makers are
realising satisfactory profits, and the production is likely
to multiply at a rapid rate.
i have already described the system of curing raisins
carried on at General Bidwell’s orchard, and the main
features of that system are generally adopted. It is
possible to dry the raisins entirely in the sun, and this
course is followed in the southern vineyards, where the
climate is warmest, and upon small vineyards throughout
the State, but, as the process is slow, it is the most common
practice to dry partly in the sun and partly by artificial
heat. When there is a large quantity to be dried, the risk
of prolonging the operation is great, for the autumn rains
may come before it is completed. For quickness and
safety, therefore, the drying process is commenced in the
sun and completed in houses heated by artificial means.
The drying-houses are of different designs, but the main
principle is a close room, heated by brick flues, the grapes
being placed on trays, one above another, over the flues.
The object to be attained is a simple one, and each grower
sets to work to attain it in his own way.
A large quantity of raisins is produced on small vine-
yards, and it is an industry peculiarly suited to the
circumstances of a small holding ■ but there are some very
extensive raisin-growers, foremost among whom are
Mr. R. B. Blowers, of Woodlands, and Mr. G. G. Briggs,
of Yolo, both in the Sacramento Valley. Mr. Briggs has
1000 acres of vines, half of which are raisin varieties.
The raisin varieties planted are white muscatel, gordo
bianco, and muscat of Alexandria. The seedless sultana is
also cultivated, which is a very productive bearer, and it is
likely to be planted extensively throughout the state. Up
to 1879 Mr. Briggs dried the whole of his raisins in the
sun, producing as much as 200,0001b5. in this way, but for
three seasons artificial heat has been had recourse to as a


help to quicken the process, and reduce the risk of losing
the crop through rains.
The first drier built by this enterprising raisin-producer
was erected three years ago, according to his own design.
It is a large wooden building fitted with frames, into which
the trays of grapes are slid, the sides consisting of doors
which can be opened at pleasure. When the doors are
open the air can pass freely through among the grapes, and
thus, when the air is dry and warm the drying process goes
on while the grapes are under cover. When there is rain,
heavy dew, or when the air is moist, the doors are let down
to protect the grapes. Used in this way, without heating,
the drier acted very well, but in a cold rainy autumn the
process was too slow, so steam pipes were introduced at the
bottom of the building to raise the temperature when
required. The steam is supplied from an ordinary boiler,
and operations upon an extensive scale can be safely carried
on in any kind of weather likely to occur during the
season.
The methods of curing the raisins differ materially from
those adopted in the south of Spain, the rate of labour
rendering the European system impracticable. Mr. Briggs
and Mr. Blowers are the leaders in the industry, and their
system may be taken as the best followed in the state. It
is the custom of these growers to cut the bunches when
perfectly ripe, and lay them on trays 3ft. long by 2ft. 6in.
wide. The trays are placed between the rows of vines,
with an inclination towards the sun to give the grapes the
benefit of more direct rays. When the grapes are cured on
one side they have to be turned, and here a labour-saving
system is adopted. An empty tray is placed upon the
grapes, and the two being held together by a man at each
side are turned over, the original tray, which is now at the
top, being removed, leaving the turned grapes on the new
tray. The old tray is used for turning the next one,
and so on. Two men in this manner turn from 4000 to
6000 trays in a day without in any way injuring the
grapes. Not only is the turning managed very cheaply by
this means, but it is more perfectly done, and with less
injury to the raisins than if attempted by hand.
When sufficiently dried—or, if artificial heat is employed,
when partially dried —the raisins are taken to the shed or
raisin-house. In the case of using artificial heat, it is


believed that trays of wire netting would be an improve-
ment, as likely to facilitate the circulation of the hot air in
the drier. When dried —a process which takes about
fifteen days in drying houses, and from twenty to thirty
days in the sun, according to the weather—the raisins are
slid off the trays into “ sweating boxes.” In these, each of
which contains lOOlbs. of raisins, they remain for three
days. This process equalises the moisture in the raisins,
those which are too dry absorbing from those which are not
dry enough, and giving the whole an improved appearance.
The sweating-box is not used in Spain, and its employment
in California is necessitated by the less perfect system of
drying. In very few cases are the raisins while drying
protected from the dews or light showers which occasionally
fall, and this must be a detriment to the quality, and bring
about a condition which necessitates the sweating-box. It
is not claimed that the best Californian raisins are equal to
those of Spain, and no doubt the superiority of the latter
is largely attributable to their being protected from the
night dews while curing. The prices at the time of my
visit for Californian raisins were 4|d. to per pound.
CHAPTER XLVI.
SUMMARY.
It is a sudden and pleasing transition from the Colorado
desert of Arizona to the clustering vineyards and orchards
of San Bernardino in Southern California. Children board
the train at the railway stations with immense bunches of
grapes, and do a brisk business. The orange groves of Los
Angelos succeed the vineyards of San Bernardino, and we
are soon in the great valley of the San Joaquin, where the
fertile land in an almost rainless climate is made productive
by irrigation. California looks all the more attractive
after seeing the other portions of the United States, and
one has an interesting time visiting the vineyards, hop-
gardens, and irrigation works in the San Joaquin Valley.
We got into the valley by crossing the coast mountains


over the celebrated “ Tehachapi Loop.” Here the railway
line nearly ties a knot upon itself. It really forms a
complete loop. The line first tunnels through a hill at a
height of 3034 feet, and then, after making a circuit of
3795 feet, comes back and crosses at right angles to the
tunnel on the hill-side seventy-eight feet above. This
spiral system of getting up a hill is not met with anywhere
else even in America. After visiting different scenes in
Southern California the railway journey is terminated at
Oakland, where it was begun. One of the magnificent
steam ferries takes us across the bay to San Francisco, and
our baggage having been checked to the Baldwin Hotel,
we step on to the new Market-street cable road-cars, and
are gently and pleasantly moved along to our destination.
The cable tramways, which are rapidly taking the place of
horse roads in San Francisco, Chicago, and other cities,
had been opened along Market-street, the main
thoroughfare, during my absence, and my experience on
this line confirms the opinion everywhere formed that the
cable system is the perfection of street travelling. In a
few days after returning to San Francisco I am outside the
Golden Gate, on board the Australia , returning home after
travelling over 10,000 miles in the United States. It was
a long and pleasant tour, free from accident or any
disagreeable experience. Hospitality and kindness were
met with at all points from the Pacific to the Atlantic, and
from Canada to Mexico, and I have every cause to
remember America with the most kindly feelings.
Railways were mentioned in the first chapter ; in nearly
every paper which followed they have been referred to ;
and railways form the subject of the concluding part of the
summary. In fact, cheap freights and suitable and con-
venient means of transportation are at the foundation of
all agricultural progress in America. The opposite state of
things in regard to the railways is the chief obstacle to
progress in Australia. In the eastern, southern, and central
states freights are low, owing to competition ; but in
California, where there is no competing railway, and where
the population is small and scattered, the freights are only
half what they are in Australia. Nothing of more import-
ance has been brought out by the mission to America than
the fact that commercial principles applied to running
railways bring about cheap freights and cars suited for the


Yarious kinds of produce to be carried. The conclusion
that irrigation is successful in America, and would be equally
successful in Australia, is also important to a country the
only defect of whose climate is a limited rainfall. It is
satisfactory to contemplate the comparison between America
and Australia in regard to cattle and sheep. The latter
country is by far the more suitable for producing fine wool,
and America is held to be incapable of producing cheap meat.
In the production of butter and cheese there are good pros-
pects of Australia competing successfully with America, the
seasons being opposite at the antipodes placing us at an
advantage in the markets of the northern hemisphere. The
prospects of successfully competing in the production of
what is now our staple crop are not so encouraging. It is
considered that the cost of producing wheat need not be
greater in Australia than in America, but that although
the bulk of the crop is grown about 1000 miles from the
Atlantic coast the American farmer has the greater facilities
for reaching the market. Au equally effective system of
handling grain after it is produced would enable us to com-
pete successfully with America, and it is chiefly in this
direction that improvements are required. In all departments
of vine and fruit growing there are highly encouraging pros-
pects. The climate of Australia resembles that of California,
where vineyards and orchards are rapidly taking the place of
wheat-fields. Wine making, raisin making, fruit-drying,
and the canning of fruit, which are carried on successfully
in California, are industries for which the climate of
Australia is peculiarly favourable. The various details in
which our agricultural methods might be improved in
accordance with the inventions and adaptations of the
Americans have been dealt with more or less minutely in
the foregoing chapters, and need not be further referred to.
The task which is now completed has been an exceedingly
pleasant one, and the writer feels under much obligation
to a large number of Americans for their great kindness and
xeadiness to afford the fullest information to a stranger.


v. v Patels'
V MELBOURNE: ) y
0 FERGUSSON & MOORE. PRINTERS.
f FLINDERS LANE EAST,
_s~r<b 5<' y *
Hi
r


131 COLLINS STREET EAST. 131
THE
Lwtiialian jj rtehold | and |] iioducc rfo
(LIMITED.)
OHATEAU Tahbilk Vineyard
LOWER GOULBURN, VICTORIA,
About 80 miles North of Melbourne.
Extent of Estate —2509 acres. Under Vines—about 300 acres.
Average Annual Produce —100,000 gallons.
fflptt ijjittw (Waited f ijfydat* at
Philadelphia ... ••• ••• 1876.
Paris ... ••• ••• ••• 1878.
lnternational Exhibition 1880-1.
Amsterdam (Silver Medal) ... .. 1883.
Adelaide (Gold Medal) ... ... ... 1881.
Bordeaux (Highest Award—Gold Medal) ... 1884.
Calcutta do. do. ... 1884.
* Eleven Awards out of twelve samples submitted , including Second Order of
Merit—the Highest Award obtained by any Colonial Wine —for Hermitage.
Town Cellars: 131 COLLINS ST. EAST.
SHIRAZ. PORT. HERMITAGE.
CLARET. MUSCAT. CARBINET.
PEDRO XIMENES. HOCK.
VERDEILHO. RIESLING.
CHASSELAS. CHABLIS.


IMPORTANT TO FARMERS AND SETTLERS.
A Wonderful Discovery in Soap.
BORAX SOAP!
BORAX SOAP!
WILL CLEANSE
Dairy Utensils, Butter Cloths,
AND REMOVE
GREASE from CLOTHING and CARPETS
With COLD WATER.
It will last three times as long as any other Soap.
You save Two-thirds Freight and Cartage,
It will not Melt if left in the water.
It does not lose Weight with age.
Will wash Linen and Clothing better than the best
Yellow Soap.
It prevents your hands from Chapping after digging
in wet soil.
You can Wash anything in brackish water.
It is fit for Toilet, Washtub, and Flooring.
Is fragrant and pleasant, compact and handy.
Heals, Cleanses, and Purifies.
If you once use it you will ask for no other.
SOLD BV
Every Storekeeper throughout the Colonies, in 1-lb. Bars, neatly wrapped,
each 6d. Made only by
Victoria and New South Wales.


A Vineyard of 2500 Acres 52
An Agricultural College ... 133
An Immigrant Train ... 70
An Orchard of 1000 Acres 46
A Bath in Salt Lake ... 93
A Lovely Gentile ... ... 94
Archbishop Lamy 179
About San Francisco ... 25
Ancient New Mexico ... 178
Atchison, Topeka, and Santa
Fe Railroad 115, 173, 178
Allister McAlister ... ... 17
Arizona ... ... ... 181
Man, The 26
Desert ... 181
Cacti ... ... 181
Australian Gold Trophy ... 56
A Millionaire ... ... 60
Analysis of Sorghum ... 162
Alleghany Mountains ... 171
A Funeral Fund ... ... 176
Artesian Wells ... ... 116
“B. and O.” Railway ... 171
Burlington Route ... 22, 117
and Missouri Rail-
road ... ... ... H 6
“Burros” ... ... ... 177
Barber’s Shop 26
Black Canon ... ... 100
Bathing Costumes... ... 94
Bunching Rakes ... ... 63
Barns 40
Bee Ranch 46
Barmaids ... ... ... 28
Boundless Prairies ... 175
Buffaloes Stopping the
Train 175
Buffalo Grass 168
Bancroft’s Library ... 61
Beet Sugar ... ... ... 161
INDEX.
PAGE
Brigham Young ... ... 89
Biggest Farm in the World 37
Baggage Man, The ... 85
Bazaar Girls at Niagara ... 141
Californian Railways ... 198
Irrigation ... ... 182
California, Climate of ... 34
Soil of ... ... 34
Products of ... 34
Compared ... ... 197
Cobble-stone Streets ... 23
Cable Tramways 198
Cow Boys 176
“ Coupe or Carriage” ... 23
Cab Philosophy ... ... 30
Custom House, The ... 22
China Town ... ... 31
Celestials ... ... ... 31
Chinese Women 32
Theatre, The ... 33
Cattle Ranches 167
in United States ... 170
Cane Sugar ... ... 158
Creameries ... ... ... 153
Cheese Factories 149
Cooling Milk ... ... 154
Cincinatti ... ... ... 171
Climate of the Prairies ... 168
Chicago and Alto Railroad 171
Coffee on the Train ... 171
“ Clearing out a Town ” ... 176
C. B. & Q. R. R 22
Canning Factories... 48, 187
Carson City... ... ... 80
Fossils 81
Coaching in Nevada ... 79
Cape Horn 71
Castle Gate... ... ... 98
Colorado ... ... ... 103
Canal Companies ... 104, 138


Checking Baggage ... 85
Chicago 118
Grain Trade ... 118
Railway Centre ... 118
Grain “ Elevators ” 118
Grain in Bulk ... 119
“ Floaters ”
“ Grading ” or Class-
ing 120
Rate of Storage ... 120
Rate of Freights ... 120
The Produce Ex-
change 121
Cattle Business ... 122
Stock Figures ... 122
Union Stock Yards 123
Feeding Travelling
Stock 123
Selling by Weight 123
Fees and Commis-
sions 124
Chilled Meat Trade 124
The Roast Beef of
Old England 125
A Slaughtering
Establishment ... ... 125
Weights of Cattle.,, 126
Chilled, not Frozen 126
Refrigerating Cars 126
Live Cattle Business 127
Hogs 128
Fixing up the Hogs 128
“Everything but the
squeal” 128
Denver 115
and Rio Grande Rail-
road 85, 95
Different Experiences ... 17
Drying Raisins ... 51, 194
Fruit 50
Democracy ... 55
Democrat and Republican 59
Derricks 41, 63
Dust, “Alkali” 84
“Dug outs” ... 93, 97
93, 97
Dining Cars 117
Dairying 149
Dodge City 176
Down a Silver Mine ... 82
Dining Cars
PAGE
Erie Canal 40, 156
Exchange, Produce ... 121
El Paso 180
Equality 57
Election of Judges ... 58
Engine Bell 70
Endowment of Agricultural
Colleges 136
From Chicago to Niagara
Falls 130
Fixing up the Hogs ... 128
Fruit-Canning Factories ... 187
First Impressions 21
Feats of Memory ... ... 26
Freights 39, 49, 120, 156, 198
Fruit Cars 47
Friendly Feeling to England 59
Feeding Stock —
123, 151, 157, 158, 167
Filagree Work 180
Flags 69
Grain Harvesting 64
Grattan and Shippie’s Com-
bined Harvester ... 64
Grain Trade of Chicago ... 118
Gold Hill 81
Green River Valley ... 97"
Grand Canon 102,
Gates, Absence of 70
Guaymas 174
Hubert Howe Bancroft ... 59
Hotels, The Baldwin ... 23
Haymaking ... ... 38
Harvesting Machinery ... 41
Hog Ranch ... ... 46
Hog Business, Chicago ... 128
History, Bancroft’s ... 61
Harvesting Hay ... ... 62
Hay Barns 64
Harvesting Grain ... ... 64
Headers and Combined
Harvesters 65
Humbolt River 85
Hop Culture 185
Honolulu 18
High License 172
Hospitality... ... 131, 178
“ Holiness unto the Lord ” 87


Hot Springs ... ... 177
Hot Water in Mines ... 82
Hog Scraping Machine ... 129
Indians, Hte ... ... 97
Indian Babies ... ... 98
Mud Huts ... ... 177
—- Pueblos ... ... 180
Inside the Golden Gates ... 21
In a Pullman Sleeper ... 84
In a Dining Car ... ... H 7
Irrigation in Kansas ... 175
at Vina ... ... 54
in California ... 182
King’s River ... 182
Soil and Inclination 183
Fresno Companies 183
Value of Land ... 183
Australian Climate 184
Water Rights ... 184
Duty and Cost of
Water 184
Irrigation in Colorado ... 103
Rainfall ... ... 103
Soil 103
When Commenced 104
Colorado Farmers... 104
Greeley Colony ... 104
Canal Companies... 104
Platte Land Co. ... 104
Railway Grants ... 105
Water Supply ... 105
Undulating Surface 105
Cold Climate ... 105
Canals and Ditches 106
Fort Collins ... 106
Lorimer and Weld
Canal 106
Cache la Poudre ... 106
Surface Canals ... 106
Laterals ... ... 107
Water Rights ... 107
Value of Land ... 105
Quantity of Water 108
Measurement of
Water 108
Distributionof Water 109
Small Furrows ... 109
Number of Irriga-
tions ... ••• ••• 109
Yield of Crops ... HO
Irrigation Laws ... ... 110
High Line Canal ... 110
Price of Water ... 11l
■NorthPoudreScheme 111
Murray River com-
pared HI
Drainage ... ... 112
Riparian Rights ... 112
Colorado Laws ... 113
Beneficial Use ... 113
Right-of-way ... 114
Eminent Domain ... 114
Kanakas ... ... ... 19
Kanaka Ladies ... ... 20
King Kalakaua ... ... 20
Kangaroo Cabs ... ... 30
King’s River Irrigation ... 182
Kansas City 172
Kindness to Strangers ... 177
Los Angelos 193
Las Vegas ... 177
Lansing and Northern Rail-
road ... ... ••• 132
“Leakages” ... ... 58
Leadville ... ... ••• 101
Land Laws ... ... 35, 167
Loose Herding ... ... 170
“Look Out for the Engine” 181
Laws, Irrigation ... ... HO
Lansing ... ••• 131
Marshall Pass 101
Mission Grape ... ... 52
Mormon Missionaries ... 90
Women 89
Temple 87
Slaves 97
Tabernacle ... 87
“Mountains upward Turned” 99
Mount Shasta ... ... 71
Mississippi Valley... ... H 4
Maize or “ Corn ” 164
Maize Sheller,“The Duplex” 166
Main Liquor Law 173
Mexican Land Grants ... 35
Mexicans and Indians ... 177


Mexico ... ... ... 180
Monk Who Drove Greeley 80
McKay, T. D. ... ... 22
Michigan Central Railway 130
Folks 131
Agricultural College 134
Nevada Silver Mines ... 78
Coaching ... ... 79
Negro Waiters 25
Labour 160
New York Shipping ... 156
New Mexico ... ... 177
Niagara Falls 138
Origin of Cheese Factories 150
On the Broad Pacific ... 17
“Old Grimes” ... ... 144
Over the Sierras ... ... 69
Oil and Wrinkles ... ... 145
On Lake Tahoe ... ... 74
Over the Rocky Mountains 95
Out Westward ... ... 174
Pacific, on the Broad ... 17
Peaceful Pacific ... ... 18
Price of Land ... 37, 108
Pueblo Indians 180
Planting and Picking Hops 186
Phylloxera ... ... ... 192
Politicians ... ... ... 55
Polite Conductor ... ... 73
Powell’s Combined Har-
vester 67
Patriotic Patrick ... ... 79
Pumping from Mines ... 88
Palisades of the Humbolt 85
Pork Prices... ... ... 130
Petoskey ... ... ... 182
Riparian Rights ... ... 112
Right-of-way for Water ... 114
Refrigerating Cars ... 126
Rio Grande Valley ... 180
Railways, 198, 156,100,149, 150
San Francisco ... 21, 23
v. Melbourne 28
Sea Sickness ... ... 18
Sacramento Valley ... 34
Sierra Nevada Mountains... 34
Sacramento River... ... 34
“ Squatters ” 36
Silver Kings ... ... 82
Spanish “ Jacks ” ... ... 36
Sheep Breeders’ Association 145
Spanish Merinos ... ... 46
Sheep Ranches ... ... 167
Vermont ... ... 143
and Cattle 197
Shipping Stock and Pro-
duce at New York ... 156
Sorghum and Beet Sugar... 161
State Capitals 173
Summary ... ... ... 197
Salt Lake City and Lake... 84
St. Louis ... ... ... 172
Slave Market ... ... 172
Santa Fe ... ... ... 178
San Jose Cannery ... ... 187
Joaquin Valley ... 182
Snow Sheds... ... ... 73
Apostle 88
Scotchman at Niagara Falls 141
Suspension Bridge, Niagara
Falls 142
Through China Town ... 29
The Biggest Farm in the
World 37
T. D. McKay 22
The Elevator 24
Tahoe Lake ... ... 74
Texan Cattle ... ... 170
Tehachapi Loop 198
Tramways Cable ... ... 198
Topeka 173
The Southern Route ... 177
The Atlantic and Pacific
Railroad ... ... ... 181
Taxation ... ... ... 58
The “ Glorious Fourth” ... 67
Trestle Bridges ... ... 72
The Comstock ... ... 82
Utah Territory 96
Lake 97


Ute Indians 98
TJtica Dairies 149
Union Stock Yards, Chicago 123
Vermont Sheep 143
Register ... ... 145
Vices, Chinese 32
Virtues, Chinese 32
Wool 197
Vermont
Westward to Kansas ... 171
Western Ranches 167
Wages ... 40, 41,190, 82,160
Wine 52, 192, 193, 194,197
Wasatch Mountains
Yosemite
PAGE
Whisky for Kanakas ... 20
Wasatch Mountains ... 86
Woman Suffrage 92
Women, Mormon 89
i, Mormon 89
Kanaka 20
Indian 98
lndian 98
Washington Bureau of
Agriculture 161
Experiments with
Sorghum 161
Yosemite 74,
Young, Brigham 89
Zinfandel 194


JAMES M'EWAN & CO,,
Ironmongers and Iron Merchants,
IMPORTERS OF
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS and MACHINERY
Of every Description.
AGENTS FOR
Robey and Co.’s Steam Engines and Threshing Machines.
J. and F. Howard’s Ploughs and Harrows.
T, Corbett’s Winnowers, Cheese Presses, &c.
Hindley’s Vertical Engines. Carlyle Windmills.
WALTER A. WOOD’S IMPROVED HARVESTER,
With New Iron Frame Twine Binder.
*
01
ft
f-1
p
o
rP
-u
• iH
£
h
QC
O
Cu
CO
Q=
J—
LXJ
LU
rc
5
co
Winner of tlie
oc
LU
■4J
D DC
£ DC
ts «=C
Ph C 3
n=
co
GRAND CHAMPION PRIZE OF AUSTRALIA,
Held at Fascoe Vale, 3rd December, 1883.
GOLD MEDAL, Shepparton, Nov. 16, 1883.
GOLD MEDAL, Numurkah, Nov. 12, 1883.
£2O PRIZE, Ballarat, Dec. 5, 1883.
£3O and SILVER MEDAL, Campania, Tasmania, Dec. 22, 1883.
£4O and SILVER MEDAL, Salisbury, S.A., Oct, 23, 1883.
FIRST PRIZE, Rochester, Nov. 13, 1883.
It won every important Field Trial held during last
season for which it competed.
81 AND 319 ELIZABETH STREET,
MELBOURNE.


CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS.
ROBISON’S PATENT.
These Pumps have ENTIRELY SUPERSEDED those of
>ther makers in the Graving Docks of Messrs. Wright and
)rr and Messrs. Duke and Son, Melbourne, where IMMENSE
QUANTITIES OF WATER require to be discharged in a short
pace of time.
They were THE ONLY PUMPS USED in successfully
floating the sunken and stranded steamers Sorata, Austral,
Dawn, Pretty Jane, Rodondo and Queenscliffe; and the
ships Amyone, Hereford, Bulwark, Samson, Briton, Sir
Jamsetjee Family and Glenshee.
During the WATER FAMINE in Victoria they were employed
y various Shire Councils in MITIGATING THE DISTRESS,
he water flowing in one instance upwards of FIFTY MILES after
icing discharged from the pump, at same time supplying the
rants of those in the vicinity of the FLOWING STREAM.
Mounted on wheels, and fitted with pole to connect with portable
engine, they can be moved about with the utmost facility, and set
to work as soon as steam can be got up. A large number mounted
in this manner have been supplied for station purposes.
FOR THE PURPOSE OF IRRIGATION THEY ARE UNEQUALLED.
,nd the unqualified success of Mr. Garden, of Cohuna, in this
irection, and which has been recorded by nearly ALL THE PRESS
i the colonies, was attained by using one of these patent Pumps.
They are Capable of Raising Water over 100 Feet High.
They require LESS STEAM POWER to work them than those
>y any other maker, thereby EFFECTING A GREAT SAYING
N THE FIRST COST OF ENGINE, AND A CONTINUAL
SAVING IN FUEL.
They can be supplied of any size from 100 to 100,000 gallons
jr minute.
ROBISON BROS. & CO.,
ENGINEERS, MELBOURNE,


W. WILLIS & CO.’S
P* A. TBNTT EiVR LAB ELS
For Registering Sheep and Cattle. Numbered from lup to 10,000.
Price, 10s. per Hundred ; 80s. per Thousand. 100 sent by post for 11s. to any
address in the Colonies.
Patent Spring Ear Punches to make holes for above.
W. WILLIS & CO.,
MANUFACTURERS,
81 Little | Collins St. W.
(Between Elizabeth & Queen
Sts., next to G. Robertson’s,
Bookseller,)
MELBOURNE
h *
? Patent Improved Sheep
1 & Cattle Ear Markers.
I' Horse, Cattle & Dog Brands,
• Bull Nose Rings.
‘ Sheep Nose & Face Brands,
i Sheep Horn and Raddle
2 Brands.
Stencil Plates & Ink.
CastratingtClambs & Knives.
, Sheep Tallying Registers.
1 Iron, Steel and Brass Bands
and Stamps of every des-
cription made to order.
SADDLERY AND HARNESS.
«T_ .A-UDJLIMIS
(Established 1853,)
Is now selling at Reduced Prices the entire Stock of Saddlery and Harness,
comprising
Ladies’ & Gentlemen’s Saddles & Bridles,
Boys’ and Girls’ Pilches; Whips, Bits, Spurs; Buggy, Carriage and Gig Harness;
Spring Cart and Dray Harness, with every other article connected with
the trade.
3 LONSDALE ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.
John Kyd.] ID El R. K 1 l\d & [Chas. W. Derham,
FLIOUH and chain merchants,
4 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.
Consignments solicited and Liberal Cash Advances made thereon.
Account Sales promptly rendered.
Agencies in all the Agricultural Centres throughout the Colony.
Cornsacks, Bran, Bags and Secondhand Sacks on Sale.
Correspondence invited.


THE NEW HIGH ARM
r>AYis
Settling -Hlatfime
Is acknowledged to be the
PERFECTION OF SEWING MACHINE MECHANISM.
THE VERTICAL FEED
NEW HAND MACHINE,
Made expressly for Australia. Executes the same variety of work as the
Treadle Machine.
T ZEE 3EI! DAYIS
Was awarded
The ONLY FIRST PRIZE and GOLD MEDALS at the
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide Exhibitions, 1880-81.
The New Sewing Machine Lamp,
The Latest Novelty, is adapted for any Sewing Machine.
HENRY BISHOP & CO.,
79 BOURKE STREET EAST, MELBOURNE,
Importers of
The Matchless Non-Vibrating Rubber Cushioned Bicycle,
The Best Roadster in the World.
THE HATCHLESS RACES,
New this Season. The Most Perfect Racer ever Produced.
THE DURABLE BICYCLE.
THE ROYAL SALVO AND OMNICYCLE TRICYCLES
AND SOCIABLES.
THE CAROCHE TRICYCLES, for Ladies, Gentlemen,
and Juveniles.
Catalogued forfoajrtJctt sodt dftee on application.


MITCHELL'S RELIABLE SEEDS.
Orders over 2s. 6 d. forwarded Free by Post.
Send Post-office order or postage stamps, and by return mail you will receive
the Seeds, post free, as under—
s. d. s. d. s. d.
Beet .. per oz. 0 6 Cress . . per oz. 0 4 Parsnip .. per oz. 0 6
Carrot .. ~ 0 6 Celery .. „ 10 Rhubarb ~ 10
Cabbage .. „ 0 9 Lettuce .. ~ 09- Radish .. ~ 0 4
Cauliflower „ 2 6 Onion .. „ 0 9 Turnip .. „ 0 4
Cucumber, Melon, Tomato, and Pumpkin, 6d. per packet. Fine Flower Seeds,
2s. 6d. per doz. packets. Hedges—Kangaroo Acacia, 6d per oz.; Box Thom,
2s. 6d. per oz. Grasses, Clover, Lucerne, &c. Fruit Trees, cheapest and best in
the city. Best selected samples at lowest prices. Mangold—Giant Long Red,
Improved Long Yellow and Yellow Globe; also, White Sugar Beet, Is. 6d. per
lb.; by post, 2s. 6d. Catalogue and Guide to Amateurs free to any address.
C. W. MITCHELL, Wholesale & Retail Seedsman, &c.,
70 &7 2 Elizabeth St. North, opposite Queen Victoria Market, Melbourne,
RAILTOJV’S FINE SEEDS!
(New and true to name) FORWARDED FREE BY POST, Orders over 2s. 6d.
Assorted Flower Seeds included gratis with all postal orders over ss.
Send post-office order or postage stamps, and by return mail you will receive
the Seeds, post free, as under :
s. d. I s. d, s. d. s. d.
Beet per oz. 0 6 Cauliflower oz. 2 6 Lettuce, oz. 0 9 Rhubarb, oz. 1 0
€&rrot „ 0 6 Cress „ 0 4 Onion 0 9 Radish ~ 0 4
Cabbage ~ 09 | Celery ~10 Parsnip 0 6 Turnip „ 0 4
Cucumber, Melon, Tomato, and Pumpkin, 6d per packet. Pine Mower Seeds,
2s. 6d. per dozen packets. Hedges—Kangaroo Acacia, 6d. per oz.; Box Thorn,
2s._ per oz. Grasses, Clovers, Lucerne, Ac. &c. Bsst selected samples at lowest
prices. Maize (90-day,) Sorghum, Field Peas, Tares, Rye, &c. &c. Write for
NEW CATALOGUE and “ Guide to Amateurs,” sent post free to any address.
RAILTON & CO., Seedsmen, 167 Swanston St., Melbourne.
« R .
I . t.
-t 3 N 11
* p r 1 -g
- s ai
g Q
h y §
° p I
° m Qc
“ n
Desire to call the attention of Farmers to their
u
H
R
U
a
THOS. HENDERSON & CO .
co
g«
t* A"
H CD
U 1 _
H p
► sr
a to
O
co B
W S
0 ©
1 *
ZD
HJ
Improved Stripping & Winnowing Machines.
Two-Wheel Reapers, Combined Reapers and Mowers,
Chaff Cutters, Horse Works, Corn Crushers,
“Eureka” Two and Three Furrow Ploughs, fitted with
patent wheels and turned axles.
Full particulars and PRICE LIST sent on application.
A.grioultural m acliine ’Works,
85-95 ELIZABETH STREET NORTH, MELBOURNE.


THE
“ DUPLEX ”
MAIZE
SHELLERS.
r=*p=Jr=Jp=Jr=Jr=»
The Beet SEELLEES
Imported.
See “ AUSTRALASIAN” 2nd Feb., 1884.
See also this Book, page 166.
SOLE AGENTS:
M'LBAI BROS, & Blfifi,
MELBOURNE.


THE AUSTRALASIAN MUTUAL
Live Stock Insurance
SOCIETY, LIMITED.
Principal Office: 59 Queen St., Melbourne.
JOHN L. DOW, Esq., M.P. (Chairman.)
Hon. J. F. LEYIEN, M.P.
THOMAS LEARMONTH, Esq.
ABRAHAM LINCOLNE, Esq.
This Society is formed for the purpose of Insuring HORSES,
CATTLE, SHEEP, PIGS, and DOGS, against Death from
Disease, Accident, or Natural Causes.
The Society is purely Mutual, holders of Policies
participating in the Profits.
All further information may be obtained on application to
the Local Agents, or to the General Manager, at the Head
Office.
FRANCIS TUNMER, General Manager.


EONSDAEE STREET
DRAPERY WAREHOUSE
T. H. HENDERSON,
Importer,
Family Draper,
Costumier,
and Tailor.
11,13 &15 LONSDALE STREET WEST,
Melbourne*
MACKENZIE’S PATENT
Improved Rabbit Suffocator.
Sold hy R. PARKER, Ironmonger, Geelong.
PRICE, £7 12s. 6d.
Orders from New Zealand promptly attended to. Parties infringing
on the above patent rights will be prosecuted.


HUGH LENNON.
Manufactory; Opposite North Melbourne Station.
CATALOGUES FREE.
New improved patent plough wheel.
The Greatest Invention of the Day for Farmers.
Double-Furrows, Strippers, Winnowers, and alt, kinds
of Farm Implements,


WILLIAM DEAN & CO.,
OIL AN® COLOUR MERCHANTS,
IMPORTERS OF
I §
I®
§ 9
« §
CD o 3
t?
s $
Ph |
•a 5
£ K
® £
J o
ffi fl
43 g
I l *.
CD
CD $0
U £
sS
O o 3
O .Q
(4
iS
Oft
SOLE AGENTS—
Varnish —Charles Turner & Son, London.
Paperhangings —Heywood, Higginbotham, Smith & Co., Manchester.
Anti-Corrosion Paints— Walter Carson and Sons, London.
Artists’ Colors, Brushware, &c. —Winsor and Newton, London.
Glass, Paper, &c. &c. -Acton & Borman, London.
Grease, Tar, Pitch, &c. —Worringham & Co., Deptford, London.
INDENTS EXECUTED ON BEST TERMS.
p-
sd
2.®
«CB
O P
P 3!
oa
°Q
§3
P P
c+OQ
CD ®
d 2.“
P p >Tj
S »?
c+ O
® WO*
10.
Cfi O'
®p<4
CD
,® t?
c»5
5*3
«*5
p§
91 FLINDERS LANE EAST,
WM. HAMILTON & CO.,
Stork, Station, ant
o<
o ®
S*
v
©ENEBAL COMMISSION ASENTi,
70 Queen Street, Melbourne.


Phillips, McWalter & Chambers
Victoria Foundry, Carlton.
LIGHT AND HEAVY CASTINGS MADE.
A large and varied Assortment of Patterns of Ornamental Cast-
ings for Verandahs and Balconies.
Awarded Silver Medal 1873 & 1881,
WM. EADFOED,
Wholesale and Retail
Tinsmith & Ironworker, Galvaniser,
Slapanntr, CoppcrSnuti), antf UlumSer,
No. 19 POST OFFICE PLACE, MELBOURNE
(Late Little Bourke Street East.)
BATHS, TANKS, CHEESE TUBS, VATS & VENTILATORS Made to Order.
DEPOT for NEW INVENTIONS.
CHAMBERS & SEYMOUR are importers of English and American Hard-
ware, and have continually arriving
YANKEE NOTIONS, DOMESTIC REQUISITES,
And Labour-saving Inventions.
We have now displayed in our NEW SHOW ROOMS a choice selection
of Electro Silver Plate, suitable for presentation ; also Mahogany and
Oak Cabinets, completely fitted with Spoons, Eorks, and Cutlery, forming
very desirable WEDDING GIFTS.
ciiambers &. s eymour,
—O PPOSITE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE.—
Bonedust, Animal Guano, Superphosphate, and all other Manures.
FOOTSCEAY BONE MILLS, FOOTSCEAY,
BEYTH, IRVINE & BINNEY,
Proprietors
(Established in the Trade upwards of Fifteen Years,)
32 KllVGr ST., MEILBOURKTE,
And JOHN BLITH & CO., Collins Street,
Liberal Terms of Credit up to Twelve Months on Approved Bills,
Circulars forwarded, with particulars, on application to office or local agents.


GENUINE WALTHAM WATCH WAREHOUSE.
M'FARLANE & SON,
WATCHMAKERS & JEWELLERS.
A Large Assortment of ENGLISH and AMERICAN WALTHAM Gold and
Silver Lever Watches.
Colonial Gold Chains, Wedding Rings and Keepers. Pebbles and other
Spectacles.
ALL ARTICLES FORWARDED POST FREE.
165 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE-
N.B.—Watches, Clocks, Music Boxes, and Jewellery Cleaned and Repaired.
C. J. & T. HAM,
HOUSE, LAND dc ESTATE AGENTS,
45 SWANSTON STREET,
JifeVbozLme
LOADS NEGOTIATED. RENTS COLLECTED.
Fire & Life Insurances Effected,
W. H. HUNTER,
SADDLE AND HARNESS MANUFACTURER,
15 Post Office Place,
11 BOURKE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
Contractor to the Victorian Government.
Special Makes in Saddles for Farmers, Stockriders and general Station Work .
Lathes’ and Gentlemen’s old riding Saddles and Harness taken in exchange.


LIMITED,
36 COLLINS STREET WEST.
Capital £500,000. Subscribed £133,665.
©(rectors.
M. H. DAVIES, Esq., M.P. I JOHN DANES, Esq.
WM, ANDEESON, Esq. | JOHN MOODIE, Esq.
T. B. MUNTZ, Esq., C.E.
DEPOSITS received at full current rates.
CURRENT ACCOUNTS, bearing interest.
ADVANCES on property repayable by instalments or
otherwise.
HENRY CORNELL, Manager.
THIS
KREB’S PATENT, LIMITED,
Manufacturers of Explosives of the best quality
for Mining, Rail and Road Making, Well-
Sinking, Quarrying, Clearing Land of Stumps
and Stones, &c. &c.
DYNAMITE AND LITHOFRACTEUR
of the highest possible strength, consistent with
safety, in use.
DETONATORS AND FUSE.
Directions for Clearing Land or Water of stones,
stumps, timber, &c., can be obtained at the office,
31 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
T. T. JONES, General Manager.
The use of these powerful explosives in clearing land saves
labour, time and money.


S 9 Bourke Street
IMPLEMENTS.
Steam Engines
Thrashers.
“ Champion ”
Binders.
“ Champion ”
Mowers.
Straw Trussers
Chaffcutters.
Earth Scoops.
Tank Ploughs.
Zig-Zag Harrows,
Disc Harrows,
ineyard Ploughs
Single-Eurrow
Ploughs.
Double-Furrow
Ploughs.
Potato-Raising
Ploughs.
Cider Mills.
Bone Mills.
Hay Rakes.
Binder Twine.
iard and other Oils,
&c. &c.
OAKSHOTT’S
HURST & CO.,
West, Melbourne.


DAVID MUNRO & CO,
154 QUEEN- ST., MELBOURNE.
>$ f =======
Pt 10\ / /
jjct *" ar^est ® toc * < °f
MACHIITEH;
i / in the Colonies.
V\/ / jfJ,- It I JP
Comprising the latest improved British and Foreign Goods
and all DAVID MUNRO & CO.’S Manufactures o
Labour-saving Machinery, expressly adapted to Yictoriai
requirements;
On application, full particulars will be furnished, am
Illustrated Catalogue sent without charge to any address
