

A
TO U R
THROUGH THE GARDENS
In GAWSWORTH,
NEAR
MACCLESFIELD,
CHESHIRE.
Congleton:
Printed and Sold by J. Dean,
ALSO SOLD BY T. HAMMOND AT HIS GARDENS, GAWSWORTH,
E. BAILEY, MACCLESFIELD, SAEL AND CO. STRAND, LONDON, AND
BY THE BOOKSELLERS IN GENERAL.
1802,




i ■# y
1 ' : ■ ! r I '*r»
itittii ...




A
TOUR
THROUGH THE
APOLLO GARDENS.
In my firft approach I found a very antique gate, put together in a
moft curious manner ; palling which, I was conducted up a long ave-
nue and at the end of it, turning to the right I difcovered a fentinel
in full proportion, fix. feet high. Calling my eyes forward I perceived
a Tablet raifed betwixt two pillars, with this infcription, " I look upon
the pleafures which we take in a garden as one of the moll innocent
delights of human life. A garden was the habitation of our firft
parents before the fall. It is naturally apt to fill the mind with
calmnefs and tranquillity, and to lay all its turbulent palfions at reft.
It gives us a great infight into the ceconomy and wifdom of provi-
dence, and fuggells innumerable fubjedts for meditation." Turning to
the left, the Great South Sea opened to my view; and proceeding up
an Alder Grove I came to the Holy Well in New South Wales, Lat.
34 South, Long. 208, 37 weft. Not far from the Well I was fur-
prifed to find a piece of mufic, fimilar to an Englilh Organ, but
played by water. Palling from New South Wales I came to the
A 2 figure


figure of Apollo, the Deity of this Elyfium, feven feet high. By a
wonderful magic I was almoft inftantly brought to Beefton Caftle in
Chefhire, having a battery of feven cannons planted at the top, and a
fentinel in full drefs keeping guard. In a moft delightful bower, formed
in this place, I was regaled with the produce of the four quarters of
the globe. Leaving this pleafant fpot with regret, I turned my eyes to
take another view, when I beheld over the caftle a Night piece elegantly
exprefled in the following words.
■
" Now came ftill evening on, and twilight grey
Had in her fober livery all things clad;
Silence accompanied; For beafts and birds,
Thofe to their grafly couch, thefe to their nefts,
Were flunk, all but the wakeful nightingale;
She, all night long, her amorous difcant fung.
Silence was pleas'd ! Now glow'd the firmament
With lucid fapphires : Hefperus that Jed
The ftarry hoft, rode brighteft, till the moon
Riling in clouded majefty, at length
Apparent queen unveil'd her peerlefs light,
And o'er the dark her filver mantle threw."
When I had read this I proceeded on my Tour and quickly arrived
in Long Ifland between 71 and 74 Weft Long, and 41 ~ 30 North
Lat. After examining the curiofities of this region, I fet fail for
Providence Ifland, where I landed in Weft Long. 78, Lat. 33. In
this ifland, amongft many other curiofities, I noted a magic mountain,
and fruit in abundance like the Garden of Eden. The refemblance it
bore to that happy place was to my imagination fo ftrong, that I could
fcarcely forbear thinking I was really there; efpecially when on turning
to


to one corner of it, I obferved in golden letters the following addrels
to the Almighty as fpoken by our fir ft Parent,
i
Thefe are thy glorious works, Parent of Good !
Almighty! I hine this univerfal frame
Thus wond'rous fair! thyfelf how wondrous then !"
From this ifland I fet fail for Non Cape, but was driven by con-
nary winds to Long Ifland again. On re-examining it more minutely,
I found at one end a labyrinth, in which I was more bewildered than
by the contrary winds, which I had encountered in my paffage. Being
with fome difficulty extricated from this labyrinth, on turning to the
left I was ft ruck with a figure of Hercules 8 feet high, grafping his
club and covered with the fkin of a lion of an amazing fize which he
had conquered in the woods of Nemsea. Going on ftill to the left,
I efpied a curious arch, with this beautiful infeription over it.
A happy feat for man's retirement made,
Fruit for his food, and arbours for his ffiade.
See how the trees in taper ranges rife,
And with their waving branches fweep the fkies,
Green plains and woods and filver ftreams confpire
To feaft the fight, and lure the foul's defire.
P
. Palling through this arch I found myfelf in a delightful
walk which led dpwn to a hermitage of a very curious ftrudture, both
pleafing and venerable % over the door is an infeription faying it
was put together A. M. 5792. The door exceeds all defcription, the
cafe of it appeared Gothic, thrown up by chance, and upon it feemed
B to


to grow branching boughs with their natural green foliage. When
this door was opened I felt an anxious expeaation of feeing the aged
hermit who, I had been informed, refrded here, whofe food was the
fruit of this garden, and his drink the water from the Holy Well,
Difappointed in this expedation (for he was gone to meditate, which is
his principal delight,) 1 took the liberty to examine his habitation in
his abfence. On entering it, an infcription (furrounded by a grove)
leemed to exprefs, that he had obtained his wilh.
And may at laft my weary age,
Find out the peaceful hermitage,
The hairy gown and moffy cell,
Where I may fit and rightly fpell
Of ev'ry Star that heav'n doth (hew
And ev'ry herb that fips the dew;
Till old experience do attain
To fomething like prophetic ftrairi,
Thefe pleafures melancholy give
And I with thee will chufe to live.
The furniture of the cell of this fecluded Being agree very well
with the defcription, which had been given me of the inhabitant. A
vaft variety of fhells are fixed up in a peculiar manner. On a ledge
over the fire place I found the King and Queen Conch Shells \ but the
reft exceeded all defcription. Between the two royal lhells, is placed a
a beautiful bull of Shakefpeare, and on one fide of the buft is the figure
of St. Mark curioufiy painted upon glafs. Turning to the fouth wall I
found the real Indian quiver, with the poifoned arrows fufpendedagainft
the wall; alfo the real Indian fhoes, the fame which their chiefs wear.
I next came to a window of curious workmanlhip; on the glafs was
ftained


ftained the Freemafon's arms with their feveral degrees and emblems
of mafonry. It appears that this Hermit mult be a Freemafon, as upon
the back fide of the chairs were reprefented the grand arch, the lquare
and compafs, the line and level, the crofs pens, the plim rule, the
the common gavil, and the 24 inch gauge. Many other things attracted
my notice, but I did not ftay to examine them; for my curiofity was
raifed, and my delire to find out the Hermit himfelf increafed, from what
I had feen of his habitation. I had not gone far however before I
found an inclination to look back once more upon this romantic place,
and in fo doing, I difcovered an infcription which had belore efcaped
my notice.
My drooping foul befet with fatal foes,
And chain'd to clay, weary of life lhe grows ;
Afraid of fin, fire flutters in my breaft,
And ftruggling flrives to reach the realms of reft.
I then took my laft leave and view of this folitary cell. Returning
through the arch by which I entered the btforementioned pleafant walk
that lead me to this hermitage, an abrupt mount feemed to blockade it.
The paflage here is narrow for a little fpace, but fuddenly turning, I
was agreeably furprized with a pleafant afcent to the top of this mount
which I found by a title erebted, was called " Mount Pleafant." No
fooner had I got to the fummit, but I found it rightly named. Around
the top of it flourifh in the moft luxuriant verdure a variety of full
grown trees, which from their fpreading branches form a delightful
canopy, fuperior to the moft elegant dome, and within the circular range
of thefe trees is a curious feat, forming a complete circle, furrounding
the mount. In the centre is erecfted a pillar, upon which is fixed an
antique table of ftone. One thing I thought very extraordinary; in
going round the extremity I found on the eaft fide a fire place, which
had


had been mod Angularly conflruded, as I could obferve from what
was llill left of it. The chimney, which was entire, afcended through
a railed fide of the mount, which I could difcover had been in ufe in
former generations, tho' now all grown over with ivy. Still examining
round I met with the following grand fentiment.
" Time like a river rolls imperceptibly away, till it lofes itfelf
in the unfathomable ocean of eternity. Happy they, who mark its pe-
riods by deeds which fhall bear record, when time itfelf Ihall be no
more." On turning towards the pillar before fpoken of, I noticed that
it was hollow, and feemed benched as if it had been intended for a
Wine vault; but opening the door I was flruck with the fight of a
Death's Head, This memento of the king of terrors, turned the de-
light which I had experienced, in viewing the pleafing fcenes around
mc, into undefciibable fenfations which " cannot be accounted for by
any combination of matter and motion, and convinced me that I have
a foul. Defcenuing in deep thought from this place, I was roufed by
the- noife of chains, which inftantly brought to my recollection that I
had heaid there was a volrl man olimnear the foot of tins mount
Looking downwards towards the place whence the noife came, I
beheld a den under the thicket of a wood, on the door of which was
written " The Den of the Wild Man from Botany Bay." This I
had fcarcely Time to read till the. door burfl open, and out he furioufly
rufhed, but fortunately I had not come fo far down from the mount as to
be within the utmofl extent of his chain. The ferioufnefs I had felt
was now converted into the extremefl terror, which for a moment pre-
vented me from obferving that he could not purfue me, and prefently
I found myfelf near the top of the mount. When I found that I was
fafe, I took courage to furvey him. The firfl obfervation I made was
that his body was all over covered with hair at leall two inches long;
and over his eyes it was fomething longer, fo that I could fcarcely dif-
tinguifh them. His beard was monftxoufly long and black, as was the
Hair of his head, which hung clotted down his back. When he flood
up,


I fuppofed him to be about fix feet high, but from the motions he
made, and the attitude he was in, it appeared he was as much ufed to
go on his hands and feet, as upon the latter only. In the former
pofiure he was much more frightful than the uglieft bear I had met
with in all my travels. Before his den lay a heap of bones apparently of
different animals, moil of them clean picked, which fully convinced
me that he was a carnivorous animal. The place to which my fright
had drawn me back, was luckily bounded by a fmall track, that led to
the bottom of the mount, and enabled me to efcape without harm.
At the foot of the mount, I found a Peninfula that led to Non Cape
Long. 12 weft Lat. 28, 4®* one P ca P e ' found a
pleafant bower with a great variety of trees and fhrubs of various kinds,
fuch as are fuitable to the climate. A hofpitable accommodation for
travellers who touch at the Cape, is here e reded, as I was informed, by
the philanthropy of the Hermit, whom I ftill grew more defirous to fee,
and therefore I immediately returned in fearch of him. I was no fooner
upon my return than I perceived, elevated to the view, a beautifully
painted Night piece, anfwering to its defcription in the following lines.
" As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,
O'er heaven's clear azure fpreads her facred light,
When not a breath difturbs the deep ferene ;
And not a cloud o'ercafts the folemn fcene.
Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
And ftars unnumber'd gild the glowing Pole.
O'er the dark trees a yellower verdure fhed,
And tip'd with Silver every mountain's head.
Then fhine the vales, the rocks in profpeds rife,
A flood of glory burfts from all the flcies.
The confcious fwains, rejoicing in the fight,
Eve the blue vault, and blefs the ufeful light."
7 C I


I palled from hence over a ftill river, acrofs which was thrown a
bridge made after the Chinefe falhion. Going on from this river, I
faw a wicket gate, which from the Angularity of its make led me to
fuppofe it belonged to the Hermit. I looked, as far as I could, to fee
what elfe might point him out, and immediately I efpied a cottage at
the end of a long avenue, which in the perfpedtive had a very pleafing
effe<3, and put me in mind of the Arcadian Age. Before I got to the
door, which as well as the gate was of wicket work I perceived an
infcription over it, thus,
Far in the windings of a vale,
Faft by a (heltring wood,
The fafe retreat of Health and Peace,
A humble cottage flood.
Having read this, the Angular ftrudiure of the cottage engaged
my attention. The roof is Amply thatched with heath, and the Ades
compofed of the fame. A window was Axed on the front Ade, and it
amazed me to obferve with what art it was fecured. As I glanced through
the door, I caught a flght of the obje<fl of my fearch, —The venerable
Hermit. It was fome moments before he perceived that any perfon was
before his cottage door, as he was in profound meditation. The inftant
I was obferved by him, he appeared ftruck with ftirprize, but it in-
flantly changed into the calmeft tranquillity. His hofpitable temper
foon led him to invite me into his cot j and no fooner was I within
it, than I was invited to partake of what it afforded.
A Ample plate of wholefome herbs.
Tho' fuch the plainnefs of his cot,
Tho' fuch his Ample cheer,
Yet hofpitality benign,
Her hand could open here. rjf


If ever ftranger thro' the wood,
Far from his path fliould ftray,
He glad received him at his board,
Or led him on his way.
Such truly was his difpofition, as I fully experienced. In par-
taking of his refrefhment I had an opportunity of furveying the con-
tents of his dwelling. On the eaft fide was a motto in golden letters,
as follows,
Beneath this heath-grown roof, this humble cell,
Health, liberty, content and virtue dwell,
Say ye who dare this humble place difdain,
What lofty palace boafts fo fair a train.
An hour-glafs and a death's head, I faw placed upon a Ihelf in
one corner, under which were inferibed the following admonitory lines.
Oh ! all ye mortals view the glafs
And count the hours that fly ;
Vain creatures view the Head of death*
And learn from thence to die.
All the furniture befides confifted of two homely benches, but this
deficiency in accommodation was amply recompenfed by a hearty
welcome and cheerful converfation. He appeared in ftature about five
feet eleven inches high, but from a flight ftoop of the body, I fuppofe
he muft have been formerly fix feet. On his head he wore a fur cap,
and his filver beard was about 8 inches long. He had on a hairy gown
which


which reached to the ground, an apron of the fame materials, and a
pair of clogs covered with the like, and in his hand a white crook,
upwards of feven feet long. From fome obfervations he made on the
ftarry firmament I judged him to be well verfed in the fcience of Afiro-
nomy, and indeed to this he muft naturally turn his thoughts in his
prefent fecluded fituation. Next to the duty he owes his Maker, the
knowledge of himfelf and the fcience of feif government feemed to en-
gage his chief attention. Upon my expreffing my fears that I fhould
find fome difficulty in getting out of this retired fcene, he readily con-
duced me. As we were returning I caught a fight of Botany Bay in
which was moored a beautiful Canoe. I alfo faw, in a wood near the
fhore, a fpecies of monkey of a large kind. He foon brought me to the
place where I firft entered and at our parting gave me fome ufeful admo-
nitions and his benediCion. He particularly requefted me to confine
my defires to the acquifition of knowledge, virtue, and peace, and in
my addrefs to the Giver of all good to fay,
Father of light and life ! Thou God fupreme ;
O teach"me what is goodT teach me thyfelfT
Save me from folly, vanity and vice,
From every low purfuit! and feed my foul
With knowledge, confcious peace; and virtue pure,
Sacred, fubflantial, never fading blifs.
I left this enchanting place, with that regret, which a man feels
when he is obliged to quit any favourite amufement, before he is half
fatisfied, and of which he believes that he fhall probably never partake
again. Compelled by bufinefs of importance to haften my departure I
returned ruminating on the following beautiful foliloquy, which I met
with and read in one part of the garden, but forget which.
Hail!


Hail! rural Solitude thou nurfe of thought
Of ev'ry Bard the treafure and the praife!
None know thy worth, but they who feel the charms
That Nature fpread before them ! who can fpend
In filent mufing many a lonely hour,
Enraptured; who forfake the buttling town,
And feek thy calm delights with inward joy,
Such as he feels, who quits the loathfome damps
Of a dark cell for Liberty and Air.
' Tis here, in love with peace and rural fcenes,
I can behold their beauties, and awhile
Abftradted from the world and all it's cares,
Can fit and view its hurry and its crowd,
Its dreams, and follies, with a tranquil Smile ;
For in the country's peace and filent eafe,
I learn to lull eack wildly-v nd'ring thou* 't
To fweet compofure: and altho' 'tis true
Society has comforts, without which
Life would be fcarce worth owning, yet at times
I afk no other friend to fhare my hours
Than Contemplation: Nature fure has charms
That to herfelf can draw the willing mind,
And with it for a while hold converfe fweet.
FINIS.
Congleton : Printed by Ji Dean^


