











PHIEIPPUS BALDvEUS deephensis v. U.AI.
PRIMO ANNUM IN PTJNTE GAEE,POSTEA
IN REGNO lAEENAPATNAM IN INSUEA CEY;
EON 8 Atmos.lam in. Geervliet 2-.Eta.tis
./ KlarteLny
vr. Sy'dtryelt. J:y JD.


Description of ey
East India
COASTS OF
MALABAR
and CORMANDEL
with their adjacent
Kingdoms & Provinces,
& of the Empire
of
CEYLON
and of the Idolatry
of the Pagans
in the
EAST INDIES.
n • r > LoitcotsT ,
Printed for jitvnfharrL and John Churchill,
at the Black fn/ctn in P




A True and Exact
DESCRIPTION
o F T H E
Moft Celebrated Eaft-India Coafts
O F
MALABAR
COROMANDEL.
As alfo of the Ifle of Ceylon.
itT K i ngd ° mS ' Princ >palities, Provinces, Cities,
CreaLres^^^Vh^ P B*f- Tcmples » Produ6h >
• rl’r , ~ Manners, Habits, Oeconomies and Ceremo-
F vnln^ he J nhab c antS J / S ,kewife the moft remarkable Warlike
-I* , Fiel t En^a B eme nrs betwixt the Tortu-
jiejes and Dutch ; with their T raffick and Commerce.
The Whole adorn’d with new Mans anrl r u .• « ,
Habits, Living Creatures, Frnkf X, 5 h ' S ° f i he , ch , ief , C l nes - , ForK <
to the Life, and cut in Copper Plates, loduct of the Indies, drawn
Al ga^ta^te^f^t C MTl eatA r Untof "* «*“T of rhePa-
Taken partly from their own Editor llwSk G "’T"’ Src.
fcripts: partlv from f rPn „Pnp / °r • B -? k ’ and Manu*
WiSt :
By
PHILIP BALDAEUS,
Minifier of the Word of
God in Ceylon.
Tranflated from the High-Dutch printed at Amfterdm, x 672.




THE
PREFACE
T O T H E
READER.
MOST of the Modern Eaft-India Voyages that have been pub-
lifhed of late years, being "Very defective either of the
many fabulous Relations that are frequently, rather to
pleafe the (Reader, than to purfue the flricl (Bytes of Truth ( not to mention
the Errors in the Computation of the diflances of Places, and frequent un-
neceffary Digrefjtons) it is no wonder if the mofl curious in Hiflory haVe
conceiVd a Very indifferent opinion, if not an entire to them. It
was upon this Confideration, that the enfuing Treatife coming to our hands,
V>e thought it abfolutely worthy the publick view, it being agreed by all who
haVe had the opportunity of travelling in thofe Countries, that the fame may
in refpelt of its fincerity and exaSlnejs challenge the Prerogative before any
other hitherto publifh'd upon the fame Subjeß. For, confide ring that the
Author thereof liv'd not only in the Station of a Minifier in divers places of
Malabar and Coromandel, and efpecially for feVeral years in the king-
dom of Jafnapatnam in the Ifk of Ceylon, but alfo affified in Perfon in
divers Sieges and Expeditions, and thereby had more than ordinary opportunity
to be inform’d concerning the Nature and of thofe Countries,
their ProduSis, Inhabitants, Manners, Cufioms, Religion, Ceremonies, Oe-
commy, Traffick, Mamfaßuries, Civil and Military Exploits, and what
elfe may he requifite for the accomplifhment of a good Hiflory, founded upon
the Faith of one who had been an Eye-wof thofe Tranfaßions ; ~
fequently he might challenge the Preference before many, who relate matters
chiefly upon hear fay. As to thofe things which are not grounded upon his
Ocular Teflimony, the fame were taken from Authentick Records and
Manufcripts, and illuflrated with Maps and 'Draughts of thofe
Countries, Cities, Nations , See. done to the . relates to the Ido-
latry of thefe Pagans, we are convinc’d by his own Teflimony, that befides
the opportunity he had of Vtftting their Pagodes, or Temples ( a thing rare -


ly allow'd there ) one of their mojl learned Brahmans liv'd with him in
the fme Houfe for a conftderable time, from Trhom he by conftant Con-
Verfation, as well as out of their own Records, mofl fecret d(e-
ceffes of their Religion, and had the e Draughts of their , much
beyond ttehat Abraham Royerius (who Tvrit upon the fame SubjeEi)
can pretend to upon that account. As for our party we have made it our
chief efi care to give you an exaFl Delineation of the before-mention d
Draughts in the befl (fopper Plates that could be , and that with
all imaginable exaclnefs according to the true Originals , contrary to what
is practis'd by many, who fludy to re matters of this kind, rather
according to their own Fancy, than to Truth. We have only this to add
that to avoid all mneceffary Prolixity, it was judged requifite to omit
many Digreffms, tending not fo much towards the Elucidation of the
Hijlory, as (we fuppoje) to fhew the Author's in the Holy
Scripture.




JSofil.Tty. \s6k.
Deicriptio va \
mpERn N
MAL AB AR,
CANAR A, DE C AN ; A
et Aliarum j |f
1.


An Exact Defcription of the Coafts
of Malabar and Coromandel in the
Eaft-Indies.
CHAP. I.
The Divifon and Limits of the Indies. The Author's purpofe in the enfuing
Treatife. A Defcriptien of Cambaja and Suratte. The Treaty with the
Great Mogul, by Mr. Van Teylingen.
Tj H E main Defign of the en-
fuing Treatife being to give
an exadt Account of the Indies,
as far as is come to our krlow-
ledg, either by our own Ex-
perience, or the conftant Converfation
with People of unqueftionable Credit, viz..
the Goafts ot Malabar and Coromandel ,
together with the Ifle of Ceylin , and
places thereunto belonging *, thought
it not beyond our fcope to infert the true
Limits and Divifion of the whole Indies ,
whereby the Reader (together with the
annexed Map) may form to himfelf the
more clear Idea of the Situation of thefe
Places.
India therefore borders to the Weft
upon the River Indus, towards the Ara-
bian Sea-, to the North it is inclofed by
the Mount Taurus, on the Eaft-fide by the
vaft Eaftern Ocean , and to the South by
the Indian Sea . India was antiently di-
vided into two Parts by the River Ganges \
thence the more Eaftern Part was call’d
India beyond the Ganges , and the Weftern
Part India , on this fide of the Ganges ,
now known by the Name of Indoftan ; and
according to the opinion of fome Au-
thors, is the fame mention’d in the Scrip-
ture by the Name of Havila.
India is befides this divided into feve-
ral Kingdoms and Provinces, to wit,
The Empire of the Great Mogul, Decan,
Malabar, Coromandel , Crika , Bengale, Pa-
gu, Siam and Cambodia, befides the Mal-
dive IJles (of which there is a vaft num-
ber ) the Iflands of Ceylon (of which
in the lecond Book) of Sumatra , Borneo,
Celebes , Amboina , Banda , and the Moluc*
que IJles , viz. Termate, Machian, Bachian ,
Ttdor, Motir, Potbacker , and divers others.
As it is not ray Intention to treat of
the whole Indies, but to confine my felf
to thofe parts I have for the moft part
feen my felf, and to give you a relation
of fuch remarkable Tranfaftions both of
Peace and War as have happen’d there ;
fo I will begin with the Kingdom of
Cambaja , and its Capital City having the
fame Name, and end with Bimilipatam
upon the Coaft of Orixa , bordering upon
Bengale.
Cambaja is a different Province from
Gufuratte , fituate at 22 deg. of Northern
Latitude; it has got its Name from its
Capital City nam’d Cambaja , (formerly
the Indian Cayrus ) feated at the mouth
of the River Indus (or Sandus j known
by different Names among divers Na-
tions: it rifes among the Mountains of
Paramifus , and being augmented by at
leaft nineteen other Rivers ( among which
are the Hydafpes and Hypafis , whither
Alexander the Great carried his Arms)
it falls by feven different Channels, or
as fome will have it by five, into the
Sea; two of which pafs through and
exonerate themfelves into the Sea in
this Kingdom of Cambaja . It borders
to the Eaft upon the Country of Mandoa ,
to the Weft upon the Country of the
Nautakers or Gedrofiers , to the North it
has the Kingdoms of Sanga and Dulcinga $
and to the South that of Decan. It is
one of the moft fruitful Provinces of the
Indies, which furnilhes the circumjacent
places with Corn, Wheat, Rice, Peafe,
Butter, Oil, and divers other Provifions.
The Inhabitants are generally either Gu-
furattiens or Benjans , being much addict-
ed to Traffick, and very quick in their
dealings. They make here the beft Ca-
lico’s of all forts; and the Country a-
bounds in indigo, Graaates, Hyacinths.
The Au-
thor's In-
tentionso
The Pro-
vince of
Cambaja.
The River
Indus was
formerly
alfo calfd
Sandus
and Pan-
gab, from
its five
Branchesi
The Limits
and Ferti-
lity of
Cambaja


Its Extent .
A Defcrip-
tion of the
City of
Cambaja,
formerly a
rich City ,
but fome-
what de-
cay'd fince
by the ill
Condutl of
the Moors.
A Defec-
tion of A-
madahach.
Amethifts, and divers others precious
Commodities. According to Cluvef s
Computation Cambaja is 150 German
Leagues long, and as many broad.
The City of Cambaja (call’d the Ben-
jan Paradife ) lies according to the com-
mon Computation 16 Leagues to the
Well of Brochia , feated at the Entrance
of one of the largeft Channels of the
River Indus. About three Leagues thence
on the oppofite Shore is a great Village,
inhabited by the Rebellious Rafpoutes , a
'perverfe Generation, living for the moft
part upon Rapine. This River is almoft
dry all the Winter, tho at high Tide it
rifes feveral Fathoms deep, fo that then
Ships may come up to the very Walls of
the City, where at low Tide it is forda-
ble. This City is reckoned as big again
as Surattc , being well built, and fortify’d
with a triple Wall. It has three Bazars,
or great Market-places, for the fale of
all forts of Merchandifes, and twelve
Gates,, befides that almoft every Street
has a peculiar Gate, which is fhut up eve-
ry night to prevent Diforders: Its whole
Circuit is about fix or feven Englifh Miles \
and without the Gates are four very de-
licious large Citterns or Ponds, and fifteen
Gardens, for the Diverfion of fuch of the
Inhabitants as are pleafed to divert them-
felves there with walking in the cool of
the Evening. They arc for the moft part
Pagans, and addicted to Traffick, efpe-
cially in all forts of Stuffs for clothing,
which they tranfport to Diu, Goa , At chin ,
Mecha and Perjta,
Amadabath the Capital City of the
Province of Gufuratte , lies 18 Leagues
from Cambaja , about 23 4 deg. Northern
Latit. and confequently diredtly under
theTropickof earner: It is feated in a
great and moll delightful Plain, juft on
the Bank of a very fine River * 7 it is both
ftrong and populous, being fortified with
a goodly Wall with round Turrets and
twelve Gates.
The Streets are very broad, the Houfes
very handfom, and the Pagan Temples
ftately built. In the Center of the City
is the Cattle, the Refidence of the Gover-
nor, furrounded with a very high Wall,
the Gates whereof are guarded by a cer-
tain Body of Troops, who let nobody
pafsorrepafs without leave: This being
formerly the ordinary Seat of their
Kings. The Commodities found at Ama-
dabath zxt Girdles, Turbants, GoldTif-
fues, Silk Stuffs, Satins, Damasks, Tape-
ftrys, Suchar, Amfpien or Opium , Cummi
Lacea , Borax , preferv’d Ginger, Mira-
bolans, Sal-Armoniack and Indigo. Un-
der the Jurifdi&ion of Amadabath are
25 confiderable Towns, and 2998 Vil-
lages.
The City of Suratte is a place of great
Traffick, both the Englifh and Dutch ha-
ving Factories here: It lies open to the
Water-fide, except that theCaftle is well
provided with Cannon brought from the
Ship Middleburgh, which was loft there
1617. But on the Land-fideit is forti-
fied by a Wall of Stone, the old Forti-
fications being only of Earth: It has no
more than three Gates, but two Gover-
nors independent on one another, one of
the Caftle, the other of the City. Next
adjacent to the Palace of the laft ftands
the Cuftom-houfe, where all Goods im-
ported or exported pay 3 2. per Cent,
Cuftom, except Gold and Silver, which
pay only 2 per Cent,
Thefe Cuftom-houfe Officers are very
troublefome and injurious to Strangers,
and have often given great caufe of Com-
plaint to our Company, as will appear
from the following Petition, and the
Mogul’s Patent (or Firman ) granted to
the faid Company, and dated the 15 th
day of the Month Rammafay, in the \6th
year of the King's Reign, and fince that
of Mahomet 1052,
cc The Dutch are approach’d to the
u Gates of your Majefty’s Court, ex-.
tc pefting at the feet of your Majefty’s
“ Throne ( whofe Brightnefs is like that
a of the Sun, and reaches to the Skies)
tC the happinefs of feeing the Eyes of the
4C greateft Monarch, to offer their juft
“ Complaints againft the Officers of your
tc Majefty at Surattc , who have been ex-
ct tremely troublefome to them, in ex-
u afting from them illegal Duties of their
44 Goods bought at Agra and Amadabath,
44 and thence brought to Suratte: They
Cc humbly requeft your Majefty to fend
cc your Orders by your Duwan or Com-
ct miffioner to the Cuftom-houfe Officers
44 at Suratte, with ftrift Command tore-
-44 gulate themfelves accordingly, as they
44 expeft to be accountable for it to your
44 Majefty.
The King did immediately difpatch his
Orders, that the Cuftom-houfe Officers
fhould not take from the Commodities
bought at Agra and belonging to the
Dutch , from 10 to 11 per Cent, and thofe.
bought at Amadabath 1 o or 1 o 4 per Cent.
that they fhould be oblig’d to Veil Tarif-
fed with the Bills of Loading given them
by the Dutch Merchants, and exadt no
more Cuftom under any other pretence :
That furthermore all Commodities bought
at Brodera and Suratte fhould pay according
The City of
Surattc.
Differences
about the
Cuftoms.
The Dutch
petition the
Great Mo-
gul.


yoL. 7. i 7. r 66.
TJie City of
Am AD A B A T H
"2.




Pot-
Surat tk.
3




Mr: Van
Teylin-
gen *s Let-
ter,
to the Price they were bought for, and that
they fliould avoid giving any jult reafon
of complaint to the Dutch. But thele
Promifes had not the defired Effea, as
will appear out of the next following
Letter of Mr. John van Teylingen Prefi-
dent and Governor of the Dutch Fafto-
ries in Gufuratte, Jndojian , and Mocha.
c \7I/Hefeas by the manifold Exadions
4 ' V and Injuries, the robbing of the
4 Fa&ory of our Company, the Detenti-
-4 on of Daniel Majfouw Barber’s Mate,
c and divers other enormous Proceedings •,
4 the Perfons in the Service of the Com-
-4 pany, in the Empire of the Great Mo-
-4 gul , have received confiderable Detri-
-4 ment from divers of the Great Mogul's
4 Officers (contrary to the intent of his
* Firman, or Letters Patents) which muft
4 needs tend to the great damage of the
4 Company in general: It has, after ma-
-4 ture deliberation, been thought expe-
-4 dient,byMr .Cornel, van der Lijn Gover-
-4 nor-General, and the reft of the Mem-
-4 bers of the Council of the Indies, to
4 redrefs the faid Affronts and Injuries
4 by Force of Arms. The Yachts, the
4 Larch, the Sluice , the Lido, and the
4 Eight-Churches, being equipped lately
4 for that purpofe, and to be join’d by
4 divers other Ships from Batavia, we
4 give the Command thereof, during my
4 abfence from the Fleet, to the Head
4 Fadtor Gerard Pclgnm , which how-
-4 ever fhall ceafe that Minute, when I
4 come aboard any one of thefe Ships in
4 Perfdn. To prevent all Diforders, Ra-
-4 pine, and other Enormities, I do by
4 thefe Prefents give a ftrift Charge to
4 all the Officers, of what degree foever,
4 and to ail the Soldiers and Seamen a-
-4 board thefe Veffels, not to hurt the
4 Moors either in their Lives or Eftates
4 (this being contrary to the Intention of
4 the Council) but only to feize upon
4 their Ships, Mony, and Goods, and to
4 fecurethem, till Satisfadtion be obtain’d
4 by the Company upon their juft Preten-
-4 lions. We therefore once morecom-
-4 mand all the Officers, Soldiers and Sea-
-4 men, without exception, not to injure
4 or rob (after the feizing of any of thefe
4 Ships) the Moors in their Perfons or
4 Goods, under the penalty of corporal
4 punilhment, and (according to the na-
-4 ture of the Crime) of the lofsof their
4 Lives, as they will anfwer the fame to
4 the contrary at their peril.
Given at the Butch Fadtory at Surat*
tc , Feb* io. 1649.
John van Teylingen ,
The following Order was likewife di-
reded to the Head Fador Gerard Pelgrim ,
and the Fador Peter Rattens .
44 It being firmly refolv’d in Council,
44 the 25 th of Ottob. to profecute with,
44 the utmoft vigour the Defign laid
44 formerly by the Governour General
44 and the Council of the Indies ( which
44 was delay’d by our long ftay) with the
44 firft opportunity the Yachts the Sluice,
44 LarckjLillo, and Eight-Churches, are cho-
-44 fen for that purpofe: But two of them
44 being now at Mocha , and the other two
44 ordered to ftay there the Winter at
44 Babul , weconftitute the Head Fadfor
44 Mr. Gerard Pelgrim Commodore over
44 the faid Ships, as foon as they are re-
-44 join’d aboard the Larch, or any other
44 of thefe Ships he fhall be pleafed to
44 chufe, where he fhall carry the
44 with Authority to call on board the
44 Council of Wax, when Occafion re-
-44 quires. In his abfence, or feparation
44 of the Ships, the Fadtor, Fetter Rut-
-44 tens , fhall exercife the fame Autho-
-44 rity as Gerard Pelgrim, both which
u however fhall ceafe, with the arrival
44 of the Prefident Mr. John van Tey-
-44 lingen . Whether the two beforemen-
-44 tioned Yachts fhall leave Alocha toge*
44 ther or not, is not yet determined \
44 but in the mean while we ftriftly
4C charge you, that fo foon as you have
44 notice that the Chafirovan (a Ship of
44 a vaft bulk ) or any of the other Ships
44 belonging to Suratte, are preparing to
44 depart, you fet fail fome days before
44 them, under pretence of being bound
44 (according as we ufed to do) for Gam-
-44 ron. ' All which is to be underftood,
44 provided Matters be not brought to a
44 happy conclufion before that time *, for
44 if that were, you have nothing to do
44 but to profecute your Voyage in good
44 earneft thither, unlefs you'had a fare
44 profpedl of gaining confiderably by
44 your ftay, and increaling the price of
44 your Cargo. For the reft, it is to be
44 your main concern,to take effedlual care
44 that none of the Great Mogul" s Ships,
44 nay even fuch as trade thither from
44 Dm, efcape your hands } and efpecially
44 to keep a watchful Eye over the Chaft~
44 rovan , which commonly fails fooner
44 than the reft, and has more ready Mo-
-44 ny aboard. In cafe it fhould happen
44 (which we hope it will not) that the
44 Yacht the Eight Churches, which is to
44 return from Gamron , fhould, by fome
44 Accident or other, be detain’d in her
Secret Or-
ders to Mr,
G.Pelgrim,
and P. Ruc-
kus.


tC Voyage, we have provided againft it,
“ by difpatching. to the Commanders
u thereof a Copy of thefe Orders for
tc their diredion upon occafion } which
u after the return from their Voyage
tl they are to deliver fealed up into your
cuftody, where the fame is to remain
cc[ till you fet fail again, which is to be
u redelivered to them to fervefor a fure
“ direction, in cafe you fliould be fepa-
a rated at Sea. Silence ought to be your
tc moil peculiar care in this cafe, for fear
tc the Secret coming to the Ears of the
tC Moors, they Ihould Hop the departure
cc of their Ships. The Larck and the
u Lillo, and in default of thofe the Pojl,
u after their firft appearance here, fhall
u be fent to Gamron , whence they fhall
u fail pretty late, as if bound for Bata-
u via, but, under pretence of being una-
a ble to profecute their Voyage, come to
6c an anchor in the Road before Dalai ,
cc from whence they (hall fall Aug . 15.
“ fleering their Conrfe diredly for the Ri-
tc ver of Suratte *, where they are to flay
a till the arrival ofthePrefident Mr.
tc van Teylingen aboard them *, and in the
tc mean while feize upon all the Moors
u Veflels coming from Mocha ; yetfo,
ct as not to commit any further Outrages
ct againft them, except only to keep them
a in fafe cuftody till the Company fhall
u have received Satisfaction from the
44 King Chajliaan . So foon as they have
<c retaken a VefTel, they fhall take the
iC Nachodas Merchants and Seamen over
44 in their Ships, and keep them under a
cc good Guard, yet without any molefta-
-4C tion, rather fliewing them all the
cc marks of Refped and Civility that
44 can be ; and fhall put as many Soldi-
<c ers and Seamen of ours aboard fuch a
44 Ship as fhall be thought fufficient to
44 keep her: and Proclamation is to be
u made, enjoining every body to abftain
cc from doing the leaft injury to the feized
u Moors, either in their Perfons or Goods*
11 and Officers are to be appointed to fee
tc the fame put in execution. After we
C 1 have got all, or moftof the Moori/h
u Veflels into our hands, you fhall take
cc care to embark all the Facquiers and
“ other loofe People in one Ship, and to
ct let them fail their ways where they
“ pleafe, they being not worth our keep-
cc ing. This done, you fhall take the
cc firft opportunity of fair Weather to
cc tranfport,. firft the ready Mony, and
cc afterwards the Merchandizes aboard
tc our Veflels * but fo, as that they be.
u well pack’d and feal’d up firft, and ex-
u ad Inventory made, with the Names
“ or Marks of the refpedive Owners:
cfc Each Parcel is to be mark’d with a pc-
tc culiar Letter * a Copy of which is to be
“ given to the Owners, and a written
“ Acknowledgment to be taken from the
Nachodas of what is thus taken, and to
“ be redelivered, in cafe Matters be ad-
jufted hereafter, thatlo every one may
u know where to look for his own * the
“ Fador being to be careful in this Point
<c in the Tranfportation, as well as the
ic Mafter of the Ship in receiving, ’as
u they will anfwer for the lofs at their
‘ c peril. The Englifh Yacht coming from
C: Mocha you are to let pafs unmolefted,
“ for weighty Reafons > purfuant to the
tc c Refolution taken in Council the 14 tb.
u The fame is to b 6 done in refped of all
“ french, Banifh, and all other Ships in
‘‘ amity with the States, provided they
u don’t attempt any thing upon the
cc Moors in your cuftody * in which cafe
“ you fhall defend your felves to the laft
“ Extremity. Laftly, If the Matter
“ could be fo contriv’d, that our Veflels
* c coming from Mocha might intercept
and feize the Ships of Carnbaja, and
“ carry them to the River ot Surat-
u tc, it would be a Angular piece of Ser-
u and much haften the Accommo-
<c dation. I conclude, wifhing you
cc Health and Happinefs in your Voyage
tc and Undertaking, for your own Glory,
c< and the Intereftof the Company.
Signed,
From the Dutch
Factory at Su-
ratte y Febr. 2o t
1649.
Arent Barentƒz.
John van Teylingen.
Fooft Dirik.
Adrian van der Burgh.
Daniel van der Hagen .
Gerardo Pelgrim, and
Elias Boudaan.


CHAP. II.
The Treaty carried, on. What Articles were propofed by the Dutch, and agreed to
by the King. His Patent or Firman; and Ratification of the Treaty.
FOR fear of exafperating the Great
Mogul beyond redrefs, it was thought
fit to difpatch the following Letter to
his Majefty.
44 Moft Renowned, moft Potent, and
tC moft illuftrious King, and Lord, fill’d
44 with Majefty and Wealth, the bright-
-44 eft Princes among the moft Powerful:
44 As an unjuft War is defervedly deteft-
-44 ed by all Nations, and feldom comes to
44 a happy Gonclufion -, fo our being ob-
-44 lig’d to aft againft your Majefty (pur-
-44 fuant to the Command of our General,
44 and the Council of the Indies) is found-
-44 ed upon very juft and legal Pretenft-
-44 ons. Had your Officers thought fit to
44 treat us according to the Tenour of
44 your Majefty’s Patent, or Firman, gran-
-44 ted to us, we fhould never have at-
-44 tempted to raife any Differences be-
-44 twixtyour Majefty and us, much lefs
44 have had recourfe to open Hoftilites.
44 But when we were forced to fee our
44 Traffick, not only in this Place; but
44 alfoat Bengale, interrupted and fpoil’d
44 by moft injurious Monopolies (to the
44 great Detriment of the Company)
44 by intolerable Affronts, and refufing
44 our juft Requeft, and humble Petiti-
-44 ons, to have the two Fugitives, and
44 fince circumcifed Servants of the Com-
-44 pany, delivered into our hands •, and
44 to have due reparation made for the
44 Damage fuftained by the Company in
44 the Robbery committed upon their
44 Faftory: All thefe injurious Pro-
-44 eeedings have obliged our Governor-
-44 General, and the Council of the In-
-44 dies, to have Recourfe to the Law of
44 Arms, to procure us reafonable Satif-
-44 faftion*, and having for this purpofe
44 fent us four Ships from Batavia, we
44 did the i itb and 1 6th of this Month,
44 feize your Majefty’s Ships the Gen-
-44 javeer and Sahabbi (coming from Mo~
tc cha) and after having taken out of
44 them all the ready Mony they had a-
-44 board, and underftanding that the
44 faid Genjawer and Sahabbi belonged
44 properly to your Majefty, we thought
44 fit ( out of refpeft to your Perfon) to
44 have them carried by our Seamen into
44 the River, and under the Caftle of Su~
44 ratte, not queftioningi>ut what We have
44 been forced to undertake upon this ac-
-44 count for the maintaining of our Juft
44 Rights, will meet with a favourable:
44 conftruftion from your Majefty. The
44 Mony feized by our Veffels, fhall not
44 fuffer the leaft diminution, but be kept
44 with all fecurity, till fuch time that
44 your Majefty lhall grant us a new Pa-
-44 tent in due Form, purfuant to fuch
44 Articles as we have Orders from our
44 Superiors to reprCfent to your Maje-
-44 tty, and are as follows.
4 1. It is defired that leave be given to
4 build a Warehoufe for our own life,
4 either in or near the Square of the Ca-
-4 file, where we may lay up fafely our
4 Merchandizes at the firft hand, free
4 from thofe Diminutions and Loffes we
4 fuftained yearly in the Alphandigo , pay-
c ing exaftly the ufual Cuftoms *, that
4 done, we (hall be at liberty to carry on
4 our Traffick, as formerly, undifturbed
4 and unmolefted.
The Goverriour’s Anfwerwas, 4 That
4 either a Place or Houfe fhould begrant-
-4 ed us juft without the Caftle, not far
4 , from the Alphandigo, for our proper ufe
4 only.
4 li. We defire that our Traffick may
4 be carried on without difturbance at
4 Bcngale , and in the circumjacent Places,
4 free from paying any Duty's, except
4 what is paid ufually at Pipeli (the
4 place where Goods are embark’d, pur-
-4 fuant to the Patent formerly granted by
4 his Majelly, but contravened by the
4 avaricious Governours.
Hereunto it was anfwercd, 4 That the
4 Governour Micrmofa fhould endeavour
4 to obtain this Point from the King.
t‘lll. Reftitution was required of fuch
4 Sums of Mony as of late Years had beeri
4 Unjuftly detained, both at Suratte and
4 Amadabath, and full Satisfaftion defi-
-4 red for whatCuftoms had been ex tor-
-4 ted from our Ships betwixt Agra and
4 Amadabath, contrary to the exprefs
4 Words of his Majefty’s Patent; the
4 whole Sum amounting to 41479 Ropias:
4 IV. His Majefty was requefted to
4 iffue his Orders for the full reftitution
4 of what Mony was taken out of out
4 Faftory at Suratte, and that a certain
4 Sum (as his Majefty fhould direct)
4 might be allotted in lieu of Satisfaftion
Articles
propofed by
the Dutch
to the
Great Mo-
: gul.
• The. An-
fiver*


» 4 for the Robbery committed upon the
4 laid Factory, the murdering of the
5 4 Company’s Servants, and the Injuries
4 and Affronts put upon us: The Sum ot
4 the Mony taken away from thence a-
-4 mounting to 66000 Ropier.
Unto thefe two Points the anfwer was
made; 4 That the reftitution of what
4 was taken from us, was a reafonabls
4 Requeft, but to give fatisfadion, for
4 that other Enormities were committed
4 by Robbers (fince fled from Juftice)
4 was not in their power ; but if any of
4 thefe Criminals could be taken, they
4 fhould be delivered into our hands.
4 V. That for the future none of his
4 Majefty’s Ships, or any others belong-
-4 ing to thofe of Suratte , Bengale , or o-
c ther places, fhould traffick to Achin ,
4 Fera, Queda , Oedjang-Salang , Malac~
4 ca, &c. and in cafe they fhould, they
4 might be feized and declared as good
4 Prizes by our Veflels, by reafon that the
4 Company being then ingaged in a War
4 againft thefe places, were refolved to
4 block up their Rivers, and to keep
Tall Foreigners from trafficking with
4 them by Sea, till they have received
4 entire Satisfaction at their hands.
4 VI. It was defired that his Majefty
4 Majefty would deliver to us the (be-
-4 forementioned) two circumcifed Ser-
-4 vants of the Company ; and if they
4 were at prefent out of reach, todcpo-
-4 fit into our hands in lieu of them
4 400000 Ropiat ; which Sum fhall bere-
-4 ftored immediately after the delivery
4 of thefe two Perfons.
The Anfwer was; 4 That one of thefe
4 circumcifed Fellows was retreated ma-
-4 ny Years before into Perfidy and the
4 laft died in his flight about eight
4 Months before: But if they would have
4 his Bones,they would endeavour to pro-
-4 cure them.
4 Vll.That if ever any of the Companys
4 Servants fhall run away hereafter, they
1 Ihall not be protected, much lefsbe cir-
c cumcifed ; and in cafe any of the infe-
-4 rior Officers fhould notwithftanding
4 this detain any of them (contrary to
4 your Majefty’s knowledg) they fhall be
4 obliged to deliver the fame to us.
4 This Article was granted, provided
4 they did not take refuge among the
4 Rafpoutes then in rebellion againft the
4 Mogul.
4 VIII. That Satisfadion fhould be gi-
c ven for what Expences the Company
4 had been forced to be at both by Sea
4 and Land, fince the Robbery committed
4 upon their Fa&ory.
4 This Article was rejected, a general
4 Satisfaction being promifed already.
c IX. That for the future a fufficient
4 Guard fhould be kept to proteft the
4 Servants and Goods of the Company
4 from the like danger ; and that in cafe
4 any fuch thing fhould ever happen a-
-4 gain, the Governor fhall be obliged
4 to make fatisfaCtion.
4 It was promifed that for the future a
4 Guard fhould be kept to fecure the Com-
-4 pany againft all danger.
c X. If our Caffila, or Caravan (which
4 God forbid) ffiould be plundered by
c the way, that the Governour (hall be
4 obliged to find out the Goods; and if
4 found, reflore them tons, and in cafe
4 of negleCt, to make fatisfaCtion for
4 them.
It was anfwered ; 4 That we mull fue
4 for a Firman , or Patent, on that ac-
c count, which would without queftion
4 be granted.
4 XI. That in all the Citys, Towns and
4 Teritories under his Majefty’s Jurifdic-
-4 tion, we Ihall be exempted from paying
c any Dutys, Cuftoms, or Impofitions,
4 except the Cuftoms at Suratte and Bro~
4 chi a ; and in cafe any Mony fhould be
4 exaded from the Servants upon that
4 account, the Mony fhall be made good
4 by his Majefty’s Vuwan y or Commifiio-
-4 ner, at Suratte,
4 XII. That the Cuflom payable from
4 fuch Goods as are to be exported, Ihall
4 continue on the fame foot as fettled
4 by the King’s la ft Firman , or Patent.
4 This Article was granted without the
4 leaft limitation.
4 XII i- That the Cuftoms of the Mer-
-4 chandizes imported, Ihall (as former-
ly) be fatisfy’d with Merchandizes
4 each in its kind.
4 This was alfo granted.
4 XIV. That we Ihall be at liberty to
4 difpofe and fell our Cargo’s and Goods
4 where and when we pleafe, without be-
-4 ing controuled therein by the Governor,
4 or any other Merchant.
4 This was likewife agreed to.
4 XV. That no Governor, of what
4 quality or degree foever, (hall obftrud
4 us in the buying up what Commodities
4 we have occafion for, or employing of
4 Brokers and other Servants for that
4 purpofc, fuch as we judg may be moll
4 ferviceable to us ; neither Ihall they be
4 taxed or otherwife molefted on that
4 fcore.
It was anfwered ; 4 That doubtlefs his
* Majefty would grant that Article, and
4 that in the mean time no body fhould


4 intermeddle with the Traffick belong-
-4 ing to the Company. «
4 XVI. That no body of what degree
4 or quality whatever fhall pretend to
4 obftrud us in the fending away of our
4 Goods, or flop our CaffilM ( Caravans)
4 or Carts, and Camels thereunto belong-
-4 ing, much lefs to endeavour to detain
4 the fame after they have been hired.
4 Unto this it was anfwer’d, that the
4 King would doubtlefs grant this Re-
-4 queft.
4 XVII. In cafe of any Conteftsarifing
4 betwixt both the Nations, whereby
4 Murder or Manfiaughter may enfue
4 (which God forbid) the Governors fhall
4 have power only to punifh the Crimi-
-4 nal, if he be one of his Subjects \ but if
4 he belong to the Company, he is to be
4 put into the hands of our Diredory, in
4 order to be punifh’d according to the
4 Laws of our Country *, and if any of our
4 People engage with any of the Indian
4 Women, the fame (hall be deliver’d up
4 to us to fuffer condign Punilhment.
4 Unto this it was anfwer’d, that this
4 Article mult be referr’d to the King’s
4 Determination *, but that further Satif-
-4 fadion (hould be given upon this Blfead
4 to the Dutch Company at Suratte.
4 XVIII. If by Tempefts or other Ac-
-4 cident fome of our Ships (hould be
4 ftranded, .or otherwife be loft on thefe
4 Coafts, the Goods fav’d by your Ma-
-4 jefty’s Subjeds (hall be reftor’d to the
4 Owners.
This was granted.
4 XIX. That we (hall be maintain’d and
4 pioteded in the quiet enjoyment of the
4 propagating and refining of the Salt-
-4 peter} and that we fhall meet with no
4 oppofition from the Governors in tranf
4 porting the fame, or be burdened with
4 new Exadions, as it happen’d two years
4 before, when the Prince of Zaatfchan
1 fqueez’d 6ooßopias out of the Company.
1 his Article was refer’d to the King.
, 4 XX. That fuch as (hall be injurious
4 in words to any of our Nation, fhall
4 be punifh’d by the Governor, in the
4 prefence of the affronted Party, to pre-
-4 vent further Inconveniences, which o-
-4 therwife might arife from thence.
This Article being very juft, was a-
greed to*
4 XXI. That we (hall have full liberty
4 to keep and maintain the Yatch weal-
-4 ways have had upon the River of Su-
-4 ratte y and (in cafe this becomes ufelefs)
to build another, and ufe it as former.
4 ly, for our Diverfion, or other occa-
-4 dons.
4 We don’t in the leaft doubt, but that
4 your Majefty, according to your wonted
4 Bounty, will take into ferious Confide-
-4 ration this our humble, but neverthc-
-4 lefs juft and equitable Requeft *, it be-
-4 ing our conftant wifh, that mat-
-4 ters may be brought to a fpeedy Ac-
-4 commodation: and w.e promife that im-
-4 mediately on the receipt of your Ma-
-4 jelly's Firman , or Letters Patent, we
4 will difcharge what Mony and Perions
4 are in our Cuftody, and carry on our
4 Traffick in your Majefty’s Dominions,
4 as before: But in cafe your Majefty
4 (which we hope not) (hould refufe
4 our Petition, we defire notice may be
4 given us thereof, that we may in tirtie
4 (with youf Majefty’s Confent) remove
4 our Effeds, and quit your Territories %
4 it being our firm Refolucion not to ftay
4 here, unlefs your Majefty will be plea-
-4 fed to grant our juft Requeft } notwith-
-4 ftanding which we live in hopes of a
4 favourable Anfwer from your Majefty’s
4 Gpodnefs. t
Unto this was affix’d another Paper,'
as follows.'
Moft Potent King!
4 TUST upon the Conclufion of our
4 J humble Petition, the Deputies im-
-4 power’d by Miermofa the Governor, to
4 treat with us concerning the Differences
4 on foot betwixt us,w&. Mierfia Mamoeth ,
4 Hagie Siasbeecq , Zabandaar , ancf feveral
4 other Perfons of Note, have promifed us
4 to give fatisfadion for the Mony (pur-
-4 fuant to your Majefty’s Orders) taken
4 from us, toftop all Traffick fromßen-
-4 gale , and this place, &c. to Aetchin y
4 Peta, Quida, and Oetjang-Salang , &c.
4 till the Differences betwixt us and thofe
4 Places be brought to a Conclufion
4 concerning which we exped further
4 Orders from our Governor-General of
4 the Indies . It was further promifed us,
4 that a Place fliould be affign’d us for
4 the building of a Warehoufe near the
4 Alphandigo $ which as well as the other
4 Articles being confirm’d to us by Oath
4 of the before*mention’d Deputys., we
4 were on our fide willing to releafe the
4 Goods feiz’d by our Ships, which we
4 have done accordingly, and refettled
4 our Traffick at Suratte y as before:
4 All which we hope will not be unaccep-
-1 table to your Majefty } humbly begging
4 your Majefty to be pleated to take our
4 further Propofals into Confideration,
4 and to favour us with your Royal Fir-
-4 man. to avoid all further Differences,


King's Let-
terror fir-
man.
and to eftablifhifh a mutual, firm and
L everlafting Correfpondence betwixt us,
c which we fhall very religioufly obferve
4 (as long as your Majefty’s Governors
4 don’t ad contrary to the faid Firman )
4 without the leaft interruption on our
4 fide. We wifh your Majefty aprofperous
4 and long Life, and Vidory over your
1 Enemies.
Dated in your Majefty’s, City of
Suratte , 28 Sept, in the year 164.9
after the Birth of Chrift.
The King’s Letter was thus.
The King Chaasjan fends the following
Diredions to Mierfia Arcp his Go-
vernor of Suratte .
4 1 lift as the Sajetes are efteem’d among
1 * the Saints, fo is Mierfta Arep re-
-4 fpeded in his Family. I would have
4 you reft fecure of my Royal Favour:
4 Befides what Dignities you were pof-
-4 fefs’d of before, we have thought fit
4 to beftow upon you the Reward of
4 Paans Zeddi , and 300 Horfes for your
4 Services, in the Government of the
4 open Country •, and fince the departure
4 of Miermofa have put you into his
4 place i and for the better maintaining
4 of your Grandeur, have allotted you the
4 Royal Revenues of both your Govern-
-4 ments, in the Adminiftration of which
4 you [hall be very vigilant and courteous}
4 towards the chief Merchants you [hall
4 comport your felf very obligingly, and
4 give a helping hand to all the foreign
4 Nations trafficking there, as tending to
4 the no fmall increafe of our Treafury.
4 Your Authority fhall not extend to ex-
4 adt more than the ufual Cuftoms, even
c of the meaneft Perfons, but you (hall ad
4 in every thing as a Man of Honour and
c Confcience: What Rarities you hap-
-4 pen to meet with coming from foreign
c places, you (hail (like your Predeceftbr
4 Miermofa) fend to my Daughter Sa~
4 hebbejen , who twice a month pays her
4 Refpeft before my Throne 9 whatever
4 is extraordinary fine and rare, let it be
4 valued, and purchafe it of the Owner
4 accordingly j but if you can’t agree,
4 fend him hither, that he may be fatif-
-4 fied in his juft Demands, So fbon as
4 my Royal Firman comes to your hands,
4 you [hall endeavour to lift loChriftian
4 Conftables,well verfed in their Art, into
4 our Service, and you [hall fpare no Coft
4 to have feme great Cannon call for our
4 ufe. We have been inform’d, that a-
-4 bout two years ago the Dutch Fadory
4 was robb’d of 50000 Ropiat, for which
4 they have feiz’d divers Sums of Mony
4 belonging to our Merchants, and
4 coming in their Ships from Mocha, and
4 have thereupon declar’d their Senti-
-4 ments to the Governour Miermofa , it
4 is therefore that I command you to ob-
-4 lige the Hollanders to reftore the fa id
4 Mony to the Owners, who have nei-
-4 ther the leaft fhare or knowledg in what
4 relates to their lofs: And in cafe you
4 fliould not be able to bring things to
4 an agreement with the Hollanders, we
4 command you to demand the faid Sums
4 of Mony of Miermofa and Ommerchan ,
4 and pay the fame to the faid Merchants
4 (whofe Effeds are feiz’d) in recom-
-4 pence of their Lofs.
Thefe are the Contents of the King’s
Letter, as it was tranflated from the
Perfian .
He makes
it lefs than
it is.
CHAP. III.
The Chom of Suhali , or the Road before Suratte. Traffick of the Dutch,
Englijh, Moors and Portuguefes to Suratte , Gufuratte , Brochia, Goga , Patte-
fatane, Mangerol, Brodera, and other places.
Hp H E City Suratte did ( purfuant to
X their antient Records) pay a year-
ly Tribute of 2000000 Mamoidys , or
1000000 Livres, or 400000 Crowns, to
their King Achabaar , one Gama Gama
being then their Governour, who had
1800 Villages under his Jurifdidion. All
about Suratte are abundance of very plea-
rant and ftately Summer-Seats, and mag-
nificent Burying-places~( a thing much in
requeft among the Moors ) befides feve-
ral large Cifterns,or rather Ponds, fac’d
with Freeftone. Among the reft one de-
ferves particularly to be taken notice
of, as having no lefis than a hundred An-
gles of 28 yards each, with Stone Steps
to lead you down into the Ciftern ; in
the midft of which ftands the Tomb of
the Founder.
befeription
of Suratte.


The Chom
e/Suhali,
of
Suratte.
The Value
f Ll Ro .
yjL .
About an hour and a half to the North
from the Mouth of the River of Suratte
(named Taf-gyly) is a Road, where Ships
may ride at anchor near a ridg of Sand-
banks, which, together with part of the
Continent, breaks the force of the
Winds. This Road, commonly call’d
Cbom Suhalt, or Sualicom , lies at 21 deg.
50 min. North Latitude, extending from
North- Eaft to North, and again South-
Weft to South ; The entrance of it is but
narrow, and at high Water not above 7,
but at low Water force 5 Fathoms deep,
with a hard fandy bottom : The North-
North-Eafl, and South-South-Weft
Winds make here the higheft Tides.
The Harbour of Suhali is not above a
Musket-fhot broad: The
Weft Winds make this Road unfafe, the
Land-Shelves lying theri alnloft dry. The
Englifh fettled their Faftory there 1609.
and the Dutch 1616. who carry their Mer-
chandizes upon Waggons drawn by Oxen
from the laid Road 4 Leagues to the City.
It is to the Settlements of thofe two
Nations, Suratte owes its chief increafe in
Trade, many rich Merchants and Ar-
tifans having been drawn thither fince
that time, who fend their Gommodoties
thence by the Red-Sea to Arabia , Aden ,
Mocha , Hide da, Juda , Mecca , Chihiry ,
Catzdny , Doffer , and Souakin (in £ffe‘a-
J confifting in fine and coarfe
Gufuratte , Decan, and Bengale Stuffs and
Cloths, Callicoes, Indigo, Sugar, Gums,
Ginger, Tobacco, Wheat, Rice, Butter,
and other Provifions, in which this Coun-
try abounds. Befides that, two or three
of the King’s Ships trade into thefe
Parts, and tranfport certain precious
Commodities belonging to fome peculiar
Merchants and Perfons of the firft Rank 7
thefe are generally obliged to the Com-
pany, for furnifhing them with fome able
Seamen and Conftables (the Moors being
but ill verfed in thefe things) efpecially
while they were at enmity with the
Danes .
One of the Kings Ships, named Sdhy i
arrived here isiB. in its return from the
Red-Sea \ the Cargo whereof confifted
in Coral, Camlets, Sattins, Velvets,
Woollen and Linen Cloths, Tin, Quick-
iilver, Cinaber, Leather, Saffron, Slaves,
(both Black and White) Gum Arabic,
Aloes of Socotora , Amber, Civet, San~
gm Draconis , Myrrh, Raifins, Almonds,
Dates, Coffee-Berries, and about fix or
feven hundred Paffengers returning from
. Mahomet's Tomb at Mecha and Medina 7
the whole valued at 2500000 Ropias y e ach
Ropia being about half a Rix-Dollar:
Thefe Ships fet fail in March and April
for the Red-Sea , and return in September
or Ofiober \ they feldom fpend above 2 5
days in their paflage. The Inhabitants
ot Goa , Dahul , Daman and Diu,
do alfo fend their Ships to Mocha and
fome other places in the Red-Sea 7
and the Benjans and Armenians ufed to
come thence to Suratte in their light Ships
loaden with all forts of Trifles, which
they exchange for Wheat, Linen, Rice,
and Coffee-Berries.
Towards the latter end of the MouJJbn ,•
vin in March and April, abundance of Ma-
labars refort hither: thefe being mortal
Enemies of the Portuguefes , are commonly
well arm’d with Fire-locks and Scimeters,
and formerly ufed to be very mifehievous
to them. The Commodities they bring
to Tale heie, are coarfe Sugar, Cardamon,
Pepper, and Cayr (of which they make
Gables arid, Ropes ) and Coco-Nuts.
Formerly the Inhabitants of Suratte
ufed to fend yearly one or two Ships in
May or June (when the Portuguefe Ships
were in harbour) to Achtn , Tanaferi ,
Queda , and the Maidive Iflands, laden
with Stuffs, and Cloths, and Callicoes }
and return’d with Pepper, Camphire,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Sandel-wpod,
Porcelain, Chinefe Silks ( brought thither
by thofe of Malacca) Tin, Benzorn, E-
lephants Teeth, and Coconuts, the Jaft
being almoft the only produd of the
Maidive Ifles.
The Men in Power here are generally
very haughty and fierce •, and tho fuffici-
ently curb’d by the King’s abfolute Sway,
yet by reafon of thediftance of the Pro-
vinces from his Refidente, commit many
Enormities 7 his Territories bordering
upon Perfta, Aum 7 the River Ganges,
and Bengale, thence to Decan, and to the
Weft by the Sea.
The Province of Gufuratte (in which
all the beforementioned Citys lie) ex-
tends in length from South to North •,
it begins at Damana , and reaches 40 Cos
beyond Amadabath 7 bordering upon the
Country of Pathane inhabited by Pagans,
fo that its whole length is 180 Cos y or
90 Dutch Leagues: to the Eaft it borders
upon the Country of Parta Bafia 7 or at
leaft within 40 Cos or 20 Leagues of it,
extending further Eaft ward for three
days journey towards Amadabath 7 and to
the Weft to the Sea, and the Kingdom
of Suadi 7 which is divided from Perfia by
a great Defart. It was a moft fruitful
and populous Country, before it was re-
duced by the Great Mogul.
of
f { )e Re<i
The Mala-
bars Ene-
Xpoftu-
gueles!™
Extent of
Gufurat-
te*
one Indian
Gos f*°
uals.


The City of
Brochia.
Goga 50
Leagues,
from Cam-
Fattapa-
tane and
BrocferT ’
Mamada-
bath.
About 12 Leagues to the North of Su~
. ratte lies the City of Brochia about 9 or
10 Leagues from the Sea, and 21 deg. 56
r min. upon the River Nardabath , which
coming down by Decan and Mandonrv , af-
fords a good Paffage for Ships, about half
way from the Sea towards Brochia , the
palfage being Ropt up there by a Sand-
bank, which has not above 9 or 10 foot
Water. The fituation of this City is
both very convenient and pleafant, upon
a Hill, being furrounded by a Rrong Rone
Wall: This place is famous for its Ma-
nufactories ot Linen and Cloths, of
which they make more here than in any
other place of the Indies *, and they have
the beR way of whitening the firß. The
Mdlabars ufed formerly to come hither
every Year with 9 or 10 Ships. The
Dutch and Englijh have had their Facto-
ries here a confiderable time ago. Its In-
habitants are for the moR part Benjans ,
who are very expert in managing the Li-
nen Manufactory : The two Suburbs of
the City are chiefly inhabited by Callico-
vveavers and Merchants ; Brochia is rec-
koned to contain 87 Villages in its Ter-
ritories, the Country round about being
all low Grounds, except that about five
or fix Leagues to the South-EaR the
Mountains of Vindat have their begin-
ning, which are very rich in Achatftens.
All Merchandizes puffing through Brochia
pay 2 per Cent. Cußom.
Goga is a finall City feated in the Bay
of Cambaja, where it grows fo Rreight,
that it rather refembles a River than an
Arm of the Sea : It has neither Walls
nor Gates to the Land-fide, but is defend-
ed by a Hone Wall towards the Sea. Here
all the Ships defigned for Arabia , and the
Southern parts (by the Merchants of
Cambaja and Amadahath) are careen’d
and vidtuall’d, there being a fafe Road
here, tho fomewhat (hallow : Here alfo
the Portuguefe Convoys ufed to keep their
Ration, to expeft the coming of their
Merchantmen.
There are befides thefe feveral other
Places of lefs note belonging to this Pro-
vince, as Pattapatane, Mangerol (men-
tioned by Tome under other Names) the
Inhabitants whereof live upon Husbandry,
and managing of Cotton } Brodcra an in-
land Town, inhabited by Husbandmen
and Clothiers; the Company ufed to keep
feme Fa&ors thereto buy upcoarfe Cloth
for the Arabians and Ethiopians. Not to
mention here its Fortifications, Gardens,
Tombs, &c.
Mamadabath was for its pleafant fituation
fometimes honoured with the Refidence of
its Kings, but is fince come to decay to
that degree, that it is no more than a poor
Village now. We will alfo make mention
only of Nariau , IVaffet (a very antient
Caßle) Jjfempour , Batona , and their Pro-
ducts, fuch as Indigo, Saltpeter, Borax ,
Afa foctida , Amfion or Opium, Gummt
Lacen , and divers other Commodities.
But before we leave the Province of
Gufuratte, and take our way thence o-
ver Diu, Daman , &c. to Goa , and fo to
the Malabars *, we muR fay fomething of
its Traffick. It is beyond all difpute that
theTraffick of Suratte , and adjacent Pla-
ces, is of great confequence, provided
there be no want of ready Mony, and
the management thereof be committed to
Perfons of underßanding. I remember
that the College of XVII give thefe fol-
lowing By-rules to their FaCfors : To in-
form themfelves of the Conßitution and
Manners of the Inhabitants,what Commo-
dities are vented, and belt to be vented
there •, who, and how potent our Ene-
mies are *, what Religion and Coin is moR
regarded, and the true fituation of the
Place where they fettle, in refpeCf to its
Northern or Southern Latitude. Certain it
is, that the Inhabitants of the Province of
Gufuratte are a cunning and fettled Ge-
neration, who muR therefore be managed
with dexterity, and much refervednefs,
mix’d with a becoming gravity and out-
ward fplendor, wherewith thefe People
are much taken, yet without ever at-
tempting to lord it over them, a thing
which after has proved detrimental, if
not deßruftive to the Undertakers. Ic
is to the wife Conduct of our Forefathers
that we are obliged for the ERablifhment
and Improvement of our Traffickat Su-
ratte *, where our Fadory was no fooner
fettled, but we fent from thence 1624.
Jan. 20. our firß Ship call’d the Heufden ,
along the Coaß of Melinde and Soffala\
and thence to the Cape of Good Hope, and
fo to Holland,
This was follow’d the fame Year, n
March , by another call’d the Peuca , but
was forced to winter on the Coaß of Co-
romandel. Thefe were follow’d 1625.
April 23. by the Ship the City of Dort,
and the We fop Yacht, but were obliged
to winter in the Ifle of St. Maurice . In
the Year 1 616. the following Ships were
fent to Holland, taking their wav through
the South Sea, viz.. The Golden Lion ,
Walcheren , and Orange. 1628, The City
of Don was fent thence to Holland through
the Straits of Madagafiar, along the Coaß
of Fuff alia.
7raffid> of
GuFurat-
ce.


P-'K *74-*
t A MaJre JoPeus t 6 SPranaf- marletyi S. A njrews
Z S .Jojty I if S .Marco yz S.Mathew
3 Fvca to Tanjm tS y dxduznye 77 S. 7c/in Baptlf
'f S.Doms tg JLifincorJia. 3 4 S. Laurence
\5 rf.Sy.de Monte zo rfj.Je Scrrai 77 fSignora Je
** -Amora. z t Lcrros Jos G-alios G-uaJaluya
7 S.'Bras za 'RuaiTfs.Jmante 3 6 S. Anna
S/Wood market zy S -Taulo 77 S. JL .MyJalcna
a GreaTi/TimarK. 24 S .Tbcmce ncruo 3 8 S.Lc/ut Evany.
tosFuh.Wa%h.P/a.zyMaytoA.T/u)m. 77 S. Pc ter
ti ?/wc7LwsL?cillcics xSJiO'fjy. dospay. 40 7J. Signora Jo
12 PicePoysTuiz-za zyArchwjns. Pal . PilanJo
'■3 Galleys Lildup zS jf.S. Ja G-raca 4.1 y Ciiftomlwu/e
4 Timber wharf 77 S.Antho. Place 42 JPuhlick hall
7 S.Cai/aryns yoA.S.JdLu 47 Jhf. JePanyvi
4-
■ GO A




Our Dutch Veflels generally arrive
here from Batavia about the end of
Auguft, in Oflobcr, or beginning of No-
ranker, and fometimes towards the middle
of December :The Dutch Fadtors at Su-
ratte taking always care to fend their
Ships into Perfta in January , or about the
middle of February at farthefl:, that they
may be at Batavia before the end of
March.
CHAP. IV.
Of what confequence the Traffick of Suratte is. A particular Defcription of
City of Mocha, and of its peculiar Customs. The City of Agra, and its
Strength. The Defcent of the Great Mogul, his Pomp and Riches.
Some Re-
marks up-
on the
in
thfe parts .
OF what Confequence the Traffick of
Suratte is to the Dutch, they have
been fufficiently made fenfible by their
Faftors ever fince 1616 . The chief
Commodities to be vented here, are.
Lead, Quick-filver, Cinabar, Ivory, Tin,
Copper, Cumeta’s, Cloves, Nutmegs,
Mace, Pepper, Porcelain, &c . And this
Traffick is the more conliderable in re-
fped of the Communication it maintains
with our other Faftories in thofe parts,
with Agra,Mocha,2sA divers other places
upon the Coaft of the happy Arabia ,
where our Traffick feems to be well efta-
bliflfd, provided we take care to live in
good Correfpondence with thofe Nations,
which muff be maintain’d by all poffible
means, by avoiding fuch things as tend to
the Dillblution thereof. Amongft thefe
• the feizing of the Moorifh Ships has feveral
• times brought our Traffick into no fmall
2 Jeopardy, as it happen’d 1621. when
# our Ships the Samfon and IVefos having
made Reprifals upon forae Moorifh Veffels,
our Trade into Arabia was quite inter-
rupted, and likely to have been quite
loft. And we run the fame danger 1 618.
after the Yacht the Grottenbroeck had taken
a Ship of Gufuratte upon the Coaft of
Coromandel •, and tho our late Seizure
happen’d not to prove much to our dif-
advantage, yet can’t we at all times pro-
mife our felves the fame fuccefs, it being
certain, that tho the APoors court our
Friendlhip, yet are they on the other
hand very ftubborn, and not eafily re-
concil’d. *
Another thing abfolutely requilite for
the carrying on of the Trade here, is,
the King’s Firman , or Patent, to keep the
avaricious Governours of Cambaja, Su-
ratte, Brochia , and other places, in awe ;
belides, that the Portuguefc Priefts are al-
ways bufy to create an ill Opinion of us
in the Moors : Tlfey muft be carefully
watch’d in their Meafures and Weights,
without which they will play you the
fame Game as Godjanifan and Godjaajjdn
did many years ago to Sir Henry Middle-
ton, an Englijh Knight, who put them
in Irons aboard his Ship till they had
given him full fatisfadion.
Our Traffick to Mocha is likewife of
great Confequence to us: Mocha is feated
in the Happy Arabia, at the entrance of
the Red Sea at 13 deg. 28 min. Northern
Latitude: It is of a conliderable extent,
without any Walls, in a barren ground,
but well built with red and blue Stones,
the Houfes flat on the top like thofe of
Conftantinopk j it has three very fine Pa-
godes, or Pagan Temples, two whereof
have no Steeples, the third, in the midft of
the City, being adorn’d with a very high
Steeple. At the North end Hands a Email
Caltle like a Redoubt built, of blue
Stone, for the Defence of the Harbour,
1 612.
Mocha was about 90 or 100 years ago
no more than a Village inhabited by
Fiffiermen ; but fmee its Reduction by the
Turks) is fo encreafed by degrees, that
it is one of the chief Places on chat Coaft
now y the T. raffick of the Indian Ships
that ufed to come to an Anchor at Aden
(formerly a great Trading City ) being
transferred to Mocha, by reafon of the
Caravans which come thither with more
conveniency at certain times of the
year. Its Inhabitants are Turks, Ara-
bians, Bcnjans and Jews: Here is conftanc-
ly a great concourfe of People from the
beginning of March to the middle of
September:, about which time the great
Ship call’d Manfouri (which is kept by
the TurkijTj Sultan for the Tranfportation
of the richeft Commodities from the far-
thermoft parts of the Red Sea hither)
arrives here, its Cargo being gene-
rally efteem’d at 2500000 or 3000000
Reals, and conlifting in Pieces of Eight,
Golden Ducats, Italian Golden TiHues’
Camlets, Saffron, Quick-lilver, and di- ]
vers ocher Commodities, belides Slaves 0
. A Defcrip-
tion
cha. .
: Its En-
' creafc ,
[
£
The Trade
of Mocha.


Caravans
over Alep-
po and A-
Jexandria.
Pilgrims
going to
Mocha.
Riches of
Mocha.
Anchorage-
many.
of both Sexes taken in the Levant , or
. thereabouts, being generally Grecians ,
Hungarians , or of the iile of Cyprus *, of
all which they pay 10 per Cent. Cudom.
The fame Ship fails back again the fird of
January , laden with Spices, Indigo, fine
Gallico’s, Turbants, and fiich like Indian
Commodities.
Befides this, there comes every year in
March a Cafjila or Caravan , confiding
commonly of 1600 Camels, the Mer-
chants being for the mod part Turks ,
Arabians and Armenians \ thefe come by
the way of Aleppo and Alexandria hither,
and fpend commonly two Months in their
k 'whole Journy, becaufe they travel not a-
* hove three or four Dutch Leagues in a
day. They bring along with them twided
Silk, Gold Wire, red Coral, Cinabar,
Saffron* Myrrhe, divers forts of frnall
Wares, Needles, Spectacles, Knives, Scil-
fars, Looking-glades, &c. This Caravan
leaves the place again in December , loaden
with all forts of Indian Commodities,
and thus fpends near a twelve month in
their whole Journy.
At Cayro you fee a vaft multitude of
Pilgrims towards the beginning of the
year, who take the conveniency of this
Caravan to travel to Mocha , eight Leagues
from whence lies Medina , where is the
Tomb of Mahomet , which is thus yearly
vifited by betwixt 30000 and 40000 Pil-
grims.
Mocha has been fo rich for many years
pad, thatinCudoms and Taxes it pays
no lefs than 200000 Reals, or Pieces of
Eight every year to the Grand Signior^ being
one of the larged and moil: conliderable
places under the Jurifdidion of the BaiTa
of Temak . The Governour of the City
fits fometimes in Perfon at the Cudom-
houfe vifiting the Packs and Cheds, he
having a certain allowance out of every
Cheil or Pack. All Indian Ships coming
to an Anchor here are oblig’d to pay,
befides the ordinary Cuftoms, Anchorage-
mony, according to their Bulk, from 10
to 50 Reals, which with fome other Ex-
actions makes the whole amount to 15
per Cent . The Turks here have alfo ano-
ther Invention of fqueezing fome Mony
out of the Moorifh Nachodes , or Officers
of the Ships \ for the Governor having
fummon’d them immediately after their
arrival to appear in his Prefence, they
are conduced thither in great State, at-
tended by his Drums, Pipes, &c. and be-
ing reconduCted to their Lodgings, the
Clothes are taken away again. The fame
is repeated afterwards juft before their
departure, when they are reconduCted to
their Boats* and their Clothes being
taken oft' again, each Officer is oblig’d to
pay for this mock Orels 20 or 25 Reals
each time.
No fooner are the Moorijh Ships come
into the Roads after they have dropc their
Anchor, but they muff carry their Rudder
and Sails afhpre, and unload the whole
Cargo of the Ship (whether they fell it
or not) of which they are oblig’d to pay
the full Cuftoms. Alter they are quite
unloaden, they give a Signal with a Can-
non for the Governor or his Deputies to
come aboard, to fee whether any thing
be left behind * and then they have liber-
ty to fell.
In the Spring the Portuguefes come hi-
ther with their Ships from Goa , Gog a,
and other places * their Cargo is common-
ly Indigo, Sarcaa, Gallico’s, Sail-cloth, all
forts of Gufuratte Stuff's and Clothing,
Tobacco, Rice, and Medicines 5 moft qf
which Commodities are fold to the Turk}
Caravans, except the Rice and Tobacco,
which is confunfd in the Country. They
carry back R,eals or Pieces of Eight,
Golden Ducats, a certain Root ufed by
the Indians in dying red. A little before,
or about the fame time,ufed alfo to come
to Mocha the Ships of Daman , Cambaja
and the Adalahar Ccfcft, loaden with Pep-
per, Clothings of Cambaja and Cowman-
def Adegias , Tajfacelas , red and white
CaJJen, red Jeta*, Canekyns , Baflas, fine
Turbants, white and blue Girdles, paint-
eci Callico s, Rice, Tobacco, coarfe and
fine Porcelain, in lieu of which they
carry back Hories, Rabins, Almonds,
Camlets, Elephants Teeth of Soffala, red
Roots for dying, which grow only in
Arabia , Chauru or Coffee-berries, Befides
thefe, the Inhabitants of Achin , of Paty ,
and other places on the Coaft of Melinda\
trade hither •, they commonly fet fail
from home in February , or beginning of
March , and return from Mocha about
Auguft, to take the conveniency of the
Mou/fon .
The want of good Water and Fuel
which the Ships much purchafe here at
a dear rate, is a great defeft in Mocha:
However, not far from the City lies a
fmall Ifle, where the Englifli ufed to lay
up and careen their Ships; here you may
have Provilions for old Clothes in abun-
dance, as likewife Fuel and Water e-
nough; whence it is evident that the
Trade of Suratte, Jgra, Mocha and
( a City feated on the Red Sea at 14 deg
S° min. fortified with four round Bafti-
ons, and adorn’d with three Temples)
is one of the moft confiderable in thole
Rti f er .
a t f b Sails
brought a-
fiwe.
Traffic of
the Portu-
gjiefcs at
Mocha ‘
Water and
Fuel fcarce
at Mocha*


The'City
dnd Cafile
of Agra.
Murders
committed
in the pre-
ence of the
King,
parts j as the Engli/h have found by Ex-
perience.
But before we take quite our leave of
Suratte , and the adjacent Territories, we
muft fay fomething alfo concerning the
City and Gaftle of Agra. This Caftle,
the ordinary Refidence of the Great Mo~
gul i is one of the moft noble Structures
of the Eaft, feated upon the Banks of the
River Jemeni , fortified with a ftrong Wall
of red Stone, with large and deep Ditches,
Draw-bridges, and four Gates. Here is
alfo kept the King’s Treafury, and the
whole Court, or General AfTembly of the
Great Men of the Empire, who often-
times are not refrain’d by the Abfolute
Authority of their Monarch, from com-
mitting moft barbarous Enormities.
Thus it happen’d Auguft 4. 1644. in
the Evening after Sun-fet, when all the
Perfons of Quality ufed to appear in the
Gofalchama to falute the King-, among
the reft, Raja Ammerftng ( a Gommander
over 5000 Horfe, who had been abfent
fome days by reafon of his Indifpofition )
making his appearance there, was ask’d
by Sillabatchan the King’s chief Bahia,
why he had not appear’d there in feveral
days? He anfwer’d him, That he had
been prevented by his Indifpofition;
wherewith the other being not fatisfied,
gave Raja fome opprobious words, which
fo exafperated him, that without more
ado he run Sillabatchan with his Scymeter
thro the Body, laying him dead upon the
gound. Another Lord named Galichan ,
feeing the other murder’d in the King’s
fight, cut almoft off the Arm of
and another Gentleman, the Son of Raja
Rittelda , difpatch’d him quite. The King
feeing this Tragical Spectacle, gave im-
mediately Orders that the Body of Silla-
batchan Ihould be carried to his Houfe in
order to his Burial j but that the Body
of Raja Ammerftng Ihould be thrown
into the River: but fcarce were they got
with the Body without the Gate to exe-
cute the King’s Command, when fome of
the Rasboutes (a rebellious Crew) who
had ferv’d under him, feeing their Com-
mander’s Body drag’d thus along, did
fall upon the King’s Servants, and kill’d
above thirty of them, among whom was
the King’s Scepter-bearer •, fo that if the
King would fee his Orders put in Execu-
tion, he was oblig’d to fend a confide-
eMuhtfwfCoiriittetL
m. the preface of the
\ Lrreat M-oa ut\


table Force to protect them againft the
Rasboutes .
Agra has four Gates, one on the North-
fidc, cover’d by ftrong Works } the fecond
on the Weft-fide, where is the Market-
place, and the Royal Court of Judicature \
the third on the South-fide leads to the
Royal Palace, being always chain’d up
to prevent any body from paffing through
it on Horfe-back, except the King and
his Children: The fourth faces the River,
where the King every day falutes the
Sun, and about Noon fees the Engage-
ments of Elephants, Lions, and other
wild Beafts.
The City of Agra therefore is now the
Capital City (as Labor was formerly)
of that part of the Indies on this fide
of the Ganges , which is under the Jurif-
di&ion of the Great Mogul . The Caftle
is faid to have been founded by King
Accabar (defeended from the Great Ta-
merlan ) after the Conqueft of Gufuratte .
thereof is fet down) is diftributed the
next day among the Poor.
The prerent King’s Birth-day is cele-
brated the fecond of September , when the
King is weighed in the fame manner, a-
gainft Precious Stones, Gold, Silver,
Gold Tiflues, Silk Stuffs, Butter, Rice,
Fruits, &c. which is afterwards bellow’d
upon the Brahmans } and Nuts made fo
curioufiy of Gold Wire (as likewife Al-
monds, and other Fruits) are thrown a-
mong the People, that 1000 of them
weigh not above 20 Ropias, and coft
about 60 Ropias. The whole Ceremony
is concluded with drinking to a great ex-
cefs all the night long, notwithftanding
Mahomed s Law. Sir Thomas Row relates,
that he had a Golden Cup befet with Tur~
quoifes , Rubies and Smaragdes , prelented
him by the Great Mogul on his Birth-
day, but not till he had emptied it four
or five times.
The King's
Birth-day >,
The Moors alfo celebrate a certain Feaft
to the Memory of two Brothers, Ser-
vants to Mahomet Raly , who being on
their way to Coromandel on Pilgrimage,
were forced by the Pagans of the Coun-
try to feck for fhelter in a certain Caftle
but being diftitute of Water, they Tal-
lied out courageoufly upon the Pagans,
and after having killed many of them,
were at laft flain themfelves. Their Me-
mory is celebrated in June ten days after
the New-Moon, when they carry a Bear
along the Streets loaden with Turbants,
Arrows, Bows and Scymeters, certain
Priefts finging doleful Tunes, and flafh-
ing themfelves with Knives, till the Blood
follows very plentifully. In the Market-
place they fet up the Figures of two
Men of Straw, reprefentihg the Murde-
rers of thefe two Saints, at which they
let fly their Arrows, and at laft burn
them to Afhes. They keep alfo another
Feaft in June , when they kill abun-
dance of He-Goats, and afterwards feaft
upon the Meat: This is faid to be done
in Commemoration of the Sacrifice of
Abraham .
The Great Mogul being abfolute Lord
over 37 large Provinces and Kingdoms,
the Per lons and Eftates of all which are
at his foie difpofal, befides the iramenfe
Prefents of his Subjedts ( none of whom
dare approach his Perfon without them )
muft needs be Matter of immenfe Trea-
fures. The King of Vifiapour fent at
one time 30 Elephants, two whereof
were girded by Golden Chains, weigh-
ing 400 Pound weight, two others
with Silver Chains, the reft of Brafs,
beiides 500 Horfes, the Saddles and
Wealth and
Strength
of the Mo-
gul.
i will noc pretend to give you an exaft
account of the Wealth of the Mogul ,
but leave you to guefs at his Strength by
the Forces he brought into the Field
1630. againft Chasjaan , which confifted
in 144500 Horfe, and 5000 Elephants \
thefe laft the Mogul alfo ufes for his Di-
verfions, and he is often feen in great
State on the back of an Elephant richly
accoutred, attended by a great number
of Horfe. When thefe Elephants are to
engage againft one another before the
King, they pay their Reverence by bend-
ing their Knees, and fhaking their Trunks
to the King*, which done, they fall on
with a great deal of fiercenefsy but as foon
as they are hotly engag’d, certain Perfons
are appointed to part them j which done,
all Enmity ceafes betwixt them, they
touch one another with their Trunks,
ind are fed with Sugar Reeds, and Arack ,
:>r Strong-waters.
Another
Feaft.
Combat of
the Ele-
phants.
As to the Wealth of the Great Mogul,
the fame appears in its Luftre on certain
Feftival days: The New-year’s Feaft kept
on the day of the firft New-Moon in
March , which lafts eighteen days. On
the young Prince’s Birth-day every body
brings his Offerings to the King, who in
his turn makes Prefents to his Courtiers,
beftows new Places and Dignities upon
fuch as have deferv’d well, and augments
their yearly Salaries. The People flock
on that day to the Queen’s Palace (if flic
be living) where having likewife made
their Offerings under the found of their
Mufical Inftruments,the Prince is weighed
in a Golden pair of Scales againft Gold
and Silver* which (after the weight
fefllval- ■
days.
The Prin-
ce's Birth-
day*


Bridles whereof were befet all over
with Diamonds, Pearls and Rubies.
Mr, John Tvoift has given the World an
exad account of the Treafury of King
Aecqbaar.
CHAP. V.
The Title of the Great Mogul, and of the Kings of Achem and Siam. The
Origin of Mahomet ; feme of his pretended Miracles , Alcoran, &c.
The King
o/AchemV
Titles.
IT is mofl furprizing to underfland
what God-like Titles the Subjeds of
the Great Mogul bedow upon their Lord
and Mailer! How all his Words are
look’d upon as Oracles, and all his Adi-
ons receiv’d with a profound Amazement!
Hence it is that the vulgar fort are really
of opinion, that certain Rays dart from
his Head and Turbant, which admit not
of the near approach of indifferent Per-
fons } and that they fcarce ever mention
his Name without the additional Titles
of the AToJI Potent upon Earth , Lord of
the World , Great Monarch , The mofi ex-
alted Majefty 9 The hrightefi of Princes a~
mong the Great Ones , &c. ’Tis true, mod
of the Indian Kings affeft mod magnifi-
cent, or rather vainglorious Titles \ but
the Kings of Acbem and Siam feem to
outvie all the reft in this point; The firll
ftiles himfelf 4 King of the World,
4 created by God, whofe Body fiiines
4 like the Sun at Noon-day: A King
4 unto whom God has given the Luftre
4 of Full-Moon , a King chofen by God,
4 a King perfed as the North-ftar, King
4 of Kings, of the Pofterity of Alexan-
-4 der the Great *, a King before whom all
4 other Kings mult bow their Heads, and
4 pay Homage 3 a King as wife as around
4 Globe, and happy like the Sea *, a King
4 who is God’s Slave and Servant \ who
4 fees God, and lets the World know
4 the Juftice of God j a Protedor of
4 God’s Juftice, a King bleffed by God,
4 a King who covers the Iniquities of
4 Men, and forgives their Offences \ a
4 King, under whofe Shade Slaves feek
4 for fhelter \ a King perfed and infalli-
-4 ble in his Councils 3 a King and Benc-
-4 fador to his People \ a juft King, who
4 maintains God’s Juftice 3 the moll be-
d neficial King upon Earth, the Soles of
4 whofe Feet emit a moll odoriferous
4 Scent, beyond all other Kings •, a King
4 whom God has bleffed with his Gold
4 Mines, whofe Eyes are as bright as the
4 Morning Star : A King who is Matter
4 of many Elephants of all forts: A King
4 unto whom God has given Riches to a-
4 dorn his Elephants with Gold and pre-
-4 cious Stones \ belides a great number of
4 Elephants of War, armed with Iron
4 Teeth and Copper Shoos: A King upon
4 whom God has bellowed Horfes with
4 golden Harneffes befet with precious
4 Stones, and many thoafand Horfes for
4 War, the choicell Stone-horfes of A-
-4 rabia , Turky , Catti, and Balacki: A
4 King whofe Territories extend from
4 the South to North: A King who be-
-4 Hows his Favours upon all that love
4 him, and rejoices inch as are difturbed
c in Mind : A King who has in his culio-
-4 dy every thing that God has created 3
4 A King whom God has placed above all
4 things, to rule, andjto (hew the Ludre
4 of the Throne of Acbem.
The King of Siam goes (till beyond it,
as. may be feen by his Letter written
1636. to the late Prince of Orange , Fre-
derick Henry,
44 'V HIS is a Golden Letter of Friend-
-4t {hip and Confederacy, replenilh’d
ct with the Brightncfs of God, the moil
44 Excellent, comprehending all that is
a to be known 3 the molt fortunate a-
-44 bove what is to be found by Men ; the
a bell and the moll fecure in Heaven,
“ Earth, and in Hell j the moll magnifi-
-44 cent, delicious, and moll agreeable
44 Words , the Glory and irrefiftible Vir-
u tue whereof pafs all oyer the Earth*
44 with the fame Vigor, as if thro God's
44 Power the Dead were revived from
44 their Graves, and purify’d from all
44 their Iniquities, to the furprife, not
44 only of the Priells, but alfo of Mer-
-44 chants, and all the fervilefort of Man-
-44 kind. For what King can compare
44 with Me, who am the moll Potent,
44 moll Illuflrious and Invincible? The
44 Mailer of 100 Crowns, adorn’d with
44 nine forts of precious Stones: Supreme
44 Lord (rve pafs by fome blafphemous Ex~
44 prejfions) of the vail and mod noble
44 Kingdom of Siam \ the Brightnefs of
44 the moll beautiful City of India , the
f* _ v <
Tne King
cf SiamV
Title,


The Mo
gul V
Court .
Religion .
cc Capital City of the World, the Streets
u whereof are crowded daily with Peo-
tc pie j a City adorned with all the Beau-
cc ties of the World, and irrigated with
u delicious Brooks *, whofe Lord has a Pa-
u lace of Gold and precious Stones *, a
u Matter of gilded Thrones,of the white,
ci red, and round-taifd Elephants, which
u three forts God has not bellowed up-
u on any other Kings j a Divine Lord,
u in whofe Territories is depofited the
<c Vidor ions Sword, and who refembles
tC the God of War with tour Arms.
But to return to the Great Mogul and
his Court: The Pcrfian Language is the
Court Language there, tho behdes this
there are at leaft three other Languages
ufed throughout his Territories, The
chief Lords of his Courts have their
certain monthly Salaries allotted them,
out of which they are obliged to main*
tain a certain number of Horfesamong
thefe are four who maintain 12000 Horfes
each (the King’s Sons entertain 15000
Horfe) others 1000, others 100, in pro-
portion to their Salaries •, the whole num-
ber of Horfe maintained by his Courtiers,
being computed at 100000 Horfe.
The Mogul changes his Clothes every
day for new ones, which he bellows upon
his Courtiers. The Mogul entertains cer-
tain Officers of Quality, calPd Nababes,
at Suratte and other places, whofe bufi-
nefsis, to enter upon Treaties with Fo-
reigners, and to keep the Roads free from
Robbers, by punilhing them with the ut-
mofl Severity. The Mogul has alfo a
laudable cullom, to lay up vail Sums of
Mony and Provifions in certain places, to
be referred for neceffitous Occalions. He
appears three times a day, and fits in
Council, from feven till nine in the Even-
ing.
The Moguls profefs the Mahometan
Religion, but are no great Zealots in it,
as Athanafm Kircher has well obferved in
Gelal Edim Mahomet, the tenth of the
Moguls defcended from the Great Tamer-
lan the firft, who call’d the Jefuits into
his Empire } and their continual Debau-
cheries in llrong Liquor (direftly con-
trary to the Law of Mahomet) is an in-
fallible fign of their indifferency in point
of Religion : Befides, that throughout all
the Empire they are not near fo well ver-
fed in the Alcoran , and the Law of Maho-
met, as the Africans , thofe of Fez . and
Morocco, &c. Notwithftandingall their
Ignorance, this accurfed Doftrine has
fpread it felf within fifty or fixty Years,
from hence all over the Hies of Java,
Borneo , and Celebes , belides divers other
Countries in thofe parts.
The Mahometans are obliged to pray
five times every day, viz,, in the morn-,
ing, at noon, in the afternoon, after Sun-
fet, and at midnight*, certain People be-
ing appointed, who from the Steeples
of the Mofques, exhort them to their
Prayers, by crying Lailla ilia ilia , Maho-
med Reful Lalla: when they are going to
pray, they ttand upright upon a Carpet
fpread upon the ground, holding both
their Hands to their Ears j fometimes
bowing towards the ground, fometimes
ftanding upright again. The Alcoran is
the Law Book of the Mahometans , con-
taining 114 Chapters, being a mixture of
the Jcmfh and Chriftian Dodtrine. Ma-
homet flourished about the Year of Chritt
600, and died 632. His Companion was
one Sergius an Arian, The Father of
Mahomet was one AbdaUa , and his Mo-
ther Emine , defeended of the Illuftrious
Family of the Korei/hites,
Mahomet firft ferved in the Wars un-
der the Emperor H , and after-
wards ferved a Merchant j after whofe
death he married Chadiga a rich Widow •
and being addided to Enthufiafm, he and
his Companion Sergius compiled the
coran, pretending that he kept correfpon-
dence with the Arch-Angel Gabriel , who
in his Trances (whiefrwere nothing but
Epileptic Fits) had revealed to him thefe
Secrets. He was born at Mecca, but be-
ing forced from thence fled to
from which time the Mahometans take
their Epocha, and call it Alnaht
or the City of the Great Prophet. His
Doftrine was firft received by his Wife
Chadiga , and his Servant Seydin ■, after-
wards by Halt, Abubeker, Omar, Otman
and others his Followers, who were cal-
led Caliphs. The Perfians prefer Halt be-
fore Mahomet, and the Turks, Omar. A-
bubeker reign’d two Years, Omar ten
Years; it is he who regulated the Alco-
ran, and inftituted the Faft in the Month
Rammedan. Otman reign’d 12 Years, and
conquered Mauritania and Cyprus. Mali
was by Mahomet appointed hisSucceflbr;
but the other three having ufurped the
Kingdom, with the exclulion of Halt this
is the 1 caTon the Perfians, who adhere to
the laff, abominate the three former.
The hatred between the Perfians and
lurks (tho both Mahometans) proceeds
from the different Interpretations ot the
Alcoran, and certain Ceremonies relating
to their Prayers, covering their Heads,
W v •
The Maho-
metan
Religion,
Mahomecs
Origin,
580
A Definition of the Coafis of


CHAP. VI.
The Feajls, Sabbath, and fame other things belonging to the Mahometans; their
Priests, Holy Orders, Manners and Cuftoms.
NO T to infill here upon the fabulous
Trifles of Mahomet's Vifions, con-
tained in fome parts of the Alcoran , we
will proceed to give you a Ihort Account
of the mod material Parts of the Maho-
metan Religion.
Alcoran. On the South-Ead of the Mofque
ftandsthe Pulpit made of Brick-work, a-
bout three fteps from the Ground, from
whence their Teachers fay their publick
Prayers, and explain the Alcoran. Their
Great Mofyues are generally adorn’d with
two high Steeples, each having Stairs
within from the bottom to the top.
Their Mofques have fcarce any Revenues
belonging to them, except what the Prieft
makes by letting fome few Chambers be-
longing to them : Many of them are
built by charitable Perfons, and fome of
thefe have a fettled Income. It is further
worth obfervation, that if a Jew will
turn Mahometan , he mull firft own Chrilt,
before they will receive him among the
Muffelmen .
They commonly circumcife Boys and
Girls at thirteen Years of Age, viz., fo
foon as they are able to fay their Confef-
fions \ There vs but one God , and Mahomet
his Prophet. If a Jew turns Turk , he is
not circumcifed again, but only walked
with Water. Their Walking, or Bath-
ing, is performed upon a threefold occa-
fion.
Their Cir-
cumcifm.
1. After they have eafed Nature, or
cohabited with their Wives.
2. When they are to go to the
or to read the Alcoran. And,
3. After they have committed fome
enormous Sins.
Their High Prieft is call’d Mufti , in
great efteem with the Grand Seignior,
and a Member of his Privy Council. Next
to him are the Cadikfheri , or Provincial
High Priefts of Europe , Natolia , &c.
Thefe are followed by the Cady, Seriphes ,
Santone5 y Hoggy , TalifmanSy and Der-
bies.
Wafnng.
They have many Ecdefiallical Orders
among them, three whereof have no
Pofleffions, or*any other Propriety } and
fome pretend to fuch a degree of Purity,
that they profefs themfelves born without
manly Seed. Some make certain Vows,
like the Roman Catholick Monks } fome ap-
pear quite naked, others only cover their
Privities. Some have vow’d perpetual Si-
lence } fome carry Water without Re-
ward} fome prick themfelves with fliarp-
pointed Needles or Indruments} others
carry a Ring of three pound weight in
their Privy Members.
Divers
Sabbath.
The Sabbath of the Mahometans is on
Friday, which they keep with the fame
ftriftnefs as the Jews do theirs on Satur-
day, at leaft with more devotion, as the
Chriftians their Sunday. They have in
each City, behdes the other Mofaues, one
great Mofque, where they then afTemblc
to perform their Devotion. Their Lent
begins in February with the New Moon,
and continues thirty days, with a great
deal of feverity, for they neither eat nor
drink all the day long '•> but fome make
themfelves amends at Night, tho the Zea-
lots will not tafte the leaft of Wine, or
any other ftrong Liquor all that time,
nor converfe with their Wives. They
are permitted to marry as many Wives
as they pleafe, tho the Akoran allows no
more than four Wives.
For the red, they believe God a Cor-
poreal Being, who is carried in a Throne
by the Angels, and Chrid to be only a
Man, an dMafromet the Comforter men-
tioned by John 14. 16. They believe a
third place belides Heaven and Hell, and
therefore pray for the Dead } as alfo a
General judgment, but implicated in ma-
ny fabulous Abfurdities } for they tell you
that two black Angels, one call’d Man-
ger, the other Quaregner , will appear, the
fird with an Iron Club, the other with a
large Fork in his hand } that every Man
befides is to have two Angels toaflid him;
but if after all he cannot give a good ac-
count of himfelf, the Angel with the
Club knocks him down, and fo be is car-
ried to Hell. And becaufe tlfey are of
opinion that thofe Angels appear to them
in their Graves, thefe are generally built
hollow } whence alfo they often make
the following Ejaculation: Good God ,
preferve us from the Interrogating Angel ,
Tenets of
their fo-
ll V on '
chunks
Mo k ues '
Their Churches are flat on the top,
commonly built on a riling Ground, fo as
to be feen at a diftance above the other
Houfes. They have within nothing but
bare white Walls, without Piftures or
Hangings thoon fome of their Tombs
we fee certain Paflages ingrav’d out of the


Pxradife.
Rules to
E ~
wL
from the Pain of the Grave , and from the
■. Evil Way . They add many fabulous
f things concerning the Angel Adrief who
at the approach of the day of Judgment,
is to kill all living things,and to hang him-
feif atlaff, till after forty Years the An-
gel Seraphiel fhall waken the Souls } and
fuch-like Fables too long to be inferted
here.
Concerning Beatitude, and the Para-
dire, they believe itconfifts in a conti-
nued enjoyment of Pleafures there. They
divide it into feven different Apartments j
one whereof is of Gold, the fecond of
Silver, another of Pearls, precious Stones,
and fo forth. Here they are to pafs their
time in Pleafures, with certain moft beau-
tiful Women, created for that purpofe
Uy God, whilft their Wives fhall look
through a Grate, and be Spe&ators of the
Enjoyments of their Husbands with thefe
moll beautiful Women, who fhall not be
fubjed to the monthly times, or Child-
bearing, and the Men as vigorous as Ma-
homet himfeif, who gloried in his having
outdone by double the number Ovid
himfeif*, Et memini , numeros fuftimiffe
mvem. They fay they fhall drink in Pa-
radife of the Spring of Alcazar menti-
oned by Mahomet $ they fhall be delighted
with the feent of the moft odoriferous
Citrons, which fhall produce moft beauti-
ful Virgins that fhall imbrace the Muf~
fulmans , and delight them with their
Charms for fifty Years together: and more
fuch like Notions tending to elevate the
Thoughts with imaginary corporeal Plea-
fures to be injoy’d in the next World,
by fuch as have obferv’d the following
Rules in their life-time, which they
reckon abfolutely requillte to attain to
this Blifs.
To believe one God, and Mahomet his
Pro P hct > and a Day of Judgment } to
P ra Y at certaln tim es; to wafh, bow,
and obferve certain other Ceremonies in
praying: To pay the Tenths, to fa ft in
the Month Rammedan ; to go on Pilgri-
mage to Mecca \ to abftain from Extor-
tions, Wine,and Hogs-flefh, becaufe they
believe the Hogs to have been progene-
rated out of the Elephants and Mens
Dung in the Ark of Noah, They are al-
fo forbid nottoufe Tables nor Dice, not
to fwear by God, not to be rafh in our
Judgment, or deceive a Brother either
in publick or private \ not to part from a
virtuous Wife \ not to be too forward to
objed and difeover the Faults of a Bro-
ther, or to defpife him ; not to fet the
Fear of God and his Punifhment out of
our Eyes, or to calumniate our Neigh-
bour, and fpread what is heard upon
flight Reports. On the other hand, they
are enjoined to be thankful for God's
Mercy } to be patient in Adverfities, and
not to defpair of God's Mercy j and to
believe that whatever happens to us
does not come by chance (for the Maho-
metans maintain ftrongly God 5 s Provi-
dence ) not to deny a Brothel’s Request
out of Avaritioufnefs, not to raife God’s
Anger out of love to his Creatures, or
to prefer a Temporal Incereft before that
which is to come : In ail Ghollly Affairs
to have a refped to him that is above us,
and in Temporal Matters to thofe that
are below us: Not to enter into any Affo-
ciation with the Devils to refrain from
Vanity, allow Orphans and Widows
their own } to inffrud their Children in
fuch things as relate to the Divine Ser-
vice to do good to your Neighbour,
not to curfe any of God’s Creatures,
but to praife him in his Works } to
read the Alcoran (except when you are
unclean ) to appear at the publick Con-
gregations, and to do as you would be
done by. It is further their opinion,
that the Souls of the Brutes are likewife
to be reviv’d and join’d with their Bo-
dies.
In relation to their Manners and Cu-
ftoms, I will begin here with the Cha-
rader given them by a Perfon of extra-
ordinary Learning, viz. That in their
whole Behaviour they are declared Enemies
to Fanny , as well in their Words and Deeds
at in their Clothing, which makes them look
upon many of us Chriflians like Momys,
who are apt to imitate every thing they fee \
whereas the Turks of both Sexes , young and
old , rich or poor , are as regular and decent
in their Habits , as if they belong'd to one
certain Order \ and are fo careful in the
Education of their Touth , that their School -
Maflers preferibe every day a certain pan
of the Alcoran, which they learn by heart ,
and fo in two years time pafs through the
whole Alcoran.
In their Marriages, and the tokens of
Marriageablenefs and Virginity, they ob-
ferve the following Rules: As foon as
the monthly Times begin to appear,
they carry the Maiden for feven days
together, adorn’d with Flowers, and as it
were in Triumph, to the next Brook,
during which time (he is to eat nothing
but what comes from the Coco-tree.
The Portuguefes (who perhaps have got
it from the Moors ) publifh the Mariage-
ablenefs of their Daughters by the found
of Trumpets, and invite their next Re-
lations to a Feaft. When a Marriage is
Their Man*
Cu J hms *
Tokens of
Afarriage■
ablcnefs .
Their Maf‘
fiAgcu


to be concluded, they bargain very hard
for the Dowry j but this being patt, and
the Agreement made betwixt the Parents,
Guardians, or other neareft Relations,
the Day for the Confummation thereof
is appointed: then the Bridegroom on
Horfe-back adorn’d with fweec-fcented
Flowers, under two Umbrello’s, pafles
with his next Friends through the chiefeft
Streets under the found of Trumpets,
Hautboys, Drums, and other fuch like
Inftruments, to the Bride’s Houfe, where
having ftay’d half an hour at the door,
and entertain’d his Bride with the Mufick
and the throwing of fome Squibs, and
other fmall Fireworks, he is admitted
into the Houfe } and being feated upon a
Chair raifed fomewhat from the ground,
and cover’d with Tapeftry, the Bride is
brought to him by her Parents and Rela-
tions, in the prefence of a Prieft and the
Judg of the Place (without whofe Confent
no Marriage Is valid ): The Prieft having
read certain PafTagesout of a Book, the
Bridegroom fwears, that in cafe of a
Divorce from his Wife, he will be ready
to rettore her Dowry *, which done, the
Prieft gives the Benedidtions, and they
are married, the whole being concluded
at that time with a Prefent of Betel and
Arack to the Guefts, yet not to any ex-
cefs, tho afterwards they keep the Wed-
ding for three, four, fix, feven or eight
days together, according to every ones
pleafure and ability.’
The Mahometans in general are Ene-
mies to Inceft, fo that even the Grand
Signior’s Son after the death of his Father
never touches his Concubines, but fhuts
thcm up in a certain Cattle on the other
hand, they are extremely addided not
only to Lull, but alfo to Sodomy it felf,
and Combination with Brutes. There
are Inflances, that two Proftitutes in
Ferfia have been condemned, one to be
occupied by a Horfe, the other by an
Afs; the firft died, but the fecond efcap’d
with Life.
TfoMalio-
metans £ -
h f °
adlihedu
Sodomy.
The Moors feed generally upon Rice
inflead of Bread, which is well tailed
here, and grows in great plenty in Ben-
gale, and divers other Provinces; the
fame is in much requeft throughout the
Indies , in China , Japan , in the Hies of
Formofa , Java , Celebes , Borneo, Ceylon, in
Malabar , and other places, tho Japan and
Bengale produce likewife very good
Wheat. The poorer fort, who can’t get
above 4 or 5 d. a day to maintain them-
felves, are forc’d to be contented with
Kitzery (a mixture of Beanflower and
Rice) boil’d in Water. Their Habita-
tions are alfo very low and mean, made
of Clay, and their Houfhold-Ituff futable
to their Houfes j for befides a few Veffels
of Brafs, and the two Bedlleds where the
Man and Wife lie (who never fleep to-
gether ) there is nothing to be teen there,
they having neither Benches nor Chairs,
but only Mats to fit upon. In fome places
they ufe Cording inllead of Wood for
Fuel: But the Houfes of People of fafhi-
on are fpacious, and divided into many
Apartments, flat on the top, whereupon
they take the cool Air in the Evening.
They are very fplendid in their Enter-
tainments, Wives and Houfes, but efpe-
cially in Gold and Silver Plate.
Their Food;
Hzhitaft-
-ons.
However Divorces are very frequent
among the Moors (or Indian Mahome-
tans ) which is foon done, if the Husband
purfuant to his Promife returns the
Dowry, which conllfts commonly in no-
thing elfe but the Woman’s Apparel.
A Man is at liberty to kill his Wife in
cafe of Adultery, but a Woman may not
lb much as fae a Divorce upon the lame
fcore. When a Woman is divorced from
her Husband, (he takes generally her
Daughters along with her, leaving the
Sons to the Husband’s difpofal. The
next morning after the Bridegroom has
lain with his Bride, and found her a Vir-
gin, publick Proclamation is made there-
of throughout the whole Town (for the
honour of her Parents ) when the Bride’s
Mother battening to her Daughter’s Bed-
Chamber, and finding the ufual tokens of
Virginity in the Sheets or Clothes laid for
that purpofe, (he carries them to the
Bridegroom’s Parents, who rejoice with
her at the Conqueft of their Son over the
Maiden’s Virginity. But if thefe Tokens
arc not apparent, matters are carried off
with lefs Pomp and more Silence.
Divorces ,
Their Clothing is very grave, and they
fcaree ever change the fafhion thereof
the Men wear Coats of Callico, or rich
Tiffues and Silks } they are ftrait above,
clofe to the Body, fattened with a Girdle
round the Watte, and reach down to the
Knees: their Breeches are wide above,
and narrow at the bottom, reaching down
to the Legs, and trimm’d with Fringes;
their Shoos are of gilt Leather, which
they turn down at the heels, for the
conveniency of throwing them off upon
occafion. When they falute one another,
they touch the Turbant with the Hand
only, but never move them as we do our
Hats. They are girt about their Loins
with a Girdle or fome fine Stuff 1 , over
which they wear another of fine Linen,
and a broad Dagger on the left fide.
Their Clo-
thing.


The Ornament of the Women confifts
chiefly in Bracelets about their Arms and
Feet, Ear-pendants, Nofe-rings, and o-
ther Jewels v when they are going abroad,
they cover their Heads with a Veil, with
feveral hair Locks twifted together, hang-
ing down their backs.
the Weft. This done, they lay Boards
over the whole Corps to keep the Earth
from touching it and whilfl they are
filling up the Grave, the Slanders-by
mutter out certain Prayers, and then
return to the Houfe of the Deceafed,with
the Priefls, who for feveral days after
pray for his Soul, fhorter or longer, ac-
cording as they are able to pay them.
During this time no Fire muft be feen
in the Houfe, what Viduals they ufe be-
ing drefs’d without doors. Upon the
Grave they lay two Stones, one at the
Head, and another at the Feet, thelnter-
ftice being of the fame length with the
dead Corps underneath it: upon thefe
the Pricfls read certain Chapters out of
th and diftribute fome Bread a-
mong the Poor: Upon the fame at the
Head, they fet fometimes a Turbant,
and if a Female be buried there, a kind’
of a Bonnet. Thus much of the
metan Subjeds of the Great Mogul-, of
the Idolatry of the we fliall have
occafion to treat at large in the third
Book. &
Their Bn-
ruls.
_
_ They obferve certain peculiar Cuftoms
in their Burials; for no fooner is the
Breath out of the Body, but their Wives,
Children and Neighbours make a moft
lamentable Outcry, asking ever and anon
the Deceafed, what made him die, whe-
ther he wanted any thing in his life-time?
This they continue for three days fuccef-
lively \ then they invite his Friends to a
Feall in memory of the Dieceafed, whofe
Corps being in the mean while well
walhed, and low’d up in fome white Stuff,
with all forts of odoriferous Drugs, is
laid upon a Bier, and accompanied by
three Pricfts (who fing and read all the
way) carried by ten or twelve Perfons
to the Grave; here they lay him upon his
right fide, with the Feet to the South,
the Head to the North, and the Face to
CHAP. VII.
A De scription of Diu, A Sea-Engagement of the Portuguefes with Jazy and
Hocenus. The singular Bravery of Laurence d’Almeyda, and Nonnius
Vafques Pereria. The Harbour of Diu taken by the Portuguefes. The
Flight of Jazy and Hocenus. Moorifh Colours fent to Portugal
A T the uttermoft Southern Point of
X\ Gufuratte lies the City of Diu, the
Draught whereof you fee here annexed,
where the Portuguefes have three Rrong
Forts. It’s commonly call’d tho its
right Name is believ’d to be Tivo, i. e.
anllle, in the Malabar Language, as may
be feen in the Names of Naynativo An-
cbativo, Malum, or the Matdive Iflands,
which being in all fixty in number, ex-
tend from the Cape Commoryn from the
7 deg. of Northern Latitude, to the third
deg. of Southern Latitude, a Trad of
140 or 150 German Leagues.
fhooting one day a certain Bird of Prev
flying, he gain’d thereby fo much Credit,
that the King not long after gave him
his liberty, and reftor’d to him the 10c
of Diu
This Ifle, which at that time had no-
thing to fhew but the Ruins and mifera-
ble Remnants of a once fiourifhing Citv
began to recover part of its former Splen-
dor under Jazy, by reafon of its con
venient Situation, betwixt the Arabian
Shoar, and the Kingdom of Decan
Having provided for the fecuritv of the
place, by erecting divers Forts and other
Fortifications, and his Wealth increafin?
of Sarmatia, in a few years, he began to equip a Flee?
in order to attack his Enemies Shins at
Sea. . Hocenus (otherwife named Mir
Amiranem ) a Per ft an bv Birth and Com
mander in chief if the S that
to come from Egypt into the Indies ha-
ving lately had a fmart Engagement with
the Laurence and Franck d’
Almeyda, and coming that way Jaz.y
thought fit to enter into a Confederacy
Origin of
Diu,
■ As to the Origin of , they relate,
that one Jaz.y, a Native of did
fettle in this liland ; but being taken Pri-
foner and made a Slave by the Mahome-
tans in thefe parts, he chang’d the Chri-
ftian Religion for that of the Turks, and
being fold into Cambaja , was at laft for
his Angular dexterity in managing the
Bow and Arrow, prefer’d to the Service
of K. Madrafakaon the Father of K. Ma-
mudiiis. jay, to give a Proof of his Skill,


The City of 3K|u
He enters
into a Con-
federacy
with Ho-
cenus.
The Portu-
guefe
Fleet comes
to Chaul.
with him, which was done accordingly:
Whilft they were confulting by what
means belt to annoy their Enemies with
their joint Fleets, News was brought, that
Laurence £Almeyda was with a few Ships
come to an Anchor before Chaul , and had
landed his Men (as being quite ignorant
of the arrival of the Egyptian Fleet in
thofe parts.) One Nizamaluc reign’d at
that time at Chaul, for the great Perfons
of Decan having imprifon’d their King,
had divided his Kingdom among them-
felves, whereof this part was fallen to his
fhare. Nizamaluc , tho no great Friend
to the Chriftians, yet for Intereft fake
had order’d his Subjefts to maintain a
good Correspondence with the Portuguefes
trafficking in thofe parts m , which Almeyda
being not ignorant of, he thought he
might ftay here with fafety enough, till
he had the opportunity of convoying
the Portuguefe Merchant Ships to Cochin .
It was indeed rumour’d abroad, that the
Egyptian Fleet had been feen on that
Goaft j but the Portuguefes imagining that
the fame might be occafion’d by the ar-
rival of certain Ships coming about
that time of the year from Mocha, they
made no great account of it; One of the
Ship s Crew at length efpy’d a confidera*
ble Fleet from the top of the Main-raaft,
but could not difcern their Strength, till
at laft they began to fulpedt the truth *,
tor Hocenus was advancing that way,
and Jazy preparing to follow him, in
order to attack the Portuguefes. Certain
Intelligence being at laft brought to Al-
meyda, that the Enemy was at hand, he
order’d his Men aboard, which was
fcarce done when they faw the Egyptians
advancing againft them. Thefe Barba-
rians had flatter’d themfelves with hopes
to furprize the Portuguefes , but thefe
having juft had time enough to put them-
felves in a good pofture of Defence,
receiv’d their Enemies fo warmly that
they thought fit to ftay for the arrival
of Jazy', however, they charged one
another (but at a diftance) all that
day, but towards night Hocenus retreated
with his Velfels to the other Bank of
the River among the Sands, for his
greater Security’s fake.
The Night being {pent on the Portu-
guefe fide in preparing for the Combat
againft next day, when Almeyda being
ignorant of the Confederacy betwixt Ho.
cenus and jazy, attack’d the firft with
The Por
tuguefes
engage Ho
cenus.


Advices of
the Portu-
guctes to
thc ‘r Ad-
miral.
Is rejoiced.
The Port 11-
guefe Ad-
miral caji
upon a
Roc L.
Hk Bra-
very,
Is wound-
ed.
great fury, in hopes of boarding the
Egyptian Ships ; but not being able to
come clofe enough up w T ith them by rea-
fon of the Sands, he was forc’d to reft
fatisfied with nlying them with his Can-
non, which he did all the day long, not-
wichftanding the Enemy were much
ftronger in Ships and Men. The Engage-
ment was very hot, Laurence d J Almeyda
being himfelf wounded twice with an
Arrow ; The Combat continued thus with
confiderable lofs on both Tides, till to-
wards night, Jazy came to the Relief of
the Egyptians with 40 Ships, but not
daring to engage with the Portuguefes ,
came to an Anchor at the Entrance of
the River, to be nearer to Hoccnus in or-
der to join with him the next day.
The Portuguefes being fohiewhat mo-
ved' at this unexpected fight, repre-
fented to their Admiral Almeyda, that
having gain’d fafficient Honour in the
yefterday’s Engagement, they ought
now to confult Prudence, and to en-
deavour to bring their Ships out of the
Harbour in the night time into the open
Sea. Almeyda did not difapprove the
Advice of his Sea-Commanders, but as
he was of a haughty Temper, fo he could
not refolve to fteal away by night, but
determin’d to make the beft of his way to
morrow by day-light; with this Refo-
lution he order’d all his Ships, as well
Merchants as others, to be ready to fet
fail with the firft Tide by break of day.
The Moors no fooner perceiv’d his Inten-
tion, but they made towards them in or-
der to intercept their Paffage; in this
Engagement a Bullet happening to ftrikc
through the Portugucfe Admiral next to
the Rudder, fhe took much Water, and
was call upon the Rocks, whence fne
could not be got off: The Portugucfe
Commanders feeing the impoffibility of
faving the Ship, fent a Boat to the Ad-
miral, defiring him to fave his Perfon,
and preferve himfelf for another occa-
fion •, but in vain, for he told them, that
he would never be guilty of fuch a piece of
Treachery, at to leave thofe who had hitherto
been hit Companions in the Danger , in the
lurch. Accordingly he animated his
Men both with his Words and Example
to defend themfelves to the utmoft ex-
tremity ; being thus animated by their
Admiral, they fought like Lions, re-
jecting all Propofals offer’d them by the
Enemy, refolving either to fave the Ship,
or die in the defence thereof.
la the mean while Almeyda having one
of his Thighs fhot off by a Bullet, loft
however not his wonted Courage, but
ordering his Men to place him. upon a
Chair near the Main-maft, he there gave
his Orders as occafion requir’d; but
whiift he was bufy in incouraging his
Men, another unfortunate Ball took away
part of his Breaft and Ribs, fo that
nis Entrails falling out he gave up the
Ghoft immediately, and his dead Car-
cafe was carried below Deck immediate-
ly. This was the end of the Brave AU
meyda , who had iignalized himfelf fo
often by his Bravery in the Service of
his King and Country.
There were befides him two other
brave Fellows,tho much inferiour in Rank,
whofe Names do well deferve a place in
this Hiftory ; one was Laurcntius Frerius
Catus, a Servant to the deceafed Admiral,
who being wounded with an Arrow in one
of his Eyes, threw himfelf notwithftand-
ing this upon his Mafter’s Body, and
when he faw the Moors enter the Ship,
fell in pell-mell among them, and kill’d
feveral of them with his Sword before
they could difpatch him. The other was
a Sailor, named Andrew Van Portm, who
ftanding on the top of the Main-maft,
and being wounded by a Mufquet-Ball in
his Shoulder, and having before loft the
life of his Right-hand, defended himfelf
from thence with his left hand for two
whole days againft thofe Barbarians, till
at length they promifed him his Life,
upon which he furrender’d, and after-
wards return’d fafely into Portugal , where
lie was honourably rewarded for his Bra-
very.
The taking of the Admiral’s Ship of
the Portugufes , tho it coft the Barbarians
600 Men (140 being loft on the Chri-
ftians fide) yet occafion’d no fmall joy
in their Fleet; as on the other hand,
the lofs thereof foon reach'd to Cochin
by fuch Ships as were fled thither:
However the Portuguefes were fo far
from being difmay a thereat, that re-
folving to be reveng’d upon thofe Bar-
barians, they left no ftone unturn’d to
gather a more formidable Strength at
Sea; and Albuquerque after having fettled
matters at Socotora (an Ifle at the en-
trance of the Red-Sea') did confiderable
mifehief to the Moors near Ormus, as
Laurence d* Almeyda (the Father of the
Admiral lately kill?d) reveng'd himfelf
for the Death of his Son, by the taking
of Dabul , Diu and Panane , whereof we
fhall give you a more ample account
anon.
For Emanuel King of Portugal, being
inform’d concerning the convenient Si-
tuation of the Harbour of Diu , fent bis


Orders to Sequeria to build a Fortrefs \
there, coft it what it would. Accord- i
ingly Feancis cT after the taking (
of Dabul, fleer’d his courfe for the Har-
bour of Diu. Hocenus was for engaging 1
the Portugucfes without the Harbour I
but at the perfwaiion of laid afide i
that Defign, it being thought much more i
expedient to expeft the coming of the i
Chriftians with their joint Forces, and to .
annoy them at their approach both by i
Sea and Land * for which purpofe they 1
had befides the Egyptian Ships and thofe i
of Diu receiv’d 80 Brigantines of Cale-
cut, and had planted their Cannon at
convenient dillances along the (hore.
The Portuguefe Admiral was fomewhat
furpriz’d to fee the Enemy keep fo clofe
beyond expectation j yet interpreting
the fame as a good Omen of his future
Vidlory, he fpent the remainder of the
day in viewing the Pollute of the Ene-
my, and Confultations what was bell to
be done.
what diffident of Jazy) took Horfe im-
mediately, in order to fly to the King of Ba
Cambaja , where he was well receiv’d.
Thofe of Calecut feeing the beft of their So
Brigantines ruin’d by the Enemy’s Shot, °f {
thought it their beft way to fave them-
felves with the lighteft over the Sands,
and two of Hocenus his Gallies were car-
ried off by Roderic Zoarcs \ many of the
Barbarians leap’d into the Sea, where
they loft their Lives, the reft got a-
Ihore, and difperfed, Jazy not being able
to flop their flight.
Diu at-
tacked by
the Portu-
guefes.
So do thofe
of Calecufc
There was as yet remaining the Ship
of Jazy, a Veffel of a vaft Bulk, appear-
ing like a Caftle well provided with
Artillery and Men, being befides this co-
ver’d with Oxes Hides to keep off the Ar-
rows, and hinder the Enemy from board-
ing by its flipperinefs: The Portuguejes
made feveral attempts to mafter it, but
being as often rcpulfed, at iaft funic her ]>
with their Cannon. TThe lois of the s
Barbarians was computed at 3000 Men,
the Portuguejes had only 30 kill’d, but
300 wounded. The Portuguejes relate,
that Nonnius his Ship being very old, yet
held out very well during the Combat,
but immediately after was found leaky in
many places molt of the Mamaluques or
Egyptians were (lain in this Engagement.
How flenderly the Portuguejes were pro-
vided with all manner of Necelfaries, may
be guelfed from hence, that when Non-
nius his Wound was to be drefs’d, there
was no Linen in the Ship to do it with,
but they were forc’d to tear a Shirt for
that purpofe. Certain it is that the Por~
tuguefes can make harder fhift than moll
other Nations, a thing of great confe-
quence in time of War, Plenty and Luxu-
ry being often the ruin of the beft Ar-
mies. The Booty got by the Portuguejes
in this Engagement was coniiderable;
for befides four War-(hips, and as many
Merchant-Men, with their Artillery, they
got a confiderable quantity of Gold, Sil-
ver and precious Stuffs and Cloths, all
: which was given a Prey to the Soldiers and
: Ships Crew: Three of the Sultan's Co-
lours were lent to Portugal to be preferv’d
• there in memory of fo remarkable a
: Vi&ory \ which made an ample amends
1 to the Portuguejes for the lofs they had
- fuftain’d fome time before near Chaul,
JazyV
Ship funk*
He having declar’d his Refolution of
attacking the Admiral’s Ship of the
Egyptians , aboard of which was Hocenus ,
the fame was approved *, but he defir’d
not to expofe his Perfon at this critical
Junfturc, but to commit the management
of the Defign to Nonnius Fajques Pereria :
Accordingly, every thing being got in
readinefs, they enter’d the Harbour the
next morning with the firft i ide, and a
ftrong Sea-Wind, Nonnius leading the
Van in his Ship with 200 chofen Men,
being follow’d by the Admiral tPAlmeyda
to protect and cover his Rear. Nonnius
advanced bravely under the thundering
Noife of the Cannon (by which ten Sea-
men that were furling the Sails were
•. kill’d at once) and making his way through
the midft of the Barbarians , at laft board-
ed Hocenus in his Ship, tho not without
great (laughter on both fides, he himfelf
having the misfortune to be wounded in
the Throat by an Arrow, of which he
died three days after.
They at-
tack the
Moors
Ships in
the Har-
bour,
10 Men
kill'd by
one Bullet.
Nonnius
wounded.
The Portuguejes not being difmay’d at
the difafter of their Commander, but
inflam’d with Revenge, redoubled their
Fury, which the Barbarians being no longer
able to withftand, they gave all over for
loft, Hocenus himfelf narrowly efcaping in
a Boat to the (hore, and ( being fome-
Hocenus
JTttu


CHAP. VIII.
Peace made with Jazy. Ferdinand Coutinho made Viceroy, Differences arifen
betwixt Almeyda and Albuquerque. The Portuguefes take Diu, which is
refortified by Jazy. Nonnius goes to Diu. The IJle Betel taken. Saldania
fur prizes Goga.
Jazy fues
for Face.
Almeyda
m fucceeded
by Fcrdin.
Coutinho.
Differences
betwixt
Almeyda
and Albu-
querque.
The Death
of Almey-
da.
T Azy thought it now time to fue for
J Peace, to obtain which he was not
fparing in his Promifes, to endeavour
to engage all the Neighbouring Princes
into the Intereft 0 f Portugal ; fo the Peace
was concluded under condition that he
Ihould furrender all the remaining Egyp-
tian Ships to the Portuguefes, releafe the
Prifoners taken near Chaul, and provide
their Fleet with all manner of Necelfaries.
Jazy being very willing, or rather neceffi-
tated, to comply with the Conditions,
the Portuguefes thought fit not to attempt
any thing further againft Diu for that
time, as being unwilling to embroil them-
felves with the King of Cambaja. Thus
Almeyda retir’d victorious to Cochin , ha-
ving paid to Nizamaluc, as he palled that
way, the ufual Prefents that were in
Arrears.
But Almeyda did not long enjoy the
fruits of his late Viftory, for Ferdinand
Coutinho a Perfon of Quality, was foon
after fent with 15 Ships and 3000 Men
to join with Albuquerque in order to at-
tack the Moors , and efpecially the City
of Calecut \ for fome Differences being
arifen betwixt Almeyda and Albuquerque ,
which were fomented by fome malicious
Perfons, the King of Portugal thought he
could pitch upon no better Expedient
to prevent the ill Confequences thereof,
than by fending Coutinho to fucceed Al-
tneyda, who preferring the King’s Inte-
reft before his private Intereft, quietly
furrendred his Charge, and at the fame
time was reconcifd to Albuquerque 7 after
he had managed the Government of the
Indies with more than ordinary Conduft
and Wifdom ; a Perfon worthy of a
much better Fortune than what happen’d
to him afterwards. For in his return to
Portugal having occafion to touch at the
Cape of good Hope , to take in fome frefh
Provifions, fome of his Men being got
alhore, and falling into Differences with
fome of the Natives about the exchange
of their Commodities; Almeyda running
thither with Sword in hand, to fee what
was the matter, the Natives began to
fall upon him and his Men; and being
reinforc’d with frelh Numbers, fet fo
hard upon the Portuguefes , that they were
not able to get to their Ships without
fighting their way through them, which
they did with a great deal of Bravery,
but alas! not without the lofs of their
Commander Almeyda (who was run
through the Body with a Stick pointed
at the end) and twelve more of their
belt Soldiers *, this was the unfortu-
nate end of this great Man, fo famous
for his great Atchievements both in Eu-
rope and Afia 9 being forc’d to end his
days upon the ftiore of Africa , which
robb’d him both of the Rewards due to
his Services, and even of a Chriflian
Sepulture.
We told you before, that the Portu-
guefes thought fit not to attempt any
thing further againft Diu ; it is now time
to fhew you what further meafures were
taken to bring about their defign to ereft
a Fort in that Ifland. They had fo far
agreed the matter with the King of
Cambaja^ that he favour’d their Intentions,
or at leaft was not againft them; but
Jazy not only ufed all his Endeavours at
Court to obftrud the defign of the Por-
tuguefes, but alfo prepar’d every thing
for a vigorous Refiftance in cafe of need.
In the mean while he was not fparing in
fair Words or Promifes, nay even in
Deeds, to the Portuguefes ; for no fooner
arriv’d Sequeria at Diu from Ormus , but
he regal’d the fleet with frefh Provisions,
and the Officers with Prefents, with a
great many Proteftations of Friendfhip
to the Crown of Portugal: but when
Sequeria began to talk to Jazy concerning
the intended Fort, he declin’d the mat-
ter, alledging that it lay not alone in his
power, and therefore they muft obtain
the King of Cambaja' s Confent, in which
he would affift them with all his Inte-
reft.
Sequeria was not fo ftupid as not to
fmell the Rat, but thinking it belt to re-
pay him in his own coin, he diflembPd
the matter, and returning his Comple-
ments with much Civility, he prepar’d
underhand for War ; but Jazy who had
a watchful Eye upon ail his Addons, knew
fo well how to improve his time, and
provide for his Security, that Sequeria
thought it moft advisable to delay his
] nYP i ajs
the
cy ite with
thePorcu ‘
S ue^es *
Js d}fcm
fed.


Jazy for-
tifies h'nn-
(elf.
Nonnius
Acunia
goes for
Diu.
Bis Ren-
devou\\
Sail for
Dabui.
Project till the next year, againft which
time lie expected fome confiderable Re-
inforcement.
Sequeria was no fooner departed,but fa-
zy imbrac’d this opportunity of ftrength-
ning himfelf on all lides 7 he added feveral
new Works to the place, and ere&ed a
Gaflle in the midft of the Entrance of
the Harbour, and betwixt that and the
City, defended it, with a ftrong Chain:
He kept feveral Ships loaden with Ballafl
ready to be funk upon occafion, to flop
up the Paflage on the other fide, and or-
der’d vafl pieces of Stones and Rocks to
be funk under the Walls, to prevent the
Portuguefes Gallies from approaching near
to them: He alfo for the better Defence
of the Harbour hir’d 180 Brigantines,and
fome Merchant-men, man’d with Arabi-
ans, Perfians and Turks (profefs’d Ene-
mies of the Chriflians) leaving in the
mean while no flone unturn’d to thwart
the defign’d Projedl of the Portuguefes at
the Court of the Ring of Cambaja.
Neither were the Portuguefes idle ori
their fide, but having made what Prepa-
rations they thought fit for fuch an Un-
dertaking, Nonnius Acunia the chief Com-
mander of the Portuguefes in the Indies , fet
forward in order to put it in Execution:
But being refolv’d to make ufe both of
Cunning and Force at the fame time, he
had by Prefents engag'd feveral bold and
cuning Fellows, who were to pafs to
Diu in the Quality and Habit of Mer-
chants, but in effeft to ferve far Spies,
and to give notice of what they thought
worth his knowledg. Thus prepar’d, the
time and place of the Rendevouz of the
whole Fleet being appointed at Chaul ,
he fet fail from thence with 300 Sail
great and fmall, Well provided with Ar-
tillery and Ammunition, having aboard
3000 Portuguefes , as many Malabars , and
2000 Canarines , for Dabul , a fmall City in
the Confines of Cambaja 7 where the Por-
tuguefes, being much animated by the Pre-
fence and Speech of a certain Francifcan
Frier, named Anthony Petron , declar’d
that they would not defift, till they had
forced the Barbarians from their ftrong
Holds in thofe parts. But finding the
Place deferted by its Inhabitants, they
fleer’d their courfe towards Betel ( a fmall
rocky Hie not above a League in compafs,
feparated from the Continent only by a
narrow Strait) about 80 Leagues from
Diu . The Situation of this Ifle being
fuch, by reafon of the Rocks which in-
clofe the Ifle near the fhore, that it might
eafily be made defenfible by an indiffe-
rent Force, the King of Cambaja had not
long before fent thither a certain Com-
mander, a Turk by Birth, with 2000
Soldiers, and 1000 Workmen, to creel
ceitain Fortifications there but having
not had fufficient time to bring them into
fuch a condition as to be able to refill
fuch a Force as this, they thought it their
fafell way to capitulate.
The Commander in chief (having ob-
tain’d a Pafsport for that purpofe) had
an Interview with the Portugucfe General,
offering to furrender the Ifle, under con-
dition that they might have liberty to
depart with all their Baggage arid Goods.
Nonnius allow’d the firft, but would, riot
confent to their taking the leaft thing
away with them, except what they had
about them. This harlh Anfwer was no
fooner known in the Ifle, but they re-
folv’d to abide the utmoft extremity,
rather than comply with it. The King’s
Treafurer found means to have a Boat
built, wherewith he tranfported all the
Ring’s Mony and Goods to the Continent:
Many of the Garifon enraged with Re-
venge and Defpair, brought all their
Horfes, beft Moveables, Wives and Chil-
dren together, and burnt them and them-
felves.There were about 700 left, moft
of them Votaries, refolv’d to die with
Sword in hand : Thefe like mad Men fell
upon the Portuguefes with more fury than
effect y for the Portuguefe General having
repulfed them, attack’d the next night by
the light of the Moon their Intrenchments
with fo 'much Vigor, that after a moft
obftinate Refinance (in which the Turki/h
Commander was kill’d ) they left them
to the Portuguefes , fome running to the
Rocks, from whence they precipitated
themfelves into the Sea 7 others endea-
vouring to efcape the Sword by hiding
themfelves in the hollowneffes of the
Rocks, but being difeover’d, fome of
them were cut to pieces, the reft made
Slaves. A certain Moor having nothing
left but his Sword, and feeing his Cora- 1
rade flain juft by his fide, and a Portu - 1
guefe advancing with his Pike towards'
him, in order to kill him, ran defperate-
ly towards him, and thrufting himfelf
upon the Portuguefe 1 s Launce, at the fame
time kill’d his Enemy with his Sword, lb
that they both died upon the fpot.
The Portuguefes loft in this Adion a-
bout 17 Perfons of Note, and had 150
wounded, many of whom died after-
wards. Nonnius thought fit to tarry here j
eight days, in hopes of receiving fome 1
Intelligence from his Spies at Diu 7 this i
prov’d of great advantage to thofe of
DiUj for in the mean while Muftapha and
Betel be-
gun to be
fortified by
tbs Cam-
bajans.
they offer
to furren-
der upon
Conditions t
A mdjl de-
fier ate Re-
folutiom
The For-
:uguefes
take the
Tfle .
Logs,of the
Porcu-
guefes-


weigh Anchor, and to fecure themfelves
without the reach of the Cannon from
the City. Being by this time fufficiently
convinc’d ( without confulting his Spies)
that there were but little hopes of Peace
or a Surrender, he took a full view of
the Town, to fee on what fide it might be
moft conveniently attack’d ; and finding
more probability to fucceed on the Har-
bour than on the Land-fide (efpecially
fince he was better provided for a Sea
than Land Enterprize) he order’d all his
Ships and Artillery to be got in a readi-
nefs, in order to attack the Cattle at
the entrance of the Harbour, break the
Chains, and to fall upon the Enemy’s
Fleet, from whence he might annoy the
City with his Cannon on the North-
fide. The Attempt was made according-
ly, but without fuccefs, the Portuguefes
being fo fiercely gall’d on all fides by the
Enemy’s Cannon, that they were forced
to defift, and Nonnius thought fit to re-
treat to Betel , from whence he return’d
with his Fleet to Goa, leaving Anthony
Saldania with fome Ships on the Coaft
of Cambaja , to watch the Enemy’s
Motions. Saldania, after having done
confiderable Mifchief to the Enemy, by
the taking of the fmall City of Goga, and
burning 25 Brigantines, left James SyU
veria behind him, and return’d after-
wards to Goa , where having fpent the
greateft part of the Winter in refitting
their Ships, Nonnius in the Spring fet
fail for Chaul about two Leagues from
Calecut , to intercept the Arabian Ships
trading in thofe parts.
Sophar (who had been at the Siege of
Aden ) coming to an Anchor with 600
Turks and 1300 Arabians before £)/«,
the Inhabitants thereof ( who before that
time thought of nothing elfe than how
to come to a good Compofition) being
encouraged by this Reinforcement, were
refolv’d to venture all for their Defence.
Muftapha was no fooner enter’d the City
but he order’d the Women, Children, and
other defencelefs People to be fent out
of the Town ; the reft being mutter’d
were found 11000 in number (without
the T urh and Arabians ) able to bear
Arms; ftrid Watches were fet in all
places, to let nobody pafs in or out of the
Town without fpecial licence ; the Can-
non were planted on the Walls, Mines
dug and fill’d, Chains made acrofs the
Harbour, and the Entrance thereof de-
fended by 73 well man’d Brigantines;
To be fliort, nothing was omitted that
was thought neceflary to ftrengthen them-
fclves either by Sea or Land.
37;ePortu-
glides af.
fault Dii
in vain.
Nonnius Acunia in the mean time tar-
ried at Betel, in expectation of the Ti-
dings he waited for from his Spies there ;
but thefe being too narrowly watch’d to
fend any Intelligence, he refolv’d to take
his chance, and fo fet fail for Diu, where
he call his Anchor in hopes to come to
a Parley with the Inhabitants: but he
was not a little furpriz’d when he heard
the Cannon from the Ramparts thunder
among his Ships, and three Bullets that
pafs’d crofs the Admiral’s Ship, gave him
Sufficient warning, that it was not fafe
flaying there long, which made him give
immediate Orders for the whole Fleet to
Preparati-
ons at Diu.
CHAP. IX.
Nonnius routs the Mahometans, takes Bazain ; and Martin Souza, Daman.
Badur King of Cambaja engages in a Treaty with the Portuguefes. His
Forces , and Expedition to Citor, The Deft ration of that City, Badur twice
defeated, flies to Diu. His End.
STlveria was in the mean while not idle,
but took many Ships bound for Diu 1
burnt fome Villages, and kept the place
fo block’d up on all fides, that in a little
time they were within reduced to great
fcarcity of Provifions : The next follow-
ing year Sylveria continued to play the
fame game, by deftroying many Towns,
Villages and Ships*, he alfo took the Ci-
ties of Pate and Patane , as alfo Manga-
lor in Cambaja , with a vaft Booty, and a
great number of Prifoners , the new King
of Cambaja being not in a condition to
aflift thofe of Diu, by reafon of fome
inteftine Troubles.
Nonnius at the fame time keeping ftill
in remembrance the Difgrace he had re-
ceiv’d before Diu , and being refolv’d to
let flip no opportunity of revenging
himfelf, he laid his Defign againft Baaain
in Cambaja, accordingly he fet fail with
a Fleet of 80 Ships great and fmall, with
4000 Land-men aboard them ( half Por~
tttguefes, half Malabars ) he feat Emanuel
Nonnius
hk Defiyt
againjl
Bazain*


The For-
tuguefes
attack it.
And take
it *
Soia at-
tacks Da-,
man.
Albuquerque with fome Ships before, to
fecure the Entrance of the Harbour, fent
for James Sylveria , who had his Station
on the other fide of Diu, and follow’d
himfelf with the whole Fleet.
Tocan the Chief of Diu, had, upon notice
that the Portuguefes were arming againft
him, intrench’d himfelt with a confide-
rable number of Horfe and Foot at
Bazain. Nonnius on the other hand, be-
ing well inform’d of the Condition of
the place by certain Deferters, divided
his Troops into three Bodies: The Van-
guard was led by James Sylveria , the
main Battel by Ferdinand de Za , the Reer
being commanded by Nonnius in Perfon.
As they were advancing towards tne
Town, they receiv’d feveral fmart Sa-
lutes from the Enemy’s Cannon, and
whole fliowers of Arrows, Tocan having
intrench’d himfelf with 10000 Men in
the Out-works ; notwithftanding which
the Portuguefes loft not To much as one
Man whilft they were advancing towards
the Enemy, whom they charg’d fo brisk-
ly, that they were forc’d to betake to
their heels ; and the Inhabitants feeing
themfelves deferred by their Protestors,
follow’d their Footfteps. Thus this City
with all its Works fell into the hands of
the Portuguefes , with the lofs only of fix
Men on their fide; whereas the Jofs of
the Moors was computed at 550. They
found in it a conliderable Booty of Pro-
vifions and Ammunition, as Bullets, Gun-
powder, and Brimftone. Nonnius highly
extoll’d the Bravery of Sylveria , who
commanding the Vanguard, had behav’d
himfelf fo gallantly, that the main Battel
did not as much as come to the Charge,
and as an acknowledgment of his Ser-
vices prefented him and all his Officers.
After they had deftroy’d all the Fruits
of the Field round about it, they de-
ltroy’d the City, and demolifh’d the For-
tifications, as thinking it not for their
intereft to fpare a fufficient number of
Troops to garifon it. Thus Nonnius ha-
ving taken an ample Revenge upon the
Barbarians , return’d with his Fleet to Goa ;
and the Mahometans being convinc’d
by this as well as the lofs of the Ifle of
Betel (and afterwards that of Daman )
of the Strength and Bravery of thePortu-
guefes, began to remit much of their
Fiercenefs, and were at laft forced to
fubmit to the building of a Fort upon
the Ifle of Diu, as will appear out of the
fequel of the matter.
Marttnus Alphonfus Soz,a being come
lately from Portugal (in the quality of
Admiral) to Goa with five ftoutVeffels,
and being join’d by 35 Ships and <soo
Land-Souldiers of Nonnius his Squadron,
he fet fail for Daman , a City of Cam-
haja, about 14 Leagues from Bazain :
This being a Place of no ftrength, the
Inhabitants had deferted their Habita-
tions; but the Rasboutes , a daring and
unruly Generation, being join’d by fome
Turks to the number of 5000 in all, had
intrench’d themfelves near the Harbour,
and defended the Entrance thereof with
a good number of great Cannon.
Alphonfus Soza took peculiar care in
taking a view of the pofture of the
Enemy; and as he was going in his Boat
from the Harbour along the (hoar, having
taken notice of a place in the City which
was but ill guarded, he order’d foaling
Ladders to be hung to the Walls, fo
that whilft they were fealing the Town
the Defenders fled, and thereby gave an
opportunity to the Portuguefes to make
themfelves Matters of a Gate; here it
was the Slaughter begun, the Fight being
carried on with equal Obftinacy for
fome time, till th zßasboutes being forc’d
to give way, many of them were cut to
pieces by the Portuguefes , who loft no
more than ten Men in this AStion, but
had many more wounded. Three days
were fpent in demolifhing the Fortifica-
tions, and laying the whole City level
with the ground ; Which done, Sozd
turn’d his victorious Arms towards Diu,
and all along the Coaft of Cambaja .
Badur King of Cambaja , being extreme-
ly nettl’d at the fticcefs of the Portuguefes ,
whom he was not in a condition to op-
pofe, at a time when he faw himfelf in-
tangled in another War, thought it his
beft way to five for Peace with Nonnius
Acunia , offering not only Baz.aln, but alfo
the adjacent Ifles (among which were
likewife the Salfetes ) and a confideraWe
Traftof Land on the Continent, thereby
to engage the Portuguefes in his Intereft
againft his Enemies, viz.. Cremantina the
Queen Dowager of Sanga i and the Mo-
gores, a Warlike Nation defeended from
the Scyta, who are frequently at War
with the Per fans: Their King MWamu-
dius, who boafted himfelf to be defeended
from the Great Tamerlan , having not
long before made a powerful Irruption
into Cambaja.
The Intention of Badur was firft to
vanquifli the Queen of Sanga , and after-
wards the Mogores: His whole Force
confifted in 150000 Horfe, and 500000
Foot, befides 15000 hir’d Foreigners,
200 Elephants train’d for the War, and
a very good Train of great Artillery;
Takes and
demlifhes
it.
Peace be-
twixt the
Portu ’
anc *
4vUr
Pr a /f
pardtmsi


He tabes
Cicor.
Sues for
Peace,
The For-
tuguefe
Fort near
Diu,
with this Army he march’d to Citor , a
very fine and populous City under the
Queen of* Sanga , who was not long be-
fore retreated thence with her Children.
The Inhabitants of Citor , unable to refill
fo powerful an Army, refolv’d to follow
the footfleps of thofe in the Ifle of Betel
( mention’d before ) and having brought
together all their Gold, Silver, and pre-
cious Stones, &c. burnt themfelves with
their Wives and Children, with the
Treafure. It is faid, that daring the
Conflagration, which lafled three days,
more than 70000 Perfons perilh’d by the
Flames. Badur enter’d vi&orioully into
Citor , where having rewarded the Ser-
vices of his Officers that behav’d them-
felves well with Prefents, he march’d di-
red I y againft the Mogores , but with very
different fuccefs \ for being twice put to
the rout by them, and deferted by Mufla-
pha his General,he was forc’d to fly to Diu,
and being full of defpair, would have ta-
ken a Refolution to leave his Kingdom,
and to fend his Treafure to Mecca *, but
being, at the earneft entreaty of his
Friends, remov’d from that Refolution,
he fent an Ambaffador to Soliman the
Grand Signior, to offer him 600000
Crowns, provided he would fend a cer-
tain number of well-difciplin’d Troops to
his Afliftance but fearing left the defir’d
Succours ffiould come too late, he offer’d
to Soz,a , who then lay before Chaul , as
alfo to Nonnius icunia , a proper place
for the erefting of a Fort near Diu , pro-
vided they would affift him againft his
Enemies.
The Portuguefes willing to take the
opportunity by the forelock, Soz.a fail’d
to Diu immediately, and being follow’d
by Nonnius , the Treaty was fign’d, and a
place affign’d, viz., the Hill which over-
looks the Harbour of Diu. This hap-
pen’d in the year 1535. The Portuguefes
went to work immediately, and laid the
Foundation of a Triangular Fort, the
Wall from the Sea-fide to the Hill being
17 Foot thick, and 20 high, at the end
whereof juft upon a Hill near the City
was ereded a Redoubt, and on the other
end a Stone Tower (fuch a one as the
Portuguefes have at Cranganor and Cana-
nor) from whence extended another Wall
to the other Corner of the Ifland : The
Wall was defended by a deep Ditch as
far as the Rocks would permit. In the
midft whereof was a Gate defended by
two Tow T ers, named St. Thomas and
St. James. Thus King Badur faw a good-
ly Fortrefs perfefted by the Portuguefes
within 49 days, that part to the Sea-
fide being fet afide till another oppor-
tunity.
One James Bottelho a brave Com-
mander, but fallen into Difgrace with
Emanuel King of Portugal , being willing
to court any opportunity of being re-
ftor’d to the King’s favour, got a Bri-
gantine built on purpofe of 18 foot in
length, and fix broad and having pro-
vided himfelf with as many Seamen as
were requir’d to manage her at Sea, he
fee fail from Diu, without letting them
whither they were bound, and proved
fo profperous in his Voyage, that with-
out any remarkable Accident, he arriv'd
fafely at Lisbon , and brought the kind
Advice of their good fuccefs at Diu,
The Portuguefcs left a Garifon of 800
Men under Emanuel Sozea in the Fort,
and were no fooner retir’d from thence
with their Fleet, but Badur began to re-
pent of his having ad mimed the Portu-
guefes into the Ioe of Din (efpecially
lince the promifed Succours arriv’d but
/lowly) whereupon he order’d the Go-
vernor Ninaar to furround the City
with a new Wall, and to enclofe the
Royal Square without the place, whereby
their Fortifications mull approach very
near to, and lie directly oppolite to thofe
of the Portuguefes. Thefe being refolv’d
not to permit a thing of this nature,
which mull needs tend to their Prejudice,
Badur was much incenfed thereat, ex-
claiming highly again/!: their Proceedings,
and endeavour’d to have furpriz’d them
in their Fort, which not fucceeding, he
fought for Aid from the Samoryn of Cale~
cut , and feveral Malabar Kings againll
them.
Nonnius being advertifed of all thefe
Treacheries, fets fail once more with 20
Ships, and 500 chofen Portuguefe Sol-
diets lor Diu, ordering Martin yilphonfo
to follow him from the Malabar Coaff.
No fooner had he caff Anchor before
Diu, but feigning himfelf lick aboard,
he fent certain Perlbns to compliment
King Badur , and beg his Excufe for his
not coming in Perfon: Whereupon Ba-
dur went aboard together with Soza the
Governor of the Fort to give a Viiit to
Nonnius , who met Badur at the Door of
his great Cabin, and laluted him with a
great deal of Civility. For tho the Death
of Badur was refolv’d on before-hand,
yet that they might not feem to violate
the Laws of Flofpitality, they had thought
fit to defer the Execution thereof till his
return towards the ffiore : It was not long
before Badur went into his Boat again in
order to return, but was no fooner got
Boldnefs of
James
Bcrcelho.
Xpv Dijjf
rends be-
twixt Ba-
rf ur and
the Por-
tftgudes*
■ Nonnitis
i fails oner
more to
| Dim
Eadar
gives him
a lift A-
boarii


into it, and making the beft way to the
fhore, when Nonnius giving the Signal to
his Men* and exhorting them to do their
Duty, they leap’d into Boats kept for
that purpofe, and following that of Ba~
dur attack’d him on all Tides. The King
being grown defperate, exhorted his Peo-
ple to a brave Defence* encouraging both
by his Words and Example, which made
the Fight fo obftinate, that the Portu-
guefes were in danger of lofing their
Prey, Soza himfelf being flain in the firft
Attack. The Bravery of a certain Ser-
yant 0 f a g ur deferves our particular
not * he being obferv’d to have wounded
with iB Arrows, as many Portuguefes, till
he was kill’d by a Mufquet-fhot himfelf.
la the mean while three Yachts arnYd
with Turks were feat from the fhore to
fuccour the King j but being moft of them
kill’d* and the King’s Galley ftruck upon
a Bank, he leapt into the Sea, and tho
forely wounded, did fwim to the Galley
of Triftan Pavia, and difcovering him-
felf to be the Sultan, beg’d his Life,
which Triflan Pavia would willingly have
granted, but juft as the King was en-
tring the Veflel, he was (lain by a.Sea-
man, who knock’d his Brains out with a
Club. This was the unfortunate end of
Badur , one of the moft Potent Kings of
A/ia, who not long before had been a
Terror to all the circumjacent Coun-
tries.
is kilfd.
The Brave-
ryrf aSer-
Badur
Badur
flahu
CHAP. X.
Sofar made a Prisoner. The Portuguefes become Mafters of the whole Isle.
Mamud King of Cambaja. A confiderable number of Ottomans fent to
the Indies. Diu befieg’d by the Turks. A smart Engagement betwixt the
Mahometans and Portuguefes. Diu reliev'd. Garzias Noronia conftituted
Vice-Roy.
Sofar a, ]
Prifoner,
Portu-
guefes
JVfafters of
the Ifland,
Rumen-
fiadt.
The Por-
tuguefes
firtify the
ca '* e '
Mamud
King of
Cambaja.
BU T to return to JD/«, and the Sea-
Engagement, where Sofar being ta-
ken Prifoner, was kindly entertain’d by
Nonnius, The Death of Badur (thonot
very honourable on the Portuguefes fide )
prov’d however of very great confe-
quence, the Portuguefes becoming there-
by Maflers of the whole Ifland without
.much opposition, the faid Badur being
defervedly hated by his Subjeds, by rea-
fon of his Tyranny and Cruelty } 600
Foot were left there in Garifon, and all
neceflary care was taken that the Cufloms
both at Diu and Rumenftadt might
be regularly paid. Mafftius in his 4 tb
Book of the Indian Hiftory, fays, that
Rumen ft adt or kumopolvs (lying not far
from Diu} was built by Jazy (mention’d
before) and got its Name from the
Conftantinopolitan Turks , that fcour fome-
times in the Indies , call’d by them
Rumes,
The Portuguefes found no great Trea-
fure of ready Mony at Diu y but confide-
- rable Stores of Ammunition and Provi-
sion, and the better to flrengthen them-
felves, fortified the City on the Sea-
fidc.
Badur was fucceeded in the Kingdom of
Cambaja by Mamud his Sifter’s Son, who
being an Infant, under the Tuition of
Driacan , Madremaluc and Alucan , thefe
were follicited by Sofar (out of a hatred
to the Portuguefes) to engage in a War for
the recovery of Liu, Alucan having
got together a Body of 5000 Horfe, and
10000 Foot, and Sofar 3000 and
1000 Horfe, they, pitch’d their Tents in
Jvne not far from Rumenfiadt. Sofa at-
tack’d the Town vigoroufly, but being
in one of the Attacks wounded in both his
hands, the Portuguefes got a little breath-
ing time, and in the mean while re-
pair’d the Walls of Rumendftadt , which
for fome reafons they had dcmoliflied be-
For Anthonius Sylverta having re*
folv’d to fortify and defend the whole
Ifland againfl the Indians , was difap-
pointed in his defign by Aluean , who im-
proving the lofs of fome Portuguefe Ships
by Tempefl to his gall’d
the Portuguefes fp forely from his Ships
in their Entrenchments, that they were
forced to quit their Pofts v fo that Alu-
can landing his Men, foon became Mailer
of the whole Ifle and the Suburbs, where
there happen’d frequent Skirmilhes be-
twixt them, the Indians being not flrong
enough to attack the Fort, which was
bravely defended by Lupo Soza Cou~
tinho.
Whilft thefe things were tranfadting
in Cambaja , the Grand Signior, to re**
venge the Murder of Badur (at the re-
quell of his Widow) had equipp’d a
Fleet of <54 flout Gallies, which being
Hit Tutors
engage in d
War .
The Por-
tuguefes
forced into
the Fort,


Sylveria
prepares
for a brave
efence,
Solyman
lands, and
attacks
tiT P f r *
uguees.
Retre/tts
to Madra-
faba.
Alncan
leaves
Diu.
A Fire-En -
„ jr
by the For-
tuguefes.
join’d by 7 Ships of Cambaja and three
Moors of Malabar with 3500 Land-men
aboard them, under the Command of Soly~
man BafTa of Egypt, they fet fail from Aden,
not quellioning but they would foon be
mailers of the Portuguefe Fort, and confe-
quently of the liland, from whence they
might extend their Conquefts into the
Continent of the Indies . Matters being
concerted beforehand betwixt Solyman
and Sofar , the laft went out to meet the
Turkifh Squadron about 15 Leagues at Sea;
and Antbonio Sylveria being advertis’d of
their appoach, took all imaginable Pre-
caution for his Security, in difpofing
what Force he had to make a vigorous
Defence, and at the fame time gave no-
tice thereof to Goa , to follicite for prompt
Succours from thence, encouraging his
Men both by his Example and Exhorta-
tions. gy this time Solyman having call
Anchor in the Road of Diu, he order’d
7°o chofen Men to land, and attempt the
Attack of the Portuguefes Fortrefs, which
they did accordingly, but were forced to
ret * re t 0 Sofa** s Fort with the lofsof 50
j aY it7iarie S kill’d, and a greater number
wounded ; the Portuguefes had alio fix
Men kill’d, and 20 wounded.
About the lame time the Turkifh Fleet
being in great danr of being forced
by a flrong South Wind upon the Coafl,
and much expos’d to the Enemy’s Shot,
he retreated to the Harbour of Madra-
faba five Leagues from Diu ; where ha-
ving concerted new meafnres with Sofar ,
he fent back his Land Forces to renew
the Siege of Diu. But jllitcan one of the
Tutors of King Matnud having con-
ceiv’d a jealoufy of the Defign of the
Turks , retir’d with his Forces from be-
fore Diu , and having reprefented their
ambitious Projects to the King, he Toon
obtained of him a Prohibition in all his
Territories not to furnifh the Turki/h
Camp with Proviftons.
This prov’d no final] difappointment
to Solyman, who notwithflanding this
did not lofe Courage, but purfued his
defign of carrying the place, cofl it what
it would: For this purpote the Turks con-
triv’d a very large Firefhip, which under
f avour °f the Tide and the fmoak of
fome burning Wood, they intended to
fend into the Harbour, and to fix to the
Fortifications 3 and whilft the Portuguefes
were bulled in quenching the Flames,
they were to attempt the furprifing of
the Fort on the X-and-lide: but whilft
the Y were ftaying for the Spring-Tide,
* rayic *f co Goveano a Portuguefe found
means to fet it on fire, tho not without
great hazard, being oblig’d to pals twice
the Enemies fire; 20 of the Turks a-
board the Firefhip leap’d into the Sea,
and were all (lain. The Turks were fo
incenfed at thisdifappointmenr, that they
exerted all their Fury againfl Rumenfladt ,
the Walls whereof being fo ruin’d as not
to be maintain’d any longer againfl a vi-
gorous Attack, Patieco the chief Comman-
der thereof thought fit to quit it in time.
The Turks flufh’d with this Succefs, re-
new’d the Siege of Diu both by Sea and
Land with more vigor than ever, leaving
nothing unattempted, with Cannonading,
Mining, or whatever might be attempted
to reduce the place ; whilft the Portu-
guefes on the other hand with Counter-
mines, Retrenchments and frequent Sal-
lies endervour’d to flop their Fury.
The Turks being at lafl by means of a
Gallery advanc’d over the Ditch, and en-.
tring the Breach, a mofl furious Combat
enfu’d for four hours fucceffively, the
Portuguefes defending themfelves like Li-
ons. Maffaus relates, that a Portuguefe
having fpent all his Balls, pull’d out one
of his Teeth and charg’d his Mufquet
with it. At lafl the Turks were forced
to retire with the lofs of 500 Men flain,
and 1000 wounded : The Portuguefes alfo
on their fide had 14 of their beft Officers
flain, and fo many of their Soldiers ei-
ther kill’d or wounded, that they had.
fcarce 40 Men left fit for Service. Be-
fides this they began to be in fuch want
ofProvifions and Ammunition, that they
were very near reduced to the lafl ex-
tremity. However they did not lote
Courage, but incouraged one another ra-
ther to die upon the fpot, than to fub-
mit to the mofl fordid flavery ; the Wo-
men and Children were even not back-
ward in giving all the Afliflance they
were able.
In the mean time Nonnius Acunia being
fufficiently fenfible of the danger of the
Fortrefs of Diu, had left no Stone un-
turn’d for the relief thereof; but the
cafe admitting of no delay, he fent
Patachos or Yachts thither: thefe coming
to an Anchor in the night time before
Madrafraba, had each put four Lanthorns
on their Sterns, with an intention to ter-
rify the Enemy. This fucceeded accor-
dingly ; for the Turks having by this time
loft above 3000 Men, and fearing the
Succour expe&ed from Goa might be
much flronger than really it was, fet fire
to the City, and leaving 500 wounded
Men, and mofl of their great Cannon
behind, reimbark’d the firft of November,
fleering their Coaft towards Arabia , and
Kunieli
tiadc left
h the For-
tuguefes.
The Turks
renew the
Siege of
Diu.
The Turks
form the
place.
Are repute
fed.
Djll re
ikv'cL
594
A Defer iption of the Coajis of


To the
great Ho -
why of the
Sofar with the Remnants of his Forces
retir’d to the Continent, to the no fmall
honour of the Portuguefes , who with fo
fmall a number had detended themfelves
not againft barbarous undifeiplin’d In-
dians, but againft a Body of warlike well-
exercifed Turkijh Troops. It’s Paid, that
Francis I. King of France, was fo highly
pleafed with this brave Aftion, that he
defir’d and had an Original Picture of
the brave Sylvcria, the Governour of the
place.
Whilft Nonnius was bulled in making
all the neceflary Preparations for the Re-
lief of Diu , Goa Garcia* Noronia was
fent by Don John King of Portugal with
11 Men of War, and 7000 Land-Men to
relieve Nonnius : Among thefe there was
one Ship fill’d with Malefaftors and Cri-
minals of all forts, who had obtain’d
their Pardon from the King-, but this
being feparated from the reft, was never
heard of afterwards. Nonnius Actinia
having furrender’d the Government to
Noronia after a ftay of ten years in thole
parts, fet fail for Portugal, his Native
Country, but before he could reach it
died at Sea, near the Cafe of Good Hope
on the African Coaft.
Nonnius
reliev'd by
Garzias
Noronia,
Nonnius
his Death .
CHAP. XL
Noronia makes an Agreement with King Mamud. Lupius Soza
Governour of Diu. Sofar’ s finifter Defigns against the Portuguefes. He be-
fieges Diu in conjunction with Mamud : Is slain in the Enterprise. The City
is vigoroufly assaulted, and as bravely defended. An unsuccessful Sally made
by the Portuguefes.
Noronia
fends his
Deputies to
Mamud.
TJ.ehr A~
gr cement.
Lupins
conflicted
Governour.
NOronia apply’d all his Thoughts to
the Affairs of Biu -, and having dif-
-0 patch’d certain Deputies to Mamud to
treat with him of a Peace, they at lalt,
riot without a great deal of difficulty,
came to the following Agreement, in the
Negotiation of which they met with no
fmall oppofition from the Grand-mother
of Mamud and Sofar, who were conti-
nually inciting the young King to re-
venge the Death of his Uncle Ring B<i~
dur -,viz. That the King of Cambaja Ihould
. remain in the Pofleffion of the City of
, Deu , and the Portuguefes ‘continue Mailers
of the Fort and Harbour thereof } that
they Ihould divide the Culloms (hare and
(hare alike, and that the Cambajans ihould
be at liberty to ereft a Wall to front the
Caftle, provided the fame were done at
a convenient diftance.
Matters being thus fettlfed, Lupins Soza
was conftituted Governour of the place
inftead of Sylvcria , with a Garifon of
900 Men. But it was not long before
Mamud, at the Inftigation of his Grand,
mother, fent a confiderable Body to at-
tack Bazain } but Laurcntius T avora ma-
king a vigorous Sally upon them, con-
ftrained them to feek for Peace. Sofar in
the mean time having recover’d himfelf}
had for fix years together bent all his
thoughts upon the ruin of the Portuguefes *,
and having found means to ingratiate
hirafelf into King Mamud his favour,
they fent underhand their EmifTaries to
the neighbouring Indian Princes, to en-
gage them againft the Portuguefes, who
they told them did lord it over them,
under pretence of trafficking in the In-
dies. The Affairs of the Portuguefes
were at that time but in a very indifFe- 1
rent condition in thole parts, their Trea-ji
furies exhaulled,their Naval Strength neg- 1
lefted, their Seamen very fcarce } and the *=
Land Soldiers deferred in fuch numbers,
that of the 900 that were in Garifoii
under the Command of Lupins Soza, there
were not above 250 left in the Govern-
ment of Mafcarenhas \ and what was
worfe, there was not above a month’s
Provilion, and a llender lhare of Ammu-
nition left.
Sofar was not unacquainted with' thefe
things, having learn’d them from divers
Portuguefe Merchants } fo that looking
upon this as a fit,opportunity to execute
their projedled Defign, they pitch’d upon
the Winter-feafon, when they knew the
Portuguefes could not be fo ealily fecured
from Goa. Sofar being in the mean
while not negligent to cajole Mafcarenhas 1
the Portuguefe Governour by his Letters
into a belief of his Sincerity, the fame
did not difeover his real Intentions, till
it was almoft too late} but finding no
other redrefs but in a brave Defence, he
made all the neceflary Preparations for
it, by fending away all the ufelefs Mouths,
and fortifying himfelf after the bell man-
ner he could: and having bought up
Mtferablc
Hate of the
Portu-
gudes.
Treachery
of Sofar.


Breads out
into open
HoftiDtics.
what quantity of Rice, Flefh and dried
Fifh he could get of the Portuguefes , he
lent Advice of his approaching danger
to Bazain, Chaul and Goa. This hap-
pen’d in the year 15 \6. Sofar took for a
pretence the new Walls that were to be
erefted at one end of the City, which
being built too near the Portuguefe For-
trcfs, thefe ftopt the Progrefs thereof,
which foon gave occafion to open Hofti-
lities. Mafcarenhas to animate his Sol-
diers told them, u That they ought to
u remember the brave Aftions of the
u Portuguefes in this very place, where
1C they had fruftrated the Defigns of the
cc Turks, of which the fame Sofar who
<c now came to attack them had born his
u lhare*, that God would certainly pu-
Ct nilh the breach of Faith of this
u Wretch; and that they ought not to
u be difraay’d at the Winter-feafon,
cc there being no queftion but that the
lc Portuguefes by their Skill in Maritime
<c Affairs, would overcome thefe Diffi-
u culties, and fuccour them in due time.
The next thing he did, was to take care
of all the Polls; the Water-Redoubt he
committed to the care of Martinho Car-
valho with 30 Men, and the Defence of
the fhore towards Cambaja to Jacobo
Lett.
Sofar by this time had begun to carry
on his Approaches a good way, and ply’d
the place warmly with his Cannon, but
could not without much difficulty at-
tempt an Affault by reafon of the Ditch,
which being inlarg’d of late, was as
broad again now as it was in Sylveria his
time however he ceafed not to play with
his Cannon, efpecially in the night time ;
and being fenfible of what advantage it
would be to him if he could make hira-
felf Mailer of the Harbour, by taking
the Water-Redoubt, he contriv’d fuch
another Engine or Firefhip as the Turks
had made ufe of in the former Siege,
which they intended to fet on fire, and°to
carry with the high Tide under the Fort:
But the Portuguefes having receiv’d Intel-
ligence of this Defign, fent out Jacobo
Lett with 20 Men to burn her, which he
did with incredible Bravery, and the lofs
of one Man only, being forc’d to carry
the Veffei through the Enemy’s Fire on
both fides, till he brought her within a
certain diftance of the Fort, where Ihe
was fet on fire, and confequently Sofar 9 s
Projed vanilh’d ihto fmoak.
sofor ai-
tacks Dm*,
Sofar’*
bnrnU


The Por-
tugudes
receive
fome Suc-
cours,
K. Mamud
comes fato
the Camp,
Makes d
Breath in
the Wall,
sofar
kind.
Not long after the Portuguefts were re-
joic’d with a frefh fopply of Men, Pro-
viilons and Ammunition from Goa , under
the Command of the young de Cajlro , a
brave Gentleman, who, after he had been
afflifted with very hard Tempefts at
Sea (in which feveral of his Vcflels were
feparated from his Squadron) came with
the reft, being eight in number, into the
Road of Dm, and in fpite of the Be-
fiegers, landed his Men, Ammunition and
Provisions, which increafed the Number
of the Garifon to 450 Men. About the
fame time Mamud King of Cambaja came
in Perfon with a good number of Troops
into the Camp; Mafcarenha 5 being wil-
ling to know their exad number, feat
out feveral Defperado’s, who engaging
the Outguard of the Enemy, three of
them were kill’d in the Skirmilh, but the
reft had the good fortune to carry off
one of the Enemy’s Sentinels, by whom
Majcarenhcus was inform’d of what he
had a mind to know. Maftarenhas ha-
ving order’d certain Signals of rejoicing
to be made, the Enemy fent a Meffenger
to know the reafon thereof, who was
anfwer’d, that’ewas done on account of
the King’s arrival in the Camp, which
put them in hopes that for the future
they fhould fight againft a great Prince,
whereas hitherto they had been engag’d
with Vagabonds and Rogues.
Mamud immediately after his arrival
levell’d his Cannon with great fury a-
gainft the Walls of the Fortrefs, and ha-
ving brought along with him an expert
Gunner, he order’d him to call certain
fiery Balls into the place, tho without
much fuccefs, till the faid Conftable be-
ing kill’d, another fucceededin his place,
who was fo unskilful in his Art, that his
Fireworks did more mifehief in the Camp
than to the Enemy. However by the
continual battering of the Enemies Can-
i non, a large Breach was made by this
1 time in the Wall, which the Befieged
repair’d to the beft of their power*,
but their main Reliance was upon the
breadth of the Ditch, which the Be-
fiegers were endeavouring to pafs by the
help of their Galleries. To prevent this,
the Portuguefts had open’d an old Vault
at the foot of the Wall, in which they
fpent feveral days and nights, but turn’d
to their advantage, fmcc from thence
they could take away great part of the
Materials the Enemy had brought thither
for the filling up of the Ditch. From
hence it was alfo that Sofar receiv’d his
Death’s wound, being flam by a Bullet
which pafs’d through his Hand and Fore-
head, which occafion’d no final! diftur-
bance in the Enemies Camp \ and had it
not been for Rumecan his Son, the Siege
had been likely to have been railed at
that time.
The Joy the Portuguefts had conceiv’d
at the death otSofar their mortal Enemy
was not a little allay’d by the perfeve-
rance of the Belieged in filling up the
Ditch, and that with fuch fuccefs, that
having Hope up the before-rnemion’d
Vault, Mafcarenhas began to be reduced
to the uemoft ftrefs, of which he gave
notice to the Viceroy at Goa, requeuing
immediate Succours. It was now about
the middle of Augujl, when the Maho-
metans were preparing for the general
A Haul t: They vilited their Mofques with
a great deal of Devotion, and Sc. James's
day being appointed for this Attack, they ]
advanc’d without the lealt noife in two 2
Bodies before break of day towards the t
Breach, in hopes of furprizing the Portu-
guefts } but finding ’em upon their guard,
they enter’d the Breach with moft ter-
rible and dreadful Outcries, which how-
ever was fo far from terrifying the brave
Portuguefts , that they were repulfed with
great {laughter : Some of the Indians ta-
king the advantage of the low Tide, got
into the Water-Fort, where they pitch’d
Mahomet* s Standard, which Mafcarcnhas
no fooner perceiv’d, but flying thither,
he gave them fuch a Reception, that
after 30 of them were flain upon the fpot,
the reft were forc’d down headlong over
the Wall This done, he return’d to his
Poll, where both by his Words and Adti-,
ons he fo encouraged his Men, that Ru~
tnecan y after a hot Difpute of fix hours,
faw himfelf oblig’d to found a Retreat.
In this Adtion not only Maftarenhat , but
alfo Ludovico Sona, Ferdinando de Cajlro ,
Anthonio PaJTando , and all the Portuguefts
in general acquir’d immortal Honour,
feveral Women having expofed them-
felves in the midft of the Combat.
Notwithftanding this Repulfe, the In-
dians did not ceafe to continue their Fire
againft the Fortrefs, which not fucceed-
ing according to expectation, they began
to apply their Mines, not without fome
fuccefs. Maftarenhas having taken no-
tice that the Enemy retreated fometimes
without any neceffity, near a certain
Tower, gave notice thereof to de Cajlro ,
and fome other Officers of note, com-
manding them to quit it; but thefe flulh’d
with their laft fuccefs, refus’d to obey,
for which they paid dear foon after : for
the Enemy taking the opportunity, when
they perceiv’d the Tower full of Soldiers,
The Indi-
ans Jlorm
the F>rt .
Are refill"
fed .


A Aline
blows up
100 POl
tuguefes.
300 Indi
ans blowt
up by a
Mine.
Diu re-
liev'd with
(owe Men
and Provi -
JJons.
Mat icy a-
tmng the
Porcu-
guefe?.
blew it up on afudden with at leaft 100
. Portugucfes in it, and among them de Ca-
> flro , and feveral others of Quality; and
fuch was the Barbarity of the Indians ,
that they thruft their Swords through
* the half-dead Bodies of fuch Portuguefis
as were thrown up into the Air before
by the Mine. They were for improving
this opportunity, and during the Confu-
fion occafion’d by this Difafter, attack’d
the Fort with incredible Fury, but were
fo warmly receiv’d by Mafiarenhas , that
they were glad to retreat. To prevent
the like for the future, the Portuguefi
Governour order’d his Men to aft with
more caution for the future, and the
Tower of St .James to be blown up,
which was executed j and not long after,
finding the Enemy ready to attack the
Tower of St. Thomas , he blew up the
Mine underneath it, and with it 300 In-
dians.
The Portuguefi Affairs in the Fortrefs
began notwithftanding all this to grow
worfe and worfe 3 for tho they had made
Intrenchrnents within Intrenchments, yet
had they (after a Siege of four Months)
not above 150 Men left for the defence
thereof \ and being reduc’d to great ex-
tremity for want of Provilions, were
forc'd to feed upon unwholefoni things,
which fo difeourag’d the Garifon, that
they were refolv’d to put an end to their
Mifery by fighting their way through the
Enemy.
But being juft upon the point of put-
ting their Defign in execution, they were
rejoic’d with a moft unexpefted Relief
from Goa, whence they had fent 50 Fri-
gats under the Command of Alvares de
Caftro , and Frandfeus de Menefis , who ar-
riv’d happily at Papain. Alvares fail’d
ftraitvvays thence with part of his Forces
( amounting to 900 in all) for Liu , and
good (lore of Ammunition and Provi-
lions, the reft follow’d before the end of
September. You may eafily imagine with
what Joy the poor emacerated Soldiers of
the Garifon receiv’d this welcome News,
which however they would not improve
to fo much advantage as they might have
done, out of a perverfe Temper, pe-
culiar to the Portugucfes , who as they
are foon dejefted in Adverfity, fo are
they infupportable in Profperity : For
now the Soldiery began to accufe Mafia-
renha* of Cowardice and Negleft, telling
him in plain terms, that they were re-
folv’d no more to be ftmt up within the
Walls, but to ad like brave Portuguefis,
to attack the Enemy in their Works, and
to make him once for all to repent that
ever he had attempted the Portuguefis.
whofe Glorious Name was dreadful aL
over the Indies , this they told him they
were fully refolv’d to put in execution,
and if he refus’d to head them, thej
would choofe another, the firft, the bell
they could. Mafiarenhas , who knew ve-
ry well the ftubborn Pride of the Portu-
guefisj when fluff'd with Succefs, did what
he could to divert them from their De-
fign by all the mild Infinuations and mofl
forcible Arguments he could invent, tel-
ling them that the fecureft Methods were
always the beft, and how dangerous it
might prove to hazard the lofing of the
Fort, when they were in a condition to
keep it till the approaching Spring, when
they expefted fufficient Succours from
Goa \ but finding them deaf to his Perfwa-
fions, he fpoke to them in the following
manner: u Soldiers, ye are not infenfi-
u ble that, if you would conlider your
Cc Duty, you ought rather to follow my
u Commands than your own Dii eft ions j
a but fmee you have ty’d up my hands,
“ and both by your Words and Aaions,
a nay by your very Looks, give me fuffi-
ct ciently to underftand, that inftead of
a commanding, I muft obey 3 go on and
a ffew your Courage, your Knowledg
“ and Experience in Martial Affairs: Go
u on, I fay, I will inftead of leading you
“ on, follow you, with this Caution how-
tc ever, that 1 would have you remember
cc to take care to return with the fame
cC marks of Bravery as you march out.
Then dividing the whole Garifon into
three Bodies, he order’d Alvares de Cajiro
to command the Van, the main Battel
he gave in charge to Francifio de Mcnefis ,
himfelf remaining to guard the Recr:
Thus they march’d towards the Enemy,
but with far different fuccefs from what
they had promifed themfelves *, moft of
them after the firft Charge retreating to-
wards the Town, inftead of puffing for-
ward ; the Body commanded by Mcnefis
being charg’d in Front and Flank, betook
themfelves to their heels, and de Caftro
himfelf being forely wounded by a Stone,
was hardly fav’d by Mafiarenhas , who
crying out to the Soldiers, that it was
now time to ihew their Bravery they had
fo much boafted of before, would fain
have ft opt their Flight, but in vain 3 for
they retreated with fo much fear and
precipitation, that for fome time after
they fcarce durft look the Enemy in the
face, or keep their Poll whereas the In-
dtans, incourag’d by this Succefs, ap-
proach’d with their Engines nearer and
nearer to the Walls of the Town.
■ Mafcaren-
■ has his
. Speech to
his Soldi-
i ers .
i
i
Their un-
fuccefsful
Sail),


CHAP. XII.
De Caftro comes to Diu. Takes fame Arabian Voxels. Routs the Indians, who
leave the Isle. Rumecan kill'd. Soliman's Tranfactions before Aden. He
causes the King of that place to be hang'd on his Mast, and makes himself
Master of the City, A Defcription of Daman, Dabul and Vifiapour.
pe Caftro
fends Acu-
nia to Diu.
He takes
fome Ara-
bian Vef-
jels.
De Caftro
relieves
Dili in
Ferfoiu
The portu-
gudes
ma H c
ma ay '
DE Cajlro Viceroy of Goa had no fooner
receiv’d the unwelcome News of
• the Death of his Son, and the diftrefled
Condition of Diu, but he fent at the
beginning of the Spring Alvares de Acu-
nia with five Men of War and 400 Land-
Men thither, with ftridt Orders that they
fiiould keep within their Fortifications
till the whole Fleet with the intended
Succours (hould arrive there. Alvares
in his Paflagc thither took feveral Ara-
bian Veflels, aboard of which were feve-
ral Perfons of Note belonging to Sofar ,
who, tho they offer’d a great Sum of
Mony for their Ranfom, were all cut to
and their Heads thrown into the
River.
The Spring being pretty well ad-
vanc’d by this time. Be Caftro fet fail for
Baz.ain with 40 Yachts, having aboard
1400 Portuguese Land-Soldiers, and 300
Canarins, With thefe, after having for
fome timeinfefted theCoaft of cambaja ,
he arriv’d in the llha dos mortos , whence
he fent an Exprefs to Mafcarenhos with
Orders to batter the Enemies Entrench-
ments near the Sea-fide with his Cannon,
to facilitate his landing} which being
bravely executed by Mafcarenhas y Be
Cajlro enter’d the Harbour without much
oppofition, and foon after landed his
Men. Be Cajlro being not a little fur-
priz’d to fee the Fort appear more like
a heap of Rubbifti than a Fortification,
the very Ditches being laid level with
the ground, he call’d a Council of War
to confult of the molt proper means to
put an end to the Siege; Some were of
opinion, that fome time ought to be al-
low’d to the Soldiers to refrefh them-
felves after the Fatigues of the Sea } but
Be Cajlro telling them, that it would be a
great difgrace for a Portuguefe Viceroy to
be lock’d up in a Fort, it was refolved to
attack the Enemy next day.
Accordingly they march’d out in good
order. Be Cajlro ordering the Draw-
bridges to be drawn up, to cut off all
hopes of retreating into the Fort, and
leaving Anthonie Correa with fome Men to
guard it againft any fudden Attempt.
The better to diftrad the Enemy’s Forces,
Nicolao Gonfalvo was commanded to make
a falfe Attack with fome Ships on the
backfide of the Ifland. Rumecan on the
bther hand, trufting to his Number, took
care to guard his Polls on all Tides, a-
gainft which Be Cajlro marched with a
much leffer Force, exhorting his Sol-
diers in a few words: That they ought to
remember that they fervid a King , who ne-
ver faiPd to reward fuch of his Soldiers as
fought bravely for God's Caufe, and the
Defence of hvs Territories in the Indies, the
Prefervation whereof depended on this Battel-,
that therefore they/hould fight like Men , and
confider that aU their Safety lay in their
hands , all hopes of retreating being cut off
by the {hutting up of the Gates of the Fort ,
and the removal of the Fleet to the backfide
of the Jfle ,
Things being thus difpos’d, Gonfalvo
made his falfe Attack on the other fide
of the Ifland, which fo alarum’d the In-
dians, that they haftned in whole Troops
thither, which gave opportunity to the
Portuguefes (who were about 3000 ftrong)
animated by the Example of Be Cajlro
and Mafcarenhos their Leaders, to break
in upon the Indians with fuch fury, that
they were not able to refill them. Ru-
mecan finding his Forces to give way, and \
imagining that the Fort was left dellitute *
of Men to defend it, aflaulted the fame
full of defpair } but being repulfed by
Correa , was forced to follow the reft,
and being dofely purfued by the Portu-
guefes, quitted the Me, and with the
Remnants of his Forces palled over to
the Continent. The Portuguefes enter’d
the City, where they kill’d all they met
with, without any regard to Age or Sex,
where they got an incredible Booty, and
among other things the Standatd of Cam-
baja, a prodigious quantity of Arms, and
35 Cannon, one whereof being of
an extraordinary fize, is kept to this day
in the Arfenal at Lisbon , with certain
Arabick Charadters upon it. The Portu-
guefes loft not above 60 Men in this
Adion, whereas of the Indians were kill’d
no lefs than 4000, and 600 taken Prifo-
ners } Rumecan himfelf loft his Life as he f
was preparing to pafs over to the Con- /
£)e Ca-
ftro V
Speech U
his Soldi-
ers.
9
He routs
the Indi-
ans.
Rumccaft
diiim


SolymanV
Trencher)
with the
King of
Aden.
tinent. Be Caftro after having given the
King of Portugal an account in his Letter
of this glorious Viftory, and the Brave-
ry of his Officers and Soldiers, gave
Orders for the repairing the Fortifi-
cations of the Fort, and return’d trium-
phant to Goa, where he was receiv’d
with the general Acclamations of the
People.
Caftagnedo gives a fomewhat different
Relation of this Aftion *, for he tells us
that Rumecan wanted neither Bravery
nor ConduftV and that he put the Portu-
guefes fo hard to it, that had it not been
for Mafearenha/s , who led in Perfon the
Soldiers to the Charge, the Portuguefes
would in all likelihood have loft the day.
He fays further, that they had 150 Men
kill’d, and among them divers brave
Officers, George de Soufe, John Manoel,
Francifco Azevedo , Cofmo de Paiva , Bal-
thafar George, Eduardo Rodrigo , Juliano
FerdinandOy F"afque Ferdinando , and o-
thers; that the Indians lofs amounted to
3000 Men, and that the whole Siege of
Diu confumed the Portuguefes at leaft 2000
Men.
We told you before, that Solyman did
come with his Fleet before Diu, from
Aden \ about 20 Leagues thence coming
to an Anchor to take in freih Water, he
fent certain Deputies with a Letter to
the King of Aden , with the ufual Prefent
of a Brocado’d Veil of Tiflue of Gold,
offering him his Friendfhip, and requiring
him in the Grand Signior 1 s Name to furnilh
his Fleet with Flelh and Fuel, if he could
not affift in Perfon in the Expedition he
was going upon, to extirpate the Por-
tuguese* ( declar’d Enemies of the Maho-
metans) out of the Indies. The King
of Aden was at that time a Tributary to
the Portuguefes , unto whom he paid year-
ly 10000 Ducats Tribute, notwithlland-
ing which he gave a very honourable
Entertainment to the Meflengers, promi-
fing to furnilh them with what NecelFa-
ries they wanted. About feven days
after the whole Turkifh Fleet entring the
Harbour of Aden , was receiv’d with An-
gular Demonllrations of Joy, the King
fending one of his chief Courtiers aboard
to congratulate Solyman upon his arrival,
and to invite him alliore. Solyman re-
turn’d for Anfwer, That he fhould be
glad to imbrace the King’s kind Offers,
but that the late Fatigues of the Sea
had put him into fuch a diforder, that
he could not ftir at prefent; but as foon
as he fhould be recover’d of his prefent
Indifpofition, he would not fail to pay his
Refpefts to the King.
The King’s Meflengers were no fooner
return’d to the City, but Solyman fent
300 Men after them, under pretence of
refrefhing themfelves, and taking a view
of the place (being all chofen Men)
and the better to cover his Treachery,
he fent word to the King, that to pre-
vent any Diforders, he would fend 100
Men the next day to bring them aboard
again. The King of Aden was fo credu-
lous as to affign thefe 300 Men their
Quarters in his Gallic, which Solyman had
no fooner notice of, but he fent the next
day inftead of the 100 Men, no lefs than
2000 Janizaries, to the no fmall Aflonifh-
ment of the King, who now beginning
to miftruft the matter, did not know
what courfe belt to take ; but whilft he
was confidering what meafures to take,
News was brought, that a much Uronger
Body of Turks was advancing into
the City, who had no fooner polled
themfelves near the Callle, but the Com-
mander in chief told the King with a
fmile, that he would be plea fed to give
a Viilt with two or three of his Cour-
tiers to Solyman, who was indifpofed a-
board his Veflels. The King now began
plainly to fee the danger that threatned
him, but not being in a condition to
make any oppofition, he was forced to
fubmit ; and being brought before Soly-
man, he as’d them with an unparallel’d
Magnanimity,Under what colour he could
prefume to take in Cuftody a Prince in
Amity with the Grand Signior, and to
treat him no otherwife than as a Crimi-
nal ? Unto which Solyman reply’d, And
are you not afham'd to let the Admiral of the
Grand Signior ft ay three days in your Har-
bour without paying him a Tifit ? The King
return’d. Had the Grand Signior been here
in Pcrfon, I ought to have done no more
than what I have done , and I am fare I
fhould not have been treated thus . ’Tls
true , lam now in your power, which I might
have prevented had 1 not trufted my felf
and my Kingdom with thofe who now are
going to betray both, without which Aden
need not have flood in fear of your
Strength : I am now , tho too late , fenfible
of my approaching Deftiny, feeing my felf
in the hands of a treacherous Tyrant ; but
tho you may difpofe of my Body , / hope the
Bravery of the Inhabitants of Aden, and
the Crandure of their Princes will outlaft
your barbarous Cruelties, He had no fooner
ended his Speech, but Solyman order’d
him to be bang’d on the Main-maft Yard,
with four of his chief Courtiers, and 1
afterwards feized upon the City, ex-'
cufing his Treachery with the Grand
ne King
of Aden
forc'd a-
board the
Turkifh
Fleet .
The Kins
°f Aden
hang ' di


r - -WV ¥ »«-■. * mum if i—i—■ ■
The King of Adej*
tfaanl Seaman Bqfcn*lralUy*
jDaoiaiTr
CfariL
Eaaadm.
dot iffhir
bwL
Sigmor’s Order, to punifh the King for
his being a Friend to the Portuguefes,
Dtu being one of the chiefeft places of
the Indies, we thought it would not be
unacceptable to the Reader to infert the
entire Hiftory thereof here. We will
now proceed to the Defcription of the
other places: Daman was one of the
moft antient and noted Places of the
Kingdom of Cambaja , which, as we told
you before, was taken and deftroy’d by
/ fartino Alphonfo de Soza. As to Chaul
and Bazain, there is fcarce any thing re-
markable to be faid of them, except
what has already been mention'd in the
account of Dtu.
Babul is a City feated at 17 deg. 45
min. of Northern Latitude upon a moft
pleafant River, arifing out of the Mountain
Sallaguatte , about two Leagues from the
Sea, in former times much frequented by
Foreign Merchants, and famous for its
Traffick and Riches. Sabajus ( a declar'd
Enemy ot the Portuguefes ) had furround-
ed this City with a Wall, and fortified
the Harbour thereof with a ftrong Cattle,-
which being garifon’d with 6000 Men,
(among whom were 500 Turks') he
thought himfelf fecurc againft any At-
tempts of the Portuguefes,
But D y Almeyda the Portuguefe Admiral*
appearing with his fleet ( aboard where-
of were 1300 European Land Souldiers,
befides 400 Malabars) fent forae of his
Gallies to make a falfe Attack upon the
Caftle, whilft he took this opportunity
of landing his Men atTomc diftance from
thence. The Indians perceiving their Er-
ror, march’d with all poflible fpeed out
of their Gates againft the Portuguefes ,
whom they gall’d forely with their Ar-
rows; but thefe advancing with Sword in i
hand againft their Enemies, made fuch 1
a havock among them, that they were
glad to retreat towards the City, and
being clofely pdrfued by the Portuguefes ,
thefe enter’d pell mell with them, and
made a great daughter, killing all they
met with, without fparing Men, Women
or Children. They got here a confidera-
ble Bboty, tho a great part of the beft
Moveables were burnt with the City,
which was fet on fire by the Portuguefes,
We have hitherto given you an ac-
count of the moft confiderable Cities of
the Kingdom of Decan, bordering to
i s taken by
the Portu-
S uefei -
Limits cf
the King-
dom of Dc-
can.


The King-
dom oj vi-
liapour*
The King
®f vifia-
TtfTf
the Great
Mogul.
Its Limits ,
Bombay.
tile South upon Malabar , upon Bifnagar to
the Eaft,upon the Sea to the Weft, and up-
on Cambaja to the North *, it’s divided into
three parts, viz., into Cuncan,Canara and
BaUaguatte , the laft of which is a ridg
of high Mountains flat on the top, with
molt excellent Failures, extending even
beyond Goa . The next in order is the
Kingdom of Vifiapour y the length where-
of is no lefs than 250 Leagues, and its
breadth 150. Its Capital City, which
bears the fame Name, lies 70 Leagues be-
yond Goa , 80 from Dabul , and is faid
to be five Leagues in Compafs, with ve-
ry ftrong Walls, and five noble Gates, on
which are mounted above a thoufand Brafs
and Iron pieces of great Cannon *, they tell
us, that among thefe there is one carrying
no lefs than 540 Pound weight of Gun-
powder, call by a certain Italian , a Na-
tive of tfowe, who being queftion’d by
one of the King’s Commiflioners concern-
ing the Mony he had disburfed upon this
account, threw him into the fame hole
where he had call the Cannon before.
Some have reckon’d this City, buterro-
neoufly, among the Cities of Cambaja .
The King of Vifiapour was formerly ab-
folute Sovereign of this Kingdom, but
.after a long and heavy War was forced
. with divers other Princes in thofe parts,
to become a Vaffal to the Great Mogul:
He ufed alfo fometimes to be embroil’d
with the Portuguefes,
This Kingdom borders to the South of
IVingurla. upon the River Afirfec, the
Boundary of the Country of Carnatica ,
in the Territory of Sivipaneyk. To the
.North of IVingurla lies the Sea-port of
Danno , the Boundary of the Kingdom
of rifiapQur on the fide of the Empire of
the Great Moguls about to Leagues from
Daman . The River here has 44 fa-
thom Water at high Tide, and 1 4 fa-
thom at low Water. The fecond Ri-
ver is named Tenapour , having at low
Water half a fathom, and with high Tide
two fathoms depth. The third call’d
Chunam , has generally two fathoms. The
fourth call’d Maehyn , has 2 4 fathom at
high Water, and half a fathom at low
Tide. The fifth Harbour is call’d Quel-
leny , the fixth Bazain the feventh Bom-
bain, ( Bombay ) where the depth is fix fu-
thorn at high, and four at low Water:
The eighth is call’d Siourvel , where at
high Water there is fix fathom deep.
All thefe Rivers belong to the Kingdom
of pGfiapour, but are for the mofl part in
the pofleflion of the Portuguefes , who have
built their Forts upon them: As for in-
ftance, at Bombain ( Bombay ) a fpacious
Harbour (at 18 deg. 50 min. Northern
Latit.) where Ships may lie fafe at An-
chor againfl all the Winds-, here the
Portuguefes have built a very fine Caftle,
(the Draught whereof you may fee in
the next Cut) which commands the whole
Road, and was in 1 662 given in part of
a Dowry, together with Tangier in the
Straits of Gibraltar , to the Infanta of For-
tugal, upon her Marriage with Charles IF.
King of England ; whereby the Englijh
thought to have got a great Booty from
the Portuguefes , whereas they are in ef-
fect Places of no confiderable Traffick.
The Rivers Babul , Radiapour and Cara-
patan, are entirely poffefs’d by the Na-
tives.
For the reft, this Kingdom abounds in
Saltpeter Works. The Royal Palace lies
in the Center of the Capital City, de-
fended by a double W’all and Ditch,
with 100 battering Pieces, and a Garifon
of 2000 Men •, the richeft Merchants
dwell in the Suburbs. The other Cities
of note of this Kingdom are Cintapour ,
a Seaport Town, Raz.apour , Banda, Raje~
bang , Inland Cities ; Arec, AUrdfy , A(ia,
Tamba and Wingurla , where the Hollan -
ders have a ftately Factory*, it is feated
at 15 deg. 7 min. of Northern Latit. a
place very confiderable, not only for its
plenty in Wheat, Rice, and all forts of
Provifions and Refrelhments, but alfo for
its fituation near Goa , which flood the
Butch in no fmall Head, whilft they
were engag’d in War with the Portu-
guefes, and had block’d up that Harbour.
The Forces of the King of Vifiapour con-
fifts in 1 50000 Horfe, and 8000 Foot,
of which more anon in the Defcription
of Ncgapatan. We will in the next
place proceed to the Defcription of
Goa , together with its Origin, and what
afterwards happen’d moft remarkable in
thofe parts, betwixt our Nation and the
Portuguefes.
The Royal
Palace.
wingnrU


Pol. 3 • p • Sox .
The KngHlk Tort oT
The Engliilx Eortr o£ Bomtajr
yJMtier JSt)M fide .
1%,




CHAP. XIII.
Goa taken Albuquerque. The Death of Sabajus.. Hidalcan comes before
Goa. Albuquerque takes Goa a fecond time : Routs the Moors, and esta-
blishes Chrifiianity in that City. The Life and Aft ions of Xaverius in the
Indies, China and Japan, His Zeal and Piety.
Goa has a
bad Air,
and moft of
its Provi-
sions from
the Conti-
nent,
Goa taken
by Albu-
querque.
Sabajus hk
Death,.
TH E City of Goa is feated in an Ifle
of a confiderable bignefs, at 1 6
deg. of Northern Latin. The Air or
Climat is not very wholefom here, fo
that the Portuguefes have in this place
(as the Dutch have at Batavia ) their
great Hofpital of the Indies , becaufe
many of the Europeans die here im-
mediately after their arrival, and many
more fall lick by reafon of the moifture
of the Air, as it was formerly at Bata*
via. , which has been remedied fince in
fome meafure, by draining the Fens there-
abouts. Goa is the Capital City of the
Portuguefe Indies , the chief Refidence of
their Viceroy and Archbilhop. The Ci-
ty is built after the Portuguefe manner,
each Houfc having its peculiar Garden,
as at Cochin , and other Portuguefe Cities
in the Indies.
The famous City of Goa was conquer’d
for the Portuguefes by Albuquerque in the
following manner : One Timoja a famous
Perfon in thofe parts, having poffefs’d
himfelf of a fmall Ifle belonging to the
Kingdom of Onor, was a declar’d Enemy
of Sabajus (of whom before) and the Ma-
hometans of Goa , who interfering with
him in their Commerce, he had de-
ftroy’d many of the Ships of the Egyp-
tians and Saracens trading thither. Thus
being link’d in point of Intereft to the
Portuguefes , he had declar’d to Almeyda
his readinefs to do what Service he was
able to perform to Emanuel then King of
Portugal,
Albuquerque coming into thofe parts,
fent for Timoja , to confult with him con-
cerning certain matters of moment re-
lating to thofe parts, who inform’d him,
that Sabajus being a declar’d Enemy of
the Portuguefes , had after the taking of
Babul , bellow’d vaft Sums of Mony in
making Preparations againft the Chri-
ftians \ but being prevented by Death from
putting them in execution, he was fucceed-
ed by his Son Hidalcan , who being engag’d
in a War with the neighbouring Kings,
and Goa at this time embroil’d within-
teftine Divifions, which had made moft of
the Garifon defert his Service, he was of
opinion, that in cafe Albuquerque would
for this time fet aftdc his Expedition
*T 1 TfT *
againft Ormits, and attack Goa , he might
make himfelf mafter of that City with-
out much oppofitibn; and to convince
him of the fmcerity of his Intention, he
offer’d to go along with him in Perfon*
and to take his Ihare in all the danger.
Albuquerque approving of the Counfel of
Timoja , call’d together a Council of War,
in which it being agreed to lay afide the
Delign upon Ormus , and in lieu thereof
to attack Goa, Timoja lifted a good num-
ber of Soldiers (under pretence that they
were to be imploy’d againft Ormus') and
foon after having join’d Albuquerque with
14 Ships, they tarried near 11 days in
the Ifle of Anchediva: For fome of the
Portuguefes began to queftion the fuccefs
of this Enterprise, alledging that there
were 4000 Men in Garifon in the City,
and that it was imprudence to rely too
much upon Timoja but AlbuqUerque per-
illing in his Refolution, fet fail from
the Ifle, and came to an Anchor before
the Bar of Goa.
From hence he detatch’d Anthony No-
ronia his Sifter’s Son, and Timoja with
fome light Veffels, to make themfelves
mailers of the two Forts that defended
the Entrance towards the City \ which
being done with all imaginable fuccefs,
he fent his Meflengers to Goa, to let the
Inhabitants know, that if they would
fubmit,they (hould be treated like Friends,
and be difcharged of one third part of
the Tribute they were oblig’d to pay to
Hidalcan •, but in cafe of refufal they
ttiuft expeft no Mercy. The Inhabitants
of Goa feeing themfelves reduc’d to this
nonplus, in the abfence of Hidalcan ,
moft of their Soldiers having defefted,
and their Forts in the Enemies hands,
thought it their wifeft courfe not to a-
bide the extremity, but to accept of the
Offers of the Portuguefes , which they did
accordingly* and receiv’d Albuquerque
with all the Demonftratioris of Frietid-
fhip, who rode triumphantly on Horfe-
back into the City under the Acclama-
tions of the People, a Dominican carrying
an Enfign with the Crofs in it, and ano-
ther the Keys of the City (furrender’d
to him) before him. He was very
pun&ual in performing all the Articles
Albuquer-
que fets
/ail for
Goa.
»
Two Forts
taken .
Goa fur-
render' d te
the Port*-
guefes.


Lofl agah
by the Por-
tuguefes.
Hidalcan
prepares
for the re-
covery of
Goa.
agreed upon betwixt him and the Inha-
. bitants, forbidding the Soldiers under
the moft fevere Penalties, to commit the
leaft Outrages. His next care was, to
take a view of the condition of the City,
where he found divers goodly Veflels,
fome lately built, others upon the Stocks*,
the Arfenal very well provided with Ar-
tillery, and the King’s Stables with a
conliderable number of the belt Arabian
Horfes. And finding by thelituation of
the Place, of what confequence it might
prove to the Portuguefes for the future,
in carrying on the War upon the Conti-
nent of Cambaja and the Cape of Corns ,
and to keep the neighbouring Princes in
awe, he left no ftone unturn’d to provide
for its Security.
I'hus much for the firft Enterprize of
the Portuguefes upon Goa . We will now
filfo give you a fliort account of their
further fuccefs, how they loft it again by
« Treachery, and regain’d it a fecond time
•the istb of Novemb . 1510. where thefe
following Perfons fignaliz’d themfelves
to their immortal Honour, Manuel de
Cunha , Manuel de Lacerda , Don John de
Lima , and his Brother Don Jeronimo de
Lima , Denys Fernandes , Diego Mendes de
Fafconcelos , with many others.
for Hidalcan had no fooner receiv’d
the furprizing News of the lofs of Goa ,
but he made a Peace with the neighbour-
ing Princes upon the belt Conditions he
could, with an intention to bend all his
Forces towards the recovery of Goa .
The better to compafs his Delign, he
fent Camalcan his General, a brave Sol-
dier, before with 8000 Foot, and 1500
Horfe, to endeavour to pafs a certain
Branch of the Sea which inclofes the Ifle,
he himfelf intending to follow with an
Army of 5000 Horfe, and 40000 Foot,
• as foon as he had made all the neceflary
Preparations for fuch an Enterprize.
Camalcan having pitch’d his Tents
near the Sea-fhore, this, together with
the News of the approach of Hidalcan
with a molt powerful Army, caus’d no
fmall Confirmation in the Ifland. Goa
was inhabited at that time by two forts
of People, viz* the Mahometans and Pa-
gans the firft out of an irreconcilable
hatred to the Chriftians, cry’d out for
Hidalcan the Son of Sabajus , who was
of the fame Religion with them \ and the
Pagans fearing left they fliould be fevere-
ly chaftifed for their having furrendred
the City upon fuch eafy terms, were for
purchaiing Hidalcan 3 s favour by betray-
ing Albuquerque’s Counfels to him. The
worft of all was, that many even among
the Portuguefes began to upbraid Albu-
querque with want of Gonduft, who they
faid, out of Vain-glory only, without the
leaft regard to the Intereft of Portugal ,
had with a handful of Men ventur’d upon
fo defperate an Enterprize as th£ feiz-
ing of fo populous a City.
Albuquerque nothing difmay’d at all
thefe Obftacles, endeavour’d to appeafe
the Portuguefes by fair words and pro-
mifes, took 100 of the chief Inhabitants
into cuftody, and having intercepted a
Letter direded to Camalcan , he punifh’d
the Author thereof with Death, with
divers others who were convifted of a
Correfpondence with the Enemy. But
as his chief aim was to difpute their
Pafiage crofs the Branch of the Sea, he
had ere&ed Batteries provided with Can-
non, at convenient diftances near the
Sea-fide, and fecur’d all their Boats, by
which means he had repulfed them feve-
ral times in their Attempts. At laft
taking the advantage of a dark tempe-
ftuous night, they brought over both
their Horfe and Foot, without receiving
any confiderable damage from the Portu-
guefes. Thus approaching to the City
in Battel-array, moft of the Inhabitants
join’d with them, which oblig’d the
Portuguefes to retreat thither, tho with-
out any great profpeft of Security.
Camalcan fummon’d Albuquerque to a
furrender under certain Conditions; but
tho he was fenfible of the approaching
danger, and the difficulty there would
be of receiving any Relief in the Winter-
feafon from May till September , when
the frequent Storms render the Seas there-
abouts unnavigable, and choak up the
Entrance of the Harbour of Goa y yet
was he refolv’d to exped the arrival of
Hidalcan , and to abide the utmoft Ex-
tremities rather than to furrender the
place, refolving if all fail’d to pafs the
Winter in his Ships in the Harbour in
fpite of the Enemy. Camalcan , aftonifh’d
at the Refolution of the Portuguefes ,
made feveral fierce Attacks upon them,
but in vain, till at laft Hidalcan appear-
ing with all his Forces, he refolv’d to cut
of all manner of Provifions from the Por-
tuguefes, by which means he did not que-
ftion to become Matters of the Place
without Bloodihed.
He refolv’d however to fend a Herald
to Albuquerque to offer him honourable
Conditions if he would depart *, but whilft
they were treating upon that Head, he
found means to have a Ship loaden with
Ballaft funk below the City, where the
Branch of the Sea is pretty narrow,and the
Albuquer-
que endea-
vours to
hinder
their Paf-
fage into
the IJIe .
Camalcan
pajjes into
the Ijle.


The Portu-
guefes in
jhet dl ~
J es '
A
dow At -
tempt of
the Portu-
gue es.
Channel very ftrait, with an intention
to have another funk hard by it: Albu-
querque was no fooner advertifed thereof,
but he call’d a Council of War, in which it
was unanimoufiy agreed, that they Ihould
embark the next night, before they had
ftopt up the whole Channel, that the
Enemy might not intercept their Paflage.
Accordingly they march’d out in the
dead time of the night; but having fet
fire to their Magazine, they were difeo-
ver’d and attack’d by the Enemy, fo that
with much ado they got to their Ships,
when they weigh’d their Anchors, and
with incredible difficulty pafs’d through
the narrow Channel at fome diftance from
the Town: By which however they were
not freed from their Mifery or Danger;
for by the continual windings of the Ri-
ver they were frequently expofed to the
Enemy’s Fire, and being deftituce of fredi
Water, they were forc’d to drink fait
corrupted Water; what Horfe-flefh they
had left being alfo confum’d, they were
reduc’d to feed upon Mice, Cats and
Leather, which occafion’d a great Mor-
tality among the Portuguefes: Add to this,
that they were continually annoy’d with
the Enemy’s Cannon from the two before-
mention’d Forts (left by the Portuguefes
for want of Men ) and faw no way how
to pafs them without a moft manifeft ha-
zard.
Albuquerque being put to thcfe ftraits,
rcfolv’d upon a thing which at firft fight
appear’d rather to be a madnefs than
founded upon ferious Confiderations: but
the Event ihew’d, that in Extremities the
boldeft and moft hazardous Undertakings
are often the bell. Both thefe Forts were
provided with good Garifons, but being
ienfible of the Mifery of the Portuguefes ,
they regarded them fo little, that they
fcarce thought it worth their while to
guard their Polls: Albuquerque having re-
ceiv’d fomc notice thereof, detatch’d 300
chofen Men, whom he divided into two
Troops; thefe being animated with great
Fromifes and Revenge, advanced to-
wards the Forts at the fame time, and
finding the Gentrys afleep, kill’d them,
and fo entring the Forts foon put the reft
to flight, took poffeffion of the Fort, and
carried off the Cannon aboard their Vef-
fels, Hidalcan was fo furpriz’d at this
bold Enterprize, that not thinking him-
felf fecure in the place where he was,
he order’d his Tent to be pitch’d at a
greater diftance.
The next thing the Indians attempted
was, to endeavour to fet fire to the Por-
tuguese Fleet by means of dry Brufh-
wood and Faggots dipt in Pitch and Ro-
fin ; to prevent which Albuquerque man’d
out certain Boats to burn them before
they could come near enough : This oc-
cafion’d a fmart Engagement, wherein
Anthony Noronia (a brave young Gentle-
man, declar’d Viceroy of the Indies after
Albuquerque ) being dangeroufly wounded
in the Knee, died a few days after. The
Enemy’s lofs was alfo very conliderable ;
but the Death of Noronia , together with
the manifold Miferies, Dangers, and Diffi-
culties they had daily to llruggle with,
made the Portuguefes refolve to fail to
the Ifle of Anchediva to fet afhore their
fick Men, who flood in great need of Re-
frelhments for their Recovery.
Whilft Albuquerque was here rumina-
ting with himfelf how to recover Goa ,
a Squadron of 10 Portuguefe Men of
War arriv’d in the Indies. Strengthened
with this Succour, and having new mo-
dell’d his Forces by purging them of
fome mutinous Spirits, he embark’d 1500
Land-Soldiers, and 300 Malabars aboard
34. Veffels ; and fleering his courfe to
the Ifle of Onor , he concerted new mea-
fures with Timoja for the Recovery of
Goa: and having engag’d him to lift as
many Forces as poffibly he could, he fet
fail immediately towards Goa with fuch
an aftonifliing Confidence of fuccefs, that
the Indians upon his approach defected
the Forts without firing a Cannon.
Advancing from hence to the City, a
bloody Engagement enfued near the Roy-
al Palace, which Hidalcarf s Soldiers pre-
tending to defend to the utmoft extremi-
ty, but being routed, the reft threw down
their Arms, fome precipitating them-
felves from the Walls into the Ditch,
others Peeking Refuge, or rather Death,
among the Waves, whilft the reft difper-
fed in the Ifland. This Engagement
lafted above fix hours. Immediately
after Timoja coming to the Affiftance of
the Portuguefes , they enter’d the City,
where they made a moft miferable havock
among the Moors , whom they were re-
folved to extirpate root and branch;
7000 whereof are fuppofed to have been
/lain in four days times; the Pagans
themfelyes being exafperated at them
for having difpoffefs’d them of their
Lands, cut many of them to pieces, and
among the reft the Treafurer of HidaU
can , in whofe Houfe they found a good
Booty. Such of the Mahometans as were
taken Prifoners, Albuquerque order’d to be
enclofed in a Turhfh Mofque, together
with a certain Rencgado Chriftian, who
had deferred to Goa , and to fet it on
Am hony
Noronia
The Por-
tuguercs
t 0
Anchedl ~
Attach
Goa a fe-
cond time *
And take
it,
\
Commit
great Cru-
elties,


A Crofs
found in the
Ruins of
Goa.
The Church
of the
Francif-
cans and
Domini-
cans.
Jncreafe «/
the Chri-
ftians.
The Death
of Xave-
rius.
Hk Body
uncorrup-
ted.
fire, which was executed accordingly.
The next thing Albuquerque took care
of, was to have Bricks and Lime made
for the rebuilding and ftrengthening of
the Fortifications and (if we may cre-
dit the Portuguefes) as they were digging
under the Ruins of fomc old Walls, they
found a Brazen Crofs, which (confide-
ring no Chriftians were ever known to
have liv’d there before ) was look’d upon
by them as a miraculous good Omen,
prefaging the Eftablifhment of the Chri-
ftian Religion there.
Albuquerque having punilh’d with Death
fuch of the Inhabitants as had had a hand
in the firft Mutiny, order’d that the
Portuguefes fhould marry the young Wo-
men of the Country ( after they had been
baptiz’d ) the better to people the City,
which from that time began to encreafe
confiderably; Sequeria having caufed the
firft Church that was built, with the adja-
cent Houfes and Convent, to be dedicated
to S. Francis. And in the year 1548. the
Church and Convent of Dominicans was
ere&ed of Brick-work, 1 1 Fathers of
that Order being about that time intro-
duced into the Indies by James Bermu-
das a Caftilian. After the arrival of
the Jefuits in thofe parts ( who have alfo
a fine College here) there were in four
years time baptiz’d no lefs than 17290
Indians, without reckoning thofe con-
verted by the Francifcans and Dominicans
before. In the Jefuits Chappel lies in-
trench’d the Body of Francis Xaverius, of
which the Portuguefes relate ftrange Mira-
cles, as well as of his whole Life an
ample relation whereof may be feen in
John dc Lucena in Portuguefe , by Daniel
Bartholi in Italian , and by feveral others
in Latin \ and in another Treatife of
Bartholi printed at Rome 1653. concern-
ing the Actions of the antient Fathers of
the Jefuitical Order. It will be fufficient
for us to touch upon fome of the chief
Heads related by the Portuguefes of this
Saint.
He died in the Ifle of Sanchan in China
1552. the fecond of December, of a vio-
lent Fever, in the eleventh year of his
Voyage over the Indies. His dead Car-
cafe was laid in a Coffin with his Clothes
on, fill’d with Lime, with an intention to
transport his Bones thence after the Flefh
had been confum’d by the quick Lime.
Many days after the Portuguefes opening
the Coffin, found his Body not only un-
corrupted, but alfo of a lively Colour, and
moft agreeable Scent: Thence being tranf-
ported to Malacca , and the Coffin being
opened a fecond time, above three Months
after his Deceafe, they found neither the
leaft figns of Corruption, or any nau-
feous Stench. After he had been buried
here five Months, a certain Jefuit tra-
velling that way from Goa, being defi-
rous to fee the Body of Xaverius , found
not only the Body, but alfo his Clothes
uncorrupted, and of a very odoriferous
Scent.
Thus it being judged unfeemly that his
Body fhould remain any longer under
ground, Didacus Pereria caufed a magni-
ficent Coffin adorn’d with Gold and
Silk to be made, wherein the Body was
depolited at Malacca, till it could be
tranfported to Goa, where it was re-
ceived with incredible demonftrations of
Joy by the Viceroy, all the Perfons of
note, and efpccially by the Jefuits, and
depofited with a great deal of Ceremony
in the Chappel of S. Paul. And finding
that the People were fo eager to touch his
Body, that it was to be fear’d they
would in time confume it, or carry it a-
way by piece-meals, it was inclofcd in
an Iron Grate *, fuch being the Zeal of the
People of Goa at that time, that they
would imbrace the Body of Xaverius
without intermiffion, lay their Beads up-
on it, rub it with their Hands* &c. and
the whole City rung of the Praifes of
this Saint, of his uncommon Zeal, Piety*
Charity, Mildnefs, bis Dangers in his Voy-
ages, his Chaftity, Temperance, Farts,
Prayers, Miracles, Conrtancy, Prudence,
and great Adtions for the Honour of
Chrift.
The Speech he made upon his depar-
ture for Japan and China to his Friends,
who were for diflwading him from fo
dangerous an Undertaking, is fo excel-
lent in its kind, that it very well de-
ferves a place in this Treatife.
cc I am furpriz’d to fee you who fpcnd
tc your days in the Praife of God Al-
lt mighty's Power and Mercy, fhould
tl now be fo diffident thereof in regard
cc of my Perfon. Have you forgot who
u is the Supreme Goverfiour of the Uni-
tc verfe, and that every thing is rul’d by
4t his Will? Can you be deftitute of
4t Inftances of this nature? Don’t the
44 Waves of the Sea, who open’d a way
tc to the Servants of God through the
fct depth thereof, furnifti you with an
a undeniable Example? Don’t the Winds
u who allay’d their fury by his Com-
tc mand, proclaim his Power? Pray
u look upon Job , who could not be af-
-4C Aided by the Devil without God’s
tc fpedal Permiffion. The Mouth of
44 Truth birafelf tells you, that the Hairs
ft tranf-
ported t§
Goa.
Xaverius
hk Speech,


44 of our Heads are number’d. As we
44 fee Ambaffadors of Temporal Princes,
44 'relying upon their Charafters, and the
44 Power of their Matters, pafs unarm’d
and undifturb’d through an Enemy’s
*, fo it becomes us who bear the
44 Charafter of Interpreters of the Di-
-44 vine Law, and of Teachers of the
44 Heathens, to rely upon nothing but
44 the Afllftance and Power of the Di-
-44 vine Majefty, which without any other
44 Weapons can carry us fafely through
44 all Dangers both by Sea and Land,
44 through Fire and Sword, orwhatelfc
44 may feem to oppofe the accomplifli-
-4t ment of his Will. And if it happen
44 that fome of his faithful Minifters fall
44 into the hands of cruel Perfons, if they
44 are devour’d by wild Beafts, fuffer
44 Shipwracks,or are expofed to Hunger,
44 Thirft, Cold, Heat, Sicknefies, and
44 other Miferies, all thefe are to be
44 look’d upon as the Effefts of the DU
44 vine Plcafure, to try the Faith and
44 Conftancy of his Servants: For were
44 it not fo, we are fuffidently convinc’d
4C by many Examples, in what manner
44 our God has a careful Eye over them j
44 how he has fent the Ravens to feed
44 them, the Angels to feed them, how
44 the wildeft Beafts have depofited
44 their natural Fury and become mild,
44 how the Flame it felf has not been
44 able to hurt them, nor the greateft
4C Tyrants to execute their Cruelties
44 upon them. ’Tis true, the Vidlory
44 does not always incline on our fide,
44 and we are often fruftrated in the ex-
-44 pedtation of the fruits of our Labour *,
44 but thofe Difappointments ought not
44 in the leaft ftop the hand of a zealous
44 Minifter, in attempting every thing
44 that may conduce to God’s Honour,
44 and the Salvation of Souls. If a Sol-
-44 dier in hopes of a fmall fliar«-of Ho-
-44 nour, ventures his Life in the miift of
44 his Enemies * if the Seaman for the
cc hopes of an inconfiderable Lucre, leave
44 the fhore, and commit his Life to the
44 mercilefs Waves, would it not be a
44 fhame for a Minifter of Chrift to re-
4C fufe to hazard his Life for God’s Ser-
-4C vice, and to look upon every thing as
“ a trifle in comparifon of the kingdom
4C of Heaven, and its Increafe ? Let no
cC fuch thoughts enter our Minds, there
44 being nothing fo precious, that ought
44 in this regard to hinder us from the
4C promoting of God’s Service.
A moll excellent Speech, worthy to
be imprinted in the Hearts of all faith-
ful Minifters of Chrill, and the more
valuable upon that fcore, that his Deeds
were altogether agreeable to his Words:
For embarking at Goa for Malacca , he
thence fet fail in a Chinefe Joncke or Veflel
for Japan , where he arriv’d happily at
Cangotxima , where this great Man did
not think it below himfelf to be in-
ftruded in the firll Rudiments of that
Language for Chrift’s fake. The next
thing he applies himfelf to was, to have
the chief Articles of the Chriftian Faith
tranflated into the Japonefe Language,
making ufe for this purpofe of an Inter-
preter, till he attain’d himfelf to the
Perfedtion thereof, in which he ceafed
not to labour day and night; being mov’d
by an uncontroulable Zeal of planting
the Gofpel among thefe Pagans. Truly
a very commendable Zeal, not to be far-
gotten by all who bear the Name of
Chrillians; and tho Xaverm his Religion
differs in certain Points from ours, yet
might his Piety and other commendable
Virtues ferve as an Encouragement to all
pious Minifters, to follow his Footfteps
in performing the Service of God to the
utmoft of their Power. It muft be con-
fefs’d on all hands, that had not the ac-
tive Spirit of the Jefuits awaken’d the
Francifcansy and other Religious Orders
from their Droufmefs, the Roman Church
had before this time been buried in its
Ruins: And as for my felf, 1 am very
willing to own, that my Pen is not capa-
ble of expreffing the worth of fo great
a Man \ tho at the fame time I am of
opinion, that if Xaverm were alive now,
he would difown many things, efpecially
as to his Miracles, fince publifh’d by his
Followers.


CHAP. XIV.
Increase of the City of Goa. Its Traffick, Manners, and my of living of the
Portuguefes there . The War betwixt the Dutch Company and the Portu-
guefes. Their Ambassadors appear in the Great Council at Batavia; their
Proportions and Tranfactions.
Incriafe
and Traf-
fic£ of Goa.
Inhabi-
tants,
The way of
living of
the Porru-
guefes.
TH E City of Goa increaling every
year in Riches and Traffick, in-
creafed alfo in Strength by the addition
of feveral Forts near the Water-fide}
this being the Capital City of the Portu-
guefes in the Indies. Its Traffick was
much more confiderable formerly than
of late years, lince by our blocking up
the Bar of Goa they were not a little
dißurb’d by our Ships. Whilß Goa
was in its flouriffiing State, they ufed to
fend their Ships to Pegu, Siam , Japan,
Ptrfia , Cambaja , Arabia , Aialabar , Coro-
mandel, Bengale , Achem , befides divers
other places. It’s well inhabited not only
by Europeans , but alfo Canarins , Moors ,
and Pagans cf all Nations, who live for
the moll part upon trading, or are Han-
dicrafts Men. The great Street of Goa
has many rich Shops well-Ror’d with
Silks, Porcellain, and other precious Com-
modities, Drugßery Wares, Manufacto-
ries, &c. Some of thefe as well asfrefli
Provisions are fold every day in the
Market places, where you hear a Crier,
or Auctioneer (call’d by them Lalang )
to fell in publick all forts of Goods,
both movable and unmovable, Cattle,
Slaves, &c. to the faireß Bidder but
they leave off early, by reafon of the ex-
ceffive Heat about mid-day.
r The manner of living of the Portu-
gucfcs is the fame here as in moR other
■ places of the Indies j they are diftinguilh’d
int o'Cazadosy i.e, married People, and
Zoldados , lingle People } the lalt are mod
eßeem’d. The Portugucfes here are ge-
nerally very idle, feidom applying theni-
felves to any Employment, leaving the
management of their bufinefs for the
moll part to their Slaves, even the Wo-
men committing the care of their Chil-
dren to the Female Slaves, who alfo give
them fuck. The Men frequently marry
with the Natives of the Country, yet
not fo much now as formerly : The Chil-
dren begot betwixt a Portugurfe and an
Indian Woman are call’d Miftrce. f, as the
Children of thefe Miftices are call’d
C aft ices.
The Men are generally adciiffed to
cxceffiveLuftj and 1 remember to have
feen three Women Slaves lie in at once,
who were got with Child by their Ma-
Rers; Fornication and Adultery being
confider’d among them as Errors of little
moment: but they are very averfe to
Drunkennefs , notwithßanding which
Quarrels and Murders are frequent a-
mong them.
The Men are alfo generally exceffivc
proud, there being fcarce any of them
that thinks himfelf remov’d a little a-
bove the vulgar fort, but what has his
Umbrello carried over his Head, another
Servant to carry his Cloke after him, and
another who holds his Sword: They ufe
frequently SnufF, not excepting even the
Maidens and Womens and as they walk
along the Streets, they are continually
ftroking and fetting up their Whiskers.
The Women never appear abroad either
a foot or in Chairs unveil’d, their Huf-
bands being (and perhaps not without
reafon) very jealous of them ; for which
reafon alfo they keep them at home in
their Apartments above Rairs, the Win-
dows whereof are fo contriv’d, that they
can look upwards, but not downwards
into the Streets.
The Dißempers inoß in vogue at Goa
are the burning Fevers, which the Portu-
guefes cure by Venefeftion, fometimes five
or fix times nday, but they let but little
at a time. The French or Spamjh Pox
are alfo fo common here (asinmoß o-
ther parts of the Indies ) that a Fidalgo
or Gentleman here does not look upon
it as a di (grace to have been afflicted
with it twice or thrice in his life-time.
For the reR, the Portugucfes nfe much
Sweetmeats, and take a Draught of cool
Water after it, they being Enemies to
ftrong Liquors, and moderate in their
Diet, a Email fnare fufficing for a good
number of People. The Women feed
much upon Rice, tho they have excellent
Wheaten Bread they alfo ufe frequently
Betel and Areek , and all forts of Pickles,
which makes them have a pale Colour.
The King of Ftfiapour has more than ;
once (hewn his Inclination of attacking 1
Goa by Land, efpecially at that time’
whilß Cornelius Simonfc : commanded the J
Their Lujl
and Pride.
Their Jea-
loufy.
Diftem-
pers.
IheKmgf
Vifiapeur
willing to
attack
GW.


How Goa
fc to he •
blocked dp
by Sea?'
The Dutch
care not to
be Mafters
of Goa*
The War
betwixt
the Dutch
and Porcu-
guefes
frofnioui
to the firft .
Dutch Fleet in thofe parts, he being
much refpeded among the Mahometans
ever fince his burning of the Galleons
near Mormagon .* But the Death of the
faid Admiral prevented the defign of
that King, as much queftioning whether
his Succeffior might be a Man of the fame
ftamp. In the year 1641. the faid King
promifed a fecond time to form the Siege
of Goa, provided the Dutch Company
would engage to let a certain number of
their Ships winter at Dabul, or
fome other of his Majefty’s Harbours,
which was no more than a neceflary Pre-
caution } it being certain, that in cafe the
Siege fhould mifearry, the Portuguefes
without our Affiftance would have made
themfelves Mafters of thefe Harbours.
Formerly it was accounted dangerous to
fend our Ships to the Bar of Goa before
Oftober *, but Experience has taught us
fince, that this Coaft of the Indies is na-
vigable towards the latter end of Augufl,
or in September, the exad time when the
rich Ships come from Mofambique, Maf-
catte, and divers other places, which
have fometimes been taken by out Ships $
whereas if they come later, they have
nothing elfe to do but to attempt the
Galleons under the Cattle. In the year
1540. the Portuguefes made fhife to bring
into the Harbour two Caracks , and as
many Galleons, well provided with Men,
arid ail other Neceffaries, which gave
them , the opportunity to fortify thelfle
of Mormagon', fince which time, to ren-
der the Blockade by Sea the more effedu-
al, the Hollanders have order’d certain
Frigots to cruife with a Sloop nfear the
Cape and the Burned IJlands ( call’d IlhaJs
quimadas ) whereby the Portuguefe Caffi-
levs, which fupply them with Provifions,
are prevented from going out or in.
It is fufficiently demonftrable, that the
Dutch Company did at firft judg it for
their intereft to be Matters of Goa, but
laid it afide afterwards, thinking it more
for their intereft to block up the Bar of
God: Certain it is, that both the Di-
redors and the Governor and Members
of the Great Council of the Indies, look’d
upon the War betwixt them and Portu-
gal as propitious to them, as is evident
from the Petition deliver’d in May 1641.
by the faid Diredois in the Hague to
the States General of the Vnited Pro-
vinces.
The chief intent of this Petition
was, to (hew, That tho it was be-
yond all queftion that the Dutch Edfi-
India Company was ereded in its firft
beginning in the years 1601 , 1 6oi, and
1504. to carry on a peaceable Commerce
l n^ut t^lat nce Experience
had fufficienly convinc'd them, that the
Portuguefes, who had play’d the Matters
in the Indies for many years before, had
left no ftohe unturn’d to difturb the Com-
ineice of the Dutch, by feizing their Ships,
and imprinting very difadvantageousNo-
tions of them into the Indian Princes.
That in 1502. when the Dutch Eafi-lndia
Trade was incorporated into one Society
or Company, two peculiar Advantages
were (among others) obtain’d thereby
at that time: Firft, Full Authority of
proteding their Traffick jointly in the
Indies by force of Arms; The Confe-
quence whereof had been, fecondly. That
the Indian Princes were enter’d into an
Engagement with the faid Dutch Com-
pany, out of hatred and fear of the
Portuguefes ; that by. theft means the
Ships of the Dutch Company having pur-
ged the Seas of the Pirats, had fettled
fince the year 1604. their Fadories and
Traffick, not only in all the Iflandsfrom
the Red Sea as far as Japan, but alfo in
the Territories of the Grand Signiof, in
Arabia, at Mocha, in Per[ia, even in the
Capital City of Ifpahan, in the King-
dom of Cdmhaja, and the Empire of the
Great Mogul, in Decan, in Malabar, Nar-
finga, Coromandel, Golgonda, Bengale, Ara-
can, Pegu, Achin, Sumatra, Jambi, Palim-
ban. Bantam, Cambodia, Siam, Cochin-Chi-
na,Tonquin, &c. That fince the Eftabliffi-
ment ot thefe Fadories, the fecurity of
their Commerce Was chiefly founded up-
on this Maxim, to maintain a War a-
gainft the declar’d Enemy of thefe Indian
Princes, their Engagements to us being
founded upon their opinion of our Enmi-
ty with the Portuguefes . To prove this
they alledg the following ten Reafons.
1. Becaufe the Dutch Edjl-India Com-
pany was chiefly by means of the War
with die Portuguefes arriv’d to that Great-
nefs it is now at, their whole Traffick
in the Indies being founded upon this
Bafis, whence they draw yearly a re-
turn of 78910 Millions of and
if the laid Foundation were not fhaken,
they might exped every year larger Re-
turns.
2. That in cafe of a Truce they ftiould
riot reap the fruits of the Vi&ories, vit.
to put a ftop to their Power, a thing ab-
folutely to be confider’d.
3. In cafe of a Truce the Equipment
of many Ships of War would be laid
slide, by which means Holland would be
depriv'd of the Strength of a confide-
rable number of Men of War in cafe oj
xteceffity. Kkkk 4. Tha!
Fa ft ories
of the
Dutch in
the Indies,
Ten Rea-
fons for the
continuance
of a War
with the
Porcu-
gucfeS'
609
Malabar and Coromandel.
Chap.XlV.


4. That in Cafe or an abatement 01
the Equipment of Ships of War for the
J * aft.lndies, and confequently of the di-
minution of our Trade in the Indies r and
the return of our Ships from thence,
the advantage accruing to Holland by the
Convoys mull alfo be neceffarily dimi-
niffi’d.
5. That many thoufands of Families
in the Indies would thereby be depriv’d
of their livelihood.
6. That the whole Eaft-India Trade,
by which many Millions are gain’d yearly,
would decay in proportion as the Portu-
guefes fhould increafe in the faid Traf-
fick.
7. That in regard of the Intereft of
the Dutch Company it ought to be confi-
der’d, that lince of late years they had
been at vaft Expences in providing Ships
of War, and lifting of Soldiers, they
were (through God’s Blefling ) in a pro-
bability of making further Gonquefts up-
on the Portuguefes.
8. That in cafe the Eaft-India Trade
fhould come to decay, and confequently
their Profit be diminilh’d, they would be
in danger of being quite opprefs’d by the
heavy burden they lay under of provi-
ding Garifons and other Neceflaries a-
gainft the Attempts of the Europeans their
Enemies.
9. That thereby the Dutch Company
would he expos’d to the hazard of being
depriv’d of all the advantages they had
gain’d by right of Arms from the Portu-
guefes,, or otherwife.
10. In cafe of a Peace or Ceflation of
Arms betwixt the Dutch Company and
the Portuguefes , it was to be fear’d, that
the good underftanding betwixt the faid
Company and the Indian Princes, would
foon decay, to the no fmall detriment
and danger of the Company and their
Servants, efpecially in Japan: which
Traffick if it were loft, the Trade of
China would be of little confequence a
Peace or Truce with the Portuguefes being
abfolutely contrary to the Engagements
they had with the Indian Kings.
In confideration therefore of the great
detriment that would accrue to the faid
Company by a Peace with the Portuguefes ,
the faid Diredors did molt humbly pe-
tition their High and Mightinefles to take
it into ferious Confideration, whether
the Damages their Subjeds, and efpecially
the Company, were likely to fuffer there-
by, would not in a great meafure over-
balance the Advantages the States might
promife themfelves from a Peace with
Portugal j and in cafe they judged the
Peace with Portugal abfolutely for their
Intereft, whether the Eaft-Indies might
not be excepted in the faid Peace, as was
done in the Truce concluded 1609. and
whereof other Inftances were in frelh
memory betwixt France , England and
Spain, who notwithftanding they were
enter’d into Alliances fmee the Conclu-
flon of the Peace in Europe , yet did con-
tinue the War in the Indies , as is evident
from the Englifh Squadrons appearing
before Mofamhicpue , Goa and Manilha , and
the shifting of the Perftans in the Con-
queft of Ormus againft the Portuguefes.
Laftly, They requefted, that in cafe
their High and Mightinefles did not judg
their Reafons of fuch weight as to flop
the Truce in the betwixt the
Company and the Portuguefes , who late-
ly have ffiaken off the Spani/h Dominion,
and imbrac’d the Intereft of K. John IV.
their High and Mightinefles would be
pleafed at leaft to delay the Concluflon
thereof till Advice could be had whether
any of the Places belonging to the Portu-
guefes in the Indies had declar’d for the
new King, that the Diredors might have
the opportunity (in cafe of an enfuing
Truce) to recal fuch of their Servants
as were perhaps engag’d in the Service of
fome of the Indian Princes, without
which they might be in danger of being
furpriz’d and feiz’d there, to their irre-
coverable Detriment.
The Bar of Goa had for a conflderable
time been kept block’d up by a Squadron
of Dutch Ships, the better to annoy the
Portuguefes in their Traffick. James
Cooper kept the faid Harbour block’d up
for three years fucceffively, as Commo-
dore, who was fucceeded by Adam Wefter-
mid (of which hereafter in the Defcrip-
tion of Ceylon ) and he by Anthony Kaan.
In the year 1639. commanded before
that place Cornelius Simonfon Van der Veer
( mention’d before) a brave Commander
and 1641. Matthew Hendrikfz Quaft with
10 Ships, and 1147 Men: This Fleet took
a Carack richly laden from Portugal j
but he being kill’d in the Engagement,
was fucceeded by Cornelius Leendertfz
Blaau , Reer Admiral.
In the year 1642. two Portuguefe Ara-
baffadors, nam’d Diego Mendes de Eritto ,
and Gonfalvo Vtllofo de Sand Jofeph , a
Religious of the Order of S. Francis , be-
ing fent by the Portuguefe Viceroy of the
Indies to the General and Great Council
of the Indies at Batavia. The fame were
order’d to be receiv’d with all marks of
Honour and Refped ; For which purpofe
Mr .John chief Penfionary,
Goa
blocked lip
by tlx
Dutch.
Tm For*
tuguefe
Ambaffa-
dors come
to Batavia,


juftta Schouten , a Member of the Great
Council of the Indies, Simon van Alphen ,
Dodtor of the Laws, Sheriff of the City
of Batavia, Sebald Wanderaar , Receiver-
General, Peter Soury, Barcnt Wichmans i
Dirk Snoek , Ewoud Spieringh , head Factors,
John Lamoot , Serjeant-Major, Gerard Ber-
bers, Dodfor of the Laws, head Factor,
Francifco dc Souza de Caftro , and Anthonio
Fialho Pereira, both Portuguefe Gentlemen,
were fent to condudt them from aboard
their Veffel to the General’s Palace, un-
der the difeharge of five pieces of Can-
non *, and being immediately introduc’d
into the Apartment where the Great
Council was then afferabled, after the
firft Compliments on both fides, one of
the Ambaffadors began to make his Ha-
rangue; “That Portugal having with-
u drawn it felf from the Spani/h Jurif-
-44 didfion, had chofen Don John Duke of
44 Braganza their King \ that the faid
44 King having foon after fent an Am-
-44 baffador to their High and Mightineffes
44 to treat of a Peace and an Alliance
44 betwixt both Nations, they had all the
4c reafon to believe that the fame was
44 brought to a happy Conclufion before
44 this time: In regard of which they
44 were fent by the Viceroy of God , to
ct treat with their Excellencies about a
44 Cefiation of Arms, as would more at
44 large appear out of their Credentials,
which they deliver’d at the fame time
to the Governor-General with this Supfcr-
feription :
A, O, Senhor Anthonio de Diemen , Ca-
pitaon General de Nacaon OUandefa W efte
Ortente. On the other fide was written,
De Conde d Aveirdt Viceroy e Capitaon
d India,
The Letter was feal’d with the Arihs
« «
of Portugal, and written in the Portuguefe
Language, as follows.
44 Commodore Quaft, intimating, that i
44 asaCelfation of Arms was concluded i
4 ‘ in Europe, fo the fame might take '
u effedk in thefe parts, and that he had
44 given orders to the Viceroy of Goa
44 accordingly. After the Deceafe of
44 the faid Commodore, we gave notice
44 thereof to Cornelius Leendertfz Blaau
44 his Succcflbri who excufing himfelf
44 with his want of Power, as being ob-
-44 lig’d to follow ftridUy the Orders of
44 the Great Council of the tidies, we
tc thought fit to fend Diego Mendes de
44 Britto , Gentleman of the King’s Hduf.
44 hold, and father Gonfalvo Villofo, to
44 treat with your Excellencies concerning
44 this Point •, they being provided with
44 Credentials from his Majefty, that
44 whatever (hall be agreed upon with
tc them, lhall be valid and kept inviola-
-4C bly. We with all Bleffmgs to the
44 Crown of Portugal , and the Vnited
4C Provinces, Dated 6 Decetnb, 1541.
t
Subfcribed, Conde d Avoir as,
% The Great Council having told them,
that they would take the matter into fc-
rious Confideration, the Difcourfe began
to turn upon indifferent matters, and a-
mong the reft concerning the Caraopue,
lately taken by the Dutch. The Ambaffa-
dors being ask’d whether the Captain
did not prefentthe Viceroy with two or
three Casks of Wine* they anfwer’d.
No: At which the Governor-General
lliew’d a great diflike, telling the Am-
baffadors, that they muft pardon the mat-
ter, it being a common thing for the belt
Seamen to make the worft Courtiers.
After the Ambaffadors had din’d with his
Excellency, they were conduced to their
Lodgings at Mr. James Harder's Houfe.
They were both Perfons of a goodly
Afpedf, the Fradcifcan being betwixt 60
and 70 years of Age, the other of about
§O. Their Train confiftcd in two Pages,
and four Poriuguefe Footmen, befides the
Negroes and Miftices , a Gentleman, a
Secretary, Surgeon, and two Boystheir
Livery was Orange Colour..
ifafr /te-
ccpt'm-
Appear in
theCoundl.
Their Age
and Train
then Cre-
dentials,
44 IN the beginning of September ar-
“ 1 riv’d in our Fort Onor, a Caravel ,
44 fent from Portugal , whereby we were
44 inform’d, that the Portuguefes have
44 proclaim’d and acknowledg’d a King
44 of their ownj by the general Confent
44 of that Natioft. His Majefty of Por-
-44 tugal did in one of his Letters give
44 notice to us, that certain Ambaffadors
44 having been difpatch’d to their High
44 and Mightinefles the States General,
44 to treat about a Peace, it was not
44 doubted, but the fame would be foon
44 concluded, a Truce having been al-
-44 ready agreed upon betwixt the two
iC Nations in Europe, whereof notice had
J been given by the faid Majefty to the
The %th of February the faid Amb'affa-
dors demanded a fecond Audience, which
being for weighty Reafons defer’d till
the io th, they appear’d a fecond time
at Nine a Clock in the Morning in the
Great Council, reiterating their former
Propolitions concerning a Ceffation of
Arms: And left the Governor-General
might not as yet have receiv’d a full ac-
count of what had been tranfafted in
Europe, they produc’d certain Original
Their Se-
cond Audi*
er.ce .
611
Chap.XlV. Malabar and Coromandel.


Letters, fent by his Portuguese Majefly to
, the Viceroy j but thefe being only private
Letters from certain Dutch Merchants
living at Lisbon , and another Letter from
the States-General to the Admiralty of
that place, and confequently the fame
that were before fent hither from our
Squadron at the way of Coromandel ,
by the Sloop call’d the Pipeli : His Ex-
cellency the Governor-General reply’d,
that the lafl being fent to the Council
before by the Commodore Quafl y they had
perufed the fame, and found that in the
Letter of the States-General, it was ex-
prefly faid that the Dutch fhould not moleft
the Portuguefes on the other fide of the Line }
which being to be underftood of the
North-fide, the Indians were not com-
prehended therein j befides that they had
not receiv’d any Inftru&ions upon that
account from the Governors and Di-
redors of the Eaft~lndia Company.
But to convince the Ambafladors that
they were not enter’d into this War out
of any other motive than to obtain an
honourable Peace *, they could not but
put them in mind, that tho they had de-
liver’d their Credentials from the Vice-
roy, they had not brought along with
them any pofitive Proof whether the faid
Viceroy were authorized by his Majefly
of Portugal to treat concerning matters
of fuch great and it was
confequently to be doubted whether the
fame would be approv’d of and ratify’d
by his Majefly.
One of the Ambafladors reply’d, that
the Viceroy of India was always en-
dow’d with a Power of making Peace
and War, many Inftances of which could
be alledg’d upon divers occafions * which
would leave no room to queftion his Au-
thority in this cafe } but if they did, they
were ready to remain as Hoflages for the
accomplilhment of what fhould be agreed
upon. His Excellency the Governour-
General return’d. That he was fatisfied
of the Authority of the Viceroy in ma-
king Peace or War with the Indian
Princes, but remain’d doubtful, whether
the fame did extend alfo to the European
Nations: Neverthelefs, that he believ’d
the Viceroy would not tranfgrefs his
Commifllon, and that therefore they had
been acknowledg’d as Plenipotentiaries j
which being done, there remained no-
thing now to do, but to proceed to the
Treaty it felf, and to make their Propo-
rtions under what Conditions they would
have the Truce fettled.
The Ambafladors anfwer’d, that they
look’d upon it as unneceflary to infill upon
many Conditions or Limitations at this
juncture, when they expedted every day
to hear of a Peace concluded betwixt
both Nations in Europe , according to
the Conditions of which, both Parties
would be oblig’d to regulate themfelves
hereafter: That their only aim now be-
ing to obtain a Ceflation of Arms, the
main thing in queflion was, to fix a cer-
tain time of its beginning, which they
thought ought to be taken from that ve-
ry hour the Truce was agreed upon and
lign’d betwixt them.
The Governor-General told them that
he agreed with them in that point, that
not many Conditions were requir’d at
this time, but that it would be next to an
impoflibility the Truce fhould commence
from the very hour the fame was fign’d,
it being very probable that the Dutch
Squadron would in the mean while not
let flip any opportunity of taking their
advantage over the Portuguefes \ as the
Forces lately lent to Ceylon , perhaps
might have made an Enterprise upon
Negumbo or Columho \ as on the other
hand, the Portuguefes might probably
have undertaken fomething againfl: Gale y
or have obtain’d Tome advantages againfl:
the Dutch in other places: The Viceroy
himfelf having commanded Don Philippo
Mafcarenhas , that he fhould (till the News
of the Truce did arrive) ad with his
utmoft vigor againfl the Dutch in Zeylon.
He urg’d, that all thefe things confider’d,
it was to be fear’d that in cafe the Truce
commenced according to their defire
this might furnifh occafion to new Mifua-
derftandings, it being more than probable
that neither of the two Parties would be
willing to reflore what they had con-
quer’d in the mean whiles that therefore
it was his opinion, that the beginning of
the faid Truce mull be fo fix’d, as that
fufficient time might be allow’d for giving
notice thereof to the Subjeds of both
Parties.
The Ambafladors made many Ob-
jedions againfl this, infixing to have the
beginning of the Truce fettled from the
Date of the figning thereof, alledging
among the reft, that they could fcarce
imagine the Viceroy fhould have Pent fuch
Orders to ALafcarenhas, The Governor-
General reply’d, that he had certain ad-
vice of it from Ceylon , but that not-
withflanding this, he hoped the Ambafla-
dors fhould not leave Batavia unfatisfied.
He at the fame time invited them to dine
with him, where they were fplendidly
entertain’d, and drank to the Health of
the King of Portugal , and the Prince of


Their third
Audience .
r The 18 th of February the faid Ambaffa-
dors had another Audience, wherein they
defir’d a pofitive Anfwer to their Propo-
rtions, the time defir’d by the Governor
to confult with the Great Council being
expir’d. They urg’d, that fince the 14 th
of February fome Yachts were arriv’d,
which had brought the Confirmation of
the News of the Peace lately concluded
betwixt both Nations, therefore they did
not queftion but their Excellencies would
no longer deny them the defir’d Trade.
The Governour-Gcneral gave for An-
fwer, That the faid Yachts had touch’d
at Pernambuco , from whence they had
brought the Articles of a ten years
Truce betwixt his Portuguefe Majefty
Don John IV. and the High and Mighty
the States General of the Vnited Pro-
vinces , in refpeft of their Territories in
Europe, with Exception however of the
Places and Colonies belonging to the Daft
and Weft-lndia Companies; that they
had alfo brought along with them the
Articles or Conditions agreed upon be-
twixt their High and Mightinefles and
Triftan de Mendoza the Portuguefe Am-
baflador, concerning the Weft-tndia Com*
pany: whence it appear’d, that the fame
ought to be firft ratified by his Portuguefe
Majefty, and fentback to the States Gene-
ral ; and that the fame after that fhould not
take effeft before notice be given thereof
in Brazil: and the fame being agreed upon
in reference to the Eaft-lndia Company,
and our Ships which left Holland in Septem-
ber laft, being expefted every day in thefc
parts with the Ratifications of the faid
.Treaty, it was thought convenient by
the Great Council to expeft their coming,
and to regulate themfelves according to
the Conditions agreed upon betwixt their
refpeftive Matters, efpecially fince the
faid Ships would probably arrive before
the fcafon would permit the Ambaffa-
dors to depart for Goa , and confequently
there would be no lofs of time in this re-
fpeft.
The Ambaffadors told them that they
could not but think it ftrange, that fince
both Nations liv’d in Amity in Europe ,
they fhould aft in a hoftile manner againft
one another in the Indies . The Governor-
General reply’d, that fince their refpec-
tive Mafters had thought it convenient
it fhould be fo, till the Ratification of
the Treaty by his Portuguefe Majefty, and
that notice had been given thereof to
them, they were oblig’d to take their
meafures accordingly. The Ambaffa-
dors anfwer’d, that they had promifed
themfelves a quite other Anfwer, tho in
all other refpefts they acknowledg’d the
Honours and obliging Entertainment they
had receiv’d, defiring that a Copy might
be given them containing an exaft ac-
count of all the Tranfaftions during their
flay here, betwixt their Excellencies and
them, by which it might appear that
they had not been defeftive in their Zeal
and Induftry to bring this matter to the
defir’d effeft. This was promifed by the
Governour-General, with this addition,
that to give them all imaginable Satif-
faftion concerning the Truce, they would
alfo give them a faithful Copy of the
Articles thereof, not queftioning but
that the Ships would arrive in the mean
while; but if they fhould happen toftay
longer, beyond expectation, they would
confult all proper means to give them what
fatisfaftion they could; They thankfully
receiv’d this Anfwer, extolling once more
the obliging Entertainment they had met
with at their hands; they din’d with
molt of the Members of the Great Coun-
cil at the Governour-Gefieral’s Houfe,
and towards, the Evening took the Air
on Horfe-back.
The 30 th of March the faid Ambafla- '
dours had another Audience, in which I
they deliver’d a Memorial to the Great *
Council ; which being read, the Gover-
nour-Gerieral told them, that what was
alledg’d in the faid Memorial was a Matter
of Faft, and agreeable to what had been
enter’d in their Records; but that they
would not have them defpond concerning
the arrival of the Ships, which he was
forty ft aid fo long behind ; but that
notwithftanding this/ he hoped they
fhould not depart without Satisfaftion.
The Ambaffadors reply’d, his Excel-
lency would be pleafed to remember his
Promife, of not letting them depart with-
out Satisfaftion, or obtaining the end of
their Coramiffion, in cafe the Ships fhould
not arrive.
The Governour-General return’d for
Anfwer, That by faying fo, he did not
intend to confent to the Truce, which
was beyond his Power, at leaft till the
arrival of the faid Ships; but to give
them all the poffible marks of his Good-
will and Eftcera, and that they fhould
be difmifs’d with all the marks of Refpeft
they were able to pay them. That fince
his Mafters had thought fit to limit the
beginning of the Truce to the time of
its being ratified by his Majefty of Por-
tugal, and being return’d into Holland, and
thence to the Eaft-Indies, they were ab-
folutely oblig’d to wait for the arrival of
it, left it fhould feem as if they thought
Their
fiwth Au~
dtsnce *


themfelves more underftanding in this
Point than the States-General.
One of the Ambafladors made Anfwer,
That they were perfwaded his Excellency
the Governour-General, was fufficicntly
authorized to make Peace and War at
his pleafure in thefe Countries, the fame
tending to the advantage ot the Dutch
Nation *, and that this Ceflation of Arms
could not but be acceptable to the States-
General, who had fo lately concluded a
Peace with the King of Portugal . He
further told them, that the Viceroy of
Goa was always authorized with fuch a
Power, but in a more peculiar manner
at this time, having receiv’d exprefs
Orders for that purpofe by a Caravel from
his Majefty.
At laft the Ambafladors perceiving
that the Great Council remain’d ftedfaft
in their Refolution, they thought it un-
fit to pufli the matter any further for that
time, reiterating their former Requeft
of having a Copy granted them concern-
ing their Tranfaftions here, and defiring
that fince the Seafon began to open the
Paflage by Sea to Coromondel , they might
be difmifs’d forthwith, in order to pro-
fecute their Joutny by Land to Goa before
the Winter, the fame being impraftica-
blc afterwards, by reafon of the frequent
Rains. The Governour-General pro-
mis’d them entire Satisfaftion upon both
thefe Heads, and that a Ship fhould be
got ready for their Excellencies * but that
however he could not forbear to tell
them, that in his opinion they would do
better to tarry a little longer, in expecta-
tion of the before-mentioned Ships, and
the Ratification expeded to be brought o-
ver by them. They reply’d. That having
receiv’d exprefs Orders from the Vice-
roy to return to Goa with the firft oppor-
tunity, they were oblig’d to obey, unlefs
his Excellency would lay his Commands
upon them to the contrary. The Go-
vernour-Gcneral anfwer’d. That it was
not in his power to command them,
what he had faid being only by way of
Advice } but if they were refolv’d to
the contrary, they fhould not be in the
leaft detain’d ; That if they thought fit.
Advice might be fent thereof to the
Viceroy by the Ship that was then juft
ready to fail for Coromandel } or if they
difliked this Propofition, one of them
might tarry at Batavia till the arrival of
the Ratification, whilft the other re-
turn’d to Goa. This Expedient being ap-
prov’d by them, it was agreed that the
Francifcan Father fhould go back to Goa
by the w’ay of and the other
ftay at Batavia , till the arrival of the Ra-
tification,
Then the Ambaffadors defir’d the Re- '
leafement of certain Miftiws and Negroes f
that were Prifoners among us*, which be- \
ing foon granted by the Governour-Ge- j
neral, he ask’d the fame favour in behalf
of four other Perfons who had been
clapt in Irons on occafion of fome Muti-
ny at Batavia , in which they were the
which was alfo granted, un-
der Condition that they fhould depart
the Country with the Francifcan Father.
They alfo made the like Requeft con-
cerning Francifco dc Souza de Caftro , who
( at the requeft of the Governor-General)
being releas’d out of his Prilbn by thofe
of Achin , was deliver’d up to the Dutch 5
he had likewife leave given him to de-
part with the Francifcan Father, pro-
vided he paid his Debts before his de-
parture.
The firlt of April the two Ships tail’d
the Tiger and Najfaw , which had left
Holland the 1 6th of September laft, being
arriv’d at Batavia , the faid Ambafladours
appear’d once more in the Great Council,
intimating, that they being inform’d that
at the time of the departure of thefe Ships
out of Holland , the Ratification of the Ar-
ticles of his Portuguefe Majefty concerning
the Ea[t~lndie s was not arriv'd, at which
they were much furpriz’d, as not know-
ing what might be the reafon thereof:
They defir’d to know whether his Excel-
lency had not receiv'd any more particu-
lar Intelligence, which might induefe him
to grant the defir’d Ceflation of Arms.
The Governour-Gcneral reply’d, that he
had put it beyond all doubt, that the Ra-
tification would have been brought along
with thefe Ships } but fince it had happen’d
other wife, it was not in his power to
grant the requir’d Truce. The Am-
baffadours ask’d whether they fhould
both depart, or whether his Excellency
thought convenient that one of them
fhould Hay behind: The Governour-Ge-
neral told them that they were at their
own difpofai } but that, fince they expeft-
ed every day the arrival of their Winter-
Ships, which infallibly would bring over
the faid Ratification, he judg’d it might be
heft for them to continue a little longer
at Batavia .
Hereupon they refolv’d once more, that
the Francifcan Father fhould go back over
Coromandel to Goa , whilft the other Omld
flay at Batavia for the arrival of the Ra-
tification. Accordingly a written Certi-
ficate was given to the Ambaffadprs Con-
cerning their Zeal and Induftfy, in in-
Some pay .
ticular Re-
quefis of
theAmbaf-
[adorn*
Another
Andkncd
One of the
Ambajfa-
dours
returns to
Goa.
4
A Defcrimion of the of


ALetterto
the Viceroy
Go*.
comparing their Commiflion, fign’d by his
Excellency the Governour-General An-
thony van Diemen , by Cornelius van der Lijn ,
John Maatz.uyher , Juft us Schouten , Corne-
lius iVitzen, and Peter Boreel , in the Caftle
of Batavia, April 9. 1642. Toth zEran-
eifean Father the Council gave the follow-
ing Letter, direded to the Viceroy of
Goa .
Moft llluftrious Lord!
“ Mendes de Britto , Gentleman
“ E-A of the King’s Houftiold, and the
a Reverend Father, Brother Gonfalvo de
u S . Jofeph , your Excellency’s Ambafla-
-44 dors, being come in our Road the isth
44 of January aboard the Dolphin , were
u honourably receiv’d by us the next day*
44 They have deliver’d to us your Ex-
-44 cellency’s Credential Letters, dated in
44 Goa the 6th of December of the laft year,
44 as alfo the Letters of his Portuguefe
44 Majefty to you, concerning the Truce
44 betwixt Portugal and the Vnited Pro-
-44 vinces . The before-mentioned Am-
-44 baffadors have not been remifs in their
44 Zeal, Induftry and Duty, to prefs in
44 their feveral Audiences the obtaining
44 of a Truce*, which we would willing-
-44 ly have granted, had not we receiv’d
44 certain Advice by fome Ships arriv’d
44 the 14 th of February by the way of ter-
-44 namhueo , and others arriv’d the firft of
44 April here, of a Truce concluded be-
-44 twixt his Majefty of Portugal and the
44 States-General of the Vnited Provinces' \
u wherein it was exprefly agreed with
“ his Majefty’s Plenipotentiary Triftaon
44 de Mendoza Furtado , among other
44 Points, that; the Truce agreed upon for
44 10 years in Europe , fhould be of the
44 fame validity in thefe parts, yet fo that
44 the fame fhould not commence before
44 that his Portuguese Majefty fhould have
44 fent back his Ratification into Holland ,
44 and the fame be publickly proclaim’d
44 afterwards in thefe parts, as will more
44 fully appear to your Excellencies out
44 of the enclofed Letters. Thus being
44 oblig’d to follow the Directions of our
44 Lords and Matters, we could not pro-
-44 ceed further in this bufmefs till the
44 arrival of the next Ships from Holland 5
44 which being expeded daily, with the
44 faid Ratification, we did advife your
44 Ambafladors to ftay (or at leatt one
44 of them) for the coming of the faid
44 Ships, as the only means not to render
44 your Excellency’s Embafly altogether
44 fruitlefs: Accordingly Mr. Diego Men-
-44 des de Britto intends to hatten his
44 Journy to Goa , immediately after the
44 firft further notice of the faid Rati-
-44 fication, which we hope will prove
44 agreeable to your Excellency’s Senti-
-44 ments. We recommend your Excellen-
-44 cy to God’s Protedion. Dated in
u the Cattle of Batavia , April 8. 1642,
Subfcribed,
The Governour-General for the
Vnited Provinces in the Eaft-Indies.
CHAP. XV.
The Ratification of the 10 years Truce brought to Batavia. A
to the Count d’Aveiras. Treaty of Peace with the Viceroy. The Articles
thereof. Agreements about the divifion of the Limits betwixt the Portuguefes
and Hollanders in the Isle of Ceylon. Agreement betwixt Mafcarenhas and
Cornelius van Sanen.
The Rath
fication
pibliftd.
H £ fo much defir’d Ratification
J, (figned at Lisbon the 1 6th of Ja~
mar y l6^lt an( j deliver’d at the Hague
die 15 th of February following ) being at
laft brought to Batavia , the fame was
publilh’d the %th of October throughout the
indies,
44 \Nthony van Diemen Governour-
44 General, and the Members of the
44 Great Council of the EaflHndies un-
“ der the Jurifdi&ion of the Vnited
44 Provinces , make known to all it may
44 concern *, That whereas by two fcve-
-44 ral Letters, dated the lid of February y
44 and 15 th of March 1642. brought over
44 by the Ship the Salamander , we have
44 been advertis’d. That the 1 ith of
44 1641. a firm Alliance and Truce has
44 been concluded for 10 years betwixt
44 the moft Potent Don John IV- King of
44 Portugal , Algerve, and Lord of
44 and of the Conquefts made on the
44 Shear of Ethiopia, Arabia, Perfia and


The P ro-
tefl fcnt to
the Count
d’ Aveiras.
44 Jndia, on one fide, and their High and
44 Mightinefles the States General of the
44 Vnited Provinces on the other fide, in-
-44 eluding all the before-mentioned King-
-44 doms, Countries, Provinces, lllands,
4 " and other places on both fides of the
44 Equinoctial Line ( without exception )
4C all fuch as now actually are, or for the
u future may be under the JurifdiCtion
44 of the fald King and the States-Gene-
-44 ral } during which fpace of ten years
44 fuccelfively all Hoftilities betwixt their
44 refpeCtive Subjects fnall ceafe both by
44 Sea and Land, without limitation or
44 exception of any Places, Perfons or
44 Circumftances, as by the Articles of
44 the fald Truce does more amply and
44 fully appear. It is therefore that we
44 are commanded to furceafe all manner
44 of Hoftilities from this day for the
44 next fucceeding ten years, according
44 to which all our Subjects fhall regulate
44 themfelves ) and to take effectual care
44 that nothing may be tranfaCted any
44 wife contrary to the true intent of the
44 Articles of the faid Alliance and
44 Truce, but to maintain the fame in-
-44 violably. And that nobody may plead
44 ignorance in this cafe, we have or-
-44 der’d thefe Prefents to be publifh’d,
44 enjoyning every body under fevere Pe-
-44 nalties, not to infringe any of the
44 before-mentioned Articles, as they will
44 anfwer the fame at their peril. Dated
44 in the Cattle of Batavia, Ottob. 4. 1642.
44 and firft publifh’d the 7 th of the fame
44 Month, under the Great Seal of the
4C Company in red Wax.
9
Anthony van Diemen .
By Order of his Excellency,
Peter Meƒdach ,
Secretary.
However this Truce was but ill ob-
ferv d by the Viceroy of Goa 0 efpecially
in the Territories of Gale in the Ifle of
Ceylon, which induc’d the Dutch General
and Great Council to fend him this fol-
lowing Proteft.
♦
1 RY Letters from our Commi/Tary
lL U Peter Boreel , whom (after the
44 Ratification of the Truce betwixt
1 his Portuguefe Majefty and the States
14 General of the Vnited Provinces ) we
4 difpatch’d to Goa , to give notice there-
-4 of to your Excellency, we have been
4 inform’d beyond all expedition, that
c upon his arrival there, and hisearneft
1 requeft to your Excellency (purfuant
“to our Orders) to withdraw the
* c Army under the Command of Don
u Philip of APafcarenha* , from the Ter-
iL ritories of Pmtegale under our Jurif-
“ di&ion, your Excellency has been plea-
c c fed to fhew fo much averfion to com-
‘ ply with his Demands, tho founded
** u P on undeniable and juft grounds re-
c prefented to your Commiffioners in the
* c feveral Conferences held upon that
SubjeCf *, that he finding his Prefence
ufelefs at Goa, he was forced to return
cc from thence without being able to en-
compafs his juft Defigns, and (pur-
‘ fuant to bis Orders receiv’d from us)
to denounce before his departure, the
Continuation of the War to yourEx-
“ cellency, till Satisfaction might be ob-
cc tain’d upon this fcore. And fince the
“ unjuft detention of the Territories of
ct Gale tends to our considerable Detri-
“ ment, we declare, that upon perufal
“ of the Writings fent to us by your
* Excellency by the hands of our Com-
ct milfary, we can make no better Con-
u ftrudion of the whole matter, than
“ that your Excellency’s Intention is,
Cc under this framed Pretext, to render
<c the Truce concluded betwixt our re-
cc fyedive Matters, invalid and of no
cc worth. It is therefore that we think
Cc our felves oblig’d to approve every
“ thing that has been tranfaded upon
4C this Head by our Commi/Tary, and
cc to make ufe of fuch means for the
“ Juftification of our Rights, as God
tc has put into our hands, and are ah
ct together futable to the Laws of Na-
tc tions. And as upon thefe Confidera-
“ tions, we have fent back this Fleet,
“ by which your Excellency will at once
“ receive this Proteft , and be made fen-
a fible at the fame time of our Refo-
tC Itftion of maintaining our juft Caufe,
44 which will queftionlels prove the oc-
-4t calion of new Differences betwixt
4C his Portuguese Majetty and the States
cC General of the Vnited Provinces , as
44 alfo of much Effufion of Blood, of
4C vaft Expences, and many other In-
-44 conveniences; we call God to wit-
“ nefs, and declare and proteft by thefe
u Presents, that we are inaocent, and
u are not anfwerable for the direful
“ Gonfequences of this breach of the
44 Truce, which we were ready to have
cc pundually obferv’d on our fide, pur-
-44 fuant to the Intention of our Mafters,
u had not your Excellency bereav’d
<c us of all hopes of adjufting matters
by an amicable Compofition, for the
“ recovery of our Rights in the Country
*The p or .
tuguefo
Pretended
that the
Dutch >
rifdiflion
did not ex-
tend with,
out the
t Walls of
LGale.


Truce be-
tmxt the
Portu-
guefes and
Dutch in
the Indies.
TheCmdi-
tims.
<c of Gale , unjuftly detain’d by your
“ Excellency. Dated in the Caftle of
u Batavia , the sth5 th of Augufl 1543.
Signed,
Anthony van Diemen ,
Francis Caron,
fuftus Schouten ,
Cornelius van der Lyn ,
John Maatzuyker ,
Salomon Sweers .
Thus matters remain’d in fufpence be-
twixt the Portuguefes and us till the year
1644. when Mr. Maatzuyker being au-
thorized by their High and Mightinefles,
as alfo by the General and Great Council
of the Indies, to treat with the Count
d ' Avdr as Viceroy of Goa, concerning a
firm Truce, and to adjuft the remaining
Differences for that purpofe (yet upon
approbation of their refpedlive Matters)
tic ame at laft concluded a Truce the
loth of November, upon the following
Conditions.
“ !• Both Parties declare, that this
“ prefent Agreement, intended for the
“ compofing of fuch Differences as have
“ hitherto occalion’d much Bloodlhed,
“ and obftrufted the fo long delir’d Peace,
“ lhall in no wife be deem’d, or be pre-
“ judicial to the Rights and Sovereignties
“ either of the molt Illuftrious King of
“ Portugal, or of their High and Mighti-
“ neffes the States-General of the United
“ Provinces , as the fame are eftablilh’d
“ (by the Truce agreed upon betwixt
“ his Portuguefe Majefty and the faid
States General) in their refpediivc
“ Cities, Caftles, Fortreffes, Towns, Har-
“ hours, and Seas in the Indies and that
“ this Agreement IhaJl be inviolably ob-
“ ferv’d on both (ides immediately after
u its fecond Publication at Goa.
“ II- Since the happy Effeds of the
“ Truce have been obftruded hitherto
“ by certain Differences arifen about the
“ juft Divilion of the Limits in the Ifle of
“ Ceylon, it is agreed that the Decifion
“ thereof lhall be entirely remitted to
“ the refpedive Mafters and Lords of
“ both Nations, and in the mean while
“ a full Ceffation of Arms and all Hofti-
a lities to be kept inviolably, and all
“ Forts, Territories, and other matters
“ to remain in the lame ftate as they
“ were at the day of the Publication of
* thele Prefents at Goa lb that not the
1 l ca ft Alteration or Innovation is to be
‘ mad® either in building, rebuilding,
“ or mending any thing, much lefs in
making any Preparations cither for a
- Defenlive or Offenlive War.
u whilft the before-men-
cc remain undecided,
the Produfts ot the Country may not
cc e<^ or I°#, by reafon of the
- Differences betwixt the Polfeflbrs, it
u 15 agreed that the fame lhall be di-
vided into two equal lhares betwixt
the Portuguefes and the Dutch, yet *fo
c that the fame fhall bedepofited (re-
main in Cuftody ) with the till the
ic decifion of thefe Differences by their
iefpeitive Principals in Europe: where-
by they oblige themfelves at the fame
time to a full Refticution in cafe the
“ fame be agreed upon by the faid Prin-
cipals. And the faid Ambaffador de-
“ clare s and protefts, that the word
depofited. , inferted at the requeft of the
“ Viceroy (for the better adjufting of
cc matters) lhall not in any wife be in-
<c terpreted as prejudicial to the Poffelfi.
44 on and Title of the States General to
thefe Lands and their Products. And
cc to avoid all Contefts concerning the
44 gathering of thefe Fruits, ic is agreed
“ the Portuguefes lhall have full liberty
to gather, without any moleffation or
hinderance, fuch Fruits as grow in one
u part of the Lands in difpute, viz. that
<c P art which is next adjacent to their
44 Fort; as on the other hand, the Hol-
landers fhall enjoy the fame freedom in
44 gathering the Fruits in that half part
44 adjoyning to their Fortrefs. The fame
44 is alfo to be underftood of equally
44 lharing the Adminillration of juftice
44 in thefe parts, left Malefaftors may be
u e PjF^ ura a nd Crimes pafs unpu-
nifh d, by reafon of the uncertainty of
44 the Adminillration of Juftice; publick
44 Proclamation hereof being to be made
a in this Ifle by the refpeftive Gover-
tc nours of both Nations.
44 IV * Ra i a Sin & a the King Candy
fhall be comprehended in this Truce
“ ( according to the third Article) with
44 Kingdoms, Provinces and Polfef-
cc lions,
<c V. All Proprietors, Owners, or Far-
mers in the Villages, lhall have full
liberty to return to their Polfeflions
4 ar )d Farms of what nature Ibever,
with their Families, provided they re-
turn within the fpace of fix Months,
4 either in Perfon, or fend their DcpUr-
u c i es * a °d P a 7 theufual Taxes and Du-
-4 ties to thofe under whofe Jurifdidlion
44 they live, without any trouble. And
4 that no Inconveniences may arife id
44 point of Confidence, it is agreed, that
44 Liberty of Confidence lhall be allow’d*
“ and the free exercife of Religion in


44 all Parifhes or Villages, except in
44 the fortified Places belonging to the
44 Hollanders , till the before-mentioned
44 Decifion be arrived out of Europe.
44 VI. The Labourers of the Ifle of
tc Ceylon, call’d Schalias, employ’d in pecl-
-44 ing of the Cinnamon, fhall have liber-
-44 ty to work with both Parties, yet not
44 without the confent of that Party un-
-44 der whofe jurifdidion they live*, and
the better to maintain the Truce, nei-
-44 ther Party fhall be permitted to en-
u tice thefe Labourers of Ceylon , or any
44 other of the Natives out of oneano-
-44 ther’s Service, without mutual Con-
-44 Lent, but (hall be oblig’d to fend them
44 back to their refpedive Dwelling-
-44 places.
44 VII. All the Goods feiz’d on account
44 of or during thefe Differences, fhall
44 be leflor’d, or elfe the Value thereof
u paid in M#ny, provided they were
44 admail y in the Pofleffion of either
u Party, and not otherwife; upon which
44 account the Dutch Ambaffador pro-
u mifes to pay here at 6 'oa, or at Suratte ,
in the next following Month of Janua-
u ry at fartheft, the Sum of iooooo
44 Spanifh Reals, to be accounted for ac-
iL cording to the true value thereof they
44 bear at Batavia , as the payment of the
44 Mony fhall be made, according to the
44 courfe of Mony in thofe places where
44 thefe Goods were taxed *, to be under-
-44 flood of fuch Goods as notwithftand-
-44 ing the payment of the before-faid
H Mony, are found to remain as yet un-
-44 fatisfied for from the nd day of Fe~
44 bruary 1643. being a twelve-month
44 after the Ratification of his Portuguefe
44 Majefly was fent to the Hague .
44 VIII. In cafe during this Truce any
u Differences fhould arife betwixt both
44 Parties, this Agreement fhall remain
44 firm and inviolable, and every thing
44 remain in the fame ftate, till the De-
-4C cifion of the refpedive Principals }
44 and in cafe the nature of the matter
44 admits of no delay, the fame is to
44 be refer’d to the Determination of
44 certain Arbitrators, to be chofen by
44 both Parties *, and whilfl the fame is in
44 agitation, the pretended Party to re-
-44 main in PoffefFion till the Point is de-
u cided by the laid Arbitrators.
* 4 IX. This prefent Agreement is not
C 4 in the leaft to be prejudicial to fuch
* 4 Judgments or Decifions as have been
64 made or given betwixt contending
H Parties, or may be given for the future
by our refpedive Principals * but the
tt fame fhall be regarded and taken as
44 valid in all refpeds by both Parties,
a notwithflanding this Agreement, in-
Ct tended only for the removing of Diffe-
-44 rences till the fame can be approv’d
44 of by our refpedive Principals. Which
44 Agreement for the ceafing of all man-
-44 ner of Hoftilities, and maintaining a
44 firm Truce in the Ifle of Ceylon , is
44 promifed by both Parties to be pub-
-44 liih’d immediately, and inviolably ob-
-44 ferv’d both in refped: of the Govcr-
-44 nours and Subjefts: as his Excellency
44 the Viceroy engages the fame for him-
-44 felf and his Succeflbrs, Generals, and
44 Governours *, and my Lord Ambafla-
-44 dor for the States of the Vnited Pro-
-44 vinces , and the Ea/t-lndia Company,
44 purfuantto the Authority granted him
44 by the mofl Noble Anthony van Diemen ,
44 General-Governonr of the Indies . In
44 Confirmation whereof this Agreement
44 is authoriz’d and confirm’d by a fo-
-44 lemn Oath taken upon the Gofpel in
cc the prefence of the moll Reverend
44 Archbifhop and Primate of Goa , Don
4C Frey Franc tfco de Martyrcs , and Don
44 Alphonfo Mcdvs , Patriarch of Ethiopia ,
44 Members of the Privy-Council of his
44 Majefly } and in the prefence of the
44 other Privy-Counfellors of Goa, who
44 have given their full Approbation and
44 Confent thereunto *, as alfo in the Pre-
-44 fence of IVollebrand Chief
44 Diredor in Perfia , Abraham Fierens ,
44 Minifler of the Gofpel, John Pottey
44 Fifcal, Andreas Frifms Secretary, Tho-
-44 mas Kuyk, head Fador * who together
44 with his Excellency the Viceroy, and
44 his Excellency the A mbaflador, did fet
44 their Hands to it } Jofeph de Chaves Co-
-44 to Major, his Excellency the Viceroy’s
44 Secretary, having taken care to make
44 the Draughts thereof.
Signed thus,
Conde d' Aveiras,
John Maatzuyker,
Fr. Francifco de Martyres,
Alphonfo Medis ,
Francifco de Melo de Caftro,
Don Manoel Pereira ,
Anthonio Saria Mochado,
Antbonio Movis Baretto ,
Jofeph Pinto Pereira ,
Wollebrand Gleynz the younger,
Abraham Fierens ,
John Pottey ,
Don Bras de Caftro ,
Lovis Mugilhaon,
Andreas Frifius ,
Andr. Selem .


44 Several Draughts of this Agreement
cc having been made both in Latin and
* 4 Portuguefe, it is agreed betwixt the Vicc-
tc roy and the Ambaflador, that in cafe
44 any Doubt fhould arife about the In-
-44 terpretation of certain words, recourfe
44 is to be had to the Latin , which being
44 the Original, is to be interpreted ac-
-44 cording to the plain fignification of
44 the words, without any collateral Gon-
-44 ftruftion, in Confirmation of which
44 this Declaration was thought fit to be
44 made: Subfcribed a fecond time on
44 the fame day by the under-written
44 Perfons.
Conde <P Avoir as,
John MaatsLuyker,
Fr . Francifco de Martyres , Arch-
bifhop and Primate*,
Alphonfo Medvs , Patriarch of
Ethiopia 1
Francifco de Melo ,
Don Manoel Pereira ,
Anthonio Saria ,
Anthonio Adonis Baretto ,
Jofeph Pinto Pereira ,
Wollehrand Gleynz. the younger.
In the year 1645. "Jan. 10. the Divi-
fion of the Limits in the Ifle of Ceylon
was agreed upon in the City of Columbo ,
Don Philippo Mafcarenhas , Succefibr to
the Count d’Aveiras, being then Viceroy
of Goa.
44 The Countries betwixt Columbo and
44 Negumbo, fhall be divided into two equal
44 fhares, according to their feveral Di-
-14 ttridts ( call’d Cories ) as far as the fame
44 can be done, to prevent the Confufion
44 which might otherwife arife from the
44 Divifion of the antient Jurifdiftions *,
44 but in fuch places where the fame is
44 not to be done, this Divifion is to be
44 made by fharing the Villages: fothat
44 confidering there are 17 Diftrifts be-
-44 twixt the two before-mentioned Forts,
44 feven thereof are to be annexed to the
44 Jurifdiction of Columbo,\li. Herra-corla ,
44 Omapauduna-corla , Quatigora-corld , Bi*
44 UgaUcorla , Galbare-corla , Apitigan-corla ,
44 and Pernacur-corla , lying altogether
44 towards that fide. To the Fort of
44 Negumbo are to be annex’d eight Di-
-44 ftrifts, viz,, Pitigal-corla , Diomede corla,
44 Vrupula-corla , Carvagal-corla , Vili-corla ,
44 Madura-corla , Hierield-corla , and Man*
44 gur-corla \ the reft to be divided into
44 two equal fhares, Alicur-corla by the
44 River Dandagan to be the common
£C Boundary of both Nations *, fo that
4 ‘ part which lies to the North fhall be-
long to Negumbo, and to Columbo what
“ lies on this fide. The Province of
cc is to be divided by
cc the fame River, together with its
4C three lefier Dittrich, Vdacahapato ,
u Miendapato and Jetigalapato\ fo that
u Jetigala fhall fall to the (hare of Ne~
44 gumbo, and Vdacaha to Columbo but
44 Miendapato fhall be divided into two
44 equal parts, in proportion to its Villa-
-44 ges, fuch Villages as lie next Jetigala-
-44 pato to be under the Jurifdidion of
t 4 Negumhoy and thofeon the fide of Vda~
<c caha under Columbo. The Portugucfes
tC fhall remain in the poffeffion of Pu~>
44 telaon and Calpentyn \ but the River of
44 Mean is to be the Boundary betwixt
cc Columbo and Gale: fo that part lying
tc on the other fide of the River fhall
44 remain to the Hollanders , but the other
44 part on this fide, together with the
44 River and Harbour to the Portugucfes ,
44 in the fame manner as they were for-
-44 merly pofiefs’d of it, under this Con-
-44 dition however, that the Hollanders
44 living here or in any other parts fhall
44 have the free ufe of the faid River
44 in fifhing, or exporting and importing
tc their Merchandizes without paying any
4t Cuftoms. And whereas by the 7 th Ar-
-44 tide of the Agreement made at Goa, it
tc was agreed, that the Labourers (call’d
cC Schalias ) who peel the Cinnamon, fhall
44 be employ’d by both Parties to prevent
cC all further Differences for the future
44 upon this Head \ it is agreed, that the
44 Hollanders fhall every year in Harvett
44 time fend one half of thefe Labourers
lt out of the Villages of Bill and Cofgure ,
ct under their Jurifdidion on the other fide
44 of the River Mean, to afiitt as former-
Ct ly the Portugucfes in peeling of Cinna-
tc mon, under condition that the Cinna-
-44 mon thus peeled by them in the Portu -
U guefe Territories, fhall be laid up in a
44 certain place upon the River Dandagan ,
tc to be divided once every year in two
44 equal fhares betwixt the two Parties,
44 provided that each Party pay the ufu-
-44 al Price to the Schalias for the peeling
44 of their (hare of Cinnamon. ThisDf
44 vifion is to take place, and to ttand
44 firm till the fame be ochenvife de-
-44 cided by our refpedive Principals in
44 Europe , with this referve neverthelefs
44 in regard of the Hollanders , who being
u ignorant hitherto in the true fituation
44 of the Country, may eafily be deceiv’d
44 in this point, and therefore Ought to
44 have the liberty to appeal to better
Judgment, and defire a recompenfa


Agreement
betwixt
Phihppo
Maicareii-
Corndius
van Sanen.
tc tion of their Lofles: But in cafe the
4C Parties ftrould difagree upon this Head,
44 this (hall not occafion any Rupture, but
44 the Truce fhall notwithftanding this
44 remain in its full force, according to
44 the intent of the 9 th Article of the
44 before-mentioned Agreement. Don
44 Philippo Mafcarenhas the prefent Vice-
-44 roy, and Mr. John Maatzuyker do alfo
cc engage to caufe this Treaty of thcDi-
-44 vifion of the Limits to be publifh’d
44 immediately, for the general benefit
44 of all fuch as have any concern therein,
Cc that the Inhabitants of this Ifle may
44 no longer remain in ignorance under
44 whofejurifdidion they live \ and for the
44 due performance thereof, have con-
-4t firm’d the fame with their Oaths, and
Ci fubferib’d the Draughts thereof both
44 in Latin and Portuguefe } yet fo, that
40 in cafe of any doubt, recourfe is to
44 be had to the Latin Original.
In the year 1647. a provifional Agree-
ment was made by Don Philippo Mafcaren-
has, the then Viceroy, and Cornelius van
Sanen, head Fador and Diredor of Win*
gurla, for the adjufting of the Diffe-
. rences concerning the Fortrefs of Ma-
lacca.
<l IA/’ the Name of God 7 Amen. Be it
u * known to all who are concern’d in
Ct this prefent Agreement, That 1647.
u April 18. the following Agreement has
u been made in the Caftle of the City
44 of Goa , in the prefence of his Excel-
cc lency Don Philtppo Mafcarenhas Vice-
-44 toy of Goa, and Cornelius van Sanen,
44 head Fador and Diredor of Wingurla ,
44 authorized by the Governour-General
44 and Great Council of the Indies , for
4i the adjufting of the Differences arifing
44 concerning Tome pretended Rights of
44 the City and Fortrefs of Malacca , con-
-44 cerning the Cuftoms and Duties to be
44 paid at Malacca \ feveral Conferences
44 having been held with the Merchants
44 of Macau , yet could not the fame be
44 reduc’d to any juft Equilibrium, or
44 fettled upon a firm Bafis, tho we made
44 as reafonable offers as poffibly could
44 be expeded : fo that in cafe your Ex-
-44 cellency thinks it convenient to pro-
-44 ceed further in this matter, you may
44 treat upon this Head with Cornelius
44 van Sanen, our head Fador at Win-
-44 gurla. By virtue of this Commiffion
44 1 reprefented to the Viceroy, that in
4C point of Juftice, fuch of our Ships as
<c pafs by Malacca without unlading or
44 felling any of their Commodities,
“ ought to pay no Cuftoms there: unto
“ which his Excellency having given for
u Anfwer, that it appear’d out of the
iL Treaties and Writings agreed upon
cc betwixt both Parties, that they ought
w to pay the fame ; it was thought fit for
u the preventing of further Differences,
u and maintaining a good Correfpon-
“ dence betwixt both Nations, to agree
cc upon the following provifional Treaty,
u till the full Dccllion of our refpedive
cc Principals, and with this Provifo, that
“ this Agreement fhall not in the leaft
u tend to the prejudice either of his
“ Portuguefe Majelty, or of the States
“ General in their refpedive Rights and
“ Pofleffions. That his Majelly’s Ships
as well as the Dutch Merchant-men
bound to China , or any other of the
“ Southern parts, coming to Malacca ,
“ fhall only be oblig’d to pay 6 per Cent.
“ for fuch Goods as they fhall adually
ct fell there \ the fame to be paid to the
u Dutch from all fuch Goods as they (hall
tc fell in any of his Majefty’s Harbours.
u Purfuant to the Agreement made at Ba~
tc tavia by the Great Council with the
14 Merchants of Macau , in the prefence of
“ the Reverend Prey Gonfalvo de S . Jofeph 7
4C each VefTef whether fmall or great,
ct bound to Macau , whether it fells or un-
cc loads any Goods at Malacca or not,fhall
44 pay two Schutleins of Gold for its Paffage
44 thither and backwards j from which
44 Duties however are to be exempted
44 his Majefly’s Ships, provided they may
44 be fearched, and an Oath taken there-
in upon, that they have no Merchandizes
44 aboard \ and if any are found, the
14 Owners are to pay 44 per Cen t. That
44 fuch Ships as pafs by Malacca , and are
44 not bound to China , fhall pay 44 per
44 Cent . whether they unload or fell any
44 Goods or not \ then they may proceed
4t in their Voyage without any Molefta-
u tion. Which Agreement is to be pub-
-44 lilh’d and ftridly obferv’d by both Par-
-44 ties, and confirm’d by Oath, till the
44 Decifion of our both fides refpedive
44 Principals.
Signed,
Don Philippo Mafcarenhas ,
Cornelius van Sanen,
Duarty de Fugeredo de Mello,
Frey Gonfalvo de S. Jofeph,
Francifco de Melo de Caftro,
Antbonio Souza Coutinho
John van Teylingen , Head Factor,
Anthony Ondermeulen ,
Jacob Rofcam ,
Leendert Johnson .


CHAP. XVI.
A Description of Anchediva, Canara, Onor, Batecalo, Malabar. Cananor
built and, befieged by the Malabars, bravely defended by Laurence de Britto ;
befieged and taken by the Hollanders.
The Tfls of
Anchedi-
va.
The Pdr-
tuguefes
fort be•
fieged.
Is derti>
HJJjed.
7he Reafon
thereof.
Canary
Onot.
Bitecalo*
if *T* H E Ifle of Anchediva 7 not far
J. from Goa 7 and about 50 Leagues
from Calecut , is almofl: covered with
Woods and Forefts, but well ftor’d with
Fifh *, the Portuguefes had formerly a
Fort here : Sebajus , the Father of H*~
dakan 7 fent a Fleet of 60 Ships to Amhe m
diva (whilft Glineyda was at Cananor)
to chafe the Portuguefes from that Ifland,
under the Command of Anthony Fernando ,
a mofl: impious Wretch, who having for-
faken both his Religion, and the Service
of his Native Country, turn’d Mahometan ,
afluming the Name of Abdala } and being
well verfed in Maritime Affairs, was in
great Favour with Sebajus. This Renegado
having landed a good Body of Men in this
Ifle, left no Stone unturn’d to make him-
felf Mafter of the Fort, erected there by
the Portuguefes : But being bravely de-
fended by Emanuel Pajfangic , a Native of
Genoa , defeended from a great Family,
and famous for his brave ACtions *, Ab-
dala hearing of the return of the victori-
ous Fleet, was glad to leave both the Fort
and the Ifle. The Fort was not long af-
ter demolifhed by the Portuguefes them-
felves, who had been taught by experi-
ence, that too great a number of For-
treffes confum’d all their Profit, and ex-
pofes them befides to no fmall dan-
n ger } like a Hen who has more Chickens
than (he can protect with her Wings, of-
ten lofes one by the rapacious Kite.
The Country of Canara is very fertile
in Rice and other Necefiaries of human
Life •, its Inhabitants, commonly called
Canarins , are very robuft, and fit for all
manner of hard Labour. The chief Citys
near the Sea-fhoar, are the City and
Kingdom of Onor 7 not far diftant from
Ooa 7 where the Portuguefes had alfo a
Fort, it being formerly a Place of confi-
derable Traffick. Next to Onor lies Ba-
tecalo 7 about 2 5 Leagues from Gotf,the King
whereof became tributary to the Crown of
Portugal under the Reign of Emanuel \ but
refufmg afterwards to pay the ufual Tri-
bute, Sequeria fent Alflwnfo Menes with
fome Ships to block up the Harbour,
which foon reduc’d the King to Obedi-
ence. Afterwards the Queen of Bateca-
lo entertaining the Pyrats in her Har-
bours, and refufing likewife to pay the
T ribute, Sofa failed thither with 49 Ships
and 1500 Landmen ; and after he had
caft Anchor in the Harbour, fent his
Meffengers into the City to require the
Payment of the Tribute, and the fur-
rendringof thePyrats: She being frigh-
tened at the Sight of fo powerful a Fleet,
furrendred four of the Pyrats Ships } but
endeavouring for the reft to detain the
Portuguefes with fair Words, thefc land-
ed their Men, not a little incommoded by
the Arrows (hot at’em by the Inhabitants
from the Coco Trees \ but having put
themfelves in order of Battel,they advan-
ced towards the City,where they were (in
the Abfence of the Queen) fo warmly en-
gag’d by the Inhabitants, that the Combat
remain’d doubtful for fome time,till thefe
being worded, they fet the City on fire,
with the Lofsof 12 Men only on their fide.
In this Aftion on eAlmeyda a brave Portu-
guefe, feeing his Comrade enclofed on all
fides by the Enemy, fought his way thro
’em; and having refeued his Companion,
withftood the whole Force of the Ene-
my, till he was relieved by a Body of the
Portuguefes . Afterwards they made In-
curlions into the Country, which foon
obliged the Queen to confent to the Pay-
ment of the Tribute.
Barcelor, Baranov and Mangalor , being
Places of no great confequence, dc-
ferve no particular Dcfcriptions *, where-
fore we will proceed to the Country of
Malabar , which (according to common
Computation) begins about 50 Leagues
to the South of Goa , and extends to the
Cape of Comoryn, to theutmoft Borders
of India , on this fide of Ganges. This
whole Country being full of Rivers is
confequently of an eafy Paflage; ’tho
moft of the Rivers here are fo lhallow,
that they are not capable of bearing any
Ships of Bulk or Burden. The largeil
Rivers are Bergera (a great Receptacle
for Pirats) Panane and Cranganor ,
common Boundaries of the Kingdoms of
Calecut and Cochin , thefe as well as the
River of Cochin are about 18 or 19 Foot
deep at High-Water, The whole Coun-
try of Malabar is divided into five King-
doms, viz*. Cananor , Calecut , Cranganor 7
Cochin and Coulang, unto which fome add
the Kingdom of Trevancor , the leaft fer-
Malabar.
Its Extent*
Its Ri-
yers.


The anti-
ent State
i/Milabar.
Shtnmo-
ryn, i.e.
m ? etorm
The Cli-
mate.
And Sca-
hns.
Products.
1
1
1
<
1
Pepper. 1
jj
1
i
Man is a
gertain
Weight.
* Found in
the Bit-
boonfy and
fold at 6
tile of all, and the two petty Kingdoms
of Porca and Calecoulang.
In former Ages Malabar was fubjeft to
one Sovereign Prince, who kept his
Court at Calecut 1 now the Refidence of
* the Great Sammoryn. This King having
at the Perfuafion of fomc of his Com>
tiers, undertaken a Voyage over the
Red-Sea , to vifit Mahomet's Tomb, and
to be thorowly inftru&ed in that Faith,
died in his return from thence 7 and leav-
ing no Iffue, the whole Empire was divi-
ded between hisEfquire, Sword-bearer,
and Scepter-bearer : The firft takingfor
his ffiare Cananor , the fecond Calecut 7
and the third Cochin .
The Nights are very cold all along the
Coal!: of Malabar , with very thick Fogs,
efpecially in January , February , and
March , when the days are excelfivc hot.
They have every day a Sea and Land
Wind \ the firffc begins every Morning at
9orlo a Clock,and holds till Sunfet. This
Coaff is fcarce navigable from June till
November , the beft time here being
from April till June. Their Winter be-
gins in May , and continues till Novem-
ber.
The chief Produfts of Malabar , are
Pepper and Cardamome : Cochin affords
great Quantities of Pepper, but Cananor
yields the beft 7 efpecially in the Inland
Countries, whence the Moors and other
Merchants from Carnatica and Viftapour
ufe to fetch it in confiderable Quantitys.
The Pepper of Calecut is lefler of Grain
than thofe of Cananor and Cochin . This
Commodity is generally cheaper at one
Place than another. They buy it by the
Canda y at the rate of 390 or 400 Fanams
a Canda , a Fanam being worth about 10
Pence of our Money. In the Year 1640.
the Price rofe to 450 Fanams . The Pep-
per delights in fhady Places, the Stem is
weak like thofe of the Vines, and ufes
to be upheld by Stalks like our Hops :
Each Stem bears commonly 6 Bunches,
every one a foot long, refembling in co-
lour to our Grapes before they are ripe.
They are gathered green in Oftober and
November , and dry’d in the Sun upon
Mats, when they turn black. Befides
the Pepper and Cardamome, this
Country produces alfo Ginger and Borborri
of a Saffron Colour. Formerly thefe two
Commodities us’d to be fold for 5 Fa-
nams a Man : It affords alfo fome Aloes ,
but in no great Quantity. Befides thefe,
Malabar affords very few Commodities,
except a few * found about
I Cananor 7 Sak-peter, Gumrmlacca (tho
none of the bell, being fold for a Fanam
the Man) and abundance of Wax and
Honey.
The whole Country is covered with
innumerable Coco-Trees, befides fuch 0-
ther Trees as generally grow in the Eafl
Indies. The Commodities carry *d tp, and
to be fold in Malabar , are Amfcn or Opt-
aw,much in ufe here, efpecially among the
Nairos when they are to fight, to intoxi-
cate their Brains. Ambergreefe alfo is in
great Efteem among the Malabars 7 and
tranfported thither from the Maidive l-
ilands. I have feen an Ounce of it fold
at Cananor for fix Reals. Malabar con-
fumes alfo abundance of Cloves , Nutmegs
and Mace 7 as alfo AUum 7 China-root 7 Lead ,
Tim, Brafs y Copper , Brimftone , Cinnahar 7
Scarlet and Crimfon Clothes , red Damasks ,
Benzorn, and coarfe Porcellain.
The whole Coaft of Malabar abounds
In Fi (hes, and at Cochin they have moll
excellent Cods. Belly Provifions are alfo
here in great Plenty, and bought at an
eafy rate 7 for they abound in Oxen,
Swine and Poultry. The Coco-Trees
furnifli them with Drink, which if not u-
fed to excefs, is tolerably wholefome.
Out of this Liquor they diftil their Arack y
much courted by the common Soldiers
and Seamen, to their great detriment.
The firft is the King of Cananor , not
in refpeft fo much of his Power, but of
his Situation next to Goa. His Refi-
dence is about* three or four Leagues in
the Country from the River of Balipatan ;
the extent of his Kingdom is from Mon-
teddy to Bergera *, he maintains a confi-
derable number of Mufqueteers and Ar-
chers, who are very expert in managing
their Scymeters.
Cananor is a populous City, inhabited
chiefly by rich Mahometan Merchants,
who live without, yet under the Cannon
of the Fortifications. They had former-
ly a confiderable Traffick to Suratte , Cam-
haja and the Red-Sea , whither they ufed
to fend yearly 25 or 30 Ships*, but this
Place is much decayed in Trade of late
Years, and is likely to be worfe.
About two Leagues to the South of
Cananor , lies the City of Termapatan,
under the Jurifdiftion of a Mahometan *,
it is ftrengthcned to the Land fide by a
good Wall. The rebellious Pirats of
Her get a do confiderable Mifchief to the
King of Cananor and his Subjects, who 7 as
well as the other Nations trading inthefe
Seas, are forced to buy Pafsports of them
for their Security. They ufed formerly
to infeft thefe Seas with 40 Frigats at a
time, but are not fo potent of late Years,
linceihe Dutch have frightened the Par*
or 7 Reals,
apiece •
Jome are
as big as a
Herts Egg, ,
and fold
for 1 2 Re-
als a piece ,
cansmor.
Tc .
tan . V
pi ra tsof
Mato


The City of C
the Por*
tuguefes
build a
Omaaor
tuguefes out of thefe Parts, fince which
time they have now and then attempted
the Dutch as they did with the Ship called
th e Dolphin, but got nothing but Blows.
Their Chiefs are Mahometans, and the
Soldiers partly Moors , partly Pagans .
Cananor lies about 40 Leagues to the
North of Cochin, having a fpacious and
fecure Harbour *, the Country thereabouts
abounding in Pepper, Cardamom, Ginger,
Miraholans, Tamarinds, &c. Peter Alva-
rus Capralts, Commander in Chief of the
fecond Fleet fent by Emanuel King of
Portugal into the Indies, after having giv-
en a Vifit to the King of Cochin, and the
Great Sammoryn, came alfo to Cananor,
where being kindly received, the King
fent an Ambaflador along with him to
the King of Portugal Almeyda did e-
reft here (with the King’s Confent) a
ftrong Fort, for the Security of their
Commerce •, whichibeing afterwards moft
vigoroufly attack’d by thofe of Cakcut and
Cranganor, was bravely defended by Lau-
rence de Britto to his Immortal Honour.
And upon this occafion it will not be be-
yond our purpofe, to give you the Reafons
which induced the Moors to enter upon
this War, which was accompany’d with
many moft remarkable Aftions.
The For tuguefes having made themfelves
Matters at Sea, not only on the Coaft of
but alfo of India and Arabia,
would not permit the Inhabitants of thefe
Countries to fend out their Ships, with-
out Pafsports obtain’d from them \ for
which purpofe they kept a ttri& eye over
all the Malabars, in a moft peculiar man-
ner. A certain Portuguefe, Captain of
•a Man of War, having attack’d aVeffel
of Cananor, which he fuppofed to have
come from Calecut without a Pafs m , he
caufed the Matter thereof, and another
Perfonof Note onboard her, to be Tow-
ed up in a Cloth, and fo threw them o-
verboard j which being done not far from
Cananor, the dead Carcafes were catt a-
fhore there* The Inhabitants knowing
the Perfons, and underftanding their
Fate, werefo exafperaced at the Portu-
guefes, that they cry’d out for Vengeance,
and attainted the Fort: Almeyda offer’d
them Satisfa&ion, and cafhier’d the Cap-
tain, but in vain, the Moors continuing
obftinate, and refolving to revenge the
Death of their Countrymen upon the For-
tuguefes in the Fort. Lau~
Reafons
why the
Mala^ ari ,
yj*' 9
with the
Porcu-
S ue *' es ’


v %
IJricto
fends to
Almcyda.
0
The Spring
was after-
wards en-
clos'd with-
in the For-
tifications,
Great Dif-
trefs in the
Fort,
Laurence de Britto being fenOble that
he muftexpeda formal Siege, refolved
to Hand the Brunt bravely, and fent his
Meflengers to Almeyda , to dcfire prompt
Succours. In the mean time the King of
Cananor was not idle, but having entren-
ched himfelf near the Harbour, all along
the Sea-fide he ereded certain Forts, to
cut off the Communication betwixt the
City and Caftle : At the fame time being
reinforced by 20000 Men, fent from Cale-
cut, they now refolved upon a formal
Siege. There was a certain Spring be-
twixt the City and Caftle, which being
the only one whence the Portuguefe Gari-
fon could be fupply’d with frelh Water,
this occafion’d frequent and bloody Skir-
mifhes, fo that they were forc’d to pur-
chafe their Water with much effufion of
Blood. Laurence Britto had with him in
the Fort a certain Mathematician, named
Thomas Ferdinand , by whofe Advice they
digged from the Fort underground to the
Spring, and by Pipes conveyed it to the
Place where they had occafion for if,
fo that after having fupplied their own
Wants, they ftopt in the next Sally the
Spring, fo that the Moors were forc’d to
remove their Camp from thence, but
they in the Fort enjoyed the Benefit there-
of. They then began their Attack on the
other fide, and by the help of Sacks filled
with Cotton, advancing to the Ditch,
fill’d it with Faggots, and made a fierce
Aflault 7 but being bravely repulfed by
the Portuguefes , and forc’d to retreat,
thefe fally’d out upon them, and made a
great Slaughter of the Barbarians.
Thefe finding that Force was not like-
ly to do their Bufinefs, refolv’d to reduce
it by Famine, knowing that the Winter
Seafons would cut off all hopes of Relief
to the Befieged. On the other hand the
Portuguefes made many fuccefsful Sallies
upon them \ in one of which a
nam’d Guadalajara , charg’d with x5O Men
a ftrong Body of the Enemy, killing above
300 of them upon the Spot, and taking
fome of their great Cannon. Soon after
it happen’d unfortunately for the Portu-
guefes, that a Fire arifing in the Fort by the
carelefnefs of a Slave, fome part of their
Magazines of Provifions was confum’d,
whereby a great Scarcity being occafion’d
in the Fort, many Negroes run over to
the Enemy, and gave them a full account
of the condition of the Garifon, who
were now forc’d to feed upon Cats, Rats,
Mice, At laft Heaven was pleas’d
to commiferate the miferable State of the
Portuguefes , by fending a prodigious
quantity of Locufts from the Sea (a
thing not unfrequent in thofe Parts) which
fervM them both for Food and Refrefii-
ment. The Spring beginning to ap-
proach, when the Sammoryn fearing the
Befieged might be fhortly reliev’d by their
Countrymen, redoubl’d his Furyagainft
the Fort ; and having fent them divers
conliderable Supplys of Men (which bad
increas’d his Army to 50000 Men) he re-
folv’d to try his utmoft to reduce them
by Force (the Portuguefes being in the
mean while fupply’d with Provifions by
a certain Prince of the Country, an E-
nemy to the Sammoryn) De Britto having
receiv d Intelligence that the Enemy
were preparing for a general Aflault,
took care to guard all the Avenues both
on the Sea and Land fide. The Moors
affaulted the Portuguefes with their utmoft
Fury,promifing themfelves an aflur’d Vic-
tory, by reafon they continually reliev’d
their Men with frefli Troops; but the
Portuguefes receiv’d them fo warmly,
that after a (mart Fight they put them to
tncßout, and purfuing them with great
Slaughter, the King of Cananor thought
it his bed way to make Peace with the
Portuguefes .
Thus much of Cananor whilft in the
Hands of the Portuguefes 7 the next thing
which falls under our Confideration is,
how it came to fall into the Hands of the
Hollanders. Thefe having made them-
felves Mafters of Cranganor , Cochin , and
Contango fail’d 1663. from Cochin with a
confiderable Fleet, and a good Number of
Land Forces, under the Command of
Jacob Huftar , Peter du Pon , Henry van
Rhede, and brave Officers,
for Cananor . Having landed their Men’
and foon made themfelves Mafters of the
City (which was without defence) they
batter’d the Fort with their great Cannon,
but without any great Succefs: the Bafti-
ons and Ditches on the Land fide being
cut out of the Rocks, and the Fortificati-
ons to the Sea fide impregnable. How-
ever after a Siege of few days the Portu*
guefes confidering, that by the taking of
Cochin all hopes of Relief were banifh’d,
they furrendred upon honourable Terms 7 ,
and the Dutch having put a Garifon of j
200 Men in the Fort, entr’d into a ftrid ■
Alliance with the King of Canamr\ ]
166+, 7
.
the Km
of Cam*
nor;
’ HqvpOl-
; nanor was
reduced fy
: the Dutch.
Canancvr
furrendrd
to the
DutcL


CHAP. XVII.
A Def crip tion of Calecut and Panane. The Arrival of Vafco de Gama
Treaty with the Sammoryn. Panane fort fed, befieg'd, the
Portuguefes. Alliance betwixt the Dutch and the Sammoryn. The Portu-
guefe Fort in Calecut attack'd by the Sammoryn, and defended by John de
Lima .
The King-
iom of Ca-
Iccut.
An. 1 $O2,
\he Sam-
noryn
bought in-
■o the field
S OOOO
Men y and
1529..
tooooo.
in odd
I 'uflom of
iuaejjion
0 the
:rown.
tone.
THE fccond Kingdom of MaJahar is
that of Calecut under the jurifdidi-
on of the Sammoryn *, it begins about three
or four Leagues to the South of Bcrgera ,
and ends at the River Crdnganor ? its
whole extent being in length 32 Leagues,
and 20 in breadth. This King is the moft
- Potent of all the Malabar Kings, having
■ a confiderable number of Nairos under
his Jurifdidion, who are very expert
r both in handling the Bow and Fire-Arms.
He has made confiderable Encroachments
r upon his Neighbours of late years *, the
Revenues of his new Conquefts amount-
ing now to 300000 panams yearly. The
Sammoryn who reign’d 1661. was when I
faw him not above 50 years of Age, and
yet much impair’d in his intelledlual
Parts by the exceflive ufe of Opium , a
Drug much in requeft among the Ma*
labars .
In the Kingdom of the Sammoryn , and
in moft others along the Coaft of Ma-
labar, the Crown is not inherited by the
Son of the King, but by him who is next
of kin to his Mother or Sifter *, for they
looking upon that as the Purer fide, they
have introduc’d this Cuftom to prevent
the baftardizing of the Crown. Thus
the King who reign’d 1642. was fuo
ceeded by his Uncle on the Mother’s fide,
and he was to be fucceeded by his Sifter’s
Son. The Sammoryn monopolizes all the
Pepper of the growth of his Country,
none of his Subjefts being allow’d to fell
it to any but his Factors.
Betwixt Cananor and Calecut lies the
Town of Panane , feated upon the Sca-
lar : Here the Dutch came I*o7. to
treat with the Sammoryn, but hebeing then
in the field againft the Portuguefes, the
Admiral lent three Deputies to him with
a Letter from Prince Maurice of Najfati.
In this place the Sammoryn kept his Reli-
ance at that time, when Don Vafco do
Gama came into thefe parts. He having
tafl Anchor before C ale cut , difpatch’d
immediately a Mefienger to the Sdmmoryn ,
to give notice of his arrival, and to let
the King know that the Renown of his
great Name having reach’d the Ears of
, f. v v
the King of Portugal , his Majefty had
intruded him with a Letter, which he
being defirous to deliver in Perfon, there-
fore deur’d leave to wait on his Ma-
jefty- .
The Sammoryn being extremely pleas’d
with the Complement, fent immediately
certain Pilots to condud the Portuguefc
Fleet into the Harbour of Capocafc ,
where there was much better and lafer
Anchorage, from whence he was con-
duced with extraordinary Pomp to the
Sammoryn .
For Don Gama being got afhore at
tended by eight Gentlemen richly attir’d
was receiv’d in the Sammoryn % Name bj
the Catual (or he that manages all Fo
reign Affairs) accompanied with a vali
number of Guards, Hautboys, Drums anc
Litters, and thence carried through Ca
km to Panane (where the Sammoryn ther
refided ) under fuch a vaft concourfe o
Spectators, that feveral were crowded tc
death. At Court Gama was wclcom’c
by the Caimaks (or chief Courtiers'
and afterwards by the High-Prieft of the
Brahmans drefs’d in white Callico, whe
taking Gama by the hand conducted him
to many fpacious Apartments (at the
Door of each whereof flood about ter
Sentinels) into a fpacious Hall, the Walk
and Floor whereof were cover’d with
rich Tapeftry, and Carpets of Silk and
Gold, the chief Men of the Kingdom
fitting round the Hall upon Wooden
Seats, artificially wrought one above ano-
ther, like the Seats in.an Amphitheater.
The Sammoryn himfelf was feated (ac-
cording to the Cuftom of the Country >
upon an 4lkatyf, or Carpet, drefs’d in
white fine Callico, brocado’d with Flowers
of Gold, adorn’d with divers rows of
Diamonds of great value: In his Ears he
had ftately Pendants of precious Stones,
and on his Head a Cap (after their Coun-
try falhion) cover’d with Diamonds,
Pearls, and other precious Scones; his
bare Feet being lillewife adorn’d with
Rings fef with all forts of precious
Stones,
Gjm y
comes. to
Panane.'
f , ■% V '
llm Re cep-
• tion,
I
I
F
>
I
1 HU Re cep-
: tion at
Court ,
i
1
The Sam-
morynV
Drefi.-
625
Malabar and Coromandel.
Chap.XVII.


■ Tfze Reception of Ron Pafea do
CrameL hy the Samykoryn,
am /
Gama 's
Speech to
the Sam*
moryn.
The Kings
Anjwer .
One of the King’s Attendants offer’d
his Majefty a Golden Veffel with Arak
and Betel, which the Indians chav/ almofl
continually to preferve their Teeth and
Gums, and treat their Guefts with it as
we do with Wine, flrong Liquors being
not much in life here. Gama after having
paid his Obeyfance to the King began
thus:
44 Emanuel, the prefent King of Portugal,
44 my Mafter, mov’d by the Renown of
44 the Greatnefs of your Majefty among
44 the Kings of Malabar, has fent me
44 with Credentials, to enter into a ftrid
44 League with You, in order to fettle a
44 firm Correfpondence and Commerce
41 betwixt both Nations j which my Ma-
tt fter would have been willing to have
u perform’d in Perfon, had not the vail
“ diftance of your Majefty’s Dominions
44 prov’d an invincible Obftacle to his
44 generous Intentions. After which ha-
ving deliver’d his Prefents, the King
anfwer’dby his Interpreter: 44 That he
44 had not the leaft doubt of the good
44 Intentions of his Brother Emanuel ,
44 King of Portugal , having fuch convin-
cl cing Proofs thereof before his Eyes,
44 by honouring him with fo fplendid a
44 Legation notwithftanding the vaft
44 diftance of their Countries } that he
44 was willing to enter with them into
cc a ftrift League and Amity, and that
cc they fhould enjoy the benefit of a free
44 Commerce in his Territories. Then
the King having ask’d them feveral Par-
ticulars concerning their Voyage, Ship-
ping and Traffick, order’d Gama to be
conduced to the Lodgings prepar’d for
his Reception.
The News of this Embaffy foon came
to the Ears of the Moorifh Merchants in
thofe parts, who fearing, not without
reafon, that the Portuguefes would do them
confiderable Mifchief in their Traffick,
join’d with the Arabians trading in thofe
parts, to hinder the Confummation of
this Treaty v for which purpofe having
purchafed the favour of many of the
Courtiers by Mony, they infinuated
into the King, that Gama was no
more than a great Pirate, who endea-
vour’d to get a footing in the King’s
Dominions, which in time might prove
his ruin whereas he might reft fecurein
his Dominions, by incouraging his Sub-
Moon
eiukavM
to objird
the #
of the Pot 1
tuguefe-


Gama gets
privately
aboard .
hk Utter.
The King's
Anfwer to
* HijUnd.
1. 1. c. 16.
Panane.
jedis in their Traffick with the exclufion
of Foreigners. Thefe Infinuations prov’d
fo effcftual, that the Sammoryn began to
give a favourable Ear to them, and had
perhaps prov’d of very ill Confequcnce
toGama,}w& not a certain African , a Na-
tive of Tunis , who underftood Portuguefe,
and had formerly convers’d with them,
difeover’d the danger-tahim , who there-
upon without further delay got aboard
his own Ships with his Attendants, and
having weigh’d his Anchors kept at a
greater diftancc from the Shore, whence
he writ to the Sammoryn,
M That the ill Defigns of the Moors
u againft his Perfon being difeover’d to
u him, he had thought fit to retire a-
u board, and to defire his Majefty not to
u be diverted from his Promife by their
u falfe Infinuations, afluring him that
“ he would reap much more benefit by
ct the Friendfhip of the King of Portugal
a than by the Moors and Arabians . The
Sammoryn promis’d the Meffenger to make
a ftrift: Enquiry after and to punilh fe-
verely thefe Offenders, who had in-
fringed the Law of Nations } and in his
Letter to the King of Portugal alfures
him, tc That the arrival of the Portu-
u guefes in his Dominions was very ac-
-44 ceptable to him, provided they might
14 regulate themfelves fo, as not to give
u any occafion of difturbance there, and
4C that the League he was entring upon
44 with his Majefty, might not prove pre-
-44 judicial to the good Correfpondence he
44 had hitherto entertain’d with divers
44 other Nations. Gama having receiv’d
this Letter, fet fail for the Ifle of Anche-
diva, where having furnilh’d himfelf
with frelh Provifions, he return’d to
Portugal , to give an account of his Tranf-
a&ions to King Emanuel . The famous
de Gama died 1524* being the firft
who difeover’d the Paflage into the Eaft-
Indies by the Cape of Good Hope .
And upon this occafion I can’t pafs by
in filence what is mention’d by Ferdinand
Lopes de Caftanheda *, viz. That Gama
with fome of his Retinue being at Cale-
cut, and entring into one of the Pagan
Temples, paid their Reverence to the
Images, as taking them for the fame they
had left in their own Churches in Portu-
gal', a convincing Proof that Superfti-
tion and Idolatry very near referable one
another.
Panane being well fortified by the Sam-
moryn with two Forts, ereded on both
fides of the Entrance of the Harbour, the
Portuguefes notwithftanding this rcfolve
to attempt it. They no fooner appear’d in
fight of the Harbour, but a certain num-
ber of the Mahometans aflbeiated them- <
felves in one of the Pagodes , and with
direful Execrations engag’d to one ano--
ther to defend the City, or die in the 1
Attempt. Triftan d ’ Acunha the Portu- [
guefe General detach’d a certain Body of
his beft Troops under the Command of
Laurence and Nonnius in fmall Gallles, to
lead the Van, being to be follbw’d by
the great Ships: Thefe enter’d the Har-
bour with unfpeakable Bravery, notwith-
Handing the Enemies Fire, who fent
their great and fmall Shot very thick up-
on them from both fides of the Shore,
but without any confiderablc effeft, molt
of their Bullets paffing over their Heads,
becaufe the Soldiers keptclofe lying up-
on their Bellies in the Gallies. The Ene-
my feeing them enter’d the Harbour,
leap’d in whole Troops into the Water,
attacking them with incredible Fury in
hopes of boarding them : but the Portu-
guefes ftood to it with fo much Refolution,
that at laft they forced the Indians to
give and purfuing them to the
Shore, made themfelves Matters of the
two Forts, and fet fire to all the Ships 3
in the Harbour, which were richly loaden, *
as alfo to the City. In this Aftion a cer-
tain Portuguefe Enfign with his Soldiers
did Wonders, and the Mahometan*
fought like Lions } but one of their
Commanders, a Fellow of a huge bulk,
being (lain by Laurence, the reft betook
themfelves to their heels. The Indians
loft 500 Men in this Engagement, and f
the Portuguefes about 22. After which
Almeyda and Acunha fail’d to Cananor, c
from whence the firft ftecred his courfe
to Cochin, and the fecond for Portugal .
About Panane grows befides Cardamom,
the beft Pepper, and is fold here at a
very reafonable rate.
Thus much of Panane } we will now
proceed to give you an account of Gale-
cut, the Capital City of Malabar , and
the Refidence of the Sammoryn , where
Steven van der Hagen the then Dutch
Admiral, in 1604. enter’d into a ftrift:
League with that King, who granted a
free Commerce to the Dutch throughout
all his Dominions. Many years before
the Portuguefes had obtain’d the fame li-
berty of the Sammoryn, who had aflign’d
them certain Habitations in that City ;
fo that they began to flourifli in their
Commerce, and the Portuguefe Priefts
were very fuccefsful in the Converfion of
many of the Pagans. This exafperated
the Moors and Arabians , who inticed the
Naim (always greedy after Prey) to
Attacifd
by the Por-i
cuguefe
The Forts
sob flam
°f the In-
d*ans#
' 4
Calecut
League be*
twixt the
Dutch and.
the Sam=
moryn;


tor y of the Troyrncej of-'Calicut afcaulted by the XruluznS .
Form-
€ ue^ 5 .,
tnajjaue *
Their
Death re-
verg'd.
The Por-
mguefe
Fort be*
fiefd.
fall to the number of 4000 upon the
Portuguefes (not above 70 ftrong) in
their Fadtory, who were almoft all mafia-
crcd by them.
Pedro Alvccres Capral the Portuguefe Ge-
neral in thofc parts, being inform’d of
this barbarous Attempt, and finding that
the Sammoryn had not been altogether
ignorant of the .matter, to revenge the
Death of his Country-men, burnt ten of
their Merchant Ships richly loaden, bat-
ter’d the City with his Great Guns, and
kill’d them above 600 Men. The fame
Treatment thef z Barbarians receiv’d after-
wards from Menefes. We will not in
this place pretend to give a particular
account of all the Differences and War-
like Exploits of the Portuguefes k ere, and
of the famous Adions of
Henry Memfes , James Capral, &c.
we will only mention in this place, that
the Portuguefes having found means to
ered a Fort at •Cakcut by the Conni-
vance of Nanbeadar the old Sammotryrf s
Sifters Son (who favour’d the Ptmtu-
guefes) the Kings of Cananor and Cochin
were fo nettled thereat. Chat they did
not defift till they had engag’d the Sam*
fwryn to attack it.
It being then in the Winter-feafon
when the Portuguefes could fcarce expeft
any Relief, and the Fort provided with
a Garifon of 300 Men only, they were
driven to great Diftrcfs a certain Re-
negade, a Native of Sicily , who had
ferv’d as an Engineer in the Siege of
Rhodes, direding the Moors in their At-
tacks. Hereupon John de Lima Gover-
nor of the Fort did all he could to de-
fend himfelf, in hopes of the approaching
Spring } and having extended his Fortifi-
cations (by means of great Casks fill’d
with Sand) to the Shore, lent notice of
his diftrefied Hate to Henry de Mmtfa,
who without delay fent 140 Land Sol-
diers aboard two Ships commanded by
Cbriftopber Jufm and Edward Fonfeca to
his ReMef: but the laft being becalm’d
near the Shore of Calecut , and the other
not having above So Men aboard, J&bn
Lima did not think it advifable to land
with lb fma 11 a number, as being not fuffi-
cicnt to break through the Enemies Works
into the Fort. However Jmfart being
refolded to venture at all, landed in a
ißoat with 30 Volunteers, who fought \
BrAVtr) (
the Porta-
guefes




jf. 62,f .
the Profpect of CRA¥GAN O R
on all fdcs* - -
Ij 4


Fonfeca
order'd mt
t° Und.
m Fon
nlkv'd.
their way through the Enemy, and with
the lofs of four of their Men reach’d
the Fort, which in the mean while was
a (faulted by the Barbarians , who were fo
warmly receiv'd by the Portuguefe Gra-
nadeers, that they were glad to retire
in great Confufion to their Works.
Soon after Fonfeca arriving with his
Ship, convey’d a Letter faflned to an
Arrow into the Fort, intimating his ar-
rival, and defiring his Inflations how
to ferve him. Lima fent an Anfwer, that
he thought it not advifable to expofe
himfelf and his Men to the fame dan-
ger as Jufart had done, but that he
fhould return with all fpeed to Menefes ,
and folicit a Succour of 500 Men, with
a good quantity of Ammunion, where-
with he did not queflion but to defend
the place. Fonfeca being return’d to Co-
chin, and having deliver’d his Meffage
to Menefes, he difpatch’d immediately
Anthony de Sylva with fome Ships, for
the relief of the befieged, whilft he
was making all neceflary Preparations to
follow with a much greater Force in the
Spring.
The Sammoryn fearing the worft, left
no (tone unturn’d to oblige the Befieged
to a Surrender before that time : and
the before-mention’d Sicilian having done
his utmoft Endeavours with Mines, M6r-
tars and Battering Pieces, but in vain,
he refolv’d to reduce them by Famine,
which he might queftionlefs have effected,
had he had only a fmall Squadron of
Ships to block up the Harbour. But the
Befieged being from time to time fup-
ply’d with Provifions and Refrefhments
by fmall Boats which enter’d in the night
time, they held it out bravely till Spring,
when Menefes arriving with 1500 Por-
tuguefes, ' landed his Men, and having
put the Malabars to the rout, with the
lofsof 3000 Men on their fide (among
whom was alfo the Sicilian ) the Sam-
moryn was fo terrified thereat, that to
prevent his Country from being ravag’d
by the Portuguefes , he clap’d up a fud-
den Peace; And the Portuguefes judging
the Fort too chargeable to keep, did
afterwards demolifh it of their own ac-
cord in the fpringing up of which ma-
ny Malabars ( greedy after Prey ) were 1
blown up into the Air.
Notwithftanding this Peace, the Sam-
moryn let flip no opportunity of doing
mifchief to the Portuguefes \ being in-
courag’d thereunto by the Differences
arifen betwixt the Portuguefe Generals, J
as betwixt Menefes and Gama, and Sam - ■
pajo and Mafcarenhas, about the Viceroy- j
fliip, which had almoft prov’d fatal to i
the Portuguefe Affairs in the Indies, This
is evident from a Letter writ by Chrifto-
pher de Soufa to the faid Sampajo , in which
he represents to him the danger Unto
which the Portuguefes (a fmall number
in comparifon of their Enemies) were
cxpofed daily in the Indies , by his Diffe-
rence with Mafcarenhos about the Vice-
royalty, exhorting him not to have re-
courfe to Violence, but the Arbitra-
tion of fuch Perfons as were competent
Judges \ telling him, that in cafe of re-
fufal he mull not expeft to be obey’d
by him. Which coming from a Perfon
noted for his Courage, Liberality and
Generofity in thefe parts, did not a lit-
tle abate the Haughtinefs of Sampajo:
and Mafcarenhas returning into Portugal ,
was favourably receiv’d by the
who having recall’d Sampajo , oblig’d
him to give full fatisfa&ion to Mafca-
renhas for the Imprifonraents, Affronts
and Damages he had fuftain’d upon that
account. For the more ample Relation
of which we refer our felves to the
Portuguefe Hiftoriaris. From Calecut we
will turn towards Cranganor , in order
to give you a Defcription of its Ori-
gin and Situation, and by what means
it fell into the Hands of the Hollanders .
And deim*
lifted*
r
Differences
among the
Portu-
guefe Ge-
nerals,
CHAP. XVIII.
A Defcription of Cranganor. How it was befieged and taken by the Dutch. Its
Excellencies. The Isle of Vaypin. Cochin Fortified. Its Inhabitants , Build-
ings, plenty of Provifions, &c. Is befieged the first time by the Dutch,
raised the Siege.
The Rive,
mi City
of Ctanga-
nor ’
lies five Leagues to the
North of Cochin , and 20 to the
Sout h 0 f Calicut , upon a fandy Hill. On
the South fide of the entrance of the River,
is built a fmall Fort call’d Pdliport \ a mile
above which, higher up the River, lies the
City and Fortrefs of Cranganor, a Place
ftrongly fortify’d by the Portuguefes at


Is bettered
by the
Dutch,
And taken
by form,
Lofs on
both fides .
divers times •, for in the beginning they
had only a Tower, which they afterwards
ftrengthen’d by a Wall, and at laft en-
clofed the whole by regular Fortificati-
ons of Earth. The King of Cranganor
keeps his Refidence not far from Cranga-
nor : He that then reigned, was a young,
lufty, and tall Perfon, a declared Enemy
of the Portuguefes , as well astheSammo-
ryn.
In the Year \66i. after the Dutch had
made themfelves maftersof Coulang , and
by ftrengthening the fame with Fortifi-
cations, and a good Garifon, had fe-
cured the South fide, they thought it ex-
pedient ( before they attempted the Con-
queft of Cochin) to get alfo a firm foot-
ing on the North fide at Cranganor , efpe-
cially fince they fear'd they might be ob-
liged to pafsthe Winter thereabouts, it
being in December. According we land-
ed our Men, but found (beyond expeda-
tion) the Fortifications in;fuch a ftate, as
not to be attack’d without great Cannon.
Above 14 days being fpent in railing Bat-
teries, making of Trenches and Breaches,
but to no great purpofe, and the ap-
proaching Seafon obliging us to carry on
the Siege with all poifible expedition, it
was refolved (upon intelligence given by
a certain Perfon, concerning the Conditi-
on of the Place) to attack the Point next
to the River, on Sunday Jan. 15. 1662.
very early in the morning.
The Signal being given accordingly by
a Cannon Shot, our Forces advanced, un-
der the favour of the Smoke of our great
Artillery, to the Bulwork, which they
took with Sword in hand, chafing the Por-
tuguefes thence to the Jefuits Church. In
this Adion the Dutch Captains, Poolmann ,
Schuknburg , and Simon Werding , as alfo
Lieutenant Silvefter , acquired immortal
Honour, being flain as they were mount-
ing the Breach, with 78 common Sol-
diers, and many wounded.
On the Portuguefe fide above 200 Chri-
ftians were killed, befides a great num-
ber of the Nairas, and among the reft
Vrbano Fialho Pereira the Governour of
the Place.
The Portuguefes then hung out a white
Flag, defiring a Parley upon reafonable
Conditions \ which were granted them,
and by virtue thereof the Portuguefe Sol-
diers tranfported into Europe. During
this Siege we found the Nights very cold,
tho the Days were almoft infupportable
by the exceffive Heat. And after the Con-
quelt thereof, being ordered to preach
the Thankfgiving Sermon in one of the
Parifli Churches (of which there were 7)
I pitch’d upon a Text in Deuteronom .
Chap. 23. v. 14.
The Hollanders judging it at that time
convenient to furrender the Place into
the King’s hands, the fame was done ac-
cordingly but regain’d and refortify’d
the fame afterwards, when they found
themfelves engag’d in a War with the
Sammoryn , who made frequent Excurfions
as far as Cochin a thing fo common a-
mong thefe Barbarians , that no fettled
Peace can be expeded with fo many
Kings.
And upon this Occafion I can’t fuffi-
ciently commiferate the Condition of the
Inhabitants of the Countries about Cran-
ganor and Cochin , who being guided by
ignorant Romifh Priefts, are in great dan-
ger of falling by degrees into Paganifm
again \ the Diftrid of Cranganor having
formerly been fo confiderable for the
great numbers of Chriftians of St. Tho-
mas (as they are call’d) inhabiting there,
that a Portuguefe Archbifiiop had his Refi-
dence in that City. It is the general 0-
pifiion here, that St. Thomas the Apoftle
coming firft to Socotora , an Ifle at the en-
trance into the Red Sea , there preached
the Gofpel with good fuccefsj whence
coming to Cranganor and Coulang , he con-
verted a great number to the Chriftian
Faith. From hence taking his way thro
Coromandel into China , he returned to
Maliapour , where he fuffered Martyrdom.
But of thefe Chriftians of St. Thomas, we
fiiall have occafion to fay more hereafter,
our prefent purpofe being to fay fome-
thing of the State of Affairs in the Por-
tuguefe Times.
Firft then, at our arrival at Cranganor , 2
we found there a Noble College of the Je- c
fuits, with a ftately Library belonging to
it, the Strudure it felf being not inferior
to many in Europe . Befides the Church
of the Francifcans , they had a ftately Ca-
thedral, adorn’d with the Tombs of the
Archbiftiops of this Place. Without the
Wall of Cranganor was the College of 2
Chanotte , famous for the refort of the/
Chriftians of St. Thomas hither, who ex- C
ercifed their Religious Worfliip here in
the Syriac Language \ and having erefted
a School for the Education of their Youth,
had feveral Matters and Priefts of their
own: Qf which more in the Defcription
of Cochin,
This Language being in high efteem a-
mong the Natives here,and ufed fometimes
alfo by our Saviour and his Apoftles", not
only a Printing Houfe, but a Seminary has
been ereded at Rome for the cultivating
thereof, and propagating the fame among
the Youth. Thus
Cranga-
nor oncfd!
Archbi-
Thejtfi.
OUty,
The Cl
ley of
Chanottc.




<A Prqj r £tct of the City of Cochiy
•. ffirs. to the North.
, Q/&L £ ;~f? ♦- -6j i .
C ochin: to the Sea fide .
Co the Land, fide\
-v, " ~ —=-".-
filter CQ Cfeisfe on tfie Land, fide.
o, ■


The Syriac
Language
propagated
at Rome.
The Ifle of
Vaypin.
Cochin.
Thus 1622. a Syriac Dictionary was
publilhed at Rome, by
rarius , a Native of Siena , and the Syriac
Grammar of Georgius , a famous
Divine and Pbilofopher of the College of
the Maronites , born near the Mount
mis. And 1618. Abraharttu ob-
liged the World with his Introduction to
the Fundamentals of the Chrifiian Faith, in
the fame Language. Whence it is evi-
dent that the Roman Clergy exceed ours,
in their zeal of propagating the Roman
Religion; tho on the other hand it muft
be allow’d that their Plenty furniflies
them with fufficient opportunities of per-
forming thofe things which the Reformed
Minijlers for want of Means are forced to
let alone. I have feen divers Books prin-
ted with the Portuguefe Characters, in the
Malabar Language, for the inftruCtion of
the Paruas, one whereof I keep by me to
this day •, tho at the fame time I muft
confefs, that in cafe we (hould follow the
fame Method, in printing with our Cha-
racters, though in their Language, it
would not have the fame effeCf, they be-
ing much bigotted both to the Roman
Clergy and the Portuguefe Language , fo
that 1 have met with fome of the Paruas
who fpoke as good Portuguefe as they do
at Lisbon. For the reft, the Products of
Cranganor are the fame as in the other
Parts of Malabar , except that now and
then they meet with fome Gold Duft, but
in no great quantity.
Betwixt the River of Cranganor and
r that of Cochin, lies the Ifle of Vaypin,
When the Dutch, in Feb, 1662, befieged
Cochin the firft time, they ereXed a Fort
upon the Bank of the River, from whence
they batter’d the Place, the River being
there not above a Musket* (hot over :
This Fort was call’d the New Orange , and
here we found a goodly Edifice, formerly
belonging to the Bilhop of the Place *, as
alfo a very large Church, in which I
preach’d the 29th of Jan, 1662. The
Ifle it felf is tolerably fertile, under the
jurifdiXion of the King of Cochin, whofe
Dominions extend from the River of
Cranganor , fix Leagues South of Cochin ,
the whole length being about ten Leagues.
The Kings of Cochin have always kept
firm to the Portuguefe Intereft, ever fince
Triumpara , being conquered by the King
of Calecut , fought for refuge among the
Portuguefes , who reftored him to his King-
dom, tho he afterward prefer’d a private
Life before his Crown.
Cochin is a very antient City, but was
not fortify’d till 1504. in the time of the
two Abuqucrques, who fet fail 1503, from
Belem in Portugal and after many fmart
Engagements with the Sammoryn , siphon-
fus return’d into Portugal , where he ob-
tain’d the Sirname of The Great 9 his Ac-
tions being deferib’d in] a peculiar Trea-
tife publilh’d at Lisbon 1576. by John Ba~
treira. Soon after the Portuguefes built a
Church there, and entred into a League
with the Sammoryn, and the Fortifications
were confiderably augmented by Edward
Patieco , and a Wall ereXed by L, Vafco
towards the Sea fide. In fome Years af-
ter this City began to increafe fo confi-
derably, that it might compare with fonie
of the beft in Europe , its length being near
two Englifh Miles.
At firft the Chriftians and Mahometans
lived promifeuoufly in the City 5 which
occafioning frequent Difturbances, Albu-
querque obtain’d from the King Naubea-
dora, that each (hould have their peculiar
Quarters aflign’d them to live in. In arid
about the City of Cochin , lived alfo
formerly fome Jews , who even now have
a Synagogue allow’d them without the
Fortifications; they are neither White
nor Brown, but quite Black. The Por-
tuguefe Hiftories mention, that at a cer-
tain time, certain blafphemous Papers a-
gainft our Saviour, with fome fevere Re-
flexions againft the Jefuit Gonfalvus Pe-
reira (who afterwards fuffer’d Martyr-
dom at Monopatapa) being found in a
Box fet in the Great Church for the ga-
thering of Alms and the fame being
fuppofed to be laid there by fome Euro-
pean Jews , who now and then ufed to re-
fort thither privately, this gave occafion
to introduce the Inquifition into Goa .
Cochin may for its bignefs juftly chal-
lenge the fecond Place after Goa among
the Indian Cities formerly in the pofleffi-
on of the Portuguefes , tho at prefent it is
not near fo big as the City of Batavia .
Its fituation lies at 10 Degrees of North
Latitude, bordering to the Weft upon
the Sea, and the River has about 17 or
18 fathom Water at high Tide* but its
Entrance is very difficult in the Winter-
time, being commonly choak’d up by the
Sands which are carried thither by the
Stream in the Winter Seafon, which how-
ever are again removed by the violence
of the Current in the Summer-time.
About Cochin , as well as all along the
Coaft of Malabar , they have every day
two forts of Winds, w. The Land
Wind beginning in the Evening, and the
Sea Wind at ten in the Morning. Cochin <
is not accounted fo wholefom as moil of 1
the other places feated on the Coaft of- 1
Malabar, by reafon of its fituation in low J
a
Cochin not
very whole-
fom9 but
plentifulh


Ant knt
Churches
and Con-
vents of
Gochin.
the Mila-
bar Co-
chim
and nuiftiy Grounds; but abounds both
in Filh and Flefli, and its fituation is ex-
tremely delightful, by reafon of the ma-
ny Brooks, and adjacent little Iflands in
the River, wherein many of the Portu-
guefes have built themfelves very pleafant
Summer Seats.
The River runs on the back-fide of the
beft Houfes of the City, where they catch
Fifh with Cafting-nets, at which the Chi-
nejes inhabiting here are very dexterous.
Formerly this City could boaft of divers
ftately Churches, fince demolifhed by the
Dutch. The Jefuits Church and College
facing the Sea-fliore, had a lofty Steeple
and a moft excellent fet of Bells: The
College,which was 3 Stories higb,and con-
tained about 20 or 30 Apartments, being
furrounded with a ftrong Wall. The
Cathedral was alfo a noble piece of Ar-
chitedture, adorn’d with two rows of
Pillars, and a lofty Steeple.
The Church and Convent of the Aufiin
Friers flood upon the Bank of the River ;
and the Church of the Dominicans with
their Convents , were two rare pieces of
Workmanfhip, beautified with a double
row of Pillars of moft excellent Stone.
The Church and Monaftery of the Fran-
eifeans is the only that remains Handing
as yet, but has no more than two Brothers
left, who are allow’d the free exercifeof
their Religion.
The beft Houfes of Cochin have their
Court-yards and Gardens belonging to
them, enclofed with very thin, yet ftrong
and high Walls, fo that the Neighbours
can’t overlook one another. The fituation
of the City is much more in length than
breadth, without any Channels in the
Streets; however that end towards the
Sea-fide is much broader than the other,
as may befeenby the annexed Draught,
which alfo reprefenting an exact view of
its Fortifications, we will refer the Rea-
der to it.
The Malabar Cochin is fcated fomewhat
lower, and built after the Indian fafliion,
with very broad Streets: it is very popu-
lous, and the Royal Palace is built with
Bricks and Mortar after the European way,
with Apartments very fpacious and lof-
ty *, near which frauds the Pagode , with
a very large Ciftern adjoining to it.
Anno 1661. in Febr. at the time of our
fi rft landing before Cochin , the Nairas in-
habiting hereabouts (notwithftanding we
pofitively declar’d we were no Enemies
of the King, but only of the Portuguefcs)
alfembled in great Numbers in this Pa-
lace and the Pagode , and from thence af-
faulted our Forces, which obliged us to
drive them from thence, with the daugh-
ter of 400 on their fide, they fighting
very defperately, by reafon they had be-
forehand intoxicated their Brains with
very large Dofes of Opium. The old
Queen of Cochin being taken Prifoner in
the Fray, by Henry van Rhede an Enngn,
was kept in fate cufrody for fome time
after.
Afterwards we began to form our At-
tacks againll the Portuguefe Cochin in three
feveral places; that on the Landslide
near the Church of St. Thomas. ( which
ferved us for a Chappel and Hofpital)
being commanded by the General in Per-
Ton; that along the Sea-fide by Tsbrand
Gotsken ; and the third near the River by
the Commodore Roothaus. After feme
time fpent in making of Trenches, and
raling of Batteries, it was thought ex-
pedient to furprize the Enemy on that
fide near the River. The firlt Sunday in Fe~
by nary being appointed for that purpofe,
Capt. Peter IVa/h was ordered to begin
the Alfiuilt with a certain Detachment at
four a Clock in the Morning : but it be-
ing after Sun-riling before they could
reach the Place, the Portuguefcs took the
Alarum; and being timely fuftaia’d by
frelh Troops drawn thither by the ring-
ing of the Bells, gave Each a warm Re-
ception to the Hollanders , that after a
molt obftinate Engagement, they were
forced to found the Retreat, with the lofs
of divers of their belt Men, and among
them the be foremen tion’d Captain, who
was kill’d by two Musket Bullets. The
General Ryetos van Goens , and the Com-
modore Roothaus , were alfo both in.
great danger, the firlt receiving feveral
Shots through his Hair, the laft being like-
ly to have been call into a deep Well.
Notwithftanding this Difappointment,
the Trenches were carried on with all
imaginable fpecd, tho not without great
difficulty, by reafon of the marfliy
Grounds, which coft us a good number
of Men, more than we could convenient-
ly fpare at chat time, when our Forces
were not a little weakned before ; we
having left at leaft 300 lick and wounded
at Coulang , and a conliderable Garifon
at Cranganor , and in the Fort of New*
Orange on the Point of the Ifle of
pin . We continued however to batter the
Town inceffimcly with our great Artil-
lery, and to omit nothing we thought
might annoy the Enemy; till a whole
Month being fpent in this Siege, and the
Number of our Men reduced to 1400*
we began to confider of the approaching
Winter, the uncertainty of the Event,
4°o Nai-
ros flak.
The Quitn
tf Cochin
Pii •
foncr.
An urfnc‘
cefsful Af
fault upcn
Cochin.




Pol-3‘1 7 - 6 33'
“ —! r~-
The C i ty of Cocixiisr
at the time of itts being taken by y Admiral
and leneral ran &oens. S.lan: i66j.
y


The siege
raijed-
The Rc -
treat of
Dutch,
and the want of feveral things neceflary
to carry on a long Siege } fo that atter
mature deliberation, it was judged ne-
ceflary to raife the Siege, and delay the
Execution thereof to a more convenient
time.
Accordingly our Cannon, Ammuniti-
on and other Moveables being fent aboard
upon Floats, the General made a fafe Re-
treat in the Night-time without beat of
Drum ; and the better to cover his De-
fign, had gain’d a certain Jew by Money
to make the Clock of S. Thoma/s Church
ftrike as ufually : to which alfo con-
tributed not a little the ingenious Inven-
tion of a certain Gunner, named Henry
Boerdorf , who went the Rounds all Night
long, and calling Who vs there ? Stand,
and that in a different Tone, deceived
the Enemies that they had not
the leaft Sufpicion of our Retreat fo
that all the Dutch Forces got fafely a-
board, without the Lofs of as much as
one Man, except a Aftgro Slave. When
the Dutch Soldiers faw the Artillery and
Baggage going on board, they were not
a little diffatisfyed thereat, bmt being ap-
peafed by Commodore RoothoMS , who
told them that it was done only to (ecure
them againft the Enemy, who intended
to make a general Sally, they were after-
wards glad to follow their Officers Direc-
tions in the Retreat.
It was almoft noon before the Portu~
guefes were convinced of our Retreat, as
fufpeding the fame to be only a Strata-
gem to draw them into an Ambuffi j but
when they faw us weigh our Anchors,
they exprefs’d their Joy with the Dif-
chargeof their Cannon round the Walls.
The Dutch General having left afufficient
Garifon for the guard of the Fort of New-
Orange, another at Cranganor under the
Command of Captain Ferffreet, and
conftituted Peter du Pon , a brave Soldi-
er, Commander in Chief of all the For-
ces in thofe Parts, fail’d to Coulang \
which Place being likewife provided with
all Necelfaries, he took his courfe towards
Batavia, with an Intention to give Cochin
a fecond Vifit in the Spring, which he
did accordingly with better Succefs.
CHAP. XIX.
The Isle of Formofa furprized by the Chinefes. Cochin besieged a fecond time
by the Dutch, is forced to furrender ; the chief Articles of the Capitulation.
The City made more compact, and ftrengthened with regular Fortifications.
The Roman Catholick Bishop of the Chriftians of S. Thomas comes to Co-
chin. His Original Bull of Indulgence.
BY this time we were fufficiently in-
form’d of the mifcrable State of our
Countrymen in the Ifle of Formofa (which
the Portuguefes would often upbraid us
with during the Siege) a compleat ac-
count whereof would be perhaps too te-
dious, and look’d upon as beyond our
purpofe •, therefore I will only for the
Satisfa&ion of the Reader, infert a Letter
written by the Reverend Mr. John Kruyf,
Minifter of the Gofpel there in the
Fort of Zealand, and afterwards at Nega-
fatan on the Coaft of Coromandel (where
he died) and directed to me, and Mr. A .
Brcyl my Fellow-Minifter in thefe Parts.
44 A Fter m y Arrival here the 6th Oft.
cc with m y Family, I was feized
44 with fo violent a Fever, as difabled
tc me to write to you, yet did not hinder
44 me to remember my hearty Service to
44 you by Mr. Roos , Captain of our Ship,
44 and the Faftor Mr, Keuf. Whether the
44 fame was brought to you or not, lam
44 ignorant as yet, having for fome time
44 after been fo dangeroufly ill with my
44 Diftemper, that my Recovery was
“ almoft defpaired of \ but am now by
44 God’s peculiar Mercy fo far recovered,
a that I went firft to Church on Thurf-
-44 day laft, and preached twice the Sun-
-44 day following, and intend to vilit the
44 Sick to morrow, and to adminifter the
44 Holy Sacrament on Sunday next. To
44 give you a particular Account of the
44 late miferable State of the Ifle of Formo •
44 fa, is both beyond Che compafs of a Let-
-44 ter, and my ptefent Strength \ and
41 tho I tremble at the very Thoughts
44 of it, yet will I mention the chiefeft
44 Tranfadions: The firft Affault of the
44 furious Chinefes was made againft the
44 Caftle of Sacam , •whereabouts', after
44 they had cut fome of our Soldiers in
44 pieces, they took my eldeftSon and
44 my Wife’s Brother, who, tho very
fertile
condition
of Formo-
fa*


Several
Minifters
beheaded
by the Chi-
nefes.
44 young, had one of his Arms cutoff.
44 The next day our Ship called the Hec-
-44 for being engag’d withavaft Number
u of Chinefe Jones , was blown up, and
44 in her Tome of our belt Soldiers, a-
u mong whom was alfo my Father-in-
-44 law Thomas Pedd. The Fort of Sac am
u being, after a defence of a few days,
44 forc’d to furrender for want of frefh
44 Water and other Neceffaries, the Mi-
-44 nifters, Officers, School mailers, Sol-
-44 diers, and in general all the Inhabit
44 tantsof the flat Country, were for-
-44 ced to make the bell Terms they
44 could for themfelves. The Squadron
44 of Ships commanded by Mr. Kauw,
44 (after it had fora fmall time rejoic’d
t 4 our drooping Spirits) being difpers’d
by Tempefts, and the Ship the Vrk
44 forc’d upon the Sands, and taken by
the Enemy, the fame was neither feen
44 nor heard of in five or fix Weeks af-
cc ter. Tobeffiort, the whole Country
c * being over-run by the Chinefes , our
44 Soldiers every where routed, Kouker-
-4c ken laid in Affies in fight of our Fort:
44 Such of ourContrymen as had not fe.
44 cur’d themfelves by a timely Flight,
tc fell into the Flands of the mercilefs E-
-44 nemies, who facrific’d the Reverend
44 Mr. Hambroek with his Son, and divers
cc others in Tilocen , to their Fury: As alfo
Mr. Peter Mm Minifter of Favorlang ,
44 and Mr. Arnold Winfheim Minifler of
j Sinkan , who had their Heads cut off,
** and their Wives with many others
44 carried into Slavery. By this there
44 being great want of Neceffaries in the
44 Fortrefs, the Soldiers died daily of
44 the Bloody Flux, Scurvy and Dropfy •,
44 fo that in nine Months time, having
44 loft above 1600 Men, both by Famine
Cc and the Sword, we were forc’d (for
44 thePrefervation of our Lives) to ca-
a pitulate. Who can without Tears re-
-44 member the unexpected Deftruftion
44 and Ruin of fo many Families, and of
near 30 Minifters, partly in their
44 Lives, partly in their Fortunes (a-
ftc mong whom I had my (hare, having
44 loft all that I had gather’d in 15 Years
44 time) the Lofs and Difhonour of the
44 Company, with the unfpeakable Mi-
-44 feries,among which 1 reckon mine none
w of theleaft, as the Lofs of three Parts
44 of my Library ? All which we ought to
a look upon as the effects of God’s juft
44 Indignation, on account of our mani-
-44 fold Sins. I have no more to add,
44 than that it is none of theleaft among
! 4 my other Afflidions, that Matters are
44 both fo ill reprefented, and worfe ta-
-44 ken at Batavia.
Subfcribed,
Youraffedionate Collegue
Negapatnam 13. to ferve you,
Oftob. 166 2.
Joannes Kruyf.
But it is time to leave the miferable
in the Ifle of Formofa , and to come to the
fecond Siege of Cochin, Anno 1661. in
September , Jacob Huflart lace Govenour
of the Moluques and Amboyna , and after-
wards refiding in the fame Quality in
Ceylon and Malabar , fet fail from jßata-
via with a good Squadron of Ships,
Tsbrand Goske Commodore, for Cochin ,
leaving Mr. Ryhlof Tan Coens at Batavia
by reafon of his Sicknefs, but follow’d
foon after. In November we began to
batter the place molt furioudy, being
willing to reduce it before wc could re-
ceive the News of a Peace concluded be-
twixt us and the Portuguefes (which we
expefted every day ) and having the lafl
year receiv’d certain Inftrudions from
the Governours of our Company to allow
free Commerce, and Liberty of Religion
to all fucli Portuguefes as would fubmit to
us, we propofed to the Befieged that
they fhould be left in full poflellion of
their Churches (except one) provided
they would receive a Dutch Garifon.
This was not ill relifh’d by forae, but
Ignatio Sermento the Governour refilling
to comply with it, we refolv’d to
lofe no time to reduce the place by
force.
Accordingly it was refolv’d in a Coun-
cil of .War to affault it on the River fide
at low Tide *, and to render the Paflage
the lefs difficult, a great number of Sacks
fill’d with Sand were prepar’d to
thrown into the River. But this At-
tempt prov’d unfuccefsful, our People
meeting with fo hot a Reception there,
that they were glad to think of retreat-
ing. But as we had no time to lofe, fo
we foon pitch’d upon another, which was
carried on with better fuccefs: For that
brave Commander Peter du Pan being or-
der’d to affault the Baftion on the Bank
of the River, he executed his Commiflion
fo fuccefsfully, that (tho not without
great Refinance ) he broke through the
Enemy, and maintain’d himfelf in fome
of the adjacent Houfes again ft the whole
Force of the Enemy, till being feconded
by frefh Troops of his own, they put
out the white Flag, and fent their De-
™ e f ec A
cochin
p f ,
the B>jh
Vnfkcctfs-
ful At-
tempt of
the Dutch.


Articles of
Swrmder
of Cochin.
qfa £ntr?of y z Dutch (renerM into , CocJiin.
puties to capitulate upon the following
Conditions.
The Francifcans to enjoy the free Ex-
erc jf e of their Religion under the Pro-
te Qj on 0 f t h e states: The Clergy to have
free liberty to carry away all their Ima-
ges, Church-Ornaments, Relicks, &c, and
what elfe belong’d to them. The Go-
vernour Jgnatio Sermento and his Family,
together with all the Officers, to be re-
ceiv’d civilly by the Dutch . The Garifon
to march out with Enfigns difplay’d,
Drums beating, with Bag and Baggage,
and to be conduced in Dutch Veflels to
Goa , except fuch of the Soldiers as
were in immediate Pay of his Majefty,
who were to be tranfported to Portugal .
Such of the Inhabitants as were willing
to ftay behind under the Jurifdidion of
the Dutch Company, to have free liberty
to remain in their full Pofleffions, and that
care (hould be taken of the Tick and
wounded. All which was punftually
perform’d, and the Keys of the City
deliver’d to our General, who foori
after enter’d vidtorious on Horfe-back in
Orders gi-
ven by the
Dutch Ge -
great Pomp, and order’d a folcmn Thankf-
giving to be made in the great Church
lately belonging to the Jeluits, for the
Conqueft of fo important a place, which
was done accordingly.
Being thus become entirely Mafters of
Cochin , after it had been 150 years in the
pofleflion of the PortuguefeSj the Dutch
General made it his chiefcft care to ifliic
his Orders not to moleft the Portuguefes ,
but to obferve pundually the Articles of
the Capitulation. The next was to de-
molifli a certain part of the Houfes and
Churches of the City, in order to draw
it into a more narrow compafs, and to
render the Fortifications the more regu-
lar, the former requiring too great a
number of Men to defend them. The
King of Cochin being crown’d, and di-
vers of the neighbouring petty Princes
oblig’d to become his Tributaries, feveral
ftrid Alliances were made with the neigh-
bouring Kings to the South of the River
of Cochin .
About the fame time Jofeph de Sanfta
Muria y of the Order of the Difcalceated
Carmelitetj fent by the Pope in quality as
a Bifhop among the Chriftians of St. Tho~-
mat) came (in his return into Europe )to
Cochin to falute our General, and was
A Roman*
Bi/hop over
the Chrh
ftians heres
comes U
Cochin.


very kindly receiv’d by his Excellency:
He had two forts of Enemies to contend
with during his ftay in thefe parts \ firft
of all with the Portuguefes , who could
not brook that any other but their Coun-
trymen Ihould be exalted to that Dignity,
and that not by the Pope, but by their
own King: The other wasth t Archidabo
(as the Portuguefes ftile him) or chief
Head of the Chriftians of St. Thomas
hereabouts, who being a Negro would
neither fubmit himfelf nor his Flock to
the Romi/h Jurifdidion.
Concerning the Chriftians of St. Tho-
mas we (hall fpeak more at large anon.
But to return to the Bifhop, Brother Jo-
feph de Sanfta Maria, he was fent from
Rome with a BuH of Indulgence, granted
Jan, 1 6. i 550. in the fifth year of Alex-
ander VII. Pope of Rome , fubferibed by
the Cardinal Barberini , Jofeph Caetanus , &c.
the true Original whereof being in ray
Cuftody, and containing many things
tending to the Elucidation of the Affairs
of the Chriftians of St. Thomas ( of whom
we ate to treat immediately after) we
thought it not beyond our fcope to ob-
lige the Reader with the Tran/lation
thereof.
Francifcus Pifhop of Portua, Cardinal Barberini, Vice-Chancellor of
the Holy Roman Church , and Proteftor of the Honourable Fraternity
of the Church of S. Jerome.
Jofephus Caetanus, Keeper of both the Seals of his Holtnefs , Refe-
rendary and Prelate; Carolus Antonius a Puteo, Jt\nigk ;
Francifcus Cinus, Sollicitor-General of the Court of Rome *
Johannes Bapcifta Valentis, Abbot ,• Petrus Baflanus, Carolus de
Comitibus, Pompejus Serinus, Marianus Vecchiarcllius, and
Job. Bapt. Ciofanus, Commijfioners:
ge Bull of
Indulgence,
f tC T)X 7 I fli to our dearly beloved Bro-
•tc V V thers and Sifters in Ghrift of
44 the moft Reverend Fraternity of the
44 Apoftle of St. Thomas, of the Church
44 dedicated to that Saint, without the
44 Walls of Cochin , founded by Legal
44 Authority, Eternal Salvation in the
44 Lord.
44 The more than ordinary Inclination
44 you have fhewn to Piety, Charitable
44 Works, and other holy Exercifes, have
44 induc’d us, who according to our Duty
44 are to take care of the Salvation of
44 the Faithful, and promoting of Piety -
and Religious Exertifes, to receive in-
-44 to and unite with our Society your
41 Fraternity intended for the Exercife
44 of pious and charitable Works \ and
44 by thefe Prefents receive you as fuch,
44 and thereby make you Partakers of all
04 the Indulgences, Authority and other
44 Spiritual Gifts granted us by Pope
44 Paul V. of happy Memory. And the
44 Reverend Father, Brother Johannes de
44 Scmßa Maria , Frier of the Order of
44 the Difcalceated Carmelites , Prefident
44 of your Fraternity, having in your
li Name earneftly follicifed for the laid
H Reception, and a grant of the Indul-
“ gcnces, we the above-mention’d Pn-
lates and Commijfioners , relying upon
u the Authority of Pope Clement VIII.
“ of happy Memory, and his Grant of
“ Nov. 7. 1604. and mov’d with a holy
4t Zeal and Chriftian Love for the pro
tc noting of the true Religious Worlhip,
we do by virtue of thefe Letters re*
ceive your Fraternity founded accord-
ing to the Apoftolical and Canonical
u Inftitution, with the Approbation of
“ the moft Reverend Bilhop, or the Or-
u dinary of that place, into our Comrau-
“ nion and Society, purfuant to the Apo-
u ftolical Authority granted us for that
u purpofe *, and therefore impart to the
46 faid Fraternity and to all its Members
“ all the Indulgences and other Spiritual
Ct Gifts, fpecified and granted to our So-
“ ciety by the faid Papal Bull of Paul V.
ct to give Encouragement to your Frater-
u nity for the performance of all forts of
u pious Works, and the obtaining of
cc eternal Salvation (by God’s Mercy )
u after this Life,
iV. B. The Bull of PaulV . being very
longi fulfome, and not material, was
not thought fit to be inferted.
636
A Defcription of the Goafs of


And it being our full intention that
u a ii the Indulgences, and other Spiritual
i. G if cs granted us at large, as before-
“ faid, ftiould be enjoy’d by your Fra-
*c ternity and its Members, purfuant to
it the Inftitution of Pope Clement VIII.
44 of happy memory *, we will and com-
mand, that thefe our Letters fhali
44 have the fame Authority (when pro-
u duccd) as if they contain’d the Origi*
nal it felf. For the Confirmation
u whereof we have order’d this Letter
ii to be fignM by the Secretary of our
44 Society, and our Seal, together with
ii that of the Protedor thereof, to be
44 affixed to it. Given in Rome at the
44 ufual place of our Afiembly, in the
44 year after the Nativity of our Saviour
44 Jefus ChriH, \660, of the XIII. In-
u didtion, the 1 6th of January , in the
44 fifth year of the Reign of our holy
44 Father Alexander VII.
Subfcribed,
Cardinally Barberinus , Protector.
Jofeph Caetanus, Prelate.
Commiffioners
Andreas Leonius, Secretary.
Francifcus Cinus ,
Carolus Antonius à Puteo ,
Marianus Vecchiarellius ,
Petrus Baƒƒanus ,
John Bapt. Ciofanus ,
Philippus de Rubeis,
CHAP. XX.
The Voyages, Miracles and Death of St. Thomas the Apostle. The Doctrine
of the Chriftians of St. Thomas; of the Greek, Syriac, Georgian
Christians ; of the Ruffians, Neftorians, Jacobites, Coptes, Abyffines Ar-
menians, Maronites. A good Correfpondence betwixt the Eastern and Western
Churches very necessary.
St. Tho-
mas his ar-
rj ™i [ n
sbe Indics *
rr r 1
ZafT
* 1 faw
thif Pillar
1662>
IT is the general opinion that the Apo-
ftle St. Thomas did come into the
Indies? but efpedally into thefe parts :
His firft coming was in the Ifle ot Soco-
tora (at the entrance of the Red Sea)
where he converted many to the Chriftian
Faith; it being certain that to this day
many of the Inhabitants ftile themfelves
Chriftiam of St. Thomas , which alfo in-
duced Xaverhu to touch at that liland in
his Voyage to the Indies? and, if we may
credit John de Lucena? would fain have
ftaid there. From Socotora St. Thomas
fail’d to Cranganor , whence, after he had
converted many to the Chriftian Faith,
he went to Coulang . Upon the Rocks
near the Sea-ibore of Coulang ftands a
Stone Pillar*, ereCted there (asthe In-
habitants report) by St. ThonM. From
Coulang eroding the high and dangerous
Mountains he travelled into Coromondel?
where having likewife planted the Seed
of the Gofpel he fail’d into China? where,
after he had preach’d the Gofpel to the
Infidels, he return’d to Maliapour 1 to con-
firm fome of the new converted Chrifti-
ans in their Faith, and there fuffei d
Martyrdom.
Maliapour (afterwards call’d St. 7w~
tnas by the Portuguefes ) was at that time
a famous City in Coromandel , where this
holy Man would fain have built a Church,
but was prevented by the Brahmans , and
their King Sagam. They relate a very
miraculous thing of St. Thomas . The
Sea having caft up a Tree of a vail bulk,
the King, who was defirous to ufe it in
the building of a Houfe, had imploy’d a
great number of Men and Elephants to
bring it from thence, but in vain, the
Wood being not to be moved from the
place: St. Thomas Handing by told the c
King, that if he would prefenthim with i
the piece of Wood, he would carry it 1
alone to the City (then ten Leagues from J
the Shore) : The King looking upon him
as a mad Man, told him he ihould do
with it what he pleas’d; whereupon
St. Thomas tying his Girdle to one of
the Branches, and making the lign of the
Crofs, drew the whole Tree after him
with a great deal of eafe, follow’d by a
vail number of People; and coming to
the City eredted a Stone Crofs there, tel-
ling the Spe&ators, that whenever the
Sea Ihould rife up to that place, God
would fend certain Strangers from far
dillant places to fettle the Chriltian Re-
ligion here, which the Portuguefes would
have to be verified at the time ot their
coming there. . ,
St. Tbmas having by this Miracle, and
One of
St. Tho-
mas hit
Miracles «


Another
Miracle ,
HU Death .
* Tom. i.
1 557-
the Converfion of a vaft number of Pa-
gans, arriv’d to a great Authority among
them *, this fo incenfed the Brahmans , that
one of them kill’d him with his Launce
upon a Hill near the City, where he ufed
to perform his Devotion. They had be-
fore that accus’d him falfly of a Murder,
but St. Thomas having refufcitated the
Child from Death, he declar’d his own
Father to have been his Murderer j
which had fo powerful an influence upon
many of the chief Men of the Country,
and the King himfelf, that they receiv’d
Baptifm. Some fay that St. Thomas was
kill’d at Calammha , by miftaking this
word for Caiurmina , i. e. upon a Stone j
Calur fignifying in the Malabar Language
a Stone , and mina upon St. Thomas having
been (lain upon a Rock: whence it is,
that if to this day you ask one of the
Chriftians of St. Thomas , where St. Tho-
mas fuffer’d Martyrdom,they will tell you,
Maliapour Caiurmina , at Maliapour upon
the Stone , where he was fton’d, and at
laft run through with a Launce.
They tell you of a certain Crofs made
by his Blood, and a vaft number of Mi-
racles wrought by it, for which I will
refer my felf to Lucena , Oforius , and
Baronins*. The Chriftians of St. Tho-
mas teach their Children in their very
Infancy thefe following Heads concerning
St. Tnomas. St. Thomas was the Man who
firft abolilh’d Idolatry *, it was he who
converted the Chinefes and Negroes } it
was he that baptiz’d them, and taught
them the true Faith, and to profefs God
the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghoft.
They alfo tell you, that he converted
the three Kings of the Eafl (one of
whom, call’d Perumal , they fay was King
of Ceylon ) and that St. Thomas’ s Body
was transferr’d from Maliapour to Edeffa
in Mefopotamia.
J I
But fetting afide all thefe uncertain
Relations, the moft fecure way (founded
upon no fmall Probabilities) is, that
St. Thomas was actually in thefe Parts,
and converted a great number of People
to the Chriftian F.aith *, which contradifts
that bold Aflertion of the Roman Catho-
licks, that all Nations have receiv’d
the Chriftian Faith from Rome it being
beyond all queftion, that at the time of
the arrival of the Portuguefes in thofe
parts under de Gama y the Inhabitants de-
clar’d themfelves to be Chriftians from
moft antient times, defiring the Pro-
tedion of the King of Portugal againft
the Pagans, and in token of their Obe-
dience presented him with a Silver Scep-
ter gilt. Nay, the Church of Rome can’t
boaft of that Honour, even of all parts
of Europe it felf *, lince the Kings of Eng -
land and Scotland , Lucius and Donaldus ,
embrac’d the Chriftian Faith 124 years
after our Saviour’s Nativity, without ha-
ving the leaft Communication with the
Church of Rome \ whence Tertullian
rightly fays, Brit amor um loca Roma-
nis inaccejfa Chrijlo fubdita funt, And
Cypriantis fays to the fame purpofe, 240
years after the Birth of Chrift, That the
fane-branches of the Gofpel have fpread them-
ftlves beyond the extent of the Roman Em-
pire, Thus Dorotheas Bifhop of Tym un-
der the Reign of Conflantine the Great,
pofitively aflerts, That the Chamber-
lain of Queen Candace did introduce
the Gofpel into Ceylon and the Happy
Arabia,
The Chriftians of St. Thomas remain’d
many years in the Primitive Purity of the
Chriftian Religion, till in time, for want
of good Pallors, they began to be in-
fe&ed with fome Pagan Superfluous, and
were in moft imminent danger of lofing
the Remnants of the Truths of the
Gofpel, had not Martome a Native of
Syria , tak|n care of the decay’d ftate of
Chriftianity in thefe parts ; and being
feconded in his Endeavours by divers 0-
ther Teachers out of Syria , Babylonia ,
Chaldcea and Egypt , the Syriac Language
was introduc’d, and the former Purity,
of Religion reftor’d among them* till in
time the Neftorian Herefy got footing
in Syria , and was from thence tranfplan-
ted hither, as is fufficiently evident from
the Records of the Malabars.
This Martome (lignifying in their ;
Language as much as Lord Thomas ) be- 1
ing much refpeCted by the Kings of Cran-
ganor and Coulang , and by the Chriftians
of St. Thomas in general, was declar’d
by them their Head : and the Bilhops of
Cochin,Coulang and Cranganor, being after- (
wards fent for out of Syria , thefe intro- <
dnc’d the Syriac Language, and acknow- j
ledg’d the Patriarch of Alexandria or Ba-
bylon for their Metropolitan, till at laft
they fubmitted to the Pope of Rome:
For the Supreme Ecclefiaftical Head of
the Indians (at the perfwafion of the
Portuguefes ) did 1562. acknowledg the
Supremacy of the Pope of Rome , pro-
vided they might continue in the former
free Exercife of their Religion, which
was confirm’d in the Synod of Goa , where
they would not confect to the leaft Alte-
ration of any of their Church-Ceremo-
nies. But after the Deceafe of this Bi-
Ihop, his Succeftbr 1599, embrac’d with
the reft of his Clergy in another Synod,
the Roman Faith. The
Vain
°f tfx
Komc '
The Chrl*
JJiam of
St, Tho-
mas de-
cay'd, ad
aftermris
reflofd to
their Pri-
mitive Pu-
rity.
Had their
own ißi-
fhop.
Ackpw-
: ledg the
JurifMi-
. on V
Ron*.


The Chriftians of St.Tlwnas inhabit for
the moft part on the Coaft of Malabar, a-
bout Cranganor , Cochin , Coulang, Travan-
cor, and ibme in Coromandel, amounting in
all to a confiderable Number. Before they
were united with the Church of Rome ,
they were infeded with the Nefiorian He-
refy, as fome are Hill to this day ; whence
it is that they deny the two Natures in the
Perfon of Chrift. This Neftorius was Bi-
(hop of Conftantinople, and Eutyches Ar~
chimandrit was Abbot in the fame City.
His Dodrine was received at firft in the
Council of Ephefus, by the Intereft of
Chryfapius (to pleafe Eudoxia the Em-
prefs) Lord Chamberlain to Theodoftus the
Emperor ; but Chryfapius being flain at
the Inftigation of Pulcheria , the Sifter of
the Emperor, the fame was afterwards
condemned in another Synod of Ephefus
held in the Year 431. two Years after the
Death of St . Auftin, wherein Cyril Bifhop
of Alexandria prefided *, as the before-
mention’d Council of Ephefus , and the
Dodrine of Eutyches was condemned in
the Council of Chalcedon 45 1.
antiently had his Refidence at Antioch .
The third Sed is that of the Georgians,
inhabiting the antient Iberia between the
Buxine and Cafpian Seas. Some would
have them to be call’d Georgians, becaufe,
as they they reverence S. George as
their Patron ; but erroneoufly, the Geor-
gians having been mention’d both by Pliny
and Mela, long before S. George was known.
They are of the fame Religion with the
Creeks , and have eighteen Bilhops of their
own, belides a Metropolitan.
Where the
Chriftians
oj S, Tho-
mas inha-
bit.
Georgl-
ans.
4-
un "
The fourth Sed is the Ruffians, who
likewife profefs the Greek Religion, de-
nying with them the Proceeding of the
Holy Ghoft from Father and Son, the
main Point in qneftion betwixt the Eas-
tern and Weftern Churches.
The fifth Sed of the Neftoriafii, fol-
low the Heretical Dodrine of Nefto-
rius, and live for the mod part among
the Pagans and Mahometans, in Babylon ,
Affyria, Mefopotomia, Panhia, Media,§cz.
Fenetus affirms, that they
are found from the North fide of Cataja,
to the molt Southerly Parts of the /«-
dies ; fo that on the Eaft fide beyond the
River Tigris, fcarce any other Chriftian
Sed is to be met with: The reafon
whereof they alledg to be,' that Cofroes
King of Per ft a, a declared Enemy of the
Emperor Heraclm, forced all his Subjeds
to embrace this Dodrine. The Patriar-
chal Seat of the Neftorians is at Muzal, a
City of Mefopotamia upon the River Ti-
gris, now fubjed to the Turks ; notwith-
ftanding which it has 40000 Chriftians
and 1 y Churches. Some of the Neftori-
mjjdidfubmit to the Roman Jurifdidion
under Pope Julius 111. who was created
Pope 1550. and reign’d five Years. And
the Patriarch Abdiefu, who was inverted
with the Epifcopal Dignity by Pope Pi-
us IV. was prerent at the Council of
Trent.
f{ The Nc ‘
1 onans *
For the reft, the antient Chriftians of
St. Thomas did adminifter the Holy Sa-
crament in both Kinds, ufing Salt, Bread,
and the ufe of Raifins inftead of Wine.
It was a very antient Cuftom- among
them, not to baptize their Children till
they were forty days old, except in cafe of
imminent danger of Life. Theyufed no
Undion, neither any Images, except that
they had Croffes in their Churches. Their
Priefts were forbid to marry a\fecond
time. They were declared Enemies of
Cyril of Alexandria, a great Antagonift
of the Neftorians , but reverenced Nefto-
rius and Diofcorus as Saints. They did
not acknowledg the Superiority of the
Pope of Rome , and ufed the Syriac New
Teftament in their Churches.
Their Doc-
trine,
As divers Religions have been broach’d
of late Years in Europe , fo there are ma-
ny Seds of antient ftanding in the Eaft .
The chiefeft of thefe areth q who
acknowledg the Patriarch of Conftanti-
nople for their Head, viz, thofe of Na-
talia (except Armenia and Cilicia) Gre-
cia, Rujfta, Bulgaria, Servia, Bofnia,
Walachia , Moldavia, Podolia and Mufco-
via.
MamSetls
in the Eaft.
1. The
Greeks,
The fixth is that of the Jacobites , hav-
ing got their Name from one Jacob a Na-
tive of Syria, and a Follower of the Doc-
trine of Eutyches, 530. according to Aft-
ref and Damafcenus, They inhabit
for the raoft part in Syria, Aleppo , Cyprus y
Mefopotamia, Babylon , and Paleftina ,
whence the Patriarch of Jerufalem is alfo a
Jacobite, but the Patriarch of the
bites reticles at Caramt , an antient noted
City in Mefopotamia . They acknowledg
but one Nature in Chrift, make the Sign
of theCrofs with one Finger only *, they
mark their young Children with the fign
of the Crofs by means of an hot Iron;
ufe both Baptifm and Circumcifion, and
rejed the Purgatory, it bting their Opi-
S. The Ja-
cobites.
The next are the Melchites, the moft
numerous of all the Seds in the Eaft ;
they are call’d Syrians from Syria , and
Melchites by their Enemies, becaufe they
conformed themfelves in their Religious
Worlhip, according to the Emperor’s
Orders. * They acknowledg for their
Head the Archbifhop of Damafm , who
z.TheWid-
chices.
*See Ni-
ceph.#i/f.
£cc/,1.i8.
c*sB. 8i 1.
28.^45.


7. The
Coptes.
8. The A>
byfflnes.
* Prcftc-
g.m was
the Title
of a certain
Afiatick
Prince *,
Jome will
have it
a Per fian
word.
nion that the Soul remains with the Body
under-ground till the Day of Judgment ;
and that the Angels are compofed of a
fiery and lucid Subftance.
The feventh are the Copes , or Egypti-
an Chriftians, being rather the Name of
a Nation, than belonging to any peculiar
Religion : They are the fame with the
Jacobites , the word Cophti being the fame
with zAEgophti. For*notwithftanding the
Dodrine of Eutyches was condemned in
the Council of Cbalcedon , and Diofcorus Pa-
triarch of Alexandria depofed upon that
fcore, the fame took deep Root in the
Eaftern Parts, and more efpecially in £-
gyp . Thefe Egyptians (according to
Tecla Maria an Abyjftne Prieft ) agree in
Point of Dodrine with the Aby/Jines , and
acknowledg the Jurifdidion of the Pa-
triarch of Alexandria , whofe Refidente
is*now at Cairo .
The eighth Se<ft is that of the Abyffiines,
or Mediterranean Ethiopians , being gene-
rally whence their King (call’d
erroncoufly by fome * Prefer John) is
ftiled the Prince of the Jacobites. They
reje&abfolutely the Councilof Chalcedon y
and will allow it no place in their Writ-
ings. To their Patriarch they give the
Name of Album , i e. Our Father , who
muft be a Native out of the Territories
of Alexandria , and of S. Anthony ’s Or-
for it is obfervable that all the Pa-
triarchs and Biihops in the Eaft y are ei-
ther of the Order of S. Bafil Bifliop of
Ccfaria and orelfeof the Or-
der of S. Anthony. The Patriarchs of
Conftantinople, Antiochia and Armenia , are
of the Order of S. Bafil j thofe of Alex-
andria and Ethiopia , and Ethiopia , as alfo
thofe of the Jacobites and Maronites y of S.
Anthonfs Order; but the Patriarchs of the
Neftoreans are promifcuofly of either of
thefe two Orders. The Abyjfmes have for
.their Head the Patriarch of Ethiopia: They
are rebaptized once every Year, on nth
day, as indeed are moft of the other Eas-
tern Chriftians. They follow the Rules of
the Old Telia ment in reference to clean
and unclean things. It is obfervable, that
contrary to the cuftoin of all the other
Eaftern Chriftians (except the Armeni-
ans) they ufe unlevened Bread in the
Holy Sacrrment \ tho fome affirm that
this is only done on Thurfday in the Holy
Week, and that at other times they ule
levened Bread. All Perfons, both Ec-
clefiaftical and Civil, take and receive
the Sacrament Handing, and that always
in the Church, the King himfeif not be-
Ing difpcnfed with in this Point: The
Prieft gives the Bread, and the Deacons
the Wine; and that day the Sacrament
is received ( which is generally once a
week ) they are forbidden to fpit. They
baptize both with Fire and Water; be-
tides which they circumcife their Chil-
dren on the B th day, and that both Sexes,
nor according to the manner of the Jew*
but after the Mahometan way, whence it
feems as if it were rather a Cuftom than
a Point of Religion. And if we deduce
their Original from the antient Ethiopi-
Herodotus tells us, that they ufed to
pradifc the fame in very antient Times;
if from the Arabians , the Matter is fuf-
ficiently evident, the Arabians being de-
fended from Ifmael, tho they are gene-
rally ambitious to trace their Origin ra-
ther from Sarah than Hagar, For the
reft, they rejeft Purgatory, and Pray-
ers for the Dead ; as alfo all Traditions
looking upon the. Word of God as the
only Rule of Faith ; but with the Jaco-
bites, allow no more than one Nature in
Chrift. Of the Religion of the Afyf
fines, Damian a Goes , Athanaf Kircher , Al~
varius , and others, have given a more
ample account.
• yjhtk
. mcniiiii.
io.
The ninth Seft is that of the Awieni-
ans y in great efteem among the Mahome-
tans y by reafon of their Traffick and
Riches } tho fome alledg another Reafon,
viz., that an Armenian did foretel Maho-
met his future Greatnefs. In the Year
.1656, a certain Armenian Merchant,
named Go]a Salomon , a very grave and
fober Perfon, travelled in our company
to Maeaffar, where we were to treat a-
bout a Peace with the King, and he to
fetch fome Mony due to him from the
Dani/h Company, who gave us feveral
needful Inftru&ions concerning both the
Ecclefiaftical and Political Affairs of the
Armenians They antiently belonged
to the Jurifdidion of the Patriarch of
Conftantinople y purfuant to a Decree of
the Council of Cbalcedon *, but afterwards
having withdrawn themfelves from the
Greek Church, fee up two Patriarchs of
their own, viz* one in the Greater , the
other in the Leffer Armenia. We were
told that they adrainifter the Sacrament
to the very Infants, whereas the Ruffians
don*t allow it to Children under feven
Years of Age. They declare pofitively
againft the Purgatory and Tranfubftan-
tiation. They rebaptize fuch as turn to
their Religion from tht Wejfern Churches-,
They don’t allow any Happinefs to the
Souls of the deceafed till after the Day
of Judgment.
The tenth Seft is that of the Mare*
nites, having got their Name, not from


The Mount
f lbanus ,
I by them-
ronitcs.
See Will,
Tyrius dc
Bel.Sacr.
.22.C.8.
the famous Heretick Maron (as William
Tyrius and Prateolus falfly imagine) but
from a certain Holy Man, In certain an-
tient Records, mention being made of
the Convent of St. Maron , the Friers
whereof were'call’d Maronites: Some of
them inhabit in Aleppo , Damafcus , Tripo-
lit, and Cyprus ; but their chief
Seat is the Mount Libamis , whofe whole
compafs being computed of 700 Leagues,
but in molt places rocky and barren, is
inhabited by about 12000 Families of the
Maronites , who pay to the Grand Seigni-
or feventeen Crowns per annum apiece for
every Head that is above twelve years
old ; and a Crown a year for each piece
of Ground of fixteen Spans in the Square.
The Mountain is of fuch a height, that it
may be difeovered at 40 Leagues diftance.
The Patriarch of the Maronites has eight
or nine SufFraganean Bifhops, he himfelf
being always a Frier of the Order of S.
Anthony , and refides fometimes near the
Mount Libamis , in a Convent of S. An-
thony, fometimes at Tripoli s. The Ma-
ronites are at prefent under the Jurifdi&i-
on of the See of Rome ; and Pope Gregory
XIII. (the fame who caufed the Altera-
tion of the New Stile to be inferred in
the Almanack) erefted a College of the
Maronites at Rome. The Maronites agree
with the Creel Church in this Opinion,
That the Holy Ghoft proceeds only from
the Father, that every Soul was created in
the beginning. They look upon a Female
Infantas unclean for eighty days after its
Birth, and the Males for forty, which is
the reafon they don’t baptize them before
that time •, and adminifter the Sacrament
to the Children foon after they are bap-
tized. They don’t carry the Sacrament
in Proceffion, and allow not of a fourth
Marriage *, but don’t ordain any Priefts
or Deacons without they are married be-
fore; and allow a Parent the power of
annulling the Marriage of his Son or
Daughter, if the fame be done without
his confent. Beatitude they don’t believe
till after the Day of Judgment. For the
reft they follow the Opinion of the Aio-
nothelites, that there is but one Nature in
Chrift. The Maronites had united them-
felves 400 Years ago with the See of
Rome ; but when Saladyn King of Egypt
and Syria did conquer thofe Parts, the
Maronites relinquifh’d the Roman Commu-
nion, till they*were reunited to them a
fecond time under Gregory XIII. and
Clement VIII. Of the S. Thomafi Chrifti-
answe have fpoken before.
Among all thefe Eaftern Setts, thqrc
are few who teach any Points contrary to
Salvation, except thofe of Neftorius and
Eutyches ; for they execrate the Adora-
tion of Images, rejeft Purgatory, allow
Marriage to the Clergy* adminifter the
Sacrament to the Laity in both kinds, de-
ny Tranfubftantiation, and don’t acknow-
ledg the jurifdidion of the See of Rome.
Maffaus relates, that the Patriarch
of the Abyffines being defired by their
King to difpute with the Jefait Roterigio,
told the Ring, That he would not enter into
Difpute with an Heretick, and charged ths
King, under pain of Eternal Damnation,
not to read their Writings. It is beyond
all difpute, that the Copies avoid the La-
tin Church as much as the Jews. Cardinal
Baronins tells us indeed, that Marcus Pa-
triarch of Alexandria , did fend his Depu-
ties to Pope Clement VIII. in order to
fubjeft himfelf and all. Egypt to the
Papal Chair ; but the fame proved abor-
tive, and proved no more than a Com-
plement in the end. See Thomas a Jefuit,
/. 7. c. 6. Whence it is evident, that Pet-
ting afide the Dodtrine of the Holy Ghoft
proceeding from the Father only, they
are fubjedt to not near fo many Errors as
the Roman Catholicks.
The Eaftern Chriftians exercife their
Religious Worfhip in different Langua-
ges; Some are of opinion that all the Pri-
mitive Chriftians, for 120 Years after
Chrift’s Nativity, viz., till the Reign of
Hadriamis the Emperor, ufed only one
Language, viz., the Hebrew, but without
any certainty : Certain it is, that-the Ar-
menians have a Tranflation of the Bible
into their own Language ; which by fome
is attributed to Chryfoftom while in ex-
ile. Alvares affirms that the Abyffimes have
tranflated the Bible in their own Lan-
guage, and fo have the Ruffians, or Muf-
covites, contrary to what is prattifed by
the Romans ; for Pope Pius IV. put the
Bible among the prohibited Books. And
Erafmus in his Letter to Charles Vtenhofer
tells him, that Lewis Bercpuin was 1529.
burnt at Paris, for no other reafon, but
his having aflerted, that the Bible might
be tranflated mto the Vulgar Tongue , and
read by the common People ; notwith-
ftanding St. Jerom and Chryfoftom had em-
ployed themfelves in the Work.
The other Eaftern Chriftians perform
their Religious Service in the Greek , La-
tin, and Chaldean Languages; and ufe
divers Liturgies, as thofe•compofed by
Petrus, Jacobus , Sixtus , &c. Whence it
is evident that it would be no very dif-
ficult task, to fettle a good mutual Cor-
refpondence betwixt them and the Pro-
tellant Churches of Europe , which has
The Eas-
tern Chur-
ches deny
the Supre-
macy of the
Roman
See.
TfoGrecks
ufed al~ .
ways five
days be-
fore Eaf-.
ter to ex-
communi-
cate the
Pope.
In
chriftians
worftdp
God.


A Cone-
fpomience
chrifiians
necejfary,
been too much neglefted hitherto, tho
we have had feverai opportunities given
us by the Eajlern Chriftians to embrace fo
ufeful a Defign. Thus (as Camerarius
tells us) the Greeks of Conjlantinople did
encourage the Bohemians and Huffites a-
gainft the Roman Catholicks. Jofeph Patri-
arch of Conjlantinople , fent one Demetri-
us a Deacon to IVittembergh , to confer
with the Divines there concerning an
Union, who carried a Greek Copy of the
Augujlan Gonfdlion back with him to
Conjlantinople. At the Synod of Thorn in
Poland 1595. certain Deputies fent by
the Greek Chriftians appeared to exhort
to a Llnity, and endeavour a Reconcili-
ation betwixt the Calvinijls and Luthe-
rans. And in the Year \6\6. Cyril Pa-
triarch of Alexandria, fent one of his
Priefts to George Abbot the famous Arch-
bifhop of Canterbury , in order to have
him inftrudted in the llniverfity of Ox-
ford in the true Principles of the Prote-
ftant Churches. Neither ought we to
pats by in filence the Confefilon of Cy-
ril Patriarch of Conjlantinople, of his
adhering to the Do&rine of Calvin ,
which drew upon him the hatred of the
Jefuits, who could not reft fatisfy’d till
they had underhand procured his Death
1638.
His Letter, writ upon that Subjeft to
a certain Friend of his, and preferved by
the Learned Andrew , is as fol-
lows,
“ DErcio ho voluto fcriver aV.Le
41 proteflarvi che mi fiate teftimo-
“ nio fe jo more, que jo more Catholico
“ Orthodoxo, nella fede del N. S, Jefu
“ Chrijio nella dottrina Evangelica con-
“ forme la Confejftone la confeffio-
“ ne mia e le altra delle chicfe Evangelice
“ che foni tutti conformi. Abhorrifco
“ H errori delli Papijii, e lefuperftitio-'
“ ne delli Greet, provo e abraccio la dot-
“ trina del dottore mcritiflimo Giovanni
* c Oalvino ede tutti che fentono con lui,
“ >n quefto voglio che mi liate teftimo-
“ nio, per che con fincera confcienza cofi
“ te ngo, cofi profefib e confeflb como
“ anco la mia confeflione moftra, e re-
“ commando a vos quefto depofito, cafo
“ che morffi, di fame partecipi Tutti li
“ fratelli Chrilliani Orthodox!: emi re-
“ commando allc preghiere di V. R. Al-
‘‘ li 15. 25. Marzo.
Cyrilio Patriarcha di Conftantinopoli.
Which tranflated into Englijh runs
thus :
u Therefore I was willing to declare
<c to you, and defire you to be my Wit*
cc nefs, that in cafe I die an Orthodox Ca-
u tholick , and in the Purity of the Faith
“ taught by Jefus Chrifi, agreeable to the
“ ConfeJJion of Faith of the Church of
the Vnited Provinces , mine being alto-
u gether the fame with theirs, and with
u the other Evangelical Churches. [
tc abhor the Errors of the Roman Church,
cc and the Superftkions of the Greek , but
“ approve and embrace the Dodrine of
u the moft Worthy John Calvin, and of
cc all thofe that have the fame Scnti-
“ ments with him. I call you to witnefs,
“ that 1 believe, confefs, and atteft
“ the fame by thefe Prefents, recom-
tc mending this my Confefiion to your
tc care, in order to communicate the
tc fame (in cafe of my Death) to all
“ truly believing Brethren, and my felf
w to your Prayers.
The 15. 25. March.
Cyril Patriarch of Conjlantinople.
As the preceding Letter is a convinc-
ing Proof of the ftedfaftnefs of Cyril,in his
adhering to the Dodtrine of Calvin \ fo
out of what hath been laid before, it is
evident that moft of the Eajlern Chri-
ftians have an averfion to the Roman Re-
ligion. And I remember that Benjamin
the Jew in his Travels, makes the fame
Obfervation in particular, in refpeft of
the Patriarch of Conjlantinople. In the
Year 1664. being at Cochin, I addrefled
my felf to Mr. Jacob Huftart our Gene-
ral, to grant leave to the Arch-Deacon,
or Chief of the Chriftians of S. Thorns
in Ecclefiaftical Affairs, to come thither,
in order to have a free Conference with
him: Which being readily granted/he
Lent his Letter to the Arch-Deacon for
that purpofe *, but he cxcufed himfelf,al-
-1 edging (and not without reafon) thSt
we having given fo extraordinary a Re-
ception to the Roman Bifhop, Jofeph de
SanftaAdaria^ ,he could not appear in Perfon
among us, without his Prejudice, to my
great Diflatisfa&ion, being extremely for-
ty it was not in my power to perform my
Promife made in my Letters to the
States General 1 662. And upon this
. occafion I can’t, without praife, men-
tion che generous Zeal of the States Ge-
neral, who at their own Charge did
Liter nf
the Patri-
arch oj
Confon.
tinople.




_ VoL 3-r-J.£3 :
The. City or Cowling .
I
S • /


order-to have the New Teftament and
our Catechifm tranflated into the Tongue
ufed among the Modern Greek Chriltians,
the fame being very different from the
antient Greek Language.
CHAP. XXI.
A Defcription of the Kingdom of Percatti, and Calecoulang. Coulang twice
taken by the Hollanders. The nature and manner of living of the Nairos.
The Paruas made Chriftians. Extraordinary Zeal of Don John King of Por-
tugal.
The King-
dom of
Perea.
The Dutch
treat with
that Kir*.
v
FaSmif
rtf Eng-
li&-
THE Kingdom of Percatti (call’d by
fome Porca) begins about four or
five Leagues to the South of Cochin , and
extends to Coulang, its whole length be-
ing about 12 Leagues.
In the Year 1642. the Dutch appear d
the firft time in this Place, and treated
with the then King of Siam , Baatchery
fauhaar (who was not above 23 Years of
Age) concerning a free Trade with Pep-
per. Which the King was very glad to
accept of, being three Years paft en-
gaged in a War with the Portuguefes ,
who had feized upon part of his Domi-
nions, and would have erefted fome For-
tifications there. He delivered to our
Deputys a fealed Letter, direfted to the
General and Great Council of the Indies ,
in which herequcfted, that we would at
lea ft once a Year fend thither a Ship
freighted with fuch Commodities, as be-
fore that time ufed to be carried to Ca•
nanor and Calecut } whereupon an Inter-
preter was fent aboard the next day, to
clcfire a Paflport from his Majefty for
fuch of our Ships as pafs’d that way }
which was granted.
The King who reign’d here 1664. of
whom Mr. JacobHufiart and I had Au-
dience at that time, was about 24. Years
old} a very aftive and wcll-limb’d Per-
fon *, his Hands, Feet, and Ears, adorn’d
with Jewels of a great value. Formerly
they ufed to tranfport their Pepper from
hence to Mocha } but fince that time the
Fnglifh have traffick’d there in that Com-
modity, who had their Faftory juft upon
the Sea-ftiore. The greateft Strength of
this King confifts in about 500 fmall
Galleys, wherewith in the rainy Seafon,
when the Rice-fields lie under Water, he
ufed to make his Excurfions from the ut-
moft Point of the Caps of Comoryn as
far as Panane , and efpecially to annoy
the King of Cochin . He proved a trou-
blefome Neighbour to the Dutch Compa-
ny, till by the Terror of their Arms they
brought him to fubmifiion, having in the
Siege of Cochin fided with the Portuguefes
againft us.
Deeper into the Country live abun-
dance of Chriftians converted by the
Portuguefes: They get their Livelyhood
by managing and gathering the Pepper,
which they are obliged to fell to the
King’s Faftor, a Brahman . •
The Air of this Country being ac-
counted extremely unwholefom } hence
it is, that moft of the Inhabitants are
troubled with fwelfd Legs, the Caufe
whereof they attribute to the Nitrous
Water, which they ufe for their com-
mon Drink} Blindnefs is alfo an ordi-
nary Diftemper here. For the reft, the
Ground is exceeding fertile, and very fit
for Tillage, fo that moft of the Ighabitants
live upon Husbandry, efpecially of Rice.
The next adjoining Kingdom is that
of Calecoulang , of no great extent *, here
the Dutch Company has had their Fafto-
ry many years ago, which ufed to buy
up a gieat quantity of Pepper in thefe
parts.
The leaft among the Malabar King-
doms is that of Coulang 7 extending to the (
utmoft Point of the Cape Ccmoryn ,
about 15 or 1 6 Leagues in length. The
City of Coulang was firft built by the
Portuguefes , being much of the fame big-
nefs as Puntegale in the Ifle of Ceylon %
having no lefs than feven Churches, fome
very good Houfes, and many thoufands
of Trees, eTpecially towards the Sea-
fide. This City is reckon’d one of the
wholefomcft on the whole Coaft of Ma- >
labar by reafon of its pure Air, and moft ■
excellent Springs. The Portuguefes at
their firft coming erected only a ftrong
Houfe, defend to themfelves in cafe
of ncceility againft the Inhabitants } not-
withftanding which, they were at a
certain time furpriz’d by them, and cut
all to pieces } which Barbarity was after-
wards reveng’d by Laurence Almcyda Son
to Francifcm Almcyda, who bur fit 20 of
their Ships richly loaden.
The Air
unwhole-
fort.
* Calecou-
. lang.
Coulang.
The Air
very
wholejom,


The Inhi-
bit.tnts
trcacke-
ro;h'.
A Ptgxn
Temple
plunder'd
by the For-
tuguefes
in time
Peace,
The Dutch
befiege
Coulang a
fecond time ,
h iving left
it before.
TSfNairos.
in the year 1503. one Brother Rboteric
a Dominican Frier, coming into thefe
parts to propagate the Gofpel, did con-
vert many of the Pagans, and incoura-
ged the Ghriftians of St. Thomas inhabi-
ting here to perfevere in their Faith.
The Inhabitants are generally very
barbarous and treacherous, of which they
have given feveral times fufficient Proofs
to the Dutch. At a certain time they
aflaulted the City by night, and had al-
inoft carried it by Surprize \ and at ano-
ther time Capt. Henry Gluwing taking the
frefh Air with fome Officers without the
Gate, were treacherouily murder’d by
them.
In the time of the Portuguefes there
flood a certain Pagode about four Leagues
without the City, famous for its Riches
throughout the Indies , which induced
Sofa to plunder it, notwithftanding there
was then a Peace betwixt them and the
Po-tfuguefes. The Nairos reveng’d the
Lofs by killing about 30 of the Portu-
guefes-, and Sofa having fent alargeVeffel
full of Fanams (their Coin ) to John King
of Portugal, the fame was by the advice of
the Pope fent back to the King of Cou-
lang, by whom it was placed again in the
faid Pagode.
Inthe year 1661, when the Hollanders
came to thefe parts to befiege the City
of Coulang , they were forc’d to have three
fmart Engagements with the Nairos, who
to the number of 7000 or 8000 Men,
arm’d with Scymeters and Mufquets, and
being intoxicated with Opium, fell upon
them like defperate Men; in which Afti-
on Mr. Dublet our under-Fa&or loft his
Life,
And upon this occaflon weought not to
pafs by the Nairos. Thefe are the Gen-
tlemen of Malabar, defeended for the
molt part either from Royal Families, or
Brahmans , and are for that reafon ex-
ceedingly haughty, proud and bold: If
they meet any of the common People
in the Street, they cry out, , i. e.
Give way. Give way. They feldom ap-
pear without their Scymeters and Shields
which they leave at the door when (by
a peculiar Privilege) they go to give a
private Vifit to one of their Neighbours
Wives, as a fign that no body muft en-
ter there in the mean while to difturb
them. They are all bred to the War
even from the feventh year of Age, when
they begin to anoint their Limbs’ with
terrain Ointments to render the Nerves
pliable, which makes them very active
md nimble, and the bell Wreftlers in
.he World. They are not only well ac-
quainted with the ufe of Bows and Ar-
rows, but alfo with Mufquets and great
Cannon •, for 1 have feen them give a
Salvo with the fame order and dexterity
as our belt difeiplin’d Troops in Europe-,
and they are of late years arriv’d to that
Perfe&ion, that they make their own
Gun-barrels, Gun-powder and Matches,
They commonly engage naked, having
only a piece of Stuff wrapt about the
middle: Being very nimble they often
turn their Backs, but foon return to the
Charge, when they find theleaft oppor-
tunity of having an advantage again!!
their Enemies. On the Hilts of theit
Swords they wear certain pieces of Me.
tal, which making a noife as they move,
ferves them for a certain Mufick: Thej
are very dexterous in defending theii
Bodies with their Shields, and confe-
quently are better at handy Blows thar
at firing, for they commonly fire toe
high. Among the Nairos thofe who cal
themfelves Arnold are the worft, being ;
Company of Defperadoes, who engagt
themfelves and their Families by Oath;
to revenge fuch Injuries as are done them
They are often feen at Batavia. The
Power of the Kings of Malabar is gene-
rally efteem’d by the number of the
Nairos under their Jurifdiftion. ’ If an\
of their Kings Ihould be murder’d, they
would facrifice all to revenge his Death,
As they arc naturally fierce and addiftec
to all manner of Luft and Pride, fo the)
are declar’d Enemies of the Chriftians.
Scarce were the Dutch Mafters ol
Coulang, but their Fleet conlifting of
Ships great and fmall, were furpriz’d
by fo violent a Tempeft (which lafted
thtee days) that they thought to have
been all loft, as lying at Anchor un-
der a low Shore, and therefore expos’d
to the utmoft fury of the Winds. The
Ships Names were, the Vlicland, Sea-
horse, Haddock , Bantam, Mary-
gold flower, Cat, Tertolen, Red Lion, Eraf-
mus, Sluyce, Achilles, the
Valley, Walnut-Tree, the Houfe of
the Elburgh, Stadthoufe of Amjierdam,
and the Exchange of udmjlerdam, the four
laft being _ lately come from Holland
freighted with Provifions, fuch as Meal,
Bacon, Cheefe, Wine, Oil and Mum, be-
lides a good number of Land-men, many
whereof were ill of the bloody Flux'.
During this Storm we fent our fervent
and conftant Prayers up to Heaven for
the delivery of our Fleet, on which de-
pended all our Safety 3 fofthe Stadthoufe
of Amjierdam was in fuch diftrefs, that
me gave one (ignal after another for Re-
The Ami
The Dutch
Fleet in
great dan-
ger of kin;
loft .


the Fleet
[ails for
Cochin,
ne King-
dom of
Trevan-
cor *
Cchvcrfm
of the Pa-
nus.
lief, having above fix foot Waterj the
Eraftrtm had loft all her Anchors, but by
good fortune got clear of the Sands;
the Sea-horfe had taken fire, but was foon
cxtineuilh’d, fo that we came off with
the lofs of three Sloops only. The fury
of the Tempeft beginning to allay on
the third day, juft at the very time when
we were coming from Prayers out of
the Church, and by midnight the fame
being quite ceafcd, a folemn Thankf-
giving was order d to be kept the isd
of Novemh. \ 66\. when I preach’d upon
the Text of Pfal.66. 12. By this time
it being judged fit for our Fleet to de-
part, a convenient Garifon was left in
the place under Capt. Kocks and Mr, A 7 y~
bof , for the defence of the Fortifications
of the City, which were lately made of
Earth.
The Kingdom of Trevancor borders
upon that of Coulang: All along the
Sea-(hore inhabite th tParuos, who being
for the moil part Chriftians, you fee the
Shore all along as far as Comoryn , and
even beyond it to Tutecoryn , full of little
Churches, fome of Wood, others of
Stone. Thefe People owe their Conver-
fion to Frandfeus Xaverius , he being the
firft who planted the Principles of Chri-
ftianity among them j they being fo much
taken with the reafonablenefs of the Ten
Commandments, that they receiv’d Bap-
tifra in great numbers, tho an acciden-
tal Quarrel betwixt a Pantos and a Ma-
hometan prov’d a ftfong Motive to their
Converfion: whence it is that John de
Lucena fays, As the Differences arifen be-
twixt the Jews and the Egyptians, proved
the means of the delivery of the People of
God , and of the recovery of their Spiritual
and Temporal Liberty \fo by God y s Di-
region a Quarrel which happen'd betwixt
a Paruas ~and a Mahometan, {rov'd the
delivery of the firff from their Spiritual and
Temporal Slavery .
The Paruas being forely opprefs’d by
the Mahometans, one John de Crus, a Na-
tive of Malabar, blit who had been in
Portugal , and honourably treated by John
the then King of Portugal, advifed them
to feek for Aid at Cochin againft the
Moors, and to receive Baptifm. Ac-
cordingly fomc of the chief Men among
them (call’d Patangatys in their Lan-
guage) were fent upon that Errand to
Cochin, where being kindly receiv’d, they
(in honour of him who had given this
Advice ) took upon them the Sirname of
Cm, a Name ftill retain’d by molt Pcr-
fons of Note among the Paruas . In
Ihort, being deliver’d from the Moorifh
Yoke, and the Pearl-fifhery (which for-
merly belong’d to them ) reftor’d to the
right Owners, above 20000 of them re-
ceiv’d Baptifm.
But tho they were baptiz’d, moit of
them being deficient in the knowledg of
the true Fundamentals of the Chriitian
Religion for want of Teachers, they had
in a little time fcarce any marks of
Chriftianity left among them except the
Ceremony of Baptifiii \ as Maffxus, John
de Luccna , and Michael Fas in his Speech
to Franctfm Kaverins fufficicntly teftify.
For the Portugucfes being too eager in
baptizing thefe People, provided they
could fay by heart the Creed , Our Father ,
and Avemary, and being unprovided with
Teachers to inftruct them, they foon re-
turn’d to Paganifm \ fo that upon this
fcore the Romijh Priefts need not talk fo
big as they often do.
John the then King of Portugal being (
fenfiblcof thisdefeft, did all that in him
lay to remedy this Evil, by fending divers
young Scholars to the Univerfities of Sa- J
lamanca , Paris and Conimbria , to be edu-
cated and fitted for the Millions into the
Indies . About the fame time Ignatius
Loyola , the Founder of the Jefuits Order,
began to be famous at Rome, for having
with his Society made a Vow to preach
the Gofpel throughout the World :
Whereupon the King of Portugal or-
der’d Peter Mafcarenbat his Ambaflador
there, to confer upon that Head with
Ignatius, and to defire fix Milfionaries for
the £aft -Indies-, two being only granted,
Simon Rotcrigius a Portuguefe (who had
ftudied at Paris at the King’s Charge)
and Francifcus Afpilcota Navctrriis , fir-
named Xaverius , were feledted for that
purpofe} but the firft being feized by a
Quartan Ague, and forc’d to ftay at Ltf~
bon , Xaverius (after having receiv’d
Pope Paul's Benedi&ibn ) fet out IJ4O.
for the Indies .
He was no fooner come thither, but
having underltood the deplorable State
of the Paruas from the mouth of Mi-
chael Fas, he did not reft fatisfied till he
might deliver them out of their Dark-
nefs: For this purpofe having had feve-
ral Conferences with John Albuquerque
Bifliop of Goa , and Martin Alphonfo de
Soufa the Viceroy, he obtain’d leave to
go among them *, for tho he appear’d
there in the quality of the Apoftofical
Nuncio, yet would he pay his due Re-
fpedts to the Civil Government.
He left Goa in the beginning of No-
vember 1542. in Company of Francifcus
du Mamas , and two young Interpreters
1
cars of the
King of
Frugal
Xaverius
goes to m
Indies.
Comes a*
mong the
Paruas.


John King
of Portu-
galV Let-
ter,
educated in the College of St. Paul *, and
coming among the Paruas y apply’d all
his care in having the chief Fundamen-
tals of the Chriftian Religion tranflated
into the Malabar Language, or in in-
ftruding the School-mafters in the right
way of educating their Youth. For the
reft, with what Zeal John King of Por~
tugal profecuted the Propagation of the
Chriftian Religion in the Indies, will belt
appear out of his Letter written 1546.
to Don John de Caflro his Viceroy of the
' lndies , as follows.
To John de Caftro Viceroy of India, all
Happinefs:
: 14 VOU knowing what an abominable
cc thing Idolatry is in our Eyes, the
tc fame fhall for the future not be tolera-
<c ted in my Dominions. Being inform’d
cc that in the Country about Goa the Pa-
-44 gan Temples are fuffer’d and frequen-
-44 ted both in publick and private, as
tc well as divers forts of Pagan Diver-
-44 lions, we command you once for all
4t to have the fame demolifh’d, burnt
‘t and rooted out*, and that all imagi-
-44 nable care be taken to prevent the
44 Importation of Idols, either of Wood,
44 Metal, Earth, or any other Matter.
44 The Heathenifh Sports fhall be abo-
-44 lifli’d, and the Brahmans not in the
u leafl encouraged, and fuch as contra-
-44 vene this our Mandat fhall be fevere-
-4t ly puniflfd. And, confidering that
44 the Pagans may be brought over to
" 4 our Religion, not only by the hopes
44 of Eternal Salvation, but alfo by Tem-
-44 poral Intereft and Preferments, you
4t (hall for the future not beftow any
44 Offices, or any other Places in the
44 Cuftom-houfe (as has been praftis’d
44 hitherto) upon the Heathens, but
44 only upon the Chrlftians. We under-
u Hand alfo that you commonly prefs
44 the Indians for our Sea-fervice* in
44 which cafe we would have you fhew
44 as much Favour as you can to the
“ Chriftians, and, if neceffity will not
44 allow you to excufe them from that
44 Service, to encourage them with good
44 Pay and Rewards: In which Point
44 you fhall confult with Michael a
a Perfbn well known to us for his Piety
44 and Zeal in propagating the Chriftian
41 Religion. Being further inform’d,
C£ that oftentimes Negro Slaves that
44 might be inftrufted in the Principles
44 our Religion, are for filthy lucres
4C fake fold to the Mahometans , the fame
fhall be ftnftly prohibited, and care
4C taken againft all manner of Ufury.
44 In the City of Bazain you /hall build
44 a Church, and dedicate it to St. Jofeph
44 and provide for the Subfiftence of the
44 Vicar and his to accom-
"c plifli which you may employ fomething
46 out of our Revenues, and the 3000
44 Pardaus formerly employ'd to the
44 maintenance of the Mahometan Mofque
£C and their Service, /hall for the future
4t be allotted for the Subfiftence of the
4t Priefts, and fuch other Perfons as give a
44 helping hand towards the Converlion
44 of the Infidels. Among the new Con-
-44 verts, or all fuch as have hitherto, or
44 for the future may be brought over to
44 the Chriftian Religion, by the care
44 of Michael Vos, you /hall diftributc
44 yearly 900 Quarters of Rice, out of
44 our Revenue : It being our Will, that
44 all the Agreements made with the
44 Chriftians oDS. Thomas , concerning
44 the Weight, Meafures, and Price of
44 their Commodities, /hall be inviolably
44 obferved. And underftanding never-
-44 thelefs that the contrary is pra&ifed
44 in and about Cochin , in the Pcppcr-
-44 Trade, we command you to affift thefe
44 Chriftians, and to take effeftual care
“ they may not be damnified, bat treat-
-44 ed with all mildnefs as becomes Chrif-
-4* tians. You /hall alfo follicite the
44 King of Cochin , not to permit any
4 Sorcery or fuch like things to be tran-
! fafted, by the Sale of Pepper; and
being inform’d that the faid King be-
tcave^ fuch of his Subjects as embrace
Chriftianity, of all their means, you
/hail earneftly intercede with him
44 on their behalf, and we will alfo write
44 to him for that purpofe. We could
44 wiffi heartily, that the Bufinefs of So-
cotora (which you have recommended
44 to our care in your Letter) might be
fettled fb as to deliver thofe mifera-
ble People out of their Slavery, pro-
vided the fame could be done without
exafperating the Grand Seignior , under
whole Jurifdiftion they live. You may
u upon this Head confult with Michael
44 Vos, and aft in the matter according
44 to your diferetion. It being alfo come
u t° our Ears, that the Pantos are fome-
-44 times but very indifferently ufed by
44 our Officers, who force them to fell
44 their Pearls (got by fiffiing or diving)
44 at what rate they pleafe to take them ;
44 this you /hall not allow of, but permic
44 them to difpofe of their Commodities
44 at the belt Price they can get. You
44 /hall make an exact Inquiry, whether
44 the Inhabitants of the Sea-fnoar might


Extraordi .
vury Care
of the Pa-
ruas.
u not be protected, and our Revenues
a fecured without a Fleet, fo that the
tc Ships employed in that Service might
“ be made ufe of upon other occafions.
a You (hall confult and debate with Fran-
-14 eifeus Xaverius , whether it were not
“ practicable for the better increafe of
“ the Chriftians, that the Pearl-flfhcry
“ might be permitted only to the Chrifti-
ct ans, with excluflon of the Mahome-
tc terns and Pagans : and as many among
cc the Paruas, who have embraced Chrif-
-44 tianicy, meet with very ill Treatment
44 from their Pagan Friends and Relati-
-44 ons, and are defpoil’d ot all theie you
4C (hall affift out of our Revenues, ac-
-44 cording as Michael Vas (hall judg it
44 convenient.
44 We have further underltood that a
44 certain Royal Youth has efcapci from
“ his Father or Uncle to Goa, in order to
14 be baptized *, as his Converfion is of
44 great moment, fo you lhall be very
44 careful of his Perfon, and of his In-
-44 ftrudion and Education in the College
44 of S. Paul , and provide for his Enter-
-44 tainment in Clothes, Attendance and
44 other matters, futable to his Quality.
44 He having notified to us in his Letter,
44 that he is the legal Heir of the Crown
44 of Ceylon, you (hall make due Enqui-
-44 ry after that matter, and write to us
44 your Sentiment thereof. The furious
44 Attempts of the Tyrant of Ceylon a-
-44 gainfl fuch of his Subjeds as embrace
44 Chrlftianity, oblige us to command
44 you, to take a flow and fecure, but a
44 fevere Revenge of him, to let the
44 World fee, that we are ready to give
44 all imaginable Protedion to thofe poor
44 Creatures, who have renounced their
44 Pagan and Diabolical Idolatries. It
44 being a general Rumour here, that the
44 Images of our Saviour and the Virgin
44 Mary arc made and fold by the Pagans ,
44 a thing unfeemly and unbecoming the
44 Chriftian Name, the fame ought not
44 to be allowed of. The Cathedral
44 Churches of Cochin and Coulang, which
44 have been building for a considerable
44 time, being (as we hear) going to de-
-44 cay, we command to be finilhed, and
44 covered with a good Roof, to keep
44 out the Rains. It is alfo our Pleafure,
44 that a Church dedicated to S. Thomas
44 (hall be built in the Street of Noroa ,
44 and that the Church of St. Cruz, late-
-44 ly begun to be built at lhall be
44 brought to perfection. In the Ifle of
44 Cioran , you lhall order a Church and
44 fomc Meeting-Houfes to be built, for
44 the conveniency of the new 'Converts
44 to be catechized in, and to be inftruc-
-44 ted in the Word of God. We could
44 alfowilh with all our Heart, that Idp-
-44 latry might be banifhed out of Sal fete
44 and Bardes •, but in this matter you
44 mull proceed with Caution, for fear of
44 exafperatingthe Minds of the People j
44 which End may be mod conveniently
44 obtained, by (hewing them with all
44 imaginable Mildnefs, their grofs Er-
-44 rors, and how inftead of the true God
44 they pay their Devotion to infenfible
44 Images and Idols. For the fame rea-
-44 fon you (hall not negleCt to confer with
44 their Principal Men upon this Head,
44 and to encourage fuch as embrace
44 Chviftianity by your Favour, Prefents,
44 and otherwife. It is our Will, that a
44 peculiar regard (hall be had to this our
44 Letter, jand the Contents thereof punc-
t4 tually obferved.
CHAP. XXII.
A Defcription of Tutecoryn and the Pearl fishery. That City taken by the
Hollanders. The Isle of Rammanakoyel, Adams-Bridg ; the Shape of his
Foot imprinted in a Stone. Tindi. The taking of Negapatan, which is befieged
by the Naike, reduced to great Extremity by Famine ; once more attacked and
maintained.
The Paru-
as are new
vcrytbjti-
LerL-
•ns.
»T» H E Pantos ever fince this Union
with the Romifh Church, are fuch
Zealots in that Religion, that there are
fcarce any hopes of ever bringing them
over to our fide •, their Ignorance in Re-
Jigious Concerns being fnch, that be-
fides the ufe of their Beads, and making
thc Sign of the Crofs, they know no-
°
thing of the true Fundamentals of the
Chriftian Religion they pretend to pro-
fefs, In the Year 1661. I was ordered to
take a Journy from Tutecoryn to Coulang ,
to vifit the Churches along the Searihore,
and crideavour to introduce a Reformati-
on there 5 but my endeavours proved in-
effectual by reafon of the great number


Blind
Zealoftht
Paruas.
Pereira
employed
in reform-
ing the Pa-
ruas.
T uteco-
ryn taken
by the
Dutch.
ot Popifh Priefts yet remaining in that
Country 5 and fuppoling a Reformati-
on could have been introduced, there
were no Minifters to maintain it in fo
large a Trad of Land, where thtParu-
<vs were for the molt part great Favourers
of the Portuguefes , and blind Zealots in
their Religion, of which I had fufficient
Proofs before at Tutecoryn . For the Dutch
being become Mafters of that Place,lssB.
I was foon after employed in the bulinefs
of Reformation, but without Succefs •,
for when I preach’d in Portuguese, fcarce
anyone of the Paruas durft enter into
the Church, but remained in the Porch,
for fear of the Romifh Priefts living a-
mong them y for tho thefe Priefts did
not then live in the City, neverthelefs the
Inhabitants would carry their Children a
great way into the Country, to be bap-
tized by the Priefts.
I remember that palling one time thro
the Market-place of Tutecoryn , a great
number of People, at the accidental
ringing of a Bell, proftrated themfelves
upon the Ground, whom I ask’d whether
they thought this a fit place for their De-
votion, when the Church was fo near
at hand, defiring them to follow me thi-
ther \ they anfwered, that lincc the
Church was defpoil’d of the Images and
other Ornaments by us, they mult look
upon us as Enemies to their Religion. I
replied, that we were no Enemies of I-
mages, but only of the worfhipping of
them, as appeared by feveral Hiftories of
the Baptifm of our Saviour, the Gonver-
lion of S. Paul and others, remaining in
the Churches: Tobefhorc, I found that
the whole knowledg of the Paruas (both
young and old) confifted in being able to
fay by Heart the Creed, Our Father, the
Ten Commandments, and the Ave Ma~
ry-
After my Departure the Reverend Mr.
John Pereira Almeyda a Native of Lisbon,
was for a whole Year employed in the
Rcformationof the Paruas, but with lels
Succefs than my felf, they having concei-
ved an Odium again ft him, as one who
had quitted that Religion, and whofe Ef-
figies upon that fcore was burnt at Goa.
In the Year 1658 in Ja we fet fail
from Negumbo, and in the beginning of
Febr. landed near Tutecoryn , after fome
refiftance from the Natives, who fet the
City and their fmall Galleys on fire, and
fo retired deeper into the Country. Th-
tecoryn is properly no more than a large
Village without Walls, Ditches, or
Gates - 7 it has three fpacious Churches,
and abundance of goodly Houfes built
of Stone, which afford a good ProfpeQ
at Sea. Hereabouts they make the belt
Lime in India. The Dutch Company has
been feveral times endeavouring to e-
redt fome Fortifications here but the
Naike, or Lord of the Country, not wil-
ling to confent to it, they have hitherto
been contented with a hadory in one of
the three Churches; where always re-
lides a Fador and Under-Fador, with
three AfliJlants, and fix or eight Soldi-
ers.
Near this Place is the famous Pearl-Fifhe-
ry, whereof there are no more than three
in the Eaft, ‘m.one near Oww*,the fecond
in the Bay of Ainam on the Chinefe Coaft,
and the third in the Bay betwixt Cape
Comoryn and the Iflc of Ceylon, wherein
are alio comprehended Manaar and A-
rifou. The Pearls are found in certain
Oyfter Shells (which are not good to eat)
and are taken by diving 7,8, 9, or 10
Fathom deep, fometimes not without
great danger. The Pearl-Filhery is not
allowed every Year, fometimes the Oy-
fter-banks being cover’d with Sand, and
fometimes the Oyfters not being come to
their full Maturity. To make a Trial of
the laft, they take out a few, and by
the quantity and quality of the Pearls ta-
ken in them, judg whether it will quit
coft to filh or not. If the Fifliing be re-
folved upon, the Inhabitants of the cir-
cumjacent Parts come in great Numbers
with their Families and Boats, and pitch
their Tents near the Sealide, where they
remain until the Fiihery is over. The
Dutch Company has a certain fliare in
what is taken for their Proteftion, the
reft being Ibid publickly in the Markets
of Tutecoryn and Calipatnam. The Pa-
yum alfo dive fometimes for certain hours
for a kind of Sea-Snails called ,
whereof they make Rings, that bear a
good Price at Ben?ale.
The Pearls of Tutecoryn and Manaar
are neither in colour nor brightnefs com-
parable to thofe taken near Ormus on the
Pcrfian Coaft. The Pearls arequeftion-
lefs nourifhed both by the Sea and River
Water, as being often found at the time
of low Tides in the Rivers. Abundance
of Pearl Dull is from hence tranfported
into where it is ufed in the Cor-
dial Medicines. The large Pearls arc
valued according to their bignels, lhape
and whitenefs* Much Cloth is made at
Tutecoryn, the Weaving-Trade being ve-
ry conliderable here, which together
with the plenty of Eatables, Rice, Su-
gar, &c, makes this Place to bemuchre*
garded by the Company.
The Pear],
jifixry*
Th; Pam*
as tko
Chrijl'ms. ,
never dive
before th t)
havemdt
certain
Conjuratu
ons to pre *
vent their
being, hurt
by the
Sharks .




>l 7 . r . 6^.(9.
Jt Y'^f
j ■rzrri:'
'


The ciU
mate of
Tuceco-
ryn*
Different
Seafons on
the North
and South-
fide of the
Mountains
This Trad of Land is fubjeft to moffc
furious Winds in Off obey, November and
December \ and in the Winter Seafons to
fuddenand heavy Rains. It is very Tan-
dy near the Sea-lhore, and has nothing
but Salt-water, which produces Scabs
other cutaneous Diftempers, as 1 can
teftify by my own Experience. During
the Months of January , February and
March, the Nights are extremely cold,
by reafon of the thick Fogs which fall
conftantly at that time, the Days being
at the fame time To exceflivc hot, that
there is no touching of the Ground with-
out their Shoos, called Seripous by the In-
habitants.
And upon this occafion I can’t pafs by
without making this Obfervation, that
notwithftanding the nearnefs of Tuteco-
ryn and Comoryn, they at the fame time
have very different Seafons: For in
May, June, July, jiuguft and September,
1 thofe inhabiting on the South-fide of the
faid Cape, enjoy all the Blcffingsof the
Summer Seafon, whilft thofe living on
* the North-fide are at the fame timcfubjedt
to all the inconveniences of the Winter:
This fide being then conftantly peftred
with tempeftuous Winds, whilft on the
other fide the Air is fetene and calm $
the difference of which muft needs be
look’d for among the Mountains, the re-
ceptacles of Winds, Rains and Snow,
the fame being obferved in other Parts
of the Indies, as well as in Africa, For
If Africa were not mountainous* it would
be altogether barren and uninhabitable,no
more than the Countries under the Torrid
Zone, which if they were deftitute of
Mountains, would alfo want Rivers (the
fources of them being all in the Moun-
tains) nor hard Rains. Thus it is ob-
fcrvable,that about Columbo,Gale, and Ma-
ture, abundance of Rains fall at different
times, becaufc that part of the Ifle of
•Ceylon is mountainous \ whereas near
Mamar, Jafnapatnam and the other Pla-
ces, where there is a flat Country, it
rains only in Offober, November , and a lit-
tle in December, all the reft of the Year
being without the leaft Rains, the defedt
whereof is however fupplied in fome mea-
gre by the Fogs or Dew ; the South
Winds, which blow then from the Gape
of Comoryn , prevent the Rains on that
fide. The Inhabitants of Peru arc very
fenfible of this difference *, for whilft the
Inhabitants of the Mountains are often
rejoiced with fudden Showers of Rain,
thofe of the flat Country, and efpecially
hear the Seafide, never feel any Rain, but
only a thick Fog or Dew,
Whence it is evident, that according
as the Mountains fend forth the Wind:
and Rains on one fide or the other diet
produce the difference of Seafons in theft
Parts; this is very perfpicuous on the
Cape of South Point of Africa, where
fuch violent gulhes of Wind are fome-
tiraes lent forth out of the Concavities of
the Mountains, that they are able to o-
verturn all that meets in their way. I
remember that travelling once that way,
I had enough to do to keep my felf and
my Horfe upright; and at another time
a Coach belonging to the Dutch Company
there, was overturn’d by fuch a gu/h of
Wind. They take it for an infallible
Sign of an approaching Tempeft on the
Cape of Good Hope , when they fee thick
Clouds appear on the top of
tainand. The fame is obferved in moft o-
ther Mountains under the Torrid Zone ;
for the Inhabitants near the EquinoElial
Line have their due rainy Seafons twice
a Year, viz. in Spring and Autumn, oc-
cafioned by the gathering of the Clouds in
the Mountains,the Pinacles of which reach-
ing very high, ftop the courfe of the Air
(which in thofe Parts moves conftantly
from Eaft to Weft} which thereby be-
ing condenled into Clouds, thefe pro-
duce of neceffity either fudden Winds or
Rains on one fide, and blelles the other
fide at the fame time with a ferene Air
and happy Climate ; the tops of thefe
Mountains being in thefe Parts like a
Partition Wall to Summer and Winter.
For the further Elucidation whereof, I
will refer my felf to the moft ingenious
Lord Bacon, and des Cartes.
From Tutecoryn towards the Ifle of
Rammanakoyel, are to be feen divers i
Churches of the Pamas, as at Baipadr, i
Manapaar, &c. where planted
the Chriftian Doftrine. The Ifle of Ram-
manakoyel abounds in Cattel, having got
its Name from Bramma or Ramma, and
the Malabar Word Key el, i. e. The Tem-
ple of Ramma ; for near the Sea-fide is
to be feen the Pagode of the Teuver or
Lord of the Ifle, which they fay con-
tains an incredible Treafure. The Foun-
dation is ftrengthened and fupported
with Stones of a vail bignefs towards
the Sea-fide, to break the Force of the
raging Waves, when the South Winds
blow. The Ifle is however but indiffe-
rently fertile, being in fome Parts very
fandy, which is very troublefome to
the Eyes, when the Winds blow very
hard. The Lord of the Ifle has built a
ftrong Caftle oppofite to the Coaft of
Coromandel , and the Country under the
* The Mom
' tains oc-
. cafiontbe
f difference
rfSeafonSo
Ifle of
Ramma-
nakoycL


Strait
Pajfa' e
under the
Cafik of
the IJle,
Adam’s
Bridg.
AdamV
Foot /hewn
by the Si-
amefe s.
The Holy
Water.
Jurifdi&ion of the Naik, In the Year
1662. land Lieutenant Herman Egbertfz.
travelling chat way, were Seized upon by
the Inhabitants and committed Prifoncrs,
being forced to live without Viduals or
Drink for a considerable time ; till a
certain Inhabitant of Manaar coming
that way, and knowing me, releafed us
out of our Captivity. The Cannon of
the Caftle commands a certain ftrait
Paiiage, which leading to Manaar, Jaf-
napatnam and Negapatnam , the fame may
be ftopt at pleafure by the Lord of the
Ifle, by finking only a few Scones in the
Channel, whereby the Navigation that
way is at his abfolute difpofal.
Not far from hence is that they call
Adams-Bridg, being a Ridge of Sands
and Rocks extending as far as Manaar,
being Sometimes paflable in fmall Boats.
In the defeription of Ceylon, we (hall have
occafionto fpeak fomething more of this
Adams- Bridg, and the Adams- Mount.
Certain it is, that the Cingalefes as well
as the Siamefes have forae knowledg
of Adam •, for the laft (hew you the print
of a Foot (faid to belong to the firft
Man) in a rocky Mountain of a yard and
a half in length, three quarters broad, and
a quarter deep, edged round about with
Silver, near which is built a moft mag-
nificent Temple, much frequented by the
Siamefe Priefts, and other Inhabitants
of the circumjacent Country, it being
their Opinion, that the leaft drop of the
Water gathered in this Print of the
Foot, and dropp’d upon their Heads,
cleanfes them from their Sins.* for which
reafon they never ufe it without a great
deal of Reverence, no body daring to
enter the Temple without 10, 12, or
more Wax Candles lighted, according to
their refpeftive Abilities } and when they
return, they take fome of this Holy Wa-
ter along with them in Bamboe- Canes, for
the ufe of their Friends, that have not
the Opportunity of coming thither in
Perfon. The King himfelf goes once e-
very Year on Pilgrimage with all his
Mandarins (or great Courtiers) to this
Temple, where they ufe this Water at
the time of the Full Moon, and conclude
the Night with dancing and drinking.
Some of the Siamefe Priefts did by fpe-
dal leave from his Majefty, fhew to cer-
tain Hollanders, 1654, in March, a Plate
of Gold, of the fame length and breadth
as the before-mentioned Adam’s Foot,
with 68 Figures engraven upon it, which
they faid were formerly to be feen in the
print of Adam’s Foot in the Rock, but
vaniihed as foon as they were engraven in
this Plate, and were the following : A
Queen with a Ring on her Finger, divers Ro- <
fes, a Chain, an Arm, a Bed of Gold, a
Chair of the fame Metal, an Elephant's
Tooth, a Royal Palace, a Golden Sword-belt,
anVmhrello, a Royal Hanger or Scimeter,
a Fan made of the Leaves of the Terry-tree,
a Fan made of a Peacocks Tail, a Royal
Crown, a Prieft with his mendicant Pot of
Iron, a Chain of Precious Stones, a red
Cow flip Flower, a double one of the fame
kind, a white one and a double white one of
the fame kmd, a Cup full of Water, a Pot
full of Water, the Sea , the World, a Fo-
refl beyond the World, the Purgatory of the
Siamefe, the highejt Mountain of the
World , the Sun, the Moon, the Evening -
Star, the Great God of tlx Heavens, the
God of the four Winds, 2000 Servants of
the four Winds, a Sea-fnail, two Eifhes of
Gold, the feven chief Rivers, feven Mmu
tains with Precious Stones , feven Royal La-
dies, the King of Beafis, the King of the
Caimans or Crocodiles, an Enfign, another
of Paper, a Chair or Litter, a Fan with a
long Handle, a Mountain in an l/land, the
King of Serpents, the King of Tygres, a
leaping Horfe, a large Elephant, a white one
of the fame kind , a Water-Serpent, a Ca-
fuarius (a Bird like an Oftrich) the King
of the white Cows, an Elephant with three
Heads and as many Tails, a Serpent, a Ship
of Gold, an Angel, a Cow with a fucking
Calf, a certain Bird half a Man and half a
Bird, a Female of the fame fort , a finging
Bird, the King of the Peacocks, the King of
the Cranes, a Bird called Krapat, a Bird
called Kuyfhit, fix Heavens, fixteen forts
of Heavens .
Concerning all which the Priefts give
you their Interpretations. The before-
mentioned extends to T?/-
lemanaar, the furthermoft point of the
Jfleof Manaar, of which more anon in
the Defeription of Ceylon .
We will now take our turn in the
Southern Parts of Coromandel, fubjeft for
the moft part to the Naik of Madure and
Tanjoumr. Tondy is the firft place next
to the Territories of Jafnapatuam, and I
remember ray felf, that fetting Sail one
Morning about 11 a Clock from Jafnapat-
nam, we were within fight of the Shoar
by 4 in the Afternoon, and the fame
Night at 9 a Clock caft Anchor before
Negapatan . From Tondy they tranfport
yearly many hundred Heads of Cartel to
Jafnapatnam near the firft ftands a
certain Pagode, called Kailiemeer, a very
high Strudture, in the Road to Negapa-
tan or Negapatnam, i. c. The City of Ser-
pents, Nag a fignifying in the Malabar
The Ft .
i*res i n
AcUmV
foot.
Tondy #*
ontbcCaft
of Coro*
nuudcL


~7'ol. J.
1
!’■ 6 S
fS RKOICTNUINt
'CHOROMAN DEL,
GOLCONDA.
et
I QXJXJL .
"Novaetaccurata clelcriptio. W
\ ( i IUL um&SZ /
iy-
\7X > r
\ \ x ° f \ Nsn \ ( -
\ '' \ \ x
\\ \ \
\b e\ j/ £ Jc.
\ k \ i i 1—






PoL ?. y , ocx .
4 .,” t . I "I I ~,, I — I —
Pk TtynlanJfche HaeJert .
c :
10.


The city of
Negapat-
nam.
Maflered
by the
Dutch,
The Pro-
teftant
Religion
introduced
in Nega-
patnam.
Language a Serpent, and Patnam a City j
becaufe the Country hereabouts abounds
with a certain fort of venomous Serpents,
called by the Cokes Capellos , which are
in fuch reverence among the Pagans , that
if they ffiould happen to kill one of them,
they will look upon it as an expiable
Crime, and to forebode fome great Mif-
fortunc.
This City was taken by compoßtion
without ftriking a Stroke, by John van
dcr Laan 0 and Lucas van der Dujfcn , Com-
mandersof the Dutch Forces, 1658. the
laftof the two being fincc made Gover-
nor of Cochin , and the other Forts on
the Malabar Coaft, fubjeef to the Holland-
ers, The Portuguefes were permitted to
depart with their Goods, Families,
Church-Ornaments, &c. in certain Ships
appointed for that purpofe by the Dutch
Company. The City is feated near the
Shoar, has no convenient Harbour, as
indeed the whole Coaft of Coromandel is
deftituteof them. Its Buildings are ve-
ry ftately, efpecially the Church, which
affords a very goodly Profpe& towards the
Sea-fide : The Land-Winds are exceffive
hot and Rifling here, as on the other
hand the Sea-Winds are refrefhing both
to Men and Beafts. It is obfervable that
whilft the Land-Wind blows, they gather
Water in Stone VeiTels, which keeps ve-
ry cool j the worftis, that thefe Winds
prevent People from fweating, which
makes the Heat the more infnpportable.
The fame is to be obferved at Mafulipatan ,
where they are fb Rifling that many Peo-
ple are killed by them.
In the Year 1660 . 14 July, I let fail
from Jafnapatnam to Negapatnam , to
introduce the Reformed Religion there,
and accordingly preached the firft time
the 1 8thj both in Dutch and Portuguefe ,
and adminiftred the Holy Sacrament to
2oPerfons, and Baptifm to fevera! Chil-
dren. After Mr. Frederick Frontenhis and
my felf hadfpent fometime there in fet-
ling the Proteftant Religion, Mr. John
Kruyf , formerly Miniftcr in the Cattle,-
called the Seelandia in the Ifleof Tajowan ,
was conftituted Minifter at Negapatnam ,
who after his Death was fucceeded by
Mr. Nathaniel de Pape , a Perfon of inde-
fatigable care, who in averyfraall time
has made confiderable Advancements in
the Portuguefe and Aialabar Languages,
who by the encouragement, and under the
Protection of Mr. Cornelius SpeelmanGo-
vernour of the Coaft of Coromandel , and
famous for his late Victories obtain'd a-
gainft the Macaffars , and the King of the
Ifle of Celebes , has fettled and fpread the
DoCtrine of the Gofpel in the circumja-
cent Villages.
At the time of our firft Arrival, we
found the Affairs of Negapatnam in no
fmall Confufion ; the City having been
juft before beffeged by the Naih, who af-
ter a vigorous Sally made by the Bcfiegcd,
had been forced to retreat with the Loft
of 300 or 400 Men. Beffdes this, the
King of V\ftapour had not long before the
Siege made an Inroad into the Country,
and by deftroying all the Fruits of the
Earth, and whatever elfe he met with,
occalion’d fuch a Famine, that the poor
Country Wretches being forc’d to fly to
the City for want of Rice and other Eat-
ables, you faw the Streets cover’d with
emaciated and half-ftarv’d Perfons, who
offer’d themfelves to Slavery for a fmall
quantity of Bread, and you might have
bought as many as you pleas’d at the rate
of 10 Shillings a Head above 5000 of
them were there bought and carried to
Jafnapatnam , as many to Columho , befides
feveral thousands that were tranfported
to Batavia.
In the Year 166 g. the Naik was again
embroil’d with the Dutch Company, but
being bravely repuls’d was glad to be at
quiet. Without the Gates on the North-
lide of the City ftands a very lofty Pa~
godej called China , near which is a Sum-
mer-Seat, with very pleafant Gardens
and Orchards, formerly belonging to
Francifco d ’ Almeyda , an antient rich For*
tuguefc 7 now living at Trangebar.
M'lfery a-
bout Ne-
gapatnaaa


CHAP. XXIII.
A Definition of Carcal, Trangebar, Trinilivaas, Colderon, Porto Novo,
Tegnatapan, Tirepoplier, Chengier, Sadrafpatan, Madrafpatan, St. Tho-
mas, Paliacatte, Carnatica, Penna, Caleture, Petapouli, and Mafu-
lipatan.
TW O Leagues from Negapatan lies
Carcaf where, as well as in moft
other Southern Places, Adrian van der
Meyden Head Faftor of our Company, did
ered a Fadory fome years ago } but fince
we have been Mailers of Negapatan , the
Fadory of Careal is not regarded. The
chief Commodities here are certain Stuffs,
efpecially thofe call’d Rambotyns , much in
requeft among the Japonefes.
From Car cal to the Banifh Fort call’d
Trangebar are about three Leagues: It has
four Bulworks, and the Garifon confifts
for the iTioft part of Topajfes and Negros ,
under the Command of one Eskel Andres.
The Inhabitants confift of Portuguefes ,
Pagans and Mahometans: Their Traffick
is very inconfiderable, their chiefeft Ad-
vantage arifing from the Excurfions they
make upon the neighbouring Mahometans ,
with whom they are in conftant
by reafon of the ill ufage they have ever
received from them. About two Years be-
fore our departure thence, one Simon van
Medenblick had got a Commiffion from the
and took a rich Moorifh Velfel,
and kill’d the whole Ships Crew. I have
often wonder’d why the Banes Ihould not
more encourage their Trade in the Indies
than they do, fince they have the fame
or rather a better opportunity for fo do-
ing than the Englifh.
chor here (as all along the Coaft of Coro-
mandel) during the South Mouffon. , but
very dangerous in the North Mouffon.
The Caftle of Tirepoplier is tolerably
ftrong, according to the falhion of the
Gentives . The Faftory formerly belong-
ing to the Butch was within the Caftle,
where is alio a ftately large with
a high Stone Tower flat at top, which
ferves the Mariners for a Guide. The
Mines of the old Caftle, belonging for-
merly to the Portuguefes , upon an Afcent
near the Sea-Shore on the North fide of
the River, are alio feen a good way at
Sea. The Country hereabouts is gene-
rally landy, and fometimes rocky. Tire*
poplier is under the Jurifdiftion of the
Criflappaneyh , whofe Refidence is at Chen-
about two days Journy to the South
of ‘Tirepoplier .
Carcai.
Trange-
bar. °
The City of Chengier is very populous,
and three times as bigas Rotterdam , feat-
fa , in a moft pleafant Valley, near ade-
-1 “fitful River,to the South of it: It is fof-
tify’d with double Stone Walls, and has
four high Rocks without, upon three of
which are built as many ftrong Forts, and
upon the fourth a Pagode. The firft of
thefe Rocks is enclos’d with a very ftrong
Wall, the fecond with four Walls, and
the third with no lefs than feven, with as
many Gates all of Stone, and kept by a
confiderablc Garifon ; theAfcents to the
Forts being cut out of the Rock, and
icarce acceflible by reafon of their Steep-
nefs and Straitnefs. On the top of thefe
Rocks are moft delicious Springs, Frelh-
water Ponds and Gardens. Befides which
there is another Fortrels upon an unaccef-
fible Rock without the City, command-
ing the Avenues towards it on that lide.
The Natk\ Palace ftands betwixt two of
the before-mention’d Rocks, moft plea-
fantly fituate, and well fortify’d. Great
Cannon are a kind of rarity here and
thofe few they have ( like thofe in the
Siege of Negapatan , 1658.) are made of
long and broad Bars of Iron, join’d toge-
ther with Iron Hoops; their Bullets arc
of Stone, and cut round.
The Naik was at our firft arrival in
thefe Farts, very obliging to our Deputy?,
Chcngicr.
From Trangebar you go by the way of
Irinilivaas to Colderon , where there is a
very dangerous Sand-Bank. From thence
you come to the Place call’d the Four Pa~
g°des , and fo to Porto Novo or
about 4 or 5 Leagues from Trangebar.
At Porto Novo inhabit fome Portuguefes ;
their Trade confifts chiefly in a certain
hard Wood call’d Coco-nuts
udrekj Cair , &c.
Colderon.
Porto No-
vo.
About a League from Porto Novo Hands
Tegnapatan , where the Hollanders have
likewife a Faftory. Next to this lies
poplier, upon a River which is navigable,
within half a League of the Dutch Fadfo-
ry. The Road lies at 11 i Degrees of
Northern Latitude, having 77 Fathom
Water, with a grey Tandy Ground, very
fit for Anchorage not above a Mile from
the Shore. There is fafe riding at An-
Tegnapa-
ran.
Tirepop-
Fer,
652
A Defer iption of the Coafts of




-Pel- 3 &S-U
PALIACATTA;
or
g e $j. )ji cf
12


Sadrafpa-
tan.
Madrafpa-
tan.
IThomas.
whom he treated very fplendidiy for 14
Days together } and after he had given
them a full view of his prodigious
Wealth, confiding in mod fumptuous
Apparel, Silver, Gold, and Jewels, as
alfo of his Wives, Concubines, and For-
ces, both Horfe and Foot, he difmifs’d
them very honourably, upon the news of
Iteragio being on his march againd us.
The Naik being almod arriv’d to the
Age of Dotage, one Trinvingelaya (who
had emafculated himfelf) was Admini-
ftrator of the Kingdom, a cruel and bloo-
dy-minded Perfon, very covetous and
implacable in his Hatred, who by his
Severity againd Criminals had rendred
the Country free from Robberies and
Pillages. This Aya or Adminidrator
General was very urgent with our Dcpu-
tys to agree with him once for all for the
yearly Sum of 1800 Rixdollars in lieu of
theCudoms, offering to us the Govern-
ment of Tegnapatan , the free Exercife of
the Chridian Religion, and full Power to
rebuild the ruin’d Caftie of the Portu-
guefes.
The Country hereabouts abounds in
Rice, Salt, Fruits, and other Eatables *,
notwithftanding which, byreafonof the
vaft number of the Inhabitants, they mud
be fupply’d with Provifions from abroad.
Their chief Commodities to be export-
ed are Linen and Woollen Stuffs, much
in requed among thofe of the Aloluques ,
Amboyna, Banda , and other Malajan Pla-
ces. But great care mud be taken thefe
Stuffs agree with their Patterns, efpecial-
ly in the goodnefs oif the Colour, wherein
they are very deceitful. The Commo-
dities imported and exchanged here are
Nutmegs , Mace, Pepper , Sandal-mod ,
Chinefe Silks, Velvets, Sattins , embroider'd
and wrought Carpets of all forts of Colours,
raw Silks, Patana Girdles, Musk , Cinnabcr ,
Quick-filver, (but no Vorcellain or Chinefe
Campher) Brazain, Tin, Lead , Copper , &c.
From Tirefoflier you go over Poelenere,
Poelemoer & Alemhrue to Sadrafpatan,' where
the Dutch have a Faftory, and from thence
to Madrafpatan , otherwife Chinmpatan,
where th sEngliJh have the Fort of S.George,
garifon’d with Topatz.es and Mijlices , and
from whence they fend their Ships every
Year, as well as from Surat. S . Thomai is a
City belonging to the Portugucfes , fituate
in Maliapour , at 23 4 Degrees Northern
Latitude, about a days Journy from Pali-
acatta} but taken from them about 8 or
P Years ago by the Moors. It is an antient
trading City, their chief Traffick con-
fiding in colour’d Stuffs, their Weavers
here being famous throughout the Indies ,
as well as their Dyers: They are tranf-
ported to Malaga , Java, the Moluques ,
Siam, Pegu, &c. The Excellency and
Laftingnefs of their Dying are attribut-
ed to a peculiar Quality in their Water,
the Springs whereof arife out of very
white Tandy Ground, without the leaft
mixture of Clay.
Paliacatta, i. e. the Old Fort iri the
Malabar Language, is feared at 13 Degn
22 Min. of Northern Latitude, 5 long
Leagues from St. Thomas. About. 6
Leagues into the Country, in a dire& Line
from the Harbour of Paliacatta , you fee
a ridg of high Mountains extending from
South to North : On the Southern part
you fee an Interface or Valley, where in
undent Times dood the Gaftle of Rama
Geridorgen } in lieu whereof was after-
wards built the Fort Geldria , where the \
Butch Governour keeps his Refidence. j
It is not very large, yet fortified with c
fome Bulworks, fufficient to refill the
Power of the neighbouring Moors , Mr,
Anthony Pavilion, Counfellor of the In-
dies, had at that time his Refidence there,
as Governour, after Mr. Cornelius Sfeel-
man *, and the Garifon confifled of about
80 or 90 men. The Road is very good at ■
half a League from the Shore, where you *
may ride fafely at Anchor at 7 or 8 Fa- *
thorn Depth during the Southern MoujJ'on j
but not in the Northern Moujfon , when
the Waves breaking forth with great
violence out of the Bay of Bengal and the
Ganges againd this Shore, render An-
chorage very dangerous.
About 3 4 Leagues from the Road is
a certain Sand-bank, extending from the
River into the Sea for a League together,
where there is no Anchorage within 4 4
5 fathoms Wather. Two Leagues to
the North is the Point of Sicerecourdi ,
from whence jets out into the Sea a
Sand-Ridg for above two Leagues and
half, near which there is no fafe Ancho-
rage within 6 4 or 7 fathoms Water.
Near the Bar there is from 6 to 10 fa-
thoms Water in the South Moujfon at
high Tide} but the Boats or Lighters
that carry the Merchandizes raufl keep
under the Southern Shoar, there being
abundance of Shelves under the Northern
Shoar. About a good Cannon-dot with-
in the mouth of the River, within reach
of the Caftie, is a good Winter-Road for
the Indian Ships. This River lies at
lead 5 Leagues to the North-Weft; into
the Country, by the City of Armagon
and the Forefl of Sicerecourdi, from
whence Paliacatta is furnifhed with Wood
for Building and Fuel, whereof there is
Paliacatta,
The £)utch
Fort Gel-
dria*
The Road
of Palis-
ottca.


1 great fcarcity in the barren Grounds
r. round that City. A fmall Brook runs
* alfo by the Fort, where we ufed often to
divert our felves in Boats.
The Canal leading to Faliacatta is al-
moft dry during the South Moujfon, but
overflows the Country for two Leagues
round in the Northern Moujfon. The
Grounds about Faliacatta are very nitrous,
fandy, and unfit to produce any thing in
great quantity *, which is the reafon that
they mull be fupply’d with molt forts of
Prorvilions (except Fifh, whereof they
have plenty) from other places. The
Fortifications being built upon Fenny
Grounds, which reach for four or five
Leagues round, have been often in dan-
ger of being fvvallow’d up by the Wa-
ters in the rainy feafon, and were there-
fore not maintain’d without vaft Charges.
Under the Cannon of the Fort of Gel-
dria lie two Villages, one to the South
call’d Diramamy , built upon a fmall Ifle,
the other on the North-fide within reach
of a Mufquet, call’d Coupon, and inha-
bited by Chriftian Filhermen, being con-
verted to the Chriftian Faith in the time
of the Portupuefes.
it be very red within, or elfe to chaw a
piece of it, and if you perceive a nitreus
tafte in it, it is very good. To try the
true Dye thereof upon Callico’s, you may
fqueeze fomc Lemmon Juice upon it, and
let it dry in the Sun } if it be not true it
will change pale. There is alfo a five
corner’d Fruit call’d Carunbolle , the Juice
whereof being fharper than that of Lem-
mons, is likewife made ufe of in trying
the true Dye of the EJfaye Colour, for
this Nation being very cunning in their
way of dealing, oftentimes make ufe
of a Dye call’d Sordaco inftead of the
Eftye, and of the Bark of a certain
Tree growing in Orixa, but may ealily
bedilUnguifh’d by the colour, being fome-
what darker than the true EJfaye, and
if rub’d with Water, will tinge it. They
have a nice way of refining and trying
the Gold here, and the Dutch Company
coin abundance of Golden Pagodes here
with the King’s Stamp upon them. A-
bundance of Nely , Rice, Gingely- feeds,
Oil, Butter, coarfe Cloths, Iron, Honey
and yellow Wax, is brought hither from
Orixa and Mafulipatan , the whole Voyage
thither and back again being commonly
perform’d in four Months. From hence
to Arracan, Pegu and Tanajfcry you pay
8 or io per Cent, for Freight of Pepper,
Sandalwood, Stuffs, Steel and Iron, and
make your returns in Gold, Rubies of
Ava, GummuLacca , long white Pepper
Lead, &e. Betwixt 7 anajftry and Occl
da towards Malacca are the Harbours of
Tanangar , Sencaza, and Perach , oppofite
to Achem, whither they trade with vaft
Profit, and bring back abundance of Tin,
a Commodity much in requefl with the
Moors, wherewith they tin their Cop-
per Veflels. A
We will now proceed to the King-
dom of Carnatica, extending 6o Badaga-
rian Leagues (one whereof is equivalent to
three Butch Miles) from South to North,
and 40 from Faliacatta to the Coaft of
Malabar. In this Country it was that the
three Naiks , or chief Lords of the Crown
of relour, keep their Refidence, who pay
a certain yearly Tribute to that Crown,
viz,, the Fitipanaik of Madure, the King’s
Bafbn-Bearer,200 Pagodes(each of which
is worth fix Holland Guilders) per an-
num the Chrijlapanaik of Cbengier the
King’s Betel Box-bearer, as many and
the JVaik of T*anjouwer his Umbrello-
bearer (who is Lord of Negapatan')
400 per annum. Thefe Dignities being
hereditary time out of mind, the Coun-
tries of Madure, Cbengier and Tanjouwer
have been annexed to them, under con-
dition of a yearly Tribute, and are be-
hdes this oblig’d to give their perfonal
Attendance at the Coronation of the law-
ful Succeflbr of the before-mentioned
Kingdom.
The King-
dom of
Carnatica,
The three
Naiks.
Petapouli is fituate at 1 6 deg. of North-
Latitude: As you fail Halt and Eaft to
the North towards this Road, you fee an
lue at a League and a half diftance made
by the North Branch of the River co-
ver’d with Coco-Trees, an infallible
Guide to the Road, where at a League’s
diftance from the Shear, there is good
Anchorage at 6 fathoms Water in a San-
dy Bottom. This is the fecureft Harbour
on all this Coaft, during the North
Mpujfon, by reafon of a Point of Land
jetting out for three Leagues in the Sea
to the North of the Ifle, and endofing
as it were the Road by a Demi-Circle,
whereas in the Sout£i Moujfon the Sea is
very boifterous, and the Waves very tur-
bulent here, ihe Bar of Petapouli has
fcarce palpable but by fmall
Velfels. The City lies a League within
t
Pe ™i
Further to the North (about a days
Voyage) from Paliacatta , Ik Penna and
Cakture, betwixt which places is found
the bed Effaye Roots, which are alfo to
be found in the Ifles near Jafnapatan: It
is a fmall Root no bigger than a little
ipng of about a fpan in length, ufed by
the Dyers. The way to try its goodnefs,
is to break it to pieces, and to fee whether
Pcnna,
Caleture.




VoL.j .f. 65 5 .
TJae Cxfv~ of
MAS ulip at am .
''lt


Inhabitants, efpecially the Gentries, who
are forely opprefs’d by the Perfians and
Moms here, who farm all the Weaving
Trade from the Great Perfons j where-
fore there is fcaree any trafficking here
without Profit, unlefs you have a Patent
from the King, which is not eafy to be
becaufe the Governours (wlto
£ay 140000 Pagodes of annual Tribute to
the King) conltantly oppofe it; and it is
no difficult matter to approach the King
(who keeps his Court at a great diftance
thence) without purchafing their Favour,
or fome other Great Mens at Court. For
the reft, this City is a Place of great
Traffick, where moft of our Commodi-
ties, as alfo thofe tranfported hither from
the Moluques, China, &c. are fold at a
very good rate. Here is alfo a great
Concourfe of Merchants from Cambaja,
Suratte , and other Places under the Jurif-
didion of the Great Mogul, as alfo from
Goa, Orixa, Bengale and Pegu, Here is
likewife a confiderable Traffick in Dia-
monds and Rubies: The firft are digged
in the Kingdoms of Golgonda and Decani,
near the City of Byfilaga beyond Suratte .•
Each Stone weighing above 25 Mangely’s ,
or Carats, belonging to the King of By-
filaga, the reft to thofe that have farm’d
the Mines. There is a certain Mountain
call’d Cotfa Vuytthia, in the Country of
Decant, which affords the choiceft Dia-
monds. Borneo, but efpecially the City
of Succadana, arc likewife very famous
for Diamonds,
the River, which is pretty large, and
runs up into the Country till it joins its
Waters with the River Meca.
Petapouli is of no great extent, inha-
bited by fome Moors and Perfians of Note,
but for the molt part by Gentries, Sub-
jeds of the King of Golgonda . As here-
abouts grows a kind of Effaye Colour,*
exceeding all the reft, call’d Tawbrevelle,
fo the painted and dy’d Stuffs of Petapouli
exceed even thofe of Mafulipatan, The
Root grows like a final! fprig of a foot
long, the Colour whereof is fo deep that
they are oblig’d to mix it with the Effaye
of jinical and Ortacour, to make it the
more lively. This Effaye Root grows in
the Ifle made by the River over againft
the City, whereof the Governour has the
Monopoly, and pays a certain yearly
Sum for it to the King, which as it is
paid molt commonly in dy’d Stuffs and
Cloths, fo he employs the Weavers
himfelf, and for that reafon will not ea-
fily permit them to be fold to the Mer-
chants (at leaft not without his Confent)
who tranfport them from thence into
Perfia, Here good Indigo is to be bought,
but much dearer than at Mafulipatan:
From hence we alfo tranfport Cotton-
Yarn, white Stuffs,and feveral other Com-
modities to Holland.
Mafulipatan is a City feated near a large
River, where the Engli/h and Butch have
their Fadories; It is very populous, and
the Refidence of a Governour, who pays
a certain yearly Tribute to the King of
Golcondar , which he fqueev.es out of the
Mafulipa-
m*
CHAP. XXIV.
An Account of most forts of precious Ston es, as Diamonds, Smaragds,
Saphirs, Amethists, fafpirs, Sardonicks , Achats, Granates, &c.
77,
rnnl
»lech.7.
t. 12*
Ezek. 3.9.
ifa.33.13,
Jcr. 1 7 . 1,
»T HE moft noble of all precious Stones
1 is the Diamond, call’d by
the Greeks, from impreg-
nable. Pliny, and others of the antient
Naturalifts being of opinion, that it is
neither to be broken by the force of the
Hammer, nor penetrable by the violence
of the Fire-, which however has lince
been fufficiently contradifted by Expe-
rience ’•) tho the fame is feveral times ufed
in the fame fenfe in the Scripture*. It
is likewife call’d Mamas by the ,
jyearnant by the Germans , Adamanto t>y
Spaniards, Almacs by the Arabians,
j um ‘hv the Malajars, and Hiera and
Jua by the Indofthans. The Beauty of a
Diamond confifts ifl its Hardnefs, Tranf-
parency and Luftrc; tho to fpeak the
truth, there are but few Diamonds with-
out fome Defers, which however pafs
current among thofe who are no nice
Judges of it. Lead is reckon’d to be ex-
actly three times as heavy as a polic’d
Diamond.
There is a certain kind of Diamonds
call’d Bofchiers, which are riot by a third
part fo valuable as the reft, tho fortie-
tiracs they exceed for Brightnefs aft the
other forts; but if they incline to a red-
dim or yellow Colour, they are not worth
half fo much, they being only valued ac-
cording id the weight of the with


The Good-
nefs and
Value of
the Dia-
monds,
The Kuby»
Their dif.
feunt
kinds t
gwdnefs
tod VslHi,
out any Multiplication. To try the
goodnefs of a Diamond you muft cut one
Diamond with another, and if the Powder
thereof be of an Alh-colour, it is right,
b ut jf w hite, otherwife* for all other
P rec i° us Stones except the Diamond
afford a white Powder, and the more
the Powder of the Diamond approaches
to a Grey, the more precious it is. T
have another way of trying the Dia-
monds, by making them red hot, and
afterwards quenching them in cold frefti
Water, and if they don’t crack they are
true and good. The true Value of the
bell Diamonds (provided they are clean
and of a juft thicknefs ) is computed thus:
The juft Value of a good Diamond weigh-
ing a Carat ( each whereof is equivalent
to four Grains) is 80 Gilders , on 32 Rix~
dollars. Now to know the juft Value of
one or two Carats , you muft multiply two
with two,the Produft whereof being four,
this muft be multiplied with the value of a
Diamond of one Carat, viz. 80 Gilders ,
the Produft whereof amounts to 320 Gil-
ders \ fo that according to this Compu-
tation, a Diamond of 20 Carats is worth
32000 Gilders , and according to the fame
proportion, one of 100 Carats no lefs
than 800000 Gilders ,
The Ruby, call’d Rubittus or
lus by the Latins, by the
Malayans, Ban amor a by the Siamefes ,
and Laal by the Indoflbans, it will en-
dure the Fire for a conliderable time.
There are three feveral forts of Rubies,
fome are of a high red and brillant colour j
thofe of a dark red colour, tho they
carry a very fine Luftre, yet are not fo
much valued as the former. The Oriental
Rubies are call’d Efpine , thofe of Ger-
many are very hard, but inclining to a
dark brown, and therefore of lefs Va-
lue i notwithftanding which they arc
true Rubies: they feldom exceed the big-
nefs of a good Pea, and are very thin,
and the Stone-Polifhers make them thin-
ner, ftill to increafe their Luftre. The
EfpineUes are of much brighter Colour,
but not fo hard, and confequently of
lefs or more Value in proportion to their
Hardnefs, fome being as hard as a Sa-
phir.
The Carbuncles are adulterated with
Sandaraeba, but thcfe falfe Colours are
foon difcovered in the Corners of the
poliflied Stones, which don’t receive thefe
Colours. The Oriental Carbuncles
are likcwife of two different kinds, fome
are of a dark brown Colour, the others
are bright and carry Luftre like Fire, and
theft are the moft precious. The Rubies
are apprais’d like the Diamonds by Ca-
rats, one, two, three, or more, with
this difference, that the Rubies thoof the
fame Weight, are fomewhat bigger in
proportion than the Diamonds, and
without the leaft Clouds or other De-
fers.
The Smaradg or Enterault, called 7a- ■
maml by the Arabians , and Jafche by the ,
Indians , is one of the precious Stones cal-
led Sjiwcpixy/os by the , and E[ma-
raude by the French. They are of three
different kinds. Scythia and Egypt pro-
duce thefe Stones, as well as the Eajl-ln-
dies. They endeavour to imitate them at
Paliacatta and Bifnagar in Glafs. Thofe
of Scythia are accounted the beft, thofe
of Peru are the next inGoodnefs, of a
dank green Colour, very hard, and more
tranfparent than thofe of the Ea(l-Indies.
Thefe laft arc harder than thofe of Peru,
but much lefs regarded. Thofe of Peru
are of a pale Colour and brttle. The
general Opinion is, that in cafe an Eme-
rault Ihonld be found excellent in all its
Parts, viz., in Colour, Shape and Tranf-
parency, it would be comparable to a
Diamond of the fame bignefs, nay
would even furpafs it in value, by reafon
of its rarity.
The Saphir is called Mila by the Arabi-
ans, and Millam by the Malayans. They
are of two forts, thofe of a dark blue Co-
lour are the bell, thofe of a pale Colour
refcmbling the Diamonds, the worft.
They are found in Malabar, , Ca-
nanor, in the Kingdom of Bifnagar, in
the Ifle of Ceylon, but Siam and Pegu pro-
duce the beft. '
The Hyacinth called by the
Greeks, is a red Stone, not unlike the
Carbuncle, but does not endure the Fire.
It is found in Spain : the jewellers fell
fometiraes the Stone called Ethiopia, for a
Hyacinth: they are of two kinds, one
red, the other inclining to a yellow.
The Amethift , called by the
Greeks, is of a purple Colour; thofe that
are found in the Eafl-Indies are preferr’d
before the reft.
The Jafpir fo called by the , and
ixazsis by the Greeks , is of two different
kinds, fome being of a lovely green Co-
lour, like the Emeraults , and of fuch a
bignefs, as to ferve for Materials for
Drinking-cups; fomje have the green
mix’d with white ; fome are of purple,
others of a rofe Colour with variety of
Flowers in them ; others are dark brown
and blew, with white Veins; fome are
Marble on one, and Jafper on the other
fide.
The Eme-
rau It.
Of thru
kink.
\
Thus
valat.
TfoSaphir
Tbs
doth.
The Ame*
chill
/fe Jafpif
found in
China,


The Sar-
dis.
* Apoc,
22. 20.
Exod. 28,
17, 20.
The Sar-
donick.
The Achat.
4mber»
Granatc.
Cats -eves.
' *
Blood-
ftonc.
Kidney-
ftone.
Hartftonc.
The Sardis has got its Name from Sar-
dinia, where it is frequently found, as
well as in Epirus. There are three feve-
ral kinds, and were by the Antients dif-
tinguifh’d into the Male and Female.
That the Sardvs is different from the Sar-
donic, is evident out of the Holy Scrip-
ture *.
The Sardonick , called ZoipJ\ovvi by the
Greeks , has got its Name from Sarda and
Onyx , or its referablancc to a human Na-
vel.
The Achat is found about Suratte , but
is of no great value, unlefs it be curiouf-
ly chequered with Figures.
Amber called Succinum by the Latins ,
y HAen-T£oyby the Greeks , and Alambrc by
the Portuguefes , is a kind of a Gum or ro-
finous Subftance, found near Koningsberg,
and fome other Places in Pruffta \ in great
efteem among the Japonefes and the Indi-
ans in general. It is often chequered with
various Figures, and has the virtue of
attracting Straw, Paper, and fuch like
light Matters.
The Granate refembles in Colour to
the Coral. There are two forts, the In-
dian and Spanifh , the laft are very red
and bright \ thofe found in Ethiopia are
fcarce to be diftinguilhed from the Hya-
cinth, except that their Luftre isfome-
what lefs than that of the Hyacinth.
The Sfone called Olhos de Gatos , i. e.
Cats-eyes, by the Portuguefes , is in much
greater efteem among the Indians than
the Portuguefes ; who are of Opinion,
that if you rub Linen-Cloth with them,
it will be fire-proof: but this I have found
contrary to Truth by my own experi-
ence.
The Hematites orßloodftone ( r
mby th cGreeks) has got its Name from
its dark red Colour, and its virtue in
quenching of Blood. It is found in New-
Spain , and reputed by them a kind of Jaf~
per j the Indians make Beads of them,
and wear them about their Necks: They
alfo lay them in Water, and afterwards
hold them clofe in their Hands, and look
upon this as an excellent Remedy to ftop
the fuperfiuous Monthly times of the
Women, or any other Flux of Blood.
This Stone is alfo found in Ceylon and
Cambaja , where it is called Silahenea .
The Nephritis or Kidney[lone , has got
its Name from the word Ntctyjos, u e . a
Kidney, becaufe it is worn by the Indians
againft the Pain of the Kidneys, and
therefore in great efteem among them.
It is found in New-Spain , and the greener
it is, the better it is.
The Naturalifts tell us, that the Stag,
when tormented in his Bowels by certain
poilonous Worms, runs up to the Neck in
Water, at which time the flimy Tears
which adhere to the Corners of his Eyes
are coagulated to the bignefs of a Wall-
nut, which thence have got the Name of
Han ft ones which taken in Wine, are
look’d upon as a Sovereign Antidote a-
gainft all manner of Poifons and Infecti-
ons.
Th z Scrpentflone is found in the Indies,
of a dark brown Colour, with a white
Spot like an Eye in the middle. Some
will have them to grow in the Heads of
the Serpents \ others are of opinion, that
the Water-Serpent hung up by the Tail,
with her Head hanging downwards, fo
near to a Veffel full of Water, that fte
may lick it, does (pew out this Stone,
which tied to the Belly, is accounted an
excellent Remedy againft the Dropfy.
The Spaniards call this Stone Piedro della
Cobra , and the Portuguefes Pedra de Cobra ,
being commonly of the bignefs of a
Shilling, lefs or more. The true Serpent-
ftone is found in that kind of Serpents,
call’d Cobra de Cabelo by the Portuguefes ,
and Serpens Pilqfus by the Latinifts , being
the moft virulent of all Serpents. They
try the Goodnefs of this Stone, by put-
ting it into fair Water, which if it bub-
bles, it is accounted true ; another Trial
is, when it fticks clofe to the Lips, or to
the Wound, unto which it will adhere
till it has drawn out all the Poifon, when
it falls off like a Leech, and is thrown in-
to Milk : Of this I faw the effeft my
felf with good Succefs in a Negro Slave
ftung by a Serpent, belonging to' bur
HeadFaftor atjafnapatnam, Sir Jorepha6
Vofch. The Brahmans make a certain
Compolition (which they keep very fe-
cret) in imitation of the natural Serpent-
ftone, the chief Ingredients whereof are
fuppos’d to be the Head, Heart, Liver
and Teeth mix’d with the Terra figillata .
Concerning the true Virtues of the Ser-
pent-ftones, you may confult Michael
Boitnus *, and Athanafm Kircher *\\
The Stone called Pedra de Porco , i. e.
Hogs-ftone , by the Portuguefes , grows in
the V?[ica Bile are a of the Hogs about Ma-
lacca. It is of a ruddy Colour, and
fometimes grey, greezy or oily at the
touch like Venice-foap, and of a bitterifti
Taft. When they will ufe this Stone, they
put it in Water, til] it acquires a bitter-
i(h Taft, and fo give the Water to the
Patient, for the cure of Peftilential and
other Fevers. They are highly efteemed
in the Indies .
The Scr-
pentftone.
A Compo •
fitionof
the Scr-
pentftonc
* In Flora
Chinenft
f Lib. 9.
Mundi
fubcerran
H
fl o nc,


The is found in the Head of
a certain kind of Toads of the bignefs
of a good Bean, of various Colours, but
moll encliningto a green, fmooth and
fhiningon theoutfide, which is bony, but
the infide of a llony Subftance : They
arc reputed an excellent Remedy againft
the Stone in the Kidneys, Poifon and In-
firmity of the Stomach. To get this
Scone, they take a very old Toad, put it
in a Veflel full of Holes, and fo bury it in
a Dunghil near a Pifmircs Neft, till the
Pifmiies have confumed the whole Sub-
ftance of the Toad, except the Stone.
They try the Goodnefs of this Stone, by
laying it before a Tortoife, which if it
is ready to fwallow it, it is accounted a
tuse Stone.
of Gold, or at 4 Stivers the Carat. The
letter ones in proportion of 4 of Gold,
or 2 4 Stivers the Carat.
There are Oriental and Occidental (
Bezoar-ftones *, thofe of the £aft, efpe- *
ciallf of Pcrfia, much exceed thofe of the <
Weft-Indies. Arabia , Malabar , Japan, :
and China produce thefe Stones, and the
Mountains of Peru in the Weft-lndics.
The Perfians call this Stone Belzoar, i. e.
the Lord of Poifon j and the Arabians , Ha-
giar Corrahone . Formerly it us’d to be
fold in Holland at the rate of 8 Guilders
per Ounce. If the outward Rind or Skin
be taken off, the next appears fmoother
and brighter than the firft. The Bezoar-
ftone has no Pit, but a Concavity contain-
ing a certain mealy Subfiance, the Vir-
tue whereof is faid to excel the Stone it
felf. Thofe taken out of the Goats liv-
ing in the Mountains, are accounted bet-
ter than of thofe feeding in the Valleys.
Thefe Stones are found in certain Bags of
a hairy Subftance, growing within the
Concavity of the Stomach, of a Span
in length, wherein the Stones lie in a row
like Buttons on a Waftcoat, as a certain
Portuguefe tells us. They have alfo ano-
ther way of trying the goodnefs of this
Stone: They take a Needle with a Thred,
and having dip?d the fame in the Juke of
a venomous Flerb call’d BaUeftra , they
draw the Needle and Thred thro the Leg
of a Dog or fome ocher living Creature,
leaving the Thred in the Wound till the
Dog faints away. This done, they give
him a certain quantity of Bezoar Pouder,
which if it recovers him, the Bezoar is
good *, if not, it is look’d upon as adul-
terated. Of feveral other Trials we have
fpoken in the Defcription of Cananor.
Toad-
llunc.
Orktui
andoed.
zoar *
Of the Bcnoctr-ftone fomething has been
faid before in the Dcfcription of
being accounted a great Antidote, but
efteemed much more iu former times than
of late Years. The Bezoar-Stone is
found in the Stomach of certain Goats
in Pcrfia , and the Ifle of Borneo called
Panan. It is of a very folid ruddy Sub-
ftance, growing in different Partitions,
like our Onions, which are eafily difcern-
able when the Stone is broken : They are
of divers Colours, fome inclining to an
Olive-Colour, others to a dark green,
fome round, fome of an oval Figure }
the fmoothcft and largeft are accounted
the bell. They are alio found in the Ifle,
called llha i. e. Cow-lftand , a-
bout 6 Leagues from Jafnapatnam , but in
no great Quantities *, for I remember that
Mr. Anthony Pavilion told me, that out
of 70 or 80 Goats, which he ordered to
be killed, he had but a few Stones, and
thefe but indifferent ones and very brit-
tle. The Aialayam try this Stone thus }
they rub it five or fix times with Mor-
tar, and if it changes the Mortar into a
yellow Colour, it is accounted true.
Thofeof itawdrttellus, that they find the
Bezoar-ftone in the Heads of certain
Apes. The Indians and Cbinefes mix it
with Rofe-water, and ufe it againfl Poi-
fon, melancholy Humours, and Quartan
Agues. They alfo make ufe of it as a
Prefervative ; for they purge twice a
year, viz., in March and September , and for
five days after take from 10 to 30 Grains
of Bezoar in Rofe-water. They fell this
Stone by weight one of 300, 250, 150,
or r4O Carats , is accounted equivalent to
three times the weight in Gold y each
Carat reckon’d at 8 Dutch Stivers. One
of 100, 90 or 80 Carats, to 1 4 the quan-
tity of Gold, or at 6 Stivers the Carat.
Oae of 70, 60, 50, or 40 Carats y to 1 4
'Bezcar-
fronc.
Among thofe Commodities which are
tranfported from Mafulipatan , the Indigo
being none of the leaft, it will be requi-
fite we fhould fay fomething alfo of this
precious Merchandize. The Indigo is of
different kinds, and grows in divers Pla-
ces: The broad Indigo grows about two
Leagues from Amadabath the Capital City
of Gufuratte , efpecially in the Village of
Circhees , from whence that kind of Indigo
has got its Name. The Indigo is a Shrub
growing up to a Man’s height, with final!
hard Twigs like the Blackberry-Trees :
Its BlolTom refembles that of the Briars,
and the Seed that of CtvtFosmm Gracum t
call’d Dufenegre by the French . They fow
it in June and July % and cut it \nNovem~
ber and December.
rht
S O,
.
,rc
The Indigo of Chirchees grows three
years fucceflivcly after its firft Sowing.
The firft Year they cut the Leaves about


fecond Gerry, and the third Catted, The
firft is cut in October, the fecond about the
middle of November, and the third in Ja-
nuary. The firft is of a light blue Co-
lour, and held againft the Sun, and
fqueez’d with the Nail of the Thumb,
fhews a Violet Colour. The fecond, call’d
Gerry, the nearer it approaches to a Vio-
let Colour, the more valuable it is. The
third, call’d Cancel, is the worft of all,
of a ruddy colour, and fo hard, as fcarce
to be broken to pieces.
a Foot above the Ground \ which being
dry’d in the Sun for 24 Hours, they are
put into Barrels full of Salt-water, of a
Man’s height, and kept down to the bot-
tom, by laying great Stones upon them,
the better to fqueeze out the Tinfture.
The Water being ftir’d often for 4 or 5
days, it is let out into gieat Casks, where
it is ftir’d and trod continually by certain
Perfons, till the Water thickens, and the
Indigo fettles to the bottom, in the fame
manner*’as they manage the Butter in Hol-
land,. The Sediment being feparated from
the Water, and ftrain’d thro thin Cloths,
is fpread upon the Ground (firft cover’d
with white Afhes) to dry. Ihe Country
People adulterate the Indigo with a cer-
tain Earth of the fame colour, or with
Oil, to make it feem the better upon the
Water. The fecond Year the Indigo
grows again on the Stalks that were left
in the Fields, which is accounted better
than the Gingy or wild Indigo. If you
intend to preferve the Seed, you muft let
the Stalks dry the fecond time, and after-
wards gather the Seed. The Indigo of
the third Year’s growth is of little value,
and confumed for the moft part by the
Inhabitants of Gufuratte in dying their
Linen and Woollen Cloths.
nd
The goodnefs of the Indigo is try’d in
the following manner: About 9or 10 a
Clock in a clear Sun-fliiiiy Morning they
take a Piece or two, and after they have
broken it in pieces* hold it againft
the Sun, to fee whether they can difeover
any Sand in it: They alfofqueeze with
their Nails fome of the Colour out, which
the nearer it comes to a Violet, the
better it is. They alfo try it with Water
and Fire: They throw a Piece of Indigo
40 or 50 times fucceffively into a Cask fill’d
with Water, and the longer it fwims up-
on the Surface, the better it is deem’d.
They alfo call a Piece of Indigo upon
burning Coals, and if the Smoke or Flame
appear of a high Violet Colour, the Indi-
go is good.
Jts Good-
The chief Signs of thegoodnefs of the
Indigo arc, its Lightnefs and feeling dry
betwixt the Fingers, its fwimming upon
the Water, and, if thrown upon burn-
ing Coals, its emitting a Violet-colour’d •
Smoke, and leaving but little Alhes be-
hind. The Ground which has born the
Indigo muft lie fallow the fourth Year,
unlelsyou would fow it with fome Kitchen
Herbs.
Hereabouts alfo grows the Indigo call’d
Aniel de Biant , by thofe of Gufuratte. They
fow it in June in light and fandy Grounds,
and it grows chiefly in June , July, Augufi
and September, the ordinary rainy Months
here * which together with the Heat of
the Sun-beams brings it to Maturity, it
being certain, that too much Rain is per-
nicious to this Shrub. Great care is to be
taken that the Grounds be well cleared
from Thorns, and Thiltles. The Buyers
of Indigo ought to be cautious how they
buy it * for if it happen to be not very
dry, they may lofe three Pound weight in
ten in 8 days time.
It isfowed in feveral Places: The/rt-
digo Laura about Agra } in Fettapour , 12
Cos from Agra \ near the City of Byana,
30 Cos from Agra ( where is the belt *,)
near the City of Baffaune , 38 Cos from
Agra i near the City of Kindowen y 40 Cos
from Agra * The Country People are ob-
liged to carry their Indigo into the next
adjacent City.
Good Indb
go if alfo
made in
Coroman-
del.
Next to Mafulipatan we muft alfo fay
fomething of Bimilipatan, where the
Dutch have had a Fa&ory a confiderable
time ago, and from thence, as well as
moft other Parts of Orixa , tranfport a-
bundance of Rice, Peafe, and other Pro-
vifions, into other Parts. The whole
Country hereabouts enjoys a wholefom
Air, tho in one Place more than in the
other: For tho the Heats are excelfive,
nay almoft intolerable, yet are the fame
in a great raeafure qualified by the cool
Sea-Winds \ fo that the reafon of the
many Diftempers and pale Countenances,
which often attend the Europeans in thofe
Parts, is not fo much to be attributed to
the Unhappinefs of the Climate, as to
their own Intemperance and Debauche-
ries.
T/je indigo
Laura.
The Indigo Laura , or Indigo de Bay ana,
j s of three different forts: The firft Crop
is call’d Fouthy by thofe of Gufuratte ; the


CHAP. XXV.
The Manner of Living of the Hollanders in the Eaft-Indies. Their ufe of Tea
and Chocolate : Their ordinary Drink ; Manner of Sleeping. A Defcription
of the two Rivers, the Ganges and the Nile.
Manner
living of
the Dutch.
Tie ufe of
Tea.
// on > prc~
fared,
AS the manner of Living of the vulgar
fort among the Dutch in the Baft*
Indies , is none of the bell, fo we will be fa-
tisfy’d with giving an account of thofe of
the better fort. They commonly rife with
the Sun, Sleep after Sun-rifing being ac-
counted very unwholfom here in the
Morning. Some have a Cullom of wafh-
ing their Heads, nay the whole Body
with cold Water, immediately after their
coming out of bed; others do it with
lukc-warm Water three or four times a
week *, the lalt of which I have found
the bell by experience. They common-
ly ftiift their Linen every day. Brandy
or any other ftrong Liquors are not nujch
ufed by the wifer fort in the Morning,
unlefs it be a Spoonful juft before Dinner,
and a little at night before they goto
bed.
The Tea (always ufed falling by the
Cbinefes) has got a mighty Afcendant o-
ver the Hollanders of late Years. The
bell grows in China , being a Shrub ri-
ling not very high above-ground, efpe-
cially in the Province of Kiangnan , near
the City of Hocichieu. The Leaves are
dry’d, roll’d up and preferv’d for ufe.
Father Martims Martini , in his Chinefe
Atla* 7 gives us the following account of
the Tea. The Leaves are very like thofe
of the Rhus Coriaria , call’d Sumach by the
Arabians , and by the Greeks , of which
it feems to be a Species; tho it does not
grow wild, but is planted, being a Shrub
with fmall Twigs. In the beginning of
the Summer it buds out a light-colour’d
BlofTom of an agreeable Scent, after
which come green Buds that turn black
at lalt. They take a Leaf, and after they
have warnfd it in an Iron Pot with a
gentle Heat, they lay it upon a clean Mat,
and having well roll’d it, put it again over
the Fire, till it be thoroughly dry’d, and
twilled together ; when they put it up in
Tin or Leaden Veflels, to preferve it from
the moill Air, which would foon corrupt
it. The Tea being of different forts,
confequently bears a lower or higher Price,
according to its goodnefs. Its chief Vir-
tues are to difperfe the grofs Vapours of
the Head and Stomach, and confequently
fro exhilarate our Spirits. The Chinefes ,
as they are never troubled with the Gout,
fo they attribute the fame to the Tea •
and Kircher aferibes to it a Diuretick Qua-
lity. Its Tafteis fomewhatbittcwlh, and
not very agreeable at firft, but well e-
nough afterwards. The Turks tell us
Wonders of their Cor Coffee, and
the Spaniards of their Chocolate; but it
has been found by experience, that the
firft encreafes the Gall, and the laft en-
flames the Blood, and nouriftes too fall;
whereas the Tea is much more moderate
in its Nature, notwithftanding which its
immoderate ufe hinders the Concoftion of
the Stomach (cfpecially if taken after
Dinner) and too much dries up the Moi-
ftures of the Body, which is the reafon
the Chinefes never take it after Meals.
The Chinefe Tea is both in Goodnefs and
Price much fuperior to the Japonefe. I
have found by experience that four or
five Cups of the Extraction of the frelh
Leaves of the Tea makes one light-
headed ; and I remember, when the beft
Tea was fold at the rate of 24 Gilders
per Pound in Holland.
The ordinary Drink of the Hollanders
is a Mixture of Water and Sugar boil’d
together. Some fill certain Earthen
Veflels over night with Water, and add
to it 3 or 4 Glaffes of Spanijh Wine, which
expofed together all night in the Dew,
turns white, and affords a pleafant Li-
quor but is a little too cool, for which
reafon fome put a certain quantity of
Mum in the VefTel. The Brunfmck Mum
is both more pleafant and wholfomherc
than in Europe 7 the worft is, that it is ex-
ceflivedear, a Cask being fometiraes fold
from 40 to 100 Rixdollars. Among the
Wines, thofe of Spain are raoft in re-
quell : It’s true they fometimes inflame
the Gall; but againft that they make ule
of Rhubarb and Cremor of Tartar, The
French and Rhenifh Wines are notllrong
enough in thefe hot Countrys, where the
Stomach requires more lively Cordials,
as a little Brandy, or a moderate lharc
of Canary, Their ordinary Food is
Goats, Sheep, Fowl, Hares. Peacocks,
and fuch like.
The Hollanders moll generally take their
Afternoons Sleep here, as the Italians
and fome other Europeans do in hot Coun-
tries - 7 a thing fufficiently commendable
wbdM
o fDrki
xmoflpTi*
Indltt ‘
660
A Deferipion of the Coajis of


father-
beds mt
nfed in the
indies
Toe River
in the Indies, where the Heat of the Sun
Beams invites the Inhabitants to pafs away
the middle of the Day (when they are
unfit for Bufmefs) at their eafe. They
have alfo a conftant Cuftom of wafhing
their Mouths after Dinner. About three
or four a Clock in the Afternoon they
take their Tea, and after that a Walk
the Evenings and Nights being pretty cool
and very pleafant here, efpecially when
the Moon Ihines. They fup commonly
about 7 or 8 a Clock, but very moderate-
ly, and go to fleep about 10 or 11 upon
Quilts, Feather-beds being not us’d in
the Indies: But care muft be taken to co-
ver well your Belly, Hips and Legs, for
fear of the Cramp, efpecially if you lie
expos’d to the open Air in Moon-lhiny
Nights, the negledl of which often proves
fatal to the Soldiers and Seamen, after
they have heated themfelves with Arak ,
or other ftrong Liquors.
Thus much of the manner of Living
of the Hollanders in the Baft-Indies. Con-
cerning the different Clans or Families of
the Indians, the manner of Living, Au-
fterity and Prerogatives of the Brahmans,
their Tedam Falls, Marriages, Feafts,
Burials, Mr. Abraham Rogerius has given
fo exadl an account, that it would be need-
lefs to repeat them here. The Foundati-
on, Strength and Magnificence of their
Fagodes , efpecially of thofe dedicated to
Wifnou zndEfwttra, with their Revenues
and Idols, are likewife raoft exadily dc-
ferib’d by the fame Author and among
other things, that their Fagodes have no
other Light but what they receive thro a
Hole on the top that they are divided
into three feveral Vaults, fupported by
Stone Pillars: The firft whereof Hands
open to all Goers a'ndComers: Thefe-
cond has two ftrong Doors, which are
kept open in the day time, and guarded
by a certain number of Brahmans ; The
third part is always kept clofe, being the
Refidence of the Idol, before which hang
Lamps, which never ceafc to burn. But
of the religious Worfhip of the Inhabi-
tants of Coromandel , Malabar and Ceylon,
we Ihall treat more at large in the third
Part of this Trcatifc.
And (ince we have had occafion to fpcak
fo much of the Places between the Rivers
Indus and Ganges , commonly known by
the Name of India on this fide the Ganges ,
we muft alfo fay forticthing concerning
th e f e Rivers. The Ganges exonc-
rates it fclf into the Sea of BengaU , call’d
other wife Sinus Gangeticus and Sinus Arga~
ricus by Ptolomey , dividing the moff
Eafterly Part of the Indies from the
Weftern Parts j the firft .whereof com*
prebend Bengal, Aracan, Pegu, Malacca,
Sumatra, &c. According to the opinion
ot St. yluftin, St. Jcrom,. Ambrofe, and
many others of the ancient Fathers, the
Ganges is the fame which is in the Holy
Scripture call’d Pifon m , bn t Cornelius a La-
pide has fufficiently demonftrated that
Pifon cannot be the River Ganges , no more
than Gihon the Nilus. The general Opi-
nion, is that the Source of the Canges is
in the Mount Caucafus, as thofe of the
Euphrates and Tigris are in the Arhunian
Mountains, and that of the Nile among
the Mountains of the Moon, near the Cape
of Good Hope on the African Coaft ; tho
Father Kircher puts the original Rife of
the Ntle in the Country of Agaos near
Sagcla bordering upon the Kingdom of
Gojani. The Source arifes in a Plain on 3
the very top of the Mountain, furrpund-,
ed with delightful but does not 1
gather into a Rivulet till at the Foot of
the faid Mountain } and being augment-
ed by the accefilon of divers other Brooks,
gathers into a Lake of 30 Leagues in
length, and 14 in breadth. From hence
it purfues its Courfe, and by various
Turnings and Windings returns near the
Place of its Source, whence palling thro
the Rocks and Precipices, it continues its
Courfe into the middle of Ethiopia. * Ifaac '
Kojfm derives the Rife of the Nile ourof j
Goyome , a Province of the Abyjfmes , and 1
fays, that among other Titles that King .
makes ufe of this; King of Goyome, where '•
the Nile hevs its Rife. The antient Egyp~ ]
tians had fo great a Veneration for the
Nile , that they bellow’d the Title of the
Arm of Ofirvs upon it: For as the Pagans
numbred the reft of the Elements among
the Gods, fo they had no lefs opinion of
the Waters, especially in the Great Ri-
vers. Hence it is that the Inhabitants
near the Ganges call it the Heavenly Ri-
ver, and are of opinion, that the Wa-
ters of that River cleanfe them from their
Sins*, nay thofe of Bengak arefo fuper-
ftitious in this Point, as to carry their
fick and dying Friends to this River,
where they lay them up to the middle in
Water : And for fuch as have no Oppor-
tunity or Strength to be carry’d thither,
they are perfwaded, that if they wafh
themfelves with any other Water, and at
the fame time think upon the faid River,
faying, Ganges , purify me, they ihall be
cleanfed from their Sins, -f- Servius ob-
ferves, that it was the general Opinion
of the Heathens, that the Water would
cleanfe them from their Sins: Which
feerns to agree with what is related of
.
*'/;<? 50*7*1
°f. tks
N^e *
*L.2.C.71*
habenc O-
ftia Nili,
./Ethiopes
aucem ejus
Fouce-s.
t
i
i
i
i
i
f Annor.
in lib.
JEacii.


Pilate *, and of the Pharifees and Jews in
general. The Mahometans are to this
day not free from that Superftition, the
Water of the Ganges being fold among
them in Bottles at a very good Price,
as we do our Spaw-Waters ; and they
pay a confiderable Cuftom for it.
Hence it is, that the Per [tans look upon
it as a Crime to do ones need into the
River, or to throw Carrion into it, nay
even to fpit into it; and that they have
attributed fuch furprizing Qualities to the
Waters of many Rivers. When the Wa-
ter of the Nile is carried in order to be
facrific’d upon the Altar, the People pay
their Reverence to the Velfel that contains
it, by prollrating therafelves upon the
Ground in the fame manner as the Mala-
bars do to the Water of Ramefrvara , near
the Pagode call’d Ramanakoil , to which
they attribute likewife a peculiar Virtue
of purging them from their Sins.
Kircher puts the Source of the River
Ganges in the Mount Thebeth, where he
fays is a large Sea, whence arife the four
Capital Rivers of viz, the Indus,
Ganges , Ravi , and Athec . The Indian
Pagans deduce its Origin from De~
wendrc y or the Heavens, from whence
it defeends into the Dewendre Locon ,
or fublunary World; and thence into
the Earth, as may be feen in the be-
forrfaid Abraham Rogerins. They farther
believe, that if they caft the Bones of
their deceas’d Friends into the
their Souls will enjoy the Blifsof Lewen-
dre for as many thoufand Years as the
Bones remain Angle Years in that River;
it being their Opinion, that tho this Wa-
ter has not the Power to introduce them
to future Blifs, yet it is a Guide to Hea-
ven thro the feven fublunary Worlds,
which they believe every one muft pafs thro
before he can enter the Heavens. They
have each its proper Name, but are com-
prehended under one general Name,
viz. Demndre Locon ; and among them
that of Bramma Locon , or the Place where
Bramma governs, is next to Heaven ; and
none are fuffer’d to enter there, except
fuch as are pafs’d from Heaven to the
Earth, and thence again thro the before-
mention’d fublunary Worlds. It is be-
yond all doubt that many both among the
Jews and Gentiles have aflignM certain Pla-
ces for the Souls to dwell in, befides Hea-
ven and Hell ; in which they are imitated
by the Purgatory-mongers, and fuch as
believe a feparate Place for the Ancient
Fathers and Innocent Children.
Before the River Ganges puts a flop to
our Voyage, and the Defcription of the
Places mention’d in this Treatife, wc
mull add fomething concerning the Ma-
labar Language.
* Mac. 27.
24. ch.2s.
Mark 7.5.


A fhort Introduction to the Malabar
Language-
Malabars write upon the
Si Leaves of the wild Palm-Trees
JL with Iron Pencils; their Letters
are very ancient, and diftinguilh’d into
(1.) Shorter running Letters, (2.) Long
ones , (3.) Vowels, (4.) Confonants, (5.)
Dipthongs, (d.) Letters us’d only in the
beginning of a Word; (7.) Such as are
us’d only in the Middle, and (8.) Such
as are us’d only in the End, as will more
clearly appear out of the annexed Cuts.
And feeing that the Malabar Letters have
hitherto not appeared in publick Print,
either in Holland or Germany, it will not
be amifs to alledg the Reafons thereof,
and to fliew that this Language is no lefs
worth our care now-a-days, than the He-
brew, Chaldean, Arabian, Per/ianj Sama-
titan and other Languages.
The main reafon why the Malabar
Language has remained fo long unknown
to us, is, becaufc that Country was not
conquered by the Dutch Company till in
the Years 1661, 1 662, 1663. from the
Portuguefes •, and it is not their Cuftom to
fend any Minifters into thofe Places,
where they are not Sovereign Mailers.
7 Tis true, I affifted at the Sieges of Cou~
tang, Crctnganor, Cochin , &c. and 1658.
at the Sieges of Tutecoryn, Manaar, Jaf-
napatnam and Negapatan *, but was imme-
diately after order’d to Pfephina in the
Kingdom of Jafnapatnam, where I had
the overfight over 24 Churches. During
thefpace of near four Years that I ftaid
here alone, Iwasfenfible what Obftacle
the Ignorance of the Native Language
was to my good Intentions: For tho ma-
ny of the Chriftians here were well c-
nough verfed in the Dutch and Portugucfe
Languages, yet fome belonging to the
more remote Churches, who had been
but {lenderly inftrufted in the Principles
ot the Ghriftian Religion by the Roman
Miffionaries, were ftrangefy al a lofs till
I got a good Interpreter, who being well
skill’d both in his Mother Tongue the Ma-
labar, and the Portugucfe Languages, did
me great Services for eight Years toge-
ther. His Name was and it was
chiefly with his Afliftance, that the fun-
damental Points of our Religion, being
comprehended in a finall Treatife, were
tranflated out of the Portugucfe into the
Malabar Language, which has been fince
printed, 1671. at Roterdam, by John Bor*
fit us. The multiplicity of Bulinefs in fo
weighty a concern as the Salvation of
Souls, having been no finall hindrance in
encompaffing fo difficult a Language as
the Malabar \ I was forced to be content-
ed with what part thereof I could attain,
and thofe few Intervals of time I had
left, whereof I have given fome Specimen
in the following Pages and Cuts. 1 can’t
upon this Occafion pafs by in Silence the
Confiderations which might induce us to
propagate the Malabar Language with
more care, than has been done hitherto ;
it being certain, that if our Religious
Worffiip could be firmly eftablifhed *in
thofe Parts (whereof the Knowjedg of
the Language is one of the chief means)
it would be very inftrumental to reconcile
not only many of the Inhabitants, but
alfo even of the Indian Princes themfelves
to our In ter eft a piece of Policy well
underftood by Emanuel King of Portu*
gal, when he introduced the Roman Ca-
tholick Religion by the help of the Jefuits
in the Indies.
I reft your Servant and Friend
in Jefus Chrift,
Gccrvlict, ii JhL
i 6 7 i.
Philip Baldeus.


Some Rules for the attaining the knowledg
of the Malabar Language.
TH E fir ft Dedenfion among ./
the Malabars comprehends the
Nouns only of the Mafculine
Gender , which terminate in the
Singular Number in n, and in the Plural
in r. They have their Singular and Plu- I nc
ral Numbers like us, and name their Cafes you
as follows. “ e /
fhej
it '
The Nominative Pradamei ,
Genitive Dutiei ,
Dative Triteij
Accufativc Chadurti,
Vocative Panchami , We
Ablative / you
Example of the firfi Declenjion. the]
Sing. Nom. Fdwm Fullo, the Fuller (of Cloth)
Gen. Fananureja the Fuller,
Dat. Fananucu to the Fuller,
Accuf. Fananer the Fuller,
Vocat .Fanano O you Fuller,
Ablat .Fananiratil of the Fuller.
1 na
&<
It is to be obferv’d that they have four as b
forts of Ablative Cafes.
(
(i.)Th eLocality as the laft mention’d.
(i.)Caufalvs } Fananale,becnnkof the Fuller.
(3.) Socially, Fananore , with the Fuller.
(4 Comparationis, Fananil , in compa-
rifon with the Fuller.
Plur. Nom. Fanar Fullones, the Fullers,
Gen. Fananareja , the Fullers, vV e
Dat. Fanarcul,Fanaruccu, to the F. g
Accu .Fanarei, the Fullers,
- Voc. Fanare, O you Fullers,
Abl. (1.) Ftnar iratil , vanar iratile ,
of the Fullers,
(2.) Fanaral, vanar ale, be-
caufe of the Fullers,
(3.) Fmar ore, vanar or um,
with the Fullers, j
(4.) Fanaril , Fanarilum , in whe
companion of thcFullcrs. the
An Example of Conjugation in the
Affirmative .
The Prefcnt Singular Tenfe.
I nan Fichuvadigirren , I believe,
you ni Fichuvadiguirray , you believe,
he 7 QFichuvadiguirran, he believes,
foeyavan c Fiehuvadiguirral, flie believes,
it j c Fichuvadiguinadu, it believes,
or Fichuvadiguidu.
The Plural.
We nangal Fichuvadiguirron, we believe,
you ningal Fichuvadivirgal,y on believe,
CM. F. Fichuvadicrargal , you
they adugal c ( Men or Women) believe,
cN. Fichuvadicradu , or Fi-
oth) chuvadiguidu , the things believe.
/« the Negative,
The Prefent Singular Tenfe.
I nan, Fichuvadichren illei, I don’t
believe it,
as before. Fichuvadicrei illei , you don’t
believe it,
Fichuvadiezan illei , he does
not believe it,
Fichuvadiezal illei, they don’t
believe it,
Fichuvadicradu illei, it don’t
believe it.
The Plural.
We nangal, Fichuvadicrem illei, we don’t
&c. believe it,
Fichuvadicrirgal illei, you don’t
believe it,
Fichuvadicrargal illei , they
believe it.
Fichuvadicrad ’ illei, th ey (iViwf.)
Fichuvadiguid illei , don’t be-
lieve it.
The Prefent Tenfe of Honour, *. f.
when you fpeak to Perfons of Quality, in
the Affirmative.


A Short Orthography of MALABAR LANGUAGE.
rd. y, jj> 66y,
f l \ / ll alJars doinmoniMizw lie upon Lzc jf eaves cf f aLnz trees with Ircnz P\nceL, Cljieir Letters are ciiftvzquiffzecl tJms
*‘S° Unt ‘ d J , T t t °J‘-"’'“’Vr. r J mn ‘ ?f‘ C L„cJ[ Letter J [iff, IclfelL,,
,ff '' i' ‘(tyJ orn * ij, on k nil jy/iicfi tney call. Modify Uttef~s, oocause lie POTvefo a>~o t.feir- found and ftfo.fr)
'rff7.. catlA^dfjrjLfainr yt four tjLnao. co.CoU dCjfs. (?) arr caffj Inltiaff fieri ufrd
mtL Ljmmy of a orord (y)Joiie onfij in Ce niUJLfy } aCfoin/ in tC end of a irSiQ. J
fo[[owuza arc Lie /otvc/s
I, " \ & r/ 7
Ih — Cue cl /atari • a a
» i. ' ' t ' /
K— itThttlit CL irCJ/Uj.' it it
E ——— in a a J/erl / I
jlia - ye na a/a iuj t t
||» U tld cuj/iari •[[ u
ti ra n a a a ft
f"—■ — cna OsJjiart. c c
Ip” ea a a lafjnjj c e
arena a\dytftfa/uj. ay*
R ana , ctf/ari a a
'o ' y /
C2 f ana cz/a na. a a
$ 6rr - <1 are na an 7 m Jit an a an
t
aauana ac ae
p 1 , ct ,J, cc Ii) jt ftfe/UJ. at
jfj/ze/e are Irzzt iat L etterc
- cate eel In / t ize m (/atezj c (an tzr
\fJ Izefe arc L a rzfa in a rat j.
|>y < // " *
lit na c, j. ,j\s L o pi ana m
u n lUja n a LLJ jeana y
I cfana cf p ran a' rr
5 it ft ’a 7i a n/i Ana f
- ran a r _2J ra n a u
pT /(na na fin L-2 /ana f
1 tana t OVT /na /
1 na na n HT , ran a r
J jtana ji // <3O r nan a n
i. N
onants iinited ?ri fJi die
/ owe Ls, 77 ZciJze a Si/li aa (e SJzo rt.
• •. .
Cana ca f/aj/art cu,f/a
£F earana ea,f/a,fztiij. ca.JJa
& r 1,1,1 r i Jt ,rir t uL
r* yutyitna Jan j.
& -- cun a cujffarL cn
EFru cure na cn fan a cf
/> of
©or ijuena Acjzerf- ja c
GFF _
- j uea tut Ac, faauj, ijaic, f/e
&& EF> ___ errand ctcy,7/jitfaiij cccr
©3F f“T — cena caj/ort a a
rr earn na. ca, fa n L j. ca'
G & CSVT Ciiin•it na, catOtjrtfiLj can
tyuatia j/
na iiy naj/fart tufiia
iujna fatnj tupia
HIJ llama naui/jiart- turnt
r£j - * v -
1 Humana injnt lanj nynt
HZ-) __ tujjtuna juj nitjftarf rujnw
! nynurana tuftiu tt^nu
G r tufaiej/arf- tianc
—_ ti^ne a na tuf iif /a tuf. nync
6V) nsj
tujnara tut n if anynufiuy
IT— /uj na tut lujnej/art tuj/ie
Or& lujnorana tujno f n f no '
i2—l6VT /uj/lanrana ihjnanTjj/ tfeiujauj nan
’ -— liuj nana iujn
EF~ afa rat cfafiart afa
fT~ cfarana cfit* fa/iy . afa
& a flu a efi//art efi
& cflrani a cft fart a eft
Efi _— efuna efu ffart- efu
ff) a fin* iin a eft/ fnuj efu
©3F efctiit efe //art cfc
©EF cfaana efe /ntj. efe
6X.T> EF j —rfejntna cfa rThji fta/i y * efri'
Q&rr cfonn cffffart- ' eff
©S^^T-- —cfarina eaa fain/. cfa
©S r intranet e fan 71fiftan a . a fan
rr- ' / / J *
Cr ten an a c a .
i
nfana nfaif a nfa
n fat •ana nfa fatiij nfa
ff nfinOy nft /erf- nft
nfijnt n a nf/anj nil
<T5j —, • n/inna nfi/fart- nfu
VE>i HP tiftira n a nfu fa nfu
©£s - n/itrut nncfnort~ nfr
nfeana tiff fan ij. nfe\
OTP 05 n fat ran a n fa)' tfanr tifzy\
G OT? rT _ nfa ml n fi/fr rI ~ nfu
6 gjprr_ n f/,
'ana nna'fa /uj. nfa
GO5 nftnrana ttfat/7yi tan if ; n fan
05 hi fa na nf.
1 - rana ra/nart ra
I rr- " »» A <> '
.I—rr rar ana ra/ana ra
u— nna nJJi art r t
rt\ana rt /ana. r/ '
® - rana rii/fart ru
ru ran a rn fan a rf
© I _- rena rej/arf- re
©, " / " / / *» /
reana re Jana re
c
___ r a ran a rar lip ftana. . Fay-
Co l_ nr —_ ten a raj/art- ra
Co I—. IT*— reran ara fa?uj. rf-
Gi_ cmr. ■ ramutna rau 7jjzfieitjj 7\tu
l i ra n a r
<X£ST fnana ftiaffa?*/- f n a
i uo0) ___ /Inarana Aa fa na. /in a
ttO? __ fnlna fmj/tarl- f?tf
tJOoT fntana futt fa iuf . fnl
fntma fi nuj/ft rt~ fnn
;HP f imri tit a fntt fan/j fna
G OCOT“__ fn cn a fn ej/farh fne
Co OOOr__ fne ana fne fa "ny fne
</aocrr fn cera na fn ce'ffijrtenah fnaay’
Co OOuI HT __ f nana f/ia/zet-t fna
G OlOi PT fnarana f7la f 71 ij! ft/w
Gcmrcjvr u2 i a na f/iitn 7ijitfe7iJ] fnau
ODDT fnanu fit
ncr A
&? tana fajjzarf ta>.
ff tartna if fa n y fa
~ hit a iz/farf- fi
'7 t '
(p it ran a it Jane tt
mj inn a injfk.fr h fu
Sjrr —in ran atn fatna in
© f/f ten a te f/ferl- te
C OEfr 1— leana lef fa tut tf
/it ran it / ay' Tt/ifta/ilj h trey
G> g?ll~ tana iejfart to
G&jrr tar afiafa fa tuf ta
GW —_ tampan a fan tan
Sp _ ttana t.
l£. .




Our /Fatfi&riny jHaurlLir |
L any u aye Sc (Ou am refers
. JO TODT Off <30(5(1505
/Bator 71 ojtc r
a 19 mre2- & am l© t t ©_£j
' ' ft’
ijiit in c&Ilj-
- 2-oar aa>icra>j lu t tl_ol_o
cT</ ii cfio^i coin r - no in on
: or tj? (55 @ 35
in ui ni 2*o inat~
T r3s z_ oar ou) go) . uu©
hui in rco n u nt ina
■ TT3 r #’uL_b-£jT_^2jaTri_o
/Hat- tit to rra
i oaroar i—i u _2j rr nrrr 9 i
ynoftin tar uf
* nr gf> cvr_2J nr oar i
I COO fid
- ! !
fo)ic ffa/ioin
■ g9i L-p or
77 Oil'll 177
' (£5Get ljjlu._ 2_j oofoar i
j; 77 ofid oy 77 OtT)7 a 1L77 711
- -2-1 CDT 6YT or rEu 0T <DT 1 I
ei~ Jte/h
uLo or fHj B? an? m(5 @ 1
n a /is rs in i H~c
oar_2JT err n£j e> ovr i
< ( <RJ> Lp m I —. oar 0? ay (5 e, 1
c- m tiii littid no fit'u
’@rg T 131107 oyt Glut uu _
9t' JiUi'i/tLS el~ nm
©u t ©so t _
1 ndtt c us n oj
■ U) O L_o
to ?i tail oil e ?n
- &i —car us am i iQi irr
2*o ruin lu
—2J or nr imam m G ef? m
fi r a n ftr
35 rr i&C/>OTBy |-2JT3S~
'a mii-fcr
i rrG£F5 or Sj
71 it 111 ,
i©l itoOflOrrTi^
it lot
-.2 inrrrnr up ao go(^
o i~ iu win i
—2J ODT CTO) 11—o L_p CRD .
7' C c/ 77 71 771
> i—lug rr n-opo=L-p i n 9 i
Crt if 770 y 710
liotori ilct e t~
UU©l— ITg7iL-p (JCDI
jffjriu I n Oi&Cufu
j —t_2j T>T T__i/GLuarr
/! y
irec it loi'a in e/ in 0 77
Crce) m t/ie Ma lab a m J
-2-1 T CUT L_p | OJ j l_6 II J I n
771 /Z) 0 71 777
L-jgctm —h
—S //z V 777 071717 tjl otd77 to 111
LD _2J go gO nr 9ih
r<r ' l i’t~ p /i* rt^oe
T<XTTOSLOL©TT AotGlu 1
creator ,* m CrTie &j<?
&m, du J£ef>& aar_2_j ,
111 J'oZittn
-2j crd l__ lu i_o & oar j
i ' TFi/uun
(5 _2Joar n? l_d crtj i lu f
y iLS liliuy Oilt til 77L
m mi±j got 0O & 8t &>§> fr
ZDcnni nu/n ' it ojinnnn
&B 5 CKDJS o=or_2^
f U i e </^
J 5 07 &G i? ODT (J> 9 I ODT 05
oo?i coji ti/j- cccr
&j 0> uo IT OCT @ £Fi li_G fr
triiii Sa 7i c to
\bs 05 i (CO) ao e l, oar 55
71 afiu ooc
0!> i &>&, oar crTt i_oif i
%/7ctU'ui 3'i rn / n e
|_2JLU'
ito uje/%-
m arrG'LJT(aT > # Gluti i
k-S' aO mm m cut arr i i
c mu ct/ijc tw
L_|T ®l—ll © @
e *~ 771 or Hi u*r
G <3o_2_J <7U) <) U_J COOT @ Q
W>&>\ || ii
ut^rrna
I—itooti—irrgrrr ont nr i n=; (
n)- io
ovf (50 Qy SJ £ L_p GOT (J
~tc rti oL r 74/77 rrcoci 't~
&rr arrp Q EFp % _2j rr w> am
a 77107'hi 7J- /) err fod'
Q (J<y> L— <5V) r? ODT_2J 2
(t/fer/I/t tm d) r )ooai7'd7n
CDri
&> am jJjugygyif
—'£/d find 0/7177 tji otr 77 ho
Bi L_D_2J 0O OO T_2J T 1
17 ?i)e l/f e
i
j uhca-ht-m
j . jj, 66 j. .
- lu rr arj? 05 (DO 0 @ & £ (rr
ooh ef-
■ aqr_2_j_2^i—
moirhiod itl
» 0@ BT (cDTj 05
Sjvtrt ini m cS\t n ctu m
2 @@j © J2J rr & @5
if/o
> 0503 oei_2_j(3
*s* itncf-am e t —^
J2J IT OUT &r&j
Crtt/v/f ca m
& &p £5 I CRT) 9 1 ©
Cre)o
o= 0r 5? 0? oar 05
-Efc c/ffia ?n ot—~ »
j*7 Gjj T O'S' 05 05.2 U T^LU
cSV/z oioini in ymy u c
Br ljd m ocm QmG mau)
&rLLf (OJ df JF? OjI_DITOOT.2U
c t?m m u n i e in
tO5 am e>2_ i j i_p l_o 2_
C C C itforuilt S< ~^
oujtQ\ — ocmj2js^d=dfsuo
£ Jii/ffdne ul
GS) cor au) L_p err©
Oil 1' 71 id fuAtld
LJIT-2JJS gd) I (cm Q&T
£t~ ytioyiio
J25-2-J rr 05 ll^
I'dfuri'octz o-n e m
i lq or oar Q o got nrri n
on tot /7L
(BjuDsZ—am <rrr_2Li ;j
7 77 citft J
l_o luooot Gi oerrulj_§os
/e cu Jjr-ttm
BtOJO tx &, G 9 nm~ o iQ ld oar
rotor ft am. .
t 5.




jTS naiid na fart na
r,fs FT narana na fn d lid
If-* ulna nt fur/- in
rP / 'f '
' 0 nij-aitd in /o 7i i
5j nuna nujXart
I2J nuiutna f ’y nit
tie n<z nejj/ei'f nc
Q f~5" iiediid /ie f n y/ ae /
W) ineydiid itceyflLji//-1 Urey
H 5 fT—_ a cut a naup
Co rr —// ora aanp f inf a p
Co HJ CT n anmt na ii diiAiy /t~. •a a n
T 5 Itld ll d ji t
U jldlUV D d f/eef- pd
IfT x / y * /
T ,: Lamina pa /ana
f • • />yy f J ,
n j u, p f iJJtprt jit
JU Jz tjmn a ju ju
H Jiiina- jiujfffrt uu
— Jiurana jtu
6LJ jyaa. pc
®LJ jiffana y fny ,nf
LJ - jtizya nayaiy lin
4—l jiana jiff/fjrt tiff
(OLJT_
\jzprana j? p fpiza ji J
(B L—J 6TT jiaiimtiiajtai/Aiji/itijidn
U --- -- tputna jr.
UJ vaiia. ya ffp?/- ya.
(J 1 nr ' ' / /
u — 11 1 jravana jra /and jra
J-J J-mvo. yi ffrt r i
' * /
na na rt lana ri
LI I ~ ‘ ft f J
u-J jrii na jriiJJieri- jnt
4-L Yiirana nt fna yf
cSr. 1 " J
LU yen a yc
®LU _— j'dana- jd fana. jd
LU pzarana r^ r
G LJ—l FT 'jro-nn yv jfart ye
fain? V
Co LUI 6YT jraniwna yauAinf: yan
IUU yi ina jy,
FT t'lttia 7\iffj7'l~ t'a
f /
<T fi mum na ra /ana tm
IT 1_ 7'171 it 7'l f/c77't~ ta
fr / f /
yf rfy-ana ?a /ditd’ /a
/3 rn na riff art mi
® mum n a if fna if
©H" ta fieri- in?
Co rr " /
w i i reaifd ia ndiia m?
&5) HT tyrya/id ray Ain Jit: nry
rr ' - r/ f / a
*• • f'ctiid I'aJ/ictf'i- /'a
GHT FT rajyi na rf if
Co fT CZD rnura na run Afji f/: ran
HT trail a r ,
ft/ia f jfrf- fa
H- f/ya na fl fan a f
fna fi/lffrl- fl
Af f/itna fl fl
I /ana fu
£2jlT flan a, fl
G G-* fna fjfarl- f
G fana f'
$6O - fj‘a n.i fg ' lip ff~ - fzy
G rr_ fna fajfffrt- fff
G
IT—j fj i ana fa ff
G G° 6YT vana fdnfinft: fu
6 so l/ana /
yana ra ra
-■ T ramii a Ta f ra
—j irma TvjXerir m
—2V Tryn na tl /ana y-t
- 2-j —'Tu na 2*itjfier{~ til
—2j mum na mi fana mi
ffA n aa<y
Co 2J mna //iriA m
G _2J _- j veanti id /a ug vt
_£J yrcyana. yay^lip./it: inry
Q _2Jrr Tvrut yyJCart jw
G_2Jh- wvauu- 3v fa'' ?v
G-2J <STT ran van a ran lAji/it : mtn
2J ■ uvana v a :
up fan a fiftart ft
Up IT fihina ft fa na fa
find fjdfrh ft
ys^ ffana ft filet ft
~ / / /fv/ '/
1Q - fuiia fujuiort Ju
f~* // ft / //
L-P —/limnia In /ana. In
Old /
G L_p ffana f f
615) Up fejrana fey
GUp IT fna fo jfari~ fa
G uprr_ j favitnay Iff /ng
Q> L_9 GTT i fatunina fan /ljif/: fan
Up tfa na f,
(SYT fan a ft fxari~ fa
CTYT fT _i fag’-ana. ft-fan a fa
6Vf fna- ffiffrl- f
cfv f/ana fl' fa./ta f
6Y5 -J fuaia
6VTn fnhtna fu fan a f
G<SYT fna f ftrrir f
G 6VT feana f/a f
Piper feyitna fyyltiji/ii~: fey
© (SVT T__ fna ffjfaf f
© 6YT* IT_ fvana ffa f
© 6 >> TT (JVT fuimtna fut Ah? ft~ •. fa te
ovr _ _ - / /
VoL 3\]fpy ij? >- ''
3? prana rral/wrt- rra
h / V '
/ rra land rra
R’• ' '
y -rrmna j'rtuiart rn
$ / </ /
y rryntna rn rn
2J rruna rrujSajrt rrn
—2J FT rruiHind rrn fairy rrn
rrena rrejj/prt rrc
G 9 arcana rrc /a tup rrc
615) j? rraryaitd ri\cyAiji/iP:t'ny
G "v) rrpna rramort rrp
y~L 7 a/' /
VjO y larva n a rrp fairy rrc
G©orr J rrtmrana rrpu ljui/irirrpu
irrana rr,
GOT -j nan a na ~t~ na
(OOk JLaratta na /ana na
oar ninct 7it/Apr i~ nt
r° / 7 / /
GOT Viuyrana fit /W /zi
«««*£ nu/nort- wu
ocpirr I willed tut nm fa ny nu
G3oor ncdfori~
G ODT lii can a tie ft nr
9COT - ticcyaiut nay Aijiftnicer
G — liana ttojfipiA na
G v OD) 1 fraud tie fan a nr
\D uO | (JYT narana nan otythtitiau
OOT t nait a jl ,
UO . ma/ia 7?ia inert ma
__ / /
i DIT maraud ma /ana ma
LJS nuna niij/tprl in /
l_ss° ntlva/ia nit fa ft a tut
(L_p niuna nni/Aar/ mn
(L--P . nuivd/td mu ia mu
SILO at c/ia me jUiarf- me
r-. / / a s •
(9 L-O iiicana me lanif via
(37T) L-O tnyjnina wayfiyi/t* may
Col DHP inctiia ma Aora- ma
pf J / -f/ . • /
Co uo it I 77 l era na mr la ?uy m a
G L-O gvt - J mauvana man Atyz/ti man |
L O iiinana m .
it .




Vlchuvadicrora, We ( our Majefty, High-
nefs, &c. ) don’t believe it.
Ficbuvadicrir y You (your Majefty, &c.)
don’t believe it.
Fichuvadicrar& y They (their Majellys)
don’t believe it.
In the Negative.
VichuvidcYon ilki y We (our Majefty)
don’t believe it.
Vicbuvadicrir iUd y We - don’t
believe it.
Fichuvadicrar illei , They don’t
believe it.
Whence it is evident that the Malabar
Language is very difficult to be learn’d y
efpecially by reafon of the vaft number
of words whereof it confifts, one and
the fame thing being frequently exprefs’d
by divers Words or Names. Thus not
only every Day in the Week, but alfo
throughout the Year, has its peculiar
Name. It is further manifeft from hence,
that the Indians are not fo unpolifliM as
forae Europeans reprefent them, and that
they treat one another (efpecially Per-
fonS of Quality) with lingular Civility
and Refpeft.
The Imperfect Tenfc.
Fichuvadicrane apo Vichuvadicren, I be-
lieved.
Ftchuvadicreye apb Vichuvadicrom, we did
believe it.
The Pcrfeft Tcnfe,
Fichuvaditeny I have believed.
Fichuvaditom , we have believed.
The Preterperfeft Tcnfe.
A ducu mune vichuvaditay, I had believed,
Aducu munevichuvaditon y we had believed.
The Future Tcnfe.
Fichuvadipen , I will believe,
Fichuvadipon y we will believe.
Our Father in the Malabar
Language.
VAnan galil yruerd engal piddve.
In Heaven who art our Father,
unureya namam ellatcum chutamga \ unu~
thy Name be fanftified , thy
reya irahjam vara j un manadin paryel
% Kingdom come j thy Will bedone
d navargal vanatil , chcyuma pelepumy-
in Earth as in Heaven , give our Bread
lum el arum cheya y andandulla engal pi ley •
to us daily , pardon us our
caran, carracucu mngal pava car an -
Trefpafies, as our Trefpalfers for-
galey perru y engaley tolxatricv e duvagu ,
give we , lead not into Temptation us,
ottdde engaluck poldngn vardmal . FilagU .
but of the Evil deliver thou us. So it be.
The Creed.
VAnamm pumium pareyta
Of the Heavens and the Earth Crea-
charvatucum vala pidavagmia , tamby-
tor, Omnipotent Father,
raneye vichuvadicren; Avanureyd maguan
God, I believe. And in Son
oruven namureyd nayen Xeju Cbriftcye
his only Jefus Chrift
vichuvadicren . Tven chetamana cfpirity
I believe. Who was conceiv’d from
waly chanitn hanni
the Holy Ghoft, born from the Virgin
Marial: vakil nindn pirranda Ponxio
Mary , &c.
Pilatin kil parulattu cruxile arraiandu cbeth
aracapata padalangalil errt charruvatucum
valla pidaguia tambiram balagapatil truer an
avaratil nindu truer a vagalacum cbetavarga -
narutytha varnvan. Chutamana
efpiritk *veye vichuvadicren . Chutamana
vargal cuftanum undanu vichuvadicren.
Pileygal porrutalu chetavargdl huirtalum
endendeycum ulla aytum vindamm vichu-
vadicren.






Vol. j. j? . 66y.
f V I. A
/ C EYLA'N,%
olim
\ j!
\ ' x mmcvtcobs M
LAN KAW¥ . >jy


A
DESCRIPTION
Of the Great and moft Famous Ifle of
CEYLON.
CHAP. I.
The Situation, Extent and Difcovery of Ceylon:
TH E Ifle of Ceylon (the 7a-
probana of the Antients ac-
cording to John de Barr os ) has
got its Name among the Por-
tuguefes, as well as the other
Europeans , from its Capital City call’d
Ceylon , known among the Natives by the
Name of Laukauwn.
This Ifle extends from the 6th to the
10 th degree of Northern Latitude. For-
merly its Circumference was reckon’d to
be about 400 Leagues, tho fince that time
the Sea has wafli’d away about 40 Leagues
on the North-fide of it. In antient times
it was queftionlefs (as we fliall fee anori
in the Defcription of Manaar) annexed
to the Continent. The Figure of this
Ifle reprefents (according to Majfaus)
an Egg, but in my opinion refcmbles ra-
ther a Weflphalia Ham, whence without
doubt the Dutch Fort near Jafnapatnam
has got the Name of Hams-heel.
natn y Prince of Ouva y Mature , Dinava-
ca, and the four Corks y Great Duke of :
the feven Cories , Matale , Earl of Cotiar y 1
Trinquenemale i Batecalo , Velafe , Vint ana, ]
Drembra , Panciapato , Vet a, Putelaon , Val- \
tare , Gale y BeUigaon\ Marquefs of Dura- -
nuraj Ratienura , Tripane, Acciapato •, Lord 1
of the Sea-ports of Alican, Columbo ,
Negombo , Chilau , Madampe , Calpentyn,
Aripiture, Manaar, and of the Fi fliery of
precious Stones and Pearls •, Lord of the
Golden Sun. All which Places, Cities,
and Fortrefles we fliall have occafion to
treat of hereafter.
Ceylon*
hi Extent*
The Titles
of Duke
and Earl
have been
introduced
by the Por«
tugucfes.
The Ifle of Ceylon abounds alfo in ex-
cellent Rivers, fuch as Chilau y Matual,
Alican , Mature , Batecalo , Trinquenemale y
and others. It produces various forts
of precious Stones, and is extremely fer-
tile, efpecially in Cinnamon: Here are
alfo found the belt Elephants of the
whole Indies .
Its Dißt*
very*
By tl.eQ.i i-
ncfes.
The beforementioned Maffaus affirms*
that its Circumference is at this time not
above 240 Leagues, its Length 78, and
the Breadth 44. But the Dutch, fince they
have been Mailers of it, after the taking
of Columbo 1555. and of Manaar and
Jafnapatnam 1658. have more exa&ly
computed itsCompafs to be 350 Leagues.
It has many excellent Harbours, Cities
and Fortrefles, and is divided into feve-
ral Provinces, as may be feen by the
Title of the King of that Bland, who
ftiles himfelf, Raja Singa, Emperor of
Ceylon , King of Candea , Cota, Ceyta-
vaca, Dambadan, Amorayapore, Jafnapat-
« T 1 ITf
This Ifle was firlt difcover’d by the;
Chinefes in the following manner; Ccr- '
tain Chinefes having fufFer’d Shipwrack,
were forc’d afliore on that Ifland, where
they profcfled their King to be the Son
of the Sun . The Inhabitants of Ceylon
adoring at that time the Sun , as the Ma-
labar s do to this day their Efvara, i. e.
the Sun, they were fo well pleafed with
their new Guefts, that they elc&ed the
Captain of the Chinefe Jonke, or Veflel,
their King y whence the prefent Kings of
Ceylon trace their Origin, and have
taken upon them the Title of Lord of
the Golden Sun , this firtt Chinefe King
Hhcf
Ceylon.


Fedegree of
the Kings
tf Ceylon.
having fliPd himfelf. The much beloved
Son of the always moving Sun. From this
King Lankauw Pali M deduced
his Origin, who took upon him the Name
of Well-beloved Lord of the whole His
Son was Lankauw Singe i. e.
The wed-beloved Lion of the and
after him his Son, Marafmge Mahadafcyn,
i. e. The well-beloved Conqueror of the Lion.
This King left behind him two Sons, the
fir ft named Lankauw Patti Mahaftane,
or, The Eye-apple of the Country •, the fe-
cond Radgora Adafcyn, or. The well-be-
loved King. Thefe two quarrelling about
the Succelion, at laflldivided Kingdoms,
that of Candy falling to the fliare of
Radgora Adafcyn, and all the reft to the
ddeft. The Pofterity of thefe two Kings
rul’d for a confiderable time after* the
ddeft Son always fucceeding before the
others. Among thefe Lankauw Patti
Mahaftane dying in the 70 year of his
Age, left a Son named Marandonna Mad-
gora , i. e. The Conqueror of the Eye-apple ,
who came no fooner to the Crown, but
he engag’d in a heavy War againft his
Uncle by the Father’s fide, which was
ended at laft by a Marriage betwixt
Marandonna Mahaftane , the Son of Mad-
goray and Malabande Wandige . They left
a numerous Iflue of Sons and Daughters,
and among the reft one named Fimala
Darma Soria Adafcyn , i. e. The Conqueror
of the whole Kingdom , (born after his Fa-
ther’s Death) who no fooner came to
Age of maturity, but he attack’d all
the Neighbouring Princes that refufed
to fubmit to his Jurifdidtion \ and
having by degrees fubdu’d them all, and
eftabli/h’d himfelf in the Throne, by the
Death of all fuch as had oppofed him, he
married at laft Rokech Wandige , i. e. The
Beautiful Queen , his Sifter’s Daughter,
by whom he had a numerous Iflue of
Sons and Daughters, from whom the
pt’efent Kings are defeended.
CHAP. II.
The first Arrival of the Portuguefes in the Isle Ceylon, under the Command
of Laurence d’ Almeyda.
Arrival of
the Portu-
guelcs in
Ceylon.
Raja Singa
Adafcyn
*n Enemy
«f the For-
uiguees.
Xft TtlUft thefe Inteftine Wars Were
V V carrying on in Ceylon , Laurence
d? Alnieyda by the Command of hfis Father
was imploy’d in cruifing upott the Maho-
metans., who were then tranfporting their
EffcSs from Malacca and Sumatra over
the Maidive Blands into Arabia. The
Portuguefes being inform’d of the Condi-
tion of the Ifland, and knowing that it
was bell fiffiing in troubled Waters, did
turn their Arms againft it, and after
many bloody Engagements, made them-
felves Mailers of all the Places which
produce the bell Cinnamon, which they
ufed to tranfport in vail quantities in-
to Europe .
At that time Raja Singa Adafcyn reign’d
in Ceylon. The general opinioh is, that
he was a King’s Son, and Nephew to the
King of Cora, tho I have often heard the
Pmtuguefes and fome of the Hollanders
fay that he was no more than a Barber,
who being well skill’d in divers Lan-
guages, and of a Warlike Inclination,
aim’d at the Crown, and at laft: was fo
fortunate as to reduce the whole Ifland
( after he had kill’d all the Great Men)
to his Obedience. This King being a
declar’d Enemy of the , he
befieg’d Columbo with a powerful Army,
and reduc’d them in a Ihort time to
fuch extremity for want of Provifions,
that the Garifon knowing the Governour
to be averfe to come to a Capitulation,
they at firll broke out into injurious
words, and at laft refolv’d (unldsthey
receiv’d Relief from Goa in a week’s time)
to kill their Officers, and to farrender
at Difcetion. But the Governour being
advertis’d of their Defign by one of his
Pages, did all that lay in his power to
keep the Soldiers in Obedience with fair
Promifes, till the arrival of the fo long
wilh’d for Succours from Goa , which
having defeated the Indian Fleet, they
forced them to raife the Siege.
This Raja Singa Adafcyn having made
himfelf Mailer of the whole Kingdom,
except Gale and Columbo , forced the Em-
peror Mahadafcyn to fly the Country,
who in his purfuit fcattered his Trea-
fure of Gold and Jewels upon the Road,
thereby to Hop the purfuit of his Ene-
mies. v Raja Singa being thus become Maf-
ter of the Empire, conllituted Vinne La-
mantia one of the late Emperor’s Favour-
ites, Governor over the Highland Coun-
tries, whole Son, named Don Jon , after-
wards obtain’d the Sovereignty. This
Vinne Lamantia finding himfelf in a con-
dition to cope with his new pretended
Mailer, took up Arms again ft him, and
Coliimbo
reliev'd.
Vinne I>
mandi
rebels <*-
gdinjl Si'
]i Sing l
66 8
A Befcription of CEYLON.


Comes to a
Compofiti-
?? . wt l b
in^a *
having brought over the greateft part of
the Country (grown weary of the Ty-
rant) to his fide, was proclaimed Empe-
ror, under the Title of
Soria , i. e. The Deliverer of the Empire.
This War being carried on with various
Succefs for a confiderable time, the Por~
tuguefes got time to breath, and induced
Raja Singa to come to a Compofition with
rime Ladarma Soria , offering him the
whole Treafure he had taken of Maha*
dafcyn the late Emperor, provided he
would refign the whole Sovereignty into
his Hands,
Whilfl: they were treating of the
Peace, rime Ladarma had a Son born
him (who bearing his Father’s Name, fuc-
ceededhim in the Empire) but he was
fcarce a Year old, when Raja Singa, not
thinking himfelf fecure in the late Trea-
ty concluded with Vinne Ladarma , he at
latt found means to cajole him to his
Court (notwithftanding thofc of Candy
ftrongly oppofed it) where he was no Too-
ner arrived, but being feized upon with
all his Attendance, Raja Singa order’d
him to be buried in the Ground up to his
Breaft, andfoto be kill’d by the means
of certain Wooden Balls, which were
thrown at his Head, till his Brains were
dalh’d out, the chiefeft of his Attendants
being likewife put to death by the Ty-
rant’s Orders*
Is betray'd
t 0 C9Hrto
d mr -
*4iv VJXir-per Stoned to V spill *
This done, he bent all his Force againft
Candy , and having made himfelf Matter
of the whole Country, fold many of the
Inhabitants for Slaves, anddifarm’d the
reft, making the Emprefs his Prifoner.
The Zingalefes being much opprefs’d by
the Tyrant, who forc’d them to carry
Earth and other Materials upon their
Heads for the building of Fortifications
all the way betwixt Candy and Settavaca ,
fought for Relief by the Fortuguefes , who
glad of fo favourable an opportunity
of ftrengthning their Intereft in that
Ifland, feat Andrew Furtado a great War-
rior with a confiderable Force to Jafna-
patnam, which he furprized, and having
got the King of that Place in his power,
requir’d his Gonfent and Affiftance to
pafs through his Country for the Relief of
Candy . The Inhabitants of that Kingdom
being not as yet enter’d into any fettled
with the For tuguefes, were not
Candy
conquer*/
tyßaja.
zkgakfei-


a little furpriz’d at the fudden arrival of
the Parangys (fo they call Foreigners)
fearing (which prov’d true afterwards)
that inftead of their pretended Delivery
they fliould only change their Slavery;
which the cunning Portuguefe Generals
having well forefeen, had brought Don
John and Don Philip , the laft Uncle of
Donna Catharina , and both educated in
the Romifh Religion, to Candy , the laft
of which he conftituted King, and Don
John Generaliflimo \ leaving Donna Ca-
tbarina the Daughter of the late Empe-
ror Mabadafcyn , and the foie Hcirefs of
the Empire, at Manaar . He alfo took
care to give notice of his coming to thofe
of Candy , with full Aflurances that he
was come for no other end than to de-
liver them from the Ufurper’s Yoke,
which had fo good an efFed upon them,
that they enter’d with him into an Offen-
five and Defenfivc Alliance againft Raja
Singa Adafcyn,
The Ufurper got foon fcent of this
Treaty, which made him advance with
a Potent Army towards Jafnapatnam ,
to prevent the Portuguefes from marching
to Candy •, but thefe were too nimble for
him, and coming to Candy before he was
arriv’d in that Kingdom, immediately
crown’d Don Philip King, and declar’d
Don John Generaliflimo, under condition
that both fliould marry Portuguefe Ladies,
and the Inhabitants take an Oath of Al-
legiance to the King of Portugal,
Don John in the mean time feeing Bon
Philip pi efer’d before him by the Portu-
guefes, conceiv’d a mortal hatred againft:
them, but thought fit to diflemble it,
till he fliould meet with a favourable op-
portunity of fliewing his Refentment,
With this intention he took care to have
Candy fortified fo, as not to fear any
thing from Raja Singa , and the Royal
Palace (lately demoliflfd by that Ufnr-
per) to be rebuilt with more Splendor
than before, for the Reception of the
new King, tho at the fame time he con-
fulted with a certain famous Sorcerer
how to remove the faid King by Poifon,
which he effected afterwards.
Make Dob
Philip
King,
Don John
exafper&
ted at tbe
Fortu-
guefcs.
Enter in -
t 0 an Al ! l ~
them.
CHAP. III.
Don Philip poifon'd. Don John fucceeds routs Singa, who dies
foon after. His Secretary Janiere takes up Arms againft Don John.
Don Philip
fettled at
Candy.
Is poifon'd
by Don
John.
Whi k
made Em*
Hm*
TH E Portuguefes fearing not without
reafon the approach of Raja Singa ,
had fortified Gonnoor , and fent John de
Melo in Company of certain Religious
Men to Manaar, to bring them frefli
fupplies of Men, Arms, and Ammuni-
tion to Candy , the Inhabitants whereof
were all difarm’d by the Ufurper, ha-
ving firft introduc’d Don Philip in great
Pomp, and plac’d him in the Royal Pa-
]ace with the general Applaufe of the
Inhabitants.
But he fcarce tailed the firft Fruits of
his Greatnefs, when Don John (taking
the opportunity of the abfence of the
chief of the Portuguefes) got fome Poi-
fon adminiftred to him, which not having
defir’d effed, he gave him another
Dofe, which put an end to his Life; and
by promifes of great Rewards and other
Enticements, brought moil of the Inha-
bitants of Candy over to his fide, who
declar’d him their Emperor, and gave
him the Title of rinne Ladarma Soria ,
after his Father, mention’d before to have
been murder’d by the Command of Raja
Singa,
The Portuguefes fore-boding them-
felves no good from Don John , whom
they knew to be their Enemy, fent
Meflengers after Meflengers to John de
Melo at Manaar , to reprefent to him
their dangerous State, wherein they found
themfelves not miftaken: For no fooner
was Don John feated in the Throne, but
he fent a Herald to the Portuguefes in
Garifon at Gannoor , who upbraiding them
with Perjury and perfidious Defigns, or-
der’d them in the Emperor’s Name to
quit their Pofts within five or fix days,
which if they refufed, they muft exped
no Quarter. The Portuguefes finding
themfelves unable to refill his Power,
and defpairing of the defir’d Relief,
thought it their fafeft way to come to a
Capitulation with Dohn John, who granted
them a free Paffage with their Swords on-
ly, being forc’d not only to leave all their
Booty, but alfo their Bag and Baggage
behind them.
The very next day John de Melo ar-
riv’d with the Succours from Manaar, but
too late, whilft Raja Singa was advancing
towards Candy, threatning a moft fevere
Revenge to the Inhabitants of that Coun-
try. Don John finding himfelf now defti-
And frees
tht Porta '
n oor# ’


Meff age of
Ra ja to D.
John.
Kurefo-
lute An-
fwer,
RajaV
Surprise*
Is defea-
ted.
tute of the afliftanceof the Portuguefes,
and underloading that his Enemy had
pitched his Tents near Walane, was fore-
ly put to it how to cope with fo great a
Force *, but being oblig’d either to fight or
quit his Advantage, he refolv’d to en-
gage the Enemy, coft what it would: for
which reafon having afrelh taken the
Oath of Allegiance from the Inhabitants,
and furnilh’d them with Arms (fuch as
they could get in hafte) he advanced to-
wards them in order of Battel. Raja Sin-
£4 being not a little furprized at his Bold -
nefs, fent him word, that He had heft
take warning by hvs Father Vinne Ladarma
Soria’i Death , and that in cafe be refufed to
fubmit to his Mercy before it was too late , he
muft expel} no other Treatment than to be cut
in pieces. Unto whom Don John fmiling,
fent for anfwer, That he would take care to
put it out of hvs Power, and if hvs Father had
been as cautious of him as he was refolved to
be, he need not have come to fo lamentable
an end, to revenge which he was come to tlfvs
Place *, exhorting him at the fame time to
implore his Mercy before it was too late.
Raja Singa was fo exafperated at this
Meirage, and the Averfion he found in
the Inhabitants of the Country, that he
declar’d. He would puni/h with Death all
that fhould oppofe him and fo order’d his
whole Army to march to Donlan, with
an Intention to furprize that Place, be-
fore Don John could come to its Relief.
Don John, thoheknew himfelf much in-
feriour in number, yet refolv’d to follow
him clofe at the Heels ; and to put the
better Countenance on the matter,march-
ed in great Pomp, With rrioft fplendid
Umbrellos born before him, and fuch o-
ther Royal Enfigns, as the Kings in thofe
Countries ufe in their Wars. Raja Singa
feeing Don John thus bravely advancing
towards him, refolv’d cither to vanquifh
or to die glorioufly in the Enterprize,
ctould not forbear to break out into thefe
Words, Verily Don John vs a courageous
Warrior, and I prefage that one day or other
he will afeend the Throne . O Raja Singa!
Where vs thy noble Boldnefs, where are all thy
great and ambitious Deftgns , where thy
Fortune which no tody could refift ! I am a-
fraid of a fudden ChangeO changeable For-
tune, why haft thou turn'd thy Bach towards
Raja Singa, who was once thy Favou-
rite!
Thus the Signal being given, the Bat-
tel began, wherein Don John and his
Forces gave way at fifft, the better to
bear the firft Alfault of the Enemy •, but
afterwards Don John It the Head of his
Guards, charg’d them fo furioufly, that
(notwithftanding Raja Singa did all that
could be expe&ed from a Great Captain)
they were forc’d to give way,and at laft to
feek for their Safety in their Heels: And
fo he return’d vi&orious to Candy, having
loft no more than 700 Men in the whole
Engagement; whereas the loft of Raja
Singa amounted to above 3000, who was
fo dejedled at this Defeat, that he ftruck
voluntarily a Thorn into his Foot, and
refuting to have his Wound drefs’d, it
gangren’d, and put an end to his days at
Settevaca.
He Ihew’d not the leaft remorfe upon
his death-bed for his Cruelties, except
thofe committed againft the Prielts of
Daldowanfe , whom he caufed to be burnt
alive j for being ask’d by the Tyrant,
whether the Murder had committed
upon his Uncle, Mother-in-law and Bro-
thers, could not be forgiven, they anfwe-
red, No ; Well then (faid the Ufurper) (
lam now at Liberty to do what 1 pleafe , and
fo committed them all to the Fury of the
Flames, exeept the High Prielt, called
Tireanco , i. e. God's Vicegerent, by the Cin-
galefes. The Prielts of Paraneydeyo , being
ask’d the fame queltion, forewarn’d by
the Difafter of the others, gave.for An-
fwer, that a Perfon guilty of fucb a Sin
could not enter into Heaven , hut if truly re-
fenting, he might by their Intercejfwn be
brought to remain betwixt Heaven and
Earth, without being fenfible of the Tor-
ments of Hell. This Aufwer was fo plea-
ling to Raja , that he difmilfed them un-
molefted, telling them, That he had orde-
red the Prieftsof Daldowanfe to be burnt,
becaufe they would make God delight in Evil 5
hut you who make him a merciful God , I will
always look upon as my Friends . Jult be-
fore his Death, he fent for the before-
mentioned Tireanco or High Prieft, deli-
ring him to forgive the Death of his Bre-
thren, offering him confiderable Prefents
at the fame time •, he refufed the laft, but
pardon’d the Crime, and fo return’d to
Candy , where he died in the noth Year
of his Age.
Don John had no fooner received In-
telligence of Raja's Death, but he put
himfelf at the Head of his Army, to
take pofleffion of the whole Kingdom.
But the Chief Secretary of Raja Singa
having got all his Mailer’s Treasure into
his Hands, and thinking himfelf in a ca-
pacity to cope with Dori John , got him-
felf proclaimed King, under the Name
of Janicre Waniaar i and at the fame
time foilicited for. Succours by the For-
tuguefes, Neither was it long before Pe-
dro Lopes de Soufa arriv’d from Goa, at the
Dies,
The Frlefts
of Daldo-
wanfe
burnt *
i
Raja’s re-
morfe for
that Alim,
Janicrc
ufurps the
Crown*


decks for
Afjlliunce
by the Por-
tuguefes.
Head of 12500 Portuguefes , befides a
g OOC j number of and ,
which occalion’d <lO final! Confternation
in Don John’s Army, who had been late-
ly Spectators of the Ravages committed
by thofe of Gale and Columbo (with the
afliftance of the new King) in the Low -
Lands , and therefore had all the reafon
to fear fo ftrong a Force of the Portuguefes
ready to join with his Enemies. Howe-
ver Pedro Lopes finding the Low-Lands laid
defolate (the bell of the Country) and
confequcntly promifing himfelf but
final] Advantages by his Stay, was for
returning to Goa , had he not been oppo-
fed by the reft of the Officers, who al-
ledged, that the beft part of the late
King’s Treafure remain'd as yet entire
at Candy *, and that in order to make
themfelves Mafters of the whole IHe,
they muft take this Opportunity of con-
quering the Petty Princes one after ano-
ther, which they put in execution accord-
ingly. For having partly by Force, part-
ly by Promifes, brought the Kings of the
Low-Lands over to their Party, it was a-
greed to affembk a ftrong Array againft
Don John The Quota? s of the fevera l
Princes to be furnifh’d for this Expediti-
on was regulated in the following manner.
The King of Cota 6 800 Men, four
War-Elephants, 50 other Elephants, 1800
Oxen for Carriage, and 1000 Colys or Pi-
oneers. King J'aniere Wdndaar
28980 Men, 24 War-Elephants, 200 0-
thers, socoOxen for Carriage, 3000 Pi-
oneers. The Kingdom of Jafnapatmm
19900 Men, 10 War-Elephants, 40 of
the common fort, 3000 Oxen, and
Pioneers. The King of Cottar 7980 Men
6ooPioneees, 1000 Oxen, 30 War-Ele-
phants, 25 others. The K.of Palugan ,
5890 Men, 1000 Pioneers, 3 War-Ele-
phants,and 25 others. The King of Ba-
tecalo 9800 Men, 2000 Pioneers, 2500
Oxen, 4 War-Elephants, and 30 others.
The King of Pama in conjunction with
fome other Princes, 59895 Men, 2140
Pioneers, 530 Elephants, and 16000 Ox-
en. So that the whole Number of thefe
Forces amounted to 151086 Heads, a-
mong whom were 139246 fighting Men,
and 11740 Pioneers, 75 War-Elephants,
1000 other Elephants, Oxen
for Carriage. The Quota of the Pom.
guefes under Pedro Lopes amounted to
1474 Portuguefes , 1200 Miflites , and
1224 Indians , 47 War-Elephants, 945
others, and 19900 Oxen.
The firft thing they took cafe of was to
fecure their Retreat, by erecting 3 Forts,
call’d Metnihromri , Mapati and Gama*
tori ; which done,they directed their March
with their joint Forces towards Candy.
A great
Army rai-
fed again]}
Don Joka,
CHAP. IV.
Don John draws out his Forces againft Janiere and the Portuguefes, attacks
them with Succefs, but is routed, at last. Donna Catherina declared Emprefs,
Janiere murdered.
DO N John having received Intelli-
gence of their March, was put to
a great Nonplus what courfe to take in
this Exigency of his Affairs, his whole
Army confuting of no more than be-
twixt 30 and 40000 Men : but know-
ing them to be refolute and entirely de-
voted to his Interelt, he keptasdofc to
the Enemy as pofllbly he could, and in
fevcral Engagements got the better of
them, till at laft being attack’d Within*
credible Fury by the Po , they put
him to the rout, and took the City of
Walane , with the Lofs of 49 Men only
on their fide, killing above 1500 Of the
Inhabitants, which ft ruck filch a Terror
into the reft, that the Whole Counrry
lubmitfed without the leaft Oppofifion,
except Dollefwagge, which they were not
able to take.
Don John not being able to rally his
flattered Forces, retired with hisEifi-
prefs into the Woods and Defects, where
they Were forced to feed upon Herbage
for fome time 3 and the Portuguefes being
now Mafters of the Country, required the
Cingakfes to own the King of Portugal
for their Sovereign Lord. Thefc on the
other hand defired that Donm Cathtrina,
the Daughter of Mahada their Legal
Emperor, might be brought from Mana-
arj and declar’d their Emprefs: Don Fe-
dro Lopes being well enough pleas’d with
this Propofition, yet willing to confult
with Janiert about the matter, he found
him not averfe to it, his Intention being
to marry her with the confenf of the
Portuguefes, Who hud underhand promi-
fed the fame 4s a ReWard of his Serviced
done to them.
Retreats
into the
Dejerti,
Don fofm
routed.


Donna Ca-
tharina
brought
from Ma-
naar.
A Porcu-
guefe
Ship loft.
Superftitl-
Qti of D.
Cacherina.
Accordingly a numerous Train and
fplendid Equipage was fent to bring the
new Emprefs to Candy *, but one of the
Ships foundring at Sea in a Storm, 150
Soldiers, a great Number of Slaves, and
two Chefts with Money were loft with
her: one Portuguefe and two Negroes
only had the good Fortune to efcape
of the whole Ships Crew, who heard
the Captain of the Ship, whofe Name
was Perere , take his lafi: Farewel in thefe
Words, O brave Perere, Is it thus thy
Fate to be fwallow'd up by the Sea! but fince
it is God's Will 7 Patience j Chrift receive
my Soul.
In the mean while all imaginable Pre-
parations being made for the Reception
of Donna Gatherina, fhc was preparing
for her Departure from Manaar : As Ihe
was carry’d along in her Litter or Chair,
one of the Poles of Cane happen’d to
break, which the new Emprefs looking
upon as an ill Omen, file cry’d out aloud.
Stop, flop , don’t carry me any further , for
this portends fome great Misfortune. Un-
to which the Governor of Manaar , who
attended her Perfon, reply’d. May it
pleafe your Majejty , we ought to confider
that we are no Heathens but Chriftians, and
muft therefore defpife fucb Superftitions ; God
will be the Supporter of you and your Caufe .
Then the Emprefs bid them take another
Pole, and foon after embark’d with a
fair Wind, which carryM her in 8 days to
Candy .
Here <fhe was met by Pedro Lopes the
Portuguefe General, and feveral of the
C ingale fe Kings and Princes, attended by
a great Number of Nobles, who paid
their Reverence (according to the Guf-
tom of the Country) by lying their Fa-
ces flat upon the Ground, this they call
Sambaja. The Emprefs arifing out of
her Litter, return’d them hearty Thanks, *
and returning to her Litter was accom-
panied into the City by Lopes and the be-
fore-mentioned Princes with incredible
Pomp, and under the general Acclamati-
ons of the People, who were infinitely
pleas’d with the Gold and Silver that was
thrown among them, as the Cavalcade
marched along, which wasfo fplendid,
that the whole Charge thereof amount-
ed to 1900000 Livres, the Remnants of
theTrcafure of the late dcceafcd Ufur-
per, RajaSinga Adafcyn, Donna Cathe -
Leaves
Manaar.
Her Recep-
tion at
Candy.


is mwnd
there.
a Beggar,
Tfo p°rtu-
fefagold
Sum for
his Head,
They com-
mitgreat
Jnfolencef .
Difference
hitrvixt
the Portu-
guefes and
Janierc.
rina after having relied herfelf from the
Fatigues of the Voyage for three days,
was crown’d with the ufual Solemnities,
and put into poffeffion of the Empire.
About that time Don John came in the
d ‘fguife of a Beggar into , where
hefetfevcral Houfes on fire, in hopes of
firing the whole City, but was frulirated
in his Defign, the Fire being always
quenched in good time, tho it often broke
out in divers Places at once.
-phe Portuguefes fufpeding the Matter,
offcFd a Reward of ioooo Pagodes
(20000 Crowns) to any that could take
him dead or alive, which made Don John
defift from his Enterprize, and to return
to his Defert.
The Portuguefes finding themfelves
now in the quiet pofTelfionof the Coun-
try, were no longer able to difguife their
natural Vices, their Pride, Avarice and
Infolence, which occafjon’d frequent Com-
plaints to the Emprefs, but without Re-
dr els j which obliged the Inhabitants to
enter into an Alfociation to deprive them
of all Subiiftence, by cutting off their Sup-
plies of Provifions ; This obliged the
Portuguefe General to fend in conjunction
with King Janiere Wandaar , 2000 Cinga~
kfes and iooo Portuguefes, to the Duke-
dom of Ouve, and 2000 Indians , and 200
Portuguefes to Halalmia beyond Candy , to
fetch in Rice and other Provifions.
The Portuguefe Soldiers, thothey were
very well received by the Inhabitants,
yet did they commit all manner of Info-
iences in their Quarters, even to the
ravifiiing of their Wives, killing their
Children, and fetting their Houfes on
fire-, fo that the C ingalefes finding them-
felves in a worfe condition now than
they were under their tyrannical Empe-
rors, entred into a Conjuration to kill
the Portuguefes at a certain appointed
time.
, In the mean while Janiere fbllicited the
Portuguefe General Lopes , for leave to
tnarry the Emprefs Catharina ; wfaichihe
handfomely deny’d, alledging, that he
could not confent to it, without fpecial
Order from the King of Portugal^ --but
that he would write to the King about it.
Janiere looking upon this only as an Ex-
cufe, defir’d to let him marry his Sifter’s
Daughter ; which being likewife refufed
by the General, Janiere\ conceived from
that Moment a mortal Hatred againft the
Portuguefes , and could not forbear to tell
the General > that He did not expett to have
met Wlth f uch a Remrct f or the Services he
had done them, fwearing that they fhould
have occafton to repent it. The Portuguefe
being fomewhat exafperated at this un-
expected Reply, told him that he ought
not to take it amifs, if he denied him
what was not in his Power to give, viz..
Donna Catherina the legal Heirefs of the
Empire, to him who had ufurped the Ti-
tle of a King, merely by being got into
the poiTeffion of the Treafure of Raja
Singa Mafcyn, but that he fliould be ve-
ry ready to ferve him upon any other oc-
cafion. Janiere being put out of all Pati-
ence by thefe infulting Words, replied
fmartly, I am fenfible of your Defrgn • you
that came here as Strangers, now you have
got your Ends thro my means, are the firft
who would tyrannise over me. Then recol-
lecting himfelf, he began to turn the Dif-
courfe, diflcrabling his Refentment; but
the fame Night difpatched a Letter to
Don John in the Defert, wherein he ad-
vertis’d him of what had palled betwixt
him and the Portuguefe General, offering
him the Empire, provided he would re-
ceive him as King of the Low-Lands \
which Don John approving of, they entred
into a Confederacy to rid their Hands of
the Portuguefes .
Things being thus fettled, Don John
began to appear among th cCingalefes (al-
ready much exafperated againft the Portu-
guefes) reprefenting to them the Danger
they were in, and how he was refolved
in conjundion with Janiere to drive them
out of the Ifland ; which they readily ac-
cepted of, promi ling all theaffiftancc they
were able to give. But as Janiere fenc
frequent Letters to Don John, it hap-
pened that fome of them fell into the
hands of the Portuguefes, who being there-
by fully convinc’d of the Deflgn carried
on againff them, begun, not without
great reafon, to fear, that unlefs they
confented to the Marriage of Janiere with
Donna Catherina, they would fcarce be able
to maintain themfelvesin the Iflc.
A Council being called for this pur- :
pole, They were much divided in their \
Opinions, fome being for confenting to I
the Marriage to prevent farther Mifcbief, •
and to have Von John murdered ; whilft
others were for hazarding all, rather than
to confept to the Match, and to have Ja~
niere murdered, under pretence that he
had laid a Defignto murder the Emprefs
and the General ; for which purpofe
fome forged Letters were to be produced,
to juftify their ConduCt
Fo encompafs this Delign, they took i
the Opportunity, when Janierc was one 1
day in conference with the Portuguefe Ge-
neral and fome other Officers: The Ge-
neral feeing him have a Scymeter on his
Janiere
enters in
a Leagk
with Dc
John.
the Partu*
gUefescon-
fuMvit
Janiere.
Refold M
Death- .


fide befet with Precious Stones, he defi-
red to let him fee it, feigning that he
liked it fo well, that he would take it for
a Pattern to have fuch another made after
it. Janiere not fufpe&ing their Defign,
unadvifedly parted with his Scymeter,
which was nofooner but a certain
Portuguese Captain (upon the Signal giv-
en by the General) did run him thro the
Body with his Sword, his Attendants
undergoing foon after the fame Fate,
His Guards being advertifed thereof,
cryed out, Haddy, T'rcafort , Trea~
fon r Radgon lamer e Marupue y KinelmU
Js mrde-
tei.
Donna Ca-
Reflections
upon it,
ere is murdered * which being a Signal to
the reft, all the Indians left the Portuguefe
Camp, except the King of Cota with his
Forces, who had not Immediate notice
of this raoft deteftable Murder.
The Portuguefes did all they could to
juftify their Proceedings upon this account
to the Emprefs, who (tho but young)
being highly difpleafed thereat, told
them, That fuppofing he wot a Traytor y be
ou^t not t 0 ave been thus harbaroufly mwr~
dered 0 but either kept a Prifoner y or at leaft
had the Benefit of a Legal Tryal Reft aft
fared, added flie, that this treacherous Pad
will turn to your Ruin * for who is it that
Lears of it y but will curfe you 7 and
never truft you in whatever you pretend to ?
Jlnd ala/S) i aid Ihc, bow ill have you ferved
your King and me ? who am likely to be in-
volved in your Ruin ? Re therefore upon your
Guard i for you will pay dearly for having
rewarded thus a Man who had done you fuch
Signal Services, Theft Words, tho com«
ing from a young Woman, and fcarce
well initiated in the fundamentals of
Ghriftianity, were adiially fulfilled af-
terwards, when the Pdrtuguefes were dri-
ven by our Forces out of Batecalo , Go*
/e, Columbo 7 Negumbo , andlaftof all out
of Jafnapatnam.


CHAP. V.
The Portuguefes leave Candy, are routed by the Cingalefes. The Emprefs taken.
Prifoner. Don John becomes Mafter of the Empire ; Marries Donna Catheri-
na. Jeronimo Oriedo defeated.
Don John
improves
the h'aS to
bis advan-
triage.
The Por-
tuguefes
leave Can
dy.
Are wife-
rably
treated by
the Cinga-
Icfcs,
1590.
And rout-
ed,
Fcdro Lo-
pcs and
D. Cathc-
rina taken
grifmrt •
DO N John was not wanting to turn
the Hatred of the People (which
' mull needs enfue upon fo barbarous a
’ Fad) to his advantage, and to reprefent
the perfidious Defigns of the Portuguefes
in the worft colours, offering them his
Affiftance againft thefe Foreigners, as he
had done before againft Raja Singa 3
which fuccecded fo well, that they re-
folv’d unanimoufly to fide with him, in
order to drive them out of the Country.
The Portuguefes having receiv’d intelli-
gence of the great Preparations made a-
gainft them, and that Don John was ad-
vancing with his Army towards Candy ,
began now, but too late, to repent of the
Murder of Janiere 3 and feeing their Ruin
at hand, unlefs they took timely care of
their Safety, they retreated from Candy
to the Fort of Gannoor , whence they fent
to Columbo for Relief. The Cingalefes
having got notice of their Flight, purfu’d
them fo clofely, that many of them fell
into their hands, efpecially of thole De-
tachments fent to Goa and Halalmia for
Provifions, 50 whereof they fent back
with their Ears, Nofes and Privy Parts
cut off, in revenge of the Ravifhments
committed upon their Wives and Daugh-
ters.
The Portuguefes were fo terrify’d there-
at, that finding themfelves deftitute of all
hopes of Relief, they refolved like wife
to leave Gannoor , and to retire to Walane y
which they put in execution 1590. on a
Sunday 3 and the better to cover their
Flight, or at leaft to divert the Cingalefes
from purfuing them, fet the circumjacent
Country on fire. But thefe preferring
their Revenge before all other Confide-
rations, follow’d them at the heels, and
attack’d them moft furioufly in four feve-
ral Parts at once. The Portuguefes de-
fended themfelves moft courageously 3 but
being over-power’d in Number, were
forc’d to give way with the lofs of many
of their belt Soldiers, either kill’d or
taken Prifoners, among whom was the
Portuguefe General Lopes and Donna Ca-
therina. The General dy’d within three
days after of his Wounds, after he had
recommended his Son to Don John's care,
who was afterwards by him (purfuant
to his Promife) fent to Columbo,
The Indians got a confiderable Booty,
befides a vaft Quantity of Arms, Cannon
and Ammunition, in this Engagement;
and Don John purfuing his Vidlory with
the utmoft vigour, made himfelf Mailer
of all the Forts belonging to the Portu-
guefes 3 fome by Affault, the Garifons
whereof he put to the Sword 3 fome by
Competition, which was punctually ob-
ferv’d. All which ftruck fuch an Amaze-
ment into the circumjacent Kings and
Princes, that they appear’d inPerfon be-
fore him, and asking Pardon lor their
having been engag’d with the Portuguefes,
brought him confiderable Prefents, and
did him Homage with the ufual Solemnity
of proftrating themfelves with their Fa-
ces to the Ground.
Being thus fettled a fecond time in the
Throne, he thought it the fafeft way to
fecure himfelf of the Fidelity of his Sub-
jects by marrying Donna Catherina (Ihe
being then but 12 years old) which was
celebrated with great Solemnity for no
days fucceflively 3 notwithftanding which
the Charges.thereof did not amount to
above 5000 Pagodes : But the Prefents
bellow’d upon many of the Nobility (to
reconcile them to his Intereft) to no lefs
than 968754 Pagodes, or 4859538 Dutch
Guilders, making the Sum of 1943815
Rixdollars. His next Care was to ftreng-
then his Frontiers by three ftrong Forts 3
and he built himfelf a Palace, furround-
ed with feveral Bulworks, wherein he
imploy’d the captive Portuguefes , who, to
their great grief, were forc’d to fee their
Enlignsdifplay’d upon the Towers of their
Enemies.
Don John having for fome time enjoy’d
the quiet Pofleflion of the Throne, Don
Jeronimo d? Oriedo was fent in the quality
of Portuguefe General to Ceylon, with a
confiderable number of Land Forces,
compos’d of Spaniards and Portuguefes ,
brought thither from Goa and other Pla-
ces on the Indian Coaft. Having by great
Prefents brought over to his fide moft of
the Princes of the Low-Lands, he order’d
feveral Forts to be eredted to ferve him
for a Retreat upon occafion. Don John
was fo far from annoying his men in per-
feding Uiefe Fortifications, thathefeem’d
to defpife it, faying, Let them go on, I will
Don John
reM ti
the
dm.
Murrks
D. Cathe-
rine
Onedo t
Porta*
y


find a way to pull down as fafi as they can
build: But underflanding that the Portu-
guefes were advancing towards Walane ,
in order to furprize Candy (where they
intended to ereft a ftrong Fort betwixt
Triopuenam and Palugan , to bridle the
Country) he attack’d them in their
March •> fo that a mofl furious Battel en-
fu’d, which remain’d dubious for fome
time, the Portuguefes fighting like Lions *,
but at lafl were forc’d to yield to the
number of their Enemies, who purfu’d
them for five days as far as Columbo \ they
keeping their Ranks clofe, and making
good their Retreat with unfpeakable Bra-
very, tho not without considerable Lofs
on their fide. Among their Wounded
was Oriedo the General, who was oblig’d
to King Cota for his Liberty, he having
conceal’d him in fome retir’d Place, with-
out which he had infallibly fallen into the
hands of the Indians. Thefe, tho not a
little tir’d with fo long and troublefom a
Purfuit, yet in their return made them-
felves Mailers of the new Portuguefe
and cutting the Garifons in pieces, laid
them level with the Ground. This Vic-
tory prov’d fo conliderable to Don John,
that during his Life Oriedo either durfl or
could not attempt any thing further a-
gainfl him.
Is routed
by D.John.
CHAP. VI.
Dominico Corré goes over to Don John: Gale, but is repuls'd. Si-
mon Corré returns to Colombo. The Portuguefes miferably maƒƒacred.
Joris van Spilbergen comes to Ceylon.
Dominico
Corre de-
fer ts.
Is made
General,
Is mur-
itr'd.
His D CAth
revenged
by Don
John.
A Bout that time Dominico Cone , a
renown’d Soldier ( known by the
name of Goliah') being difoblig’d by the
Portuguefes , came over to Don John ,
having firfl cut off the Nofes and Ears of
feveral Monks who had offended him.
He alfo entic’d Corhe Bandaar , a revolted
Prince, into Don John's Camp, who caus’d %
him to be tormented to death, and be-
llow’d his Principality upon Dominico Cor~
re\ to whom they gave the Name of Idel
Soria Bandaar . Whilfl he was doing Ho-
mage to the Emperor, a very large Tree
that Hood hard by, fplit in two pieces,
without being touch’d , which the Inhabi-
tants (a fupefflitious Generation) inter-
preted as an ill Omen.
Not long after the Emperor lent a con-
fiderable Army under the Command of
Dominico Corre\ and his Brother Simon
Corre\ to befiege Gale: But the Portugue-
fts defended themfelves fo well, that the
greatefl part of this Army was ruin’d,
and Dowinico himfelf taken Prifoner,
whom the Portuguefes (contrary to their
Promife) carry’d to Columbo , where he
was privately murder’d. This barbarous
Aftion fo highly exafperated Don'Johnj
that he order’d Tome Portuguefes to be
kill’d by the Elephants, others he cut off
their Nofes and Ears, and fent them to
Columbo to tell the General, that in cafe
they did not fet all the Prifoners at li-
berty, the Portuguefes in his hands Ihould
receive the fame Treatment.
The Soldiers in Garifon at Columbo fec«
ing this miferable Speftade in their Com-
panions, broke out into a Mutiny againlt
the General, who by murdering Cont
againll his Parole, had given occalion to
this Difaller. There was nothing to be
heard among them but. Kill the Dog , kill
him y whilft Jeronimo d' Oriedo cry’d for
Mercy. Notwithflanding which, a whole
Troop of them were advancing with
their drawn Swords againfl him, and had
certainly kill’d him upon the Spot, had
not fome Monks thrown themfelves (to
their no fmall danger) betwixt him and
them, and fpeaking to the Soldiers, calling
them Gentlemen, and begging them for
the Love of Chrifl, not to aft againll the
Crown of Portugal in the perfon of their
General, appeas’d their Wrath \ tho
even then the General was forc’d to hide
himfelf in a Convent, till the Tumult
could be entirely appeas’d, which was not
till 1 6 days after.
Notwithftanding the barbarous Ufage
Dominico Cone had met with from the
Portuguefes , his Brother Simon Cone went
over to them, pretending to the Empe-
ror that he intended to advance towards
Columbo to revenge his Brother’s Death.
He was very honourably receiv’d by the
Portuguefes , who not only bellow’d the
Government of a Province upon him,
but alfo marry’d him to a Portuguefe Lady,
whom together with his Son (begotten
in this Marriage) they kept as Pledges of
his Fidelity, whilft he was imploy’d in
carrying on the War againll Don John ,
simon
ever t 0 the
P° rcu § uc *
les °


Emanucl
come over
to the For-
tuguefes.
j6 ° 2 *
However having got intelligence that the
Portuguefes had form’d a Defign againft
the Life of the faid Don John , he gave no-
tice thereof to him, defiring him to be
upon his guard.
The Emperor being willing to be fully
fatisfy’d in a Matter of fuch moment, ap-
ply’d himfelf to on e Emanuel Dias, who
being formerly a Foot.boy to the Portu-
guese General Lopes , was advanc’d by the
faid Don John to the Dignity of one of his
Gentlemen of the firft rank, and had
received many other Favours at his hands.
Emanuel Dias willing to contribute what
lay in his power to his fatisfafti-
on, propos’d to go to Columbo , under pre-
tence of having deferted his Service, but
in truth to dive into the real Defign of
the Portuguefes. Accordingly he arriv’d
at Columbo on Eafter-day 1602. where he
propos’d to Don Jeronimo Oriedo feveral
ways of murdering Don John, and that
with fo much affurance and Teeming pro-
bability, that he was highly carefs’d by
that General, who agreed with him con-
cerning the Method how the Defign
iliould be put in execution. For this
purpofe five Portuguefes were pitch’d upon
to fhare the Danger and Glory of fo
brave an Adlion (as they ftil’d it) among
whom were three Captains, viz. Chriftian
Jacobo , Alberto Primer o, and Cafpar Feme,
Emanuel Dias being promis’d no lefs a
Reward than the Crown of Candy , play’d
the Hypocrite fo artificially, that he took
a folemn Oath upon the Crucifix to be
true to his Truft, and fo he was difmifs’d
to Walane with a good Sum of Money,
from whence he return’d to Candy.
There he gave an account to the Em-
peror how Meafures had been concerted
betwixt Don Jeronimo and him, that a
certain Body of Troops fhould be polled
near the Fort of Walane , to be ready at
hand to furprize that Place as foon as they
fhould receive the Signal of the Murder
of the Emperor being put in execution;
for which purpofe thofe who had un-
dertaken that Task were within a li-
mited time to appear near Candy, Here-
upon the Emperor advanc'd fecretly in
the night time at the head of a good Body
of Troops to where the before-
mention’d Accomplices appearing accord-
He
ceives the
PortugUe.
fes.
Betrays
them.


ing to agreement, well arm’d with Japo-
ncfe Scymeters, call’d Trajfados , they were
kindly receiv’d by Emanuel Dias, and in-
troduc’d into the Emperor’s Prefence 9
but foon after were feiz’d by his Guard,
and the Signal given at the fame time
from the Fort of Walarie . So that the
Portuguefes believing every thing to have
fucceeded according to expedition, ad-
vanced with all poffible fpeed towards the
Fort, where they quellionlefs would have
met with fo warm a reception, that few
of them would have return’d home, had
not a certain Servant, who had deferred
from the Enemy, difcover’d the whole
matter to them, which made them re-
treat with all fpeed towards Columbo ,
leaving all their Baggage and fome Arms
a Prey to the Enemy. Emanuel Dias got
a vail Reputation by this bold Enterprize,
and was rewarded with vail Prefents by
the Emperor but the five Portuguefes
were after a long Captivity put to a raoft
painful Death.
About this time the Dutch General Jorvs
Spilbergen coming with two Ships on the
Coaft of Ceylon , went to Candy on pur-
pofe to falute the Emperor in the Name
of the States of the Vnited Provinces ,
and his Excellency Prince Maurice of
Na(fau 3 and was favourably receiv’d by
Don John , and difmifs’d with confiderable
Pretents. Having left Erafmus Martens
and Mr. Hans Pempel , two very good Mu-
ficians, there, he return’d highly fatif-
fy’d, 3 Sept. 1603. by the way of Mete-
cola, to Achen . But the Portuguefes were
were not a little difiatisfy’d at his arrival
there, as fearing that in cafe the Dutch
fhould enter into a Confederacy with the
Emperor, their Stay would not be long
in that Jfland, which proved true after-
wards, they being quite chafed thence in
the Year 1658.
Joris Spii-
bergen
comes to
Ceylon.
1603.
CHAP. VII.
Sebald de Weert comes to Ceylon. Great Diƒƒatisfaction betwixt the Emperor
and him. Is murdered , Don John falls ƒick, and dies. His Qualifica-
tions.
Sebald de
WeerCi
comes to
Ceylon.
■ • ;* V-’-V; ,
]
m : )
Difference 1
betwixt i
the Empe- \
nr. and
him, '■
1
Is dug • ;
mented by
the Empe- \
toy's Am- '
haffador. ’
SEbald de Weert and Fibraads van Warr
wick came foon after into Ceylon ,
where they entred into agreement with
the they fail’d toA~
chen to aflemj|fe more Forces, and landing
at AlatccolawMi 7 Ships, 26 April, 1603.
Dc Weert gave notice thereof tp the Em-
peror, who defired him to come and put
an end to the Conferences begun before,
for the confummation of* the Treaty.
Dc Weert coming into the Emperor’s Pre-
fence, was ask’d by him why he had fet
the Portuguefe Prifoners at liberty *, which,
as it had ' been done unadvifedly, fo he
made the beft Excufe he could upon that
fcore, which being not fatisfadory to the
Emperor, caus’d in him no fmall fufpicion ;
the fame was much augmented by what his
Ambaffador (who had been with the
Vice Admiral De Weert at Achen ) related
to him, that during his ftay with the
Dutch he could not obterve but that they
were Friends of the Portuguefes , where-
of they had given fufficient Proofs, when
they tet the Portuguefe Officers that were
their Prifoners, above him at the Table.
He further added, that he had received
information from credible hands, that
the Vice-Admiral intended to invite the
Emperor and the chiefeft men of his
Court, aboard his* Veffel to a Banquet 3
but in effefr, to detain them Prifoners,
and make themfelves Mailers of the Coun-
try : That he had thought it his Duty to
give this Caution to his Majefty, that he
might not truil the and thereby
with the reft of his Princes be drawn
into the Snafe, to the irreparable ruin
of the whole Country*
Don John finding the Arabafiador’s
Reafons not to be ill grounded, and ha-
ving conceiv’d no fmall jealoufy at the
Vice-Admiral’s difcharging the Portuguefe
Prifoners contrary to his Promite, it was
debated in Council, whether they ought
to treat with him any further, or break
off the Treaty already begun. After
various Deliberations, it was agreed to
endeavour to perfwade the Vice-Admiral
to fail with his Fleet to Cale 7 in order
(according to mutual Agreement) to
befiege that Place, whereby they would
not want opportunity to judg of his
Gondud in reference to the Portuguefes,
Sebald de Ween foon after inviced the
Emperor aboard his Veffel, which he re-
futed, alledging that the chief Men of
the Empire did not approve of a thing
never known before. De Ween teeing
the Emperor refolute in his rcfufal, dc-
pe Weert
invites the
Emperor
on board *


ther-in-law having taken a journy to the
Frontiers \ and that from thence they
would haften with all their forces to the
Siege. Sebald de IVeert being fomewhat
heated with ftrong Liquor, reply’d un-.
difcreetly. That certainly the Emprefs could
not he in difirefs for a Man, and that he
was refjl not to fail to Gale, or to fight
again fi the Portuguefes, before the Emperor
had done him the honour of viewing his Ships .
Don John , who was naturally a cholerick
Per Ton, was fo incens’d at this Anfwer,
that he left the Room, and in going out
faid, Bind the Dog-, whereupon four of
his Gentlemen advanced to lay hold of
him, but he endeavouring to draw his
Sword, and making a noife to call his
Attendants to his Afliflance (who were
left near the Sea fide by the Emperor’s
order) they laid hold of him from be-
hind, and one of them fplitting his Head
with a Scymeter laid him dead upon the
ground.
fir’d him to do him the honour of coming
only to the Sea-fliore to view his Ships, and
that he had order’d a Tent to be pitch’d
there for his Reception. The Emperor
not only refufed alfo this Offer, but his
Sufpicion was increafed, the before-men-
tioned Ambaffador whifpering him in
the Ear, Are you now fienfihle , my mofi
gracious Lord , that I was in the rights and
that they intend to catch you in the Snare ?
And the Dutch Vice-Admiral De IVeert
being not a little difturb’d at lb flat a
Denial, told him frankly, that (ince His
Majefty did not think fit to come either a-
hoard him, or at leaf to the Shore , be was
refolv'd not to fight for him againfl the
Portuguefes. Don John, tho not a little
exafperated at fo bold a Reply, yet dif-
fembl’d his Anger, telling him only,
that he Ihould purfuant to his Promife,
fail to Gale with his Fleet, whilfl he
would take a turn to Candy to vifit the
Emprefs, who w r as alone there, his Bro-
De Weerc
/peaks
with too
much bold-
ne/s.
*
rtfM. ”
‘ Which
► proves the
) occafm of
his Death,
The Prince of Owe being the only
Perfon who durfl give an account to the
Emperor of what had happen’d, he ap-
pear’d fomewhat difturtfd thereat, ask-
ing him, why they did not make him a
Prifoner , according to bis order : whereupon
the Prince telling him, that it was im-
poflible to be done, becaure he flood upon
his Defence ; Lon John reply’d, Nay,
fines he fought for his Death let him have it ,
And oj hit
Atten-
dants*


Don John
fills jkk
#/ a bum-
vii Fever.
Dies-.
Hu ifluc.
and let hit Attendants follow their Ad after \
which was put in Execution immediate-
ly, fcarce any one of thofe that came
afhore with him efcaping the fury of
thefe Barbarians, except a Boy named
Ifaac Plevier y a Native of Flijfmgen , who
was flill alive, and in the then Empe-
ror’s Service, 22 Nov, 1614. Some few
alfo had the good fortune of efcaping by
fwimraing to the Ships.
The Emperor foon after went to Can-
dy, from whence he writ thefe few Lines
in Portuguefe to the Commanders ot the
Dutch Velfels j Que bebtm vinhoy noa he
bon, Deos fes juftitia y fe quifieres pat,
pen \ fequires guerra ? guerra : i. e. Who
drinks Wine is not goody God /hews his
Juflice j If you defire Peace , you /hall have
Peace y if War , War,
However Don John did not furvivc
long this barbarous Adion, being feiz’d
with fo violent a burning Fever, that
to cool himfelf he was kept in cold
Water without any Relief: He alfo
drunk frequently of the Water of the
Brook call’d Hal gradojey betwixt Ouve
and Matarette y which being fo cold, as
not to be held in the Mouth without
fhivering, yet could not in the leaft
quench his Thirft. He often bewail’d
the barbarous Murder of the Dutch , but
faid that De Wcert had no more than
what he deferv’d. Thus languifhing for
fome time in continual Agonies, he was
in no condition to difpofe of his Affairs,
but ended his Life in Mifery 1604. He
left behind him one Son, named Maha-
flame Adafcyn y and two Daughters, one
named Soria Mahadafcyn , i. e. Beloved
Sunlight , the other Cathan Adafcyn , i. e.
Beloved Peace \ all three born from Don-
na Catherina , call’d by the Cingalefes Ma-
habandige Adafcyn , i. e. Beloved Emprefs,
Don John was a valiant and great
Captain, as his whole Life fufficiently
teftifies *, he was tall of Stature, and
well limb’d, black, and rultical in his
Speech: He had gather’d a vafl: Trea-
fure of Gold and Jewels, and had founded
many Forts, Palaces, and publick Inns,
call’d by the Cingalefes Ambalanft, e. Refling
Places, He kept a firid Hand in the
Government y and as he never pardon’d
Crimes, fo he was very liberal to all
fuch as behav’d themfelves well in their
Civil or Military Stations, on whom he
confer’d Honours and Riches. He was
a cornpleat Statefman, and flood firm to
his Engagements with all Foreign Princes
except the Portuguese s y upon whom look-
ing with a jealous Eye, he had conceiv’d
a mortal hatred. As he defpifed all
Religions, fo he allow’d the free exer-
cife thereof to all without diflindion.
The Corps of the dcceafed Emperor J
was no fooner interr’d with extraordi- f
nary Magnificence, but the Great Men (
of the Kingdom began to divide into
feveral Fadions, every one aiming at the
Crown ; The mod potent among them
was the Prince of Ouve , who publickly
fet up for the Empire, but was oppofed
by Cenuwieraat , Brother-in-law to the late
Emperor, who pretended to be Regent
for his Nephew ( his Brother’s Son ) till
he Ihould come to Age of Maturity,
Donna Catherina well forefeeing the ill
Confequences that might enfue upon thofe
Pretenfions, declar’d her felf Regent of
her young Son, and by taking off the
Heads of fome of the moft fufpeded
Lords* remov’d the prefent Danger, and
appealed the Troubles that threatned
her Ruin for fome time.
cb&
rn^er '
Divtjiohs
among the
Great Men,
Appea/ed
by D. Ca
thcriiw-
CHAP. VIII.
Diviƒions Among the Great Men in Ceylon. The Prince of Ouve murder'd by
Cenuwieraat, who marries Donna Catherina the Empreƒs.
The Portu-
guclc& of -
fer a. Con -
whkb y d
dtny'd.
H E Portuguefes rejoic’d at the Death
0 f jy on John , fent Meffengers after
M e ff en g ers to Goa , to advertife the Vice-
ro 7 °f this welcome News, and to defire
his Advice in this juncture. The faid
Viceroy being of opinion, that they
ought to engage in an Alliance with
Donna Catherina (as a means to make
themfelves matters by degrees of the
whole Ifle) the fame was propofed ac-
cordingly, but rejected by Donna Cathe-
rina, who told them, that fhe would re-
main Sovereign Miftrifsin her Territo-
ries. However the Princes of the Low-
lands being forely opprefs’d by the In-
curfions and Ravages committed in their
Territories both by the Prince of Ouve
and the Emperor’s Brother-in-law,
hearkened to the Enticements of the
Portuguefes , and enter’d into a Gonfcdc*
racy with them.


Ouve and
Cenuwie-
raat don't
appear at
Court .
Prince
Ouve re -
Colves to
Cenn-
wieraat.
Is murde-
red by Cc-
nuwicraat.
.4 Commo-
tion /«Gan-
dy.
Is appealed
by the Em-
frtfu
The Emprefs being not a little di-
fturb’d at thefe Inteftine Commotions,fear-
ing (he (hould be facrificed to the pre-
vailing Party, call’d a General AHem-
bly of all the Lords of the Empire, who
all appear’d accordingly in Perfon, ex-
cept the Prince of Ouve and Cenuwieraat
Adafcyn , who thereupon were by Procla-
mation declar’d Rebels by the Emprefs,
and their Eftates confifcated. However
Cenuwieraat having given fufficient Rea-
fons for his Abfence, and the Prince of
Ouve having at the Interceffion of his
Friends obtain’d his Pardon, they after-
wards appear’d at Court, but well guard-
ed, neither Party trufting one another.
Things thus palling on for fome time,
the Prince of Ouve refolv’d, after the
Conclufion of the Aflfembly of the States,
to rid his hands of Cenuwieraat , and after-
wards to fecureto himfelf the Crown by
marrying Donna Catherina: but Cenuwie-
raat having got feent of this Defign, re-
folv’d to be before-hand with him } to ac-
complifli which, he difturb’d his thoughts,
(hewing to the Prince of Ouve upon all
occafions moft lingular marks of his Re-
fpe& and Friendlhip. But having in the
mean while ftrengthned his Intereft by
ingaging moft of the Great Men to his
fide, he took his opportunity when they
were both going to take their leave of
the Emp refs: For coming at the outward
Gate, the Prince of Ouve would have
given the Precedency to Prince Cenuwie-
raat, as defeended from the Imperial
Blood , which he refufing to accept of,
told him that it was his due by reafon of
his Age: fo that, after fome time fpent in
Compliments, Prince Ouve went in firft,
and was inftantly run through the
Back, and laid dead upon th« ground by
Cenuwieraat , who faid no more than.
Traitor , thou haft thy Reward, and fo
retiring to his People, left the City im-
mediately.
Thofe belonging to the Prince of
Ouve hearing of the Murder of their
Matter, run thro the Streets, crying out,
Treafon , Treafon , which put the City in-
to fuch an Alarm, that the People (be-
lieving the Emprefs was kill’d ) cut all to
pieces they met with, fo that the Streets
were every where fill'd with Horror and
Slaughter, which would have continued
longer,had not Donna Gatherina by (hewing
her felf to the People, fomewhat appeas’d
their Fury. However, they not ceafing
to exclaim, and uttering moft horrid
Threats againft the Prince of Cenuwie-
raat, for the Murder of Prince Ouve , the
Emprefs, to prevent further Mifchief,
thought it her fafeft way to prohibit un-
der pain of Death, that any Injury Ihould
be done to Prince Cemwieraat , declaring
that what had been done was done by her
own Orders *, which fomewhat fettled the
Minds of the People.
But her thoughts were very different
from what Ihe Ihewed to the People, hav-
ing conceived fuch a Horror at the Faft
that fhe refolved not to let it go unre-
venged upon the Prince Cenuwieraat. He
being advertifed hereof by his Friends,
kept conftantly upon his guard, not negl
ledfing in the mean while to have it re-
prefented to the Emprefs ( not without
good reafons) that he had been forced to
undertake this Faft for hisSelf-prefervati-
on and the Welfare of the Kingdom, her
Majefty and his Brother’s Children: which
had fo good an effeft upon the Emprefs,
that by the Mediation of certain Great
Men a Match was concluded betwixt the
Emprefs and him, as the moft proper
means to reftore Tranquillity to the Em
pire. At his Coronation he took upon
him the Name Camapaii Mahadafeyn.
He no fooner faw himfelf eftablifh’d
in the Throne, but he apply’d himfelf
to the Hollanders , in order to enter into
an Alliance with them againft the Portu-
guefes, as will appear out of the Sequel
of this Hiftory.
For their High and Mightinefles the
States-Gencral of the United Provinces
having 1609. made a Truce for twelve
years with Arch-Duke Albert and Ifabella
Clara Eugenia Infanta of Spain , by virtue
whereof it was among other matters
agreed, that the fame Ihould take place
alfo in the Eaft-Indies : The then Di-
rectors of that Company being willing to
improve this Interval for the better fet-
tling their Commerce in thefe parts, did
petition their High and Mightinefles, and
his Highnefs the Prince, to fend their Let-
ters to all the Indian Kings and Princes
to enter into a Confederacy with them;
which being granted accordingly, the
faid Letters, with certain Articles and
Inftruftions, were by the Directors of
the faid Dutch Eaft-jndia Company dif*
patch’d immediately to the Indies aboard
the Greyhound Yacht, Capt. Wemmer van
Berchem Commander: which done, they
equipp’d a Squadron of Ships, which
fet fail out of Holland the 3 oth of Janua-
ry under the Command of Peter Both ,
Governor-General of the Indies, and
arriv’d fafely the 1 8th of November fol-
lowing at Bantam , with full power from
their High and Mightinefles, and his
Highnefs the Prince, to enter into fuch
Cenuwie-
] m r c j? rs
Mmm
the lm*
Truce be-
twixt the
Spaniards
and Dutch.


Alliances with all the Indian Kings and
Princes, as they thought mod expedient
for the fettling of their Commerce, and
ruining that of the Portuguefts irt thofe
parts, 2
CHAP. IX.
Letters from the States General of the United Provinces, and Prince Maurice,
ƒent by Marcellus de Boƒchhouwer to the Emperor of Ceylon.
The Letter
cf the
States-Ge-
r.eral to the
Emperor of
Ceylon.
TH E Letters from their High and
Mightinefles, and his Highnefs the
Prince of Orange , to the Emperor of
Ceylon , were as followeth.
Aloft Potent King f
44 IT has pleafed the Almighty God
44 * through his Mercy fo to blefs our
, 44 Arms, taken up for the maintaining
of the Rights and Privileges of our
44 Native Country againd the King of
44 Spain and Portugal , that after a bloody
44 War carried on 42 years fucceffively
44 both by Sea and Land, the faid King
44 being convinc’d of our Unanimity,
44 Power and Conftancy, fupported by
44 the Strength of our Friends and Neigh-
-44 bouring Allies, has thought fit to make
44 us the fame Offers, for which we
44 had been oblig’d to commence a War,
44 viz., to declare us a free People, in-
-44 dependent from his Power *, and that
44 he was inclin’d to enter upon a 1 reaty
44 of Peace or Truce with us for a con-
-44 fiderable number of years. Which
44 Offers (after mature deliberation)
44 having been accepted by us, a Treaty
44 was fet on foot accordingly with the
44 faid King of Spain and Portugal , which
44 being brought to a Conclufion the 9th
44 of April lad pad, a Truce was agreed
44 upon for 12 years next enfuing, by
44 virtue whereof all the Subjeds of this
44 State are not only at liberty to carry
44 on their Traffick, Commerce or Na-
-44 vigation in all the Kingdoms and
44 Countries where they ufed to enjoy
44 the fame before the War, but alfo
44 in all other Countries, Kingdoms or
44 Princes, and with all other Nations
44 or Provinces without exception } and
44 with this Provifo, that neither the
44 King of Spain and Portugal , nor his Offi-
-44 cers and Subjeds, fhall in refped of
44 this Traffick hitherto carried on, or
44 to be carried on for the future, moled
44 or be troubleforae (either diredly or
44 indiredly ) to our Subjeds, or thofe
44 belonging to any King, Prince, or
44 other Superior Power, with whom we
44 have any Commerce *, and that your
44 Majedy, as well as all other Kings, Prin-
-44 ces, States and Nations, as well in the
44 Indies as in other parts, (hall be compre-
-44 bended in the faid twelve years Truce,
44 and not be moleded or attack’d on ac-
-44 count of their Friendfhip and Coin-
-44 merce with us. But if (contrary to
44 our Expedition, and the folemn Pro-
-44 mife made by the King of Spain and Por~
44 tugal, confirm’d by his Hand and Seal )
44 it fhould happen that your Majedy’s
44 Subjeds and Countries fhould be in-
-44 volved in any Troubles with the faid
44 King, either by Sea or Land, by rea-
-44 fon of their Friendfhip, Alliance or
44 Commerce with us, your Majedy may
44 red affur’d, that we fhall want neither
44 Will nor Power, neither Ships, Am-
-44 munition nor Forces, as well of our
44 own, as of fuch other Kings and Prin-
-44 ces our Allies, as are Guarantees of
44 the faid Treaty, and have engag’d to
44 fee the fame executed in all its parti-
-44 culars, and confequently in refped of
44 your Majedy’s Dominions, as well as
44 of all other Countries and Dominions
44 both in the Indies , and elfewhere, to
44 proted and defend your Majedy’s Do-
-44 minions and Subjeds againd all Ag-
-44 greffors, who upon that account fhall
44 moled them. We don’t doubt but
44 that fome of the King of Spain and
44 Portugal his Creatures and Officers
44 will be apt to infinuate into your Ma-
-44 jedy, his Subjeds, and other Kings,
44 Princes, Nations and Republicks, a
44 quite different Sentiment of the faid
44 Treaty. But we allure your Majedy
44 by thefe Prefents upon our Faith, with-
-44 out any tergiverfationmnto which your
44 Majedy and Subjedsf and all other
44 Kings, Princes, Nations and States
44 may give entire Credit, and defire
44 that your Majedy will be pleafed
44 to rely upon it accordingly, to the
44 firm Settlement of a mutual and good
44 Correfpondcncy,Navigation and Traf-
-44 fick betwixt our Subjeds \ we on our
tc r 1 ■


Pr. Man-
riceV Let-
ter to the
Emperor.
“ fide will not be wanting to entertain
“ the fame with the utmoft Sincerity,
“ confiding in the Omnipotent God, the
“ King of Kings, who knows the depth
“ of the Hearts of Men, that he will be
“ pleas’d to take both your and our Sub-
“ jeds into his Protcdion, and increafc
“ their well-being thro his Power and
“ Mercy. Dated in the Hague , Sept. 15.
“ isop.
Subfcribed,
And fome what lower,
Your Highnefles moft hearty Friends
the States-Gcneral of the' United
Provinces , by their Order and
Command,
Maurice Prince of Orange , Earl of
“ Naffdu , C atzenellebogen. Die ft Vl-
-ny Meurs y Marquefs of fare and
“ VHJJingen, Governour, Captain and
“ Admiral General of Cuelders, Hol-
“ land, Zealand , Wefl-Friefland , Zut-
“ pben, Vtrechty Ov &c.
Mofl Potent King ,
ct O D prated your Majefty, and
• 44 VJT give you all the Blcflings upon
44 Earth. We have for a conliderablc
44 time been engaged in a War againfl:
44 the King of Portugal, in order to op-
-44 pofe his ambitious Defigns, the fame
44 Motive having induced your Majefty to
44 defend your Dominions againfthis At-
-44 tempts *, the Almighty God has been
44 pleas’d to blefs our Arms with fuch
44 Succcfs, as to oblige our Enemy to a
44 twelve Years Truce, which by the
44 Mediation of feveral neighbouring
44 Kings has been brought at laft to a hap-
-44 py Conclufion : But, finding that the
cl faid King did continue his Warlike
44 Preparations, and imagining that the
44 fame was intended chiefly, in order to
44 attack your Majefty and fome other
44 Princes in the Indies, our Allies (after
14 being bereaved of our AfTiftance) we
44 thought it abfolutely requifite, not to
44 agree to the faid Truce, unlefs your
44 Majefty were* included therein, toge-
-44 ther with the reft of our Friends and
44 Allies. Whereupon the fame was con-
-44 eluded at laft, under condition, that
44 we and all our Friends and Allies
44 fliould enjoy full Liberty, to fend our
44 Ships into what Countries we pleas’d
44 without any Moleftation from the For-
t tuguefes -y and that in cafe your Ma-
‘ jeify, or any other of our Confede-
cc rates, Ihould be attack’d by him, we
( fliould deem the fame as done to our
“ felves : to accomplifli which we ftall
tt b <L ready upon all Occafions to be
auiftant in revenging any Damages done
“ u P°n that Score to your Majefty, or a-
“ny other of our Allies. We have
“ fome reafon to that the In-
“ tention of the faid King is, to fepa-
“ rate by this Artifice your Majefty from
“ our Intereft, which ought to be a mu-
“ tual caution to us,to be upon our Guard
“ for the future i for fincc the occafion
“ of dividing us by Force of Arms is re-
“ moved, they will not be fparingtoat-
“ tain to their end by Fraud and other
“ Sinifter Means. It is therefore, that
“ we have order’d our Governour-Gene-
“ ral, to treat with your Majefty, and
“ to find out fuch means, as may be moft
“ proper to prevent their Intrigues, and
w to unite us againfl: thofe, whofe Word
tc and Faith we dare not altogether rely
“ upon. We did not think fit to ftipu-
“ late in the faid Treaty, that his Sub-
“ jeds fliould be excluded from the
“ Traffickof Ceylon , but left the fame
“ to your Majefty’s Difcretion, not
“ queftioning, but that according to
“ your Wifdom and Underftanding,' you
“ will ad in that refped, fo as that nO-
“ thing may betranfaded that may tend
“ towards the Diflblution of our Alli-
“ ance, which we hope the Almighty
“ will maintain by his Blefllng, to the
“ Honour of his Holy Name, and the
“ Welfare of your Majefty, and our Bc-
“ loved Subjeds.
the Maurice de
Octob. «j. 1609.
The Superfcription was as follows.
“ To the moft Illuftrious and moft Noble
Emperour of Ceylon y King of Can-
“ dy^Trinquenemale , ,
“ te-CorleSy Manaar , ChilatOy Cota ,
u Batecalo, Punte-Gale , our Beloved
“ Brother in the Wars.
Thefe Letters were no (boner brought
in the Greyhound Yacht to , but
the Diredor of our Eaft-India Company
there, named John van , ordered
immediately Marcellus de our M
Under-Fador, aboard the Ship called the &
Black Lyon, to Ceylon along with Peter
Both, a Native of Amenforty Commodore, r.
bound likewife for that liland.
Marcellus
Bofch-
clx\L


CHAP. X.
Marcellus de Bofchhouwer comes to Candy. His Treaty and Agreement with
the Emperor of that Iƒle.
MArceUus de Bofchhouwer coming ac-
cordingly, March 8. 1611, to
Candy, had Audience of his Imperial Ma-
jefty Cenuvoieraat Adafcyn, unto whom
having delivered the before- mentioned
Letters, the Emperor received him with
all imaginable Deraonftrations of Joy,
placing him on his fide on a Chair of
Gold, clad in a White Garment -. Where-
upon the Treaty being begun, immedi-
ately the fame was concluded May it.
following, upon the following Conditi-
ons.
I. This Confederacy fliall be kept invi-
olably, and Hand firm for the future.
11. All Hoftilities (hall ceafe, and a ge-
neral Amneftybe granted.
111. In cafe the Portuguefes (hould attack
his Majefty, the States-General (hall be
obliged to a Hid his Majefty with all their
Forces.
IV. His Majefty grants leave to the
Dutch , to ered a Fortrefs at Cotiarum ,
provided the King of Cotiarum may en-
joy his Cuftoms and other Revenues.
V. The Emperor obliges himfelf to
furnifli Bricks, Lime and other Materials
for the building of the faid Fortrefs* as
alfo Labourers to be paid by the Compa*
ny. . „ „ .
VI. His Imperial Majefty (hall take
care to have Warc-houfes of Stone or
Brick ereded at Candy , for the Security
of our Company againft Fire.
VII. His Majefty (hall take our Ships
and Seamen under his Protedion, arid de-
fend them to the utmoftof his Power a-
gainft the Portuguefes , as the Hollanders
(hall be obliged to do the fame, in refpeft
of his Majelly’s Subjeds.
VIII. His Majefty obliges himfelf to
tranfad nothing in all Military Affairs,
that have any relation to our Company,
without the Knowledg of their Officers;
for which purpofe two Hollanders (hall
fit conftantly in his Council of War, to
be prefent at all Debates, arid other Mat-
ters to be tranfaded there.
IX. He engages himfelf to have all the
Merchandizes of the Dutch carried upon
Beads fit for Carriage to Candy , and fuch
Commodities as are bought there, to be
carried back to the Sca-(hoar at Cotiarum ,
at his own Charge.
X. In cafe any Veffels, Sloops or Boats,
(hould happen to be call away on thefe
Coafts, his Majefty’s Subjeds (hall be ob-
liged to fave as much of the Goods as
they can, without any Reward, for the
ufe of our Company.
XI. The Dutch fliall be permitted to
export their Merchandizes, without ex-
ception, Cuftomfree.
XII. All and every oneof his Majefty’s
Subjeds (hall be at Liberty to traffick
with our Company.
kill. His Imperial Majefty obliges him-
felf to purchafe any Rarities, or other
uncommon Commodities at fuch a rate,
as may bear a proportion, in refped of
other Commodities agreed upon with
our Company in their Exchanges.
XIV. His Majefty engages to deliver
yearly ail the Cinamon that is to be got
to our Company, to be paid either in
Money or in Merchandizes, according to
the lifual Exchange.
XV. It is agreed, that not any forts of
Merchandizes (hall be delivered to fuch
Perfons, as are entred into Contrads of
Commerce with the Hollanders , before
the Natives of Holland are fatisfyed in
this Point; and in cafe the contrary be
prov’d, their Perfons and Goods fliall be
detain’d, till they have made good the
faid Contrad.
XVI. His Majefty (hall not allow free
Commerce to any of the European Nati-
ons, without peculiar Confent from their
High and Mightineffes, and hisHighnefs
the Prince of Orange .
XVII. His Majefty obliges himfelf to
furnifli Timber and other Materials, for
the building of Veffels, Yachts and
Boats, to be delivered upon the Shoar.
XVIII. All Prifoncrs taken on both
fides (hall be relcafed.
XIX • All the Officers of the Dutch
Company fliall be exempted from his Ma-
jefty’s Jurifdidion; and if any of them
happen to commit any Trefpafs, they
dretobe puniflied by the Heads of the
Dutch Company, as his Majefty’s Sub-
jeds (hall enjoy the fame Benefit.
XX. His Majefty obliges himfelf to
difpofe of all his Precious Stones and
Pearls to the Hollanders , as they on their
fide engage to fell all their extraordinary
Jewels, Precious Things and other Ran-


ties, at a reafonable Rate; but in cafe any
difference fhould arife upon that account,
the fame fhall not be alledged as a Reafon
for the difiblving of this Confederacy.
XXL For the fame Reafon his Majefty
and the States-General, fhall maintain
this Alliance inviolably, and affift one a-
nother upon all Occafions.
XXII. All Ads of Hoftility commit-
ted on both fides, fhall be buried by a ge-
neral Oblivion.
XXIII. No body, except his Majefty,
fhall have Power given him to coin Mony,
or to cnhaunce the Value of the Coin,
beyond what has been agreed betwixt his
Majefty and the Hollanders , in proporti-
on to the Mony tranfported hither from
Holland ; and if any of his Majefty’s, or
our Subjects are found to have coin’d falfe
Money, they are to be punifhed with
Death
XXIV. His Majefty and the Hollanders
fhall agree upon the moft proper Methods
for fettling both the larger and lefler
Coin, for the promoting of Traffick.
XXV. Such Coin as fhall be adjudged
current by both Parties, fhall be changed
every three Years by turns, once at Can-
dy, and the next three Years in one of
our Places.
XXVI. The Coin fhall be either en-
haunced or lowered, according to the
prefent exigency of Affairs in time of
War,
XXVII. All the Indian Nations fhall
be free to come and traffick in their own
Veflels, in his Majefty’s Dominions, with-
out paying any Cuftoms, for the fpace of
three Years next enfuing.
XXVIII. After the Expiration of the
Term of thefe three Years, his Majefty
fhall beat Liberty to enter into a Treaty
with the Plenipotentiaries of their High
and MightinefTes, concerning the Rate of
Cuftoms of all Commodities.
XXIX. His Majefty agrees, that their
High and MightinefTes, and his Highnefs
the Pr. of Orange , fhall enjoy one Moiety
of all the Cuftoms, for which purpofe
certain Commiffioners and Clerks fhall be
appointed by the Confent of both Par-
ties.
XXX. All the Prizes taken on the
Coaftof Ceylon , fhall be divided fhareand
lhare alike, betwixt your Majefty on the
one fide, and their High and MightinefTes,
and his Highnefs the Prince of Orange on
the other fide ; provided that what Pri-
foners are taken, fhall be ranfonfd, but
never put to Death.
XXXI. All Fadtors or other Officers be-
longing to their High and MightinefTes,
and his Highnefs the Prince of Orange ,
fhall give Palfes to fuch of your Majefty’s
Subjeds as intend to traffick in thofe
Parts; as his Majefty fhall do the fame,
without which they fhall be liable to be
feized, and their Goods confifcated.
XXXII. His Majefty, their High and
MightinefTes, and his Highnefs the Prince
of Orange , fhall be obliged to take effec-
tual Care, to have the Roads and Paflages
both by Sea and Land, in the Ifle of Cey~
lon , to be kept well and clear from High-
waymen and Pirates; for which purpofe
his Majefty obliges himfelf to furnifh
Timber, for the building of Galleys and
other Veflels, for the clearing of the
Seas; and in cafe any Highwaymen or Pi-
rates are taken, they fhall be punifhed
with Death.
XXXIII. His Imperial Majefty, their
High and MightinefTes, and his Highnefs
the Prince of Orange , do promife to
keep this Confederacy inviolably, to the
utmoft of their Power, nor to fuffer the
fame to be violated by their Subjeds; to
inflid fevere Punifhments upon fuch as
fhall go about to violate it, and give full
Satisfadion for all Damages fuftained up-
on that account.
CHAP. XI.
Marcellus de Bofchhouwer defires leave to depart, which the Emperor will not
conƒent to. Has considerable Dignities beƒtowed upon him . The Portugueƒes
rob and murder the Dutch at Cotiarum. The Emperor convenes the Eƒtates
of the Empire . The Portuguefes routed near Jafnapatnam.
hoiiwcr
defires to
be difrnif-
M
np HE Articles of this Confederacy
being thus concluded, Mr. Bofch-
bouwer defir’d leave from his Imperial Ma-
jefty to depart, with the Elephants that
were ready to carry certain Comnrodi-
ties to for the ufe of the
Dutch Faftory there; from whence he
might go to Paliacatta , to give the Dutch
Governor of that Place an account of his
Negotiation. But the Emperor and his


WW *
ttml
Hasgreat
uponhim.
Portu-
glides
mk] / c !
butch.
Difference
betwixt 2
Brothers,
Council were not willing toconfent to his
Difmilfion, alledging, that fmee accord-
ing to one of the before-mention’d Ar-
ticles, they were obliged not to tranfaft
any thing in Warlike Affairs, without
thcKnowledg and Confentof the Dutch,
it was rcquifite he fhould flay with them
for thatpurpofe. Thefe Reafons prevai-
led fo far with Mr. B.ofcbhouwer, that he
refolv’d to flay •, and the Emperor heap-
ed Favours after Favours upon him, hav-
ing created him Prince of Migonne, Koc~
kelecorle, Ananagepora , and Miwitigael,
Knight of the Order of the Golden Sun,
Prehdent of the Council of War, thefe-
cond Perfon in his Privy Council, and
Lord High Admiral: and he knew fo well
how to improve the Emperor’s good Opi-
nion of his Perfon, that fcarceany thing
of Moment was undertaken without his
Advice.
Inthe Year i6it. Jun. 20. th t Portu-
guefes took the Field, with a Body of
rooo Portuguefes, and 3000 Indians their
Allies, under the Command of Simon
Cone \ and having got a certain Candinefe
for their Guide, they march’d thro un-
known ways to Cotiarum, where they
furpriz’d the Dutch belonging to Mr.
BofchhoUwer , put them all to the Sword,
and plunder’d the Place, and then retir’d
with all Speed to Sette Code, for fear of be-
ing overtaken by the Emperor’s Forces.
For the Emperor had no fooner notice
of their March, but he fent a Body of
5000 men, commanded by Marajinge At-
file, an old experienc’d Captain, and un-
der him Mayndappo and V'lre Segre , two
brave Noblemen, to Cotiarumy but com-
ing too late, they purfu’d the Portuguefes
Day and Night, till they overtook them
near Sette Code, kill’d 23 Portuguefes , doo
Indians, fet feveral Villages on fire, and
return’d with many Prifoners and a good
Booty to Candy.
About the fame time an Envoy of the
King of Palugam came to Court, repre-
fenting that John Sangati his Mailer’s
Brother, and King of Podere, was en-
tred into an Alliance with the Portuguefes,
in order to deliver all his Harbours into
their Hands, and afterwards to carry on
a War againfl his Imperial Majefly with
their AlTiftance. Hereupon the King of
Podere being fummon’d to appear at
Court at a prefix’d time, he fent an En-
voy to clear his Innocence with the Empe-
rour, unto whom he reprefented the
Perhdioufnefs of the King of Palugam,
who had kill’d his own Brother at Ta-
ble, for no other rcafon, but that he
might be foie Mailer of the whole King-
dom, offering befldes to remain there as a
Hoflage for his Mailer’s Fidelity. The
Emperor, tho not very well fatisfy’d with
the King of Podere , by reafon of his not
appearing in Perfon ; yet confidering,
that what had been alledged by his En-
voy, concerning the Murder of his Elder
Brother, was no more than Truth, and
that certain Differences were arifen late-
ly betwixt them about the Cuftoms of
the River of Palugam, one half whereof
was allotted by the Effaces to the King of
Podere, he difmilfed the Envoy well fa-
tisfied, refolving to fufpend his Judg-*
menc, till time Ihould unfold the mat-?
ter.
The Emperor having bent his Thoughts
upon a War, he convened the Effaces of
the Empire, viz. Idele King of Qotiarum,*
Celle Wandaar King of Palugam , Coma-
yo Wandaar King of Batecalo, Com Wit-
ty Raelhamy Prince of Ouve, Marcdlus de
Bofchhouwer Prince of Migonne, Aieter
Raelhamy Prince of Vdiene, Jallago de Ra-
le Prince of Cotomak, Aiewater Rate Prince
of Mcwatcr, Wik fienefimge Earl of Qua-
treCorle, John Sangati Prince and Lord
of Podere , Cole Rale Duke of Ode, Jatte-
nore Brother of the Prince Jalagode , Cad
Heberad Govcrnour of the County of Har~
cipate , Corope Governour of the County
of Odogo d'Asked, Wanategerc Gpver-
nourof the Province t>( Matere. In the
fame Aflembly appear’d alfo the Govern
nours and Commanders in chief of the
lefler Provinces, and the Ambaffadorof
the King of Jafnapatnam , the King of
Patania being the only one, who thofum-
moned by a peculiar Letter, dated July
1 6. 1611. made feveral frivolous Excu-
fes for his not appearing there.
Among other matters of the greateft
Moment, it was refolved in this Aflem--
bly to raife an Army of joqqo Mep, one
half whereof was to be employed in the
Siege of Puntegale, under the Goadudl of
the Prince of Ouue *, the other againft
Walane , under the Command of the
Prince of ASgonw • And in cafe they
met with good Suceefs, both Annies
were to join and attack Columbo, For the
carrying on of this Enterprise, 4 Milli-
ons and 500000 Livers were to be raifed.
Concerning the Differences betwixt the
King of Palugam , and his Brother John
Sangati, they were both enjoin’d under
pain of Death, ngt to hurt one another,
till the matter could be further enquired
into; . . V . • ' { .
A High Court of judicature was alfo
fettled, to examine and decide all fueh
Matters, as before that time ufed to be
The. Em-,
feror con-
venes the
mutes.
n hat wait
conclude
then*


determined by the Emperor and his Privy
. Council. The Judges of this Court were,
1 the Prince of Migonne Prefident, the
Prince of Ouve , the Prince of Felaren ,
and the Prince of Cottomale. None of
the inferiour Courts were to take cogni-
zance of criminal Matters, without the
approbation of this High Court, from
whence no Appeal was to be allowed.
The Prince of Ouve, the Prince of Mi-
gonne, the Prince of T'elaren, the Prince
of Cottomale, and the Earl of Qitatre Cork ,
were appointed Members of his Majefty’s
Privy Council.
It was alfo further decreed, that not
only Liberty fhould be granted, but alfo
Houfes and Lands allotted to fuch Seamen
as would fettle in his Majefty’s Domini-
ons*, by which means they propofed to
get in time a fuffident number of able
Seamen to man their Gallies, of which
three were order’d to be built immedi-
ately, with fome other Vefiels, to cruize
upon the Portuguefes on theCoaft of Orixa
and Bengale, &c. It was alfo agreed,
that no Quarter fhould be given to the
Portuguefes and their Confederates, unlefs
they were Women or Children *, and that
a Pardon fhould be publifhed for all De-
ferters that would return within 6o Days
into his Majefty’s Service, which was done
accordingly at Candy, 23 July, \6n.
Expedition againft Walane and Gale, to
obferve their Motions, they attack’d*the
Reer of the Portuguefes , who imagining
no otherwife than that the whole Force
of the Emperor was on their back, were
foon brought into confufion $ but finding
their Miftake, rallied again, and retreat-
ed towards Columbo, making themfelves
Matters in their March thither of the
Dukedom of Migonne, where they com-
mitted all manner of Cruelties. The
Modeliar or Governor being accus’d of
having betray’d his Truft, fent a Letter to
the Prince of Migonne, wherein he decla-
red, that after having fuftained three Af-
, faults, he was forced to furrender ; ad-
ding, that they were ready to lhake off
the Portuguefe Yoke with the firft oppor-
tunity that offered, tho the Portuguefes
had taken molt of their Wives and Chil-
dren, ( and among the reft the Gover-
nour’s Wife) along with them, as Ho-
ftages and Pledges of their Fidelity, to
Columbo. They fent alfo a Prefent to their
Prince, as a Token of their Obedience.
The Letter was dated 30 Aug . 1612.
by the Command of the chief Ftfego
Modeliar .
Are beaten.
The Prince, after having confulted
about this Letter with the Emperor, fent
anfwer, that he was extremely concerned
at the lofs of his Country and Subjeds,
exhorting them to periill in their Fidelity,
and that as foon as polfible he would ap-
pear among them at the Head of the
Imperial Army.
Portuguc
fes march
to Jafna-
patnam.
Whilft thefe things were tranfafting.
Advice was brought that the Portuguefes
were on their march towards Jafnapat-
nam\ whereupon the Emperor having
fent part of his Forces defign’d for the
CHAP. XII.
The Death of the Hereditary Imperial Prince. His Funeral. The King of
Panua rebels , is taken Prifoner , and with all his Adherents.
Death of
the Impe-
rialFrme,
A Bout the fame time the Hereditary
. Imperial Prince Mahaflanne , Son of
’* the late Emperor Don John , died after a
Sicknefs of fix days. The occafion of his
Death was varioufly reported \ but the
general Opinion was that he had been
poifoned by Cenurvieraat his Father-in-law,
to make way for his eldeft Son Comar a
Singaftanne to fuccecd him in the Empire.
Certain it is that his Death was generally
lamented, the Guards were doubled all
round the Imperial Palace, and great
Preparations made for his Funeral, which
was perform’d the isd of v 4uguft in the
Afternoon. The Emprefs efpecially gave
moft evident Marks of her Grief, calling
him at parting. Her own precious Flcfh and
Blood, her only Hopes, Life and Satisfaction,
vowing to revenge his Death, and not to
take any Nouriihment, that fhe might
follow her Son. She did afterwards fall
into a Swoon, and was fain to be remov’d
out of the Room by her two Daughters,
who alfo were melted in Tears.
The Corps of the deceafed Prince be-
ing expos’d to the view of the People,
they broke out into molt lamentable Ex-
clamations, crying, Where vs the Traitor
that murder'd our Prince ? We will tear him
to pieces. So that the Emperor fearing a
general Infurrcdfion, got the Prince of
Migonne and the Prince of Ouve to tell


Funeral Tomv oj r if JLoi/al Tnnce


them, that the Prince was not poifon’d,
but died of a Fever, which fomewhat
appeas’d the Tumult. The Corps being
put into a Mourning Herfe adorn’d with
Gold and precious Stones, was carried
to the place of Burial in the following
manner :
Corps iu the Grave, under the moft
dreadful Ejaculations and Outcries of the
People, which lafted till the Corps was
quite burnt to Afoes; which done the
whole Train return’d to* Court to’con-
dole the Emprefsand her Daughters.
HU
bum '
In September Advice being brought to
Court that the King of Pama had join’d
the Portuguefes againft the Emperor, and
that the King of Cotiarum intended to
follow his Footfteps, the Emperor with
the Advice of his Privy Council fent his
Letters dated the 23 Sept . to both thefe
Kings, to make their perfonal Appear-
ance at Court within 1 6 days, under the
forfeiture of all their Eftates, and Ba-
ni foment. The King of Cotiarum hap-
pening to be ill at that time, he fent his
Uncle to know the reaibn of his being
fummoned to Court, and thereupon ap-
in Perfon on the 9th Off. follow-
ing, giving fuch Proofs of his Innocence,
that he was foon clear’d by the Emperor.
But the King of Pama knowing himfelf
guilty, did not think fit to appear \ fo
that it was refblved to reduce him by
Force, his E)efeftion having put a ftop to
the Expedition againft Walane and Gale.
Accordingly the Princes of Migonne and
Ouve 7 at the head of an Army of 35000
men, march’d 1 Jan. 1613. diredfly to-
wards Pama , with a refolution tode-
ftroy all with Fire and Sword : But the
Inhabitants finding themfelves not in a
condition to oppofe fo formidable a
Force, fent Deputys with Prefents to the
Princes, defiring they might be fpared,
as having no hand in this Defedf ion which
being granted, they were amerced in
457000 Larynen (befides their yearly
Tribute) amounting juft to two Months
Pay of the whole Army, and to give Ho-
ftagcs for the King’s Appearance at Court
in 5 or 6 days after.
%
PanUa
T” Hh
Firft of all went the Prince’s MulTcians,
clad in black Gingam or Linenthen the
Mufqueteers and Pikemen, three in a
Rank: Thefe were follow’d by the Shield-
bearers and Halberdiers with their Hal-
berds downwards : After thefe came 40
War-Elephants guided by as many Gentl-
emen, and 8 Perftan Horfes led by eight
Knights of the Golden Sun and after thefe
the Grooms of the Bed-chamber all rich-
ly attir’d. Then came the Scepter and
Crown, carried each upon a black Velvet
Culhion, and the Prince’s Arms. Thefe
were followed by the Corps attended by
eight of the greateft Lords of the Coun-
try j then the Emprefs’s Palankin or Lit-
ter attended by 16 with Fans, fourllm-
brello’s, and eight Betel Boxes, as alfo a
Nofcgay of Gold to be worn by the Em-
peror only. After thefe came the Em-
peror fupported by the Princes of Migonne
and Mewater, follow’d by the chief Lords
of the Empire and the Governours of the
Provinces. They pafs’d along the Streets
under feveral Arches made of fine Stuffs
and PlaifiSr-work. The Corps being
depofited on the Place of Burial with a
deal of Solemnity, the Priefts mutter’d
out certain Prayers, and the common
People exprefs’d their Sorrow by frequent
mournful Outcries.
//« Fune-
ral,
The Place
of Burial,
The Place of Burial Horn by
the C ingalefe s') was a four-Square raifed
from the Ground feven Steps high; It
was level on the top, and adorned with
feveral Rows of Trees. In the midft of
it was the Grave, into which the Lords
who had carried the Corps threw a great
quantity of Sandal-wood, and fweet-
feented Spices; and having put the Corps
upon it cover’d with the fame Spices, as
high as a Man could reach, they alfo
poured in among it three large VefTels full
ot Oil of Cinnamon, and another with
Butter. Over the Grave was ere&ed a
large Canopy riling up like a Pyramid of
feven Foot high, under which Hood the
Lords whilft the Ceremony lafted : which
being over, the Prince of Migome took a
Bundle of Straw, which was given him
fay the Prince of Amme , and a golden
Chafindilh with Fire, and two lighted
Torches, and being attended by thefaid
Prince of Amme and two Gentlemen of
the Bedchamber, fet fire to the Spices and
Accordingly he was no fooner come j
there, but being brought before the Privy <
Council, his Accufation was read to him *
in Writing, viz.. 44 That he had entred in- 0j
44 Engagement with the Portuguefes
44 againft the Emperor, and was to have
44 marry’d the young Princefs Hantan
44 and with her as a Dowry the
it of Batecalo and Palugam:
That he had defpifed the Emperor’s
4C Order in not coming to Court; and
44 hired a certain Ruffian for 5000 Larynes
44 to murder the Emperor, with a Pro-
-44 of 20000 more, and certain Pof-
-44 feffions, after the fame was accom-
-44 plifhed, as appeared both by his own
44 Hand-writing, and the Confeflion of
44 the Ruffian. Which being fo evident
Appears at
Court , and
is accus'd
of Tmfun*


ber (who were all in Tears) unto whom
he made rich Prefents of Jewels, and i
order’d his Chancellor (who had not had
the leaft Knowledg of this Defign) to
bind up his Eyes. In the mean while the
the King took fome Betel and Arek , and
thenfaid. Why do we flay ? Vnfortumte I, '
what am I reduc'd to ! Then taking three
turns round the Scaffold, he fat down,
and taking a little Betel told the Specta-
tors, I am a King defeended from the Im-
perial Blood j but fince I mufl die , this is
my only Requefl , that my dead Corps may
not be left to the management of vile Perfons ,
hut be honoured with a Royal Sepulture,
Which being promis’d by fome of the
Lords there prefent, he feem’d to be
well fatisfy’d, and having ask’d their
Pardon for what had pafs’d, he had Iris
Eyes ty’dup, and laying his Head upon a
Block, it was fever’d from the Body,
which (at the IntercelTion of the faid
Lords) had a Royal Sepulture allowed it
by the Emperor.
againft him, that he had fcarceany thing
to reply, he acknowledg’d himfelf guilty,
craving the Emperor’s Mercy, in regard
of his being defeended from the Imperial
Blood, and of the many Services done to
the Crown by his Anceftors.
Speech.
Is commit-
ted to Pri-
jw.
He was by Order from the Council
ordered to be committed Prifoner in the
Caftle of Meddema Honore , from whence
hefent a moft fubmifTive Letter to the
Emperor, imploring his Mercy to fave
his Life, and to condemn him to a per-
petual Imprifonment. About 62 Perfons
found to have been his Accomplices in
this Confpiracy were fent to other Prj,- w
fons, and afterwards punifh’d with Death.
The 20 th of March being the Day ap-
pointed for the Trial of the King and
his Accomplices, 50 Lords of the Em-
pire appointed for that purpofe, alter a
full Hearing found them all guilty of High
Treafon, and accordingly pronounc’d the
following Sentence : That the King of
Panua fliould be beheaded, and the reft
be thrown before the Elephants, and
all their Goods and Eftates be confif-
cated. This Sentence being figned by his
Imperial Majefty, was put in execution
accordingly the 241 b of March following
in the Forenoon.
Hit Trial.
Sentence.
After his Death Samatway the King’s -
Uncle being with a general approbation 1
declared his Succeffor, marched at the
head of an Army of 50000 men, the
Bth of April, to Panua, to take poffeffion
of that Kingdom, which he found invol-
ved in no fmall Troubles, there being a
ftrong Party who oppofed his Succelbon :
But 125 of the Ringleaders Ijeing cut to
pieces by the new King’s Forces, the reft
reft thought fit to fubmit. So foon as he
found himfelf in the quiet PoffeiTion of the
Kingdom, he fent back the Forces, asalfo
the Arrears of the annual Tribute, be-
fides confiderable Prefents. The Portu-
guefes not long after fent their Deputys to
entice thofe of Pama with vaft Promifes
to engage with them afrefh \ but thefc
were fent back without being heard.
His Succef
for.
, According 1 } 7 a Scaffold cover’d with
White (the Royal Colour here) being
ereCted in the Caftle of fieddema Honor e,
the King was brought thither, and feated
• himfelf upon a gilt Chair, He at firft
appear’d undaunted } but being depriv d
of all his Dignities, in the view of the
People, and the Sentence read to him,
he began to bewail his unfortunate Con-
dition, asking frequently whether there
were no hopes of a Pardon? Being told
no, he fuffer’d' himfelf to be undrefs’d by
fome of his Gentlemen of the Bedcham-
Execution.
Behaviour .
CHAP. XIII.
The Emperor ƒits down before Walane. The Prince of Migonne equips a Squa-
dron of Ships. The Empreƒs falls ƒick, diƒpoƒes of her Affairs, and dies.
The Empe-
ror befieges
Wakne.
T T was not long after that the Empe-
J[ ror with a good Army form’d the
§j e g e 0 f Walane , and took the Caftle hy
Affault \ but his Souldiers being too in-
tent upon the Plunder, the Portuguefes re-
covered themfelves, and beat them from
thence. The Emperor being highly exaf-
perated at this Mifcarriage, caufed io v f
Cingalefes tobehang’d, which proved of
the worfe confequence, becaufc the ?or-
tuguefes receiving frefli Succours foon
after, he was forc’d to raife the Siege.
In the mean time the Prince of Migonne
had not been idle to equip fome Gallies
and Fuftes (fmall Veffels) to cruize upon
the Portuguefes between the Gape of Co-
moryn and the Ifle of Ceylon. The fame
fet fail the 1 6th of May out of the Harbour
of Cotiarum , under the Command of a
Nephew of the Prince of Ouve , as Admi-
Raifes tht
Siege,
ASquadron
i of Ships
, fent a crux•
Jmg.


ral, and Wandige Nay Hanni Vice-Admi-
ral. The firft Gaily was called the Candy ,
one Sanderappo Captain. The id call’d
the Holland , Kiftena Captain. The id
the Migonne , one Dingappe Captain.
The 4 th called the Fortune , one Ordia
Captain. %th the Good Luck , one Mara-
finge Captain. 6th , The Faithful , com-
manded by Captain Sanderappo, Thefe
Ships returned the (ft/.? of March , 1613.
with a great Booty amounting (to near
tfoooco Livers. For they had taken two
Portuguefc VefTels near Chilau to the North
of Negumbo and Manaar , called Patafios \
and three Fuflcs, befides 20 Barks which
they fet on fire. Not far from Calecut
and the Cape of Comoryn they took ano-
ther Ship, whereof they threw (accord-
ing to Order) the Portuguefes over-board,
forced another afhoar, and took a Moorifh
Vellcl richly laden coming from Ortnus ,
and bound for Cochin , and another Por-
tuguefe Ship coming from Bengal . The
Portuguefes and Mifiices of all which
they threw into the Seas, keeping only
the Portuguefi Women and Negros, In
the Road of Panaca they met with another
Portuguefe Ship riding at anchor, deferted
by the Ship’s Crew, which they brought
into the Harbour of Cotiarum . HisMa-
jefty order’d the Booty to be diftributed
among the Officers and Seamen.
In July 1613. the Emprefs Donna Ca-
therine* being with child, fell dangeroufly
iil of a Fever ; She fent for the Prince of
Migorme and the Prince of Ouve , unto
whom (after having taken an Oath of
Secrecy from them) fhe difcovered the
whole Sentiments of her Heart, and
(with the Emperors Confent) conftituted
them Governours of her Children. She
had conceived fuch an immoderate Grief
at the Death of her eldeft Son, the Prince
of Mabajlanne , that fhe would fcarce take
any Suflenance. She declared, that no-
thing troubled her more, than that be-
fore her Death fhe fhould not fee the
Downfal of the Portuguefes in Ceylon \ and
would often, with a great deal of eager-
nefs enquire, whether the expeded Suc-
cours were not arrived out of Holland.
Such was her Grief, as I told you before,
about the lofsof her Son, that fhe would’
fcarce reft day or night which had que-
ftionlefs prov’d the occallon of this Dif-
temper: and fhe was no left troubled
how to difpofe ot her Children after her
Death *, fhe bequeathed to them all her
Jewels and Treafure Ihe had been gather-
ing for a coniiderable time *, as alfo cer-
tain Legacies to all her Servants, and
reftored all her Slaves of both Sexes to
their Liberty.
Her Sicknefs increafing daily, fhe was
carried from Welmantotte (her ordinary
Refidence) to Modeni 7 where in the Pre-
fence of the Emperor, fhe charged her
eldeft Son to revenge the latedeceafed
Prince’s Death upon the Phyfician, who
fhe faid was the Author thereof: But as
fhe was fometimes not well in her Senfes,
fo this was not much regarded. In the
mean while the Emperor took care to pre-
vent all Diforders which might be occa-
fioned by the Empreft’s Death, by rein-
forcing the Frontier Garifon?, and doub-
ling the Guards in other Places. The
Emprefs having pretty well recover’d her
Senfes, fent for her five Children, Coma-
ra Singafiame Hereditary Prince of the
Crown, and his two Brothers Janisre
yidanne and Lamait 7 and the twoPrincef-
fes Mahadafcyn and Hantan Hdafiyn: She
clafp’d them one after another with Tears
in her Eyes, in her Arms,and killing them,
faid, See bere 7 you deareft part of my own
Flefb and Blood , your Mother that has brought
you into the World y but mujl leave you in a
little time. Then fhe call’d to her the
two before-mentioned Princes, unto
whom fhe deliver’d her Children in thefe
Words: I now deliver to you the deareft
Pledges 1 have • take care of them as of your
own Eyes 7 and retaliate upon them the many
Obligations you have received at our bands.
Then turning towards the Emperor, fhe
told him, Tou are the occafion of my Death .
Which fo fenfibly touch’d him (he loviug
the Emprefs extremely) that foon after it
threw him into a violent Diftemper. Af-
ter that fhe fcarce fpoke to any body
except to the Prince of Ouve , unto whom
fhe declared her Sorrow for having adored
and facrificed to the Pagan Idols, contra-
ry to her better Knowledg, having been
educated a Chriftian, telling him, that
fhe faw the Devils ready to ftrangle her.
The Prince of Migonne (upon whom fhe
fix’d her Eyes all the while) anfwered her,
T 'hat the infernal Spirits had no Power over
a Chriftian , provided they heartily repented
of their Sins 7 that therefore fhe ought to reft
fatisfyd, and to implore God's Mercy for her
Soul 7 for Jefus Chrift’s fake. She returned
for anfvver, lam a Chriftian , and would
willingly pray , I defire you to pray with me.
The Prince of Migonne pray’d aloud. Our
Father , and the 12 Articles of the Chri-
ftian Creed : Unto which the Emprefs
replyM in Portuguefe, , O ch>ifti Jjuda
mi! O Cbrift help me I Soon after being
carried back to Welmantotte fhe fpoke
her laft Words: Omy dear Princes and
Princefes, faid Die, where mujl I leave you ?
My Lords, (pointing to thePrincs of Aft


gome and Prince of Ouve ) perform your
Promifes , farewel, I am departing, O
God take care of my Soul: and fo {he
expir’d the 20 th of July 1613. in the
3>f& year or her Age, and was buried
the 2 \ft with the fame Pomp,and ia the
fame place as the Prince her Son was be-
tore.
CHAP. XIV.
The Emperor falls very ill : Aƒƒembles the Eƒtates. The Tranƒactions of that
Aƒƒembly.
The Empe-
ror falls
M-
Affcmbles
theEfiates.
HU Speech.
THE Emperor finding himfelf worfe
and worfe, would needs be carried
to a fimll City call’d Dtlcge, where he
appointed the States of the Empire to
meet Aug. 18. in order to fettle the Suc-
ceffion of the Crown. The Members of
this Great Aflembly (according to the
Schedule read to the King) were, Idele,
King of Cottar um \ Celle Wandaar, King
of Pahigam *, Comaro Wandaar, King of
Batecalo \ Samarway, King of Panua *, Na-
macar the King of Jafnapatnam's Am-
baffador •, Corimtte Prince of Ouve •, Mar-
celius Prince of Migonne, Materael Hani,
Prince of Kelaren m , Jalagode Rale , Prince
of Catemale *, Mewater Rale Prince of
Mewater Jane Sengati , Prince and Lord
of Podere Wiek Feneftnge, Earl of Qua-
trecorle Gael Heneraed, Governour of the
Earldom of Harjipate Corope, Governour
of the Earldom of Odogodas j Kery Wa-
nafegre, Governour of the Province of
Matele j Attapatte Governour of Wludt
Gamme , and Pafgrame Halvenrale G over-
nour of Atapelt and Wilwele belides a
great number of other Noblemen, unto
whom his Imperial Majefty made the fol-
lowing Speech.
“ My Lords; This prefent Aflembly
“ being occafion’d by my Sicknefs (per-
“ haps the fore-runner of my approach-
“ ing End) I firft of all defire you to
“ forgive me all Mifcarriages I may have
“ committed, the fame having been done
cC without my knowledg; and feeling
“ my felf very feeble, and decaying in
“ Strength, 1 thought fit to take effectual
“ care about the Succeffion, to avoid
“ all Contefts that might likely arife
“ after my Deceafe. You can’t be for-
“ getful what Difturbance arofe in the
“ Empire after the Death of my Brother
“ rime Ladarm Sori , which ought to
“ ferve us as a Caution to prevent the
“ fame at this juncture, by committing the
“ Tuition of Ccmara the el*
“ deft Hereditary Prince of the Crown,
“ to fuch as you (hall judg beft qualified
“ for fo high a Truft, with a full Au-
u thority to manage the Adminiilra-
u tion of all publick Affairs during the
u Prince’s Minority, the Choice whereof
u 1 recommend to your prefent Care.
The Lords being not a little fur priz’d
at this Propofition, gave in their Opi-
nions in writing, wherein they pitch'd
upon the Prince of Migonne and the
Prince of Ouve, who both cxcufed them-
fclves, pleading their Inability, and de-
filing his Majefty to chufe fome more able
Perlons in their fteads. The Emperor
reply’d flghing. And are you then fo back-
ward in doing me this piece of Service ? Can
you be fo forgetful of all the Obligations I
have heap'd upon you ? They anfvver’d,
that they were ready to facriflce their
Lives and Eftates for his Majefty, but
that they were afraid their Shoulders
were too weak for fo great a Burden.
Well then, reply’d the Emperor, we will
leave the Choice to my Son the Prince , where-
with the whole Aflembly was fatisfy’d.
The Emperor then order’d the King of
Cotiarum to bring in the Prince, which
being done accordingly, he told him.
Son, make your Choice from among all thefe
Kings and Princes of two Perfons , fuch as
you love beft, who fhall be Adminiftrators of
the Empire after my Death. The Prince
anfwer’d all in Tears, Coed. Father! and
will you die dear Father, pray don't leave
me! Which words drew Tears both from
the Emperor and the whole Aflembly.
The Emperor anfwer’d, I don't know how
foon my time may come to leave you \
wherefore 1 would have you pitch upon two
Perfons, fuch as you love beft next to my felf.
Well then , reply’d the Prince, 1 love the
Prince of Migonne, and Itkewife the Prince
of Ouve, and next to him the Prince of
Velaren. lam fatisfied , faid the Empe-
ror, bring them to me , that J may furrender
you to their Care . Accordingly the Prince
having led the two before-mentioned
Princes to the Emperor, he told him,
Thefe fhall be my Governors now, and when
come to Maturity my chief Counfellors.
The Emperor return’d for Anfvver, not


The Adm'h
nijlrators
tirade' 1
cur'd!
without fome Emotion, My dear Son ,
fee here your Father , whofe Life perhaps will
not be long you are but young , therefore
be always advis'd by thefe two Princes . A
Torrent of Tears which trickled down
his Cheeks having ftopt his Voice, he
order’d himfelf to be carried out of the
Artembly, enjoyning only in a few words
all the Lords there prefent, to perfift in
their Fidelity, which they unanimourty
promifed to do, and in token of their
entire Submirtlon, faluted the Emperor
with the ufual Sambaje , or Reverence,
according to the Cuftom of that Coun-
try*
The next day the Royal Patent to in-
vert the before-mentioned two Princes
with the Adminiftration of the Empire
was read in the Artembly. Cenuwieraat
by the Grace of God Emperor of Ceylon,
King of Candy r Settevaca , Trinquenemak ,
Jafnapatnam , Settecorks , Manaar , Chi-
laon, Pama , Batecalo , Palugam and Jack \
Prince of Ouva , Dennevaque , Pajfadon -
Cor/c, Felaren, Coromak y Mewatre and
Fentane , Duke of IVtllegamme , Cdte, Oiy
and Jattenore Earl of Quatre Cork , Atar-
hepatte, Odegodafcary , Cr aim tty and itota-
Peace to all thofe that read thefe
Prefents.
u Being much indifpofed, and confe-
4to quently in no final] danger of Life, we
44 thought fit to convene all the Great
44 Men of the Empire to confult the
44 Welfare of the Publick, and of our
“ dearly beloved Son Comara Singaftan
44 (whom God preferve) It is for this
u reafon that we have appointed two
w Princes Adminiftrators (after our de-
-44 ceafe) not only of the Empire, but
44 alfo of our Hereditary Prince during
44 his Minority, with full Authority to
44 govern the Realm m , the two Princes
44 chofen for fo great a Truft, being the
44 Prince of Migonne and the Prince of
u Ouve, declar’d fuch by the unanimous
u Confent of the Artembly. Wc do by
ct thefe Prefents furrender to the faid
“ Princes all our Kingdoms, Provinces
a and Dominions, to be govern’d by
4C them, during the Minority of our
41 dearly beloved Sonsj and as we are
4< very glad to have been able (in our
44 life-time) to prevent all Intcftine
44 Commotions by this Settlement, fo
44 we require and delire the two before-
-44 mentioned Princes to take upon them
44 the Government of all our Domini-
-44 ons till our Recovery, or, in cafe of
44 my Deceafe, till the Hereditary Prince
44 comes to an Age of Maturity, or his
44 Brothers, in cafe he fliould happen to
44 die before that time: We therefore
44 command by thefe Prefents exprerty,
4C that no body clfe fhall prefume to take
44 upon him the Adminiftration and Tui-
-44 tion of the before-mentioned Princes
44 and Princelfes, but fhall obey the faid
cc two Princes without the leaft oppofi.
44 tion, under forfeiture of their Lives.
44 Thefe two Princes fhall take effectual
44 care of the Education of the young
44 Princes and Princelfes under proper
44 Tutors, and to fee the eldeft Prince,
44 when come to Age, quietly fettled in
44 the Throne*, and in cafe of his De-
-44 ceafe Janiere Aft an to fucceed, as after
44 him Lamoftanne , the third is to be the
u next Heir to the Crown *, but in cafe
44 all the faid Princes fhould die with-
-44 out Irtue, our dearly beloved Daugh-
-44 ter, the Princefs Mahadafcyn y and
46 after her her Sifter, the Princefs Hama
44 Madafcyn , fhall fucceed them in their
44 due turns. But in cafe thefe alfo fhould
44 leave no Children behind them, the
44 Empire fhall devolve into your hands,
44 and you fliall be at full liberty to chufe
44 with the unanimous Confent of the
4C Great Men of the Empire, fuch a Per-
-44 fon of the Imperial Blood as you
44 think the beft qualified for the Wel-
-44 fare of the Empire, which I leave to
44 the Wifdom of this Artembly, In
44 the mean while, every one ( after my
44 Deceafe) fhall be oblig’d to be accoun-
u table to the two Adminiftrators for
44 all the Revenues of their refpedive
44 Lands without failure, upon pain of
44 Death and lofs of their Eftates. The
44 two Adminiftrators fhall have a due
44 regard for all fuch Counfellors as were
44 in our life-time, and not turn them
44 out, unlefs they fhould not behave
44 themfelves as they ought to do, when
u they fhall have power to put others in
44 their places.
u All Mandats (hall be ilTued by the
u two Adminiftrators in the Name of
ct the whole Empire, and the Heredita-
ct ry Prince } according to which all the
cc Great Men and Nobility, without ex-
ct ception, fhall appear at Court when
4t requir’d, and obey them in all other
u refpefts : They (hall alfo be oblig’d
“ to take the ufual Oath of Allegiance
u to the Hereditary Prince, and his
44 two Adminiftrators, and to promife
“ to perfift in their Fidelity, and not to
44 fuffer any Alliance or Engagement to
44 be made with our Enemies the Portu-
-44 guefes 7 or any Rebels, under what pre-
-44 tencc foever. They fhall be oblig’d
44 to artift in the reducing of all fuch
w* y C
Settltmti
of thi Em-
pH,


4c (tho of the next Kindred) as pre-
-44 tend to difturb the publick Peace:
44 And laftly, all the Kings and Lords
< 4 {hall take an Oath, that after our
44 Deceafe they will raife no Difturbance
44 in the Empire, but will fubmit quiet-
-44 ly to the prefent Difpofition, under
44 forfeiture of their Lives. For which
44 reafon our Grant written in Golden
4,4 Letters, is to be deliver’d to the Princes
44 of Migonne and Ouve , purfuant to
44 which they (hall have full Authority to
44 govern and proteCl in our and the
44 Hereditary Prince’s Name our Domi-
-44 nions, and to adminifter Juftice both
44 in Civil and Criminal Caufes. We
44 therefore order and command all
44 Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Clergy.
44 men, Nobles, Governours, and Heads
44 of Provinces and Cities, Captains, Pre-
-44 fidents, Counfellors, Admirals, Chan-
-44 cellors, and all other Perfons in our
44 Service, as Deputies, Adminiftrators,
44 Farmers, Inhabitants, Souldiers, Citi-
-44 zens, and others inhabiting the Cities,
44 Villages, or any places whatever, all
44 and every one in particular, to receive
44 and acknowledg the before-mentioned
44 two Princes, Adminiftrators and Go-
-44 vernours of the Realm, till the Here-
-44 ditary Prince came of Age, and to take
44 the Oath of Fidelity to them, and fhew
44 them the fame refped as to our own
a Perfon, and, as becomes faithful and
44 true Subjects, to behave themfelves in
44 all refpeds according to the true intent
cc of this Patent. We alfo annul by
44 thefe Prefents all Laws or Conftitu-
-44 tions which may feem contrary to the
44 true meaning thereof $ and to give it
44 all the Authority and Weight that
44 can be, have in Conjunction with the
44 Hereditary Prince, and the Princes,
44 Dukes and Lords of this Affembly,
44 fign’d it with our own Hand, and or-
-44 der’d the Great Seal to be affix’d to
44 it. For the fame reafon we have alfo
44 commanded the fame to be regifter’d
44 in all the Courts, Councils and Trea-
-44 furies of our Empire, that no body
44 may plead Ignorance of this our laft
44 Will. Dated at the Imperial Court
cc at Digelege , ip Aug. 1613.
CHAP. XV.
The Hereditary Princes are carried to Cockelecorle. Gale Heneraed is routed,
and being ƒummoned to Court , is made Priƒoner, and executed.
The Empe -
nr {men -
ders bk
children to
Im-aton.'
THE faid Patent being publiftfd by
his Imperial Majefty’s order, the
Adminiftrators as well as the reft of the
Eftates took the Oath of Allegiance to
the Hereditary Prince \ which done, the
Adminiftrators upon their Knees re-
turn’d his Majefty thanks for the Honour
he had beftow’d upon them, wilhing him
a long and happy Life. His Majefty
lifting them up, order’d them to fit
down by him, and difclofed to them
fome of his Treafures which were buried
under ground, befides feveral other mat-
ters relating to the Adminiftration of
the State.
Then the three Princes and two Prin-
ceftes being call’d in, he exhorted them
to follow the Dire&ions of their Gover-
nors \ and taking the eldeft Prince in his
Arras, My deareft Son , faid he, I xvifh you
and your Brothers and Sifters all imaginable
Profperity : and then turning to the Princes
of Migonne and Ouve\ fays he, from
my hands thefe my deareft Treafures , which
I commit to your care \ and thus deliver’d
them up to the two Adminiftrators, who
took care to have them convey’d in the
night-time to the Dukedom of Cockele -
corle for their better fecurity, charging
thofe who conduced them, upon their
Lives not to divulge whither they were
carried : which done, the Affiembly was
diffolv’d the 20 th.
The Portuguefes had no fooner notice
of the Death of the Emprefs, and the
Sicknefs of the Emperor, but they left
no Stone unturn’d ( notwithftanding the
mifcarriage of their Defign upon Pama )
to raife new Troubles. For this pur-
pofe they had found means to bring over
to their fide the Son of Gael Heneraed Go-
vernor of Harcipate , Prefident in the
Dukedom of Cockdecorle , who all along
had fupply’d them with Provifions at
Walane , and had engag’d feveral of
the Nobility to raife Divifions, thereby
to give opportunity to the Portuguefes to
make themfelves Matters of the King-
dom. The two Princes Adminiftrators
having got fome notice of the matter,
they refolv’d to find out the bottom of
this Defign, For this purpoft the Prince
They ars
carried u
Co( j ke k"
60rte “


A Letter
intercepted
cf Henc-
racdV.
Hcnera-
cdV Forces
routed.
He it fum-
mon'd t&
Court,
of Migome march’d the 15 th of Septem-
. her at the head of a good Body, under
pretence of changing the Garifons on the
Frontiers, but near Ode and Jatteno met
Heneraed" s Forces, who being not a little
furpriz’d at the fight of the Prince, pre-
tended they were order’d for Cottamale
upon fome particular bufmefs. The
Prince being now more than ever con-
firm’d in the matter, order’d their chief
Commander to be brought before him
immediately, who being fearch’d, a Let-
ter of Gael Heneraed was found about
him, viz. That all things look’d with a good
face towards the accompli/hment of the De-
fign concerted betwixt them. That he bad
confulted with hvs Son Abecque, Prefident
of Cockelecorle, and that they bad agreed
with many of the Nobility to murder the
Princes and Princeffes , and likewife the Prin-
ces of Migonne and Ouve, the Iffue where-
of they fhould know as foon evs it was put in
Execution. He fent them in the mean time a
certain quantity of Powder , Ball and Provi-
fions7 advifing them to be upon their Guard 7
becaufe the Carifon of Candy had been re-
inforc’d confiderably of late y which feem’d
as- if fome Deftgn were in hand againfl
them.
The Prince gave immediate Orders to
feize the Commander, who (landing upon
his Defence,was cut to pieces: his Soldiers
and Pioneers attempted to fa ve themfelves
byflight,but being purfued were moft (lain,
f except a few that fav’d themfelves in the
Woods. The Prince difpatch’d a Meflen-
ger immediately to the Governour with
orders to come immediately to Court,
“ having particular occafion to concert fome
Matters of moment with him.
He who knew nothing of what was paf-
fed, appear’d accordingly the 17 th of Sep-
tember at the Court in Candy , where be-
ing well receiv’d by the Prince, they
talk’d of feveral matters relating to the
Government; upon which occafion he
gave him repeated adurances of his Fide-
lity, telling him, that he was ready to
venture his Life for the Welfare of the
Empire. The Prince of Migome had
much ado to diflcmble his Anger, only
told him. We have neverthelefs received
certain Advice that you hatch Treafon againft
the Crown , and are enter’d into a Confederacy
with the Portuguefes our Enemies to
the Oath you have fo lately taken. He de-
clar’d his Innocence with many Aflevera-
tions, defiling that he might be confron-
ted with his Accufers: Whereupon the
Prince of Ouve told him, We could wijh
you innocent , but are too well inform’d of
your Treachery , and fo order’d him to
withdraw (after fome further Excufe)
to be difarm’d, and his Perfon to be
fecur’d.
1 he Captain of the Guard coming to
feize him, he laid, Friendjou are wronged
fo made the beft of his way towards the
Gate, in hopes of making his efcape*
but the Captain asking him, you not
the Governour Gael Heneraed ? he an-
fwer’d, Tes. The Captain reply’d, Then
lam not wrong , I beg your Pardon , being
oblig'd to execute hvs Majejiy’s Orders: So
that feeing there was no hopes of efca-
ping, he defir’d to be brought before his
Majefty, or before the Princes Admini-
ftrators. The Captain told him, that
he had no fuch Orders *, whereupon fome
of the Governour’s Soldiers put them-
felves in a pollute of Defence, but were
all made Prifoners, and put to death the
next day, being 32 in number. Ano-
ther Party attempted to efcape by night,
but 50 of them were taken and commit-
ted to Prifbn, which made his cafe worfe.
In the mean time the two Adminiflra-
tors took care to have the Emperor’s
Children tranfported to another Caftle,
and Pent Orders to all the Govcrnours
to flop all the Soldiers of Heneraed , un-
lefs they were provided with a Pafport
from his Majefty.
The nd Heneraed was examin’d in the
Council, where at firft he boldly deny’d
every thing alledg’d againfl: him, but
foon after confefs’d the whole, and beg’d
Mercy, alledging, that what he had done
was out of Difcontent, becaufe he had
not been promoted to a higher Station.
He did not deny that 16 Noblemen had
been concern’d in this Confpiracy, yet
refus’d to name them 7 but feeing the
Brahman y who had made the firft difeo-
very, appear, he fa id, No queflion but
you will foon know their Names now 7 how-
ever 1 will not difeover them. The Brah-
mans declar’d, that Gael Heneraed had
caufed two Gentlemen to be mur.
der’d, becaufe they refufed to have a
hand in this Confpiracy. The 16 No-
blemen being apprehended confefs’d the
Fa£t, and the iph being appointed for :
their Trial, they were all condemn’d to‘
Death. The 27th they were executed in \
the following manner: The 50 Soldiers
who had endeavour’d to make their
efcape, had their Heads cut off. The
26 Noblemen, who had fign’d the Con- 2
federacy, had the Heads cut off firft, and c
then their Bodies thrown before the
Dogs. Four of his chief Counfellours
were drawn with hot Pinchers, had
afterwards thsir Hands cut off, andtheir
HU Soldi
ers taken.
The Etnft*
1 peror's
Children
carried to
; another
place.
d He if a-
.£ mined.
e
1-
it
1
m
I
%
• Tried
condemn'd,
with 26
| Gentlem*
Their £&•
cutm.


Bodies quartered, which were hung up
about the Cattle. The unfortunate Go-
vernour, who had been a Spectator of
the miferable Exits of his Accomplices,
being likewife burnt with red hot Pin-
chersateach Corner of the Streets, was
broken alive upon the Wheel, and after-
wards thrown before the Elephants,
one of which threw him up to a confide-
rable height, and afterwards catching
him again, crulh’d him to pieces with
his Teeth, The reft had the good For-
tune to efcape to Columbo,
CHAP. XVI.
A Battel betwixt the Emperor and the Rebels. The Portugueƒes propoƒe & Trea-
ty of Peace, which is refuƒed. They march towards Candy, but are routed.
An hi-
l etwlxf
tk Empe-
nr and
Kd;h,
Siiefes*
the Empe~
rofsCamp,
SOON after the Princes of Mtgonne
and Ouve , together with the Earl of
Quatrecorle , took a Progrefs to Cockele-
cork, being followed by 2000 Men, and
honourably received by the Inhabitants *,
they fettled Matters upon the old Foot,
and made fome Alteration in the Coin,
giving ftri& Orders not to raife the Mo-
ny above the prefix’d Value.
In the Year 1614. there happened a
bloody Engagement betwixt the Imperial
Forces and the Rebels, wherein 4000 Men
being kill’d on both Tides, and the laft
finding themfelves too weak, retreated
in the Night time, and follicited the
Portuguefes for Help. The Emperor re-
maining thus Matter of the Field, order’d
his Camp to be ftrongly fortify’d; and
keeping only 2000 Men, and 1000 Pio-
neers for his Guard, he Tent his General
with the whole Army to cut off the Re-
treat of the Enemy. The Portuguefes
having got notice thereof, gathered fe-
cretly a Body of 100 Portuguefes , and
5000 Natives •, and marching thro unpaf-
Table ways, furpriz’d the Outguards, and
entred the Camp without much Oppoliti-
on, every one Peeking how to fave them-
felves by a timely flight. In this A&ion
the Prince of Migonne was wounded with
a Lance in his Right Leg, and the Prince
of Ouve in the Right Arm, and 500 were
{lain upon the Spot on the Emperor’s
fide.
Anno 1514. March 14. Don Munno de
Feriera , Brother of the Earl of Fere , ar-
riv’d at Columbo, in the Quality of Vice-
roy of Goa , to relieve Don Jeronimo d y
Oviedo, He brought along with him a-
bout 132 Portuguefes , befidesa good num-
ber of Miftices , to reinforce the Garifons,
with pofitive Orders to endeavour, if
poffible, to procure a Peace with the Em-
peror of Ceylon.
Purfuant to thefe Orders hcfent the
3 d of June, Don Franeifco de Mwcz.es his
Envoy to Candy , with full Power to
treat with the laid Emperor upon the
beft Terms he could. Accordingly the
faid Envoy delivered to the Emperor a
Letter from the General, and afiother
from the Viceroy of Goa , written in the
King of Spain's Name, the chief Con-
tents whereof (belldes fome Compliments)
were, 44 That his Catholick Majefty be-
-44 ing averfe to the Effufion of human
44 Blood, was inclined to enter into a
44 Treaty with his Majefty, in order to
44 fettle a firm and lafting Peaces for
44 which purpofe he had granted full
44 Power to certain Perfons of Note to
44 treat upon that Head, defiring that
44 his Majefty would bepleafed to accept
44 of them as fuch, and give them a far
44 vourable Reception. Goa , Feb. 22.
1614. The General’s Letter was much
to the fame purpofe.
The Emperor having propofed the
matter the 13 th following in Council,
it was refolved they Ihould bring in their
Propofitions in Writing, which being
done the 18 th of the fame Month, were as
follows.
1. The King of Spain is willing to en-
ter into an amicable Treaty with the
Emperor.
2. The Peace to be concluded cither
for ever, or for a certain fpacc of Years,
to be kept inviolably, and all Hoftilities
to ceafe both by Water and Land imme-
diately.
3. Each Party to keep what they are in
pofleflion of at prefent.
4. His Imperial Majefty (hall renounce
his Alliance with the Dutch, and engage
himfelf never to enter into any other
with them for the future, or any other
State at Enmity with Spain and Portugal, ,
and to permit no other European Nation
to traffick there.
Propofes &
Peace.
The King
of SpaiaV
Utter*
. *.
p o pJa
fe,


Are re-
ft del.
7>jf’Pf>rcu-
guefes/w-
-pofe a
Truce,
The Por-
tuguelcs
march to~
wards
Candy.
Bath Parties to be at Liberty to
traflkk in what Commodities they pleafe,
without entring into any Articks upon
that Head.
6. His Majefty fhall grant Liberty for
the free Exercife of the Roman Catholick
Religion in Candy , and the building a
Church and Convent,with convenient Ha-
bitations for two or three hundred Per-
fons, both of the Clergy and Laity.
7. His Majefty fhall fend one of his
Hereditary Princes to keep his Court at
ColumbOy in lieu whereof they will fend
a Perfon of Quality to ftay always near
his Majefty.
8. His imperial Majefty fhall reftore
all the Jewels, Mony, Prifoners, Slaves
ot both Sexes, Cannon, &c. taken in the
laft War.
Thefe Propofitions being read and de-
bited in the Council, it was refolved not
to enter into any further Treaty with the
Portuguefes , as fearing not without rea-
Ibn, that Tome treacherous Defign (as
ol'ten had happened before) lay concea-
led under this pretended Treaty. An
Anfwcr was therefore return’d to the
Portuguefe Envoy, Jun.lo. That his Im-
perial Majefty was not inclined to treat
with the King ot Spain, before all the
Lands and Lordflfips taken from him
were reftor’d: That however the Spa-
niards fhould remain in pofleflion of Gale
and Columbo, with the Territories there-
unto belonging but that his Imperial
Majefty would by no means renounce his
Alliance made with the Dutch , but keep
the fame inviolably. Furthermore his
Majefty requir’d a full Compenlation of
all the Damages he had fuftain’d in this
War, and was refolved to have Cuftom
paid him of ail Goods exported or im-
ported.
The Portuguefes finding them fo refo-
-- lute, would fain have made a confidera-
ble Abatement in their Pretenfions *, for
which purpofe they propos’d a Deflation
of Arms, which being likewife rejected,
the Envoy return’d the Bth of June with-
out cffeftiag any thing, with a Letter
from the Emperour, direded to the Por-
guefe General, containing in Subftance,
That be was refolved not to violate bvs Oath
with the Dutch, and that being fenftble.no
Faith ought to be given to the Portuguefes,
he intended to furfue them by Force of Arms ,
and that they might make their account ac-
cordingly \
The Portuguefes not a little exafperatcd
at fo refolute an Anfwer, march'd with
an Army of 25000 Men towards Candy.
The Emperor’s Array confifted of 29000
Men, and meeting juft near Wdianey Aug,
6, a fmart Engagement enfu’d, in which
the Portuguefes were worfted, nOO Indi-
ans and 40 Portuguefes being (lain on their
fide, with the Lofs of 700 Men on the
Emperor’s fide. The Portuguefes faved
themfelves from a total Defeat, by the
favour of the adjacent Woods.
This Vidtory occafion’d no fmall Joy at
Candy , where the Prince of Migonne and
the Prince of Ouve who had led the Van
were receiv’d with more than ordinary
refped. Soon after a Deferter came to
Candyy who gave them an account of the
whole condition of the Portuguefe Camp,
which might have been entirely ruin'd’
had the CingaUfis purfu’d their Vidory:
He told them that before the Battel, they
had not left above 300 Men at Columbo y
which had occafion’d fuch Fears and Tu-
mults in that City, that the fame might
have been eafily furpriz’d with a mode-
rate Force , and that upon the return of
the General from the Army, he had or-
der’d feveral to be hang’d upon that ac-
count.
The 29th of Aug . The Emperor de-
clar’d, that he would marry the Daugh-'
ter of the late Emprels by her firft Huf-i
band,alledging, that he had debauch’d her
before, which made moft of the Great 1
Men confent to the Match but the Prince
of Migonne oppos’d the fame, telling the
Emperor with a great deal of Freedom,
That to commit Incefi was direftly contrary
to the II or d of God , and that for that re a-
fon ke could never approve of ft, hut was ob-
liged to put his Imperial Majefty in mind of
his Salvation . Thefe Words having
drawn Tears from the Emperors Eyes,
he promifed to lay afide all Thoughts of
that nature for the future, and to con-
verfe with her no otherwife than a Fa-
ther might do with his Daughter.
The s th of Oftob. thofe of Candy de-
feated a Convoy of poo PortuguefeSy that
were marching with Provifions and Am-
munition to Candy , but had not the fame
Succefs in another Enterprize \ for hav-
ing laid an Ambufh of 500 Men, to in-
tercept the Portuguefe GeneraL as he was
coming from Columbo to Walaney the 7
Portuguefes having got Intelligence there- ?
of, fent a jftronger Body, which
ded them, and cut them all to pieces, d
except two CtngalefeSy who hid them-
felves among the Dead, till the Night
gave them an Opportunity to make their
Efcape.
Towards the end of the Year 1614.
the Inhabitants of Baucalo having mur-
Aubeata.
The Enft,
ror muli
have mu-
rid hit
Daughter-
in-law.
r k Por*
uguefes
Hrpriq
;oo OR"
lincftf*


der’d the Ambafladors of the King of
Palugamw pon the Road, a furious War
enfu’d bttwixt them, in which the laft
worfled (with the alliftance of the Prince
of Ouve) the King of Batecalo , who was
himfelf trcacheroufly murdered, and his
Kingdom bellowed upon the King of Pa -
lugam.
CHAP. XVII.
Mr. Bofchhouwer fent as an Ambaffador to the United Provinces, enters into
an Engagement with the Crown of Denmark, dies in his Return to the Indies.
GuleGedde the Daniƒh Commodore arrives Ceylon, returns without effect-
ing any thing. The Portuguefes erect divers Fortifications by Fraud, The Em-
peror's Enterprize upon Columbo. The Portugueƒes beaten.
Bofchhou-
wer fent
Ambajja-
* or>
Comw to
amam.
M Arc ell us de Bofcbbouwer, who had
(as we have underftood) attained
tothehigheft Dignities in the Empire of
Ceylon, being defirous to make himfelf
known by fome great Enterprize, obtain-
ed leave from the Emperor 1 6 15. to go
to Mafulipatam , to follicite the fo long
promis’d Succours againft the Portuguefes,
with full Power to enter into Alliances
with all fuch Kings, Princes and States
as he thought might contribute any thing
towards clearing his Majefty’s Dominions
from the Portuguefes.
Having tor this purpole obtain d di-
vers Letters and Credentials, wherein
his Majefty promis’d to ratify every thing
the faid Mr. Bofcbbouwer (hould treat of,
with any Prince upon that Subjeft \ he
fet out in Quality of Ambaffiador and
Plenipotentiary fromCeylon, the 9th of May
1615. and arrived Jun.i. at Mafulip at am,
where at that time one Hans van Hafe,
Director and Vifitor General of the In-
dies, commanded in chief, who went a-
long with Marcellus de Bofcbbouwer to
Bantam, in order to concert meafures
with Gerard Reynfl , the Dutch General
there, concerning the intended Succours
againft the Portuguefes.
But the faid General being dead fome-
time before, and the War carried on
at that time by the Dutch Company in the
Aiolucque Blands and thofe of Banda , as
alfo againft Poulo Ay, hindring the Dutch at
that Jundture from fending the promis’d
Succours to the Emperor of Ceylon (it be-
ing abfolutely requifite tofecurc the Mo-
lucques,before they cou’d think of any New
Conquefts) it was refolved by the Coun-
cil of Bantam to permit Mr. Bofcbbouwer
(at his earneft requeft) to go to Holland ,
in order to reprefent the true State of
matters in the Empire of Ceylon to their
High and Mightineffes the States-Gene-
ral, his Highnefs the Prince of, Orange,
and the Dirdtors of the Eafi-lndia Com-
pany. Vol. HI.
But upon his Arrival in Holland , he
found things not in any wife to anfwer 11
his Expectation: for in regard of his 1
Quality and high Station in Ceylon , pre-
tending to much more Refpedtand Ho-
nour than the Company was willing to
grant him m , this occafion’d fuch Contefts
among them, that he refolved (notwith-
ftanding his Allegiance due to the States)
to go into Denmark, where he arriv’d
June 16. O. S. 1617. and not long after
entr’d into an Engagement with the Danes 1
at Copenhagen, which was ratify’d by their *
King ChrijUan IV. 1618. March 30. Ac- 1
cordingly he fet fail from Denmark with
his Lady (who challenged the Title of *:
Princefs of Migonne ) and a Retinue of *
fome Servants and Soldiers, but died be-
fore he came to the end of his Voyage, 1
after which moil of the Soldiers defer-
red on the Coaft of Coromandel (where
his Lady died alfo afterwards) where by
tho all his Defigns vaniffied into Smoke,
yet will it perhaps not be beyond our
purpofe, to give a more clrcumftantial
account of this unfortunate Voyage.
Mr. Bofcbbouwer having (as we told *
you) obtain’d a Man of War and a 1
Yacht from the King of Denmark, on \
account of the Emperour of Ceylon, and
the Danijh Eafl-lndia Company (lately
erefted) having join’d five Ships with
them, under Gule Gedde a Danifh Noble-
man, they fet Sail out of the Sound, and
after many Tempefts and other Difficul-
ties, having pafs’d the Englifh Channel,
they did not arrive it \ Ceylon till twenty
two Months after, viz. 1610. not with-
out the Lofs of a confiderable Number
of their Men (among whom was Mr.
Bofcbbouwer himfelf) that perilled for
want of Provifions, and the Fatigues of
fo tedious a Voyage.
— J -» • • «
Some of thefe Ships arriving in the
Harbour of Batecalo , others at Coutjare ,
Gule Gedde gave notice of his Arrival,
And thence
into Hoi*
land. ‘
Engages
with the
Danes.
Sets Sail
/orCeylon.
Dies.
A pwtku~
l fi
The Danes
arrive in
Ceylon#


TJp Empe-
ror rejefts
their Offer,
The Danifh
Commodore
fetxes
Bofch-
houwerr
Effetls,
Returns to -
Denmark. <
and of the Occafion thereof, as alfo of
the Death of Bofchhouwer+ to the Em-
peror, who no fooner underftood his
Death, and that the Danes preten-
ded to put the Equipment of this Squa-
dron to his account, but he appeared
much furpriz’d thereat, declaring that
he had given no Authority to Bofch-
houwer to enter into fuch an En-
gagement } fo that the Danes had no-
thing but bare Words, in recompence
of the vaft Charge they had been at upon
this account.
The Danifb Commodore Cule Gcdde,
finding himfelf thus difappointed in all
his hopes, apply’d all his Thoughts, how
to reimburfe the King his Mailer part of
the Charge he had been at in the Equip,
ment of this Squadron ; for which rea-
i fon he faz'd upon all Bofchhoumr’i Effedls
f aboard his Veflels, alter having taken
care of his Burial, which was perform’d
with little Pomp ; but that of his Son of
three Years of Age (who being born at
Copenhagen, was Godfon of K.
IV. and died likewife in this Voyage)
was done with more Solemnity. The
feizing of Bofchhouwer' s Effects being per-
form'd in the Harbour of
by Gale Gedde, he fent his Widow at
her requelt to Candy, ftript of every
thing, except what Ihe had laved pri-
vately by the adillance of fomc Friends,
from whence after a flay of feven Years,
Ihe was by the Emperor (at the
requell of General Roland Crape) fent
with fome Servants to Tranquebare.
After the Departure of BofMmmr’s
Widow for Candy, the Commodore
Gedde fet Sail with part of his Squadron
Irora Coutjare ,in order to join the reft
of his Ships at Batecalo, and to follicite
once more Satisfaction from the Emperor;
but in the mean while, one of his Ships
that was left at Trinqu being fei-
zed upon by the Ships Crew, and after-
wards fplic upon the Rocks, the Seamen
and Soldiers got with their Boats to the
Goad of Coromandel, where fbme of them
took Service among the Portuguefes at St.
7 homas, the rell among the Dutch at Pa-
llacatte. Cule Gedde having but fmall
hopes of Succefs,, and fearing that fome
of the other Ships might follow their
Example, thought fit to weigh Anchor
and take his next courfe for Denmark,
The Portuguefes being infinitely glad
at the Departure of thefe unwelcome
Gueds out of Ceylon, now bent all their
Thoughts how to exclude all other Nati-
ons from the Trafllck of that Country;
Toencompafs which, they judged it the
mod proper means to ered a Fort near
that Harbour, the Place whereof (after
a narrow View taken of the Ground
and various Debates) was pitch’d upon
at the North-Wed Point of the Bay, up-
on a Neck of Land jetting out into the
Sea, on the back-ilde of the Pagode of
Trinquenemale, the Walls whereof would
be of conliderable Advantage to them.
Accordingly the faid Fort being begun
1522. was carried on with all imaginable
Vigour, to bring it to perfedion, before
the Emperor of Candy (with whom they
were at Peace then) could have any no-
tice of it. For no fooner was that Prince
advertis’d of this treacherous Defign
but he preceded againll it, and fent a
conliderable Force to demolifir it; but
being repuls’d by the Portuguefes, thefe
continu’d the Fortifications, being an ir-
regular Triangular Fortrefs, which they
furnilh’d with great Cannon taken out of
the Sea, belonging formerly to the Da-
nifh Ship that was cad away near that
Place.
, Whild the Portuguefes were embroil’d
with the Cingalefes upon that account, a
certain Radyc of the AJalab.trs entred the
Kingdom of Jafnapatnam with a confide-
rable Force, in hopes to recover the fame
from the Portuguefes, who had lately con-
quer’d the fame r But Philippa d’ Olivere
their General, an old experienc’d Cap-
tain, receiv’d them fo bravely, that few
of them return’d into their Native Coun-
try.
The Portuguefes having thus once more
nd their Hands of their Enemies, yet
not thinking themfelvesfecure,unlefs > they
ftrengthen’d their Conquelts by fome ad-
ditional Fortifications, order’d certain
new Works to be made, which after-
wards were chang’d into a Royal Fortrefs
with four Baftions. The Foundation
whereof was laid 1624, but not brought
to perfe&ion till the Year 1612 bein?
lin’d with white Stone.
But to eflablifh themfelves the better
in this Ifland, they concluded a Peace (by
the Mediation of certain Clergymen)
with the Emperor, who was willing to
embrace it, till he could find a more con-
venient Opportunity of revenging him-
felf for the many Affronts they had put
upon him ; one of the main Conditions of
this Peace was, that the Portuguefes fhould
not build any other Forts or Fortifications
many Place of the Empire, but might
remain in poffeflian of wiiat they had at
prefen t.
this Agreement,
which was fo advantageous to the Porta-
The Por-
euguefes
ere cl a
new Fort,
Rout the
MaUbars.
Build tm
more Forts
Feacewith
theEmpe*
rcr *


Contrl-
vance of
the Portu-
guefes.
ealcfcs \rt
,'puifd.
The Empe-
ror engages
with the
Cingalefes
at Col um-
bo.
guefes, finding that the European Nations
had ft ill a free accefs into the Kingdom
of Candy by the River Palliagamme (o-
therwife call’d Batecalo) they were con T
triving all poffible means to fecure that
Paflage to themfelves.
To accomplilh their end with all ima-
ginable Secrecy, they pitch’d upon a
Mi pice, an experienc’d Engineer, who
being of a dark Colour, was fent in the
difguife of a Gufuratte Jogy, or Mendicant
Frier, from Columbo to Batecalo, who
fettled hirafelf in the Village of Saman-
ture *, from whence having taken a full
view of all the circumjacent Country for
two years together, he pitch’d upon a
fandy Place about 2 4. Leagues from the
Village, for the ere&ing of thedefigned
Fort j but finding upon ftrift enquiry,
that the Channel leading that way from
the Mouth of the River, was the greateft
part of the Year chok’d up with Sand,
and that confequently there would be no
conveniency of getting frelh Water there,
he was forc’d to go about 6 Leagues lower
down the River, where meeting with a
fmall Ifle of a League in circuit, and not
above a Mile diftant from the main Chan-
nel, convey’d thither direftly from the
Mouth of the River, he returned to
Columbo and having given a full account
to the Government there of the advan-
tageous Situation of this Ifle for their in-
tended Project, the Pcrtuguefes fent
him back in 1627. with 13 Companies of
Soldiers, in order to put it in execution.
Thefe, at their arrival, having iecured
themfelves by throwing up iome In-
trenchments inclos’d with PaUfadoes,
to wof k they went with ail expedition to
perfect the intended Fortrefs, which was
of a Quinquangular Figure, with three
Baflions. :
The King of Candy had no fooner intelli-
gence thereof, but he Tent a good Body of
Troops thither to prevent their Defign :
They made fhift to land in the llland, but
were forc’d to retreat without effefting
any thing, and leave the Portuguefes to
per fed their Fortifications, which they
did foon after, being well provided with
all forts of Materials for fuch a Pur-
pofe.
The Emperor finding himfelf thus by
no lefs than feven Capital Forts, built on
all the beft Avenues of the Iflc, reduc’d
to fuch Straits by the Portuguefes , that
without their Confent he was not in a
condition to keep the Icafl; Gorrefpondcncc
with any foreign Nation, refolved to try
his utmoft to draw thefe Thorns out of
his Flefh. For this purpofe he thought fit
to cry the Inclinations of the Cingalefes
inhabiting at Columbo ; and finding them
ready to revolt by reafon of the many
Indignities received from the Portuguefes ,
He engaged them to his Party. Things
being thus fettled, the only thing remain-
ing was how to entice their General Con-
f amine de Saax o take the Field, by which
means they might find an opportunity of
going over to the Emperor. Knowing
therefore that Don Aiichael dc Noronha v
Conde de Linharos , the then Viceroy of
Goa , had lately wrote an affronting Letter
to thefaid General, wherein he told him,
that he was more fit for a Merchant than
a Soldier, and that he regarded more his
own Profit than the King’s Glory, and
his Conqueff \ they infinuated into him,
that Trace both' his Expeditions againfu
Candy had prov’d unfuccefsful, it would
notbeamifs (to retrieve his Honour) to,
try his Fortune againftOim, promifing
to appear in the Field with all their Pow r-
er, which they did accordingly.
Confiantin de Saa the Portugucfe Gene-
ral was fo highly pleas’d at this Propoln
tion, that he not only gladly embraced
it, but alfo fent a Challenge to Comarre
Singe Hafiamte , Prince of Ouve , eldelt
Son of the Emper.or Zenerat
who font him word, that he would ex-
pedt his coming like a Man of Honour.
Accordingly the Portugucfe General took 1
the Field the 10th of with 1300 S
of his own Countrymen, 1700 }
and Bcoo Cingalefcs , and the Prince of
Ouve being join’d by his two Brothers,
Vyfiapalla and Raja Singa , made up ah
Army of 23000 rrien, who (according
to the Advice of the Emperor their Fa-
ther) kept at a diftance, feeming to a-
void an Engagement. The Portuguefes
being much furprized at their being fuf-
fer’d to pafsthe Mountains of Ouve with-
out the Icaft: Oppofition, march’d di-
redly to Badulc the Capital City of
that Dukedom, which they took and
plunder’d with all the circumjacent Coun-
try, and fo Retired again towards the
Mountains, the Princes being all the
while Spectators of their Ravages, with
a refolution to watch their opportunity of
taking a fevere Revenge, fo foon as the
Cingalefes (according to theirPromife)
1 fliould defert the Portuguefes .
i Thefe things were not fo fecretly car-
: ried on, but that Conftaniin de Saa got
i forae feent of the matter. This made
; him fummon before him all their chief
r Officers, unto whom he reprefented the
f Reafons of his Sufpicion, but in very ob-
£ liging Terras, thinking it his tefl: way
The Form
guefes
tak? the
FlelcL
Plunder
Baduk.'


Are at-
tacked in
iheir .
March.
*Andmt -
ed.
to c diffemble, yet to ufe all imaginable
Precautions againft them. They pofitivc-
ly denying what was alledgcd againft
them, he continu’d his March till Night,
when finding the Enemy to keep clofer to
him than they us’d to do, and being con-
firmed in his former Sufpicion by frefh
Intelligence, he order’d the Cingalefes
(contrary to what they us’d to do) to
pitch their Tents in the Center of the
Camp, and the next morning with break
of day for the whole Army to fet fire to
all their Baggage ( except wearing Ap-
parel) the better to further their March.
They had fcarce marched a few hours,
when the Princes coming up pretty clofe
with the Portuguefe Army, the 8000 Cm-
galefes joined with their Countrymen,
and with their joint Forces attack’d them
in the Flank at the Dcfcent of a Moun-
tain, firing upon them very furioufly
thro an adjacent Wood, whereabouts a
great number of the Portuguefes were
flain, the Cingalefes falling in Pell mcll
among them with their Scymetcrs and
Pikes, efpccially after a fudden Storm had
rend red the Portuguefes Firelocks almoft
ufelefs, without which they might pro-
bably have made a tolerable good Retreat.
Conflantin de Saa their General had his
Head cut off by one of the rebellious Cin~
galefes, which he prefented to RajaSinga
upon a Drum, whilft he was wafting him-
felf in a neighbouring Brook. To con-
fefs the Truth, de Saa deferv’d a much
better Treatment, both in refpedof his
Valour, and the many good Offices he had
done to the fame Cingalefes at Columbo,
who now fobafdy betray'd him and his
whole Army.
It is not eafy to be imagin’d what a con-
fternation this general Defeat occafion’d
among the Portuguefes in the Kle of Ceylon ,
and efpccially at Columbo, for the detence
whereof there were fcarce any Troops
left behind, except a few of the moft
antient among the Inhabitants. This en-
couraged the Emperor to fend his young-
eft Son Mahaflanne (afterwards named
Raja Singa ) to form the Siege of that
Place, which he did accordingly; but
was fo bravely received by Lancerotte de
Se/ies their Governour, that after a whole
Month’s Siege, he was forced to retreat
without effe&ing any thing. The Be-
fieged being afterwards reinforced from
Goa with 400 men (among whom were
300 Coffers) with a confiderable quantity
of Provifions, Ammunition, and other
NecdTaries, began to hold up their heads
again, and bid defiance to the Cingalefes.
Columbo
hefieged bj
the Cingj.
Ides.
CHAP. XVIII.
The Emperor dies. Inteftine Divifions betwixt his two Sons. The Portuguefes
at War with the new Emperor ; make Peace with him. The Hollanders invit-
ed by his Majesty's Letter to the Governour of Paliacatta, to come into the Iƒle
of Ceylon.
Tly old
Emperor
dles.
The young -
eft Son
jefes upon
Title
SOON after, viz, 1532. the old Em-
peror happening to die, left the Em-
pire betwixt his three Sons, viz. Ouve to
Commarra Singa Haflanne his eldeft Son,
Matele to Vtfict Falla Haflanne his fecond,
and Candy to Adahaflanne the youngeft,
who befides this a Turn’d the Imperial
Title under the Name of Raja Singa
Adafcyn, to the no fmall diffatisra&ion of
his eldeft Brother Commarra SingaHaflan-
ne, whom he knew fo well how to a mule
under different Pretcnfions, that the
matter remained undecided as long as he
lived*, and immediately after his Death
feized upon the Province of Ouve , which
rifla Falla the fecond Brother (who claim-
ed one half for his Share) took fo hei-
noufly, that Matters came betwixt them
to an open Rupture.
The Portuguefes having by this time rc-
ceived divers Supplies from Goa , and
pretty well recover’d of their late Dif-
grace, refolved to improve this Oppor-
tunity to their advantage. For which
purpofe entring the Low-Lands, they for-
ced moft of the Princes there to fide with
them, but durft not venture to attempt
the Paflage of the Mountains. They
pitch’d ; their Tents therefore near Allago,
as the moft proper Place to keep the adja-
cent Country in awe : But Raja Singa the
new Emperor furpriz’d them in their
Camp, and forc’d them to retreat with
all hafte to Columbo.
The Portuguefes now finding thera-
felves unable to cope with the Emperor,
thought it requifite to come to an agree-
ment ; for which purpofe having Tent their
Envoys to Candy, a Peace was concluded
accordingly, but Toon broken again on
Thc Porttf-
guefes be-
gin a War
againft the
Emienr.
Arc hater..
Mak?
Fence-


The Dutch
invited in-
to Ceylon
by the Em*
per of s
Utter*
the Portuguefe fide, who let flip no op-
portunity to, improve their, advantage,
notwithftanding the faid Peace.
Raja Singa being thus fully convinc’d,
that no firm Peace was likely to be fettl’d
with the Portuguefes in Ceylon , difiembled
his Refentment, but in the mean time
refolved to invite the Hollanders to force
thein out the and accordingly
fent the following Letter dated Sept. 9.
\6s6. to the Governour of Paliacatta.
44 I Raja Singa , Emperor of the Ille of
44 Ceylon * King of Candy , Settcvaca 7
44 Banbadany , jinor ay afore , Jafnapat-
-44 nam 7 Prince of Ouve, Mature , Di-
-44 navaca , Quatrecorle \ Great Duke of
44 Settecorle , Mat alt e \ Earl of Cat a-
-44 jar , Trinquenemaky Batecalo , Vale-
-44 febuitena , Dumbra , Panoa 7 Patoveta 7
44 Putelaon , V'affare, Gale , Billigaon *
44 Marquefs of Duramira , Ratenura ,
44 Tinipane , Axcepaon 7 Lord of the
44 Ports of Alicaon , Caleture , Colum~
44 bo, Negombo, Chilao, Madampe,
44 Calpentyn 7 Ariputure, M anaar, and
44 of thePearl-Filhery.
44 I don’t queflion but that
44 Jl Fame has already made known to
44 you the good Succefs of our Arms a-
-44 gainft the Portuguefes, yet did judg it
44 abfolutely requifite to give a more par-
-44 ticular account thereof to the Gover-
-44 nour off the Fortrefs of Paliacatta .
44 Firft of all the Emperor did regain
44 from the Portuguefes the two Fortrelfes
4C of Walane and Forago, as likewife the
44 City of Mama Goma , with 500 Portu-
-44 guefe Inhabitants, and a good number
44 of Monks of divers Orders. Don Nuno
44 Alvares Perere being then their Gene-
-44 ral, thought thereupon fit to make
44 Peace in order to recover the Prifon-
-44 ers taken by the Emperor’s Forces. A-
-44 bout eleven Years after the Conclufion
44 of the faid Peace ConUantine dp Saa
44 being made their General, did trea-
t 4 cheroufly furprize Jafnapatnam, and
44 built the Forts of Batecalo and Trinque-
-44 nemale, giving no other reafon for their
44 fo doing to the Emperor, than that
44 having certain Intelligence, that fome
44 of their European Enemies were com-
-44 ing to fettle there, they were forc’d
44 to ereft thefe Fortifications for their
44 own defence. About a year after the
44 Frier they had left their Hoftage at
44 Candy, being releas’d by the Emperor
44 (according to his Parole) they made a
4t powerful Irruption into the Empire:
u and after their Retreat the Emperor
44 happening to die, I had fcarce afeended
4C the Throne, but within eleven Months
44 after they made another Incurfion *, but
44 encountring them near Arpibatana , we
ct forced them to retreat with confide-
-44 rable Lofs. Seven Months after they
u invaded the Dukedom of Ouve , where
44 we routed them in a fmart Engage-
-44 raent* and the rebellious Natives hav-
-44 ing deferred them, and joined with us
44 (according to their Duty) compleated
44 our Vidory : Their General, a Major
44 General, and the Governour of Dina-
-44 vaca , being (lain upon the fpot, with
a 400 Soldiers * and their Colonel of the
44 Artillery, their Governour of the fe-
-44 ven Cories, and Matura , with 300 Sol-
-44 diers,many Captains and Enfigns, taken
44 Prifoners. Since that time we took
44 the Fort of Mantea Ravane with 100
44 Portuguefe Soldiers with their Captains*
44 and another Fort in Sofragaen 1 with
44 three Companies, befides that two o-
-44 ther Fortifications of theirs were de-
-4c molifhed. It was much about the fame
tC time that I kept the City of Columbo
t 4 invefted for 30 days * but finding my
44 felf ill, I returned to Candy, leaving the
44 Command of my Forces to Mara Tana
44 Wandaar , who within 15 days after
44 my departure retreating thence, there-
-44 by gave an opportunity to the Enemy
44 to protraft the War for a Year and
44 half, and afterwards deferred in Per-
-44 fon to the Enemy. I did alfo fall into
44 the Enemies Dominions, and having
44 entrench’d my felf near Ganetena in the
44 four Corks , I did confiderable Mifchief,
44 fo that the new Governour of Columbo
44 Diego de Melo de CaHro (formerly Go-
-44 vernour of St. Thomas) fent thither
44 from Goa , was forc’d to fue for Peace,
ct which I granted to prevent the Mife-
t4 ries and Calamities of a long War 5
44 the faid General having fworn by the
44 Name of his God, and in his King’s
44 dead, to deliver up the Forts of TW»-
u quenemale and Batecalo , and to releafe
u all Prifoners onbothfides. Thirteen
u Months after the conclufion of this
44 Peace, the Governour of Batecalo did
44 fide with certain Rebels, in order to
44 alfalfinate one of my Governours, aid-
-44 ing and affifting them alfo in robbing a
44 Bark belonging to me, and commit-
-44 ting divers treacherous A&s in many
44 Parts, as well of our own Kingdoms,
44 as thofe of other Indian Princes \ there-
-44 fore I have taken a refolution to rid my
44 hands of thefe Enemies, and to declare
44 my felf a Brother in War with the
44 King of th e Hollanders, as long as the


44 Sun and Moon fhall rejoice us with their
44 Light, and the Viceroy of Jacatra ,
44 and the Governor of Paliacatta (hall
44 be willing toafliftme, in hopes that
44 this Confederacy with the Dutch Na-
-44 tion will anfwer my good Intentions
44 and Sentiments of them. 1 the King
44 let theGovernour of Paliacatta know,
44 that, during the feven years lince ray
44 Acceffion to the Throne, I have made
44 the beft enquiry I could, who was the
44 moft Potent King in Europe, in order
44 to oppofe the Defigns of the Portu-
-44 guefes: And being at laft inform’d that
44 the King of the Hollanders was not
44 only a Scourge to their King, but alfo
44 fupported by the Strength and Power
44 of feveral other Kings his Confede-
-4C rates, 1 took a firm Refolution ( re-
-44 lying upon the Fidelity of the Gover-
-4< nor of Paliacatta ) to declare my felf
44 a Brother in War to the King of the
u Hollanders as long as Sun and Moon
44 fhall continue in the Firmament. ’Tis
44 true, fome Treaties of this kind have
44 been made formerly betwixt my Pre-
-44 decefibrs and the Viceroy of Jacatra ,
44 and the Governor of Paliacatta j but
44 thefe having prov’d ineffectual, it
44 feems as if it had pleafed God to bring
CL the fame Perfection under my Reign,
44 in hopes that the Governor of Palia-
u catta will with all poflible care fecond
44 our Endeavours, whereof we give
44 him Affurances upon our Royal Word,
44 that they lhall be at liberty to ereCt a
44 Fortrefs cither at Cotiar or Batecalo ,
44 for which purpofe they may employ a
44 Squadron of five Ships (a Force fuf-
-44 fident to ballance the prefent Strength
“ of the Enemy) who may befecureofout
ct Affiftance, either by my felf in Perfon
Cc or by my Brother. All the Cannon or
Booty taken by them ftiall be at their
44 own difpofal, and they lhall be provi-
-44 ded with all forts of Materials requi-
-44 fite for the building of a Fort either
44 at Batecalo or Cotiar. I further engage
44 my felf by my Royal Word, to repay
44 the Governor all the Charges he fhall
14 be at in equipping the Laid Squadron
44 to be fent to my Affiftance, to which
44 of the before-mentioned Harbors you
44 pleafe. If the Governor approves of
44 thefe Propofitions, let him fend a Veflel
44 to Trinquenemale or Cotiar , in order to
44 tranfport my Ambaffadors with fafety
44 to him, whom I would have reft fe-
-44 cure, that in cafe he can bring this
44 bufinefs to Perfection, he lhall be well
44 rewarded for his Service according to
44 his Dignity and Merits: But if it be
44 beyond his power, let him difpatch
44 this Meflenger with all fpeed to the
44 Viceroy of Jacatra.
Dated the sth
of Sept, 1636.
Raja Singa,
Imperador.
A certain Brahman being difpatch’d
with this Letter, the fame liv’d for fix
months undifeover’d among the Pom*
guefes at Jafnapatnam , before he could
meet with a conveniency to be tranf-
ported to the Coaft of Coromandel , from
whence he purfued his Journy by Land to
Paliacatta , where he delivered Raja Singa y %
Letter to the then Governor Charles
Reyniers ,
CHAP. XIX.
A Treaty, and Letter in return of that of the Emperor's. The Dutch Deputies
in Ceylon are honourably receiv'd. Their Transactions, and Return with the
the Emperor's Ambaffadors. The Portuguefes endeavour to render the Dutch
ƒuƒpected. The Emperor's Anƒwer to the Dutch Admiral.
Refolution
theCoun-
dl of the
Indies.
Charles Reyniers the Governor of Pa~
liacatta ( afterwards General of the
Indies ) had no fooner receiv’d this Let-
ter, but he fent the fame to Batavia to the
General and Great Council of the Indies,
who after mature deliberation refolv’d
to fend a Perfon fitly qualified for fuch a
Truft aboard the Falcon Yacht in order to
enter into a ftri& Amity and Commerce
with the Emperor, and to procure a con-
fidence Cargo of Cinnamon j whereof
immediate notice Was alfo to be given
to the Dutch Fleet before Goa ,
It is to be obferv’d, that foraetimc
before this Letter was brought to Bata*
via, the General Anthony van Diemen, and
the Council of the Indies, had already
taken the Affairs of Ceylon into their Con-
fideration, having order’d the beforc-
faid Mr. Reyniers to make all poflible En-
quiry, whether it were not feafible to
get forae fhare as well as the Portuguefes


Dutch En-
vy s fent to
Ceylon.
Hm Ah -
tUEmpe -
nr,
in the Cinnamon Trade. One John Thijf-
fen a Mafter of a Vefiel (afterwards Go-
vernour of Malacca , and now a Member
of the Council of the Indies ) who had
bin a Prifoner in Ceylon , having alfo late-
ly given the faid Council an exad account
of the Condition of the Ifle, it was re-
folv’d to fend him forthwith with
three Yachts, the Falcon , the F'oorburgh ,
and the Lejfer Hollandia, and the Ruttem
Frigot, to the Coaft of Coromandel } where
coming to an Anchor before Paliacatta
the laft day of Auguft, and their Com-
miffions being open’d, he was, in con-
junction with the Fadtor Andrew Helmont ,
conftituted Envoy to the Emperor of
Ceylon.
Accordingly the 21 fl of Oftober they
took their way towards Tegmpatnam ,
where having furnifh’d therafelves with
two Negroes (acquainted with that
Country) they fet fail for Ceylon , where
they arriv’d within five or fix days after,
and call Anchor near the Village of Cal-
tnony or Calarme , about feven Leagues
from the Cabo de Fradres , i. e. the Monks
Cape. They fent immediately one of
the two before-mentioned Negroes a-
(hore, to get intelligence what part of the
Country they were in} which being done
by a certain Signal (a Fire made upon
an adjacent Hill) they fent him after his
return, in Company of the other Negro,
with a Letter of Recommendation from
the Faftor Chrimma to the Emperor of
Ceylon , under proraife that they were to
return in 16 days, which they did ac-
cordingly, bringing along with them not
only certain Hoftagcs, and among them
a certain Hollander , who living at the
Emperor’s Court, was willing to accom-
pany them, and gave them very good In-
telligence, but alfo the Lord High-Trea-
furer of his Majefty, and John Alberts
another Dutch-man, a Native of Embden
(who having deferred from Mr. Anthony
Caens Ship, had fince ferv’d the Empe-
ror in the quality of a Court-Martial)
in order to conduft our Envoys to the Im-
perial Court.
Accordingly they fet out .on their
Journy from the Village of Samanture ,
and in four days arriv’d at Pangergame in
the Country of where they were
introduc’d the fame night by the Light
of Torches into the Emperor’s Prefence,
who then kept his Refidence at one of
his Pleafurohoufes on the other fide of the
River Mavilgange , Their Reception was
very magnificent, as will appear anon by
the Entertainment given to Mr. Gerard
Hulft, whereof we fhall have occafion to
give a move ample Defcription. Tile
Credential Letters written by the Go-
vernour of Paliacatta , and deliver’d by
the Envoys to his Imperial Majefty, were
as follows.
To the molt Potent Emperor
Sing a, &c.
At oft Potent Emperor!
“ C,OD protedt your Imperial Ma-
“ jefty ! Your Majefty isnotigao-'
“ rant of the long and tedious Wars we
“ have for fo many years laft pall carried
“ on ( by the Bleffing of God ) with good
“ fuccefs both in Europe and the Indies
“ againft the King of Spain and Portugal ,
“ and how at this time we keep , their
“ chief City in the Indies , block’d up
“ with fo numerous a Squadron of Men
“ of War, that they are not in a Con-
“ dition to relieve any of their Subjedh
“ from thence. We have underftood by
“ your Majefty’s Letter the many Out,
“ rages, Infolencies, Treafons and Wars
“ carried on by the Portuguejes againft
“ y°ur Majefty fince their Settlement in
“ your Territories, contrary to the En-
“ gagements. Treaties and Confedera-
“ cies made betwixt you and them ; all
“ which they have treacheroufly broken,
“ in order to make themfelvesMafters of
“ your Empire, and to irapofe the moft
* miferable Slavery upon your Sub-
lets. Our General of Jacatra being
“ inform’d of thefe Defigns, and your
“ Majefty’s moft commendable Intenti-
“ °ns to free your Country from fuch
unwelcome Guefts, and to lecure your
tc Subjects againft all Violences, by fweep-
“ ing out the very Remnants of the
“ Portuguefes: The General, I fay, be-
“ ing extremely rejoic’d at this Refolu-
‘‘ Uon, a nd more efpecially that your
“ Majefty defired our Affiftance, did give
immediate Orders for the difpatching
tc of thefe Envoys, to treat with your
“ Majefty, and to declare to you the
“ fincerity of our Intentions towards
“ your Majefty and your Subjefts, in
“ the fame manner as the Effedts thereof
“ have been fuffidently approv’d by ma-
ny of your Neighbouring Princes and
Nations. If your Majefty will be
u pleafed to allow us the Exportation of
cc fome Cinnamon, we oblige our felves
u to affift your Majefty with Mulquets,
“ Powder, Ammunition, and other Arms;
u lb that in cafe you will order two or
“ more Ships Cargo’s of Cinnamon to be
“ got ready for our ufe againft May
Letterfroni
the Gover-
nor of Pa-
liacatca to
the Empe-
ror of Cey-
lon.


TrunfaUi -
ons of the
Envoys,
44 next, wc either will pay ready Mony
44 for it, or exchange the fame for Am-
-44 munition or other Merchandizes, as
44 your Majefty fhall think fit. So foon
44 as our Envoys are affur’d of your Ma-
-4t jefty’s Refolutions upon this Head, and
44 of your Intentions to enter into a fur-
u ther Treaty with us, they fhall (ac-
-44 cording to orders) fet fail immediate-
-4t ly to our Fleet before to confer
44 with the Admiral how foon and how
44 many Ships may be detach’d out of his
“ Fleet, either for the Tranfportation
44 of the Cinnamon, or your Majefty’s
44 Aid, according to the prefent Exigency
44 of Affairs. We defire therefore your
44 Majefty to give thefe Envoys, fent with
44 a moft fmcere Intention to your Ma-
-44 jefty, a futable Reception, and a fa-
-44 vourable Audience *, and afterwards
44 to difpatch them with all convenient
cc fpeed, to further their arrival at our
cc Fleet before Goa , before the Mouffon
44 be paffed, which otherwife might
44 prove no final] Obftacle to our Defign.
44 We acknowledg we ought to have prc-
tc fented your Majefty with fome Foreign
44 Rarities (according to Cuftom) but
44 being ignorant of the Condition of
44 your Country, and in no fmall fear
44 that thefe Envoys might perhaps be de-
-44 tain’d by the Portuguefes , we hope your
44 Majefty will excufe the fame for this
44 time. We pray, moft Potent Empe-
-44 ror, that God may grant your Majefty
44 Health, Profperity, and Vidory over
44 your Enemies.
Dated in the Fore Subfcribed,
Geldria y the loth
oioftob, 1637. Your Majefty’s moft
devoted Servant,
Charles Reyniers.
The Emperor, whilft the Envoys were
making their Propofitions, flood with the
Crown on his Head, and a Scymeter in
his Hand, his Head, Arms and Legs a-
dorn’d with Jewels, Rings and Chains of
Gold. He enquired after the State of
Affairs in Holland , the Health of the
Prince of Orange , and whether the Envoys
had a full Power to treat with him \ unto
which they anfwer’d, No, but that the
Admiral of the Dutch Squadron before
Goa had : So they were conduced to the
Apartments prepar’d for their Recepti-
on, to reft themfelves after fo fatiguing
a Journy.
The next day being again admitted in-
to the Emperor’s Prefence, he ask’d them
feveral Matters concerning the prefent
ftate of Affairs in Europe: The Portuguefes
having made it their bufmefs to reprefent
the Dutch as an inconfiderable Mob , and
the Emperor neverthelefs having by the
great Naval Strength that appear’d of
late years in the Eaf-Indies conceived a
quite different opinion of their Strength
than what had been whifper’d about by
the Portuguefes , was very glad to find
the Truth to prove agreeable to his for-
mer Sentiments concerning the Power of
a Nation, with whom he was going to
enter into a ftrid Confederacy againft the
Portuguefes . The next following day they
began to enter upon a Treaty about the
Cinnamon, and the Fort of Batecalo.
Whilft his Majefty held frequent Confe-
rences (twice a day for a whole Week)
with our Deputies, a Letter was fent to
the King or Prince of Mateli (the Em-
peror’s Brother) by Diego de Melo de]
Caftro , Governour of Columbo y wherein £
he complained of the intended Breach of 6
the Peace y filing the Hollanders rebellious j
Subjctfsof the King of Portugal, who had j
incur 7 d the Hatred of all the other Indian
Princes . He added, That the Emperor was
guilty of this Rupture whereof be had given
notice in a Letter to the Viceroy of Goa,
His Majefty defir’d that the faid Letter
fliould be tranflated into the Dutch y and
be deliver’d by the Envoys to the Ad-
miral before Goa •, and told them for the
reft, that he was too well acquainted with
their ways, to give Ear to thefe Calum-
nies : That he would endeavour to amufe
them with Compliments, till he could :
find an opportunity of furprizing the'
Fort of Mankeware in the Low-Countries
near the South Shore of the Ifle. He
writ alfo a Letter to the Admiral Wefi&t-
wold y and order’d three Deputies to go
along with our Envoys tb take a view of
the Fleet before Goa y and to give an ac-
count thereof to him.
The 17th of the fame Month his Ma-
jefty thought fit to difpatch the Envoys:
Palanhyns or Litters were order’d for
their Journy, with fome Elephants for
their Baggage, and a Convoy of 20 Laf~
caryns , under the Command of a Colonel
to conduft them, with orders to defray
their Charges in all places through which
they pa(fed. It was further remarkable,
that whilft the Governour of Paliacatta?s
Letter was deliver’d to his Majefty, and
the Envoys made their Propofitions, he
arofe from his Chair, and remain’d (land.
ing all the while, an Honour never done
to the Portuguefes, The Dutch Envoys
fet fail the 4 th of the next following
The For-
tuguefes
endeavour
to render
the Dutch
fufteftel
[
k
1
I
I The Etnp
m's Cm •
' tej) ti tie
Dutch.
p


Letter of
the Empc-
m to the
'
Month of December , with the three before-
mention’d Deputies aboard the Falcon
Yacht, and coming up the 1 9th following
with the Dutch Squadron before Goa , they
deliver’d to Adam Wefterxvold their Ad-
miral, the following Letter from his Im-
perial Majefty.
u L_l Aving fent a Letter in September
lC * -* to the Governour of Paliacatta , I
u receiv’d an Anfwer thereupon the 1 pth
“ of Novemb . 1637. but the Envoys not
u being inftruded fufficiently to treat
“ with me, but the fame being referr’d
“ by the General of Jacatra to the Admi-
tc ral of the Fleets 1 thought fit to fend
cc certain Deputies to treat with your
“ Excellency. The before-mentioned
tc Governour having made mention alfo
<c of theTranfportation of a certain quan-
u tity of Cinnamon, your Excellency if
ct you pleafe may fend five Men of War
cc to attack the Fort of Batecalo , and fome
other Veflels to other Harbours, in or-
u der to take in all the Cinnamon that
u is to be had there. lam inform’d that
“ you intend to Ray before Goa till April
tc next, and then are to return to Jacatra ,
in order to return afterwards with all
tc poflible fpeed to the Harbour of Co-
u lumbo, and from thence to detach three
u Ships to the Harbour of Batecalo , in
lc order to make themfelves Mailers of
4C that place. I will at the fame time ad-
a vance with my Forces to Columbo 3 and
Ci in cafe God be pleafed to blefs our
u Arms with Vidory againil our Ene-
cc mies, I dare affure you upon my Royal
u Word, that the City fliall be preferv’d
u for our mutual ufe, and that we will
Cc enter into a Contrad with you con-
“ cerning all the Pepper and Cinnamon
c< in the lile. It is therefore that I judg
tc it advifable to come with your whole
Cc Strength, in order to accelerate our
Cl Confederacy, which may be as dura-
cc ble &s the Sun and Moon: But if this
<c Ihould not be convenient, pray fend
w a trufty Perfon whom we may treat
tc with, there being little time to be loft,
cc fince things being already come to a
u Rupture with the Portuguefes , we (hall
tc ftand in prefent need of your Affiftance.
cc I exped the return of the three De-
cC puties with the arrival of your Fleet.
From Vintane Signed,
23 Nov . 1537.
Raja Singa.
Imperador,
Sealed with the Pummel of his Ma-
jelly’s Scymeter, printed in Red Wax.
It was diredted,
To the Lord Admiral of the Dutch Fleet
before Goa .
CHAP. XX.
Sea Engagement before Goa, betwixt the Dutch and Portuguefe Fleets.
Sea En- '
gdgement
before
Goa. •'
<
A Lift of
the Dutch
Squadron .
WHilft the Envoys were honourably
entertain’d aboard the Fleet by
Mam van Wefterxvold the Dutch Admiral,
a Sea Engagement happen’d the 4 tb of
January 1638. betwixt us and the Portu-
guefes. The Dutch Squadron was com-
pofed of the following Ships.
The Vtrecht , aboard whereof was the
Admiral Adam van Wefterxvold, Capt,Rey-
nier Wybrandz ,, Head Fadtor James Nolpe ,
carrying 42 Brafsand Iron Cannon moun-
ted, and 150 Men, among whom were
35 Soldiers, commanded by Lieutenant
Hans Maagdelyn .
The Fltjftngen , aboard of which was
the Vice-Admiral, Head Fadtor, Fifcal,
and Commiflary John van Txvift 3 Hubert
Hubertfon Captain, carrying 38 pieces of
Cannon, and 140 Men, among whom
were 20 Soldiers, commanded by a Ser-
jeant named Cornelius Bloem,
The Arms of Rotterdam Reer-Admiral,
commanded by Herman Wolters, Baak , and
John David Wolfxvinkel Chvk, carrying 38
pieces of Cannon, and 130 Men, among
whom were 20 Soldiers.
The Hague , aboard of which were
Floris van Caftel Head Fador, Minne
Williams Keert de Koe Captain, and James
van Capel under Fador, carrying 34 pieces
of Cannon, and no Men, among them
20 Soldiers.
The Harderwyk, commanded by Paul
Clafen , Peter Bruchart under Fador, car-
rying 3 6 pieces of Cannon, 115 Men,
among them 20 Soldiers.
The Fere, commanded by Ifaac Didfori
Kien , Laurence de Mwfhal under Fador,
carying 30 pieces of Cannon, and 105
Men., among them 20 Soldiers o


A Lift of
the Portu-
■ ’
The Texel , commanded by Captain
Cornelius Leendard Falk, Jooft van Wielyk 1
under Faftor, carrying 24 pieces of Can- t
non, and 77 Men, among them 12 Sol- 1
diers.
The Breda , commanded by Francis l
Thyfe , John Fox under Faftor, carrying
24 Cannon, 77 Men, and among them
12 Soldiers.
The Yacht the Little Amjlerdam , Ja- <
cot Jacobfon Struck Commander, carrying
8 Guns, and 25 Men.
The little Enchuyfen Yacht commanded
by Captain Reynier, carrying 2 Brafs and
6 Iron Guns, and 20 Men.
The Falcon Yacht, John Thy fen Captain,
Adrian Helmont Faftor, carrying 1 6 Iron
Guns, 40 Men, and among them fix Sol- ,
diers.
The Dolphin Frigat, commanded by
Peter van der Kamer , carrying 6 Iron
Guns, and 20 Men.
r The Portuguefe Squadron confifted of
• thefe following Ships.
The Bon Jefus , Don Anthonio Telles ck
MeneferAd miral, carrying 7 6 Brafs Guns,
and 400 Men, among whom were 300 ‘
Portuguefes , the reft Negroes.
The S. Sehaflian Vice-Admiral, com-
manded by Capt. Anthonio Menez.es Bou-
rette, carrying 50 Brafs Guns, 150 For-
tuguefes, and 200 Negroes.
Madre de Deos Reer-Admifal, com-
manded by Lewis Gonfalves , carrying 35
Iron and Brafs Guns, 130 Portuguefes and
120 Negroes,
The S. Bartholomew , Lewis de Cajlelbran-
co Commander, carrying 26 Iron and
Brafs Guns, 140 Portuguefes , and 160 Ne-
groes.
The S. Francis , Captain Domingo Pereira
Commander, carrying 25 Guns, 100
Portuguefes , and as many Negroes.
The S. Philipp commanded by Don Diego
de carrying 24 Guns, 100 Pom-
guefes, and 100 Negroes.
With thefe 6 Galeons, and 20 fmall
Frigats, the Portuguefes fet fail out of
the Road of Goa , Jan. 4. 1538. in
fight of the Dutch , who no fooner got
fight of them, but they weighed their
Anchors, and in form of a Crefcent
fail’d with a Land-wind and low Water
out into the Main. The Portuguefes di-
vided into two Squadrons follow’d them
with all the Sails they could make, their
ea ttcjacjment JJutch near &'oa .
708
A Defer Mon of CEYLON.


Sea En~
gagment
betwixt
Dutch***
a Portu-
a UC fe ship
with two
Dutch
‘ Ct
Admiral making up towards the Dutch
Admiral, as their Vice-Admiral (thonot
fo good a Sailor as the reft) did to the
Ships the Rotterdam , the V‘ere , and the
Falcon Yacht. In the Morning about
Nine a Clock both Fleets began to come
within Cannon-fhot, about three Leagues
from the Road of Goa, where the En-
gagement began betwixt the tWo Admi-
rals, who plentifully exchang’d their
Broad.fides for three hours fucceflively,
as did three others of the Portuguefe
Ships with the Dutch Fleet, the reft of
their Galleons not being able to come up
immediately for want of a Wind. The
Portuguefe Vice-Admiral coming at laft
up with the reft, was briskly faluted by
our Ships the Rotterdam and the V°.re,
whilft the reft of the Dutch Veflels did
what they could to advance defer to the
Enemy; and at laft having got the advan-
tage of the Sca-wind, they were for
boarding the Portuguefe Ships, having fent
the Texel and Dolphin Frigats, two Fire-
fhips, to get in among them ; but thefe
fetting it before the Wind, avoided that
danger. The Dutch Admiral Weflerwold
did his utraoft in his Ship the Vtrecht
to board the Portuguefe Admiral; which
he perceiving,retreated towards his Squa-
dron, which made the Dutch Admiral
fet it with all the fail he could make upon
their Vice-Admiral, which he did with
fuch fuccefs, that the Portuguefe was forced
to cut his Sails and Cables to get rid of
his Enemy, whilft the whole Portuguefe
Squadron ply’d the Dutch Admiral with
their Cannon, who thereby receiv’d con-
llderablc damage, efpecially in his Rig-
ging. Our Ship the V'ere would have
boarded the S. Bartholomew, but they got
clear of one another, yet not without
receiving a good Broad-fide from the
Ship the Hague ; and the Flijfmgen find-
ing the Portuguefe Admiral engag’d with
thefe two Ships, fhe laid the Bartholomew
aboard, and with the afliftance of the
Hague ply’d her fo warmly, that fhe was
fet on fire, the reft of the Portuguefe
Ships retreating in the mean while to-
wards the Shore. Such was the violence
of the Flames, that notwithftanding all
the Endeavours that were ufed, the Hague
was alfo fet on fife, and foon after the
Flijfmgen, and were all three confum’d by
the Flames.
The Portugucfes in the mean while ta-
king the advantage of the Confufion,
made the bell of their way towards the
Road of Goa , being purfued for one
League and a half by the Rotterdam, Vere,
and Texel , clofe under their Forts ; the
reft of our Ships being bufied in faving
the Men from the danger of the Fire, and
in repairing their Mafts and Rigging,
fo that the Victory remain’d on our fide,
which would have been very confiderable
had the fame been not allay’d by the
burning of the two before-mentioned
Ships.
J
The Lofs of the Dutch amounted to
35 Men, among whom were Capt. Her-
man Wouters Baalg befides 50 Wounded,
among whom was the Fa&or James Nolpe:
The lofs on the Portuguefe fide amounted
to 78 Portuguefes , and 150 Miftices and
Negroes. Don Lerv'vs de Caftelbranco, and
Father Laurence de Merinda a jefuit, were
taken Prifoners, with 90 Portuguefes , and
49 Miftices and Negroes, being fay’d by
the fame Boats that came to fave their
own Men, and exchang’d afterwards for
a Captain, a FaSor, and eight other
Dutch- men belonging to the Wieringtn
Yacht (burnt near Malacca ) befides a
Suni of 2000 Crowns paid to Don Pedro
de Silva Viceroy of the Indies, The fir ft
of March a Portuguefe Caraque, half
loaden with Pepper and Cinnamon, and
bound for Portugal , immediately after the
departure of the Dutch Fleet was burnt
by accident} and the Galeon the Madre
de Decs underwent the fame fate in April
following, to the great detriment of the
Portuguefes , whofe Naval Force in the
Indies was not a little impair’d by the
lofs of thefe three great Ships.
The Emperor of Ceylon s Deputies who
were prefent in the Engagement, were
furpriz’d at the Bravery of the Hollan-
ders, who with their Email Ships durlt
board the Portuguefes fo much ftronger
both in Men and Cannon. After the
Engagement the Dutch Fleet came to an
Anchor near the IQands on the South-fide
of Goa y to refit their Ships, and to ven-
ture a fecond Engagement. Soon after
the Hertogenbofch a brave Veffel comman-
ded by William Jacob Kofler , join’d our
Fleet, coming lately from Surdtte with a
rich Cargo of the beft Indian Stuffs, In-
digo, Saltpeter, and other Indian Com-
modities, valued at 412000 Gilders, at
the firil hand, which for meer Fafety
fake were difperfed among the other
Veffels. The 1 2th of January arriv’d
likewife the Ship Henrietta Lduifa from
Batavia , having on board 76000 Crowns,
befides other Merchandizes for our Facto-
ry of Suratte , and was fent thither in
company of the Breda and Enchuyfen
Yachts.
*
Logs on
both fidtSc
The Dutch
refit near
. the South
Ifles of
Goa.
i
»
Are rein-
forc'd with
_ two Shipsi


CHAP. XXI.
William Jacob Kofter fent to Ceylon by Admiral Wefterwold. The Portu-
guefes march to Candy, are totally routed by the Emperor. The Dutch be-
ƒiege Batecalo.
A Dutch
Squadron
<ent to
Ceyi°n.
Admiral's
Letterto
the Empe-
ror of Ccy-
lon.
TH E of 1638. th eValcon Yacht
beihg likewife difpatch’d to Bata-
via, with Advice of the late Engage-
ment, and fome Merchandizes, as alfo
the Sick and Wounded to be difpos’d in
the Hofpital there, our Squadron confin-
ed only of 7 Capital Ships and 2 Yachts.
But the Dutch Admiral perceiving the
Fortuguefes to make not the leaft Prepara-
tions of attacking them a fecond time,
it was rcfolv’d in a Council of War to
fend Mr. William Jacob Kofter Commo-
dore, with the Texely the Amfterdam t
and Dolphiny mann’d with 180 Men and
70 Souldiers, to the Ifle of Ceylony to give
notice to the Emperor of the intended
Succours againft May y and in the mean
while to offer his Affiftance in the Siege
of fome Fort or other belonging to the
Fortuguefes -, for which purpofe the Ad-
miral writ the following Letter to his Im-
perial Majefty.
44 Adam van Wejlerwold , Counfellor Ex-
-44 traordinary of the Indies y and Ad"
44 miral of the Dutch Fleet, wifhcs
44 themoft Potent Emperor of Ceylon ,
44 King of Candy , &c. all Happinefs
44 and Profperity, with the utmoft
44 Offer of his Service, for the throw-
a ing off the intolerable Yoke of
a the Fortuguefes,
Mojl Potent Emperor ,
44 \X7 r Hilft the Illuftrious General
44 VV and Council of the u-
n-44 derthe Jurifdidion of the Vnited Pro*
44 vincesy were employ'd in equipping a
4t Squadron of 16 Ships, to be fent from
44 Batavia before Goa , in order to annoy
44 our common Enemies the Fortuguefes ,
44 and to prevent their fending any Ca-
-44 racques or Galeons during the late
44 Northern Mouffon to Portugal , the
44 Ship the Hufduynen arriv’d at Batavia
44 from the Coaft of Coromandely with
44 Letters from the Governour of that
44 Coaft, wherein was enclos’d your Ma-
-4t jelly’s Letter, dated at Candy, Sept,
44 9. 1656. The faid General and Coun-
-44 cil of the Indies , having underftood
44 by thefe Letters, the many Treache-
-44 ries and Outrages committed by the
44 Fortuguefes in your Majefty’s Domini-
-44 ons, and that you were pleas’d to crave
44 their Affiftance for the defence of your
44 Country, and rooting out our common
44 Enemies, offering for thatpurpofe to
44 have either Batecalo or Cotiar (which
44 of the two we fhould pitch upon) for-
-44 tify’datyour own Charge for ourufe,
44 aslikewifeto give Satisfaction for all
44 the Charge we fhould be at in the E-
-44 quipment of fuch Ships as fhould be
ct fent to your affiftance : Thefe Propo-
-44 fitions having been well weigh’d by the
44 General and Council of the Indies , it
4t was refolv’d by them, purfuant to the
44 good Inclinations they have to your
44 Majefty, to comply with your Defires.
44 And it appearing by your Majefty’s
44 Letter, dated Novemb. n, 1637. and
44 fent to me by the Faulcon Yacht, that
4C you ftill perfift in the fame laudable
44 Sentiments, I took immediate care to
44 fend a Veffel and two Yachts, to ad-
-44 vertife your Majefty of our Coming,
44 under the Commodore William Jacob
44 Koftcry the fecond Member of my
44 Council, who is to treat with your Ma-
-44 jefty concerning our intended Defign,
44 and to concert meafures which of the
44 Portuguefe Forts may be molt conveni-
-44 ently attack’d at our Arrival, and
44 where your Majefty"s Forces are to
44 rendevouz, in order to affift inthetak-
-44 ing of the faid Forts *, for which pur-
-44 pofea certain quantity of Ladders of
44 Bamboes, befides fome other Materi-
-44 als, muft begot ready. Your Majefty’s
44 Deputies who come with thefe Ships,
44 will be able to give you a more com-
-44 pleat account by word of Mouth, cori-
-44 cerning out Intentions. If the Block-
-44 ade of Goa be rais’d by the end of A~
44 prily I intend (purfuant to the Orders
44 receiv’d from the General and Coun-
-44 cil of the Indies ) to fet fail in Perfon
44 with three of my biggeft Ships, well
44 provided with Men and Ammunition*
44 for Ceylon , to confer and treat more
44 amply with your Majefty concerning
44 our projected Defign. I hope your
44 Majefty will according to your Pro-
-44 mife, order two Ships Cargos of Cin-
-44 namon to be got ready againft our Ar-
-44 rival. I wilh your Majefty a long


Commo-
dore Ko-
fler ar-
rives in
Ceylon.
Ths Portu-
guefes put
to a great
Nonplus,
They march
towards
Candy.
“ Life, and Vidory againft your Ene-
u mies.
The before-mentioned Commodore
Kofter , having fet Sail accordingly,
March 17. from Goa, with the 3 Ships
th zTexel, little Jmfterdam and Dolphin,
came to an Anchor the id of April fol-
lowing near Trinquenemale, a Harbour
on the Northfide of the Ifle of Ceylon ;
where the Emperor’s Deputys being fee
afhore, in order to deliver the Admiral s
Letter at Candy, and give notice of the
Arrival of the Dutch Ships, they under-
ftood, that the Emperor immediately af-
ter the Departure of th q Falcon Yacht,
had caufed a good Quantity °f Cinnamon,
Wax and Pepper, to be laid up for our
ufe. The Portuguefes had no fooner no-
tice thereof, but they fent a Letter to
his Majefty, asking the Reafon why he had
ordered fuch a Quantity of Merchandises to
be laid up, which , purfuctnt to the Contraff
JUpulated betwixt them, belonged only to
them . The Emperor return’d them no
other Anfwer than that. He having pro-
mifed the fame to his Friends the Holland-
ers, he would try who fhould dare to oppofe it.
This refolate Anfwer fo nettled the
Portuguefes at Columbo, that being now
• fully convinc’d of the Confederacy be-
' twixt the Emperor and the Dutch, and
that they mull: Toon expert to be attack’d
at Batecalo, they were put to the greatest
Nonplus, what Refolution to take in this
prefent Exigency of Affairs. Some con-
fidering that having fcarce been able to
cope with the Emperor alone, they would
not be able to refill his Efforts, when
fuftain’dby the Dutch , were of Opinion
to embark all their Treafure, Men and
Artillery, todemolifh the Fort, and fet
Sail for Goa.
But the braver fort rejeding this Pro-
pofition as bafe, and inconfiftent with
their King’s Honour, refolv’d, rather than
thus to quit an Ifle, which they had fix’d
themfelves in with the Lofs of fo much
Blood and Treafure, to venture the ut-
mofl and die in the Attempt, Damijao
Bottado , who had laid the firft Foundati-
on of the Fortrefs of Batecalo , propos’d
among the reft, that they ought to ga-
ther all their Forces, and march up to
Candy , before Raja Singa could be join’d
by the Dutch.
This Advice being approved of, they
, marched in 'March 1638. under the
Command of their General Diego de Me-
jo, the before-mention’d Damijao Bottado ,
and the Major-General Sorde , towards
Candy.
The Emperor having got notice of (
their March, retir’d from thence with *
all his People, leaving the City to their
Mercy, which they took without any
Oppofition , and having plunder’d and 2
burnt the fame, direded their March to h
the Mountains of Gannor or Gannero ,
where they pitch’d their Tents, their
whole Force confiftingof 2300 Portuguefes
and Miflices , and 6000 Negroes.
This it was that the Emperor had fo
long look’d for, who immediately or-
der’d the Road to IValane , and all other
Places thro which they were to pafs, to be
flopp’d, by laying great Trees crofs the
Roads. The Enemies finding themfelves
reduc’d to thefe Straits, the Cingalefes u- *
nanimoufly revolted to the Emperor •, fo £
that the Portuguefes feeing not the leaft
hopes of efcaping by Force of Arras,
had recourfe to two Friers, one a Francif-
can, and the other an Aujlin Monk, who
were fent to endeavour to obtain them a
free Paffage from the Emperor to Colum-
bo: But the Emperor gave them fuch an
Anfwer, that the Friers thought it their
fafeft way not to return to their Camp ,
fo that the Portuguefes finding themfelves
paft all Reprieve, the General de Melo
ask’d Bottado what was to be done, and
which way they fhould efcape the Dan-
ger into which they were drawn by his
rafh Advice, who gave him no other An-
fwer, than that they muft die together.
The Emperor Raja Singa in the mean
while kept dole in his Camp, watching
all the Opportunities of attacking them,
with the utmoft Advantage, which foon
happen’d *, for a violent Storm of Rain
(which he knew would render the Portu-
guefe Firelocks in fome manner ufelefs)
made him draw out his Troops againft:
the Enemy } and putting the Mufqueteers
in Front, he order’d them after the firft
Difcharge to retire, and give way to 5000
Bowmen of Mangelcorle , who being fuf-
tain’d by as many Pikes, did break in
with fuch Fury among the Portuguefes,
that they foon put them into Diforder,
and immediately after to the Rout, with
the Slaughter of all the Portuguefes , ex-
cept a very few who obtain’d Mercy at
their Conqueror’s Hands, amounting in
all not to above 70 Perfons.
The Emperor was a Spedator of this
Engagement from a Tree near the Bank
of a River, which ran betwixt him and
the Mountain of Gannor , whither they
brought the Heads of the Portuguefes llain
in the Battel, which were heap’d up in
form of a Pyramid before him. All the
Great Officers of the Portuguefes loft
take and
burn it.
Are defea*
ted by the
Cingalefes
And put t«
the Rout .
A Pyramid
of Heads,


upon each of which were mounted four
brafs Demi-Culverins *, and the Emperor
having left the Grois of his Army under
the Command of his Brother the Prince
of Mateli to invcft Columbo , join’d our
forces before Batecalo , April inPer-
fon, with a Detachment of 2000 Men.
Commodore Kofter being receiv’d by his
Imperial Majefty with all poffible Marks
of Honour, they immediately enter’d up-
on a Debate, how to attack the Fortrefs
with the utraoft Vigour upon the Arrival
of the reft of our Ships.
their Lives near the Mountain of Gannor 7
and among them their General deMelo 1
whofe Sword was afterwards prefented
by the Emperor to the Admiral Wejler-
wold.
In the mean while matters having been
concerted with the Moddiar , or Gover-
nour of Mattadape , concerning the For-
tuguefe Fortrefs of Batecalo y they fet fail
thither *, and having landed 100 Soldiers,
and as many Seamen in two Troops, they
foon rais’d two Batteries, with the affif-
tance of the Natives, one on the Eaft,
the other on the South-fide of the Fort,
Siege of
Bacccalo.
CHAP. XXII.
Adam Wefterwold's Arrival in Ceylon. Batecalo taken. A Treaty betwixt
the Emperor and Mr. Wefterwold.
Wcfler-
wold
comes be-
fore Bate-
calo.
TpHE- Admiral having fet
be Sail April 22. from before ,ar-
riv d Batecalo, May 10. with the Ships
the Maeftricht, Harderwick, Rotterdam,
i oe, and tiie tnehuyfen \acht, having on
boa id 840 Men, Officers, Soldiers and
Wefterwold Mariners. The next following Day hav-
Goa ing landed his Med,with 6 great Pieces for
Battery, the fame were mounted itnme-
diately, in order to facilitate the Palfage
of their Forces into theflfle Uponwhich
the Fort was built; This being executed
Inc In’n.UUiJ , y ,




Pol. l-p-jn?.
gfjPP® ll fOUT OF
a^£calo.
_/ ()♦


Batealo
fumndred
upon Artl -
Severe Pu-
nijhment of
the cinga-
kfcs.
A Defer jp-
t'mof Ba-
lecalo.;
Alliance
betwixt
theEwpe-
ion and the
Dutch,
accordingly the i Sth, and 500 Men
brought over under favour of the Gannon,
which play’d incettantly for four Hours
upon the Povtuguefes , they put out the
white Flag immediately, and fent two
Deputies to capitulate with th t Dutch Ad-
miral, which was foon done upon the
following Conditions: That they (hould
furrender the Fort immediately, and be
permitted to march out without Arms or
Baggage. The Povtuguefes and Miflices
to the Number of 108, with their Wives
and Children, to be tranfported in a
Dutch Vettel to Negapatan , but the Na-
tives to be delivered up to the Emperor,
which was executed accordingly, fifty of
them (who had murder’d one pf his Ma-
jefty’s Gentlemen) being empal’d alive,
and the reft fold for Slaves with their
Wives and Children.
The Fort of Batecalo is feated in an
IQeof about two Dutch Leagues in com-
pafs, three Leagues within the Mouth
of the River of Batecalo , which has giv-
en it its Name. It was fortified with
high Stone Walls and three paflable Bafti-
ons, upon which were mounted 11 Iron
and Brafs Cannons, befides fome letter
Ones, with a futable Proportion of Am-
munition. We found in it Rice fufficient
for two Months, but their Frefh-Water
being about a Mufquet-lhot without the
Fortrefs, the Dutch had made themfelves
Mafters of that Spring. Commodore
Koftev was made Governor of the Fort,
with a Garifon of one hundred Dutch Sol-
diers.
After the taking of this Fortrefs, the
Admiral IVefterwold made an Alliance
with the Emperor of Ceylon , in the
Name of their High and Mightinettes
the States-General of the Vnited- Provin-
his Highnefs Frederick Prince of O-
range, and of the Honourable Eafi-India
Company, with the Approbation of the
General and Council of the Indies 7 upon
the following Conditions:
I. A Firm and ftedfaft Amity (hall be
maintain’d betwixt his Majefty
and his Subjefts, and the Dutch Nation,
and their Eaft-lndia Company, who (hall
afllffc his Majefty upon all Occafions againft
the Povtuguefes.
11. As often as any Place or Fort is ta-
ken by the Dutch , with the Affiftance of
his Majefty, from the common Enemy,
the Booty to be divided (hare and (hare
alike.
111. After the taking of any Forts,
the Dutch (hall provide the fame with ne-
celfary Garifons and Ammunition 7 and
if any thing be wanting to compleat the
Fortifications, the fame (hall be done at
the Charge of his Majefty, as it (hall be
thought requifite by the Dutoh.
IV. His Majefty obliges himfelf to pay
pundually every Month their Soldiers and
Officers.
V. As alfo to build in the conquered
Places or Forts (where no Houfes are be-
fore) a Houfe of Stone (as the Dutch
(hall think fit) to be us’d for a Ware-
houfe, as alfo a Magazine for their Arms
and Naval Stores.
VI. In cafe his Majefty defigns any
thing againft the common Enemy,the fame
is to be confulted with our Chief Officers.
VII. For the Security of the Rivers,
his Majefty is to furnifh a certain Number
of Gallies and Gally-Slaves, which are
to be provided with Soldiers and Ammu-
nition by the Dutch,
VIII. His Majefty and his Subjects ob-
lige themfelves to make full Reparation
of the Charges the Dutch have been at in
equipping the prefent Fleet, Yachts, Vef-
fels, &c, and furnittiing them with Men,
Soldiers, Officers, Ammunition, Provi-
fions, &c, or of fuch other Ships as the
General and Council (hall for the future
fend to his Majefty’s Affiftance into Cey-
lon, with their neceffary Men, Ammuni-
tion, Provifions, &c. the Charges where-
of (hall bereimburfed in Cinnamon, Pep-
per, Cardamom, Indigo, Wax, Rice,
and fuch other Commodities as are of
the Produft of his Majefty’s Dominions,
except the Mato or Wild Cinnamon,
IX. His Majefty in refpeft of his Friend-
(hip and good Inclinations to the Dutch
Nation, allows them free Paflage and
Traffick in all his Dominions, in the Ille
of Ceylon , in all his Cities, Towns, Vil-
lages, Seaports, Roads, Bays, Rivers,
&c. with their Veffels, Yachts, Boats,
&c. to buy, fell or exchange, import or
export without the lead Moleftation, or
paying any Cuftoms under any pretence
whatever. His Majefty’s Subjefts (hall
not be permitted to fell the Dutch any
Cinnamon, Pepper, Wax and Elephants
Teeth, except what is fold by the Empe-
ror’s Orders who engages himfelf, that
in cafe he (hould have occafion to fell 4,
10, 20, or more Elephants, he will pro-
cure them the like Number at the fame
rate as they were fold.
X. His Majefty, and all the Great Men
of the Empire promife, not to allow
their Subjedts to traffick, either with a-
ny European or Eafiern Nation, either by
Sale or Exchange, in fuch Commodities
as are of the Produdfc of Ceylon 7 much


lefs to permit the Ships of thefe Nations
to tarry in the Harbours of Ceylon , but
to oblige them to depart forthwith.
However the Neighbouring Nations of
Daucy and Tanjouwer may pafs and repafs
freely with their Veffels, to and from
Ceylon .
XL His Majefty obliges himfelfto fend
yearly to Batavia-, one or two Shiploads
of Cinnamon, Pepper, Cardamom, In-
digo, Way, &c. as a Reimburfement
of the Charge beftowed in the Equip-
ment of the Veffels fent to his Affiftance }
and in cafe the faid Cargo fliould amount
to more than the Charges, the Surplus
to be paid to his Majefty, either in rea-
dy Mony or fuch Commodities, as his
Majefty fhall think fit.
XII. His Majefty having granted full
Liberty for the Dutch Merchants, to tra-
vel, traffick, buy and fell, the Inhabi-
tants fhall be obliged to furnifh them
with Beafts fit for Carriage, for the car-
rying of fuch Goods as they have bought,
either to their Warehoufes, or aboard
their Veffels. Furthermore, the faid
Merchants or other Hollanders fhall re-
main under the Jurifdidion of the re-
fpedivc Commanders or Heads of their
own Nation, as the Natives of Ceylon
ftand under the Subjedion of the Empe-
ror.
XIII. No body, without exception,
that trades with the Butch here, fhall
have Freedom to fell any fuch Commodi-
ties bought from them to others, before
the Dutch have fully received their Quo-
ta 1 and in cafe of Contravention, the
Dutch fhall have a Power to feize his Per-
fon, and to compel him to produce the
faid Goods. Furthermore, in cafe any
of the Natives ftand indebted to the
Dutch for a confiderable Sum, they fhall
be fubjed to the fame Treatment, with
this Provifo neverthelefs, that in cafe a-
ny of his Majefty’s Subjeds be taken into
Cuftody by the Dutch , notice fhall be giv-
en thereof to the Emperor or his Gover-
nor.
XIV. Nobody of what Quality what-
ever fhall pretend to raife ordiminifh the
Coin, otherwife than has been agreed be-
twixt his Majefty and the Dutch, and
fuch as contravene this Article on either
fide, fhall without Mercy be punifh’d
with Death, and Confiscation of their
Eftates to his Majefty’s ufe.
XV. In cafe a Hollander fliould fly into
his Majefty’s Dominions, the fame fhall
be deliver’d up } as on the other hand
the fame fhall be done on our fide, in cafe
any of his Majefty’s Subjeds fheltcr them-
felves in our Dominions.
XV L After the Conclufion of this Trea-
ty, neither his Majefty nor any of his
Subjeds fhall maintain any fecret or pnb-
lick Commerce or Correfpondence with
the Portuguefes , our common Enemies
much lefs to traffick with them under any
pretence whatever, but look upon them
as their conftant declar’d Enemies: And
in cafe any of his Majefty’s Subjeds fhall
be difeover’d to have fold them any Com-
modities, the Tranfgreffors fhall be pu-
nifh’d with Death.
XVII. His Majefty fhall notfufferany
Priefts, Friers or Clergymen to dwell in
his Dominions, but oblige them to dc-
part as the Authors of all Rebellions
and the Ruin of Governments.
XVIII. In cafe any Dutch Ships employ-
ed in his Majefty’s Service, fhall takea-
ny Prizes from the Enemies, the fame
fhall belong to the Eajl~lndia Company,
with this Provifo however, that the faid
Company fhall alone bear all the Damages
fuftained by the faid Ships, in any of
thefe Engagements.
XIX. In cafe the Dutch furnifh any
great Gannon for the Fortreffes, or 0-
therwife for his Majefty’s Service, the
fame may freely be taken back, if Occa-
fion requires, without any Hindrance,
and be brought aboard of Ship or other-
wife, where it fhall be thought moft con-
venient.
XX. Tranfaded and concluded thus,
in the Prefence of his Imperial Majefty
of Ceylon , and of Adam Weftermld Mem-
ber of the Council of the Indies , and
Commodore of the Squadron of Ships on
the Coaft of Ceylon , as alfo of William
Jacob Kofter , Vice-Commodore of the
faid Squadron, at the Royal Palace, in
the Country of Batecalo , May 23.1638.
Additional Article,
The Dutch oblige themfelves to fhew
all poffible Favour and Affiftance to fuch
Veffels, as fhall go from hence with his
Majefty’s, or any of his Governors Pafs-
ports to other Harbours.
Signed,
Raja Stnga Imperador,
Adam Weƒterwold ,
William Jacob Kofter .
Sealed with his Majefty’s and
Mr. IVeftermWs Seals.
Purfuant to this Agreement, his Ma-
jelly order’d 400 Balls of Cinnamon,
87 Quintals of Way, and 3059 Pounds
of Pepper to be deliver’d to Mr. IVefter-


wold , in part of the Reimburfement of
Charges they had been at, promifing to
deliver the reft, as foon as it could be
brought together at the Seaport of Sam-
mature, and to haften the Ratification of
the fa id Alliance *, his Majefty feat two
Ambafiadors to Batavia , in Company of
Mr. Weflerwold , with fome Prefents to the
General and Council of the Indies , who
being honourably received and treated
there, were afterwards fent back with
Letters and Prefents for his Majefty,
with the Yachts the Grijpskerh , Faulcon
and V?nlo, bound for the Coaft of Coro-
mandel.
The Emperor’s Army in the mean
while being about 20000 ftrong, conti-
nued before Columbo \ and the Portuguefes
having been very unfuccefsful in divers
Sallies, it was more than probable that
this Place (tho the Capital City of the
Portuguefes in this Ifle) would be forc'd to
furrender upon the Arrival of the expec-
ted Dutch Fleet, under the Admiral An-
thony de Caan,
Col umbo
bcfieged.
Ratificati-
an of the
faid Alli-
ance.
CHAP. XXIII.
Puntegale taken by Storm by William Jacob Kofter. Caleture besieged.
from Columho *, notwithftanding which
the Dutch divided their Forces into three
Bodies, and advanced clofe under the
Fort: The 9 th early in the Morning,
they were attack’d by the faid Portuguefes ,
whom they repuls’d, tho not without
fome lofs. Neverthelefs they kept our
Forces in conftant Alarm, thofeof Can-
THE Bth of March, Commodore Kof~
ter being come to an Anchor about
noon in the Bay of Puntegale, under the E-
nemies Cannon, he landed his Men before
Night on the North-fide without any Re-
finance. Intelligence was brought by
fome Negroes, that they expefted a
inforcemcnt in the City of 250 Portuguefes
iefieged.
Tuntcyale taken by Star me.


dy being by the nth of March advanced
no further chan Billigamme , 6 Leagues
fro mGale m 7 but (thro God’s lingular Mer-
cy) three of our Ships, mz.. the Harlem ,
Middkkurgh and Brcda y coming on the
fame day to anchor in the Bay, and land-
ing 400 men, as well Soldiers as Seamen,
we were Toon exempted from all Fear.
Maatzuyker, fince Governour of the /»-
who has ferved in that Station 15
Years. He was fucceeded by Jacob van
in the Prefidentfhip of Gak
(the Affairs of the Company hitherto
not admitting of the Quality of a Go-
vernour here ) who died afterwards at
Batavia, and was fucceeded by Adrian van
derMeyden, in whofe time Cakture,Colum-
bo, Manaar and Jafnapatnam were taken.
He was fucceeded by Ryklof van Coens and
Jacob Huftart, by which time the Com-
pany having confiderably enlarged their
Limits in this Ifle, a Governour was con-
ftituted at Columbo , the City of Gak be-
ing left to the management of a Com-
mander in chief, the firft in that Station
being one Tsbrand Gotsken , a Native of
the Hague , a brave Soldier, fufficiently
known for his fignal Services done at the
Sieges of Columbo , Manaar , Jafnapatnam
and Cochin. , whereof he was Governour
afterwards, and fince chief Direftor in
Perfia. Adrian Rootbaas his Succeflbr is
a Perfon who has render’d his Name fa-
mous by Sea, efpecially in the Levant and
before Goa , as the former had done by
Land,
The nth finding they had made a fuf-
ficient Breach in the Baflion of St. JagOj
they began to make all necefiary Prepa-
rations for the llorming of the Place,
which was done accordingly the 13 th with
iluch undaunted Bravery, that after an
hour and half’s flout refinance it was
taken by Afiault. This City was after-
wards, viz.. 1663, and 54. rendered al-
moit impregnable by the Dutch by fcveral
additional Fortifications } and this Day
is ever fince celebrated yearly by a folemn
Thankfgiving.
Mr. Kofler (who was treacheroufly
murder'd by the Cingaleses , as Sebald de
Wart was by his own Imprudence) was
fnccceded by John Thyjfen , who is yet
living, and has render’d himfelf famous
for his many Services done the Company
in thofc Parts. In his Head came John
is taken
v toun.
Camtybe .




7^ol. 7.V . *1 t*l .
„ The, Citt or Gal e,
3:


A Vefcrip-
tion of
Gale.
Cakturc.
Is inveflect
by the
Dutch.
Gale has a commodious Bay, fit for
Anchorage, except that with a South- !
Wed Wind the Sea runs very hollow
there. At the very Entrance of the Har-
bour lies a dangerous Rock, near to which
all Ships mud pafs, and againft which the
Hercules , one of our Ships, was dav’d
to pieces. There is no coming into the
Bay, unlefs you pafs by the Water-Fort,
which is well provided with Cannon for
the Security of the Harbour. The For-
tifications of the City itfelf confid only
in three Badions, the red being fo in-
clos’d with the Sea and Rocks, that there
is no approaching to it even with the
fmajleft Boats. On the top of a Rock
which jets out into the Sea is a Lanthorn,
and an Iron Cannon, wherewith they
give warning to the Ships, and near it
you fee the Company’s Flag difplay’d.
The City is well built of Stone, very
high, with goodly Houfes, a dately
Church, pleafant Gardens, and mod de-
licious Springs } the Mountains which fur-
round it affording a pleafant Profpedf,
over which you pafs thro Roads cut out
of the Rocks, tail’d by them Cravettes.
About a days Journy from Gale ftands
the Fort of Caleture , in a mod delight-
ful Country, near the Entrance of a large
and broad River, on the Sea-ftiore, fur-
rounded by a double ftrong Wall of
Earth. It was reduced by the Dire&or
General Gerard Hulft , 15O#. 1655. in
the following manner.
Having rendevouzed his Forces, con-
fiding of 593 men, near and be-
ing join’d the 28 th of September by fome
more Troops under Chriftopher Egger , Leo-
nard Wiltfchut and Melchior van Schoori-
bcek, they directed their March towards
Caleturc, But being informed that the
Enemy were refolved to make a vigorous
Defence, and our Artillery being not yet
come up, it was thought advifable to de-
tach Capt. Abraham Cons and JurianGevels
with fiveCompanys, to fecure the Pafs
of Oucatte over the River, thereby to
prevent the Enemy from receiving any
Supplies, till the arrival of our Ships,
that were expedted every day with more
Forces.
The 29th we took a view of all the A-
venues leading to the Place} and Guards
being plac’d in all convenient Pods, the
Fadtor Renter Serooskerken and Mr. Tsbrand
Godskcn were difpatch’d to our Ships, to
fend us the necefiary Artillery and Am-
munition.
The s th of Oftoher Advice was brought
by two of the Natives, that the Garifon,
confiding of 300 men, was but ilcnderly
provided with Provifions, their Whole
Store confifting only in 50 * Parras, and
two Email Packs of dry’d Fiffi, and that
they were forc’d to live upon Canfies , or
Water and Rice.
The 6th of Oftoher after we had mount-
ed fome Great Guns upon our Batteries,
a certain -f- Topas, who had been Secretary
to Captain Marcello Fialho , came over to
us, who difeovered to the General Hulft
the whole Strength of the Enemy, and
the Names of their Officers'} adding,
that 4 or 5 days before his departure there
were about 210 Parras of Rice in the
Store-houfe, whereof they didributed a
certain quantity to each Soldier every-
day, and to the King’s Negroes call’d
II Crfjfer*, a Quart a piece: That they
had no Lafcaryns in the Place, and as
he believ’d could not hold it above 10
days, tho they feem’d refolved to defend
it to the lad extremity, in hopes of be-
ing relieved the next week by Cafpar Fi~
geiro.
The fame day Major John van der Laan
brought word that all was well fecured
on his Attack } and Captain James Swart ,
and the Faftor Abraham Hartman brought
up with 60 Seamen the two great Can-
non that were left behind. Capt. Dian-
teiro was alfb detach’d with 40 Dutch Sol-
diers, and a good number of Lafcaryns ,
to the Pafs of Wellikande } and the Gene-
ral Gerard Hulft with Mr. Adrian van der
Meyden having taken a view of our Bat-
teries, did go to take a view of the Pafs
near where, as well as on the
other fide, they found every thing to their
fatisfadion, 756 men being imployed on
that fide.
The 7 th of Oftoher they went up the
River as far as Wellikande , to fee whether
the Enemy could receive any Supplies of
Provifions by the Brook, or from above
by the way of Anguratotte and Tihoene }
but found it not feafible by reafon of the
fhallownefs of the Water. However five
Ferry-boats were fhew’d them in the nar-
rowed: Places of the River, where hav-
ing placed feme Lafcaryns , they com-
mitted the management thereof to Mr.
John van der Laan. Tht nth of Oftoher
a Mortar of a large fize and a 12 Poun-
der were mounted on the Battery, and
Mr. John van der Laan came to tell the
General that the fecond Battery would be
ready to play on his fide the fame night.
The 14 th in the Morning we faw a
Portuguefe Lieutenant and Drummer with
a white Flag, coming out of the Fort,
fent by Anthonio Mendes d y Aranha their
Commander in chief, with the following
Letter. “ Having
* Each
Parras k
40 Pound.
t a Topas
« the Son
ru/ ue fe'
in-
dian Wo-
ma7li
|| Gaffers
are Negros
il p tho %..
An S°' a *


44 Having for feveral days paft dif-
-44 charged our Truft as a Captain ought
44 to do, and finding you not fo furioufly
44 imployed today, I thought fit to take
44 this opportunity to try whether you
44 would treat with me according to the
44 Cuftom of War 3 for which purpofe I
4C have fent you a trufty Perfon. In the
44 mean while all Hoftilities fliall ceafe
44 on our fide, hoping the fame from you.
44 We recommend you to God’s Protefti-
-4C on. Caleture , Oft. 14. 1655*
Anthonio Mendes d ’ Aranha.
44 the Superior Officers, including the
44 Captains, fhall have liberty to take
44 their Swords along with them. It
44 wasfigned,
'they offer
to capitu-
late.
Anthonio Mendes d' Aranba,
John Alonzo.
44 After the ratification it was thus
44 fubferibed by both Parties.
Gerard Huljl.
Adrian van der Meyden,
John van der Laan .
Anthonio Mendes d? Aranha,
John Alonzo.
A Ceflation of Arms being agreed up-
on, Martin Sholtes an Enfign was fent
back with the Portuguefe Officer to treat
about the Conditions, whilfDa Mefien-
ger was difpatclfd with a Letter to the
Diffave (or Deputy-Governour) of Saffra
Gamme 1 to defire him to have it rumor’d
abroad, that the Portuguefes in Caleture
had lately been fupply’dwith Provifions 3
in hopes thereby to amufe Cafpar Figeiro
(whoflood with his Forces near Mouta-
pelle) not to haftcn to their Relief.
The is th early in the Morning the
Portuguefe Officer returned with the Ar-
ticles 3 towards Noon the Garifon, con-
fining in nine Companys making in all
255 men, marched out of the Fort, and
having paid theirßevercnce with theirEn-
fignsas ufual, the Soldiers were difarmed.
The Companys were the following: The
Royal Company commanded by the Cap-
tain Major Marcello Fialho, confiftedof 31
Portuguefes: That of John Anthonio Pel
haon of 27. That of Pedro de Bathos oi
28. That of Manuel Rodrigos of 28
That of Diego Frovs of 3 6. That of Ja-
como Padraon of 28. That of Manue
Mendes of 27. That of Lewis Aim .
Perkro of 24. And that of Leonardo dt
Silva of 26, In all 255.
Befides the Perfons of Note living ir
the Place, with their Families, that wen
conduftd to Callamoende , and 50 more
that were with the Governour Anthonh
Mendes d ’ Aranha (afterwards our Prifo-
ners at Jafnapatnarn) that were carry’d tc
Gale , the other Superior Officers wen
fent to Macoene , and the reft kept undei
a good Gnard in the Fort.
Immediately notice of this Vidor]
having been given to the Emperor Rajc
Singa , General Hulft and Mr. Adrian va?
der Meyden took a view of the Fortificati-
ons of the Place, whereat they were noi
a little furprized, and found therein tc
Enfigns, 5 great Guns, 4Brafsones, k
Sand 5 Pounders, and one Iron 8 Poun
der, 40 Barrels of Gun-powder, 204
Bamboe Canes fill’d, 710 Bullets, 1 8c
Mufquets, 61 Pikes, 7 CheftswithMuf
quet Balls, another Barrel with larger
Bullets fit for Mufquetoons, it 6 Ammu-
nition Pouches, 5 Mufquetoons, fora*
firy Bullets, 60 Spades and 8 Hatchets.
The) mri
out.
The Capitulation wasfoon after con-
cluded upon the following Terms:
4t The Soldiers to march out with their
C 4 Matches not lighted, Balls in the
44 Mouth, and Enfigns difplay’d *, the
cC Officers with their Scarfs, which they
4t fhall lay down roll’d up before the Stan-
-4C dard of the Company. All the Great
tC Officers, to the Captains inclufive, to
44 be tranfported during this Mouffon to
u Goa *, the reft of the Officers and Sol-
-44 diers to Batavia, and from thence to
44 Portugal at the charge of the Company,
44 All the Officers and Soldiers fhall be
cc allowed to carry their Baggage along
44 with them 3 but their Servants fhall
44 be left to the Difcretion of the Dutch
4t General. * All Church Ornaments fhall
44 be removed. All fuch as have married
44 Portuguefe Women, and the Mijlkes ,
4C fliall be conduced to Columbo , or where-
-44 ever elfe they think fit. But the Laf-
-44 carym and Negros , whether married or
44 unmarried, fhall remain Prifoners of
44 War. The Fathers and Clergymen
44 fhall enjoy the fame Liberty as the
44 higheft Officers, and (hall be tranfport-
u ed from Caleture on the fame day.
44 Thefe Articles are to be ratify’d to
morrow morning by Sun-riling. All
Articles of
the cap-
tulat'm .


CHAP. XXIV.
Engagements near Paneture and near Montual, both to the difadvantage of the
Portuguefes.
Ysbrand
Godskens
w-mrof
Calecure.
A£ W .
mint be-
twixt the
Dutch and
Y" Sbrand Godskens being conftituted Go-
vernour of Caleture , with a Com-
pany to keep Garifon there. Major John
JAander Laan march’d the 1 6th from the
other fide of the River towards Paneture ,
being followed by the General and Mr.
van der Meyden with the reft of the Forces.
In the dusk of the Evening we came up
with the Portuguefes , whom we faluted fo
briskly with our Firelocks, that they
thought fit to retreat, leaving 17 dead,
and all their Ammunition, with their
Standard, behind them. On our fide we
had 15 wounded, befides Arent Janfz,
van Norden an Enfign. According to the
report of one of their Captains, who
was taken Prifoner, they confifted of fix
Gompanys commanded by Domingos Ser-
mento Captain Major of MmXual , de-
tached towards Caleture to fecure this Pafs
till to morrow, for Cafpar Figeiro, who
was on his march at the head of <soo
men, to attempt the Relief of that Place.
Whereupon it was thought convenient to
make a Halt betwixt Paneture and Galki/fe ,
near a good Spring, and there to expeft
the coming up of the reft of their For-
ces.
The fame night, the Moon fhining ve-
ry bright, a Prifoner was brought into
our Gamp, who being a Native of Antorf ,
and well vers’d in the Dutch Tongue,
told the General, that he had ferved the
King of Portugal 11 Years, and that
Figeiro would doubtlefs be with them by
day-light.
The 17tfe, being Sunday, word being
brought that the Portuguefes were at hand,
Major John van der Laan and Capt. Kous
were pofted with five Companies and two
Field-Pieces, on a convenient Place, to
receive the firft Shock of the Enemy,
whom, after a general Difchargeof their
Fire-Arms and Gannon, they received fo
warmly with Sword in hand, that they
were foon brought into confufion, and
purfu’d as far as to the Church call’d
Noffa Senhora de Milagres , i. e. That of our
Lady of Miracles , with a Slaughter of
150 on the Enemies fide. Among our
Troops Major van der Laan was wounded
in the Cheek, and a Gunner, two com-
mon Soldiers and a Serjeant, kill’d.
The 1 8th of Oftober happen’d another
Engagement betwixt us and the Portugue-
fes near MontuaU Our Forces attack’d -
them in ther Entrenchments, from whence ;
they fired furioufly upon them *, but no 1
fooner had they broke thro their Works,
but they threw down their Arms, and
made the belt of their way to Columbo ,
leaving all their'Ammunition behind
them, and 22 kill’d upon the Spot
whereas we had not fo much as one
wounded on our fide. We left two
Companys as a Guard of the Church of
St. Sebafiian } and advancing nearer to-
wards Columbo , a Body of Portuguefes re-
treated in Boats from Montual to Columbo ,
leaving the Pafs open to us, where we
found 3 Iron Guns and fome Cinnamon,
and put a Guard of 16 Soldiers in it un-
der a Serjeant.
Here we received intelligence, that of
the whole Body commanded by Cafpar Fi~
geiro , confifting of 600 Portuguefes , and
fent from Columbo to the Relief of Cale-
ture, not above 1 60 were returned to
that City.
The 19th before Noon fome Portuguefes
being got into a Coco-Garden, fome of
our Soldiers forced them to retire •, but
thofe of the City firing upon them, kill’d
one of our Serjeants, and wounded Hans
Chrifiophers a Lieutenant, and two com-
mon Soldiers. The fame day the Gene-
ral was certify’d by Letters from Capt.
Kous and Lieut. Wilftchut, that they had
already told above 300 (lain of the Portu-
guefes upon the Roads, and that daily
more Heads and Prifoners were brought
in. They fent at the fame time a Waft-
coat of Cafpar Figeiro, wherein was the
following Letter.
44 Y* 0 U are not ignorant of the Re-
-44 ■** folution taken the 1 ith of Oftober t
44 concerning your Endeavours to relieve 1
44 the Fort of Caleture . All the Forces 1
44 we have been able to gather for this
44 Expedition confift in 420 men, which
44 we hope will prove fufficient thro the
44 Blefiing of God and your good For-
-44 tune and Conduct, to make you return
44 vidorious. We leave the Management
cc of that Affair to your approved Ex-
-44 perience, it being impoflible for us
44 to forefee all the Circumftances and
44 Accidents that may attend a Bufinefs
44 of this nature. It muft be your care
A ficoni
En £ a & e '
menta
mflru&i-
-ons roCaf-
parFigei-
ro,


M to get frequent intelligence of the Po-
u fture of the Enemy, and how to bring
“ the Provifions laid up for the Relief of
u the Place at Belantotte , into the Fort }
the Succefs whereof you lhall notify to
cc us with thefirft opportunity, that we
cc may fend frcfh Supplies of Rice both
ic for your ufe, and of the Garifon in the
cc Fort. If you can meet with any Pro-
u vifions in the Country, you will not
cc fail to feize them for your Gonvenicn-
cy.
ct In cafe you ffiould prove fuccefsful
in the relief of Caleture , you muft
u join your Forces, and the Captain Ma-
c< jor of the Place muft fubmit to your
tc Command. We don’t queftion but
Ct you will not be wanting in your Duty
tc in a Bufinefs of fuch vaft moment,
tc whereon depends the Prefervation and
u Welfare, not only of this City, but
tc alfo of the whole Kle.
“ If after the Relief of Caleture you
cc find, that for want of Provifions, or
u for other weighty reafons, the Fort is
u not to be maintain’d, you lhall agree
xc among your felvcs what is fitteft to be
u done for his Majefty’s Intereft, whe-
u ther it be not the beft way to bring
“ the Fortifications into a narrower Com-
“ pals, and leaving onlyi 5 o Men for
“ the defence thereof, to join the reft
“ with your Body.
“ If you find it impracticable to bring
“ any Supplies into the Fort, you lhall
“ entrench your felf at a convenient di-
“ ftance, and from thence give notice to
“ Anthonio Mendes , the Go-
“ vernour, that he lhall nail up all the
“ Cannon, deftroy all the Ammunition
“ and make the heft of his way to your
“ Camp, thereby topreferve fuch brave
“ Troops, on whom in fome meafure
“ depends the Defence of this City.
At Columbo, OH, Signed,
I 3* Antonio de SnuzaCnuf-iviln
Antonio de Souza Coutinho.
And lower,
“ Juft upon the Condufion of thefc
“ Prefents we have received the expeft-
tc ed Succours from the Indian Coaft,
ct which confifting of 200 men, is to be
€c joined with your Troops, We re-
u commend you to God’s Protedion.
Colombo, 15 Off,
i*ss.
CHAP. XXV.
A famous Highway-man taken. The Beginning of the Siege of Columbo. The
Emperor offers the Dutch his Assistance. His Letter to the Dutch General.
* A pate-
mle si an
°Jfff''
t Haratie
« a Ser-
ftant.
'j laicaryn
VoUku
* Diflave
a Govcr-
nour.
A famous
A Thank/-
gmng-day.
A Bout the fame time arrived three
** * Apahamies , and as many Hara-
ties with fome [j Lafcaryns , from the Im-
perial Court *, and the *DiJfave of Saffra-
gamme with Letters from Mr. Jorvs Her~
'vendonck our Refident at Candy , intimat-
ing that he had been commanded by his
Majefty to notify his being ill of an Ague,
and that he hop’d before long to be with
all his Nobility at Columho. In return of
which another Letter was fent to his
Majefty, to notify our Victory over the
Enemy.
The fame day Advice was brought that
the famous Highway-man Franctfco An-
thunes was fallen into the hands of fbrae
of our Lafcaryns , wherefore a Detach-
ment was order’d to bring him into the
Camp} but either thro the Cold and In-
conveniences of the Journy, or rather
out of fear, he dy’d by the way, and
was bury’d.
About the fame day a Thankfgiving-
day was alfo appointed to be held the
18th of Offober , to return thanks to Godl
for having bleffed our Arms with Succefs,
and begging his Mercy for the future.
The lift the General with Ibme other
Officers of Note having taken a view of
the Situation of the City of Columho at
QuiadeLobo , order’d all forts of Materials
to be brought thither from Montml , for
the railing of a Battery, and hired 50
Pioneers for that purpofe.
The lid the DiJJave of Saffragamme
appear’d in Perfon in a Houfe formerly
belonging to Diego Melo de Caftro Gover-
nour of Columho , offering certain Sup-
plies of Men from his Majefty, which was
thankfully received by the General.
The 23d another Battery wasere&ed
near the Church of St. Sehaftian,
Two days after came into the Camp
the Emperor’s Dijfaveoi the Four Corks at
the head of 700 men; and the fame Even-
ing the General received a Letter writ
with his Majefty’s own Hand, and
brought by one of his own Poft-men: It
was curioufly perfumed with all forts
of Spices, and on each fide you faw the


Welcome
of Figeiro
at Colum-
btf.
A noted
Deferter
lives an
account of
the Condi-
tion at Co-
tomba
figure of a Woman, with her Hands
folded, lifting her Eyes up to Heaven,
being an Anfwer to Mr. Adrian van der
uMeyden’s Letter writ to his Majefty from
Batecalo. The King feem’d not well fa-
tisfied, that the faid Letter had not been
wrapp’d in white Linen as ufual, and
that fome of his Titles had not been in-
ferted \ yet he teftify’d his Satisfaction
about the arrival of the Dutch fleet,alledg-
ing for the reft, that purfuant to the Pro-
nufe made him by Mr .Jacob
the Agreement with him and Adrian van
der Meyden, till City was to be delivered
into his Hands: But that as he made no
great account thereof, he was fatisfy’d,
provided they would allow him the Ho-
nour of the Conqueft, which he would
acknowledg upon all Occafions. In the
Conclulion of the Letter he told them,
that he had ordered Lodgings to be pre-
par’d for them in all the Places thro which
they were to pafs.
The 16th we were bufy in mounting
the Cannon upon a Battery, and had four
Men wounded and one kill’d. The fame
Day we receiv’d a Supply of Ammuniti-
on and Provifion, brought aboard the Ly*
on Yacht to Puntegale. Sunday the iSth
after Sermon, a Deferter with a Negro
came intotheCamp from the City, who
having made his Efcape thro the fens,
told the General, that Cafpar Figeirow as
by the Governor of Columbo, welcomd
with thefe Words, Tou deftrve to be banged ,
and that he had alledged many Falflioods
in his Defence, and among the reft that
he could not attack us, becaufe we were
fo deeply entrench’d near the Sea-fhoar.
The fame day the Emperor’s Dijfavc of
the feven Corks arriv’d in the Camp
with 500 Men, who together with the
other Lafcarins were employed in carry-
ing Ammunition. The 29th a Deferter
came over to us from the City, his Name
was Herman Luca/s , a Native of Hertogen-
bujh y who having formerly deferted our
Service at Gale, in company of one na-
med Walraven , had obtain’d the Name of
fohndeßofa among the Portuguefes -, but
having had the Misfortune of killing a-
nother at Columbo, was fled to Candy,
where he pretended to have been fent by
the Governor, to view the Outworks of
the Place: He gave the General an ac-
count of divers remarkable Paffages, and
among the reft, that he had been prefent
in the Engagement, which happen’d the
17 th, and that of that whole Body, not
above 150 Portuguefes return’d to Colum-
bo, where there were as yet nine Compa-
nies, amounting in all vtith the Citizens
able to bear Arms to 800 Men : That the
Governor was highly concerned at the
lofs of thefe Troops, and the enfuing
Siege, efpecially lince Tome of the Citi-
zens Ihew’d no great Inclination to fight.
We play’d the iame day very furioufly
upon the City, and the Battery rais’d a-
gainft S. Sebajiian was likewife brought
to perfection.
The next following Day a certain Portu-
guefeFrifonet was brought into the Camp
he was fent from Mtlagre, and had lived 14
days upon Grafs and Herbs in the Woods,
The 3 d of Novemb . a Carpenter and
Cannoneer were kill’d by a Cannon-fhoc
upon the Battery raifed at Quia de Lo-
bo, and the fame Afternoon the Sloop
call’d the Delft arriv’d from Caleture with
Pouder. About the fame time a Defer-
ter came to us out of the City, but being
lately come from Goa, he could tell no
great matter. The fame Evening the
Ship call’d the Brorvn-fi/h arriv’d with Let-
ters from Laurence Pit , Governor of the
Coaft of Coromandel , having on board
44544 Pounds of Gun-powder m , (he
brought alfo Advice, that the Yacht the
Popkensburg was fafely arriv’d at Gale y
but that they had no News of the Ship
called the Haddock, The fame Night wc
were bufy in raifmg a Battery near the
Sea-lhoar.
The 4 th of Novemb. early in the Morn-
ing, News was brought to the General
from Negumbo, that according to the
Report of certain Inhabitants of Annaro-
lundane, 12 Sail of Ships were difcover’d
off of Chilaon whereupon immediate
Orders were given to the Commodore
Edward Hauw, to ufe all pottible Endea-
vours to get Intelligence thereof : the
fame was alfo recommended to the Head
Fador of Gale, John Kroon , and to be up-
on his Guard. The fame Afternoon, a
Cannon-Bullet from the Baftion of St.
Stephen, patting thro a Gallery of the
Church of Quia de Lobo, whild the Sur-
geons were dretting fome wounded Sol-
diers, a Soldier was kill’d, two others
had their Arms (hot off, and three more
were dangeroudy wounded.
About the fame time Tenecon Apuhamy „
came in the Quality of the Emperor’s
Meffenger, with a Bread (hield of Gold,
befet with precious Stones, and faden’d
to a Gold Chain, and brought the follow-
ing Letter from his Majedy to the Gene-
ral.
“ T) A 7 A sin £ a the s reatcft Monar ch
u XV and mpft Potent Emperor of the
Empire of Ceylon , wiflhes Health to
Columbo
.
ews 0 r
being dif
covered 3
The Empe-
ror's Let-
ter to Ge-
neral


44 Gerard Hulft Admiral of the Fleet,
44 belonging to the moft faithful Nation
44 of th e Dutch.
44 By the Letters fent to me from the
44 Governor of our Fortrefs of Gale, I
a haveunderftood, that immediately af-
44 ter your Arrival with the Dutch Fleet
iC there, you have made yourfelf Mailer
44 of the Fort of Caleture \ and that one
44 half of the Portuguefe Prifoners were
a fent aboard a Ship, the reft being re-
44 fervedforour Service. The News of
44 your Succefs in the Engagement be-
44 twixt Caleture and Columbo , without
44 any conliderable Lofs on the fide of
44 our faithful Hollanders , being likewife
44 receiv’d by me with Angular Satisfafti-
iC on, I fent immediate Orders to all my
44 Dijfaves (Governors) and chief Com-
44 manders, to bring into the Field all
44 the Forces of our Empire. In the
44 mean while I receiv’d an Ola (Letter)
44 from the Dijfave of Saffragam, dated
44 Ottob. 23. wherein he informs me, that
44 having been fent for by your Excellen-
44 cy, you enquired after my Health,
44 telling him at the fame time, that you
44 were come to no other end, than to
44 deliver the Cities of Columbo, Manaar
44 and Jafnapatnam into our Hands*
u which done, you would in Perfon ap-’
44 pear in our Imperial Majefty’s Prc-
-44 fence. I have been very ill for many
u Days pall, which however has not pre-
-44 vented my taking the necelfary mea-
-44 fares for the railing of the Forces of
44 the Empire. No fooner had Irecei-
-44 ved the welcome News of your Excel-
cc lency, but I was in a manner immcdi-
-44 ately reftor’d to my former Health
44 being now twice as ftrong as before 5
44 and able (thro God’s Mercy) toaffift
44 in Perfon in the intended Expedition
44 which I intend to begin theiiof Nov.
“ I have fent with this Letter one of the
44 Officers of our Court, to enquire after
44 your Excellency’s Health, and to bring
4t youa Prefent from me, which I hope
44 your Excellency will value, not fo
44 much in regard of its Value, as in re-
-44 fpeft of the Love and good Inclination
44 of the Giver.
Dated at our Imperial Court in the City
of Candy, Oft. 29. 1655. &<*ja Singa
Raju , moft Potent Emperor of Cey-
lon.
CHAP. XXVI.
Resolutions and Infructions concerning the intended General Assault upon the City
of Columbo.
,
Aifault *L
agreed up-
on by gens-
raicon-
lent.
Tkc Dutch
General's
the qover-
nor of c©.'
Jumbo.
TH E 9th of Nov . a new Battery with
four great brafs Cannon, having be-
gantoplay againft St. Stephen's Baftion
a General Council of War was call’d of
all the Chief Officers, in order to con-
fult (after having implor’d the Divine
Affiftance) whether it were convenient
to venture a General Alfault upon Colum-
bo: The General having openly declar’d,
that every one there prefent Ihonldbe at
his full Liberty to difeover his real Senti-
nlsnts concerning this great Undertak-
mg 9 ft was agreed by unanimous Con-
fent, that feeing the Alacrity of the Sol-
diers, it was convenient to attempt a Ge-
neral Aflault.
Soon after the General difpatclfd a
Trumpeter, bearing a Flag of Truce in
his Hand, to the Portuguefe Governor,
Anthony de Souza Continho , with the fol-
lowing Letter.
44 The Succefs that has attended our
44 Arms in the taidng of Cakturc y and the
cc Defeat of the Troops under Caff at
tc Figeiro , near the Shoar of Pamture,
u together with the Advantages obtain-
tc ed already in the Siege of Columbo ,
u may as I fuppofe fufficiently entitle
cc me to demand, without Vanity, the
“ delivering up of the City, in the Name
44 of his Imperial Majefty Raja Singa 7
44 and the raofl Noble Dutch-Eajl-India
44 Company. I hope your Excellency
44 will not put a wrong Interpretation
44 upon this Demand, when you conlider
44 that,purfuant to the Tenor of your own
44 Letters fent to Don Anthonio Mendes
cC d y Aranha y and Cafpar Figeiro, thefirft
44 dated Sepremb. 30. and the fecond the
44 1 sth and 15 th of Ottoh. (both which are
cc fallen into our Hands) you were then
4t fufficiently fenfible, that the Defence
44 of Columbo depended on the Preferva-
-44 tion of the Forces in Caleture y and
44 thofe under the Command of Cafpar
44 Figeiro, It is upon this fcore that I
44 am of Opinion, I don't put the leaft


TheGover-
mfs An-
fiver.
onsforthe
General
A V MIu
44 Blemifh upon your Courage, fince be-
-44 ing bereav’d of thele means, you have
44 never thele fs given fucli ample Proofs
44 of your Zeal and Bravery in the De-
-44 fence of this Place. My Requeft is
4< only founded upon this, to avoid the
44 Effufion of Innocent Blood, the almoft
44 neceilary Confequence and unavoidable
44 Fate of all Places taken by Afiault, it
44 being fufficiently known, that the Fu-
-44 ryof the conquering is not
44 eafily flopp’d upon thofe Occa lions.
Nov. 9. Gerard Hulft .
The Trumpeter returning a little while
after, told, that coming near to S. John’s
Baflion, the Letter was taken from him
by a Portuguefe Officer, who affur’d him,
that the Governor fhould return an An-
fwer the next Day: Hereupon the Can-
non being ordered to play as before,
three Companies under the Lieutenants
William de Wit , Henry Gerritfz , and
Chriflopher Egger , were fent to Montual ,
in order to be put on board the two
Yachts, the T sr Goes and the Erafmus.
The 1 cth of Novemb . an Anfwer was
fent to the General upon his Letter.
44 As God Almighty difpofes the
41 Chances of War according to his
44 Pleafure, fo he may as well declare
44 now for our fide, as he has done for
cc you before : The Place you require,
44 belongs to the King of Portugal my
44 Mailer, who having entrufled me with
44 the fame, I mult be
cc him for it. The Reafons alledged by
C 4 your Excellency, are not fufficient to
u move me to lay afide the Defence ot
44 this City •, not queftioning, but that
44 Time and Experience will convince
44 you, that our Condition tt prefent is
44 much beyond what you imagine. I
44 recommend you to God’s Protection.
Nov. 9. Antonio de Souza Coutinho.
After the Receit of this refolute An-
fwer, the General thought fit togive the
following Inftrudions for the intended
General Afiault.
cc The Yachts, viz., the Maid of En~
“ chuyfen, commanded by Volkert Adrian
u Shram (who afterwards rendred hira-
-44 feif fo famous in the North, during
tC the Englifh War) and the Workum, A-
-44 rent Groenfield Commander, ftiall ap-
-44 proach into the Bay, as near to the
44 Water-Fort as poffibly they can •, for
64 which purpofe they (hall be provided
ct with 11 o chofen Seamen, 5000 Pounds
cc of Gunpowder, and with Shot in pro-
44 portion.
cc The Yachts ftiall anchor in any part
tc of the Bay, where they can bell an-
cc noy the Water-Fort, and under fa-
-44 vour of their Cannon land their Men.
cc For this purpofe the Yachts the Ter
44 Goes and Erafmus, fhall keep within
44 Cannon-fiioc of the other two Yachts,
44 and have aboard, befides their Ships
44 Crew, 100 Landmen each, viz. the
cc Companies of William de. Wit, Henry.
4C Gcrritfz , and Chriflopher Egger, in or-
-44 der to land, in conjunction with the
44 Men of the other Yachts. The Boats,
44 Tenders and other fmall Vefiels fhall
44 keep near the before-mention’d Ships,
44 viz. the Tender the Amflerdam with
44 her Sloop, near the Ter Goes, and the
44 Sloop the Wefel , the Boat of the Mary-
-44 gold flower, with her Sloop the Delft ,
44 and the Tender the Naarden with the
44 reft. The Tenders the Hair and
44 Brownfifh (hall keep near the Shoar, to
tc be ready upon all Occafions to carry
44 Advice where it fhall bethought ne-
<c cefiary. In Ihort, all the Boats (hall at-
-44 tend the Velfels that are engag’d againft
44 the Fort, in order toTave their Aden,
44 in cafe any of them fliould be funk or
cc difabled. When the Companies Scan-
-44 dard is fix’d above the red Flag, this
44 fhall be the Signal of landing : If the
44 faid Standard is fet up on the Main-
-44 maft yards Arm, it fhall be the Signal
44 for the Boats ter come to fuccour the
44 Ship, fhe being in danger of finking.
44 When the Prince’s Standard is fet
44 up on the Ramparts, it is a Sign that
4c we are Mailers of that part of the
u Fortifications, when the Attack either
cc upon the Caftle or Fort may ceafe, till
ct the faid Standard be fet up in Captain
44 Kuylenburg* s Quarters, near the Sea-
<c fhoar this being intended for a Signal,
cc that we are alfo Mailers of the Town
44 on the Landlide, when the Officers in
44 their refpe&ive Attacks may either
44 flop or go forward, according as it
44 fhall be thought convenient by the Ma-
-44 jority of Voices.
44 Whilft the Ships the Maid of En~
44 chuyfen and Workum , arc under Sail to
44 enter the Bay, all the reft of the
44 Ships fhall weigh their Anchors, and
44 put up the red Flag, as if they would
44 enter the Bay, but keep without Gan-
-44 non-fhot. So foon as the Forces are
44 landed, all the Officers, Soldiers and
44 Seamen, fhall obey Mr. Adrian Roo-
-44 thaus % as their fupreme Commander.
- - ' LL tf Tl *1(1


u Whilft the Ships and Menareenga-
u ged againft the Water-Fort, the City
u is to be aflaulted at the fame time,
u near the Sea-lhoar, at the Baftion of
cc St. John, and on the Land-fide near
ic the Gate of Rajuha : The Attack up-
u on the Baftion of S. John (hall be com-
ct manded by Captain Kous , and the o-
“ ther by Captain Kuylenburgh, either of
u them to be feconded, as Occafion re-
<c quires, by Mr. John van der Laan, the
tc Companies of Kuylenburgh , Covert
<c Quartet, Jurian Gevel, Andrew Stec-
cc kens, Lambert Steenhagen, Hans Chrifto-
u pher, Joachim Block , Melchior van Scbo-
-4C nenbeck and John Adoll, with 3 6 Javane-
u fes, and half a Company of Bandane-
“ fes, to be employ’d in the Aflault of
cc the firft Baftion: The fcaling Ladders
tc fhall be carried and fixed by the Ban-
ct danefes, Javanefes and Mardykers, mix’d
cc with fome Dutch Seamen, arm’d with
cc Hand-Gtanadoes, Pikes and Hangers.
4C The Baftions of Clergos and S. Philippo,
<c near that of Saint Sebajlian (at the
<c Gate of Rajuha) (hall be attack’d
cC by the Companies of Captain Wef-
<c trenen , Lieutenant IVildtfchut, John
u Hartman, John Cooper, Hardenbergh y
u Roggenkamp, James Alenbicr, Diedelof
cc van der Beek 7 Henry Broekhuyfen , John
u Coertfen , with the Javanefes , half a
cc Company of Bandanefes , and the Com-
u pany commanded by Captain Ruyfch,
tc Captain Weftrenen (hall command
u the Attack againft the Baftion of Ckr-
u gos, and Captain Ruyfch that ofS. Phi-
LC UppOj to be feconded by frefh Forces as
“ Occafion requires. The Bandanefes y
u Javanefes and Mardykers, in conjundi-
tc on with the Dutch Seamen, fhall fix the
u fcaling Ladders, and the Lafcaryns of
u Ceylon be employ’d in carrying off
u the Slain.
About the fame time we received In-
telligence, that the Portuguefe Succours
were arriv’d at Goa, and that they intend-
ed to come to the Relief of Columbo:
Word whereof was fent immediately to
Gale to be upon their Guard, for fear of
a Surprize. The 11 th of Novemb. (the
Day appointed for the General Aflault)
it being calm, fo that the Ships could
not enter the Bay, the fame was defer’d
till the next Day, tho we did not ceafe
in the mean time to play more furioufly
with our Cannon than ever before, and
we obferv’d that the Enemy had taken
in their red Flag upon the Baftion of S.
Crus,
CHAP. XXVII.
A General Affault both by Sea and Land made upon Columbo, but without Suc-
ceƒs. Letters from Raja Singa to the General. Dutch Prifoners come out of
Columbo.
The Wa~
ter-hort
e A *'
THE 12 th by break of Day, the Maid
of Enchuyfen , and foon after the
Workum, being followed by th t Ter Goes
and the Erafmus , thunder’d moft fu-
rioufly againft the Water-Fort, from
whence they anfwer’d them very briskly.
Immediately after the Aflault was begun
on the Landfide in three feveral Places:
The General in Perfon with ten Compa-
dies attack’d the Gate of Rajuha , and
the Baftions of S. Philippo and Clergos \ and
Major John van der Laan with nine Com-
panies, thofe of St. John and Courcvs •,
whilft James Lippens with two Companies
of Soldiers and fome Seamen, pafs’d
the Fens in feven Chinefe Champans or
Boats, in order to attack the City where
it was leaft fortify’d.
the General perceiving, he advanc’d in
Perfon witfi fome of the braveft Officers,
and fix’d the fcaling Ladders to the Cor-
tin : but having receiv’d a Wound in his
Left Thigh, he was forc’d to be carried
off. In the mean while News being
brought that they had enter’d the Breach
on Major van der Laarfs Attack, he re-
turn’d to his Station (before his Wound
was dreffed) but found things in fuch a
Confufion, that he was forc’d to retreat,
the Major and his Forces not being able
to maintain themfelves in the Breach, re-
treating at the fame time, after they had
in vain attempted three times to recover
it. Lieutenant Melchior van Schoonbeek , a
High-German by Birth, and of a Noble
Family, was the only Perfon who got
upon the Baftion of S. John , but for want
of being feconded, loft his Life there like
a brave Soldier, his Head being after-
wards ftuck upon a Pike by the Portuguefes ,
upon the fame Baftion. The
WihM
But the Befieg’d fir’d fo furloufly upon
our Men, efpecially with their Firelocks,
that the Seamen could not be brought
forward to fix the fcaling Ladders * which
hj sc*
*n4 Lmd,


timber of
tk -’ fl ain
Ixtter
from the
Emperor t>
the Gene-
uL
The Forces under Captain LippenSy
having not without fome Refiftance from
four Mancbous or Boats, palled the Fens,
got into the City y but the Captain being
forely wounded, made fliift to retreat
with fome few, the reft for want of time-
ly Succours being all made Prifoners of
War. The Yacht the Maid of Enchuy-
feny was fo forely batter’d from the Fort,
that being ready to fink, her Grew was
carried off by the Sloop the Langerack
but the Workum cut her Cables, and got
out of the Bay without any coafiderable
Lofs. The Number of the Slain on our
fide amounted to 200, and 350 wounded,
not including the two Companies of John
van Hardenburg and Roggencampy and the
Seamen commanded by John Lippens , that
Were made Prifoners in the City. The
Ships the Ter Goes and ErafmiiSy who had
aboard the Soldiers that were to affault
the Water-Fort, not being able to get
near enough by reafon of the Wind, foon
got out of the Bay.
44 this unfortunate Day the Ge-
b 44 neral received a Letter from his
44 Imperial Majeffy, teftifying his good
44 Opinion of his Excellency, not quef-
u tioning but that after the taking of Co-
-44 lumbo he would deliver the faid City
44 into his Hands, purfuantto the Agree-
-44 ment made with hit K Wefterwold. That
H he defir d to have fuch of his Rebelli-
-44 ous Subjects, as Ihould fall into our
4c Hands, deliver’d up to his Dif~
44 faveSy either alive or dead, in order
44 to puniffi them with the fame Severity,
44 as he had done thofe at Batecalo *, and
44 that he had order’d his Governors to
44 ravage and deftroy all the Villages in the
44 Low-Lands. He fent at the fame time
enclos’d a Letter from the Portuguefe Go-
vernor, Antonio de Souza Continho , dated
Oftob.ij. at Columbo , to the Emperor, the
chief Contents whereof were, u That
44 he could not forbear to put his Majeffy
44 in mind of the antient Friendfhip bc-
-44 twixt him and the Portuguefes , which
t 4 he was forry to have been interrupted,
44 by the Dutch making themfelves Maf-
-44 ters of Cakture, and having routed
44 their Forces near Paneture , by laying
44 fo clofe and vigorous a Siege to the Gi-
-44 tyof Columbo , that they were in great
4 ‘ Danger of being forc’d to furrender.
41 Wherefore they craved his Majefty’s
44 Affiftance againft the Hollanders , who
4t after they were Matters of the City,
4t would certainly not deliver up the
44 fame to his Majeffy, but lord it over
44 his Subjects j which his Majeffy, accord-
cc ing to his Wildom, might ealily fee,
“ how much it would tend to his Diffio-
cC nour , whereas if he join’d with the
v ' Portuguefes againft them, he might
“ promife hirafelf all the Advantages
44 due to To great a Monarch.
The 13*6 of Novemb . was fpent In car-
rying the wounded Soldiers to Negumbo ,
Gale , and Montual: The fame Day the
Enemy in a Bravado, put two of our En-
figns upon the Baffions of S. John and S.
Pbilippo, At the fame time Advice was
brought, that the Ships the Avenhorn and
Campen richly laden from Perfidy were
arrived at Gale in their Voyage to Bata-
via. For which Reafon the Yacht the
Brownfifh was difpatch’d to Gak y to carry
fome Letters thither, to be fent further
to Batavia, as likewise a Letter to be fent
by Land to the Emperor Raja Singa .
The Yacht the Popkensburg arriv'd alio
with Gunpowder and other Neceffarid
for our Camp.
The 19*6, a Letter from the Emperor
Raja Singa was deliver’d by his Dtjfaves
to the General, wherein he condol’d him
about his Wound, and the ill Sneeds of
the late Affault, telling him, that he was
employ’d Day and Night in making Pre-
parations to join him with his Forces, and
defiring not to venture a fecond Affault
before his Arrival. A Letterof Thanks
being order’d to be written to hisMajeffy,
the Yachts the Workum and Popkensburg ,
with a Frigate, were difpatch’d to Negum - ‘
boy to cruife to the North of that Har-
bour, to get timely Intelligence of the
Enemies Approach.
The 16th fome Cannon-fhot being
heard at a good diffance, it was generally
believed to be the Signal from the Fortrefs
of Negumbo , to advertife the Arrival of
the Portuguefe Fleet. Whereupon Mr.
Adrian van derMeydcn took two Compa-
nies of Soldiers and as many Seamen,
out of the Church of Quia de Lobo (where
they had their Poll) and marched direct-
ly to Montual y in order to embark them
there, to prevent the Enemies Landing.
The General,notwithflanding his Wound ?
follow’d thither in Perfon, and found
them ready to embark, which was how-
ever defer’d for that time, till they Ihould
receive more certain Intelligence. On-
ly the Yachts the Mars and the Flijjingcr'y
with fome Officers aboard them, were
commanded to cruife off the Northern
Point of Montual .
Much about the fame time arriv’d the
Roman Yacht from Suratte with 1 6 Loads
of Wheat. The Officers reported that
Thsipomfc-
ed(eiit *~
SemeSkips
fent a
cruiJtngL


A whole
Fleet of
Portu •
guefes loft.
a Portuguefe Fleet confining of 30 Frigates,
was entirely deftroy’d by aTempeftnear
Winguvla , but that no body knew from
whence they came, or whither they were
bound; and that the Cannon we heard
fome Days before, was difcharg’d by
them as a Signal of their Diftrefs, to the
Workum and Popkensburg.
The 19th Captain Kuylenburgh , who
died of the Wbunds he received in the
late A flan It, being honourably interr’d j
the Ift of Decemb. two Serjeants came in-
to our Gamp, who being formerly taken
Prifoners at u4nguratotte by the Portuguefes ,
had taken the as thefe were
flying from Manaar to Tutecoryn , to de-
fert and hide themfelves among the Moors
of Kilicare, from whence they were
brought in one of our Veffels hither.
On the other hand a certain Seaman, na-
med ClaasClaafz,, did fwim crofspartof
the Bay into the City.
The fame Night a new Trench was 0-
pen’d againlt the Baftion of S. John , and
carried on with all imaginable Diligence.
The Yacht the Roman was fent a cruiling
to get Intelligence, whether any of the
Enemies Ships could be difeover’d at Sea
as the Flufhing Yacht was difpatch’d to
the Coaft of Aialabar, and the Eraftnus
fent out in her ftead a cruifing.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Want in Columbo. Anthony Amiral de Menezes taken Priƒouer. The Con-
tinuation of the Siege.
Wont in
Columbo.
Anthonio
Mcnexes
utters
TH E 7 th of Decetnb. we got Intelli-
gence, that moft of the Inhabitants
of Columbo, for want of Rice and other
Provifions, had been forc’d to lift them-
felves among the regular Forces; that in
the late Affault they had taken 70 or 80
of ours Prifoners, whereas their whole
Lofs did not amount to above 20 or 25
Fortuguefes, among whom were however
twoPerfonsof Note, viz., Anthonioßar-
bofo, and Felicia Leefio , Lord of Macoene .
That they had mounted the Cannon ta-
ken out of the Maid of Enchuyfen upon
their Baftions, and were bufy in making
divers Retrenchments, in hopes of being
foon fuccour’d from Goa, and that their
whole Force conlifted in 700 Fortuguefes.
The 10 th of Decetnb. Antonio Amiral de
Menetes (then Governor of Jafnapatnam ,
and afterwards 1658. kill’d at the taking
of Manaar) was taken Prifoner at Mon-
tual, as he was going from Manaar to Co-
lumho with fome Letters, one whereof
being written in Charadters, was unciphe-
red by the GeneraPs Order, and was as
follows.
To the General Antonio de Souza Cou-
tinho.
“ OEfore I had the leaft Intelligence
“ U of the Approach of the Enemies
cc Ships, I writ to your Excellency by
a Land, tho I have not heard fince what
“is become of the Meffenger. The
w three Pados are well arriv’d at Goa , and
ct the five Medengers fent thither the
cc fixth fent by Anthony d? Abreu , did not
“ ft ay in the leaft in this Fort, but tarri-
“ ed two Days at Negapatan, and brings
along with him full Inflations con-
‘ cerning the Relief of Colombo. I have
\ L been idle in my Station, both in
advihng how to raife Men for our Ser-
vice in the Indies, and in contributing
all that Jay in my Power of my own
accord, which by fome others has not
“ been done without reluftancy, efpeci-
ally in giving my A(Tiftance in equipping
‘ Tome Veflels of Bulk, and Galleys
c well mann’d for the Relief of the City,
cc hitherto heard no News from
the Fleet at Cape Comoryn , fent for
cc that purpofe. I wifh they may reach
tt t he Ifle of Manaar, when we/hall have
Opportunity to debate the whole mat-
cc ter with the Commander in Chief, how
cc to contrive matters for the Defence of
the Place: You may reft a [far’d, that
u nothing fliali be wanting on my part,
a that may tend towards the Accom-
plifhment of its Relief, which I heartily
“ wifh may take effedt ; it being my O-
“ pinion, that a good Fleet is the very
u means now to preferve that Place, till
“ we receive our Supplies from Goa.
u Perhaps it may pleafe God to deftroy
cc the Hereticks in this Siege, and to a-
a bate their Haughtinefs, occafion’d by
u their late Succefs, caus’d by our
u Negled ; it being certain, that the
u fame might have been forefeen a con*
a fiderable time ago. Orders are given
-- to have a good quantity of Matches


2GO Ks~
[tks mafe
*■ SxX).
44 made, which (hall be brought by the
44 firft Pado that goes from hence j the
44 other tw r o Shall follow foon after, one
“ of them being to be armed for the
44 Defence of the other : Their approach
u you will know by the Signals agreed
4t upon. Perhaps the Governor of Aia-
-44 naar may have got Intelligence of our
tc Fleet, and has given you intelligence
44 thereof. God preferve and deliver
44 your Excellency from all danger.
Jafnapatnam 11. Antbonio Amiral de Menez.es.
Sov, 1655.
The Contents of another Letter were
as follows.
u T Writ to your Excellency under Co-
-44 * vert of Sebajlian Martino with the
44 Galliots of September , when I little
44 dream’d of what we heard afterwards
44 at Cochin , and on the Cape Comoryn ,
44 concerning the prefent danger of the
44 City, and of the lofs of fo brave a
44 Captain as Anthonio Mendes <P Aranha ,
44 with a good number of our choiceft
44 Men. I have fince underftood feveral
44 other things of this nature, which
44 have coll me many Tears \ we did all
44 we could to make the Cape Comoryn ,
44 but the contrary Wind prevented us:
4: However, tho we have fail’d in this,
44 you may affure you felf, that the Vice-
-44 roy will not fail to fuccour the City of
44 Columbo with all his Forces in the /«.
44 dies. It is rumour’d here, that Don
44 Manoel Mafcarenhtvs intends to leave
44 this place, there being very bad News
44 brought lately from Jafnapatnam but
44 we hope and pray to God that he will
44 be pleafed to preferve the City till Fe-
-44 bruary ,
Nicolao d' Olivera.
n Novemb. 1655.
The reft of the Letters were very near
the fame, with this addition only, that
the Portuguefes fet fail in Otiober with 15
Frigots, but were forc'd back near the
Cape Comoryn , fo near that they had land-
ed fomc Soldiers, who were marched by
Land to Jafnapatnam, with an intention
to come to Colombo , to give notice there
of the Equipment of fix Galcons at Goa
intended for the Succours of die City }
and that in cafe the Dutch (hould block
up that Habour, they would fight their
way through them. All thefe Letters
were fent to his Imperial Majcfty.
The 12 Decemb. 200 Negroes being
feea to Tally out of the Gate of M^ anc t
keeping along the Sea-fhore, three Com-
panies were order’d to attack them * but
they no fooner efpied our People advan-
cing towards them, than they retreated
in hafte to the City; However three of
them deferted to us, and gave an account
that the reafon of their coming out was
only to fetch and cut fome Faggot-
Wood for the repairing of the Baftions
of S. John y S. Stephen and S. Philtppo j and
that they had made betwixt the two for-
mer a Retrenchment, in cafe they Ihouid
be forced to quit the Baftions.
The fame day we finifh’d our fecond
Redoubt, and the next two Portuguefe,
Deferters confirm’d the Report of the-
Negroes, adding that they much dreaded
our Mines, that the Baftion of S. John
was guarded by two Companies (of 25
or 30 Men each) under Cafpar Figeiro y
the Gate of Magapane with three, ° and
the reft in proportion. At the fame
time we faw a whole Troop of half-
ftarv’d Wretches forc’d out of the Town,
but were made to return from whence
they came, except a few Portuguefe , who
could give good intelligence about the
Condition of the Place.
The in the morning 10 or iz
Boats came out of the Town to fetch
Faggot-wood \ but finding us prepare
to attack them, they retir’d with Preci-
pitation, after they had wounded three of
oar Men.
The 15 th the General agreed with 20
Pioneers to work continually (fix at a
time) in the Trenches, at the rate of
20 Pence per diem , befides a good Reward
after they had finifti’d the Work. In the
Afternoon a Battery of 6 Guns was or-
der’d to be ere&cd.
The 18 th a Gunner having out of care-.
lefnefs double charg’d a Gun upon a Bat- 1
tery, kill’d three of our own Pioneers, ‘
and wounded 7 Negroes; and in the Even-
ing four great Cannon were not without
fome lofs planted upon the before-men-
tioned Battery.
The 19th we play’d thence raoft fu-
rioufly upon the Baftions of S. John and
Stephen , and two more Cannons were
mounted upon it the fame Evening.
The loth a new Redoubt was begun,
the Trenches being then carried on within
two Rods of the Counterfcarp. In the
Evening we miffed Simon Lopes , who was
again gone over to the Enemy.
The 16th three Negro Carpenters
coming over to us, reported that the
Portuguefes had undermin’d the Baftion of
S .John, and laid 5 large Barrels with Gun-
powder in five divers places underneath
f
Report of
fonts De-
fetters.
An urfet-
tmxte Ac-
cl dent.


Reflation
taken in a
council of
If nr.
it, having laid the Train by the means of
certa i n Bambocanes, which were to be
lighted on the top whilft we were affault-
ing the faid Baftion, which was the rea-
Ibn that they had not difcharg’d their
Cannon from thence thefe two days paft.
They added, that the Son of Anthonio
de Souza Coutinho the Governor of Co-
lumho, being bufy in incouraging the
Workmen by his own Example, receiv’d
a Wound by a Mufquet-fhot in the Head,
of which he died foon after. A Coun-
cil of War was alfo call’d, in which it
w as refolv’d to carry on the Trenches
with all imaginable vigor, to prevent the
Enemy in perfecting his Retrenchments
before the Breach of the Baftion of
S. John , and to fix our Miners there.
The 27th the General gave notice to
the DifTaves of Saffragam and the four
Cortes, that he intended to fend an En-
voy to his Majefty, to know his Inclina-
tions, whether he intended to appear
in Perfon in our Camp or not: he de-
fied them to write to him upon the fame
Subjeft, the time for attempting a fe-
cond general Affault drawing near; and
that in cafe his Majefty had the leaft
doubt left of our fincerc Intentions, he
would give him full Satisfaction upon that
Head.
CHAP. XXIX.
The Portuguefes throw Stones out of a Mortar. We make a third Redoubt :
Endeavour to lay the Gallery over the Ditch. A Spy hang'd. Letters from
Coromandel.
Another
Redoubt
ere fled.
Form-
guefes/or-
%
the Ditch,.
THE i%th of December in the Eve-
ning the Portuguefes began to throw
feveral Stones out of a Mortar into our
Works, which fomething furpris’d us at
firft,but afterwards weguefs’d that it was
Simon Lopes who lately deferted our Service
that had put them in the way of it. The
next day Capt. John Hartman was fent
with Letters to the Emperor at Candy ,
and we were hard at work to bring the
third Redoubt near the Sea-fhore to per-
fection, where we planted a Mortar, and
continued our approaches to the Counter-
fcarp.
A Chinefe Deferter, a Native of Macao,
reported that they were indifferently
well provided with Provifions in the City,
and that it was true that the Governor’s
Son was dead. Letters were at the fame
difpatch’d to Mr. Lawrence Pit, Governor
of Coromandel, to fend us fome Ammuniti-
on, and to order the Ships which upon the
arrival of the Veffels from Tajouan fail
from thence to Batavia, to touch at Gale , to
be employ’d in thwarting the intended Suc-
cours of the Portuguefes, or to take aboard
part of the Portuguefe Prifoners among us.
The Sth of January, finding the Ene-
my bufy in planting Palifado’s in the
Ditch, fome Seamen arm’d with Hand-
granado’s made them foon quit that En-
terprise. But the next following day
finding the Enemy to have made fome
Entrenchments there, a Hole was or-
der’d to be made in the Wall \ and Cap-
tain Henry Gerard , the head Gunner and
Ingineer, and Carpenter, being order’d
to view the Work, they reported that
the Enemy had planted a row of Pali-
fado’s clofe to one another, extending
to the Sea-fliore, which made them ima-
gine that they expefted the moft fierce
Affault on that fide.
Six expert Carpenters having offer’d
their Service for perfecting the Gallery,
ioo Crowns were promifed them as a
Reward ; and it being refolv’d to fix the
faid Gallery the next day under favour o{
our great Cannon and Fire-locks, a cer-
tain number of Mufqueteers were or-
der’d to the extremities of the Trenches:
but the Wall being thicker at the bottom
than at the top, it was almoft Evening
before they could make a Breach in it,
when attacking the Enemy with their
Hand-granado’s, they forced them from
the Ditch, where they polled 12 Fire-
locks } but thefe receiv’d fo warm a Sa-
lute from the Enemy’s Cannon and Fire-
locks both of the Baftions of S. John and
S. Stephen , and the Palifado-work, that
they were forced to retreat, and the
fixing of the Gallery was thought fit to
be delay’d till a more convenient time,
having loft only one Carpenter and two
Negroes in this Enterprise. John Rootha-
«sthe Dutch Reer-Admiral fent 12 Jan.
three Negro Prifoners from the Fleet in-
to the Camp, who were taken coming
with Letters from Afanaar , in order to
carry them into Columbo \ but they were
of little moment, except what was con-
The Dutch
endeam
in vainti
fix their
Oaderj,


sm Let-
lets inter-
aped.
Jfcjp In-
jiruftions
wt to the
Dutch
fleet.
Letters
from Co-
wmandel.
* A certain
Meafure.
I Certain
Indian
Fruit of
which they
o,s ‘
tain’d in the following Paflage taken out
of Lorenfo Barbara's Letter direded to
Bon Francifco de Souza,
“ Your Fleet could not make the Cape
cc Comoryn^ becaufe they came too late, and
u were overtaken by a violent Tempeft }
w the Soldiers aboard were fent by Land
“ to Jutecoryn , and from thence by Sea
cc to Manaar, That they underftood
u that great Endeavours were ufed to
“ equip a Squadron of great Ships and
u Frigots, to be joyn’d by 8 Galeons
u for the relief of Columbo, and that they
u had certain Advice that the Galeons
“ were getting ready for that purpofe;
4C That the reft they would be inform’d
tc of by the Captain-Major’s Letter to the
Governor, &c\
The faid Prifoners reported that An-
thonio Arniral had brought a Reinforce-
ment of fix Companies from Jafnapatnam
to Manaar \ and that it was reported
there, that 5 Galeons and 28 Frigots
were to come from Goa , and being joyn’d
with fome other Velfels and Forces at
Manaar were to fail to the relief of Co-
lumbo: whereupon the General fent his
Inftrudions to our Squadron to watch the
coming of the Enemy, but efpecially to our
Cruifers, the Workum , Popkensburgh , Mars
and Erafmus Yachts } 30 Bandanefe Soldi-
ers, and as many Mardykers were alfo
order’d aboard thefe Veffels, and a Negro
Deferter reported that thofe come from
Manaar to Columbo were half naked, and
had brought no Letters, one of them be-
ing wounded, but knew nothing further.
The 1 s th of January fome of our Laf~
caryns brought in a Spy, whom they had
taken under pretence of going into the
City to fell Tobacco ; but upon the Evi-
dence of two Cingalefe Carpenters that
he was a Spy, he was hang’d on a Gibbet
near the place where he intended to have
got into the place.
The 1 9th Letters were brought to the
• Camp, Tent by Laurence Pit , then Go-
vernor of Coromandel , intimating that
we might exped a Supply of 35000
Founds weight of Gunpowder with the
Yachts the Codfifh , Rabbit, and Patience ,
that for the reft the Company had loft
1 50 loads of Rice, and 250 Ammenams*
of Areek fby an accidental Fire. That
* feveral private Merchants having lately
fent certain Ships loaden with all forts of
Provifions, we need not fear any thing
y upon that account. The Rabbit alone
£ had a Cargo of 26822 Pounds weight of
Gunpowder, 50 Packs of Guinea Linen
Cloth, and 10 Loads of Rice, valued al-
together at 23860 Gilders.
It was further advifed, that in all pro-
bability the King of Golconda was like-
ly to be embroil’d in a War with Mirza
Mula his General, who had put ftrong
Garifons in the Fortrelfes of Gendecalte i
Gronconde and Goeti, That the General
Chan Channe was lately retir’d with the
Forces of riftapour , confifting of 8000
Horfe, and 40000 Foot, from Velour to
but for what reafon was not
known. A Copy was alfo fent of a Let-
ter written by Leonard Johnfon Fador*
Decemb, 8. from Wingurla to Batavia ,
whence it appear’d that they were making
great Preparations at Goa for the relief
of Columbo, a But, added he, the Por-
u tuguefe Viceroy having fufficient Intel-
u ligence of our Strength before Co-
“ lumbo , it feems to me to be rather a
u Bravado than a real Defign, unlefs it
cc were (as fome affirm ) that the Re-
“ lief of that City wasfo politively com-
“ manded by the King of Portugal , that
Cc the Viceroy would be forced to attempt
u it, unlefs he were prevented by the
“ Dutch blocking up the Harbour of Goa
u before that time. That it was ru-
u mour’d there that the Portuguefe Sol-
cc diers fliould be oblig’d by Oath, con-
“ firm’d by the Blefficd Sacrament, that
cc in cafe they were not able to worft the
u Butch Fleet, they fhould fet fire to
a their own Ships j but he hoped that
ct the City would fall into our hands
“ before they could put their Defign in
“ Execution. But, as it were not fafe to
cC defpife ones Enemy, fo he would take
ct care to give from time to time Intelli-
“ gence of what he could learn to the
“ Diredor-General Gerard Huljl with all
4C imaginable fpeed, for which purpofe
“ he hoped to purchafe the Diligence of
u fome of the Natives by Mony. The
following Lift was annex’d of fuch Ships
as were to be employ’d in the faid Expe-
dition, 2 Caraques , 2 large Galeons, one
lefler one, 2 Caravals , 6 Patacho’s or
Yachts, 20 light Frigots, 24 more from
the Coaft of Sipaveneick , with fome Ga-
leons, and other Boats call’d Singazeeles,
His further opinion was, that the faid
Squadron might be ready towards the
end of January , and that the fame was
to be reinforc’d by fome Yachts from
Chaulj that befides the Garifon to be
left at Goa , 2000 Europeans , not reckoning
the Miftices and Negroes, were to be
embark’d aboard the faid Fleet. He
advifed further, that two English Ships
being fome days before come to an An-
chor before Goa , the Viceroy had offer’d
the Captains a confiderable Sum of Moriy,
Lift of the
Porcu-
guefe
Ships for
the relief
of Colum-
bo.


provided they would fail along with the
Fleet to Ceylon i but that they refufed to
accept of the fame, and were fail’d to
the Northward.
u Fleet from Cochin and the Cape. It is
44 fuppofed they will be ready to fail by
44 the end of the firft Month of the Year.
44 Three Yachts more are order’d from
14 Mofambique y being now taking in their
44 Cargo, befides another Yacht, defign’d
44 for Macafar. The Caravel intended
44 for China is not ready to fail, and it
44 remains uncertain whether fhe will g 0
cc thither. But, if fhe does, it will not
cc be till next Spring. Hitherto we fee
44 no Preparations either of Men or Ships
44 for Ceylon *, and they feem unrefolved
44 whether they had bed fend any Relief
44 thither, for fear they Ihould fall into
44 the hands of the Dutch. But if any be
41 fent, it will certainly not be till after
44 the departure of the Ships for Pcrtu-
-44 for which the Viceroy (hews a
44 great concern, being afraid they will
44 be intercepted by the Dutch before
4 4 they can reach Portugal
Dated January 6. Your Excellency’s
conftant Slave,
The z \ft of January , two hours before
break of day, the General being got a-
board the Ter Goes , call’d a Council of
War there, wherein it was refolv’d to
fend forthwith the Ship the Cod-fi/h to
Negomboj in order to unlade her Cargo
(intended for Gale ) there in company of
the Amfterdam and Marygold-fiorver - y and
the Hare Yacht was order’d to keep as
clofe to the Bay as poffibly llhe could, to
obferve the fmall Vedels that might pafs
and repafs in and out of the City.
The 14th of January the Flujhing Yacht
coming from Wtngurla, brought Letters
from our Faftor Leonard Johnfon y dated
the 6th of January , intimating, that the
Viceroy of Goa y inftead of fending the
pretended Succours to Ceylon , had now
refolved to fend two Caracks to Portugal y
and three Yachts to Mozambique \ and that
the Defign of the Relief of Columbo
feem’d to be laid afide: in confirmation
whereof he fcnt the following Tranflation
of a Letter written by one of our Spies
there.
To the Commodore of the Dutch Squadron
near Wingurla.
Uragami Sinay.
Hereupon it was agreed in a Council of
War, to order the Ships the Ter Goes,
Mars, the Arms of Holland , Amfterdam,
Flufhing, Erafmus, Naarden , Zierik-fee ,
Mary gold-flower, and the Hare , forthwith
towards Goa , there to expeft the coming
of the Ships from Trajouan , in company
of thofe from Per fid and Suratte. And
that the Yachts the Workum , Popkenf-
burgh, Codfifh and Rabbit, with fome light
Frigats and Sloops, fhould be kept for the
Blockade of the Harbour of Columbo.
t 0 01
cc TWO Ships (both arrived this
cc x Year) viz. Bon Jefta carrying 6$
cc Q an d the Noffa Senhora da Gratia
“ of 60 Guns, are intended to be fent to
“ Portugal , being now bufy in unloading,
44 and expefting only the return of our
Let ter of a.
spy from
Goa.
CHAP. XXX.
Mr. Hartman prefented by the Emperor. Some Spies hang'd. The Arrival of
feveral Ships. Letters from the Emperor and Dutch General .
A Bout that time the Emperor fent his
Letter to the Dutch General Mr.
Hulft, in anfwer to his fent by Mr. Hart-
man, the chief Contents of which were,
That he intended to come into our
4C Camp in the night-time, having been
44 detained hitherto by the Advice of the
« Great Men of his Court (thefe Pagans
44 being very fuperftitious in chufing their
44 time) but that now he was refolved to
44 fpeak with the General infpiteof all
44 the pretended Obftacles. That he was
44 glad to underftand, that notwithftand-
u ing our Lofs in the laft general Aflault
u we kept our Polls, and that he intend-
u ed to difpatch Mr. Hartman the next
u Thurfday. It was dated at Balane y
January 20, 1656. and fubfcribed,
Raja Sing a Rajou y molt potent
Emperor of Ceylon.
Mr. Hartman returned, being prefent-
ed with a Golden Chain and a Ring, and
reported, that fome of the Emperor’s
Diffaves having brought him the news,
Mr, Hart-
man’i fa
turn.
730
A Defcripiion of GE Y L O N.


SoW
Dutch
Ships ar-
rived,
two Spies
hangd.
Advices
from Ma-
lacca.
Two Dc-
ferters give
TtheCon-
ditmof '
the city.
that we had loft a confiderable number of
men by the fpringing of a Mine, be was
very glad to hear the contrary after-
wards. The 16th of January early in the
Morning a Letter was delivered from our
Head Fadorat Gale , John Kroon , that the
Ships the the Bengale , the Black
Bull and the Grey-bound from Tajouan by
the way of Mafulipatan , loaden with
Merchandizes from Perfia , and the Kite-
land belonging to thofe of Suratte , were
arrived there, and that he had ordered
them to fail for Columba. Two Spies
come lately out of the City, to view the
Condition of our Attacks and Batteries,
were bang’d two days after.
At the fame time Letters were brought
into the Camp, dated the lafl of Novemb.
at Malacca , intimating, that the 14 th y
15 th and 19th of November 1655. the
Ships the Vlieland , Black Bull , Arnemuy-
den and the Sweet-briar , were arrived
there from Tajouan, their Loading being
valued at 1349436 Gilders at the firft
hand : and that the Sweet-briar y the Bom-
burg and Lion were with a good quantity
of Tin of Malacca fent to Bengale . The
Cargo of thefe Ships confifls commonly
of Japonefe Silver, Bars of Copper,
Alum, Gold, China Tea, and Sugar of
Formofa , befides a confidcrable quantity
of Tin of Malacca . Upon the Coafl of
Malabar , and in Ceylon (where they com-
monly arrive at the fame time) they load
with Cinnamon, Pepper and Cardamom.
They generally make a long Voyage :
.For they fet fail from Batavia to Japan
and Taman in May , and come to Malacca
in December: From thence they fleer
their Courfe by the Nicebares to Ceylon ,
or Bengale , or Coromandel (but never
from thefe Places to Ceylon , but fome-
times return from Bengale or Ceylon to
Malacca or Batavia') and from thence by
Malabar to Suratte and Per fa , and return
in May to Ceylon (and fometimes flrait-
ways to Batavia ) and fo further with
their Cargo (they have taken in at Su-
ratte or i nFerfid) to the Coafl of Coro-
mandef where being loaden with Linen
Cloth, painted Callicoes and other Mer-
chandizes, they return to Batavia in June
or July . By Letters from John TbyJTen
Governourof Malacca , advice was given
that the Tin Trade (thechiefeft of that
Country) had been but very indifferent
that Year.
But it is time to return to the Siege of
Columho. The laft day of January two
Portuguefe Deserters, who had made fhift
to let themfelves down by Ropes from
St, Stephens Baftion, reported, that many
of their Comrades were willing to defert
for want of Pay, but that they were
flridly guarded *, that the Garifon con-
ilfled flill of 650 Europeans , and they
had Rice for two Months longer y that
they flill rely’d upon the promifed Suc-
cours of 6 Galeons. Soon after we favt
a whole Troop of half-ftarv’d Wretches
coming out of the Town \ but 120 were
forced to return without Relief. The
1 ith of February about 500 of them, Men,'
Women and Children, being torced by
extremity of Hunger, came to the Gene-
ral’s Quarter imploring his Mercy *, but
they were forced back into the Town
along the Sea-fhore near the Baflion of
St. John . in the mean while the Empe-
ror fent the following Letter to the Ge-
neral.
Raja Singa Rajou .
“ Imperial Majefty has former- :
cc VJ jy ( t h ro God’s Mercy) been vie- i
cc torious over our Enemies in u f
cc where I routed their whole Army r
u commanded by Don Confiantino •, after
tc which, laying Siege to I had
cc my Head Quarters in the Garden of
cc Lewis Gomes Pinto . It then pleafed
“ God to afflidl me with a Diftemper,
u which the Viceroy having got notice
“ of, he defired me io return to Candy j
“ which I did accordingly, leaving my
tc Brother Carnanct Singa King of Ou-ve }
“ with the Prince of rtftapalla, to com-
u mand the Siege, who put no fmall Ble-
-4C mUh upon our Imperial Family.
ct Whilft they were imployed in that
u Siege, the treacherous Portuguefes hav-
ct ing at that time forced a Multitude of
fct ftarved Wretches out of the City,
“ they had mix’d with them certain Vil-
Cc lains, who fet all our Works on fire.
Cc Wherefore I hope your Excellency
u will keep a ftridt Guard j tor I can’t
Cc forbear, for the Love and good Incli-
Cc nations I bear to your Excellency, to
Cc put you in mind, that the Portuguefes are
4c a molt perfidious Nation, and that even
Ct my Forces are compofed of divers forts
tc of People: So that your Excellency
Ct ought to have a particular regard for
<c your ownPerfon,which will be a iingulat
tc Satisfaction to me. For you mult know*
cc that there being variety of People in
a the Ifle of Ceylon , who have ferved
u divers Princes, and are us’d to Ravages;
4C and Rapines, thefe are generally trea-
ct cherous, and not to be trailed by your
tc Excellency, tho perhaps they will en-
cc deavour to obtain your Favour by
The Em-
peror's
Letter to
the Gene-
ral*


The Dutch
utufto
the Giver-
mur of Co-
lumbo.
Ct Flatteries and Pretences of Friendfliip,
tc they being fuch profligate Wretches,
Cc as to be induced by the hopes of a fmall
u Gain to undertake any bafe and trea-
tc cherous Aft. The Letters fent from this
u Court to your Excellency being generally
u written in an unknown Tongue, I defire
a you, if you find any Defeft or Inconve-
cc niency in them, to give notice thereof
tc immediately, to remove all Obftacles
u and Mifunderftandings on our fide ,
tc it being our refolution, that the Peace
Cc made with you (hall continue as long as
cc the Sun and Moon furnifti us with Light,
as you on your behalf have engaged it
tc lhall lafl: as long as the World Hands.
u I once intended to have fent you an
Ct Anfwer to your Letter dated Jan. 8.
tc but underftanding that your Excellency
u had difpatched to this Court aGap-
u tain of the Guards, I thought fit to
“ defer it for fome time. In former
times whilfl: I was very young, I was
tc encamped with my Army in Malvane
u but that being many years ago, I did
tC fend thither certain Perfons to view
“ the Place, who allur’d me, that the
Place pitch’d upon by the Diffave of
H the four Corks, was unfit for our Recep-
£t tion, which was the reafon I order’d
tc my Head Quarters to be fettled in the
Cl Fortrefs of Reygamwatte . In confidera-
ct tion of which and other Mifcarriages
Ct of the faid Diffave , I have put another
u in his Place, with whom you may con-
cc fult in relation to fuch matters as tend
<c to our Service. I further ifiued my
cc Orders to the Dijfaves, and fent cer-
u tain Perfons to prepare my Quarters
cc with the utmoft Expedition, which
tL done I intend to be there immediately
cc after.
Dated in the Camp Subfcribed
and Court of Gui-
ramibula. Feb. 14. „ • c . n
1656. * RajaStnga Rajou , moft
potent Emperor of
Ceylon ,
The General being extremely pleafed
with the Emperor’s Approbation concern-
ing the fending back of the poor ftarv’d
Wretches forc’d out of , thought
lie to fend the following Letter to the
Governourof Columbo.
« Fading that you fuffer the poor Ne-
“ r i ro Citizens, after that you have
“ received all the Services you poffibly
u could from them, to periih for want of
“ Suftenance; and whereas you prevent-
-4: ed their Defertion formerly by ftrift
Watches, you now permit thermo e 0
“■ where they pleafe in order to be rid of
“ them: I thought it my Duty (for the
“ difcharge of my Confcience) to delire
“ yo« to let the faid Negro Citizens know
“ that fuch as for the future come out of
“ the City, lhall bepunifh’d with Death.
“ This 1 thought fit to let your Excellent
“ cy know, in hopes of moving you
“ companion. 1 remain for the reft
“ your Excellency’s Servant,
Dated in the Dutch Camp
before Col umbo. Feb.it. ~ „ , r ,
1656. 5 • Gerard Hulfi.
The 1 7th of February the Yacht the Sa-
phir came into the Road from Coromandel
and brought a Letter from the Governor
Laurence Pit, dated January 29. at Paha-
catta: Her Cargo confifted in Rice and
Gun-powder, tho not fo much as was ex-
peded, the full quantity of Brimftone
not being brought from Tajouvan.
But notwithftanding the beforefaid
Warning given to the Negro Citizens,
many of them coming every day into our
Camp, one of them was ordered to be
hanged to deter others from doing the
like; fo that afterwards 15 and more
died every day in the City of Famine,
and a Scofbutick Dropfy began allb to
reign among the Europeans there. The
19th a Mlf ice Deferter brought advice,
that they had equip’d a Boat, which lay
ready to fail againft the next Night for
Manaar, whereupon Orders werefentto
Commodore Roothaus to intercept her, if
poffibly he could. The 20 tb Mr. John
Hartman came with the following Letter
from the Emperor to the General.
Raja Singa Rajou.
a Y OUR Letter dated the Bth of Fe-
c‘ A brmry, I received the next fol-
a lowing Day, wherein you teftify your
cc defire of being admitted into our Roy-
cfc al Prefence, in order to allure me in
CL Perfon of the fincere Intentions of the
ct Dutch Company to continue in their
u Confederacy with our Imperial Ma-
u jetty, made from the time of your Ar-
<c rival with your Fleet in our Empire.
tc It has always been my hearty Wilh to
u fee you in my Prefence, which I hope
ct will be fulfill’d with the arrival of your
a Excellency in our Camp near Raygam*
“ watte, ' You further mention the Mif-
u behaviour of fome of our Lafcaryns
cc under the Dijfavcs -, fo foon as our Ini-
tc perial Majefty arrives in the above-
Columbo.
The Emfr
rot's Let-
ter to the
Genenh
73 2
A Description of CEYLON.


“ faid Camp, thefe Forces and Officers
“ (hall be relieved by others, and fuch
u as have not done their duty to the
“ Crown be punifhed, as is pradifed in
the Camps of other Great Kings and
“ Monarchs. Your Excellency did alfo
tc give notice that you had fent away 9
u Ships the s th of this Month. God Al-
“ mighty I hope will blefs your Excellen-
u cy’s pefigns with Succefs, according to
“ the at mod: of my Wiflies, there being
u nothing that can more rejoice oiir Itn-
ic penal Majefty than the Welfare and
<c Profperity of the Hollanders: And I
cc hope, that after my arrival in the
“ Camp, fuch Meafures may be taken
ct betwixt us, as may foon reduce the
u City. The refradory Party among
“ my Troops you have mentioned, (hall
cc be branded with Infamy, not only for
u themfelves, but alfo their Generation *,
lc fo that their Names (hall be defpifed
u hereafter for ever. Whenever I (hall
c< fee your Perfon, 1 (hall imagine to have
cc the whole State of Holland before me*,
u and fmce according to our Conftitu-
u tions Matters of this nature are not to
tc tranfaded but on fortunate Days and
u Hours, your Excellency (hall be adver-
Ct tifed thereof by fome Perfon of note.
Cc Juft as I was leaving Candy , the Prince
u my Son, given me by God for the
w Welfare of my faithful Hollanders ,
“ took leave of me, denting to be re-
a membred to your Excellency.
In the Camp of Guinmi- R a j a ftma Ram,
htila, Feb. 18. i6s6. ' * J
The faid Mr. Hartman was prefented
by the Emperor with a tame Elephant,
and told the General, that the Emperor
had given him fome private hints, that
the Prince his Son would take it as a
peculiar Obligation, if the General
would honour him with a fmall Prefent.
The Emperor’s Dijfaves coming the 11ft
of February to the General, in order to
fetch the Anfwer to the Emperor’s
Letter, they were told, that the Letter
was not finifhed, by reafon of many
things of moment to be inferted therein:
But the General took this opportunity to
advife with them what Prefent might be
moft acceptable to the Prince. They an-
fwered, they could not tell, but would
confider of the matter. In the After-
noon they received the defired Letter
fealed up under the Difcharge of the Can-
non, as is ufual upon fuch occafions, when
each of the Captains is prefented with a
piece of Sattin, and two of th e Dijfaves
with a red Roan Cap, a thing highly
valued by them (called Toppy Monday In
their Language) with a Japonefe Buckler
for one of the Prince’s Attendants.
Hartman
prefenrect
with an
Elephant ,
CHAP. XXXI.
The Besieged sire furiouƒly upon the Befiegers. The Emperor's Envoys. Negro
Deferters forced back. Letters intercepted . The Emperor prefents the Gene-
ral with an Elk. A new Battery erected .
The Be peg-
cd fire
bns f y li f
c ”
TT H E ild of February the Enemy play’d
1 moft furioufly with their Gannon
from the Bullions of St. Stephen and St.
John , and kill’d us feveral Men. His Ma-
jefty being that day come to his Camp at
Reygamwatte , to take a view of the Quar-
ters prepared for his reception, perceiv-
ing a more than ordinary Smoke, fent
a Meffenger to know the truth of the
matter. In the Evening about Supper-
time, word was brought that certain De-
puty s from his Majefty were arrived at a
Farm about two Miles from the Camp,
and that they had fent a Meffenger to
fignify, that they weredelirous tofpeak
with the General that Evenings which
being readily granted, an Enfign was
fent thither with fome Soldiers to con-
dud them to the Camp, and to make an
Excufe, that the time of the Night had
hindred their Reception to be futable to
their Quality. They told the General,
that his Majefty had received his Letter
with a great deal of Satisfaction, and that
they were fent to tell his Excellency, that
his Majelty was at prefent at Walemtty ,
and that as foon as his Quarters were fit-
ted up, he fhould be fent for ; for which
reafon they were commanded by his Ma-
jeffcy to order the Dijfa-ve of Saffragamme
to have the Roads leading to Reygarmvatte
repaired. They would willingly have
returned the fame night* but it being
cxceflive dark, their Quarters were af-
figned them in the Camp till next morn-
ing.
The fame day Edmund Ruyfch fent word,
that a great number of poor Wretches
were coming out of the City : The Men,
to the number of 50, were fecured at
Veputys
fen t into
the Camp
from the
Emperor. 1


Deferters
whifd
An inter-
cepted
Letter.
Milagre but the Women and Children
being brought before the General, he or-
der d them (purfuant to their former
Refolution) to be whip’d back into the
Town near the Baftion of St. John, this
being look’d upon as the molt proper
means to ftraiten the Enemy, and to
bring them to our Terms. Towards the
Evening the Men, with 10 mote, who
lince had join’d them, being alfo brought
into the Camp, the General took two of
them afide, and told them, that, they
mutt look upon it as a particular Favour,
to be fent back once more *, but if they
return’d they mull expert nothing blitthe
Gallows, unlefs they would engage with
fome of the Aratches that had defected
our Camp, tofurprize fome Baftion or
other for our Service. They were like-
wife forced back with a good Whipping,
c b e 24 th 150 more had the fame En-
tertainment.
The 16th of February the Dijjave of the
four Cories came to tell the General, that
thofe of Saffragamme were Hill bufy in
repairing the Roads and Bridges, and
produced a Letter from certain Great
Men of the Court, enjoining him to de-
mand 1 o certain Perfons, that had made
fhife to get out of the City with the Ene-
mies Troops, and fheltred themfelves
in the adjacent Villages, having deferted
the King’s Service before. The General
was not unwilling to grant his Requefl: j
but withal told him, that if thefe Perfons
of Quality had been as forward in further-
ing their King’s Service as we, there
would not have been fo many Deferters.
The fame day a Letter was deliver'd to the
General written by one of our Aratches to
thzTidane of Pafdun-Corle , as follows :
cc T T Ante der a Lionayde , Son-in-law to
4C il Ranatonge Aracbie, wifhes Health
cc to F'idane, and the three Chieftains of
cc the three Patios of Pafdun-Corle. Im-
u mediately upon the receipt of thefe,
cc you (hall without fail or delay gather,
4 in the time of 8 days, out of all the
cc circumjacent Villages, 50 Pingues of
<c Pullets, Butter, Pepper, Atchiar , and
tc Earthen VelTels j and with them, in
u company of all the Heads or Majo-
tC rals of the Villages of Anguratotte ,
cc come towards Horne, and from thence
cc into the Imperial Camp, there to pay
ic your Obeyfance to hisMajefty. Such
tc as fail in their Duty muft exped to
receive condign Punilhment. You
1 mult not publiill my Name, what I do
in this refpcd not being by my own
u Authority j but when you come to
u Court, you may then declare, that it
£C was Hangedera Lionayde , Ranatonge
u Raleys Son-in-law, who gave you this
ct Invitation.
The Aratche who had been the Author
6f this Letter, being feized and exa-
min’d the fame Evening by Mr. Adrian
van der Meyden and Major van der Laan ,
did not difown his Hand, but refufed to
difeover (tho he was threaten’d with
prefent Death) by; whofe Command he
had writ it. The General being of opi-
nion that there was fome Myftery hid
> under this pretence, efpecially fince this
Ctngalefe liv’d under the Company’s Jurif-
didion, and had receiv’d fignal Obliga-
tions from them, commanded his Head
to be cut off, deliver’d him up
for that purpofe to the Provoft, in
hopes of extorting a Confeffion from him
by this means j but under-hand order’d
him to be fecur’d only aboard the Ship
the Arms of Amfterdaw , for fear, that,
in cafe he fhould be executed on a fudden,
they might be bereaved of the Oppor-
tunity of difeovering the Truth.
February ijth being Sunday, the Gene-
ral fent a Letter to Raja Singa 1 to adver-
tife his Majefty what had pafs’d with the
Aratche , and at the fame time enclofed
the Original of the intercepted Letter.
The fame day the Diffave of Saffragamme
coming to the General to tell him, that
the Roads and Bridges were now repaired
according to his Majefty’s Orders *, he
was commanded by him to imploy the
fame People in perfecting the Pallifadoes
intended for the new Redoubt near the
Gate of Rajuba , which he promifed to
do. The General alfo told him what had
happen’d with the Aratche \ which he ap-
proving of, the General further defired
him to provide fome Bujfiers for the ufe
of the Seamen, who were forely afflifted
with the Scurvy, which he likewife a-
greed to.
Word being brought that four Fiflier-
men were coming over to us in a Tony
or Fiflier-boat, they were forewarn'd not
to come into the Gamp, under the pain
of being bang’d, unlefs they could en-
gage all the Fifhermen to come at once.
About the fame time a certain Moorifh
Veffcl came into the Road from Puntegale
with a Pafsport from John Kroon our Head
Fador there. They brought advice that
the Lands and Villages under thejurif-
didion of Gale were farm’d out at 1 5849
Rixdollars, for the next Year, to be paid
by four quarterly Payments, and that the
Arcck 7 which the Company had taken at,
Letter fat
to the Em-
ror*
A Moorifti
Veffcl
brings Ai‘
vice con-
cerning tk
Condition
of Gale.


A Moori ill
ftp
bring? Ax-
mice con-
cerning the
Condition
of Gale.
Ships from
Coroman-
del.
The Gene-
ral pre-
fented with
an by
the Empe-
ror,
the rate of 24 Laryns the Ammenam the
laft year, was now to be deliver’d at the
rate of 1 6 Laryns, Five more Ships ar-
rived at the fame time laden with Rice.
The laft day of this month, finding
that the Enemy work’d againft us near
the Gate of Rajuha , Lieutenant Alenbier
was fent with 6 Firelocks to fecure their
Workmen > but thefe faved themfelves
by an early Flight, and our People re-
turn’d without receiving any Damage.
About the fame time Letters were brought
by the Yacht the Arnemuyden , dated the
i ’-yh of February , on the Coaft of Coro-
mandel, others being alfo expeded,
dated the 11 th , with the Yacht the Codfifh ,
not arriv’d as yet, having aboard 100
Loads of Rice of Bengale , a good Quan-
tity of Gunpowder and 60 Soldiers: The
other Vefiels Cargo conlifted in 18877
Pound-weight of Gunpowder, 2781 Bul-
lets of divers Sizes, viz,. 231 of 24.
Pounds, 750 of 18, 1800 of 12, 1500
Stone-Bullets, and 10000 Pound Weight
of Lead, belides fome other Merchandi-
zes, and 1 6 Loads of Rice, amounting
to the Value of <5098 Guilders, on ac-
count of thofe of Ceylon only. At the
fame time the Rabbit fail’d out of the
Road, being order’d to cruife on the
South Point of Negumbo, and to be re-
lieved every eight Days by another Ship.
Pretty late in the Evening, three De-
j puties from the Emperor prefcnted the
J General with an Elk, which his Majefty
. himfelf had hunted the fame Morning in
an adjacent Wood, which was received
with great Reverence by his Excellen-
cy.
The General and Mr. van der Meyden , 1
hearing the Beat of Drum in the new Re-
doubt, near the Gate of Rajuha, they
went thither in Per Ton \ and in their way
met with 17 Lafcaryns, and 2 Aratches,
who being polled in an Outwork near the
faM Gate, had quitted the fame ; they
being order’d to be fecured in the Head
Quarter, they went forward, and found
that the Alarm had been occafion’d by
the coming over of the Lafcaryns, whom
they millook for Enemies. They report-
ed that the City was provided with Pro-
vilions till May, their Allowance, viz
2 5 Mididos to a Head, being given them
for the Month of April: They added,
that it was whifper’d about, that the Go-
vernor had embark’d all his Moveables,
Mony and Jewels in a Boat, and fent them
in the Night-time to Manaar j which
News was very unpleafing to us, becaufe
they had efcaped the Sight of our Ships.
The 6 th, 7 th, Bth and 9th of March,
we advanced bravely towards the Gate of
Rajuha : two Portuguefe Deferters, with
fome Lafcaryns well armed, being exami-
ned apart, depofed, that the City could
not hold out longer than towards the end
of May, the Remnants of the Rice be-
ing very ftony and unclean, nay wet and
corrupted. Hereupon the General or-
dered that a Battery of two Gunsihould
be ereded oppollte to the utmoft Point of
the Baftion of St, John, the better to bat-
ter and lay level the Flank of that of St.
Stephens , and under favour thereof to o-
pen again the Trench leading to our Mine,
and fo working along the Wall, to take
Poll upon the Gounterfcarp.
Deferters
give an ac-
count of the
Condition
o/Colum-
bo.
CHAP. XXXII.
Many Deferters give account of the Condition of Columbo. Ysbrand Gotskens
fent Envoy to the Emperor. His Letter to the General, and that of the Be-
fieged to the Emperor.
A Bout that time divers Lafcaryn De-
ferters, and among them a Portu-
guefe, made heavy Complaints that they
were forced to feed upon corrupted Rice ;
The lad told us, that there were no
more than 40 left of our Prifoners, and
that fiich of our Officers as were not flain
in the Affault, died afterwards of their
Wounds, except a Serjeant. He alfo
difeover’d to us, that the Befieged had
carried all their Guns from the Badions
of S. Stephen , S. Philip and Clergos into
their Out work, before the Gate of Rajuha y
in order to difeharge the fame the next
following Night upon our Pioneers.
Paul Meno , who was then upon the
Guard there, was thereupon order’d td
let the Labourers ceafe, till they had
fpent their Powder and Ball in vain, and
then to let them return to their Work.
In effed, they (hoc very furioufly the
next Night both with their Cannon and
Firelocks upon our Works *, and by
break of Day the General went on Horfe-
back to Milagre, to view the Works of
the Dijfaves on that fide, which he found


A Boy De-
farter
brings cer-
tain Ad-
vice*
2 Dutch
S
fhe°Enemy.
to be well fecured by a ftrong Set of Pa-
lifadoes, reaching from the Sea-ffioar to
the Fens; and being guarded by four Com-
panies, thefe were thought fufficient to
oppofe any Sally of the Enemy on that
fide.
One of oar Soldiers being fome days
before miffing, we underftood that he
had fought for ihslter with his Majefty
for a Crime he had committed, which at
his Majefty’s Requeft was remitted him,
yet not without. being difeharg’d from
our Service. The Dijfave who made this
Requeft, told the General, that the
Grapes fent to the Emperor had been ve-
ry well accepted.
The 13 th of March a Boy, who had
deferred the Portuguefes , came to the Ge-
neral, and told him in private, that hav-
ing been let down from the Baftion Cler-
gos with a Rope, by fome Lafcaryns who
kept Guard there, they intended the next
Night with the rifing of the Moon, to
come all over to us, or elfe to deliver up
the Baftion. The Boy according to his
own Defire being foundly whipp’d, was
fent back into the City, to take away all
fufpicion of a private Correfpondence
with us.
Tofecondhis Endeavours a Company
of the Guards was poftedina convenient
Place } but the Belieged fir’d fo briskly
from the Baftions of St. Stephen and St.
Philip that Night, that there was no Op-
portunity of putting it in execution at
that time. A Toupas Deferter reported
the next Day, that the Baftion of St.
Stephen was guarded only by 16 Men,
having queftionlefs difpofed the reft in
other Places, as being fenfible that the
gaining of that Baftion would ftand us in
no great ftead. Six Lafcaryn Deferters
confirmed the fame foon after, and two
among them alfured the General, that
the Governor of Columbo had fent a Let-
ter to the Emperor Raja Singa .
The 14th Edmund Ruyfch y whofe Quar-
ters were at Milagre , fent word, that
Henry William Boogare a Corporal, and
Peter van Bruyfingen a common Soldier,
were gone over to the Enemy. The
fame day ten Lafcaryns well arm’d came
over to us, and the fame Evening with
the riling of the Moon, two Gannon for
Battery were planted upon the Battery
againft St. John's Baftion. His Majefty
having defir’d, that fome Perfon of Note
might be fent to him, to confer with him
in private, our Fa&or TsbrandGotskens, a
Native of the Hague , a Perfon equally
dextrous with his Pen as the Sword, was
fent with all Expedition thither.' About
the fame time fome Lafcaryns with their
Wives and Children coming out of the
City, were turn’d back again j a Letter
being at the fame time deliver’d to a cer-
tain Boy for Simon Lopes y lately gone 0-
ver to the Enemy, intimating, that, if
he would endeavour to make the Negroes in
the City rife y he Jhouid not only deferve
his Pardon , but alfo a good Reward .
At Midnight we made a falfe Attack,
which put the whole City into fuch an A-
larum, that there was nothing to be
heard but ringing of Bells, and the noife
of Drums, but in half an Hour all was
quiet The next Day his Majefty
fent three Deputies, to know the rcafon
of fuch fierce firing ; which being told
them, they inform’d the General that
Tshrand Gotskens had not as yet had Audi-
ence of the Emperor, but would quefti-
onlefs be admitted the next Day. A Let-
ter was alfo fent to the General from the
Emperor Raja Singa , wherein were en-
clos’d 20 others, one from Antonio de
Souza Coutinho Governour of Columbo ,
the other from the chief Citizens of that
City, both dated the iot/;of March y in
which they implore his Majefty’s Affif-
tance.
RAJA SINGA RAJOV,
u 't>h E prefent Opportunity has in-
u JL vited our Imperial Majefty, to
<c difpatch thefe few Lines to your Ex-
“ cellency : Two Days ago, being
Ct Wednefday the 15th of March , I
u broke up from Guiramibula , and march-
u ing along the other fide of the River
u by the way of Walemtty, have fix’d
u my Tents in this Place, from whence I
“ have difpatch’d immediately feme of
“ my Great Courtiers, to notify my Ar-
cC rival in the Camp at Reygamwatte , and
u to enquire after your Excellency’s
“ Health. I commanded them at the
u fame time (having not as yet an An-
cc fwer to fome of your Excellency’s Lct-
“ ters direftedtome) to defire you to
“ fend a Perfon of Note, unto whom I
“ might by word of mouth give ah An-
“ fwer to the faid Letters. It being
a Night when I arriv’d in the Camp at
a Reygamwatte , I could not order the
“ Difpofition of rdy Forces till next
cc Morning, when the two enclofcd Let-
a ters were delivered to me, one from
u the Governor, the other from the Ci-
“ tizens of Columbo^ the Contents where-
*r * r
Alettn t)
the Defy,
far Simon
topes.
A falfe
Attach
-Colom-
bo,
The Er-
ror's Ut-
ter tithe
Giwal,


The Gover-
nor’s Let-
ter to the
Emperor,
44 of you will underftand from the Ori-
-44 ginals.
Subfcribed,
Ac our Court and Camp
of ReygamwatteMar. , .
i 7. 1656. Raja Stnga Rajou, moft
Potent Emperor of
Ceylon .
Moft Potent Emperor Raja Singa, &c.
c( TMmediately after our Enemies did
a A engage into this unjuft War, which
cc continues to this Day, I let your Ma-
« jefty know the Reafons which induced
me to follicite fome Supplys from
« your Majefty not queftioning, but
“ that you would not leave mein fuch
“ an Extremity, it being always the
“ Ambition of great Monarchs, to take
“ thelefs powerful under their Protedi*
u on ; tho thro God’s Mercy, we have
“ hitherto not only defended this City,
u but alfo at feveral times given the Ene-
-44 my fufficient Proofs o t our Bravery,
<c in deftroying and difperfing his Forces,
44 of which we have fent an accouut to
44 your Majefty. But perhaps thefe Let-
u tcrs never came to your Majefty’s
44 Hands, being intercepted by the Ene-
-44 my j which feems the lefs furprizing to
44 me, fince they have treated the Natives
44 of this I(land (without any juft Caufe)
44 that went out of this City like Slaves,
44 forcing many of them to retire bade
44 without the leaft Mercy. The City
44 of Columho is an antient Inheritance
44 of the Portuguefes, bellowed upon’em
44 by the Kings and Emperors, your Pre-
-44 deceffors, who always were ready to
44 honour them with their Protection }
44 neither do we want Opportunity to
44 make your Majefty (if you pleafe)
44 fenfible of the manifold Services done
44 by the Portuguefes in this Ifle, in cafe
44 we did not believe the fame to be ftill
44 in the Memory of your Majefty, and
44 many of your Great Ones. We don’t
44 know to have given the leaft reafon of
44 Difpleafure to your Majefty, which
44 makes us imagine, that you will be
44 pleafed not to leave us in this Extremi-
-44 ty, in regard it feems much more rea-
-44 fonable, to affift the Portuguefes your
44 antient Friends, than the Hollanders
44 your new Guefts. Time has already
44 difeovered the Intentions of the Dutch,
44 and Experience will foon convince you,
44 that all their Aim is founded upon Lu-
-4C ere and Intereft, which they dilfemblc
14 for the prefenf, but fo foon as they
41 are Mailers of this Place, your Majefty
44 will too late be convinc’d of the Truth
44 of what I fay. I will not pretend to
44 urge that matter ainy further for the
44 prefent, leaving the Determination of
44 the whole to your Majefty’s Wifdom,
44 and the Conduft of your Counfellors.
44 God prefer ve your Imperial Majefty.
Columho , Mur, Antonio de Souza Coutinho .
10. 1 656, •
Aloft High and mofl Potent Emperor and
Lord , RajaSinga, &c.
44 TMmediately after the Hollanders had :
44 A laid Siege to this Place, our Magi- J
44 ftrates and Governors did give notice \
44 thereof to your Majefty, as likewife 1
44 of theenfuing General Alfault made
44 by the Enemy both by Sea and Land ;
44 which being done in the Day-time, we
44 let them advance into the City, but
44 afterwards made them glad to ask for
44 Quarter, which was granted them.
44 According to the Confelfion of the
44 Dutch themfelves, they were 240 ftrong
44 when they paffed the Fens, the great-
-44 eft part whereof with their Boats fell
44 into our Hands, belides a Ship of 30
44 Guns taken by us, and another much
44 damaged, which they had enough to
44 do to carry off, not to mention thofe
c; that were flain in the Ships, and in the
44 Affault. Being afterwards advanc’d
44 to the Ditch, they fix’d their Miners,
44 and were bufy in bringing over their
44 Gallery \ but we forc’d them to retire
44 with confiderable Lofs, and took the
44 . Gallery with the Lofs of one Manon-
-44 ly. There remains nothing now but
44 for your Majefty to vouchfafe us your
44 Favour, which we heartily wilh for
44 and defire. From what has been faid,
44 we hope your Majefty is fufficiently
44 convinc’d of our good Will and Zeal,
44 in defending a Place, bellow’d upon
44 us by your Imperial Majefty’s Ance-
-44 ftors, and that, if fupported by your
44 Favour, we (hall never ceafe to perfift
44 in the fame Refolution, in hopes that
44 your Majefty will rather a (Tift the Portu-
-44 guefes your antient Friends, than the
44 Hollanders . God protect your Majefty,
44 and your Dominions.
Columho , Afar, it. Order from
1 <5 5 5.
Diego Lcitaon de Souza,
Chief Secretary.
APanocl de Fonfeca,
Diego de Souza de Cunha .
Ruy Lopes Coutinho.
John Coclho de Caftro.
Bento Fereiro d 9 Ahreu.
The Citi-
zens Let-
ter to the
Emperor .


The 10th of March a Negro Pioneer
came over to us, who having worked in
the Ditch, difeover’d the Place to us,
and that four Portuguefes being taken as
they were coming to our Camp, had been
hanged. That our new Battery had kil-
led two Canaryns and a Gunner, and
wounded feveral others upon the Baftion
of St. Stephen. Concerning their Provi-
fions, they confirmed what had been told
us before. The General went with the
faid Negro in Perfon to the Ditch,
to fee the Place where the Negro had
been at work, and perceiving three For-
tuguefes clofe together in the Ditch, he
got upon the Wall, and difeharged his
Fufee twice at them j but foon got down
again, without which he had been in
great Danger, three Bullets paffing imme-
diately after that way.
Pit Geni<
r d in ia-
Profit-
H {illd
CHAP. XXXIII.
Ysbrand Gotskens returns from the Emperor's Court , gives an account of his
Tranfactions. Letters fent to Columbo. A Battery raised. A circumstan-
tial account from Goa, and its Condition.
A Boy ta-
ken as a
Spy.
Ysbrand
Gotskens
ficmnTof
his Negoti-
atm.
A Bout noon a Boy was taken in our
Works, where Paul Mena then
kept guard, inquiring after our Strength j
and being ask’d why, heanfwer’d that
the Governor of Columbo had fent him
to enquire after it : In confidtration of his
Youth and Simplicity, he came off with
a good whipping, and fo was fent back
into the City, Major van der Laan fent
word, that the Enemy having made a
Hole thro the Wall, played from thence
direftly upon his Works, and had kill’d
a Negro the fame Night they play’d
with a Cannon upon the fame Works,
but without hurting any Body.
The 23d of March towards Evening,
the Faftor Tshrand Gotskens having taken
his Leave the fame day of the Empe-
ror, return'd to our Camp, where he
gave the following account in Writing
of his Negotiation ; 44 That in anfwer to
ci five feveral Letters written by General
44 Huljt to his Majefty, he had command-
a edhim to tell the General, thathav-
-44 ing received a Letter dated the 1 6th
44 at Columbo , he would let him know
“ the Contents thereof. That his Ma-
-4c jefty was well fatisfied with the Pro-
“ ceedings againft fuch as were fled out
44 of the City *, which tho it might feem
u fomewhat cruel, yet was he contented
a to have the Blame thereof himfelf,
Ct as tending to his Service, and the fpee-
u dy reducing of the City. That be-
a caufe his Majefty was fenfible that what-
“ ever Prefents he could make to the Ge-
“ neral of rich Apparel, and fuch like
44 Ornaments, he was fufficiently’provi-
cc ded with before, he had thought fit
44 to beftow upon him the Title and Dig-
-44 nicy of his Direftor-Generali and that
44 for the future he fhould be acknow-
-44 ledged as fuch throughout his Doraini-
u ons. That he further defired the Ge-
-4C neral not to takeitamifs, that after
44 the Dijfaves had notified his Arrival
44 in the Camp of Reygamrvatte , a Guide
44 had been denied to the Captain of the
4 ‘ Guard, it being contrary to the Cuftom
44 of his Country for any one to be in-
-44 troduced at Court, without notice
44 being given of his Arrival to the Em-
-44 peror.
14 What the General had alledged
44 concerning the Mouj[on, and the Sol-
-44 diers being fatigued by fo tedious a
u Siege, his Majefty was very fenfible
cc thereof, and that when the General
44 fhould come into his Prefence (which
44 he hoped would be within three or
44 four days) they would confer upon
44 that Point, and fettle the matter to
44 his Satisfaction : But his Majefly being
44 inform’d that his Excellency frequent-
-44 ly expos’d his Perfon, and regarding
cC him with the fame tendernefs as his
cC own Eyes, had defir’d his Excellency
c 4 for the future to take more care of
44 his Perfon, commanding ail his Officers
44 of what Quality foever, to be careful
44 of him to the lait degree.
4C What his Excellency bad alledged,
44 concerning hisMajefty’s being conffiant-
-44 ly employed in Weighty Affairs, and
44 that therefore he was unwilling to dif-
-44 turb him with frequent Letters, his
44 Majefty replied, that the Subjeft ol his
44 Excellency’s Letters being fuch, a*
44 mod nearly concerned his Service, no*
44 thing could be more acceptable to him,
44 than to beftow his time in perufmg the
44 Letters of the moft trufty Servant
a that


Tw Ut-
ters fent
into Co-
lombo.
44 that ever he had in his Life, defiring
44 therefore, that his Excellency might
44 fuperfede thefe Excufes. That what
44 his Excellency had alledged in his be-
-44 half, concerning the miftake in com-
-44 raanding his Forces at Reigamcorle , as it
44 was intended for his Majefty’s Service,
44 fo it was very acceptable to him, and
44 needed no farther Excufe *, as was like-
-44 wife the Punifhment inflided upon the
44 Author of the Letter writ from Paf-
-44 dun-Corle , to deter others from the like
44 Undertakings. Concerning theTrea-
-44 ty made with Mr. IVefterwold , his Ma-
-44 jefty declar’d, he would keep the fame
44 inviolably, notwithftanding that feve-
-44 ral Generals of the Indies , and Dutch
44 Governours of the Ifle in had
44 done many things which had given oc-
-44 calion to no fmall Difturbances: but
44 that as he call’d God towitnefsof his
44 Innocence, fo he was extremely glad
44 to have met with a Perfon of Honour
44 in his Excellency’s Perfon, who having
44 done already conOderable Services to
44 his Crown, he intended to enter with
44 him into a ftrift Confederacy, which
44 ffiould Hand firm as long as the Sun
44 and Moon ffiould furniffi the World
41 with Light.
44 It was therefore that his Majefty was
u very defirous to know his Excellency’s
tc Intentions, whether, after the taking
C 4 of Columbo, they ffiould attack the King-
-4C dom of Jafnapatnam or the Ifle of
Cc Manaar , and whether it were not con-
-4t venient to fend fome of his Forces
4t under certain Dijjaves thither imme-
-4t diately: That he had received two
lc Letters from the before-mentioned
4C Places, which ffiould be communicated
4t to his Excellency. His Majefty alfo de-
-4t dared, that either next Sunday or
4C Thurfday (which of thefe two his
44 Excellency ffiould pitch upon) he would
44 expeft him at Court, and that he would
44 fend fome of his Courtiers to condud
44 him thither.
At the fame time certain Deputies from
his Majefty brought along with them two
Letters pen’d by Mr. Hulfi our General,
in anfwer to thofe fent from Columbo to
the Emperor, and difpatch’d to his Ma-
jefty *, which being well approv’d of by
him, and figned by his Excellency in his
Majefty’s Name, were carried the next
day into the City.
Soon after news was brought from
Montual , that 400 command-
ed by four Officers, had been feen near
the Sea-fhore on the other fide of the
River, but hitherto had not made the
leak attempt of pafling the fame. Abun-
dance of the Inhabitants of the Inland
Countries, who perhaps had never had a
fight of a Man of War, or any welldifci-
plin’d Forces, flock’d thither (with his
Majefly’s Permilßon) to fee them. A-
bout the fame time we received a Rein-
forcementof 50 men from Puntegale. be-
ing all they could fpare.
The before-mentioned Letters fent in
his Majelly’s Name, and carried by fome
of his Cratches and Lafc ary ns into Colum-
bo 0 were at firfl received with a general
Salute of the Cannon and Small Arms j
but being open’d, the Inhabitants fuffici-
ently teflify’d their Refentment, telling
the Mefiengers, that in cafe their Condi-
tion was not fo defperate, they would
play them another Game before they re-
turn’d } of which ufage the Mefiengers
defired the General to make his Com-
plaint to the Emperor.
The fame day arofe a violent Tempeft,
with Rain, Thunder and Lightning,
which kill’d one of our Sentinels, and
ftruck three Mufquets, in the Church of
Quia de Loho, all to pieces. The Empe-
ror was fo complaifant, as to enquire the
next day by one of his Meflengers, whe-
ther we had fuffer’d any damage in our
Tents or Works, and was anfwer’d, that
God had preferv’d us from all the Dan-
ger. The fame day, being the 25th of
March , two Europeans came over to us *,
one of them, a Native of Marfeilles, was
over-taken by the way, and received 9
Wounds, fo that he narrowly efcap’d to
our Works, but died the next Morning.
The 2 6th a Serjeant, a Mifiice , came
over to us, and reported, that two more
of the fame Company watched only an
Opportunity to defert : That they had
already diftributed to each Soldier his
Quota of Provifions, t viz J . a Parra of Rice
per diem , for the Month of ylpril : That
they were much afflifted with the Drop-
fy and the Beribery , a Swelling in the
Knees, which takes away the ufe of their
Legs.
Soon after Commodore Roothaus fent in
three Fiffiermen taken by our Boats within.
Mufquet-ffiot of the Water-Fort. The
Seamen had 50 Crowns given them (the
ufual Reward for every Tony ox Fifher-
boat) and 25 more as an Encouragement,
thefe Fifhermen being the chief Perfons
who fupply’d the City with Provifions.
Orders were alfofent to the Commodore,
not to expofe his Seamen without an ab-
folute neceffity.
Some of our belt Workmen were alfo
confulted about the erefting another Bat-
A Supply
°f 50 men
comes t 0
■’
How theft
Let ters
ne . re ,J er
A violent
Tcmpejh
Some ft-
flymen
ta ¥ nf


A Porcu-
gucfcJVcr-
chant
comes into
the Camp.
News from
Goa advi-
fed by Leo-
nard Wil-
liams.
tery againft the Baftion of St. John , in
order to deftroy their Pallifadb Work in
the Ditch, and to facilitate the bringing
over of the Gallery. The General told
the Emperor’s Dijjdve, that he ftood in
need of 4 or 500 Pioneers and Work-
men j but he declined the matter, telling
him, that when he came to the Emperor,
he would doubtlefs not deny his Requeft.
About the fame time a Portuguefe Mer-
chant came in a Boat crofs the Bay into
our Camp, in company of a Negro Trum-
peter: They reported, that they were
reduced to great extremity in the Place *,
that no lefs than 130 had been buried
yefterday *, and that if moft of the Por-
tuguefes had not their Legs fwell’d by the
Dropfy,they had deferted long before this.
The 19th of March the Enemy were
preparing to attack the Redoubt of Paul
Meno two hours before day j but the Ne-
gro Pioneers with the Sentinel retreating
in time, and giving the Alarm, they re-
tired, after having exchanged fome Muf-
quet-balls without doing any harm. Four
Deputys arriving foon after to enquire
the occafion ot fuch fmart Firing, they
were flievvn the Works, and told, that
we wanted 4 or sooColysov5 ooColysov Labourers.
Three other Fifhcrmen were alfo brought
up by the Seamen, who had theufual Re-
ward given them.
At the fame time the Pophcnsburgh
Yacht arriving from lVingurla y brought
the following Advice:
That Don Rodrigo de Lobo , Conde de Se -
Viceroy of Goa , and his Secretary,
with three of his Domefticks, having
been poifoned, died within 4or 5 days
after. His Death being concealed for
fome time, Manuel Mafcarenhas Homem ,
formerly Governour of Ceylon, was (pur-
fnant to the King’s Orders) conftitoted
two days after Viceroy in his ftead : But
the Fidalgos or Gentlemen not being fatif-
fy’d with his Perfon, they expeded daily a
Revolt (juft as it happen’d againft him at
Columbo , 1652.) However, not long af-
ter the Viceroy’s Death, the Merchants
of Goa began to load all the Yachts that
were there, as alfo one Galeon and a
Carach *, whilft the Governour was bufy
in equipping of Men of War and other
Vefiels, intended for Ceylon , offering 20
Seraphyns (or Dutch Guilders) to every
Soldier that would lift himfelf. Our Re-
lident of Wingurla further advis’d, that
they had Pent from Goa 160 Ships, and
among them \6 Men of War, theStibof
February , to the North, to fetch Provifi-
ons and fome other necefiary Commodi-
ties y and that thefaid Fleet had tarried
four dr five days in fight of Wtngurk bv
reaion of the contrary Winds. That
three Patachos or Yachts were failed for
Mofambique -, but one being leaky, was
fore dto return to Bomhaffa: Two more
to Macajfar, two more and one
Carach and a Galeon, the Bon Jefus
and Noffd Senhora de Gratia , fet fail the
l 9*b of February for Portugal-, aboard of
which were carried the following Gentle-
men, being accufed of certain Crimes a-
gamtt the Government, viz.
Cafiro, late Governonr General -, Don Lewd
de Souza -, Don Pedro de Ca[lro Manuel de
Bouzo Cabraer, Matter of the Artillery •
Diego de Salvaar , Captain Major;
•vaondeMelo , late Goveruourof
Charles Hudfart, a rich Merchant;
Dr. Caldero- 7 and Jeronimo Lobo de Falhetta.
In the Baffyn (under the Jurifdittion of
Goa) remained Prifoners, on account of
being concern’d in the declaring Don Bm
deCaflro Viceroy, Don Rodrigo
a Captain in the BaJJyn -, the de
Tazendat, or Sur-lntcndant of the Mer-
chants -, and Leon Corre.
He advifed, that the before-raention’d
Carach andGaleon had aboard a very large
Cargo of Stuff's and Callico’s, of Cinna-
mon, Indigo, Pepper, Bezoar-ftones,
Cloves, ire . And that feveral of the
ncheft Merchants of Goo, having embark’d
all their Effefts aboard thefaid tvvoVef-
iels, were gone privately along with
them to Portugal,
Two days before the Yachts
rjck-fee and Naerden arrived before Gor
4 Patamars with a Portuguefe 7 came
to that Place to bring advice ofthedefpe-
late Condition of Columbo , and that they
flood in great need of the fo Jong expedf-
cd Succours. But the Government of
Goa finding a great averfion in the Portu-
gal 6 Soldiers, as well as the Negro Sea-
men, to go to Ceylon, efpecially in this
dangerous Seafon; they pretended to
have receiv’d Letters from Don Jnthonio
de Souza Coutinho , Governour of Columbo ,
with advice, that the Dutch had bin forc'd,
with the afliftance of Kaja Singa 1 toraife
the Siege; and to make this News pafs
for current, the new Viceroy Manuel
Mafcarcnhas Homcm got the Governour of
Columbo his Hand counterfeited, and or-
der’d for three days fucceffively Ringing
of Bells, illuminations, Bonfires, and
* Patamars are Indian Advice-boats cover'd all over
for the Carriage of Letters , which they tie round in
Wax Cloths to the Mafts. Patamars are alfo jfymi
Foot-Fofis


ether Demonftrations of Joy to be made
for its Relief.
By the fame Letters from Wtngurla Ad-
vice was brought, that our Ships defign’d
for Perfia and Suratte , were failed from
thence *, and that according to the Intel-
ligence received from Ditfely (a Mahome.
tan City not far from Goa) the fo long
expeded Squadron, confiding of between
2p and 30 Ships, was to fail within three
days with Men and Provifions for Ceylon y
tho this proved afterwards only a Rho-
domontade.
He further added, that after the de-
parture of the before-mentioned Veflels
bound to Perfia and Suratte , frequently
Yachts had been fent to the River of Goa ,
to get intelligence of the motion of the
laid Squadron. That as far as they could
learn, they ftay’d only for the return of
the before-mentioned Fleet fent out to
fetch Provifions from the North*, when
they intended to force all the Seamen,
before they could fet foot alhore, aboard
the Men of War, in order to carry them,
together with 7 or 800 European Soldiers, 1
and good ftore of Provifions, to the Ifle of
Ceylon , for the Relief of Columho. Ac-
cording to the Governour of Wingurla* s
Opinion, the faid Succours could not be -
ready before April •, and that, if by that
time they had no certain news at Goa of
the Surrender of Columhoy they would
befides the before-mentioned Squadron
gather all their Naval and Land-Forces,
and endeavour to penetrate, with the
ftrong North Wind, which commonly
blows in that Seafon, into the Harbour
of Columhoy for its relief.
He further added, that there lay two
Galeons and a at anchor in the
River ot C7ort, one whereof, which lay
near Marmagony would fcarce be fit to go
out this Seafon. Laftly, that the Yacht
the Roman lay ready to fail upon the firlt
News he fhould receive of the going out
of the faid Squadron for the relief of Co-.
lumboy to give us timely notice of their
Coming.
CHAP. XXXIV.
Letters betwixt the Emperor and General . Several Deferters come over to us.
The General invited to the Emperor's Camp .
Letter
from the
General
to the Em -
peror.
TH E 30 th of March a good number
of Portuguefes paTing the Fens in two
Boats, call’d Manchous , attack’d our For-
ces in their Works near the Gate of Ma-
pane, but after fome firing on both fides,
were forced to retire in confufion. Soon
after a certain Captain of a Village was
taken by our People, who was fent out
to fetch in fome Fafcines, intended to be
made ufe of in ftrengthening theCortyn
betwixt the Baftions of St. John and St.
Stephen . Two Tonys or Fifher-boats were
likewife brought in with 5 Fiihermen, and
the Seamen rewarded according toCuftom.
At the fame time the General writ a
Letter to the Emperor, wherein he im-
parted to his Majefty the News he had
received concerning the intended Relief
of Colurnbo . In the Evening two Portu-
guefc Deferters that came from the Bu-
llion of St. Stephen (having fent the Sen-
tinel upon an Errand) gave us a tolerable
account of the Condition of the City j
and the next day another Portuguefe De-
ferter bore the Marks of their Extremity
in his Countenance, which was very mea-
ger. The Seamen alfo brought in 4
Fifhermen more, who making up the
number of 15 in all, they were fold for
Slaves by the Sound of Trumpet, to re-
imburfe us the Mony that was given to
the Seamen for the taking of them.
The Ift of April the DiJJaves of Ouve
and the four Cories came at the head of a
Troop of 100 Lafcaryns, divided into
certain Companies, into the Camp and
bringing along with them a Letter from
his Majefty to the General, neatly laid
together, they were received with all
poffible Marks of Honour. The Letter
ran thus;
“ V OUR Excellency’s Lettey, dated
a -*• the 24 th of March , 1 received the
cc fame day, wherein you declare your
cc readinefs to ferve our Imperial Majefty '
4fc upon all occalions; which, together
u with the Proofs we have received there-
cc of ever fince your Landing in this Ifland,
Cc could not but be highly acceptable to
cc our Imperial Majefty. Your Excellen-
u cy declares, that you will referve what
u you have further to propofe till the
<c time you lhall be admitted into our
u Prefence. Our dearly beloved Director
General being fo near our Camp, has
Fifteen Fl-
ftermen
[old for
Slaves.
The Empe-
ror s Let-
ter to the
General*


confulta-
tions a-
bout the
General's
RukSinpa
Two more
cannon
f Unted on
a Battery.
Sixteen
Veferters.
u neverthelefs not as yet appear’d in our
ct Prefence, which we ealily pafs by in
cc regard of the Affedion our Imperial
u Majefty bears to your Perfon. We
Lt have fent the Dijfaves of Ouve and of
u the Four Cories to condud you hither.
tc When they are arrived, your Excellen-
u cy may order the Dijfaves of the Four
u Cories , and of the Seven Corles y and of
iC Saffragamme , to take care in the mean
cc while of the Forces, and what elfe
you fhall find moft requifite for onr
<c Service, and to chufe one of them
cc ( whom you pleafe) for your Con-
a dudor, not queftioning, but that (ac-
u cording to your Wifdom and Expe-
<c rience) you will provide for the Secu-
cc rity of our Forces, and our dear Hoi-
a landers . God condud your Excellen-
cc cy with his Blefiing, that our Imperial
cc Eyes may fee your Perfon, which hap-
“ py Hour and Day I exped with joyful
cc Eyes *, alluring your Excellency, that
cc whatever you fhall propofe to us will
w be as acceptable to our Ears as the moft
u harmonious Mufick in the World.
At Reygamwatte, April 1. 1656.
It was then confulted what Method was
moft convenient to be taken, and what
Preparations were neceflary in order to
attend the Emperor with the utmoft
Splendour } his Dijjavc having ( by his
Majefty’s Orders) appointed the next
following Wednesday for the General's
reception. But before his Departure he
order’d two twelve Pounders to be plant-
ed upon the Battery againfl St. John's Ba-
where the next day a Seaman was
kilfd, and a Souldier (hot by the fame Ball
thro the Hat, without touching his Head,
or any other part. The fame day 1 6 Laf-
caryns well arm’d coming over to us from
the Bullion of St. Stephen , were over-
taken by fome Portuguefe Forces, with
whom there happen'd a fmart Skirmidi
before they could get clear, two of them
being wounded. They were employed
in our Works near the Gate of Rajuha.
In the Afternoon the Diffaves of Ouve
and the Four Cories came with a numerous
Retinue to attend the General, leaving it
to his choice whom of the two he would
pitch upon to condud: him to his Majefty.
After fome Difcourfe the Diffave of Saf-
fragamme was named by his Excellency
for that purpofc, and order’d to get e-
vcry thing in rcadinefs for their depar-
ture againfl: the next Morning. News
was brought at the fame time that feven
Canary ns were taken by fome of the Em-
peror’s Forces above Negombo y coming in
a Fi(her-boat from Columbo .
April in the Afternoon, Ad-
vice being given that his Majefty was
come on Horfeback to the Pafs of IVele.
cande y the General was preparing to meet
him there *, but as they were juft ready to
take Horfe, certain Diffaves came Poll
with a Meflage from the Emperor, defir-
ing the General not to come till to mor-
row, becaufe his Majefty was return’d
immediately.
Accordingly the sth5 th of April the Gene-:
ral fetout on his Journy, in order to wait 1
on his Majefty, attended by the two Fac-
tors Edward Ooms and Tsbrand Gotskens \
the Fifcal Lucas van der Duffen , Cornelius
F'alkenburgh Secretary, James van der Rhee ,
the Interpreter George Bloom , and Don John
de Cofta } accompany’d by the Imperial
Diffaves of Ouve and Saffragamme , and a
Company of Firelocks under Capt .John
Hartman } Mr. Adrian van der Meyden ,
Major van der Laan , the Diffave of the
Four Cories , befides feveral Officers of
Note} conducting them as far as to the
Pafs of Nacolegamme , his Majefty being
then encamp'd upon the River of Key gam-
watte,
The firftTeftimony of Refpeft Ihew’d
to the Director General of his Majefty,
was the offer of three fine and
coutred Horfes, for the Courtiers to
make ufe of them at -pleafure. Thefe
were follow’d by five tame Elephants,
with their Guides, who were order’d to
keep in the Van. Then came a confider-
able number of Noblemen and Officers,
at the head of their refpeftive Troops,
paying their RefpeCts to his Excellency,
and asking after his Health. As they ap-
proached the Imperial Head Quarters,
they were met by fome of the chief Men of
his Majefty’s Court, accompany’d by a vaft
number of Soldiers, Umbrello-Carriers,
Trumpets, Muficians, 11 Elephants, and
two fine Horfes, with Saddles, Bridies,
and other Ornaments befet with Gold
and precious Stones, to complement his
Excellency in his Majefty’s behalf. Tims
they marched on thro a Guard of Fufi-
leers and Bowmen ranged on both (ides,
for a quarter of an hour together, till
they came to a Houfe prepared for the
General’s Reception, neatly furniflfd,
the outward Rooms being hung with
Hanging of a white Linen Cloth, and the
Bed-Chambers with Gold Stuffs. Here
the General entred with his Retinae un-
der a Salvo of Fire-locks, placed on the
other fide of the River near the Imperial
Palace. They had fcarce arrived here
The Gent,
ul fa
m,
Fmmik


jhiGene-
nl pre-
tiresfor
tißtturn,
Qimxi's
Dner t:
w,
two hours, but his Majefty’s DiJJ'aves came
to enquire after the General’s Health,
being inform’d that his Excellency was
feiz’d with an Ague, which had made
him refolve to come to him in Perfon,
had he not received nearer Advice, that
his dearly beloved Diredtor was on the
mending hand, of which he expeded the
confirmation with the utmoft impatience.
Thefe Compliments were return’d by the
General with the utmoft demonftrations
of Refped and Duty, telling the Dif-
favesy that he was highly defirous to ap-
pear in the Prefence of fo famous and
potent a Monarch fo foon as poffible could
be, his Prefence being abfolutely neceflary
in the Camp.
Next day being the 6th , great llore of
Provifions of the bell kind were brought
in Boats for the General and his whole
Retinue. In the Afternoon fome Cour-
tiers brought word to the General in pri-
vate, that his Majefty being feiz’d that
Morning with a fuddenlllnefs, could (to
his great Affli&ion) not fpeak with his
Excellency that day. His Excellency re-
ply’d, that he was heartily forry, his
Prefence was fo abfolutely neceflary in the
Camp,that he could not without great ha-
zard flay, fince it was uncertain how foon
his Majefty mighty recover; for which
reafon he defired leave to depart for this
time, till a better opportunity, defiring,
that four Horfes might be laid by the way,
which, as foon as his Majefty thought
convenient, might carry him with all
fpeed to Court. Whereupon Orders
were given to John Hartman to prepare
for the March, which was done accord-
ingly the fame Night.
Soon after we underftood, that his
Majefty had been forc’d to have been
let blood in the Arm, and that he had
fhow’d a great deal of Sorrow for the
intended departure of the General tel-
ling his Courtiers, that being fenfible
how neceffary his Prefence was in the
Camp, he would either the next morn-
ing, or at furtheft in the Evening, ad-
mit him into his Prefence, in cafe he
found the leaft abatement of his 111-
nefs. In the mean while the General
fent the following Letter to his Ma-
jefty:
Mofi Serene Emperor ,
44 qp HR E E days being already pafs’d
44 * fince 1 came hither by your Ma-
-44 jelly’s Command and Defire *, but
44 not being able hitherto to appear
44 in your Majefty’s Prefence, I moft
44 humbly beg leave to return to the
Camp, the whole Burden whereof
refts upon my Shoulders ; promi-
-44 fing to be ready to attend your Ma-
-44 jelly whenever you fhall think fit to
44 fend for me, and living in conftant
44 hopes, that in cafe fome Mifcarriage
44 or other fiiould happen in my Abfence,
44 the fame will not be alledged againft
44 me, and put upon me as a Blemiih to
44 blot out the remembrance of my for-
-44 mer Service. God proted the Empe-
-44 ror.
7. i6s6. Your Majefty’s moll
humble Servant,
Gerard Hulƒt.
This done, the General order’d r/-
brand Gotskens and Don John de CoJta 7
with fome of Lis trully Lafcaryns , to
take a view of the King’s Guards upon
the Road, with an intention, that in
cafe he faw no certain Profped of go-
ing to Court to day (as indeed there
was but little appearance he Ihould, confi-
dering the Emperor’s Indifpofition ) he
would privately go Poll to the Camp,
The B th of j4p>ril the following Letter
was delivered to the General from the
Emperor.
u I 1 HE Perfons fent to enquire after l
“ A your Excellency’s Health, deli- >
44 ver’d to me with a great deal of 1
44 fatisfaftion your Excellency’s Letter 1
44 wrote on Friday laft at 4 a Clock.
44 I was extremely pleas’d to hear you
44 were in health, and retain’d the fame
“ Inclinations for our Service. It was
“ on the other hand no fmall Affli&ion
44 to me that you had ftay’d fo long
44 in my Court, without being able to
44 fee you. I allure you, that the fame
44 has happen’d far beyond my Wilhes
44 or Intention } but it feems to have been
44 fo ordain’d by God, that your Excel-
-44 lency Ihouldbea Witnefs of mylllnefs,
44 and at the fame time have an op-
-44 portunity of receiving the Prefent
44 fent to you by the Prince (born by
44 God’s Providence for the Welfare of
44 my Subjects) and deliver’d into my
44 hands before my Departure from Can~
44 dy . Your Excellency may prepare your
44 felf againlt to morrow, when I will
44 fend word for your Appearance in my
44 Prefence \ which done, you (hall have
44 liberty to return into the Camp, when I
44 will alfo iflue my Orders for the fur-
The Emp*
ror ' s Ut ~
* er to , tl ; e
eneui *


I y° u wit ,h all things requifite
for the accoraplifhment of fuch Mea-
u fures as (hall be taken betwixt us. Af-
cc ter ray Recovery I intend to come in
u Pcrfbn into your Camp, for which
£t reafon I have commanded the Difave
u of Ouve to prepare my Quarters there.
“ No more, but that our Imperial Ma-
u jelly does not ceafe to pray to God for
cc your Excellency’s Welfare.
Raja Singa , moƒt potent
April 7. before treaty
of Day.
Emperor of Ceylon.
CHAP. XXXV.
The General's most magnificent Entry. He is admitted into his Majefty's Prefence.
What pafs'd at their Interview. The General's Return. His unfortunate
End.
der’d immediately his Guards to pafs the
River with thePrefents, with an inten-
tion to follow them in Perfon with his
whole Train, where his Excellency was
complimented by the Dijfaves of Ouve
and Matule, the Captain of his Ma jetty’s
Guard du Corps , and a great number of
other Courtiers. The whole Cavalcade
was order’d in the following manner :
His Excellency’s Guards led the Van, 15
Enfigns and Standards being by the firft
Ranks carried trailing upon the Ground,
The Gene -
En~
A Bout Noon, juft as the General was
** at dinner, we heard a Noife of
Drums, Trumpets and other Mufick on
the other fide of the River, and loon
after faw fome of the chief Courtiers of
the Emperor, with three of the choicefl:
Horfesof his Stable, adorn’d with moft
magnificent Saddles, Bridles and other
Accoutrements, to advance in very good
order towards us *, fome Perfons of the
firfl Quality marching before to invite his
Excellency to Court. The General or-
'lhc Dutch Generals Cnteygd
744
A Defcripion of CEYLON.




c*d Dra U }°J e 1 u t l c LA u^£n i£ £* } ' CI 1 y, l /-^ Jn^u A mmu.i, pj.. . °, J: ?fi ii ~l^. 1 i! 1 ~^ : ■°f d Hiilil: f Dutch CmicraL Mj.p. .


Au j-
me.
Kh sp eec b
to the Em-
tmr.
to (hew the Spoils of their Enemies.
Thefe were follow’d by his Majefty s
Horfes and Muficians, and then by five
tame Elephants } without the Gate of
the Palace were ranged a vaft number of
Mufqueteers, and pafling over the Bridg
they found the Guard in the outward
Court ranged on both fides, through
which they marched into the Imperial
Palace. „ ,
The Doors being (hut after them, all the
Hollanders there prefent were conduced
through a large Square into a fpacious
Hall (call’d by them Mandonoe ) on the
Weft-fide whereof they found his Ma-
jefty feated in great Pomp upon a Chair
of State, mounted fome fteps from the
ground. No fooner had they enter’d the
Halibut all the great Courtiers paid their
Reverence by falling fiat with their Faces
upon the ground, and the Dutch upon their
Knees, till his Majefty was pleafed to or-
der them to rife by a Nod. Then they
began to approach the Imperial Throne,
adorn’d with moft precious Tapeftrys of
Gold (call’d by them Alcatwes\ ) coming
to the middle of the Hall, they fell upon
their Knees a fecond time, according to
the Cuftom of the Eaftern Nations, till
his Majefty was pleafed to arife from his
Seat, and commanded the General to
come nearer, who made the following
Speech to his Majefty.
“ Molt Potent Monarch ' Y our moin
“ humble Servant approaches your Itnpe-
“ rial Throne with a moll violent Paffion,
“ in confidence of your generous Incli-
“ nations, and wonted Clemency, which
“ has encourag’d me to addrcfs my felf
“ to your MajeHy ( whofe Name is Re-
“ nown’d throughout the World) with
“ a moll fincere wilh that God Almighty
« will be pleafed to blefs your moll II-
“ lullrious Imperial MajeHy, and the
“ Prince, with a long and happy Life for
“ the Welfare and Protection of your
“ Subjects,
“ 1 am come hither to renew and con-
“ firm the moll fincere Confederacy eHa-
“ blilh’d betwixt your moll Potent Ma-
“ jelly and the Dutch Nation-, and to
“ delire that whatever Differences or
“ Dillurbances may have happen’d hi-
“ therto betwixt your Imperial Majelly
“ and our Nation, may be buried in
“ eternal Oblivion, in order to efla-
“ blifh an eternal Peace and Confede-
‘t racy, which may be as durable as the
“ Bodies of the Sun and Moon. It can’t
“ be deny’d but that feveral Mifunder-
« Handings have happen’d betwixt your
“ Majslly’s Officers and thofe of our
4t Company ; but thefe ought now to be (
u remov’d even out of our Memory,
4t at a time when we are fo profufe of
cc the Blood of our Countrymen, to force
tc our common Enemies out of this Ifle,
u and ready to give your Majefty every
a day new Proofs of our Sincerity and
cc hearty Inclinations towards you.
His Majefty appear’d highly fatisfied
with what his Excellency had faid, or-
dering him at the fame time to rife, which
he Teem’d not to underftand, and at the
fame time offer’d certain Prefents, being, *
as he faid, of little Value in
but nevertherlefs much regarded by the t
moft Potent Emperors and Monarchs, to ,
wit, fome Standards taken from thofe ve-
ry Enemies who had for many years to-
gether fo cruelly and barbaroufly op-
prefs’d his Majefty’s Subje&s, efpecially
in the Low-Lands . His Majefty then,
fpeaking of the Prefents fent to his Ex-
cellency by the Prince his Son, his Ex-
cellency acknowledg’d the fame with ex-
traordinary Reverence, pointing at the
fame time at a Jewel he wore upon his
Breaft, prefented him before by his Ma-
jefty and fo approaching the Throne,
he kneel’d upon a Cufhion laid upon the
Step of the Throne, and touching his
Majefty’s Hand, told him, that he thought
it the greateft Honour he ever was capa-
ble of receiving, to be admitted to kifs
his Majefty’s Hands.
The Emperor took a Gargantinho , or
Collar of Gold, which he threw about,
his Excellency’s Neck, and drawing his
own Ring from the firll Finger of his <
Left-hand, he defir’d he fliould extend his 1
Finger, and wear it in remembrance of
his Majelly, who put it upon his Finger.
His Excellency was fo furpriz’d at this
extraordinary favour, that he had fcarce
power to put out his middle Finger of
his left-hand, telling his Majelly, that
this Finger having had the misfortune to
be disfigur’d by his. Enemies, was now
abundantly recompenfed for his pains by
the Honour his Majelly had been pleafed
to bellow upon him. Then retiring fome-
what backwards, and Handing upon a
TapeHry, he declar’d to his MajeHy,
“ That he was fent into this Iflc with full
“ Power by the General and Council of
“ the Indies to propofe to his MajeHy,
tc whether he would be pleafed to con-
tinue the antient Alliance (made with
“ Mr. Wejltrwold) or have the fame re-
“ new’d, and Ibme other Articles added,
“ alfuring his MajeHy, that whatever
<c fhould be agreed upon fhould be kepi
** inviolably on their fide* Unto whicl
Wbat pafi
the
Y or.
Extraordi-
nary Honour
done to the
General .
t
. Certain
7 Fropofiti-
ons made
1 by the Ge-
neral.
I


U prefen-
ted with a
Garter .
his Majefty reply’d, that he was highly
fatisfied with his Propofal.
Then the General giving a (hort ac-
count of their Succefs againft the Ene-
my, his Majefty faid, that he had heard
of the fame to his fignal Satisfaftion, and
that he had a Prefent from the Prince his
Son for his Excellency: Whereupon ap-
proaching the Throne a fecond time, his
Majefty prefented him with a Garter of
Gold, which he faid had been worn by
the Prince himfelf.
This done, our Prefents being order’d
to be brought in, Capt, Hartman enter’d
with 15 of his flout eft Soldiers, each of
them trailing one of the Enemies Colours
upon the ground ; which being thrown
carelefly down in the Hall of Audience,
a white Buckler formerly belonging to
the Portuguefe Governor Jlnthonio Menhes
d'Arenha, was laid upon them, as alfo an
Indian Scymeter, the Hilt whereof was
of Achet and Gold curioufly wrought,
which his Excellency declar’d to be in-
tended for the Prince, wherewith to de-
fend his Subjects (when come to riper
years) againft all the Enemies of the
Crown, not excepting the Hollanders
themfelves, if they deferv’d it. Where-
with his Majefty feem’d fo highly fatisfied,
that he put the Scymeter next to his
Throne.
The Prefents fent by the Company to
his Majefty were as follows.
Two very fine Perfian Florfes, one
Turly Gun, two Perfian Bows, with
their Arrows and Quivers richly em-
broider’d ; one Japonefe Gown, very rich ;
two Greyhounds, two Perfian Sheep, two
Rock-goats of Viftapour, one piece of
Sandelwood.
Thofe for the young Prince were :
One very fine Perjian Horfe, two Fu-
fees with very curious Barrels, one Sil-
ver Bafon, wherein were laid two pieces
of Perfian Stuffs wrought with Gold, two
Silver Boxes of Cfona, one Hog Stone
call’d Pedra de Porco , one piece of San-
delwood, &c.
Whilft the Prefents were deliver’d, his
Excellency bsgg’d his Majefty’s Pardon
for having detain’d him fo long; and as
the time of his flay could be but fhort,
he told him that he had three things more
to propofe to his Majefty (whereof the
want of the Pioneers was one) deliring
that he would be pleafed to hear the
fame from the mouth of Tsbrand Gotskens
in private, he being the only Perfon
whom he had entrufted with the Secret.
The Emperor then commanded all his
Courtiers to withdraw, deliring that our
Officers might be order’d to do the fame •
which being done accordingly, his Ex-
cellency again approach'd the Throne,
and having by his Interpreters George
Bloem and Cottemaley , difcours’d with his
Majefty a quarter of an hour, he defir’d
leave to depart to the Camp, which be-
ing granted, he was reconduded with
the fame Pomp to his Lodgings.
The fame Evening the General fent
to the Emperor by George Bloem two no-
ted Partifans, who had done a great deal
of mifthief in the Country under Gafpar
Figeiro, to difpofe of them at pleafure.
Mr. Bloem was receiv’d by the Emperor
in a private Room, and prefented with
a Golden Chain and Ring.
The 9th of yjpril early in the Morning
the General took Horfe, and came pretty
early with his whole Retinue to Nacck-
gamme, from whence he was conduced by
Mr. uidrian van der Meyden and Mr. John
van der Laan with two Companies to the
Camp. At his arrival there he found
the Gallery fix’d in the Ditch ( without
any confiderable lofs) and every thing
elfe in a good Condition.
The 10th in the Afternoon the Gene-
ral took a view of all the Works, and
among the reft commanded Capt.
Gerard to fet up a Ladder, and take a
view of the Condition of the Enemy on
the other fide of the Ditch ; he found the
Enemy had made an Entrenchment ex-
tending towards the Sea-lhore, with a
Ditch before it, 8 foot deep, upon
which having planted two pieces of Can-
non, they were likely to prevent our
fixing the Miners on that fide, our Tren-
ches being carried on direftly againft that
place; whereupon it was agreed to make
a Breach in the Wall on this fide of the
Ditch, and to plant a Cannon there in
order to ruin the faid Entrenchment.
About Sun-fet his Excellency returning
to the fame place to encourage the Work-
men both by his Words and Example,
the Portugueses began to ufe their utmoft
endeavours to fet fire to the Gallery,
throwing all forts of combuftible Mat-
ter upon it, which the General per-
ceiving, he advanc’d with the reft to afllft
in exdnguifliing the Fire; but whilft he
was bufy in the midft of the Gallery in
performing his Duty with his Breaftopen,
he was heard on a fudden to cry out, :
Good God help me! O help me! which Capt.
Joachim Block who flood hard by hear-
ing, and finding him all over bloody, he
carried him with the affiftance of Major
Van dcr Laan from thence to a Bed, where
without fpeaking one word more he ex-
r
G t T
leave T
m '
The Gene*
ral returns
to the
Camp ,
Takes a
view of the
Works,
[ The Pomi-
- guefcs fct
fire to our
[ G alle r).
He h
wounded.


s. - ' » 4
Hus foccflc GkRARB H Thirst Gout i-|
feller, anl^DirectorGenerali of if ,G
Jcr in (jfuef cf alt the. <§ e a dfiZaiil Forces Jent \
to Cf.YLGN, and Goa ft of tie IISTDIES. I


pir’d. His Wound being fearched, they
tound it to be done by a Mufquet-Bullet,
which palled in under the right Shoulder,
quite through under the right Arm.
very affable Convention, eloquent and
well-vers’d in divers Languages: He was
befides this of a very good Afpeft, tall
and well-made, brisk and indefatigable
in what he undertook and to be fhort.
Nature and Induftry had fram'd fo exatt
an Harmony betwixt hit Soul and Body , that
few Men can pretend to the fame degree of
Perfeffion .
Dies,
This was the unfortunate End of this
moft excellent Perfon, in the Vigor of his
Age, defeended of a good Family, and
of great Experience both in Civil and
Military Affairs j being for the reft of a
Hh chx -
Trattcr-.
CHAP. XXXVI.
The General's Death notified to the Emperor, who fends his Envoys into the Camp.
Mr. Adrian van der Meyden fucceeds him. A Portuguefe Captain comes
over to us.
The Gene-
ral's Death
notified to
the Empe-
ror,
I
His Corps
tarried to
Gale.
Envoys fent <
from the
Emperor. (
j
Take a
view rf the
pi ate where .
he was
wounded, *
j
TH E fame night George Bloem Inter-
preter being difpatch’d with a Let-
ter to the Emperor, to carry the dole-
ful News of the General’s Death, his
Majefty fent the 1 ith of April the Dijfaves
of the five and feven Cories to take a
view of his Corps. It being alfo agreed
in a Council of War, that the fame fhould
be condufted by the Fador Ysbrand
Gotskens and Capt. John Hartman , under
a Guard of 20 Fire-locks, to Puntegale
( 9 German Leagues thence ) the fame was
done accordingly with a great deal of
Splendor. Thq fame night his Majefty
fent the Dtjfaves of Matule and Adigar y
attended by divers other Courtiers, to
condole the Death of his dearly beloved
Diredor General. They were very in-
quifitive, whether he was flain byfome
of his own People, or by the Enemy, or
by fome unexpected Accident: Being
fhewn the place where he receiv’d his
Wound, they crawl’d thither trembling
for fear upon the ground, from whence
they took a handful of Earth, and de-
fird that no body (hould fet a foot in that
place.
His Corps was depofited in a Vault un-
der ground at Gale till 1657. when by
order from Mr. Fan der Meyden it was
inter’d with great Solemnity in the
Church there near the Pulpit $ his Arms,
Buckler, Sword and Spurs being hung
againft the Wall. In the year 1658. the
faid Corps being tranfported from thence
to Columbo , was put into a ftately Mo-
nument there, with an Infcription upon
it, containing in fubftance. That he had
pur chafed the Conqueft of Columbo by his
Death , for the honour of his Native Coun-
try.
After the Deceafe of the General, the
Burden of the fupreme Command of the
Siege was laid by unanimous Confent up.
on the Shoulders of Mr. Adrian van der
Meyden Governor of Gale, who had the
good fortune to fee the City reduc’d in
the next following Month of May .
The 13 th of April a Letter was brought
to the Camp from Leonard Johnfon , da-
ted the id at Wingurla , intimating that
22 Frigats under the Command of Fran-
eifeo de Seixa Cabreira , with all forts of
Provifions, and 800 Portuguefe Landmen
aboard, were fail’d from Goa . Where-
upon the Commodore and Peter
de Bitter being fent for, to confult what
was beft to be done, it was refolved
(in order to prevent their bringing into
the City the intended Succours) to at-
tempt a vigorous Aflault upon the Bafti-
on of St. Stephen , for which purpofe four
brave Officers were chofen, who with 8o
Volunteers (who had offer’d themfelves
for a Reward of 50 Crowns a piece)
were to make the Attack.
The fifme Evening the Fluffing Yach
coming to an Anchor in the Road, fooi
after Adrian van der Maart her Captaii
came alhore, and told the General, thai
about three days before meeting with th(
Portuguefe Squadron near Coulang and the
Cape Comoryn , he had attack’d one o]
their Frigots fo fuccefsfully, that he Taw
her fink before his Eyes, 1 6 Portuguefes
only with Capt. Simon Souza being fav’d
of all that were aboard her. That foon
after he had loft fight of them all, fup-
pofing they were return’d to the Cape
Comoryn , it being his opinion that as the
Wind ftood, they muft before this have
been near Columbo. In the night time a
certain Portuguefe Captain, one of the
Fidalgos , or Gentlemen, who had been
concern’d in declaring Don Bras de Caftro
Viceroy of Goa } came over to us, having
Mr, Van
der Mey-
den jk-
ceeds the
General in
that big,
nit),
A Lettci
from Wiu-
■ glirla con-
cerning the
Portu-
guefe Suc-
cours.
The Fluf-
fing tacht
meets the
Portu-
guefc
Fleet. '
A Peru*
guelc Gen*
tie man
comes (Mr
to Wi


Letter of
condole -
me from
lor,
been detain’d Prifoner in the Baftion of
S. Stephen , and made his efcape with
four of his Servants through Don Fran-
eifeo de Rolyn’s Houfe by means of a Boat.
He entertain’d the new General for a
confiderable time. It was in the mean
time refolv’d to delay the Aflault upon
the Baftion of S. Stephen's for two or three
days. Our Interpreter George Bloem re-
turn’d alfo with the following Letter of
Condoleanee from his Majefty.
Raja Singa Rajou , moft potent Emperor
of Ceylon, wifhes Health to Mr. Adrian
van der Altyden , Governor of the
Imperial Fortrefs of Gale.
ct Letter dated in the Evening
44 at feven a Clock on Monday the
44 loth of April, did arrive in the Impe-
a rial Camp about Midnight, and was
u deliver’d to our Imperial Majefty on
44 Tuefday about Noon. The Death of
u our Diredor-General has caufed an ex-
-44 ceflive Afflidion in our Imperial Heart.
44 Whilft our beloved Diredor was at
44 our Court, I was unwilling (accord-
-44 ing to the fingular Love I bore to his
44 Perfon) to let him know my Illnefs;
44 but being now on the mending hand,
44 I am forced to hear of his Death,
44 which now we mull commit to Provi-
-4C dence, and fubmit to his Will. Our
44 Imperial Majefty has likewife under-
-44 flood by your Excellency’s Letter that
44 you are invefted with the fame Power
44 as our beloved Diredor-General was.
44 Ic is a general receiv’d Cuftom in the
44 Courts of all the great Monarchs, that
44 in cafe a Perfon of note, and in good
Ct efteem with them dies, his Succeflbr
4c appears before the faid Monarch, and
44 receives his Confirmation and Blelfing
44 at his hands. As you have always
been ferviceable to us, it is our Plea-
-44 fure that you come to Court (in the
44 fame manner as the Diredor-General
44 did ) in order to receive the Honours
44 due to your Merits , being fenfible that
44 you have render’d us confiderable Ser-
-4; vices, without having receiv’d any Re-
-44 ward hitherto , wherefore it is my
44 Pleafure, that when you refolve to
44 come, you give notice thereof before-
-44 hand what day you have pitch’d upon,
44 in order to receive you with the fame
44 Refped as the Diredor-General your
44 Predecelfor. I doubt not in the mean
44 while but you will be very careful in
44 your high Station. At the doling of
44 this Letter Advice is brought that
t 4 the Portugucfes exped every day
44 Succours, which has made me give
ct ftrid Orders to keep a ft rift Guard
“ both by Sea and Land.
In the Camp and
Court of Re y-
gamwatte,ii
April i6s6.
Raja Singa Rajou ,
Molt Potent Emperor
of Ceylon.
In the night 2 Portuguefes , 3 Topaffits ,
and 11 Lafcaryn Defercers gave a doleful
account of the miierable condition of the
City, and of the Sicknefs and Mortality
that reign’d there. The 1 6th we play’d
moft furioufly againft the Gate of Rajuha ,
and the General having fent Advice of
the expeded Succours in the City to the
Emperor, gave Orders to Commodore
Rootbaus to keep the Fluffing, Popkenshurgh
and Lion Yachts in readinefs to purfue
the Enemy’s Squadron. About the fame
time a Portuguefe Captain came over to
us with 18 Lafcaryns and three Topaffics 3
his pretence was, that having receiv’d an
Affront from the Governor, he had taken
this method to revenge himfdf. Diedelof
van der Beek writ from ATapane, that the
poor ftarv’d Wretches in the Plain be-
twixt our Works and the City butchered
one another, two Women having lately
devour’d their new-born Babes. The
19th of April a Letter was deliver’d to
the General from the Emperor.
44 Excellency was deliver’d
4u to me after Midnight, by which
u you declaring your readinefs to ferve
44 me, the fame was receiv’d with fin-
-44 gular fatisfadion, knowing that your
44 Excellency ever fince your landing in
44 this Ifle has (hewn a more than ordi-
ct nary Inclination for our Service. YoUr
u Excellency being now through God’s
44 Mercy put into this high Station, it is
44 expeded you fhould give more lignal
<c Proofs thereof than before. You alfo
tc mention the expeded Portuguese Suc-
-44 cours, and the Succefs of our faithful
44 Hollanders againft them. I hope in
cc God that this Vidory will prove the
44 forerunner of others. What I writ
a in my laft concerning your care in
44 the Camp, was not intended as if I
44 queftion’d your Condud, but becaufe
44 it belong’d to me to mention it. You
44 further advife, that the Enemy’s Squa-
-44 dron has orders to fail diredly for
44 Columbo, but confidering the ill Treat-
ct ment Aianoel ATafcarenhas Homem the
u prefent Viceroy of Goa met with-at
44 Colmnbo (whilil Governor there) ic
ct feems to me moft probable, that he
44 has fentthis Fleet rather to be worftcgf
11 Lafca-
ryn, 5 To
pail'es, 2
Porcu-
gude De-
fer: crs.
More De~
fetters.
The Emte-
ror's Let-
ter to the
new Gene-
ral,


He orders
tbe late
jewels S to
be fent into
Holland.
u by the Hollanders , than with a real in-
tc tention to relieve Columbo.
u Your Excellency fays that one iVi-
colao de Moura Captain-Major of the
cc City is come over to us: I defire you
ct would give a good Entertainment to
“ all fuch as come to us with a fincere
u Intention. The other News has been
tC very acceptable to me, God I hope
u will crown our Endeavours with Suc-
ct cefs. Your mentioning the late de-
tc ceafed Diredor-General’s Name has
u renew’d my Grief*, and as I lov’d him
cc entirely, fo I muft recommend to
u you the Jewels which were pre-
-4t fented to him (whilft living) from
CL our Imperial Majefly, that the fame
u may be fent into Holland to his next
ct Kindred \ it being our Will and Plea-
Ct fure to give upon this occafion a con-
u vincing Proof to our Hollanders of the
tc moft fincere AfFedion we bear them.
ct For, tho the unfortunate Death of
u the faid Diredor has rob’d him of the
u opportunity to execute thofe Defigns
tc he had projeded for our Services, yet
u his Counfels, Care and Watchfulnefs
u will remain for ever in our Memories.
ct I am very follicitous to know what
cc method you intend to take in reducing
u the City, whether by Force or Famine :
u If you intend to take it by Afiault, let
u me know of it two or three days
before-hand fecretly. My Illnefs has
44 hitherto prevented me from profecu-
“ ting my Refolution of coming into the
u Camp, to take a view of all the Works
tc of the Hollanders \ however I am re-
w folv’d to come nearer to the Camp,
“ which as foon as it is done I will give
4t you notice thereof, and defire your
Ct Prefence there, in order to concert
u Meafures with you before you return
u to the Gamp. No more, &c.
Raja Singa Rajou,
Rcygamwatce 28
April 1656.
Moft: Potent Empe-
ror of Ceylon•
P. S. “ It is defir’d that the Captain
u who funk one of the Enemy’s Frigats,
tc and forced the reft to return back,
4t may come along with the General to
u the Emperor, in order to make himfelf
a known to his Majelly.
The Superfcription was,
Raja Singa Rajou , Moll Potent Emperor
of Ceylon , willies Health to Adrian
van der Meyden , Governor of our Im-
perial lortrefs of Gale.
In the Afternoon a Ceflation of Arms
being order’d for fome time, the follow-
ing Summons were fent into the City.
44 ILJ Aving by the prefent Siege reduc’d
u * * the Citizens of Columbo to the laft
44 Extremity, and bereaved them of all
44 hopes of the fo long expedled Succours
44 from Goa , we thought fit to fumraon
44 the City a fecond time in the Name of
44 his Imperial Majefiy Rapa Stnga , and
44 of the Honourable the Dutch Eafl~
44 India, For the Squadron fent the i ith
44 of this Month from Goa by the new
44 Viceroy Manocl Mafcarenhas Homem
44 ( Conde de Secredo his Predecefibr dy-
-44 ing the 13 th of January )to the relief
44 of Columbo , being pretty well provi-
-44 ded with Provilions, but very indiffe-
-44 rently raan’d, was engag’d fo briskly
44 by our People, that fome of their
44 Frigots were loft, others much da-
-44 mag’d, and the reft forc’d to retire in
44 Confulion to 7 'utecoryn and Manaar .
44 According to the Opinion of your
44 own Captain Simon de Souz.a, and fome
14 others, that are our Prifoners, raoft
44 of the Men aboard them are likely to
44 defert, for fear of falling into the hands
44 of our Ships that are cruifing there-
-44 abouts; and the reft will fcarce be
44 able by reafon of the Moujfon to reach
44 this place. Perhaps you may flatter
44 your felf, that the fame Moujjbn will
44 oblige our Ships to leave before long,
44 as well thofe Parts as this Bay j but if
44 you rely upon this Point, we declare
44 our felves innocent of all the Grievan-
-44 ces and Sufferings put upon the poor
44 Citizens, who will befides this be there-
-44 by put in danger of lofing all they
44 have, whereas at prefent they may ex-
-44 peft honourable Conditions, which
44 they can’t hope for hereafter. We
44 recommend this to your Excellency’s
44 Confideration, and your Perfon to
44 God’s Proteftion.
In the Imperial
Camp before
Columbo , 18
April 16 $6.
Adrian van der Meyden.
The following Letter was fent in An-
fwer to the former.
a pj £ Letter fent to me by the mofl:
a A noble General Gerard Hulfi , dated
tc the gth of Noventb . laft, I anfvver’d at
ct that time *, which, as it can’t be un-
u known to your Excellency, fo the fame
u Anfwer may ferve to your Letter
u neither the Change of War, nor want
Summons
fent inti
Columbo
The
fiver.


“ of Provifions having given mefufficient
“ OccaCon hitherto to alter ray Refoluti-
“ on, which is, to take care of and de-
“ fend the City to the utraoft of ray Pow-
“ er, for the Service of the King my
“ Mafter. God protedi your Excellency >
Colombo, Apr.
ip. i6s6.
Antonio de Souza Coutinbo.
Being convinced by this Letter, that
nothing but Force could reduce them to
reafon, the Cannon were order’d to play
again as before.
CHAP. XXXVII.
Many Deferters. Letters from the Emperor. Ysbrand Gotskens fent to his
Majefty. Resolution taken to affault the City. Succours arrived from Ba-
tavia.
The Empe-
ror' s Let-
ter to the
General.]
THE 21 fi of April, 7 Lafcaryn Defer-
ters reported, that the Citizens and
Soldiers beginning to murmur for want
of Rice, it was refolv’d to give to each
Citizen and Soldier and to each Topat
and Lafcaryn 4 Medide per diem , befides
their former Allowance. x Soon after a
Portuguefe Defertcr related, that they
had barricadoed up moft of the Streets,
and planted Cannon in them. About the
fame time the new General received the
following Letter from the Emperor.
RAJA SINGA RAJOV , &c.
cC T of your Letter dated the
cc l9th of April, I have (with a
u great deal of Satisfaction) underftood
Cc your good Health, and good laclinati-
“ ons for my Service, as well as of Ma-
tt jor John van dcr Laan , and the reft of
“ the Chief Officers. Before the Arri-
ve valof the late Diredor-General (of
cc Blefted Memory) I had taken a Refo-
cc lution within my felf, to come and take
“ a View of your Gamp \ but being then
« prevented by my Illnefs, I ftill continue
cc i n the fame Refolution, not only to
cc view the Works there, but alfo to be
cc a Spedator of the brave Addons per-
cc form’d there for my Service. My faith-
cc ful Hollanders , who are come hither
u from far diftant Countries, have for
“ feveral Months laft paft endured many
u Miferies, not without much effufion of
“ Blood and as lam ftedfaftly perfua-
a ded that both land our Imperial fa*
“ mily may promife our felvesthe fame
iC and more for the future, fo (hall I think
tc it no Trouble to come fo far into the
u Camp, to be an Eye-witnefs (to my
a great Satisfaction) of the brave Adi-
tc ons performed there for our Imperial
u Majefty’s Service. That no notice has
u been taken hitherto by this Court of
u the Captain-Major, is to be attributed
u to his being employed Day and Night
cc in the Company’s Service. Some foo-
u lifliPeopeare much deceived, if they
cc judg that there can be the leaft Sepa-
u ration of Intereft betwixt our Majefty
cc and the Company, the wifer fort be-
cc ing convinced that our Intereft is the
u fame. The faid Major John van der
u Laan has done me confiderable Service
“ever lince his coming into this Ifle;
u and therefore I declare, that lince the
u late Diredor-General appear’d at this
cc Court, 1 did lay afide all Animofity,
a in confederation of his great Qualities
cc and Services •, fo that now the faid
(C Major who has fpilfd his Blood more
cc than once, and been wounded with Bul-
cc lets in my Service, fhall be made fen-.
cc fible of the Love and Affedion I bear
u him, whenever he comes into my Pre~
cc fence. What you mention about Maf~
a carenhas , is no lefs than the Truth,
cc and an undeniable one, to convince the
World, that God will take Revenge
cc of fuch as offend their Sovereigns,
tC which induces me to believe, that this
ct War we jointly carry on againft our
<c Enemy, will be blefled by God with
u Succefs. 1 was very glad to underftand
u by your Excellencies Letter, that the
u Jewels prefented by me to the Direc-
a tor-General have been fent to Batavia,
44 in order to be tranfported from thence
cc bytrufty Perfons into Holland . The
cc faid Diredor-General having done me
Cc fuch Signal Services, ever fince his
lc Coming into this Country, I intend fo
<c foonasthe War is brought to a Con-
<c clufion, to fend a Letter with the firft
<c Ship to the States-General of Holland ,
tc to give them an ample Teftimony
tc thereof. The Refolution taken in


u Council of War is very accepta-
u ble to me: But as your Excellency in
44 his High Station has the chief Ma-
ct nagement of fuch Matters, as tend to
44 our Majefty’s Service, in your Hands, fo
44 lammoft inclined to follow your Ad-
-44 vice. The Method propofedfor the
44 reducing of the City has been debated
44 in our Imperial Council *, but as the
44 fame muft be expreffed in a different
44 Language (which carries along with
44 it a confiderable Alteration) I will pafs
44 it by in filence, earneflly requiring
44 you, that whenever the faid Refolution
44 is to be put in execution, to fend me
44 Advice of it, that I may aflift you
44 therein Perfon. You are of Opinion
€c that it would be more convenient for
u me not to come into the Camp, till af-
-44 ter the taking of the City but what
44 Bufinefs have lin the Camp then, un-
u lefs it be to fee the Conditions per-
€i form’d ? whereas the late Diredor-
u General had given me his Word, that
tc the City {hould be delivered into ray
tc Hands. In the Letter I fent to your
a Excellency, I defir’d that the Captain
<c who had funk the Portuguefe Ship (hould
u come along with you to our Court
u and you having made no mention of
4C him in your Anfwer, I am at a ftand
u to guefs the Reafon thereof. The auk-
cc ward Anfwer of the Portuguefes in
cc Columbo to your Summons, (hews them
44 to be void of Senfe \ and I, who am
ct well acquainted with their Bravadoes,
tc look upon it as an infallible Sign of
cc their Diftrefs ; being convinc’d by my
<c own Experience in divers Engage-
u ments, that when they were moftat a
u pinch, they would brag moft. I have
4C for a confiderable time confider’d with
44 myfelf, whether I (hould write a Let-
-44 ter to thofe in the City, but for fear
44 of a haughty Anfwer, 1 refolve to let
44 it alone. No more, &c.
The 22d of April,
i 6 $ 6,
Raja Singa Rajou, Moft
potent Emperor of
Ceylon.
The following Letter was enclofed,
and direfted to the Sabandaar of Gale ,
Don John <k Cofla •
a |LJ Aving been inform’d by feveral of
tl i 1 our Meflengers fentfrom hence
cc with Letters, that lince the Arrival of
a the late Direftor-General of Blefled
Memory, you have given all imagina-
u ble Satisfaction in reference to his Per-
; fon, I intended to have Lent you a Pre-
“ fent at that time, but that the faid
“ Director’s Departure (which was fo
“ fudden, that my Servants did not over-
cC take him before he came to
“ hof) prevented it. But when the new
tC General (hall appear at Court, you as
“ well as the reft of the Officers (hall not
“be forgot. You have been an Eye-
“ Witncfs of the Refpect paid by me
“ here to the Direftor-General ; and
“ whenever the new General makes his
“ Appearance before us, the fame lhall
“ (not without great Reafon) be increa-
“ fed, our Imperial Majefty having re-
“ ceiv’d more Signal Services from his
“ Excellency, whereof I would have you
“ give notice to him at the firft Oppor-
“ tunity. If you Ihould happen to dif-
“ cover any Error in fuch Letters as are
“ fent from this Court, you lhall excufe
“ them to the General. You lhall alfo
“ put him in mind, that we ftand in need
“ here of an Anvil, and a pair of Smiths
“ Bellows •, and as there is frequent Oc-
“ callon for Writing, don’t forget to
“ let us be furnilh’d with fome white Pa-
“ per; you may fend alfo fome China
“ Ware. Farewel.
At the Court of Reygamwatte, April aj, i6$S.
A Tops?
Deferkr
brined
Letter
from a
Merck#
in Colum*
bo.
Mr. van der Laan .
f Beg of you to believe what I am go-
cc * ing to tell you, concerning the pre-
ct fent Condition of the City. Be care-
“ ful not to venture a Storm, they having
cc provided Retrenchments in all Polls,
tc well provided with Cannon, belides
cc four Mines, to be difcovercd to you by
“my Servant. The Rice is fold flill at
cc three Seraphyns , and is very fcarce. If
a you intend to haften the Surrender of
a this City, fend fome body from Cale ~
<c ture hither, to convince them that they ■
“ are Hill living there this being the
cc Reafon why they would not hitherto
cc hearken to any Conditions. 1 fend my
a Servant with this Letter to you, to
u fhew the fame to the General, tho it
a is rumoured abroad here that General
Cc Hulft is dead, but I don’t believe it.
The 24 th of the fame Month, aTo-
pets Deferter, named Laz,aro Henrico , who
came over to us during the Siege of
leture , but afterwards run over again to
the Enemy (notwithftanding he was well
entertained by the late Diredor-General)
brought a Letter from Fonfeque de
Moniis, a Merchant of Columbo , diredkd
to Major van der Laan.


Gotskens
!f. tot J c
rn c ' *
An account
foliation"
InjlrutH-
m for the
intended
“ The next thing I have to requeft for
cc God’s fake, and as you tender our
“ Friendfhip, is to prefcrve and fecure
tc the Bearer hereof, being refold’d like-
ct wife to come over to you, which I
u can’t do at prefent, being fo narrowly
cc watch’d, but hope to be with you in a
“ few Days. God grant you a long
a Life.
Your Servant and Slave,
Manoel Fonƒeque de Moniis .
Whereupon it was refolv’d to fecure
the raid Topat aboard a Ship till further
Order.
Soon after Tsbrand Gotskens was dis-
patch’d to his Majefty, to reprefent to
him fome matters of the greateft Confe-
quence, and to know his Sentiments. It
was not long before he return’d in Com-
pany of the Dijfaves of Saffragam , and the
Four Cories , and the Curupele Apohami , and
gave an account of his Negotiation to the
General van der Meyden \ and among o-
ther things, that his Majefty was well
fatisfied with the Refolution taken April
21. but Teem’d to be inclin’d to have the
Aflault delay’d till Sunday the laft Day
of the Month, when he intended to be an
Eye-Witnefs of it.
The 23 d of April, it being refolved to
give the General Aflault the next follow-
ing Night, efpeciaily upon the Baftions
of S. Stephen and Clergos , and (in cafe
they fucceeded) afterwards upon that of
S. Philippo , every thing was preparing
for the execution thereof, and every one
order’d to his Poft. The following In-
ftruftions in Writing were given to each
commanding Officer in Chief, which they
were ftridly to obey.
u Thofe that are order’d to give the
a Aflault upon the Baft ions, (hall be ob-
tc lig’d to fix the fcaling Ladders them-
ct felves, and ufe their ucmoft Endea-
-4C vours to make themfelves Mafters
thereof, and to maintain themfelves
a there: In cafe the Baftionof S .Stephen
a betaken, the commanding Officer fhall
let the Trumpeter found the Tune Wil-
cc Warn of Naffau as a Signal, that God
cc hasbleffed us with Victory on that fide.
cc So foon as the Aflault begins from the
cc Redoubt, betwixt St. Stephen and St.
u John* s Baftion, the Companies of John
u Hartman , George Gebel, Henry Gerard ,
u and James Baker fhall be in a readinefs
ct to fecond them, as Occafion requires.
a During the Aflault, the Javaneses,
“ Bandanefes , Lafcaryns , Topaffes , with
cc fome Europeans , fhall endeavour to
c * pafs the Ditch, in order to force the
ct Enemy from their Works at the Foot
cc of the Baftion of Sc. John , and fhall
tc be commanded by Captain N.Schcrf ,
u Arent Johnfon , Nde IVit, N. Chample,
u and James van Uriel. Whilft the Af-
u fault continues upon the Baftion of Sc*
u Stephen , Major van der Laan fhall with
cc his Forces attack the Gate of Rajuha *,
u and in cafe God blefs us with Sneeds,
tc no Officer of what degree foever fluff
“ prefume to grant leave or fuffer any of
“ his Soldiers to leave their Colours or
u enter the City, being forewarn’d that
cc the Enemy have planted their Gannon
cc there, charged with fmall Shot.
Dated Apr. 27. Siibfcribed by Command
from the General,
Adrian van der Meyden ,
James van Rhee Secretary.
Immediate notice of this Refolution
was given to the Emperor, but there hap-
pening no fmall Differencrs and Heats
in the Council of War that was held that
Evening about the Execution of this
Defign, the fame was thought fit to be
defer d to another time. Scarce was
the Council broken up, but a Lafcaryn
Deferter coming from St. John's Baftion,
reported, that this Evening they had re-
inforced the ordinary Guard of the Bafti-
on of St. Stephen with 30 of their choi-
ceft Men, called Faliantons or Bravoes
by them, befides 10 other Soldiers, which
made us imagine that a Javdnefe Defer-
ter, who had got perhaps fome fcent of
the matter, had difcover’d our Defign to
them.
At the fame was brought of
the Arrival of the Yachts the Red Lion,
Avenhorn and Pelican , who left Batavia
in March. The iSth of April, the Lieu-
tenant Chrijlophcr Egger , James Firy,
Martin Sholtes , and Enfign Brewer were
fent in the Night-time to view the Afcent
to the Baftion of St. Stephen \ they gave
an account that they had found them well
upon their Guard there, and the Ground
being fandy would afford no firm footing.
The 19th of April a Letter was brought
into the Camp from Abraham van der
Mart , fent by the Lion Yacht from the
Ifles of Tutecoryn , with the joyful News
that the Portuguese Squadron being met
by the Butch the 1 ptfe, off of Tritchiana-
dour and Caylpatnam , they were forced
-to retreat betwixt the Ifles of Tutecoryn ,
Is delayed
till ano-
ther time *
3 Ship sur-
vive from
Batavia.
The Condi-
tion of St.
Stephen’ s
Bajlion
viewed.


Great News
from tbe
Dutch
Fleet.
A Succour
0/ 225
Men from
Batavia.
where they were block’d up by our Ships,
and van der Mart gave nofmall hopes of
preventing their coming out again, pro-
vided he were reinforced in time with
two or three nimble Yachts. Letters
were at the fame time deliver’d from the
Head Faftor Reynier Serooskerke , concern-
ing the Preparations of the PortuguefeSy
and that they intended to pafs the Mouffon
on the Coafl of Malabar. That thp
Traffickof the Company at Calicoulang
was in a good Condition, and that he in-
tended to buy up a good Quantity of Pep-
per and other Commodities againfl: the
Year 1657. News was alfo brought from
Bataviay that a Succour of 225 Men was
fent from thence to Ceylony who within a
few Days were to come by Land hither
from Gale. At the fame time we recei-
ved a Letter written in Latin by the Ser-
jeant Severin Dolandety which being
thrown over the Ditch, required afpee-
dy Anfwer.
44 QTz/erm wiffies his Enfign Health:
44 (3 The Meffage brought me by the
44 Father was very acceptable to me. I
44 and my Comrades are above half dead,
44 of 74 there being no more than 10
14 left, and thefe in a moft miferable
44 Condition,for want of Bread,Wine and
44 Meat, being not ufed to feed upon Rice,
44 therefore wedefiretobe fupply’dwith
44 the fame (if poffibie) for the Prefer-
-44 vation of our Lives, and the Recove-
-44 ry of our Strength * in return where-
-44 of I will acknowledg you the Prefer-
-44 ver of my Life, as long as I live. Mr.
44 Cornicularm is alfo very near Death’s
44 Door, but perhaps a little Bread and
44 Wine might recover him. I beg you
44 once more for God’s fake not to for-
-4C get us, and to deliver it to the before-
-44 mention’d Father, who is ourtrufly
44 Friend. God proteft you.
Severin Dolander.
A Letter <f
& Dutch
Serjeant
from Co.
lumbo*
CHAP. XXXVIII.
Ship fent to Tutecoryn. Raja Singa dissatisfied. Prifoners exchanged. Let-
ters from Raja Singa. The Baftions of St. John and St. Stephen taken by
Storm, not without a con fider able Lofs.
A Rein-
fircement
fent to the
Flea near
Tutecoryn
THE Council having taken into Delibe-
ration, the Condition of the Enemies
Fleet near Tutecoryn y it was refolv’d to
difpatch thither forthwith the Yachts the
, Marty Rabbity the Roman and Lyon , be-
fides two other Veflels under Commodore
Roothaus. At the fame time an Anfwer
was order’d to be fent to the Dutch Pri-
foners in Columbo.
44 V OURS we have receiv’d by the
44 ** Father, and underftood your
44 miferable Condition \ thefe are the
44 chances of War, the belt Comfort
44 you can have in, this Extremity with
44 your Fellow-Prifoners, At your ear-
-44 neft Requeft we fend you a Bottle of
44 Spanifh Wine, ten new-bak’d Loaves,
44 and a piece of Meat and Bacon *, the
44 Effedts and Mony defign’d for Captain
44 Simon de Bounty who is kept among
44 the Prifoners at Caleturey are put aboard
44 the Ship : and becaufe one of the
44 Portuguefe Soldiers did this Forenoon
44 call from the Bullion of St. John to one
44 of our Sentinels, that the Governor
44 was willing to exchange i oof his Men,
44 that are our Prifoners, for your ten ,
u we have fent Word to the Governor
c L Anthonie de Coutinho , that as foon
u as he will difeharge you, we will fend
“ back 1 o Portuguefe Prifoners fromd-
tc leture.
May 1.1 555.
Adrian van der Meyden.
Accordingly the id of May in the
Forenoon, a Portuguefe Captain, named
Domingo Coelhoy deliver’d a Letter toEn-
fign Peregrin in our Service, offering,
that in cafe we would exchange eight
Portuguefe Prifoners at Caleture for the
Serjeant and feven Soldiers, they would
fend them to us, which was denied, and
in lieu thereof offer’d feven common Sol-
diers and one Officer in exchange for
them. About the fame time his Majcfty
lent back a Letter, which he feem’d high-
ly difpleas’d at, with another as follows,
44 WOUR Letter writ to foitieof my
44 1 Courtiers laft Monday, wtisdeli-
-44 vered to them before Sunfet; what
44 you relate of Major van der Laanh go-
-44 ingto Mapaney to obferve what paft
44 there,, and that finding thofe that were
An offer
for the £l-
-
Fri l ms *


An wry
utter
fm the
Ewfsror.
8 Dutch
Prifoners
fent out of
Columbo.
Their Ac-
count.
44 come out of Columbo , to be fupplied un-
-44 derhand with Provifions,he commanded
44 to fire among them, and to fecure the
44 Modeliar Jazjondere , who had been ac-
-44 ceflbry to the matter; has been very ac-
-44 ceptable to me,as tending to myService.
44 The Letter deliver’d to me by Curupule
44 Meynde , written upon half a Sheet, I
44 did not think fit to read, much lefs to
44 anfwer,being fill’d with nothing but in-
-44 lipid Stuff: If perhaps a hidden Muti-
-44 ny or Accident, or any other Misfor-
-44 tune had happen’d in the Camp, I
44 could have excufed fuch a Letter, in
44 refpeft of the Love and Inclination I
44 bear to the Hollanders , my moft trufty
44 Servants } but every thing being in a
44 very good Condition, I can’t fufficient-
-44 ly admire what could induce George to
44 write fuch a Letter. Truly the Gene-
-44 ral (who has the fupreme Command
44 there) ought not to have been fo care-
-44 lefs in this matter, fuch a Negledf be-
-44 ing not very futable to the Conduft
44 that may be expeded from a Perfon
44 entertain’d in the Service of a Great
44 Monarch *, wherefore I fend you this
44 Letter, together with the Ola (Letter)
44 in order tp have it read in the Prefencc
44 of the General, and to let him know
44 word by word the true Contents therc-
-44 of.
Thurfday, May 2. 16 $6.
Confidering the nicety of the Cingale-
ses and Malabars in this Point, it muff be
confelTed, that more caution ought to
have been ufed in this refpedt.
Towards Evening the Portuguefes fent
our eight Prifoners out of the City, half
dead for want of Food, three of them
being fo weak, that they could neither go
nor Hand •, they unanimoufly depofed,
that there had been a great Diforder a-
mong the Officers, which had prevented
their marching to the Baffion of ,
after they had enter’d the City, as they
ought to have done, the fame being guar-
ded only by 15 Men. But whilft they
ftaid in expedhtion for Orders from the
Sea-Captain Lipfens (of whom they fpoke
very indifferently) they were attack’d
both in Front and Rear by a great Num-
ber of Portuguefes , and charg’d fo furi-
onfly, that fcarce 26 of them efcaped,
• without being either kill’d or wounded,
after they had fpent all their Powder and
Ball. They added, that what had been
related of their having fell to plundering
was not true, that they were fecur’d in
a Warehoufe belonging to ,
where they had the fame daily Allow-
ance of Rice with the King’s Soldiers,
and that they had fed as well as the reft
of the Inhabitants upon the Flelhof-E-
--lephants. Bafflers Hides, nay upon Dogs,
Cats and Rats. That moft of the 74
Prifoners died for Want of good Food,
and according to all Appearance thefe
8 would not live long. They further
faid, that as they were going out of the
City, they faw a Body of 400 or 500
Men, fome Europeans , forae Negroes,
near St. John’s Gate.
The tfhoi May the Emperor Raja Sin-
ga fent the following Letter.
a A Bout three Years ago Captain Jo- 4
u ** r'vs Hervendonk , with fome other \
cc Officers and Soldiers entring into our
a Service \ and their time being expir’d
a fince, for which they had agreed with
cc the Company, I refolv’d with my felf
44 (lince I had no great Occafion for them
“ here) to fend them to the Camp. An
44 Account of what Services the faid
44 Captain had done me, may be feen in
44 a Letter written by him (according to
44 my Command) to the late Direftor-
-44 General, immediately after his Land-
-44 ing near Columbo. He had neither be-
-44 fore nor fince the fame Senfe he had
44 when he writ that Letter, which then
44 induc’d me to a Refolution to beftow
44 certain Favours upon him before his
4t Departure. But his infolent Behavi-
-44 our having drawn upon him feverai
44 Chaftifements, without any hopes of
44 Amendment, I thought fit to remove
44 him from his Station, and to put Fran-
-4 Cos Has (who happen’d then to come
44 as a MefTenger with Letters to our
44 Court) in his Place. This Man having
44 lived torTbme time among the Portu-
-44 guefes our Enemies, feem’d to have
44 laid afide all the Mod eft yof the Ponu-
-44 guefes , and addided himfelf to all
44 forts of Villanies, which made me dip-
-44 charge him from my Service, and to
44 reftore the before-mention’d Jorvs Her-
-44 vendonk to his former Place. I would
44 not have my Hollanders entertain fuch
44 an Opinion of me, that I would let a-
-44 ny one who has ferv’d fo long in our
44 Imperial Court, be difmifs’d without
44 a Reward } for whoever gains our Itn-
-44 penal Favour, fhall never depart un-
-44 rewarded : But fuch as are not willing,
44 or can’t apply themfelves to that Study,
44 may be fure that they will be fent a-
-44 way like this Perfon. The reafon why
44 the faid Francis Has ftayed in Candy ,
44 is not unknown to your Excellency
A Letter
from the
Emperor*


Another
Letter
from the
Emperor
44 but as he is a Hollander , it is but juft
44 he fliould be difmifTed at his due time.
44 I won’t fay all concerning him, what I
44 could ; my DiJJ'aves will give your Ex-
-44 cellency a more ample account of him,
44 or when ,your Excellency appears at
u this Court, you will be further fatisfi*
44 ed in this matter. No more \ God pro-
<4 te& your Excellency.
At Reygamwatte,
May 4. \6s6.
Raja Singa Rajou , Moft
Potent Emperor of
Ceylon .
It is beyond all queftion, that the Dif-
ferences arifen betwixt this Joris Herven-
donk and Francis Hat gave occafion to ma-
ny Difturbances \ Hervendonk being ac-
cus’d, of having by his Infinuations been
the Occafion of Francis Has his detention
in even to the Year from
whence perhaps he may not bedifchar-
ged whilfthe lives. Thefe and fome o-
ther Accidents had put the Emperor’s
Mind into fuch a ferment, that for three
Days together he Ihow’d all the Marks of
a fevere Difpleafure, even to' the beft of
his Courtiers, fo as to turn even his Face
from them. But his Majefty’s Letter de-
liver’d to the new General, May 6. Teem-
ed to leave him in a much better Hu-
mour.
RAJA SING A RAJOV , &c.
H Excellency’s Letter dated
44 .1 the 3d, was deliver’d to me on
44 Thurfday the 4 th, wherein you exprefs
44 your Sorrow for the Miftake in the Let-
-4C ter I fent back with ray laft Letter :
u As among all other Foreign Nations,
u our Imperial Majefty has chofen the
44 Hollanders , as the fitteft tobe eraploy-
-44 ed for the increafe of our Glory, Fame
44 and Empire, by reafon of their Fide-
-44 lity (which renders them very dear to
44 me, beyond ray own Subjefts) fo when
44 they commit any Miftake, it touches
cc me fo fenfibly, in regard of the other
44 Nations that frequent our Court, that
44 I can’t forbear to make them fenfible
44 of their Error, even upon the leaft
44 Occafion, in order to their Amend-
-44 ment for the future. If therefore
44 your Excellency will apply yourfelf to
44 fuch things as tend to our Imperial
44 Service, the fame will be highly ac-
a ccptable to us. Our Beloved Direc-
-44 tor-General of Happy Memory did,
44 during that fmall time he continued in
44 our Empire, follow this Rule with the
44 greateft exaftnefs imaginable : But
M being fnatch’d away on a fudden by
a Death, we were depriv’d of theOp-
cc portunity of rewarding his Services
w according to our Wifli. And as the
44 faid Dire&or-General has not been
u wanting, in leaving certain Marks of
“ the Methods and Cuftoms to be made
44 ufeof in our Service, fo it will be no
44 difficult Task for your Excellency to
u follow his Footfteps. Your Exccllen-
-44 cy mentions the Refolution you have
a taken of attempting a fecond AlTault
4C upon the City, by reafon of the ap-
u preaching Seafon, which does not per-
u mit our Ships to tarry longer with
tc Safety in that Road •, and that the Ene-
-44 my is much ieflened in his Strength
tc fince the laft Aflault: all which as it is
44 altogether reafonable, fo I approve of
u it with much Satisfaction. On the o-
ct ther hand,our prefent Illnefs is no fmall
44 Affliftion to us, which bereaves us of
the Opportunity of appearing there in
44 Perfon, and being an Eye-Witnefs of
44 this Engagement, and to be nearer at
44 hand to fecond you with our Troops,
44 in cafe there fliould be Occafionj but
44 let come of it what will, wearerefoi-
-44 ved to be in the Camp by next Sunday.
44 If your Excellency thinks fit to ftay
44 for our Coming, it is well; but if
44 not, and that an Opportunity prefents
4t of gaining the Place, without impai-
-44 ring our Honour and Reputation, I
a amfatisfy’d, living in hopes, that God
44 Almighty will crown our Endeavours
44 with Victory. Your Excellency men-
-44 tions at the end of your Letter, that
44 you have exchanged eight of your Peo*
44 pie that were Prifoners in the City
44 (the Remnants of 74) for as many
44 Portuguefes your Prifoners. lam very
44 glad you fent word of it, that it may
44 not be alledged againft the Hollanders,
44 that they treat with the Enemy with-
-44 out our Knowledg. In the mean time
44 lam defirous to know how the reft
44 died, whether for want of Food, or
44 being well look’d to in their Sicknefs *,
44 and further, *what Inftrudtions you
41 have fent to the Portuguefes by thofe
4 ‘ that were fent into the City ; if it
u be a Secret worth knowing, your
44 Excellency will be pleafed to re-
-44 veal it to us. Ever fince the Death
44 of our Diredor-General, no found
44 of the Drum has been heard in our
44 Camp j but in our March nearer to
44 the Enemy and your Camp, it will
44 be requifite to make ufe of our Drums
44 and other Warlike Mufick j where-
-44 of we thought fit to giye notice to


The Dutch
enter the
City.
Are forc'd
to retreat
to the Ba-
jlion of St.
John.
“ your Excellency. No more for the
“ prefent ; God protect your Exccllen-
u cy’s Perfbn.
Raja Singa Rajou , moft potent
Emperor ot Ceylon,
This Letter being read in Council, it
was refolv’d to give the AlTault the yth
of May about 7 or 8 a Clock in the Morn-
ing, and to make the fierceffc Attack upon
the Baftion of St. John ; which was put
in execution accordingly, Martin Sholtes
Lieutenant of the Fufileersof Gale (now
Captain in Gale ) being the firft who with
undaunted Courage mounted the Breach,
and being bravely feconded by his Men,
they entred even into the City ; but be-
ing furrounded on all hides by a great
number of Portuguefes , were forc’d to
retreat to the Baftion of St .John, where
at laft they maintain’d their Poll:, af-
ter having three feveral times repuls’d the
Enemy, who endeavoured with all the
Force they could bring together to dif-
lodg them from thence, ( our Men being
conftantly reliev’d with frefh Troops)
till the Evening, when the Firing fome-
what ceafing, they took that opportunity
of entrenching themfelves with Fafcines
and Earth towards the fide of the City,
being neverthelefs ftill expofed to the E-
nemies Shot from the Water-Fort and
the Baftions of St. Stephen and Couras i
which coft us many a brave Soldier.
In the beginning of the Afiault the
DiJJaves of Saffragamme and of the Four
Cories came into the Trenches with the
Cingalefe Forces; and foon after his Ma-
jefty fent likewife the Dijfaves of Qu-
ite and Matule , the Adtgar Amracon ,
and Curupele Apohamy , at the head of a
great number of Lafcaryns : but thefe
brought along with them more Confufion
than real Affiftance, the Cingaleses be-
ing always better at making a noife and
plundering, than fighting.
We had no fooner fix’d our Guards
upon the Baftion, but a Negro Slavs
(call’d Coffers ) brought us advice, that
in the laft Afiault the Enemy had the
Captain Major, the City Major, and a
good number of their beft Men wounded,
and betwixt 40 and 50 kill’d. We im-
ployed the greateft part of the Night in
fortifying our felves with Pallifadoes and
Earth-works on the Baftion, in difeo-
vering the Mines, and planting foras
Cannon ; to facilitate which, it was or-
der’d that a falfe Attack be made at two a
Clock in the Morning, and with break of
day we faw the Prince’s Standard difplay’d
there in token of our Viftory *, which
however we had purchafed at a dear rate,
being even then much expos’d to the E-
nemies Shot from three Baftions. Upon
a general Mufter we found 290 Wounded,
80 Sick, and 86 Kill’d ; fo that we had
in all not above 1287 Europeans left fit for
Service. However John Aiaatzuyker a
Lieutenant brought a Supply of 75 Men
into our Camp, and 30 more from Candy ;
befides thefe Lieutenant Didelof was poll-
ed with 66 men at and at Mon-
tual 68.
Among the Slain were the following
Officers, whofe Names well defer ve to be
tranfmitted to Pofterity: Chriftopher Eg-
ger, Jurian Gebel , James James
Scherf \ Jurian Smithy Paul Meno , War-
mer vander Heyde , Among the Wound-
ed, Major 1 van der Laan wounded by a
Splinter on his Shoulder, and near the
Ear ; Capt. Henry Gerard Gluwingb mor-
tally wounded in four Places*, James de
With wounded with a ten Pounder in the
Thigh, of which he died afterwards ;
Martin Sholtes in the Arm; John Cowper
in both hands; James > Tlenbierin the Leg ;
PaulKetelaer in the Hand ; John Bartels in
the Belly ; Herman Wynantz ,, &c.
s uin and
wounded in
thcAjfuult.
CHAP. XXXIX.
Our Cannon upon the Baftion of St. John turn’d againft the City. The Portu-
guefes offer to capitulate. Articles for the Surrender of the Place. The Rati-
fication. The Portuguefes march out of the City .
Our Cun■
non read}]
2
sin of
St, j 0 hn.
r T 1 HE 10 th of May having planted our
1 Cannon upon the Baftion of St. John
againft the City, the General and Major
van der Laan came in the Afernoon to
take a view of them. Soon after we faw
the Enemy put out a white Flag, and
Capt. Manuel Cabreira de Pontes delivered
the following Lines to Major van der Laan :
u Apt. Manuel Cabreira de Pontes , the
u Bearer hereof, comes to delire a
u Pafsport for three Perfons of Note to


a come into your Camp to treat with you
“ concerning fome Matters of moment.
u God proted your Excellency.
Colombo, May jo.
I 6 5 6.
Anthonio de Souza Cou-
tinbo.
Major van der Laan having told him,
that he would deliver it to the General,
ask’d him, whether he defired a formal
Pafsport in Writing, or would be fatif-
fy'd with his Parole. The Portuguefe
Officer reply’d, that his Parole was fuf-
ficient, fo they parted, and all Hoftili-
ties ceafed.
Within two hours after our People
were order’d to call to thofe in the City,
and to ask them why they did not fend
their Deputys } but they anfwering, that
they would not come without a Pafsport,
the fame was fent with all poffible fpeed ;
but it being then pretty late, they excu-
fed themfelves, that it was not cuftomary
to flay a Night out of a Fortrefsat fuch
a Conjuncture. Whereupon we began to
fire again till next Morning about 8 a
Clock, being the ntfc, when the Depu-
tys came into the Camp, viz.Laurenzo Fe-
riera de Britto late Captain Major of Pun-
tegaky Hievonimo de Luzena Tavares , late
Vuxdor das Fazendas, i. e. Sur-intendant of
the Merchants in Columbo, and Diego Lei-
taon de Souza Secretary of the City, who
delivered to the Council the following
Articles:
I. HP Hat a Ceffation of Arms fhall be
A agreed on till the loth of May
next, in order to fee the Blue of the ex-
peded Succours, which if it arrives be-
fore that time, and is ftrong enough to
raife the Siege, this Treaty (hall be of no
effed. in the mean time no Correfpon-
dence or Commerce is to be allowed on
either fide, except what is done by Mef-
fengers, for the Performance whereof
Hoftagesare to be given on both fides.
11. In cafe of a Surrender of the City,
the Churches and Images fhall not be de-
filed, and the Priefts and Friers fhall have
full liberty to take along with them,
without any moleflation, all the Images,
Relicks, facred Veflels, Silver Lamps,
■and other Church Ornaments belonging to
the Performance of Divine Service, not
excepting the Moveables belonging to
each Clergy-man in particular.
111. The Governour and Deputy-Go-
vernour, Anthonio de Souza Coutinho and
Francifco de MdodcCaJlro , as likewife the
Son of Anthonio de Souza Coutinho , fhall be
treated with all due Refped and Civility,
and hay# full liberty to leave the City
with all their Moveables, Gold, Sil-
ver, Rings, Jewels, Servants, Portu-
guefe Pages, and Slaves of both Sexes;
and to remain in their Houfes till they
embark, under the fpecial Protedion of
the General, who (hall be obliged to pro-
vide them (for their Mony) with Provi-
(lons during their flay here, and with
Neceffaries for their Voyage, as likewife
with convenient Shipping for themfelves
and their Families, with able Seamen,
Arms, Ammunition, and what elfe may
be requifite for that purpofe, whenever
the fame (hall be required.
IV. The Major of the City, Captain
Major of the Garifon, and Serjeant Ma-
jor, and the late deceafed Captain’s Fa-
mily, (hall receive the fame Treatment.
V. The Captains of Foot, Reforma-
do’s, and other Officers of what degree
foever, (hall march out with all the Marks
of Honour, Enfigns difplay’d, Matches
lighted. Balls in the Mouth, and with
their Baggage, and (hall be provided with
Shipping to tranfport them beyond Sea
to the Indian Shore. They are in the
mean while to be maintain’d by the Dutch
General, out of the Superplus of the
Mony belonging to the King of Portugal\
or for want of fuch, at his own Charge,
or of the Company, till the time of their
Tranfportation, and they (hall not be
moleiled either by Sea or Land.
VI. The Ovidor , Judg, and other Offi-
cers of the Exchequer, the Head Faftor,
Alcade Major or Chief Magiftrate, and
the Farmers of the King’s Demefns, (hall
enjoy the fame Favour granted to the
Major of the City.
VII. All Gentlemen, Cavaliers, and
the chiefeft; Citizens and Inhabitants,
(hall have liberty to challenge the fame
Conditions granted to the City Major \
and, if any of them are inclin’d to re-
main under the Jurifdiftion of th e Ho-
llanders y xhtY (hall be left undifturb’d in the
full PofTeflion of their Houfes, Eftates,
Villages, and every thing belonging to
them, and be treated in all other refpeCts
like the Natives of Holland. For the free
exercife of their Religion they (hall have
a Church, with a convenient number of
Clergymen allow’d them •, and if here-
after any of them (hall think fit to go to
fome other part of the Indies, they (hall
be at liberty to fell both their real and per-
fonal Eftates, or otherwife difpofe of
them without moleftation. They (hall
alfo be provided with Shipping at the
publick Charge, except fuch as have Ships
of their own, who (hall be free to traf-
fick where they pleafe, paying the ufual
Guftoms. All


VIII. All Foreign Merchants, both Eu-
ropeans and Negroes, that were come to
Columbo to traffick, fhall be free to depart
with their Veffels, Goods, Gold, Silver,,
and other Merchandizes bought up here,
efpecially the Cinnamon bought for the
King or the City’s ufe, whether aboard
a Ship or not: Provifions fhall be likewife
provided them for their Mony, and a fafe
retreat j and in cafe they ftand in need of
Seamen, they fhall be fupply’d with them.
IX. The Negro Inhabitants both mar-
ried and unmarried, and even the Fo-
reigners of what Condition foever, fhall
enjoy the fame freedom granted to the
Portuguefe Citizens.
X. All the Modeliars , Cratches and Laf-
caryns that have hitherto been in the King
of Portugal's Service (notwithflanding
they have left the Service of the Compa-
ny, or of his Majefly ) fhall be at liberty
to depart with their Moveables whither
they pleafe.
XI. XII. Simon Lopes de Bajlo , a Portu-
guefe by Birth, but fmee in the Service of
the Dutch, (hall be pardon’d for his
Offence in coming over to us, and be free
to depart in Company of the Governor :
Likewife all Dutch Deferters that have
taken Service in the City fhall not be
molefted, but have liberty to march out
along with our Forces.
XIII. All lick and wounded Soldiers
or Inhabitants, fhall be entertain’d there
at the Charge of the Company (if the
Superplus of the King’s Mony proves in-
efficient) till they recover their Health,
and afterwards provided with Conve-
niences for their Tranfportion.
XIV. Upon the Surrender of the City
after the Dutch are put in Poffeffion there-
of, their General fhall take effedual care
that no Affront or Mifchief be done to
the Governors, other Perfons of Note,
Soldiers, and Inhabitants, and their Fa-
milies, but the fame fhall be proteded by
the faid General, as well within as with-
out the City, againft all Violences from
the King of Candy's Forces. Sign’d,
Anthonio de Souza Coutinho.
After mature deliberation in the Coun-
cil, the following Articles were in An-
fwer to the former, deliver’d the 11th
to the three Deputies in the Name of
his Imperial Majefty of Ceylon , their
High and Mightineffes the States-General
of the Vnited Provinces , the Governors
of the Eaft-lndia Company, and of John
Maatuiyker Governor-General, and the
Council of the Indies .
| E City (hall be furrender’d this day \
before Noon, without any further }
delay, upon the following Conditions, g
What was defir’d in the fecond Ar- *
tide in relation to the Clergy is granted g
and two Places fhall be appointed for
them to be in till their departure.
To the third Article it is anfwer’d ?
That it is not in the Power of the Gene-
ral to have the Governors, &c. tranfpor-
ted at this time to Tutecoryn or Manaar\
but that it fhall be done with the firft
conveniency * or elfe to Cochin or Win-
gula: But in cafe they have a mind to be
tranfported to the other Shore, the fame
fhall be perform’d by fome of the Com-
pany’s Ships within 15 days after the date
hereof. They are allow’d to carry along
with them all their Slaves of both Sexes*
and thofe belonging to the Governor’s
Son Chriftovaon de Souza, in hopes that
they will not take any but their own,
as likewife all their Moveables, Gold,
Silver, Rings and Jewels j and they fhall
be proteded in their Houfes till the time
of their departure.
The Officers mention’d in the 4 th Ar-
ticle fhall be treated according to their
refpedive Dignities, and be proteded
againft all harm. They may take along
with them their Gold, Silver, Clothing,
and what elfe they carry about them :
But as to their Slaves of both Sexes, they
fhall be confider’d according to their re-
fpedive Qualities. In tvhat they carry a-
bout them fhall be comprehended Beds and
Bed-clothes, Hangings, Tapeftry, Bol-
fters, Quilts, &c. The Officers and Re-
formades fhall march out with the ufual
marks of Honour, and be tranfported
to the Coaft of Coromandel with as much
of their Moveables as their Slaves or
other Servants (allotted them by the
General’s favour ) fhall be able to carry.
The Soldiers fhall march out with
their Baggage, Colours difplay’d. Mat-
ches lighted, Ball in their Mouth, and
Drums beating to the General’s Quarters,
where they fhall furrender their Arms
under the great Standard, and from
thence with the iirft conveniency be
tranfported into Europe . Such as are
married or born in the Indies fhall be
tranfported to the Coafl of Coromandel
and be maintain’d till the time of their de-
parture at the Charge of the Company.
The Officers mention’d in the 6th Ar-
ticle fhall partake of the fame Favour
granted to other Perfons of Note \ the
City Major and Head Fador to be com-
prehended in the fame.
Articles
granted to
the Porcu-
guefes.


All fuch as intend to fubmit to the
Jurifdidfion of the Dutch fhall be civilly
and favourably treated, and remain in
the quiet Poffeffion of their Eftates *, but
in cafe they have a mind to depart, their
Goods are left to the Difcretion of the
General.
The chiefeftof the Citizens and mar-
ried Portuguefes , with their Children,
who are not inclinable to ftay in this
I lie, fhall at the time of their departure
receive the fame Treatment as the Offi-
cers \ but the Natives of the Ifle fhall be
left to the Difpofition of the General.
The Modeliars, Aratches and Lafcaryns,
fhall receive the fame Treatment as the
Dutch Deferters.
All fick and wounded Perfons, whether
Inhabitants or Soldiers, now in the Hofpi-
tal, or any other place of the City,
fhall ftay there til! the recovery of their
Healths, and be furnifh’d with what they
defire.
All the Officers, Inhabitants, Soldiers
and unmarried Women, fhall be protected
by the General againft all Violences and
Oppreffions.
The General does alfo agree, that if
any Ships approach the City for its re-
lief betwixt this and the 3c th of May,
notice fhall be given them of its Sur-
render, with orders to depart, and fhall
be protected at leaft till they are out of
fight of Columbo. The nthof May 1656,
Signed,
Adrian van der Meyden, John van der Laan,
Peter de Bitter, Edward Ooms ,
Ysbrand Gotskens .
I Adrian van der Meyden , Governor-
General for the Dutch EaflAndia Com-
pany in the Hie of Ceylon, with the reft
of the Members of the Council, promife
and engage by thefe Prefents, T hat, in
Cafe the Deputies bring back this Capi-
tulation, approv’d as fuch by the Go-
vernor Anthonio de Souza Coutinho , and
his Council, we will punctually obferve
all the Articles contain’d therein with-
out the leaft limitation or exception } and
further grant fuch Favours as are in our
power to allow of. In Confirmation
whereof we have in Gonjundfion with the
faid Dcputys ligned the fame, in the
Dutch Camp before CoJumbo, the i ifh of
May 1656.
Sign’d on our fide by
Adrian van der Myden, John van der Laan,
Peter de Bitter, Edward Ooms ,
Ysbrand Gotskens , John Hartman .
On the Enemy's fide by
Anthonio de Souza Coutinbo,
Francifco de Melo de Caftro ,
Anthonio de Silva ,
Gafpar de Ronga Pereira,
Laurenzo Fereira de Britto,
Hieronymo de Luzena Tavares,
Diego Leitaon de Souza.
In the Morning about Nine a Clock,
the Deputies return’d with the Capitu- <
lation approv’d and fign’d as before, (
with a Letter of Interceffioa from the 1
Governor and Deputy-Governor for Si-
mon Lopes , who had deferted our Service.
The Capitulation being fign’d once more,
and the Council difmifs’d, Tsbrand Gotf~
hens and James van der Rhee our Secre-
tary of War, were immediately after
Dinner fent into the City, to demand
the Keys from the two Portuguefe Go-
vernors, and to take account of all the
Arms, Ammunition and Provifions, as
alfo to fettle certain matters concerning
the marching out of the Troops purfuant
to the Capitulation.
Accordingly there marched but of the
place Anthonio dc Melo de Caftro Captain-
Major at the head of the King’s Troops,
confifting in and 36Cap-
tains (call’d Reformados by the Portu~
guefes) with their Enfigns difplay’d.
Drums beating, Matches lighted, and
Bali in the mouth, marching through our
Forces rang’d cn both fides, to the Ge-
neral’s Quarters, where having furren-
dei’d their Arms, they were conduced
to the place prepar’d for their Lodging
that night. Thefe were follow’d by the
Citizens, Sick,Wounded, and Criples. In
the mean while their chief Engineer difco-
ver’d to two of our Deputies four Mines
on the fide of the Baftion of Rajuha , be-
twixt the Baftions S. Stephen and Clergos,
each whereof being fill’d with four Bar-
rels of Gunpowder, the Trains were re-
mov’d, and Sentinels plac’d near them.
This done, our Forces march’d into the
City, follow’d by the General, Major
Van der Laan H and the reft of the Head
Officers. Near the Sea-fhore not far
from the Baftion of Coura6 } the Gover-
nor and Deputy-Governor (both vene-
rable aged Portuguefes ) came with their
Retinue to falute the General. After
fome Complements on both fides, Orders
were given to our Forces where to take
their Polls, and to difarm all the Lafca-
ryns in the City. Towards Evening the
Prince’s Standard was planted in the
Ratificati-
on of the
Capitula-
tion,l
The Portu-
guefes
march out
of Colum-
bo.
The Dutch
march inh
the Cit


?'al. 3~p, ‘/Go*
iCaO X; tr M B o
zt.






j'vl- j. jy. /'CI
The Channel.
\
2,2,.


Water-Fort, and the great Cannon dif-
charg’d round the place as a Signal of our
Viftory. Thus the City of Columho, not
inferior in Strength to molt of
fell into the hands of our Nation, after
Ihe had been 150 years in the Poflelfion W
of the Portuguefes. In acknowledgment
of which a Thankfgiving Day was a
pointed the Sunday following, being the
14th of May , which was celebrated ac-
Europe, cordingly, and the Thankfgiving-Ser-
mon was preach’d by the Reverend Fran-
cis in the Church of S. Francis,
fince call’d the Town Church.
a
An Account of the Siege of Columbo taken from their own Journals,
and (for the publick Good) communicated to the Author by
Matthaeus Van den Broek , formerly a Member of the Council of
the Indies , now Governor of the Eaƒt-India Company. Faith-
fully tranflated from the Portuguefe.
J true Account of the Siege of Colombo carried on by Raja Singa Kjng of
Candy and the Hollanders, till the Surrender of that Fortrefs under Anthonio
de Souza Coutinho, Captain General in the of Ceylon.
IN the Month of September 1655.
10 Dutch Ships came to an Anchor
near Negumbo , two more being out
at fome diftance at Sea, having landed
11 Companies of Europeans of 80 Men
each } and being join’d by a good num-
ber of Negroes, they march’d to the
Pafs of Betal , but by reafon of the vio-
lent Rains were forced to return to Ne-
gumbo, Mr. Gerard Huljl the Dutch Ge-
neral having reimbark’d his Forces with
fome others taken out of Negumbo, .fail’d
with the before-mentioned 12 Ships to
Columbo , where much about the fame time
we had receiv’d a fupply of Provifions in
three Galliots fent from Cochin by the
brave and faithful Simon Gomes de Silva ,
Governor of that place. Our Governor
Ccutinho took part of the Rice, in order
to carry it to Caleture , where they flood
in great need of it, but was prevented
in his Defign by the fhallownefs of the
River. The nd of Septemb. we receiv’d
another Supply from Tutecoryn , confiding
in 28 Sail *, under the Command of Ni-
colas de Moura, the Fleet being chiefly la-
den on the account of private Merchants.
The Enemy having left fix of their
bed Ships before Columbo , fail’d with the
reft to Caleture *, whereupon our Gover-
nor gave Orders to Capt. Cafpar Figueira
de Serpe , then encamp’d upon the Fron-
tiers of the King of Candy , to come to
Columbo , which he did accordingly Octo-
ber 7.
Without the City were at that time
encamp’d the famous Diffave Francifco
Antuncs towards Mature , and Alvares Ro-
drtgo Boralho fent out with three Compa-
nies to get Intelligence of the Enemy,
who from the isd of September to the
I sth of October laid before Caleture , and
had raifed three Batteries againft it.
Our Governor being feniible of the
Condition of the Place, fent thither a
Convoy of Provifions commanded by
Nicolas de Moura , under a good Guard
of Europeans and Negroes, landed by
Manoel de Gil , Diffave of Negumbo , who
has fo often fignalized himfelf in our
King’s Service in the Me of Ceylon. This
brave Man attempting to pafs the River
with 12 of his choiceft Men (the Boat
holding no more) was fo warmly re-
ceiv’d by fome of the Enemies Forces,
that, after they had kill’d feveral of his
Men with their Fire-Arms, he was forc’d
to retire *, the Commander in chief fol-
low’d his Footfleps contrary to the Opi-
nion of Capt. Domingo Coelbo de Alla,
who would fain have perfwaded him to
advance as near as he could to Caleture , to
incommode the Enemy in the Siege*
Upon this occafion Alvares Rodrigo Boral-
ho did confiderable Service, in fending
Intelligence from time to time of what
pafs’d, till at laft this whole Body
came back to the City.
It being then refolv’d to fuccour Cale-
ture to the utmoft of our Power, and
four Galliots being at the fame time ar-
riv’d from the Viceroy of Goa , we made
up a Body of 600 Portuguefes , the Com-
mand whereof was committed to Cafpar
Figueira to attempt the Relief of the
Place in conjunction with fome Cingalefes,


Figueira
routed.
Conflerna•
tion occa~
jion’d by
this Defeat
at Coium-
bo.
notwithftanding the Enemy’s Force con-
fifted of 3000 Europeans , befides a good
number of Bandanefes and Cingalefes fent
to their Affiftance by the King of Can-
dy..
Accordingly Cafpar Figueira encamp’d
with his Troops the 1 6th of Offober two
Leagues from Cakture , having receiv’d
Advice before, that the Enemy were al-
ready poffefs’d of the Pafs on this fide,
and had pofted three Companies there.
Purfuant to this Intelligence he order’d
fix Companies under the Command of
Domingo Sarmento and Francifco Antunes
to attack the Enemy in the Night, which
they did accordingly with incredible Bra-
very for a confiderable time, but very
indifferent Succefs j for inftead of being
engag’d with three Companies of 80
Men each (as they fuppofed ) they found
the Enemy much fuperior in Number, to
charge them fo furioufly both in- Front
and Flank, that they were put into
Coofufion with great Slaughter, before
they could recoiled themfelves. Figueira
being by this time come up with the reft
of his Forces, unadvifedly attack’d the
Enemy a fecond time but thefe opening
their Ranks on both fides, difcharg’d two
Cannon among our Forces, which occa-
fion’d fuch a Confufion, that the Enemy
improving their advantage, once more
put us to flight. Figueira and his Lieut,
Manoel Cabreira were for trying their For-
tune once more but finding the Flower
of their Forces either flain or difperfed,
and no means left to make them return to
the Charge, they thought fit to retreat
and bring off their wounded Men, among
whom were Sehafiian Pereira and Jofeph
Antunes , the only two that efcaped alive
of eleven Captains. Of the Reformades,
John Cordeiro , Manoel Fernandes de Miran-
da, Manoel de Santjago Garcia , with 200
common Soldiers, came off alive.
This ill Succefs caus’d an unfpeakable
Confirmation in the City of Columbo,
where there was nothing to be heard but
Outcries and Lamentations in the Streets \
the Shops were (hut up, and the Gates
kept clofe, with find Orders that no-
body fhould appear arm’d without doors.
The next thing to be done, was to give
an account of their prefent ill Condition
to the Viceroy of Goa ; and the fame be-
ing (at their earneft requeft) commit-
ted to the care of Damian Vieira a Jefuit,
and Manoel Saraiva , an Inhabitant of
Manaar , the laft of thefe two went no
further than from Columbo toManaar,{von\
whence he difpatch’d the Letters to Anto-
mo Amiral de Menefes at Jafnapatnam,
a Negled that deferv’d a very fevere Pu-
nilhment.
By this time the Hofpital was fill’d
with the fick and wounded Soldiers,
where Brother Golfal an Aujlin Frier
did both the Duty of a devout, religious,
and charitable Lay-man: The number
of thofe that died here for want of good
looking after, being fcarce inferior to
what was loft in the Engagement.
On the other hand, the Dutch had pur-
chas’d this Vidory with very little lofs
on their fide *, notwithftanding which
Major Van der Eaan ( a mortal Enemy of
the Portuguefes , and a zealous Heretick)
having receiv’d a Wound in the Cheek,
took a moft barbarous Revenge from all
the Portuguefes he met with, who were
all maffacred in the Woods (fometimes
20 and 30 together) by his Orders in
cool Blood, he having often been heard
to fay. That if the Portuguefes were at hit
difpofal , he would cut them all off at one
ftroke. Their General Mr. Hulfi being
of a more compaffionate Temper, or-
der’d Quarter to be given to the new
lifted Forces, but this Heretick told him
that they ought to be cut to pieces, in re-
taliation of what they did to the Dutch,
whom they never gave any Quarter:
However through the General’s Mercy
about 60 of the new lifted Men had their
Lives given them. In this Engagement
the brave Francifco Antunes , who had
render’d his Name fb famous in Ceylon
by his many Vidories, alfo loft his Life
in a Wood, who deferv’d to have had a
Maufolaum ereded to his Memory.
Thus the Enemy by this Vidory be-
coming Mafter of the Field, afterwards
foon made himfelf Mafter of the whole
Ifland of Ceylon , the City of Columbo
( after the lofs of Cakture ) expeding no
lefs than to be reduc’d to the utmoft ex-
tremity. For after they had endur’d for
fomedays lnconveniences of Hun-
ger in Cakture , Anthonio Mendes d'Aran-
ha reprefented to his Soldiers, that they
had rather try the utmoft, than to pe-
rifh for want of Food, exhorting them
to fight their way with Sword in hand
through the Enemy. He prevail’d at
laft fo far with them, as to agree with
them in his Refolutions *, but the appoin-
ted time approaching, they found tliem-
felves fo enfeebled for want of good
Food, that not being able to put their
Defign in Execution, they were forced
to furrender, upon Condition that they
fhould march out with their Arms, &c.
Thus the King of Portugal loft at once a 1
ftrong Fortrefs, one of his moft expe-
This mi
be
upon as i
Cdumtr,'
Surrender
of Cak-
ture.


The Gati-
h w#
t
q 2c,
the Dutch
art before
c “ um '
The feveral
Fofis aft
jignd up-
«n the Ba-
fions.
rienc’d Officers in the whole Hie, and 250
choice Men, through the mifmanagement
of fome who prefer’d their ownintereft
before that of his Majefty.
The 1 -jib of Ottober the Enemy march-
ing directly to Columbo, polled themfelves
in fight of the City near S. Sebafttan,
where Anthonio de Souz.a Coutinho the
then Governor, together with Francifco
de Melo de Cajlro, order’d immediately
fome Works to be call: up to hinder their
approach ; But the 1 Stb they werefo vi-
goroufty attack’d in thefe Intrenchments,
that they had enough to do to efcapc to the
City, and to cut down the Bridges behind
them.
We then apply’d our felves to the
ftrengthening of our Batteries, whilft the
Enemy kill’d all they met with without
the City, and immediately fell to the
railing of their Batteries, which was no
difficult task for them to do, being back’d
by an Army of 20 or 30000 Men under
Raja Singa King of Candy , and furnilh’d
by him with Pioneers and other Necelfa-
ries in abundance.
Our Governor and Francifco de Melo de
Caflro did leave no Stone unturn’d for
the defence of the City, they villted
the Magazines and Armories, and fur-
nilh’d with Arms all fuch as were capa-
ble of bearing them, not excepting even
the old Men and School-boys. The Pofts
on the Baftions were affign’d to the fol-
lowing Commanders \ on the Baftion of
S .John, Manoel Correa de Banos j on that
of S. Sebaftian, Francifco Gorian de Fialho m ,
on that of Madre de Deos , John de Pavia
de Quintal on that of S. Conception, £>o-
mingos Peixoto *, on that of S. Hieronymo,
Alpbonfo Carvalho de Souzji \ on that of
S .Anthonio, Manoel Carvalho da Maya *, on
that of S. Jacob , Manoel Nunes ; on that
of S. Auftin, Luys de Paiva Quintal j on
that of S. Laurence, Anthonio de Silva m ,
on that of S .Crus, Cafpar d'Aranja Pereira *,
on that of S. Francifco Xaverio, Manoel
Caldeira de Brito \ and on that of GaU
voca , Dominges Fires who all gave fuffi-
cient Proofs of their Bravery in their
refpe&ive Pofts during the Siege, as did
likewife Father Damian Vieira a jefuit,
cfpecially in the Attack upon the Garden
of Antonio de Mota, and fome Houfes
Handing upon an Erainency at S. Tloomas,
in which tho they were repulfed the firft
time, yet the next day our Forces com-
manded by Alvaro Rodrigo and Manoel
Caldeira , being feconded by fome Com-
panies polled on the other fide of the
Ditch, made therafelves Mailers of it,
being of no fmall Conveniency to us.
to hinder the approach of .the Enemy.
Notwithftanding this the Enemy ad-
vanced apace under favour of their Ar-
tillery, of which they brought great
ftore daily from their Ships. And on
our fide we found the Baftion of S. John
moft expos’d, we ftrengthned the fame
with Malts, Earth and Fafcineswe
made alfo a cover’d way from the Wail
to the brink of the Ditch, the fame was
done near the Baftions of S. Sebafttan and
Rajuha •, both Clergy-men and Lay-men
without diftinclion of Perfons imploying
themfelves in this Work, and furnifhing
Materials for fo ufeful a Work, efpecially
Cafpar Figueira de Serpe, who having great
ftore of Baskets, Spades, and other fuch
like Inftruments, facrificed them all tor
the publick Service.
The 20th of Oftober the Enemy began
to falute us with 12 great pieces of Can-
non from three Batteries, viz, 3 from
that of S. Thomas, 5 from that at Agua
de Luphe , and 4 from that of S. Sebafttan,
from whence they fent Bco Bullets, 18,
20, 24 and 28 Pounders, in one day into
the City. But tho the Enemies Bullets
did confiderable Execution, fome of the
King’s unfaithful Servants did more mif-
chief by introducing adulterated Coin,
and engroffing the Provifions under pre-
tence of the King’s Service for their
own lucres fake.
There were at that time not above
1300 Souls, young and old, Europeans and
Indians, viz*. 500 that receiv’d Pay, and a-
mong them, fome married, fome unmar-
ried, fome Children and Topajfes ; 300
married People who ferv’d without Pay,
400 Lafcaryns , and about 60 Labourers \
the whole number of the Europeans not
amounting to above 500 Men. The Go-
vernor with the Confent of the whole
City, pitch’d upon Anthonio d'Abreu an
Inhabitant of Negapatnam , to be fent to
Goa, to give an account to the Viceroy
of the City. He was favourably receiv’d'
by the Viceroy, who told him that he
had already fent a Squadron under Ma-
noel de Magalhavs Coutinho , to carry a
Supply of Provifions and Men thither,
brought together for that purpofe by
Anthonio Amiral de Menefes at Manaar .
But this Convoy came no further than
the Cape Comoryn , and could not make
the Cape, tho fome were of opinion it
was rather for want of Willj fo he
return’d to Columbo, where the Vice-
roy being dead in the mean while,
the whole face of Affairs was changed,
and Columbo loft for want of timely Sup-
ply.
‘ < _ r/• r r . 7. _
The Enemp
play from
their Bat-
teries.
Kumber of
People in
the City .
Anch. d’
Abreu fent
toG oa, to
give an ac~
count of the
Condition
of Colum-
bo.


Ofieoj our
Engineers
dejerts.
Care and
Conduft of
the Gover-
nor,
The before-mention’d three Batteries
i being railed above 200 Paces from our
Walls, they erefted another againfl the
Baflion ot St. John , within 400 Paces of
it, from whence they batter’d us moft
farioufly with three Demi-Cannon. Im-
mediately after, one of our Engineers, a
Hollander by Birth, named John de Rofa,
deferted to the Enemy * ’tis true, he was
no great Conjurer in his Art, yet did us
conliderable Mifchief. For the Enemies
Batteries play’d fo furioufly upon our Out-
works, that in two days time they were
ail laid level with the Ground, and our
Baftions and Walls were fo forely batte-
red, that with much ado we could flop
the Breaches,which was done by continual
and indefatigable Labour *."each Soldier
and Officer employing the Intervals they
had, when they were not upon Duty, in
working like the meaneft Labourer.
1 he Governor Anthonio Coutinbo fpent
Day and Night in vifiting the Works, a-
nimating his Soldiers both in Words and
his Example, leaving his Habitation, and
contenting himfelf with a fmall Tent
near the Baflion of St. John , where the
Enemies made their greateft Effort. Af-
terwards he took up his Quarters in a
Warehoufe, fcarce undreffing himfelf all
the time the Siege lafled, and employ’d
much of his time in keeping an exaft ac-
count of the Stores, and diflributing
Provillons with his own Hands, without
which Precaution the City could not have
held out half fo long. Francifco de Me-
lo de Cajlro followed his Footfleps, having
not been feen without his Clothes and
Arms for feven Months together. The
City-Major Manoel Marques Gorjaon did
alllft them in his Station, as did likewife
Cafpar Figueira de Serpe , the DiJTaves of
the Cories of Negumbo and of Mature ,
John Coelho de Cajlro , Manoel Gil , Manoel
Seixas , and John Banka, who were pre-
lent in all Places, where there was the
moft danger to encounter. The Clergy,
but efpecially the Capucins, were very affi-
dlions in confeffing the Soldiers, in pray-
ing and doing all manner of good Offices
without Intermiffion * and foraeof them
would not be backward in being upon the
Guard with the Soldiery, and give the
Enemies ample Proofs of their Valour.
The Enemy thunder’d fo furioufly againft
the Baflion of St. John , that it appear’d
like a heap of Rubbiffi then they turn’d
their Fury againft the Horn-work of St
Stephen and the adjacent Point* but Ma~
noel da Vetga the Commanding Officer on
the Baftion of St. Stephen , Francifco Con-
an Fialho, John Ferraon d? Abreu , Gontal
The 29th of Novemb, the Dutch Gene-
ral Gerard Hulft fent a Drummer with a
white Flag with a Meffenger into the Ci-
ty, tofummon our Governor to a Surren-
der, who delaying his Anfwer till next
day, the Enemy fir’d moft furioufly with
his Cannon all that Night * but the next
Morning we fent Diego de Souaa de Cajlro
and Thomas Fereire Leite with an Anfwer,
the laft perfonating a Drummer, in or-
der to get fome Intelligence of the Con-
dition of the Enemy * but they were up-
on their Guard, and therefore fent a Cap-
tain and a Lieutenant, attended by two
Soldiers to receive our Governor’s Let-
ter, wherein he told the General, that
he wanted neither Will nor Power to de-
fend the Place to the utmoft for his King’s
Service, being ftil! Efficiently provided
with Powder and Ball, and other Neceffa-
ries *, and to add the more weight to his
Words, we fir’d moft farioufly all that
Night. '
The Dutch repay’d us in the fame Coin,
fending us commonly a Prefent of 800
Cannon-ball and 900 Granadoes every
Day. The nth of Novemb, they cele-
brated the Feaft of St. Martin the Pope
by anew Invention of Fireballs, whereof
they fent a good Number into the City,
Martinho Piementel, Manoel Carvalho , and
others employ’d in the Defence of the
Works towards St. Sebajlian , were inde-
tatigabie in repairing the Breaches, and
rendring the Baftions tolerably dcfenfi-
ble.
Braver) of
the Bejie-
led.
. Hieronymo Lucena (hewM the fame care
in the Baftion of Mcidre de . Dcqs, till he
was reliev’d by Lewis Tavern de Cmha ;
and the Wall which extended towards St.
Sebajlian being found very weak, the Ge-
neral recommended the Defence thereof
to the four Captains of the Galliots, late-
ly come from Goa . Thefe order’d an
Entrenchment to be made there of 150
Yards long, one broad, and fix Foot high.
Father Damian Vieira the Jefuit being em-
ploy’d in furthering this Work, a Ballet
taking away a great piece of the Wall,
ftruck him on the Head, fo that he
fell dead upon the Ground \ but foon re-
covering himfelf, he fell to his Work a-
gain, his Servant conftantly attending
him with a Sword and Fufee, wherewith
he did confiderable Execution, being com-
monly one of the foremoft in charging
the Enemy. Finding that the Baftion of
Xavevm (otherwife call’d Comat) began
alfo tobeforely batter’d by the Enemy,
the care thereof was committed to an old
famous Soldier, Manoel Rodrigos Franco ,
who foon put it out of all Danger.
the City
fummonei
to funerr
dcr.


j
fSr
A’*, urn
Urn I **-
Tcs Dutch
T Wf'l
andfecondcd the Game by a general Af-
fault. For early in the Morning three
of their ftouteft Shipsappearing in fight
of the City, one of them called the Maid
of Enclouyfen enter’d the Harbour, carry-
ing the red Flag in her Stern } and com-
ing to an Anchor within Mufquet-fhot of
the Baftion of St. Cm, gave us feveral
warm Salutes, under the found of Drums
and Trumpets *, but Manoel d 1 Abreu Go-
dirtlooand Anthonio de Silva y the Command-
ing Officers on the Baftion of St. Laurence ,
did ply them thick with their Gannon,
that having firft brought by the Board all
her Mafts, they made foon after fo many
Holes in her fides, that (he was ready to
fink, and a few of her Crew made hard
ffiifc toefcape in the long Boat. Theo-
ther two Ships feeing the other fo ill trea-
ted, did not think fit to follow her Foot-
fteps,but made the beft of their way to the
Road, alledging in their behalf, that they
were not able to come up with the other.
At the fame time they attempted the
Artault on the Land fide. Mr. John van
der Laan afiaulted with 7 Companies the
Gate of Acouras , advancing boldly with
Sword in hand to the very Faces of our
People, the foremoft of which began to
give way, and in all likelihood the reft
would have follow’d their Example, had
not Father Antonio Nunes a Jefuit, with his
drawn Sword threatn’d fuch as were
ready to fiy with prefent Death *, nay his
Comrade John Cordeito wounded one of
the Soldiers as he was flying with his long
Rapier. Soon after Cafpar Figueira de Ser-
pe coming with frefh Supplies, this fo a-
nimated our Soldiers, that they not only
ftopp d the Enemies Fury, but alfo made
them give way in a little while after. In
this A&ion an Enfign and Serjeant acqui-
red Immortal Honour, and Manoel d? AU
meyda , thoa very old Soldier, yet did
not leave his Port: till he had received 11
Wounds. Felicia de Seixas and Contrero
de Seixas loft their Lives with their
Swords in their Hands Manoel Guerreiro,
le. the Warrior , did great Service with
his Cannon from his Redoubt, he being
an expert Cannoneer.
Major van der Laan feeing there was
no likelihood of fuccceding, founded a
Retreat, leaving the Ground covered
with the dead Carcafesof the Hollanders.
The Enemy receiv'd alfo confiderablc Da-
mage from the Tower, where Diego de
Souza de Caflro commanded, and no quef-
tion much more might have been expefted
had we been provided with good Gunners:
for it muft be conferted, that we wanted
not Officers of Courage and Experience,
• 1 ' ——
but only fuch as underftood the Mathe-
raaticks and the Art of Gunnery *, an
Inftance of which might be given in one
of our Gunners, who having doable char-
ged a Cannon, did wound one of our
Captains and two others, vie.. Thomas
Fereira Leite , and Pedro Gonfalves Salgado ,
tho for the reft their Fidelity ought not
to be pafs’d by in lilence } it having been
obferv’d, that not one of our Cannoneers
deferred to the Enemy, but moft of them
loft their Lives in the Service.
The Gate of Rajuha was attack’d with
800 choice Men by General Hulft in Per-
fon, who endeavoured to mouut the
Walls with fcaling Ladders: As they
parted the Bridg, they were forely gall’d
from the Bafttons of St. Stephen , St. Se-
baflian, and that of Madre de Deos , the
Defence whereof being committed to
Rodrigo Boralho , Antonio de Mota d ’ Olivet-
rtf, and Manoel Cabreira de Ponte , they
gave fuch a hot falute with their Firelocks
from behind their Pallifado Works to the
Hollanders , that many of them were
laid dead upon the Ground. A cer-
tain Gannon of Stone did them confidcra-
ble Damage, and would have done more,
had it not burft in pieces. Three times
they renewed the Artault with incredible
Fury, and as often were they repaired
with an unfpeakable Bravery. At laft
General Hulft, to encourage his Men, cri-
ed oat aloud, Soldiers , the Princes Stan-
dard vs fet upon the Bajlion of St, John
(which in efteft was not fo) and fo with
a Carfe (Sante Diabo, i. e. Holy Devil)
he fnatch’d a Ladder oat of a Fellow’s
Hand *, but finding no body ready to fol-
low him, Whilft he was encouraging his
Men, and fixing his Ladder to the very
Gate, he was wounded in the Thigh,
and fo forc’d to retreat. On the fide of the
Lake or Fens (called Lagoa by the Portu-
guefes) 2*o Men were embark’d in 8
Cbinefe Boats brought from Batavia foe
that purpofe. They were met by Do-
mingos Coelbo d ’ Alla in 5 Manchous or Bar-
ges, who fought with them coarageoufly
for fome time, but was forced at laffc to
fuffer them to land, but retir’d into a
Pallifado-Work near Maria Telles y trom
whence he with Sebajlian Caldeira , and
sor 5 more (the reft being run away)
fir’d briskly upon the Hollanders ; who at
laft finding a Hole or Gate near the Hoofe
of Sebajlian Caldeira , they forc’d their
way, notwithftanding the brave Rertft-
ance made by Manoel Rodrigues Franco ,
Guardian de Faro, and Francifco Rebedo de
Palfares , who feat a good quantity of
, Hand-granadoes and Fire-balls among
Not one
Forcu-
gude
Cannoneer
deferred.


1 them, the fa id Guardian having receiv’d
; two Wounds by Mufquet-Balls. The
Dutch forcing their way into a narrow
Street, were there met by Manoel Fernan-
des de Miranda , who tho forely wounded
yet continued fighting with his Sword and
Buckler, till exhaufted of his Strength
by the Lofs of Blood, he was ready to
drop, and would infallibly have died up-
on the Spot, had not francifco de Lemos
carried him off. In his Place fucceeded
Diego Leitaon de Souza, who difeharging
a Mufquetoon on the Corner of a Street
among the Dutch , made them halt \ the
fame was done by Father Damian Vieira
the Jefuit, who with another Mufquetoon
made fuch a Havock among the Enemy,
that thefe two flopped their farther Pro-
grefs, till Antonio de Leaon appear’d at
the Head of a good Troop of Souldiers j
he being provided with another Mufque-
toon, charged the Enemy fo briskly
(as they were endeavouring to break into
the backfidc of fome Gardens) that they
were forc’d to retreat back into the nar-
row Street, where he maintain’d the
Fight (tho his Mufquetoon,by reafon of its
being too frequently charged, ftruck him
down to the Ground) till Anthonio de
Melo de Caftro came with his whole Com-
pany to his Relief, when after fome firing
Quarter being offered to the Remnants
of the Vutch,thzy accepted of the fame; fo
that 74, tho moil of them wounded, were
made Prifoners of War, whereof 8 only
return’d into the Dutch Gamp afterwards,
the reft dying in the City, many where-
of were converted to the Catholick
Faith, by the indefatigable care of the
Jefuits, and efpecially of Damian Vie-
ira.
This was the Succefs of the general
Aflault begun early in the Morning, and
not ended till two in the Afternoon, du-
ring which the Governor Anthonio de
Souza Coutinho , and Francifco de Melo de
Caftro , kept in Perfon the Girard with
fome other Officers of Note in the Mar-
ket-place, from whence they difpatch’d
their Orders, as Occafion requir’d. The
City-Major Aianoel Marques Gorian , did
likewife appear in all Places where the
Danger was moft preffing •, and Cafpar Fi~
gueirawas very careful in fending what
Succours he could fpare from the Baftion
of St. John. In Ihorr, the Streets, Brea-
ches, the Lane and Ditch were all tain-
ted with the Blood of the Hollanders , and
the Ground cover’d with Colours, Arras,
Drums, Scaling-Ladders and dead Car-
cafes, their Lofs being computed at no
lefs than 1000 Men, and among them
many brave Officers. On our fide we
had not above 30 Men killed, tho the
Enemy to dilfemble their Lofs, gave us a
general Salvo of at leafl 1000 Mufquets.
The next day Father Damian going
without the Walls in order to bury the
Dead, was fainted by three Firelocks
from the Enemy, which made him retire,
and defer his charitable Refolution till
the next following Night. We obferv’d
a black Flag in one of their Works, as a
Signal, that they would give Quarter to
no body without exception, the fame
Order having been given them likewife
before the Affault begun. We got no
lels than 30 pieces of Cannon out of the
Ship that lay under the Water-Fort,
which were planted on our Works. Some
Refrelhments were alfo diftributed a-
mong the Soldiers, tho to confefs the
Truth, the Publick Stores being very
low, every one provided for himfelf, as
well as he could, without any regard to
the poor Soldiers. However about 18
days after. Father Damian (by Order
from the General) went with fome Dutch
Prifoners aboard the Veflel, where they '
found fome Casks of Wine, and fome i
Meat and Bacon.
In the mean time the Enemies were not
idle, but daily encreafed their Works;
they made a Covered Way within 40
Paces of St. John's Baftion from Weft to
the Eaft, in form of a Redoubt, upon
which they planted fix great Guns, viz,
three againft the Baftion of St. John, and
the other three againft that of St. Ste-
phen. From thence they carried on their
Trenches to the Sea-fide from South to
North, clofed with another Redoubt,
which being provided with two pieces of
Cannon, much annoyed the Wall betwixt
the Baftion of Courts and St. John. This
made the Governor Coutinho order fome
of the Citizens to raife a kind of an En-
trenchment of about two Foot thick and
three high behind it. From the fecond
Redoubt the Enemy carried on their
Trenches into the open Field, and at
laft added a third R.edoubt, from whence
they could batter the Wall betwixt the
Baftions of St. John and St. Stephen , which
being likewife forc’d to be ftrengthened
by forae Works of Earth and Fafcines,
no body, not even the Governor himfelf,
were fparing in laying hand to fo ufeful
a Work, which being 400 Ells in length,
each Divifion had its lhare allotted, in
order to bring it the fooner to perfe&i-
on.
Domingo CoelhocP Alla, aflifted by Caf*
par d } Aranja Pereira, John d* Andrade Ma~
Lofs on
botbfidcs,
/
Sows Fn-
vifion ta-
ken out of
the Dutch
VejfeL


ijueira
hsdom
km-
Cwetouf-
vstffome
if tie
%crs.
chado, and Don Francifco Rohm , all inhabi-
tants of the City, did great Service with
their Slaves, in the Munchous or Boats,,
in protecting our Workmen on that lids,
as well as the Diffaves } and to be ftoit,
there was no body fo young, no body lb
old, that was exempted from continual
Labour or Watching.
The Dutch on the other hand carried
on the Trenches from the Redoubt with
fix Guns, to the Hill of Aqua de Lupe ,
and made another Trench from the Re-
doubt in the Plain, which was to meet a-
nother Redoubt thrown upon the Front
of the Baftion of St. Stephen , beyond the
Lake or Fens. They alfo railed another
Battery in the Garden of Antonio ; de
Mot a , againft the Baftion of St. Stephen,
and another near the before-mention’d
Redoubt of fix Guus, in a parallel with
that in the Plain, and another juft at the
Foot of the Baftion of St. Cm, which be-
ing fo near the Ditch, was likely to be a
Thorn in our Eye, there being nothing
but the Ditch betwixt us and the Enemy,
fo that we could throw Stones at them,
and often talk’d wit h one another.-
About the fame time Cafpar Figueira de
Serpe defir’d leave to lay down his Com-
miffion, not to ffiun the Danger or Trou-
ble of his Station, but becaufe many of
the Gentlemen and Subaltern Officers re-
fufed to obey his Command*, fo he was
difeharg’d, and Antonio de Melo de Gaftro,
Nephew to the late Governor Francifco
de Melo deCafiro, who had behav’d hifn*
felf with more than ordinary Bravery in
his Pod during the Siege, put in his place.
As we fhrewdly fufpected the Enemy
to have a Defign of undermining the
Badion of St. Stephen, a Cavalier was
order’d to be rais’d near it, in cafe the
fame ffiould fucceed. This was done by
the contrivance of a certain Indian Mer-
chant of the Coad of Coromandel , who
alfo ordered the Redoubt, demolifh’d
fince the lad general Affault, to be repai-
red; By the direction alfo of another
certain Merchant (who was Surveyor of
our Magazine) a Countermine was con-
triv'd, which did us great Service. It
was a mod deplorable thing to have in
fuch a Fortrefs as this, not fo much as
one Portuguefe' Engineer, nay not fo much
e as a good Carpenter of our Nation, the
Defeat whereof can be attributed to no-
thing elfe but to the Covetoufnefs of
feme of the King’s Officers, who put the
Mony defign’d for that ufe into their
Pockets, and at the fame time put it to
the King’s Account. Neither were our
Fortifications infucha Condition as they
ought to have been ; for whereas we had f
had fufficient time to enclofe that part off
the City near the Sea-fide, call’d Galvoca
(comprehending a third part of the
whole) with drong Walls, and to ren-
der it impregnable, of the
natural Situation thereof, - being accefli-
ble only in certain Places in fmall Boats,
they had planted only fome Coco and
Palm-Trees there, which perifh and are
waffi’d away by the Waves in a ffiort time.
Thus the Baftions, which ought to have
been fac’d with Stone, were only made
of Earth, which are not durable,ancfeatily
fpoil’d by the Water-Floods; the effects
whereof were then obvious enough, from
the Hofpital to the Gate of the Jefuits
College, which comprehends a very
large Trad of Ground. Belides this,
the Carriages of our great Guns were fo
rotten, that mod of them after the fird
Difcharge broke to pieces *, fo that we
were forc’d to take the Wood from the
Houfes, nay even out of the Churches (as
we did in that of St. Domingo) to make
new Ones.
My Pen wants Words to exprefs the
Affronts put upon the Holy Images by
the Hereticks, whereof I will give you
only one Indance. They took the Image
of the Holy Apoftle St. and af-
ter they had cut off the Nofe, Ears and
Arms, fet it up for a Mark to ffioot at \
afterwards they knock’d it full of great
Nails, and fo (hot it out of a Mortar
Nov. 1 6. into our Ditch, whence it was
taken up and carried to the Jefuits Col-
lege, by Father Damian Vieira , and two
Reform’d Officers, Manoel de Seixas, and
Manoel de 5. Jago Garcia . But the Fran-
eifeans laying Claim to it, they carried it
in Publick Proceffion to their Church, and
placed it upon the High Altar. Father
Francifco S. Mattheus folemniz’d the Day
with a learned Speech.
The 20th of Nonjemb. the holy Thomas
bleffed us with the Arrival of a certain
Portuguefe , a Native of Aveiros , named
Simon Lopes de Bafto, who for certain
Reafons being retir’d from Goato Wm-
gurla, had ferved among the Dutch in a
very good Station in the Camp but
finding his Countrymen in Didrefs, left
all and came over to us, and did us mod
fignal Service in the Siege.
The Enemy carried on their Trenches
from the Foot of the Badion of St. Crus,
to the Edg of the Ditch, with an Inten-
tion to fix their Miners under the Badion
of St. John but we made a Countermine,
and defended the Ditch on the other fide
with a good tofecureour


Brav€ ., y 0 j
Mauhias
Albuquer-
/ People againft the Granadoes, which
; the Enemy threw in without Intermiffion,
' This Poft being recommended to the
care of Domingos Coelho, he ftrengthen’d
the fame by Pallifadoes, from whence he
commanded the Paflage over the Ditch
with his Fire-arms 3 and Manoel Rodrigos
Franco , and Manoel de S. Jago Garcia ,
would often skirmifh with the Enemy on
their own Bridges *, two whole Companies
under the faid Coelho, and Diego de Souza
de Caftro , being appointed to fecond them
as Neceffity requir’d.
The lotfoand nth of Jan . the Enemy
advanc’d to the Ditch in two Places, viz.
thro the before-mention’d Brcaft-work,
andfomewhat lower: From the firft Place
they played with a great Cannon, and on
the other fide having made a great Breach
thro the Wall, they threw Fafcines, Logs
of Wood, Baskets with Earth, and fuch
like Materials into the Ditch 5 and the
better to cover their Workmen, and af-
ford an eafy Paflage to their Souldiers,
they fix’d their Gallery : but Emanuel Guer~
retro at the Head of his Company, Do-
mingos Coelho d* Alla, Emanuel deS.Jago
Garcia , and Diego de Souza Caftro , did re-
ceive them fo courageoufiy, that from
1 oat Night till break of Day, there was
nothing to be heard or feen but firing,
both at the entrance of the Mine, and
from the Baft ion of St. John, from whence
Don Diego Fafconcelhos did confiderable
Mifchief to the Dutch with his great Can-
non, who meeting with founcxpe&ed a
Reception, thought fit to retire with
confiderable Lofs, leaving moft of their
Materials behind them, which were
brought into the City. We loft only two
Men in this Adion, and the Dutch for e-
ver after were not fo forward to come fo
near us, but ply’d us chiefly with their
Cannon-balls, Stones and Bombs 3 where-
as we had but one Mortar, which was
uieleis to us (for want of expert Can-
noneers) till Simon Lopes de Bafto came
over to us, who now and then faluted the
Enemy with Stones out of that Mortar,
who anfwer’d us briskly, tho moft of
them broke in the Air, and did no other
Mifchief but to fome Houfes, that were
miferably (batter’d. One of the Enemies
Bombs happening to fall entire upon the
Ground, Matthias d’ Albuquerque, a Na-
tive of Goa , Handing hard by, took it
up, and threw it into the next Dutch Mine,
with an unparalleled Courage, with fuch
Succefs, that it blew up into the Air im-
mediately.
TheiSffo of Jan. four Ships arriv’d
from Gale, and foon after two more,
which with the 14 that were in the Bay
before, made up 20 in all. The fame
day the Dutch planted a Grofs upon the
Redoubt call’d Conception , under the
tripple Difcharge of their Cannon and
Small Arms. This Redoubt had been
made by the Direction and Affiftance of
the Governor, the Mafter of the Ord-
nance, and feveral of our beft Officers, and
the Dijfaves. That day two new lifted
Men, belonging to Don Rodrigo de Caftro
his Company,deferted to the Enemy; and
Fernaon Martinho de Souza the Governor’s
Son, a Gentleman who had given feveral
Proofs of his Courage, was unfortunate-
ly (hot with a Mufquet-ball in the Head on
the Baftion of S. John, of which Wound
he died foon after. About the fame time
died alfo Antbonio Barboza Pinheiro , one
of our Captains of the Artillery, aPer-
fon of indefatigable Care, and who had
fignaliz’d himfelf upon many Occafions,
both in the Field and the City.
The ift of Feb . two other new lifted
Soldiers of Manoel de Veigas his Company
deferted to the Enemy, and the 6th nine
Ships return’d from the Bay to Gale. By
this time we began to be reduc’d to great
Extremity for want of Provifions, a lit-
tie Meafure of Rice being then fold at
half a Seraphyn \ fo that we faw the poor
Wretches (as well Europeans as Ne-
groes) drop down dead in the Streets :
The Berbery , Bloody-Flux and fpotted
Fevers being grown fo common, that few
were free from them. To be (hort, wc
were in a conftant Conflid with three
moft dreadful Enemies, the Plague, Hun-
ger and Sword. To add to our Afflidi-
on, the Heat was fo cxcefiive for want of
Rain (which ufually falls in Ceylon) that
many were ftifled for want of Air, which
made us drive about 300 of thefe miferable
Creatures (unfit for Service) out of the
City on the Btfc,who were forc’d to return ]
by the Dutch the 9th. The i ith, 500 £
Negroes were forc’d out of the City,
but were fent back by the Hollanders the
fame day. The 17 th, we faw divers
Gibbets creded without our Walls, on
which they did hang divers of the rai-
ferable Creatures that were forc’d out of
the Town. We had fo many dead in
the City, that we wanted room to bury
them. The 19th two of our Soldiers de-
ferred, one whereof being taken, was
hang’d up immediately. The 2 3d, 50
Negroes (the Re'mnants of the laft 500)
return’d to the City. The 27 th, the
Bridg made by the Enemy on this fide of
their Trenches, was fet on fire from the
Baftionof St. John, but the Fire was foon
m / s
kjilel
Negroes
forced out
of the City


Columbo
I qiefted
lythofeof
Goa.
Fmke
ncreafes.
quench’d. The 29th the Befieged made
a kind of a Cover’d Way, near the Gate
of Rajuha , from the Baftion of Aiadre de
Deos , to that of St. Sebaflian.
The 2d of March , our City-Major was
fent in a fmall Vefiel to Mannar, to fol-
licite for Succours there, in cafe any
Ihould have been lately arrived from Por-
tugal \ for at Goa they thought of no-
thing lefs than Ceylon , for they did not
want either Men or Ships to fend to Ma-
cafar or Mofambique , but could find none
for Columbo *, for tho the Cinnamon was
upon the King's Account,the reft of their
Cargo belonged to private Perfons, who
would not venture their Ships for the
Publick, without extraordinary Re-
wards.
Thefame day an Advice-Boat arriv’d
from Gale, and we made the beginning
of a Cavallier on the Baftion of Ada dr e
deDeos \ but finding that the Enemy were
railing a Battery againft it, it was not
brought to Perfection. Two Portuguefes
and nine Lafcaryns deferted. The 3 d,
the Enemy began to open their Trenches
on the fide of the Mapanefe Fields. The
6tb one Dyke deferted, and the yth ano-
ther did the fame,leaving the Boat, where
were fora eCanaryns, who returned. The
11 th another Soldier belonging to Alvaro
Rodrigo Boralho’s Company, went over to
the Enemy, who receiv'd that day a Re-
inforcement of 10 Ships.
The 1 ith early in the Morning we found
that the Enemy had pofted himfelf upon
an Eminency at the Foot of the Baftion of
St. Crus , juft over againft our Redoubt,
and that they had carried on their Tren-
ches a good way into the Field. A Soldier
of Manoel Cabreira deferted to the Ene-
my. The we fent away four Pachas,
or Advice-boats. The we difeove-
red three Sails with fome Sloops, which
occafion’d great Joy in the City, think-
ing that it had been the fo long look’d
for Succours, but foon found our Miftake *,
the fame day two Dutch Deferters and a
Boy came into the Town. The Enemy
having ftrengthen’d their Battery againft
the Outworks of the Baftion of St. Ste-
phen and St. John, they laid the \6tb one
fide of St. Stephens Baftion, level with the
Ground.
The Famine encreafed every day, a
Fig-Tree or a Papey-Tree was now fold
for 50 Pardaus : Herbage we had none,
fome Roots there were, but miferably
dry, by reafon of the Heat of the Seafon,
which caufed a great Mortality.
The 17 th an Aratche and two Lafcarym
went over to the Enemy, and perceiving
that they had railed an Eminency, in or-
der to ereCt a Redoubt and Battery near
the Gate of Rajuba , we demolilhed the
lame by planting a 28 Pounder againft
it. We had an Advice-Boat lent us from
the Northern-Quarter, and about Mid-
night the Enemy alarm'd us by a falfe
Attack. The 10th , five Soldiers being
taken that were going over to the Ene-
my, four of them were bang'd immedi-
ately, the fifth who had difeover'd the
reft, efcaping with his Life.
The 2 ifi we made a Countermine, a-
bout ten Foot from the Enemies, which
was carried to the Palm-Trees planted on
the Fortifications whilft Simon Lopes de
Bafto Mafter of our Ordnance, Manoel
Fernandes da Miranda , Manoel de S . Jago
Garcia , Father Damian Vieira and feve-
ral other Portuguefe Officers, were em-
ployed in encouraging the Workmen j
one of our Cannon-balls fell among fomc
Granadoes and other Fire-works, which
caufed a great Alarm in the whole City,
and the brave John Pereira Corte Real , a
Native of Negapatnam , who had fignali-
led himfelf upon a thoufand Occafions in
the Service of our Artillery, here loft
his Life, being generally regretted by all
who new his Merit. The nd and 23d,
the Enemy continued to perfect their
Works near the Gate of Rajuha , againft
which we play’d with a Demi-Cannon
from behind the Wall of St. Stephen's
Baftion.
The 2\th twoMeflengers from the K.
of Candy brought a Letter to the Gover-
nor, and another to the Inhabitants of
Columho , in anfwer to a Letter fent to that
King, at the beginning of the Siege.
They appear’d in Mourning-Apparel, to
intimate (according to the Cuftom of
that Court) how much concern'd his Ma-
jefty was at the many Injuries and Affronts
put upon him during the late War. They
contain'd in Subftance, that the King
fummon’d them to a Surrender, promi-
fing all the Inhabitants the free poffelTion
of all their Eflates, Villages, &c. for
their Suflenance, as the only means to de-
liver them from the Miferies and Oppref-
fions they now groan’d under, alledging
that the fame were the effects of God's
juft Vengeance for their Ingratitude,
Ihewnuponfo many Occafions to his Im-
perial Majefty, in return of the many
Benefits they had receiv'd at his Hands,
and not admitting his Ambaffadors fent
to them with Propofols of an Alliance.
Thefe Letters were likewife fubferibed by
the Dutch General Hulfl , which being
read publickly, the Melfengers were dif-
4 Defer-,
ters han-
ged.
Two \fej~
[angers
. with Let-
ters from
; Raja Singa
( come to
Columbo.


They fend
tin Advice -
Boat for
News.
%d
af treat
Price,
mifs’d with much Refpeft, but were
Pearce got out of the City, when they
were overtaken by a molt dreadful Storm
of Rain,- Thunder and Lightning.
The 25 th Alvaro Rodrigo Boralho kill’d
a Soldier as he was going over to the
Enemy.
The 16th an Advice-Boat was dif-
patch’d to get Intelligence whether there
were any hopes of Succours for Columbo *,
but all the News we could learn, was that
the Viceroy of Goa (the only Perfon we
put our Confidence in next to God ) was
lately dead *, which tho it was doleful
News for us, yet was it refolv’d to hold
out .to the ialfc Extremity, which was
perform’d to the greatell nicety, the
Dutch never being able to become Mailers
of the Place, till moll of us were
confuraed either by the Sword or Fa-
mine. Advice was alfo brought us, that
Bonfires had been made at Goa y upon
certain Advice brought by fome Negroes
(under Proteftion of the Dutch ) taken
at Putelaon in Ceylon , that Columbo was
not in fo defperate a Condition as had
been reprefented, which they had re-
ported upon the Credit of a certain
Dutch Mailer of a VelTel.
The 17th of March one of our Ser-
jeants was devour’d by a Crocodile in the
Fens, his Clothes and Arms being found
afterwards. At this time a Parra of
Rice was fold at 25 Scraphyns y or Gilders;
and all our Church-yards being fill’d with
dead Corps, we were forc’d to have
another confecrated for that purpofe.
The 28 th in the Morning the Enemy
had thrown up another Redoubt near the
Wall of the Gate of Rajuha. One of the
Inhabitants, a Native of Cranganor, went
over to the Enemy from the Bullion of
S. John, being forced thereunto by Hun-
ger, which was grown fo excefllve, that
Dogs, Cats and Rats, and other fuch
like things were fold at a very high
rate.
The 31ft two Soldiers and a Lafcaryn
went over to the Enemy. The next
Morning we faw fome fmall Batteries
raifed againft the Redoubt of S. John 7 s
Baftion, where our People had made
fome Entrenchments raifed like Heps of
10 Paces high, cover’d with a Breaftwork
like a cover’d way, call’d Aleapaon by
the Portuguefes. At the fame time we
began to work on a Countermine, with-
in 20 Paces of the Enemy’s Mine at
S. John's Baftion. The fame day above
50 of our tick died in the Hofpital, be-
tides what were daily found dead in the
Houles and Streets, the Ammunition-
Bread being by this time become a moft
precious Commodity.
The firft of April one of the Enemy’s
Advice-Boats came into the Road. The
fecond 7 Lafcaryns deferted, and ever
after 20 or 30 a day went over to the
Enemy. The third two Dutch Yachts
came into the Road, aboard one of which
was a Chirurgeon. At the fame time a
Parra of Rice was fold for 59 Seraphyns y
or Gilders y but the worft was, that there
was not enough of it, and could not be
purchas’d but with ready Mony. The
Governor’s Steward (tho without his
knowledg) * refufing to part with any
without ready Gold, to the great Difre-
putation of his Mafter, who tho a Gen-
tleman of great Honour, yet was highly
blam’d for committing a thing of fuch
moment to the management of fo ava-
ritious a Perfon.
The 4 th of April the Enemy had raifed
anew Redoubt and Battery provided with
two pieces of Cannon, near the Gate of
Rajuha, wherewith they had fo batter’d
our Palifado’s, and other wooden Fences,
that there was no fafe palling betwixt
the Fortifications and the Wall on the
other fide of. the Ditch. The Enemy
receiv’d a Succour of two Ships, and the
next day four more. The Enemy made
their Approaches with fo much Circum-
fpeftion, that they advanc’d to the Ditch
(where it was dry) with the lofs of a few
of their Men, who improvidently ex-
pofed themfelves to our Fire-Arms. .
The 6th we begun another Counter-
mine, and the 7 th the Enemy threw a-
bundance of Fafcines and Faggots into
the dry Ditch, and fet fire to our Pali-
fado’s, which was foon quenched by
the indultry of our Men} whilll the
t>uteh were employ’d on the other fide to
cut a Breach with Pickaxes in the Wall,
but were foon chafed from thence by our
Firelocks, not without confiderable lofs.
The B th of April we began another
Countermine, which being fenced with
a kind of Palifado Beams cover’d with
Earth to refill the Enemies Fire-works,
was carried on under the Condud of the
Mailer of the Ordnance Antonio de Melo
deCaflro y the Serjeant-Major Antonio de
Leaon y Diego de Souz,a y and Manoel de
S.Jago Garcia. The fame day at Jeaft
70 fick Perfons (moll Europeans ) died
in the Hofpital; many of the Negroes
lay dead in the Street for want of room
to be buried in, which produced a moll
naufeous feent. The Hunger was en-
creafed by this time to fuch a degree,
that they began to feed upon Mens Flelh ;
* Semper
inveniun-
tur me F rca ’
caUmiu-
turnMfL


vtmfie*-
trsmity f or
mt oj
Fmipons-
feveral Mothers murder’d their own
Children to feed upon, two whereof
were executed. It was a moft doleful
gp e(^ac | e t 0 j iear t h e p oor m iferable
Wretches cry out in the Streets for
Bread, fome imploring Heaven for Affi-
ftance, others curling thofe who were
the occafion of their Mifery, others ex-
piring and breathing their laft in the
Houfes and Streets.
The 9th Domingo de Kamos forced a
multitude of poor Wretches out of the
Town; but thefe being driven back by
the Enemy, and expos’d to our Email
jhot, perifli’d either by them or by Fa-
mine upon the fhore.
The Enemy advanc’d this day briskly
with their Trenches, as we did on our
fide in our Retrenchments.
The 10 th we fet fire to the Enemy’s
Gallery, which however did not fucceed
according to expe&ation for want of fuffi-
cient Fuel m , but Father Damian Vieira ,
Manoel Guerreiro, and Simon Lopes de Baflo
did kill many of the Enemy upon this
occafion.
The nth we planted a Cannon be-
twixt our Palifado’s againft their Galle-
ry, but they had ftrengthned it fo well
that we could effed nothing of moment.
One of our Soldiers run over to them.
The 11th we began two other Mines
with incredible labour, but indifferent
fuccefs, for want of skilful Engineers.
Four feleded Men were pofted in the
Redoubt of S. John’s Baftion, who de-
fended that Poft, which was within a few
Rods from the Enemy’s Works, with a
great deal of Bravery, as they did in
moll other places, notwithftanding we
were reduced to a very inconfiderable
number, there being not above five or
fix Men left in fome Companies, as thofe
of Diego de Souza de Caftro , Manoel de
S. Jago Garcia , and Bon Diego de Vafcon-
celbos, who perform’d Wonders in the
defence of the Baftion of S. John.
The 13 th the Enemy having receiv’d
a Reinforcement out of two Yachts, they
bour’d very hard in their Mine on the
Baftion of S. John under favour of their
Cannon, which play’d inceflantly; At
that time Father Damian Vieira kill’d a
ftout Hollander who had the Diredion
of the Work, which advanced apace,
tho we ply’d them very warmly with our
Fireworks. Two of our Soldiers defer-
red to the Enemy.
The 18 th we began to work on our
Countermine from the foot of the Bafti-
on of S. John towards that of S. Stephen ,
under the Diredion of Father Damian
Vietra, Simon Lopes de Baflo and John
Fereira d ’ Abreu , whilft the Serjeant-
Major Antonio de Leaon , Diego de Souza
de Caftro, and Kuy Lopes Coutinho ply’d the
Enemy with their Fireworks, and other
combuftible Matter.
The fame day we got intelligence by
an Advice-Boat that the fo long expefted
Succours under the Command of Francifco
de Seixas Cabreira was come upon our
Coaft;, it confifted of 21 Ships, and two
Galliots with Provifions, one whereof
was upon the King’s account, the other
of Simon Souza , a Gentleman of Honour,
who took Compaffion of our prefent Con-
dition. They fet fail from Goa the 29th
of March', but as they were endea-
vouring to make the Cape Comoryn , one
of the Galliots, in which was Simon de
Souza , was attack’d fo furioufly by a
Dutch Veflel coming from Cakcoulang
with Pepper, that after having loft her
Maft Ihe funk, Simon de Souza being nar-
rowly fav’d with a few Soldiers, and
carried to Columbo. The Dutch Ship
then falling in among the reft fought fo
manly, that Ihe forced our Ships to re-
treat into the Harbour of Tutecoryn ,
from whence they could not come to Co-
lumbo till Auguft tho if the faid Fleet
had arriv’d fafely,they had brought fcarce
Rice enough to ferve only for a little time.
About the fame the fame time Father
Damian Vieira , John Fereira d’Abreu , and
Simon Lopes de Bafto,> went with fome o-
ther Officers (call’d Reformado’s by the
Portuguefes ) into one of our Mines.
Father Damian and Lieut. Nunes going
about 6 paces before the reft, todifeover
whether any of the Enemys were at
hand, and being miftaken by their Com-
rades for Hollanders , thefe difeharged
their Mufquetoons upon them, notwith-
ftanding which the Jefuit efcaped mira-
culoufly the danger, without receiving
the leaft hurt. This happy efcape was
attributed to the Prayers of Father Frey
Luys a Capucin , to whom fuch as were go-
ing upon fome defperate Enterprise us’d
to recommend themfelves.
The 15 th Nicholas de Moura efcap’d
out of Prifon (where he was detain’d
ever fince the bufinefs of the Count d'Obi-
das ) and with five Miflices went over to
the Enemy, as did much at the fame time
a Serjeant and a Soldier. About 80
Paces from the Gate of Rajuha the Enemy
batter’d part of our Wall betwixt the
Baftions of Madre de Deos and S. Se-
bastian, from a Battery of 5 pieces of
Cannon, from whence they (hot 350
Cannon-Balls againft it in one day.
News of
th f e defeat
f y~ r
Columbo.
a ftrangt
Efcape.


Great Mor-
tality at
Columbo.
'ftl
fc rSt J
The 1 6th we made a falfe Alarm to
try whether every one would repair
readily to his Poll: two new-lifted Sol-
diers took this opportunity to defert,
and being now deftitute of Men to work
in our Mines, nobody was excufed from
that Service, from the Governor to the
private CentineL
The 1 the Enemy having fix’d ano-
ther Cannon upon the Battery before the
Gate of Rajuha , they laid the Wall le-
vel with the ground } our People being
fo weakned by Famine, that they were
not in a condition to carry thither any
Fafcines or Earth to repair it. At the
fame time Manoel Fragofa a Reform’d
Captain who had done lignal Services in
the Indies , and efpecially in Ceylon , went
over to the Enemy, becaufe his Pay
(which was given to others who much
lefs deferv’d it) was refufed him, nay
he could not even get Suftenance for his
Mony, which put him upon this defpe-
rate Refolution } two common Soldiers
Natives of India defected at the fame
time. There died fuch a vaft number
every day in the Hofpital for want of
Neceffaries, that many of the Soldiery
chofe rather to abide with their Compa-
nies, where they expir’d in fight of their
Comrades.
The Enemy receiv’d a Succour of two
Ships, a Yacht and a Galliot, whereas
the poorßefieged had not the leaft Relief
in feven Months.
The 1 Sth Mr. Adrian van der Meyden
Governor of Gale, fent us a Letter (their
General being lately dead ) and to ter-
rify us the more, prefented all his Forces
in order of Battel betwixt his Trenches }
but our Men commanded by Alfonfo Cor-
rea, John Ferraon d?Ahreu , Manoel Pereira
Matofo , Ignatio Fernandes , Simon Lopes de
Bafio , and Father Damian Vieira , made a
vigorous Sally the next following Night
out of the Gate Rajuha , when Francifco
Afca a Reform’d Captain took the op-
portunity to defert us.
The 19th Diego de Souza de Caftro was
fent with an Anfwer to the Governor’s
Letter } and the Son of Manoel de Souza
went over to the Enemy.
The 10th a Soldier deferted from the
Baftion of S .Crus, on which fide the Ene-
my had attack’d us with the greateft
fury ever fince their lofs fuftain’d there
under the Command Caftpar d’ Aranja
Pereira , who fucceeded Manoel d’ Abreu
Godinho , after his Poft was alfign’d him,
behind the Wall betwixt St. John’s and
S. Stephen’s Baftion. The City Major
having four Bufflers left which had
drawn a Waggon for a confiderable
had them kill’d for the ufe of the Gari-
fon, who, after the Meat was confumed,
feafted alfo upon the Hides, which they
cut into fmall pieces.
The 2\ft the Enemy had drawn a Line
of Communication from the Battery near i
the Gate of Rajuha to the Lake : At the
fame time five Perfons were wounded
by one of their Bombs, and Capt. Ma-
noel Guerreiro mortally, who had kill’d
many a brave Dutch-man with his Fufee
during this Siege.
The 2 id the Enemy having fet fire to
our Countermine, the brave Joan Pena-
on d' Abreu and Simon Lopes de Baflo , were
the chiefeft that gave their Affiftance in
quenching of it amongft a flower of
Bullets and Hand-granadoes. At the
fame time a Topcus went over to the Ene-
my, the only one that deferted of that
kind, tho we had a good number of them
among us, who for the molt part died
with the Portuguefes in the Defence of the
City.
The 23d Father Damian Vieira, John
Ahreu , John Pereira (Inhabitants of
S. Thomas ) Simon Lopes de Bafto , Manoel
Pereira Matofo , Sehajlian Rodrigues , Jgna-
tio Fernandes , Jofeph Coelho and Manoel
Pereira Gomes, got early in the morning
crofs the Fens, in order to furprize one
of the Enemy’s Works, but were fo
warmly received, that they were glad to
retreat, and fight their way through the
Dutch, who had enclofed them on all
fides.
The 24th a Tony was fent to get Intelli-
gence, the Enemy fir’d moft furioufly
from their Battery againfl S. Stephen's
Baftion and the Gate of Rajuha , where
the Wall being laid level with the ground,
the Houfes fuffer’d much by their Can-
non.
The 25$ the Enemy planted two pieces
of Cannon at the extremity of their
Trenches againfl: S. Stephen* s Baflion, and
Raphael de Torres a Prifoner for Debt,
efcaped out of Prifon.
The 16th the Dutch continued to play
without intermiffion upon the Baftions of
S. John , S. Stephen and Madre de Deos .
The fame day 9 Portuguefes were buried
in one Pit or Grave, there being no place
left to bury them in. A Candil of Rice
was fold at that time for 2500 Seraphyns ,
or Gilders, and a Candil of Wheat for
3400 Gilders, and happy was he who
could purchafe it} for you would fee
Women throw their Babes into the Streets
for want of Suck and other Suftenance, t
and others to part with their Jewels for<
A Bomb
hjils five
Persons,
Great Ex-
tremity in
Columho.


Dirk Ogd
the Vice -
cmmo-
\uiU
the Lion,
Mi
irougbt the
*rJ t
/the Pot-
tuguefe
Succours,
a flender Meafure of Rice, a Commodity
more precious at that time than all the
precious Stones. During this general
Calamity the City-Major Manoel Marches
Gorian Ihew’d himfelf a true Patriot in
all his Actions, but efpccially in diflri-
buting what Rice he had left among the
Soldiers, which if he had fold mull have
amounted to a confiderable Sum of Mo-
ny at that juncture; but he was willing
to part with all, in hopes to preferve the
Place for his King. At the fame time a
falfe Attack was made near the Gate of
Rajuha .
The 27th one of our Serjeants be-
longing to Capt. Santjago' s Company de-
ferted to the Enemy. At the fame time
we faw them carry on their Trenches
from the Battery raifed againft the Gate
of Rajuha , towards the Baftion of S. Se-
baftian. Their Batteries continued to
play without intermiffion day and night.
The fame night Father Damian Vieira
with feven more made a Sally upon the
faid Trenches, and carried off moft of the
Tools of their Workmen. Simon Lopes
de Baflo took this opportunity of fending
two Spies into the Enemy’s Camp, who
being difcover’d had much ado to fave
themfelves, being forc’d to pafs through
a fhower of the Enemy’s Bullets. They
return’d the 29th, and brought Advice
of the Death of General Hulft, and the
Commodore *of the Dutch Fleet. At
the fame time an Advice-Boat jp carrying
three Guns came into our Harbour, a-
board whereof was the Fifcal. An
Alarm was order’d to be given at four
in the Morning with the found of Drums,
Trumpets, and other Warlike Inftru-
ments, and a general difcharge of our
Cannon and fmall Arms.
The 30 th Father Damian Vieira, Simon
Lopes de Ba/io, John Pereira, Alphonfo Cor-
rea, Sebaflian Rodrigos, and Jofeph Coelho,
went out to take a view of the Enemy’s
Works, and advanced within 10 paces of
them, which they found defended by a
kind of Breafl-work made up with Hur-
dles; notwithflanding which they at-
tack’d them with Sword in hand.
The Ift of May the Enemy defir’d to
have their Prifoners exchang’d for Tome
of ours, which being agreed to, the fe-
cond we deliver’d up eight of their Pri-
foners, the only Remnants of thofe taken
in the lafl general Aflault, in lieu of
which we had as many of ours reflor’d
to us. They then began a freffi to play
moll furioufly from their Mortars and
Cannon.
The 3 d at feven in the Morning, Fa-
Cher Damian , (John d ’ Abreu , and Simon
Lopes de Bafto went without the Fortifi-
cations, to gather up the Bullets near
the Baftion of S, Stephen , which uftd to be
taken up by the Enemy in the night time.
Father Damian Vieira , Simon fapes, and
two more made another Sally, to level
forae of the Enemy’s Works, but with-
out Succefs. The fame day two Soldiers
went over to the Enemy.
The 4 th Father Vieira, Simon Lopes ,
Francifco Valente dos Compos, Antonio Ma~ ■
deiro, John Pereira , Manoel Pereira Ma-
tofo, Alfonfo Correa, Manoel Pereira Go-
mes, Manoel Nuguera Freire , and Thomas
Fereira Lete , made a vigorous Sally, and
with Sword in hand attack’d the Enemy’s
Batteries raifed againft the Outworks of
S. Stephen , S. Sebaftian, and the Baftion
of Madre de Deos , with fuch Succefs, that
they ruin’d them entirely, and fet fire to
theFafcines, Hurdles and other Wood-
work that fuflain’d them, notwithftand-
ing the Dutch came with a confiderable
Body to the relief of their Countrymen,
but were repulfed not without a confidc-
rable lofs, and among the reft one of
their braveft Officers, who was buried
under a triple Salvo of their Firelocks;
fo that our People remain’d Mailers of
the Pofls, and return’d victorious into
the City.
The sth5 th Ignatio Fernandes , Manoel dc
Santjago Garcia , Sebaftian Rodrigues , John
Pereira de Lago , and Father Damian Viei-
ra (who never flaid behind upon fuch like
occafions) made another Sally, but not
meeting with any Enemy where they ex-
pected him, return’d without effecting
any thing.
The 7th about fix in the Morning (it
having been rainy before, which is a ra-
rity here at this feafon ) the Enemy made
an Affault upon the Baftion of S. John ,
defended by Don Diego Vafconcelhos , and
two Youths, Don Conjiantino de Menefes,
and Diego jfaques , both under 14 years
of Age, all the Soldiers being fwept
away by Famine; for within thefe two
months above 400 Men died in our Hofpi-
tal, and our fo long expected Succours
being block’d up at Tutecoryn , we were
pafl all hopes of Succours, whereas at
Goa there was nothing to be heard of
but Divertifements. To be fhort, the
Enemy made themfelves Mafters * of the >
Baftion, after having kill’d the Captain t
and the two Youths, who defended them- f
felves like Lions fet upon by a multi- *
tude of Dutch Dogs. This done, they
turn’d the Cannon againft the City,
whereby many of the Portuguefes that
A fnccefi~
ful Sally.
* Martin
Scholces
fir]} enter'd
the Breach.


A jimp
Engage-
aty T e
Columbo.
were haftening to its relief, were Gain
j n t h e streets. The fecond Baftion, af-
faulted at the fame time by the Dutch ,
was bravely defended by Manoel Figeiros ,
who with two pieces of Cannon kill’d
abundance of them \ but being conftantly
feconded by frefli Troops, efpecially of
the Cingalefes , they fent fuch ftiowers of
Arrows and Bullets among our People,
that they were forced to quit that Baftion
alfo.
From thence marching into the City,
they were met at the entrance of a
Street by the Commander in chief Anto-
nio de Melo de Cafiro , Die go de Souza de
Cafiro , Father Anthony Nunes the Jefuit,
Sehaflian Rodrigues , John Pereirajf'mcente de
Silva , Franc ifco V'alente dos Campos , Alfonfo
Correa , Sehaflian Periera , Ferraon
d' AbreUj Anthonio de Magalhanes , and
an Enfign under Capt. Alla, Thefe, tho
few in number, but many in Valour,
charg’d the Dutch with incomparable
Bravery. The Portuguefe Alexander Ma-
met Marques Gorjaon , making the belt of
his way over the dead Carcafes that co-
ver’d the ground, fingl’d out a Dutch
Captain of a Gigantick Bulk, who fhot
him with a Piftol through the Body, not-
withftanding which he run him through
with his Sword, and fent him immediate-
ly to the other World •, then pufhing on
his Fortune, made the Dutch give ground,
and having rallied his Men fecur’d the
Poll for that time. The Dutch renew’d
the Charge five times fucceffively, but
were as often courageoufly repulfed by
Anthonio de Melo de Cafiro , and thofe few
that follow’d him $ and being refolv’d ei-
ther to conquer or to die, they broke in
with Sword in hand amongft the Enemy,
and again poflefs’d themfelves of the firft
Baftion, and foon after alfo of the fe-
cond : the firft who enter’d the laft was
Anthonio de Magelhanes , who fought with
an uncommon Zeal againft the Enemy
for before they became Mafters of our
Cannon, he ply’d them very warmly from
behind the Wall (the only defence he
had left) fo that it coft them many a
brave Fellow before they could make
themfelves Mafters of it \ and being now
polled again upon the fame Baftion, he
was bravely feconded by two Demi-
Cannons from the new Baftion, and a
fmart fhower of Fire-works, which fet
the circumambient Air into fuch a
flame and fmoak, that at a diftance it ap-
pear’d like the Mouth of Hell.
At the fame time the Governor Anthonio
de Souza Coutinho and Francifco de Melo de
Cafiro did all that could be expedted from
brave Men on the Couratj or the Baftion
of Kaverins , both by way of Command,
and by charging the Cannon in Perfon,
and performing the Duty of common
Soldiers. The Fathers Philippo and Pedro
de Cajlelbranco , both Aujlin friers, were
not behind-hand with the reft in giving
their utmoft Affiftance for the defence of
the Place, being appointed to keep a
watchful Eye upon the Enemy whenever
they were going to alarum or amufe us
with falfe Attacks.
It muft certainly be confefs’d, that this
Engagement was one of the moft re-
markable that ever happen’d in the Eaft,
confidering that a few, and thefe moft
wounded, lick, or weakened by Famine,
did engage a much greater number, con-
tinually luftain’d by frefli Troops, from
fix a Clock in the Morning till eight in
the Evening, during which time the Ene-
my was repulfed not only once but five fe-
veral times, by a much inferior number,
who having not the leaft relief or time
to breath, were forced all that time to
endure the danger and fatigues of the
Aftion, which coft the Enemy above
400 Men kill’d, belides thofe wounded
and burnt by our Fire-works: On our
fide we loft alfo the flower of our Forces,
fome whereof were (lain, others wound-
ed and burnt to that degree, that they
were difabled from bearing of Arms for
a confiderable time after. Among the
flain were, Diego de Vafconcelhos , who had
given a thoufand Proofs of his Bravery
in this Siege j Father Antonio Nunes the
Jefuit, a Pattern of Virtue, who figna-
liz’d himfelf not only all along on the Ba-
ftion of S. John l as well as in other parts
of the City, by incouraging the Soldiers,
comforting the Sick, and burying the
Dead : He was fhot at the Gate of the
Baftion with a Mufquet-Ball, receiv’d
afterwards a deep Cut, and at laft flain
by a hand-granado after he had kill’d
feveral of the Enemy with his Mufque-
toon. At the fame time died in the Bed
of Honour ( after they had given a thou-
fand Proofs of their Bravery ) Alfonfo
Correa , F'incente da Silva , Francifco F'a-
lente de Campos , Sehaflian Pereira , and that
brave Sea-Commander Sehaflian d? Abreu
Godinho , befides an Enfign, a Native of
Bazain, belonging to Capt. Alla" s Com-
pany j Manoel de Seixcus an Inhabitant of
Columboy and Anthonio Caminha d'Alzevedo ,
were forely burnt \ Diego de Souza de Cafiro
was mortally wounded with two Bullets.,
notwithftanding which he would not re-
tire from the Engagement till he receiv’d
a deep Cut, Manoel Caldeira de Brim
Incredible
Buveiy of
the Portu-
guefes.
Their Lfa


Cmfultati -
inalwt a
Surrender.
Vidave was wounded by a Mufquct-ball,
as were like wife John Ferraon d ’ Abreu ,
Andreas de Seixas, Manoel Nugueira Fre~
ire, Manoel de Souza, and Manoel Segal-
do. Laurence Days a Native of Columbo ,
was wounded with no lefs than 3 Muf-
quet-balls •, Kuy Lopes Coutinbo , Domingos
Fires, Inhabitants of Negapatan , Lieut.
Arrais , Captain S . Jago , Manoel Correa ,
Commander in Chief upon the Badion
of S. John, Frand fco Pereira, Simon Lopes
de Baflo, and many more were miferably
burnt, Mod of thefe received their
Wounds by the accidental fetting on fire
of a Velfel fill’d with Gunpowder, thro
the carelefnefs of our own People. The
Reverend Father Paulo was wounded,
as he was furniffiing the Combatants with
Fireworks, as was likewife Father Manoel
Veldes, who was touch’d by two Bullets,
without receiving the lead harm by ’em *,
a Granado did alfo fall jud before his
Feet, without doing him the lead harm,
as he was bufy in defending his Pod with
Alvaro Rodriges Boralho at the Gate of Ra-
juha.
Father Damian Vieira with his Compa-
ny did confiderable Mifchief to the Dutch
from the Church of St. Domingo, being
bravely feconded by Cafpar Aranja Pereira ,
Knight of the Crofs, and an old Servant
of the King (who fucceeded the City-
Major in his Place) with 9 or 10 of his
Followers ; this being the Place mod ex-
pofed to the Enemy: The Commander
in chief Antonio de Melo de Cajiro , no lefs
annoy’d them from the new Badion, and
with their Shot fo fcoured the Streets,
that there was no fafe Paffage for the
Dutch and Cingalefes .
The Dutch without the Town, did on
the other hand exert their utmod Efforts
againd the old Badion, which being ai-
med laid level with the Ground, the
Wall without ferv’d for a Breadwork }
and being continually fupply’d with frefh
Troops of the Candinefes and others, put
our Men, butfew in Number* mod of
them fick, wounded or half-darved, and
befides that but ill provided with Am-
munition, very hard to it on that fide.
For by this time we had not only but few
Men, but alfo not above 15 days Proviri-
ons left, and fcarce fo much Gunpowder
as would fuffice for two Charges of our
Artillery.
Things being come to this Pafs, it was
debated in the Council (confifting of 34
p er fons) whether it were not beft to
think of a Surrender*, 13 were of Opi-
nion rather to die upon the Spot, than to
treat with the Enemy ; but the moft being
of a contrary Opinion, and hine of them
pofitively infiding upon it, that it would
be mod conducing for the King’s Intered,
that feeing the Place was no longer tena-
ble, to preferve the Remnants of thefe
brave Fellows, who had behaved them-
felves fo courageoufly, it was agreed to
enter upon a Treaty.
Accordingly the 10 th, Manoel Cahreira
was fent with a Letter to Mr. John van der
Laan , concerning the Conditions of the in-
tended Treaty ;an Anfwer to which being
feat the nth, Laurence Fereira de Britto,
Diego Leitaon de Souza, and Hieronymo de
Lucena were difpatch’d as Plenipotentia-
ries, to demand a Celfation of Arms till
the 25 th of May, againd which time we
expe&ed the fo long defir’d Succours.
But the Enemy, who were not ignorant
of our prerent Gircuradances, would
hearken to no other Conditions, than to
furrender the City the next day by 12 a
Clock at Noon, which if we refufed,
they threatn’d to give us no Quarter \ fo
that we were forc’d to obtain the bed
Terms we could, without any longer
Hefitauion, the Articles whereof being
drawn up in had (for want of time) I
had not the Opportunity to perufe them,
aild therefore can only tell you upon this
Head, that Columbo was forc’d to fur-
render, tho I can’t precifely tell upon
what Terms.
No fooner was the News of the Trea-
ty divulged among the People, but no-
thing was heard but dreadful Outcries and
Lamentations: The Ecclefiadicks (or at
lead the molt cautious among them) hid
the Images and Relicts, and unfurnifh’d
the Altars, for fear they Ihould be defiled
by the Hereticks, as had frequently been
done before upon fuch like Occafions.
The Dutch having taken poffellion of the
Badions* our Garifon confiding of 90 .
Soldiers and 100 arm’d Inhabitants, in-
cluding Officers, nay even the lame and
maim’d, marched out, fome with their
Swords and Mufquets in one Hand, and a
Stick or a Crutch in the other.
The Hollanders feeing thefe poor Rem-
nants, mod of which appear’d more like
Skeletons than living Men, were adoni-
ffied at their Bravery, in the defence of
a Place they had been forced to purchafe
with fo much Blood. Ten Dutch Com-
panies march’d into the City, at the Head
of which appear’d the General, Adrian van
der Meyden , and Mr. John van der Laan on
Horfeback, not to reckon the Cingaleses
fent to guard the Governor of Columbo' s
Houfe \ which was no fooner done, but a
Melfenger was fent to him to demand Si-
Is furrcn\
dred.
The Garl-
fin conjift-
l9 ° h
O J n m4rc


rhl i u ,t
fold a ~
sMcr
havwgbeeh
whipp'd at
fjfihni
f i} J
men Lopes de Bafto 5 being not in a condi-
tion to refufe him, he order’d immedi-
ately the faid Simon Lopes , with a certain
Aratche of Negumbo , and fomeZMcfoDe-
ferters, to be deliver’d to him, who were
all bang’d on a Gibbet foon after in fight
of the Portuguefes , who were forc’d to
be Eye-witnefies of the miferable Exit
6f this Simon Lopes , who for the fignal
Services he had done them in the Siege,
deferv’d to have a Monument of Brafs e-
refted to his Memory. To the Shame of
thofe be it fpoken, who ought to have en-
deavour’d to afford him a much better
Recompence for his paft Services, and
rather expofed him in a Boat to the chance
of the Seas, than to a certain fhameful
Death.
The Hollanders were fufficiently fenfi-
ble of the Bravery of the Portuguefes du-
ring this Siege, which lafted 7 Months’
(without receiving the leaft Succours or
Supplies) by the Lofs they fuftain’d of
their braveft Soldiers and belt Officers,
which amounted to 3000 Men, befides
the wounded and maimed} befides that
the Charges of the Siege amounted to
more than would have built fuch another
Columbo. , ■' ■ ■ ' t
The General and Mr. John van der
Laan were no fooner fettled in their Ha-
bitations, but they gave Liberty to the
Soldiers to plunder the Place (contrary
to their Parole) for one day, which was
extended to five by Mr. van der Laan ,
viz,, from the time of their coming into
the City, till the time we march’d out,
which was perform’d by the Hereticks
with the utmoft EUgour *, nay whilft our
Soldiers were embarking, and the Inha-
bitants within three days after, they con-
tinued their Robberies even upon the Sea-
fhoar. Aimoft all our People went aboard
along with them, except a few who
ftaid behind with the Governor and De-
puty-Governor *, andfome, that (by great
Promifes) were engag’d in the King of
Candy's Service, which perhaps has hap-
pen’d by a lingular Providence of God,
as a means to influence that King’s Coun-
fels, in order to expel the Dutch one time
or other out of the Ifle of Ceylon.
Our People were tranfported to Nega-
patan, where they were molt kindly re-
ceived and provided with Medicines,
Clothing and other NecelFaries by the
Inhabitants, till they received their Pay,
after the Arrival of Antonio Amiral de
Memtes Governor of Jafnapatnam, who
at the fame time in treated Anthonio Men-
des d y AranhaX who after having been de-
tain’d a Prifoner at was now come
to Negapatan) to go along with him to
Jafnapatnam , in the Quality of his De-
puty-Governor, as not queftioning but
that he (hould be the next againft whom
the Enemy would exert their utmoft Ef-
forts, which he accepted of j tho confide-
ring the Fatigues and Miferies he had en-
dur’d'of late, he might very well have
excufed the fame, as well as the reft of
the Soldiers *, who notwithftanding this,
half lick and half ftarv’d as they were,
did embark for one of the moft dange-
rous Places in Ceylon , to give frelh Proofs
of their Bravery.
This was the end of this Siege, onepf
the moft remarkable in all its Circum-
ftances that ever was heard of, confider-
ing that a Place of that bignefs was de-
fended by fo Header a Number for the
fpace of feven Months (without the leaft
Supplies) againft a powerful Force of the
Dutch and Cingalefes , who firft defeated
the Portuguese Forces (compofed of the
Flower of their Men) in two fmart En-
gagements fo that the whole Number
of the Portuguefes was at laft reduc’d to
200 Souls. The Account of this Siege
being fpread among the Eaftern Moors
and Pagans by feveral Perfons, who bad
been Eye-WitnefTes of the great A&ions
perform’d there, did beget an incredible
Reputation of the Bravery of the Portu-
guefes among thofe Nations, tho the fame
proved unfortunate in the end.
Thus his Majefty of Portugal loft a
Place, and with it a whole Kingdom,
three times bigger than Portugal it felf,
and much richer and more plentiful, the
very Center of the World, the richefl:
Trad of Land under the Sun, and with
it (probably) all that is in the pofieffion
of the Portuguefes , to the South of Gape
Comoryn. His Majefty loft a confiderable
Squadron of Ships fent to the Relief of
Columbo. The firft Squadron intended for
this Expedition, did come no higher than
the Gape Comoryn. , the pretended Suc-
cours from Manaar came to nothing :
And the fecond Squadron promifed by
the Viceroy of Goa in January , did not
fet fail till the 29th of March , and was
forced to retreat without effefting any
thing.
The want of Money was alledged as
the main Reafonof this delay, when it
is fufficiently known that the King had
both Shipsand Mony enough at Goa, which
could not have been better employed than
for the Relief of a Place of fuch vaft Im-
portance : We know what vaft SimsNuno
Alvares Botalho confumed a t Mofantbique t
which was neverthelefs not difapproved
Some Pre-
tences for
the not re-
lievingoj
Col umbo.


Minfsto
Portu-
gueei ilj '
by the King of Caflile , and why might
not the fame be expeded from the King
of Portugal ? To conclude, Columho , and
with it the whole Ifle of Ceylon , being loft
for want of Succours, all fuch as have
deferved well in the Defence of that
Place, ought to be rewarded for their
Services, as thofe who have been negled-
ful in their Duty for the Prefervation
thereof, deferve condign Punilhment at
hisMajefty’s Hands. And as nothing is
more common, than that Courtiers em-
ploy their Favourites in Places of Truft
(without any regard to Meric) and after-
wards endeavour to conceal their Mifcar-
riages from the King it is for this rea-
fon that we lay this account at your Ma-
jefty’s Feet, taken from the Journal kept
at Columbo and other authentick Records,
confirm’d by the Teftimony of many
Perfons of Credit, both Eccleliafticks
and Laymen, that were prefent from
the beginning to the end of this Siege.
CHAP. XL.
The Origin of Columbo. Arrival of the Portuguefes. Their Engagements
with and Conqueƒt of the Moors. They fortify Columbo. Raja Singa diƒ-
ƒatisfied.
My- no f
tk city of
Columbo.
Treatyk-
Ku ue
Cingaklh
THE City of Columho is an anticnt
City, feated at 6 4 Degrees of
North Latitude, in a pleafant Country,
near a delightful River *, which queftion-
iefs induc’d the Portuguefes to fix upon
this Place for their chief Refidencein this
Ifland. For Emanuel King of Portugal ,
having been fully inform’d concerning the
Condition of Ceylon , order’d a Fort to
be ereded there, for the better Eftablifh-
ment of his Affairs there, and to curb
the Emperor. Lup, de Britto being Lent
thither with a good Number of Soldiers
and Workmen, John Silva deliver’d the
faid Fort up to him. For Zoares who was
lately fail’d with 20 Ships and 700 Land-
men to Ceylon (after Laurence d' Almeyda ,
who fome Years before entred into a
Confederacy with the King of Ceylon)
had juft before made an Agreement with
the Governor of Columho about a Settle-
ment in that Place, which he look’d up-
on as the moft proper for a Fortification,
both in refped of its Situation, and
the Plenty of the beft Cinnamon that
grows in the whole Ille, being feated in
the Form of a Crefcent, and affording
fafe Anchorage for Ships, provided they
are not too bulky.
Accordingly it was agreed to ered n
Fortification there, under pretence of fe-
curing the Commerce of th z
but in effed to curb the King and the Na-
tives. He who reign’d at that time in
the Ifle being a Brahman , was not a little
jealous of the Europeans *, but being fen-
fible to w hat pitch of Greatnefs the King
Coc^nW2LS lately arriv’d by the Atfif-
tance °f the Portuguefes , he gave his Con-
fent, tbo not without fome Reludancy,
and confequently was of no long Conti-
nuance. For the Saracens who were cha-
fed thither from the Continent, and had
fettled their Traffick in this Hie, found
means by the Promifes of great Sums of
Mony, and of their Affiftance, to en-
tice the King and Court to oppofe the
Defigns of the Portuguefes , who intended
to enflave them, under pretence of fet-
ling their Commerce ; for which purpofe
they raifed fome Works, and having
mounted fome Iron Cannon upon them,
feiz’d fome Portuguefes that came afhore,
without fufpeding any harm.
Zoares coming aihore with his Work-
men, in order to rafe the intended For-
tifications, was furpriz’d to find fome
Forts ereded by the Cingalefes ; and hav-
ing receiv’d certain Intelligence, that
the fame had been done at the Inftigation
of the Moors , he eafily guelfed that no-
thing but Force was likely to eftablilh the
Portuguefes in Ceylon . Accordingly hav-
ing landed his Men, he attack’d the E-
nemy, who at adiftance fomewhat gall’d
his Forces with their Arrows *, but after
they came to a clofe Engagement, the
Cingalefes were quickly put to the Rout,
and purfued by the Portuguefes with confi-
derableLofs: The Portuguefes had many
wounded but few killed, among the laft
was the brave Patieco y lately come from
Malacca .
Zoares having allow’d one day only to
his People to refrefli themfelves, began
the next Morning an Entrenchment,
reaching from the Harbour to the Seafide,
without the leaft Oppofition: within this
he order’d a Fort to be erefted, where-
upon having mounted his Cannon, and
Is foon
broken.
The Porcu-
guefes
rout the
Cingalefes


Force the
King to pay
a yearly
Tribute..
is iUdi -
geiled by
ldb^ inga "
ftrengthen’d it by a Wall that furrounded
| ie f oon made the King repent of his
inconftancy, who feat his Envoys toZort-
reSj asking Pardon for what was pafs’d,
and deliring that the former Alliance
might be renew’d : But Zoares refufed to
hearken to thefe Proportions, demanding
Satisfaction for the Affront, and a yearly
Tribute to be paid to K. Emanud *, which
the King of Ceylon (who dreaded the
Portuguefes) not daring to refufe, it was
agreed that he fhould pay to Portugal an
annual Tribute of 124000 Pound Weight
Q f Cinnamon, i 2 Rings let with the moll
p re dous Rubies and Saphirs, and 6 Ele-
phants, under Condition thatK .Emanuel
fhould aflift the King of Ceylon and his
Succeffors both by Sea and Land, againft
all his Enemies.
The Treaty being thus concluded, Zoa~
res continu’d his Fortifications, which be-
ing brought to perfection with the affif-
tance of th z he left John de
Silva with a good Garifon thefe, and
Anthonio Miranda Acevedo with four Ships
to guard the Coaft •, which done, he re-
turn’d in December to Cochin , where he
was received with all imaginable Dernon-
ftrations of Joy. Lup. de Britto (before
mentioned) fucceeding John de Silva ,
brought along with him abundance of
Workmen and Bricklayers, who made a
kind of Mortar of the Sea-cockles, and
lin’d the Fortifications with a ftrong Wall,
deepned the Ditches, and added what
Works they thought neceffary for the Ac-
compli Oi men t thereof.
This created no fmall Jealoufy (not
without reafon) in the Cingalefes , which
wasencreafed by the Intonations of the
Aioorifh Merchants, who told the King
that their Prophecies were like to prove
too true, fincehe was now made fenfible,
that thefe Foreigners had not only exclu-
ded all other Strangers from the Traffick
of this Ifle, butalfo had made him a Tri-
butary of Portugal , and Ihortly would
make him their Vaffal* if he did not in
time hearken to the Gounfel of his
Friends.
Thefe Intouations had the defired ef-
fect, for the King not only cutoff all Sup-
plies of Proviflons and other Neceffaries
from the Fort but the common People
being alfo incenfed by thefe Difcourfes,
murdered feveral Portuguefes , who ven-
tur’d a little too far without the Fort.
De Britto at fir ft diffembled the matter,
but finding he could no longer contain his
Soldiers (burning with Revenge) he
chofe 150 of his beft Men, and with
them affaulted the City of Columbo
(which lay near the Fort) juft about
noon, when molt of the Inhabitants were
afleep to avoid the Heat of the Day, and
at the firft Alarum betook themfelves to
their Heels, leaving the City to the Ene-
mies Mercy.
De Britto feeing himfelf Mafter of the
Place without the leaft Oppofition, for-
bid his Soldiers to plunder, or commit a*
ny other Outrages j but order’d the Wo-
men and Children to be tied to the Poll <
of the Doors, with an Intention to con-
vince the that he was not come
like an Enemy to deftroy, but like ;
Friend to preferve them. But as he hac
but little reafon to rely upon their Gene-
rofity, he thought fit to make a Tria
of their Inclinations } fo he orderec
fome Houfes that lay next to the Portu ■
guefe Fort to be fee on fire : this had the
defir’d Succefs \ for the Cingalefes out 0
the Affeftion they bore to their Wive:
and Children, had gather’d all theii
Force in order to relieve them at anj
rate \ but finding their Houfes on fire,
run firft with all Speed to quench the
Flame, whereby Britto got leifure to re-
treat in good Order into the Fort, and
to provide himfelf againft the intended
Aflault, which however could not be
done without fome Lofs, above 30 of his
Men having been wounded in the Re.
treat.
However Britto reaped no other Bene-
fit by this Enterprise, than that the Cin-
galefes (exafperated to the higheft De-
gree) befieged the Fort with 20000 Men \
and tho they were often bravely repuls’d,
yet did they perfift in their Refolution, in
hopes of reducing the Place by Famine,be-
caufe the approaching Month of May
(the firfftrf the Winter-Seafon) did be-
reave them of all hopes of Succours. In
the mean while the Cingalefes did not
ceafe to carry on their Works to the very
Ditch, from whence they annoy’d the
Portugucfes with their Arrows,their Num-
ber making up the Defeft of their Force,
which was not comparable to the Portu-
guefe Artillery and Fire-arms. They al-
fo gather’d up 600 Bullets that were fhot
at them from the Fort,of which they made
the bell ufe they could.
But what molt troubled the Portugucfes
was, that they were to fetch all their
frefii Water without the Fort, and that
they were extremely harafled with conti-
nual watching : However they hoped to
defend the Place till the next Summer,
in hopes of Succours, in which they at
laft found themfelves fruftrated j Anthonlo
de Lemos coming only with one Galley
Britto
fur prices
Columbo.
Porcuguc-
les kjk-
ged in the
Fort.


Make a
vigoroM
Sail}.
The Siege
wjed.
and 50 Landmen to their Relief, Seguera
with the reft of the Forces having ftaid
behind.
The Cingalefes in the mean time had
found means to ereft two Wooden Tow-
ers fill’d with Earth, which being plac’d
near the Ditch, they intended to make
ufeof to cover their Pioneers, whilft
they were bufy in filling it up. Britto
was not a little ftartled at this Device,
and finding himfelf now reduc’d to fuch
Straits, as to be obliged to venture at
all, he order’d slnthonio de Lemos to draw
as near to the Shore as poflibly he could,
and to endeavour to ruin thefe Towers
with his great Cannon, whilft he would
make a Sally with 350 Men, and attack
the Enemy with the utmoft Vigour*, this
was put in execution accordingly with
fuch Succefs, that the Towers were en-
tirely ruin’d, and the Cingalefes beaten
out of their Works.
Notwithftanding this Defeat, the Cin-
gakfes, encourag’d by the Moors who
came to their Afliftance with isoHorfe,
and 25 Elephants, refolved to try their
utmoft againft the Portuguefes, Thefe E-
lephants having Turrets fill’d with Men
arm’d with Cutlafties on both Tides, did
ftrike no fmall Terror at firft into the
Portuguefes , but afterwards turn’d to the
difadvantageof the Cingalefes *, for thefe
Beafts not able to bear the Wounds that
were given them by the Portuguefe Ar-
tillery, foon turn’d their Backs, and put
their own Troops into Diforder, with a
great Slaughter among the Cingalefes and
Moots, who now beginning to de-
fpair of Succefs, raifed the Siege immedi-
ately, and the King fent his Ambafladors
to Britto, to ask Pardon for what was
paft, and to defire a Reconciliation.
Thus we fee how the Portuguefes have
been forced to fettle, or at leaft to main-
tain themfelves in Ceylon by the Sword *,
and the better to attain their end, it was
their conftant Pra&ice in the Indies to fow
the Seeds of Divifion among thofe Prin-
ces ; an Inftancc whereof is given us by
Maffatis himfelf, in his Hiftory of the In-
dies.
The King of Cota had three Sifters
Sons, who (according to the Cuftom of
the Country) being his Legal Heirs, be-
gan to be very uneafy at the long Life of
their Uncle, found means to remove him
out of the way, and to divide the Coun-
try betwixt them : But Parea Pandar the
eldeft of the three, having murder’d the
fecond, Maduyn the youngeft began ai-
fofoon after to conceive a Jealoufy at
his Brother’s Proceeding* complaining
that he was not rewarded according to
his Defcrts, as having been the Advifer
and Executer of the Murder of their Un-
cle. Pared Pandar finding his Brother
diflatisfied, thought it his fecureft way
to fore-arm himfelf againll him* and
therefore enter’d into a Treaty with the
King of Portugal , to fettle the Succeftion
of the Crown upon his Daughter’s Son
(with the Exclufion of Maduyn) dire&ly
contrary to the Cuftom of that Country*
Maduyn ex afperated to thehigheft degree
at this Proceeding, denounc’d open War
againft his Brother, and after having ra-
vag’d the Country thro which he palled,
laid Siege to Cota.
The elder Brother difdaining to be at-
tack’d in his City, march’d out againft
Maduyn , and pitch’d his Tent in an ad-
vantageous Poll. He had a Troop of
Portuguefes in his Camp, one whereof
(whether hir’d thereunto by Maduyn, or
by chance, is uncertain) ihot him thro the
Head. After his Death the Portuguefes
fet his Daughter’s Son upon the Throne
with the ufual Solemnities : but in confi-
deration of his Youth, and the Weaknels
of his Title, introduced contrary to the
Cuftom of the Country, they much fear-
ed the Hatred of the People, back’d by
the Intereft of Maduyn *, they fent there-
fore for Succours to Noronha , who
foon after arriv’d with a good Squadron
of Ships and 3000 Men, under pretence
of affifting the young King (as Maffaus
exprefly tells us) but in effeft to make
himfelf Mafter of the Tteafure buried at
Columbo , 100000 Crowns of which he
carried off along with him.
In the mean while Maduyn fortified
himfelf with all poflible Diligence in the
City of Ceta-V'aca, nine Leagues from Co-
lumho (according to Maffaus) but Noron~
ha having with little Oppofition taken
and burnt the faid Place, return’d victo-
rious to Goa . What further became of
Maduyn , is not mention’d by or
any other Hiftorian.
Thus wc have feen the beginning of
Columbo under the Portuguefes , and its
Surrender to the Dutch 1656. They
found about 6or 7 Loads of multy Rice
in the Place, fome Packs of Cinnamon,
good Store of fome good, fome
not, 24 Light Frigates, 9 whereof were
funk, 1500 Guilders ready Money coin’d
in the City, 33 Packs of Clothes, 25
Bells of Metal, 60 Brafs, and 68 Iron
pieces of Cannon, one Mortar, and fix
lefler Pieces, 10000 Cannon-Bullets of
different Sizes and Weight, 6500 Pound
Weight of good Gunpowder, and 1150
Dijferetws
betwixt 7.
Brothers
fomented
by the For-
tuguelesi
What was
found in
Columbo*


bad, a good Quantity of Brimftone and
Saltpeter. No fooner were we in pof-
feflion of Columbo, but Raja Sing a fliew’d
his Diffatisfadtion by the following Let-
ter.
“ the reafon, I can’t as yet give entire
u Credit to it: But in cafe it Ihould be
u fo, I defire to know with all poffible
cc fpeed the Articles of the faid Treaty.
“ Whilft our Beloved Diredtor-General
H was alive, I writ to him concerning
“ certain matters he promifed Ihould be
li perform’d, which 1 defire you to re-
“ member.
Raja Sin-
ga 's Let ter.
“ VEfterday and the Day before yef-
terday it was reported at our
a Court, that there was a Treaty on
u foot with the Portuguefes about the
“ Surrender of the City, fincewhichl
u have receiv’d Intelligence, that the
u fame is brought to effedi. If it be true,
lL you ought to have given notice there-
of to our Imperial Majefty, which is
Signed,
From our Im-
perial Court
at Keygam-
watte, May
11. i6s6.
Raja Singa Rajou , Moft
Potent Emperor of
Ceylon .
CHAP. XLI.
Deƒerters feverely puniƒhed. Raja Singa forbids all Commerce with the Hollan-
ders. His Letter of Complaint. Divers Portuguefe Ships taken. Raja
Singa ravages and plunders the Lands and Subjects belonging to the Company.
IT was now thought high time to pu-
nilh fuch as had deferred our Service
during the Siege. Among thef c Simon
Lopes, a Portuguefe by Birth, who had 50
Guilders per Month Pay in our Service,
and after we were repulfed in the general
Aflault was gone over to the Enemy, did
lead the Van, and was, notwithftanding
all the Interceffions of the Portuguefes ,
hang’d on a Gibbet. Two other Europe-
ans (whofe Names wewillpafsby inli-
lence) underwent the fame Fate ; and a-
nother was feverely whipp’d, and forc’d
to ftand with a Rope about his Neck for
12 Hours under the Gallows.
The next thing to be done was to take
care of the Tranfportation of the Pom-
guefes, among whom the Ecclefiafticks
and Inhabitants of Columbo were fent be-
yond Sea to Mr. Laurence Pit our Gover-
nor, who was to difpatch them further
to the Iflc of S. Thomas, About that
time we receiv’d a Letter from Raja Sin-
ga? wherein he fufficiently teftify’d his
DiffatistadHon. Walraven Thomas our
Book-keeper fent word from Montual,
that he had fent the Corporal Hans Jacob
Lambert, 1 o Mardykers , and a Serjeant
to the Pals of Nacclegamme, with Or-
ders to oppofe the Forces gather’d there-
abouts by the Di(faves of Ouv&, of the
four and of the feven Corks-, which not
agreeing with the Sentiments of the Ge-
neral and his Council,they order’d the faid
Corporal to fend back the Mardykers to
Montual, and not to ftop the Paffage of
any of the Royal Forces, for fear of giv-
ing any occafion of Offence to the Empe-
ror.
Notwithftanding this, we foon found
the effefts of the Diffatisfadtion of Raja
Singa , who having cut off all means of re-
ceiving Supplies by Land from the Sa~
bandar, Don John de Cnfta was difpatch’d
to the DtJJdves of Sajfragam, and thofc
of the four and feven Corks, who told
him, that their People were at their full
Liberty (tho we knew to the contrary)
to bring their Provifions to our Marker,
but that they durft not give a Vifit to the
General, without exprefs Orders from
Court.
The nd of March , the Yachts the
Mars and Lyon came to an anchor in the
Road of Columbo , aboard one whereof
was the Vice-Commodore Roothaus , who
(upon the Receipt of a Letter from our
Head Fa&or Mr. Reinier Serooshrh , inti-
mating that a fmall Yacht laden with Pro-
vifions upon the King of Cochin’s Ac-
count, was gone from thence to Columbo)
had left the Yachts Fli/fingen , Popkens-
burg, Sea-Comy , the Haddock and the Ro~
man , with two other Veflels on that
Coaft, who were fupplied with frelh Pro-
vifions by the Inhabitants of Caylpatnam,
The Inhabitants thereof being very defl-
rous to renew their Commerce with our
Company, they were then equipping two
Frigats there.
About the fame time notice was given
us,that Cannangere Aratchis , a faithful Ser-
vant of the Company, had (to our great
Diflatisfaftion) fubmitted to the King of
RajaSinga
fa ws his
, 2 Tachts
come before
Columbo.
Cingalefes
go over to
the Empe-
ror*
Defer ten
'punijJM
withDeath .


utter of
Complaint
fm the
,n ‘ iW ‘
Candy, and that 90 of the Lafcaryn De-
fer ters had taken the way of Angretotte ,
Thefe proved the Forerunners of many
enfuing Misfortunes. In the mean while
Baja Sing a urg’d ftifly the Surrender of
Negumbo and Columbo into his Hands,
under pretence that thefe Places belong’d
to him, by virtue of an Agreement
made betwixt him, and the late Direc-
tor-General Mr. Gerard Hul(l upon
which account he writ the following Let-
ter.
44 R Imperial Majefty being very
44 delirous to introduce the Dutch
44 Nation into our Dominions, Adam
44 Weflerwold came on this Coaftwith a
44 Squadron of Ships, juft as we had
44 made our {elves Mailers of Batccalo ,
44 when we thought fit to conclude a
44 Peace with him \ which being confir-
-44 med by Oath, was but (lenderly ob-
-44 ferv’d by fomc Oificers afterwards :
44 As for inflance by Captain Burchart
44 Koch , alias Coque (who was after-
-44 wards kill’d by a Soldier at Puntcgale)
44 and Commiflary Peter Kieft , who be-
-44 ing fent as Plenipotentiaries to our
44 Court, did confirm the before-mentio-
-44 ned Peace by Oath *, purfuant to which
44 at their Departure for Gale, they
44 took along with them one of our Z)//-
44 faves, in order to deliver into his
44 Hands the Country of Mature . But
44 at his coming there, they found means
44 to render the faraeineffeftual, by find-
-44 ing out certain Difficulties, which
44 made the Paid DJjj'ave return to our
44 Court, to our great Difiatisfaftion.
4C It was about that time that our Belo-
-44 ved Direftor-General did come into
44 our Kingdom from Holland , with full
44 Power to aft as helhould find it moil
44 Putable to our Service, and to the
44 Eftablifhment of a firm Peace and
44 Friendship *, purfuant to which, he de-
-44 fir’d us by way of Mouth to bury all
44 pafs’d Mifcarriages in Oblivion, pro-
-44 miPing at the fame time in the Name
44 of the Prince of Orange and the Eaft-
-44 India Company, full Satisfaction for the
44 fame \ as alfo, that the Fortrefies of
44 Negumho and Colombo (when taken)
44 Ihould be deliver’d into the Hands of
44 our Imperial Majefty, and certain Hoi-
-44 landers to be allotted in the faid Pla-
-44 ces for our Service. It is upon this ac-
-44 count that we fent our Auxiliaries to
44 affiil our dearly Beloved Hollanders in
44 the taking of Columbo \ which being
44 taken Since, they are becomeJorget-
-44 ful of their Promife, and do continue
44 to do lo to this Day. Your Excellency
44 is left at your own Liberty to do what
44 you think fit, till notice of this Pro-
-44 ceeding can be given to the Prince of
44 Orange , and the Honourable Company.
44 But I would have you remember/that
44 fuch as don’t know God and keep their
44 Word, will one time or other be fen-
-44 fible of the ill confequences thereof }
u I am fenfible I have God on my iide.
By way of Poftfcript was writ.
44 Wo Letters have been difpatch’d
44 A from our Imperial Court. Your
44 Excellency has writ in Dutch to George
44 Bloem , but without mentioning any
44 thing relating to our Service. Your
44 Excellency may write fuch frivolous
44 Pretences to whom you pleafe, but
44 ought not to impofe them upon our
44 Imperial Majefty \ it being in vain to
44 alledg, that the Direftor-General had
44 receiv’d his Inftruftions from Batavia ,
44 whereas he brought his full Power a-
-44 long with him out of Holland . Such
44 finifter dealings, as they create no
44 fmall Jealoufy, fol can’t fee with what
44 Face you can expeft any further Cre-
-44 dit from us. I have taken care to have
44 this translated into Dutch , that you
44 may have no reafon to plead Igno-
-44 ranee. George Bloem fhall ftay here,
4< till I receive your Anfwer, when I in-
-44 tend to fend him back with a Letter,
44 No more, fre.
From our Imperial Court at Key
gmwatte , May n. i6s6.
Unto which was annex’d the following
Account, not thought fit to be inferted
in the Imperial Letter.
u nr’HIS Day,being the ndoiMarch i
cC -*■ his Imperial Majefty having fent
44 for me, order’d the Letter writ in
44 Portuguefe to be tranflated into
c 4 Dutch , to be fent among others to your
44 Excellency. When I fhew’d the Tran-
tC ilation to his Majefty, he told me, that
44 after the Arrival of theDireftor-Ge-
-44 neral i n Ceylon, he had fent word to
44 him,that feveral Rebels fhelter’d them-
-44 feives in and about Columbo , efpecially
44 one Cctfpar Figeiro , who had done con-
-44 fiderable Damage to his Majefty s
44 Lands •, as alfo concerning certain Pre-
-44 fents fent to his Court by the Viceroy
44 of Goa y fome whereof were fent only
tC by the faid Direftor-General. His
44 Majefty further dellr’d me to give you


Raja Singa
U angry
with the
Dutch.
3 Portu-
guefe Fri-
gates ta-
ken.
Ct to underftand, that it had been agreed,
<c not to recede in the leaft from the
4t literal Senfeof the Treaty, cfpecial-
a ly in what related to that Article
u concerning any City or Place taken
“ with the Affiftancc of his Majefty’s
u Forces } whereas your Excellency had
u not as much as taken the leaft care
u (fince the taking of Columbo ) to fend
cc to his Majefty his rebellious Subjefts,
Cc nor any of the Prefents, except two
cc Perftan Cats, a Ship, &c. deliver’d by
tc me to his Majefty. The not fending
tC of the Rebels has been very ill re-
u lift’d here.
Our General took care to fend a moft
obliging Anfwer to the Emperor’s Let-
ter, which however wasfo far from giv-
ing any real Satisfaction to Raja Singa ,
that on the contrary he conceiv’d fuch a
Hatred againft the Dutch , as made him
engage with the Portuguefes againft them.
For notice having been fent to our Coun-
cil by Anthonio de Motte , and Manoel Ron-
feque de Montis , two Portuguefes , that
they had been fbllicited by Raja Singa to
enter into his Service, with Promifes of
vaft Rewards, and the full Enjoyment of
the fame Revenues they had been poffefs’d
of before, in their moft fiouriffiing fi-
liate } it was order’d that none of the
. Imperial Soldiers ffiould be for the fu-
ture admitted into the City, except fuch
as ffiould be fent in the Quality of Meffen-
gers from the King, or any of his Dijfaves ,
to the General and Council : 32 Men
were alfo commanded to guard thePaffes
near Caleture. Molt of the Portuguefes at
Columbo , were fent under a Convoy of a
whole Company to Gale \ and upon a feru-
tiny of the Mufter-roll, it was found
that there were 300 Men miffing from a-
mong the Lafcaryns of Matule , and ma-
ny more follow’d their Footfteps foon af-
ter.
The 30 th of May early in the Morning,
four Frigates being difcover’d near the
Shore, towards the fide of Galkijfi , we
took in our Princes Flag, in order to en-
tice them into the Road : the Commo-
dore, who led the Van, perhaps began to
fufpedt the matter, and therefore fleer’d
his courfe to the North •, but the other
three were no fooner come within the
reach of our Cannon, but wefentoutour
flnall Veflels to fetch their Officers affiore.
Thefe told us, that they left the Bar of
Goa the nd with fix Frigates, and that
two of them being feparated from the
reft by a moft violent Tempeft near Cou-
lanwere either loft, or perhaps had
faved themfelves in fome Port or other;
one of them having been feen without
Mails. They added, that a Portuguefe
Caravan was come to an Anchor in the
River of Goa. Thefe fix Frigates had a-
board 58 Soldiers, befides good Store of
Provifions, Ammunition and all other
Neceffaries, intended for the Relief of
Columbo, in cafe the Squadron under
Francifco de Seixa fhould mifcarry. Their
Cargo flood us in great Head, confidering
the Scarcity that was among us at that
time.
The i/lof June we took another Fri-
gate and a Yacht, the Officers whereof
being likewife brought affiore, told us,
that the City of Cochin had contributed a
good Sum of Money towards the relief
of Columbo. Their Letters being open’d,
contain’d nothing material, except that
they were embroil’d with the King of Co-
chin,
Certain Advice was brought to the
Governor, that the Day before, as the
before-mention’d Ships of Cochin were
paffing along the Shore of Galkijfe , the
Imperial Di/faves of Matule and Ouva y
had been feen to give them a Signal with
a white Cloth, and had taken abundance
of Pains to get aboard them, offering
400 Larynes to the Fiffiermen, if they
would carry them aboard of one or the
other and that they had got ready two
Boats, but durft not venture thro the
Waves. Confidering the Pains the Em-
peror had lately taken to entice away
fomeof the bell Officers belonging to
the Company, and divers Outrages com-
mitted by the King’s Lafcaryns in the
Park of the Company : Thefe together,
I fay, feem’d to us the infallible Forerun-
ners of the enfuing Broils.
For it was not long before Cornelius van
der Duyn , Deputy-Governor of Mature ,
fent word from thence, that the King’s
Officers and Soldiers had forbid all the In-
habitants thereabouts to furniffi.the Hol-
landers with Provifions, or to obey their
Orders, but to retire into the King’s Do-
minions, where they ffiould have full Li-
berty to make their Excurfions into our
Dominions, as they had done already at
Billigam , MaUtmande , and Baigam.
To prevent fuchlike Outrages for the
future, three Companies of 40 Men each
were fent out of Gale , two of which
were order’d towards Accuras , topro-
te£t the Inhabitants againft the Inroads
made by the King’s Soldiers, in the quiet
poffeffionof fuch Lands as were granted
to the Company by the Emperor; for by
this time we began ffirewdly to fufpedl,
Another
Yacht ad
Fr k At *


that moft of the Great Ones were enter’d
into a Confederacy with the King againft
us* this appeas’d by the Tergiverfations
of the Adigar , who palling by the way
of Angrctotte to Mature, pretended he
was come by Orders from our General,
which was a manifeft Falfhood ; fome of
their Proceedings may be feen out of the
following Letter.
Attepitty Apuhamy is come to Mai-
Ci limanda , from whence he has font
u an Oh* or Letter, intimating that he
u was come by the King’s fpecial Order,
<c to take pofrefTion of the Country of
u Mature in his Majefty’s Name, and to
u enjoin all the Inhabitants, not to fup-
u ply the Dutch with any Provlfions or
u otherwifo. He further f'aid , that he
w had intended to have been with them
u before this ; but being now come with
u full Authority, lie exhorts them to
‘ c obey the Emperor’s Orders, for the
44 Honour of his Court, and of the Dtf~
u fave of Mature, which if they do,
41 they may allure themfelves of all ima-
u ginable Favour from the Court. The
tl Dijfave of Saffragam has font the D//-
44 fave of Mature, to affift you upon all
u Occalions.
In Fafdmncork and Cakture things went
at the fame rate, where they had taken
Cottemynde , his Mother, and Brother
(befides many others) Prifoners, and car-
ried them to the Pals of Cakture: their
Intentions appear by the following Ola ,
cc | 'zjdoculle Mandonna Apohami makes
cc i known to all the Aratches , Lafca •
u r J HS , and the chief Majorats and Coio-
tC nels of Cakture , Macoene , and Barharyn,
“ that as foon as this Ola comes to their
cc Hands, they fhall not keep the leaft
cc Correfpondence with the Dutch , nor
u pay any Duties to them, from the
u Villages (formerly granted to them)
4C or furnilh them with Labourers to work
u on their Fortifications. Thofo that
u fhall ad contrary to the Tenor of this,
ct muft exped to be feverely punilh’d }
44 wherefore come and join with me.
Manoel Andrado (who fignaliz’d hira-
folf before Jafmpatnam , of which anon)
was likewife advertis’d by a Letter from
his Brother-in-law, that the King’s For-
ces had wounded a Woman and a Slave
near the Pafs of Cakture , and that there-
fore he (hould keep a watchful Eye over
his Lafcaryns . About Negumho they
play’d the fame Game, and Raja Singa
had made his AddrefTes to Patangatti ,
the Colonel of Coquielle , in hopes by great
Fromifes to bring him over to his Party.
On a certain Tree near the Church of
Cuia de Lobo y was affixed the following
Paper.
41 HTHE City of Columbo is now taken,
u and was according to Agreement
tc to be furrendred to his Majesty, but
C: has not been perform’d ? if any fatal
Cc Confequences attend this Breach of
u Promile, we declare our feives inno-
u cent thereof; But as we are well affu-
cc red of his Majefty’s good Inclinations
41 towards the Dutch Nation, fo if you
u intend to fend any Deputies to treat
tC with him, you fhall have Liberty fo to
cc do, and a Pafsport for them.
Our General and Council finding them-
folvesunder an abfolute Neceflityof re-
prefenting to Raja Singa the Injuftice of ■
his Proceedings in a Letter, they told
him, that thefe Proceedings being direct-
ly contrary to their mutual Intentions of
annoying the Portuguefes , and confequent-
iy tending both to his Majefty and the
Company’s Prejudice, they defir’d that
all Hoftilities might be laid afide, and
inftead thereof their former good Corre-
fpondence be renew’d. They defir’d Raja
Singa to fend his Anfwer, and with it an
Envoy, or one of his Dijfaves , unto whom
they would deliver the Fortrefs of Ne~
gumbo , after the Fortifications were de-
molififd. And to leave no room for a-
ny further Pretences, the General ac-
quainted the Emperor, that in cafe his
Majefty would let him know what fur-
ther Satisfaction he requir’d at hi« Hands,
he would be ready to comply with his
Majefty’s Demands, provided the fame
could be done without great Prejudice to
the Company’s Service. But that in cafe
his Majefty thought fit to perfiftin his
unjuft Oppreflions of the Dutch and o-
thers under our Jarifdidion, he proceft-
ed and declar’d in the Prefence of God ■
and to all the World, that he was inno-
cent of all the Calamities and Effufiori
of Blood, that needs muft be the Con-
fequences of fuch Proceedings, which
muft oblige us (tho much againft our
Will) to have recourfe to fuch means as
God had put into our Hands for the De-
fence of our Subjects. With this Letter
they fent a Faulcon and a Sparrow-hawk>
with a Perfian Faulconer, as a Prefent to
the Emperor.
Advice was brought at the fame time
from Cakture , that the King’s Lafcarym
a
affix'd u
* rree *
Contents of
the utter


were very troublefome to our Subjedh,
w h o were t 0 ] eave their Habita-
tions for fear of being carried away, and
that they had wounded fome and purfued
them to the River fide. That the two
Cratches Cannangere and Pitt Uteri , lay en-
camp’d near and had fumraoned
the Country thereabouts to join with
them within three days j that 10 of our
Lafcarym , and 42 Labourers fent from
Caleture to Columbo , were carried away
by a Party of Vagabonds. To prevent
the like for the future, and efpecially to
prote& our Workmen imployd in the
peeling of the Cinnamon (call’d Chalias)
200 Soldiers were order’d to Bentot, un-
der the Command of Martin Scholtes ,
Peter Chample and Jorvs Hervendonck , who
for their better Security were to be join’d
by the Lafcaryns under the Captain of
Gale-Corle.
Outrages
committed
hy the Laf-
200 Mm
1 m '
CHAP. XLII.
A Feaƒt appointed. Two Caffers come over to us. George Bloem efcapes from
Candy. A Skirmifh betwixt the Dutch and Cingalefes. Robbers punish'd.
News of the Portuguefe Squadron. The arrival of fome Dutch Ships , their
miftake. A ƒtrange Notion among the Indians concerning Columbo's being
impregnable. Negumbo taken and retaken.
Raja Sin-
ga 's An -
Jmr to no
IT being now a Month fince the Sur-
render of Columho , a Thankfgiving
Day was appointed to give Thanks to
God Almighty for this great Succefs, and
to implore his Mercy to blefs our Arms
for the future. The faid Day is kept ever
fince on the i ith of May.
Raja Singa did fend an Anfwer to the
General’s Letter, but faid fcarce any
thing in relation to the matter in hand,
declaring only his fatisfa&ion about the
prefent, and defiring that the Perfian
Faulkoner might ftay with him, which
the General (to gratify the Emperor)
did confent to, at leaft till fuch time that
the Ships ihould be ready to return to
Gamron . However thefe Civilities did
not anfwer the end for which they were
intended *, Raja Singa ordering foon after
his Lafcaryns to take all the Dutch they
could light on Prifoners, and to cut off
the Nofes and Ears of all the Negroes,
Cingalefes , Moors and Slaves that fervM
the Hollanders \ but the 200 before-men-
tioffd Soldiers ftruck fuch a Terror into
the King’s Forces, that they retreated
back, and gave liberty at leaft to 1000
of the Inhabitants to return to their
Houfes.
Raja Singa in the mean time continued
now as before his Hoftilities, one of his
Parties having lately carried away a
Duria and two Labourers within half a
League of Columbo , which oblig’d us to
be continually upon our Guard. The
Dutch ftill refiding at Candy , being afraid
they fhould be detain’d there againft their
will, writ to the General to haften the
departure of the Perfian Faulkoner with
the Hawks, in hopes that thereby the
King might be brought into a good hu-
mour to let them depart.
About the fame time a certain Meffen-
ger named Chitty Maley carnet oColumbo
with fome Hawks and other Prefents for
the Emperor *, fix Hawks more with their
Faulkoners were alfo brought from the
Goaft of Coromandel for the fame pur-
pofe.
The loth of July two Gaffers came
over to us, one whereof having been
the King’s Trumpeter, the other a Drum-
mer, they reported that his Majcfty con-
tinued Hill in his Camp at Reygamwatte y
but intended fhortly to break up for Rua-
nelie, the Diffave of Matule having been
fent before already to take care of the
High-ways through which they were to
pafs. They further told us, that the
Emperor having granted to divers Portu~
guefes certain goodly Villages, this had
created ill Blood among the Courtiers.
Our Interpreter George Bloem was
forced to continue there till he found
means to make his efcape in the night-
time from the Camp of Reygamwatte , by
means of a Tony or Boat, wherewith j
he got to Montual , having deceiv’d his j
Guards by giving them a good dofe of \
ftrong Liquors. Five other Dutch Men i
who had deferted our Service continued
with the King at Court.
News was brought at the fame time,
that fomc of the King’s Forces having
got Intelligence that Mr. Rabel a brave
Cingalefe y a Native of Mature in our
Tm Car-
fers cm
over to us.
Our Inter-
preter e-
[capes front
the Camp
of the Em-
peror.


cinga-
lefts in
vm At-
wW
Jw9 Rtb-
ias pa-
The Por-
tuguefe
Squadron
gjtts ckxr
i f the
Durrh.
Service, was abfent from Hakman with a
Serjeant and mofl of the Soldiers, having
left only a Guard of 10 Europeans and
15 Lafcaryns in the place, they to the
number of 100 Men attack’d them on a
fudden, in hopes to carry the Place by
furprize, but were notwithflanding fo
hotly receiv’d, that they were glad to re-
tire.
Things began thus to grow worfe and
worfe, without hopes of Amendment,
becaufe we were frequently bit by
our own Dogs, I mean the perfidious
Cingalefes under our Jurifdidion, who
gave conflanc Intelligence of all our De-
figns,fo that we could not fend abroad the
fmallefl Party but the Enemy had before-
hand notice thereof*, whereas we could
never difeover the leafl of their Inten-
tions, of which we were fufficiently con-
vinc’d by divers intercepted Letters.
The King’s Forces having furpriz'd a
Serjeant named Peter Johnfon , a Native
of Dantdck , with fome Inhabitants of
the Country, and four Soldiers Wives,
they carried them before the Diffave of
the feven Cories , who told them, that
they had been long enough in the Dutch
Service, and mufl refolve now to be his
Majefty’s Slaves.
The id of Auguft we receiv’d a Letter
from Laurence Hauxwyk our Under-Paftor
at Caleture , that feveral Robbers had
been feen about Boemhoele , who had cut
down the Fruits of the Earth \ that An*
drado being fent after them with fome
Lafcaryns , had met only with two of
them, who refufing obflinately to con-
fefs by whom they were fent out to cut
down the Rice, they had cut off their
Heads, and fet them upon Poles near the
place where they had (polled the Rice.
The 13 th of Auguft being Sunday, the
Yacht call'd the Columbo came into our
Road, having left Tutecoryn the 11 th: fhe
brought Letters from the Commodore to
the General, intimating that the Enemy's
Squadron compos’d of 15 Frigats had
efcap’d his hands the nth of July , taking
the opportunity of the Night, and the
advantage of the Flats betwixt the Ifles *,
that they were purfued by our Ships as
far as Pambanaat, which could not come
up with them by teafbn of the Sands.
r He further told him, that fufpcaing the
Teuver or Governor of the Country to
have been corrupted with Mony, and to
have given them a free Paffage betwixt
Manaar and Jafnapatnam ( which he
commands by either laying in or re-
moving certain Stones from the en-
trance thereof) he had been oblig’d to
return to Tutecoryn,
We had at the fame time advice of the
arrival of our Ships, the Amfterdam, the
Avenhorn , Saphir , Haddock , Workurn , Pe-
Patience , and Black Ball , upon the
Coall of Coromandel: But it was no fmall
Mortification unto us, that the
(contrary to the General of Ceylon* s Or-
ders ) had left the Frifoners and Porta-
Soldiers (who according to the
Articles of Surrender were to have been
carried to Batavia') afhore near Nega~
patnam , and that Ihe had not touch’d in
the Southern Harbours, where there was
a confiderable Cargo of Cloches and o-
ther Commodities ready, which could
not be difpos’d of and by the
firfl: overfight the Enemy had been re-
inforc’d with 80 brave Soldiers contrary
to the intention of the Agreement.
We had at the fame time Letters from
the Fadtor Adrian van Nexvland y dated in
the Dani/h Fort call’d where-
by we underflood that the before-men-
tioned Portuguefe Frigats were pafs’d
through the Straits (by the afGftance of
the Governor) to Jafnapatnam , from
whence Anthony Amiral de Menefes (after-
wards kill’d by one of our Cannon-balls
near Manaar ') had fent his Forces in
Boats to Negapatnam , in order to ga-
ther a Body (at the requefl of Rajs
Singa ) in thofe parts, which, as the cafe
then flood, might have prov d very dan-
gerous to us, had not God through his
Mercy prevented their Defigns.
During all thefe Troubles, our Gene-
ral kept a watchful Eye upon the Enemy’s
Motions, and order’d Mr. John van der
Laan with 300 Men to fcour the Coun-
try. Thefe Differences continued for a
confiderable time, viz,, to the year 1665.
and tho fome glimpfes of Peace appear’d
at certain Intervals, yet is it certain that
Raja Singa is not reconcil’d to us to this
day,and perhaps never will whilfl he lives.
We have hitherto treated of Columbo j
we now will pafs the River at Montua /,
and take our courfe higher up to Ne~
gumbo. But before we come thither, I
can’t forbear to fay a word or two con- (
cerning the general Opinion of the ln~\
dians , viz,. That Columbo was imgregna-
ble. Hence it was that the Portuguefcs
boafled in all places, that the King of
Portugal and Viceroy of Goa would ne-
ver fuffer fo flrong a Fortrefs to fall into
the hands of the Hereticks, efpecially
after we were repulfed in the fir ft general
Afiault. I happen’d to be then at Ma~
cajfar , where the Portuguefe Father and
fome Miflionaries lately come from China
Overfight
f.
tJe ITf
Opinion con*
cerning the
firengrh c f
Columbo.


ufed to make this Siege their Sport *, and
one Francifco Fiero, one of the richeft
Merchants in the Indies, offer’d to lay
vaft Wagers that it was not taken by the
Hollanders,
The King of Celebes and MacafTar (the
Capital City of that Ifle ) had the fame
opinion concerning the Strength of Co-
lumbo, he and molt of his Courtiers be-
ing much inclin’d to the Portuguefe fide.
But within three Months, juft at my re-
turn to Batavia ( after the Conclufion of
the Peace betwixt us and the King of
Macajfar) we had the News of the Sur-
render of Columho , brought to Batavia
by Peter Bitter , to the general fatisfaftion
of the People.
But after this Digreflion it is time to
come to Negumho , which lies about two
Leagues and a half, or five good, hours
walking along the Banks of the River to
the North. lam not able to tell you the
exad time of its beginning, the Portu-
guese Hiftorians being filent as to this
Point, being no more than a Fort built
for the conveniency of prote&ing the
Country, which abounds in Cinnamon.
I told you before, how Adam Wefler-
mid made himfelf Matter of Batecalo:
After which Anthony Caan took 1639,
the Fort of Trinquenemale , the moft fpa-
cious Harbour on the Eaft-lide of Ceylon .
Philip Lucas the Dutch Diredor-General
in the Indies took Negumho the firft time
Feb, p. 1640. and foon after (as has
been told before, viz l 3 March follow-
ing) our Commodore William Jacob Koftcr
took Gale by Storm, but was afterwards
treacheroufly murder’d by fome of Raja's
People with four of his Guards.
For the Paid Mr. Kofter coming to
Candy in Perfon, was detain’d therewith]
vain Promifes, without the leaft proba- 5
bility of fuccefs, till growing impatient 1
he began to utter Threats and very harfh
Words (a great piece of Imprudence) a-
gainft fome of the Great Ones at Courts
which coming to Raja 7 s Ears, he was
difmifs’d without the ufual marks of Ho-
nour, and conduced towards Batecalo,
but murder’d by the way by the Civgalefes
his Condufters. This was the Reward
beftow’d by Raja upon Kofter, who had re-
duc’d Trinquenemale ale and Mature, with
all the Countries thereunto belonging,
to his Jurifdiftion.
'Tlzc Jtdurder of 7 Ai r .Jdojler by
k tfm Cinaalefcs.
Mr, Koftcr
treacht •
wfy m*
tir'd.




Tol.j. p. ySy.
t^EgumboJ
*}•


Certain it is, had Raja been Jmcere,
we might with his AfUdance eafily have
made our felves Mailers at that Juncture
of Columbo, when all their regular For-
ces being fent to the Relief ot Gale, there
were but a few old Soldiers, Priefts and
Citizens left for the defence of the Place.
But Raja thought it better to play the
Trimmer betwixt two European Nations,
than to be in danger of being conquer’d
by one, and fo thought it his belt way to
dve Opportunity to the Portuguefes to
recover a little Breath.
For the Portuguefes having received a
ftrong Reinforcement from Goa, found
means to regain the Fort of Negumbo-,
which done," they fat down before Gale,
but were bravely entertain’d by John
Thyffen , who gave them many a Brufh }
Raja Stnga fitting all this while by like a
Spedtator, tho the Portuguefes remain’d
Mailers of all the Low-Lands, tho we de-
liver'd Batecalo into his Hands, and made
much greater Offers by Peter Barrel our
AmbafTador. Things continued in the
fame State till the Year 1644, at the be*
ginning whereof Franci s Caron took Ne-
gumbo from the Portuguefes a fecond time,
and having ftrengthen’d it with four new
Bullions of Earth, furrounded with ftrong
Pallifadoes, left a Garifon of 500 Men
therefor its Guard. After the Depar-
ture of our Fleet, and forne Detachments
fent to Gale, and other Places, Don Phi-
lippa Mafcarenhas made an Attempt upon
the Place, but being bravely repuls’d,
/ cj J 1 >
was glad to retire in confufion to Columbo.
It was about this time that Mr. John Ma-
atzjuyker (now Governor-General of the
Dutch Eaft ■ Indies) coming to Goa, enter'd
into a Treaty with the Portuguefe Viceroy,
John de Silva Telles de Menez.cs, Earl of A~
veiras, concerning the Limits betwixt
both Nations in the Ille of Ceylon -, which
being brought to a Conclufion 1645, the
faid Mr. MaatzuyVer remain’d in thofe
Parts, in the Quality of Governor of
Puntegale.
Negumba
taken a
ft con f- tm€
J
r/;e,Por£U-
°uclcs d
m '
vain to re •
cover iti
CHAP. XLIII.
Raja Singa treats underhand the Portuguefes, his tame Elephants detained .
Raja declares againft the Portuguefes. The Dutch Angretotte. Both
the Portuguefes and Dutch are reinforced. Engagement near Tiboene. Ca-
leture deferted. Portuguefes worsted both by Sea and Land. Manaar ta-
ken.
Raja fides
with the
Porcu-
guefes.
Ku Etc-
ffmts
(ti{ed.
RAJ a singa at the Initiation of the
Portuguefes being grown very jealous
of the Dutch being in podeffionof they
Cories, conniv’d at the Robberies that
were committed in thofe Parts by his
People, which at lad obliged Mr. John
Thyjfen to proclaim open War againd
them and accordingly Nicholas Jacobfon
Overfchie , Governor of Negumbo, and
Overfeerof the Dutch Limits (who died
afterwards at Poorburgh) caufed all the
King's tame Elephants to be feizM, which
fo exafperated his Majefty, that he drew
all his Forces together and entered the
feven Cories, where our People had the
word of it, becaufe they furrendred
without being reduc’d to the utmoft Ex-
tremity. However after the return of
Mr. MaaUuyker, Negumbo , Gale-Corle,
and Mature , with the Countries thereun-
to belonging, were foon fecur’d againd
all farther Attempts ', the Cinnamon
was gather’d and peel’d as before, the
Wild Elephants tam’d, and every thing
elfe fettled for the Advantage of our
Company : nay Raja Singa himfelf was
appeas'd, who retreated with his Forces,
tho without doing any harm to the Portu-
guefes, an infallible Sign that there was
no ill Underflanding betwixt them.
Matters thus continu'd till 1649, when
Mr. Maatnuyker redeem’d all ourPrifo-
ners, and by a Meflenger fent with fome
Prefents, brought matters to an honoura-
ble Compofition. In the beginning of
the Year 1650, Mr. Rampot left Gale and
Mature , to the great DiiTatisfaftion of
Raja Singa, who however was fo far
from breaking with us upon that account,
that when we entred into a War with the
Portuguefes , 1652. Raja declar’d again#
them, laying hold of the Opportunity
that prefented it felf, by a late Mutiny
among the Portuguefe Soldiers and chief
Inhabitants of Columbo , rais’d againft
Manoel Mafcarenbas Homem their Gover-
nor, whom they had taken into Cufto-
dy.
Thcfe Mutineers having gather'd what
Forces they were able near Columbo ,
' ‘ f t 1:
I *•
Mutiny at
Columbo
again]}
their Go-
vernor,


Angretoc-
ce loft by
the Dutch.
Raja mfies
a Diverfi-
on in fa-
vour of
the Dutch.
The For-
tuguefes
are rein-
f o,C€{ *'
march’d on a fudden with 800 European
Soldiers and as many Negroes towards
our Fort of Angretotte , which they ob-
lig’d to a Surrender Jan. 1653.
after a Siege of 11 Days, in which they
loft a confiderable Number of Men j 98
Germans , 24 Javanefes, and a greater
Number of Lafcaryns were made Prifo-
ners of War, under condition that they
fhould be difmifs’d for a reafonable Ran-
fom. The fame Afternoon a Body of
300 Men were fent to their Relief, who
happen’d to come too late *, tho as the
cafe flood, their Endeavours would have
prov’d in vain, confidering the Enemy
was twice as ftrong and advantageoufly
polled ; and we had not come off at fo
cheap a rate, had not Raja Singa given
the Enemy a ftrong Diverfion near Cone-
gore, whereabouts they attack’d the Paft
near Columbo with fuch Vigour, that the
Governor and Deputy-Governor were
glad to fend for their Forces from Rey-
gam and Pafdum-Corle to oppofe the Im-
perialifts. Thefe were no fooner re-
treated, but the Portuguefes attack’d our
Outguards near Negumbo , and pofiefs’d
themfelves of the 4 and 7 Corks : But Ra-
ja Singa rallying his Forces, march’d from
Ouva to Saffragam (the Capital City of
the five Corks ) the Portuguefe DiJJdve
was glad to retreat with his Forces to
GurheviUe , and thereby gave us Oppor-
tunity to* join our Forces, and fecure the
Countries of Gale and Mature.
In the meanwhile, viz.. the 10 th of
May, the Portuguefes in Columho receiv’d
a Reinforcement of 12 Frigates, with a
good number of Officers and Soldiers
from Goa , under the Command of Fran-
cifco de Melo de Cafiro *, our Cruizers be-
ing fcarce two days before (to our great
Misfortune) forc’d to retreat from their
Stations by ftrefs of Weather into the
Harbour of Gale . Notwithftanding
which, they made no conliderable At-
tempt againft us, being contented to fe-
cure only their Workmen employ’d in
peeling of the Cinnamon, and other In-
habitants of the Country againft our Par-
ties.
Raja Singa finding that in 1653 in Sep-
tember, the Portuguefes had receiv’d a
frefli Supply from Tutecoryn , whereas our
four Ships did not bring one fingle Sol-
dier to relieve the reft that our Gover-
nor Jacob van Kittenjlein had obtain’d
leave to depart } and that when Com-
rnifTary Rijklof van Goens touch’d with
his four Ships towards the latter end of
Oftober in Ceylon, in his way to Perfia and
Suratte , without bringing us the leaft
Succours, he retreated with his half ftar-
ved tatter’d Troops from Caravanella ,
thro the 7 and 4 Corks to Candy, to re-
frefh themfelves.
The Portuguefes finding themfelves fe-
cure on that fide, did appear with all
the Forces they could bring into the Field
before Columbo, in hopes of drawing our
Forces out of the Fortbut finding them-
felves fruftrated in their hopes, they re-
treated in the beginning of 1654, to-
wards Rey gam and Pafdum-Corle, whence
they fent frequent Parties to take away
our Cattel, and to fpoil the Fruits of the
Earth. But Major John van der Laan was
always at hand with a good Body to ob-
ferve them.
The 20 th of March our Governor A-
drian van der Meyden , marched from
Gale to Cakture , and being join’d there
the 23 d by all his Forces, he follow’d the
Portuguefes thro Berberm , Dodangodde,
and Tiboen , where he attack’d them the
2 6th in the Morning, in their advantage-
ous Poll : the Engagement was very
fierce for a whole Hour, when our Forces
feign’d a Retreat, in hopes to draw the -
nemy from his Poft, but they were too
wife to follow us } they had more Men
flain on their fide than we. After our
Forces had refrefh’d themfelves a little
while at Tiboen , we march’d to Cakture,
and the Enemy retreated out of our Do-
minions croft the River to Columbo.
Soon after 5 Galeons with icoo Portu~
guefe Landmen aboard them, arriving up-
on our Coaft, engag’d three of our Yachts
call’d the Greyhound , the Rhinoceros , and
Dromedary , and purfu’d them to the Flats
of Negumbo , but took none of them,
our Veflels retiring under the Cannon
there, and the Portuguefis to Columbo,
having loft their Captain* Major, and ma-
ny others in this Engagement.
A Council being call’d to confult what
to do in this Emergency, it was refolv’d
to leave Cakture , and to employ our
whole Force in the defence of Negumbo,
without which we were not in a condition
to maintain that Fortrefs, which was of
the greateft confequence to us. Accord-
ingly Negumbo being well provided with
what Forces we were able to gather, the
Enemy (whole Forces were confiderably
encreafi’d by the late Reinforcements)
march’d from Galkijfe to Cakture , and
thence to Alicaon, where they pitch’d
their Tents; to oppofe which we brought
into the Field about 200 Europeans, 80
Javanefes, and a good Number of Lafia-
ryns,wherewith we made a fhife to defend
our Country as well as we could.
;mt
p^L
fes ad
utch,
s Portu '
Vejftls.
7 88
‘ A Definition of CE Y ION.


VanGoens
fats the
Qalcons.
Some Sup-
plies
brought to
tk Dutch,
The Dutch
pafs the
River A-
licaon.
Be.tt the
Portugue-
frs.
About this time Commiflary van Goens
in his return from Per/ia and Suratte to
Ceylon , had the good Fortune to beat the
Galeons near the Cape du Ramos , and
thereby to releafe 20 of our People made
Prifonersat Angretotte, who were feta-
fhore at Puntegale. This was the reafon
that the Portuguefes could not fpare many
Men for the ufe of their Frigates, having
fuftain’d a confiderable Lofs of them in
the late Engagement with Mr. vanGoens ,
near Achiera , neither were they fo a&ive
in the Field till the enfuing July , when we
having receiv’d fome Reinforcements, ap-
pointed our Rendcvouz at Bentotte , in
light of the Enemy, having only a River
betwixt us and them. We kill’d the For-
tuguefes about 30 Europeans in divers Skir-
mifhes, and took from them divers Boats,
which made them not fo eager afterwards
to attack our Countries, in order to
fpoilour Cinnamon and Areck Harveft,
and the taking of Elephants, wherein
confifts the chief Revenue of this Ifle,
belonging to our Company.
The 13 th of Septemb. the Yachts the
Turtle-Dove, the Red-Lyon and the Had-
dad, arriv'd with frefh Supplies and 50
Soldiers. The of Decemb . the Yacht
the Kanien brought us a Supply of 54
Soldiers more j befides which, 159 Sea-
men were taken out of four Ships (come
with the Director Henry van Gent into
Gale , to provide themfelves with frefh
Water) all which being join’d with our
Forces encamp’d at Bentotte , we embark-
ed the 1 6th of Decemb. all our Forces,
tfpoftrong (including Officers) compo-
fed of Seamen, Land-Soldiers, javane-
fcs and Cingalefes, in 20 CatapaneeU or
Land-Boats, and thus palled the River
Alicaon .
But fcarce had we reach’d the oppofite
Bank of the River, but we met withfo
warm a Reception from 300 chofen Por-
tuguefe s, and fome T ‘opafies and Ctngalefes,
that moll of our Indian Forces betook
themfelves to their Heels , but being ral-
lied again upon the Bank of the Rivet,
return’d to the Charge *, and being brave-
ly feconded by the reft, forced the Enemy
to retreat, leaving one of their Cannon
of 1000 Pounds Weight behind them,
60 (lain, and many more wounded. They
behaved themfelves bravely, but were
forc’d after this Defeat to retire by the
way of Adalvane to Columbo.
The Portuguefes finding us not ready to
attack Caleture (after they had given the
ufual Pay to the Soldiers) they up
in the beginning of 1655, and furpriz’d
Kaja’s Forces, under the Command or the
Diffave of the four Corks ; and being re-
intorced by fome other Forces from Jaf~
napatnam and Aianaar, befides a good
Number of Lafcaryns , they purfued the
Diffave of the feven Cories, as far as to
the Straits of Candy , plundring all the
Country thro which they pafTed : which
fo exafperated the King, that he order’d
all his Forces to appear in the Field but
his Van being routed in April near AttapU
tin by Cafpar Figeiro , the King quitted the
Field full of Diffatisfa&ion.
It happen’d to our good Fortune, that
the new Governor and Portuguefe Admi-
ral, Anthonio de Souza Coutinho (under
whofe Government Columbo was loft)
coming with 8 Frigates and 500 Land-
men into thefe Parts, was the iBf/? of
May forc’d towards the Coaft of Gale :
Wefcntout two Yachts, viz. the Lyon
and Kanien , who coming up with them,
took two with all the Men and Provifions,
and forc’d two more afhore j fo that no
more than two or three of them got
fafe to Columbo , and Coutinho himfelf was
forc’d to take his Courfe round the Point
das Pedrcus to Jafnapatnam and Manaar y
from whence he came with a good Troop
by the way of Putelaon , Calpentyn , and
the feven Cories , in Auguft to Columbo ,
where he was no fooner eftablilh’d in his
Dignity, but he vifited with Anthonio
Mendes d? Arangie the Fort of Caleture i
where he left a Garifon of 300 Europeans ,
and a good Number of Negroes, but re-
folv’d to keep Cafpar Figeiro near his Per-
fon.
By that time the Dire&or-General Ge-
rard Hulfl came in Company of Mr. John
van der Laan (a Perfon well verfed in
the Affairs of Ceylon ) into thofe parts.
About the middle of Septemb. three
Yachts were difpatch’d from Cape Como-
ryn, in order to obferve the Frigates Tent
from Columbo to Tutecoryn for Provifions,
and either to take them or to block them
up betwixt the Iflands. It was alfo re-
folved to force the Portuguefes to quit Ca-
leture, whilft the Enemy were yet under
apprehenfion of the Strength of the For-
ces come alongwith the Dire&or-General,
and lately landed at Negumbo , from
whence he intended to give the Enemy a
Vifit on the other fide of the River at
Montual.
However the Portuguefe Squadnon,
confifting of 20 Frigates and fome Barks,
loaden with all forts of Necefiaries at
Jafnapatnam, and fome other Places on
the Indian Coaft, made fhifc to pafs by
with full Sails within fight of Negumbo
(where our Ships lay at anchor) and to
jy-lm
routed.
Tfoporcu-
guefes
a
ea '


A new
Viceroy
comes to
Goa with
fome Galc-
ons.
oiflance
hfnapac-
mm and
Columbo.
odnefs of
feCoun-
our fignal Regret got into Columbo. Mr.
Hulfi receiv’d at the fame time Advice
by a fmall Advice-boat, that a new Vice-
roy was arriv’d at Goa with three Galeons,
one Yacht, and a good Number of Land-
men. A Council being call’d, it was
thought convenient to try whether thefe
Galeons might not be furpriz’d near Mar-
magon or Agoada (two Caftles in the
Bay of Goa) At the fame time Mr. Hulfi
came with four Ships and a good Num-
ber of Soldiers before Berbery «, where
having landed and join’d his Forces with
the reft the of Septemb , he foon af-
ter made himfelf Mailer of Caleture , an
account whereof has been given before.
But it is time to leave Ncgumbo, provi-
ded with a good Garifon (firft by Major
John van der Laan , and afterwards by the
Head Fa cl or Edward Hauw) and to go
towards Manaar. In the Year 1661. I
undertook a Journy over Land from Jaf-
napatnam to Columbo , 4901*50 Leagues
diftant from one another, which 1 ac-
compli (h’d in feven Days.
From Ncgumbo you travel by the way
of Cajuel, to the River Cbilauw , and fo
thro the Countries of Madampe and Pute-
laon, leaving the Ifle of Calpentyn to the
left; then thro Aripou (where the Chrifti-
ans have a Church) to Manaar , thence to
Wannias , the Church of Mantotte , and
fo to Jafnapatnam , of which more here-
after. We made this Obfervation in
this Journy, that no Cinnamon grows,
except on the other fide of the River
Cbilauw , and beyond Jafnapatnam . For
the reft, all thefe before-mention’d Coun-
tries have a very fruitful Soil (except
Calpentyn , which is fomewhat barren) ef-
peciaily about Aiadampc, butaredefti-
tute of Inhabitants: The Bufflers feed-
ing here in vaft Herds, which makes me
believe that it would afford plenty of e-
very thing were it well cultivated.
We will now proceed to give you fome
account of the Hie of Manaar, which
formerly adhered to the Continent, as
fufficiently appears by the Sand Bank, cal-
led Adams-Bridg. Next unto this lies
the Ifle of Rammanakoyef where is to be
feen a rich and famous Pagode , belonging
to the Tcaver or Governor, who has a
Fort on the Continent. At certain Sea-
fons there is a Pallage with fmall Boats,
thro fome Depths of this Adams-Eridg,
one whereof 1 had onceoccahon to pafs
my felf.
The faid Ifle was reduced by the Hol-
landcrs, 1658. in the following manner,
by Mr. Rjikiof van Coens. The Portugue-
fes had made Entrenchments all along the
Shore, which were defended by iooqT
chofen Men and 12 Frigates, to hinder
the Approach of our Boats. Our great
Ships were order’d to advance as near as
they could, under favour of which our
Boats landed the Men. Serjeant Henry
van Wcl ((ince a Lieutenant) was the
firft who fet foot on (bore } and being
bravely follow’d by the reft, were as
courageoufly receiv’d by the
who did all that Men could do to fecond
their Comrades *, but our Cannon from
the Ships, together with our fmall Arms,
made fuch a Havock among them, that
they were forc’d to quit their Entrench-
ments. Here it was that Antonio Amiral
de Menez.es, the Portuguefe General, loft
his Life by a Cannon-Bullet, and Anthonio
Mendes d ’ Arangie , a famous Soldier, was
mortally wounded, with many other
brave Officers,
On our fide we loft an Enfign, and be-
fore our Landing (when the Long-boat
of the Ship Naarden was taken) the brave
Lieutenant Block , which we return’d ’em
with full meafure all their Frigates, as
they palled by our Squadron, being either
funk or taken, with a great Slaughter of
their Men. Major John van der Laan (tho
he had a heavy Fall before our Landing,
being a very large and fat Perfon) did ne-
verthelefs behave himfelf upon this Oc-
calion with incredible Bravery, breaking
thro the thickeft of the Ranks of the E-
nemy, whereby he made good the Title
beftow’d upon him long before, of being
the Terror of the Portuguefes.
After this defeat, the Portuguefes not
thinking themfelves fecure in the Fort
Manaar , retir’d over the Water to Jaf-
napatnam, leaving only Andrew Fillofa
with a very moderate Force in the Caftle
of S. George, They would not have ef-
caped our Hands at fo cheap a rate, had
we not been ftop’d by the great Rains
and Tempcfts.
The nd Andrew ffllofa being deferted
by moll of his Men, was oblig’d to fur-
render the Caftle of St. George upon rea-
fonable Terms. We took about *oo Pri-
foners, both Europeans and Negroes, and
among them a Caffer (or African Negro)
who pretending to be a Captain, was fo
ftubborn, that he would not take up his
Armsorarife from the Ground (as he
was commanded to do) without a good
Baftinado.
The of Febr. I preach’d the
Thankfgiving-Serraon in the great Church
upon the Text of i Sam. 7. 7. for the
molt fortunate Redu&ion of this lAe,
whereof our General might fay with Car-
heifitf
Manaar
e utchi
Porcuguc-
fes km
the Fort
Manaar.
S. George
fmendred.


Tke taking of jjle of Adanaar by the Dutch.
far, rent, vidt, vies, being beyond all
queftion one of the greateft Adions that
ever happen’d betwixt us and the Portu~
guefes in the Indies, confidering we were
forc’d to attack the Enemies Forces, com-
pofed of Veteran European Soldiers, and
to chafe them from their advantageous
Polls, and that only with 800 Men, and
confequently with the utmoft hazard 5
being refolv’d either to overcome or die
in the Attempt, becaufe we had quite
drain’d the Garifon of Columbo 9 leaving
only a few, and thofe infirm Perfons to
guard that Place, bccaufe we expeded
hourly the Arrival of the Ship the Sala-
mandar with fome 100 Soldiers, and good
Store of Ammunition and Provifion, hav-
ing aboard the Commodore Peter de Bit-
ter , the Fador Edward Ooms, and Captain
Peter Wafch . The fame having been de-
tained by Calms and Tempefts for near fix
Months, and endur’d great Hardfhips a-
bout the Maidive Iflauds, arriv’d at laft
fafely at Columho , but was foon after or-
der’d by the Governor Adrian van der
Meyden, to fail to Manaar, where (he
came to an Anchor immediately after we
had made our felves Mailers of that Ifle,
and were juft then preparing to march to-
wards Jafnapatnam. But before we leave
Manaar, we mull add fomething con-
cerning the true Condition of this Ifland,
The Sala-
mandar
brings a
Supply cf
Men and
Frovifms*


CHAP. XLIV.
A Dejcription of Manaar. How the Christian Religion was planted, and might
be further promoted there. A Defcription of the Country of the Wannias.
Our March towards Jafnapatnam. We pafs the River ; rout the Portuguefes,
and take the Water-Fort.
Manaar
n'hencc if
its
The
lefe and
Malabar
Tavgues
tfcHon
m c> on.
situation
of Manaar.
its elm-
ches.
Pearl fifh-
cry at Mi-
naar.
MAnaar derives its Name from the
Malabar Language, from the word
Many i. e. Sandy and Aar a River , fig-
nifying as much as a Sand-River y it being
obfervable, that both the Cingalefe and
Malabar Languages arc fpoken in the
Ifle of Ceylon . The firft is ufed beyond
NegumbOy viz. at Columboy Caleturey her-
beryn y Aiicany Gaky BelligammCy MaturCy
Ipondtrey &c. But in all the other parts
of this Ifle oppofite to the Coaft of Coro-
manddy and all along the Bay, they fpeak
the Malabar Tongue j whence it feems ve-
ry probable, that that Trad of Land (as
the Inhabitants of Jafnapatnam them-
felves believe) was firft of all peopled
by thofe of Coromandef who brought
their Language along with them *, it be-
ing certain that in the Inland Countries
about Candy , Vintane , Ballaneyy &c. they
fpeak only Cingalefe .
The Ifle of Manaar is fituate at 9 deg,
of Northern Latitude, its length being a-
bout two and a half German Leagues,
and one broad, including the Salt-water
River (as you will fee in the Map) which
reaches as far as the great Church call’d
Cared . The Caftle is feated upon a
Canal able to bear fmall Yachts, which
draw 3,4, or 5 foot Water, and can go
from thence to Jafnapatnam. This Caftle
was ftrengthened with fome additional
Fortifications, and furrounded with a
deep Ditch, after we had taken it from
the Portuguefes. The whole Ifle has no
more than feven Churches, unto each
wherebf belong divers confiderable Villa-
ges : The firft is the City Churchy next
that call’d Tottavaly y then Carcely Erke-
lampatti, S. Peter'" s Church belonging to
the Fifhermen \ Peixaky and the laft:
TeUemanaaVy lying at the furthermoft, and
near the Sea-fide.
This Ifland was formerly celebrated
for the Pearl Fifhery y as well as the City
of Tutecoryn *, but no Pearls having been
taken there for thefe 10 years laft paft,
the Inhabitants are reduc’d to great Po-
verty , whereas the fumptuous Edifices,
Churches and Monafteries, with their Or-
naments, arc fufficient Demonftrations of
its former Grandure.
In the year 1 666. (after my departure)
our Company order’d the firft time the
Pearl fifhery to be renew’d again, with no
ill fuccefs y and according to feveral Let-
ters 1 have receiv’d from thence, they
took a confiderable quantity of Pearls,
the fecond time, in the year 1669 .
The Inhabitants of Manaar fpeak (be-
fides the Malabar ) moft generally Portu-
guefey being long ago converted to the
Chriftian Faith, for which reafon they
have fuffer’d moft cruel Pcrfecutions from
the Kings of Jafnapatnamy who baptiz’d
many of the new converted Chriftians
with Blood, after they had receiv’d the
Baptifm with Water. Many of them fled
for this reafon to Goa by Land, being
above 100 Leagues, and among them a
young Gentleman of Royal Extraction,
who embrac’d Chriftianity there.
It was Francifcus Xavevim who conver-
ted the Inhabitants here, as well as thofe
on the Cape Comoryn and the Parua&y as
wc have told you before in the Dcfcripti-
on of the Indian Coaft, and in the ac-
count of his Life. The faid Xavcrius
eftablifh’d among them certain Teachers
call’d Canacappeby who were to inftruft
the Inhabitants in the firft Rudiments of
the Chriftian Religion, as the Ten Com-
mandments, the Creed, Our Father, &c.
which they did with indefatigable Care
and Induftry -.Thefe were fucceeded by the
Jefuits (call’d Paulites here, becaufe they
were fent into the Indies by Pope Paul III.)
who in their way of teaching both the
old and young ones, did far exceed the
Francifcansy and all other Orders among
the Romanics. And I am very free to
confefs, that I have frequently follow’d
their Footfteps in reforming the Churches
and Schools in Manaar and Jafnapatnamy
as far as they were confiftent with our
Religion, and confonant to the Genius
of thefe Nations. It being abfolutely ne-
ceflary, that he who undertakes this task
fhould be well acquainted with the me-
thod to be ufed among thefe People in
the Infancy of their Converfion, intricate
Queftions and Myfteries being more apt
to confound than to inftruft them: For
which reafon it is molt proper to teach
them the naked Truth of the Gofpel in
as few Points as poffibly can be done (the
"Ehe hhn-
bitants of
Manaar
fP ea k alfi
Port u.
guefe.
Perfecutm
of the
Chriftm
k Manaar.
Whxt Mt*
thod if
moft proper
fir the Con i*
verfton oj
thefe X*
thus.


yd.? . Jgz.
Th x I^x ax"id of Main ajvr. .
•




The Cate -
ckifm once
introdued
Mws*
mil not be
Alter'd.
Youth being very apt to retain here
what they have been told ) to catechife
frequently the young ones in the pretence
of their Parents, thereby to excite in
them a laudable Emulation to follow their
Footfteps. St. Paul himfelf leads us the
way, when he fays, that you mull firft
lay the Foundation of the Doftrine of
Chrift, before you can raife the Edifice of
the Church.
It is alfoabfolutely requifite, that the
fame Catechifm that has been at firft in-
troduc’d among the Native Ghriftians
Ihould be retain’d without any alteration,
which, as it would over-charge their Me-
mory, fo it would breed nothing but
Confufion inftead of Profit. It was for
this reafon, that when by order from the
, fupreme Magiftrates, the Reformation of
thefe Churches was committed to my
- care, I reduc’d the chief Points of the
Chriftian Doftrine into Queftions and
Anfwers, which were afterwards intro-
duc’d into the Churches of Jafnapatnam ,
Manaar , Gale, Columbo , Negumbo and
Mature , and receiv’d by the fucceeding
Minifters, by fpecial Command from the
General and Council of the Indies , and
the Governor of thefe places and were
afterwards confirm’d by the General
Aflembly of the Clergy of Ceylon held
at Columbo 1659. from the of Februa-
ry till the 3 d of. March,
They had had enough of the Mil-
chiefs that cnfued upon thefe Alterations,
introduced by new Minifters into the
Ifle of Formofa , who inftead of lollowing
the footfteps of Robert Junius and George
Candins (Minifters of the Gofpel there)
would introduce certain Novelties. I
found it alfo abfolutely neceflary to have
thefe Queflions and Anfwers put, not on-
ly in the Portuguefe but alfo in the Aiala~
bar Tongue, feveral Copies whereof were
fent to our Brethren at Columbo , Gale and
Negapatnam .
it is beyond ail difpute that the Lorr-
Dutch Tongue is not fo proper to propa-
gate our Religion here as the Malabar and
Portuguefe \ and that the
Minifters of the Gofpel fent into thofe
parts fhould rather apply themfelves tc
thefe Languages,than to impofe their owr
upon the new Converts, which alway<
meets with great difficulty, and can t b<
introduc’d without vaft Trouble anc
Charges: befides, that it is much mor<
reafonable one Man Ihould accommodate
himfelf to many, than thefe to one Mar
It is furthermore requifite, that as th
Minifters ought to pay all due Refpedf %
the Magiftrates, *fo thefe Ihould treat
them with all imaginaale Civility and
Honour, to acquire them the more Au-
thority among the Natives.
The Ifle of Manaar abounds in Filh to
filch a degree, that the Inhabitants here
(as well as at Negumho ) dry and fend
them into other parts in vaft quantities.
They have here a peculiar Filh (proper-
ly a Sea-Calf) of an amphibious nature}
the Females have Breafts and give Suck,
and the Flelh when well boil’d taftes not
unlike our Sturgeon, and might eafily be
miftaken for Veal.
But it is time we pafs the River of
Mctnaar towards Mantotte . This River
is not very deep*, nay on that fide where
you come to it over the Canal near the
Caftle, it is fo lhallow, that you may wade
through it with eafe, the Water fcarce
coming up to your Knees, tho it is fo
broad that it will take up half an hour
before you can pafs it. The Country on 1
the other fide is call’d the Country of the t
Wannias , under the Jurifdi&ion of our 1
Company *, their Churches make up to-
gether with thofe of Manaar no lefs than
14, and are under the Infpe&ion of
the Minifter who refides in the Ifle of
Manaar , and duly vifits them once a
month. This Country, tho it acknow-
ledges the Jurifdiftion of our Company,
pays the ufual Taxes, furnifhes them with
Elephants, &c. yet muft they be mildly
treated, it being their general Maxims
to difoblige neither Raja Singa nor the
Company.
In the year 1658. in the beginning of
March ( after the taking of Manaar , and
providing it with a good Garilon) we
march’d into that Country towards Jaf-
napatnam, Mantotie begins to the North
of the Salt River near the Village of
Peringaly , extending to the South along
the Sea-fhore, as far as the River Ari~
pouture l where Moufilipatte begins, near
the Village of Aripou, extending further
Southward to the Mountains of Condre-
male, which face the Bay oppolite to
the Ifle of Calpentyn , and crofs the
Country Mantotte , ftretching to Sete-
coulangi 6 Villages whereof belong to
Manaar , 6 to Jafnapatnam , and s t 0
Mantotte .
The reft of Mantotte and Moufilipatte
extends to the Eaft to the great Foreft
(the Boundary of the Country on that
fide) Mantotte it felf has 64 Villages,
Moufilipatte 24, and that part of Sete-
coulang 6, amounting in all to 84. All
thefe Countries are very fertile, efpecial-
Manaar
h Q ? F f^ nty
° y l3 '
A peculiar
kind of
The Conn-
tr) °/ the
Wanmas ’


Winter and
Summer
divers 0 ™
parts of
Ceylon,
Our March
from Ma-
nm to
Paffage c-
vertheKi -
ly in Rice, which produces a hundred-
q . but the worft is, the Ele-
phants do great Mifchief in thofe parts
that are not very populous.
It is very remarkable what John de
Lucena obferves in the Life of Xaverius ,
viz.. That on the Cape Comoryn , and all
along that Trad of the Eaft~ Indies , whilll
it is Summer and dry Seafon on the
Wett-fide of the Cape, the Winter and
rainy Seafon appears on the oppoiite
fide: the feme is to be obferv’d in the
Ifle of Ceylon . For whilft the Winter
continues about the Wamicvs
and Manaar , during the Months of O#o-
ber, November and December , it is Sum-
mer in all the other parts: On the con-
trary, in the Months of jipril and May ,
whilft: it is Summer about Jafnapatnam ,
which continues fix or feven Months, it
is Winter and rainy Weather at Co -
Gale , and the Countries there-
abouts. In the Low-Lands remote from
the mountainous part of Ceylon , there
blow only two Winds; but about Ca-
lumbo, Galcj and fome other places, you
have duly a Day and Night-Wind,as upon
the Coaft of Coromandel. From April till
Oftoher the Wind blows conftantly a
brisk Gale from the South with a clear
Air and bright Sun-fhine, as does the
North-wind from November till April.
In January , February and March it is ge-
nerally very calm, with intolerable Heat;
but a Dew falls in the Night, which be-
ing very unwholefom, the Inhabitants re-
turn with Sun-fet into their Houfes: and
were it not for thefe Dews and the
ftrong Winds which cool the Air, the
Heat would be unfupportable here.
As we march’d through the Country
of Wamias, we kept a mofl exaft Difci-
pline } and as we had no great plenty of
Provilions, we allow’d only a fmall mea-
fore Rice every day to each Soldier, ra-
ther than incommode the Inhabitants:
and finding our Forces to be extremely
tir’d by long Marches, and coafequently
uncapable of engaging with the lame
advantage with the Enemy in cafe they
fhould be attack’d, it was refolv’d inftead
of marching up to the head of the River
through the Tandy ground, to pafs the
River in Boats, tho it would require near
an hour and a half for every Boat to pafs
it.
The worft was, that upon our arrival
on the other fide of the River we ex-
pected the Enemy ready to give us a warm
Reception, becaufe we could not trans-
port above 200 or at raoft 300 Men at
once over the River, and that the Bank
was very muddy 5 for I remember that
fome years after two Elephants palling 0-
ver to the Jafnapatnam fide, one of them
ftuck in the Mud, and was kill’d by the
Inhabitants, nothing being more common
than for the Elephants to come crofs the
River to feed upon the Fruits of the
Palm-trees, to come at which they tram-
ple the Roots of the Trees fo long with
their Feet till they loofen, and afterwards
throw them down with their Bodies, and
fo eat the Fruit.
However the firft: Troop of our Forces
got over without any oppofition, and no
fooner had put themfelves in order of
Battel, but receiv’d Intelligence that the
Enemy were retreated from thence the
day before, in order to exp eft us at the
head Spring of the River.
After we had tranfported all our Forces
over the River, the Inhabitants treated
us very civilly, and furnifli’d us with plen-
ty of Provifions and Fruits. The firlt
place we came to was the chief Church
of the Province of Tenmarache , call’d
Chavagatzari , where after wc had rc-
frefti’d our felves with a good Dinner,
we march’d forward the feme day with
two Field-pieces to Nnvacouli (two hours
from Jafnapatnam ) where we encamp’d
that night.
The next day ( after Morning-Prayer )
we march’d on to the River, where we
expefted to meet with a vigorous Oppo-
fition ; but finding no Refinance, we ad-
vanced by degrees towards the Cattle
near the Church of Sundecouli , where in
the Evening we had a fmart Skirmilh
with the Portuguefes , of whom we kill’d
many upon the fpot, and polled our felves
that night round about the before-men-
tioned Church.
The next following day we advanc’d
to the City, which being without any
Fortifications, we broke through the Wall
and Houfes; and purfuing the Enemy
from Street to Street, under the favour
of our Cannon, which opened us the
way, we advanc’d towards the Caflle.
The gth of March we made our felves
Matters of the Jefuits Church and Col-
lege at the Weft-End of the City, and
the 18 th following of the Church and
Monaftery of the Dominicans on the Eaft-
fide: which made us give publick Thanks
to God Almighty for his Bleffings, the
Text being the jtb Verfe of the 20th
Plaint.
The Enemy being thus forced to quit
their Houfes, had no other way left than
We march
towards
Jatnapac-
nam.
A Skjmifo
with the
Porta-
guefes.
FheCitjf
J ainap f*
'


VoL 3. r - to*.
»^^IfAPATS-k^




The Taking f the City of lafnagatnam..
to retreat to the Caftle, which they did
in great diforder, many of the Inhabi-
tants of the Country thronging in among
the Portuguefes , fo that the Caftle wasfo
crowded with People that they had not
room enough to difpofe them to any ad-
vantage.
But the better to ftraiten the Cattle
of Jafnapatnam , and take away from the
Garifon all hopes of relief, it was thought
neceflary to attack a certain Outwork or
Redoubt, built upon a fmall Ifle in the
middle of the River, not far from its
Entrance, which it commands. , This
Fort was built by Anthonio Amiral de
MtYiez.es, and may juftly be call'd the
Key of Jafnapatnaw j and if fuch ano-
ther were made on the Point of Calmom,
no Veflel could approach the Caftle with-
out leave.
Accordingly we detatch’d a good Body
of Men to the Ifle of Ourature, in order
to attack the faid Fort, in which at that
time commanded one Hieronimo de Patva
with a good Garifon. The Ifle of Our a-
ture ( where formerly the Portuguefes had
a Cattle, the Ruins of which are yet to
be feen) lying at fomc diftancc from
this Water-Fort, we were forc’d to raift
our Batteries againft it upon the Iflc of
Caradiva : But finding that by rcafon of
the diftance betwixt us and them, and the
ftrength of the Wall, we could make no
Breach in it, it was refolv’d to affauic
the place by the help of certain Vcflels
provided with Breaft-works and Cannon.
But before we thought fit to venture at fo
defperate an Attempt, it was refolved
to fend the following Summons to the
Commander of the Fort,
44 IT having pleafed Almighty God to
w 1 blefs our Arms with fuch Succefs,
4C that there is no poffibility left for you
44 to refill us, or defend your felf againft
44 our Attacks: It is therefore that we
44 have thought fit to let you know
44 (asisufual upon fuch occasions) that
44 we are come to fummon the Fort of
44 Cays 7 in the Name of the States-
-44 General of the Vnited Provinces , ot the
44 Governors of the Eaft-lndia Compa-
-44 ny, and his Excellency John Maat~
44 zuyker Governor-General, and the
44 Council of the Indies 7 as by thefe Pre-
-44 fents I fummon the faid Fort, not
The Fort
Cays fm*
mw 'd to . 4
Suucn


Fort Ham 4 & He ee.
| x \ i or J C3.J5 |
w queftidning' but that after you have
** given diffident Proofs of your Cou-
** rage, you will now confider how un-
“ able you are to refift our Force.
“ Don’t therefore obftinately refift God’s
“ Will, and our Strength, fince we
offer you fuch Conditions as are ge-
nerally allow’d to brave Soldiers.
‘‘ But in cafe you will be obftinate in
1,4 making trial of our Strength, we pro-
teft before God and the Chriftian
u World, that we are innocent of all
“ t i he ratal Confequences and Mifcries
‘ rbat are likely to befal you i being
t refo , l ; ve^ d on °ur fide (if God grants
“ s Vidory) to treat you after the
fevereft manner, according to the
Cuftom of War, and not to hearken
* l° T , a Py Conditions. You have given
fufficient Proofs of your Courage to
“ admiration ; it is time therefore you
ffiould now ad with Prudence, and
" confult your fafety. We exped your
* pofitive Anfwer within three hours
by the Bearer of this, or whom
' your Excellency lhall think fit to
‘ * end to US, who lhall return fafely
opon our Word and Honour; Sub-
“ “ in s (as you think fit
either your Friend or Enemy ,
F “. ft ’tittsrta
Forces, both by Se;
and Land.
This Letter being tranflated into
Portuguese , was fent into the Fort i the
Commander whereof remembring the
old Vcrfe, °
Ftftula duke canity dum decipit
attceps , 1
fent the following Anfwer.
I* That the F°rt belonging to nobody,
but to the King of Portugal his Mailer,
~ « e v * a -} oblig’d to maintain the fame
for his Majefty till the laft drop of
his Blood. That he could do no
more than what pleafed God to per-
mit him, but neither he nor his Men
_ were to be terrified by Threats.
TheAnfm
thereupon




I rTTmMW Mi HI MUM _
Vol. jV.
f Regnttm
I tafkapatnamJ
f cum - |
L rj/svfjs X
\ A§k
%6-


This bold Anfwer made us think of
nothing elfe but Force, fo that we were
preparing every thing for an Aflault,
which would have coft us many a brave
Fellow, had not the want of Frelh Wa-
ter in the Fort oblig’d them to come to a
Capitulation. For having no other frelh
Water in the Fort, but what was prefer-
ved in a large Wooden Ciftern, part
whereof was taken away by the Ships,
that tranfported fome Women of Quality
with their Riches from Jafnapatnam to
Negapatnam, and the reft being fpoil’d
by our Bombs, they were glad to accept
fuch Articles as we were willing to give
them, which however were very honou-
rable, the Soldiers being allow’d to march
out with all the Marks of Honour, and
to be tranfported into Europe . The Com-
mander who had a Wife and Children,
was permitted to go to the Indian Coaft,
or that of Coromandel. The 28 th of A-
pril I preach’d the Thankfgiving-Sermon
for this Surrender, upon the Text out of
the 48 th Pfalm , mr. 8. Upon this Occafi-
on Captain Cornelius Rob the younger
(who died two Years after at Amfterdam)
Captain Peter Wafh (who was kill’d after-
wards before Cochin ) and Mr. Van der
Rheede r gave moll fignal Proofs of their
Courage. Since that time divers Vaults
for frefh Water have been made in this
Fort and in Manaar .
The F)rt
funendredc
CHAP. XLV.
Continuation of the Siege of Jafnapatnam. Sea-fight befire Goa, Divers En-
gagements betwixt the Dutch and Portuguefes. Jafnapatnam surrendred.
Some Portuguefes living among the Hollanders there plot againƒt them, are be-
trayed by a Topas. The Provinces and Churches of Jafnapatnam.
Strength of
the Cafile
of Jafna-
pacnam.
TWortu-
guefescn-
deavour in
vain to
fetch Pro-
vifim.
Topas
corm o-
w tom
*f! )a
f er *
BUT it is time to return to the Gallic
of Jafnapatnam , which being built
upon a Rock, and furrounded with a
ftrong triple Wall, feem’d to defy both
our Mines and Cannoh, efpecially lince
we were not fo well provided with Gun-
powder as we fhould have been \ where-
fore we thought it our fafeft way to ex-
pert that from Time, which Force was
not likely to procure, refolving in the
mean while to annoy the Enemy as much
as poiTibly we could with our Bombs,
which kill’d them abundance of Men.
The Enemy finding themfelves in a
little time reduc’d to great Straits, fent
out divers Boats to fetch fome frelh Pro-
vifionsfrom the Blands, but were always
forc’d to return without Succefs. Upon
this occafion Tsbrand Gotskem born at the
Hague , then Director of the Company in
Perfia , and Barent Clebont , then a Lieute-
nant, fince a Captain at Jafnapatnam , be-
haved themfelves bravely, being both
wounded, one near the Mouth, the other
in the Knee.
The Portuguefes in the mean while liv-
ing in hopes of Succours from Goa , fent
a Letter by a certain Topas from Trinque-
male, named Ignatio Feras y to their Ad-
miral } but this Negro coming over to
us with the Letter, we fent a good Body
of our beft Forces to prevent their Land-
ing, but we heard of none.
On the other hand we received the
joyful News, that Commodore Adrian
Roothaus , had March 23. in an Engage-
ment with the Portuguefes near Goa, burnt
one of their biggeft Galeons call’d the St.
Thomas , and had fo difabled the reft,
that they had but little hopes left of re-
lieving Jafnapatnam . For which Viftory
we gave publick Thanks to God the 2 6th
of May\6es % the Text was taken out of
Exod. 15. 9.
About the fame time I received a Let-
ter from the Reverend Theodoro Sas (lincc
Minifterat Malacca ) then in the Dutch
Fleet before Goa y intimating that the
10th of Jan . in the fame Year 1658. the
Portuguefes attack’d us with 10 Galeons
and fome Frigats; the Engagements laf-
ted till Night without any confiderable
Damage on our fide. That on the 17th
and 2 9th of the fame Month another Com-
bat enfued, without any great Lofs on
both fides. The 3 d of Febr, the Enemy
attack’d us once more, but were chafed
under their Caftle. In all thefe three En-
gagements the Dutch had no more than 9
Men killed and a few wounded. The
Letter was dated aboard the Phenix , crui-
fing before the Bar of Goa y Febr . n.
1658.
- In the mean while our Forces having
fo clofely furrounded the Caftle of Jafna-
patnam with, their Line»and Works, that
The Dutch
worft the
Portugue-
es at Sea °
Several
gagements


Jafnapac-
iiam fur-
)cndred.
The Condi-
tions.
They march
The Caflle
repaired.
they could not Ilir even with the leaft
Boat, without being taken or funk \ and
being now deftitute of all hopes of Re-
lief, they hung out the white Flag, June
21. on the South Eaft Bullion. The Ca-
pitulation was agreed upon the next fol-
lowing Day, under thefe Conditions:
That the Garifon Ihould march out with
their Arms, Colours flying, Drums beat-
ing, &c. and take along with them one
piece of Cannon, and to be tranfported
to Europe , the Head Officers Ihall be ci-
villy treated, and to be conduced to one
or other of their Forts, and the Ecclefi-
afticks to the Coaft of Coromandel. All
Gold, Silver and other Precious Movea-
bles, (hall be left to the Difpofal of the
Conquerors j the Inhabitants Ihall like-
wife be tranfported to what part of the
Indies they like bell, moft of whom went
afterwards by the way of Malacca to Ba~
tavia.
Accordingly John de Melo Leonardo d?
Oliveiro y Fiador de Fazendas, and Anthonio
Mendes d* Aranha march’d out of the Caf-
tle with the reft of the Head Officers,
Rodrigo Boralho delivering the Keys at the
fame time to Major John wander Laan \
but they were fo weak, that they did not
think fit to carry along with them their
piece of Cannon, tho they (pent two
whole days in marching out. A confide-
rable Number of Soldiers laid down
their Arms and Colours before the Stan-
dard of the Company, as did many of
the Inhabitants (among whom was Cafpar
Figeiro the Scourge of the Cingalefes)
with their Wives and Children, Negroes,
40 or 50 Ecclefiafticks, Francifcans , Je-
fuits7 and Dominicans , notwichftanding
that during the Siege (which lafted
3 1 Months) they had loft near 1600 Men
by the Sword and Mortality.
Immediately after Commodore Peter de
Bitter was fent to Batavia , by the way of
Malacca , to bring this joyful News to
Mr. John Adaatzuyker our General, and
the Council of the Indies. The 23d of
['fun, 1 preach’d a Thankfgiving-Sermon
out of Exod . 17. 15. which was continu-
ed every Year on the fame Day.
Whenweentred the Gallic, we found
it all battered to pieces by our Bombs - 7
and fuch was the ftench, that for fome-
time no body could abide there. We
took care to have the Springs clear’d,
the Dung removed, the Churches, Hou-
fesand Walls repair’d } 300 Coco-Trees
were alfo to be planted, and many Hou-
fes, that flood too near the Ditch of the
Caftle, to be broken down , and to encou-
rage the Inhabitants of the Country to
fettle here, the Cuftom upon Tobacco
was taken off, and Jacob Rhee our Head
Fador, a very underftanding Perfon,
conftituted pro tempore Commander in
Chief here.
Things being thus difpofed, our Forces
werefoon after tranfported totheCoaft
of Coromandel , in order to reduce the
City of Negapatnam: We left but a
(lender Garifon at compos’d
for the moft part of Portugucfes , who
had taken Service among us j befides
which there was a confiderable Number
of Prifonersin the Caftle.
Thefe in conjundtion with fome of the
Natives (not without the Confentof Ra-
ja Singa) fram’d a Plot againft us: Their -
Defign was, to murder all the Officersin
the Caftle, whilft I was preaching in Por-
tuguefe in the City } which done, cer-
tain Perfons of their Gang Ihould attack
and kill the Guard, and thus to make
themfelves Mailers of the Caftle.
It happen’d by accident that whilft I
was preaching, Don Manoel Andrado , one
of our Cingalese Captains and Modliar ,
coming with 18 of his Followers (who
generally attended him) to the Church,
remain’d in the Porch, where he could
hear as well as within the Church. He
was not a little furpriz’d (as he himfelf
told me afterwards) to fee the Portuguefes
remain /landing likewife without the
Church-door, and laying their Hands
upon their Swords } yet not being able to
guefs the true reafon thereof, this Trea-
chery was not difeover’d till fome days
after, when the whole Defign being laid
open to Mr. Jacob wan der Rhee , he took
care to double the Guards, to {hut the
Caftle-gates, and to fecure all fuch as had
a hand in the Plot. The next thing was
to fend for me by a Letter (I being then
vificing the Churches in the Country)
upon the receipt whereof I return’d im-
mediately to the Caftle, where with
great Aflonifhment I had an account giv-
en me of the whole Defign, how it had
been difeover’d, and the Traytors fecu-
red. For which Delivery I preach’d a
folemn Thankfgiving-Sermon in Low-
Dutch, the istho{ Septemb . 1658. out of
the Book of Eft her, Chap. 9. 20 24.
Not long after moft of the Traitors
having confefled their Crimes, fome were
condemn’d to be hang’d, others to be
beheaded, and fome to be laid upon the
Wheel. The three chief Heads of this
Confpiracy were, a certain Inhabitant of
Manaar , one Don Louys , and another
Portuguefe \ thefe three were laid upon the
Wheel or a Crofs, and after they had re-
A treachs-
r°w Mi*
D™
jafnapat-
nam.
. Y
] S e i'


Tke Tray*
jirme-
ceiv’d a Stroke with the Ax in the Neck
an cl on the Breaft, had their Entrails ta-
ken out, and the Heart laid upon the
Mouth.
chiawUt , not far from the great Pagode
(the Ruins whereof are to be feen to this
day) took the fame from the Emperor of
Ceylon, Hard by this Pagode is to be feen
a moft miraculous Spring, 24 Rods in
Circumference, cut out "'of an entire
Rock, or, as the Inhabitants will have it,
open’d by a Thunderbolt, of which more
hereafter, when we fhall treat of the
Hies of Jafnapatnam: we took it after it
had been 40 Years in the pofleflion of the
Portuguefes,
The Portu-
guefes con -
J a f-
na F atnam ‘
A .
i
A certain Jefuit nam’d a Na-
tive of Malacca , was beheaded. This
unfortunate Perfon being prevented by
Sicknefs from going along with the reft
of the Portuguefe Clergymen, had not
been concern’d in this treacherous De-
fign, much lefs given his Confent to it.
Butfomeof the Tray tors having given
notice thereof to him by Letters, wherein
they felled him the Father of their Souls \
he was unwilling to betray his Country-
men, for which, he paid now with his
Head: eleven more were hanged, and
afterwards expofed in the open Country
on Trees*, but the Heads of the Ringlea-
ders were fix’d upon Poles in the Mar-
ket-place.
The Gaftle of Jafnapatnam is of a
Quadrangular Figure, and ftrongly forti-
fied with very high and thick Walls \
it is bigger in Circuit than the Caftle of
Batavia , being the Capital City of the
whole Kingdom. Philippo de Olivero , af-
ter having defeated the Cingalefcs near A~
Jafnapatnam is divided into four Pro-
vinces, which are very populous } its
whole Length is about 6 German Leagues,
and its Breadth 3, being well inhabited
and adorned with Villages and Churches.
The whole Number of the Villages a-
mounts to 159, of their own Churches
34, betides the Dutch and Partuguefe Chur-
ches. Jafnapatnam is on the Northfide
wafh’d by the Gulph of Bengal? , and bor-
ders to the South of a River, which
makes it a kind of an Bland, and exone-
rates it felf in two different Channels
into the Sea.
B} . Q r
jafnapat-
nam.
The Provinces of Jafnapatnam are
Tenmdrache , Waddemarache
Provinces
of Jafna-
patnam.


and PatchiarapaUe. The Province of Bel-
ligamme has 14 Churches,the chief where-
of is THipole a large Strufture, with a dou-
ble row of Pillars } the Houfe thereunto
belonging is the Work of the Jefuits,
beautifyed with a pleafant Garden, hand-
fome Court and moft delicious Vineyards,
affording moft forts of Indian Fruits, and
water’d with feveral Springs.
introduced and taught here by me. The
nth of Jan . 166 1. the holy Sacrament
was the firft time adminiftred to 12
Communicants of the Natives. The
19 th of April in the fame Year their Num-
ber encreafed to 15, and before my De-
parture to 30. In the Year 1665, we
had above 1000 Schoolboys, among whom
were 480 who could anfwer all the Quef-
tions relating to the chief Points of our
Religion. I have fometimes had no lefs
than 2000 Auditors in this Church.
The Sacra.'
went firfl
admini-
fired to the
Indians
here ,
The Church
Telipole.
In Auguft 1658, the Reform’d Religi-
on was the firft time (as in all other
Churches of Jafnapatnam and Manaar)
A certain Indian named Michael Fonfe*
ca , ask’d me once a very odd Queftion,
viz.. When John baptiz.ed Chrifi , whether
he baptised him in the Name of God the
Father , the Son and the Holy Ghoft and be-
ing anfwer’d Tes, he reply'd that thus
Jefus Chrifi was baptiz’d in his own Name,
which he could not well comprehend. I
told him, there was not the leaft Abfur-
dity in the matter, fince Jefus Chrifi was
not baptized upon his own account, or as
God alone, nor as a bare Man, but as
being endowed both with the Divine and
Human Nature. That the Son of God
could not be baptized otherwife but in
the Name of God \ and that under the
Word God , was not only comprehen-
ded the Father , but alfo the Son and Holy
Ghoft 1 that Jefus Chrifi was the fame in
offence with the Father and the Holy
Ghoft > and that there were no degrees in
the Deityj for tho the Father was the firft,
yet were the Son as well and truly God
as the Father and Holy Ghofi : wherewith
he was well fatisfy’d. For the Indians be-
ing generally very ingenious, they will
ask many acute Queftions, as concerning
the Creation and End of the World , the Im-
mortality of the Soulj Helly and fuch
like.
Moft of the Churches here have cer-
tain Scaffolds or Theaters near them, ef-
Theaters
near the
Churches,




Mallaeam
Mayletb..


Acliia\relli.
Oudewil .




fkChurch
Mallagam.
Tkckrch
Ma) cm.
tkuk A-
ehiavelli.
pecially that of Telipole , where the Je-
fuits ufed to reprefent certain Hiflories of
the Bible to the People on Holidays.
About half an Hour thence ftandsthe
Church Mallagam of good Brickwork,
with an adjacent Houfe built upon two
Arches, and a handfom pair of Stairs
leading to the top of it. The Church was
begun by the Poftuguefes , but finifh’d by
the Dutch . It has 200 School-boys, but
not above 500 Auditors.
The Church Mayletti is about 5 Quar-
ters of an Hour from Tdipole. Here are
750 Schoolboys, all taught by one Maf-
ter, who has more work than the two at
Telipole : the Auditors of this Church a-
mount to 1500 or 1600. The Church is
a large Structure of Stone ; the Houfe
belonging to it is lofty, with a Balcony
on the top of it, affording a very fine
Propped into the main Sea, fo that it
may well deferve the Name of Belle
videre, The Church is not above half a
Mile from the Sea-fide. They abound
here in Fifh, fuch as Crabs, Soles, Plaice,
&c. as likewife in Hares and Partridges.
The Church Achiavelli lies about two
Hours from Telipole , it is a large and lof-
ty Strudure built of Stone, capable of
containing 2000 Perfons } it was not fi-
nifli’d till in our time. The Village lies
extremely pleafant among the Woods, j
ftor’d with vaft Quantities of Turtle-
Doves, which cue at certain Hours three
times a day, and ferve the Inhabitants
inftead of a Clock, to know the time of
the Day. They have alfo Plenty of Hares,
Stags and Wild-Boars, but are alfb an-
noyed by the Serpents.
As divers old Brahmans live in this
Place, fo were the Inhabitants not fo
forward in embracing the Chriftjan Re-
ligion \ the antient Brahman , named Phi-
lippOy does not want the Knowlcdg of
the Fundamentals of our Religion, but
is more inclin’d to the Hiftorical, than
the Dodrinal part. Among others there
lived here a certain Brahmany a Learned
Perfon, with whom I ufed to have fre-
quent Gonverfation, whilft I liv’d at A~
chiavelli y he was baptized at laft in the
4 6th Year of his Age, and afterwards
writ the Hiftory of the Life and Pa/fton oj
our Saviour , in a lofty Poetical Stile, in
the Latin Malabary call’d Hanfcreety which
is quite different from the common Mala-
Fleajant-
nefs of the
Village.
Batecottg
801
A Defer if tion of CEYLON.
Cbap-XLV.


bar Ghara&ers. The School here has a-
bout 4 0r.506 Boys, and the Church 7,
8 or 900 Auditors.
600 Boys, who in my time had madefuch
confiderable Progrefs, that they could re-
fute the Popifh Errors concerning Purga-
tory, the Mafs, Indulgences, Auricular
Confeflion, &c. Mr. Andrew the School-
mafter and his IKher, being Perfons ve-
ry diligent in their Stations. The Inha-
bitants are very devout here, and at
Sermon-time feldoni lefs than 12 or 1300
come to Church.
The Church
Ondewil.
About an Hour from Telipole ftands the
Church Ondewil , in a great Plain, with
an adjacent large Stone-houfe, formerly
the Habitation of a Franciscan Fryar.
The Soil is very lufeious here and fertile
in Rice, Naceny , and other Eatables. The
Schoolboys amount to 600, and the Audi-
tors to 900 or 1000.
The Church Changane is not above a
good Mile from Paneteripou , lying with
this and batecotte in at riangle, almoft
at an equal diftance from one another.
Both the Church and adjacent Houfe are
built of Stone, as is alfo Paneteripou :
They are very conveniently built with a
Court before, furrounded by a Brick
Wall * behind is an Orchard of Cocoe and
Portuguefe Fig-Trees, befides Potatoes ,
Bananaes , &c. The School is frequented
by 700 Boys, who are carefully inftruc-
ted by their Schoolmafter nam’d Ambrofio.
The Inhabitants flock to Church with fo
much Zeal, that there is fcarcc room to
contain them all.
The Church
Changane.
theCburch
Bacecocte,
Two hours diftant from theCaftleis
the Church Batecotte , with a lofty adja-
cent Houfe, flat on the top, and adorn’d
with a pleafant Garden, well ftor’d with
Treesthe Fields round about it are ex-
tremely fruitful. It is feated near the
Salt River , and abounds in Fifti and all
manner of other Provifions. Of School-
boys they have here about 8 or 900, and
of Auditors in the Church near 2000.
The Church
Paneceri-
pou.
About half an hour from Batecotte is
the Church Paneteripou , a neat and mag-
nificent Edifice of Stone, with a plea-
fant Houfe near it built upon Arches,
with two fpacious Rooms and a Gallery,
fine Gardens, and a delicious Fifhpond or
Ciftern. The School is frequented by
Two hours from Jafnapatnam, and
one from Changanefi. ands the Church Ma -
TheChmh
Manipay.
802
A Defcri'ption of CEYLON.




P ane ter i poti f
- MESart^tne


J'oL p. 802,. IsT'l li .
' ** ■i"_ ** * *~ t* y
2 8.




Th(Church
Vanar-
pone.
Tie Church
Nalour.
nip ay. About 560 Children are educa-
ted in this School. It is fcarce to be
imagined, that at fo fmall a diftancc
there fiiould be fo great a difference be-
twixt the People, the Inhabitants here
being a malicious Generation, fuperftiti-
ous, and ftill much inclin’d to Paganifm.
The Church is big enough to contain
2oco Souls, but feldom above 7or Bco
come to hear the Sermons. The Houfe
is built only of Clay, and cover’d with
Palm-tree-Leaves. Juft before the
Church is a fine Pond or Ciftern with
trefii Water, near which flood formerly
one of their Pagodes . This Place is in-
habited by feveral of the Family of Ma~
dapoli , who were concern’d in the Plot
(lately mention’d) with Don Louys.
The Church Fanarpone ftands juft un-
der the Caftle of Jafnapatnam , moft in-
habited by Wafhers \ Fanar fignifying as
much as a Waflier in the Malabar. It is
not very big, nor has a Houfe belonging
to it. The Schoolboys amount to 200,
and the Auditors in the Church to about
5 or 600 Souls.
Juft by Kanarpone is the Church Na-
lour, built only of Clay, and flenderly
cover d. Here alfo flood formerly a
Pagode. The School is frequented by a-
bout 590 Children, who are not fo well
verfed in the Points of the Chriftian Re-
ligion as mofl of the reft, the People here
retaining ftill a ftrong Inclination to Pa-
ganifm, efpecially fince fome Years ago
about 100 Printers of Callicoes were
tranfplanted hither from the Coaft of
Coromandel , to the no fmall Prejudice of
the Chriftian Religion, tho the Company
were no great Gainers by it •, fince it is
evident, that for want of good Water at
Jafnapatnam , the fame can’t be brought
to their true PerfcSion, arid therefore
are much better bought and tranfported
from the Coaft of Coromandel .
This is certain, that this Generation is
very mifehievous to the Chriftians here, it
being frequent to fee them appear in
publick painted with Cinza or Allies (ac-
counted holy among them) and to carry
their Beads } belidcs that the Moors have
their publick Schools allow’d them of late
Years. I muft confefs that whilft Mr*
jinthony Pavilioen (at the time of my be-
ing there) was Governor of Jafnapat-
nam> he did all in him lay to alUft me (at
I 1


my requeft ) in flopping the Progrefs of
t j ie p a g an Superftitions, and was not well
pleated to fee the Callico Printers in-
troduc’d here, it being (not without
reafon ) to be fear’d that in time they
may (by promifcuous Marriages) in-
create to fuch a number as may endanger
both the Church and State, efpccially if
they are allowed the burning of their
Dead, and fome other Pagan Ceremo-
nies they much infift upon.
It is further to be fear’d, that in time
there may be a promifcuous Copulation
betwixt the Chriftians and Pagans, which
muft needs produce direful Effe&s in the
Church. It may be objeded, that fevere
Punifhments will put a flop to that Evil
( fome having already been punilh’d with
Death upon that account) but this does
not altogether remove the Danger ; be-
fides, that it ought to be confider’d whe-
ther fuch a Severity be confonant to the
Word of God or not.
v'm, or Chair-men and Water-Carriers.
The Church is a neat Strudure, but the
Inhabitants an idle and bate Generation.
About 450 Children belong to the School*
but feldom frequent it, becaufe they ge-
nerally go abroad a fifhing with their
Parents. Seldom above 400 come to
Church, whereas there are about 1500
Inhabitants. It is a pleafant place, deli-
cioufly feated among Trees of a confide-
table bignefs. Thus far we have fpokcn
of the Province Belligamme , and its
Churches, unto which belong likewife
Copay and Pontour y containing about 800
School-boys, and 2000 Souls. The Chil-
dren in thefe Schools arc diftinguifh’d
into feveral Forms, according to their
refpedive degrees of Proficiency ; fo that
thote who have learn’d (for inftance)
the Creed y and Our Father , teach thote
that fcarce know to fay Our Father, A-
mong thefe Boys, they have fome they
call Merinhos y who take an account of
fuch as are abfent, and return them to
the Mafter, or the Head Merinho.
Thechmh
couH'
The laft Church not far from the City,
* s Sundecouli , belonging to the Ci-
CHAP. XLVI.
The ƒecond, third and fourth Provinces , with their reƒpective Churches, belong-
ing to Jafnapatnam. The Isles of Jafnapatnam. Vaƒt number of Chriƒtians.
The Author's Zeal in promoting the Chriftian Religion.
Thcchurch
Navacouli.
The Church
of Chava-
gaezery.
The church
Cathay.
TH E fecond Province of Jafnapatnam
is Tenmarache , which contains five
Churches, with the Villages thereunto
belonging. The firll is the Church Na~
vacoult , feated in a pleafant Plain abound-
ing in Cattel and Fruit \ as the Woods
afford great flore of Apes and Monkys,
and all forts of Venifon and Wild Fowl.
Both the Church and adjacent Houfe
are only of Clay, and cover’d with Palm-
leaves. The School is frequented by
400 Children, and the Church by 7 or
Soo Auditors.
An hour from Navacouli Hands the
Church of Chavagatz,ery y the biggefl of
the whole Province, and the adjacent
Houfe, very flrong and well-built, having
a pleafant Profpeft towards the Sea, with
fine Gardens, well ftor’d with all forts
of Indian Fruits. They abound in Fifh,
for they live upon Husbandry and Fifh-
ing. The School is frequented by 1000
Children, who are inftrudted by two
Mailers and an Ufher, and the Church
by betwixt 2 and 3000 Souls.
The Church Cathay is an hour from
Chavagatz*ery , through fandy and diffi-
cult Ways, but full of Ponds ftor’d with
Wild-ducks; befides which they abound
in Snipes, Herns, Indian Ravens, and all
forts of fmall Birds. The Church and
Houte are only of Clay, and cover’d
with Leaves, like that of Navacouli.
The School has 550 Children, and the
Church 11 or 1200 Auditors.
Betwixt Cathay and the Church Wa-
rami arc fandy and difficult Ways. The
Church ftands in the rnidft of a fmall
Wood of Areek y Coco y Painty Panamas ,
Mango'Sy Cajou and Guiavo-Tvees. This
place affords, befides the ordinary Melons,
the raoft delicious Water-Melons in the
Indies. The Church is but flendcrly
built, and encloted with a Wall of Earth,
as is likewife the Hoqfc; yet has it di-
vers fpacious Apartments, and a hand-
fome Entrance. The School has about
800 Children, and the Church 2500 Au-
ditors.
The laft Church of Tenmarache is that
of lllondi Matual , unto which belongs the
Village of Nagar Kojel , famous for a
large Pagode that flood there formerly.
The Church is only of Clay, but the
TheChwch
waranni.
The Church
IJlondi
Macual.




Kopay
TNavacouli


Poutour
C liava eat 2 e r i
zg.




Bfe^anni


The Pro-
vince
Wadde-
marache.
The Church
Catavelli.
adjacent Houfe of Stone, unto which you
afcend by Heps *, it has three large Apart-
ments, a neat Entrance, and a fair Pro-
fpeft. Hereabouts are great numbers of
Peacocks, and fometimes they fee fome
Elephants in this Tra£t of Land. The
Company alfo maintains here fome tame
Elephants, as in divers other places, they
being feparated at fome dillance for the
better conveniency of their Fodder. Un-
to this School belong about 650 Chil-
dren, and to the Church 1100 or 1200
Auditors.
The third Province is call’d Wadde-
mavache, having only three Churches.
It affords fuch plenty of Failure, of Cows,
Sheep, Goats, Fowl, Pigeons, and Par-
tridges, that you may buy a Sheep for
Bd. or 10 d. 60 Eggs for 3 d. and four
good Pullets for a Fanam , or sd.
The firft Church is call’d CataveUi,
the Church and adjacent Houfe are both
of Brick, the lall having a Summer-houfc
on the top of it, from whence you have
a delightful Profpeft into the Plain. The
School has 600 Children, and the Church
ioco or 1200 Auditors.
The fecond Church is Vreputti 7 the
Village is inhabited by a fet of Vaga-
bonds and Thieves, of the Family of
the Nallocvs , not much inclin’d to Reli-
gion. The School is frequented by 590
Children, and the Church by 8 or 900
Auditors lefs or more. The Children
are taught here to make their Letters in
the Sand.
The Church Paretiture is the finell and
largcft of this Province, call’d by the
tuguefes, Punta das or the
Point. Paretiture lignifies in the Malabar
Tongue as much as Cottons Harbour, from
the great quantity of Cotton that grows
thereabouts on fmall Trees. Not long ago,
whilft we were engag’d in War with
the Engli(h, a Fort was order’d to be ereft-
ed here. During the War with Portugal,
the Dutch carried off from hence one of
their Priefts, and plunder’d Manaar at
the fame time. Hereabouts alfo happen’d
a fmart Engagement betwixt the Portu-
guefes and us, wherein we were hard put
to it, and loft among others Capt. John
Hooghfaten. During the Siege of Jafna-
patnam the Portuguefes expected the
landing of their Succours in this place.
The Road is fo good here, that Ships
rbtchmk
Paretitl,tei
Pedros
A fimn
skimiji,
be . tK,xt
rj£° f " u ‘
and Dutch
thk
P laci b
A Strs*? uti.U'r thcJJuuic* ?y!u’rof Any Jy. syisnth/ ‘icai Sl t nuns




lliqn<ili Matual


Paeretftwee




A good
Road,
Great num-
ber of Chri-
Ilians at
hrecicurc.
may nde fare at Anchor for 7 or 8
Months, but they muft take care to de-
part before the Northern ATouffbn, which
renders this Shore very dangerous: So
foon as any Ships are difcoverM at Sea.
a Flag is put out on a long Pole for their
Direction. The Church was much de-
t3/l u j )ut as een of late,
jult before the Church Hands a tall Ta-
mann Tree, which affording a very
agreeable Shadow in the heat of the day
the People are often inftruded by the
Minifter to the number of 3000. The
Schoo! has about iooo Children.
.•c ipj „ and furthermoft Province
is call d patch,arapalle , which has four
Churches,, and as many Schools. This
Province is very Tandy and unwholefom.
wants good Water, and is much infefted
by the Elephants, by reafon of the valfc
quantity of wild Palm-Trees that grow
here, and afford Food to the poorer fort
of Inhabitants, thb the Elephants throw
down lome hundreds every year, being
i
2 Pro /
Patchiara-
palic uh
rioiefm.
very greedy after the Fruit when it comes
t 0 Maturity. At a certain feafon of the
year the children are fete’d here with a
cer tain Swelling in the Belly and Groin,
which fweeps away a good number of
them. They are alio afflifted with cer-
tain Fevers (like thole of Manaar ) which
regulate their Fits according to the
Moon, and kill in a little time. The
Itch and Small-pox are alfo very common
here : The Inhabitants being very poor,
and feeding molt generally upon un-
wholefom Diet, fuch as dry’d Filh, Pou-
wtes, Kdenges, and a little FLice, As
this Province borders upon Raja Singa's
Country, fo they are fubjeft to the Incur-
t / •
Cons of the Cingalefes i which is the rea-
fon that the Houfe belonging to the
Churph of Poelepolay ( the firff: in this
Province) is furrounded with a high
Wall with Port-holes in the nature of
a Redoubt. The School has about 300
Children, and the Church 500 Auditors.
Here are certain Women who have a
way to play upon Earthern Veflels or
Mugs ( call’d Callangsf) by blowing into
them as into a Trumpet. This Pro-
vince affords a kind of Wood call’d
Jagers-lVood (or Humers*wood ) which
for its goodnefs ,is tranfported to the
coaft of Coromandel,
The Church
Poelcpo*.
lay*
807
Chap. XL VI. A Defcrip ion of CEYL O NT


The chunb
Mogom-
male.
,
Tamtam-”
me .
The church
Mulipatto*
ourature
the firjl
{ft °f
lam iPat
Two good hours from Poekpolay Hands
the Church of Mogommale in a Wood,
with an adjacent Houfe, both well built
the School has about 450 Children, and
the Church soo Auditors.
The Church Tambammc is the largeft
and beft feated in the whole Province.
The School has 500 Children, and the
Church 900 Auditors.
Mutipatto is the laffc Church, about a
day’s Journy from Jajmpatnam , near the
Head of the River call’d Paffo Seco , or
the Dry PaJJdge \ where we have a Pa-
guarded by foine Soldiers. The
Church-Houfe is provided with Port-
holes for its Defence, but the Church is
mean and finall. The School has no more
than 2i 5 Children, and the Church fcarce
350 Auditors.
Thus far of and its Pro-
vinces, Churches and Schools. We will
now pals over into the adjacent Ifles,
which are fix in number.
The fkft of thefe files is Ourature ,
which has three Churches, viz, Aleputti ,
Welane and 5. John , or Ourature , all which
ave to g e f' ier a hout 800 School-boys,
and 2600 Auditors. This file has been
fubjeft to great Floods, both before and
in the time of the Portuguefes , to fuch a
degree that the People were forced to
fave themfelves on the tops of the Trees.
Of this we faw an Inftance in the year
1658. when a moft furious Tempeft, ac-
companied by a Hurrican, raifed the Wa-
ters beyond the Shore to fuch a height,
that it broke into the Water-Gate of
the Caftle, throwing down every thing
that Hood in the way ; the Tiles were all
blown from the Houfes, the Trees tore
up by the Roots, and unfpeakable damage
done both to Men and Cattle. After
the fury of the Tempeft was fomewhat
allay’d, feveral Fiflies were taken in the
Church-porch, which had been carried
along with the Water over the Cortin.
This Ifle has plenty of Fifh and Stags:
It produces alfo a certain fmall Root,
call’d Saye, us’d by the Dyers to dye Red 1
Cloths. They make alfo very good But-
ter here, and have ftore of Larks and
fome Sea-gulls.
The Ifle of Ourature and Caradiva are
feparated by the River, in the midll c
whereof lies the Fort Cays (or Hams- <
heel) of which we have fpoken before.
An injlmct
of aFhdi
The Fn-
dußs «/
this ft>
The ft
of Can-
diva.






JSoL. ?. p. 3oS.
3^'




From this Ifle the Elephants are embark’d
by means of a Bridg, and tranfported to
Coromandel and Bengale. This Ifle is
fuppofed to produce the beft Saye in the
Indies . It has a well built Church and
Houfe belonging to it of Stone the
Church was finifh’d in my time, as was
that of Ourature , which was fet on fire
by the Portuguefes. The School is fre-
quented by 490 Children, and the Church
by 1000 or 1100 Perfons.
The School has 200 Children, and the
Church 800 Auditors.
The Ifle Analativa is fmall, but pro-
duces vaft plenty of Oifters. The In-
habitants of both Sexes amount to about
800, and 206 Children. It has a little
Church and convenient Houfe near it.
It was formerly call’d Donna Cldra y from
a certain Lady that liv’d there, and was
Miftrefs of it in the time of the Portu-
guefes. They ftill fhew there a Chair
wherein (he ufed to fit, which is big e-
nough to hold conveniently two Perfons
at once.
Analativa s
or D.Clara
Somewhat further into the Sea to the
right as you fail to the Ifle Pongardiva ,
lies a little I hand call’d Jlha Deferta , i. e.
the Defert Ifland ,by the Portuguefes. This
Ifle as well as that of Carativa , abounds
in Serpents, and furnifhes oiir Ships with
Fuel.
Tf:e Defert
The Ifland Nainativa has gbt its Name
from the great number of Jackals that
are found there j of which more anon.
It is very fmall, arid inhabited by Brah-
mans turn’d Chriftians, who lead very
fober Lives. The School has 70 Chil-
dren, and the Church 300 Auditors.
The Church is very fraall, yet has an ad-
jacent Houfe fit to lodg Strangers in.
Nainativa;
tongardi-
va *
Pongardiva is a large Ifle, but the
Ground being rocky, produces but little
for the fuftenance of Mankind, except
Stags, Hares and Peacocks in great quan-
tities they abound alfo in Fifh, and
efpecially in large Oifters, which are
better to ftew than to be eaten raw.
The Men are generally much taller here
than in any other part of the Indies.
Nindundiva , or the Long Ifle , from its
length,which is about fix Leagues, is call’d
Jlha das Vac i. e. the Cow Ifland , by
the Portuguefes , becaufe abundance of
Nindundi-
va, or liha
das Vacas«
809
Chap.XLVX
A Dejcription of CEYLON.


Mounds in
CatteL
Great Mor-
tality a-
ritong them.
A remark-
able
Spring,
Gated are tranfported thither from Tow-
day, which makes Cattel fo cheap there
that you may buy a good Cow for four
Dutch Shillings (or half a Rixdollar)
but their Oxen and Cows are not near fo
big as thofe on the Continent of Jafna-
patnam. Oftentimes a Mortality happens
among the Cattel, becaufe the Ground
being hot and dry, produces divers veno-
mous Herbs, which they feed upon. The
Inhabitants are very poor, and live upon
miferable Diet: I remember that being
once eight days in this Ifle, I and my
Company conld fcarce get Provifions for
our Suftenance. The Ifle is of difficult
accefs, becaufe the Shore is rocky, and
has no Bays, but only a few narrow
Creeks, where there is no coming in ex-
cept in very calm Weather , otherwife
the Sea beats with fuch violence againft
the Rocks, that thefe is no coming near
them, tho there be fometimes five or fix
fathom Water. For which reafon there
is no coming at it except in the calm
Sea Tons, which happen twice a year at the
change of the Mouffons : For the South-
wind forces you upon the Rocks, and
with the North-wind the Shore is too
lhallow to approach it. The Portuguefes
had formerly a Fort here, the Ruins
whereof are to be feen to this day.
They alfo brought fome Horfes into this
Ifle, which multiplying in time produc’d
a certain kind of Horfes that are very
fmall, but hardy and very fit to travel
on ftony and rocky grounds: They live
in the Wildernefs, and are taken by
forcing them unto the Bank of a River
or Pond, where they catch them in Snares
or Ropes. This Ifle produces alfo a
certain kind of Goats, out of which they
take Bezoar Stones, but they are none
Df the belt. It has about 900 Inhabi-
tants, and 170 Children,
It is very remarkable that there is no
frefh Water in all this Ifle, except what
is found in one place among the Rocks,
being above half a mile in Circuit. If
we may credit the Inhabitants, thefe
Rocks were fplit by a Thunderbolt,
which occafion’d thefe Springs, lome
whereof have not above half a foot,
others a foot deep Water: The entire
Rocks arifmg betwixt thefe Springs have
often caft Men and Beafts down the Pre-
cipices.
There are fome other Iflands near this
Shore, but being very fmall and not in-
habited (as the Paktiva , and the two
Brothers, lince call’d Hoorn and Enchuy-
fen) are not worth bur particular Obfer-
vatioa.
In the year 1663. I and my Gollegue
Mr. John a Breyl fent the following ac-
count to Mr. Maatzuyker, General of the
Indies for our Company, viz. That in
Jafnapatnam were at that time 1501 2,
Children under the Tuition of the re-
fpedive School-matters there, being all
Natives \ not reckoning thofe of Mamar
and the Country of the JVannias, where
in my Vifitation 1665. in March and
I found in thofe of Poenery , Polve-
raincatti 7 Peringale , Mantotte , Nanatam ,
and udripou, all Churches belonging to
the Wamicus , and in the Churches of
Manaar , viz, Totavalli 1 Karjel , Irkelam-
patti, Tcllemanaar , Peixale , the Fifhers and
City Churches, 1315 Children of the Na-
tives. Such as were come to Age of ma-
turity amounted in the Wannuvs to 4533,
and in the Ifle of Manaar to 3520, not
including 214 Slaves lately converted,
who had already learn’d certain forms of
Prayers. According to the Church-
Regifters (call’d here Patolcvs ) in the
year 1663. there were of Chriftian Men
and Women in the Kingdom of Jafna-
patnam 62*58, not including the Slaves,
whereof there were 2587. The number
of the baptiz’d Children from 1658, till
1 66 1, viz. in three years and a half, in.
the Churches of Jafnapatnam amounted
to 5799 Children, and 3 6 that were come
to Age of Maturity. During that time
were married 2158 Couples, not reckon-
ing thofe baptiz’d and married in the
Low-Dutch and Portuguefe Churches. At
the time of ray departure the number of
the Children in the Schools was rifen to
18000, and that of the baptized Chil-
dren in 1663 to 12387. From the year
1658, till 1661. the whole burden of
vifiting all the before-mention’d Churches
lay upon my Shoulders, till Mr. Breyl
was join’d with me, who dying in his
return to Holland ( his Corps being ih-
ter’d at the Cape of Good Hope') 1665.
Mr. Bartholomew Heyne fucceeded in his
place.
In the Churches of Jafnapatnam the
Ten Commandments written in large
Malabar Charafters, are hung up on a
Table, on both fidcs whereof are the
Our Father , and the Creed. Every Sun-
day the People come to Church about ■
Ten a Clock, and after they have fung a
Pfalm, the School-matter reads a Sermon
in the Malabar Language, for which pur-
pofe a certain number of Sermons arc
allotted to each Church, to be read in the
abfence of the Minifter. This done,
they conclude with finging another
Pfalm.
Chrifians
in the
Wannias
and Ma-
naar.
Humber f
Chrijhatis
in Jafna-
patnanu
How the
Religions
Worfl.ip if
per for nets


p. Sw.
(^atcJiuxn 'oj vtv i/^^i^iaiTta'rri. .
hz.




Jbe Dutch
Minifters
in the In-
dies under-
go more
Difficulties
than the
Romanifts.
But the greateft Trouble that belongs
to a Minifter in thefe parts, is the In-
ftrudion to be given both to young and
old by way of mouth, which is beft done
by way of Queftion and Anfwcr, which
makes the deepeft Imprettion into the
Minds of thefe tender Chriftians. Be-
fides, as the Malabar Tongue is fo diffi-
cult to attain to, that none of our Mini-
fters dare pretend to the Pcrfedion of
it y fo on the other hand, they may learn
without much trouble, as much as is requi-
fite for the inftruding them in the main
Points of our Religion. Add to this,
that our Minifters undergo much more
Fatigue in their Stations than the Romi/h
Ecclefiafticks, who preach very feldom \
and each Church having its peculiar At-
tendant, they are not oblig’d to travel
from place to place as we do. Befides,
that they bring the Portuguese Language
commonly along with them, which ours
are forc’d to learn upon the fpot, not
without great difficulty, not to mention
feveral other Difadvantages on our fide,
fufficient to convince thofe who extol the
Merits of the Romi/h Clergy upon that
fcore, and vilify ours: thefe I would have
confider, that at this time there are no
more than two or three Minifters belong-
ing to all thefe Churches, which had no
iefs than forty in the time of the Portu-
guefes y and we have three Sermons every
Sunday, and one in the Week \ befides
the conftant Vifitations of the Churches
in the Country.
Before my departure, I took care to
have the next following Pieces tranttated
(the fame being revis'd by me before)
out of the Portuguefe into the Malahary
by Francis de Fonfecciy a Member of the
Reform’d Churches.
44 The Gofpel of St. Matthew. The
41 Letter Catechifra. Inftrudions for
tc Communicants. Queftions and An-
-44 fwers out of the New Teftament,
44 Short Queftions and Anfwers concern-
-44 ing the chief Matters contain’d in the
44 Old Teftament. ( This was not quite
perfected at the time of ray departure. )
44 Confolations for the Sick. Formulary
44 of Baptifm, both for Children and o-
-44 thers. Morning and Evening Prayers,
14 as alfo Devotions to be ufed both before
44 and after Sermons, and before and after
44 Meals. Prayers for Rain and a fruitful
44 Seafon. Thankfgivings on account of
44 Vidories obtain’d againft our Enemies.
44 Prayers to be us’d in the Army before an
44 Engagement. Prayers for Criminals
44 before Execution. Formulary and Pray-
-44 ers of Marriage. Some Pfalras of
44 David fet in Metre after the Malabar C
tfc falhion. Some Sermons, m. upon the
44 Nativity of Chrift, upon his Paflion, and
44 Death, Rcfurredion and Afcenfion;
44 upon the fending of the Holy Ghoft,
44 the Gircomcifion of our Saviour, the
tc Hiftoryof the Wife Men of theEaft,
44 the Refurredion and Day of laft Judg-
-44 raent \ upon Charity due from one
44 Chriftian to another, out of Luke 10.
44 Who is our Neighbour ? the rejoydng
4t of the Angels in Heaven for the Con-
-44 verfion of a Sinner, upon the Queftion
44 of the Pharifccs, Mat. 12. v. 38. and
44 fuchlikc.
I had abundance of other Sermons by
me in the Portuguefe Language, but for
vyant of a good Interpreter (whom I
mention’d before, having his hands full
with the reft) the fame was fain to be
defer’d till another opportunity, tho at
the fame time I never thought it con-
venient to overcharge thefe People with
many Books, purfuant to the Opinion
of Mr. John Maatzjuyhr our General,
in his Letter fent to me from Batavia ,
Sept. 18. 1661.
44 I Could not without an extreme Sa-
-44 * tisfadion underftand the happy Con-
-44 dition of the Churches in Jafnapat~
u nan, and the EfFeds of your Induftry.
44 God Almighty blefs your Endeavours
44 and Zeal to the honour of his holy
4 * Name, and the Salvation of many
44 thoufand Souls. Being in great want
tc of Books for the Churches and Schools
4t of this Country, it is impoflible to
44 gratify your defire, cfpecially fmcc
44 many of thefe Books are very ill ma-
-44 nag’d by fpme People. I hope you arc
44 pretty well provided by this time,
44 that your good Intentions may not be
44 difappointed for want of them. Tho
4 * in my opinion Reading and Writing are
44 things not fo abfolutely neceflary for the
44 Edification of thefe poor Wretches, as
44 that they may be inftruded in the
44 Fundamentals of Religion, which con-
-44 lifts in few Points. For in cafe we
44 pretend to propagate Chriftianity by
44 reading and writing, I am afraid it
44 will prove both tedious and chargeable
44 to the Company. To promote this
44 holy Work we have fent three Mini-
-44 fters, whereof two are gone with the
44 Ships to Malabar, and the third is late-
-44 ly arriv’d with the Yacht the Achilles:
44 they are all three young Men, and
44 not long ago came from Hollandy and
44 confequently moft likely to do confi-
-44 dcrable Service for a long timc,provi


“ ded they are indued with due Zeal, as
“ I hope they are, for the benefit of the
“ Ifle of Ceylon , and the places there-
“ unto belonging. We have alfo fent a
“ Minifter to fo recom-
“ mending you to the Protection of
“ Almighty God, I reft
From the Caftle
of BaUvia 18
Sept. 1662.
Your affectionate
Friend,
John Maatzuyker.
CHAP. XLVII.
The Nature and Qualifications of the Inhabitants Jafnapatnam. The Bellales,
and their manner of living. The Brahmans, their Doctrines ƒhewn and
refuted.
Oyalifca-
tmsofthe
tarts*' f
Jafnapat>
mm. F
The Habit
of the Bel-
iaks.
Are rich in
Cattel,
Their man-
ner of
thre/hing
the Corn ,
IT is time to fay fome thing of the
Inhabitants of Jafnapatnam ; which
done, we will return to Batecalo , and fo
leaving the Ifle we will turn our felves
another way.
In Ceylon arc divers Clans,\r Families,
as well as on the Coaft of Coromandel.
The Generation of the BeUales is the
chiefeft here fince Chriftianity has been
introduc’d, the Brahmans challenging the
firft rank among the Pagans.
The Beliaks wear a kind of Garment
from above the Navel, turning betwixt
the Legs like a pair of Drawers. They
alfomakeufe of Seripous (or Soles) tied
to the bottom of the feet with Leather
Straps, the upper part of the feet being
bare, to prevent their fweating. Upon
the Belly they have a kind of a Bag (call’d
Maddi ) being part of their Garment
roll’d together, wherein they keep their
Areek and Betel , and fome Paper to make
ufe of upon occafion. On the right
fide they carry a kind of a Knife in a
Sheaf, and an Iron Pen pointed with
Silver, as is likewife the Sheath, in which
they keep alfo a piece of Steel to fharpen
their Knife upon. They make holes in
their Ears from their Infancy, which be-
ing adorn’d with Golden Pendants, draw
them down to their Shoulders, They
live upon Husbandry, and are rich in
Cattel, fuch as Cows, Oxen for the Plow,
Sheep, Goats and Bafflers. Their Ha-
bitations are both convenient and neat,
with pleafant Gardens, well planted with
Betef and furnifh’d with excellent Springs,
which furnifh them (during the dry
Summer Seafon) with Water for the
watering of the Gardens. Their Har-
veft is in January and February ; their
Winter, or rainy Seafon being in Novem-
ber and December . In fome places, viz.,
in the low marfhy Grounds, they have
Harveft twice a year: They threfh their
Corn ( after the manner of the Ifraelites )
with Oxen, not muffled thefe tread the
Seed out of the Ears.
During the rainy Seafon it rains with
fuch violence, that the Fields are all over-
flown ; and I remember that in my time
a confiderable part of the Consn of the
Caftle was waffl’d away by the Rains.
This continues for two 'months, and
it- happens oftentimes, that for eight
months after it rains above three
times, which is the reafon that they arc
oblig’d even to water the Coco-Trees
till they are fix years old. If you dig
about two foot deep you meet with
rocky ground, fo that if you will have
a Spring you rauft cut them out of the
Rocks with vaft Charge.
The before-mention’d BeUales make
likewife Butter, but not after the fame
manner as we do in Holland , They
take a kind of a Mill made like a Star
at the bottom, this they roll betwixt
both hands (as we do with our Choco-
late) till the Butter comes. Some of
our j Dutch Women make alfo good
Cheefe, but it is not regarded among the
Inhabitants ; but Butter is in great efteem
among them as well as among the Moors y
nay the Family of Commety ufe Butter
like Drink. Milk turn’d to Curds ( call’d
by them Tayr ) is alfo in great requeft
with them, and ufed like a cooling Me-
dicine in Fevers, and the Small-Pox,
which are very frequent here.
Their Cattel they keep both day and
night in the Field, tho towards night
they drive them into a certain Enclofure: J
They are never hous’d in the Winter, 1
but feed in the Grounds where the Corn
firft fprouts forth, and afterwards are
fed with Hay till Harveft time. If the
Cattel happen to break into a Neighbour’s
Field, the Owner is oblig’d to make good
the Damage. The BeUales are generally
the richeft of the Country; they don’t
marry except in their own Family, and
Great
Rains,
TheGromi
rocky.
I Their my
* of making
\ Butter .
>
How the)
manage
their Cat-
tel,




Are Uti -
grow,
The Brah-
mans.
Fnm
whence de-
fended.
commonly in the Spring; as the Romans
did formerly in May 3 and the Perfians
in the Spring: if it happens to be a
fruitful Year, they are the more inclined
to marry. They are very litigious, and
will go to Law for a Trifle, becaufcthcy
are conftantly envious at one another.
Brahmans living in Jafnapatnam ,
or any other part of the Indies , arc for
the moft part Men of great Morality,
fober, clean, induftrious, civil, obliging,
and very moderate both in eating and
drinking •, they ufe no ftrong Liquors, wafh
or bathe twice a day, eat nothing that
has bad or may have Life, yet are much
addifted (like all the reft of the Indians )
to Pleafure. Notwithftanding they are
Chriftians, they carry ftill certain Beads,
and (as Rogerius obferves, fol. 71.) like
thofe of Coromandel , never marry out
of their Families, but frequently their
Brothers and Sifters Children; tho elfe
they are great Enemies to Inceft, but
excufe this near Alliance by the great
Value they put upon their Generation,
which they deduce from Bramma , and
ome Learned Men from Abraham and
Ketura , whofe Children, according to
Gen. 25. v. 6, went into the Eaflem Coun~
try.
Tho they bear the Name of Chnftians,
and know how to difcourfc rationally of
the Ten Commandments, and the other
Points of the Chriftian Dodrine, they
ftill retain many of their Pagan Super-
ftitions. If you tell them of the Chri-
ftian Liberty in Viduals and Drinks, they
reply, that they are not ignorant of it,
but as the Eflence of Chriftianity does
not confift in eating and drinking, fo
they did not think thcmfelves oblig’d to
feed upon fuch things as are contrary to
their Nature and Education, being from
their Infancy ufed to much tenderer Food,
which agrees beft with their Conftitu-
tion, and makes them generally Jive to
a great Age.
They are not ignorant in the Courfe of
the Stars, in calculating the Eclipfes of
the Sun and Moon, know the feven Stars ,
which they call Arramicn , i. e. Six-fifhes ,
becaufe,. fay they, we fee no more than
fix. They underftand alfo the Names of
the Planets, and chiefeft of the fixed Stars,
but this muft be underftood from the moft
Learned among them.
Retain
fome Pa*
gan Super*
jUtion,
Their ret*
fons for it.


Tneir Be-
lief con-
cerning the
beginning
cf the
World*
their Be-
lief con-
cerning the
beginning
of the
Souls .
Emr a-
tnfag the
jews, con-
cerning the
Tranfmi-
irut'm of
the Soul.
Tho we (hall treat in particular hereaf- j
ter of the Errors of the Pagans, yet can
knot pafs by here in filence, what 1 have 1
obferv’d my felf concerning their Opini- 1
of the Creation of the Worlds its Age , 1
and Tranfmigration of the Soul. In the
Year 1665, after I had catechiz’d the
People after Sermon in the Church of Pa-
retiture, happening to difeourfe concern-
ing the Creation and Age of the World ,
fome of the Indians affirm’d that the
World had Hood 4864 Years fince theit
Kaligam or fourth Period. For they
have four Periods, the firlt called Creita-
gam, the fecond Treitagam , the third
Dwaparugam , and the fourth Kaligam .
And whereas the Indians in Coromandel
did in the Year 1639, compute no more
than 4739 Years fince the Creation of the
World, I told ’em that they follow’d the
Footfteps of the Chinefes, who in their Co-
mputations made no great account of 100
Years lefs or more, which made ’em fmile.
I told ’em further, that there was no cer-
tain Computation from the beginning of
the World,except what was founded upon
the Holy Scripture •, and that in the
Year 1 66 5 (according to the Jewifh Com-
putation) the World had (food 5425
Years. Concerning the Origin of the
Soul, I found them of the fame Opinion
with the Great Rabbi, viz. That all Souls
were created in the beginning , and kept till
■ they were to he communicated to certain Bo-
dies. Unto which they have added the
Pythagorean Tradition of the Tranfmigra-
tion of the Soul .
I remember that at a certain time, as I
was walking with fome of them, and en-
deavouring to refute this Opinion \ they
objected that it was impoffible fora Child
to be born Blind, Dumb or Lame, with-
out having receiv’d a Soul that had been
guilty of very grofs Sins. For, faid
they, fince the Child has not committed
any Sins, and God does not punifli any
Body without finning, this mult be attri-
buted to the Sins committed by the Soul
whilft yet in another Body, and now en-
tred into the Child- Unto which I re-
ply’d in our Saviour’s Words, out of
John 9.1. when his Difciples ask’d hint
concerning the blind Man from his Birth,
Neither had this Man finned nor his Parents,
but that the Works of God fhouldhe made
manifeft in him. Whence ft Teems that
theyeir* were fome what infe&ed with this
Tradition, mention whereof is alfo made
by Jofeph. Antiq. I, 18. c. 11. and de Bello
Judaico , /. 2. c, 8. The Words of
rod. Mat. 14. 2. when he fays concerning
Chrift, This w John the Sapfift, heitrifen
from the Dead, intimate the fame; as i
like wife what the Jews faid concerning
Ghrilt, Mat. 16. 13, 14, fome that he
was John the Baptift, fome Elias, and o-
thers Jeremias , Hence Eliot (common-
ly call’d Levita) in his Book Ttsbi, and
the other Cabalifts of the Jews were of
Opinion, that the Souls pals thro three
diftindt Bodies, which they pretend to
evince from the Words of Job 33.29. Lo!
ad thefe things workethGod twice or thrice
thro one Man . Thus the Jews affirm that
the Soul of Adam was tranflated into the
Body of afterwards into that of
the Mejfiah , which Error having been in-
troduced into Paleftine by Antiacfaj£ sPhiJs>.~
fophers,th Qjewijh Doftorsdid not ftick to
maintain that the Souls of finful Men did
tranfmigrate into the Bodies of Beafts, accord-
ing to the degrees or heinoufnefs of their Crimes,
whereas it is manifeft, that a rational
Soul can’t fix its Habitation but in the
Body inftru&ed with proper Organs,
whereby it exerts its and
the Scripture tells us exprefly, that the
Soul and Spirit returns to God who gave it 1
befides many other Arguments I alledged
to them upon this Head againft their O-
pinion.
- m A J > ■ ft ft «
The learned Vojfm is of opinion, that 7
this Error took its beginning from the «
true Tradition of the Refurreftion of she
Dead, which was fpread even among the v
Druids in Gaul, according to Cxfar , lib. 6.
with this difference however, that the
Pythagoreans affirm the Souls to tranfmi-
grate even into the Bodies of Beafts*,
whereas the firft reftrain it only to the
Bodies of Men, which made them face
Death with an undaunted Courage, ac-
cording to Lucan, lib. 1 .
Felices err ore fue, quos ille timorum
Maximus baud urget lethi mem, inde
ruendi
In ferrum mens prona viris, animaque ca~
paces
Mor tvs , & ignavum eft reditura par cere
vita.
4
Appian fays of the antient Germans a-
mong other things, that they defpifed
Death in hopes of another Life , and Tho-
mevs Aviot an Englifhman affures us, that
the fame had been found in Virginia. Jo-
feph Acofta fays the fame of Peru and
Mexico - 7 and the fame is related of Guinea,
of th eChinefes, the antient Egyptians and
Getes. The Pythagoreans fay of Athaltdes ,
that his Soul before it entred the Body
of Pythagoras , tranfmigrated into three
feveral other Bodies, firft into thj*t of
This Opini-
on receiv'd
among the
Druids.


Euphorbia , the Son of Panthus in the Tro-
jan War, afterwards into Pyrrhus , next
into Elens, and then into Pythagoras, All
the Indian Pagans are infefted with this
erroneous Opinion, as we fhall fee more
at large hereafter : but what is more
furprizing is, that the Sadduces among
the Jews, who had fo much Veneration
for the Books of Mofes , Ihould deny the
Immortality of the Soul \ when it is
faidin Gen. 1. id. That the Soul of Man
was not created , like material Subftances,
but was part of the Spirit of God.
The fame fay all the Gentiles , as Hermes ,
Zoroafter, Chalcidius and Epicharmvs . Ci-
cero in Somnio Scip. fays. There vs a near
Relation betwixt God and our Souls . Seneca
in his Letter to Lucilius tells him, That
the Souls are in Heaven \ and fpeaking of
the deceafed Son of Marcia, he fays, in
meliori Statu eft, he is in a better State.
The Turks, and Perfians, and Mahomet
in his Alcoran acknowledg the Immortality
of the Soul ; which put thefe Chriftians to
the blufb, who affirm that the Souls of the
Wicked are annihilated, or what others af-
fert, That the Souls rejl in the Matter till the
Day of Judgment.
CHAP. XLVIII.
Marriages of the Bellales and Brahmans. Divers Circumftances obferved upon
that account. Families, Degrees, and Handicraftƒmen of Jafnapatnam. The
Taking and Defcription of Trinquenemale.
IN the preceding Chapter we told you
concerning the Marriages of the Bel-
iaks, and how the Brahmans often marry
their Brothers and Sifters Children. A-
mong fome of the Chriftians in Ceylon ob-
tains a certain Cuftora to this day, to
tye the Tali or Bracelet of the Bride a-
bout the Bridegroom’s Neck, a thing in-
troduced by the Pagans , and imitated by
the Chriftians : for as Rogerius obferves,
the Inhabitants of the Coaft of Coroman-
del look upon it as a Ceremony fo ne-
cefiary towards the Confirmation of the
Marriage, that whenever the Husband
dies, the Tali he wore about his Neck on
his Marriage-Day is to be burnt with
him.
As Maidens without a good Portion
are a very bad Commodity here, hence it
is that frequent Collections are made
to help the poorer fort to Husbands.
They are of Opinion, that a Angle Man
is but half a Man ; nay that thofe who
negledtor lofe any time in propagating
their own Kind, are not far different from
a Murderer and a Deftroyer of Human
Kind (according to the opinion of Plato ,
which was likewife encourag’d among
the Athenians and Romans') which is the
reafon they often marry their Daughters
at to and n Years of Age, and nothing
is more frequent than to fee them bring
forth Children at 13 or 14.
Triumphal Arch raifed without Doors,
made of Fig-tree Branches, FloweiV
Pomegranates, and fuch like. The rich-
er fort feldom fail to give a good Enter-
tainment to their Friends, of Venifon,
Hares, Partridges, Filh, Fruits, Pre-
ferves, &c. and the Evening is fpent in
dancing, finging, and divers other Di-
verfions. However ftrong Liquors arc
never made ufe of on fuch Occafions, un-
ids the Hollanders (who can’t well be mer-
ry without them) bring fome along with
them. Thefe Marriage-Diverfions con-
tinue fometimes four or five days fuccef-
fively.
Marriage -
cujhms,
I remember that during my Refidence
here, fometimes Children of eight or nine
Years of Age would have engaged in
mutual Promifes of Marriage, in mine and
their Friends Prefence; which I always
oppofed, fearing, not without reafon,
that they might repent their Bargain, be-
fore they came to a marriageable Age.
For the reft they conftantly obferve this
Cuftom, that the Female is younger than
the Bridegroom nay they feldom will
chufe a Maid, that has already had her
Monthly Times : this Cuftom is fo ftriCt-
ly obferved on the Coaft of Coromandel ,
that if a Brahmans Daughter remains
unmarried till that time, fhe rauft lay
alide all hopes of it for the future.
They mar-
ry very
young.
The learned Selden /hews out of Rab-
bi Mofes Maimonides , that the Jewifh High
Priefts were not allow’d to marry a Mai-
den, unlefs fhe was under 12 Years of
Age •, and the antient Romans commonly
married their Daughters at 10, n or 12
The fame
praftifed
by the
Jews and
Romans.
Weddings.
After they have been three times pro-
claimed from the Pulpit, the Marriage
Ceremony is perform’d by the Minifter *,
theHoufe where the Wedding is kept
Wmg generally adorn’d with a kind of


Children
never mar-
y without
the Confent
of their
Urents,
Divers
Tribes.
The Tribe
if the Chi-
vias.
Of the far-
ms.
Of the
Chittiis.
of the
Carreas.
Of the
Nallouas.
Years of Age. It is fufficiently known
what Mofes fays, in relation to the Marks
of Virginity, Deut. 12. 17. which to
this day is followed by the Moors of Fez
and Morocco, If they happen to die
without HTue, the Mother’s Portion re-
turns to her Friends, the reft to the Huf-
band’s. One laudable Cuftom they have,
which is, that fcarce ever Children mar-
ry here without the confent of their Pa-
rents *, a Cuftom not only agreeable to
the exprefs Command of God, exprefs’d
in divers Places of the Scripture, and the
Pradice of all Ages even among the Pa-
gans, but alfo confonant to the Civil Con-
ftitutions, and the Decrees of the Council
of Lateran and other Councils, which de-
clare a Marriage betwixt Raptorem and
Raptam invalid in it felf.
The Tribe or Family of the Chivias ,
ufe formerly to attend the Service of the
King of Jafnapatnam , but now do all
forts of Drudgery, as carrying of Wa-
ter and Wood for the Dutch Inhabitants ;
they make ufe alfo of them for Litterraen,
10 or 12 of them being fometimes em-
ployed at a time, to carry a good bulky
Hollander , 10, 20, nay 30 Leagues in a
Litter. However as they are defeended
from Courtiers, fo they are too protfS
to carry any ordinary Perfon, who mull
be contented to be carried by the ordina-
ry Coelys or Labourers, who live all over
the Country } whereas the Chivias inhabit
in the Diftrid of the Church of Chunde-
couli.
Thofe of the Tribe of the Parruas do
not live in fuch great Numbers in Jafna-
fatnam, as they do about Tutecoryn } they
apply themfelves to the Sea, and efpeci-
ally in diving for Sea-Horfe Teeth
and Pearls. They generally fpcak For-
tuguefe, and are an adive fort of People.
The Chittiis live for the raoft part up-
on the Linen Manufadure and Trafiick,
the word Chitty fignifying as much as a
Merchant} they are a crafty Generation.
Each of thefe Tribes does not marry in-
to any other,befides their own, nay com-
monly in the fame Family. Befides which,
each Flandicraftfman educates his Son to
the fame Trade he is of } thus a Weaver’s
Sonfollowsthe Weaving-Trade, as the
Smith’s Son does that of a Smith.
The Tribe of the Carreas live upon
Filhing, which they perform with mon-
ftrous large Nets } they inhabit near the
Seadhoreof Jafnapatnam , and the Banks
of the Salt-River. Thofe of the Tribe
of the Mokkucvs are likewife Filhermen.
The Nallouas are generally Slaves to
the Bdlaks y and much blacker than the
reft. Their Bufinefs is to gather the Li-
quor that flows out of the Coco-Trees,
call’d Suyri and Euwak by the Indians , to
dig the Ground, tend the Cattel, water
the Trees, and fuch like Drudgeries, ash
commonly done alfo by the Coelys or or-
dinary Labourers. They are a nafty
Generation, you may fmell them at a
good diftance, not unlike the Hottentots
on the Cape of Good Hope .
The Parreas are the moft defpicable of
all, their Employment being to carry out
Dung and fuch like filthy things,they feed
upon Rats and Mice.
It is obfervable, that the Tribes of the
higher Rank look upon the inferiour
Ones with a great deal of Scorn, thefe ,
being obliged to falifte the others in the
Streets with deep Reverence, and other
Ceremonies to Ihew their Submiflion.
On the other hand, all the Men of what
Rank or Quality foever, exercife a great
Authority over their Wives, whom they
rarely honour fo far as to eat with them,
but commonly dine alone. None of all
thefe Tribes eat Cows Flefh, which is
the reafon that no Cows are killed but by
the Dutch , the Cow being look’d upon a-
mong the reft as a Sacred Creature, as it
was formerly among the Egyptians *, of
which more hereafter.
Tho their Tribes are very numerous,
\yet do they relate to Tome few Families,
from whence they take their Original,like
the Branches from the Stem of a Tree.
The fame was pradifed among the anti-
entEgyptians,who diftinguilh’d their Nati-
on into four Head Tribes, viz,, the Priejls ,
the Soldiers , the Artifans and Handicraft
men , and the Sheep and Cowherds. Juft
as now-a-days fome of the European Na-
tions are diftinguifh’d into four Eftates,
viz.. Noblemen , Patricians or Gentlemen ,
Citizens , and the Common People,
For the reft, the generality of the In-
habitants of the Kingdom of Jafnapat-
nam are naturally ingenious, and have
a ftrong Memory *, they are very fober
and moderate in their Diet, and (except
the Nallouas and Pane as) very clean in
their Apparel, not quarrelfom, but ve-
ry free with their Tongue.
Their general Vice is Fornication
and Adultery, efpecially among the
young Men, as the old Ones are much ad-
dided to Superftitions, as to the choice
of certain Days (whereof fomething
was raid before concerning Raja Singa)
the Cries of Birds, and fuch like
things ufed among the antient Rornam,
Hence it is that the Portuguefes in thole
Parts have a Proverb to this day, I know
Of the
Parreas. X
/
/
Great Dif-
ference j in
the degrees
cf their
Tribes,
*See Exo.
8. &
Gen. 45.
s2'
The inba-
b^ nts °l


Their Su-
perftitm.
lawyers
in Jafna-
pamam.
Their Fhj*
ficians.
not what unfortunate Sight (Rofto Mofin-'
ho ) did come in my way this day.
Thus on the Coaft of Coromandel, they
look upon it as fortunate, if they fee &
certain red Bird, with a white Ring a-
bout his Neck. John van Twift in his De-
feription of Gufuratte , tells us of the Na-
tives there, that they look upon it as a
good Sign, if they meet an Elephant or
Camel loaden or unloaden, a Horfc with-
out a Burden, or a Cow or Buffler with
Water on their Backs, for without a
Toad they were accounted unfortunate
a Ram or Dog with a piece of Meat in
his Mouth, a Cat palfing to the right
hand of them : they alfo reckon it for-
tunate, if they meet any Body that car-
ries Meat, Milk and Butter, or if a Cock
crolfes the way.
It is certain, that the Obfervations of
theories and Flights of the Birds have
not only been ufual among the antient Ro-
mans, but alfo the Jews , with feveral o-
therfuch like Superftitions, Prediftions,
asking Advice from the Devil, the find-
ing out of ftolen or loft Goods, &c. for
Necromancy was forbid, Ifa, 8. 19. In-
cantations, Afts 19. 15. Obfervations of
the Cries of the Birds, Ez.ek. 21. 21. the
choice of certain Days, Efih. 3.7. &9.
24. the confuting of Woods, Hof. 4.
12. befides which, the Predi&ions from
the different Appearance of the Water,
Air, Fire and Earth, out of certain Uni-
on of Charafters or Numbers (called Ca-
bala) Chiromancy, Aftrology, Infpedi-
ons into the Magic Glafs, and fuch like
Diabolical Illufions, described more at
large by Peucem in his Treatife, de vari’vs
Divinatiomm generihus.
Befides the Artifans and Handicraftf-
men, whereof there is great Plenty in
Jafnapatnam, they have certain Perfons
who apply themfelves to the Law; and
in the high Court of Juftice, compofed
of Hollanders and Indians , were fet al-
ways (befides the M ) a certain
Perfon well verfed in the Laws and Con-
ftitutions of his Native Country. They
havealfo their Advocates, who make
very long Speeches in their Pleadings.
Neither are they deftitute of Phyfici-
ans, fuch as they are \ for to fpeak Truth
they are more than Empiricks, who
pradife according to certain Books and
Traditions, tranfmitted to them by their
Anceftors, and confirm’d to them by
their own Experience. They know not
what Anatomy is, and very little of the
nature of purging Medicines, which are
not often ufed in this hot Climate : How-
ever when a Purge is to be given (whe-
thcr a Potion or Pills) the Compofition
this is always made of frefh Herbs •, and if it
works too ftrong, they mix fome roude-
red Pepper with Water, and apply it to
the Navel in the nature of an Ointment
I can tell it by my own experience that
it is a good Remedy againft the Bcily.ach
and Loofenefs.
They have alfo good Store of Surgeons
and Barbers, the laft carry always a
fmall Looking-glafs along with them,
their Rafors are thicker on the back than
ours; they not only (have your Beard
and Head, but alfo pare your Hand and
Toe Nails, and cleanfe your Ears.
Weavers are here in abundance. Thefe
fit flat upon the Ground, their Feet be-
ing plac’d in a Hole dug for that pur-
pofe, whilft they are at work.
Callico-Printers or Painters are num-
berlefs here, who have a way of prepa-
ring their Colours, that they never go
out by wafhing, tho thofe printed at Jaf.
napatnam are not near fo good as thofe
of the Coaft of Coromandel , and efpeci-
ally thofe done at Mafulipatan.
They are excellent Workmen in Ivory
and Ebony Wood, as likewifc in Gold
and Silver, and will come with their
Tools (which are but few) to work in
theHoufes of the Dutch, They areex-
adlly well verfed in the eflaying of Gold.
They are as well provided with Smiths,
Carpenters and Bricklayers, as moft Pla-
ces in Europe , tho a Carpenter or Brick-
layer gets not above five or fix Pence
a day.
Having thus given you a full account
of the Kingdom of we
will now go from thence along the Sea-
fhorc to Trinquenemale, taken 1639 by
Mr. Anthony Caan , which might have been
done before whilll Mr. Adam Weftermld
was in Ceylon (there being no more than
50 Men in Garifon) had not RajaSmga
bent his Thoughts upon Batecalo , eras
fome will have it upon Matecalo, Trin-
quenemale has a moft excellent Harbour,
(as you may fee by the Draught) nay to
fpeak the Truth, the beft and largeft in
the whole Ifle of Ceylon r there being more
fecure riding at anchor here, than in
the Harbours bf BelUgamme , Gale or Ca-
lumho.
This Place was feveral times relin-
quifb’d and rebuilt by our Company, cf-
pecially during our War with the Eng -
Hfh , it being not thought convenient to
leave fo good a Harbour, and fo conve-
niently feated for the interrupting all
Correfpondence betwixt Foreigners and
Raja Singa, to the Difcretion of an E-
heY£ '
WeAvcn '
Pwtw.
Other Nan*
dkraftf-
men,
Trinquc-
ncmalc.


en &Fort o£
e m:axe
Strengthen
nei wish
additional
fortfjfo.
nemy •, tho the repairing of it (during
xnyftay in Ceylon) under Captain Peter
Wa/h , coft us abundance of People, that
were fwept away by a Phrenfical Diftem-
per, which made them drown them-
felves in the Sea. Some of their Bodies
being open’d, certain Worms were found
in the Subftance of the Brains, occafion’d
queftionlefs by the Violence of the Heat,
the continual Labour, Watching, and
the feeding upon Salt-Provifions j but
moreefpecially by the cold Night-Fogs.
After which time it was ftrengthened
with fome additional Fortifications, as
appears by Captain Peter du Pon\ Let-
ter, dated the s th of Oftob . 1657. from
Macaffar in the Ifle of Celebes.
tc 1 was once more order’d to fail with
tc fome Forces to Trinquenemale , to take
44 once more poffeffion of that Harbour
tc and Bay for our Company, which I
44 did accordingly with good Succefs;
tc and having refortify’d the Place with
u fourßaftions, and reduc’d the circum-
“ jacent Inhabitants to our Subjeftion, I
ct leftafufficient Garifon there, and fo
lt return’d to Columbo.
From Trinquenemale you travel by the
way of Capello to Batecalo , the firft place
conquer’d by the Dutch in this Kland,
whereof we have given you the belt ac-
count we were able, not queftioning but
that in cafe we fhould once live in Peace
with the King of Candy (who is very
old* almoft doting, and much addifted
to ftrong Liquor) our Countrymen will
be much better acquainted with the In-
land Countries than they have been hi-
therto.
According to the lafl: Letter I receiv’d
front Tutecoryn, dated Decemb. 20.1 662.
there had been lately an Infurredion in
the Ifie of Ceylon , fo that they were for-
ced to draw their Forces together out of
Saffragam and Afannekewarre , but was
appeafed fince, tho the Forces were not
as yet difmifTed.
819
Ghap.XLVIII. A Defcription o/CEYLON.


CHAP. XLIX.
Natural Hiƒtory of Ceylon. Their Pagodes, Convents , Monks. Manners , Ha-
bit and Oeconomy of the Cingalefes.
The City of
Candy.
ThcivTcm-
pics.
And Idols.
HAving hitherto taken a view of
thofe Places of Ceylon that are under
the Jurifdiftion of the Dutch Company,
we will now take a turn to Candy , the
Imperial Refidencc, as the molt proper
place to be inform’d concerning the real
Conftitution of this Ule, and its Inhabi-
tants.
The City of Candy is feated about 30
Leagues from the Sea-fide, and 9 from
Fintane up the River of Trinquenetnale,
about 2t Leagues by Land from ,
and 9 from the Sea-(hore, where the Em-
peror has his Docks for building and re-
fitting his Ships and Gallies. The other
Cities of Ceylon being not defcribed in
any Books, we muft alfopafsby in filence
here. All over the Ifle you fee abundance
of very fplendid Pa The Foun-
dation of that of Finta has no lefs than
130 foot in Circumference j it is of a
great height, and gilt on the top \ it is
oval on the bottom, and arifes into a
four-corner’d Point like a Pyramid. The
Great Pagode betwixt Gale and Matecalo
is alfo much celebrated, ferving for a
Light-houfe to Ships as well as that of
Trinquenemale. In the large high Pagode
before-mention’d ftands an Idol repre-
fenting a Man with a naked Sword in
his hand, lifting up his Arm, as if he
were ready to ftrike. To this Idol the
Cingalefcs pay their Reverence, and offer
their Sacrifices upon all Emergencies, or
in time of Sicknels; for which reafon
they keep a Basket in every Houfe,
wherein they gather fuch Provifions as
they are to facrifice. They believe that
the World will not have an end folong
as that Pagode ftands. Some worfhip an
Elephant's' Head of Wood or Stone, to
obtain Wifdom. They adorn their Idols
with FloweVs. Thefe Elephants Heads
are plac’d foraetimes on Trees in the
High-ways, fometimes in little Brick
Houfes or Chappels. You fee alfo fre-
quently in the high Road certain heaps
of Stones, Earth or Dung, upon which
each Paflenger throws fomething as he
palfes by.
Juft by Belligamtne I faw the Figure of
a Man at lealt fix Yards high, cut in a
Rock about half a yard deep, who us’d
to be worlhip’d by the Cingalefes.
Near it is a high-peak’d Mountain, ac-
counted the higheft in the Indies , call’d
Pico de Adam , or Adam's Peak becaufe I
they are of opinion, that here (food for- 1
merly the Paradife, where Adam was
created : they alfo tell you, that the
Print of the Foot of Adam is to be feen
to this day in the Rock, the Draught
whereof is .kept in the Imperial Court.
Unto this Rock a vaft number of People
flock from far diftant places, to fee this
facred Relick, tho the Mountain is of very
difficult accefs, nay (if we may credit
Mafftcus the Jefuit) (juite inacceffible,
unlefs by means of certain Iron Chains
and Iron Spikes fattened to the Rocks.
Some are of opinion that they reve-
rence the Chamberlain of the Queen
Candace in this place, who according to
fome Hiftorians, but efpecially Domhaus
Bifhop of Tyrus (a Man equally famous
for his Learning and San&ity under Con-
ftantine the Great) preach’d the Gof-
pel in the Happy Arabia , Erythroea and
Taprobana.
There are alfo divers Convents in <
Ceylon , and a great number of Brahmans *
and Priefts, who are in great Veneration-
among the common People j they never
eat any thing that has been living, or is
capable of producing any living Sub-
ttance, as Eggs, &c. Their Friers wear
yellow Habits, with their Heads (haven
all over, for which reafon they never ap-
pear in the Streets without Umbrello’s,
and Beads in their hands, muttering
out certain Prayers as they go along.
Their Convents have divers Galleries
and Chappels, wherein are placed the
Statutes of feveral Men and Women,
who, as they fay, have led holy Lives.
Thefe are adorn’d with Gold and Silver
Apparel, and attended with burning
Lamps and Wax-Candies day and night,
plac’d upon Altars: The Candlefticks
being fupported by naked Boys artifici-
ally carved. The Friers have their cer-
tain hours for Prayers, which they per-
form in thefe Chappels.
They have alio their publics Fro-
celTions: The Head or Abbot of the
Convent being mounted on a fine Ele-
phant, fumptaoufly harnefled with an
Umbrello over his Head, marches along
the Street in great Pomp, under the
found of Horns, Trumpets, and other
Adam’;
Mountain.
Convents
and Mon\s
of r Ceylon.
Todr Fri-
ctions,


Ihe iiidian Procejstorv.
TheGen'm
«T the Cin-
galefes.
fuch fort of Muflck, making an odd kind of
Harmony, accompanyM by a great num-
ber of Men, Women and Children } the
Maidens of Quality dance all along before
the Elephant naked down to the middle,
* their Heads, Arms and Ears adorn’d with
Golden Bracelets and jewels •, the Gar-
ments which cover their under parts are
of different Colours. They pay their
daily Devotions to a certain Idol call’d
Sambaja , by proftrating themfelves upon
the ground, and afterwards clafping
their hands together over their Heads.
But concerning the Religious Worfhip of
the Cingaleses we fhall have occafion to
fay more in the following Treatife,
which in effed differs very little from the
Malabars and thofe of Coromandel , except
that they are not altogether fuch Bigots,
the Emperor of Ceylon allowing Liberty
of Confcience to all Nations. TheCm-
galefes are not fo ftubborn, but that ma-
ny of them have been without much
difficulty converted to the Roman Faith,
and fmee that to the Reformed Reli-
gion.
For the reft the Cingalefes are naturally
aftive and ingenious, and good Work*
men in Gold, Silver, Ivory, Ebony, Iron
Works, &c. Arms inlaid with Silver,
eloquent, nimble, courageous, fit for War-
like Exploits, fober and watchful. They
march one Tingle Man after another, by
reafon of the many narrow Lanes in this
Country , their Arms are a Half-pike,
their Drums are fmall, but make a great
noife, which may be heard at three
Leagues diflance in the Mountains } they
are beft in the purfuit of a routed Enemy.
Since they have converfed fo much with
the Fortuguefes and other European Na-
tions, they are grown fo cunning that
they muft not be too much trufled, nor
defpifed.
Inceft is fo common a Vice among
them, that when Husbands have occafion
to leave their Wives for forae time, they
recommend the Conjugal Duty to be per-
form’d by their own Brothers. I re-
member a certain Woman at Gale , who
had Confidence enough to complain of
the want of Duty in her Husband’s Bro-
ther upon that account. The like hap-
pen’d in my time at Jafnapatnam, which
had been likely to be punifh’d with
Death, had not at my Interceffion, and


in regard of the tender beginnings of
Chriftianity, the fame been pafs’d by for
that time.
gree. They marry as many Wives as
they think fit, as well as the Mahometans ,
of which there live a confiderable num-
ber in this Ifle. They marry their Daugh-
ters at 10 or 11 years of Age, aCuftom
not to be rooted out among them, they
being very fond of the Virginity of their
Wives. They bury their Dead after
the manner of the Pagans.
> The Cingalefes are in Shape and Man-
ners not unlike the Malabars , with long
hanging Ears, but not fo black. The
Drefs of the Men is a Veil call’d Royillo ,
of Woolen or Linen Cloth } their under
Garment is a piece of Linen wrapt about
the middle, and drawn through both their
Legs, like a pair of Breeches: On their
Heads they wear a kind of red Caps,
fuch as we call Rock Caps, which they
look upon as a Angular Ornament, and in
their Ears Rings and precious Stones.
The Hilts of their Swords or Scymeters
are commonly of Silver, Ivory, or Gold,
with flaming Blades.
The common People appear for the
moll part naked, having only a piece
of Cloth wrapt round the middle to
cover their Privy Parts. The Women
go with their Breafts uncover’d, being
generally well limb’d : Inftead of a Head-
drefs they have a way of tying their
Hair together like a Cap. They wear
Golden or Silver Necklaces about their
Necks, and Rings on their Fingers and
Toes.
The Cingalefes as well as the Malabars
are much addifted to Idlenefs and Plea-
fures, and infift much upon their Pedi-
The Ha
hits.
In their Houfes they are exceffive neat,
ufe inftead of Trenchards and Table-
Cloths the Leaves of Fig-trees*, their
Spoons are made of Coco Nutfhells, and
their drinking Veffels of Earth, with
hollow Pipes, through which they pour
(like the Moors ) the Drink into the
Mouth without touching their Lips } for
as the Cingalefes and Malabars infift much
upon their Noble Defcent, fo they will
neither eat nor drink with thofe of an
inferior Rank} nay many of them are
fo proud as not to eat with their own
Wives.
Their Oc-
conomy.
The raoft current Coin here are the
Silver Laryns , each whereof is worth
about 10 d. a Fanam is only 5 d. tho
they have Golden and Silver Funarm 5 a
Pagode was formerly no more than 84
Stivers , but is fince raifed to 120, or fix
Butch Gilders } as well in Ceylon as Ma-
labar, two Golden Fanams at 5 d. a piece
make a Laryn .
Their Cok.
CHAP. L.
Fertility of Ceylon. A Defcription of the Cinnamon and Snakewood. A
ƒtrange Tree .
np H E Ifle of Ceylon is very fertile in
1 Rice, and all forts of Fruits, as
Ananas, Cocoes , the beft Oranges, Lem-
mons, and Citrons, exceeding by far thofe
of Spain and Portugal *, Fig-trees, Cajou-
ves, Grapes, Potato’s, Quiavos, Papajes
and Pomgranats. You have here frelh
Grapes the whole year round, except
in the three Winter or rainy Months.
It abounds alfo in Sugar-reeds, and Mul-
berry-trees, which produce a good quan-
tity of Silk *, as in Ginger, Pepper, Car-
damum, Tobacco, wild Palm-trees, af-
fording vaft quantities of a kind of Sugar,
and the Juice call’d Suyri their ordinary
Drink. They are ftor’d alfo with Calabafs
Trees, Cotton T rees ,Areek T rees ,Portuguefe
Figs, Mangos of divers forts, long Pep-
per, Melons, Water-Melons, Onions, and
Garlick. Since the fettling of the Dutch
here, they have alfo propagated with
good fuccefs Cabbages, Afparagas, Car-
rots and Radifhes: But the Helen or
the Bride in Conteft of this Ifle is the
fineft and pureft Cinnamon, which grow-
ing only in this Ifland, no wonder if we
have difputed the entire Pofleffion there-
of for fo many years with the Porta-
guefes.
Fertility of
Ceylon.
This precious Spice is call’d by the
Cingalefes Cureneo potto , and the Tree
Curindo-gat , fome of which are of a
great bulk, their Leaves refembling thofe
of the Lemmon Trees, but not quite fo
broad } the BlolTom is white and of an
agreeable feent, which produces a ycl-
lowifti Fruit, not unlike a fmall Olive,
out of which the Inhabitants prefs an
Oil not much differing both in Colour
and Virtue from that of Nutmegs, but in
fmell like the Cinnamon it felf.
A Defcrip*
tion of the
Cinnamon ,
and the
Tree.


I LiMJLke. manner of nee Lina


three forts
of Cinna-
mon*
The Cinnamon-Tree has a double Bark,
the outward Bark being taken off with
a crooked Knife \ the inward Rind is cut
with firft round the Tree, and
then in length, which being expos’d to
the Sun-beams in the Fields, (brinks toge-
ther into fuch fmall Rolls as we fee them
in Europe, The Trees that are thus
peel’d perifh, inftead whereof the Fruits
that fall upon the Ground produce other
Cinnamon-Trees. The Wood is very
white, and ufed by the Inhabitants for
building. It is obfervable that thefe Cin-
namon-Trees don’t grow all over Ceylon ,
but only in fome certain places: For in
the whole Kingdom of Jafnapatnam , and
the Ifle of Manaar y none of thefe Trees
are to be feen, but only beyond the Ri-
ver Chilau , in the Country about Ne~
gumbo y and the Inland Countries, a$ like-
wife near Gale, Thefe Trees feldom
grow together, but are generally feen in
Woods mixt with other Trees. Whilft
I was Minifter at Gale , fome of my Slaves
us’d now and then to bring fome Cinna-
mon Wood among the reft into the
Kitchin, which when put into the Fire
emitted a very odoriferous feent.
It is further worth taking notice of,
that whereas according to the Judgment
of the Naturalifts and Phyficians, the
Cinnamon is very hot, yet does the Root
of the Tree produce not only a Water
fmelling exa&ly like Camphyr, but alfo
the ftrongeft feented Camphyr it felf: I
have feveral pieces of it, which fmell fo
ftrong that lam fcarce able to endure it.
Out of the Cinnamon Wood, whilft yet
green, they diftil a Water of an agree-
able fmell, and very wholefom to our
Bodies. The Natives make out of the
outward Bark of thefe Trees curious Ca-
binets ; I have fuch a one by me of a
confiderable bignefs, which was prefented
me by Major Peter du Pon 1665. juft up-
on my departure from Ceylon .
The Eaft-lndies produce three different
forts of Cinnamon, i. Is the fincft Cin-
namon call’d Cartel Fino by the Portuguefes ,
being the fame that is taken from very
young, or at Icaft not very old Trees.
2. The coarfe Cinnamon call’d Cartel
Groffo by the Portuguefes , taken from very
thick and old Trees. And, 3. TheC*-
nel de Mato , or wild Cinnamon, which
grows likewife on the Coaft of Mala-
bar, but is in no efteem; for where-
as a Baar of Ceylonefe Cinnamon is fold
for 50 or 60 Kixdollars , the wild Cinna-
mon yields not above 10 or 12. Tho I
have heard fome of the moft ingenious
of the Natives affirm, that the wild
Cinnamon might be much meliorated,
and made fit tor ufe. The Dutch Com-
pany is now, through God’s Bleffing, in the
pofleffion of the Cinnamon of all kinds,
as likewife of all the Spices, viz. of the
Nutmegs, Mace and Cloves, except the
Pepper, which grows in feveral places.
The Snake-wood or Lignum Coluhrinum,
grows moft frequently in the Ifle of
Ceylon ; it is white inclining to yellow,
very hard, and of a bitter it is
in great requeft among the Indians , and
accounted a good Remedy againft feveral
Diftempers: They ponder it, and rub
the whole Body with it to cure the Itch.
They alfo take an Ounce of ponder’d
Snake-mod in Water or Wine againft the
Colick, burning Fevers, and other Dif-
tempers, but especially againft the Stings
of the Serpents, of which there are many
in this Ifland.
The Cingalefe Naturalifts fay that the
Virtue of the Snahe-vrood was firft difeo-
ver’d by a certain fmall Creature call’d
Quily or Quirpeky by the Portuguefes , being
of the bignefs of our FerretSy wherewith
we catch the Rabbets y of this kind the
Indians keep many in their Houfes, part-
ly for Sport, partly to catch Rats and
Mice with. This Creature having a na-
tural Antipathy againft the Snakes and
Serpents, whenever it is ftung by them
runs to the Snake-woody and alter having
eaten of it, is cur’d of its Wound.
Marcellus de Bofchhouwer y a Perfon in great
efteem in Ceylon y relates, that he has
feveral times feen this Qujypele engag’d
with Snakes, and among the reft one
that vanquifti’d a Serpent*, but being
wounded run to the next Wood, and
having eaten fome of this Snake-woody re-
turn’d in half an hour to the place, where
its vanquifti’d Enemy lay extended dead
upon the ground. The Cingalefes call
the Root of this TreeAfay Lelliy unto
which they attribute a Angular Virtue
for the Cure of divers Diftempers*.
There grows a ftrange Tree in the Ifle
of Ceylon call’d the Root-treey becaufe its
Branches turn to the ground like Ropes,
where taking Root again, they produce
a Tree that fpreads in a fhort time over
a fpacious Trad of Ground. Ceylon pro-
duces alfo Tamarind-T rees of a conlide-
rable bulk, the Fruit whereof is account-
ed an excellent Remedy againft the Scur-
vy and Dropfy. There grows another
Tree in Ceylon like our Noli me tangere \
for if you go to touch it, it moves back-
wards, and gives way to your hand.
For the reft, Ceylon is fufficiently pro-
vided with Medicinal Herbs, and they
the Snake
wood.
Its ufe cl-
rnong the
Indians,
firfl
tycom’d,
Antipath)
betwixt
the .
p en t,




wmmf.p. szpT*.
TAe QatcKuvj oj" ILLijjfiants ~on Cetlon "
33-


cure all their Diftempers with green
Herbs, in the ufe whereof their Phyficians
are better vers’d (by Experience ) than
many of our pretending Chyrurgeons ;
God Almighty having provided Reme-
dies futable to the Diftempers of each
Country,
CHAP. LI.
Great number of Elephants in Ceylon : Are very pernicious. Divers Inƒtances
of it. How they take the Elephants . Their Buffers, Tygers, Bears, Birds,
Fiƒhes, Crocodiles and Porcupines , or Sea-hogs.
THE Ifle of Ceylon abounds in all
forts of four-leg’d Creatures, Birds,
Fiflies, Stones and certain Produ&s of
the Sea, of each whereof we mull fay
fomething.
Elephants being decoy’d by the tame ones
into thefe Enclofures, are catch’d in the
Traps or Snares, like as we do in our de-
coying Ponds, They are very hard to
be tam’d, arid require fometiraes four
whole Months before they can be brought
to lie down: All this while they mult
be carried twice a day to fome River or
other to fwim. This is done by putting a
wild Elephant betwixt two tame ones,
who take fuch care of the other, that
they hit him from both fides with their
Trunks, till they make him pliable, and
at lall quite tame.
It often happens that the young Ele-
phants are taken in following the old
ones. Thefe are very unlucky: I re-
member, that one time as feveral of us
were talking together, one of thefe
young Elephants came flily and pulh’d
with his back-fide againll one of our
Company, that he was ready to fall upon
his Nofe.
Among the four-leg’d Bealls the£/*-
fhant challenges the firft Rank *, of thefe
there are great numbers here, and fo
pernicious, that it is not fafe travelling
without fome Soldiers with their Drums
and Kettles, the noife whereof frightens
thefe Creatures: They are moll dange-
rous towards Evening when they are
hungry \ for the Coleys or Littermen often
tun away at the fight of an Elephant,
leaving thofe they carry to Ihift for them-
felves.
1 remember that in my time, a Portu-
guese Reform’d Minilter, nam’d John Pe-
reira d'Almeyda , travelling with his Wife
from Gale to Columho , the Litter-Carriers
(according to their Cullom) ran away
at the fight of an Elephant, who
did however not the lealt harm, but
laying his Trunk upon the Woman’s
Palankin or Litter, went away: But
things of that nature happen not always
alike.
I obferv’d once as I was travelling from
Manaar to Jafnapatnam y that the Ele-
phants had done confiderable mifehief
hereabouts, and during the rainy Seafon
had render’d the Ways almoft unpaflable.
We had the good fortune to efcape nar-
rowly the danger of an Elephant who
kill’d a certain Negro, one of the Com-
manders of the Elephant-Hunters, in a
place we had pafs’d not long before.
Elephants
cf Ceylon.
They feed upon green Herbs and Leaves
of Fig-trees, Coco , and other Trees } nei-
ther do they refufe Areek and Sugar.
At a certain time of the year an Oil iflues
out of the Heads of the old Elephants
when they run mad, and oftentimes kill
their Carndk or Guides. The Ceylonefe
Elephants are accounted the largeft and
belt in the Indies , and, if you will believe
the Natives, are ador’d by the other
Elephants.
Horfes (great Enemies of the Ele- -
phants)were firft brought frorii abroad in-
to this Ifle. The Portuguefes having fome
years fincc fent Horfes into the Ifle de
VacaSy they are multiply’d to fuch a de-
gree, that you may fee them feed in
Herds of 6d, 70, 80, or 100.
Horfes*
At Mature are vail Stables, where the
wild Elephants are tam’d, and afterwards
fold to the Moors of Bengale and Coro-
mandd. They take the Elephants near
' Mature in the following manner: They
fix abundance of large Stakes or Trunks
of Trees in the ground, fo as to leave
the Entrance wide enough, bat growing
narrower within by degrees in thefe
they have certain Traps, and the wild
Of Bufflers they have a great ftore
in Ceylon \ 1 have feen whole Herds of
them of ioo arid mote feeding ill the
Countries of Chilau and Madarnpe, which
were but indifferently peopled at that
time. They have alfo Hedg-Hogs,Oxcn,
Cows, Bulls, Sheep, Goats, Stags, Does,
Buffers;,
Horn they
tx\e and
tme the
Elephants ,


Elks, tame and wild Boars, Hares and
Partridges, Peacocks and Apes in abun-
dance.
Ceylon produces great plenty of Fifii,
as Cacap, Plaice, Crabs, Pikes, Kwg.fi/hes,
Sail-fi/hes , Craw-fiflies, Haddocks, Galleon,
fi/hes. Sharks, Orados, Sardins, large
Smelts, Bat-fifhes, Seals, Oifters, Muf-
des, Shrimps, Pampas, Barbels, Bomtos,
Corquados , &c.
F,n lCs .
The Woods here produce alfo fome
ravenous Beafts, as Tygers, tho I never
faw any, but had a Grey-hound given me
by a Portugueje 0 who bore the marks of
a Tyger’s Claws on his Buttocks. Bears
I have feen both in Jafnapatnam and
Manaar, I faw once five or fix young
ones drowned in Manaar by the Inhabi-
tants, who had found them at Mantotte y
and thought fit to take this courfe with
them to prevent their increafe.
Tygers and
Bears.
Among the Amphibious Creatures, the
Kalman or Crocodile, call’d Lag am by
the Portuguefes, is very frequent here;
fome of which are 18 foot long. They
have four Feet with crooked Claws, their
Skin cover’d with Scales, which are to
hard upon the Back, that they are Muf-
quet proof •, fo that they are not vulnera-
ble except in the Belly and Eyes; Their
under Jaws are unmovable, but they have
lharp Teeth: Their Back-bones being
without Joints, they can’t turn fhort,
whence the belt way to efcape them, is to
get away from them by many windings
and turnings. ’Tis generally believ’d
here that the Crocodile has a Stone or
rather Bone in the Head, which given in
Pouder is an excellent Remedy againft
the Stone. The Bones of the Sharks are
accounted very good againft the fame
Diftemper.
Mr. Rochefort fays, that in fome of the
Rivers of the Ifles of America are certain
Crocodiles that fmell like Mufque. I
have with amazement feen Crocodiles
lying upon the Water like Logs of Wood,
with their Eyes Ihut ■, and if they hap-
pen to meet with a Prey, they leap at it
on a Hidden, like an Arrow from the
Bow.
Vincent le Blanc tells us a ftory of a
Burgermafter’s Servant of Alexandria,
who pafling near the River-fide was de-
vour’d by a Crocodile which he took for
a Log of Wood fwimming upon the
Water. They fay that they have a white
Fat, which is an excellent Remedy againft
lharp Humours that fettle in any part of
the Body. In Jafnapatnam there are ma-
ny Crocodiles in the Fens, Ponds and
Lakes, which if they happen to dry up
in the Summer, they dig holes to live in;
we were often vifited by them in our
Camp before Jafnapatnam, but they did
no mifehief. The Chinefes make a dainty
Dilh of the young Crocodiles.
Crocodiles
Jackals.
They abound alfo in Jackals , a Crea-
ture very greedy after Mens Flefh, for
which reafon they cover their Graves
with great Stones \ they fometimes take
them with Grey-hounds, but when they
are hard put to it, they pifs, which
emits fo naufeous a fcent that the Hounds
can’t endure it. The Flefh of the Jackals
is given with good fuccefs by the Phyfi-
cians of the Country to cure the Con-
fumption. Towards the Evening the
Jackals meet and make a moft dreadful
noife, and will fome times fall upon
Paffengers. In my time a Caffer who was
in drink had his Teeth eaten out by the
Jackals. The Jackal is not unlike a Fox,
and has exaftly fuch a Tail. The Ma-
labar* call the Jackals Adiviis. I faw but
one Leopard in the Ifle of Ceylon y and not
one Unicorn or Rhinoceros.
Ceylon affords vaft quantities of Birds,
call’d by the Inhabitants by peculiar
Names. Crows you fliall fee by thou-
fands about Noon upon the Houfes, but
they are fo cunning as not eafily to be (hot
except through a hole or fmall Window.
Towards night they leave the Towns,
and retire to the Trees in the Country,
and in the morning early look about for
Prey. If one of them happens to be
kill’d, the reft make a moft terrible Out-
cry.
Crows*
All forts of
fowl and
B,r * s ‘
There are certain Birds in Ceylon call’d
Minhotos by the , who often
make bold with the young Chickens; they
have alfo Owls that make a dreadful
noife in the night-time. They abound
in Geefe, Herons, wild and tame Ducks,
Peacocks, Pigeons, Turtles, Partridges,
Parrocets, of moft delicious colours;
Peewits, Swallows, Bats, &c. Among
the reft here is a certain Bird which builds
his Neft hanging on the Branches of the
Trees: They have alfo abundance of fine
finging Birds, Nightingals and Larks in
abundance, Sea-gulls, Water-fnipes, Bees,
Fire-flies, Gnats and Locufts.
In the Ifle of Manaar arc great num-
bets of very large Porcupines, or Sea-
hogs 5 they have very lharp Teeth, and
their Flelh is fit for Food; the Females
have Breafts and Milk, they come often
a Chore and feed upon Herbs.
Porcupines.


CHAP. LII.
Serpents of Ceylon. Remedies againƒst their Stings. An odd Story of a Serpent-
Catcher. Precious Stones , Products of the Sea, Amber-Greafe, its Goodneƒs.
SErpents are very common all over the
Ifle of Ceylon : The Sea-Serpents are
fometimes 8,9, or 10 yards long. The
Land-Serpents call’d Ratcatchers are alfo
very large, live on the tops of the
Houfes, but are harmlefs Creatures. The
molt dangerous are thofe call’d Cobres
CaptUos by the Portuguefes , which fre-
quently ufed to kill People whilft I liv’d
in Jafnapatnam. So foon as any body is
ftung or wounded by thefe Serpents, they
apply the Adder-ftone to the Wound, and
§i ve f° me Milk. Our Chy-
j. U |.g C Qjj Albert van Lambergen writ to
me 1 666, that being ftung by a Serpent,
he became blind, but after fome time
recover’d his Tight. A Pariftiioner be-
longing to the Church of Mantpay , as he
was mending the top of the Church,
happen’d to be wounded by a Serpent
that lay hid among a heap of Leaves, and
died foon after. I faw once two Serpents
twilled round one another fporting under
the Wall of the fame Church, which I
order’d td be cut to pieces by a Soldier,
Such of the Inhabitants as retain ftill fome
Remnants of Paganifm, will not allow the
Serpents to be kill’d.
The Malabars call the Serpents Pambo
and Naga, and give their Cattel and Chil-
dren their Names *, nay they feed them
becaufe they Ihould do them no harm.
The Serpents come frequently into the
Houfes, efpecially in the rainy feafon.
During my Abode at Jafnapatnam two
Dogs were ftung to death in the Houfe,
and I have feen them fometimes pafs up
flairs over the Beds. Another time a
Serpent pafs’d fo near my Wife in the
Houfe, that he touch’d her Leg with the
Tail, and was afterwards kill’d by the
Servants.
There is alfo here a kind of Adders call’d
Pipers by the they are fpeckled
and very venomous. Whilft I liv’d at
jafnapatnamy a certain Uish-German Sol-
Serpents,
Kemdies
tm) mg.


s n t0 ° 0 f a
Serpent-
catcher,
Remedies
agamfl the
srpen s *
dier belonging to the Garifon (common-
ly known by the Name of the Serpent-
Catcher') being fent for by Mr. Anthony
Pavilion Governor of Coromandel , to
take a certain Cobre Capel , that was in his
Lodging-room \ he came accordingly,
and with his Hat only before his Face, laid
hold with his other hand of the Serpent,
without receiving the leaft harm he did
handle the Creature afterwards in our
Prefence, and not only carried it away
in his Snapfack, but alfo ufed to deep
near it. I fufpeding fome Witchcraft
in the matter, talk’d to him ferioufiy a-
bout it \ but he allured me, that nothing
was done but by natural means, and that
he always carried the Head and Heart of
a Serpent about him : wherewith 1 was
forced to reftfatisfy'd, he being not wil-
ling to difeover the whole Myftery.
Among the Inhabitants of theCoaftof
Coromandel , and the Cingalefes and Mala-
bars, are certain Fellows, who have an
Art of making the Serpents ftand up-
right and dance before them, which they
perform by certain enchanting Songs.
Thofe that are to take an Oath in thofc
parts, put one of their Hands into an
Earthern Velfel, wherein is a Serpent:
if they efcape without being wounded,
they are fuppofed to fwear true but if
not, on the contrary.
Upon this Occafion I can’t forget to
mention fome Remedys ufed againftthe
Stings of Serpents. Firft of all it is re-
quifite to bind the affeded Part above
and below the Wound, to prevent the
Poifon from being communicated to the
Mafs of Blood, and afterwards hold it
over or as near to the Flame as it is pof-
fible. 1 would have every body that
goes to the Eafi-Indies, to provide him-
felf with fome Orvietan, Jheriac, Mithri~
date, Confedion of Alkermes, Balfam of
Peru, Rue, Scordium, Scorzonera, Angelic,
and Contrahierva Roots, thefe being
great Cordials and Antidotes.
They muft keep to a cooling Diet, and
avoid purging and bleeding, but inftead
thereof make ufe of bathing to open the
Pores of the Body. The Peel of Lem-
ons or Citrons taken frefh from the Tree,
is accounted an excellent Remedy, and
faffing Spittle applied to the Wound.
If you can take the Serpent that has giv-
en the Wound, bruife the Head, and ap-
ply it to the affeded part. However the
Adderft one furpaffes all the reft, but is of-
ten adulterated. The right one raifes no
Bubbles upon the Water, and flicks clofe
to the Lips, if put to the Mouth.
The Serpents of Ceylon are not altoge-
ther fo large as thofe of Java and Banda]:
at Batavia there was once taken a Ser-
pent, which had fwallowed an entire
Stag of a large Size -, and one taken at
Banda had done the fame with a Negro
Woman.
Befides thefe Serpents, Ceylon produ-
ces feveral forts of other crawling Crea-
tures, as Thoufand Feet, called Midepie by
the Portuguefes, which are fometimes 7
Inches long } Scorpions, Spiders of a pro-
digious Bignefs, Frogs, Tortoifes, Toads,
&c. Ceylon alfo affords divers precious
Stones, as Saphirs, Rubies, Topazes, Cra-
vats, &c. Some fay it alfo produces
Gold, Silver, Iron, and other Metals,
but that their Kings will not allow thefe
Mines to be dug. This Teems not impro-
bable, it being certain that Iron has been
bought out of the Country. It affords
alfo Chryftal in abundance. The Com-
modities chiefly vented here by the Por-
tuguefes, were colour’d Stuffs of all forts,
Velvets, Silks, Red Caps, Porcelain Spi-
ces, Amfira or Opium, China Root, Cam-
phyr, Musk, Sandel wood, Lead, Cop-
per, Tin, Saltpeter, Brimftone, gilt
Looking-Glafles, glafs Bottles, painted
Callicoes of Suratte and Coromandel, all
which areftill in vogue here.
Thelfleof Ceylon has befidesFifh, fe-
veral Products of the Sea. Of the
Pearls and Pearl-fifhery we have fpoken
before, in the Defcription of Tutecoryn.
Ambergreefe is found here fomctimes near
the Sea-(hore, in good large pieces and
of the belt kind : they call it Panaham-
bar in the Maidive Iflands, This preci-
ous Drug was altogether unknown to
Hippocrates, Diofcorides and Galen, and to
this day its true Origin is a Riddle to us \
tho fome will have it to be the Seed of the
Whales, others a certain fine Earth, o-
thers a certain Pitch or Rofin, grow-
ing at the bottom of the Sea, and for-
ced thence to the Shore by Terapefts.
Certain it is, that it is generally found
after ftormy Weather. Mr. John Huy~
gan van Linfchoten mentions a piece of
Ambergreefe , taken up near the Cape Co-
moryn, isS which weighed 30 Quin-
tals. It’s faid, that the Birds are very
fond of the Scent of it, and the Prints of
the Bills of Birds have fometimes been
perceived in the Amber, and is accounted
a certain Sign of its Goodnefs.
Mr. Rocheford in his Natural Hiftory of
the American Iflands, fays, that the Am*
her there, when firft: taken, has fo naufeous
aScent, that the Birds are drawn to-
wards it as by the Smell of a Carrion:
He fays, it fmells like rank Bacon.
p re cim
Stones .
Ambcr-v
greefe, ■
♦
Its Origin,


Goodnefs
hwto be
mi
™f mbcr is of different kinds j the
black (the worft of all) is found near
the I lie of Mauritius •, next is the White
and the Cry the bell of all. In fome
pits of America there isa kind of
for, they call the foxed Amber, becaufeit
is fwallowed and vomited up again by the
foxes without any Alteration, except
“‘I 1 * fomethingof its Scent.
The belt Ambergreefe is of an Alh Colour,
like Ames mix d with Wax. It is adul-
terated with Wax, Rofin and Pitch ; to
know the real Goodnefs of it, you mull
„ a . ,nto it, and by the
Smell of the Moifture that adheres to it,
yoamayjudgof its Goodnefs: You may
alfo lay a fmail quantity of Amber upon
a hot Knife * if it be good, it will melt
immediately like Wax 1 and provided
the Knife be very hot, it will quite eva-
porate without leaving theleaft Dress
behind. Scaliger , GarefJZJard %f.
Am-nandes Lopes, , and have
written of the , its Medic-
inal Virtues we will leave to the Tuds-
ment of the Phyllcians. 6
The Sea about Ceylon produces like-
wife whole Coral Trees, fome Branches
whereof curioufly grown I preferve in
my Study. It affords alfo certain Horns
of Sea-Horfes, called Cbankos, which are
frequently tranlported to Bemale , be-
lides divers other forts of Horns and
Shells (but not fo curioufly twitted as
thofe of Amboyna) Sea-apples- Sea-Stars*
and fuch like, “


THE
IDOLATRY
O F T H E
Eaft-India Pa gans,
Giving a true and full Account of the
Religious Worƒhip of the Indoƒthans,
the Inhabitants of Coromandel , the
Malabars and Ceylonefes ; with a De-
fcription of their Idols.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
The general Conƒent of all Nations concerning the Exiƒtence of God. Divers
Sects of the Brahmans. Their Opinion concerning the Creation . The Idols
Ixora and Quivelinga.
The Exi[~
*
TH E Exiftence of a God or fa-
preme Being, is fo firmly
rooted in the Heart of Man-
kind, that there is no Nation
in the World but what has acknowled-
ged the fame. What is alledged to the
contrary by fome, of the Chilefes, Tapu-
jars, Brafilians, Madagafcarians, as alfo
of the Inhabitants of Florida, the Can-
bee Iflands, and efpeciallyof the Cape of
Good Hope, muft rather be attributed to
the want of Knowledg of thofc Authors,
than real Truth. Of this I was fufficient-
ly convinced 1 666, when I tarried three
Months at the Cape of Good Hope, where I
found thcfc Barbarians to perform their
Religious Service in the Night time,which
I had no Opportunity to obferve in
*565, when I came that Way before.
What is faid of Diagoras, Theodoras, Cy~
renaicus, Bion, Evemerus, Lucianos, Epi-
curus, and efpeciallyof Protagoras,
rite* and Socrates, and their Denial of the
Exiftence of God, being to be under-
ftood only of the Plurality of Gods,
which was always rejeded by the wifer
fort among the Pagans; whence it is
that we meet with the Titles of Ens En-
tium, the Being of all Beings, Ensprimum,
the fir ft Being, Primus motor & vis matrix,
the ' firft moving Caufe and Suhftance , in
their Writings.
This being laid down as a fundamen-
tal Rule, we will proceed to give an ac-
count of the Idolatry of the Pagans in-
habiting the Coaft of Malabar and the
Indies, on both fides of the Cape Como*
ryn, viz. at Tutecoryn , Trevanor , Coulang,
830
Part 1.


srifc«/
Ik Brah-
Roge-
rs,Tcxc-
ira,Caroli-
no > John
v *n Twill,
6*c.
Calecoulang , Cochin 7 Cranganor 7 Calecut 7 Ca-
nanor, as alfo on the Coafl of Coromandel ,
and the IQeof Ceylon . According to
mw,the Brahmans are diflinguifh’d into lix
Seds, ws.. Weiflnouxvcus, Seiria , Smaerta 7
Schaermeka , Pafenda and Tfcheclea 3 and
the Benjans of Gufuratte into no lefs than
63 : but in the forementioned parts, the
Brahmans are divided into four head
Sedts.
The firfl are the Cenrawack , .who ufe
neither Fire, nor Candles, nor cold Wa-
ter, for fear it fliould contain fome liv-
ing Creatures ; they don’t pafs the Streets
ualefs they be fwept before with a Broom,
which they always carry with them, for
fear of treading upon any thing that is
living. They believe neither God nor
Providence, but that all things are pro-
duced by Chance.
The fecond Sed is called Samaraeth 7
they adually believe a God.
The tjiird Bifnou 7 who calf their God
Ram. 1 hey have a Fall which begins in
Auguft, and holds 40 days.
The fourth Sed is that of the Goegii ,
who have no Habitations of their own,
but deep in the Night-time in the Chur-
ches ; they walk generally naked, hav-
ing only a Cloth to cover their Privities,
and befmear themfelvcs all over with A-
fhes. They believe a God (whom they
call Bruyn) the Creator of the Univerfe,
who is in every thing, whether Man or
Beafl (tho he can’t be fecn by the Crea-
ture) gives Light to Sun and Moon, and
annihilates what and when he pleafes.
They fay, that fuch as die in their Faith,
go diredly to their God Bruyn : they do
not burn, but bury their dead. Whoe-
ver embraces their Sed, is obliged to
take near a Pound of Cowdung every
day among his ordinary Food, for fix
Months fuccelfively, the Cow T being ac-
counted facred, and her Dung the pu-
rcfl thing among them. They are very
fupcrflitious: a Cart, Buffler or Afs
without a Load, a Dog empty mouth’d,
aHegoat, Ape, a Goldfmith, Carpenter,
Barber, Taylor, Smith, Cottonweavcr,
a Widow, a Burial, or fome body going
to a Burial, are altogether ill Omens to
them *, as an Elephant, Camel, an Horfe
without a Burden, a Cow, an Ox and
Buffler laden with Water, pretends good
Luck in their Opinion. Someacknow-
ledg one Vijlnou for their fupreme God,
■ but the moft one Ixora ; we will firfl
' treat of Ixora, and afterwards of Fift-
\ nou and Bramma,
The Brahmans have a very odd Opini-
on of the Creation of the World (of
Which more hereafter) They fay that
this VVoild will diminifh by degrees, till
it comes to a Drop of Water, which is
the Ixoretta or Divinity it felf : After
that it fhail encreafe again, when Ixoretta
ci ying out aloud, Quen 7 quen 7 will make it
turn again into a fingledropof Dew j
this will make it revive again, firfl into a
Muflard-Seed Corn, then turn to a
Pearl, and laftly into an Egg, containing
the five Elements. This Egg they fay
is to have feven diftind Shells or Partiti-
ons like an Onion, whence will break
forth the Fire and Air upwards, and the
others downwards; and, the Egg being
thereby broken into two pieces, the upper
part produced the Heavens, as the under
part did the Earth; and becaufe the
Egg had feven Shells, which by the Divi-
fion thereof made 14 half ones, thefe-
ven uppermoft Parts furnilhed the mat-
ter for feven Heavens, as the feven un-
dermofl did for as many Worlds . An
unpardonable Contradiction, when they
themfelves acknowledg their Bramma ,
and implore him as the Creator of Heavens
and Earthy and how incongruous is it,
to make the Ixoretta or Divinity fubjed
todecreafe ?
They further add, that at the opening
of the beforefaid Egg, there appear’d a
Thred drawn all along the middle, which
join’d the 14 upper and under Worlds:
Ixoretta then taking his Place in the
hignefl Sphere of the Heavens, there a-
roie at the fame time a Mountain on the
Earth, named Calaja , on the top of
which flood a Triangular Subfiance (Tri-
con* Sacra ) which produced a round Sub-
fiance, called Quivelinga, i. e. the Mem - 1
hers of Generation of both Sexes ; which'
Quiyelinga they fay, is Ixoretta or the
Divinity: for finding that all living
Creatures were procreated by the carnal
Copulation of Men and Women, they
reverenced this Quivelinga , as the Ori-
ginal of all created things, and adorned
him in their Temples with the belt
fweet Herbs and Flowers. They have a
certain religious Order called Jogiis , who
wear the figure of this Quivelinga , ei-
ther of Wood or Copper, about the Neck,
and offer him daily the belt of their Vic-
tuals. Rogerius fpeaks to the fame pur-
pofe of the Lingam 7 i. e. Memhrum vi-
rile in Muliebri , as the Ixora or Efwara
is reprefented in their Pagodes.
St. Jujlin * tells us foraething like
this of the Priapus, which ufed to he
carried in Proceflion in Honour of Bac-
chtiSy thro the Cities of Italy, and that
the Matrons ufed to crown his Membrum
Opinion of
the Bnh-
mans con-
cerning the
Creation of
the World 6
What Qui-
velinga
was.
*L, 7.C.210
de Civita-
tc Dein


virile with Garlands. I have read in fe-
, veral Authors of known Integrity, and
fpeak it upon the Credit of divers
People yet living, that the Canarins,
and Inhabitants about Goa, do carry their
Brides to fuch a Priapus , in order to de-
liver them of their Virginity. The
whole matter whereof I will for Mode-
fties fake relate in Latin: Sponfa magno
comitatumultaque cum pompa inter plaufus
ac fonos muficos ducitur ad Idolum , quod
anea virga vel ferrea, vel eburnea promt-
nente praditum confpicitur, & ad hanenuda-
ta vcfte Sponfa a Matre vel a proximis
Confanguineis vehementer impellitur , quod
cum abfque gravi dolore fieri nequeat, illi
qui adfunt , cantando & faltando fponf
flebiles voces opprimant , fi quae eft, qua do-
lorem immenfum verita, hoc modo Firgini-
tate privari recufat, blandvs Confangptineo-
rum verbis ad Idolum paulatim adaucitur,
atque ad id a Matre tamdiu (invita quam-
vis) adigitur, donee Firginitatem amtferit •,
poftea Sponfa domum redens Sfonfo traditur,
qui de hoc prec fe fufceptoLabore fibi maximo-
pere gratulatur.
gure which is infinite, whereas the Signi-
fication of the word fufficiently contra-
dids them. Quivelinga being compofed
out of the word Ling a or Ling am , i. e.
the Manly Tard, and Quiven, the fame
with Ixora and the Figure carried by the
Jogii, exprefly reprefents theConjundion
of the Members of both Sexes.
Quivelinga then (as we faid before) is
of a Circular Figure, which being enclo-
fed in three diftind Rinds or Shells,which
they fay are tranfmuted into three Gods,
viz.. Bramma , Fiftnum and Quiven *, the
firftand hardeft produces Bramma , the
fecond Fiftnum, and the innermoft
ven, Quivelinga being thus defpoU’d of
his Shells, was burnt to Aihesby Fire,
and fix’d in the Triangle r Quivelinga be-
ing thereby become a thing without Senlc
or Motion, it was requifite it fhould be
guarded by fome -body m , which Bram-
ma and Fiftnum refuting to do ,Quiven un-
dertook the Task, and conftantly at-
tending Quivelinga with Prayers and Sa-
crifices of Flowers, deferved thereby to
be ranked above his Brothers, and ob-
tain’d the Title of the Great God, as their
Poets call him. The Brahmans fay, that
Bramma , Fiftnum, and Quiven or Ixora,
are commiffioned by the Firft Being to
rule the World in the Nature of his Vice-
roys. They fay Ixora refides in Calaja,
Fiftnum in the Milk-Sea, and Bramma in
Sattialogam, or the higheft Place in Hea-
ven, of which more hereafter.
Cmarins
Priapus/
Baal Phegor feems to have been the
Priaptu of the Jews , Jeropt in his Com-
mentary upon the Prophet Hofea, fays.
That the Jewifh Women worfhipped
Baal Phegor,ob ohfcant magnitudinem Mem~
bri, quern nos Priapum pojfumus appellare .
The Brahmans will indeed not allow
of this Interpretation, alledging that
they adore under this, the Circular Fi-
CHAP. II.
A Defcription of Ixora, his Wives. Abƒtinency of the Brahmans. Divers ƒorts
of Eunuchs.
a Defer ip-
tm of
Bisßif-
T ..
wa!anti-
ently re-
prefented
mth Horns
uptoJhe
Jhuds.
T XORA is as bright and white as Milk,
1 three £y e s, two whereof arc
plac’d as thofe of other Men, and the
third in the Front, being fo full of Fire,
thatitconfumes every thing it looks up-
on# His Stature is immenfe* ioxßram-
ma being defirous to fee his Head, foar’d
up high into the Earth, but could not
reach it. Fiftnum (whom they call the
God of Inventions and Changes) having
the fame Curiofity to fee his Feet, which
reach’d deep into the Ground, transfor-
med himfelf into a Hog, the better to
dig up the Earth, but could likewife not
obtain his Wifh. For, fay they, Ixora
j s 0 f p 0 yaft an extent, that the Serpent
Sate i u (which i s f° l°ng as to compafs the
feven Worlds and the feven Seas) was
not big enough to ferve him for a Brace-
let. I heard a Pagan once ridicule a
Brahman, becaufe he put the Figure of
Ixora in his Chamber *, whereas accord-
ing to their Opinion, it was much lar-
ger than the Serpent Bategu .
Ixora has no lefs than 16 Hands,where-
with he holds the following things, A
Heart, a Chain, a Fiddle , * a Bell, For-
cellain Bafon , Capita, i. c. Bramma’s
Head, a Trident, a Rope , an Ax, Fire,
Gold, a Drum, Beads, a Staff, an Iron
Wheel , a Serpent, with a Crefcent or half
Moon on his Forehead. His Apparel is
a Tygers Skin, his Cloke the Hide of an
Elephant, furrounded with Serpents f.
He wears about his Neck a Collar of the
Skin of a certain Creature, called Mau -
* //P4B
had bit
Flute,
t Pa “
*°f e no f A
panther,
the spots
whereof in*
o j~ f ature
j n stars,
Fiowers y
832
Part f.
The Idolatry of


dega , on which is fattened a Bell, fuch as
our Oxen or Sheep commonly have about
their Necks.
He has alfo about his Neck three
Chains, one whereof being intermix’d
with Rofes and other Flowers, affords an
odoriferous Scent. The fecond is made 1
of the Heads of Bramma •, for they fay,
that Bramma dies and revives every year,
and that Ixora gathering his Heads as
often as he dies, had made this Chain of
it. The third is made of the Bones of
PUHllll illmnlmlit" lltltHiiiimiiimi'im him ' 11
ake Idol Ixora
Chatti , one of IxoraV Wives. For it is
to be known that he has two Wives, one
named Grienga or the Goddcfs of the Seasy
whom he always carries in his Hairlocks •,
the other this Chattiy otherwife called Pa-
ramefeeriy who they fay dies and revives
once a Year y and as often as (he dies, he
takes one of her Bones, which are put
into this Chain. He carries alfo the fame
Beads as the Brahmans do, his whole Bo-
dy being befmear’d with Afhes, and thus
rides in Triumph thro Cala\ay upon an
Ox named Irixapatan y unto whom they
offer certain Sacrifices.
His Attendants are called PudcvSy Pix*
aros and Pes. Pudat is reprefented like
a fat and fhort Perfon, with a large
Paunch, without a Beard, having Ser-
pents hanging down with their Tails
from his Head. He wears a Bracelet on
his left Arm, and two others about his
Thighs, made of Serpents, and a Staff
in his Right Hand. The Pes and Pixaros
arereprelented much taller, with burn-
ing Torches in their Hands in the Night-
time.
They fay that Bramma has created the
llniverfc, y'iflmm governs it, and Ixora
kills and puts a Period to every thing.
They further add, that ixora has com-
municated part of his Subftance to his
Wife Parameters, alias Parvati , and
Ihe again to him *, fo that they arc both
Hermaphrodites, and Ixora is fometimes
reprefented as fuch; and Rogerius , lib,
fays, that the Brahmans call their to,
Ardhanari , i. e. a Manxvife. There are
however a certain fort of Brahmans cal-
led Tirimimpi, who are fofar different'
from the reft, that they won’t as mjich
as caft an Eye upon a Woman \ for
which reafon as often as they pafs thro
the Streets, they have certain Perfons,
who bid the Women go out of the way.
Thus the Hierophantes of Athens , and the
Priefts of the Goddcfs Cybek among the
A firlti
fort of
Brahmans*


Romans , ufed to deny themfelves the ufe
of Venery, the firft by caftrating them-
felves, the others by certain Drugs.
The Jews diftinguilh betwixt Eunuchs
made by God, and thofe made by Men, the
laft are believed to owe their Original to
the Perftans - 7 and among the Jews they
had certain Perfons, called lmpingentes 7
becaufe they ufed to run againft Polls and
Doors, rather than to look upon a Wo-
man.
Rogerius * mentions another fort of
Brahmans , called Saufiaz.it , who renounce
all Worldly Pleafures, abftain from Wo-
men, and even the Betel (tho generally
ufed all over the Indies) eat but once a
day, have no fix’d Habitations, ufe no-
thing but earthen Veffels, and live upon
Alms. The fundamental Rules of their
Sedt being to withftand Luft 7 Anger , Co-
vetoufnefs, Pride , the Pleafures of the
Worlds and Revenge i
r.2,c.^
Divers
forts of
Eunuchs .
CHAP. III.
Conteƒt betwixt Bramma, viftnum and Ixora, who is obliged to be a Mendicant
twelve Years. A Child produced out of the Blood of Viftnum, occaƒions new
Differences.
TH E Refidence of Ixora is upon the
Silver Mount Calaja, to the South
of the famous Mountain Mahameru , being
a moft delicious Place, planted with all
forts of Trees, that bear Fruit all the
Year round. The Rofes and other Flow-
ers fend forth a moft odoriferous Scent,
and the Pond at the Foot of the Mount
is enclofed with pleafant Walks of Trees,
that afford an agreeable Shade, whilft
the Peacocks and divers other Birds en-
tertain the Ear with their Harmonious
Noife, as the Beautiful Women do the
Eyes. The circumjacent Woods are in-
habited by a certain People, called Mu-
mis or Rixis 7 who avoiding the Conver-
fation of others, fpend their time in
offering daily Sacrifices to their God.
It is obfervable, that thothefe Pagans
are generally black themfelves, yet do
they reprefent thefe Rixis to be of a fair
Complexion, with long white Beards,
and long Garments hanging crofswife,
from about the Neck down over the
Breaft. They are in fuchefteem among
them, that they believe, that whom they
blefsare bleffcd, and whom they curfe
arecurfed.
Within the Mountain lives another
Generation, call’d Jexaquinnera and
JQuendra, who are free from all Troubles,
fpend their Days in continual Contem-
plations, Praifcs and Prayers to God.
Round about the Mountain ftand 7 Lad-
ders, by which you afeend to a fpacious
Plain, in the middle whereof is a Belief
Silver, and a fqnare Table, furrounded
with nine precious Scones of divers Col-
ours. Upon this Table lies a Silver Rofe
called Tamara Pua, which contains two
Women as bright and fair as a Pearl 7
one is called Brigafiri , i. e. the Lady of
the Mouth , the other Tara/iri , i. e. the La~
dy of the Tongue , becaufe they praife
God with the Mouth and Tongue. In
the Center of this Rofe is the T'tangle ,
(mentioned in the I fi Chap.) of Quweim-
ga, which they fay is the permanent Re-
fidence of God.
Jtfordbeing one time diverting himfelf
in this Cajala or Paradife , with Pudas 7
Fes and Pixajos , let fall forae Words, in-
timating him to be the greateft in all the
World 7 which Bramma and Fiftnum not
able to brook, a Conteft arofeabout the
Precedency, to decide which Ixora told
them, that which of the two could take
a full view of him from Head to Foot,
Ihould be accounted the Greateft.
Bramma hereupon got upon his Bird
Anmm (whereof more anon) and palled
up into the Air, to get Sight of Jxora's
Head, whilft Fiflnum transforming him*
felf into a Hog, dug into the Ground,
to come at his Feet: whilft he was thus
employed, meeting with a moft poifo-
nous Serpent, he was fo ftartled at it,
that he defifted from his Enterprise. This
Story is related more at large by feveral
of the Malabar Poets.
Bramma on the other hand, refoluteia
his Defigns, foared very high into the
Air, when being met by three Flowers,
they ask’d him whither he was a going ;
he replied, to get light of the Head of
I xora 7 they told him, his Labour was in
vain, , by reafon of the vaft diftance,
which made Bramma change his Refoluti-
on : but at the fame time delired the
Flowers to tell Ixora , that he was pre-
vented from coming fo high as his Head,
by a fudden Giddinefs in his Brains,
Contefl fa
twixt Ix ‘
viftnuni.
834
The Idolatry of
Part L


One of
BrammaV
Beds cut
off by Ix-
ora.
ixora at-
tacked by
the Mu-
mis -
which they prbmiled, and did according-
ly ; but ixora being fenlible of the De-
ceit, ‘did with his Chacra or Scy meter,
cut off one of the four Heads of Bram-
ma, and turfed the Flowers. Out of the
Blood of Bramma 7 sHead, came forth a
Man with 500 Heads and ioqq Hands,
named Sagatracavaxen, The day on which
Brammo's Head was cut off, was ever af-
ter looked upon as ominous, and named
pongalacha , i. e. Dies infefttis \ whence a-
rofe the Proverb of a thing that is never
to be done, It /hall be at Pongalacha ,
The three Flowers were curfed, viz..
That one of them fliould grow upon a
Dunghil, and be cut down there j the o-
ther to be turn’d into a Crow, and the
third into a Cow.
The Brahmans further fay, That Ixora
to expiate the Crime he had committed
by cutting off the Head of Bramma , tur-
ned Mendicant as the Jogii do, with
Bramma\ Skull in his Hand, till the fame
fhould be filled with Alms \ whence arofe
thatCuftom pra&ifed to this Day, that
he who kills a Brahman, muftbeg Alms for
12 years in the Skull of the Brahman killed
by his Hands. Ixora therefore beg’d Alms
for 12 Years j for tho he receiv’d fuffident
Alms, yet by the fiery Rays that darted
from his Eye in his Forehead, it was all
confumed and turned to Allies in an In-
ftant.
One day as he was gathering Alms a-
mong the beforefaid Mumvs , their Wives
came running with whole Ladles of Blood
to fill the Skull; but not being able to
fuftain the Glance of his Eyes, they were
fo furpriz’d, that they let flip not only
their Ladles, but alfo their Clothes. The
JMumvs feeing their Wives naked, did fall
pellmell upon Ixora \ one attack’d him
with an Ax, which he feized and got up
into the Air •, another would have killed
him with a Serpent, which betook in
his Hands, without receiving any harm.
Then they brought a furious Tyger to
devour him, this he killed and flee’d, and
made a Garment of the Skin •, then they
fet upon him a wild Elephant, who un-
derwentthe fame Fate, his Hide ftrving
him afterwards for a Cloke* this >4*,
Serpent, and are the
fame Trophies he holds in his Hands.
Viftmm willing to deliver Ixora , ap-
pear'd to the Mumvs in the (hape of a
molt beautiful Virgin, which occafion’d
fuch a Surprise to them, that the Med
(as their Wives had done before) fell in-
to a Trance, and Ixora fpill’d his Seed
upon the Ground, which y'iflmm with
his Hand form’d into a Child.
Ixora being towards the end of the
1 zth year, quite tired with His Mendicant
Life, had recourfe to Fiftnum, who com-
miferating his Condition, put out the fie-
ry Eye, that confumed all the Alms in
the Skull which done, Fiftnum wound-
ed hirafelf in one of his Fingers, and
fill'd the Skull with the Blood, which put
an end to his Pilgrimage, but gave birth
to the Order of the Jogii , who in the
Memory of Ixora? s Pilgrimage, lead a
Mendicant Life to this Day.
Out of the Blood of Vtftmm a Child '
was procreated, called which oc- <
calion’d new Contcfts, Bramma challeng-
ing it as his own, becaufe it was begot in
hisSkulU Fifinum becaulh it came forth
out of his Blood, and Ixora becaufe it
came out of his Hands; To reconcile
this Difference, Devaitidra , a King of the
aerial Spirits, perfuaded them to relin-
quilh their Pretenlions by joint Confent ,
which they having confented to, Devain-
dr a educated the Child at Devalogam ,
where becoming a fimous Bowman, he
protefted that Place againfl: Sagatracava-
gem, who, as we told before, being the
Produd of Bramma? s Head, had 500
Heads and 1000 Hands. Afterwards
Ixora returned to Calaja hit former Re-
fidence*
It is obfervable, that if one of their
Kings dies, they tie his Hands and Feet,
when certain Soldiers come to threaten
him with their Sticks > which Affront,
they believe is a means to expiate the
Trefpaffes committed by him in his Life-
time againfl: his Subjeds.
* <
Relieved
by Virf-
nurcu
Another
Conte# .
CHAP. IV.
The Children of Ixora ; the Nativity and Conƒtitution of Quenavady. The O-
rigin of Sura. Quenavady caƒtrated. Conteƒt betwixt him and Superben-
nia. His Habitation and Gluttony, funeral of the Malabars.
had 6 Faces and 12 f lands. The Daugh-
ter, who was as black as a Coal, had the
Face of a Hog. The eldeft Son named £ue~
-r j XORA had three Sons and one
i Daughter, the eldeft: refembling an
Elephant, the fecond an Ape, the third
Children
of Ixora.
835
Chap. IV.
the Eaft-India Pagans.


navady was born in the Wood by Piragu ,
with an Elephant’s Head and Face, the
reft of his Body being like other Men.
For Ixora walking one time with his Lady
Paramefceri towards the Wood Piragu , fhe
faw an Elephant fporting with a Female of
the fame kind, and fo raifed her Appetite,
that fhe defir’d Ixora to be both tranf-
form’d into Elephants ; which being done
accordingly, they ate of a certain Fruit
in the Wood, which made them quite
frenzical, fo that they made the fame
noifs, overturn’d the Trees, threw up
the Sand with their Trunks, and did all
the other Aftions of Elephants, not ex-
cepting even their Copulation. The
Quencva-
dyV Origi-
nal.
||||||||||J|||||l||ll f I I ' ' ■nnmTn.nmi.nMT .
WThe Idol Qiienavady,Jxoras SonQ
Female having conceiv’d immediately,
brought forth this Child with the Ele-
phant’s Head and Face, and foon after
they refumed their own Shape. Tara-
mefeeri tried to give fuck to this young
Monfter, but being in danger of having
her Breafl: torn in pieces by it, Ihe de-
liver’d it up to Ixora, who had it brought
up in Calaja.
the Girdle of the Brahmans , and on his
Feet divers Gold Rings and Bells.
They tell you another Story of Ixora ,
viz*. That being one time inebriated with
the Sury , or Juice of the Coco-Tree, and
having Carnal Copulation with Parame-
/cm, a fmall quantity of Ixora’s Seed was
fpilt upon the ground, and afterwards
cover’d with Earth by Paramefceri ; this
produc’d a Palm-tree. Ixora coming
foon after into the Wood, and feeing the
young Tree, cut off the top thereof with
his Chacra , or Weapon. The Liquor
which iflued thence fo well pleafed Ixora>
that he took a good quantity of it in
his Cup he always carried along with
him, and having drank his full ihare, ty*d
up the Tree, and fo return’d to Calaja.
He repeated this fo often, that Para-
mefeeri finding him always return in Drink
This Qtfencvady had the Hand, Teeth
and Face of an Elephant, with large
hanging Ears, and ugly Lips, with red
Pimples all over the Face: His Hair is
long (like his Father’s) tied about with
a Serpent or Adder, with a Crefccnt of
Half-moon on his Fore-head, and four
Hands, befides the Trunk; the reft of
his Body like other Men, but fhining like
Gold, with a large Paunch tied about
with a red piece of Stuff: He wears alfo
A Defcrip-
fm of him.
A Story of
Ixora*
8 3 6
Part I.
The Idolatry of


Tte Brah-
mans a-
mfe to
VmkeH-
nCS‘
Quenava-
dy cap a-
Haw mr-
flipp'd.
Difference
betwixt
Quenava-
dy and Su-
pcrbenmT
from the Wood, took the next oppor-
tunity to follow him thither, and find-
ing the Juice very acceptable, fhe tailed
fo long of it, till fhe was alfo inebriated.
Ixora when he fit ft efpy’d his Wife behind
him, cry’d out to her, Calli, that is, you
fhe-Thief: whereupon fhe anfwering,
Calla , i. e. Thief ; the Malabars to this
day call the faid Juice Calla . Ixora being
well pleas’d with the young Tree, he
ftretch’d it with his hand higher and
higher, and fo turn’d it into a Palm-
tree.
It feems fomewhat odd, that the Brah-
mans who pretend fo much to Sobriety,
Ihould make their Supreme God a Drun-
kard, when they are fo nice in this Point,
that they will never make ufe of our
Ink, for fear there fhould be fome Wine
in it. Thus the Samoryn of Calccut kill’d
his own Brother-in-law becaufe he was
drunk, and the King of Cochin did the
fame to a Company of drunken Nairos,
They further tell us of this Ixora , that
he caus’d his Son Quenavady to be ca-
ftrated, becaufe he once, whilft yet in
his Mother s Arms, touch’d her Privy-
Parts with his Trunk: others fay he ac-
tually enjoy’d her; which is the reafon
the Malabars fay that the Elephants have
noTefticles.
It is to this Quenavady the Pagan Ar-
tifans, Workmen, &c, offer the firft-
fruits of their Labour. After they have
reverenced and offer’d Sacrifices to him
for 12 years, he moves one of his Ears,
as a fign that they muff continue the fame ;
which being done 12 other years, he
(hakes the other Ear, to give them to
underftand that he requires (till more at
their hands; if they hold on 12 years
longer, he opens his Eyes and grants
their Requefh.
Ixora being at a certain time defirous
to try the Agility of his two Sons Que~
navady and Superbemia , offer’d a very fine
Fig as a Reward to him who fhould
carry the day. Quenavady having a ve-
ry thick Skin, and riding only upon a
Moufe, whereas Superbemia had 6 Faces
and 12 Arms, and rid upon a Peacock,
being fufficiently convinc’d that his Bro-
ther would carry the Prize, took his op-
portunity whilft the other was riding
round the Calaja , to turn fhort and fo
lay hold of the Fig. Superbennia having
taken his turn, purfuant to the Wager,
and not finding the Fig, did fall upon
Quenavady lb furioufly, that he beat out
one of his Teeth: But Ixora giving Su-
perbennia another Fig, the difference was
foon ended. But not knowing what to
do with the Tooth, he gave it to Tijlnou ,
defiring him to reftore it to Quenavady ,
which he did accordingly by putting it
into a Fig which he gave to his Nephew,
who as he was going to eat the Fig found
the Tooth, which he turn’d into a nice
writing Pen, and kept it to write his
Poetry with.
For the reft Quenavady is reprefented
as very voracious, for they fay he could
devour the whole World; nor is he to
be fatiated but in the Sugar-Sea call’d
Jexucadhil , which is of a vail extent, and
/always boiling-hot, having in the midil
a Mount compos’d cf 9 very fine Stones,
with a Plain on the top, delicioufly feat-
ed, in the Center whereof ftands the
Tree Z#o/#, inclofed with a row of pre-
cious Stones curioufly wrought. In this
Endofure is a Structure of the fineft red
Coral, cover’d with precious Stones;
The Doors whereof, as well as the Ave-
nues to the place, are guarded by a good
force of the Fudas , who fpend their
time in holy Meditations and Prayers in
the Company of a good number of Wo-
men, who fing to the Praife of God.
Clofe about the Tree Luola are Seats of
Gold, and a Table made of the moll pre-
cious Stone call’d BairacaUe , upon which
Hand a bright fhining Moufe, and a
Rofe, in the Leaves whereof are written
14 Letters or Chara&ers. This is the
Refidence of Quenavady , who rides up-
on the faid Moufe.
He has on each fide of him a mofl beau-
tiful Woman, who are continually em-
ploy’d to lade Sugar mixt with Hony into
his Mouth; and for fear he fhould be tir’d
with the fame Diet, good llore of yiffes
(Indian Cakes) fried in Butter-milk, But-
ter, and divers other Provifions, Hand
always before him. The Hills near it
afford alfo Figs, Grapes, Coco Nuts, and
all other forts of the bell Fruits, as well
as Rofes and other Flowers; the Mufici-
ans that attend divert him with Fiddles,
Trumpets, Flutes, Hautboys, and other
Mufical Inftruments, as many Women
are employ'd to make rich Incenfes, and
to anoint his Body with Sandal Wood,
Civet, Musk, and to offer all forts of
odoriferous Flowers.
The Malabars celebrate yearly the
Memory of their deceafed Friends with
great Pomp and vail Charge, according
to their Abilities. The Kings upon this
occafion entertain the Brahmans (who
are in high efleem there, as being the
Interpreters of their Tedam or Law-
book) magnificently, and diftribute Mo-
nj. after the Feaft. And becaufe in the
The Sugar-
Sea,
Funeral
Feajis cf
the Mala-
bars.


1 Indies, but efpccially on the Coaft of
j Malabar , there are many petty Kings, as
thofc of Trevancor , Coulang , ,
Fore a. Cochin , Cranganor, , &c.
thefe Feafts are frequent in thofe parts,
and the Brahmans will be fure to partake
of them, tho they travel fometimes 10,
15, nay 20 Leagues for it, and take their
full lhare j for tho they value themfelves
much for abftaining from Flcili, Fiih,
Eggs, Wine and other ftrong Liquors,
yet will they make themfelves a full a-
mends with fuch Viftualsas are allowable
by their Confticution.
CHAP. V.
Of the other Children of Ixora. A Coco-Nut in the Head of an Ape. Siri
Hanuman born an Ape. Reviv'd from the dead. Combat betwixt Super-
bennia and Quenavady. His curƒing of the Moon.
why the
coco-mt
print of a
Mans Face,
the wives
Nairos flip
off their P
clothes in
dancing,
THE next to Quenavady, is ftiled
Egafotirubum, or the true God, re-
prefented with an Elephant’s Head, and
11 Hands. He is only to be worihip’d
by the Brahmans , tho others alfo facri-
fice to him, but mult at the fame time
abftainfrom Flelh, Fi(h, Eggs and Wine.
Next to him comes Ceuxi, whofc Origin
is related thus: Paramefceri Ixora* s Sppufe
having anointed her Body with Oil and
Saffron, and walking her felf in a Pond,
did form from the Impuritys of her Bo-
dy a living Man \ Ixora feeing him at a
diltance, and believing him to be her
Lover, haftned thither, and ftruck with
his Weapon his Head off* at the foot of
the Mountain Calaja , which was turn’d
into a Coco-Tree, whence it is that the
Indians fay, that the print of a Man’s
ace was Cofo- Nut. Para-
tnefeeri being forely afflifted at her Son’s
Death, Ixora pleaded his Ignorance, and
to comfort her in her Afflidion, cut off
the Head of a white Elephant, which he
put upon the Shoulders of her dead Son,
and fo reftor’d him to life again. He is
reprefented with an Elephant’s Head and
two Hands.
Ixora had alfo another Son, named Siri
Hamman, by Paramefceri , which was born
ah Ape. Ixora it feems was a moft cele-
brated Dancer, and ufed frequently to
Ihew his Adivity in the prefence of the
Celcftial Spirits, as well as his Spoufe
Paramefceri , who was fo adive in dan-
cing, that one time when Ihe had loft her
Ear-Jewel out of one Ear, (he took it up
with two Toes of her Feet, and put it in
her Ear again, to the incredible furprize
of the Spedators. Hence perhaps arofe
the Cuftom ufed among the Ladies of
the Nairos, who whilft they are dancing
at a-certain Feaft celebrated in honour of
one their Idols, let on a fudden flip all
their Clothes* and remain naked. But
to return to Ixora : Having invited ma-
ny of the Celeftial Spirits to fee him
dance, Paramefceri happen’d to fee two
Apes fport together in the adjacent
Wood 3 flie defir’d Ixora to transform
both her and him into Apes, which done,
they leapt about in the Wood till coming
to a Bambo~ Tree, Paramefceri then con-
ceiv’d an Ape. In the mean time the
Celeftial Spirits being come, according
to invitation, and among them Jecxa,
Quinnera and Quendra , and finding their
Hoft abroad, they fent the Wind (as the
nimbleft of all) to find out Ixora , who
having told him his Errand, they both
refum’d their former lhapes.
Paramefceri being now alham’d of her
Burden, requefted the Wind to convey
the Ape into the Womb of Anhema, one
of the Ladies of the Celeftial Spirits 3
and fo they return’d home, where Ixora
danc’d to the admiration of the whole
Aflembly. Anhema afterwards brought
forth an Ape as white as Ixora himfelf,
who being endow’d with peculiar Virtues
by his Father, performed many noted
Exploits 3 of which more hereafter in
the Hiftory of Siri Rama .
# Two odd Stories they tell of this Ape:
Firft, That being one time very hungry,
and taking the Sun for a dainty bit, he
was endeavouring to leap up towards it,
but was beat back by the Iron Weapon
of Ixora, who gave him a good knock on
the Pate, but without any harm, whence
he got the Name of Hamman. The
other is. That meeting one time with
a white Elephant call’d on
which was mounted JDevaindra King of
the Celeftial Spirits, a Quarrel arofe be-
twixt them, in which Hamman was (lain:
His Father the Wind being aflJided at his
Death, hid his Face under ground, fo
that the Inhabitants of the Earth being
ready to perifli for want of Air in the
oddstories
of the Ape
siriHanu-
man*


extremity of Heat, they addrefs’d them-
felves to Ixora , who reftor’d Hanuman
to life, and recal’d the Wind above
ground.
Thus the Wind was ador’d as a God
both by the Greeks and Romans . The
Athenians erefted a Temple to the Wind,
as Auguftus did in France \ the Phenicians
did the fame. This Ape has divers ce-
lebrated Pagodes ereded to him by the In-
dians. We read in the Portuguefe Hifto-
ries, that in 1354, when they plunder’d
the famous Pagode upon the Adams Mount
in Ceylon , they found an Ape's Tooth,
(the moft facred Relick of the Pagans of
Pegu, Ceylon , Malabar , B eng ale , Coro~
mandel and Bifnagar ) enclofed in a Box
fet with precious Stones, which they
carried to Goa\ fome of the Indian
Princes offer’d 700000 Ducats to redeem
it, but it was not accepted of, by reafon
the Bilhop of Goa oppofed it.
Another Son of Ixora was call d Super-
hernia, with 6 Faces and 12 Hands, the
occahon whereof happened thus: Para-
mefceri being one day employ’d in walk-
ing her felf in a Ciftern, 6 Weavers
happen’d to pafs by, who inflam’d with
Luft, look’d very wifhfully at her \ this
having the fame effeft upon her, Ihe con-
ceiv’d the fame inftant: but fearing
Ixora* s Anger, file threw it out with her
Spittle upon the ground, which turning
• in an inftant into a Child with 6 Faces and
*l2 Hands, much refembling in all other
refpeds the 6 Weavers, they took it
along with them, and educated it in all
manner of Accomplilhments. One time
being ingag’d in a Diipute with Ixora , he
was lb taken with his Wit, that he re-
ceiv’d him for his Son, alfign’d him a
Place at Calaja , and prerented him with
a Peacock to ridempon.
Before I conclude this Chapter, I muft
tell you one thing more of Quenavady.
Returning one day pretty late at night
from a Banquet, when the Moon was not
very light, it being only the 4 th day after
the New Moon in Auguft , with his Um-
brella in one hand, in the other a Poetry
and fome Cakes under his Arm, he ran
unwarily againft a Poll: with fuch vio-
lence, that he fell upon the ground and
dropt not only his Umbrella, but alfo his
Poems and Cakes: As he was moft con-
cern’d for the laft, fo he took a good
bite or two of them before he rofe again,
or look’d for his Book and Umbrella.
The Moon feeing this pleafant Spedacie,
could not forbear laughing } which Qy:e~
navady perceivings broke out into this
Curfc, Who ever , O Moon , /hall fee thee
for the future upon this day in Auguft, /hall
be damnify’d in hvs Privities . Hence it is
that the Pagans will not ftir abroad the
4 th of Auguft after Sun-fet, nay even not
on the sth, for fear of partaking of this
Curfe j and if any one is oblig’d to ftay
without doors, he covers his Face, and
even will not look into the Water for
fear of feeing the Moon, tho they fee
the St. Thomas Ghriftians, the Jews and
Mahometans look upon it at the fame time
without the leaft detriment.
Quenaw
dy curfes
the Mon:
A Concept
tmbyfan-
CJ '
CHAP. VI.
Ixora's Daughter, and the Origin of the Fear of the Malabars of
that Diƒtemper. Their Pagode Amadyri plunder'd by the King of Cochin.
She comes to Coulang.
A Certain Giant named Kacxada (of
which more anon) having liv’d 12
years with Bramma, he receiv’d among
many other Prefents a Book from him,
and fome Bracelets, as alfo the Virtue of
being invulnerable. The Natives of Co-
romandel believe thefe Giants to have been
Children of the Brahman Caftiopa by his
Wife Aditi, juft as the Jem fay that
Lilith brought forth Devils begotten by
Mam . Banda finding himfelf thus plac’d
above the common rank of Men, by his
Strength beftow’d upon him by Bramma ,
would needs challenge Ixora,. who know-
ing his Strength.fent againft him a certain
Female named Sorga , who cot off one of
his Heads (forbefides his true Head, he
had many others, but only in appearance)
but Darida returning the next day, reite-
rated his Boafts, when Ixora engag’d five
holy Women, call’d Cbamundigal by the
Malabars , in his Quarrel, who cut off his
falfe Heads 3 but all to no purpofe, fo that
Darida perilling in his Infolence, Ixora
confulted with Fiftnum, what to do in this
exigency. Whilft they were debating
the matter, Fiftnum fent forth from his
Body a certain matter (call’d Bixa by
the Malabars ) which entring that of
Ixora, pafi’d again thro the Eye on his
Paridao


Front, and falling upon the ground pro-
duc’d in an inftant a Female, which
Ixora acknowledging for his Daughter,
gave her the Name ox Patragali Pagode.
This Daughter had 8 Faces, i 5 Hands
as black as a Coal, with large round
Eyes, her Teeth like the Tusks of a Boar:
In lieu of Pendants (he has two Elephants
in her Ears, and Serpents about her Bo-
dy inftead of a Garment*, her Hair-locks
are Peacocks Tails, in her Hand flie car-
ries a Sword, a Trident, a large Pdr-
cellain Bafon, another Veffel call’d Ca-
pala by the Ma\abars y a Scymiter call’d
Mautegam , a Hanger call’d Carutela , an
Arrow, a Weapon call’d Cona , a Rope,
an Ape with an Iron Wheel.
This Monfter was no fooner born, but
Ihe went to revenge her Father’s Quarrel,
and fighting for feven days fucceffively, (he
cut off 7 of his imaginary Heads*, but
finding all her Endeavours in vain, and
that Darida was not vulnerable as long
as he kept the Book and Bracelets given
him by Bramma , flie apply’d her felf to
Sorga, intreating her to take upon her
the Habit of a Beggar, and by that means
endeavour to get the beforefaid things
into her hands. Accordingly Sorga took
the opportunity to ask Alms of Darida ,
when he was at fome diftance from his
Houfe, who told her, that if (he would
go to his Houfe his Wife would anfwer
her defire, which if (he did not, he would
do it himfelf. Sorga then went to his
Houfe, and ask’d his Wife for the Brace-
lets and Book in her Husband’s Name,
who freely delivering the fame, flie
brought them inftantly to Patragali. Da-
rida having thus loft his beft Treafures,
wherein Bramma had enclofed all his
Happinefs, and thereby being bereav’d
of his former Strength, was foon after
engag’d again, and had his true Head
cut oft by Patragali .
Being much exalted by this Viftory,
flie came ftrait to Ixora , who being then
juft undrefs’d leapt into a Ciftern, for
tear of being feen by Patragali , from
whence fie gave her fome Flelh and Blood j
but finding her not fatisfied thus, he or-
der’d her to hold out her Bafon, and cut-
ting off one of his Fingers he fill’d it
with his own Blood \ but Patragali con-
tinuing ftill unfatisfied, took one of her
Golden Chains ( compofed of fmall pieces
like Pepper Corns) and threw it into his
Face, which railing in his Face great num-
bers of Pimples, or fmall Ulcers, he
cry’d out with great furprize, Bafuri, i. e.
O you revengeful Woman! and defiring
her to defift, created two young Men
named Birapatrem dnd whom
he bellow’d upon her, and thus pa-
cified her Anger ; but to rid his hand
of her for the future, he prefented her
with a Velfel of Sandal Wood, ordering
her to go with it into the World, and to
refide (tho unknown) among the Mor-
tals, and to require Vows and Sacrifices
at their hands.
The Pagans therefore imagining that
it is Patragali fends the Small-Fox among
the People, leave the Patient fo foon as
he is feiz’d with it; and hence perhaps
it is, that they have a certain Idol re-
presenting a Female, with a Child laying
his Arms about her Neck, and imploring
her Afliftance. They deliver up thefe
Patients to the care of the Comarcus, a
Fraternity belonging to the Pagode of Pa-
tragali *, thefe offer the Blood of fome
Cocks and other Sacrifices to the God-
defs in behalf of the Sick } and for the
reft give them only fome Canfies , or
Rice boil’d in Watery and leaving them
for the reft to their own difpofal, more
die for want of good looking after, than
by the Violence of the Diftemper *, nay
fometimes are kill’d by Comaras 7 who in-
herit all their Moveables.
We told you before, that Ixora call’d
his Daughter Bafuri , which to this day
lignifies the Small-Pox among the Mala-
bars, which they fay is the Sword of Pa-
tragali, and for that reafon endeavour to
mitigate her Wrath by Sacrifices, where-
in they follow the footfteps of theantient
Creeks ,
They fay that Patragali has her chief
Refidence in the Great Pagode of Cran-
ganor y call’d the Pagode of Pilgrims, from
the vaft number of Zealots that flock
thither,- and as this brings in a Revenue
of many thoufand Fanams to the King of
Cranganor , fo the King oiCochin, who fain
would have had a fliare in the Booty, did
poft fome Forces on the Pafles, who
rob’d and plunder’d the Pilgrims, in-
tending by this means to oblige them to
refort to the Pagode built in the King-
dom of Palurti under his Jurifdidlion.
Thus the old King of Cochin did plunder
and rob the famous Pagode of Ammadiri y
of all its Treafure, at the head of a
Body of 10000 Men, and afterwards
laugh’d at them into the bargain, faying
that he had taken it only as his Inheri-
tance, as being the Son and Heir of the
Idol; juft as Dionyfius the Sicilian Tyrant
did with Jupiter and zAEfculapius .
But to return to Patragali ; Ihe was no
fooner got out into the Main with her
VelTel of Sandal-wood, but being attack’d
Opinion of
the Pagans
about the
Small-px.
The Pa-
gode ef
F a J?§ all
The King
°f Cocnin
b
Adventures
f p * :n &f
/Vfjxon


by fome Fitoer-men and Ape-Hunters,
was forc’d to return to Calaja, where
finding Jxora overwhelm’d with Sleep,
toe overturn’d his Bedftead, which a-
wakening him, toe told him her Difaftcr;
whereupon being endow’d with new Vi-
gor by Ixora, toe return’d to her Veflel,
and having defeated the and
landed fafely on the South-fide ot Coulang _
( a City of Malabar ) the Queen thereof
fent for her to Court, and entertain’d
her there for 1 1 years as her own Daugh-
ter.
The Lord of Couleta (a Country 7
Leagues to the North of C ale cut) then
defiring Patragali in Marriage for his Son,
the fame was concluded, and fhe taken
home, where fhe liv’d for 12 years with-
out ever cohabiting with her Husband,
as boafting her felt to be the Daughter
of Ixora . Mendoza fpeaks of a certain
Idol in China with a Child hanging about
her Neck, which the Jefuits would fain
perfvvade the World to have been intend-
ed for the Virgin Mary, tho it Teems
much more probable, that it was intend-
ed for this Patragali. What Mr. Lc
Blanc tells us of the Female Idol of Ca~
lecut , Teems very TuTpicious to me.
CHAP. VII.
Patragali's Father and Mother ƒuƒƒer Shipwrack. She ƒends her Husband to ƒell
her jewels, and goes in queƒt after him. Nine ƒever al Adventures which
happen to her. The reƒt of Ixora his Children, their Adventures. What
further becomes of Par ameƒ ceri.
PatragaliV
Husband
executed.
D ...
St S s
Mfi foe
goes in
queflofber
“•
Afterwards patragali’ s Father and
Mother-in-law being embark’d a-
board a Ship with all their Riches, in or-
der to traffick with them in Foreign Coun-
tries, they were attack’d at Sea by the
Ape.hunters, who linking their Ships, they
loft all their Riches- Patragali then gave
her Golden Foot-rings to her Husband to
fell them, who departed accordingly, but
meeting upon the Road a Goldfinith (a
Highway-man of Pandy ) he under pre-
tence of viewing the Rings, entertain d
the Husband, till by feveral By-ways
they brought him to Pandy. Here the
pretended Goldfmith (who had not long
before ftoln juft fuch Rings from the
Queen of Pandy ) accufed Patragali of
the Robbery, who was put in PnTon, and
afterwards empal’d alive on a Palm-tree.
The Goldfmith’s Wife having an aver-
lion to fo foul a Fad, upbraided her
Husband with it, who kill’d and buried
her near a Well. . . ,
Patragali having ftaid fix days without
hearing any News from her Husband,
refolv’d to go in fearch after him.
The firft thing (he met with.was an-
eeon, which toe ask’d,
her Husband ? The Pigeon reply d, toe
had feen him go that way, but not re-
turn In recompence whereof Pat * a if*
gave her this Bleffing, That toe toould
never want Water in February (being the
drieft feafon here) and prefented her
with a piece of her Cham, which toe
threw about her Neck, C the Turtles have
fuch a Ring about the Neck.)
Patragali following the way toewn her
by the Pigeon, met with another Bird,
of whom having enquir’d as toe did be-
fore of the Pigeon, toe receiv’d the fame
Anfwer, which made her beftow a Tuft
upon his Head, being perhaps the fame
we call the Piemt in our Country, call’d
Carpenteiro by the Portuguefes.
Afterwards Patragali coming to a Man-
go-Tree, toe ask’d the fame Queftion-,
but receiving no Anfwer, toe curft it,
that for the future the dead Corps toould
be burnt with no other Wood, and that
all Veflels built of that Wood, toould
rot and be worm-eaten at Sea.
Meeting next a Cow, toe was kick’d
by her hindermoft Legs; which toe re-
fented fo ill, that toe gave her this Curfe,
That of her four Teats one toould be for
the ufe of the Pagode, the other for the
Prince of the Country, the third for the
Owner, and the fourth only for her Calf;
that they toould make Drums of her Skin,
and that confequently toe toould be fub-
je£l to Blows both dead and alive.
The fifth toe met with being a Nairo,
or Soldier of Malabar, this Fellow had
dug a hole, and having cover’d the fame
with fbme Twigs and Sand, Patragali fell
into it as toe pafs’d along; toe gave him
this Curfe, that he toould be call’d Cow-
ard all his life-time.
The next was a Naira, or a s
Daughter, who being ask’d by her, whe-
ther toe had not feen her Husband ? toe


Patragali
revenges
h . er J W
death
t ‘ ciapt her Hands, faying in fcornful tone,
f j What are you running after your Huf-
band ? I have not feen him. She gave him
this Curfe, That (he (hould be married
to a Nairo , a Coward, who as foon as
he turn’d Soldier (hould leave her in 40
days after.
She then coming to a Jaquo-Tree, (he
ask’d after her Husband again: the Tree
bowing its Twigs, furnifhed her with fome
of its Milky Liquor (as this Tree does
if you cut any of its Twigs) (he bellow’d
this BMing upon it. That its Fruits
(hould be highly efteem’d by the Rings
and Princes, and that tho its Stem might
corrupt, it (hould continue to bear Fruit
(as in effed it does) and that they
(hould employ its Wood in ’making their
Cymbals call’d Tabelyne , and the Statues
of their Idols.
The eighth (he met with was a Folia , a
Man of mean Extraction, who not going
out of her way (as they ufually do) (he told
him, that he (hould not be admitted into
the Houfes of Perfons of Quality from
Oftober till February.
The laft (he met with was a ,
likewife a Perfon of low Birth ; but
having paid her the ufual Reverence, (he
admir’d at his Civility, which made her
ask him. Whether he did know her? He
reply’d, that he took notice of her Swines
Tusks, and the Elephants in her Ears;
which fo pleafed her, that (he told him,
he (hould drink of the Liquor of the
Palm-tree (which in effed they do when
they gather it ) and that he and his Fa-
mily (hould feed upon Cow’s Flefh. Then
tracing the way (hew’d her by the Parrea ,
ihe found her Husband empal’d upon the
Palm-tree; which being too high for her,
(he obtain’d by her Prayers that the Palm-
tree broke, and fo deliver’d her Huf-
band, whom (he brought to Life again.
Patragali now burning of Revenge to
punifh the Murderers of her Husband,
addrefs’d her felf to Ixora, who having’
furnilh’d her with a ftrong Body of
Raxaxos , or Devils ( having been wicked
Men in their life-time) (he enter’d the
Territories of Pandy, and at laft kill’d
the King and the Goldfmith. His Wife
flie reviv’d from the dead, who having
brought forth a Son, (he granted him a
Privilege to work in the Pagodes , and to
receive to himfelf the tenth part of all
the Gold he (hould make ufe of, the
fourth in toof what he (hould work for
the King, and as much as he could get
from private Perfons.
We told you before of the of
Patragali in Crangartor , where befides
her Statue Hands that of a large Man in
Marble, which the Brahmans knock every
day with Hammers upon the Head, to
keep it from growing too bin.
Thus much of Ixor s Children who
were, properly fpeaking,only four in num-
ber (Superbenma being only an adopted
Son) we muft alfo go on in the Story of
Paramefceri his Spoufe and her Origin.
Jecxa Pajava King of the Peringales had
font Daughters, the eldeft whereof was
Paramefceri , otherwife call’d Parvati-, Sa-
roffodi and Gojatris the fecond and third
being married to Bramma, and Pagode
Sm to njlmm. Their Father being de-
nrous to fee his Daughters in their full
Glory, invited Bramma and Fiflnum to
a moft magnificent Feaft. ask-
ing him whether he had invited Ixora
he anfwer’d, No, ( Ixora being then in
his Mendicant State ) but afterwards con-
sidering the matter, he invited him at
laft, which Ixora took (b hainoufly, that
he refolv’d to fpoil the Feaft.
The Day appointed for the Feaft being
come, Siri Pagode came in great Pomp in
a . (lately Chariot made of nine mod pre-
cious Stones, mod artificially wrought,
her felf being adorn’d with numberlefs
Jewels and Pearls, and attended by a
fplendid Retinue of Servants and Mu-
flcians; Sarojfodi and Gojatrvs the other
two Siders appear’d with the fame Splen-
dor. Paramefceri in the mean while ha-
ving obtain’d leave to go to the Fead from
Ixora, he order’d her to put on her bed
Apparel, and gave her his Serpents, his
Umbrella of Peacocks Tails, his Chain
of Bones, his Tygers Skin, and Elephants
Hide*, thus equipp’d (he mounted upon
an Ox, and with a large Attendance of
Drummers, and Pudcvs and Pixares , came
to her Father’s Palace, where being met
at the Gates by her Siders and the other
Gueds, thefe feeing her Equipage much
below what they expefted, indead of
welcoming her as they ought to have
done, burft out into laughter, which fo
vexed Paramefceri , that without more a-
do (he return’d to Calaja , where (he gave
an account of what Treatment (he had
met with, becaufe her Sifters appear’d at the
Feaft in a moft fumptuous Equipage , their
apparel being cover d all over with precious
Stones and Pearls , whereas fhe who was the
eldeft Sifter , and married to Ixora, had
been defpis’d for her mean appearance.
Ixora mov’d at the juft Complaints of
his Spoufe, lent his Son Quenavady to
fpoil the Feaft. Fiftnum being well ac-
quainted with Temper, or-
der’d good ftore of Cakes to be fet before
Pcdegree
of Para-
meiccri.
Rogeriis
gives a
fomewhut
different
Relation.


him in the Hall, which pleafed him fo
well, that he foon forgot his Father’s
Orders. Ixora wondering at Quenevad/ s
long ftay, fent his Brother Superbennia
upon the fame Errand •, V'ifimm know-
ing him not to be diverted with Trifles,
fent out to him fome ingenious Perfons,
who entertain’d him fo well with fubtile
Difcourfes and Arguments, that he like-
wife neglefted his Father’s Commands.
At laft Ixora finding both his Sons to
ftay behind, order’d his Daughter Pair a-
gait thither * 7 Viftnum no fooner heard of
her coming, but he commanded a rnoft
delicious Banquet to be fet before her in
the Hall, through which (he was topafs,
which fo diverted her Senfes, that (he
foon forgot what (he came about.
Ixora finding all thefe Endeavours to
prove ineffectual, refolved to go thither
in Perfon which F'iftnunt no fooner got
notice of, but he told King Jecxa Prajava
his Father-in-law, that not being able to
cope with Ixora , he would retire with
his Wifej and Bramma doing the fame,
the Sun and the Moon (two of the Guelh )
ftaid only behind: Ixora coming to his Fa-
ther-in-law’s Palace, upbraided him with
the Contempt he had put upon him and his
Wife Paramefceri , and fo taking him by
the Hair full of Anger, there came forth
at the fame inftant a (lout Warrior arm’d
Cap-a-pee (like the Man of the antient
Pagans ) call’d F'irapatren by the Mala-
bars, who cut off Jecxa Prajava? s Head,
the Hands of the God of the Fire , and
beat out the Teeth of the Sun, What
Rogerius fays concerning Jecxa Pra]ava\
having got a Goats Head inftead of the
other, and that the Moon alfo got a good
banging, I could never learn either from
thefe Pagans themfelves, or from the
Portuguefe Hiftories.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
The Idol Viftnum, and his Transformation into a Fiƒh. Mats Altar. Another
Transformation of Viftnum. An Account of the Milk.Sea. Cauram's
Altar.
ViftnumV
Vifcent
and Refi.
deuce.
W "Tlftnum the fecond in rankamo . n §
'% / the Gods next to Ixora, is alfo
dcfccndcdfrom Quivelinga. He
▼ is of a black Colour, with one
Head, and four Hands •, he refides on the
Sugar-Sea, and governs the World fleep-
inl Inftead of a Bed, he repofes upon
a noted Serpent call’d Amatan, with five
Heads •, two whereof ferve him for Pil-
iars, one for a Bolder, and two under
bis Hands. This Serpent, as they fay*
being once in the humour to try the
Power of Viftnum, got a fixth Head, which
Viftnum no fooner faw, but he got another
Hand to lay upon the Head, and the Ser-
pent having got a feventh Head, he got
likewife another Hand 5 fo that, as the
Serpents Heads did grow to the number ot
a thoufand, his Hands encreafed in propor-
tion; whence it is that they look upon
the Serpents asCeleftial Spirits,keep them
in great Veneration, and never kill them,
tho they arc often hurt by them. Thus
the Serpents were reckoned by the an-
tient Lithuanians , Samogitians,
and Egyptians.
tThey tell us further, that Pijtnum wears w
the Print of a Foot upon his Breaft : For r
one Ricxi Sirxtelfiena being defirous to ;
know which of the three was the molt
Potent God, came to Calaja, and gave Ixora
a good Box on the Ear, who transform’d
him into a Stone •, but having after 1 z
years recover’d his Life, he did the fame
to Bramma , who let him go without do-
ing him any harm. Then coming to
Vittnum, and finding him upon his Bed,
he fet his foot upon his Breaft, which
Piftmm fix’d there* fo that he was forced
to continue there 100 years.
Vtfimm had two Wives, one call’d '
Leximi alias Laetzemi, and I
before-mention’d. The firft Pifinum
found in the Milk-Sea , in a Rofe of
108 large and r 008 leiler Leaves her
chief bufmefs is to fcratch his Head. The
Wears 4
Print on
hii Breaft-,
ViftnumV
Wives*
843
Chsp* I*
the Eaft-India Pagans.


* China
Ilhtflr,
Part 3.
Ed, 6*
other is call’d Pumi Divi, i. e. the God-
defs of fieaven , in whofe Lap he lays his
Feet, which Ihe is to rub with her Hands.
They attribute no lefs than ten feveral
Transformations to Fiftnwn, nine where-
of they fay are accomplifli’d already, but
the tenth is to come. Father Kircher the
Jefuit * mentions the fame to have been
related to him by Father an^w-
ftin Frier 5 and Rogmus fays iikewife fome-
thing of them: but as under thefe ten
Transformations are hid the chief Myfte-
ries of the Pagan Religion on both Tides
of the Ganges , fo we will treat of them
at large with this Precaution, that thefe
Pagans often give divers Names to the
fame God, by reafon of the great diffe-
rence betwixt the Languages of the -
Viflnum
ten times
trans-
form'd*
</ he Idol oj Vxftnum .
844
Part U.
The Idolatry of


jans, Gentives and Malabars: So, tho
they acknowledg the fame Ixora , Bram-
ma and Fijlnum, fome of them call’d
ixora Mahex, or Adahadcuw, Bramma ,
Bruma or Ram, and Fijlnum Bexuo , &c.’
which feeras to intimate as if they had
a certain refped to the Trinity * juft as
the Chinefes worlhip three Divine Attri-
butes under the Name of Pujfa, and the
Greeks placed the three Charities near the
Throne of Jupiter •, and if the Modern
Jews were not quite obftinate in their de-
nial of the Trinity, they might be con-
vinc’d by their own Rabbies , Rabbi Ifaac ,
Rabbi [ 'judas Nagi y and Rabbi Simeon.
Zcdam or Law-book, being inclofed in a
Chanke or Sea-horft’s Horn, the fame
was found out by Fijlnum j whence
it is that they fay the Prints of the
Fingers are to be feen in thefe Horns
to this day and chat they have put the
Saccaram or Sword, and the Chanki or
1 •
as you fee in the
preceding Draught, tho fome aferibe the
lame to Bramma.
But before we enter further upon the
Defcription of the TranfmutatioriS, we
muft add certain Preliminaries as tending
to the Explanation thereof.
All thefe Transformations were per-
form’d in four different times or fpaces :
Kortefinge by the Benjans ,
they fay continued 1728000 years. The
fecond Tretafinge 1296000 years ; The
third Buaperfinge 8064000 years: The
fourth KaUifinge 4032000 years, being
the fame term of time we now live in *
fo that according to their Computation at
Suratte there were in 1657, at leaft 4758
years elapfed of this laft term of Time.
For it is to be known, that the Benjans ,
and moft other Pagans, Egyptians, Chine-
fes and Japonefes , differ feveral 1000 of
years in their Computations from ours.
And to convince you that the Benjans
have the fame years with ours, it is to
be obftrv’d, that they as well as we di-
vide their Years into 12 Months, amount-
ing in the whole to 360 days in the year ;
and to make amends for our odd days
they have thirteen Months in every fourth
Year, yet fo that the 13 th Month' hath
no more than 16 days. And it is fur-
ther their opinion, that after the expi-
ration of this laft term of Time of
4032000 years, the World lhall be re-
new’d. In which Point they follow in
fome meafure the Footfteps of Plato, who
allow’d no left than 36000 years before
the Sun could pafs through the 360 deg.
of the Zodiack m , tho they make their
Annus magnus, as the antient Pagans call’d
it,
Interea magnum Sol Circumvolvitur An-
num *. j,
. The firft Transformation was into a
Fifh, occalion’d by Raxiaxa alias Adirem ,
who haying carried away the Law-book
of the inferiour Gods call’d Devagal or
Dewet ax, hid himfelf at the bottom of
the Sea. The inferior Gods making their
Complaints to Fijlnum , he transform’d
himfelf into that ravenous Fifh the Shark,
and thus diving to the bottom of the
Sea, laid hold of Raxiaxa , otherwife
call’d Seremiaxen , and Sancafoor by the
Benjans, kill’d him, and feiz’d the Law-
book, divided into four parts the firft
whereof treated of the Souls of the Blef-
fed, the fecond of the vagabond Souls,
the third of good Works, the fourth of
bad Works. But what Rogerius lays, /. 1,
c. 5. viz., that the fourth part is loft, I
could never be convinc’d of. The Filh is
call’d Mat or Mathia , tho the Malabars
and Benjans call it Zecxvs. The Benjans
tell us, that thefe Books were ftoln from
Bramma , but the Malabars from the Dewe-
ta/s, or inferiour Gods. The Benjans fay
that Bramma was transform’d into a Filh,
whereas the Malabars aferibe it to Fijlnum .
The Benjans call thefe Tranfrautations
Altars fo that according to their luppo-
iition Mats Altar being the firft, has now
ftood 2500 years.
Upon this occafion I muft agree with
Rogerius , when he fays, /. 2. c. 3. that he
could not dive into the Myfteries of the
Transformations, becaufe I am certain
that it coft me a great deal of trou-
ble before I could attain to the knowledg
thereof, and that not without the Affi-
ftance of a certain Brahman , who coming
from Bengale fettled at Jafnapatnam *,and
as I frequently convers’d with him, fo I
often ufed to difeourfe with him concern-
ing the Animadverfions made upon this
Head by Rogerius: He being afterwards
converted to the Chriftian Faith, and bap-
tized in the Church of Fanarpone , and
our Difeourfe running upon the Transfor-
mations of Fijlnum, he told me that this
Four rc~
workable
Dlv^lons
The firjl
into a Fiji}.
* Virgil.
1.5./Encida
The Pagans on the Coaft of Coroman-
del and Malabar call theft four terms of
time, Critagom, Treitdgom , Dwapdrugom,
and Kaligom•, where it is to be obftrv’d,
that according to the Computation of the
Pagans, and the Gentiles of Suratte , there
are in this year 1670 elapfed 4771.
whereas thofe of Coromandel compute
4770, being only one year’s difference :
but finding in 1665. that the Inhabitants
of Jafnapatnam computed then the 4864^


The femd
Trans for-
°f
vitnum.
y ear t^ie Term} I told them that
they did notftandfor 100 years lefs or
more, whereat they fmiled.
I But it is time we fhould now proceed
to the fecond Transformation. The
3 3 Gods and the Adires held an Affembly
in the Milk-Sea, to confult how to get
into their pofteflion the Amhrofia, call’d
by fome Amurtam and Amortam, by o-
thers Amratam . Some fay that Jxora and
Fifinum having call’d together all the
good and evil Spirits, enter’d upon a De-
bate, how to find out fomething endu’d
with fuch a Virtue as to make Men live
without Vi&uals or Drink, and without
danger of Death, or being tir’d. Where-
upon it being agreed, that they fhould
turn the Mount Mahameru ( call’d Me-
roiiwa by Rogerius ) like the Turners
do, and inftead of a Rope make ufe of
the Serpent Harugu, call’d Sefcha by the
Brahmans , being of fo vaft a bulk, as to
enclofe the feven Worlds and Seas *, ac-
cordingly they began their Turners-work,
but finding the Mount immovable, they
addrefs’d themfelves to a noted Ape
call’d Baly ( of whom more anon in the
Hiftory of Siri Rama ) by whofe Afll-
ftance the Mount began to ftir - 7 and meet-
ing at the fame time with a beautiful
Woman named Bara, they beftow’d her
upon Baly as a Reward for his Services.
But continuing their Work, the Mount
by turning round tumbl’d into the Sea ;
fo that being deftitute of all means to re-
cover it thence, they were forced to have
recoiirfe to Fifimm, who taking the
jfhape of a Tortoife, dived to the bottom,
and brought the Mount up on his Back.
Here it was that Fifinum met with the
beautiful Macha Lecxemi, whom he mar-
ried afterwards. But the Mount being
exceeding high, Fifinum took the fhape
of a Bird, and flew round about it, till
it was brought lower. This Story feems
to have fome relation to the Fable of
Mount Atlas, and what is faid Heh. i.
that God bears up the IVorld.
The Gods and the Adires then conti-
nuing their Work, did light upon fome
Poifon, which being too ftrong for them
they fent to Ixora, but were ftill in pur-
fuic after the Amhrofia, which they in-
tended to prefent to their Great King
Deva Indra (who was then very lick)
firnamed Quiet a Navam, becaufe his
whole Body was cover’d with Manly
Yards, in revenge of the Adultery he
committed with the Wife of the Great
Rixi Quendama: For Deva Indra being ex-
tremely in love with the faid Lady, tranf-
fornfd himfelf into a Cock, and coming
to her Houfe in the night-time, began
to crow moft briskly. Rixi thinking it
had been near break of Day, got out of
his Bed, and whilft he was going to ait
adjacent Pond to perform his ufual Devo-
tions, Deva Indra took the opportunity
to enjoy his Wife. Rixi returning from
his Devotion, and perceiving the Cheat,
tranfmuted his Wife into a Stone, and
laid the other Punifhment upon her
Lover.
By this time the Adires having feiz’d
upon the Amhrofia without giving a (hare
to the Gods, thefe made their Applica-
tions to Fifinum, who thereupon taking
the fhape of a moft beautiful Nymph,
fat down at Table with the Adires, when
their Attendants were juft ready to di-
ftribute the Amhrofia among them. Be-
ing all extremely enamour’d with her
Beauty, every one courted her for his
Spoufe. To decide the matter (he told
them, that they fhould put the Amhrofia
into her Hand, and with their Eyes Ihut
and Hands ty’d behind them, but their
Mouths open,receive every one their lhare
of the Amhrofia } and that he upon whom
file fhould pitch for her Husband, Ihould
be the laft. This being done according-
ly, file feiz’d upon the Amhrofia, and car-
ried it to the Gods. But whilft they were
all opening their Mouths to receive the
faid Amhrofia , Ravaben ( who had affum’d
the fhape of one of the Gods) fhew’d
his Boars Tusks, which Fifinum feeing
gave him fuch a powerful Blow, that
his Head flew from his Shoulders \ whence
the Adires, whatever fhape they alfume,
always retain their Tusks. However
Fifinum throwing the Body and Head
into the Air, the fame were transform’d
into two Planets, call’d Rahu and Quen-
daum. Rogerius calls them, Ragou and
Ketou, which in the Malabar fignifies as
much as Caput and Cauda, or the Dragon's
Head and Tail. But here the Brahmans
commit an Error in Aftronomy, for they
have no Planets, but a fixed Sidus con-
fifting of 31 Stars on the North-fide
without the Zodiac •, where the Moon
pafling from South to North, and again
from the North to South, goes through
this Ecliptic^Line, being the fame the
Sun paffes through every year, and the
Moon every Month in the for
when fhe takes her Courfe from South to
North, the place where fhe paffes through
the Ecliptick Line is call’d the Dragon's
Head, as the place of the faid Line
through which fhe paffes in her return
from North to South is call’d the Dra-
gon's Tail, hence it is, that (according
846
The Idolatry of
Part 11.


to Rogerius ) thefe Pagans fay that there
is an Antipathy betwixt Sun and Moon,
and Ragou and Ketou , and when they
fee an Eclipfe of the Sun or Moon, that
they are fighting with Ragou and
or that they are devour’d by them.
The inferiour Gods employ part of the
Ambrofia they had got in reftoring their
Great God to Health, and removing the
Manly Members from his Body, inftead
whereof he got as many Eyes.
The before-mentioned Poifon taken
out of the Mount Mahameru , being fb
virulent, that whatever it touch’d was
confum’d to Afhes, was given to Ixora
in the prefence of Paramefceri his Spoufe,
The J\l’inovaL of the Jilonnt Jleejjcrwiit .


tiifferent
Relation
of the Ben-
jans and
Gentives
of the fe-
cond Tranf-
formation.
who dreading the Effe&s thereof, clapt
her Hand to his Throat to prevent him
from fwallowing it, and laying the other
Hand upon his Mouth for fear he fhould
fpue it out again and fet the World on
fire, mingling at the fame time her Pray-
ers ( Nila candamtre acxeram ) with her
Endeavours, the Poifon forc’d its way
through Ixora’s Ear, and was in an in-
ftant transform’d into a Devil, call’d
Canda Carna Pixaxo, The Prints of
Parameter? s Finger left three black fpots
on Ixora’s Throat, whence he got the
Sirname of Nils Candaon , i. e. Black
Throat , or Black Head,
The Benjans and Gentives give a diffe-
rent Relation of this fecond Transforma-
tion. They fay that the Sea being fwoln
with Pride, broke out in thefe words;
Who vs it that can compare with the Riches
contain'd in my Figure Marble Faults ? Here
it vs the Moon has fix’d her Habitation ; the
Water of Tammarith, which renders thofe
that drink it immortal , vs inclofed in my
Bofom. The Elephant with his feven Trunks ,
and the feven-headed Horfe dwell in the
Depths , which produce black , white and red
Coral in vafl quantity . The Great God
of Heaven being exafperated at this Va-
nity, commanded the Giant and the four-
headed God Bramma to go to the River
Siam Boerwetty , near which lies the Gol-
den Mount Meepwwat feated in the Cen-
ter of the Earth, and 40000 Leagues
high, and to remove the faid Mount into
the Sea, by winding the Serpent Signage
about it, and thereby force the Sea to
call out her Treafure, which had ren-
der’d her fo vainglorious. This being put
in Execution accordingly, the Sea call
out the following fourteen things. 1. The
Mony call’d Lecfemy. 2. The moft pre-
cious Jewel Confenchmany , or the Carbun-
cle, which carries a Luflre like the Full-
Moon. 3. The Tree Paertfatig, 4. The
Vcf&l Silxeren, with the Water of Sora,
5. Do ft or Dannewanter. 6. Indemademaen.
7- The white Cow of Plenty call’d Cam-
doga, 8. The immortal Water call’d Ama~
rith, 9. The Elephant with feven Trunks,
Hiera Wannefty . 1 o. The beauteous Female
Dancer, Remba. 11. The feven-headed
Horfe Exmognora, 12. The Bow Demok.
13* The Horn Chiank. And, 14. The
Poifon Sahar . This done, the Sea began
to abate of its Pride, the Mount and
Serpent had their peculiar places aflign’d
them, and the Treafuresof the Sea were
diftributed to different Places and Per-
sons* Thus far ol the fecond Transfor-
mation, containing ifeo years of the
firft term of Time;
C HAP. II.
Viftnum transform'd into a Hog; Waras his Altar. Some Reflectons upon
the Fables of the Pagans. Viftnum's fourth Transformation into half a
Man, and half a Lion .
The third
Transfor-
mation,
A Certain Adiren, named ,
was of fuch vaft length, that taking
up the Earth he roll’d it together like an
Anchor-Cable, and carried it upon his
Shoulders to the infernal places call’d
Padalas , whilft Fifinum was afleep in his,
Bed. Fie no fooner neard ot the Pre-
fumption of this Adiren , but he affum’d
the lhape of a Hog, and digging with his
Snout through the Earth, till he came to
the Padalas , kill’d the Robber, and taking
tie Earth upon his 1 usks, fix’d it in its
former place. Hence it is, that in the
Pagode calld Adi Warraha , in the City
of Trimottam , not Tar from Sinzd, there
is to be feen the Head of a Hog, which
the Brahmans fay was theProdud of the
Earth, and is reverenc’d as the true Idol
of Fifinum in memory of this Tranf-
formation.
*he Benjans and Gent we s of Indoftan
and Suratte give us the following account
of it. During the firft term of Time,
fay they, the World was foover-burden’d
with Sin, that the Serpent of 1000 Heads
unable to bear the weight thereof any
longer, withdrew her felf from under-
neath it, whereby the World, together
with Men and Beafts, were caftinto and
periftfd in the depth of the Sea. Brarn-
ma addrcffing hiralelf to the Great God,
defir’d him to retrieve the World out of
the Abyfs of the Sea, which he willingly
granted. Whereupon Fijlnum affum’d
the fhape of a Boar’s Head, with Tusks
as big as an Elephant’s Trunk, white all
over bis Body, with four Arms and Hands,
having in one Hand a great Sword call’d
Godda , and in the other a Book, as like-
wife a Horn and round Tftcker, Thus
transform’d, he threw himfelf into the
Sea, being at firft no bigger than a Man’s
Finger, but increas’d before he reach’d
the bottom to fuch a degree, that in
848
Part It
The Idolatry of


cafe the Earth had been plac’d on the
furface of the Water, and he flood upon
it, his Head would have touch’d the Stars.
Coming to the bottom of the Sea, he
kill’d the dreadful Giant Hirnaks , whofe
Blood ting’d the whole Sea with red.
Viflmm having trampled him under his
Feet, lifted with his Tusks the Earth out
of the Sea, and placing the Tortoife upon
the Water, and the Serpent with a thou-
fand Heads upon the Tortolfe, he retir’d
to his Refidence, and Bramma with one
word created a new Generation of Men.
This Transformation comprehends 2700
years, in the firft Period of time.
This Story feems to intimate, that
thefe Pagans have heard fomething of
the Deluge, confidering efpecially that
——M————
\Clzc Idol of Vt/hvivn'v iry Izvs
fraizsfo r mat to n ,
& as dfcrib’ci by y Bcnjans •
849
Chap. 11.
the Eaft-India Pagans.


the Senjans do live nearer to the Borders
of Ferfia and Armenia than the reft of
the Indians *, there being alfo mention
made of the Giants, Gen . 6 . 4. and it is
very probable, that the antient Pagans
were not quite ignorant of the Hiftory of
the Deluge, which they afterwards ufhe-
red into the World, under divers pecu-
liar Deluges, as for inftance the Diluvi-
um Ogygxcums which happen’d in Atticas
and Deucalion's Deluge in Thejfaly ; and the
Prometheus of the antient Pagans, is by
moft Criticks taken for the fame with
Noah .
But we come to the fourth Transfor-
mation *, yet before we enter upon the
Particulars thereof, we muft add fome-
thing more relating to the third Trans-
formation. The Earth being reftored to
its former Station, Fiftnum upon an exadt
view found it fomething inclining to the
Souths which Vlflnum not being able to
remedy, he addrefTed himfelf to a cer-
tain Saint of very low Stature, nam’d
Rixi Agajfia (Rogerius * calls him Agaftea')
who having laid his holy Book upon that
part inclining to the South, put it into a
juft Equilibrium.
God of Riches, called otherwife Bajfi-
ronnem. 8. Ixananatn or Ixora himfelf;
hence ic is that you fee frequently eight
Stones placed at the Entrance of, and a-
bout their Parades.
The fourth Transformation into half a
Lion and half a Man was occafioned thus:
During the firft Period of Time, a cer-
tain Gyant HinenkeJJep (as the Benjam
call him, butth q Malabar s Rentacxenj hav-
ing been forced to abfeond for 12 years
on the account of Bramma , afterwards
made the following Requeft to him : Mofi
Potent Bramma, grant me the Favour to
make me a great Monarch upon Earth , and
heflow this further BleJJing upon me , that
I may not be killed either by Day or by Nighty
either within or without my Houfe , either by
Heaven , Earthy Sun or Moon , by Thunder ,
Lightnings Stars or Comets, neither by
Clouds , Winds , Hail, Snow or Rains , or
Birds s Beafts , Men , Devils , FiJhesorWa-
ter y not by Serpent Adder s, Poifon , Sword ,
Arrows or any other Weapons . Bramma hav-
ing granted the Gyant’s requeft, hefoon
made himfelf Mafter of the whole Earth,
and overcome with Pride at hisSuccefs,
ifliied out a Mandate, that no body Ihould
be adored but himfelf, under the forfei-
ture of the Lives of fuch as fhould con-
travene it. Things continuing in this
State for fome Years, the Brahmans be-
gan to murmur, that they fhould be ob-
liged to adore any terreflrial Power , tho never
fo greats to the prejudice of the celejlial Spi-
rits s they refolved therefore to make
their Supplications to Vtftmms implo-
ring him to deliver them from the OppreJJi-
ons of this Tyrants who gave them for an-
fwer, That the Giant fhould have fhortly a
Son horns who fhould be their Deliverers and
till then they muft have Patience .
Within 10 Months after Naeckfeu , the
Giants Wife, brought forth a Son named
Prellades who when he was five years old
was put to a Schoolmafter ; being one
time fent for by his Father, his Mafter
inftru&ed him how to pronounce his Fa-
ther’s Name in fkort writing, which was
JreniUs but inftead thereof the Boy faid
Arys being the abbreviated Name of
Fiftnum . The Mafter aftonifliedput his
Hand upon his Mouth, bidding him to
forbear, for fear of being theoccafion
of his own Death \ hut the more he for-
bid him, the more the Boy perfifted in
faying Arys Arys inftead of Irenia.
The Schoolmafter not knowing what
to do, brought him to his Father, telling
him, Thai bis Son would not pronounce his
Names which he had taken fo much pains to .
teach him. The Father asking him the
The fwth
Trans for-
mathi.
* 1*2.0.19.
Fifinum walking with this Agajjia near
the Seafide, the Sea asked Who
it was that walked with him ? Viftnum re-
plied, He vs a Saint who vs going to reft ore
the Earth to its true Ballance . Where-
upon the Sea, fcorning his low Stature
(he being not above the height of a joint
of a Finger) wetted him with its Waves j
which Affront being highly refented by
Aga/Jia , hetookfomeof the Seawater in
his hand, and beginning to drink, did not
defift till he had drunk up the whole Sea :
Dewet as and Rixiis feeing the Sea thus ex-
hauited, interceded with A'gajjia not to
rob'the World of fo lingular a Benefit,
and prevailed upon him fo far, that he pif-
fed cut again all the Water heJiad drun-
ken before; and this is the reafon their
Philofophers atledg for the Saltnefs of the
Sea. •
Agaffia after having reftored the bal-
lance of the Earth, took his leave of
■Viftnum , who to prevent the like for the
future, order’d the Great. Serpent to wind
herfelf about the feven Worlds and fe-
ven Seas; and for more Securities fake,
appointed 8 Guardians to watch over it,
called in the Malabar by the following
Names; i. Jndra the King of the Celefti-
.al Spirits. 2. Fanni the God of Fire.
3; Padurpati King of the evil Spirits.
4. Nirurdi.. King~of the infernal Spirits.
5. Farunna the God of the Sea. 6 . Marti
the God of the Winds. 7. Cubera the


reafon, the Boy anfwered, Tour Name is
not the true Name, , hut the other vs the
Truth it felf. His Father asking further.
What vs Truth ? The Son anfwered, Tift-
mm who fills the 14 Worlds is the Truth .
What Benefit, faid the Father, do you re-
ceive from Viftnum ? And what Benefit, re*
plied the Son, (hall I receive by yours ? The
Giant told him, Whoever refeats my
Name, (hall be hlejfed with Riches, Honour,
Dignities and Life . How, fays the Son,
can you give Life and Riches ? Tes / can ,
replied the Giant, and will convince you
immediately, it being in my Power to take a-
way your Life, That will fcarce happen,
anfwered the Son, according to your Pro-
vidence and Difcretion, What is Provi-
dence and Difcretion ? asked the Giant*
" The Ido! oj * Vlftiium tranfomied into half a Maiz Sc half' a Lyan .


That vs the Eternal Divine Name of V ift-
num, replied the Son, the Creator of the
14 Worlds. The Father asking him,
Where is this Name to be found ? The Son
ahfwered, In every thing both in Heaven
and Earthy every thing being fided with
Viflnum. What, replied the Father,
and is Viflnum alfo in this Pidar ? Tes , re-
plied the Son, andlikewife in you and me.
The Giant not longer able to contain
himfelf, told him, Boy, becaufe thou in-
fifteft thus upon the Name of Viflnum, I wid
beat your Brains out with this Stick hut if
thou wilt pronounce my Name , thou /halt
neither die, neither be beaten. That won't
he, fays the Boy, for your Names fake ,
becaufe God has ordered it otherwife. But I
wid fpoil that Ordinance, replied the Gi-
ant, and with that {truck with his gol-
den Staff at the Boy, who, hiding him-
felf behind the Pillar, implor’d the
Name of Fiftnum. The Giant turning
again with more Fury than ever againft
the Son, ftruck with fuch Violence that
the Pillar burft and produced a Monfter,
half a Man, half a Lion , an Flermaphro-
dite, with Breafts both above and below,
breaking Fire and Flames out of its
Noftrils.
Th g Bcnjans fay, that the Giant did
eredi a red hot Pillar to tie his Son to,
telling him at the fame time, Let us fee
who can deliver you out of my Hands . The
Son then invoking the affiftance of Ftjl-
mm, the Pillar burft, and forth came
the Monfter. All the Standers by were
amazed at this Spedacle, and the Giant
hirafelf trembled for fear. Fiftnum re-
folving to revenge bis own Quarrel, and
at the fame time not to break the Pro-
mife made by Bramma to the Giant, laid
hold of the Giant, and hurrying him
under Ground diredly under the Thref-
hold of his own Houfe, and keeping him
there till Sunfet, tore his Body in pieces,
thereby fulfilling Bramma 7 s Promife, that
heihould not be killed within nor without
his Houfe , neither in Heaven nor upon Earth ,
neither by Beafls, Birds, Sword, Wind ,
Rain, Hail . The Giant’s Son fucceeding
his Father in the Empire, ruled with
great applaufe for many fucceeding
years.
Thus ended the fourth Transformati-
on of* the firft Period of time, called
Kortefinge by the Bcnjans, .comprehend-
ing in all 1728000 years ; for tho all
thefe Transformations were tranfa&ed
within the time of 7700 years and three
days, the reft, viz. 1720000 years, 360
days, mult be fuppofed to have been the
Intervals of thefe Tranfa&ions.
CHAP. III.
The fifth Transformation of Viftnum into a Brahman. Great Plenty under
Mavaly. The Requeft of the transformed Viftnum. Praffaram's Altar and
Birth. He kills Reneca his Mother. Raja Inder's Cow of Plenty. Praffaram's
great Actions.
WHilft Mavaly (called Belragie by
the Bcnjans and Gentives ) ruled
the World, the Inhabitants thereof were
fo plentifully provided with every thing
by his Bounty, that Poverty was a thing
unknown among human Race. Fiftnum
perceiving that as the cafe then flood,
there were no different degrees, nor any
dependance in the World either on God
or Man, refolved to diveft Mavaly (by
Fraud) of the Government of the
World.
With this Intention Fiftnum affumed
the Shape of a Brahman , and appearing
in a Mendicant Pofture before Mavaly ,
he asked him, who he was , and upon what
Errand he came? The pretended Brah-
man replyed, Having heard of your Charity
lam come to crave fame Alms. Mavaly
anfwer'd, I who have granted the Requefts
of many Kings and Princes, void not deny
thee, let it be what it wid , whether Kingdoms,
Money, Honours , or whatever elfe you can
ask . The Brahman replied, my aim is
not at fuch mighty things, but after all,
for fear of Denial, I beg of you to pro-
mife me, without exception to grant my
Requeft. Mavaly anfwering that he
would, the Brahman begged him to con-
firm it with an Oath.
Mavaly being juft upon the point of
confirming it by Oath, the Planet Venus
(who flood juft by) told him, And is it
cuftomary to fwear to the giving of Alms ?
which Mavaly being not in the leaft mov-
ed at, fwore to the Brahman , who told
him, lam not covetous of Kingdoms or Pro-
vinces, my Be fire is confined to three Foot of
Ground , where I may ere ft a Hut , whereto
lay up my Books, Vmbreda and Drinking -
852
The Idolatry of p art jj


Cup *, I beg you therefore to pour fame of
your Water upon the Ground . For it is a
cuftom among thefe Pagans, that when-
ever they dif[)pfe of or fell any thing,
they confirm their Promife or Bargain,
by pouring fome Water upon the Ground,
part whereof the Buyer catches with his
Hands and drinks, in confirmation of the
Bargain juft as Jacob defired Jofeph to
lay his Hand under his Hips, when he
was going to make him his Promife upon
Oath, Gen. 47. 29. & 24, 2. where the
Hips (according to fome Interpreters)
are taken pro partibus generations , in (\ui~
bus circumcifionis ftgnum dabatur,
Mavaly told him, Ash a Kingdom and I
will grant it . The Brahman replied,
Wexe I a King , I mufi punifh Criminals ,
£Tke £ l7/lll cJ, a7 i' al/ 1C World* to the
'p& ViftnUMX -


which I could not do without trefpa/Jlng the
j Rules of the Order of the Brahmans *, where-
fore I dejire no more than three Foot of
Ground . Mavaly replied, that will not be
enough to build you a Houfe upon . I want
no Houfe, laid the Brahman , having nei-
ther Wife nor Children , I defire only three
Foot of Ground , which you can’t refufe with-
out being perjured . Adavaly telling the
Brahman that he never broke his Pro-
mife, and ordering Venus to bring him
fome Water, flie defired him not to pour
the Water upon the Brahman , whom The
looked upon as an Impoflor. Mavaly re-
plied, Of what confequence can three Foot
of Ground be ? Take heed , anfwered Ve~
nus 7 for tbit is Viflnum himfelf , who vs
come in difguife to deceive you . Mavaly re-
turn’d, i have not finned againfl Viflnum,
and therefore have no reafon to fear him .
Notwichflanding which Mentis continued
to perfuade him by many Arguments,
not to trufl him : But Mavaly perfifling
in his Refolution, told her, Let come on it
what will , if it fhould cojl me my Life , I
will not break my Oath. Then taking the
Veflel with the Water, he bid the Brah-
man to hold up his Hands, which Venus
perceiving, fhe held Mavaly ’s Arms, de-
firing him not to pour out the Water ,
but Mavaly pulhing back her Hand, bid
the Brahman a fecond time to hold up his
Hands. Venus then changing her Shape,
Hopp’d the Pipe of the Veflel, which
Mavaly endeavouring to loofen with a
Twig, he hurt Venus 1 s one Eye, whence
flie got the Name of Chueren . Then
Water coming out of the Spout of the
Veffd, the Brahman did drink. This
done, Mavaly order’d him to meafure
the three Foot of ground where he plea-
fed. Viflnum having by this time reaf-
firmed his own Shape, he covered the
whole Earth with one of his Feet,and with
the other the Paradife called Sorgalogam.
Whilft Viflnum was extending his Foot,
Bramma poured Water upon it, which
produced the River Ganges , fo highly
celebrated among the Indians and other
Pagans. Viflnum having thus meafured
two Foot, Mavaly told him, he might
alfo take the third, which he did by mea-
furing the inferiour Region, called Pada-
ias, and thus became Mailer of the whole
World.
gion, whereof he made him King.
But Mavaly’ s Wife upbraiding Vtfllmm
with Ingratitude, he carried her to her
Husband, and as a Reward of his Piety
bellowed upon him the Government of
the place of Darknefs, Viflnum himfelf
remaining with him nine days to guard
the Entrance thereof. Rogerim calls this
Mavaly a Devil, named*///, and fays
that whilH the Waters of the Ganges
were flowing from above over Ixorah
Head, and rifen out of the Hip of a
Saint, 60000 Men were brought to Life.
This Fable had queftionlefs its Origin
Irom the want of Knowledg of the true
fourceof the River Ganges , for which
reafon they generally ftile it the Heavenly
River,
Mavaly being not fatisfy’d with his
prefent Station, made his Complaint to
Viflnum, who told him, that in regard
he had been a charitable Perfon, a Man
of Truth and without Sin, he would
conflitute him King of the Paradife.
Mavaly making a deep Reverence (called
by them Sambajd ) returned for anfwer,
It is not my ambition to reign, being on-
ly affefted with the Hardlhips of my for-
mer Subjects, wh6 have no body now to
provide them with Neceflaries, aslufed
to do. Viflnum replied, The poor (hall
ferve the rich, and be maintained by
them • fo that he that will work, fhall
want for nothing. I will alfo conflitute
you the Doorkeeper of the Paradife, fo
that nobody fhall enter there witnout thy
Knowledg. But replied Mavaly , how
fhall 1 then be able to judg at fuch a dif-
tance, how you deal with Mankipd up-
on Earth? 1 will, anfwered Viflnum, af-
fign you a certain Place in Heaven, from
whence you may overlook the Earth \ and
fo made him Doorkeeper of the Para-
dife.
Accordingly Fiftnum diftinguifhed
Mankind into three forts, Rich, Poor
and Middle-fized, which were to have a
Reciprocal Dependance on one another,
That fuch as had lived pioufly and done
A&s of Charity fhould be received after
their Death, and live in Plenty and
Splendor •, but fuch as did otherwife,
fhould after their Deceafe be transform’d
again into Slaves and Drudges, to do
Penance tor their former Sins, till by
their good Works they fhould merit Pa*
radife, which they were not to enter
however without Mavaly’ s Confent. He
alfo conflicted a Feaft (called Ona by
the Malabar s') to be celebrated yearly in
Auguft, when they fpend feveral days
together in feafting and other forts of
g forts of
People,
Viflnum
/nafer of
the World.
The Gentives add, that this Brahman
(whom they call Fanam, 5. e. a black
Dwarf, and Rogerius calls him B arm afar i y
i. e. a young Brahman, by the Name of
Warnara *) fet his Left Foot upon Mava-
/y’s Bread or Head, and thus kick’d him
thro the Ground into the infernal Re-
Y hzc.io.


the fixth
Transfor-
mation*
Diverfions, and appear in all their bed
Apparel.
The fixth Transformation happened
thus: After the appearing of Hammans
mentioned in the s th Chap . Part 1. one
Braman and Bramani being joined in
Wedlock, did for a confiderable time
lead a pious and contented Life near the
River Bewa •, but the Woman being bar-
ren (a thing much defpifed among the
Benjans) they refolved to retire into
fome Defart, there to implore God’s Af-
fiftance. Having thus for fome time
led a Vagabond Life, tjiey came to a
certain Pagode built in a Foreft, near
which ftood a very fine Tree, under the
Shade whereof they repofed themfelves
for fome time-; and fent forth their Pray-
ers upon their bended Knees. After fome
time finding their Prayers ineffe&ual, the
Woman told her Husband, that they
ought to leave this (hady Place, and in
lieu thereof to expofe themfelves to
the Injuries of the Sun, Rains and Storms,
to try whether perhaps by this Humilia-
tion and Penance, God might be pre-
vailed upon to blefs them with Chil-
dren. They perfevered in this Aufteri-
tyand continual Prayers for fome lon-
ger time, but in-vain , the Woman grow-
ing beyond all Patience, told her Huf- ,
band, that being quite weary of Life,
fhe defired him to faft with her, till
thereby they could put a Period to their
miferable Life. Accordingly having
fpent nine days without eating or
drinking, Fifinum appear’d to them in
the Shape of a Child, asking them,
what was the occafion of their Mortifica-
tion and fervent Prayers. The Woman
anfwered. All our Prayers are direSed
to Fifinum , to blefs me with fuch a hand-
fome Child as thee. Fifinum replied, And
do you inftead of Gold and Silver defire
Children, who commonly prove the
Toils of Life ? Bramani anfwered, all
the Riches and Pleafures of this World
.are not fo valuable tome, as a Son of
my own, fo well (hap’d as thy felf. Fifi-
num replied, Your Prayers are heard,
and as you have three feveral times mor-
tify’d your Bodies, fo three Sons (hall be
born thee fucceffively ; and fo he vanilh*
fed.
Being both exhaufted with Fading,
they died foon after*, but the Soul of
Bramani was infufed into the Body of
the new-born Reneca , and that of Bra-
man into the Body of the new-born Bra-
man, firnamed Siamdichcmi , who being
come to their riper Years, join’d
together in Marriage } Reneca 's Sifter
being at the fame time married to the
Great Raja Sefiraarfum , who had 1000
Arms.
Siamdichcmi retir'd with Reneca to a
Solitude, near the River Ganges , where
they built a Hut of Straw, with an In-
tention to live upon the Fruits of the
Earth, and pafs their time in praying to
Fifinum.
It was not long before Reneca (purfu-
ant to the Promife made by Fifinum)
brought forth a beautiful Son, unto whom
(he gave the Name of Prajfaram , who
being carefully educated under the Tuiti-
on of his Father, did in his i ith year
interpret the mod abftrufe Characters
that could be laid before him. His Mo-
ther having received a certain Cloth from
Fifinum , which keeping Water as well
as any Earthen Velfel, Reneca going to
fetch Water one time out of the Ri-
ver Ganges , (he happen’d to fee the great
Raja Sefiraarfum with his Spoufe (her
Sifter) a hunting near the River-fide. Re-
neca asked one of his Attendants, who
it was, and being anfwered, that it was
Raja Sefiraarfum With his Queen, (he ad-
vanced towards them \ but finding that
her Sifter took no notice of her- (he fat
down in a very melancholy Pofture up-
on the Bank of the Ganges , complaining
of the vaft difference there was betwixt
her Sifter and her.
faid (he, /he is a Queen , and I
a poor Brahman’* Wife } fhe is poffejfed of
Riches , Honour and Plenty , and I know no-
thing but Want and Mifery a
She was then a going to fill her Cloth
with Water, but found it, to her great
Aftoniftiment, leaky \ and being afraid
to return home, ftaid abroad till after
Sunfet. Siamdichcmi furpriz’d at her
long day, look’d at the Doors, and
finding her fitting in a melancholy Pof-
ture, ask’d her whether (he had brought
no Water \ but (he anfwering* (he had
not, and giving him the reafon for it,
he told her, that he was certain (he had
uttered fome Expreflions contrary to his
Zeal and Piety *, and being exafperated
to the higheft degree, commanded his
Son Praffaram to cut off his Mother’s
Head with an Ax. Praffaram would
haveexcufedhimfelf, but finding his Fa-
ther refolute, he was forced to obey, and
cutoff his Mother’s Neck. The Father
being highly taken with the Obedience of
his Son, told him, that he (hould ask
him what hepleafed, and it (hould be
granted him. faid the Son, refufd-
tate my Mother from the Dead *, the Fa-:
ther then taking fome of the fan&ified
*■
Praffaram
the Son of
Reneca.
t /
Rencbi
killed*


Water of the Ganges, befprinkled the
Body with it, and muttering out certain
Prayers, reftored it to Life again.
had Ihown upon all Occafions. Thefe
Reafons were fo prevailing with the Huf-
band, that he received her into his Arms,
and baniflied all Revenge from his
Thoughts.
And revi-
ved.
Renecct could not forbear to make her
Complaints concerning the harfli ufage of
her Husband, occafion’d only by forae
Weaknefles and Refiedions upon her Sif-
ter’s good Fortune, reprefenting to him
her Piety, Fidelity and Obedience flic
Traffaram (tho not above 1 1 years of
Age) being by this time advanced fo far
in the Knowledg of the Law, that he
was paft his Father’s teaching, was ad-
Praflaram
P
Indcr *
C ory
85 6
Part 11.
The Idolatry of


Raja Scf-
traarfum
vifits the
Brahman.
The Cow of |
Plenty,
i
1
(
, (
i
Raja plen-
tifully en-
tertained,
♦
vifed by him to apply himfelf to Raja In-
der, King of the bleffed Souls , for his
further Accomplifhment, which the Son
did accordingly *, fo foon as the Son had
left him, he refolved to pay his Devotions
to Vijlnum for 12 years fuccefhyely, fit-
ting crofs-leg’d without Intermiflion up-
on the Ground (a thing much pra&ifed
among thefe Pagans) Thus 1659- I&w
a certain Jogy, or Mendicant, at Columbo ,
whofe Arms were grown together over
his Head, by fitting in that Pofture.
Soon after it happen’d, that the be-
fore-mention’d King Raja Seflraarfum ,
coming to give a Vifit to his Brother-in-
law with a great Retinue, he was fo faft
afleep, that all the noife of the Hounds,
Horns and Drums could not awaken him:
his Wife Reneca therefore having rouzed
her Husband, by fprinkling fome warm
Water upon his Head, he arofe ; w T hen
Raja faluting the Brahman , told him,
that the Fame of his Piety had induced
him and his Retinue to come to fup, and
to take a Nights Lodging with him.
The Brahman Siamdichemi, being much
concern’d how to provide for fo many
iooo Perfons, at laft confider’d 01 the
white Cow , called Camdoga , belonging
to Raja Inder , which furniilics thole that
have her in their poffeffion with c-
very thing they wifh for. Having there-
fore defired Inder to fend him the faid
Cow, he granted his Requeft; and the
Cow being fent down, the Brahman de-
iired Raja and his Attendants to fit down
at Supper, which was ferved with fuch
Variety and Plenty, that Raja , who was
come upon no other account than to ri-
dicule his Brother in Law’s-Poverty,flood
amazed thereat *, and furthei LO tiy his
Ability, ask’d him, to prefent him with
fome Jewels; which the Brahman hav-
ing prefented him with (much beyond
what could be expected) Raja askd him
for fome Clothes and Money for his Peo-
ple, which being likewife brought him
by his Brother-in-law, he refolved alio
to flay the next day ; and being ferved
at Table with the fame Plenty as before,
he flayed alfo the third day *, when
meeting with the fame Entertainment,
he was amazed to find out whence all
this Plenty of Provifions, Clothes and
Riches could come in a place, where he
expected fo little, efpecially lince he ob-
ferved that all was brought out of the
Brahman's Hut, which was not big e-
iiough to hold half the quantity. This
made him order fome ot his Spies to
take particular notice, whether there
was not a Vault underground, fiom
whence thefe things were brought. The
Spies watching ail Opportunities to fk-
tisfy their Mailer’s Curiofty, found at
laft that a Header white Cow did bring
forth all thefe things (which (he threw
out of her Stomach) whereof immediate
notice was given to Raja.
The next Morning as he was taking
his Leave from the Brahman , being ask’d
by him, whether he was dehrous of a-
ny thing elfe, he told him, that he wan-
ted nothing more, but only the white
Cow he had Teen in his Hut; the Brah-
man replied, that being not his own, fhe
was not in his difpofal. And, faid Raja ,
will you deny tnefo fmall a Requefl , a /-
ter you have heaped fo many Obligations up-
on me before ? What I did before , laid the
Brahman , was in my own Power , but this vs
not. How , replied Raja , don't you know
that it is in my Power to take her againfl your
Will ? and then calling tofome of his
Followers, he commanded them to fetch
the white Cow out of the Hut. The
Brahman feeing this beloved white Cow
thus fnatched from him, told her at part-
ing, Dear Camdoga, tmft I thus leave
you , how can I anjwer this to Raja Indsr
your Mafter ? revenge thy felf at once both
of thine and mine Enemies. The Cow
Camdoga no fooner heard thefe Words,
butalfuming a fliape three times bigger
than her own, fhe laid about her with
her Horns to that degree, that fhe kill’d
and trod under Foot feveral thousand of
Raja's People*, which done, fhe flew
like Lightning up into the Air to her
own Mafter. Raja exafperated at the
Slaughter of his Men, and burning with
Revenge, returned to the Hut of the
Brahman , where they kill’d and left him
wallowing in his Blood. The unfortu-
nate Reneca , unwilling to outlive her
Husband, fetfireto the Hut, and burnt
herfelf with his dead Carcafe.
Camdoga in the mean while meeting
with Praffaram not far from her Matter’s
Houfe, told him what had happen’d,
who declar’d he would revenge the fame
21 times upon all the Kctteriis (a wicked
Generation ) and thus making the beft of
his way with his Perzy , Bow and Arrow,
he penetrated into the middle of Raja's
Troops, and kill’d him with all his
Guards } thence travelling through the
World, he kill’d all the Ketteriis he met
with, but could not do it fo effedually,
but that fome efcap’d his Fury, who mul-
tiplying by degrees, he was forc’d to re-
new his Revenge againft them, which he
did 21 times, till they were quite rooted
out from the face of the Earth.
RajaV Peo-
ple defea-
ted by the
white Con' 1 .
Siamdi-
chemi
murdered,
, Reneca
burns her
felf with
• his Corps ,
whence the
cttfam of
hwm *& the
Dcad '
Praffaram
revenues
thenVcath


The Smy
of Ram.
Praflaram
endeavours
to l(ill
Ram.
The Mala-
bars ac-
count of
thii Tranf-
fomatm.
By this time riflmm remembring his
Promife made to Praftaram’s Parents, viz..
that they were to be bleft with three Sons,
he commanded Bramha (the God with
four Heads) to fend down from Heaven
the Souls of Siamdtchemi and Reneca , and
to convey them into the Bodies of Kagia
d* After at, and his Wife Couz.Ha (flain
among the Ketteriis ) unto whom he had
made a Promife of exalting their Pofte-
rity.
Bramha finding by the Celeftial Re-
cords, that their time was expir’d (for
thefe Pagans believe that nothing is done
without Divine Providence, and that the
Fate of Men is written inßramhd’s Hand)
infufed the Soul of Reneca into the Body
of Ccuz.Ha , and the Spirit of
mi into that of Ragia y which brought
forth a Son named Ram: This Ram ha-
ving marry’d Sytha y and making his pub-
lick Entry into the City ( according to
the Cuftom of the Bertjam ) was met by
Pralfaram , who being inform’d that he
was defcended of the Race of the
teriis , did let fly at him, which Ram
perceiving did the fame from his Elephant
on which he was mounted; but their
Arrows hitting againfl: one another in
the Air did no mifchief, except that all
the ftrength of Prajfaram’s Arrow be-
ing lodg’d in that of ,he was there-
by bereav’d of all his Advantage, being
no more than a common Brahman for ever
after, whereas Kam encreafed every day
in Power.
The Malabars fay that this Transfor-
mation was made by Vtfimm in the fhape
of Shi Parexi Rama. For the Rixi living
in the Dcfarts, being no longer able to
endure the Oppfeffions from the Neigh-
bouring Kings, offer’d their Sacrifices
to rijlnum, defiring his AlMance againll
them. A certain famous Rixi named Pa-
ra Jara, facrificing one day to Vtfimm,
he appear’d in the lhape of a Child, and
aflifted at the Ceremony of the Sacrifice;
which done, Parexi Rama took up an Ax
and kill’d 44 Kings, who ufed to infeft
the Rixi , and put them into the Pofl'eflloit
of their Territories. Shi Parexi Rama
being afterwards defirous to ereft certain
Temples, and not finding fufficient room
for that purpofe (becaufe the Sea then
touch’d the Mount Gatte') he offer’d his
Sacrifice, when a Sieve appearing to him
(fuch as they ufe to cleanfe the Rice
with ) he found that as often as he did
fhake it, the Sea retreated backwards
from the Shoie ; but whilft he was doin CT
it a third time, Farrinem the God of the
Sea, having transform’d himfelf into
Pifmires (call’d by them ) gnaw’d
the Sieve in pieces. However Shi Rama
built 108 Temples, and erefted as many
Stones near them, from Adangalor to the
Cape Comoryn, much reverenc’d to this
day by the Indians,
In the mean while the Filhermen of
that Coaft making their Complaints to
Parexi Rama ) that by this means they
had been bereav’d of their Subliftence
he conflituted them his Guards of the
Temples he had built, with a fufficient
allowance for their Maintenance; fo that
tbefe Fifhermen being thus become Brah-
mans, they ufed always to wear a Thred
of a Filhing-Net about their Necks whilft
they were performing their Sacrifices,
and introduc’d that Cuftom among the
Pagans, for a new-married Couple to go
a filhing with a Linen Cloth inftead of 3
Net.
. Parexi Rama being one time employ’d
in his Solitude in facrificing to the Gods
Shi Rama (or Fiftmm ) appear’d in the
fhape of a Man * which 1 Parexi R
taking notice of, his Jealoufy was railed
to fuch a height, that he would needs
enter into a fingle Combat with him •, but
being prevented by the Rixii, they difeo-
ver’d themfelves to one another, and
entring into a ftridi Friendfhip, Parexi
Rama prefented his Bow to Shi Rama
who return’d to the Milk-Sea.
Orifo
°f
ErahmaK '
CHAP. IV.
The ƒeventh Transformation of Viftnum into Rama. His Birth. He gains
his Bride Sytha by ƒhooting. Beauty of Lekeman. His meeting with Soup-
penekhia. Rawan takes away Sytha ; performs Wonders. Ram and Leke-
man go in queƒt of Sytha. Hanuman's great Actions in Ceylon.
IXora being reverenc’d by all the World,
but efpecially by one Rawan, (call’d
Rawana by Rogerius , who makes him a
Son of the Brahman Ka/fiopa) who for
300 years offer’d him 100 Flowers every
day; Ixora having one time a mind to


the story
o/Rama
or Siri Ra-
f yj°m
t hjt Kings
andFmces
pint it up-
and
Maces,
got his"
Bride
Sytha.
try his Sincerity, took away one of the
Flowers, and afterwards charged him
with want of Duty \ Rawan ignorant of
the Deceit, counted his Flowers, and
finding no more than 99, would have
torn out one of his Eyes to compleat
the number of 100. But Ixora flopping
his Hand, told him, that having now had
a fufficient proof of his Integrity, he
fhould ask what he pleafed and he would
be fure to grant it; Rawan then asked a
fliare with Ixora in the Government of
the World } which being granted him
by Ixora , Rawan nevertheless continued
his daily Devotions, and being ask’d the
reafon by lxora r he told him, that he
would not defift from his Prayers, till he
had given him 10 Heads and 20 Arms,
which being likewife granted by Ixora , he
fix’d his Refidence in the Country of
Lanka y in the famous Ifle of Ceylon , call’d
by others Sanka, who alfo fay that he built
feven Palaces there of Gold, Silver,
Steel, Iron, and other Metals.
Having thus rul’d for fome thoufand
years over all the Neighbouring Kings,
he became fo proud, as to force his Sub-
jefts to worlhip him inftead of Ixora,
which they were forced to do for 25
years, till being quite tir’d out of all
Patience by his Tyrannys, they emplof’d
Ixora to deliver them from Rawan , that
fo they might recover their former free-
dom of adoring him.
About that time there liv’d a certain
Ragie .named Dafferat , or Dejferatha , or
peexareda. This King having three
Wives, one of them named Coufila , after
fome time brought forth a Son named
Ram by the Brahman who en-
ervated daily in Wifdom and Underftand-
ing, beyond what could be expeded from
his tender years. His fecond Wife Keggy
(call’d Kaiaa by the Malabar s) brought
forth another Son named Barrat, and
Somettcry , or Somittra , the third Wife,
Lekeman and Setteroukan . The Malabars
fay, that thefe four Sons were born from
thefe three Women by the means of four
Fills.
Viftnum being thus brought into the
World in the fhape of a Ram , was edu-
cated by the Brahmans in all manner of
Wifdom and Knowledg. There hap-
pen’d to live at that time a certain Ragie
*d Sannek , in the Country of Sian*
. who having fix’d a prodigious ftrong
Bow in a certainEnclofuremade for that
purpofe, iffued his Proclamation, to cn-
courage all fuch as would venture to
draw and break the faid Bow, offering
his Daughter Sytha with a great Portion
as a Reward to him who fhould accom-
plifh it. This being likewife come to
the Ears of the Brahmans , Ram foilicited
his Tutor to let him try his Strength,
which the Mailer not without foms Re-
ludancy having confented to, he went
along with him under the Notion of his
Servant, and coming to Rag . Banners
Court heard him offer the fame Re-
ward to any one that could manage and
break the Bow, telling them, that he who
would enter the Lift fhould take the
VefTel with Betel , which was offer’d By
his own hand.
Immediately after he faw the before*
mentioned Rawan with 10 Heads take
the Betel , and boafting of his Strength,
told them that no body but him fhould
pretend to Sytha .* then drawing the Bow
with his utmoft Strength, he let flip the
Sinew, which ftriking his Thumb off he
fell into a Sound. Divers other Ragies
try’d to mange the fame Bow, but find-
ing their Strength fail them were forced
to defift.
The Betel being next brought to the
Brahmans , among whom flood Ram , he
at laft obtain’d leave from his Mafter to
accept of the Betel , which he did ac-
cordingly, and entring the Lift, found
a tall Maft or Poll fix’d in the Center of
the Court, on the top whereof was a
Fifti, and at the bottom a Ciftern with
Water, wherein plainly appear’d the
fliade of the Fifh. Ram then drew the
Bow with fuch violence, that he not only
fhot the Fifh into feveral parts, but alfo
broke the Bow to pieces.
The Bride rejoic’d at his Succefs, pre-
fented him with a whole Ditfi full of
Jewels, as did all the reft there prefent
proportionable to their Abilities: His
Parents being alfo fent for to partake of
the Honours done to their Son, they came
with their other three Sons, who marriedi
the three Daughters of Raja Sannek , viz.
Barrat married Onnemela , Lekeman Sekhy $
and Setteroukan Lila.
Ram then defir’d to return to his Na-
tive Country •, which being granted, not
without great relu&ancy, he went back
with his Father, Mother and three Bro-
thres, with their Wives, where his Fa-
ther deliver’d up the Kingdom to him *
but having receiv’d a Wound in his
Thumb, which prov’d very painful to
him, it was healed at laft by his Wife,
in acknowledgment of which Benefit he
told her, that he would grant her what-
, ever fhc would ask: She then defir’d her
Husband to fend his three Sons, Ram ,
1 lekeman (call’d otherwife Laatfmana ,
The Mala-
bars jay,
Orifice,
and invi-
ted the
Brahmans
e
t h at f
times ufed
to dijhrb
thofeCere•
moms "


Ram 'tra-
vels ixidrig
we ‘Gan-
ges.
HawanV
Sifter in
love with
Lekeman. ’
He cuts off
her Nofe
and Ears,
and Settrtigria ) and Setterouhan for 12
years into Foreign Countries, and to
furrender the Kingdom to her Son Barr at
(call’d Baratha and Panda by the Mala-
bar s) *, Barrdt Ob the other hand was
unwilling to accept of this Offer, not-
withflanding which Ram departed with
his Family ahd two Brothers to the Vil-
lage of Baratp'ery 12 Cos from Afonti, but
leaving a pair of his Slippers behind,
Barr at who Itill refus’d to encroach upon
his eldcft Brother’s Right, Ufed to facri-
fice FloWers, Sandal-wood and Saffron to
them in his abfence.
Ram in the mean while travelling albhg
:he River Ganges to Poufouwatfivdn , where
ifter a mbnth’s (lay, Whilfl the Brothers
were bufy in efe&ing the Huts, Lekemdn
ffed to go evfery day to gather Fruit for
their Siibfiftetfce he being a very hand-
fohi Perferi, abd got Upon a Ttee to ga-
ther f6me FVuits, Was efpyM by a certain
Womail named Sditppertekhia (and Chur-
manag'd by the MaVdbars ) the Siller of
Rawan , and Widow of one Vivali ( kill’d
in Rawan' s Service) who being cbrrte to
wadi her felf iii the Ganges, told him.
That fhe 'looking updn him as 'the handfomcfl
P erf on in the World, /he fnufl be mi for able
for eber unlefs he would voudhfafe to love
her , Which if he refufed , [he Would turn her
Loi)e into Hatred, when he niuft prepare to
ihgdge With her in /ingle Combat. Lekeman
reply M, That his Love being fix'd in ano-
ther [idee, he 'cbiild not oblige her, and i that
to fight With her ivoUldiiot tkfn fb h’is honour.
6 unfortunate Man ! cry’d (he, how Utile
beefi thou acquainted with iriy Strength ! if I
cdn y t enjoy thee, I Will have thy 'Life before
1 pdH frdm'thvs place. Ldkeman then cOn-
fldcrifig whom he had t 6 do With, told
h'dr, that tho he Was Willing, it was not
ifi his power, (he being of the Family of
the ' Raches , khd 'he of the Tribe of thfc
fifdht-KetUrijs i but that if /he‘Would go
foiiis Bfdtller Ram's Hut, which was not
far thdilde, and Mbtaih fifs CohTeht, be
would not be backwkYd to gratify ber
fldlire. £>he HO (bOrter carrle to ham's
Hiit, blithe knew hdr at firft fight, and
lodkiilg tipoh this hs a fit Opportunity to
fevdnge the Affront he had receiv’d of
PCa\vdn, he g‘ive her ’a Letter directed to
his Brother Lckehfan, Wherein he order’d
him to clit off thofe Farts in which he'r
Srrebgth Was lodg’d. Thus fhe left Ram
Well fatisfied, babehitlg to her pretended
Bridegroom, ’WhbitrfllefOUhd bufy in ga-
liuh ihg Of ‘Fiiiir, and delivering the'Let-
ter ’to Him, 'bid him read bis Brother’s
<!bfiferit. } Bli tLekeman UußeritaUdiiigbis
BfdtbdrVliuerifidn, flmfoWards her, and
under pretence of taking her up in his
Arms, cut off her Nofe and wherein
her Strength was lodg’d.
Thus mortified Ihe went away, threat-
ning Revenge to the two Brothers, and
making the bell of her way to her Bro-
ther Rattan’s Palace*, but lighting by
chance upon an Uncle’s Houle of hers
named Char, who commanded iocoo
Horfe, fhe Hop’d there, arid being ask’d
hoW fhe came fo defac’d, Ihe told them
that fome Robbers near the Ganges had
treated her in this manner.
The youngeft of heir Uncles order’d
immediately 300 HOrfe to be in readi-
ngs to march with him to the Ganges,
Where they attack’d ham's Habitation
with fuch fury, that Lekeman was ptiC
under no fmall Confternation m , but Ram
defended his Habitation fo courageoufly,
that he kill’d moft of the Horfe-men with
his Bow call’d Diennoekbaanne, with their
Leader. Ghar had Uo fooner receiv’d In-
telligence of this Defeat, but putting
himfelf at the head of the remaining
9700 Hoffe, he march’d to the fame
place, but with no better fuccefs, being
flain by ham with all his Forces.
Sddppenekhid having been an Eye-Wit-
ness of this Defeat at a diflance, made
all the hafte could to come to her Brother
Rawan , who having ask’d her the reafon,
fhe told him, that meeting with a very
beauteous Woman near the River Ganges,
fhe endeavour’d to perfwade her to come
along with her, with an intention to pre-
fent her to him m , but being overtaken
by her Husband and his Brother, they had
fo mortify’d her in that manner as they
now faw her. Rawan highly exafpera-
ted at this ufage, bid her to fhew him
the place where it happen’d, which flic
did accordingly, and at the fame time
gaVe him an account of what had hap-
pen’d to her Uncle and the 10000 Horfe-
riien.
Rdwdfi thus fore-warn’d, afliim’d the
(hape of a Stag with two Heads, and fo
did l fted hear Kdrift s Hut,the better to fur-
prize him with the firft opportunity; but
being efpyM by Syiha Rants Wife, flie
was fo mtich taken wit'h his bright Skin,
that fhe defir’d her Husband tofhoothim,
and to make her a Veil of his Skin. Ram
told her that the fame could not be dmie
without danger \ but (he perfifting ilfner
Intfeaties, he confented, yet under Con-
dition, that (lie and his Brother Lekeman
(hould not pafs three certain Circles he
made with Chalk crofs the Hut. He
no fooner got into the field, but the two-
headed Stag fet up his heels, and being
00
//orfe-men
tylfd by
Rara -
: Rawan
1 tranff
form'd into
■ a Stag.


''The ten awa n _
bis Brother, who was in danger of pe-
•rifliing by his Enemies Hands. Sytha
Thunder-Itruclc at this Voice, bcg’d Le-
hman to fuccour her Husband, who told
her, that he believ’d this Voice to be
fi&itious, as not queftioning that his Bro-
purfued %y Rm fot 3 Cos was fliot with
an Arrow in the Breaft.
Is (hat by
Ram.
swan’s Ghoft at the fame time enter-
ins into the Body of a Fakier, he went
ftraitways to Ramh Hut, and with a dole-
ful Voice cry’d out to to fuccour


He carries
array Sy-
clu.
Places her
in a Gar -
den in
Ceylon.
Ram and
Lckcman
so in queft
*; Sytha.
ther, who had fo lately (lain 10000 Men,
could be in a condition to cope with one.
But Sytha imploring his Afilftance with
a flood of Tears, he went accordingly.
In the mean time the Fakier endow’d
with Rowan's Spirit, having affum’d the
fhape of a Beggar, came to beg fome
Alms of Sytha , who excus’d the matter,
yet'at laft was prevail’d upon to give
him fome Fruit that were left the day
before } but as (he was extending Arm
towards the Beggar, he catch’d hold of
her. Hand, and pulling her over the Cir-
cle (under pretence of bringing her to
the place where her Husband was en-
gag’d ) he carried her to the Country of
Lanka in the Ifle of Ceylon.
As he was carrying her along he met
with the Giant Siettank , of the Tribe
of the Raches , who beg’d fome Viftuals
of him in a threatning tone. Rowan
having no Provifions to give him, took
up a Stone, which he rubbing againft his
Thigh, made a large hole, the Blood
whereof turn’d the Stone into Meat, which
he gave the Giant, who had no fooner
eat it, but it turn’d to a Stone again in
his Stomach, and opprcfs’d him to fuch
a degree that he was not able to ftir or
move.
Then Rowan purfuing his Journy came
to the Mountain Refmokperrvat , where
he met with the Apes with Bears Heads,
call’d Hanuman , Suckertge , Anget and
Siamboemt *, and Sytha dropping her Ring,
the fame was taken up by Hanuman.
Rawan coming into Ceylon, and not
daring to bring Sytha into his Houfe,
plac’d her in a Garden under a certain
y ree ca ll’d Syfem , and having appointed
her a Guard of twelve Giants, he daily
made hisCourtlhip to her, but fhe refufed
all his Offers.
In the mean time Ram returning home-
wards, and meeting with his Brother
Lekeman by the way, they both came to
the Hut, but to their great furprize found
Sytha gone. Ram in a moft violent Rage
upbraided his Brother with leaving the
Hut, but having underftood the reafon
they refolv’d to go in queft of Sytha.
As they were pafling through a very
long fubterraneous Paflage, they met with
a certain Giant at his Devotion, who be-
jng f ur p r j z ’d to fee them, Ram told him,
that the defire of finding out his Spoufe
had brought him through this dangerous
place, asking him, whether he had not
heard any thing of her : He anfwer’d,
that he had feen a Giant flying through
the Air, holding a Woman upon his
Hand. Ram further enquiring what way
they were gone, he anfwer’d, towards
the Country of Dekendefa .
Ram verily believing this to be Sytha ,
blefs’d the Giant, and purfuing his Journy
to the Mount Refmokperwat , met with the
before-mention’d Apes with Bears Heads,
where Hamman proftrating himfelf at
his Feet, ask’d him, What brought him
to this remote part of the World ? Ram
anfwer’d. To look after his Spoufe,
Hamman reply’d, I faw a Giant pafs
through the Air with a Woman fitting
upon his Hand, who drop’d this Ear-
ring. Ram infinitely rejoye’d at the fight
thereof (knowing it to be his Wife’s)
ask’d him, what way they had taken ■?
Hamman reply’d, To the Country of
Lanka in the Ifle of Ceylon } and at the
fame time offering his Service for the
recovery of his Spoufe, he entreated
the Ape Suckerige to aflift him in this En-
terprize*, promifing him, that in cafe
they fucceedcd, Ram fliould reftore to
him his Wife and his Eflate in the Valley
of Kieckenda , taken from him by his Bro-
ther Bad: But Suckerige remember’d his
Brother’s Strength, how he had worfted
the Giant Rawan, and held his Head two
Months under his Anns (before the
Government of the World was commit-
ted to him by Kiftnum) belidesfeveral
other Giants told him, that Ram being
only of a middle Stature, was not likely
to conquer him.
Hamman however perfifling in his
Perfuafions, and extolling the Power of
Ram , Suckerige asked a Token, viz,
that he (hould (hoot his Arrow thro fome
of the Branches of the Trees, whilfl:
they were agitated by the Wind. Leh-
man having underftood his Requeft, fpoke
to his Brother Ram, who bidding them
Hint their Eyes, he fliot at once with
his Arrow thro feven Trees, and at the
fame time order’d Suckerige to challenge
his Brother Bad in his Name} which be-
ing done accordingly, Bad appear’d,
and in a fcornful Tone told Ram , that he
would cut off , his Head at one Stroke $
whereat Ram being exafperated to the
higheft degree, he drew his Bow, fent
his Arrow through his Body, and re-
ftor’d the Valley of Kieckenda to Suckc-
rige, and with it his Wife.
Ram having now taken a Refolution to
ftay with his Brother in the Mountain,
fent Hanuman,Anget,Suckerige and Sucking ,
Chieftains of the Apes, into the Valley of
Quicxtnta (as the Malabar s call it) not
far from the Valley of Kieckenda , in queft
of his Spoufe. Hanuman being ready to
depart with his Company, gave him his
teomsfc,
gives m
account fa,
Ram sf
Sytha.
Ram
Bad.


Hanuman
fies into
Ceylon.
Rears fm.
Sytha.
Ring as a token to (hew to his Spoufe
Sytha: Accordingly they fet out on their
Journy, taking two different. Roads, two
and two together *, but not meeting with
Sytha , they met at a certain place near
the Sea*fide full of Defpair at their ill
fuccefs. However Hanuman bid them
have a good Heart, telling them, that
Ceylon lying oppofite to them crols the
Seas, he would according to the Power
granted him by Fiftnum fly over the Sea
into Ceylon , where Rawan kept his Refi-
dence.
Hamman being at laft in difguife, ar-
riv’d in the Ifle of Ceylon , met with ten
Female Giants that were appointed her
Guard by Rawan in the Air: Thefe re-
futing him Paffage, he affum’d the ftiape
of a Fly, and thus efcaping their Hands,
advanced to the Shore of Ceylon •, but be-
ing there met by a huge Giant who ftopt
his Paffage, was forc’d to reaffume his
own Body of an Ape, and fo to engage
the Giant, who feeing him to fight fo
courageoufly, commended his Bravery,
telling him, that he fhould fucceed in
what he detir’d. Hamman anfwering,
that he came only to look for his Mafter
Ram* s Wife; The Giant reply’d, She in
j kept by the mofi Potent Rawan in a Garden
under a Syfem-Tree.
Hamman then purfuing his Journy,
and being extremely tir’d, did fall into a
fwound upon the Sea-fhore; where ha-
ving flept 18 hours, and forgotten the
Name of the place aflign’d him by the
Giant, he transform’d himfelf into a Cat,
and running through all the Houfes and
Corners of Ceylon , but without fuccefs,
at laft happen’d to light upon the top
of Rawan* s Houfe, from whence efpying
the Tree where Sytha was kept, he ad-
vanced towards it *, but whilft he was in
doubt whether it were Sytha or not, he
faw Rawan coming towards her, and re-
newing his Courtfhip, offering all his
Territories and Treafures in cafe ftie
would confcnt to be his Wife *, but Sytha
reply’d, that being Ram 1 s alone, (he would
never encourage his Addreffes, threat-
ning to confume him by Fire if he per-
fifted in his Demands.
Rowan was no fooner gone, but Hanu~
man dropt the Ring given him by Ram
into Sytha* s Lap, who burft out into
Tears, imagining that Ram had been
kill’d by fome of the Giants 5 but Ham-
man throwing himfelf at her Feet, told
her that Ram was in good health, and
had fent him to look after her. Sytha
(hill queftioning the truth, Hamman told
her that the Ring was given him as a
token to her, yet not with an intention
to bring her to him, but only to learn
News of her. Then hafte away, reply’d
Ihe, and detire Ram to deliver me out of
the hands of the Tyrant Rawan.
Hanuman went his way, but confide-
ring with himfelf, he would not forfake
Lanka without leaving behind him fome
Remembrances of his having been there,
he return’d to Sytha , asking her leave to
gather fome Fruits, which fhe deny’d,
telling him, that he would be unfortu-
nate in his Enterprize, if he fed upon
any other Fruit but what he found upon
the ground: Well, faid Hanuman, and
fo laying hold of the next Fruit-Tree,
tearing it up by the root he eat the
Fruit, the fame he did to moft of the
other Trees in the Garden, except that
where Sytha was plac’d. The Gardiner
feeing the next Morning what havock
Hanuman had made, told his Mafter what
happen’d, who being incenfed to the
higheft degree, order’d 10000 Giants to
kill this Ape. Hanuman feeing them ad-
vancing againft him, laid hold of one of
the biggeft Trees, and made fuch havock
among thefe Giants, that fedree one of
them efcap’d.
Rawan no fooner heard of this Defeat,
but he fent 25000 more to revenge the
Quarrel of their Comrades; but thefe
having undergone the fame fate, he fent
his youngeft Son at the head of 12000
of the choiceft Giants, who put Hanuman <
fo hard to it, that they made him reel ‘
feveral times *, but his Strength being con- £
tinually renew’d by Ram* s care, he at'
firft flew Rawan* s youngeft Son, and at
laft the whole Army.
Mandory Rawan*s Spoufe did all that
lay in her power to perfwade her Huf-
band to deliver up Sytha to Ram , for
fear of lofing his whole Eftate but Rawan
was fo far from hearkening to her Coun-
fel, that he iffued a Proclamation, that he
who thought himfelf the ftrongeft Man
in the Ifle of Ceylon (hould engage with
the Ape; But there being no body who
durft compare for Strength with Rawan*s
eldeft Son, named Inderjlet , (who former-
ly had vanquifli’d Raja Inder ) he order’d
him, that whenever he was a going to
(hoot his Arrow, he fliould utter certain
words taught him by Bramma , which
had that effed as to turn the Arrow into
a Serpent, and to entangle his Adver-
fary.
Inderjlet thus bold with hopes, advanc’d
at the head of his Giants againft Hanu-
man, who laid fo bravely about him, that
he made the Giants flirink, which Inderjlet
Hanuman’i
at
ey on ‘
Great
Slaughter
of the Oi-
ants,


Indernct
of*a be-
witched
Arrow.
Thu story
feems to
have fome
l °of °
Sampfon.
perceiving, let fly his Arrow againft
Hanuman , which being in an inftant tranf-
form’d into a Serpent, was tore to pieces
by Hanuman \ which Inderfiet feeing, he
flew like Lightning thro the Air to the
holy Bramma , upbraided him with De-
ceitfulnefs, ancH:hreatning him with no
lefs than the lofs of his Life, unlefs he
Ihew’d him the right way of vanquilhing
his Enemy.
Bramma being put to fuch a nonplus ,
haftned to Hanuman , and calling him-
felf at his Feet beg’d of him not to op-
pofe Inderfiei* s Arrow, as wanting not
means to proted himfelf againft his At-
tempts by divers other ways. Hanuman
taking Compaffion of Bramma granted
his Requeft, who then told Inderfiet, that
by his Charms he had fo order’d the mat-
ter as to render his Arrow more effedual
than before. Inderjiet encourag’d by his
Promife, fent forth his Arrow againft
Hanuman a fecond time, which turning
into a Serpent ftuck fo clofe to his Limbs,
that the Giants had fafficient opportunity
to exercife their Weapons upon him, tho
he receiv’d no more harm by it than if
he had been touch’d with a Feather.
However they carried him before the ten
headed Rawan , who ask’d him by what
means he was become invnher;- 1 *e: Ha~
numan rcply’d, By Ram's 'T r whofe
Wife thou haft carried s ch if
thou doft not reftor* • thy
whole Country (hall be lau defolaie.
Rawan exafperated at thi ■ wer,
commanded 10000 Giants to kill him,
but finding their Endeavours prove un-
fucccfsful, he ask’d Hanuman by what
means he might be bereav’d of his
Strength: He reply’d, If you dip my
Tail in Oil, wrap it in Cotton, and then
fetit on fire, all my Strength will vanifli
in an inftanr. Rawan believing the matter,
put it in Execution,' notwithftanding
which Hanuman pull’d the Serpent to
pieces like a piece of Thred, kill’d rnoft
of the Giants, and fet fire to the Houfes.
This done, he took his leave of Sytha ,
who gtive him one of her Bracelets as a
token, to (hew Ram that he had feen her,
charging him at the fame time not to
look back till he had pall the Seas, elfe
he would be in great danger. Hanuman
ftridiy obfcrvM this Rule till he came to
the Sea*(bore, when approaching on a
fuddea to a great Flame, he look’d back,
and the Flame reaching his Tail, he was
glad to run into the Sea to extinguifh the
Fire.
Then taking his courfe through the
Air, he pafs’d the Seas, and meeting with
his Comrades, told them what had hap-
pen’d, who thence made the beft of their
way to the Mountain Refmokpevwat } and
having fhew’d Sytha' s Bracelets to Ram ,
who immediately order’d Suckery , Lord
of the Valley of Kiechnda , to fummon
all the Apes under his Jurifdidion to arm
againft Rawan , he accordingly appear’d
under their 18 Kings, each whereof ap-
pear’d at the head of 20000 Apes, a-
mounting in all to 360000 Apes.
Ram and his Brother Lehman march’d
at the head of this powerful Army to
the Sea-fide diredly oppofite to the Hie
of Ceylon , where Ram having fpent three
days in falling and praying, to open a
Paffage for his Forces through the Sea,
but in vain, he drew his Bow threatning
the Sea to reduce it into fuch narrow
Bounds, that where then was nothing to
be feen but Water, theTerreftial Crea-
tures (hould fport upon the pleafanc
Sands without danger. The Waves of
the Sea thereupon humbling themfelves
before Ram , told him, that to open him
a Paffage through the depth could not
be done without a total Deftmdion of a
vaft number of Fi&es, but that there
was in his Army a certain Ape call’d
Stchem , endow’d with fuch a Quality by
his Mailer the holy Narfy , that whatever
Stone he Oiould only touch, would fwini
on the Airfare ot the Water like Wood.
Accordingly Ram order’d a vaft quanti-
ty of Stones to be brought from the
neighbouring Mountains, which being on-
ly touch’d by Sichem , and then thrown
into the Sea, did fwim upon the Surface
thereof, and making a Bridg cf 100
Leagues in length, afforded an eafy Paffage
for his whole Army.
The Inhabitants of Lanka or Ceylon
being foon alarum’d by the nolle of their
Drums, and other Warlike Instruments,
Rawan's Wife intreated her Husband to
take a view of that prodigious Army
from the top of his Houfe, whom Ram no
fooner fpy’d at a diftance, but with his
Arrow he /hot off his ten Crowns from
his ten Heads. His Wife laying hold
of this opportunity, exhorted him once
more to deliver up Sytha to Ram , who,
fays file, can with the fame Arrow which
took off your ten Crowns, alfo take off
your ten Heads.
But Rawan perfifting in his Refolution
not to part with Sytha , Ram told his
Brother Lehman, that to leave nothing
unattempced to reduce Rawan to Reafon,
they would difpatch the Ape Anget to
him to demand Sytha , and in cafe of
refufal, to tell him now, that they
A
f
crops the
Sea.


RawanV
Brother
tomes over
u Ram.
Rawan is
Obfiinacy.
were come to deftroy all with Fire and
Sword.
Rawan being advertis’d of his arrival,
call’d together all his Giants, (among
whom was his Brother Bebickhem ) and
having caufed 10 Statues to be made with
10 Heads like himfelf, he took his place
in the raidft of them: Anget coming
boldly into the Room, ask’d what Mon-
fters thefe were, and which of them was
Rawan himfelf? Whereat Rawan being
highly exafperated, ask’d who it was that
dares affront him thus, threatning to
make him repent his boldnefs. Anget
reply’d, Were I not here in the quality
of an Ambaflador,! would try my Strength
with thee, being fent by Ram to let thee
know, that he did not come with this
Army to deftroy thy but to re-
cover his Wife Sytha } vrhich if thou re-
fufeft to do, he declares himfelf innocent
of all the Effufion of Blood that fhall en-
fue. But Rawan anfwering, that he was
refolv’d not to deliver her*, Anget brought
this Anfwer to Ram .
At the fame time Rawan’s Brother,
with five of his chief Counfellors, find-
ing him not in a capacity to cope with
fo powerful an Army, afliim’d the lhape
of Apes, and throwing themfelves at
the Feet of Ram , crav’d his Mercy and
Protection.
The Apes of Raws s Army taking them
for Spies, handled them very roughly at
firft coming into the Camp } and Hanu~
man or Hanneman elpecially, would have
diffwaded him from having the leaft con-
cern with them, but were appeafed by
Ram , when he told them that he knew
them to be Men of Honour and Pro-
bit Y- . _ . ,
By this time Rawan had arnfd xoooo
of his boldeft Giants to attack Ram s
Camp s but thefe being Toon defeated, he
fent 18000 more, who having undergone
the fame fate, he fent 30000 more } and
thefe alfo fucceeding no better, he fent
50000 more, who were all routed like
the reft. .
Then Rawan’s eldeft Son entreating his
Father to let him engage alone againft
the whole Camp of Ram , he could not
confent to his Requeft } but having con-
vinced his Father of the Advantages he
had lately got by the Inftruftions of Bram-
ma, he put him at the head of 10000
of his choiceft Giants. W ith thefe Troops
being advanc’d to Ram’s Camp, he en-
courag’d them to fight bravely, whilft he
foaring up into the Air did hide himfelf
behind one of the W heels the Chariot
of the Sun, till coming diredtiy over
Ram’s Camp, he fent forth one of his C
Magical Arrows, which turning irnmedi- f
ately into a Serpent, fent forth fuch a
vaft number of other Serpents among the
Apes, that their Arms and Legs being
quite entangled, they were knock’d down
on all Tides by the Giants.
Ram not a little furpriz’d at this Dif-
after, ask’d Rawan’s Brother what was
beft to be done} who told him, that if
he would fend for his wing’d Garroude ,
the Serpents w T ould vanifh in an inftanc.
Ram following his Advice, Garroude no
fooner appear’d but the Serpents vanifh’d,
and the Apes fought it out bravely with
the Giants.
In the mean while Ram having advis’d
with his Council how to attack Jnderftet *
Rawan’ s eldeft Son in the Air, and Leke*
man having offer’d his Service, he got
upon Hanuman’s Back, who carrying him
up into the Air, Inderfiet lent a fhower
of Arrows againft him } but thefe being
repulfed by Lekeman’s Shield, and lnder~
fiet feeing him advance towards him,
threw away his Bow and Arrows, and
laying hold likewife of his Sword and
Buckler, a moft furious Combat enfued,
which remain’d dubious for fome time, till
Lekeman giving him a Blow on his Neck i
cut off* his Head at one ftroke, which dropt e
down before his Father’s Feet. Mandory /
his Mother burft out into a moft violent
Paffion for the lofs of her beloved Son,
tearing her Hair and Breafts with her
Nails, and upbraiding her Husband with
Cruelty, Injuftice and Lafcivioufncfs, but
to little purpofe, Rawan perfifting in her
Refolution of not delivering Sytha,
Being refolv’d to make his utmoft
Efforts, he crav’d the Affiftance of his
Brother, a moft famous Giant, nam’d
Coukeringh (or Kompacarna , as Rogerius * ■
calls him after the Malabars) this Giant
ufed to fpend his whole Life in fleeping,
except one day when he appear’d in his
full Activity, and to fpend his time in
filling his Belly with Viduals for the
whole fucceeding year. It being then in
the third Month of his fleep, Rawan
call’d to him aloud, Brother Coukeringh ,.
rouze, rouze, and come to my Affiftance,
■ or elfe we are loft I Coukeringh asking
; him half afleep, what was the matter ?
Rawan told him, that being attack’d by
> a vaft Body of Apes under the Command
i of one Ram , who had kill’d two of his
. Sons, and no lefs than feven Generals,
; with 200000 Giants, he had no other
: means left to reprieve himfelf and his
• Subjefts from Deftruftion, but to implore
r hk Aid. The Giant replv’d, Thou beeft
Rawan s
eldeji Sen
flam
*c*
He feekj
for Ajp~
fiance by
his Brother


unfortunate, Rawan, to have entangl’d
thy felf in an unjuft War againft an Ar-
my headed by the Divine Ram 7 I have
forefeen it in my Sleep, that the fame
will turn to the Deftruftion of thy felf
.and thy Country.
Rawan flood amaz’d, but full of De-
fpair, told his Brother, That if it was
his fate ( written in his Forehead ) to die
by the hands of Ram , it was in vain to
avoid it, defiring once more his Affiftance.
The Giant reply’d, My Life is at your
Service, and fo ordering his Chariot
drawn by ten pair of Aflestobe got rea-
dy, put himfelf at the head of Rawavfs
Army compos’d of Giants. Ram in the
mean while underftanding that the great
Giant was coming againft him, he ap-
pointed fome thoufand of Apes to throw
upon him the tops of the which
they did accordingly, tho in vain, the
Giant piercing the Mount that was
thrown upon him with his Arrow, not-
withftanding it had 100 Leagues in com-
pafs.
This made Ram ask Bebickhem , Rawan's
Brother, by what means the Giant Couke-
ringh might be vanquifh’d. Bebickhem re-
ply’d, You muft retreat three Paces back-
wards 7 that can’t be, anfwer’d Ram , be-
caufe I am defeended of the Race of the
Ketterivs, who dare not retreat under
pain of Banifhment. But there is no o-
ther Remedy, return’d Bebickhem 7 but
the belt Advice 1 can give you is, to de-
feend from your Chariot, and let the fame
be carried three Paces backwards. This
being approv’d by Ram , was done ac-
cordingly, fo that whilft the Giant was
making a moil horrid Daughter among
the Apes, he fhot his Head off, which
falling upon the ground fhook the Earth
as if a whole Mountain had tumbled
down, a whole River of Blood as black
as Pitch guftiing out of his Veins.
Notwithftandiog this the Trunk of his
Body continued to make a great (laugh-
ter among the Apes 7 fo that Ram being
again oblig’d to have recourfc to
Brother, he told him, that ifhefentout
a Party of Apes to get a blue Cloth died
with Indigo, and therewith cover’d the
Body, it would become immovable. In
the meanwhile the Trunk of the Giant
continued to make great havock among
the Apes, but to little purpofe, they
being reviv’d (by the Afpedt of Ram )
as fall as they were kill’d.
By this time the blue Cloth being brought
was thrown upon the Trunk, which in
an inftant remain’d as unmovable as a
Stone in the Field. Rawan feeing himfelf
thus reduc’d to defpair, had recourfe to
the Goddefs Bowami, unto whom he
offer’d a Sacrifice of frefh Butter, Sandal-
wood, Flowers and Spices, imploring
her Aid againft Ram with fuch
that it is believ’d he would have obtain’d
his Requeft, had not the Ape Hanuman
defiled the Sacrifice by throwing one of
the dead Garcafes of the flain Giants up-
on the Altar, ere&ed in a deep hole for
this Sacrifice.
Ramn thus drove to the laft extremi-
ty, put himfelf again at the head of his
Forces, and like a defperate Perfon flew
all the Apes he met in his way, forcing
all the Hills before him the Apes threw
in his way, till Ram drawing his Bow
fhot off nine of his Heads j and then calling
to him aloud, Rawan faid he, delifl from
Bloodfhed, return me and I will
heal thy Wounds, and reftore thee thy
Heads and Kingdom, without which thou
wilt certainly lofe all. But Rawan re-
plying, that if Fate had fo ordain’d it,
he would rather lofe his 10 Heads alfo
than Sytha. Ram fhot likewife his tenth
Head off: But perceiving that the Head-
lefs Body laid ftill about him with its
24 Arms, he threw fome Water upon
it, and muttering out certain words,,
made it as immoveable as a Stone.
Mandory was no fooner inform’d of her
Husband’s Death, but fhe threw her felf at
Ran? s Feet, bewailing his Obllinacy, noc-
withftanding the many forebodes of his
Fall, an unfortunate Raven and a doleful
Owl having fettled upon his Houfe, with
very dreadful Lamentations and Outcries,
the fore-runners of his Misfortune. As
I have, added Ihe, been innocent of what
has happen’d, fo I hope you won’t deny
me my Prote&ion: Ram bid her be fatif-
fied, ordering her at the fame time to
pafs feven times through the fmoke of
the Fire kept at Tchie, to purify her felf,
and renew her Virginity, which done
he would marry her to her Husband’s
Brother Bebickhem , who accordingly was
put into Ramrfs place. Then Ram be-
ing carried in his Rofe Litter to the Tree
Syfem, where Sytha was kept a Prifoner,
fhe embrac’d him, returning him a mil- j
lion of Thanks for her Deliverance.
The next thing RamA\A 7 was to revive
his Apes flain in the late Engagement;
and fo march’d back over the fame Bridg
that had carried him into Ceylon . Being
come to the oppolite Shore, he order’d the
Stones to be carried to the place whence
they had been taken, and marching to
the Valley of Kieckenda , he would there
have taken his leave of Suckery - 7 but he
KiwanV
iafi ISam*
jSi.
flmty
%****
tik Wife
married to
bußrotkro
Earn mats
again with
Syiha,


caufe (he had Rattan* s Pifture drawn upon i
a piece of Board, flie purg’d her felf by
putting her Hand into a Vefiel fill’d with
Serpents.
They further add. That her Husband
being become extreme jealous, caus’d her
to be thrown before the Elephants, and
afterwards before the Tygers, but Ihe
efcaped without the leaft harm. They
fay, that when Hanuman faw Ram attend
into Heaven, he cry’d aloud to him, O
Divine Ram! what have I done, that yon
will leave me behind! Ram anfwer’d,
Hanuman , be not diflatisfied, thou (halt
never die, and many Pagodes (hall be
ere&ed to thy Memory. Farewel.
Thus ended the fecond Period of Time,
which, according to the Computation of
the Benjans, contains a Million and 296000,
whereof Ram reign’d 2000. This fe-
cond Period is call’d Treitagom by the
Malabars, and Tretanike by the Benjans.
refilling to part with him thus, would
needs accompany him with all his Forces
as far as the Village of Baratpoeriy where
Ram was receiv’d by his Father, Mother
and Brother, with great Demonftrations
of Joy* the fweet fcented Rofe-Water,
Saffron, Betel, and other Perfumes, be-
ing lavifhly bellow’d upon him and all
thofe that had attended him home.
Returns
m>
Ram having bellow’d his Blelfing upon
Suckery he return’d home, but Hanuman
ftaid with him. He reign’d in Peace 11
years after his return, and begat two
Sons, Lan and Chus. Then taking his
opportunity when he had fent Hanuman
out of the way, he attended into Heaven
with the Inhabitants of the Earth, ex-
cept his two Sons.
The Malabars fay, that Ram being
jealous of Sytha, would have murder’d
her, had Ihc not cleared her felf by the
Fire and a folemn Oath. Another time
being again feiz?d with a Jealoufy, be-
CH A P. V.
The eighth Altar. The Parents, Birth and Education of Kifna. His miracu-
lous Deliverance. Ragia Kans endeavours to murder him. Kifna turns a
Shepherd, and flys with his Company to Goggel.
Tk eighth
Transfer-
motion the
markaluc.
AS the eighth Transformation of Fiji-
nuntis accounted of the greatelt
' moment above the reft for, fay the Pa-
gans, in all the others Ftftmm appear d
in the World with fome part of his Di-
vinity, but in this he carried along with
him the whole Subftance of it, fo that
he left his place vacant in Heaven; This
Transformation happen’d with the be-
ginning of the third Period of Time-,
and, according to the relation of the
Benjam , was thus. _ .
One Ragia Kam living in the City ot
Mottera , 2$ Cosfrom upo “.£ he
River Sienvnertdt had a young Sifter
named Deuki. About 3 higher up
the fame River liv’d a certain Brahman
named Wajknckuvc in the City of
The faid Deuki being arriv’d to a marri-
ageable Age, her Brother Ragia Kans
look’d out for a Husband for her i but
meeting with none for his purpofe in that
City, he fent to the City of Goggel , where
his Meffenger hearing of the Worth and
Piety of IVajfeudeuw, the fame was at his
Recommendation married to him when
he was only 19, and (he no more than
12. years of Age.
The faid Ragia having underftood that
there was among his Subjeds a certain
Brahman, named Narret, well skill’d in
Chiromancy (a thing in high efteem a-
mong the Pagans* ) he fent for him, de-
firing him to look into his Sifter’s Hands,
and to foretel, without diflembling the
matter,what good or bad Fortune was like
to befal her. The Brahman having view’d
her Hand, told the King, that according
to the Lines of her Hand fhe was to bring
forth fix Sons, and one Daughter, the
youngeft of whom will not Only take
away thy Kingdom, but alfo thy Life.
The King being not a little furpriz’d
at this Prophecy, order’d the faid Deuki
and her Husband to be imprifoned in a
ftrong Cattle, and that all the Children
begotten upon her Body Ihould be kill’d
immediately. Accordingly the Midwife
brought the new-born Babes to her Bro-
ther, who beat out the Brains of fix of
them ( viz., five Sons and one Daughter )
againtt a Stone. Afterwards undemand-
ing that (he was with Child With the
feventh, he enclofed her in a Room
with Iron Doors, and appointed her a
Guard of 100 Soldiers, with ftrid Orders
that the Child as foon as it was born
Chould be brought to him. Upon this
* See Vof ■
fIUS 1. 2.
Idol. c. 47.
8c Pucer.
de Divin,


* The Bth
day of the
decreafwg
Moon,
occafion I can’t but obferve, that this as
well as the cnfuing part of the Story of
Kifna fecms to have a near relation to the
Hiftory of the Birth of our Saviour, his
flight into Egypt, the Murder of the in-
nocent Children by Herod , Chrift’s Mi-
racles and Afcenfion, &c.
The time of her Reckoning being ex-
pir’d on the day * Aetben, of the Month
Souwame , this unfortunate Lady being
overwhelm’d with Grief, fhe brought
forth a Son about Midnight without the
lealt Pain, whofe Face was as bright as the
Full Moon j but as file had occafion to re-
joice at the Birth of fo fine a Child, his
Fate put her into incredible Affliftion: But
Fiftmm (whofe Divine Virtue was in-
fufed into this Child) comforted his
{ The deliverance of EB


Mother, telling her, that he would find
means to efcape the hands of his Uncle,
and deliver her out of her Prifon. Then
fpeaking to his Father, Pray, fays he,
carry me to Goggel on the other fide of
the River Siemmena to the Brahman Nen ,
whofe Wife being lately brought to Bed
of a Daughter, exchange me for her,
and leave the reft to my difpofal.
Wafftndeuw anfwer’d, how is it pofli-
ble to remove thee out of a Chamber
fo clofely guarded and kept, that not the
leaft thing could pafs in or out ? Kifna
(this was the Child’s Name) reply’d, the
Doors (hall be open’d to thee, and the
Guards fo overcome with Sleep, that no-
thing (hall flop thy free Paffage*, he had
no fooner fpoken thefe words but the
feven Doors open’d themfelves, fo that
Waffendeuw took the Child and carried hint
off without the leaft hinderance. But
coming to the River Siemmena direftly
oppofite to Goggel , Kifna* s Father per-
ceiving the Current to be very ftrong
{it being in the midft of the rainy Sea-
fon ) and not knowing which way to pafs
it, Kifna commanded the Water to give
way on both fides to his Father, who ac-
cordingly pafs’d dry-footed croft the Ri-
ver, being all the way guarded by a Ser-
pent that held her Head over the Child
to ferve it inftead of an Umbrella. The
Benjans call thisf rpent Sickenafy, Coming
to the Brahmans Houfe, the Door open’d
it felf, and finding the Brahman and his
Wife afleep, he exchang’d his Son for
their Daughter, which he carried along
with him to the Caftle. In Ihort, the
Water afforded him once more a free
Paffage, and finding the Doors of the
Caftle open, and the Guards afleep, he
lock’d them after him, and deliver’d the
Girl to his Wife.
The Guards hearing the Child cry foon
after, enter’d the Chamber, fnatch’dit
from the unfortunate Parents, and brought
it to Ragia Kans, who finding it a Girl,
upbraided the Brahman with want of Skill,
yet for fear of the worft, was going to
ffcrike the Head againft a Stone } but the
Child flipping out of his hands flew up
into the Air, and told him. It was in vain
to attempt to murder her, fince he that was
to take away his Head and his Kingdom , to
revenge the Death of bis five Brothers and a
Sifter , was fafe at Goggel. This faid, it
flew up high into the Air, where it was
turn’d into Lightning by Viftnum , a thing
never feen before in the World.
Ragia Kans not a little furpriz’d at this
Accident, confulted all his Friends what
he had beft to do in this Emergency 5 but
none being able to advife him to any*
purpofe, whilll he was very melancholy '
and ruminating upon the oddnefs of the
thing, he underftood that the pious
Brahman Nen who liv’d at Goggel, had a
raoft beautiful Son, which put it into his
head, whether it might not perhaps be he
who was to take Revenge of him for his
Tyrannies. At laft, to make fure work,he
refolv’d to have the Child kill’d j but not
thinking it fafe to undertake fo hainous a
thing bare-fac’d (for fear of the com-
mon People ) he made his Applications
to his eldeft Sifter Poetena , enjoyning her
as Ihe tender’d his Life, to go with fome
Prefents to this Brahman's Houfe, and to
endeavour to kill this Child, by anointing
her Teats with Poifon.
Accordingly coming with confiderable
Prefents to the Child’s Mother at Goggel ,
(he wifh’d her much Joy, and taking the
Child in her Lap, (he gave ample Re-
commendations of its Beauty, and then
kiffmg and playing with the Child, laid
it to her Breaft: But this Child being
proof againftall Poifon* did fuck away not
only all her Milk, but likewife the Blood
out of her Veins, till flie dropt down dead
upon the fpot.
Ragia forely afflifted with this News*
releas’d his Sifter Deuki and her Husband,
asking his Sifter’s Pardon for his having
pretended to thwart the immutable De-
crees of Deftiny, and defiring that all
paft things might be buried in Oblivion.
However, as the Child at Goggel lay con-
ftantly in his Head, he advis’d with his
Vizier, or Chief Minifter, upon the mat-
ter : He told him, that there liv’d a cer-
tain Giant named Settafor at Mottera , who
had the Gift of transforming himfelf in-
to a Cart and Oxen, by which means he
might carry the Child into the Air and
murder it. The King purfuant to his
Advice, fent for the faid Seftafor, who
at his requeft crofting the River Siemme-
na, when he came near the City of Goggel,
transform’d himfelf into a little near.
Cart, drawn by two white Oxen with
gilt Hofns * and palfmg thus through the
Streets of the City, at Jaft ftop’d near
the Brahman Nen his Door. One of
the neighbouring Women having juft at
that time Kifna in her Arms at the Door,
fetthe Child upon the faid Cart, which
was no fooner done, but Seftafor flew
with the Child up into the Ait. The
Mother amai’d at this Spe&acle, cry’d
out aloud, O Viftnum proteft my Child!
Her Prayers were heard * for Kifnd, when
he faw himfelf high in the Air, affum’d
the fliape and ftrength of a Giant, and


gave fuch a Blow near the Giant’s Heart,
that he beat the Breath out of his Body \
then reafluming his former lhape of
a Child, got upon his dead Carcafe, and
fo fell down with it upon the ground.
His Parents being Eye-witnefles of the De-
liverance of their fuppofed Son, were fo
furpriz’d thereat, that looking upon him
as fomething extraordinary font them
from Heaven, they facrificcdto the Gods,
and gave abundance of Alms to the
Poor.
Ragia Kans finding himfelf difappoint-
ed in his hopes, had recourfo once more to
his raoft trufty Counfellors : one of them
told him, that there was a certain Deyt,
or Giant, named Turnawent, who being
endow’d with the Virtue of transforming
himfelf into a Whirlwind, the King en-
gag’d him on his fide, in order to carry
the Child into the Air. Kifna , who heard
the Whirlwind rolling crofs the River
Siemwena towards the City of Goggel y
being then in his Mother’s Lap at the
Door, rolPd down upon the ground y
whence the Whirlwind fnatching him up
into the Air, his Parents ftood amaz’d at
fo ftrange a Speftacle, imploring Kift-
mm for his Afliftance.
Kifna being carried to a vaft height by
the Wind, aflum’d the fliape of a Man,
and taking the Giant Turnamnt by the
Throat, turn’d his Neck round and then
reaffuming his former fliape, got upon the
dead Carcafe of the Giant, and fell down
along with it upon the ground juft be-
fore his Parents Door, to the great
Amazement of the Inhabitants of Goggel ,
who could not but look upon this Acci-
dent as miraculous, or that had fome-
thing of Divine in it.
Kifna in the mean while remaining up-
on the Giant’s Back, cry’d moft vehe-
mently \ his Mother laid him to her
Breaft, but he not ceafing to cry, (he
laid him in a hanging Cradle , notwith-
ftanding which he continued crying, till
his Mother having recounted to him the
Story of Ram (as related before) he
leap’d out of the Cradle, and taking the
fliape of Ram with his Bow and Arrow,
he cry’d out, Lehman , let us go after
Rawan and deliver Sytha. His Mother
being ready to proftrate her folf at his
Feet, he foon reaflum’d his former fliape,
and encreafod miraculoufly both in
Strength and Wifdom.
It happen’d one time that his Mother
did bring upon the Table a Golden Difli
with Rice Milk, and fome Herbs drefs’d
after the way of the Benjans , which Kifna
feeing, he told her he could not eat it
unlefs thefe things were all mix’d toge-
ther, which flie did accordingly: but
Kifna rafting it, defir’d her to foparate
them again ; his Mother anfwering him
that it was not in human Power fo to do*
he laid his Hand over the Difli and fcpa-
rated them immediately, to the aftonilfe-
ment of his Parents.
His Father being a Brahman of the
Cowherds, maintain’d his Family by
breeding of Cattel, which, lince the
bringing of Kifna into the Houfe, was
encrcafed to 900000.
His Mother being one time bufy in
charming, he ask’d her for a little Butter:
Ihe gave him a little, but not thinking
that enough, he ask’d for more, which ihe
refilling, he took the opportunity whilft
Ihe was gone out of the way to take away
fome. His Mother returning ask’d Kifna
what was become of the Butter ? He an-
fwer’d, that the Cats and Rats had eat it.
But the Mother not thus fatisfied, look’d
into Kifna' s Mouth, where flic had a view
of the whole World with its Waters,,
Forefts, Mountains, &c. enclos’d in a
blue Circle. The Mother aftonilh’d at
fo ftrange a Speftacle, yet foon recover’d
her felf, when flie faw Kifna return to
his Childilh Shape and Game again j fo
taking up a Twig, threaten’d to ftrike
him, but he running out of the Town flic
purfu’d him, but not being able to over-
take him, he ftood ftill at laft, when flie
gave him three or four Blows, urging him
ftill to tell her what was become of the
Butter *, he perfifted in his former
that the Cats and Rats had eaten it. She
took all the Ropes belonging to the
199000 Cows, endeavouring to tic them
together in Knots } but notwithftanding
all her Endeavours, the Knots would not
tic, till Kifna finding her much out of
humour at this Difappointment, he per-
mitted the Ropes to be knotted, and him-
felf to be ty’d with the Ropes , but his
Mother finding him cry bitterly, Ihe re-
leas’d him foon after.
Another time his Mother being gone
to milk the Cows, order’d him to hold
a Stick in his hand to make the Cows
ftand ftill whilft flie was a milking but
finding flie had left her Brafe Veflel,
wherein flie ufed to gather her Milk be-
hind, and not daring to fend Kifna*, he
told her he would foon find a way to
fetch the Veflel without ftirring from the
place, and fo extending one of his Arms
fo far as to reach the Veflel, he gave
it to his Mother, and fo reaflum’d the
fliape of a Child.
In the mean while Ragia Kans being


inform’d that the Inhabitants of Coggel
increas’d conliderably in Riches (for
Kifna*s fake) he order’d his Governor
to load them with heavy Taxes *, which
being done accordingly with the utmoft
Severity, they advis’d with Kifna whether
they had not beft remove with their Car-
tel to the fertile Valleys of the Mountain
of Perwet. Kifna approving their Pro-
poStion, perfwaded his Parents to do
the fame, fo that they tranfported all
their Moveables and Cattel to the moft
fertile Vallies about the Mount Perwet 7 or
Ooden Perwet, near the River Siemmena \
here they fix’d their Habitations in a
certain Village call’d Brindawink, feated
in the midft of moft picafafll Pafturages,
planted with Trees, and To abounding
in Grafs, that thofe vail Herds of Cattel
were not able to coilfurne it. Kifna was
fo well pleas’d with the place, that he
clad himfelf after their falhion, with a
Garland of Peacocks Feathers upon his
Woolen Cap, and a Flute to play away
the reft of the Cowherds.
CHAP. VI.
Further Deƒigns of Ragia Kans againƒt Kifna by the means of certain Giants,
Raja Inder and Bramha. Kifna produces a Pearl-Tree, and is made a King
of the Cowherds .
RJgia Kans highly exafperated at
this removal of his Subjeds, fum-
mon’d a certain Giant nam’d Bacaffar,
who haying the virtue of transforming
himfelf into a Hern, he fent him to car-
ry away Kifna, which he did according-
ly and having carry’d him up into the
Air, endeavour’d to fwallow him, but
Kifna transforming himfelf into a fiery
Flame burnt the Hern to Alhes, and he
return’d to his Parents without receiving
the leaft harm. The News thereof ha-
ving foon reach’d the Ears of Ragia ,
he fent another Giant nam’d
who transforming himfelf into the lhape of
a Boy, came to Kifna as he was looking
after the Cattel in the field,and engag’d in
a wreftling Match among the other Boys,
not queftioning by this means but to draw
Kifna into the Game, and fo make an
end of him; But Kifna (who was not
ignorant of his Defign) challeng’d him,
and as they were wreftling gave him fuch
a kick upon his Breaft, that he tumbl’d
down dead upon the fpot.
Ragia Kans finding himfelf once more
difappointed in his Aim, fent the dread-
ful Giant Jgafor, whofe Entrails were
all Fire. This Giant having laid him-
felf clofe to the Cowherds Huts, open’d
his dreadful Jaws, fo that the uppermoft
reach’d up to the Skies, his Teeth repre-
fenting like Coco-trees, and his Throat
like the Entrance of the Huts. Kifna
knowing the Deceit, drove his Cattel to
his own Stables, but the reft went ftrait-
ways with their Cattel into the Giant s
Throat; which the Giant no fooner per-
ceiv’d, but he Ihut his Teeth, fo that the
poor Wretches finding themfelves in the
midftof Fire and Flames, apply’d them-
felves to Kifna , who was got among
them on purpofe to make himfelf an In-
ftrument of their Deliverance: he bid
them not to defpair, and then extending
himfelf with all his might, made the
Giant to burfl in pieces, and thus open’d
a Paffage for the reft to efcape the
Flames.
This miraculous' Deliverance being
foon fpread all over the neighbouring
Country, Ragia Kans entreated the Giant
Dawanneel ( who had the power of tranf-
muting himfelf into a Flame) todeftroy
Kifna: Accordingly he came to the place
where Kifna and his Companions were
feeding the Cattel, and fetting all (not
excecpting even the Trees and Grafs)
into a light Flame, the Cowherds fled to
Kifna (who was at fome diftance) for
help, which he promis’d them in an in-
ftant, and fo advancing towards the Gi-
ant, took and held him round the middle,
till he forc’d him to fwallow all the Fire
again.
Ragia Kans almoft reduc’d to defpair,
had recourfe to the Giant Kafep , who
having afium’d the fhape of an Afs of a
prodigious bignefs, advanc’d towards
the Cowherds with a dreadful Counte-
nance who being terrified at fo dreadful
an Afpeft, left Kifna alone, who was fo
far from being furpriz’d at this monftrous
fight, that he laid by his Pipe, and ad-
vancing towards the Afs, who cameopen-
mouth’d upon him, endeavour’d to take
him by one of his hindermofl: heels, but
the Afs gave him fo terrible a kick with


his Foot, that he threw him 8 or 10
yards high into the Air. Kifna finding
himfelf thus roughly handled, thought
fit to affume the Ihape of a Giant, and
fo taking the Afs by the hinder Leg, did
fwing him three or four times about
his Head, and then throwing him againft
the ground fqueez’d the Breath out of his
Body.
The God Bramha being not ignorant
of what had pafs’d, and curious to know
whether Kifna was not endow’d with fome
Divine Virtue, took his opportunity, and
carried off all the Cattel belonging to
Kifna and the other Cowherds 9 who run-
ning to Kifna and imploring his Affi-
ftance, he bid them /hut their Eyes, which
they had no fooner done, but he pro-
duc'd the fame number of Cattel they
had loft. Brahma came about a year
after and brought back all the Cattel, ask-
ing his Pardon for what was paft. Kifna
told Brahma that he had better keep with-
in his own bounds 9 and caufing the Cat-
tel he had produc’d to vani/h imme-
diately, he kept them brought back by
Brahma.
Another time, all the Cattel juft after
they had been drinking about Noon out
of the River Siemmena , fell dead on a
fudden upon the ground : Kifna furpriz’d
at this Accident, and knowing that Gar-
roude having lately diflodg’d the mon-
ftrous Serpent KaUinaegh from her Dam
call’d Rammane Drepek , he (hrewdly fuf-
peded that fhe had taken to this River,
and infected the fame with her Venom:
Then getting upon a Palm-tree,he affum’d
his white and black Skin, and two more
Arms and Hands 9 and fending for Gar-
roude, order’d him to go to Bramha, and
to demand of him the things taken out
of the Sea in the times of Couram, and
left in his Cuftody till his return. Gar-
roude battening to brought back
to Kifna the Chianko , or Horn, the beau-
teous Woman Lekfemy , and the Jewel
Confenkmany, This done, he took the
Horn in one hand, a piece of Iron in the
fecond, another Weapon in the third,
and a Flower in the fourth hand. Thus
equipp’d, he leapt into the River in the
prefence of his Companions, and diving
to the bottom, met with the Wife of
fome of the Attendants belonging to the
Serpent KaUinaegh , who ask’d him what
had brought him thither, fore-warning
him to retreat in time, before he fliould
be Teen by the Serpent, which queftion-
lefs would devour him in an inftant.
Kifna reply’d, that being come on pur-
pofe to find out the Serpent, he defir’d
he might be fhew’d him ; which they re-
fufing to do, he turn'd his Eyes on all
Tides, and at laft efpying the Serpent he
awaken’d him out of his fleep,bidding him
to leave this River unlefs he would pay
for it with Death. The Serpent Kalli-
naegh fwelling with Rage fiew upon Kifna.,
and beat him backwards, but he reco-
vering himfelf, fqueez’d the Serpent’s
Head to that degree, that not knowing
what to do he twitted himfelf about his
Body: but Kifna encreas’d the bulk of
Body in fuch a manner, that the Serpent
ready burft, was forc’d to let go his
hold, being ready to drop down dead for
want of Strength. Kifna then got on
the top of his Neck, and putting an
Awl through his Nottrils, rid upon him
as if he had been on horfe back. The
Wife and Attendants of the Serpent find-
ing him quite out of breath, intreated
Kifna to fpare his Life, promifing to quit
the River immediately. But KaUinaegh
not willing to confent to what they had
offer’d, ftill endeavour’d to get rid of
Kifna 9 but finding all his Endeavours in
vain, and that Kifna’s Body increas’d
every minute in weight, he was glad to
approve of what had been offer’d by his
Wife. Kifna having pardon’d his Offence,
told him, that he would double his
Strength (becaufe he had been engag’d
againft a God ) and that Garroude fhould
not any more ditturb him in his Den,
provided he would leave this River, and
for the future never hurt either Men or
Beafts.
The Serpent with his Wife and At-
tendants having paid their Reverence
three times to Kifna ? left the River Siem-
mena j and Kifna arifing on a fudden above
the furface of the Water, realfum’d his
own fhape, and coming afliore blew his
Horn, by the found whereof all the
Cattel were in an inftant reftofd to
Life.
All thefe Miracles wrought by Kifna
had fuch an influence upon the Cowherds,
that they confulted all poffible means to
pay him due Reverence. One among the
reft told him. You know that Rajalnder t
the King of Heavens and the bleffed
Souls, keeps an annual Feaft in the Moun-
tain of Ooden Permt with the Believers 9
and fince we have no lefs Obligations to
Kifna, let us make alfo a Feaft to his
Honour, and invite him to the faid Moun-
tain. This being approv’d of by a ge-
neral Confent, they prepar’d a moft
fplendid Feaft, which they celebrated
with fuch demonftrations of Joy, that
the Noife thereof coming to Indcr's Ears,


Kifna pro-
duces a
Pearl-tree,
Makes
fpon with
tks Wmcn -
and looking upon it with a jealous Eye,
call’d together the Rains (difpofed in
twelve peculiar places) ordering them
to pour down their Waters upon the
Fields and Cottages of thefe Cowherds:
They were ready to obey, and pour’d
forth fuch prodigious (bowers of Rain,
that the Fields being all laid under Wa-
ter, Men and Bealls were upon the point
of being drown’d. The Cowherds high-
ly furpriz’d at the oddnefs of the thing
(it being in the dry Mouffon ) had once
morerecourfe to Kifna, who order’d them
to get up to the top of the Mount Ooden
Pcrxvet till the Rains ceafed *, and they
had no fooner obey’d his Orders, but he
took the whole Mountain, with Cattel,
Men and all upon his little Finger, and
lifted them up feven times higher than
the Waters could rife.
The Rains finding their Endeavours
fruftrated,return’d to and told him,
that they had pour’d down their Waters
feven days and nights without intermifli-
on, but. in vain, there being a certain
Perfon in thofe parts who could lift the
whole Mountain with his little Finger in-
to the Air, Raja Inder then perceiving
his Error, came to Kifna to make his
Excufe, and difmounting from his Ele-
phant, beg’d forgivenefs for having at-
tempted any thing againfl him, pleading
his ignorance, and as a token of his Re-
pentance, prefented him with the Cam-
dogaf or Cow of Plenty, which Kifna
was pleas’d to accept of, and pardon’d
his fault.
Not long after Kifna coming home one
day, found his Mother bufy in putting
fome Pearls on a String * he ask’d her
from what Tree fne had gather’d them •,
but Die anfwering, that Ihe never knew
Pearls to grow on Trees, but only in
Oifler-ftiells, Kifna took one of the tag-
ged, which he had no fooner put into the
ground, but they faw a Pearl-Tree fprout
forth full of the mod exquifite Pearls.
The Mother (landing amaz’d, and ready
to worlhip him, he caus’d the Tree to
vanifli immediately.
Soon after fome of the Cowherds and
their Wives as they were walking in the
Foreft, agreed to wafli themfelves in the
River * Kifna efpying them at a diftance,
fecretly got all their Clothes, and getting
upon an adjacent Palm-tree, had his
fport to fee them coming naked out of
the Water without being able to find
their Clothes: They were not a little fur-
priz’d at firft, but looking up and feeing
Kifna in the Palm-tree, they defied him
to reftore their Clothes, which he told
them (to try the Modefty of the Women)
he would, provided they would come
underneath the Tree \ but they excufing
the matter, he threw the Women their
Clothes.
At a certain time Kifna taking a walk
with the other Cowherds, they chofe him
their King, and every one had his place
afllgn’d him under the new King. There
liv’d among them a certain charitable
Brahman, whofe Wife (without the know-
ledg of her Husband) paid her daily
Devotions to Kifna , who fent two of his
Meflengers to let her know, that being
difpofed to make merry at her Houle
with fome of his Companions, (he fhould
provide fomething for their Entertain-
ment. The Meflengers meeting with the
Brahman told him the Meflage, who told
them, that lie knew nothing of Kifna ,
neither would he make any Entertainment
for him. With this Anfwer they return’d
to Kifna 1 who chiding them for their
miftake, bid them fpeak to the Woman $
which being done accordingly, (he no
fooner heard the Name of Kifna, but
making a low Reverence, to work (lie
went, and having drefs’d five or fix good
Diflies with a handfom Defert, (he carried
them her felf to Kifna , begging him to
accept of what (he was unworthy to
offer, which he did, and gave her his
Blefling; that as long as (he Jiv’d (lie
(hould want for nothing, and that after
her Deceafe her Soul fhould not tranfmi-
grate * into another E|pdy ; but that be-
ing purified by him, (he (hould go di-
redlv to Heaven.
j
Kifna with his Companions having
feafled plentifully upon what the Brah-
mans Wife had brought them, as they
were returning home met with fome Milk-
maids, unto whom Kifna told, that they
mud not pafs by without paying Toll to
him,who was King of the Place. The Maids
not thinking he had been in earned went
on their ways *, but Kifna with his Stick
breaking their MilkVeflels, one of them
was fo exafperated thereat, that (he made
Complaint thereof to his Mother, who
calling him to an account for this Out-
rage, he deny’d the matter ; but his Mo-
ther believing the contrary told him,
that he had broken the Peace, and that
if it (hould come to Ragicff s Ear, he might
be punifh’d for it: He re ply 1 did
not know I had done them any wrong,
but as for Ragia Kan's Anger I don't fear
it, tho he knew it to morrow.
It happen’d not long after, that in a
certain Moonfliiny Night in the Month
ullfoor (in which begins the New Year)
Is chofett.
King,
*Thefe Pa-
gans 100%
upon it as
a fmgular
Bl effing
when their
Souls are
not to enter
into ether
Bodies -


Kifna with fome of his Companions were
diverting themfelves with their Pipes in
an adjacent Wood; and Kifna efpecially
play’d fo charmingly upon his Flute, that
the Women in the Village being awaken’d
by the found of this Harmony, came run-
ning into the Wood to partake of their
Divertifements. Kifna ask’d them whe-
ther they were not afraid to come into
the Wood at that time of night ? They
anfwer’d. That their Ears and Hearts had
been fo touch’d with his melodious Har-
mony, that they were not able to flay
at home: So Ktfna gave them a Tune or
two, which fo furpriz’d them, that mofl
of them flood amaz’d, gazing all the
while at his Beauty, whilfl others pall
their time in dancing. This they con-
tinued till midnight, when having be-
flow’d his Blelfing upon the Women he
fent them home, he and his Companions
palling their time in the fame Jollities all
night till break of day.
CHAP. VII.
A farther account of the Defigns of Ragia Kans, who is kill'd at laƒt by Kifna.
New Decrees againft Kifna, which prove ineffectual. His other Miracles.
RAgia Kans being more and more a-
larm’d at thefe Miracles, fent for
his chief Miniflcr named ,and
his two chief Generals nam’d
and Moftik , to confult with them how to
rid his hands of Kifna: Panjemllo told
him, that all clandefline means having
prov’d to no purpofe hitherto, he knew
no other way than to engage the flrongefl
of all the Giants ( named Kehy ) againfl
him.
Ragia approving his Advice, fent ac-
cordingly the faid Giant, who meeting
with Kifna, ask’d, him where he was go-
ing ? Where I pleafe, reply’d :Ho
ho, anfwer’d the Giant Kehy, 1 will take
care of that, and fo was going to lay his
great Paws upon him; but taking
him by the Throat, did not let go his
hold till he had fqueez’d the Breath out
of his Body; which done, Kifna put his
Hand into his Throat, and pulling his
Heart out, firfl laid it upon his Mouth,
and afterwards threw it to the Ravens.
Ragia Kans being now put to the laft
fhift, a certain Brahman named ,ad-
vis’d the King to invite Kifna with his
Followers to a Feall, and fo to have him
kill’d at Table. Ragia approving his
Counfel, fent Meflengers to invite them
accordingly, but they were fo far from
granting their requeft, that they defir’d
Kifna' s Parents not to let him go, who
with Tears in their Eyes beg’d him to
flay at home; but Kifna refufing to
hearken to their Advice, order’d his
Chariot to be got ready, and taking his
Father, his eldefl Brother and Mother
along with him, went forward to Coggel
upon the River Siemmena oppofite to
Mottera. t
Here it was that Akeroer one of the
King’s Meflengers, bathing himfclf in the
Panjemllo River, and diving three times fucceflive-
Sianmor ly (after the manner of the Ben jam)
faw Kifna under Water feated upon his
Throne; which Apparition being feen by
him again in the fame flate above Wa-
ter, he could not forbear to break out
into thefe words: O holy Kifna! thou
beeft truly God in human Shape, becaufethou
both under and above Water ; a
fign thou beeft prefent in all places , a Qua-
Uty belonging only to the Gods! Pardon
me for having invited thee to this Feaft.
Kifna Kifna told him he was fallible it was not
his fault, and din’d with him the fame
day in a Garden Akeroer had juft near
Kifna the Bank of the River,
After Dinner they pafs’d the River,
but had not gone far before they met the
King’s Waflierman with a pack of Clothes
on his Back; fome of the Company of
Kifna having a mind to divert themfelves,
pufh’d one another againfl the Walher-
man, who giving them foul Language,
Naret Kifna bid his Companions to threfh him
handfomly, which they did.
Ragia Kans exafperated to the highell
degree at this ufage of his Servant, re-
folv’d to declare open Enmity againfl
Kifna. Not long after Kifna meeting
upon the Road a Barber, he prefented
him (according to the Cuflom of that
Country) a Looking-glafs to look in,
and pair’d his Nails; the Barbers in the
Eaftern Countries always pairing the
Nails on the Hands and Toes after they
have fbav’d the Beard. Kifna gave him
his Blefling, telling him, that his Soul
fhould directly go to God without being
tranfplanted into another Body.


Kifna
breaks the
ft mg Ar-
row of
Mottera.
Kills 10
Courtiers .
As they were entring the City they
were met by a Gardiner’s Wife, who
ufed to fcrve Ragia Kans with Flowers:
This Woman proftrating her felf at
Kifna' s Feet, faid, O Divine Man! having
never feen any thing fo beautiful us thy felf t
1 offer to thee thefe Flowers defsgrfd for
Ragia Kans, thinking my felf much more
oblig'd to your Divinity than his
entreating thee not to defpife my Cottage , but
to take up thy Lodging there for this night .
Then prefenting Kifna with a Garland of
Flowers, he took up his Lodgings in the
Houle, being welcom’d by the Husband
in the moft devout manner in the World,
who declar’d himfelf unworthy of re-
ceiving fo great a Gueft, and ferv’d
Kifna and his Company at Table, who
at parting beftow’d his Blefling up-
on him, viz.. That they fliould never
want, and their Souls go diredly to
Heaven.
Being advanc’d a little further, they
met a poor Cripple or lame Woman,
having a Vcflel fill’d with Spices, fweet-
feented Oils, SandeLwood, Saffron, Civet
and other Perfumes. Kifna making a
halt, (he made a certain fign with her Fin-
ger on his Forehead, catting the reft upon
his Head. Kifna asking her what it was
(he would ask him ? The Woman reply’d,
Nothing but the ufc of my Limbs. Kifna
then fetting his Foot upon hers, and ta-
king her by the hand, raifed her from
the ground, and not only reftor’d her
Limbs, but alfo renew’d her Age, fo that
inftead of a wrinkly tawny Skin, (he
got a frelh and fair one in an inftant.
At her requeft Kifna and his Company
lodg’d the following night in her Houfe.
The next following day Ktjna and
his Company walking through the Streets
of Mottera y they were fhew’d the ftrong
Bow, which none of the Giants had been
able to manage •, but Kifna broke the
String of it at the firft pull. Thence
they walk’d towards the Court, where
the Courtiers were expc&ing the coming
of the King: thefe feeing a whole Troop
of Country Fellows,would not allow them
Entrance into the Court •, but pufhing
Kifna back roughly, he (truck 10 of
them ( among whom were two Colonels)
down to the ground, fo that they ex-
pir’d at his Feet, and their Souls were
convey’d immediately to Heaven, a Fa-
vour he beftow’d upon the Souls of all
fuch as were flain by his hands.
Ragia Kans being inform’d of all thefe
Tranfa&ions, and almoft reduc’d to de-
fpair, order’d a Turret to be ereftcd
upon the Back of an Elephant, furniftfd
with two Warlike Engines, to be ma-
nag’d by as many Men. He order’d the
Guide of the Elephant, that as foon as
he faw Kifna coming to the Gaftle, he
(hould fend out the Elephant to trample
him under feet, or elfe endeavour to kill
him by the means of the Engines.
The following day Kifna going to-
wards the Court, the Guides fet looic
the Elephant upon him *, but Kifna not
only ftopt him in his full Career, but
alfo putting his Foot againft his Trunk,
pull’d out both of his Teeth , afterwards
feizing him by the Tail, fwung him three
or four times round his Head, and then
dafh’d his Head againft the Stones. Ra-
gia now finding himfelf reduc’d to the
laft extremity, and enrag’d with Anger,
addrefs’d himfelf to his two renown’d
Generals Kansjamdoor and Moftik , telling
them, that fince they had eaten his Bread
(b many years, it was now time to fhcw
their Fidelity and Bravery, and to de-
liver him from his mortal Enemy.
Accordingly they having fent a Chal-
lenge to Kifna , he appear’d at the ap-
pointed time and place, where a moft
fierce Combat enfu’d, which remain’d 1
dubious for three hours, till at laft Kifna (
threw them (one after another) with
fuch a prodigious force to the ground,
that the Blood, and with it their
gufh’d out of their Mouths.
During the Combat Ragia Kans hap*
peningto look over the Wall of the Cattle,
no fooner faw Kifna , but he thought he
heard a Voice telling him, that he was
the Perfon who fhould at once take
away his Life and his Crown. He was
fcarce return’d into his Apartment, when
News being brought him of the death
of his two Generals, he commanded
every one to betake therafelves to their
Arms, to fight againft Kifna , offering a
great Reward to any that could deliver
him up into his hands either dead or alive.
Accordingly the whole City rofe in Arms,
and engag’d Kifna without the Cattle
Gates, but were not able to conquer
this invincible Hero.
For Ragia Kans having in the mean
while order’d Kifna’s Parents to be whipt
with Siambokken , or brafs Scourges in his
prefence: Kifna ( according to his Om-
nifciency) being not ignorant of the
matter, leap’d over the Wall into the
Palace, where finding Ragia Kans fitting
upon his Throne, he got hold of his
Head, and prefs’d it to the ground till
he broke his Neck, and to confummate
the matter, gave him three or four ter-
rible Blows which beat out his Brains.
Kills an
Etybdnt:
&&
u
Routs a
w^ le Bo s
°* Men '
Kans ’


Kifna un-
da the Tit-
Brahman*
jcrasjjtnda
refolves to
KagiaKans
The next thing he did, Was to fend his
eldeft Brother to deliver their Parents
from their Captivity, who finding the
Guards fled, brought them to Kifna y where
they receiv’d one another witli\ mutual
Embraces } Kifna deckring his Sorrow
for their Sufferings upon his account,
and thefe declaring themfelves amply re-
warded with the light of his Perfon.
Kifna having put Ongefeen Ragia Kan's
Father in his Head, return’d with his
Parents, Brothers and Companions to
their ufual Habitations, where he put
himfelf under the Tuition of a certain
learned Brahman , having chofen a certain
poor Scholar named Sedamnia for his
Attendant at School to carry his Books
and Writings.
There liv’d at that time at Mottera a
certain Merchant, a Relation of Kifna' s
Mother, whofe Daughter call’d Conta be-
ing married to Ragia Dandou , King of
Eftenapour , had brought forth five Sons *,
the Firft-born whereof his Father had
obtain’d by his Prayers to Inder the King
of the Celeftial Spirits, the fecond from
Bramma , the third from the Wind, and
the two laft from the famous Hero Effo-
nocomaer.
The five Brothers did at a certain time
undertake a Journy with their Mother
to Mottera , to vifit their Grandfather,
where they contracted fomething of Ac-
quaintance with Kifna , and frequently
reverenced him. About the fame time
the Women of Goggei , and of the Vil-
lage inhabited by the Cowherds, were
very earneft in their Sollicitations for
Kifna' s return, without which they faid
they neither could nor would eat or
drink.
In the mean while the five Brothers
having receiv’d the unwelcome News of
their Father’s Illnefs, were forc’d to re-
turn to Eftenapour \ and the fatal Exit of
Ragia Kans and fo many of his Giants
being come to the Ears of Jerasjanda his
Brother-in-law,he refolv’d to revenge the
fame to the utmoll of his Power. Ac-
cordingly having gather’d a Body of
$5OOO chofen Horfc, he laid Siege to
Mottera *, but Kifna having by his fre-
quent Sallies quite ruin’d his Army, took
him Prifoner at laid, but knowing
that he had by his conftant Prayers ob-
tain’d from Bramma that he fhould live
ioo years, and at laft be kill’d by one
Rhijm , he releafed his Prifoner, who ha-
ving foon gather’d another Army, be-
fieg’d Mottera a fecond time, and was
worfted again as before by Kifna. The
fame he continued to do fixteen times, till
all his People being flain in the Wars,
he pafTed through all the Corners of the
World to raife new Forces, and meeting
with the famous Giant Sialinder , he put
him at the head of his Forces, and fo
forc’d the Siege of Mottera a 17 th
time.
The fituation of Kifna’ s Houfe was
fuch as to be plainly difeover’d in the
Camp, as from thence he had a full Pro-
fpeft of their Army. Kifna having polled
his Brother at the Entrance of his Houfe,
he happen’d to be feen by the Enemy’s
General, who miftaking him for Kijha,
advanced towards the Houfe : Kifna who
favv him coming at adiftance, confidering
With himfelf, that in cafe he fhould fall
by his hands, his Soul mult go ftraitways
to Heaven ( a favour he thought him un-
worthy of) run out of the back-door,
making the belt of his way to a Cave
of a certain Brahman about 4 Cos from
Mottera } this Man had by his continued
Prayers obtain’d from Bramma , that if
any one fhould difturb him in his Devo-
tions, the fame Ihould be confumed to
Allies. Kifna being not ignorant of
this, and feeing his Adverfary parking
him, enter’d the faid Cave, and throw-
ing a piece of Cloth over the Brahmans,
Head flielter’d himfelf behind it. The
Giant who follow’d his Footfteps, fooa
after enter’d the Cave, and finding the
Brahman cover’d with with a piece of
Cloth, gave him two or three found
Boxes on the Ear, telling him, that he
Ihould take that as a Reward for his care
in hiding Kifna in his Cave. Retreat ,
Retreat , faid the Brahman , before I unco-
ver my Face r mlefs thou wilt be confumed
by Fire. Then taking away the Cloth, the
Giant was immediately in a Flame, and
burnt to Afhes. Kifna return’d to
and having routed Ragia Kans Brother’s
Forces, he took him Prifoner} but in
refpeCt: of Bramma’ s Promife, difmifs’d
him foon after.
Kifna in the mean while confidering
that Jerasjanda was to live 100 years,
and that confequently he Would not lay
afide his Defigns againft Mottera , it hap-
pen’d that Wiffuchre the Son of Bramma
being come from Heaven to give Kifna a
Vifit, and asking him what it was he
would requeft of him ? He anfwer’d.
Build me a City in all refpedts like that
of Mottera } which he did accordingly
the fame night in an adjacent Ifland, be-
ing altogether like that of Mottera , ex-
cept that this was of Gold inftead of
Stone. Kifna being inform’d thereof by
Wiffuchre himfelf, over-whelm’d the In-
h f, x teen
tmes mr ’
hy
h)


Another
Miracle of
K:fna.
*A cm ah
Seed.
habitants of Mottera with fo heavy a
Sleep, that (unknown to them) he car-
ried them with all their Cartel, and Ra-
gia Ongefem their King to this new City,
unto which he gave the Name of Davor~
cw, leaving Scdamma his old School-
fellow and Attendant behind him in a
certain Village, which fince has got the
Name Sedammapoer \ which done, he re*
turn’d with his Brother to Mottera.
By this time the Giant Sialinder having
gather’d a vaft Army, fat down before
Mot Ur a \ but Kifna and his Brother af-
ter having kill’d a great number of the
Enemy, feigning a Retreat were pur-
lu’d by Sialinder 7 s Forces, till coming to
a high Mountain they vanifh’d, and re-
tir’d to the City Davarca *, and Sialinder
being thereby become Matter of Mott era ,
fettled his Refidence there.
In the mean while Kifna' s School-fellow
being married was grown fo poor, that
he was forced to fell his Clothes to buy
Vi&uals. Being almoft reduc’d to de-
fpaiv, his Wife advisM him to take a
Journy to his old School-fellow K'tfm,
who fhe did not queftion would commi-
feratc his Condition. How is this poffi-
ble, reply’d the Husband, being quite
naked and not fit to appear before any
body? Kifna, arifwer’d the Wife, does
not defpife the pobr, go and take a
handful of Kam * along with thee for a
Preftnt.
The Husband follow’d his Wife’s Ad-
vice, and went to Havana, who was no
fooher enter’d the Street where Kifna
liv’d, but being difeover’d by him from
a Window, he came out to meet and em-
brace him, and carrying him into his
Houfe order’d him to be wafh’d and pro-
vided with new Clothes. Kifna ask’d
him whether he had brought him any
Prefents. Being a poor Man , reply’d Se~
damma , I had nothing to give but this ,
which my Wife fem to thee y in hopes that
the Gods would not refufe the meanejl Pvs-
fem. Kifna receiv’d it kindly, and put
it in a Corner of a Cottage belonging
to one of his Neighbours j and at the
fame inttant Sedamma’ s Cottage was
turn’d into a fpacious Palace:. His Wife
was much furprik’d at this change, but
imagining that it was done by Kifna , fhe
fearch’d all the Corners bf the Houfe
and where-ever fhe turn’d her Face founi
fuch a vatt quantity of Gold and Silver,
and of Ropicvs , that fhe had fufficient
wherewithal to provide her felf with
Servants, Provifions and every thing in
proportion to the Grandeiir df her Pa-
lace. Sedamma being ignorant of what
had happen’d, return’d full of Melancholy
from Kifna, ruminating upon the Road
whether he had not belt leave his Wife
and Children but fobh recolleding him.-
felf, that he ought not to lay the whole
Burden upon his Wife’s Shoulders, and
defpair of God’s Mercy, he made the
befß of his way homeward : but ap-
proaching the Village, he was amaz’d to
fee the Change that had happen’d fince
his departure, whith made him fufped
he had mifs’d his way \ but finding by
fome undeniable Circumftances that he
was in the right, he went into the Vil-
lage, where finding inttead of a Cottage
of Straw a Royal Palace, he flood atto-
nifh’d, not knowing which way to turn
till being difeover’d by his Wife out of a
Window, fhe fentoneof the Servants to
defire him to enter •, which he did, and
being kindly receiv’d by his Wife and
Children, he ask’d the exaft time of this
fudden Change, which happening (as
far as they could guefs) precifely at the
fame time he prefented the Seed, they
paid their Devotions to Kifna , diftribu-
ted Alms among the Poor, and liv’d in
great Plenty for a long time after.
CHAP. VIII.
A King's Daughter in love with Kifna, ƒends him word of it . Kifna delivers
16000 Royal Virgins , and cures the Leproƒy.
SOmetime after Ragia King of
Poercp had a Son and Daughter born
him, the firft named Rochemeya , the other
Rochemy , who being grown up, the Fa-
ther was very defirous to have his Daugh-
ter well match’d before his Death. A-
mong others he confulted with upon this
matter, there was a certain Brahman
named Naret , much celebrated for his
Wifdom and Learning, who being de-
fir’d by the King to infpedt his Daugh-
ter’s Hands, and to foretel him by the
Art of Chiromancy, who (hould be her
Husband; Naret having taken a full view
of the Lineaments of her Right-hand,
told her, Bhffed Virgin! who beef ordain’d


Rochemy
defend for
Kifna.
Is oppos'd
by her Bro-
ther.
Rochemy’x
Letter to
Kilna.
to be the Syoufe of the holy Kifna. The
Father rejoic’d thereat to the higheft
degree, told this good News to his Son,
who being of a contrary Sentiment, re-
ply’d, that he would never fuffer fo beau-
tiful a Creature to be married to a Coun-
try Clown.
k is to be obferv’d, that the Soul of
Ram" s Spoufe, being tranfplanted
into the Body of this Virgin, in order to
be efpoufed to Kifna \ this young Lady
was not infenfible thereof, for which rea-
fon fhe had refolv’d to think of no body
dfe but Kifna : which her Brother being
refolv’d to prevent, he fent to the Giant
the King of Mottera , that in cafe he was
inclin’d to marry his Sifter he Ihoujd come
with all fpeed, his Father intending to
marry her to Kifna , The Giant ravifli’d
at this joyful News, order’d a moft mag-
nificent Equipage of Elephants, Camels,
Horfes, Oxen and Chariots to be got
ready, and attended with Trumpets,
Hautboys, Kettledrums, and other Mu-
fical Inftruments, and a numerous Re.
tinue, fet out from Mottera.
No fooner were they come within two
days Jpurny to Rochemy" s Father’s ReiL-
dence, when fbe ? not knowing what to
do in this Exigency, thought ht to give
notice thereof to Kifna by a Letter,
which (he order’d one of her Servants
to deliver to the firfl Brahman Ihe met,
in order to carry it to Kifna tbe Con-
tents whereof were as follows.
« T Toly Kifna! worthy to be belov’d
“!■ of me and all the World: Be-
“ ipg refolv’d to be nobody’s but only
cc yours as long as I have Breath tp draw,
“ I thought fit to let you know, that my
“ old Father likewife wilhes nothing
“ more than to fee that happy day 5 but
“ my Brother, who has more Ambition
“ than Piety, having fent for the Giant
“ of Mottera to marry me, and being
“ come within two days Journy of our
“ Refidence, I delire you to provide a-
“ gainft their Attempts, nothing being
“ able to refill your Divine Powe.
Your Highneft’s always devoted.
ROCHEMY.
The Servant having brought a Brah-
man to the Princefs, Ihe by a Prefentof a
Golden Dj(b fill’d with Ropia 3, and a pro-
life of more if he perform’d his Errand,
engag’d him to undertake the Task: Ac-
cordingly fie weqt full fpeed for 5 Cos ,
when b§ing fomewhat tir’d he fat down
under a lhady Tree, to refrefh himfelf
with a draught of cool Water, and fall-
ing afleep, was carried by Kifna to Da~
varca. The Brahman awaking out of his
fteep, and finding himfelf at Davarca ,
foon guefs’d the truth, and going ftrak
to Kifna" s Houfe, deliver’d the Letter at
his Feet. Kifna had no fooner read the
Letter, but afluming the fliape of a Man
with four Arras, and taking his Bow and
Arrow, he got upon his Cow with the
Brahman i ,and fo fee out on their Journy
from Davarca,
In the mean time the Giant approach-
ing to the Refidence of his pretended
Spoufe, was met by her Brother, and
conducted into the Palace \ and Kifna ar-
riving foon after near the City, refted
himfelf under the lhade of a Tree near
a Pagode, whence he fent the Brahman
to Rochemy to give notice of his arrival,
who rewarded him with vaft Prefents for
his Fidelity-
Rochemy knowing that her Brother was
in the Evening to make a Cavalcade with
her pretended Bridegroom through the
City (according to the Cuftom of the
Benjans ) Ihe refolved to lay hold of this
opportunity to efc&pe their hands: For
this purpofe flie entreated her Father*
that being now arrived to the Age of
nine years, Ihe might offer her Sacrifice
to the Goddefs Rohani. The Father ha-
ving granted her Requeft, fhe took a Difh
fgjl of Pearls, and with two of her At-
tendants went towards the Pagode, whi-
ther her pretended Bridegroom and her
Brother would needs accompany her,
but Raid without the Temple whilft Ihe
perform’d her Sacrifice \ which done, Ihe
came out of the Temple near the Door,
where fhe knew Kifna had plac’d himfelf,
who no fooner faw her appear, but he
took her up and carried her away.
At the Outcry of her Maids the pre-
tended Bridegroom came with his whole
Attendants to fnatch her from him, but
Kifna receiv’d them fo courageoufly with
his Bow and Arrows, that they were
forced to retreat with the loft of feveral
thpufands of their belt Men. Rocbetnfs
Brother feeing the Bridegroom defeated,
would neverthelcft try his Strength with
Kifna, and coming up with him was a
going to cleave his Head with his Scyme-
ter; but Kifna having difarm’d him threw
him upon the ground, and after having
given him fome Blows, ty’d him Neck
and Heels together under his Cart, and
fo made his Entry into , where
he was receiv’d with all imaginable De-
monftrations of Joy. Brother
Rochemy
deliver i
by Kifna,


Kifna de -
Uvets an
from a
Crocodile .
was releas’d at her requeft, and Kifnd
confumraated his Marriage with great
Pomp in the City of Davarca.
Sometime after it happen’d, that a ve-
ry ftrong Elephant being feiz’d by a
Crocodile in a certain Giftern or Pond
where the Elephants us’d to drink, a fu-
rious Combat enfu’d, which put all the
Elephants that were Spe&ators thereof
into no fmall Confufion. At lad feeing
they were not able to affift their Compa-
nions, and prefs’d with Hunger,they went
away, and left the poor Elephant in the
lurch. He feeing himfelf thus deftitute
kept on ftruggling with the Crocodile,
fending up at the fame time his Prayers
to Viflnum to deliver him from the Jaws
of the Crocodile.
But it being then the time of Kifna* s ap-
pearing upon Earth, he heard his Prayers
after 20 days r and fending for Garroude
to carry him immediately to the Pond,
he threw his Weapon at the Crocodile,
and cutting off his Neck releas’d the
Elephant, who kneeling before Kifna y he
told him he (hould ask what he pleas’d,
and it fliould be granted him. Nothing,
reply ? d the Elephant, but that I may go
immediately to Heaven, being quite
weary of this World. Kifna granting
his Requeft, took him into his Palankin ,
or Litter, and carrying him to Heaven,
order’d Garroude to convey him imme-
diately back to Davarca .
About the fame time one Ragia Boet-
taenpat having two Wives named Somuta
and Surifa, the firft brought forth a Son
named Droe, and the other one named
Rafepoeter •, but Surifa being molt belov’d
by her Husband, Somuta when her Son
Droe was about five years of Age, feat
him very neatly drefs’d to pay his Re-
fpeft to his Father, who being extremely
delighted with him, highly carefs’d and
fet him in his Lap. Surifa having got
notice thereof, fent immediately her Son
to the King, whilft (he remain’d at fomc
diftance to obferve what pafs’d* But the
King being fo much taken with Droe ,
that he fcarce look’d at the other* Su-
rifa enter’d the Room, and upbraiding
him with Ingratitude, made him fend
away Droe and take her Son in his Lap.
Droe exafperated to the higheft degree
at this Affront, went away without
making his Reverence:, and making his
Complaint to his Mother, told her, that
he was refolved to retire into a Deftrt to
fpend his time in Prayers. The Mother
did all (lie could to did wade him from it,
but in vain j for taking the next oppor-
tunity of his Mother’s abfence, he got
privately out of the Houfe. He had
fcarce travell’d 2 Cos from the City, when
being met by the Learned Brahman Naret ,
he ask’d him whither he was going? He
anfwer’d. As young as 1 am, I have taken
a Refolution to retire from the World,
where I find there remains nothing but
Malice and Envy ; Then relating all that
happen’d to him, he told him, that he
was refolvM to pafs his days in the De-
fert.
Go on my Son, reply’d Naret , thou
wilt be heard by Kifna: Then going
forward, he came to a Foreft, where
feeing a Mango- Tree, he repos’d himfelf
under its fhade, and fpent three days
and nights in Tears, Prayers and Falling.
Kifna mov’d with Companion at his ten-
der Age, appear’d to him, asking what
made him pray with fo much Fervency ?
Droe proftrating himfelf at the feet of
Kifna faid, O Divine Kifna! my Requeft
to thee is, cc That the Affront given me
u by Surifa may turn upon their Heads,
u that Ihe may be a Slave to my Mo-
tc ther, that I may fucceed my Father in
4C the Kingdom, and after my Death be
“ plac’d in fome pleafant place you fhall
u choofe for me.
Kifna anfwer’d, Thy Prayer is granted,
go return to thy Parents, Surifa (hall live
a Slave to thy Mother, thou lhalt fucceed
thy Father in the Throne, and after thy
Death I will place thee in the Heavens in
the form of a Star, that (hall remain for
ever in the Firmament, and ferve the
Mariners for a Guide. Droe having paid
his Reverence to Kifna , return’d full of
Joy to his Father’s Palace. The old King,
who had been almoft diftrafted at his
abfence, receiv’d him with more than
ordinary Satisfaftion, and for ever after
Ihew’d fo much Affcftion to his Mother*
that Surifa was in comparifon of her no
more than a Slave, and after fome years
furrender’d the Kingdom to him. He
rul’d very fortunately for many years,
and after his Death was plac’d among the
Stars, being the fame the Benjans call to
this day Droe Katara , i. e. Stella Polarvs , ;
or the North-Star.
It happen’d fome time after, that Ra-
gia Nerkafeur , a moft Potent Monarch,
having conquer’d 15000 Kings, kept them
clofe Prifoners with their Wives and
Daughters } thefe offer’d their conftant
Prayers to Kifna for their delivery from
this Opprefiion. Kifna confidering that
they having fpent thefe three years in
Prayer, it would be high time to deliver
them, fent for Garroude, whom he order’d
to carry him to Nietskanda, where he
Droe or
the North -
Star.


was no fooner arriv’d, but he told the
King Ntrkafeur that unlefs he releafed
the Royal Captives, he mull pay for it
with his Head. The King anfwering
Kifna with Threats, they prepar’d both
fides for a Combat : For Kifna having
kill’d thofe that were fent againft .him,
the King himfelf at the head of a llrong
Troop, attack’d Kifna with great fury,
who kill’d every Man of them except the
Ragia , who perfifting in his Obftinacy,
had at laft his Head cut off by Kifna 1
who releas’d all the Prifoners in an in-
ftant, and among them itfooo Royal
Virgins, who proftrating themfelves at
his feet, he gave them leave to return to
their Parents, or where elfe they pleas’d :
But they defir’d to flay with him, im-
ploring his Proteftion, which being gran-
ted by Kifna, he carried .them to De-
njarca, where he built a Seraglio for their
Reception, wherein each Lady had her
own Apartment. H.,
four of his Brahmans what was belt to be
done, who told him, that if he let flip
this lucky... baur all his Falling would
avail him nothing, advifing him at the
fame time to take only a little Water
and a Leaf of the Tally- Tree, till the
Brahman Ihould come.
This Brahman Doermjfa having a Pro-
phetick Spirit, was not ignorant that the
King had eaten fomething in his abfence,
and therefore went to the King, asking
him why he had put fuch an Affront upon
him ? The Ragia was for excufing the
matter, but to no purpofe } for the Brah~
man going out of the doors gave him
this Gurfe, That he might from head
to foot be cover'd with Boils and the
Leprofy *, which being fulfill’d in an in-
ftant upon the unfortunate King, he pray’d
to Kifna to deliver him from this Evil,
but in vain, his Evil encreafing every
day, fo that at laft being quite tir’d with
Life, he refolv’d to put a Period to it
by Fire. Every thing being got in readi-
,nefs for this purpofe, Kifna appear’d to
him,, asking what was hisßequeft? He
reply’d, to. be freed from my Dillemper.
Ktfna cur’d him not only of his Leprofy,
but alfo turn’d the fame into ‘a Tiery
Wheel, which following the Brahman
Doerwajfa where ever he went, put him
into fuch a fright, that he offer’d his
Prayers to Ragia Inder to deliver him of
this Fire: but Ragia Inder telling him,
that he muft apply himfelf to him who
was the Author thereof, he made his Ap-
plications to Bramma , from whom ha-
ving receiv’d the fame Anfwer, he im-
plor’d the Afliftance of Kifna , begging
him to pardon his fudden Paflion, and to
deliver him from the Evil he had been
pleafed to lay upon him. Kifna c hiding
him for his unruly Paflion, advis’d him
to lay the fame alidc for the future, and
then deliver’d him frpm the Plague of the
Fiery Wheel. ■%,.
In the Country of Ammaramo livfd a
certain zealous Ragia named Amarichs
who having publiftfd a general Fall by
beat of Drum (according to theCuftom
of that Country) the fame was obferv’d
with the utmoft lt happen’d
that the Brahman Doerwajfa palling that
way the fame day, he was invited by the
faid King to flay there till the next day
after the Fall-day.
The Brahman complying with the
King’s Requeft, he fent for fome of his
chief Brahmans to know the exadl hour
when they might begin to eat: Thefe
having confulted their Books, and told
the King, that the juft time would be
two hours after Sun-riling } he invited
the beforemention’d Brahman againft that
time to a Collation. But the Brahman
milling the appointed hour, the King
went to the River to wadi himfelf; but
finding after his return, that the Brah-
man was not come yet, he advifed with
Kifna cures
tbeLeproJ).
CHAP. IX.
The Origin and Qualifications of Droepeti. She binds up the Wound of Kifna.
Suffufter forc'd out of his Kingdom. Droepeti exil'd with her Brothers, and
fed by the Sun. They come to Court. Their further Tranƒactions.
IN the Country of Eftenapour liv’d a
certain Ragia named Pandouw , whofe
Wife was call’d Drocndy: His Brother
nam’d Deudcraes being blind, had a Wife
call’d Sendary , and by her a hundred Sons,
the eldeß whereof was named Derficnde .
In the Country of Ranfiaandoes liv’d at
the fame time a certain King nam’d
Droepet , whofe Daughter was reputed
the mo ft beautiful Woman that ever was
feen. Ragia Pandouw happening to die
left behind him five Sons, the eldeft of
* u
Part 11.
The Idolatry of


Acrffing
ims Dm-
epen by
CamdogaV
Kifna’x
Finger tyd
up with a
stuff,
which fucceeding him in the Throne, one
of the other four was put to School to a
certain Brahman , to be inftru&ed in all
matters relating to their Divinity.
The Daughter of Ragia Droepeti being
now come to a marriageable Age, her
Father was not a little follicicous how
to bellow his Daughter to the belt ad-
vantage; For this purpofe he fent his
Meflengers to invite the neighbouring
Kings and the chiefeft Brahmans to a great
Feaft, and caus’d a long Poll to be e-
re&ed, with a ftrong Bow underneath,
and a Flfh on the top, in the fame man-
ner as we have mentioned before in the
Story of Ram,
Kifna appearing here among the reft,
yet would not attempt the Bow, having
promifed his Alfiftance (upon this ac-
count) to a certain Brahman . named
AerJJmg , he manag’d the Bow with that
dexterity, that he fhot down the Fi(h,
anc [ rece i v ’d a fineNecklacc of Pearl from
the hands of his Bride.
One time Droepeti feeing a Cow pafs
through the Fields with five Bulls fol-
lowing her, Ihe flood amaz’d at the No-
velty of the thing, as (he thought ; this
coming to the Ears of Camdoga the Con?
of Plenty , (he was fo offended thereat,
that (he told her (he would make her to
be thus purfu’d by five Men. The King
entertain’d his Guefts with a fplendid
Feaft, but the Bridegroom having made
a Vow not to enjoy his Bride till after his
return home, they came no fooner to his
own Houfc-door, but being met by his
Mother, he told her that he had brought
fomething along with him: Then, re-
ply’d the Mother, your two Brothers
mull each have his (hare : That can’t be,
return’d Aerjftng , for it is a Woman.
That lignifies nothing, anfwer’d the Mo-
ther, what I have once faid is impofllble
to be recall’d. Aerffing full of Grief
told his Brothers what had happen’d,
who abominating the matter, communi-
cated the fame to Droepeti.
It happen’d afterwards, that Kifna ha-
ving invited the Panfpendaons with her
Mother, and Droepeti to dine with him
at Davarca , as they were walking after
Dinner in the Field, Kifna had a mind to
cut fome Sugar-Reeds ; but cutting Ms
Finger, all the Standers-by call’d for
fome Linen Rags to tie it up : But Droe-
peti immediately tearing a piece of her
Golden Brocado’d Gown, (he ty’d it a-
bout his Finger. Kifna (according to
his Omnifciency) knowing how many
Threds there were in the piece (he had
torn off, 'uit. 999. he told her that Ihe
fhould have as many Garments of Cloth
of Gold as there were Threds in it.
They then took their leave, and tho
Kifna knew well that Droepeti was ftill
a Virgin, yet he took notice of it.
After their return home, one Senbem ,
Brother-in-law to Droepeti , began to be
much out of humour, ailedglng, that
Suffufter was not the rightful Heir of the
Throne *, for, faid he, tho Deutcraes by
reafon of his Blindnefs might be incapa-
ble of the Government, and
Fandom was put in his Read, yet after
his Deceafe Suffufter his Son could not
fucceed him, the right of Inheritance of
the Crown belonging to the eldeft of the
hundred Sons of Deuteraes , and confe-
quently to Derfiende his eldeft Son. This
gave occafion to pitch upon fome way
to reflore Derfiende to his right; and
knowing that Suffufter was much addidled
to play at Dice, they look’d upon this as
the beft means to encompafs their De-
fign: Suffufter having been for fome time
a Favourite of Kifna , grew fo ambitious
as to defpife him at laft. Kifna remem-
bring this Affront, whilfl he was playing
with Derfiende , fo order’d the matter that
Suffufter loft all his ready Mony, where-
by being egg’d on more and more to re-
cover his lofs, he at laft threw at all, and
loft his Eftate and Kingdom.
It had happen’d fome time before, that
Derfiende being in SitffuftePs Palace, look’d
into Droepeti her Apartment, which be-
ing pav’d with Glafs (a thing he never
had feen before) he took it for Water,?
and would not venture to go in. Droe-
peti perceiving his Error, told him, Hotv y
Are the Sons like the Father ? Is the whole
Family blind? which put Derfiende into'
fuch a rage, that he fwore he would re-
venge it with the firft opportunity.
Derfiende remembring his Oath, whilft
they were at play purpofed to fet aS
much Mony againft Droepeti as he would
defire*, which being agreed to, Derfiende
won that Stake likewife. Things being
come to this pafs, he propos’d to Suffufter
that he would lay all he had got of him 4
at one Stake, provided he would engage,*
that in cafe he did win it, he would
choofe a voluntary Exile for 12 years.
Suffufter in hopes of better fortune, con-
fenting to the Proportion, they threw
the Dice, but Fortune frowning again
upon Suffufter , Derfiende remain’d in’
PoffefTion of all.
By this time Derfiende remembring the
Affront Droepeti put upon him in her
Apartment, order’d her to be llripp’d
ftarfc naked, and to Oxpofe her to the
Suflufler
* nd Der *
criim
Droe ped


is deli,
ve/'d by
Kilha.
They go in-
to Exilei
v * evv Servants. The diftrefled
Droepeti reduc’d to this extremity, im-
plor’d Kifna’ s Afliftance to relieve her
from the Qiame fhe was likely to under-
go, putting him in mind of his Bounty
after fhe had torn her Garments for his
fake. In the mean time the Servants
being employ’d in undrcffing Droepeti,
they had no fooner pull’d off one of her
Garments, but another fucceeded in an
inftant; which continuing thus 999 times,
they were feiz’d with fuch an Aftonilh-
ment, that they entreated Der/iende to
defift, left Kifna fhould give him fome
fevere proofs of his Anger * which had
fuch an influence upon Der/iende, that he
difmifs’d her without any further harm.
The time of the appointed Exile now
approaching, the five Brothers with their
Mother Sendary and Droepeti left their
Native Country ; but beginning to want
Provifion upon the Road, Droepeti paid
her Devotions to the Sun to fupply their
Wants. The Sun commiferating their
Condition, fill’d them every morning a
Veflel with Vi&uals, fufficient to feed
loooMen. At laft coming to a certain
Village call’d Widoenougan , they lodg’d
in the Houfc of one Widoenougarre y where
Ihc left her Mother, who was grown fo
decrepit, that Ihe was not able to follow
them.
Thence wandring through vaft De-
fer ts without meeting either with Man
or Beaft, they at laft came to a pleafant
River, where whilft they were repofing
themfelves, they faw a certain famous
and learned Brahman named Dermfa ,
walking along the Bank of it at the head
of icoo Brahmans his Followers; who
being not ignorant (by his Skill) who
they were, after the ufual Salute imme-
diately addrefs’d himfelf to Sujfufter ,
telling him, that he and his Company
had a mind to take a Dinner with him,
which Sujfufter approving ( trufting to the
Bounty of the Sun, and the Brahmans
Piety) he defir’d them to come, which
they promifed to do as foon as they had
wafli’d themfelves in the River.
Droepeti underftanding what had hap-
pen’d, had recourfe to the Veflel, but
finding it empty, knew not what to do,
but advis’d them to have recourfe to Ki ft* a J s
Bounty: Accordingly they fent forth
their joint and fervent Prayers to Kifna ,
but finding no relief, and the time of
the Brahmans coming being near at hand,
they refolv’d rather than to be expos’d
to fuch Shame and Confufion as this, to
make a large Wood Fire, and therein to
put a Period to their miferablc Life.
They went to work immediately, and
having gather’d a fufficient quantity ol
Wood, Droepeti was (hewing the reft the
way, and thefc following to tread in
her footfteps.
Kifna then feeing their Conftancy ftopt
them, and asking what was their Grie-
vance? Sujjufter reply’d, O Kifna! who
knoweft every thing, noucanft not be
ignorant of what has happen’d to us to
day ! Kifna anfwer’d, Let me fee the
Veflel that was prefented you by the Sun :
which being produc’d, Kifna view’d it
on all Tides, and finding a Grain of Rice
on the brim he eat it, and by its multi-
plying Power gave it fuch a Virtue, that
it not only fatislied him, but aljfo the
Brahman and his 1000 Followers, who
thank’d Naccod , the youngeft Brother of
Sujfufter (who was fent to bring them to
Dinner ) that tho they had not" the leaft
Appetite to eat fince they had been
wafbing in the River, yet they thank’d
his Brother for his good Intentions.
This unfortunate Company having thus
wander’d for nine years through the De-
fer ts, at la ft refolv’d to try their for-
tune at the Court of King Weraart, of the
Tribe of the Ketterijs in the Co ntryof
Mejfedees. Sujjufter being the fir ft that
went to King Wetaart, being demanded
who he was ? he ask’d the King whether
he had not heard of the five Brothers
Fanfpendaons? The King replying, he had ;
he told the King, that he had ferv’d
them as their Hiftorian, and that if the
King would receive him in the fame Sta-
tion, he would relate to him the Ad-
ventures of that King, how he had 101 l
his Kingdom at Dice, &c. The King
pleas’d with his Proportion, order’d him
to ftay at Court. The fecond Brother
encourag’d by his Succefs, addrefs’d him*
felf likewife to the King, telling him
that he had ferv’d Sujjufter in the quality
of a Cook, who ordering him to drefe
a Difli of Meat, he did it accordingly,
and pleas’d the King fo well, that he
made him his head Cook.
The third, who was an excellent Bow-
man, thought fit to lay his Bow and Ar-
rows afide; and appearing in the Prc-
fcncc of the King without any Weapon,
told him, that he had ferv’d Sujjufter in
his Profperky in the quality of a Brab~
man y but being now forced to bear bis
(hare in the Misfortunes of his Mafter,
he came to (helcer himfelf under his Roy-
al Prote&ion. The King being taken
with his Difcourfe, receiv’d him into his
Service. The fourth, after having paid
his Reverence to the King, told hin*.
They leave
the De-
ferts.


that he had been Gentleman of the
Horfe to SuJJufter , in which Station he
was receiv'd by the King. The fifth
Brother not knowing what to fay in his
own behalf, told the King, that he had
been Shepherd to him, in which Station
he was likewife receiv’d by King We~
rxart.
Droepeti being now alone, made likewife
her Applications to the King, alledging
that having ferv'd in the quality of a
Maid of Honour in the Court of Siiffufier ,
(he hoped to be receiv’d among the
Ladies of the Court, which was willing-
ly granted her. Having thus continued
two years in their refpedive Stations,
they began to revive their hopes of fee-
ing their Native Country again, there
being but one year more to the end of
their Exile.
But Derfiende finding the time of their
Exile near expiring, fent out certain
famous Wreillers to try their Skill with
them. Thefe palling through feveral
Countries, had vanquiftfd many of the
Ragia 5, and in fcorn carried their Pidures
ty’d to their Knees: Coming at laft to
King Weraart\ Court, they challeng’d
and kill’d the King’s Brothet-in-law, and
were for doing the fame to the King,
who rather than hazard his Perfon, bf-
■ fer’d them his Pidure to be carried in
Triumph upon their Knees. But Sufi
fufter being inform’d of the matter,
told him, that fuch a piece of Cowar-
dice being unworthy of the Name of
the Ketteriis, he advis’d him to match
him with his head Cook, whom, as
he feid, he had often feen wreftle
ftoutly at the Court of Sujfujter. The
King extremely pleas’d at this Pro-
portion, ask’d the Cook, whether he
durft engage with one of thefe famous
Wreillers *, who having anfwer’d. Yes,
and the appointed time being come, they
went to it bravely, and held it for a
confiderable time with equal Advantage,
till at laft the Cook found means to twift
his Arms back, and fetting his Foot
againfl: his Rump, threw him backwards,
and kill’d him upon the fpot.
Derfiende had no fooner heard this
unwelcome News, but he fent his lldfcle
with loooco Horfe into King Weraart* s
Country, to drive away all the Cattel £
which being done accordingly, and no-
tice thereof given to King Weraatt , he
put himfelf at the head of 600000 Horfe,
and overtaking the Enemy in a great Plain,
a bloody Battel enfued, but his Forces
being routed he was taken Prifoncr by
the Enemy.
The Prince overwhelm’d with Tears,
engag’d the Cook who had fo lately ob-
tain’d the Victory, to go in purfuit of
the Enemy, who coming in fight bf them
cry’d aloud. Halt you Robbers, releafe
the King, or this day lhall be your laft *,
they laugh’d at this madnefs, till feeing
him lay about him with his Weapons
amongfb the hindermoll, they turn’d
their Arms againfl him 9 but the Cook
alfifled by Kifncf s Strength, flew the whole
Army, except one whom he fent to Der-
fiende to carry him the News of this
Defeat.
He had no fooner receiv’d thefe dif-
mal Tidings, but he told him, certain-
ly thefe are the PanfpendaonSj go and put
thy fdf at the head of 6000 chofen Horfe
to revenge our Quarrel: Accordingly
he enter’d King Weraart* s
making great havock among Men and
Bealls, without the leafl oppoiition, We~
raari not daring to oppofe his Forces
(that confifted only of 200 Horfe ) to
fo powerful an Enemy. SuJJufter vex’d
at his Cowardice, told him, that if he
did not think fit to hazard his Perfon,
he Ihould give leave to the Prince arid his
Governour the Brahman , to go along with
what Forces he had in quell of the Ene-
my, which the King not refilling, the
Prince and the Brahman went after the
Enemy in their Chariot \ and finding
them in Battel array ready to receive
them, the Prince was fo frighten’d thereat,
that the Brahman was forc’d to tie him in
the Chariot, and cover him with a Cloth:
Then the Brahman attack’d the Enemy
with fuch fury, that notwithftanding the
inequality of their number, he flew them
all (after a bloody Engagement) upon
the fpot, except their General, who be*
ing made a Prifoner, the Brahman gave
him three or four found boxes on the Ear,
telling him, that he fhould go to his
King to carry hint the good NeWs, but
have a care how he ever came there
again. The Brahman was fo humble as
to bellow both all the Honour of the
Vidory, and the Booty upon the Prince,
who willing enough to accept of the fame,
made his Entry in a triumphant manner
into the City.
Not long after King Weraart playing
at Tables with one of his Nobles, made
his boaft of the late Vidory obtain’d by
his Son, which Suffufler not able to brook,
told the King, That what he boafted of did
not belong to his Sow, but to the Brahman.
The King hearing him fay thefe words,
threw the Dice with fuch violence into
the Tables, that one of them flew into


Sujfufter’s Face, and drew fome Blood
from him: Suffufter highly exafperated
at this Affront, confulted with his Bro-
thers and Sifter to leave the Court fe-
cretly, and return to their Native Coun-
try, the time of their Banilhment being
near expir’d, which they did according-
ly. _
The Prince no fooner underftood their
departure,but he went immediately to the
King, telling him, he was forty the King
had taken fo ill what had told
him, it being nothing but the bare truth ;
for, faid he, it was not I, but the
man that obtain’d the Vidfory, and it
were they who have twice deliver’d our
Country and your felf from Definition.
1 advife you to take care what you do.
for I allure you they are the
themfelves.
The King flood amaz’d at thefe words;
And is it polfible, faid he, that I who
am but a Petty King Ihould be ferved by
them? And fo ordering all his Elephants,
Horfes and Chariots to be got ready, he
follow’d them with all polfible fpeed i and
having overtaken them at laft, he pro-
ftrated himfelf before Suffufter, faying,
“ Moft Potent King! whom I am un-
“ worthy to ferve, pardon me for having
“ receiv’d Services from you, contrary
“ to my knowledg •, pray return along
“ with me, that we may not take our
“ leave without a merry Cup. I will
“ afterwards provide you with Camels,
“ Elephants, Horfes, Chariots, and what
“ elfe lhall be requifite for your journy.
Sufufter being prevail’d upon to return
with the King to the City, they took
their mutual leaves at a moft folemn
Feaft, with mutual demonftrations of
Friendlhip and being provided with all
Necelfaries for their Journy, return’d
towards their Native Country.
But whilft they were upon the Road,
Sujjujler repenting of his former Pride,
frequently fent his Prayers to Kifna, ac-
knowledging his Crime, for which he
own’d he had been defervedly punifh’d
by him; But the time of his 12 years
Baniffiment being now expir’d, he pro-
mis’d to ferve him with all humility, if
by his Affiftance he and his Brothers
might be reftor’d to their Native Coun-
try. Kifna well fatisfi’d with this Ac-
knowledgment, appear’d to them, asking
what was their requeft ? anfwer’d.
That Derfiende may be put out of the
Throne, and 1 be plac’d there in his
Head. Kifna having promis’d him his
Affiftance, faid that they had beft fend a
certain Poet (who flood hard by) to
demand the Kingdom of him. The
Poet went accordingly, demanding the
Kingdom to be reftor’d to the true Own-
ers, the term of the 12 years Bani/h-
-ment being now expir’d. But Derfiende
anfwer’d, that he did not know the Pan-
fpendaons, and was refolv’d to keep his
Crown in fpite of them ; and fo bid the
Poet to go out of his Prefence. Kifna
underftanding this Anfwer, told them,
Perhaps he has taken it amifs,that we have
not fent to him a Perfon of a higher rank.
The Panfpendaons reply’d, that they were
ready to throw themlelves at his feet, if
they thought he would grant their Re-
queft •, which being approv’d of, Kifna
promis’d to go along with them in Per-
fon.
S u (Tudor
prays tj
Kilha.
Is Irani h
him.
Derfiende
refufes fy
rejhre the
Kingdom,
CHAP. X.
Kifna lodges with a Brahman : Goes to the Court of Derfiende, who engages in
a bloody Battel with Suffufter, and is routed. Droepeti is enjoy'd by five
Brothers. Kifna vifits divers wicked Kings. The Concluƒion of his Reign.
AT Eftenapour liv’d a Brahman named
Widder , who fed upon Alms \ his
Wife was call’d Predimtte , both Per-
fons very zealous in their Devotions to
Kifna $ who being not ignorant of their
Zeal, refolv’d to blefs them with a Vifit.
Accordingly he came to the Cottage of
the poor Brahman , who after having pro-
ftrated themfelves at his Feet, brought
fome Rock Water ( according to the
Cuftom of the Country) to wafli his
Feet. Kifna told them 1 intend to dine
with you, and fo laying himfelf down
pretended to fleep, with an intention to
obferve all that pafs’d in the Cottage.
Ragia Derfiende hearing of the coming
of Kifna to this poor Cottage, before
he had vifited his Court, forbid all the
Inhabitants under pain of death, to fur-
nilh the poor Brahman that day either
with Mony or Provifions. The Brahman
being in great neceflity would fain have
pawn’d his Brafs Kettle and Fryingpan,
but nobody daring to lend him any Mony,
Kilna w-
fits d pm
Brahman.


Bleffes him
with Kkb~
es ‘
Kifna goes
to the
Com of
er ien e ’
or give the leaft Provilions, he return’d in
a very melancholy Pofture. His Wife
bid him not defpair, telling him, that
Kifna knowing their Poverty, would ac-
cept the Will for the Deed } and fo or-
dering him to go into the Garden to ga-
ther fuch Herbs as were there, and al-
low’d them to eat (for the Brahmans
dare not eat all forts of Herbs or Roots,
as for inftance, the Beets, becaufe they
are red, and refemble Blood) which be-
ing done, ihe drefs’d them, and having
awaken’d Kifna> offer’d it to him upon
a By fang Leaf} Kifna ask’d them, Have
you nothing elfe? I fuppos’d you would
have made fome Cakes: The Woman
anfwer’d, that their Poverty being fuch
as not to permit them to do it } Kifna
bid her look backwards, where feeing
in a Corner a fine Basket of Fruits and
Sweetmeats, fhe proftrated her felf at his
Feet.
Thus feafting together, Kifna ask’d
them after Dinner, what they requeued
of him? The Brahman reply’d, a No-
cc thing, but that I may ferve and love
u thee with a fincere Heart, that 1 may
<c never ceafe to pray to thee, and that
<c when my Soul and Body muft be par-
“ ted, ray Zeal for thee may neverthe-
-4t lefs continue with me. Kifna reply’d.
All this fhall be granted thee, and be-
caufe thou haft prefer’d Piety before
Riches, you fhall likewife have your full
lhare of them. He had no fooner fpoken
thefe words, but the Brahman's Cottage
was in an inftant chang’d into a magni-
ficent Structure; and Kifna prefented
them with as much Gold as was fuffi-
cient to maintain them in great plenty
all their life-time.
Kifna after having once more imparted
his Bleffing to his Hoft, departed, taking
his way towards the Caftle of Derfiende ,
it being then juft three hours before Sun-
fet, the ufual time for the Kings in the
Eaftern Countries to give Audience to
their Subjects. Kifna was receiv’d with
a great deal of Reverence by fome of the
Court } but the King looking upon him
with an indifferent Eye, ask’d him, When
he came into the City, and why he would
not pay him a Vifit before the poor
Brahman ? Kifna reply’d, Riches are of
no value to me, the meaneft Cottage of
a Believer I prefer before the moft fump-
tuous Palace of a King: And why then,
faid the King, would you come to Court?
I did come, reply’d Kifna , in the Name
of the Panfpendaons , to demand thy King-
dom, their 1 1 years Exile being now ex-
pir’d. The King anfwer’d, 1 know them
not, neither will I deliver the Kingdom.
Kifna told him, that if he would not.
he fhould at leaft allot a Village for their
Maintenance 1 I will not give them the
breadth of a foot, anfwer’d Derfiende }
then prepare your felf, faid Kifna , you
muft fight for it.
The Panfpendaons hearing this Anfwer,
prepar’d for a vigorous War} and
engag’d King IVeraart , and the potent
Bagla Droepet (Droepctfs Father) in their
Quarrel, with four other Kings, they
attack’d Derfiende , who having drawn up
his Horfe in a great Plain, a fierce Battel
enfu’d, which Tailed 18 days, Kifna fight-
ing in a Chariot drawn by Oxen.
In Derfiende his Army was a famous
Warrior named Caran , who having (by
his conftant Prayers) obtain’d a prodi-
gious Strength from Kifna, did perform
Wonders in his Chariot: Kifna efpying
him at fome diftance, order’d Erflende
(whofat with him in the fame Chariot)
to break the Wheel of Cararfs Chariot,
which being done accordingly by a ftrong*
Arrow, Caran came down out of his Cha-
riot, but whilft he was bufy in mending
the Wheel, was by the fame Erftende
(hot with an Arrow into the Breaft ; He
drawing the Arrow out of the Wound,
cry’d out to Kifna, And is this the Re-
ward thou giveft me for fo many Offe-
rings? Kifna anfwer’d, Have Patience;
my Will is to deliver thee out of this
troublefom World, and to allow thee a
place in Heaven, whither I am going to
meet all the Believers (my time upon Earth
being almoft expir’d ) after I have pur-
ged the World of the wicked. Caran
was no fooner flain, but the Vidory de-
clar d againft Dcrjlcyide, whole Forces
were all flain upon the fpot (as were
King IVeraart , and King Droepet on the
other fide) and among them Derfiende
himfelf, with his 99 Brothers. Thus
the Panfpendaons being reftor’d to the
Kingdom, they pay’d their conftant De-
votions to Kifna , who from thence re-
turn’d to Davarca ,
All this while Droepeti had liv’d with-
out the knowledg of any Man; but Peace
and Quietnefs being now reftor’d in the
Kingdom, the five Brothers were con-
certing ail pofiible means how to enjoy
Droepeti, without Inceft. At laft a
certain Brahman named Wiffumna, pro-
pos’d the following Expedient. The
Year, faid he, has 360 days, which di-
vided into five equal parts, each amounts
to two Months and 12 days: And it
being your Mother’s Will that the five
Brothers fhould have an equal {hare in
A Battel
fought for
18 days.
The Giant
Caran
kill'd*


SuffufterV
Sacrifice.
Kifna vl
Jits the
World , to
purge it
from the
wicked*
Droepeti , Suffufler muft cohabit with her
the firft two Months and 12 days*, and
the other four Brothers fuccefTiWeiy each
his two Months and 12 days: But to wipe
off the ftain of Inceft, Droepeti muft
after the Expiration of each refpedlive
term of two Months and 12 days purify
her felf three times by the Fire*, whence
it is evident, that the Pagans aferibed
to the Fire a purifying Quality j from
whom the Jews queftionlefs took that
Doftrine, and the Roman Catholicks
their Purgatory. This being approv’d
of by the joint Confent of the five
Brothers, it was further agreed, That
he who (hould tranfgrefs his limited
time, fliould be banilh’d for 12 years.
But Suffufler willing to appeafe the Gods
by Sacrifices, in confideration of the
great Effufion of Blood occafion’d by his
Reftauration, confulted the Goegys (a
certain Order of the Brahmans ) who
advis’d him to inftitute a folemn Feaft,
offer Sacrifices, be liberal to the Poor,
and to maintain a certain number of
learned Brahmans , to read and explain
their holy Writings. Suffufler obey’d,
and perform’d every thing with all ima-
ginable exa&nefs, ordering a Hole to be
dig’d, which he fill’d with Sugar, Butter,
Sandelwood, Milk, Rice and Betel, and
offer’d Rofes, Flowers, Spices, and other
rich Incenfe.
This done, he invited Kifna to a
fumptuous Feaft •, and asking him, what
Acknowledgment he was able to pay him
for the many Favours he had receiv’d
at his hands, Kifna anfwer’d, Take a
white Horfe with black Ears and a yellow
Tail, and fallen a Paper on his Head with
the following Lines written in Golden
Characters: “ Whoever meets me and
“ lets me pafs unmolefted, (hall worlhip
“ me and Kifna , who will reward their
“ Piety j but whoever Hops me, let him
“ prepare to fight. He further told
him, that he (hould give him his Brother
Erftende for his Companion, his intention
' being to purge the World of the wicked,
during that fhort time he had to flay as
yet upon Earth. The King obey’d, and
having prefented his Brother with a Cha-
riot, and put him at the head of a good
Body of Horfe, he took his leave of
Kifna, who went his way, the Horfe
leading the Van without a Guide.
This Horfe pafs’d through many King-
doms, where every one that did read the
Infcription, pay’d Reverence to Kifna:
But coming into the Territories of Sin-
dcra, who having receiv’d feveral fignal
Obligations from Kifna, feiz’d upon the
Horfe, by that means to engage Kifna
to come to his Court: Accordingly Kifna
(whoknew his intention) vifited him in
his Court, where being reverenced and
prefented by the King, he gave him his
Bleffing, and fo fet forward again to the
King of Sudannerva .
This King flopping the Horfe wot>
Clipp’d Kifna, alledging, that he did not
do it to engage with Kifna, but to try his
Strength againft Erftende; Kifna accep-
ting his Excufe, Erftende drew his Bow
and fhot an Arrow into his Breaft. The
King lifting up his Eyes unto Heave*},
and tearing the Arrow out of his Wound,
cry’d, O Kifna! doft thou thus reward
thy Adorers! My Soul muft now tranf-
migrate into another Body. No, an-
fwer’d Kifna , thy Soul fhall afeend to
Heaven in an inftant, and enjoy eter-
nal Blifs.
Hence he travell’d to the impious King
Anffalauw , who Hopping the Horfe,
and bringing his Forces to fight againft
him, were all flam upon the fpoc. Next
coming to King Sallauw , he follow’d the
footfteps of Anffalauw , and had the fame
Fate. Afterwards they came to Mottera,
the Refidence of the famous Giant Ragia
Jerafingh , who had been formerly de-
feated no lefs than 18 times by Kifna.
This Giant having fortified Mottera with
high and ftrong Walls, drew out his
Forces into the Field, himfelf being co-
ver’d with a Cuirafs, or Armour, that
was both Sword and Shot-proof. Both
Armies engag’d one another with fuch
fury, that the like had never been feen
before, with fuch various Succefs, that
it remain’d dubious who was likely to be
the Vanquilher, the Night putting an
end to the Battel for that time.
Kifna being fenfible that it would be
a hard task to kill this Giant as long as
he made ufe of this Armour, got with
Erftende over the City Walls, having
transform’d both himfelf and Erftende in-
to the fhape of two old and tall Brahmans.
In this pofture they feated themfelves
near the Pagode, where the Giant us’d to
walh himfelf, who coming thither ask’d
them, What is it you two devout Men defire
ask and you fhall have , he it what it will.
Kifna reply’d, That Kings were apt to
promife much more than they intended
to perform. The Giant anfwer’d, that
was never his Cultom, defiring them to
ask what they pleas’d, it Ihould be gran-
ted : The difguis’d Kifna then ask’d the
King to give him his Hand as a token of
his Sincerity, which the King having done
accordingly, Ad that we ask of , faia
He b lefts
SinckrJ.
Comes to
Sudan-
newa, who
is IfilTd h
Erfknde.
Comes to
and rents
fever a I
King a
He leaps
over the
Walls of
Mottera.


* A kind of
Mian
Weapon.
The Giant
Jerafingh
kjiCd,
he, vs, that whenever thou engage/} again
again]} Kifna, thou /halt not put on thy jhot-
free Armour . The King (tho fufpeding
the matter) anfwer’d, Well, fince I have
given my word it fhall be done, provided
that he who engages in a Tingle Combat
with me fhall bring no Bow and Arrow ;
hut if he will fight with a Gor* *, or try
his Skill. with me in wreftilng, I am
rea( jy t 0 an f wer hi m .
Kifna and Erfiende difappear’d' without
anfwering one word, and Erfiende'* s Skill
lying chiefly in his Bow, he engag’d £r-
jiendc*s Brother (a famous Wredder ) in
his Head. The Combat was fo equal,
that the night parting them they refer’d
the whole Decifion of the Quarrel till
next day } being both equally tir’d with
wredling, they fought with the Gors the
next day , they engag’d molt furioufly all
the day, giving one another mod; terri-
ble Blows, but with equal advantage,
fo that night approaching, they were
forced to defer the final Deciilon till the
third day : Then it was that the Giant
exerting all his Force, gave fuch frequent
and terrible Blows to Rhijm Erftenden*s
Brother, that being ready to faint, he
was knock’d down feveral times: But
imploring Kijna’s Afllftance, he was en-
dow’d with new Vigor, fo that recover-
ing his Strength, he attack’d the Giant
Jerafingh afrelh, and at lad laying hold
on his Legs, tore him afunder, with his
Entrails hanging down upon the ground.
Kifna* s Forces feeing this Spedacle, at-
tack’d his Army, and flew them all upon
the fpot.
Kifna in his return being met by Suffu-
fter, was entertain’d by him in a Garden
without the City, Erfiende at the fame
time prefenting him with a Garland of
Flowers. Kifna being highly fatisfied
with him, faid, Defire what you think
fit . But Erfiende excufing hirafelf, Kifna
told him, That hi * time upon Earth being
mar expired, he intended to grant him what-
ever requefi he could make. Then, reply’d
Erfiende , bedow one of your Wives up-
on me. Kifna anfwcr’d,Take my Chariot
and go to Davarca , vifit all the Cham-
bers of my Seraglio , and which of the
Ladies thou finded without me, take her
for thy own. Erfiende went indantly to the
Seraglio at Devarca , and entring the fifd
Chamber found Kifna talking with the
Lady \ then going to the fecond, he found
him there likewise and fo in the third,
fourth, and all the red: Being druck with
Amazement, he return’d to the Garden
where he had left Kifna , and prodrating
himfelf, faid, O Kifna, thou beefi the true
God , and prefent every where, pardon tny
Errors ! Kifna giving him his BlefTmg;
told him, he fliould perfevere in his
Prayers, and To return’d to Davarca.
Kifna afterwards feeing the Cowherds
multiply to 56 Karool (each Karool ma-
king 100 Lak, each whereof is iocooo)
or ydooccoco living Souls, and that
they had encreas’d as well in Iniquity as
well as in Number, he was highly in-
cens’d againd them, declaring that he
would root them out, not by his or other
Mens hands, but their own.
it happen’d that a great number 6f
them being invited to a Fead where Kifna
was alfo prefent, they were fo full of
wantonnefs, as to damp upon the pre-
cious Flowers call’d Majfiou and Caffomba
(affording a mod delicious Tinfture for
dying) with their Feet. Not contented
thus, it being a Moonlhiny Night, they
contriv’d to ridicule the famous Prophet
Ruchi , whom they faw fitting very
thoughtfully under a Tree. For this
purpofe they put a Basket under a certain
Man’s Clothes, drefs’d like a Woman,
and carrying her to Ruchi, ask’d him,
whether this Woman was to bring forth
a Male or Female Child ? He not minding
them the fird time, they pull’d him by
the Arm, and ask’d him the fame Quedioh
in a very rude manner a fecond time;
when being as it were awaken’d out of
his Penfivenefs, he told them, he fliould
bring forth an Iron Bar which fliould
break all their Skulls. He had no fooner
faid thefe words, but the difguis’d Man
was feiz’d with mod intolerable Pains,
which did not ceafe till he had brought
forth an Iron Bar. Being amaz’d at fo
odd an Accident, they had recourfe to
Kifna l who order’d them to go to the
Village of Perwatfpatang , feated upon the
River, where they fliould find a Stone,
wherewith they mud rub the Iron Bar
till it was reduc’d to Ponder, and then
throw it into the River. They did as
they were order’d, but no fooner had
they thrown the pouder of the Iron into
the Water, but the whole River was
fill’d with Reeds or fmall Canes, as if it
had been a Fored : They gave an account
of it to told them it was wel).
It happen’d upon another Fedival, that
the young Tribe being merry together,
one of the Company took up one of thefe
Reeds from the ground, and flriking
another over the Head in jed, he faw
him drop down dead before his Feet t
The Friends of the deceafed taking up
another fuch Reed, druck the other
young Fellow over the Head, who like-
Va fl fo-
cn'afe °f
' J *


wife falling down dead, his Friends did
the fame to them, and fo one to another,
till they were all kill’d, according to the
Prediftion of Rucbi the Brahman.
Kifna having now fulfill'd his Office in
rooting out Wickednelj among Man,
font for the Panfpendaons and Drocpcti,
and their Mother to ,where he
told them, that having felefted them as
well as his Wives from the reft, he would
have them go to the Mount
Fernet, whence they Ihould be taken up
into Heaven. Accordingly they went
with Kifna’s 16006 Wives to the faid
Mount, the Peak whereof nobody could
reach but Sujfujlcr however they were
all together drawn up infenfibly through
the Air into Heaven.
Kifna knowing that his time was come
to leave the Earth, he took a handful
of Dull, and throwing it over the City,
their Golden Streets and Houfes were in
an inftant tranfmuted into Straw, Dirt,
Wood and Stones; which done, heafeen-
ded ftrait to Heaven. The Pagans are
Davarca unanimoufly of opinion, that in cafe the
whole Sea was fill’d with Ink, and the
Earth made of Paper, and all the Inha-
Hemaatfiel bitants of the Terreftrial Globe were
only imploy’d in writing, they would not
be fufficient to give an exad account of
all the Miracles wrought by Kifna in
100 years time, in the third Period of
the World call’d Duaserfinge, containing
864000 Years.
Kifna a f.
u
J0h.51.25,
CHAP. XI.
The ninth Appearance of Viftnum in the shape of Boudha or Bodhe. His
tenth Transformation into a flying Horfe , call'd Kallenkyn. The Origin and
Actions of Bramma.
TH E Benjans tell us of , that he
has neither Father nor Mother, that
he is invifible, but whenever he appears it
is with four Arms; He fpends his whole
time in praying with a dejefted Coun-
tenance to the Great God ( call’d Maha-
deuw by the Benjans ) and that after having
continued 26430 years without perform-
ing any Miracles, his time is expir’d upon
Earth, being the time we now live in, ac-
cording to the Computation of the Pa-
gans. For purfuant to the Computation
of the Benjans at Sura , there were in
the year of Chrift 1649, pafs’d 4750
years, and confequcntly 21680 years to
come.
What is laid of this Idol concern-
ing his being born without Father and
Mother, and his Invifibility, feems to
have fome relation to what they may per-
haps have heard of Chrift, as his four Arms
intimate his Power, a thing frequently
attributed to the Pagan Gods; juft as the
antient Poets made their Giants with a
hundred Hands. The Jefuit Kircher at-
tributes likewife four Heads (but erro-
neoufiy) to this Bodhe (call’d
by others) and fays, that by his four
Arras they would reprefent the four Ele-
ments. What the faid jefuit relates of
Ranttzander the Son of Bal , who came
from Heaven to deliver his People from
the Oppreffion of the Giants and Ty-
rants, feems to be a Confirmation of
what we faid before concerning fome
obfeure Remnants of Knowledg among
thefe Pagans of Chrift,
The Benjans tell us, that is
a white wing’d Horfe, Handing upon
three feet only in Heaven, holding one
of the foremoll Legs up without inter-
miflion. They fay, that at the begin-
ning of this Transformation the Benjans
fliall live pioufly and happily, but by de-
grees turn to all manner of Impiety and
Wickcdnefs for 40570 years: Then, fay
they, this Horfe is to trample upon the
Earth with his right fore Leg with fuch
a force, that the Serpent being
no longer able to bear the World, the
Tortoife finding the whole Burden laid on
her Back, will run to the Sea and drown
the World, which is to be the Conclu-
fion of the laft Period of the World;
after which the firft is to begin again:
For it is obfervable, that all the Eaftern
Pagans believe the Eternity of the World,
allowing only fome Changes from one
time to another.
The Whitenefsof this Horfe intimates
the Cleannefs, its Wings the Aftivity
and Agility, and the Horfe it felf the
Strength of the God Fiflnum ; it being
certain,that tho moft of the Indian Pagans,
and efpccially the M , are black
themfelves, yet they have a peculiar
efteem for the white Colour, as may be
feen in the White Cow of Plenty, call’d
The tenth
Tranfor-
malm.


'The Idol !Bodiie.
Pegafus of the anticnt Pagans, which was
plac’d by them likewife among the Stars.
What they fay of the World’s being caft
into the Sea by the Tortoife, appears
to have fome relation to Noah's Flood:
And it is obfervable, that according to
the Do&rine of the Malabars , before the
laft Metamorphofis of things, there (hall
be fuch diforders in the World, that
Camdoga , and the famous White Ele-
phant of the King of , mention’d
in the firft Book. Thus Virgil deferibes
Turnus his Horfe to be white * and of
the Strength, A&ivlty and Excellency of
a Horfe there are many Railages to be
found both in facred and profane Hifto-
ry. The Wings attributed to this Horfe
feera to be done in imitation of the
/fin.
" *


~Thc Idol of the. "Winged HoxCe.
ce wnoie lUti of Famines and J ihbes
lhall be confounded. They fay there
ihall but two pious Kings be remaining
upon Earth at that time, viz. the Kings
of Vappi. and of Atari.
ces his Origin from a Flower-pot, but
the Commentator upon Rogtrm had fuffi-
ciently ihewn that Tamara is quite ano-
ther thing. Tho this Opinion feems to
agree in fome refpeft with what Father
Kircheir fays in the 9th Transformation of
Ftjinum, viz, that he was transform’d in-
to Lotum, being a certain ProduS of the
Sea, and the opinion of th of
Thus much of the God Ixora and
Fiftmm \ we muft alfo fay fomething of
the third, viz.. Bramma , who owes his
Origin to Quivelinga. Rogtrm dedu-
Origin
Bramma.


Thales and the Stoich , who acknowledg’d
the Water either the Principal of the
Nourilher of every thing.
fort of Kings) are out of his Arm,,
which is the rcafon that they never make
the fame low Bows before their Kings as
their other Subjeds, but have the Privi-
lege of fitting down in their Prefence.
Unto thefe 14 Worlds as many divers
forts of People attribute their Origin;
1. Sudh as are endow’d with Wifdom.
2. Thofe that are provident in their Acti-
ons. 3. Thofe that are eloquent. 4. Such
as are cunning and defigning. 5. Drun-
kards and Gluttons. 6. The Generous
and Brave. 7. The Idle and Lazy.
8. Whore-mafters and voluptuous
fons. 9. Labourers, Artifans, and Han-
dicrafts Men. 10. Peafants and Gardi-
ners. 11. The Parreas , and other forts
of nafty People, who they fay came out
of the Heels of Brammd. 12. Thieves,
Murderers and Robbers. 13. Thofe that
opprefs the P6or. 14. Thofe endow’d
with peculiar Qualities, and an aSive
Spirit. They further fay, that they can
judg by the Phyfiognomy of a Perfon,
what part of Bramma he was come from.
Of the Worlds and the feven Seas we
{hall fay more prefently.
The chief things attributed to Bram-
ma by thefe Pagans are, that he has not
only created the World, but alfo deter-
mines the Duration and Times of all
created Matters: And as they alfo ac-
knowledg him the Son of God, and the
Supreme Governor of Angels, nay even
afcribe to him a human Nature , fo it is
evident, that thefe Attributes muft have
their Origin from what they have heard
(tho perhaps confufedly )of Jefus Chrift
the Son of God.
They reprefeht it with four Heads,
but fay he loft one by ixorcC s means to
punifh his Pride. Hence it is that the
Brahmans now adays have no more than
three Books of the Vedam , the fourth
which treated of God being loft.
For the fir ft of thefe Books treated
of God, and of the Origin and Beginning
of the Univerfe. The fecond, of thofe
who have the Government and Manage-
ment thereof. The third, of Morality
and true Virtue. The fourth of the Ce-
remonials in their Temples, and Sacri-
fices. Thefe four Books of the Vedam
are by them call’d Roggo Vedam , Jadura
Vedam , Sama Vedam , and Tar aw ana Ve-
dam \ and by the Malabars , Icca , Jcciyxa ,
Soman, and Adaravan. The lofs of this
firft Part is highly lamented by the Brah-
mans. They alfo attribute to him the
Prefervation of all created things } whence
the modern Brahmans afcribe all the good
or bad Fortune which befals Mortals here
upon Earth to the Direction of Brahma,
who they fay has alfo prefix’d every living
Creature his time of Life and Drath.
Th e Crea-
ity of the
\‘M,
14 forts of
People*
The Malabars fay, Bramma has two
Wives, SarojJody and Quiatry , who are
both barren. The firft being his own,
Daughter, has given occafion to a Pro-
verb among the Malabars , You muft not
do like Bramma, The Equipage, 6r
ther Carriage of Bramma is a certain
Bird, call’d Annam by the Malabars \ for
thefe Pagans attribute to every one of
their Gods a certain Horfe or Carriage
call’d Wdhanam, which carries them from
place to place. They further fay, that
this Bird Annam , if Milk mix’d with Wa-
ter be fet before him, he will drink the
Milk without touching the Water, an
Emblem of fuch as know how to diftin-
guilh Good from Evil.
They relate many other fabulous things,
as for inftance, That Bramma after a
Period of many Ages, is to die and be
reviv’d ; that he he has certain Deputies
or Alfiftants, the chief of whom is Dewen-
dra, the Head of all the Governors of
the feven Worlds which are beyond our
World, met below the Heavens, or
Brammo's Refidence: In thefe Worlds
( fay they ) the Believers live after their
Death. They allow that fome things of
lelfcr moment, fuch as Herbs, Cucum-
bers, &c. have been created by others,
but that all things of moment owe their
Origin to Bramma , who loft one of his
four Heads, becaufe he had told a Lie
to Ixora, and feveral fuch Abfurdities
more.
They further fay, that not only the
feveral Worlds, but alfo the different Fa-
milies and Tribes have their Origin from
Bramma . The Super-acreal World they fay
came out of his Brains or Face*, for
thefe Pagans acknowledg certain Celeftial
Orbs , with Arifiotle . The fecond World
they fay did come out of his Eyes*, the
third out of his Mouth, the fourth out
of his left Ear, the fifth out of his Tongue
and Gums *, the fixth out of his Heart,
the 7th out of his Belly, the Bth out of his
Privy Parts, the 9th out of his left Thigh,
the lothout of his Knees, the nth out
of his Heels, the nth out of the Toes
of his right Foot, the 13 th out of the
Ball of his left Foot, and the 14th out of
the Air that furrounded him.
The Brahmans fay they are the Pro-
dud of his Brains, and the Nairos or
Soldiers, of his Feet j as the Exafiri ( a
The Origin
of the 14
Worlds.


CHAP. XII.
Of the Creation, Quality and Diviƒion of the World, according to the Opinion
of the Learned Heathens.
THE Benjans and Malabars confti-
tute God the Creator of the Uni-
vcrfe, for they frequently give God the
Title of Creator of Heaven and Earth .
We told you in the preceding Chapter,
that they attribute the Creation of the
World t whereunto we will
now add, that they fay, the Power of
creating the World was communicated
to him by njlnum. They believe with
Epicurus and Metrodorus y more than one
World, of which before ; belides which
they make feven great Seas. 1. The
Water-Sea. 2. The Milk-Sea. 3. The
Cream-Sea . 4. The Butter-Sea . 5. The
Salt-Sea . 6. The Sugar-Sea . 7. The
Wine-Sea. The Faradife they place in
the Water-Sea, the Priefts and Jogyes be-
long to the Milk-Sea ; the Voluptuous in
the Cream-Sea ; the Fortunate and Blefled
in the Butter-Sea ; the Merciful in the
Salt-Sea ; thofe who are Liberal in giving
Alms in the Sugar-Sea , and thofe that
live in great Plenty in the Wine-Sea .
Notwithftanding this general Opinion,
the Brahmans maintain, that the World
was produc’d from an Egg ; of which
opinion it feems were alfo the antient
Egyptians , the Thebeans , Orpheus , Plato ,
and the Perfians .
The Malabars look for the Origin of
all things in the Privy Member of their
God, which being too large, he could
not enjoy his Wife Cbatti , wherefore be
was forced to cut it into 18 pieces,
which turn’d into divers forts of Arms ;
but the Blood which iflued thence pro-
duc’d the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and
fome few drops falling upon the ground,
the Rofes, and other forts of Flowers:
But all living Creatures, both rational
and irrational, were brought forth by
Ixora? s cohabiting with Chatti.
The Brahmans further are infe&ed with
a ridiculous Opinion, that the World is
not round but flat; and that confequent-
ly theTerreftrial Globe is not enclos’d
in, or furrounded by the Air, but limit
its Extent by the Horizon that is obvious
to our fight *, for they maintain, that the
Heavens are the uppermoft half, and
the Earth the lowermoft of the Egg-
fhell i whence it is that they conlider the
Heavens as immovable, and the Motion
of the Sun, Moon and Stars (unto
whom they attribute peculiar Souls ) to
be like the Fiflies at Sea in the day from
Eaft to Weft, and in the night from
the Weft ( not below but along the edg
of the Horizon) to the North, and
fo again to the Eaft. If you objed,
that according to their Suppofition, the
Sun mull never ceafe to fhine: They
anfwer, that to the North there is a valb
ridg of Mountains call’d or
Merouma, behind which the Sun, Moon
and Stars withdraw from our fight. They
add, that the World refts upon an Ox,
who when he has a mind to eafe him-
felf, he throws the World from one of
his Horns to the other, which occalions
what we call Earthquakes.
opinion cf
the Brail-
mans "f
Sf J
the World.
7 Seas.
They are alfo grofly miftaken in the
Computation of the Extent of the Earth,
which the Brahmans fay, is from North
to South i 00000 Joxe ; whereas it is
beyond all doubt, that the whole Cir-
cumference of the Globe amounts to no
more than 5400 Germ, Miles, reckoning
1 S °f thefe Miles to a Degree, of which
there are 360. They allb conftitute no
lefs than five Elements, adding the Hea-
vens to the reft in which point they
follow the footfteps of who calls
the Heavens the firft Element. Thefe
five Elements both the Brahmans and
jans reverence like Gods, becaufe, fay
they, they enter into the Compofition of
every thing upon Earth; whence they
allot every one of them his peculiar
Wahanam y or Horfe. They have alfo
invented no lefs than feven PadaUat, as
they cal] them, or fubterranean places
(not unlike the Purgatory and Limbus
Patrum of our Modern Roman Catho-
licks) which inferior Worlds are known
among them by thefe following Names,
Adda , Bidelay Sudda, Taladdam, ,
Mahaddam and Paddam ; and are inha-
bited by Men who receive no other Light
but what certain Serpents carrying very
bright Stones on their Heads afford them.
Asalfim-
ccrninfc its


CHAP. XIII.
The Opinion of theƒe Pagans concerning the Soul, and its Tranfmigration. The
Form, Structure, Splendour and Revenues of their Pagodes or Temples. Of
the Ceremony of waƒhing of theƒe Pagans.
jT/jePytha-
gorean
Tranfmi-
gration of
the Souls,
the Build •
ing of
their Pa-
godes.
THE modern Brahmans, in imitation
of the antient Egyptians , Thracians,
Druids and Germans, believe, that.the
Souls were not fuch from Eternity, but
created by God, and kept as part of his
Effencc, till after the Creation of the
Earth, they were infus’d either into Men
orßeafts. Concerning the Pythagorean
Dodrine of the Tranfmigration of Souls
(fb generally receiv’d among the moaern
Pagans) we have had occafion to fpeak
before in the Description of Ceylon ; we
will only add in this Place, that the Ma-
labar s fay on this Head, They are of o-
pinion, that this Tranfmigration ot the
Souls from one Body into another is in-
ftituted by God as a Punifliment for
our Sins, which continues till they aie
either conveyed into Heaven or Hell;
they fay, there is a certain Judg, nam d
ChitraPutta, who judges of theAdions
of Mankind when they lie upon their
Deathbed, and determines according to
their paft Adions, whether the Soul of
the deceas’d lhall tranfmigrate into a
Dog, Cat, Crow, Cow, King, Brah-
man, Serpent, &c» So that in cafe a
Perfon in his Life-time has done a notori-
ous Injuftice to another, his Soul mail be
tranfplanted into the Body ot a Slave o
the offended Party. The Reafon why
they abftain with fo much Stridnefs from
all forts of Meat, is no other, than that
they are afraid, as T expieues it,
that in feeding upon a piece of Beef, they
may eat a piece of their Father or Grand-
father. ,
Thefe Pagans have their Pagodes or
Temples eroded to the Honour of their
Idols; in the choice of the Places, and
manner of the Building, they follow ra-
ther their Inftind or pretended Infpirati-
on, than any general Rule or Method.
Theft Pagodes are on the Coaft: of Mala-
bar molt commonly built of Marble,
and on the Coaft: of Coromandel of very
large fquave Stone ; ftch is the molt ce-
lebrated Pagode at Patjimmalojel , a valt
Structure, and endow’d with vaft Re-
venues, by the great conflux of Pflgnms
that continually rcfort thither, of which
1 have been an eye-witnefs my fclf.
The Pagodes of the Malabars are ge-
nerally cover’d with Coppei, adorn
with Balls gilt on the top ; within and
without ftand their Idols with many
Heads and Arms, furrounded' on all
fides with Serpents. The Pagode is
enclofed by a Brick-wall, for the Recepti-
on of the People, who don’t enter the
Pagode , but perform their Worfliip in
the Court, as the Jews didin the Hall of
Solomon. Hence it is that the Gates are
well guarded, being commonly either of
Marble or covered with Brafs, with the
Figures of Elephants, Tygres, Bears
and Lyons upon them ; and on the Fron-
tifpiece many dreadful Heads of Lions
with Hogs Tusks, representing the Idol
Patagali , Ixord* s Daughter.
Th zk Pagodes are not only maintain'd
by the Prefents that are conftantly made,
but have alfo a conftant Revenue from
the Cuftoms of all Commodities bought
or fold, an exad account whereof may
be feen in Rogerius, 1. 1, c, io. Thefe
Pagans have alfo a great Reverence for
their Pagodes ; whence it is that they
will not enter a Pagode with their Seri-
pus or Slippers : and they always have
their Gifterns at the Entrance of the Pa-
godes to cleanfe themfelves before they
enter ; juft as the fame is pradf ifed among
the modern Mahometans in their Mofques ,
and as the Jews had the Brafs Sea
belonging to the Temple for the Levites
to wafh themfelves in. Linfcoten menti-
ons, that the Pagan Priefts in Calecut be-
fprinkle thofe that arc entering the Pa-
gode with Holy Water, like our Roman
Catholich , The Pagans in Coromandel
have abundance of fmall Pagodes on thefe
Places, where they burn their dead,
whereof I took particular notice at Nega*
patan ; and in Bantam the richer fort
maintain frequently fraall Chappels foi
their private ufe. Of the Pagodes in Pe-
gu, fee Cafp. Balbi ; of thofe of Japan.
Caron and Almeyda ; and of thofe of China
Ferdinand Pintho,
Their Cuftom of wafhing themfelves
daily, feems not only to be introduced
for the cleaning and cooling of their Bo-
dies, but chiefly for the purifying of ’em
from their Sins; for as thefe Pagans
make a Diftindion betwixt venial and
tnortdl Sins, they regulate their walhing
accordingly. The firft they areclean-
Their 'Re-
venue.f.
Reverence
for their
Pagodes.
Their
Wajhing -


fed of by dipping the Head under Water,
whereas to purify themfelves of the o-
thers (viz,, fuch as include theLofs of
Life or Family, and fall under the Cog-
nizance of the Civil Magiftrates) they
dive the whole Body under Water:
Their Gonftitutions (being to them the
fame as our ten Commandments) are:
1. That thofe of an inferiour Rank
mult not touch thofe of a fuperiour Qua-
lity, and the greater the Difference the
more is the Diftance ; whence the inferi-
our People cry out in the Streets Tintelas ,
i. e. don't make your felf unclean, and thofe
of fuperiour Rank Popo, Give way, for
if any of the common fort happen to
touch a Perfon of a high Rank, he be-
comes unclean, and muft waft himfelf
with Water.
2. Thofe that touch a dead Carcafe,
nay even any of the deceafed Kindred,
within fifteen days after, become un-
clean.
3. Thofe that touch a Woman in
Childbed, or the Child ;
4. Ora Woman that has her Monthly
Times, till the fourth day.
5. All fuch as are become unclean, if
they touch another he becomes fo like-
wife.
6. If one that is unclean eats Rice be-
fore he has cleanfed himfelf, he lofes the
Advantage of his Family, and commits a
mortal Sin.
7. Perfons of Quality commit a mor-
tal Sin, if they eat Rice boil’d by one of
an inferiour Rank.
8. The fame it is, if he lies with a
Woman of alow extraction.
9. The Brahmans, tho all of the fame
Tribe, yet are not permitted to eat with
one another; thus if any one touches
with his Right Hand (wherewith he eats)
his Neighbour, it is a venial Sin, becaufe
that Hand is unclean by touching the
Rice; the fame it is, if the Figleaf
(which they ufe inftead of a Twine thred)
touches his that fits next to him : but if
but one fingle Grain of Rice ftiould hap-
pen to fall upon the Figleaf of the others,
he muft not eat it, without committing
a mortal Sin.
ly on that part of his Body which
touch’d it, which muft be purify’d by
Water. Thus if any body puts his Fin-
ger into the Mouth, nay if two Perfons
of a different Rank meet at a Ciftern,,
if but one Drop of Water that has
touch’d the Body of him that is of an
inferiour Degree, happens to fall upon
him of a fuperiour Rank, he becomes
unclean, and is guilty of a venial Sin.
Their Ceremonies obfeiVd in wafting
are : Firft of all they fancy, that the
Stone on the edg of the Giftern is Eram-
ma, the Place where they wadi is Viftmm 9
and the Ciftcrn it felf Ixora, They
enter the Ciftern quite naked (their Pri-
vities being cover’d only with a Leaf) and
write with their Fingers the Syllable om
in the Water, and then with three Fin-
gers call up a little Water into the Air,
intimating, that Ixora, Fiftnum and
Bramma have bathed themfelves there;
at the fame time pronouncing thefe
Words, Tottum quenca bitten pava, i.-c.
By the touching of this Water I have cafi a-
way my Sin . Then parting the Water
with both their Hands, they dip their
Hands in it, and thereby believe them-
felves cleanfed from all their Sins com-
mitted by touching. Afterwards they
caft fome Water with both Hands to-
wards the 8 parts of the World, as a
Sacrifice to the eight Guardians thereof
fay the Siri Pagode , walh their faces
three times fuccefiively, faying. Purify
me, this done, they throw likewife fome
Water towards Heaven, as a Sacrifice to
the Sun; and having waft’d their Hands
and Feet, take a fmall Quantity of the
Aftesof Cowdungin the left Hand, which
being mix’d with a little Water, they
fay Sudamaga , i. e. be clean . Further-
more, as they fuppofe the Left Hand to
be the Earth, and the Right the Hea-
vens, and the infide of the Hand the
Place of Propagation ; they lay the
Right Hand clofe upon the Left, faying.
Let this be the end of the World ; and as
they believe that at the end of the World,
Ixoretta is to be transformed into an Egg,
they imagine that the Concavity betwixt
their two Hands reprefents the faid Egg,
whence (after having paufed a while)
they takeaway the Right Hand, faying.
Heaven and Earth are feparated ; and then
write with the Forefinger of the Right
Hand in the A files contain’d in the Left,
the two Syllables ja ra , intimating the
Gonteft betwixt the Fire and Air in the
Egg, in carrying the Heavens to the
top, and the Earth underneath. This
done, they lay their Hands below the
m
10. Immediately after Dinner or Sup-
per, they take away the Figleaves, and
the leaft Grain of Rice that perhaps
may be fallen upon the Ground, which is
laid up together in a certain place, be-
caufe all the Remnants are unclean. The
place where they have eaten, they purify
with Cows Dung ; and if the leaft Grain
of Rice ftould be left behind, he that
touches it, becomes unclean immediate-
>
ufedfarpii-
rifymgf


Navel, on the upper orifice of the Sto-
mach, upon the Breaft, Front, Head, and
Crown of the Head, and afterwards up-
on theinferiour Parts of the Body } they
likewife touch the Eyes, Ears, Feet and
Heels with their Fingers, extending now
and then their Hands, as if they were
going to give fomething : they likewife
fliew their empty Hands to the eight
Guardians of the World ? and afterwards
befmearing themfelves with Allies with
three Fingers of the Right Hand (in ho-
nour of Bramma , Fiftnum and Ixora ) on
the Breaft, Front and Shoulders, they
then reckon themfelves clear and purifi-
ed of all their Sins. If you ask them, <
what makes them ufe all thefe Ceremo-
nies, they give for anfwer. That they
have two different Laws, viz., the Carma
and Nhana , one whereof contains In-
ftrudionsfor the inward Service of God,
the other for the exteriour or Ceremoni-
al part. They add, that Parexi Rama ,
when he made the Sea recede from the
Coaftof Malabar , did recommend in a
moft peculiar manner the obfervance of
the Carma to the Malabar j, whence Ma-
labar to this day retains the Name of
Carma i. e. the Country of Car-
ma.
CHAP. XIV.
Of the Holy Aƒhes uƒed in anointing themƒelves, and of their Feƒtivals.
Why the
Ajhes of
Cowdung h
[acred with
'em.
Aflies of Cowdung area thing
J|[ infuch requeft among the Indian-Pa-
gans, that they with it befmear every
Morning, their Front, Breaft and Shoul-
ders * every King maintains in his Court
a certain Perfon, who every day early in
the Morning expofes a good quantity of
thefe Aflies upon a Fig-leaf in the Mar-
ket-place, when every one that pleafes
comes and takes fome part thereof for
hisufe* of thefe Aflies they alfo offer
daily Sacrifices to their Gods. The Jo-
gyes attend conftantly near the Pagodes ,
with a whole Bag full of thefe Aflies,
which they diftribute to the People, who
in return give them feme Alms. They
always appear befmear’d with thefeAfhes,
in which confifts a great part of their
Holinefs, their God Ixora being alfo be-
daub’d with thefe Aflies * the reafon
whereof, as they relate it, is this.
We told you before, that Ixora or
Ouiven , having undertaken to keep Qui-
velinga, the Aflies which fettled within
the Shell, render’d Ixora immortal, rift-
mm being defirous to enjoy the fame Pre-
rogative, feiz’d upon a Cow, and car-
rying her to Calaja , Ixorafs Refidence, he
fnatch’d away fome of thefe Aflies *
which Ixora perceiving, he ftruckoutfe-
veral of her Teeth by a Blow he gave
her, which falling upon the Earth, pro-
duc’d a kind of large Water Melons,
call’d Abobacus by the Portuguefes. How-
ever riftnum keeping clofe behind his
Cow, he gather’d the next Dung, and
burnt it to Aflies*, whence it is that to
this day thefePagans have fo great a Vene-
ration for the Cowdung, that they believe
it purifies every thing upon Earth. The
faid Cow brought forth a Bull-calf, unto
which Ixora gave the Name of lrixipaten y
and ufed him inftead of a Horfe. The
Malabar Women, tho otherwife pretty
cleanly, yet are fo intoxicated to this
Superftition, that they cleanfe their
Chambers and their Cifterns with Cow-
dung.
The Samoryn or King of Calecut wa- /
flies himfelf every day before Dinner *, /
and when he goes to the Pagode , the way c
from the Ciftern to the Pagode is cover'd |
with Cow-dung, upon which they ftrow
Rofes and other Flowers , belides that
two Women each with a Pot of Cow-
dung mix’d with Water, walk juft be-
fore him *, and the Place where he dines
is afterwards conftantly cleanfed with
Cow-dung. They relate farther of the
Cow, that Quenevady and Superbennia did
fit betwixt her Horns, the Sun and Moon
in her Eyes, Brammd > s two Wives in her
Ears, Ixora in her Nofe, riftnum in her
Tongue, in her Thighs the Rixii, the four
Books of the redam in her four Legs *
that her Milk is the true Ambrofia or A~
mottam , and her Pifs the Tirtam , or the
Water fit to purify themfelves from
their Sins: whence it is, that when they
fee a Cow ready to pifs, they catch it
with their Hands, drink a little of it, and
with the reft wafh their Faces. As thefe
Pagan Kings claim the Patronage of
Cows, fo the Samoryn of Calecut is at-
tended every Morning early by fix Boys,
all over befmear’d with frefti Cow-dung,
with Garlands of. Flowers on their
Heads* as foon as the Samoryn riles, they
How tht
King of
Calecuc
purifies
himfelf.


pay him Reverence, who orders them im-
mediately to give the Flowers to the
Cows, which they do.
They have not the fame regard for
the Bulls and Oxen, tho they make a Bull
the Father or Author of the Royal Family
of the Exaflri , from whence the Kings of
Cochin , Cranganor, Cananor, and others
are defcended ; they relate, that all
the Males of this Family being extinft,
a Woman of the fame Tribe being be-
got with Child by a Bull, revived the
faid Family.
and Ayotia, 12 Leagues from Caff, for
which reafon it is, that the rich ereft
Pagodes, Jans (call’d Ammalamsj and
Cifterns for the Conveniency of the tra-
velling Men and Beafts.
The Malabars have a peculiar way to
merit the forgiving of their Sins; there
grows a certain Stone call’d Talagram-
wict on one fide of the Mount Mahameru,
near a Riverfide (which the Jogys al-
ways carry about them) fome whereof
contain Gold, and are then called Jerenia
Querpam ; one of thefe carry’d in a Vef-
fel, and in another the five following
things belonging to the Cow, viz., the
Cream, Milk, Butter, Pifs , and Dung
mix’d together, call’d by them Panchavi-
am Wine, and afterwards put into the o-
ther Velfel, wherein lies the Talagramma ,
and given to any Perfon whilll he re-
cites the Vedamantiram (a Prayer of five
words) purchafes Pardon for all Sins,
deftroys his Enemies, reconciles him to
his Friends, and procures Riches. This
Prayer is in high Veneration among the
Brahmans , which they ufe conftantly
when they are fitting down to eat, but
no body dares to fay it in the Streets:
The five Words are Panefua , Apanefua,
Vinefua, Vdanefua , and Sumanefua ; the
firft lignifies the Soul or Spirit, the fecond
the Pofteriors, where the Excrements
are difcharg’d ; the third the Hearing ;
the fourth Seeing 5 the fifth the Smel-
ling.
The Malahars alledg the following
reafonfor the A(hes of the Cow-dung;
They fay that the Lingam (i.e. membrum
virile) of Ixora, before it was cut in
pieces, being fo long that it reach’d up
to his Forehead, let fly fome few Drops
of Seed, which happening to light into
his fiery eye in the Front, was burnt to
Allies immediately. Hence it is that in
Canara, betwixt Cananor and Mangalor,
there are to be found a certain Order of
pretended holy religious Men,living con-
ftantly in th epagodes. Thefe appear in the
Streets quite naked, and making a noife
by the ringing of a Bell they carry a-
long with them, the Women (without
diftinftion of Age or Quality, even
to the Queens) come running out to
touch their Privy Members.
That the Egyptians, and after them
the Jews, had a peculiar Veneration for
Cows and Calves, is fufficiently evident
from many Palfages in the Scripture ; and
the Afhes of the Red Cow are mention’d,
Neb. 9. 13. & Numb . ch. 19,
Befides this Purification, thefe Pa-
gans have alfo their meritorious A&s of
Piety ; fome of the Jogiis carry Iron
Collars about their Necks, walk con-
ftantly with Iron Fetters and Chains, and
have Iron Nails with the Points inwards
in their wooden Slippers or Sandels.
Some have been known to ty them-
felves with Ropes to a Tree, till they
expired in great Torments.
Ifawi6s7, one of thefe Jogys atCo-
lumbo, whofe Arms were grown toge-
ther over his Head, a Pofture he had
chofen out of Devotion. Others of this
Order never deep, but pray inceffant-
ly ; of this kind are alfo to be found in
Japan and China.
Another meritorious Aft of the Pagans
is the viflting their celebrated Pagodes
and other holy Places (like the Pilgrima-
ges of the Romanifts) as the famous Pa~
gode Rammanakojel, the Adams Mountain
in Ceylon, and divers other Places at Su-
ratte, Davarca, Mottcra, Caft , Bengale,
Opinion of
the Mala-
bars of the
Cowdmg.
They have alfo their Feftivals: one of
the moft remarkable Feftivals of thefe
Pagans, is celebrated in Honour of rift-
mm or Ixora ; tho the Malahars folem-
nize certain Feftivals, as that in Honour
of Ixora 7 s Spoufes, which are not regard-
ed by other Brahmans, which beginning
the Bth of Jan. continues for nine days,
the Ceremonies may be feen in Rogeri-
us, 1. 2. c. 12. The Feafts celebrated in
Honour of Ixora and Vifinum, are call’d
Trenaca and Panduga. The Gentives,
Malahars, and Inhabitants of Coromandel
alfo folemnize a Feaft to the Memory
of the Nativity of Fiftnum, and his
Transformation into Kifna in Auguft ,
when they adorn their Houfes with all
forts of Greens, which feems to have
fome Refemblance to our Chriftmafs:
They alfo ufe another Feaft to the Honour
of yiftnum, in remembrance of the
1 5000 Virgins; it begins the eighth day
after the Full Moon in 05. They have
alfo a Feaft in Honour of riftmnf s Spoufe,
call’d Lafceni by thofe of Coromandel ;
this is celebrated by the Brahmans Wives
in September, for nine days, when they
their Fef*
tiv ds.


pray for the long Life of their Husbands,
and to obtain Riches. They have alfo
two other Fealls in July and November.
They obferve befides this certain days,
as Sacred and Fortunate, as the Firfb day
of every Month, the day of the Solltice,
when the Sun turns from the North to
the South.
They pay every Morning their Re-
verence to the Sun, and having walh’d
themfelves three times, they threw the
Water with their Hands upwards, to
prevent (as they fay) the evil Spirits
from keeping the Sun betwixt the Moun-
tains. The New Year they begin with
the New Moon in April, as the modern
Jews in the Month Ahlb. They call the
New Years Fealt Samwatfaradi Panduga ,
Panduga fignifying as much as a Feaft,and
Samwatfaram a Year, as Adi is the firll
day of the Month -, for they have twelve
Months in the Year, viz., April call’d
The fir am. May Wehviacam , June Jef-
tam, July Auguft Spawanam ,
September Badrapadam , O&ober Afwy~
am, November Card cam, December
Margifaram , January Ponjam , February
Magam , March Paelgouwan. And be-
cauie thefe 12 Months are not equivalent
to the Months of the Sun, they have e-
very third Year a Leap-year, confining
of 13 Months, which we have only once
every four Years.
Befides the Names of every Month,
and of every day in the Week, the Ma-
labar* have a peculiar Name for each day
in every Month. They have alfo peculi-
ar Names for each Year, as far as fixty
Years, unto which they add the Word
Samwatfaram, fignifying a Year, which
however is often left out for Brevities
fake } then they fay Prahawa the Fir ft,
Pinawa the Second, &c . Tfaja the fifti-
eth, meaning the Samwatfaram or Year.
They compute by 60 years, juft as the
Greeks do by their Olympiads m , they alfo
name the Days of every Week (like the
antientPagans) after the Planets*, thus
Suria fignifies to them the Sun, and Jen-
dr a the Moon, whence they call Suria
Waram the Sunday , and the Monday Jen-
dra Waram .
They divide each day into 30 Hours,
juft as the Gentives divide their Day and
Night into 60 Hours, fome whereof they
account fortunate, and fome unfortunate.
Of the Pagan Feafts you may confult Ca-
rolinus, chap . 22.
CHAP. XV.
Of the Faƒtdays of the Pagans, and their Origin . Their Marriages and ƒolemn
Oaths ; Ceremonies ufed with their Sick and Dead .
AS the Pagans pray conftantly thrice
a day, viz., in the Morning, about
Noon (when they repofe themfelves)
and in the Evening, fo they have their
folemn Faftdays \ one of thefe is call’d
Bgadexi, which Word (in their Learned
Language, call'd Samofcrad , or Hanfcret,
as Kircher fUles it, which is in the fame ef-
teem among the Malabars, as the Latin
inJEytrope') fignifiesas much as eleven, or
tbe eleventh , becaufe it is kept the ele-
venth day after the full Moon, and again
the eleventh day after the new Moon \
fo that they have two of thefe Falls eve-
ry Month, viz- one every 15 days, when
they abllain from eating all the day long,
or at lead till four or five a Clock in the
Afternoon, when they mull not feed up-
on Flefh, or Fifii, or Rice, but only up-
on Fruits,. Peafe, Beans, Milk, and fuch
like, and not drink the lealt ftrong Li-
quor.
The Origin of this Faft-day is ridi-
culous enough. They tell you, that a
young Fellow much addi&ed to Venery,
going one night very late to vilic his
Miftrefs, could not light on a Boat to
ferry him over the River j however, be-
ing rcfolv’d not to depart, he ftaid there
all night, and did fall afleep, without
having eaten any thing all that day:
Next morning early pafiing the River, as
he was going to his Miftrefs’s Houfe, he
met with a Camel juft at Sun-rifing, at
which throwing a Stone it hit acciden-
tally upon fome Flowers, and call them
from the Stalks upon the ground, and fo
he came to his Miftrefs.
After fome years happening to die,
and being carried before Chitraputren , he
could not produce any good Works he
had perform’d in his Life-time to inticle
himfelf to the Paradife, except this his
accidental falling, and the throwing down
of the Flowers at Sun-rifing, which
he interpreted as a Sacrifice intended for
the Sun. Chitraputren after a long hear-
ing condemned him to the infernal Re-
ori jn f
thl 1 firft
Faftday of
the f e Fa*
gans '


gions *, yet in confideration of his falling
;on the nth day after the Full-Moon,
" having the favour granted him of abiding
for fome days in the Paradife, he was
ask’d, what Paradife he would choofe?
He anfwer’d, The Woman's Paradife.
Being convey’d thither accordingly, as
he was in Bed the next night with one of
the Ladies, he broke out into moft dread-
ful Ejulations *, and being ask’d by his
Bedfellow the reafon, he reply’d, Bccaufe
1 have fo fhort a time to ftay in this Para-
dife. The Woman who had taken a liking
to him, told him, that he Ihould rife early
in the Morning, wadi himfelf all over,
and at the Gate watch the coming of the
Servants of Ixora , who were then going
into the Wood of Rofes , to gather Flowers
for their Mafter } (he bad him to crowd
in among them, and having gather’d the
moft odoriferous Flowers he could find,
offer them as aPi efent to Ixora . He fol-
low’d the Woman’s Advice, and having
gather’d the moft fweet-feented Flowers
he could, offer’d them to Ixora , who ex-
tremely pleas’d with this Prefent, ask’d
Chitraputren who this young Man was ? he
told him, he was a Perfon condemn'd to
the infernal Punilhments: But Ixora or-
der’d him to remain in Paradife with the
fame Woman, and to gather Flowers for
him. Now becaufe this young Man got
into Paradife by his fading, the Pagans
faft upon the before-mention’d 1 ithday.
return’d to his own home the next Morn-
ing.
Some years after the faid Bert happen-
ing to die, and being carried before Ch /-
trapoutren the Judg of the dead, he found
upon Examination, that having commit-
ted many Crimes in his Life-time by kil-
ling the wild Beads, he was condemned
to the infernal Regions. But as Jewen or
Jamma the Chieftain of the Devils and
his Company were hurrying him along,
they were met by Ixora , who being in-
form’d of his falling all the night long
upon- the Tree Cuola , and his offering of
the Flowers to QmveVmga , he deliver’d
him immediately out of the Devil’s
hands, aad fent him into Paradife.
Some tell a different Story upon this
head, viz.. That Bert perceiving a Tyger
under the Tree,was forced to remain upon
the Tree all night without eating any Vic-
tuals : They alfo tell you the Dialogue
betwixt Bert and the Tyger } Bert it feems
told the Tyger, that whereas he was noc
able to faft above three days, he defir’d
him to let him go unmolefted to his Houfe,
where he would take leave of his Wife
and return again. The Tyger reply’d,
No } for, faid he, if I Jet thee come down
fafely, thou wilt certainly kill me with
thy Bow and Arrow, which thou didft
leave under the Tree whilft thou waft
climbing up to fetch a Pigeon thou hadft
Ibot before. But Bert taking an Oath by
Ixora that he would return, the Tyger
let him pafs. Bert being return’d home,
told his Wife what had happen’d, and
that he mull return to the Tree where
the Tyger ftaid for his coming; The
VVoman offer’d to go in his Head, and fo
did his Children to be devour’d by the
Tyger, alledging, that without him they
Ihould be depriv’d of all Subfiftance.
But Bert not approving their choice,
they went all together to the Tyger, un-
to whom Bert faid, Purfuant to his Oath
he was come to be devour’d by him : But
the Woman entreating the Tyger to de-
vour her in his Head, as not being abie
to fubfift without him, and the Children
making the fame Petition to him, the
Tyger was put to fuch a Nonplus, that
he did not know what to choofe; but
whilft he was ruminating upon the mat-
ter, Ixora threw a Net over them, and
fo drew them all into Paradife.
They have another Fait call’d Quive-
rajiri, which deduces its Origin from
Quiven (the fame as Ixora) and Raftri ,
i, e . the Night, dignifying as much as
a Night-faft, or Quivens night: It fails
out in February , and being one of their
eftablifh’d Fads, is kept with a great
deal of ftridnefs, they being forbid either
to cat or drink, or to deep all that night,
which they fpend in rehearfing the Fidli-
ons of their Gods, and walking round
the Pagodes till Day-break, when they
facrifice to the Idol, and give Alms to
the Poor } which done, the Faft is ended.
The feamd
Eijf.
The Origin of this Faft they afcribe to
one Bert, a famous Hunter, who going
one Evening abroad to fhoot fome Birds,
got upon a certain Tree near a Ciilern,
call’d Cuola, the Leaves whereof fmell
as'fweet as Flowers: Being very eager
at the fport, he tarried upon the Tree
all night, and to pafs away his time
without deeping, he pull’d off conftant-
ly the Flowers of the Tree, which he
throwing one after another upon the :
ground, one of them did fall upon Qm~ \
•velinga, who happen’d juft to lie under <
the Tree without £m’s knowledg, wh© ]
Its Origin,
The third Fall call’d Tirimdira , is
kept only by the Women, having got
its Name from the 27 tb day of the 9th
Month} on which day Canteven the God
of Love , being kill’d by Ixora , the Wo-
men were fo griev’d thereat, that they
The third
Faji.
Its Origin.


Why the
Gedof
Love was
\jlledby
Ixora *
The fourth
Fuji,
would not touch the leaft Eatables all
that day*, and ever fince keep a Faft on
the 27th of December in memory of this
Difafter, being much about the fame time
we celebrate the Feaft of our Saviour’s
Nativity. They fay the reafon why Ixora
kill’d this Canteven , or Cupid , was be-
caufe the laft was fallen in love with
Paramcfceri , Ixora? s Spoufe, for which rea-
fon he burnt him to Afhes with.his fiery
Eye on the Forehead. But the Brahmans
fay that Ixora being for a contiderable
time employ’d in holy matters, and there-
by become forgetful of Paramefceri, (he
addreft herfelf to Canteven , to infufe in-
to her Husband frelh Sentiments of Love *,
but file afterwards no fooner under-
ftood his Death, than fhe died for Grief:
Being however brought to Life at the
Foot of the Mount Timana (where fhe #
ftaid for fomecime after to do Penance/
and thence got the Name of the Daugh-
ter of the Mount Timana) Ixora appear’d
to her, promiling to continue his Con-
jugal Love hereafter. Paramefceri took
this Opportunity to defire Ixora to re-
vive Cupid from the Dead, with this ad-
dition, that he fliould remain immortal
for ever after *, whence they fay, that
Cupid reigns all over the World by the
Strength of Imagination in both Sexes;
by which they feem to intimate, that as
the Inclination to Love ceafes in old Per-
fons, it is conftantly reviv’d in the young
ones, andfo will continue as long as the
World ftands.
They have another famous Faft, cal-
led Mafaupafa , from the Word Mafa
(which in the high Malabar Tongue fig-
nifiesaMouth) and Vpada a Faft, being
the moft facred of all their Fafts, begin-
ning with the laft day of Oftober.
Such as keep this Faft, having firft
wafh’d and drefs’d themfeives very clean,
repair to the Pagode of Vijlnum \ and
the next day being the 1 9th of Novemb,
after having chang’d their Clothes, go
round the faid Temple early in the Morn-
ing 1o 1 times, and the moft devoted
1001 times. The fame they repeat eve-
ryday during the whole November and
December , muttering all the while by
themfeives the Words Naraina and A-
quanama, Sirnames belonging to F'iftnum.
All this while they muft eat nothing but
Milk and Figs, neither look upon a Wo-
man, and think or fpeak of nothing
but what relates unto Jfiflnum, The
next following year they take the fame
courfe, beginning with the ift day of
Decemb, and continuing till the to tb ot
Jan. in all 40 Days. The third Year
they begin with the i ft of Jan. and con-
tinue the fame Devotions till the to th of
Feb. and thus the fame fucceflively for
nine years longer, till the Number of ix
years being compleated, they obtain a
general Pardon for all their Trefpafles.
Concerning their Marriages, Polygamy
and fome other matters relating to this :
purpofe, we have had occation to fay
fomething already in the Defcription of
Ceylon : we wi.ll now give an account of
fuch things as were not mention’d, or at
Jeatt not circumttantially in that Place.
The firtt is, that the Brahmans are not
only at liberty to marry as many Wives
as they think fit (a Privilege they al-
ways enjoy’d, as may be Teen out of their
antient Records, call’d Poranes ) but alfo
may choofe their Wives out of four dif-
ferent Tribes, juft as the Levites enjoy’d
the Privilege of marrying in what Tribe
they thought fit among the Jews.
As to their Marriage Ceremonies, fome
precede the Marriage it fe>lf, fome are
concomitant to it, and the reft follow
it.
The firft thing they obferve is, to con- 1
fait an Aftrologer about the Petition of (■
the Planets, and the Time or Hour,*
when it is fortunate for the Bride to be
married ; for which reafon they aifo
confult on what day of the Month, and
under what Conjun&ion the Bridegroom
is born. Next they apply themfelves to
a Brahmin or Prieft, who for four days
fuccelfively before the Wedding, burns
a little Rice and Butter mix’d with Eggs
fora Sacrifice. The time of the folemn
Promife or Engagement approaching,
they light a large Waxcandle, and put
fome Rice upon the Table of Quenevady,
the huge devouring Elephant before-
mention’d. This done, the Bridegroom
throws a Necklace or Taly , with fome
Gold fatten’d to it, about the Bride’s
Neck, as a Token that the Engagement
is now made } whence the Malabars call
Marriage Quitha , i. e. an Obligation. The
Wife after the Death of her Husband,
always breaks this Necklace, as a Token
that the Obligation is diftblv’d, after
which the Bride fafts 15 days.
After the Copulation is perform’d,
they entertain their Friends at a Feaft ;
but the young Couple are not bedded
till about eight or ten days after : for
before they can actually cohabit, they
mutt attend a fortunate Conjundion of
the Planets *, and before they enter the
Bedchamber, perform their Prayers at
the Door, in the Company of a Priett,
who gives them his Baling. The next
Their Mar-
riages.
Marriage *
Ceremo*
nies^


Their man-
ner of talk-
ing an
Oath .
following day, the new married Couple
take a piece of Cloth, cut at one end,
wherewith they go a filhing in a River ,
the firft Fifh they take, they touch on
the Head with a great deal of Reverence,
and according as they take more or lefs
Fifties, they fhall have few or more
Children \ if they catch nothing, the
Woman is to prove barren.
As the chief reafon why they marry
fo young among the Brahmans , is their
Fondnefs of a Maidenhead, fo on the o-
ther hand nothing is more defpicable a-
mong them than a Maiden come to a
full Age, which has introduc’d the Cuf-
tom of begging Portions for Maidens
that they may be married in time.
The Indian Kings that are not Brah-
mans never marry, but only keep certain
Miftreffes, whofe Children don’t inhe- x
rit, nay can’t as much as challenge the
leaft Prerogative, in refpeft of their
Nobility; fo that here obtains the Axi-
om, Frutim fequitur ventrem. The Kings
Sifters are generally marry’d to fome o-
ther Sovereign Princes, who muft faft 15
days before Marriage. The Nairos have
likewife no fettled Marriages, whence
their Wives are ftiled Parafceri , i. e.
Women for many . The Brahmans take
as much care to couple a Bull and a Cow
together, as other People do in marry-
ing their Children.
Thefe Pagans perform their folemn
Oaths near a Pagode , and the Brahmans
of Coromandel in the Prefence ofaPrieft,
near a holy Fire, juft as the Romans ufe
to do in the Prefence of their Priefts,
the Athenians before the Altar, and the
Arcadians during the Sacrifice. Thefe
Pagans being ready to take an Oath near
the Pagode , they put three Fingers of the
Right Hand, viz. the Thumb , the next ,
and the Middle Finger, into an Earthen
Veffel fill’d with melted Buttery this
done, they put a Leaf into the fame
Butter, which they tie clofe round their
three Fingers: after three days the faid
Leaf is taken off in the Prefence of the
King or Prince of the Country, if his
Fingers are not burnt, his Adversary Puf-
fers Punifhment, but if he proves hurt,
he is fure to be punifh’d.
They have another way of taking an
Oath, no lefs dangerous than the
he that takes the Oath is oblig’d to fwim
crofs the River betwixt Cochin and Cran-
ganor, which is frill of Crocodiles } and
if he that has taken the Oath efcapes
without hurt, he is fuppofed to have ta-
ken a juft Oath.
InCanara they have another way, for
they put fome Adders and a Lemon into
an Earthen Veflel •, and if he that takes
the Oath, takes the Citron out of the
VelTel, without receiving any harm, he
has truly fworn. The Inhabitants of
Formofa when they take an Oath, break
only a Straw to pieces.
Whenever any body falls fick, the Pa- *
tient need not fear to be difturb’d with r
much Phyfick, Bleeding, Clyfters, and*
fuch like, their chief Remedy conlifting 1
in Faffing, fometimes more than is
venient. They alfo fend forth continual
Prayers, to obtain a happy Tranfmigra-
tionof the Soul, and exhort the Patient
to rehearfe continually the Name of God,
and when his Strength fails, his Friends
repeat the fame in his Prefence j becaufe
the Brahmans are of opinion, that he
who dies with the Name of Godin his
Mouth, goes direftly to the Paradife :
For the fiimereafon they alfo diftribute
Alms to the Poor. If they give the Pa-
tient any Medicines, they are generally
Laxatives of frefh Herbs, a little Milk
Canftc (or Rice and Water boil’d to-
gether) a little Saffron, Ginger, or
Leeks.
When the Patient is near expiring,
they reiterate their Prayers, befprinkling
them with Holy Water of the River
Ganges } for they fay, that the infernal
Judg fends his Servants to torment them
at that time, and that they fend forth
their Prayers to yifinum, to fend one of
his Servants to deliver the dying Perfon
out of their Clutches.
After their Deceafe they wadi the
Corps, afterwards fhave his Beard, ftop
his Mouth with Betel and Lime, wrap
him in a Shrowd, and laft of all clofe
his Eyes. Of the burning of their Dead
we have fpoken before, in the Defcripti-
on of the Funeral Ceremony of the Prince
of Ceylon , and Rogerius * has given ia
more ample account of the whole matter.
Some of thefe Pagans bury their Dead
near their Habitations, and without the
Cities (like the Athenians and Romans)
and cover them with great Stones, for
fear the Jackalls and other Wild Beafts,
fliould dig them up and devour them.
They faft and fhave their Heads for
their deceas’d Friends; and if they be of
Royal Extraftion, all the Subjeft’s are ob-
liged to have their Heads fhav’d. In Ma-
labar the next Relations don’t ftir out of
Doors for 15 days, deep only on Mats
upon the Ground, and don’t aflift at the
ufual Sacrifices. When I mention Faff-
ing, I mean that they only eat a little
Rice at Noon, After 7 days they fend
What Ce-
remonies
they ufe
with their
Dead and
Sid^
* 1.i.c.i0.
900
V
Parc 11.
The Idolatry of


for the Barber, who having cleans’d the
Houfewith Milk and Cowpifs, and the
Perfons belonging to it,they gather up the
Afhes of the deceas’d Perfon, after the
Expiration of the 1 5 days } and having
put the fame into an Urn, they throw it
with great Lamentations into the River,
the Sea, or any ocher Water : This done,
they ptirify the Place where the Corps
was burnt, and plant there a Fig-tree.
Afterwards changing their Clothes, and
being cleans'd by repeated Walkings,they
put an end to the Mourning, except the
next Heir, who continues in Mourning a
whole Year, during which he abllains
from Flefh, Filh, Eggs, Wine, nay even
from their beloved Betel. No Perfon mull
touch his Head, neither mull he cohabit
with his Wife : Befides which, he is obli-
ged to perform daily the following Cere-
mony *, He takes a fmall quantity of boil’d
Rice, made up in form of a little Ball,
this he lays upon a Figleaf fpread upon
the Ground without the Houfe-door, and
taking part of another Figleaf, he bends
it together, fancying all the while, that
the Deceas’d is there prefent to eat the
Riceball •, then taking a little Rice mix’d
with Butter in both his Hands, he turns
his Face about, as if he were looking to
put it into the Mouth of the deceas’d
Perfon. This done, the Slanders by
clap their Hands together, a Signal to
the Crows (of which there are vail
Numbers in Malabar ) to come to take
the Ball of Rice* prepar’d for the de-
ceas’d Perfon y which if the Crows do,
the Heir is at Liberty to go to his Dinner,
but if they don’t, it is look’d upon as an
ill Omen, and the whole Ceremony con-
fider’d as fruitlefs.
At the Conclufion of the Mourning,
the Relations of the deceas’d are invited
to a fplendid Feaft, where however they
mult not eat either Flefh, Filh or Eggi*
and none but the rifher fort are invited
to partake of it. This they repeat once
a Year, on the fame day the deceas’d di-
ed, to the Memory of their Friend. I
will not enlarge ray felf in this Place up-
on that moil barbarous Cultom of fome
of thefe Pagans, for the Wives to burn
therafelves alive with the deadCarcafeS
of their Husbands, a thing ilill practis’d
in the moil, populous City of Pdndi, for
when the Funeral Ceremony of Vimp
Naigne , the Prince of the Country, was
folemniz’d with great Pomp, 300 of his
Wives did precipitate therafelves alive
(under the Sound of Drums and Trum-
pets) into the fame Hole fill’d with burn-
ing Oil, Butter, and other combuitible
Matter, which burn’d both his and their
Bodies to Alhes. We conclude with a
hearty Wilh, that thefe poor Wretches,
quite entangled in the Darknefsof Paga-
nifm, may thro his Mercy, and with th£
Affiftance of fuch Magillrates as ought
to keep a watchful eye over their Acli-
ons,be in time brought to the true Know-
ledgof theGofpd.
FINIS.


THE
INDEX
TO THE
Third Volume.
A.
ABilfines, 640
Abufes of Englilh Seamen, 215.
How to redrefs them, 21 6 .
Abufes in the Queen's Ships, 21 6.
How to reform them, 217.
Abufes in the King's Service at Sea, and how
to reform them, 370.
Account of Difcoveries in the Weft Indies,
4 1 4-
Achiavelli Church and pieafant Village,
801.
Aconcagua River in Chile, 18.
Acunha fent to Diu takes Arabian Veffels,
5 99-
Adam’i Bridg, and the print of his Foot,
6 50.
Adam’s Mountain in Ceylon, 820.
Admonition to Gentlemen to beware how
they are drawn into Expeditions at Sea,
314-
Advantages of the Commerce between Chile
and the Philippine Jflands, 5 6. Of keep-
ing a Fleet on the Coaft of Spain in time
of War, 213, Of the Peace after fffieen
Elizabeth’s Death, 229.
Advice of Sir William Monfon for fup-
preffing the Argierines, 252. His /Id-
vice to Subjects to comply with the King,
298. To Great Per Jons and unexperi-
enced Generals at Sea, 303. For a King
to eleft Generals, Counjellors , and Go-
vernors, 304,
Advice to plant the Jflani of Madagafcar,
449-
Aerf Yin gains Droepeti by [hooting,. 881.
Affront offer'd by the Dutch to the Englilh
Embaffadors, 242.
Agat Stone, 65 y 0
Agra City andCaflle, 577.
Agreement between Philip Mafcarenhas
and Cornelius van Sanen, 620.
Albacoras Fifh in Chile, 3^.
Alliance betwixt the Emperor of Ceylon and
the Dutch, 713.
Allowance of Viffuals in the Kings Ships
at Sea, 347*
Allowance of Viftuals in the King of Spains
Galleys, 351.
Almagro and Pizarro fall out , 111.
Alraagro beheaded by Order of the Pizarros,
1 16.
Alraagro ajffls to conquer Peru, 406'.
Almeyda the Viceroy of India’s Death, 588.
Almonds in Chile, 9,
Aliican leaves Diu, 594,
Amadabat City defcrib'd, 5 66*
Amazons River difcover'd, 104* Navi-
gated up to Quito, and down again to the
Sea , 105.
Amazons River, 419.
Amber, 6 57.
Amber-greece, 828. Different kinds of
it, the Goodnefs how to be try'd, 829.
America by whom fir ft peopled , 64. What
Light of it among antient Philofophers,
85. What in Scripture, 86. Difcovcry
of it, and by what means , 89. Di(co-
ver'd by Columbus, 403.
Amethift Stone, 656.
Ammenara an Indian Me a fare, r jip 9
Amoks defpcrate Villains, 644.


Analativa IJle , 809.
Anchediva IJlandy the Portuguefe Fort
tkro demoltJh y d by the Dutch, d2l.
Anchorage pd/d dt Mocha, 5 7 d.
Angol City foundedy its Situation , Defcrip-
tion, and Character oj the Natives y 142.
Angretotte Fort /o/I by tbo Dutch, 788.
Animals i« Chile defcritfdy 11, dmi 43.
AnnFoytf/ dbip /oyt, 299.
Anfwers to the Resolutions of Queen Eli-
zabeth's Council about making a defen-
five War againft Spain, 225.
Anfwer to a Proffitt of the Dutch for fur-
prizing Canaria and St. Thome, 483.
Antony de Menefes taken with Letters , 7 2d.
Antony de Abreu fent to Goa to give an
Account of the Condition of Columbo,
7 5 3-
Apahames Officers of note in Ceylon, 720.
Apavicoras Shell-fifh in Chile, 35.
Apoftles River in Chile, 24.
Appendix to Sir William Monfon’/ fixth
Book , 553.
Araucanos refolve to revolt , 142. They re-
volt y aud raife a numerous Army , 143.
Send an Emhaffador to treat with the new
Spanifh Governor , 1 50.
Arauco River in Chile, 20.
Areek an Indian Fruity 729.
Arguments againft fi/hing anfiveFd, 521,
Armenians, . <540.
Arms of Chilefes, to.
Arroba is twenty five pounds weighty 37.
Articles propos'd by the Dutch to the Great
Mogul, and the AnfwerSy $69.
Artificers but few in Chile, 74.
Alhes of Cow-dungy why it is facred among
the Pagan Indians, I 894.
Atagualpa Inga defigns to furprize and de-
Jtroy the Spaniards. Is fummorfd by a
Friar , and taken Pvifonery 109.
Athenians rejett Advicey becaufe not juft.
Bod.
Auguftus CasTar’/ Advice to Governors , 307.
B*
BAbylon, 425.
Badur King of Cambaia his warlike
Prepay attorn y 59 1. Takes Citor; offers
the Portuguefes a Place to build a Fort ,
592. Is kilfdy 593.
Ballen a River in Chile, 24.
Basket-work that will hold Watery 80.
Batecaie Klngdonty 61 1.
Ba teca ie defend*d, 713.
Batecottc, 802.
Battel fought for eighteen days , 4 Fable ,
885.
BaEaim, dot.
Bealls In Ceylon, Sid.
Bellatcs, their Habit, Wealth in Cat tel,
mmmr of treading their Com, way of
making Butter , how they manage their
Cattel, S l2. They are litigious y 814.,
°f E gvpc the fir (I that us'd
Difctplme m War, 30 g,
Belt Cities in Peru next to Lima, 'u 3,
betel Ijland taken by the Portuguefes, 589.
Bezoar Stones m Chile, 37. in Malabar,
621 .
Bezoar Stone Oriental and OccidentaL 6< 8.
Biobio River in Chile, 20.
Birds in Chile, 37. In Ceylon, 826.
Bifhop fupreme in Ecclefiafiicai affairs in
12 4»
Bi(hop comes to Cochin, 6z<.
Bloodflone, <^ 7#
Boat Twain his Duty , 32 6. Ills Office]
342.
Boatlwam of the Tard his Duty , 326.
Boldnds of Chilenians to avoid Slavery ,
Bombay,
Book 0/ the Proceedings in the Expedition
to Cadiz zmdtr /C Charles 1. and the
Anfwer to it y 2 68.
Boy d Spy,
Brahmans whence defeendedy their Pagan
SuperJlitioHy and Reafons for it, 814,
■ 'their Belief concerning the Beginning of
the World , and of Souls , 815. Their
Marriage Cuftoms , tb<?y marry young ,
Sid. y?nV7 /brt 0/ fbom, 833.
*ro *wr/<r to Drunkennefs\ 837.
Their Origin, ’ 858.
Biama Indian God , om? bis Heads cut
off by Ixora, 835. Lfo
Bravery of a Servant , 593. 0/Portu-
guefes,
Bread i« Cuyo, g 2
Bridg of the Ingas, , n
Brochia City, ,
Buerios Ayres founded, £0
Buffaloes i« Ceylon, § 2 /
Building 0/ 357 ‘
Bull of Indulgence ,
Burning Mountains in Chile, 13.
C.
River in Chile, j 9/
Cadiz Expedition by the Earl of Suf-
fer 184. Ships taken and burnt there ,
187. Quitted again , j gg*
Cafres Blacks of the South of Africk, 717,
Calecut Kingdom, 7 61$.
CaiecutCity, s27*
Galeture Town, 65 4, hwefiecl by the
Dutch, 7 17. Surrender dy 71 g.
Cambaia Province , tt/ Limit/ Fertility ,
Extent y 555.
Cambaia City defer ib 7 d, 5
Cambra River,
Camdoga’i Car/if, gg £ e
Caofpana m Chile, 24,
Index to the Third Volume


Cananor, 522. Taken by the Dutch, p. 624
Canary Iflands, 484
Canarines offer their Brides to Priapus, 832
Candea conquer'd by Raja Singa, 669
Cannon , their Names, Weight , Charge,&c,
342
Canoes 0/ Whalebone, 79
Capiapo Indians revenge the Death of their
Cacique, Are overcome by Capt. Francis
deAquirre, 136
Capoulican General of the Araucanos,
makes Lautaro hvs Lieutenant. libs Cha-
rafter, 145. He defigns to bejiege the
City Imperial , is miraculoufly pre-
vented, 148- Is betray'd by one of hvs
own Men, taken by the Spaniards,
153. His Speech , he is baptiz'd and ex-
ecuted, 154
Captains of Privateers , 337
Caradiva 1 ft and, 808
Caran 885
Caravans of Aleppo, awd Alexandria,s7#
Caravel taken by Stratagem , 497
Carcal Tonm, 652
Caren Fountain in Chile, 27
Carnatica Kingdom, 654
Carnero Porf m Chile, 33
Carpenters Office , 345
Carracks, their Navigation to the Eaft-
Indies, 395
Carreas TWk 0/ Indians, 817
Carthagena founded\ its Situation , Fa/W-
Carchageria, 416"
Cafpian Fctf, 424
Caftro Viceroy of India, relieves Diu, 599
Cat no Indian Animal , 111
Catavelli, 80 6
C ate chifm introduced among the Indians not
to be alter'd, 793
Cathay Church , ‘ 804
Catherine made Queen of Candea, remov'd
from Manaar, her Superftition , dwd Fe-
ception at Candea, 673, Is crown'd^ 4.
F/er Refleftions on a Murder committed by
the Portuguefes, 675, Falls ftek and
dies . 692
Catfeyes Ffom, 657
CrfMd Produft of Chile, 9
Cavendifli’* Voyage round the World , 401
Cauquenes Fiw m Chile, ip
Cienuvieraat murders Prince Ouve, clears
himfelf, and marries Queen Catherine
of Ceylon, 682. Convenes the States ,
and what was concluded , 6 87. Befieges
Walena, rrti/er the Siege , 691. Ftf//r
ajfembles the States , 6**s Speech,69s.
.Declares the Adminiflrators of the Em-
pire, dwd fettles it , 694, Delivers hvs
Children to them, 695
Ceremonies of Pagan Indians m wafhing ,
894
Ceremonies with their felt and dead, p. pco
Cellares Indians fuppos to be Spaniards
originally,
Ceylon its extent and , 667.
.Am/a/ 0/ Portuguefes 665. It’s
Fertility, g,,
Ceylonefes their Temples , jWo/r, Convents
and Religious Men, their Procefftons,%io
Their Genius, 821. Tk/V Fteto,
Com, g 22
Cezimbra Town on the Coaft of Portugal,
Chalbin River in Chile, 2 j*
Chambaronigo River in Chile,
Changane, g O2
Chapter of Santiago in Chile chofen by the
• 124
Chatham ttsConveniency for the Navy 454,
Exceptions againft it, ? J
Chavagatzeri, g q|
cllau *, * OI
Chengier Cftjr,
Chico, River in Chile, 2/
Child, Bird in Chile,
Children in Ceylon never marry without
their Parents Confent, § j 7
Chile Kingdom, its Situation and Climate, u
Its Divifton , Temperatenefs, is free from
Lightning. 2. From poifonous Creatures ,
Fagr, its Climate and Soil like Eu-
rope, 3. Etymology of the Name of
Chile, 30. Fj sm/? Riches, 11 ?
Chiloe, Iflands of Chile, ? 0
Chittijs, a Tribe of
Chivias, a Tribe of Indians, 817
Cfiom, or Road of Sohali,
Chono, Iflands of Chile, r
Chores Shell-fifh in Chile, 3^
Chriftians of St. Thomas decay'd and re-
ftor'd, had their own Bifhops , acknowledg
the Jurifdiftion of Rome, 538. Where
they inhabit , their Doftrine, 6^9
Chriftians in the Wannias, and Manaar,
810
Chuapa, River in Chile, 1 g
Cibil, Herb, its Virtues, g 2
Cingalefe Malabar Tongue both us'd in
Ceylon, 79 i
Cingalefes go over to their Emperor, 780,
Attack'd in vain, 785. Routed, 701
Cinnamon Tree in Chile, 47
Cinnamon and its Tree deferih'd, 822.
Three forts of it , 824
Civil War betwixt the Heirs of the Empire
of Peru, 109
Clerk of the Navy, his Duty, 325
Clerk of the Survey at Chatham, hvs Duty ,
Clerk of the Rope-yard, hvs Duty , 326"
Clerks of the Check, their Duty, 325
Clothing of the Chilenian Jflanders , 78
Index to the bird Volume.


Cochin City, Chrijlians and Mahometans
liv'd in it, not wholefom, but plentiful,6 31.
Its Churches and Monaft cries * 7 an un-
fucccfsful A [fault upon it, 6 34. Beftegd
a fecond time by the Dutch, 632. Sur-
render'd to them , 635
Coxfwain and his Aiate their Office, 348
Coco }f inds, 54.
Coco- joints tn Chile, 9
Coco Nut , why it has the Print of a Mans
Pace , 838
Colcuva River in Chile, 20
Colderon Town , • 652
Colina £mr in Chile, . 19
Columbo reliev'd y 66 8. Befieg'd by the
Dutch, 702. Furioujly ply'd with great
Cannon, 721. Ajfaulted by Sea and
Land with ill Succefs , 724. Want in
the Town, 726. Sally with 200 Blacks ,
727. More Particulars of the Siege,- 728.
Famine in the Town , 732. Tky fire
briskly upon the Befiegers , 733,
Attack upon it, 735. Tfce Dutch 0/-
dwd ewter C/fy, to dre repulftd
to the Baftion of St. John, tfeiV
wounded in the Ajfault \ Cannon planted
by them on the Baflion to play into the
City, 757. Articles of Surrender pro-
pos'd by the Befteged, 758. Articles
granted them , 759. T'k furren-
der'd, 760. What was found in it, 779
Columbo ifi 5/Vge according to the Portu-
guefes account. Number of People in the
City, 763. Conduft of the Governor, the
City fummon'd, 764. General Affault,
the Dutch repuifed, 765. The Governor's
Son kill'd. Blacks turn'd out of the City,
768. The City neglefted by thofe of
Goa, Famine increafes , Deferters bang'd,
Meffengers come with Letters from Raja
Singa, 7 69. Cats and Dogs fold at a
great rate, 770. Extremity of Want ,
771. Mortality, 772. Succefsful Sally,
the City enter'd by the Dutch, 773.
Hot Engagement in the City, 775. It
is furrenderd, only 190 marching out,
77 6. Origin of the City, 777
Columbus offers his difeovery to fever al
Kings and Princes, and is rejected \ the
Queen of Spain imbrctces it", he fails upon
his difeovery, 90, Had but 90 Men
in his Ships , 91. Lands, and takes
Poffejffon, 92. Is put in Irons , his Ex-
preffions thereupon, 94. He dies at Valla-
dolid, 95
Combat of Elephants, 578
Commodities fold in Ceylon, - Sl6
Commotion in Candea appeas'd by the Em-
prefs,
Comparifon betwixt the times under Eli-
zabeth and K . Charles I. 293. Betwixt
the antient Trade and the new, 437* be-
twixt the Weft-India Trade and our
Fijhery, 515
Competition between France and Spain by
Sea. 383
Compofnion of the Serpents Stone , 6 57
Concepcion, City and Bay in Chile, 19,20
Conception City in Chile founded, 138
Its Situation , Latitude , and Character of
its Inhabitants, 139. Rebuilt, 148
Conception by fancy , 839
Concha Hi Spring in Chile, 28
Conditions of the Truce betwixt the Dutch
and Portuguefes in India, 6 17
Confiderations offer'd to the Miniftry of
England by Sir Will. Monfon, 557
Conflellations of Chile, 42
Conftitutions of Pagan Indians, 894
Conte ft betwixt the Indian Gods Ixora,
Brama, and Viftnum, 835
Confutation about the Dutch General's going
to Raja Singa, 742
Contents of a Letter fent to Raja Singa,
783
Contra-Rotulator of the Admiralty, 323
Contributions under carry on
the War againft Spain, 293
Contrivance of Portuguefes, 701
Conveniency of a Lefture of Navigational?
Convcrfton of Indians, 606
Cook of a Ship, his Office , 348
Cooper at Sea, his Office, 348
Copiapo River in Chile, 17
Copiapo Port in Chile, 33
Copiapo Talley deferib'd, 119
Coptics, 6 40
Coquimbo Port in Chile, 33
Coquirnbo, or La Serena City founded r#
Chile, 134. It abounds in rich
its advantageous Situation , 135
Cordage and Tackling for Ships, and Match
for Fire-Arms in Chile, 9
Cordellcra Mountain in Chile deferib'd, i o
Coronados River in Chile, 24
Corporal his Office, 348
Correfpondence with the Eaftern Chrijlians
neceffary, 642
Cortes goes to difeover Mexico, 104. His
Exploits , 41 1
Cofs an Indian Mile, half a Dutch League ,
573
Coucon Port in Chile, ,33
Coukering the Giant jlain , 8 66
Coulan its Air wholefom, <543. The Na-
tives treacherous befieg'd a fecond time
by the Dutch, <544
Countries whence India Commodities are
brought, 395
Coutinho fucceeds Almeyda as Ticeroy of
India, 588
Cow of Plenty % Bs?* Tow dung us s d for
purifying , 894
Coypo River in Chile, 20


Cranganor City and River, 6 29. The
City taken by the Dutch, wcu> an Arch-
bijhoprick, and had a College of Jefuits ,
and one call'd of Chanotte, p. 630
Creator of the World, 891
Creed in the Malabar Language, 66 5
Crocodiles in Ceylon, 826
Crofs found in the Ruins of Goa, 606
Crowing of a Cock admir’d by the Indians,
107
Cuba, 93,0^415
Cubagua, 419
Cudagua Lake in Chile, 19
Cumana, 419
Guravara River in Chile, 20
Cuyes fmall tame Rabbets in Chile, 44
Cuyo Province of Chile, Remarks on it, and
Inland Country , 60. Its Situation , 62
Cuyo Indians of a Copper Colour, 80,
More hairy than the Chilenians. Their
Women paint their Faces green. Proof of
their Agility. They pretend to an Inftinft
in finding things loft j build no Houfes, 81.
Love to be Independent , 82
D.
DAman, 601
Danes fail to Ceylon, are
return to Denmark. 700
Danger in attempting to take Argier, 254
Dangers to Ships upon accidental meeting
with Whales , <535
Darida, 839
Darien, 415
Daughters in Chile are Riches to their Pa-
rents, 77
Decan Kingdom its limits.
Delightful Profpeft, 28
Delora River in Chile, 19
Demonfirative Proof of the Wealth 0/Chile,
1 33
Defert Ifland, 809
Deferters , . 7*l, 734, 735, 73<S
Defperate old Indian, 77
Diamonds,
Difference betwixt the Countries on the Eafi
and Wefi-ftde of the Mountains of Chile,
25
Difference betwixt the King of Shain’*
Ships formerly and now, 350
Difference betwixt Spaniards and Portu-
guefes about the Eaft-lndies, , 398
Difference among Portuguefe Generals,
. 629
Differences with the Dutch at Suratte about
Cuftoms, 566. Betwixt Almeyda and
Albuquerque, 588. Betwixt two Bro-
thers in Ceylon, fomented by the Por-
tuguefes, 779. Betwixt Badur and the
Portuguefes, 59 2
Different Seafons on the North and South
fides of the Mountains in India, 649
Direttions of an Admiral to hit Ships if they
lofe Company, p / z
Difafter of K, Henry the Bth’* Ships, izi
Difcouragement to Seamen, 330
Difcovery of America profecutcd , 95
Difcovery of feveral Countries, 3 8 9
Difcovery of the Hollanders trade, and their
circumventing us therein, and how tore-
duce the fi/hing into our hands, 5 14
Difcourfe of the Shipping of England, and
Officers of the King’s Ships, 328
Difcourfe of the North We ft Pajfage, 425.
Dilfave, a Governor in Ceylon, 720
Difiances from Port to Port round America,
420
Betwixt Jafnapatan and Colombo, 790
Between Ports in the North-Sea , 492
Diftinttionof the ftrengtb of Ships, 350
Din City defer ib’d. Its Origin, 584. At-
tack'd by the Portuguefes, 587
Din 1/land taken by the Portuguefes, 593.
Befteg'd and reliev'd, 594. Reliev'd again ,
598
Divifton of Limits between Dutch and Por-
tuguefes /V* Ceylon, 619. Among great
Men in Ceylon, 68c
Dog frights the Indians, 99
Dominick Correa deferts to the Indians, is
made General , and is murder’d , 677
Drake’* Foyage to the Weft-Indies, and
Aftions there, 169. His Foyage to the
Road of Cadiz and Terzera Iflands, 170.
Hk Foyage with Hawkins to the Weft-
Indies, where both dy’d , 182. /do wo*
vain-glorious , 399. //i* Foyage round
the World, 400
Drink, which moft proper in India, 660
Droe the North fiar, 879
Droepeti’* Origin and Qualities , order’d fa
be ftripp’d , 881. Deliver’d by Kifna,
£oe* /«fo Exile, &:c. 882
Dutch Admiral refufes to take in his Flag to
the Englifh, ) 242
Dutch that have pafs’d the Straits of Ma-
gellan to little purpofe, 402
Dutch their Character, 445, 559
Dutch Ship taken by Stratagem , 497
Dutch Fleet in danger of being loft, 644.
Sails to Cochin, 645
Dutch invited into Ceylon by the Emperor,
703
Dutch Envoys fent to Ceylon, have Au-
dience of the Emperor, 705. Their Pro-
ceedings and Difpatch, 706
Dutch Squadron fent to Ceylon, 710. Ar-
rives there , ’ 711
Dutch Ships fent to Goa, 730
Dutch Ships arrive ■ at Suratte, 73 r
Dutch General prefented with an Elk by the
Emperor of Ceylon, 735
Dutch receive Intelligence of Portuguefe
Succours coming to Colurabo, 748
Index to the Third Volume


Dutch Prifoners eight fmt out o/Columbo,7s 5
Dutch Interpreter efcapes from the Empe-
ror of Ceylon’* Camp , 784
Dutch pafs the River Alicaon, and beat
the Portuguefes, 789
Dutch march from Manaar to Jafnapatan m .
Their Paffage over the River , they take
that City , 794. They worfi the Portu-
guefes at Sea, 797
E.
of Cumberland’* Expedition with
7 176. Hvs next Expedition
with 8 Ships , 179. Again to the Coaft
of Spain, iBi. /its Voyage to Puerto
Rico, 207. Hvs Defign , £nw
T'pyage, 208. Exception againft hvs
Enterprise, 209. Takes the Town and
Fort, 211
Earl of E flex’! Voyage to the Iftands to lit-
tle or no effe <7, 189
Earl of Northumberland'! Voyage, 299
Eaftern Churches deny the Supremacy of the
Roman See, 641
Eaft-Indies, the beginning of the Englifh
re fort thither, 382
Edgar King of England maintains the Pre-
rogative of the Seas, 297
Election of an Admiral , hvs Qualifications,
and Duty , 330
Elephants of Ceylon, how taken and tam'd,'
825
Emanuel Diaz deceives the Portuguefes,
678
Emeralds, 6^6
Emperor of Ceylon joins with the Cinga-
lefes, 701. Dies, _ 7 02
Encouragement to Merchants in Chile, 10
Engagement between the Emperor of Ceylon
and the Rebels, 697. Betwixt the Dutch
and Portuguefes, * 788
Englifh that attempted to pafs the Straits
of Magellan, and fail'd, 402
Envoys fent by the Emperor of Ceylon, view
the Place where the Dutch General wan
MPd , 748
Epiftle of Sir Will. Monfon to all Sea-Offi-
cers and Sailors ,
Error of Tranfmigration of Souls among
jews and Druids, Si 5
Errors of the Earl of Northumberland’*
Voyage, # 3°°
Errors m the Attempt upon Argier under
King James the Firft , 2%6
Errors in the Expedition to the JJle of Ree
under King Charles the Firft , 266
Efperanca River in Chile, 2,4
Eftimats of Ships for carry ingbtfh abroad, 1 ) 30
Eunuchs y divers forts of them, 834
Euxine Sea, 4 2 4
Examples of the Goodncfs of Generals towards
Examples of great Men who have refus'd to
take bafe Advantages of their Enemies , 310
Excellent Paftures in Chile, 25
ExceJJive Cold, a remarkable inftdnce of it ,
, _ 114
Exhalations and other Meteors 1 2
Exhortation to pay Ship mony, and contri-
bute to curb the Infolencies of the Dutch,
28 6
Exigence of Cod , 830
Expedition of the Englifh to Portugal, 174
Expences at Sea how to be fav'd , 3r z
Exploits of Portuguefes at Adem, and
other places , 395
Eyou River in Chile, 20
•- t
F.
FAffories of Dutch in India, 60 9
Famous Robber taken , 721
Fafts of the Indian Pagans, their Original,
897
Feather Beds not us'd in India, 661
Fertility of the Coaft of Chile, 34
Feftivals of tl>e Mogul, 578
Of the Malabars, 896
Fight at Sea with Ships how to be manag'd,
3S
Fight of Galleys, 359
Fights betwixt the Dutch and Portuguefes,
707, 719
Figueira routed, and Confternation on that
account at Col umbo, 76%
Fine Ifland in Chile, 5 1
Fire Engine of the Turks burnt by the Por-
tuguefes, 594
Firejhip burnt , 596
Fi[h on the Coaft of Chile, 35. In Gey-
ion, Sl6
How to be vented in England, and
abroad, 522
Fi/hermen taken by the Dutch, 739
Fijhing upon feveral Coafts to the Southward ,
531, To the Northward , 532. In
Newfoundland, 533
Five Portuguefe Galleys engage three
Dutch Vejfels, 788
Flag, the Ceremony of wearing it, and Vfe
made of it, * 364
Flamencos Birds in Chile, 39
Flavio Amalphy firft found the ufe of the
Load ft one at Sea, 340
Fleet of England in the Downs, and nothing
done , 195
Fleet of noo Sail under King Edward the
Third , 281
Fleet of Portuguefes caft away , 728
Fleets that have been loft, 'and that have
pafs'd the Straits of Magellan, 5 9
Fleets of Spain and England at Sea , 178
Florida, 415
Flying Fifh , 3 6
Flowers in Chile, 7
Index to the Tbird Volume


Forbifher’i Expedition at Sea, 18 3. A~
gain to Breft, p.
Formofa Ifland its miferable Condition, 6 34
Fort built at Cananor by the Portuguefes,
623. Refug'd and diflrefs'd by the In-
dians, but not taken , 624
forts of the Chilenians, 70
fountains , Springs and Brooks in the Moun-
tains of Chile, 15
Fountains of Chile, 27
Four principal Officers of the Navy , what
fort of Men they mull be, 327
four remarkable Diviftons of Time, 845
Francolines Fowl in Chile, 39
French debar'd fifhing on the Englilh Coafi,
239
Fruits of Chile deferib'd, 7
Funeral Feafls of Malabars, 837
G.
cdefcriPd, 7*7
I Gallegos River in Chile, 24
Gallinafas Birds in Chile, 38
Galleys , how they may be us'd in England,
361. Their ufe in time of War, 3 62 .
The befl place in England for them, 363
Reception at the Samorin’s Court,
625. Hvs Speech to that King, and his
Anfwer, 616, Gets aboard, his Letter and
the King's Anfwer, 617
Ganges River, 66 1
D. Garcia new Governor of Chile lands at
Quinquina, 150. Lands on the Conti-
nent andraifesa Fort, beats the Indians
that attack him f is reinforc'd, gives Cau-
polican Battel , and beats him, 151.
Raifes another Fort, and again beats the
Indians, 152
Garcia de Noronha Kiceroy of India, a-
grets with Mamud, 595
Garzolas Birds in Chile, 39
Gafca fentfrom Spain to quell the Rebellion
in Peru, 4 °9
Geldria Dutch Fort, 6 53
Generous Wine in Chile, 8
Georgians,
Giants among the Chilenian Iflanders, 78
Gigantes River in Chile, 24
Goa, its Air, taken by Albuquerque, 603.
Loft again, 504. Retaken, 605. Its
Inhabitants , scß. Dow to be block’d up
by Sea , 609. Blocked up by the Dutch,
6 10
God of Love kill'd by Ixora, 899
Goga City , # 574
Gold great plenty in Chile, 8. More of it
than Silver, 9
Gold Mines in Chile wrought, 13 2
Good Rowers among the Chilenians, 79
Goodnefs of the Ifle of Ceylon, 790
Gors an Indian Weapon , 887
Grain of Chile, 7
Granate Stone , P-657
Grand Pilots his Duty , 325
Snows, 26
Great Oppofition made by the Indians of
Chile, n 6
Great Rains, 2\z
Greeks, 639. They us'd five days before
Eafter to excommunicate the Pope, 641
Cuafcar Inga taken Prifoner 9 109. Is put
to death by order of Atagualpa, 1 rc
Guafco River in Chile, 1 g
Guafco Port there, 33
Guayac Tree in Chile, 47
Gjtnneri Duty, 326. His
Gunners of Sconces their Duty , 326
Guzarat, its Extent > 573. Traffick, s74
H.
HAneraed Governor of Harcipore caw-
fpires with the Portuguefes, is routed,
tryd and executed , 695
Hanuman gives an account to Ram 0/ Sy-
tha, 852. Flies into Ceylon, hears of
Sytha, his AClions in Ceylon* 863
Haraties Serpents in Ceylon, 720
Harbours of England, 37 6
Of Wales and Scotland, 377
Of Ireland, 378
Of Holland, Zealand, Flanders, 4 66
Of Bifcay, Galicia, Portugal, 469
Of Algarve, Andaluzia, Barbary,47o
Hard/hips the Spaniards endur'd in Chile,
114
Hartflone , 657
Havana Port in Cuba,
Hawkins and Forbilhert Forage to the Coajl
of Spain, 177
Herradura Port in Chile, 33
Hebrides lflands,ufe to be made of them,ss%
Hgh ways in Chile of great note, 1 1
Hogs Stone , 657
Holy Kings Ifland , 5 6
Holy Week celebrated in Chile, i 29
Holy Water, 650
Honduras, 416
Horfes in Ceylon, 825
Houfckeeper at Chatham -Hill his Duty , 32#
How to work the Sun at Sea , 34Q
Hulft, Dutch General , in danger of being
kill’d, 738, His Journey to the Emperor
of Ceylon, and Reception, 742. De-
signs to return, 743. His Entry, 744.
His Audience and Speech *, what pafs'd
betwixt him and the Emperor 5 Honour
done him, Proportions made by him , 745*
Is prefented with a Garter , takes leave,
returns to the Camp ) views the Works, is
wounded , 746. Dies. His Character ,74B.
Fiw CVpi carry 7 d to Gale, 748
Hunting and Hawking in Chile, 40
Hunting in Guyo, 61


Husbandmen and Fifhermen the Support of
Commonwealths, P-537
Hyacinth Stone, 656
.y
I*
JAcobltes, 63 9
Jafnapatan City taken by the Dutch, 794.
Its Cafile fummon'd, 797. The Befieged
endeavour in vain to get Provifions, 797.
Is furrender'd, and repair'd, 798. Its
Defcription, bow gain'd by the Portu-
guefes, 799
Jamaica, 4 1 S
James Botelho his bold Enterprise, 592
Janiere ufurps the Crown of Ceylon, 671.
Seeks Ajfiftancefrom the Portuguefes,s72.
Is murder'd, 67 5
Jafper Stone , 656
JaZy of Diu joins in Confederacy with Mir
HaZem the Turk, 584. Plays the Hy-
pocrite with the Portuguefes, and is dif-
cover'd, 588. Fortifies bimfelf, 589
Jeresjanda refolves to revenge Ragia Kan’*
Death, is fixteen times worfted by Kifna,
875
Jerafingh the Giant kill'd , 887
Jews and Romans married young, 81 6
111 Management of Spanifh Ships, 349
lllondi Matual, 804
Impaling of Indians, 713
Imperial River in Chile, 20
Imperial City in Chile founded, and its ft-
tuation, * 140
Imperial Prince of Ceylon’* Death, 588
Increafe and Traffich of Goa, 508
Increafe of Cowherds fabulous, 887
Inderfiet makes ufe of a bewitch'd Arrow,
854
India, its Bounds and Divifion, 565
Indian Stratagem, *43
Indian Pagans look upon it as a great Blef-
Jtng when their Souls are not to enter into
other Bodies, 873
Indians conceal their Treafure from Foreign
Nations, 14. All of them fur pric'd at
the fight of Horfes, 109
Indians of Chile their Courage and Bold-
nefs, 67. Their State Affemhlies, man-
ner of their meeting, and choice of a Ge-
neral, 60. Their Nobility examin'd, ib.
Their Temper, Make, they are good Horfe-
men* their Numbers and Habitations,
Houfes, Fidelity to one another. Furniture,
71. Their Diet and Bread, 72. Their
Clothing , Finery , Dancing, Wind Inftru-
ments, 73* I heir way of keeping ac-
count, their Hardinefs againfi Wet and
Cold they bear Wounds better than the
Spaniards, 75. Their Complexion • they
have no red Hair, / peak Spanifh per-
fettly, bear their years well, live tong,
have ( good Teeth, cannot endure to leave
their own Country , 7 6. Their Mar*
ridges, how they manage Foligamy , 77.
to War without Pay , wr/
brave, and want Iron, 78
Indigo, 658. Its Goodnefs. Indigo Lau-
ra. Trial of it. Good made in Coro-
mandel, 959
Inhabitants of Jafnapatan their Qualifi-
cations, 8l 2. Their Tices, Si j. Their
Superfiition, Lawyers, Fhyficians, Sur-
geons, Barbers, Weavers, Painters, and
other Fldndicraft *, 818
Infotencies of the Dutch, 240. & fequent.
553
Infpiration on the Clergy and Laity in
iofing, 131
Infiance of a Flood , 808
Inftruttions from an Admiral to his Tice
and Rear Admirals and Captains, 332
Inftruttions given by the Earl of Lindfey,
333
Inftruttions given by a Spanifh Admiral,
353
Inftruttions to Gafpar Figueiro, 719.
Hvs welcome at Col umbo, 721
Infiruttions for a general Affault upon Co-
lombo* 723, 753
Intelligence how to be got in Spain, 218.
How in the Tercera Ifiands, 219
intolerable Cold on the Mountains of Chile, 26
Introduttion to the Earl of Northumber-
land’* Toy age, 292
To Sir Tho. Drake’* Toy age round
the World, 399
Inventor of the Sea-Needle, 89
John Emperor of Ceylon drives the Por-
tuguefes/row Gannoor, 670. Is routed,
and retreats to the Deferts, 672. In a
Beggars Difguife, burns Houfes in Can-
dca, but vs forc'd to fly, 6 74. Is re-
fior'd to hvs Kingdom, and marries 'Queen
Catherine, 676. Revenges the Death of
hvs General, 677. Falls fick, and dies \
hvs Qharatter, 681
Joris Spilbergen comes to Ceylon, 679.
Hvs Funeral , place of Burial , hvs Corps
burnt , 690
Journy in fearch of Mines remarkable, 14
IJland of Providence, 451
Ifiands of Chile, 50. Of Salomon, 53. Of
St. Laurence and St. Stephen, 5 6. Of
Angels, 5 6. Of Chile and the Straits of
Magellan peopled by Savages, 79
Ifie of S. Paul, 53
Ifie of Pat agones, 5#
Itata River in Chile* . 1 9
Juan Ferriandez Ifiands of Chile, 51
Ixora Indian God deferib'd, his Bignefs, 832.
Attack'd by the Mummies, reliev'd by
Viftnum, his Children, 835. A Story of
him, 8 36. His Daughter deferib'd, 840
Index to the Third ,


K.
KEeper of the great Stores of the Navy
hit Duty, p. 324
Kidney Stone, 6 57
King of Aden forc'd aboard a Turkifh
Ship, and bang'd, doo
King of Panane joins with the Portuguefes,
appears at Court and it accus'd of Trea-
fon, committed to Prifon \ hit Trial, Sen-
tence. Execution, Behaviour, Speech and
Succeffor, dpi
King of Cochin robs a famous Pagode , 841
King of Calecut how he purifies himfelf, 895
King's Merchant belonging to the Navy, hit
Duty, 325
Kifna an Indian God, hit Parents, .867.
Hit Birth, BdB. Hit Deliverance , 86p.
Turns Shepherd , 870. Produces a Pearl-
Tree, makes fport with Women, it chofen
King ? 873. Breaks the flrong Arrow of
Mottera, kills ten Courtiers, an Elephant,
two Generals, and Ragia Kan, and routs
a whole Body of Men, 875. Is under
the Tuition of Brahma, 876, A Mira-
cle of hit, 877. Delivers an Elephant
from a Crocodile, 879. Delivers idooo
Captives, cures the Leprofy, 880.
Hit Finger ty'd up with a piece of
Gold Stuff, 881. Vifits a poor Brah*-
man, 884. Bleffes him with Riches ,
goes to the Court of Derliende, 885.
Fifits the World to purge it from the
wicked. Bleffes Sindera, comes to Suda-
newa, routs feveral Kings, leaps over
the Walls of Mottera, 88d. Afcends
up to Heaven, 888
L.
LAdies River in Chile, 21
Lakes in Chile, 29
La Riga River in Chile, 18
Lampa River in Chile, 19
Lands in the fame Latitude with Chile, yet
differing in Temperature, 3
Langotama River in Chile, 18
Language in which the Eaftern Chriftians
wor/hipGod, d 4 i
Lafcarines Soldiers in Ceylon, 720
La Serena, vid, Coquimbo.
Lavapie River in Chile, 20
Lautaro, an Indian, Page to Valdivia, his
Treachery, and Speech to hit Countrymen,
144. He enters and facks the City of
the Conception, 147. Tnkes it a fecond
thne r 148* Marches to befiege Santiago,
is kill'd with an Arrow, 149
Laws of K. Richard the Firfi for punifhing
Offenders at Sea , 367
League betwixt the Dutch and Samorin,d27
Leagues to anfwer a Degree , 340
Length and Breadth of Europe, Alia, and
Africk, 421. Of Days, 34 o
Letters from the Dutch General totheFke-
roy of Goa, £l5. From K. John of
Portugal to D. John de Caftro Ficeroy
of India, d 4 d. From the States Gene-
ral to the Emperor of Ceylon, 683.
From Prince Maurice to the fame, <584.
From the Governor of Palicate to the
fame, 705. From the Dutch Admiral
to the fame, 710. From the Emperor
of Ceylon to General Hulft, 721, 725,
73i* 732, 73d, 741, 743, 74 p 5
7SS? 7Bo* From the Dutch Ge-
neral to the Governour of Columbo, and
his Anfwer, 722, 732. Intercepted by
the Dutch, 72 6, 729, 734, From a
Spy at Goa, 730. From the Dutch
General to the Emperor of Ceylon, 734,,
74* i 743* Prom the Governor of Co-
lumbo to the Emperor of Ceylon, and
from the Citizens of that place to him,i%%
Levo River in Chile, 20
Lewis the 2d K. of Hungary loft through
his Suhjefts refufing him Supplies, 295;
Lewis IJland, what isrequifite for planting
of it, 525. Its ufe, 558
Lewfon (Sir Richard) his Foyage to the
IJlandsto no purpofe, ipd. His Foyage
to Ireland, where he defray'd fome Spa-
nifh Ships, 197. His Foyage with
Sir Will. Monfon to the Coaft of Spain*
198. Takes two^Eafterlings, 199. At-
tacks a Carrack and eleven Galleys at
Cezimbra, 200. Tikes the Car rack,lol.
Burns two Galleys, 202. He and Sir Will
in the Narrow Seas, where is no ACtkn s
* led
Lima in Peru founded by Pizarro, its Si-
tuation delicious, it never rains there , 112
Limari River in Chile, 13
Lion.fifh, 35
Lift of Portuguefes Ships for relief of Co-
luriibo, 7 29
Lope de Souza Governor of Diu, 595
Lord's Prayer in the Malabar Language,66%
Lucayos Iflands, 414
M.
MAchis, or Indian Doctors, their Cha-
racter, 5.
Madraftapatan Town, #53
Magalhaens, or Magellan firft attempted to
fail round the World , 3 pd. His Death ,
397
Magellan offers to difeover the Strait of his
Name, 101, Sails upon his Dtfcovery,
his Men mutiny leaves the Mutineers
afhore, paftes the Straits in 20 days , is
kill'd, IG2
Mague Tree in Chile, 48
Mahometan Religion, 58a


Mahometans in India, their Circumcifion,
Wafhing, Sabbath, Mofques, Orders, Te-
nets of Religion , 581. Their Paradife,
Rules to attain Eternal Blifs, Manners
and Cufloms, Tokens of being marriage
able. Marriages, 582. Their Divorces,
Food, Habitations, Clothing, 583. Their
Burials, 584
Mahomet 7 * Origin, 580
Maiz or Indian Wheat, 72
Malabar Language an Introduction to it,
663, Rules for learning of it, 66 4
Malabar its Extent and Rivers, 611 . The
Climate, Seafons , Product, 622
Malabars Enemies to the Portuguefes, 573
Mallangam, 801
Mallua River in Chile, 19
Mamadabath City, 574
Mamud King of Canabaja, 593. Is re-
puWd at Diu, 597
Man an Indian Weight, 612
Manaar Jfland taken by the Dutch, 790.
Reafons of its Name, its Situation, Chur-
ches, Pearl-fi/hery, Inhabitants, who fpeak
Portuguefe, 792. Has plenty of Fifh,
one fort peculiar, 793
Manegues Shell-fifh in Chile, 34
Manipay, 802
Mankind naturally hardy, 80
Manner of travelling in Cuyo* 62
Manner of living of the Dutch in India, 66b
Manufactures of the Iflands of Chile, 5 1
Mapocho Valley defer ll9. Inhabited
by 80000 Indians* 120
Mapocho River in Chile* 18, 28
Marcellus Bofchouter fent to Ceylon, 684.
His Treaty and Agreement with that Em~
peror, 689. He defires to be difmifs’d,
685. Has great Favours beftow'd on him,
687. Is fent Embaffador, comes to Ban-
tam, thence into Holland, engages with
the Danes, fails for Ceylon, and dies,
699
Maronltes, 640
Marriages and Chrijlenings celebrated with
much Pomp in Chile, 1 3 1
Marriages of Pagan Indians, 899
Martin Alfonfo de Souza attacks Daman,
takes and demolijhes it, 59 1
Martires River in Chile, 24
Mafcarenhas Governour of Diu, hvs Speech
to his Souldiers, 59$
Mafquerade of great Expence, *3*
Mafs of Silver brought from America, 89
Maflers Attendants of the Navy their Duty,
, 325
Mafter Shipwrights their Duty, / 325
Mafiing of a Ship, 34^
Mafulipatan,
Matthias de Albuquerque his Bravery, 768
Maulc River in Chile, 1 9
Mayktti, Sot
Maypo River in Chile, 2 8
Mayten Fountain in Chile, 28
Mecca, . - 424
Medicinal Herbs in Chile deferib J d, 6
Medicinal Fountain in Chile, 29
Medina Sidonia Duke, Admiral of the Spa-
nifli Fleet , engag'd by the Englifh, 171
Mediterranean Sea, 4.2 4.
Melchites,
Men how to be preferv'd in fight, 358
Mendoga River, 24
Meffengers of the Navy their Duty, 327
Metaquito i?i<z;er in Chile, ip
Method for Converfion of Indians, 790
Military Exhortations of the Chilenians, 70
Mine blows up 100 Portuguefes j another
300 Indians, 598
Minifters beheaded by the Chinefes, 634
Miraculous Spring , 799
Miserable ft ate of the Portuguefes, 595
Misfortune of D. Diego Lobo a Spanifh
Captain. 202
Mocha City deferib’d, its Encreafe and
Trade, 575. jfo Riches, Thfcfe 0/ the
Portuguefes Jkre, Water and Fuelfcarce,
' 576
Moguls Letter in favour of the Dutch, 5 72.
i/w Coart Religion, 580
Mogommal Church, 808
Mona ft cries of Men not fo full a/s Nunneries
in Chile, 129
Monfon (i’/V William) ibw Dedication to
hvs eldeft Son , 163. Z/w Dedication to
kvs Friends, 168. Z/is Voyage to the
Coaft of Spain, 204. Attempts a Ga-
Icon, but vs repuls'd , 203. Hi* Far ewe I
to the Gentlemen be dedicates hvs Book to,
231. i/w Epiftle to his fecond Son, 233.
H'vs Epiftles to the Commanders in Queen
Elizabeths Wars, 236. The fever al Ca-
pacities he ferv'din at Sea , 239. His
Juftification, Ibid. Hvs Voyage about
England, Scotland and Ireland, 246;
His contrivance to draw the Pyrates with-
in his reach . His Reception , being taken
for a Pyrate, 248. He takes a Pyrate,
251. His Opinion of the Expedition of
Cadiz under K. Charles the Fir ft, 258.
His further Opinion upon the News of
taking a Fort there, 265. More about
keeping of Cadiz, when taken, 166. His
Epiftle to Projectors, 453. Several Paf-
fetges of his Life, 502. & fequent. His
Epiftle to the King, 512. To the Gen-
tlemen that read his Difcourfes, 513
Mouffons when they blow in the Eaft-Indies,
340
Moors obftruft the Portuguefes fettling as
Calicut, 626
Moorilh Keffel gives .Advice of the Condi-
tion of Gale,
Mortality of Cattle ? 81 o


Mount Libanus inhabited by the Maronites,
p.
Mules in Chile, 9
Mulipatto Church , 808
Murder committed in the prcfence of the
Mogul, 577
Martilla Tree in Chile, 48
Mufter of Ships and Mariners in England
in Q. Elizabeth’* days , 279
Mutiny among the Portuguefes, 598
Mutiny at Columbo againft the Governor,
787
Muxillones IJland of Chile, S°
/
N.
NAel Stream, a Whirlpool on the Coaft
of Norway, 535
Naicks Indian Lords , 654
Nainativa IJland, 809
Naires, 644. four hundred of them flain,
632
Naked People in a very cold Country, 78
Nalloras, a Tribe of Indians, 817
Nalour, 803
Names of Ships left by Q, Elizabeth at her
Death, 214
Of Ships Sir Will. Monfon ferv'd in, 251
Of Timber and Planks in a Ship , 345
Of the Governours of Hifpaniola, 414
Natural Obedience of Chilenians to their
Caciques, 78
Navacouli, 804
Navy fet out by K. Charles the Firft, an.
1635* 2 90
Negapatan City mafterd by the Dutch,
Proteftant Religion there, miferable con-
dition of it, 6$ 1
Negumbo taken a fecond time by the Dutch,
the Portuguefes attempt in vain to re-
cover it, 787
Neftorians, 639
New Guinea IJlands, 53
New Granada, 41 6
New Viceroy of Goa, 790
Nile River, 425. Itsfourcc, 661
Nindundiva, or Ilha das Vacas, 809
Nombre de Dios, 41 6
Nuble River in Chile, 20
Number of Chriftians in Jafnapatan, 810
Nunho d’ Acunha goes for Goa, hisßen-
devouz, affaults Diu in vain . His De-
pgn again[t Bazaim, 590. t Attacks and
takes it, 591. Sails again for Diu, is
vifited by Badur, 592. His Death, 595
O.
OAth, manner of taking it by the Pa-
gan Indians, 900
Obfervations on the Harbours of England,
Scotland and Ireland, 378
Obfervations of William Monfon, 221.
On the Dutch, T ’ ‘ 298
, v ■ • ■ 1 „ ■ ,r:
ni St V eS 'u • 77, 838
Offer of exchanging Fnfoners at Columbo,
754
Office of the Admiralty in England, 318
Office of the Mafter of one of the Kings
Shit s -) 339
Officers of the Admiralty their Allowance,^! 9
Officers in conflant Fay belonging to Ships,
320
Officers of the Admiralty, their Duty, 321
Officers Affiftants of the Navy , their Duty 7
324
Ojos de Agua, a remarkable spring in
Chile, l 6
Ondewijl, 802
Onor Kingdom , cn
Ophir faid to be Hifpaniola, 8 6
Opinion concerning the ftrength of Columbo,
. . 785
Opinion of Malabars concerning Cow-dung,
896
Order of Battel of the Chilenians, 70
Orders of the Dutch relating to their Affairs
at Suratte, 557
Given by the Dutch General at Cochin,63 5
Orellana, 419
Origin of 14 Worlds, 89 1
Of the firft Faft-day of the Indian Pagans,
897. Of the fecond and third, B9B. Of
the fourth, 2 99
Overfight of the Ship the Saphir, 78*
Ourature firft Ifle of Jafnapatan, 808
Outrages committed by the Lafcarines, 784
Oyfiers of Chile, 34
P.
PAcifick Sea , 31
Pacudo Port in Chile, 33
Pagan Temple plunder'd, 644
Tagodes in India, their Revenues and Ke.
verence paid them, 893
Palicate City and its Road, 653
Palm-Tree in Chile, 47
Pan reprefented with Horns, his Flute and
Panther's Skin, 132
Panama on the South Sea founded , 103
Panane Town, 625. Attack'd by the Por-
tuguefes, and taken , 627
Paneteripou, 802
Panuco, 415
Paper affix'd to a Tree, charging the Dutch
with breach of Faith , 783
Paragua The in Chile, 47
Parameter ft Pe degree, 842
Paretiture, 80 6
Parras 50 Pound weight in India, 717
Parreas, a Tribe of Indians, 817
Particulars concerning the Eaft-Indies, 392
Parvas, a Nation, their Converfion, 545*
Their conftancy in the Roman Religion
Parvas, a Tribe of Indians, 817


Paftene, a Genoefe, fent from Peru with
Succours to Chile, 133, His joyful Re~
ception, 134. Is difappointed of a fe-
cond Supply in Peru, and returns to
Chile, 135
Patamars, what they are, 74°
Fatchiarapalle Province of Jafnapatan,
807
Patragali Pagode in Cangranor, 841
Fatragali’j Adventures, 842, 843. Re-
venges her Plusband's Death, 844
Pattapatane City, 574
Paxaros River in Chile, 24
Faxaro Carpenter© the Woodpecker in Chile,
39
Paxaros Ifland of Chile, 50
Peace with Spain after death,
237
Betwixt Portuguefes and Badur, 59 1
Pearl-fifhing, 99,648
Pearls of a prodigious bignefs, 99
Pedegree of the King of Ceylon, 668
Pegus a fort of wild Rabbets in Chile, 44
Pejerreyes Fifh in Chile * 37
Pengu Free in Chile, 48
Penguin Iflands , 5 6
Penna Town, #54
People of Chile very patient , 75
People of 14 forts , 89 [
Pepper, 611
Pericos Shell-fifh in Chile, 35
Paricoces Rats in Chile, 44
Perfecution of Chriftians at Manaar, 79 2
Perfian Gulph, 4 26
Peru how nam'd, 86. Its difeovery firfi
attempted , 1 o 6
Petapouli Town, 6 54
Peterroa River in Chile, 19
Petition of the Dutch to the Great Mogul,
566
Philip made King of Candea, poifon'd by
hi/s Brother, 6 7 0
Phlebotomy, or bleeding in Chile, 72
Picos the Papagayos Shell-fifh in Chile, 3 5
Pilot and Coafter his Office i 34 *
Pimienta Harbour, . 5S
Pjnguedas Birds in Chile, 39
Pizarro left with only thirteen Spaniards
and a Mulatto in the Jfiand Gorgbna.
Is reliev'd by a Ship from Panama, 107.
Returns to Panama, and thence into Spain,
then perfues his Conquefi of Peru, 108.
He revolts, 135. His AClions, 405.
His Death , 4 oS
Places imp affable in the Mountains of Chile,
1 5
Places taken by the Englifh in g. Elizabeth’*
time of little or no confequerice, 2 11
Plantations of the French, 44 6
Plants in Chile, 5
Plato’* Advice to Governouxs , 3°7
Poanque Rivet in Chile,
Poelepolay Churchy p. 807
Pongardive Ifle, 809
for Dominicans and Jefuits to
confer Degrees in Chile, 127
Porca Kingdom, its Air unwholefom, Factory
of the Englifh there, 643
Porcupines, 82 6
Porters at the Shipyards their Duty, 326
Portland Race, 53 6
Porto Novo, 652
Portuguefe Difcoverys in Africk and India,
390
Portuguefe Fleet at Chaul engages Mir Ha-
2.em, 585. Advife their Admiral, who
rejeCls it, is caft upon a Rock, and kill'd,
58 6
Portuguefe Fort .tear Diu; 592
Portuguefe Embaffadors at Batavia, 6io.
Their Reception, Credentials, Age, Train ,
their Audiences, 611. Fourth Audience ,
612. One of them returns to Goa., 6 14
Portuguefe Fort at Calicut hefiejrfi, 628.
Reliev'd, ‘ 619
Portuguefe account of the Siege of Co-
iumbo, 761
Portuguefe Squadron gets clear of the Dutch,
785
Portuguefe Merchant comes into the Dutch
Camp, 74°
portuguefes receive Succours, 597. Their
way of living in India, their Character
and Diftempers , 608. Maffdcred at Ca-
licut, and their Death reveng'd, <528.
Side with the Zingalefes, 659. Commit
great Jnfolences in Ceylon, fall out with
Janiere, refolve on his Death, 674. They
leave Candea, and are routed, 676,
March to Jafnapatan, and are beaten, <588;
They furprize the Emperor's Camp, offer
peace , 69 7. Are rejected,propofe a Truce,
march towards Candea, furprize 500
Candenefes, 698. EreCt a new Fort ,
rout the Malabars, build two more Forts,
make Peace with the Emperor, 700.
They take the Field, plunder Badule, 701.
Are attack'd in their March, and routed,
702. They make War on the Emperor ,
are beaten, make Peace, 702. They en-
deavour to render the Dutch fufpc&ed in
Ceylon, 707. Are put to a great Non-
plus, march towards Candea, take and
burn it, are routed by the Cingalefes,7ll.
Rout the Gingalefes, 777* Force their
King to pay a yearly Tribute, which is
refented, fwprizje Colombo, are hefteg'd
in the Fort , 77 6. Make a vigorous Sally
and raife the Siege, 779. Defeated at
Sea, I*9
Poverty, falfly pretended, to refufe K, Charles
the Firfi Supplies , 294
Poverty of England caused by the Dutch,
555


Pran, an Indian Spy, forms a Dcfign againfi
the Spaniards, but it turns to the ruin of
fib Indians, p. 153
Praflaram the Son of Reneca, 855. He
endeavours to kill Ram, 858
Precious Stones in Ceylon, 828
Precedents of Princes defending their Prero-
gatives on their Seas, 284
Pretences for not relieving of Columbo, 77 6
Princes, Embaffadors , and others tranfported
by Sir Will. Monfon, 250
Prices taken in the War in Q± Elizabeths
time, 112
Prizes taken, how divided, 338
Procejfions in Chile, their Magnificence , 128
Prodigious Ranfom, no
Proje& for the fecurity of the Englilh Navy,
452- To prevent the French landing in
England, 457. To prevent the French
and Dutch Fleets joining, 458. To war
upon Holland, 461. To get Poffeffion of
the Jfland of Wakerland, 464. T 0 make
War upon Spain, 4 66, To increafe 200
Sail of Ships, 470. For fettling in Gui-
nea, 471. Of a Hoy age to the Ealt-
Indies to fettle there, 474. To intercept
the Ships of Cambaia trading to the Red-
Sea, 479. Of the Genoefes, to bring the
Eaft-India Commodities to Mufcovy by
Land , 480. To come to Tombagatu
and Gago in Africk for Gold, 480.
For a private Voyage to Guinea, 482.
To trade to the Welt-Indies with the
King nf SpainS Confent, 482. To ruin
Spain with the Affiftance of Holland,4B7.
For the Spaniards to annoy the Dutch in
their Trade, 490
Promocaes River in Chile, 19
Propofition of Sir Will. Moufon to the Par-
liament concerning the Navy, 380
Protefiation of the Dutch General againfi
the Portuguefes in India, 616
Provinces of Jafnapatan, 799
Provifions to maintain the King’s Labourers,
and the Labour they /hall be put to Winter
and Summer,
Punifhmcnts at Sea, 330
Puntagale befteg’d by the Dutch, 715.
7 aken by Storm, 716
Puren Lake in Chile, 20, 29
Puffer's Duty, 32 6, His Office, 347
Pyramid ff Heads, 7 \ 1
Pyrats in the North of Scotland and Ire-
land, 247
Pyrats of Malabar, 621
Q,
QValities of the Natives of Chile, 75
Quantity of Fijh vented m other Coun-
tries, 516
§fiar term afters at Sea their Office , 348
Elizabeths Death, 229
Queen of Cochin taken by the Dutch, <532
Quenavadi, Indian God, his Original and
Defer iption , 83 6. Is cafirated. How
worjhipp'd *, difference betwixt him and
Superbennia, 837. He curfes the Moon,
839
Queule River in Chile, 21
Quickfilver and Lead little us'd in Chile, 8
Quillota Port in Chile, 33
Quintero Port in Chile, 33
Quirpele a Creature , an Enemy to Snakes ,
824
Quinquina Jfland of Chile, 33
Quito Province temperate , tho under the
Line, 85
Quiveling what it was, 830
R.
RAgia Kans endeavours to kill Kifna,B7o,
871. His further Dejigns againjp
Kifna, 875
Raja Singa Enemy to the Portuguefes, 668.
His Meffdge to D. ]ohn Emperor of Cey-
lon, is defeated, dies. His Murder of
Pagan Priefts , and Repentance , 671
Raja Singa diffatisfied with the Dutch, 780,
782. His Anfveer to their General, 784.
He treats with the Portuguefes, his Ele-
phants feizdd, 787. Makes a Diver-
sion in favour of the Dutch, 788. His
Troops routed, 789
Raja Seltraarfum vifits the Brahman, is
plentifully entertain d j his People defeated
by the white Cow , 857
Rainbow how it appears on the Mountains of
Chile, 12
Rale mo River in Chile, 20
Ram the Story of him , 858. How he got
his Bride Sytha, 859, He travels along
the Ganges, 10000 Horfemen kill'd by
him, 86o # He and in quefi
of Sytha, he kills Bael, 802. Meets with
Sytha, 866. Returns home, 867
Rama, orSirißama, 859
Rammanacoyel Ifland, 649
Ramon Fountain in Chile, 27
Rapel River in Chile, 19
Rapel Lake in Chile, 29
Rapid Rivers in Chile, 1 5
Rapid ‘Tides, 98
Rates for Seamens Wages , 278
Ratification of a Truce betwixt Dutch and
Portuguefes in India, 615
Rawan transform’d into a Stag, 860. Is
(hot by Ram, 26 1. He carries away
Sytha, and places her in a Carden in Cey-
lon, 862. His Obftinacy, his eldefi Son
jlain , he fecks for AJft fiance by his Bro-
ther, 865. His laft Sacrifice, he it flam
by Ram, and bis Wife married to his
Brother, 866
RawanV Sifier in love with Lekeman, 860


Rawan’* Brother comes over to Ram, 865
Reafons again fi Salomon’* having dtfco-
ver'd America, 88. For not attacking
the Spanifh Ships in Ferol, 193. For
King Charles the Firffs not refenting the
Wrongs offer'd by the Dutch fooner, and
for fetting out his Fleet an. 1635. 289.
Againfi the India Voyage anfwer'd, 475.
Of the Dutch for continuing the War with
the Portugnefes in India, 609. Why
the Maiabars made War upon the Por-
tuguefes, 623
Recital of Captains who were instrumental in
the Conqueft of Chile, 137
Recloma a famous Indian Lady, 22
Red Sea, 424
Rebellions on the Dutch Enterprise upon
the Canaries, 484. On the ill manage-
ment of the Englilh with hfpett to Hoi-
land, 554
Reinforcement fent to the Dutch Fleet near
Tutecorin, 754
Religious Digreffion of Ovalle, 101
Religious Worjhip , magnificent and cofily in
Chile, 127
Religious Worfhip bow perform'd in Jafna-
patan, 810
Remarkable Cures perform'd by Chilenian
Doctors, 5
Remarkable Spring , 81 o
Remarks upon the Trade of India, 575
Remedies againfi Serpents Stings, 827, 829
Reneca kill'd and reviv'd , 85 6. Burns
her felf with Siamdichemi’* Corps,whence
the Cuftom of burning the dead , 857
Report of Pigmies, 80
Reproof of the Spaniards CoVetoufnefs , 95
Refemblance betwixt Animals in Chile and
in Europe, 4
Refolutions of the Chilenians, 114. Of
Elizabeth’* Council to make a defen-
five War againfi Spain, 222, How to
hinder their landing, and fight if landed,
223. Of the Dutch Council of the Eaft-
Indies, 704. Of the Dutch Council of
War , 7*B
Rich Mines difeover'd, 1 5
Riches of Chile, 8
Riches of Peru not believ'd in Spain, IcB
Ridiculous Opinion of the Brahmans con-
cerning the Figure of the World, and its
Magnitude, 892
Riode Mendoza, 17
Rlofin fondo in Chile, 24
River of Plate difeover'd, the Virtue of its
Water, its fall, 100,420
Rivers of Chile, ‘ 17
Robbers puniftid , ?8$
Rochemy, a Virgin, defign'd for Kifna,
her Love to him , Jhe it deliver'd by hint,
878
Rock of Turky Stones in Chile, 119
Roupic its Vtilue, 570
Rubies , 6^ 6
Rudder and Sails of Ships to be carried afhoro
at Mocha, 576
Rule to know the Age of the Moon , 340.
To know the Burden of a Sbip, t 34 6
Rumecan /lain, . 599
Rumenftadt, 593. Quitted by the Per-
tuguefes, 594
Ruffians, <539
S.
SAbaio, hvs Death , 603
Sadraftapatan Tbnw, 653
St. John’* Piwr, 24
S. John de Puerto Rico, or Boniquen, 414
S, Thomas the Apofile's arrival in India,
hvs fever al Toy ages , one of bis Miracles,
637. Another Miracle , hi* Death, <538
S« Thomas’* Town, <553
S. Vincent’* Port iw Chile* 33
S. Vi&orian’* Pmr, 24
Salt Rivet in Chile, 17
Sa/f /oMHd ow # Horh m Chile* 30
Salt and Cask for fifhing, 527
Salutes at Sea bow to be regulated , 368
Samorin Sovereign of Malabar, 611 . //is
Zto/jr, 625
Sandal, or Sander’* Tree in Chile, 47
Sandwich, the People bafe and ill affefted ,
241. Advantage the Dutch may take
of it in a War with England, 242.
More of their Viilany 0 244
Santa Marta, 414
Santiago City Capital of Chile defer ib'd,
its Conveniences , a noble Street in it , 120,
Its Town-Houfe , 121. Church of S. Do-
minick, Francifcans Convent, Jefuits
Church , 122. Its Government, Court of
the Royal Audiencia, 123. This Court
of great Advantage to the City , 124.
Its Foundation , Riches , Militia., 125. ft*
2/4/f Increafi and Trade, 12<£
Saphirs , <55(5
0/ Chile, 30
Sea-Coafis , Port* and Havens of Chile, 32
Sea-Wolves, or Seals , 35
Sotf* beyond the Ocean difcoDerd , 424
Seafons in Chile, 4
Scbald de Weert cowo* to Ceylon, chjfor*
#ith the Emperor, invites him aboard,6so o
Speak * too boldly, which is the caufe of his
and his Companions Death, <sßo
Sebailian Cabot hi* Difcoveries, 445
Sebaftiari Cano, Spaniard, the jfr/fc th*#
/tfi/’d rotmd the JVorld , 397
Se#* iw the Baft, 639
Security to England, 468
Serpent-Catcher, 828
Serpents in Ceylon, 827
Serpent-Stone, $57
Sevaldo Jflandi, 5(5
Index to tbs Third Volume


Several Sea-Engagements betwixt Fortu-
guefes and Dutch, 797
Sheathing of Ships , 346
Sheep of Chile, 44
Ships of the Bi/hop of Placentia loft in the
Straits of Magellan, 59
Ships built by K. James and K. Charles the
Firfl, # 277
Ships built in Spain from 159 c to 1600,
35 1
Ships burnt and defray'd by the Portuguefes
at Diu, 587
Siamclichemi murder'd , 857
Siege of Cochin rais'd, 633
Siege of Batecalo, 712
Silveira Governor of Diu prepares for his
Defence , 5 94
Simplicity of the Indians, 94
Siri Rama, 859
Skirmifh betwixt Portugueies and Dutch,
80 6
Slaughter of Giants , 863
Small-pox, the Indians opinion about them,
840
Snakewood , its ufe, how firft difeover'd , 824
Snow on the Mountains of Chile, 13
Soboral Ifland of Chile, 50
Solar taken Prifoner , 593. His Treachery,
595. He attacks D iu, 596. Js kill'd, 597
Solyman lands and attacks the Portuguefes
at Diu. Retreats , 594. Renews the Siege,
attacks the place , w repulfed , 594.
Treachery with the King of Aden,6oo
Sovereignty of the Seas of England, 282.
Sowtfc Sea, remarks on its Navigation, 3 x.
When firft heard of, and its Riches, 96.
Its Difcovery continu'd, and its Ports and
1/lands, 99. Difcover'd by Vafco Nu-
nez de Balboa, 405
South- Wind mo ft favourable in Chile, 30
Spain, how to have been ruind by a Fleet, 75
Spaniards take Atagualpa’i Ranfom, and
put him to death , 11 o. Drawn into an
Ambufh through Covetoufnefs, 134. Bea-
ten a fecond time by the Araucanos. Fly
from the City of the Conception, 147
Spanilh Fleet loft in the Straits of Magellan,
S 9
Spanifh Ships fent fafe from Dover to Dun-
kirk in fpite of the Dutch by K . James
the Fir ft, 238
Special Duties of the Officers of the King's
Ships at Sea, ‘ 336
SpilbergV Observation of 25 Ports in the
Straits of Magellan. He vs affiaulted by
the Indians, 32
Springs extremely cold , 16
Spies bang'd, 73 1
Stars of Chile, 41
<sLwo/Portugal tfH.1625. p. 259. Of the
Canaries, and Tercera Iftands, 260. Of
Andaluzia, Sevil, and the Straits * 262
State of the Weft-Indies, 263. Of Ire-
land and Scotland, 379, Of the Har-
bours in France, 460
Steward and hvs Mate their Office, 348
Stone-Bridg 100 Leagues long acrofs the
Sea, a Fable, 864
Story of a Chilenian, 75. Of a Pilot faid
to have dy'd in the Houfe of Columbus,
90. Of Sir Will. Monfon, and a Por-
tuguefe at Lisbon, 498. Another of
Sir Will, at Villafranca, 501. Of two
Fir at s, 537. One alluding to that of
Sampfon, 864. Others , 502, 503
Strange Fifth in the Welt-Indies, 533
Strange Efcape, 771
Stratagems to be us'd at Sea, 492
Straits of Magellan and S . Vincent, 54
Succefsful Sally, 598
Succejfton in the Kingdom of Calicut, 625
Succours fent into Chile, 133. Their joyful
Reception , 134
Sudden change of Air, 12
Sugar-Sea, 837
Summons fent by the Dutch into Columbo,
and the Anfwer,' 750
Sundecouli, 804
Supplies fent to the Dutch in Ceylon, 789
Suratte Citty, 5 66. Defcription of it, 572.
Its Trade , 573
Surgeon of the Navy bis Duty, 327. His
Office, 348
Surveyor of the KiOuals of the Navy his
Duty, 325
Snflufter and Derfiende play for a Crown f
881
Suflufter goes into Banifhment, 882. Prays
to Kifna, is heard, 884. His Sacri-
fice, ' 88 6
Swabber and Lier thar Office, 348
Syriack Language propagated dlßorae, 631
T.
TAgataguas Lake in Chile, 29
Taltales Birds in Chile, 38
Tambamme Church, B©B
Tea how prepar'd, 660
Tegnapaton Town, 652
Telipole Church, 800
Teno River in Chile, 19
Termapatan City , 62$
Thorn-Bufthes in Chile affording plenty of
Fuel, 4
Three Portuguefe Frigats taken by the
Dutch, 782
Three forts of People , 854
Tierra del fuego on the Magellan Straits t
Time of fifthlng to the Northward, 524
Tinguiritica River in Chile, 19
Tirepoplier Town, 652


Titles given by the Portuguefes to Perfons
ferving in India, 394. Of the King of
Ceylon, 667. Of Dukes and Earls in-
troduc'd in India by the Portuguefes, 66 7.
Of the Kings of Achem and Siam, 579
Toadftone , 658
Token River in Chile, 21
Tondy on the Coaft of Coromandel, 6 30
Tongoy River in Chile, 18
Topas, the Son of a Portuguefe and an
Indian Woman , > ' 717
Toms of Portuguefes in the Ealt-Indies,
394
Trade to Africk and Afia, 440. Toother
parts nearer England, 442. To Turky,
443. To Rulfia, 444. Of the Red-
Sea, 573
Trddes to be advanc'd by Eifhing , 523
Trangebar, a Danilh Fort, 6 52
Tranfmigration of Souls believ'd in India,
893
Treacherous Defign againft the Dutch at
Jafnapatan difcover'd , 798. The Trai-
tors executed, 799
Treafurer of the Admiralty hvs Duty , 322
Treaty betwixt the Portuguefes and Cinga-
lefes foon broken , 777
Trees always green in Chile, 4
Trees of Chile, 4 6
Trevancor Kingdom , 645
Tribes of Indians, 817
Trinqueneraale, 818. Strengthen'd with
additional Fortifications, 81 9
Truce betwixt Dutch and Portuguefes in
India, 6 17. Betwixt Spaniards and
Dutch, 683
Tumbez difcover'd, 107
Tunny Fifth in Chile, 3 6
Tutecorin taken by the Dutch, 648. Its
Climate , 649
Two brave Exploits of Portuguefes, 58 6
V.
VAldivia conquers Chile, 118. Purfues
hvs Conqueft, 134. Marches to Peru
to afiift the King's Forces, 135, Is
vi&orious, and returns to Chile with a
Supply, 1 3 6. Purfues hvs Conqueft , 1 38.
Strengthens hvs Garifons, deftgns a Viyage
for Spain, 141. Marches againft the
Araucanos, engages them, 144* Is ta-
ken by them, and kill'd, they make Flutes
of hvs Bones, H 5
Valdivia River and Port in Chile, 21
Valdivia City in Chile founded , a
Fort ereCled, *4*
Valparaifo Port in Chile, 33
Vanarpone, - B°3
Vander Meyden fucceeds VlulSl at General
at the Siege of Columbo, 748
Van Teylin 5 * Letter about the affairs of
the Dutch at Suratce, 567
Variety of Waters diverting, 16
Vafco Nunez firft fees the South Sea, and
purfues the Difcovery of it , 97. /* be-
headed, 98
i&rte 0/ firft Conquerors of Peru,
111
Vaypin Ifle, 631
Venetians trading in England, 442
Venezuela, 419
Viceroy of India how declar'd by the Portu-
guefes, 394
Victuals carried to Sea , 521
Villagran marches to revenge Valdivia’*
Death, and comes to a Battel with Lau-
taro, 146
Villa Rica City in Chile founded, and its
Situation, 141
Vinne Lamantia rebels againft Raja Singa,
668. Comes to a Compofition with him ,
vs betray'd and murder'd, 669
Violent Tempo ft, 739
Vifiapour Kingdom fub]ed to the Mogul, its
Limits, 602. Its King willing to attack
Goa, 608
Viknum’* Defcent and Refidence, wears a
Print on hvs Breaft, hvs Wives, 843. Is
ten times transform'd, 844. Is Mafter of
the World , 854
llkecuefte Root in Chile, 34
Vngrateful Return, 13 3
Vniverfity and rare Wits at Cordova in
Tucuman, 100
Vnfuccefsful Attempt of the Dutch, 634
Voyage of Danes to the Eaft-Indies, 699
Voyages jet out by and what
Profit they turn'd to, 315
Voycas Birds in Chile, 39
W.
WAddemarache, 806
Wannias Country , 793
War with Spain refolv'd on under K. Charles
the Firft, 258
War with Scotland how to be manag'd, if
they proceed in Rebellion, 31 1. The fame
/ how to be done on the Weft of Scotland,
313
Waranni, 804
Warlike Ornaments of Chilefes, 70
Warrant-places granted by the L. High
Admiral , 3 2^
Wa/hing of the Indian Pagans, 893
Way of regiftring Events in Chile, 74
Wealth and Strength of the Mogul, 578
Weapons a ftrange fort , - 82
Wefterwold comes before Batavia, 712
Whales on the Coaft of Chile, 35
Whales and fever al forts Fifties,
534
“ White Wine in Chile, 8
'• Wives of the Nairos flip off all their Clothes
in dancing, 838
Index to the Third Volume *


Wild Corns in Chile, 46
Wingurla a Fattory of the Dutch, 6oz
Winter and Summer at once in tarts
of Ceylon, 794
Wife Repartee of an Indian, 99
Women in Chile make the Bread, 72. Their
Behaviour at Feajls, care of their Huf-
bands and Drefs, 73. They hate Head-
Drejfes and Paint, 74. Their hard Edu-
cation, 75. Their manner of mourning,
78
Wonderful Prefervation, 133
Worlds, two mdifcover’d, befjdcs- the four
known, 422
X.
XAverius ( J.Francis) his Speech, Death,
Body mcorrupted, Tranfportation to
Goa, 607. Hhgoing to the Indies, and
Coming among the Paruas, 64%
Y.
YAnaconas, n >bat they are, u*
Yarmouth Men build Ships to fell to
the Dutch, - l9
Touth of Chile their Education, 70
Ysbrand Gotsken’f account of hh Nego-
tiation, 739. He vs fent to the Empe-
ror of Ceylon,' his , 753
2.
ZEmbre Lake, 42 j
Zenobia 9ueen her CharaSer, 30 ?
Zenu IJland , 4l g
F I N 1 S.
Index to the Third Volume.












