

A.
TREATISE
ON
COLONIAL BUILDING STONES,
HEAD AT A MEETING OF THE
VICTORIAN INSTITUTE OF ARCHITECTS,
(July 18th, 1859.)
BY
J. G. KNIGHT, ESQ.
PRESIDENT OF THE SOCIETY.
MELBOURNE:
Printed at the Office of the “Australian Builder,” 9, Collins-street, w.




COLONIAL BUILDING STONES.
In submitting the following brief Treatise to the notice of the
profession and those who take an interest in disclosing the re-
sources of the Australian colonies, I regret being obliged to
state at the outset that mv personal investigations in the
Southern hemisphere have not extended beyond Victoria; so
that in the remarks I am about to offer upon the building stones
of the neighboring colonies I can merely record my opinions as
derived from observation and experiments made upon such ma-
terials as have been imported into Melbourne. It is not unlikely
thar I may yet have the opportunity of visiting some of the
places from which these samples have been procured, and in the
event of my doing so, the importance of the subject will per-
haps justify my recurring to it on some future occasion.
I trust it may be considered pardonable egotism if I presume
to take a little credit to myself for having aided in developing
the constructive elements of building in this colony ; but the
suggestions I have been enabled to offer would have tended to
no practical improvement had they not received the hearty con-
currence and support of an influential officer of the Govern-
ment. Captain Pasley, the gentleman I allude to, has at all
times exhibited the greatest anxiety to promote the discovery
and manufacture of superior productions for building or other
industrial purposes, and has exerted himself to obtain the mean?
whereby such materials could be properly tested, and their pro-
duction encouraged according to the degree of merit they mar
be found to possess.
It is now four years since a circular was issued bv the Com-
missioner of Public Works, inviting samples of various build-
ing materials, as well as specimens of artistic and mechanical


skill; and, 'although it may be smc *
brilliant to exhibit, either m“ erthekss a fact that many
resulting from that appea, persons, till
great improvements have been effe , , the
then unknown, have had their talents brought to light by
agency I have just h a comme ndable anxiety on
Subsequent acts also tend to snow a u • se our
the part of successive Governments to foster a the
resources in £»> *- the
discovery of ahi st-class si , „ materials, are
erection of a museum for testing and blli di „o
strong proofs of the importance attached to the art
building stones which are known to exist in this
colony are basalt-locally known as bluestone Js.
slate stones, sandstones o various V, is the
Basalt is spread over a large area of well
most abundant of all our materials. The i is un .
known to need any technical d f arcb itectural
questionable, but its suitabi ity or w # tice j have
pretension is generally doubted. } result of my expe-
been a great friend to bluestone, but and
rience has somewhat altered my opinio
I an. now inclined to the belief that it is tof
edifice where the design embiaces
architectural embellishment. bluestone beyond its
I fear there is a disposition In Me ibourne,
capacity, to produce arch ' eC ‘" in WO rking delicate
thousands of pounds are almost was
mouldings upon this material, such M com .
being .scarcely visible. av ® 1 ' fa i lin g into such miS-
mittal of this error, but hope to f t 0 spe nd £lO
takes in future, for I hold it to be ■ „ mic h,nent which does
worth of labor in working a moulding or 1 io nate
not pay for the outlay m gratifying the I P a
extent. We attach a certain idea o beauty «»
particular moulding, whic eau > (he lay 0 f light and
— p» fc of bluestone destroys the proper


=S=rit:rrcs=;
r-Sfet
X^SSSms
3^~SS2S
r;:=sHa^
”r—^=^r s ;^
::: e P e 9 t wiU be found to be less affected hy time and
, r’tban those which ate foe the
My principal Parliament I have already
external ekvatio- o< the Hje» « the color of
given in the foim r production of those ordinary ef


tion of architectural details should produce a feeling- of satis-
faction or pleasure in the mind of the observer proportionate
to the amount of the outlay incurred, then I say that ornaments
wroug-ht in basalt will not come up to such a standard of com-
parison ; and, under these circumstances, the expenditure of
large sums of money in attempting- to delineate minute features
is a waste of capital and a misapplication of the abstract forms
of beauty in architecture.
If the known durability of bluestone is to be regarded of
greater moment than any objections to its color, let us use it
with discretion ; let the treatment of the orders be simplified to
suit the material; and although such an innovation would de-
tract from the acknowledged standard of correctness, the loss
in this respect will be compensated by the saving in cost effected
through the omission of those enrichments which show but
vaguely on such a gloomy stone.
Granite of good quality abounds in many parts of the
colony; it has, however, been but little used, owing to the
great cost of working it for ornamental purposes. Quarries
have been opened at Gellibrand’s Hill, near Brqadmeadows,
and at Mill Park, the estate of the Hon. Henry Miller, about
three miles off the Plenty road. It can also be obtained by
water carriage from Corner Inlet, Mounts Martha and Eliza,
and from the You Yangs, by means of a short tram-road to
the Geelong Railway; the latter would probably be the
cheapest source for supplying Melbourne. It is not, however,
to be supposed, with the present price of labor, that granite
can be much employed. The eost of putting good work upon
this material is something enormous compared with bluestone,
and for the same description of workmanship the rate is about
two and a quarter times more for granite; and comparing the
labor on granite with the Bacchus Marsh or Harley freestones,
the former is four and three quarter times dearer than the
latter.
The most prominent specimens of granite building in Mel-
bourne are the Government offices in William-street, the
pilasters of the Town Hall, and portions of Prince’s Bridge.
The stone for these works was procured from Gellibrand’s Hill,
near Broadmeadows. Most of it appears to have been taken


from or near the surface, which is commonly called grass-rock,
and none of the works mentioned exhibit the material in a
very favorable light—they present a somewhat rusty appear-
ance, and in some instances the original color of the stone is
altogether destroyed by metallic oxydation. It is not at all
impossible that age may have a similar effect upon the more
recently erected examples these consist of the arcaded
portions of some houses in Gertrude-street, Collingwood,
known as Granite-terrace, the material of which is from the
quarries of Henry Miller, Esq,, on the Plenty; and the
columns at the entrance to Messrs. Thorpe’s premises, in
Collins-street west, from the quarry at Gellibrand’s Hill. The
plinth of the New Custom House is also of a species of granite,
syenite, from Gabo Island (to which my remarks on oxydation
will not apply). This material is exceedingly hard, and, on
inspection, it will be seen that, without expending an extra-
ordinary amount of labor, it is impossible to produce a lair
and even surface upon it, and, of course, more difficult to
form channels, sinkings, or mouldings. Even in cutting the
ordinary rustications, you may note that, the angles of the
chisel being speedily worn off, the channels are worked more
round than square. The same remarks may be applied to all
kinds of granite. Labor must not be stinted, and if finely-
wrought faces are required, the cost of production will neces-
sarily be very high. Most of the colonial granite have a
strong resemblance to those obtained from Cornwall, in Eng-
land, which are distinguished from those of Scotland by
having their constituents more unequally divided j the peculiar
fitness and greater durability of the Scotch granites for building
purposes are principally owing to the even and regular distribu-
tion of the particles of which these plutonic rocks are composed,
Specimens of colonial granite are set up in the back elevation
of the Museum for Building Materials, and a few are here
submitted for your inspection.
The clay-slate stones of the silurian formation next deserve
a brief notice. The samples which have been brought under
mv personal observation are from the neighborhoods of
Templestowe and Kilmore. Both are exceedingly hard,
compact, and closely laminated; in color a dark blue, and in


general appearance resembling- the Caithness flagging imported
from Scotland. The extreme toughness of this description of
stone, and the great difficulty of cutting it across the planes
of bedding, render it unavailable for general building purposes.
It is, however, exceedingly well fitted for street flagging,
steps, lintels, or other similar purposes. Applied as “ random
coursed work/’ it would be found effective in ecclesiastical
architecture as filling in between freestone or brick dressings.
Some of this kind of work is exhibited in the back elevation of
the Museum for Building Materials, and to which I would
invite your attention.
I now come to the most important part of ray subject—viz.,
a description of the sandstones and limestones usually
employed for building purposes, as well as those more recently
discovered, which have not yet been practically tested by time,
and are still the subjects of speculation and experiment.
It would appear that, in the early days of Melbourne, even
prior to the gold discoveries, all parties were not quite satisfied
with the appearance of bluestone. Several buildings were raised
with a sandstone, principally obtained from a quarry on the
Saltwater River, near the Melbourne Racecourse. The stone,
however, had but little to recommend it for general use, being
very irregular in its composition, as well as defective in eolor.
In manv parts of the colony sandstone was obtained in the
neighborhood for local wants, but no great effort appears to
have been made to find a substitute for basalt. The employ-
ment of sandstone in Melbourne, for any building of architec-
tural pretension, is of recent occurrence. Amongst the earliest
works may be mentioned the Union Bank, and Supreme Court-
house, built of stone from Geelong, but of inferior quality to
that now quarried at Barrabool Hills. The first named build-
ing was prudently painted, and appears to be in good preserva-
tion, but the latter is now too far gone to be benefitted by such
a precautionary operation.
The only colonial freestone at all extensively employed, ex-
cepting that now brought from Bacchus Marsh and Barley, has
been used at Geelong. The stone belongs to the carboniferous
formation, and the best quality is obtained from the quarries
of Messrs. Holdsworth and Firth, in the township of Ceres, on


the Barabool Hills. It is to be regretted, both for the
character of the stone and the durability of many ol the tail -
ings in Geelong, that an inferior material has been frequein; y
Jed in preference to the best stone from Holdsworth and Frrt
quarries. The result of this want of care m selection is no
plainly exhibited, many costly buildings in Geelong giving
evident indications of slow decay. The color of the stone is
not very favorable for architectural display, the prevailing tint
EL a greenish yellow. Nevertheless, the buildings «
Geefong contras, very favorably with those of the city of
Melbourne, the former being sensibly cleaner, ng
freer from the extremes of blackened bluestone *£ te “ d
stucco which pervade in the streets of our own met,o P° '
The Geelong freestone does not, however, appear to have
found much favor beyond its own township, “ d
there seems to have been some doubt as to i s beauty o. dura
bilitv for I find the Bank of \ ictona erected with the tie
steE’ from the quarry of Mr. Bitfield, at Kangaroo Point,
T The an ßarabool Hills stone has been subjected to experiments,
with the following results asßin ,i-
Under the action of sulphate ot soda, a teb* "
Js to that of freezing, the stone has become partially
disintegrated. r o i^nih
An inch cube was crushed byaweigi 0~, '
A scantling, din. x 4in., placed in the position of a beam or
lintel, with a span of four feet between its supports, broke with
it evaporated lOdwt. of the water previously abso.hed.
Skof m Ne:: South Wales «
Melbourne Exchange, the front ot Guce -
15


London Chartered Bank, and the dressings of innumerable
churches, stores, and houses. The stone is so well known that
it is quite needless for me to trouble you with any minute
particulars regarding- it. I would simply mention what I con-
ceive to be its principal defect, viz., the prevalence of green
spots throughout its whole mass. These spots become darker
by exposure to the atmosphere, through the peroxydation of
the iron contained in them; and eventually as the particles of
sand become disintegrated, holes are worn in the stone similar
in appearance to the decay of dead knots in timber. This will
be seen by the specimen I now submit; and to those gentlemen
who may not have noted the defects I refer to I would suggest
an inspection of the stone buildings erected at different periods :
the extension of these blemishes will then be clearly discernable.
The stone in question has given way under the influence of
sulphate of soda, the sample exposed to the solution being
entirely disintegrated.
Its power of resisting crushing is found to be 2,8811 b. on a
cube of one inch, taking the average of three samples.
A scantling, 4in. x 4in., with a span of four feet, broke with
a weight of 2cwt. 3qr. 201 b. suspended from the centre of its
bearing. A 3in. cube, when perfectly dry, weighed 38oz.
15dwts. 12grs.; after six hours’ immersion in water it increased
loz. 4dwt. 12gr.; and followed by 24 hours’ exposure to a
temperature of 60 degrees this diminished to 7dwt. I2gr.
Mr. Johnson’s analysis of the stone gives—
Silica ... ... ... .. .. 96.4
Carbonate of lime ... ... .2
Carbonate of magnesia ... .. .2
Oxyde of iron ... ... .. .. 1.4
Alumina ... ... .. .. .. 1.8
100 parL'.
Its specific gravity is 2.252.
I should mention that the test of absorption has been tried
on the 3in. blocks here placed belore you, and as these have
one end rough on purpose to show the fracture of the stone,
they are not properly cubes, and the weight must not therefore
be taken as the contents of a block exactly 3in. square. This
does not of course affect the matter of absorption, and I only


refer to it so that any gentleman who feels disposed to check
these results may know the data on which they were founded.
Mr, Pitfield, the proprietor of the last-named quarries, has
recently introduced another stone, procured also at Kangaroo
Point, about three miles from the first-mentioned place. Ihe
sample submitted for your inspection was taken off a large
block forming one of the piers of the Museum for Building'
Materials ; and the stone is also to be seen in the dressings and
tracery of St. Patrick’s Cathedral.
I am informed that the original quarry from which the green-
tinted stone has been taken is now nearly worked out, and that
this new quarry has been opened to supply its place. The
change is certainly for the better, the stone produced being
purer in color, harder and more even in texture. One objection
is alleged against it—that large quantities cannot be raised in
thick beds. The stone is closely laminated, so that, if blocks
of great size were required, they would have to be set contrary
to the planes of bedding, which would of course be very inju-
dicious. Should this objection be removed, and it be discovered,
on farther working into the quarry, that masses of what is
called liver rock can be obtained, I should have no hesitation
in declaring that this was the best sandstone yet developed in
the Australian colonies. Its laminated structure, though
adverse to its present employment where large stones are
required, would be advantageous for the production of steps,
landings, and the like, the want of which must have been felt
by many of the gentlemen lam now addressing. The stone is
proved to be harder and less absorbent than the old Kangaroo
Point, and I have no doubt about its withstanding wear and
tear much better than any of the sandstones now in use. On
referring to the tables of experiments, it will be seen that other
samples have more successfully withstood the test of crushing,
but their superiority in this respect is negatived by defects
which will be specified as they come under review.
The new Kangaroo Point stone has been subjected to the
test of sulphate of soda, tried both by Mr. Johnson and rnvself,
and does not yield under its influence. Its power to resist
crushing is 2,9561 b. on a square inch when dry, and 1,9191 b.
on a similar cube after four hours immersion in watei. Its


capacity to carry weight as a lintel, 4in. x 4in., with a span of
four feet, is 2cwt. 2qr. 201 b. A Sin. block when dry weighed
370 z. 15dwt. and after six hours’ immersion in water it increased
loz., and after twenty-four hours’ exposure this diminished to
lOdwc., still retaining lOdwt. Its specific gravity is 2.207;
and Mr. Johnson’s analysis shows its component parts to be
Silica ... ... _ ••• ••• •••
Alumina, with traces of iron .. .. ..
Carbonate of lime ... .. •• •••
Carbonate of magnesia .. .. •*
100 parts.
The third sample of sandstone from Van Dieman’s Land
which calls for special notice is from the quarries belonging to
Mr. Quinn, situate at North West Bay.
This is the stone principally used in the erection of the
Oriental Bank, in Queen-street. A sample is also exhibited
at the Museum for Building Materials. As the stone in the
hank was fixed some time prior to my receiving the specimen
for the Museum I have formed my opinion of the material
from its appearance in the bank,- and so far-as lam enabled
to judge I do not think it at all equal to the stone from Mr.
Bitfield’s new quarry. There is but little difference of color
between the two stones when newly-wrought, hut after
exposure to the weather the distinction is more apparent; in
instance of which, it may be observed that the stone on the
south side of the Oriental Bank is becoming very much
discolored; and, although the chemical analysis of the stone
does not adduce the presence of iron, except in a very small
degree, the action of that mineral is strongly marked upon
many parts of the building, so much so that the columns of
the portico, which are of the ordinary Kangaroo Point stone,
appear to advantage placed in juxta-position to the stone under
consideration.
The material from Mr. Quinn’s quarries is in some respects
superior to the old Kangaroo Point stone, being comparatively
free from the dark green spots which I have already referred
to. It is also harder, and resists the same chemical test
which decomposes the stone from Kangaroo Point. As the
Oriental Bank has been recently erected, it may be worth the


attention of those who feel interested in the production of
improved building 1 materials, to note any changes in the
appearance of this or any other modern freestone edifice, with
the view to add reliable data for our guidance in future
operations.
The stone in question has withstood the test of sulphate of
soda, but not so completely as Pitfield’s new quarry. Its
power to resist crushing is 2,0891 b. on a cube of one inch.
A Sin. cube, when dry, weighed 350 z. lOdwt.; after six
hours’ immersion it increased loz. 7dwt. 12gr., and this,
after 24 hours’ exposure to gentle heat, diminished 12dwt.
12gr., retaining, therefore, 15dwt. of moisture. Its specific
gravity is 2.322, and an analysis shows its component parts to
Silica ~ .. •• ••• •• 97.75
Carbonate of lime ... .. ... ••
Oxyde of iron .. .. .. •••
Alumina ... ••• ••• • ■ •••
100 parts.
The last development of stone from the coast of Tasmania
calls for a passing remark. The specimen here exhibited is
from the Huon River.
Some time ago a strong effort was made to push this stone
into notice, but the material was too bad to be loug benefited
by any kind of patronage. I believe it to be the worst stone
ever brought into Melbourne, and it needs no scientific tests to
demonstrate its worthlessness. The sample I here submit for
your inspection tells its own tale, and adds another instance of
the necessity which exists for the exercise of the greatest
caution in adopting newly-discovered stones without duly
testing them both by scientific and practical processes.
I remember a specimen of this stone being put into my
hands about two years ago, and a wish was expressed that I
would give a testimonial in its favor. I declined doing so,
but did not think it quite so bad as it has since turned out to
be; for it would hardly be credited that many of the large
blocks which were sold on the Melbourne Wharf, perhaps 18
months ago, are now so entirely rotten that they could not be
lifted on to a dray without tumbling to pieces.
I have not tried any experiments on this stone beyond that


by sulphate of soda, which, as might he expected, speedily
reduces it to a state of paste.
I regret that I am not in a position to afford much informa-
tion with respect to the building stones of Sydney or Adelaide.
Freestone is abundant in Sydney, the city being chiefly
built of stone quarried on the site of the property itself. This
gives the capital of New South Wales an immense advantage
over Melbourne, and renders the erection of premises in
freestone as cheap a mode of building as in brick, besides
avoiding the necessity of resorting to external stucco for the
production of architectural effects.
Examples of the character and quality of Sydney freestone
are to be seen in the front of Tennant’s auction-room, in
Collins-street, and the dressings of a building belonging to
the Government, in Bourke-street west, now in the
occupation of the Registrar-General. A specimen block has
been expressly ordered for exhibition at the Museum foi
Building Materials, but it has not yet arrived.
It appears that the stone, like most of its class, does not
retain its original color, but becomes brown in patches, and
in the two buildings I have mentioned it exhibits symptoms of
decay —portions of the cornices, and particularly the dentils,
have lost their original form, and, in some instances the latter
features have nearly rotted away. Not having been in Sydney,
I cannot say whether the stone imported into Melbourne is a
fair sample or otherwise. r Jhe best material is proem ed, I
understand, from Pyrmont, a short distance from the city.
Speaking only of what I have seen, and the evidence I have
collected from those who have visited New South Wales,
although I am disposed to envy the possession of the cheap and
abundant supply of material so readily at their command, I do
not think the stone has sufficient excellence to recommend its
importation into this colony. In addition to freestone, marble
is found in many parts of New South Wales. I have not yet
been able to procure any specimens, but I hope, however, to do
so before the Museum is completed.
Experiments on two samples of Sydney freestone give the
following results The first cube of one inch crushed with a
weight of 2,0001bs , and the second carried 2,457. A Sin. block


when dry weighed 380 z.; after six hours’ immersion in water
it increased loz. 7dwt. 12gr., and being exposed to a gentle
heat for twenty-four hours, this diminished to 12dwt. 12gr.,
leaving 15dwt. of moisture behind. Subjected to the action of
sulphate of soda it was considerably disintegrated.
The few remarks just made upon the stone of Sydney will
apply with little alteration to that supplied by Adelaide. I
submit for your inspection a sample from the Glenwin quarry,
which was forwarded to the Stone Award Committee about
18 months ago; in the course of that short period the material
has exhibited symptoms of decay from mere exposure to the
weather. Many of the tool-marks originally made are now
nearly obliterated. In addition to which, the stone is extremely
variable in texture, abounding in veins as hard as flint, with
soft patches of semi-congealed sand intervening.
Further researches must therefore be made in the sister
colony before the shipment of freestone is likely to rank among
its commercial transactions with Victoria.
Although there is little chance of our being indebted to
Adelaide for ordinary building stone, it has recently produced
a good quality of marble, which for general building purposes,
is not greatly inferior to the celebrated Carara—a name which,
owing to the discovery of the secret partnership existing between
his Holiness the Pope, Mr. Huffy, and myself, has become
familiar to everyone in Victoria. It will be readily seen, on
comparing the Adelaide with the Italian marble, that the
former is more coarsely granular, the crystals being very large,
somewhat resembling quartz. This distinction is more per-
ceptible in the fracture of the stone than when it is wrought to
a fair surface. The cost of working the Adelaide marble would
exceed that of Italy by about one-fourth; but as the quality
and color of the material would not suggest the necessity for
putting such fine work upon it as the Italian marble is capable
of displaying, the cost of the labor (which should be judiciously
expended) upon the material from Adelaide would not exceed
that paid for the best kind of work on bluestone.
Coarse and inferior as the Adelaide marble doubtless is when
compared with that procured from Italy, I think it will be
generally admitted by those who may take the trouble to


inspect the collection of building material at the Museum m
Queen-street, that, so far as color and the appearance of in
structibility me concerned, the colonial marble is super™Jo
any of the stone therein exhibited, the specimens from Caraia
ll 'The onlfbtckß at present received from Adelaide are from
Macclesfield, about 40 miles from the port. The estimated cos
of the stone at Melbourne was 9s. Bd. per cubic &ot-a pce
which would keep it out of the market so far as gene, al build-
in, purposes are concerned. More recent researches have, how-
ever! developed quarries on the property of William Randa ,
Z at Finnis lale, near Rapid Bay, and within two miles of
shipment tor vessels of light draught. The specimens I have
received, and some of which I here present to your nonce- ap-
to be superior to the stone ft om Macclesfield, and t e
proprietor states that it could be delivered in at
Lad. per cubic foot, which is the average price of the free
S T Xpt"; maihle for the face of a building, the great
superiority of the material over ordinary stone renders m
unnecessary to use it in such large scantlings as would be
Therwrie employed. For plain faces, slabs of marble from
one and a half to two inches in thickness, firmly cemented on
“ reugh stone! or brick blocks, and cramped thereto, would
make a° substantial, inexpensive, and handsome front. »
courses of masonry, treated in the above manner, are bu.lt m
the walls of the Museum, and I am fully persuaned that; m _ 50
years' time they will be found sounder and less affected
any other class of material contained in that buildi g.
The color of the Adelaide marble would be considered too
dark for the artistic purposes of the sculptor, ut on
think it will be so regarded by the architect; “ "'oUviate"fdie
good medium tint, and only grey enough to obviate
objection which might with good reason be urged against
geologist, does not think it at
all probable that we shall find marble in large or workable
mal l this colony. We know that
does exist. On the Upper Yarra, and on the Western Ooa ,


there are caverns which contain marble but not of a quality
suitable for building - purposes. There is, however, some
consolation to be derived from the knowledge that marble can
be had within the precincts of Australian federation; and as
no semi-political demonstration has ever been made against the
importation of the thousands of tons of stone which have been
brought over from Van Diemen’s Land (thouga the getting of
freestone from a penal colony would seem to be almost as
infectious a thing as importing Catholicised marble), I presume
the untainted soil of Adelaide might be allowed to yield us
that which it appears we are not likely to obtain within our
own territory.
With reference to the use ot marble I would venture to
make this proposition, that the beauty of such a material lessens
the necessity for artificial enrichment, and that a chaste but
comparatively plain building of marble may be made to equal,
if not to excel, a more elaborate design in ordinary stone, or a
profusely ornate one in stucco; and I will risk this statement,
that the Doric order in marble or granite will strike the
beholder with more surprise and admiration than the most
highly-enriched Corinthian, if executed in common stone.
This reliance for effect upon innate worth is strongly illustrated
in the adaptation of some of our most beautiful woods. A
skilful cabinet-maker selects and arranges his materials so that
their finely polished surfaces may exhibit all the varieties of
color and delicately-pencilled grain to the best advantage.
The choicest materials become practically an enrichment to the
plainer kinds. Take a homely example of this in tlft use of
cedar. How much more satisfactory to most minds is the
appearance of a well-polished cedar door, displaying the
genuine nature of the wood, than is one of painted dea.,
however much its mouldings may be gilded, 01 otherwise
embellished. The eye and the mind are more lastingly grat-
fied, if not so immediately attracted by that which is real
and lasting than by florid and fleeting shams. And as a
beautiful woman loses none of her beauty, at least in the
estimation of the educated, by being uncrinolined and simply
attired, so will a superior material like marble look rich in
itself though used in ever so plain a manner.
c


In speaking thus favorable of marble I would have it
understood that it is because I do not consider a really first
sandstone has yet been produced in any of the Australian
colonies. As compared with those existing in England our
hi i ding stones are greatly inferior. Had we such materials as
the Portland oolite, Craigleith, Bolsover, Park Spring, &c., I
should not then have said a word about marble. However, as
our researches have been very limited, and our experience of
colonial stones but of few years’ date, we may yet discover
something approaching nearer to our taste and requirements,
and it will always be my anxious desire to give every facility
for proving the value of every newly developed material.
The power of marble to resist crushing is very great ; a
cube of one inch was tried at a pressure of three tons without
producing 1 any effect; the testing apparatus was not sufficiently
strong’ to go beyond that weight. A one inch cube of Carara
was also tried with a similar result.
Tested as a beam for carrying weight, a 4in. scantling of
Adelaide, with a span of four feet, broke at lOcwt. Iqr, 111 b.
Its absorption is very little. A Sin. cube of Adelaide gained
sdwt. after six hours immersion, and a similar Cube of Carara
gained 2dwt. 12gr. under similar circumstances. The specific
gravity of Adelaide marble is 2,715, Carara being about the
same, or 2,713.
There is one cause of fear about the color of this marble
becoming more yellow than it now appears. On examining
some of the small specimens from Mr. Randall’s quarry, iron
pyrites is plainly traceable. I have not noticed it in the stone
from Macclesfield, but the cost of carriage from that place
would be a bar to its adoption. Should this mineral be found
to pervade the mass of the marble in the more accessible
locality of Finnis Yale, ail that I have previously said in its
favor must go for nothing. Some sample blocks are pro-
mised us, and when they arrive this question will soon be
settled.
It only remains for me to refer to the building stones of
this colony which have been recently discovered, or brought
into use. In treating of the Geelong and other colonial
sandstones at the commencement of this paper, I wished to


distinguish between the earlier and more recent discovers.
Strictly speaking, the Bacchus Marsh stone is an old dis-
covery it having- been used in the neighborhood some fourteen
years ao-o,but as no steps were taken to develop the quarry till
the offer of the Government reward, it may he better to regard
11 In menthming'the circumstance that it was I who instigated
the offer of a reward of £I,OOO for the discovery of a superior
budding-stone, I merely wish to show that I had no wish to
travel out of the colony either for stone or anything else
a suitable material could he found within it; and whate e
my shortcomings may be, I can at least console wrth the
reflection that I have done as much to promote the self-sustain-
ing power of the colony as my limited sphere of action won
the offer of the reward in question has not realised
alUh was wished for, there can be but little doubt that it
has been productive of more than £I,OOO worth of good. By
the report of the Board appointed to adjudicate upon the
matter it will be seen that eleven samples were sent in oi
comnetition. Of that number, the one which demands our
first attention is the stone from Messrs. Matson’s quarries, near
Bacchus Marsh. The favorable opinion pronounced upon tins
m„ rial “y the Stone Reward Committee, led to its being
. , t rl the erection of the New Treasury, the Custom
Hote id h Crown Lands’ Selection Office Many other
“Tin the hands of private architects have also been built of
g B^ TTial as the best of the specimens
In cnoos g Board, the members of
which had been submßed o the Boa
hood of the quanies, in wu o following para-
been exposed. Their opinion is given m the iollowm* J
B '<MnTard to the most important question of
1 ° Qt tangible evidence exists, and this the
is fortunate that son o . Specimens of the
Board has most care u mill in the string courses to
stone may be seen at Mr. iouu D ,


ft chimney-shaft built nine years since; at the Woolpack Inn,
in window-sills nine years old ; at Mr. Crook’s house, thirteen
years old; the Court House, a house belonging 1 to Mr. Craven,
and the school house, the three latter being recently built. An
examination of these illustrations furnished evidence favor-
able to the durability of the stone. Age has evidently im-
proved it; its hardness has increased, and the angles and
arrises of the masonry at the entrance to Mr. Crook’s house
are as perfect and sharp as on the day when the stone was
fixed.”
As an illustration of the condition of the stone, after four-
teen years exposure, I submit a sample taken from the block-
ing of Mr. Crook’s house. Ido not think you will he able
to trace any appearance of decay or disintegration in this
block; and in testing the crushing power on one inch cubes, I
found the old sample sustained 2cwt. more than a cube from a
recently quarried and better quality of stone.
While I think very well of the Bacchus Marsh stone, and
am in some degree responsible for its do not look
upon it as the heau-ideal of a building stone, nor such a one as
to justify any relaxation of our efforts to obtain a better
material.
The opening of the quarries has developed peculiarities
which were not traceable in the first sample block. An inspec-
tion of the buildings in which the stone is used, shows differ-
ences of color beyond the variation which sandstones usually
display. Another drawback to the economical working of the
rock is, that large masses of debris have to be cleared away to
get at the good working beds, so that the cost of quarrying is
considerably increased. From a return recently made by Mr.
Todd, the Government Inspector at Bacchus Marsh, it appears
that out of 718,175 cubic feet of surface and rock cleared
away, only 31,038 ft. of stone have been sent from the quar-
ries. This waste is nearly equal to a cubic foot of workable
stone out of a cubic yard of rock and rubbish. It is very
probable that this practical difficulty will not be an exception
to the rule of quarrying in Victoria, for if further experience
does not controvert my present opinion, I think it very un-
likely that we shall find in this colony, as in many parts of


the United Kingdom, large masses of compact rock of nearly
uniform quality. I believe we shall meet with our best stone
in reefs more or less surrounded by useless shaley beds. A
great expenditure of labor must therefore take place before the
good parts of the rock can be worked. In formations of this
kind quarrying is rendered both tedious and costly. Unlike
bluestone, every chip of which is marketable, there is no outlet
for the thousands of tons of rubble which arise in the course
of getting to the workable beds of sandstone.
The popular notion, that the further you work into a quarry,
the better the stone will become, does not apply to many of
the geological formations in this hemisphere; for after clearing
away the weather-worn rock, by which I mean that affected
by present causes, the beds near to the surface have, in
many instances, been found sounder and more uniform in
color than those either further into the hill or on a much lower
level.
Apart from the question of cost in quarrying, there need be
no fear about the supply of this description of stone; far be-
yond the property of Messrs. Matson the same formation may
be traced for miles—in the parish of Myrniong, on the Kor-
kuperimel Creek, there is a face of this rock nearly 200 feet
high, and covering a great area. I submit a sample of the stone
taken from this place, and although I do not consider it equal
to that quarried by Messrs. Matson, it is of similar character
and composition.
Although the action of the weather for fourteen years does
not appear to have affected the Bacchus Marsh stone, it has,
like that from Kangaroo Point, disintegrated under the test of
sulphate of soda.
The power to resist crushing is quite as great as could
be expected for a stone of this kind, a cube of one inch carry-
ing 1,9491 b,
Its capacity to carry weight ranks equal to the old Kangaroo
Point; a 4in, scantling, with a span of four feet, broke with
2cvvt. 3qr. 241 b.
A Gin. cube absorbed 2oz. 7dwt. 12gr., after six hours’
immersion; on exposure afterwards to a gentle heat it evapo-
rated lOdwt. only, leaving loz. 17dwt. 12gr. still in the stone.


Its specific gravity is 2.213, and an analysis shows its com-
ponent parts to be —
cr .... 92.7
Silica ... _ ••• ••• oo
Carbonate of lime ... ... •• •• '
Carbonate of magnesia ... .. •• ’ 42
Oxyde of iron ••• •• •• 2 ' BB
Alumina ... ... •• •* ** _*
100 parts.
The stone from Mount Sturgeon, in the Western District,
deserves especial notice, it having been most favorably
mentioned in the report of the Stone Reward Committee.
The opinion therein expressed was founded on the on y
evidence before them viz., the samples forwarded by the
discoverers of the quarry. These samples entirely justified
the strong commendation contained in the report; but samples
of stone, like testimonials to character, are not to be imphcity
relied on, and in this instance the blocks ordered for trial, an
set up in the Museum, have turned out very inferior to the
first specimens. An inspection of the stone, as it is now
worked and fixed, will not confirm the good opinion which a
glance at the small block before you would be likely to produce.
The bulk of the stone exhibits various degrees of hardness;
is costly to work, and much more costly to procure j the
distance from Mount Sturgeon to Belfast being nearly GO
miles, and the road generally a bad one, land carriage would
not be less than 4s. per foot, which is less in proportion than
2s. 6d. per foot paid for back carriage from Bacchus Mars .
the freight from Belfast would be 25., and vessels could not lie
alongside the jetty during stormy weather. All these ex.
charges would, of course, become serious drawbacks to the use of
stone of unexceptionable quality; but as the masonry at the
Museum already indicates the prevalence of clayey veins,
irregular lines of bedding and flinty hardness, these defects,
combined with the great cost of procuring the material, are
likely to keep it out of the market for a long time to come.
Mount Sturgeon has been visited by Mr. Selwyn, who reports
the stone to exist in immense quantities. He also anticipates
that if further researches were made, a more uniformly goo
quality of material would probably be discovered. As X have
had an opportunity of practically testing the correctness of some


of the theories propounded by this gentleman, and have found
them invariably true, I might venture to state on so reliable an
authority, that in the event of the western districts being ma e
more easily accessible, Mount Sturgeon may yet become a
large contributor of the material needful to raise a worthy
Capitol in the Southern Hemisphere.
It would of course be expected that a stone possessing the
hardness of the one now before you would successfully with-
stand any ordinary tests. A cube of one inch resisted a
pressure up to three tons without being affected.
A Sin. cube absorbed only 15dwt. after six hours’ immersion
in water. Its specific gravity is 2.380.
The fine white freestone from Kyneton has not, I think, been
sufficiently investigated; and although Ido not expect that the
further development of the quarries at present known would
lead to the production of an extraordinary good material, it is
very probable that, when the railway is formed up to the
township, it will be found worth while to send down moderate
quantities of this stone for interior work. The fineness of its
texture would admit of its being worked almost as cheaply as
Bath stone. ,
The most serious objection to the Kyneton stone for external
building is, that the iron with which it is impregnated, becomes
rapidly s oxydised on exposure to the weather, and the streaks
of rust thus created appear more glaring and unsightly in
contrast with the almost pure white silica composing the body
of the stone. This defect would, however, oe avoided by
keeping the stone dry; and in such protected situations, for
tracery, capitals, or any description of decorated work, the
Kyneton stone might be employed both with economy and
advantage. ,
It partially yielded under the influence of sulphate of soda,
bat not so much ns Bacchus Marsh or old Kangaroo Point
stones. A cube of one inch crushed with a pressure of
A scantling of din. square, with a span of four feet, broke with
a weight of 2cwt. 2qr. 211 b , which is equal to that borne by
the new Kangaroo Point.
A Sin. cube absorbed loz. 14dwt. 12gr. of water after six
hours’ immersion. Taken out and dried for twenty-four hours


it diminished only lOdwt., leaving loz. 2dwt. 12gr. of moisture
still in the stone.
Its specific gravity is 2.207.
The stone procured within a short distance of the coast at
Western Port, and of which the cube before you is a sample,
attracted considerable attention some three years ago. Its
apparent hardness, density, and strength, recommended it to
the approval of many persons interested in building operations,
and a large quantity was consequently brought into Melbourne.
The supply has, however, long since ceased, in consequence of
the strong symptoms of decay presented by the stone alter a
very brief exposure to the atmosphere.
The principal illustration of the quality of this material is
at the English and Scottish Bank, in Elizabeth-street. Every-
one who has seen that building must have noticed the state of
evident decay exhibited in nearly all parts of the edifice, and
those who have watched the progress of the stone s exfoliation
must, I am sure, feel regret that a design evincing such good
taste and peculiar fitness for commercial purposes, should be
marred by the decadence of the principal material employed in
its construction.
The face of the building in question has been lecently scraped
down, but I am not aware that any attempt was made to arrest
the exfoliation of the stone j at any rate the superficial opera-
tion does not appear to have effected any cure of the disease.
One thing, however, is very clearly shown—that those portions
of the masonry which were rubbed are much less affected than
those which were tooled. Ido not mention this as anextraoi-
dinary circumstance, but rather in illustration of a g'eneial lule,
that a rubbed surface is more lasting, and preserves the stone
much longer than a tooled one. r lhe latter operation is fie-
quently necessary for effect, and to relieve the monotony of
a large smooth surface, but except for such purposes, or with
very hard stones, where rubbing would be too expensive, no
sandstone or limestone exposed to the weather should be tooled.
It is obvious that the process of tooling, axeing, or picking,
must bruise the face of the material, and the stone so acted on
will more readily throw off this skin than one in
which the coarser particles are rubbed down on a plane with the


finer ones; by such process the pores of the stone are filled and
a kind of enamel formed upon the face which tends greatly to
resist the action of the weather and preserve the stone intact.
There is another reason why rubbed stones are less influenced
by exposure than those which are wrought. A tooled or picked
face has a greater water-holding surface, the corrugations
formed by the tool, or the indentations of the pick, naturally
add to the superfices of the stone, besides rendering the surface
more susceptible to atmospheric action. Portions of nearly all
the stones exhibited at the Museum for Building Materials, are
tooled in various ways, not with a view to increase their dura-
bility by such process, but rather to obtain the earliest evidence
of their having any tendency to decay.
Notwithstanding the very unfavorable symptoms indicated
by the bank in Elizabeth-street, and in other places where the
material in question has been used, the stone from the Western
Port district is not condemned by many of its first advocates.
It is contended that the quarry from which the stone was taken
being within tidal influence, the decay traceable at the bank
is owing to the material being impregnated with salt water.
Not being a believer in this doctrine, and my observations on
the effect of saltwater upon stone agreeing with the examina-
tion made by Mr. Snow, the architect, upon the stone of
Point Nepean, both tending to prove that the material under
such circumstances became harder instead of softer, the only
defect being that it would for a long time continue damp, I
have invited Mr. Johnson to investigate the subject, and that
gentleman is now trying some experiments which are likely to
lead to a satisfactory solution of the question. Without pre-
judging Mr. Johnson’s investigation, I may say that he does
not attribute the decay of the stone to the presence of salt.
The following are the component parts of the Western Port
stone: —
Silica .. .. •• ••• •• B *-7
Carbonate of lime ... ... •• 2.5
Oxyde of iron .. .. •• ••• 7.2
Alumina ... ... ••• •• —•
Magnesia, soluble salts and water .. ... 2.4
100 parts,
The stone from Apollo Bay, which is believed to be free
from the objections urged agamst that of Western Port, con-
D


tains the following ingredients:
Silica ... ••• ••• ■” . BiA
Carbonate of lime and carbonate of magnesia, traces
Oxide of iron •• •• •• •*
Alumina . • ••• ••• ' *
Water .. ..
100 parts.
Subsequent to the publication of the Parliamentaiy Repoit
on building stones other discoveries have been added to the
list 5 and as one of these is of an important character, I will
briefly refer to it before concluding my review of the other
stones mentioned in that Report.
The material called Darley freestone was brought under the
notice of Parliament in a joint report, by Captain Pasley
and myself, on the qualities and prices of various building
stones, and submitted the 17th of February last. A second
report, by Mr. Selwyn and myself, was also presented to
Parliament a few days afterwards.
The stone was discovered by Mr. Barbour, a contractor for
some large works over the Deep Creek. The appearance of
the first specimens he submitted for inspection being considered
extremely promising, a further examination of the district was
determined on.
The stone-bearing district is situate on Goodman’s Creek in
the parish of Cormadai, adjoining M‘Leod’s pre-emptive right;
its distance is about five miles from the Ballaarat road, and 38
miles from Melbourne. At present the cost of caniage is 3s.
per foot, but when the roads are dry the price will probably
recede to 2s. 6d. This is a trifle beyond the cost of convey-
ance from Messrs. Matson’s quarries. The color of the stone,
as will be seen by the sample, is a light buff, not unlike the
Caen stone of Normandy —a tint which, I think, will not be
considered objectionable. A sample stone, 11 feet long, is set
up for a pier at the Museum for Building Materials; and a
panel of the same kind of stone, exhibiting various descrip-
tions of workmanship, is placed on the opposite side to the
pier. To these samples I would beg to invite attention as,
from their juxta-position to other stones, a fair comparison can
be instituted; and as Darley stone has been selected for the
building of the Houses of Parliament, it may be well to have
its merits and demerits fully considered. For my own part, I


confess to preferring Darley to the Bacchus Marsh stone ; hut
my admiration is not absorbed in either. Ido not aim at the
discovery of the philosopher’s building' stone, or expect to alight
upon a material of indestructible combinations; but I can
hardly bring myself to the belief that any of the colonial or
intercolonial freestones yet discovered have sufficient excellence
to warrant their adoption in the erection of our national works.
Admitting their comparative goodness, it is not difficult to
refer to other samples possessing much better qualities; and,
for the sake of comparison, I would ask you to examine
the specimens of English stones here placed before you.
The difference between these and our colonial productions
will be obvious to the touch in merely handling the samples ;
and when you have done with them, just turn for a moment to
the small cube of Italian marble, when its superiority over the
best of the English stones will be as strikingly manifest.
In adducing these illustrations I seek only to show the
degrees of comparative excellence exhibited in various mate-
rials, and to point out that, although we have succeeded in
finding a very fair stone within the colony, that better exists
elsewhere ; and this is a strong' reason the fui thei
development of our stone-bearing districts should be encou-
raged. Eor my own part, I shall only use the Darley-stone
until a better one is discovered, and the question of color shall
not bind me when the more important one of quality intervenes.
It is a fortunate circumstance that both the Bacchus Marsh
and Darley quarries are accessible to carriers returning from
the diggings. This reduces the cost of carriage to about
one-half the ordinary price, and admits the stones being sold
at as cheap, if not a cheaper rate than that from Tasmania.
Judging by the texture of the Darley stone, it would not be
expected to stand the usual tests so well as many of the tougher
samples; it has, nevertheless, passed through the various experi -
ments with very fair success.
A cube of one inch crushed at 2,118. A 4-inch scantling,
with a bearing of four feet, carried 3cwt. Oqr. 21b. before giv-
ing way. A 3-inch cube absorbed 2oz. 12dwt. of water after
six hours’ immersion; and after twenty-hours’ drying it
evaporated half an ounce, retaining 2oz. 2dvvt. of moisture. Its
specific gravity is 2.350; and analysis gives—silica, 93.05; car-


bonate'of lime, .55} magnesia, 2.4; iron oxyde, 2.0; alumina,
2 o—loo parts.
The stone has been subjected to the test of sulphate of soda,
and gave way but slightly under its action, the piece experi-
mented on retaining its form, while those from Kangaroo Point
and Bacchus Marsh stones were entirely disintegrated. A per-
sonal examination of the rocks in the district tends to confirm
an opinion in favor of the stone. Nearly all the stone, whether
in loose boulders or in masses of rock standing exposed to the
weather, is perfectly sound at the surface. I submit an
illustration of the condition I refer to. This piece was cut by
myself from a mass of rock jutting out from the ground: it
was covered with lichens, and appears to be free from any
symptom of decay.
I think I have now referred to the principal sandstones
known in these colonies. A few words will do adequate
justice to the limestones, which may more properly be termed
sandstones with calcareous cement; and I will then, in conclu-
sion, briefly allude to a class of colonial sandstones which,
though not suited for first-class work, may yet be found useful
for many ordinary purposes.
Toe only specimens of limestones I am enabled to place
before you are from Cape Schanck, Cape Nelson (near Portland
Bay), Warrnambool, and Point Nepean; and, with reference
to these, I cannot do better than quote a paragraph from the
Stone Reward Report, the tenor of which is fully confirmed
by subsequent experience ;
« In the limestone brought under the notice of the Board
there is one characteristic —viz., a great variation in texture.
Extremely hard and soft patches occur in most of the stones
belonging to this formation, sandholes and veins almost like
flint being found in the same block. This unevenness of com-
position in a serious objection to any kind of building material.
Not only is it liable to speedy decay, owing to its irregular
density, but the labor in converting it is considerably increased.
In working such a stone the mason can never rely on the
effect of a single blow, and the caution needed in dealing with
such a material necessarily increases the cost of conversion.
The tooled specimen submitted by Messrs. Coney and Francis
plainly illustrates the objections above referred to.”


In confirmation of the opinion hel-ein recorded I would call
Y our attention to some samples of the above-named stones,
which were acted upon by the water test for about four months,
the samples being exposed to the sun in the day tune and
placed under the dripping water at night. As lam thoioug hly
persuaded that this, as a single test, is about the most effective
that could be adopted, and as I propose to apply it in a more
systematic manner on the materials at the Building Museum,
I may be allowed to describe its oneration, as stated in the
report before quoted from:
« In order to arrive at an approximate estimate of the capa-
city of the different stones to resist the action of the weather,
a mode of testing by water, originated by Mr. King it, as
been adopted with very satisfactory results. The plan o
operation being extremely simple may be briefly descn e .
Experimental blocks, nine inches long and three inches by three
inches, were cut off the different samples and worked perfectly
smooth, the edges being kept clean and sharp, and the blocks
rubbed equally fair. The stones were then placed in a troug ,
so that three of their four angles were exposed to the action of
the drip. A copper pipe, pierced with fine holes, was fixed
about 18 inches above the trough, and connected with the
service from the YanYean; through this perforated pipe the
water was made to pour upon the stones underneath, m the
form of a shower of rain. This process has been carried on at
nio-ht for the period of four months 5 during the day the
samples have been exposed to the sun and allowed to dry. Ihe
water has not been applied continuously, the stones for two
months having only been subjected to the ordinary influences of
the weather. „
“ Some objection has been taken to the above method on
the ground that the effect of the exposure to the weather
would not be so severe as this artificial rain for 12 out of every
24 hours: but owing to the absence of all data regarding the
history of the materials referred to, it was absolutely neces-
sary to apply a very strong test, in order to arrive at a definite
conclusion within a reasonable time. The aim of this expen-
ment was to obtain the atmospheric influence of several yeais
within the course of a few months; and as it would be
impracticable to await the results to be demonstrated by


Portland,
Ordinary
Kind.
Warrnam-
bool.
Cape
Schanck.
oz.
dt.
J?r-
oz.
dt.
gr-
oz.
dt. gr.
3-in. blocks when dry weighed ..
After six hours’ immersion the
33
10
12
36
10
0
37
0 0
increase was ...
When taken out and exposed to
a gentle heat for 24 hours, the
4
7
0
0
12
12
1
12 12
water absorbed diminished ...
Leaving the following propor-
tions of moisture still in the
0
12
12
0
7
12
0
12 12
stone .. ..
3
14
12
0
3
0
1
0 0
ordinary action of the weather, the necessity became greater
for applying a process of testing' in the most powerful and
concentrated form. Although the application of water by this
method may be severe, it is equally fair upon all the stones
brought under its operation, and its effect upon them shows at
least with some approximation to truth their value in relation
to each other. Some of the stones may be seen evidently
wearing away, while the surfaces and angles of others are not
visibly affected. The Board would therefore be reluctant to
recommend any stone for exposed work which yielded under
such an experiment.”
I would only add that subsequent observations confirm all the
suspicions expressed in reference to the durability of the
colonial limestones. No reliance can be placed upon them, at
least not any of the tertiary formation indicated by the samples
now before you.
The principle works in which colonial limestones have been
«sed are:—The lighthouse at Cape Schanck, built of the stone
'earing that name; the Sanitary Station on Port Philip Bay,
-milt of the stone from Point Nepean ; Christ Church, at St.
Kilda, and Chalmer’s Church at East Melbourne. In both of
the latter works the stone from Point Nepean has also been em-
ployed. A similar kind of stone is used in the Western Dis-
trict; and in many cases precaution has been taken to prevent
decay by stuccoing over the stone. This very necessary expedient
has also been adopted at the Sanitary Station. Since writing the
foregoing, I have consulted Mr. Snow, the architect in charge
of that work, and his opinion fully confirms what I have pre-
viously stated.
The limestones have been expermented on in the usual man-
ner with these results. Inch tubes crushed as follows :


N.B.—The Warrnambool sample had been greatly hardened
by salt water, and was superior to the stone usually obtained.
The stones now remaining to be noticed are, as I just pre-
viously stated, not of a kind at all likely to be used, except as
accessories in building works.
The first sample of this class is from a quarry recently dis-
covered and opened by Messrs. Johnston, two experienced and
indefatigable quarrymen, who have I believe, travelled over
more ground in search of stone than any other men in Victoria.
These persons were the discoverers of the clay-slate flagging
quarry at Templestowe, and were awarded the sum of £5O by
the Stone Reward Committee. That quarry, though very
promising at first, proved like others I have mentioned, to be
too limited for profitable working. Their last discovery, how-
ever, bids fair to be more useful and remunerative. The stone
before you is from Doncaster, about 14 miles from Melbourne,
It is a sandstone somewhat indurated with clay, and appears to
belong to a very recent geological formation, Its color would
not recommend it for architectural purposes, but the large
sample set up at the Museum might not be considered objec-
tionable for ordinary work, while the price at which it can be
supplied—viz,, 4s. 6d. per foot—would in some instances
outweigh any objection to its color. The principal business
done at the quarry is getting scantlings for cills, steps, curbing,
flagging-, &c., the stone being fitted for the last-mentioned pur-
pose ; and although it is not so hard as the Caithness paving,
it is sufficiently strong for general purposes. The footway on
the south side of the W estern Market, opposite the Exchange
in Flinders-lane, is laid with this stone. It is also well adapted
for coreing—lintels or such like things—and we are now using
it for similar work at the Houses of Parliament.
The strength of the stone is proved by the following experi-
ments :
A cube of one inch sustained 3,1631 b. before crushing.
A scantling 4x4 inches, with the usual bearing, carried
3cwt. 3qr. 201 b., when it broke.
A three-inch cube absorbed loz. after six hours’ immersion ;
taken out and exposed to dry for 24 hours, it evaporated |oz.,
leaving |oz. of moisture still in the stone.


Its specific gravity is 2,487. (
The remarks made upon the last-mentioned stone will apply
generally to the quarry at Bulleen, recently worked hy Mr.
Groom, and from which the accompanying sample was
procured. This material, exhibiting various descriptions of
workmanship, occupies a panel on the north side of the Museum.
Other specimens, also from the Upper Yarra District, and
belonging to the same geological formation, are also set up in
the walls of this general repository. None of them, however,
call for any special remark beyond this, that such kind of stone
might be advantageously used for filling in courses between
bluestone stone quoins; a facing of this description would
cost about Is. 4d. per superficial foot, which is something like
a medium between rubble and unwrought ashlar.
The next specimen to be noticed is a sandstone recently
quarried on the estate of Patrick Phelan, Esq., at Keilor.
Its dull greenish hue does not particulary recommend it lor
superior building purposes ; and another objectionable feature
in the rock is the frequent occurrence of shakes and irregular
seams, in the form of minute clayey joints. A block of this
stone, when deposited at the Museum a few months ago,
appeared perfectly sound and homogeneous. Its exposure to
the weather has, however, developed fissures of the kind
have just mentioned in five or six different places. This disposi-
tion to rend asunder by the action of heat or wet, appears to
be peculiar to many of the colonial stones. It is shown in
those from Geelong, Mount Sturgeon, Bulleen, the Plenty,
Kilmore, and worst of all in the unfortunate material from the
Huon River, in Tasmania.
The Keilor stone has been subjected to the usual expenmen s,
with the following results. It gives under the test by sulphate
of soda: a cube of 1 inch crushed at a pressure of 2,4771 b.
A 3-inch cube absorbed loz. lOdwt., after si* hours immer-
sion: taken out, and exposed to dry for 24 hours’ it evaporated
Bdwt., leaving loz. 2dwt. of moisture still in the stone, its
specific gravity is 2,477.
The next samples I have to present for your inspection are
from the silurian rocks. The first was quarried by Mr. Roberts,
of Kilmore, and the second discovered by Mr. Guliett, is


from the di.trict of the River Plenty, about 18 miles from
Melbourne. It is unnecessary to trouble you with many
observations upon either. The first has not been improved by
being turned out of its natural bed, on the Dry Creek, near
Kilmore. It certainly appeared healthier 18 months ago, and
did not then display such fancy colors as the block now presents.
It is, nevertheless, a very hard material, and the district
might yet develope a better one. The stone from the Plenty,
which was sent in competition for the £I,OOO reward, has also
suffered under atmospheric influences. Like the specimen from
Keilor, this block seems indisposed to keep in one piece, while
it displays irregular fissures which did not appear when the
stone was first quarried. It is alleged in its behalf, that the
block forwarded for our inspection, being taken from the
surface, does not fairly represent the quality of the stone. I
shall be glad to find this opinion correct—at present it is only
a surmise! Should future operations in this district develop©
a sounder material, such discovery would probably lead to
its obtaining a market, and as the Yan Yean tramway run*
very close to the quarry, the stone might be brought into
Melbourne at a moderate price. The latter, however, must
not be the paramount consideration, when there is any question
about the fitness or durability of the stone itself, and when it
is further remembered that the amount of labor expended on
working usually exceeds the price of the raw material.
The latest development of colonial sandstone is but a few
weeks old, and the sample here placed before you completes my
collection up to the present date. The last discovery has not
added much to the value of our stock of information beyond
adducing another instance of the little reliance to be placed on
pocket specimens of building materials. The stone in question
is found on the property of Mr. Ingles, on the Wernbee River,
in the parish of Ballan, and was brought under my notice by
Mr. Wakeford, a contractor for some road work in the neigh-
borhood. The specimen first exhibited looked so promising,
and the description given of the quarry was so tempting, that
I started off to Ballan, in the expectation of finding a stone to
supersede the Darley; but an examination of the rocks, which
are classed by Mr. Selwyn as belonging to the carboniferous
a


series, speedily dispelled all my farorable anticipations, the
stone being- full of vents, or “ dries,” as they are technically
termed; so that it would be almost irapossiblejto quarry large
blocks, and still more difficult to keep them entire during- the
piocess of scabbling. You may observe that the stone is very
similar to the sample from Kyneton, except that its texture is
not so fine. Subjected to the usual experiments, the following
results ensued :
An inch cube crushed under a weight of 2,4501 b.
A 6-inch cube absorbed loz, 15dwt. of water after six hours’
immersion. Taken out and dried for twenty-four hours it
evaporated 12dwt. 12gr., leaving loz. 2dwt. 12gr. still in the
stone. The stone yielded but very little under the action of
sulphate of soda, and withstood the other tests in a very satis-
factory manner, and altogether would be considered a superior
material could it be obtained in solid blocks.
Its specific gravity is 2,446, and analysis gives the following
contents—
Silica ... 1M 99,313
Alumina, with traces of iron .. .. ggj
Traces oflime and loss ... ... 1.056
100 parts.
This last discovery brings me to the conclusion of the present
paper. For the sake of comparison I submit some samples of
stone from England and elsewhere: the first is the celebrated
oolite from the island of Portland; the second is called “ Park
Spring,” a fine sandstone from near Leeds, in Yorkshire; the
third is another sample of Yorkshire stone; the fourth is
the oolite Bath stone; the fifth, a sandstone from the neigh-
borhood of Glasgow; and the last, The well-known limestone
from Caen in France.
Experiments have been tried on these materials which need
not here be detailed, as the whole of the data I L have been
enabled to collect will be placed before you in a tabular form.
I will not, therefore, tax your patience with any further parti-
culars. A subject of this kind is not the most enlivening that
could be chosen to descant upon, and so far as the aesthetic
principles of architecture are concerned, my theme is hardly
suitable for the consideration of a learned society. It is never-


theless of some importance, not only to the members of our
profession, but to those who entrust us with the expenditure of
lai •ge sums of money, that we should be practically acquainted
with the nature of the materials proposed to be employed, as
well as possessing an artistic knowledge of the most appropriate
forms in which such materials should be arranged. The latter
is doubtless the greater accomplishment, but is profitless in the
ordinary business of life unless associated with sound judgment
and practical experience. Few men are placed in positions of
greater trust and responsibility than architects and engineers—
the fortune of the capitalist, the prosperity ot public com-
panies, and the savings of the thrifty trader, are commonly
committed to their keeping, and something more is due to
these interests than superficially elaborate architecture without
durability, or engineering triumphs or failures founded on the
insolvency of misguided enterprise. It would not be im-
possible to point out illustrations in this colony where the want
of practical knowledge has led to serious loss, through mis-
taken economy on the one hand, or lavish wastefulness on the
other. This, lam sure, is as evident to my professional bre-
thren as it is to me. I have doubtless contributed my share to
the catalogue of errors; but there is no need to glory in our
comparative ignorance, and it may not therefore be beneath
our notice to study the nature and properties of the various
materials employed in building operations, as the surest means
of forming a foundation on which a lasting professional reputa-
tion can be established.
I have only now to give you the result of the several ex-
periments, so far as they have been pioceeded with, but
before doing so I wish to acknowledge the great assistance I
have received from Mr. Roberts, the superintendent in charge
of the erection of the Museum for building materials. This
gentleman is most zealously and faithfully carrying out the
objects contemplated by the work in question—a work which
I believe will be found of yearly increasing value to all who
are interested in the art of building.


Weight
of
3 inch
Quantity of
water
—
blocks,
cubes
not
when
perfect
quite
Increase of weight
after six hours im-
evapoiated after 24
hours exposure to a
Quantity of water
retained after this
dry.
mersion in water.
temperature
of 60
trial.
degrees.
Clay slatestone, from Templestowe
Bluestone
Carara marble
Adelaide marble ..
Mount Sturgeon sandstone
Western Port sandstone .. .. .. * ’
Granite from the Plenty, smaller size ..
Sienite, from Gabo Island
Granite, from Mount Martha .. .. ] *
Granite, from Mount Eliza
Doncaster sandstone, from Johnston’s Quarry ..
Bulleen sandstone, from Groom’s Quarry
New Kangaroo Point sandstone..
Old Kangaroo Point sandstone
North-west Bay sandstone, from Quinn’s Quarry
Tasmania .. .. • J
Bacchus Marsh colonial sandstone
Barley sandstone, colonial
Oz.
47
45
43
46
38
40
43
40
34
39
41
40
37
38
35.
32
33
dwt.
2
0
0
0
0
10
7
15
7
15
15
6
15
15
10
15
10
gr-
12
0
0
0
■ 0
0
12
0
12
0
0
12
0
12
0
0
12
Oz.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
dwt.
2
2
2
5
15
15
2
0
0
5
0
9
0
4
7
7
12
gr.
12
J2
12
0
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
12
0
12
12
12
0
Oz.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
dwt.
2
2
2
2
10
10
2
0
0
5
10
12
10
7
12
10
10
gr.
12
12
12
12
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
12
0
12
12
0
0
Oz.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
dwt.
0
0
0
.2
5
5
0
0
0
0
10
17
10
17
15
17
3
g r -
0
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
Tables showing ’<°f Absorption and Evaporation exhibited in certain Building Stones. The weights
ff,m are m ounces,; the dmt. 20 parts of the ox.; and gr. 24 parts of the dwt.


—
Weight of 3-inch
blocks, not perfect
cubes when quite dry.
Increase of weight
after six hours im-
mersion in water.
Quantity of water
evaporated after 24
hours exposure to a
temperature Of 60
degrees.
Quality of water
retained after thi«
trial.
Barley sandstone, second quarry
Oz.
dwt.
gr-
Oz.
dwt.
gr.
Oz.
dwt.
gr-
Oz.
dwt.
gr.
32
5
12
2
12
0
0
12
12
1
19
12
Geelong sandstone
35
5
12
1
14
12
0
10
0
1
2
12
Ballan sandstone ..
• •
35
15
0
1
15
0
0
12
12
1
2
12
Kyneton sandstone
31
15
0
1
15
0
0
7
12
1
7
12
Keilor sandstone ..
37
0
0
1
10
0
0
8
0
1
2
0
Kilcnore sandstone
40
15
0
1
15
0
0
12
12
1
2
12
Portland colonial limestone
33
10
12
4
7
0
0
12
12
3
14
12
Do., do., No. 2. .. •«
42
15
12
0
14
12
0
12
12
0
2
0
Warrnambool limestone .. ..
36
10
0
0
12
12
0
7
12
0
3
0
Gape Schank limestone
37
0
0
1
12
12
0
12
12
1
0
0
Sydney sandstone
38
0
0
1
7
12
0
12
12
0
15
0
Adelaide sandstone .. ’'..
38
0
0
1
5
0
0
JO
0
0
15
0
Huon Kiver, Tasmania, sandstone
Park Spring English sandstone, from
near
39
0
0
0
17
12
0
12
0
0
7
2
Leeds
39
0
0
1
7
12
0
10
0
0
17
12
Portland limestone, English
39
0
0
2
5
0
0
12
12
1
12
12
Bath oolite, English
31
5
12
3
4
12
0
12
12
2
12
0
Caen limestone, from France .,
Fifeshire sandstone, from Scotland
f-
32
35
0
0
10
0
3
2
0
10
0
0
0
0
19
2
0
6


Colonial Stones.
Specific
gravity.
Crushing force
per
square inch.
Amount of
disin-
tegration.
Weight per cubic
foot in an
ordinary dry state.
Weight per cubie
bot after four hours
immersion in water.
Darley sandstone
2,350
In lbs.
2,118
•800
In lbs,
124 7-16
In lbs.
132
Bacchus Marsh sandstone
# .
• •
, ,
2,213
1,949
•200
124
1H3 5-16
Geelong sandstone
2,207
2,150
•600
136 11-16
138 10-16
Kyneton sandstone
2,250
•600
131 7-16
135 11-16
Kilmore sandstone
2,428
3,100
•650
.
Bulleen sandstone
2,484
2,100
•750
142 9-16
147 4-16
Doncaster sandstone
2,487
3,163
•800
150
Plenty sandstone
..
• •
2,455
3,200
•500
146 13-16
150 3-16
Portland (western district) limestone
, ,
, ,
2,503
3,065
•700
Warrnambool limestone, a
hardened by salt water
picked
specimen
2,438
6,035
•800
Cape Scbank limestone
, m
« •
2,500
3,550
•600
,
146
Ballan sandstone ..
2,446
2,450
•800
,
Keilor sandstone ..
• •
• ,
2,477
,1,600
•300
145 11-16
149 10-16
Western Port sandstone ..
• .
2,357
5,400
•500
148 8-16
149 5-16
Apollo Bay sandstone
..
..
• •
2.473 )
Tested up to fi,7201b5
1-000
Bluestone (basalt)
, .
• »
• .
2,625 /
without producing
163 7-16
Granite from the Plenty
• •
• •
• •
2,655 (
anv effect. The
1-000
. --
Sienite from Gabo Island
• •
• ,
, ,
2,652 (
machine was in
1-000
, . .
„
Templestowe clay slate stone
• •
• •
, ,
2,600 \
adequate to ge
1-000
-
Mount Sturgeon sandstone
. •
..
..
2,386 J
beyond this weigh
t| 1-000
142 12-16
144
Tablb showing the specific gravity of colonial and other building stones, the force required to crush 1 inch cubes, the
amount of disintegration caused by the action of sulphate of soda, taking 1 ; 000 as an indication of perfect resistance
and the weight per cubic foot:


•Intercolonial Stone*.
j Specific
1
Crushing force
; ’ i•
; Aipountof Weight per cubic
Weight per* rnhip
i gravity.
j
square inch.
disin-
tegration.
foot in an ordinary
state.
foot after four hours
immersion in water.
Pftfield’s New Kangaroo Point sandstone, from
lasmama ....
Kangaroo Point stone, old quarry
Sandstone > from Quinn’s’ Quarry
In lbs.
In lbs.
In lbs.
2,207
2,252
2,956
2,881
•900
•050
132 3-16
135 5-16
134 9-16
137 2-16
Huon River sandstone, Tasmania’
2,322
2,417
2,089
•700
140 9-16
143
Sydney sandstone
•001
-
Adelaide sandstone
2,237
2,228
2,800
Tested up to 6720
•300
—
- ■„
Adelaide marble ..
2,7 15
—
—
Stones from Europe.
.rifeshire sandstone, Scotland
lb. without effect
> 1'000
167 5-16
Bath oolite, England
2,241
2,447
i 2,383
2,076
f
1,814
•100
128 3-16
136
Portland oolite, Engdand
Park Spring sandstone, from near Leeds, G.B.
1,600
3,135
Tested up to 6720
■b. without pro-
•800
•950
} 1-000
124 14-16
137 2-16
126 6-16
140 9-16
148
136 4-16
Caen, Normandy ..
Carara marM*
ducing any effect
1,543
Tested up to6720
)
•700
]
134 5-16
2.713 ]
(
b., without pro-
ducing any effect
[ i-ooo
166
—


Crushing
Crushing
force per
force per
square inch
square inch
after 4 hours’
■when dry.
immersion
in water.
Pitfield’s new quarry at Kanga-
roo Point ■ • •••
In Ihs.
2,956
In lbs.
1,919
3lf
PitfieW’s old quarry at Kangaroo
2,881
2,118
1,949
1,428
50i
Point
1,260
1,073
a four sami
35$
Bacchus Marsh ..
ales of each
•
Description of Stone.
Price per
Foot.
Price of
Labor per
Foot.
Granite ...
e. d,
8 0
£ s. d.
12 6
I
10 0
0 8 6
2
Marble ••• ••• , ••
7 10
0 6 10
3
Mount Sturgeon freestone
3 6
0 9 9
4
Bluestone • ■ —
6 6
5 6
0 4 8
6
0
Bacchus Marsh or Uarley stone ..
Portland from England
0 5 6
include delivery at Melbourne.
Table ehomng the might required to erneh inch
four Building Stones principally used in Melbourne .
The above results are derived from the average of tour samples of each
•tone in a dry, and two of each f I j owin g B t on es to act as lintels.
Experiments to prove the htness of the 1 5 f4f t and tha
&c.. tried on scantlings 4 inches x 4 inches, navm 0
entire weight suspended from the cen re. Breaking weight.
cwt. qr. lbs.
. t 1 1 26
Eifeshire (Scotland) sandstone ••• ••• 22 20
Bath oolite ■ Pitfield’s new
Kangaroo Point white sandstone ( ..2 2 20
quarry, Tasmania) .. •• ** ’’ “ 22 21
Kyneton (Victoria) sandstone ... •• C* ... 23 20
Kangaroo Point sandstone (Pitfield’s old quarry).. ... g
Bacchus Marsh sandstone (Victoria) •« 3 0 2
Barley sandstone (Victoria) .«■ .*** .. 3 2 0
Bulleen sandstone (Victoria) ’ ’ io 33 20
Doncaster sandstone (near Bulleen) • * * * 4 2 20
Geelong (Barrabool Hill) sandstone 6 0 20
Portland limestone (English) •• T VV ’* 9 3 6
Park Spring sandstone (from England, near Leeds) lQ l u
Adelaide Marble .-. •• • •
Table burning the Comparative Cost of certain Description
of Masonry.
Memo. —The prices of
is.»*' la of "“ ”■'-
