

A TRIP
ROUND
THE
WORLD
jg|


Jaken in Mellouine


SAILING SHIP DEVON (LONDON).


A HOLIDAY for Health,
Pleasure, Geographical
Knowledge, combined with
an insight into the ways of
the world and of other
peoples of that day.
J. J. p.


A Trip Round the World.
THE following pages contain a few gleanings taken
from a diary which I kept whilst enjoying the
sweets of a twelve months’ holiday from the
shores of England. I have endeavoured to describe
many of the places visited and also most of the inter-
esting incidents which occurred both on land and water.
It was during the month of October, 1877, that I
met in London the captain of a ship which was bound
for Alexandria. He, knowing my intention to travel,
invited me to join his ship as a passenger. The offer
was, of course, gladly accepted; he promised to write
me a letter with further particulars as to the date of
sailing. On the 9th of October I received instructions to
hold myself in readiness to start from North Shields
in a few days, and therefore arranged to leave London
on the 11th to visit my birthplace, Alnwick, in Northum-
berland, for which dear old town I have a fond recol-
lection and hope always to retain it.
I left King’s Cross by the 10.30 a.m. train and there
took leave of my friends, who bid me hearty good
cheer, good health and a jolly holiday. At Alnwick I
found a telegram to join the ship “ Remus ” the follow-
ing day. I therefore only had time to pay a hurried
visit to a few friends and say good-bye.
On reaching Sunderland I found that the ship would
not be ready for sea until the following Monday, but


spent the time pleasantly with the captain and his
family circle.
We are now starting down the river from Shields.
I cannot say under the most favourable auspices, for it
is 7.30 p.m., dark, miserable, and cold, the ship is not
one usually used for passenger service, she being chiefly
employed carrying coals to the Black Sea ports. She,
however, has a pretty comfortable little cabin, sufficiently
large to accommodate four persons tolerably well.
I now discover that I have a fellow passenger,
a Mr. Smith; he being a friend of the owners and bound
for Alexandria on business. After the usual introduc-
tion and chat over supper, we decide not to face the
elements again that night, so warm ourselves with a
little whisky and water, and after drinking to a plea-
sant voyage and to all friends left at home, we retire
early.
The following day, October 16th, was fine, but
decidedly cold on the water; it being clear, we had a
splendid view of Flamborough Head, Lowestoft, Yar-
mouth, and Cromer.
I found my fellow passenger a most agreeable man
and full of fun; he had never been a sea voyage before,
nor had I, so we were together in that respect, and both
being in good health, in spite of the roughness of the
weather, determined to thoroughly enjoy ourselves.
In going down Channel we sighted the South
Foreland, Dover, and were close in to Folkestone and
Dungeness; at the latter place we signalled all well, to
which they responded on shore; had also a good view
of Beachy Head, the Isle of Wight, and Start Point.
We signalled again here for the last time to our friends
in the old country, the next place visible being the Isle
D’Onessant. The weather now became much warmer,


which was more agreeable to us all, for it is no joke
to be confined to the small space of a ship’s deck off the
shores of England in the advanced autumn. We now
expected to meet a little rough sea in the Bay of Biscay,
but were somewhat disappointed, for the sea was calm,
with the exception of a good heavy Atlantic swell,
causing the ship to roll a great deal, which put us to
some inconvenience, especially when walking the deck,
or at meal times; in the latter case it being difficult to
judge how long the food would remain on the table,
as several times in a minute it gave evident signs of
being deposited on the floor or against the side of the
cabin.
We continued in this cheerful way for some days.
On Saturday, October 20th, an incident occurred which
somewhat upset our equilibrium. I may mention here,
in passing, that the Cleopatra Needle was expected to
be in our neighbourhood on her way to England. We
were, therefore, constantly on the watch so as, if pos-
sible, to catch a glimpse of her. While thus engaged I
noticed a steamer far over on the horizon steaming in
the same direction as ourselves; the whole of the
morning she seemed to be nearing us, until at noon I
should say she was not four miles distant. I remarked
the fact to the Chief Engineer, who explained the
matter by saying that probably she wanted to speak with
us. As she continued to bear down upon us I became
somewhat uneasy. Although a novice at seafaring, I
could see that the two vessels were in a somewhat danger-
ous position, and thought it advisable to inform our Cap-
tain, who was below at the time; he, however, did not
come on deck, believing me to be in joke, and I must
admit that he was justified to a degree in coming to
this conclusion, for the morning had been spent by


Smith, the Captain, and myself, playing practical jokes,
each upon the other. As the case became more alarm-
ing, I called out to him that the steamer was upon us,
and before he could reach the top of the companion
stairs we were in collision, she striking us on the star-
board side abaft the funnel, but fortunately doing no
other damage than tearing away bulwark. There was
evidently some gross carelessness somewhere, for an
accident of this kind should most certainly never hap-
pen on the open sea, on a clear, bright, fine day. How-
ever, we were thankful to be spared a watery grave,
which lot seemed most imminent but a few minutes
before.
The following day we saw our friend the steamer
far ahead of us, steaming away as if nothing unusual
had occurred. We also sighted the coast of Portugal,
seeing distinctly some forts and hills in the distance.
It is hardly possible for me to describe my feelings
adequately at sight of such scenery. Together with the
surrounding circumstances, the clear atmosphere, smooth
water, and warm, beautiful air, it certainly makes one
feel almost inclined to be dissatisfied with his native
land.
We also passed the mouth of the River Tagus and
had a cheer from a homeward bound steamer.
Before turning in for the night we gave peremptory
orders that we were to be called when we neared Cape
St. Vincent. I must not omit to relate a little incident
which caused a great deal of fun on board. Our genial
and good-tempered friend Smith had been most inter-
ested all the voyage in reading “ Under Two Flags.”
About middle day he was absorbed as usual in his book
when the ship gave an extra lurch and, to his utter
dismay and disappointment the book was carried over-
board. Of course this created much merriment.


At 1.20 a.m., October 23rd, we were aroused by loud
shouts and someone shaking us most violently. After
rubbing our eyes and hurriedly dressing we went on
deck, and certainly were well repaid for our trouble; the
moon was full, the night fine, Cape St. Vincent. right
before us, the white cliff being not more than two miles
off, the lighthouse light was burning brightly; in the
background stood a large white building, the whole pre-
senting a splendid picture. After feasting our eyes on
the sight for some time we turned in again and in the
morning found ourselves anchored outside the Moorish
town of Tangiers, which place has no port and whose
roadstead, bristling with rocks and full of sandbanks,
compel vessels to remain a considerable distance from
shore. From the sea Tangiers looks very picturesque,,
situated on two hills, all the houses being built of white
stone, but on entering the town the stranger is much
disappointed, the streets are narrow, dirty, and the
smell in them simply disgusting. You seem to have
landed in a place, although only a short journey from
London, totally devoid of civilization. At this time of
the year there are some thousands of Arabs, collected
from all parts of the country, bound on their sacred
pilgrimage to Mecca; they are chiefly encamped in and
around the town. I was informed that the Greek and
Spanish merchants engaged the deck of a ship for a
fixed sum and sublet it to these miserable wretches at
anything but a reasonable figure; they crowd as many
as they possibly can on the vessel. In twelve hours we
had on board no less than three hundred souls, huddled
together in a hopeless mass of confusion.
While all these arrangements were taking place,
Smith and myself went ashore with a trustworthy Arab
(at least so we were told) named Mohammed, visiting the


principal places of interest, first going through the
Bazaar, where we purchased a few curiosities. We
travelled on mules, but were in great fear on entering
a street in case there should be another rider coming in
the opposite direction, which put me very much in mind
of Balaam and his ass, for in passing one’s legs were
very much rubbed against the wall, which by no means
tended to improve the temper. We also inspected the
Mosque and journeyed some two or three miles out of
the town to visit an orange grove, which was most
interesting; we feasted on the fruit to our hearts’
content. Quantities of citrons, lemons and the mulberry
are largely grown in these gardens.
On our return we passed a company of Arabs, about
twenty in number, on camels, leaving the town after
having taken their goods into the market. We noticed
a great variety in the costume of the town people, the
lower classes mostly wearing the fez, a long brown, or
white cloth cloak, white knickerbockers and a pair of
shoes, turned down at the heel; the better class, white
or coloured turbans, long white flannel cloaks, red or
blue waistcoats, coloured trousers and yellow shoes. I
am told that the social condition of the natives is as
odious as can well be imagined; for instance, a husband
can divorce his wife by merely explaining his motives to
the Cadi, or even without taking this trouble. So much
for Tangiers. We rejoin the “ Remus ” and once more
start off with our living cargo for Alexandria.
We passed Gibraltar about 7 p.m. on October 25th,
but were sorry to find it was too dark to see anything
of the place. The following day we sighted Gala,
and from there started fairly on our way up the blue
Mediterranean waters. A man must indeed be hard to
please who cannot appreciate a sail on this magnificent


sea, with its phosphorescence at night and clear blue sky
by day, the former is unsurpassed and I felt inclined,
and in fact did watch it for hours every evening. The
sunsets are proverbially so splendid that I will not ven-
ture here to describe them. I can think of nothing more
enjoyable than a few months’ holiday spent in a yacht
in the Mediterranean, say, visiting some of the towns
on the coast of Italy.
I have always been sorry that my trip was marred
by the presence of the religious fanatics who made most
horrible noises, calling it music, and in a sensitive
nature the want of anything like sanitary arrangements
was most unpleasant. However, all this was experi-
ence to me, and having fortunately escaped the cholera
(which was a wonder) I am not altogether dissatisfied,
but would never recommend anyone to follow my
example, but to travel in a regular passenger ship, which
does not carry pilgrims. We sighted Cape Bon, the
Islands of Pantellaria and Malta; of the latter place we
had a good view.
November 3rd, all is now excitement and bustle, as
we approach the land of the pharaohs and the city
made famous by Orestes and Hypatia. About noon
the low lying sands of the desert are visible, and as
we approach nearer, the Pasha’s Palace and other large
buildings stand prominently out among the numerous
houses.
So far as can be seen from the sea, Alexandria is
a well fortified place; it also possesses a good harbour.
On landing the traveller is perfectly besieged by Arab
donkey boys most eager to do business. In the centre
of the town is a large, oblong square, in the middle of
which there is a grass plot with a double row of trees all
round, a fountain at one end and a band stand: it


resembles very much a Continental town with boule-
vards. The streets leading to the square are very nar-
row and dirty, it being quite impossible in many places
for two vehicles to pass; they are, however, thronged
with people of all classes, Greeks, Italians, French and
Arabs, all busily engaged in the great commerce for
which Alexandria is still famous.
I called upon the English Consul, who received me
very kindly. He gave me a note to an Egyptian official,
asking for an order to view the Khedive’s Palace; the
latter sent a mounted soldier (who rode behind my car-
riage) as an escort; he conducted me to the Palace. The
chief appartments I viewed, but was not struck with
their magnificence. I also, of course, did not neglect to
see the obelisk made of Thebian stone, the catacombs
and Pompey’s Pillar. I think the latter one of the
most interesting features to the visitor; it is a column
of polished red granite, the capital of which is Corin-
thian standing nine feet high, the shaft one solid block
ninety feet long and nine in diameter, the whole column
being one hundred and fourteen feet in height. It
would be a difficult task to try and discover what this
pillar was erected to commemorate, but it stands to
remind its admirers of the once greatness of Egypt.
After bidding adieu to my friends of the ship,
I took the train across the desert to Grand Cairo. The
railway journey is uninteresting and decidedly tiring,
the travelling being slow, the time occupied being about
four hours and a half.
On entering the city of Cairo, which is surrounded
by walls, it presents a most animated appearance, all is
bustle and activity. Here the Oriental manners and
customs are more correctly preserved than at any other
place yet visited, and are more vividly presented to the


eyes of a stranger. Situated in the centre of the city there
is one magnificent square called Esbetrieh, built or com-
menced during the reign of Mehemet AH. It seems to
me that to this man’s indefatigable energy all the
modern Egyptian improvements are due. There are also
smaller squares, out of which lead wide roads. In one
I was with the shops built in a block,
having a sarrQor* in front supported by columns of
white marble, the pavements also being of the same
material. With a few exceptions the streets are nar-
row, but are lighted by gas; this is a decided improve-
ment on those of Alexandria, which are supplied in the
most primitive style with oil lamps.
I paid frequent visits to the Bazaars, which are
numerous, and purchased small articles as presents to
send home: they are well provided with goods of every
description.
Mr. Kennedy says, writing of the Bazaars of
Cairo, “ that they still retain without alloy that rich
vein of poetry and romance which looks you in the face
from out every page of the Arabian Nights.”
The owner of the shop is, as a rule, most polite and
obliging; he usually invites you to accept of a cup of
coffee and a cigarette while being served. The Arabs are
inveterate smokers of cigarettes. The men are hand-
some and have a light brown complexion. One has
no opportunity of judging of the women, but I am told
that they are fairer than the men, which is probably
due to their faces being covered and consequently not so
exposed to the sun. I took several walks along the
banks of the Nile; the water at this time of the year
is high and has a dirty, muddy appearance, but the
scene on the river is animated and lively. There is
always to be seen large fleets of craft, unique in them


selves, with one huge sail, making their way down stream
with their cargoes of cotton seed and grain. It is very
interesting indeed to stand and watch them. The banks
of the Nile are rich in cultivation, and it is a very
pleasant pastime to take a stroll among the groves of
date palms, of which there are many.
During my visit to Cairo I put up at Shepherd’s
Hotel and made the acquaintance of a Mr. Clark, one
of Burton’s Company; they were about to make an
expedition into Nubia. I was invited to join the party,
but on being informed that I must purchase my own
camel and that I would have to ride him for a fortnight
at a stretch, thirty-five miles a day, decided to decline
the offer.
The scenes in Cairo are most varied. From the
balcony of the hotel may be seen, within the short space
of half-an-hour, crowds of people of all nationalities;
first comes the rich Egyptian merchant, perched on his
donkey, and another may be seen walking slowly along
smoking his long pipe. Now the soldier, with the Fiz
and light-blue uniform, also women, with their long,
dark-blue garments and the hideous covering over the
face and head, and again, the Pasha or Bey, in his
grand carriage and pair, preceded by a runner announc-
ing to all the greatness of the man to whom he is
attached. The wealthy Arab on his fiery steed, prancing
proudly along; besides all these there are Greeks, French,
Italians and Englishmen. It must be impossible to
witness such a sight in any other city in the world. At
the corners of the streets donkey boys stand waiting for
hire; also carriages of every description.
In the grand square, on fixed afternoons, the band
plays, and large numbers of the people assemble to hear
the music.


The Pyramids of Ghizeh are situated about eight
or nine miles from Cairo. There are parties made up
occasionally at the hotel to visit them, accompanied by
a respectable Dragoman, that is to say as respectable
as they are made, but being anxious to push forward
on my journey, I could not wait, so decided to go alone.
This I discovered, to my cost, to have been a great
mistake, for not only was I placing myself entirely in
the hands of the plundering Arabs who flock round the
Pyramids, ready to grab all the backsheesh they can lay
their hands upon, but was also running the risk of being
very roughly handled. I don’t suppose the men would
dare to do an Englishman any bodily harm but, never-
theless, it’s not pleasant to feel that you are entirely
at their mercy.
I hired a carriage for twenty shillings, and being
an Englishman, of course, had a runner, a youth of
about twenty, wearing a red Fiz with long tassel reach-
ing to the shoulder, a tight-fitting red waistcoat, braided
with black and gold, a coloured sack wound round his
waist, loose white knickerbockers, bare legs and feet,
and short white cape, and carrying in his hand a long
cane. These lads run about four yards in front of the
horses, calling out, and keeping the way clear.
I passed through some very fertile country and
along the four-mile avenue, with fine trees on either
side, continuing for some distance along the banks of
the sweet water canal. Here we passed the Khedive
and his two sons and, of course, exchanged salutes.
The sand all round the great Pyramids is very soft,
and the sightseer is obliged to toil for some distance
before reaching them. Before he has gone far he is
surrounded by some half-dozen howling scoundrels, all
anxious to be the chosen guide. This business settled,


you are conducted proudly to the small entrance of the
great Pyramid of Ghizeh, which is no less than four
hundred and eighty-four feet high, covering an area of
several acres; its solid masonry is estimated at 89,000,000
cubic feet, and its weight at 6,848,000 tons. You enter
by a very small door, accompanied by three men with
lighted torches, descending a long passage three to four
feet high and three feet wide a distance of some twenty
yards. The passage is quite smooth, there being no
steps, and it is with great difficulty that the journey is
accomplished. There is one man in front, on whom you
lean, and the others coming on behind; it is really
wonderful how the fellows manage to hold on with their
hands and feet. After arriving at the bottom and
taking a few minutes’ rest, you begin to ascend a similar
passage leading to the very heart of the Pyramid. Now
the one man drags you up the smooth tunnel and the
others push behind. After ascending some 124 feet two
galleries are reached, striking out in different directions.
I was now able to stand and rest for a few minutes,
being quite worn out with fatigue, and perfectly bathed
with perspiration, through the exertion of climbing. The
chief gallery is five feet wide at the base, and is made
of seven or eight layers of stone, each one projecting
a little beyond the one below it, so that it becomes
smaller as it ascends. The roof is made of flat stones
laid across the space. The principal chamber, into which
this corridor forms the entry, is the one in which the
sarcophagus of Cheops was found. The room is thirty-
four feet long, seventeen feet wide, and nineteen feet
high, and is composed wholly of granite, beautifully
polished. The guides are most particular in pointing
out the roof, which is very fine; it consists of nine
enormous blocks, some nineteen feet long, laid aslant


across, to make the ceiling. I was told that above this
there were other chambers, but did not see them. The
second gallery is similar to the one described, and
conducts to a smaller room of the same kind. While
inspecting these wonders my kindly guides took some
little advantage of my loneliness, and informed me that
if I did not hand over a gold coin by way of back-
sheesh they would put out the light and leave me to
find an exit as best I could. I need hardly say that
without much hesitation they were presented with a
half-sovereign; had they known that I had forty-five
pounds in gold in my pocket I very much doubt whether
I should have escaped so easily.
The Pyramids are wonderfully made of great
masses of stones placed one upon another in layers,
each layer receding from the one below. It is not
until you come near, in fact, almost touch them, that
you can actually realise their vast dimensions.
Not far distant from this spot lies couched the
solemn Sphinx, which is not less wonderful than the
Pyramids themselves.
On the 14th November I left the busy life of
Cairo, taking the train across the desert to Suez; there
are several stoppages on the way at small towns and
villages, the principal being Zaguzig and Ismailia.
The journey is a long and wearysome one, travelling
being very slow. The hotel people seem to sympathise
with the traveller, for they make up a very nice basket
of luncheon, which is most acceptable. The villages
passed on the journey are scarcely worthy of the name,
consisting chiefly of scattered houses, built of mud and
reeds; many of them have painted figures on the outside
and are covered with hieroglyphics. As the train
approaches the station, which consists of a wooden shed,


the natives assemble to witness the proceedings, amongst
them being numberless children holding out their hands
and asking for that ever-needed backsheesh.
I was horrified at the swarms of flies settled on
and about the children’s eyes, and equally surprised at
their seeming indifference. This must be an awful
pest to Egypt. I reached Suez about 10 p.m., and put
up at the Hotel de Suez, very tired and feeling some-
what lonely.
Suez is quite a second-rate Egyptian town, and
is built in a very irregular shape; many of the streets
are without pavement for foot passengers, and they
wind about in a most peculiar fashion. They are also
dirty and badly kept. The place derives its chief
support from the Pando Company’s overland service,
and also the telegraph station. It is bounded on the
west by the blue-tinged mountains called Jabel Attakat;
they are some miles distant from the town, but stand
out in grand relief across the wide expanse of desert.
I traversed a track on one occasion for several miles to
see how near I could get to the hills, but returned quite
footsore, having made no impression on the distance.
After this I was warned by the Hotel people that such
a journey was most unsafe, and that it should not be
attempted.
A gentleman staying at the Hotel and myself
arranged a trip a day’s journey into the desert, on the
Arabian side, to visit a sweet-water well, where Moses
is supposed to have encamped, and called after him.
We hired donkeys, men and a guide to convey ourselves
and the necessary provisions, and started off early in
the morning. One of the first things to be done was
to get our donkeys into a boat, which was anything but
an easy task; having accomplished it, we had to pull


some considerable distance up the Suez Canal and land
at a safe place on the Arabian shore. Mounting and
getting fairly under way, we travelled for miles.
Riding up and down hill, apparently making very little
headway across the vast expanse of wilderness, passing
here and there a few of the bones of a dead camel. The
journey has little to recommend it but very hard work.
The well is small and consists of first clear water,
bubbling up through the sand. There are several clumps
of palm trees, caches, and other desert plants growing
round about; there are also one or two small mud houses
in the neighbourhood, and a hut by the side of the
spring. Here we unpacked our traps and were heartily
glad to tuck into the victuals.
The return journey was uneventful, with the
exception of our passing on the way a few Arabs,
mounted on camels and armed to the teeth with most
primitive rifles, and looking remarkably fierce customers.
We saluted each other in the most respectful manner and
passed on.
These men are more or less musical; they play an
instrument, roughly made, consisting of two or more
reeds tied together, each reed the shape of an ordinary
tin whistle, and making a noise resembling the bagpipes.
They play while travelling through the desert, and can
be heard for a considerable distance. I cannot say that
I was favourably impressed with the honesty of the
people of Suez, in fact, mistrusted them to such an
extent that every night before going to bed, for the
sake of protection I put six chairs leaning Indian file
each against the other behind my bedroom door, so as
not to be taken by surprise should anyone enter.
For the first time since leaving London I here
became a little homesick and felt very much the want of


a companion. This feeling was very much intensified
by my only knowing one man who could speak English
(the one who took the journey to Moses’ Well), and he,
of course, could not be constantly with me, having many
business calls to attend to. I debated with myself as
to the advisability of returning but, ultimately, after a
great effort to conquer my feelings, determined to
continue my journey.
I negotiated with the captain of a ship passing
through the Canal, bound for Bombay, and obtained
from him a passage. I was rather sorry, however, to
find that he was engaging to carry pilgrims to Jeddah,
but as the journey was a short one, I decided to put up
with the inconvenience, which proved to be much worse
than that felt on board the “ Remus,” for we had no
less than 250 women and nearly 400 men to carry, which
did not admit of any portion of the deck being parted
off for the special use of the Captain, myself and the
officers.
These Arabs, as I proved over and over again, are
really the most double-faced rascals it is possible to
find in a day’s march. The Bombay ship was anchored
some little distance from shore, and it was necessary for
me to engage a small native boat to carry myself and
baggage on board. The way I was treated by these
polite, self-sacrificing individuals will, I think, tend to
convince my readers of the correctness of my estimate of
their good nature and kindly disposition towards a com-
plete stranger in their homely and hospitable country.
I drove a respectable bargain with the men for the fixed
sum of 10/-, for which I was to be safely transferred
from the land into the charge of Captain Frail, of the
S.S. “ Romulus.” All went well until within twenty
yards of the vessel, when I was politely informed that


unless they received another susbtantial sum of English
money they would tack and return to Suez, and it was
with the utmost difficulty that I persuaded them to con-
tinue the journey. The sea was somewhat rough, the
wind high. The men, through wrangling and inatten-
tion, allowed us to run with full force against the side
of the ship, smashing the bows of the boat to pieces.
I seized a rope hanging over the side and in the rebound
was left suspended in this most uncomfortable position,
but was, fortunately, quickly hauled on board.
On leaving Egypt I could not help thinking over
what I had seen and heard, and am sorry to say that
vices of all kinds, immorality, bad government and
plunder, meets you at every turn.
Once more on the sea and looking on grand old
Mount Sinai, which is soon left behind as we continue
on our way down the Red Sea.
As my acquaintance with the pilgrims was now only
to last for two days, I gave them a good deal of atten-
tion. The were really most devout, setting the Christians
a good example. The men are up by sunrise, and to all
appearances pray more earnestly; they also repeat
prayers at intervals during the day. They are very
good-natured amongst themselves, and certainly endure
many hardships without the slightest murmur; they
suffered much for want of water, which could only be
given out sparingly. There was great commotion on
board the whole of the day and night previous to our
arrival at Jeddah. The men were very busy shaving
their heads, leaving only a small tuft of hair on the
crown, and titivating themselves in grand style. Each
individual had a little water to wash in, a luxury which,
I should say, many had not experienced for a very long
time; they also unearthed from their baggage clean


clothing, and on the morning Jeddah was sighted the
whole of the pilgrims appeared in snow-white costumes,
the picturesqueness of the scene on deck can scarcely be
described; the praying was also incessant.
The approach to the town of Jeddah by sea is very
difficult and dangerous. The ship is piloted most skil-
fully in a zig-zag course through the coral reefs, many
of which are above the surface of the water, the sides
in some instances are quite perpendicular, which enabled
the ship to go within a yard of them, and in other cases
they are just tipped by the spray. The water, also
being clear, gives them a very pretty effect. The town,
when viewed from the sea, is very similar to the others
which I have described, being built of white stone. From
a distance, and with the sun shining brightly upon it,
it really looks a very delightful spot. On landing, as
is usually the case, one is much disappointed. On the
land side it is walled round with gates, opening in
several directions, which are guarded by soldiers. The
eastern one, facing Mecca, no Christian has yet passed
through. The houses are lofty and built of stone,
coloured white; the streets, like those of Suez, are not
paved, they are pleasantly shaded with acacian and palm
trees.
The English are very scarce in Jeddah. I think
there are only two—the Consul and a merchant or agent;
the latter sent his servant as guide to show me the chief
places of interest, one sight being the supposed tomb
of our first mother, Eve. Passing through the northern
gate, which is situated about half-a-mile, and entering
the cemetery, a trifle by way of backsheesh is asked by
the lame, halt, and blind. After satisfying these indivi-
duals, I proceeded to inspect the tomb. Our ancestor,
so I was told, was a hundred and eighteen feet high; the


place where her head is supposed to be is marked by a
wall, forming three sides of a square, and standing
some three feet high. In the centre is a sort of cupola,
and at the feet there is a large piece of crimson cloth, on
which the faithful deposit their offerings.
All round Jeddah the country is one vast barren,
undulating desert of sand, with long tracks reaching as
far as the eye can see in every direction.
It is easily seen that the place is one of great com-
mercial importance to Arabia, the imports and exports
during the year, our English shipping friend informed
me, being something considerable.
The pilgrims were not less anxious to get ashore
than we were to get rid of them; personally, I was
heartily glad to see the last one landed and to congratu-
late myself that for the last time I had voluntarily
travelled with these uncivilised and barbarous pieces of
humanity, who think as little of the life of a Christian
as that of a dog.
I have mentioned the winding and difficult passage
through which we passed on entering the harbour of
Jeddah, and was now preparing to look with the same
wonder and interest at the skill to be displayed in
guiding such an enormous boat through the narrow and
dangerous channels on the way out to sea. We had not
gone far when I noticed the water all round us becoming
quite thick and cloudy, as though someone had thrown
a large quantity of ground chalk into it, and that we
seemed to be making very little if any headway. I soon
discovered that it was our fate to be less fortunate
to-day than we were yesterday, for the ship glided very
comfortably on to a coral reef, and had become a firm
fixture; she could neither be moved ahead or astern.
This was very distressing to our Captain, who was most


anxious to continue his voyage. We made every effort
to free ourselves, making use of every available means
at our disposal. We tried having hawsers overboard
fastened to other vessels, who tugged us, putting on full
steam the whole of the afternoon; darkness coming on,
we were compelled to relinquish the task for the night.
The following morning all were hard at work again, and
continued until mid-day. Our Captain was about to
give orders for some of the cargo to be unloaded, having
waited for high tide, which, by the way, is hardly worth
the name in this particular sea, when, to our surprise, the
ship moved off the reef as easily as she had gone on to it.
Natives were now engaged to dive under water to
ascertain if any damage had occurred; this was a most
amusing sight. The men took a header overboard on
the starboard side, and came swimming up again off the
port side, having gone right under us. After a repeti-
tion of this sort of thing for some time we were reported
all safe and sound, and proceeded on our journey with-
out further mishap.
I suffered very much from the intense heat in the
Red Sea, being totally unprovided with the requisite
outfit for such a hot climate; my clothing was much too
thick and heavy. I had no proper hat to protect me
from the sun; in addition to this trouble, the ship had
no awning. After being at sea only a few days, in
appearance I became more like a boiled lobster than
anything else; as to sunstroke, I was hourly expecting
it.
We sighted the coast at several places, and by
means of the glass found it to be one continuous line of
dreary desert, not a village or house to be seen. On
Saturday, December Ist, we passed through the Straits
of Bab-el Mandeb, which are only about seventeen miles


across, consisting of barren hills on either shore. There
is also a small island on the African side, which we
noticed was fortified.
The following day we sighted Aden, but were too
far away to see it well.
Between this and India I was much interested in
watching the flying fish; they fly in large shoals and
several feet above the surface of the water for some
considerable distance; they are greatly attracted by the
lights on board ship at night, for every morning we
found a quantity on deck. They vary very much in
size, the average length being about five or six inches.
Arrived at Bombay, December 12th. The first
glimpse of India on landing suffices to convince the
visitor of the vast magnificence of the Empire. Contrast-
ing it with Egypt, it is like coming from the lowest
possible grade of barbarism into the highest state of
Eastern civilisation. English rule and order is the
reigning feature. The native officials are smart, active
and intelligent; they speak the English language, in
many instances, better than many of the people of our
own country.
The variety of the costumes present a picture at
once curious, and fills the mind of the stranger seeing
the sight for the first time, with wonder and amazement.
On leaving home it was my intention, should I
reach Bombay, to visit my friend, Mr. Chalk, a resident
here of some years’ standing. I hired a buggy to convey
me to his offices, but had not proceeded far when the
machine came to grief, one of the shafts breaking in
two, I was sent spinning into the road. I shook myself
together none the worse for the little upset, and taking
another conveyance, arrived in due time at Church Gate
Street. My friend received me very kindly; he was not


only delighted, but surprised to see me, not having
previously heard of my coming. I went home with
him that evening to the bungalow at Malabar Hill, which
resulted in an invitation to remain his guest as long as I
liked. It will always be a source of great pleasure to
look back upon the happy days I spent under his roof.
I received the greatest kindness at the hands of him and
his wife, which will ever be gratefully remembered.
On a closer acquaintance with Bombay I found it
to be a much larger place than I expected. The harbour
is a very fine one, and capable of sheltering a large
number of ships. The town really consists of two
distinct parts, viz., the old portion, situated some dis-
tance inland, occupied chiefly by the natives; this
district is very thickly populated, the residents being
Hindoos, Parsees and Mahomedans. It contains many
bazaars and fine shops, and is a scene of bustle and
activity from sunrise to sunset. Most of the European
business is conducted in the part of the town nearest
the sea, called the Fort.
The new Public Offices are also situated here; the
people have certainly much reason to be proud of them,
for they are magnificent buildings.
The English residents and wealthy natives reside in
bungalows situated some four miles north of Bombay,
on a remarkably pretty spot, called Malabar Hill. The
houses are all dotted about amongst the tall waving
palms, and are built upon rocks in snug and, at the
same time, cool quarters.
The roads leading to this district are pleasant and
lively, especially between five and six o’clock in the
evening, as at this time they are thronged with carriages
of all descriptions, accompanied by native coachmen
and footmen, decked in handsome uniforms of all


colours, according to the taste of the Nabob who is
being driven home to his luxurious suburban retreat.
Crowds of foot passengers are also to be seen, of all
castes, hurrying home after the fatigues of the day.
There are several large, open spaces laid out with
grass between the new and old towns. These are used
for recreation, and the rising generation play cricket
most vigorously. As night comes on knots of natives
may be seen squatting on the grass, enjoying a game of
chess or cards by the aid of a small lamp. Occasionally
a military band plays in the Victoria Gardens, where
all the people resort to enjoy the music; the assemblies
are usually very gay.
The Parsee Towers of Silence are places of promin-
ence, as are also the burial places of the Hindoos. In
the former case, looking through a high gate, I saw a
garden, in the middle of which was built a tower of
immense height. I was told that on the top of this
was an iron grating, upon which their dead bodies are
laid. Hovering around were innumerable birds, amongst
them the huge vulture.
The Hindoo Cemetery is enclosed by a brick wall,
and is kept quite private. Volumes of smoke daily
curl up to the clouds, showing that the ashes of another
human being are being placed beside those of his many
brethren who have gone before. My first pleasure tour
consisted of a trip up the small river Panwell, and a
visit to the caves of Elephanta. I hired a Bundir boat
with a small cabin, storing it with provisions enough to
last for a couple of days. I started with my servant
and three natives, crossing the harbour about two in the
afternoon and landed on the island of Elephanta to
view the wonderful caves. They are excavated out of
the solid rock, and are no less than 130 feet long by


123 feet broad; at several places they are supported by
carved pillars, and in the centre is a massive representa-
tion of the Hindoo Trinity. Many of the figures,
however, are much defaced. A man is now stationed
on the Island; he acts as guide and prevents any further
wanton destruction.
Returning to the boat again, we had a splendid sail
up the river until nightfall, when I prepared the little
cabin, making it very snug. Having my own cooking
apparatus, I first set to work to get something ready to
refresh the inner man. He being satisfied I wrapped
myself up in a warm rug and slept soundly until
6 o’clock the following morning. I now found our
boat anchored some distance up the river. The men had
been astir long before and told me that since daybreak
they had made considerable headway. After a light
breakfast I started off with my gun in search of sport,
and tramped a long distance over the marshy ground,
my man carrying me on his shoulders through the ugly
places, but my efforts with the gun met with little success.
My bad shooting seemed to amuse the natives who, I
think, enjoyed the fun immensely I returned to the
boat about 10 o’clock, and passed the whole day on
the river enjoying the scenery; in many places it was
very pretty. The night was again passed on board, and
I reached Bombay again the next day.
My friend, Mr. Chalk, owned a small estate near
Bandora, a village about ten miles from Bombay, on the
Bombay and Baroda Railway, where we often spent
from Saturday to Monday. The bungalow is erected
on the side of a hill, and commands a fine view of the
sea. It is partly surrounded by a verandah, on which
are lounges and chairs; also a wide pathway covered
with ground sea-shells, to prevent the approach of
snakes.


I spent Christmas here. Mr. and Mrs. Chalk
invited a large number of friends; we went out horse
riding early in the morning, played lawn tennis in the
afternoon, and after dinner smoked our cigars on the
verandah, and talked of our friends over the water, no
doubt enjoying their Christmas, but in a totally different
fashion.
There are some forty acres of land on the estate
planted with mango and other trees; the grounds are
ornamentally arranged, with winding carriage drive and
footpath leading to the house. I used often to take
walks when staying here to the little villages round
about. As a rule, they are most primitive places; the
houses are of light wooden structure, covered with white
plaster, and are, as it were, dropped down indiscri-
minately, without any idea of order; there are, there-
fore, no streets or pavement. In the early morning the
women may be seen marching in “ Indian file ” from
the neighbouring wells, each carrying a pitcher of water
on her head, not being held on by the hand but balanced
in a most masterly fashion; they are, as a rule, fine
figures, and walk as erect as a well-drilled soldier.
The children run about like a lot of little harum-
scarum imps, perfectly naked up to the age of six or
seven, and often older, years. I often got a dozen of
them together on the sands and started them off racing
for pennies, which was really great fun to me, and was
thoroughly appreciated by the young scamps. As an-
other amusement I used to superintend the coolies work-
ing in the grounds, but found this a little irksome; they
are such a lazy lot that there’s no satisfaction in having
anything to do with them. I, therefore, soon resigned
my position as coolie-lieutenant, and sought some more
lively occupation.


I had the pleasure of witnessing a Hindoo wedding
in Bombay; the ceremony generally takes place during
the months from January to May, which are considered
by the natives to be the lucky months of the year.
From the birth of a child the parents at once begin to
save up as much money as possible, but instead of
putting it aside to hand over to the young people when
starting in life, it is lavishly spent in the most reckless
manner during the wedding festivities. Each native tries
to outdo his neighbour in magnificence on these occa-
sions, and it is the boast of his life to relate how much
money he has been able to dispose of in the manner
described. The future of the young pair seems to be
very little thought about. When a boy is four or five
years old his father proceeds to consult with a profes-
sional match-maker, who travels about the country to
find a suitable little girl of the same caste and rank.
When one is found he reports to the parents that each
child is perfect in every respect and that it would be a
desirable union; the friends are then called together,
introduced, and the children duly betrothed.
Mr. and Mrs. Chalk and myself, according to
invitation, went to see the little son of Mr. Vutchraz
married. He was about eight years old. In the early
part of the day the youthful bridegroom, mounted on
the back of a grey horse, gaily caparisoned, and with a
large retinue of friends following behind and a band
in front, making all the hideous noises imaginable,
marched in procession through the streets to the house
of his bride. Returning with her they are conducted to
an inner chamber, where the religious ceremony is per-
formed. As our carriage stopped at the door the band
struck up the National Anthem in our honour; we were
conducted through a long corridor and upstairs into a


gallery overlooking the room below. The bride and
bridegroom, the former closely veiled, were seated in
the middle, on the floor, with crowds of friends and
relations, dressed in costumes comprising all the colours
of the rainbow. The house was brilliantly illuminated
with Chinese lanterns and coloured lamps, which pre-
sented quite a grand spectacle. I could not understand
much that went on, but a priest stood repeating loud
prayers over the young pair, and at the same time wound
a sacred cord round their necks; he joined their hands
together under a piece of crimson cloth and occasionally
painted the youth’s face with red paint, sprinkling scent
on them both, and performing various other curious rites.
During the whole of this time the bride was kept closely
enveloped from head to foot, her face not being once
seen by us. We were not allowed to witness all the
ceremony, much being conducted in private.
At intervals our gallery was entered by servants,
who handed round lemonade, etc.; they sprinkled rose
water over us, and a garland of white flowers was put
round the neck of each visitor. Before going home we
were also presented with a handsome bouquet.
There are really three ceremonies connected with a
Hindoo marriage—the betrothal, the grand occasion
which I have described, after which the girl is taken
into the house of her father-in-law. At the age of
sixteen or seventeen the bridegroom takes his wife under
his own care.
I have not given any details of my daily life in
Bombay as each day was spent much like the other.
One of the first things necessary was to purchase new
and suitable clothing, of which, as before stated, I was
very deficient. The best costume, and that most gener-
ally worn, is a white linen jacket and trousers, the


former cut in military style, closely buttoned up at the
throat, flannel underclothes, and, as a protection from
the sun, the usual helmet hat.
The next thing to be done is to engage a boy.
With the assistance of Mrs. Chalk I managed to get
hold of a very decent fellow, about 35 years of age;
his pay was to be twelve rupees a month. I rigged him
out in most becoming fashion, with red turban, long
white cloak reaching to his ankles, and red sash round
the waist. He accompanied me wherever I went, and
was most attentive. It is a very pretty sight at a dinner
party to see the different servants each behind their
master’s chair.
My daily routine was to be called at 6 a.m., when
the boy brought me some fruit, often bananas or
melons. After dressing I either went for a ride or took
a long walk. As I went along I interested myself in
the doings of the natives. They are to be seen in large
numbers round about the wells, washing, some sitting,
with the barber busily engaged shaving the head. This
latter performance with the majority of men is gone
through one a week, but amongst the wealthy every
day. They are also most particular over cleaning the
teeth; this is done with a twig or piece of wood. They
work away most vigorously, and never use the same
piece of stick a second time. They think the English
custom of using a toothbrush anything but nice, as the
saliver in the mouth is considered unclean.
Another sight is the washer women. They beat
the clothes against large stones; it seemed a wonder to
me that they were not torn to threads. I returned home
about eight, had a cold bath, and got ready for break-
fast. This meal over, I usually drove into Bombay
with Mr. Chalk, and generally found something to do or


see in town, having tiffin (lunch) at 1 o’clock, and found
my way to the office again at 5 p.m. At this time each
day Mrs. Chalk axrived in the carriage to take us
home. It is quite the order of the day for the ladies to
drive into town and call for the husband, taking him
home to dinner at 6 or 7 o’clock.
The cool evening is much appreciated by all, and
it is then, as at home, that the families assemble
together, enjoying a little music, reading, playing
games, etc., and many of the gentlemen glory in the
fumes of a cigar, looking over the balcony or sitting
on the verandah listening to the croaking of the frogs
in the garden below.
I was not contented to leave India without seeing a
little of the interior and country life and, finding that
the expense would be too great to admit of a visit to
Agra and Delhi, I decided upon taking a shorter
journey, and was fortunate this time in having a friend.
Mr. Oliver Chalk, who had been spending a short holi-
day at Bombay, was returning home. I embraced the
opportunity of travelling with him as far as Mhow.
This place is* simply a military station bordering on the
Holkar State Territory, and is situated on a vast plain
of open, level country, extending for many miles in
every direction.
During the journey in the train I passed through a
vast extent of jungle, and was delighted beyond
measure with the grandeur of the passage up the
Ghauts. The powerful engines used for this purpose do
their work well, proceeding slowly and surely along the
winding path up the sides of the mountains. It makes
one quite shudder on looking out of the carriage window
at the immense depth below. The scenery is, of course,


continually changing; its grandeur at many places is
quite beyond my power to attempt to describe.
After leaving the G.I.P. line there is only a single
narrow three-foot gauge railway running into the Holkar
country. I travelled as far as Indore, this being the
furthest point on the line; the station is some four miles
distance from the town. Arriving late in the evening
the train was shunted into a siding, and there we spent
the rest of the night, tolerably comfortable in the
railway carriage. By way of a little variety the barking
jackals occasionally woke one up. They were evidently
assembled in great numbers round about, but as day-
light came on they had entirely disappeared.
My friend, Mr. Oliver Chalk, was called away on
business the morning following our arrival, and was,
in consequence, obliged to leave me for something over a
week to explore the district alone. He was kind enough,
however, to give me a letter to a friend, resident a day’s
journey from Indore, with whom I was well entertained.
After taking leave of him I hesitated for some time as
to what means to adopt to cover the few miles between
the railway and the town.
There were camels, elephants and bullock carts wait-
ing for hire at the station to carry passengers, but being
early in the day, and nice and cool, I finally decided to
walk, and was very pleased afterwards that I had done
so, for it gave me plenty of time to linger and inspect
the many objects of interest on the way. I met no
other European the whole distance. At stated points
along the roads, and in little nooks near clumps of trees
I passed heathen images of all sizes and descriptions;
they were in many cases the most hideous looking objects
one can possibly imagine, some made of iron, others of
carved stone, all with great daubs of coloured paint


indiscriminately dabbed over them. The roads were
very rough, being unmade. I was rather tired on
arriving at my journey’s end.
Indore is a very primitive place and decidedly the
most uncultivated I had yet seen in India. The railway,
which is quite a new introduction, will doubtless greatly
improve it.
There is no hiding the fact that here the great
Holka reigns supreme; he passed along one of the streets
as I entered the city with a mounted escort of his own
troops; they were fine-looking men, wearing a dark
brown uniform, with large turbans, and carrying lances.
There was a great crowd following who cheered lustily.
There are large barracks here for the native soldiers;
the city also contains a fine palace and many temples.
In some of the streets there are long rows of stalls
similar to those seen on market days in the north
county towns of England. The vendor sells all kinds
of native ware and eatables.
The climate in this district is very different to the
close, damp heat of Bombay; during the day it is
intensely hot, but as night comes on it is very cold.
I did not find a couple of blankets and an eiderdown
quilt too much on my bed; in fact, they made me just
nice and comfortable.
I went for two or three shooting and riding excur-
sions during my stay, which were most enjoyable,
returning to Bombay after a very pleasant three weeks’
tour.
It was now time to leave the sunny shore of India
for those of Australia. I engaged a second-class berth
on board the P. and O. S.S. “ Siam,” which I con-
sidered at the time sufficiently luxurious for a single
young fellow journeying alone. I was indeed sorry to


part from my friends, the Chalks. They had themselves
great thoughts of visiting Australia, and half promised
to follow in the next steamer for Melbourne. I left
them sincerely hoping that they would carry out their
intention. We steamed out of the Bombay harbour at
half-past five p.m. on February the first.
It was now my lot in travelling to mix more
amongst my own countrymen than I had done for many
months past. No doubt, I ought to have appreciated
their homely society, but could not manage to do it.
They were indeed a strange mixture. My quarters on
board were decidedly of the rough and ready kind.
In the first place the accommodation allotted to second-
class passengers was very inferior. I was surprised to
find this on board a ship carrying the flag of the
P. & O. Co.; they profess a great deal, but my experi-
ence was that it ended there. It was simply disgraceful
for them to charge twenty shillings a day passage
money.
Our cabin was right forward on the ship, and next
to the forecastle, for some unknown reason or, as I
thought afterwards, to work a donkey engine, there
were hot steam pipes running along the floor. These,
together with the climate, made it almost unbearable
below stairs. On deck we were not permitted to walk
abaft the funnel, the remainder of the room was strewed
with cattle, sheep pens, and hen coops; upon these we
were obliged to sit, there being no other place provided.
We were also unpleasantly near the Lascar fellows, who
enjoyed their unsavoury dinners right under our noses.
Just at the top of our companion stairs there was
a very comfortable deck-house, but this, of course, was
reserved, and the smoking-room, for the first-class
passengers, and we could only enter at the risk of being
snubbed.


I had one friend on board, Mr. Hormusjee Bomorjee
Jujeebhoy, a Parsee I had met in Bombay. He was on
his way to visit some coffee plantations in Ceylon. He
travelled first-class, but often came forward to have a
chat. I was very sorry to lose him at Colu'mbo,.
As I said, my companions were not by any means
members of the upper ten thousand. The man occupying
the bed above mine was a full private in the 9th Lancers,
and invariably came to bed with a carcase full of
intoxicating liquor; on more than one occasion, when he
got a chance of going ashore at Ceylon, he was carried
back to the ship, and after a few hours’ gentle, child-
like slumber which, however, was broken at intervals
by violent snorting, more like half-a-dozen pigs than
anything else, awoke to the fact of his being in the
bunk instead of still chatting amongst friends in the
canteen ashore.
This individual was particularly anxious to be
chummy with his mate, as he chose to call me, but his
mate, being a cold-hearted fellow, demanded that his
quarters should be changed. After a little trouble and
much haggling with the steward, I removed my baggage
into another cabin.
I believe it’s a fact that discharged soldiers leaving
India are given a passage at a very reduced figure,
either home or to any British Colony. If lam right
I consider it A^ at one P a yi n g three
or four times the money should have no advantage what-
ever in the way of accommodation, and should be
obliged to rub shoulders with them in the way I was
obliged to do.
We had one really nice young fellow, about four-
and-twenty, son of a Colonel. Having been unsuccess-
ful in India, he was going to try his fortunes further


south. He seemed quite out of his element and, I think,
felt having to rough it very much indeed.
As for the rest of the passengers, most of them
joined us at Point-de-Galle, many being transferred over
to the “ Siam ” from the English mail, bound for
Calcutta. They consisted of two Australian horse-
dealers, true specimens, as hard as nails, with plenty
of gold chain and pendant; they had the appearance
of being able to defeat the efforts of any buck-jumper
in the Colony. We also had the company of a paper-
hanger and a carpenter; their chief was travelling
saloon, and was going out to superintend the decoration
of some large mansion near Melbourne. There were
also two foremen gold miners, and three or four young
Scotchmen, who had become dissatisfied with the pro-
spect of coffee-growing, and were about to try their
luck at sheep farming. The general tone of the conver-
sation at table within our limited circle may be judged
from the description of our company, but I must not
omit to say that they were all a good tempered and
jolly set of fellows, so far as they went. I am quite
sure they enjoyed the voyage thoroughly, and in many
cases better than their grander brethren further aft.
The journey as far as Colombo was really most
enjoyable, so far as the cool sea breeze was concerned,
being a nice and agreeable change after the sultry heat
of Bombay. We had a good view of the Malabar
coast nearly the whole distance, presenting some very
pretty pictures, also passing at times large sailing and
steam ships bound for various ports. As we neared thp
port, a perfect fleet of small boats could be seen leaving
the shore, some sailing and others rowing towards us;
before we had cast anchor they had quite surrounded
us. They were of great interest to me, having never


witnessed such a sight in my life. These boats are most
unique and curious; the hull, or body, is composed solely
of the trunk of a tree, hollowed out, with rough seats
placed across, sufficiently wide for one man to sit upon;
it is pointed at either side. Parallel with this, at a
distance of about three yards, floats a heavy log of
timber, which is connected at either end by an arched
branch of a tree, the whole being tied together with
rope. This is used for the purpose of balancing. Many
of these boats hoist large sails, and are carried at a
rapid rate before the wind, being most skilfully handled
by the natives.
Our engine had no sooner ceased working than the
Cingalese came swarming on board, anxious to drive
hard bargains for their odds and ends, which chiefly
consist of ivory, ebony, and tortoiseshell ornaments,
also all sorts of precious stones, especially sapphires and
rubies, together with a great variety of nick-nacks.
They offer large quantities of fruit for sale—pineapples,
cocoanuts, etc. Occasionally a cheap purchase is made,
but such cases are rare, the purchaser being generally
severely bitten.
The Cingalese are a sharp, intelligent people at first
sight, and at a distance the men may easily be taken for
women. They wear the hair, which is long, rolled round
in a knob behind, through which is fastened a tortoise-
shell comb. They have a long, coloured skirt, reaching
to the ankles, and tunic bodice. The women wear a
coloured cotton skirt and small tippet, covering the
shoulders and breasts.
We were only allowed a couple of hours on shore.
My inspection of the town was, therefore, very limited;
it only consisted of a hasty walk through the bazaar
and a glance at the country round about, which enabled


me to see that the chief seaport town of Ceylon was
not only prettily situated, but a flourishing little place.
We expected to remain at Galle some days, as the
English mail was telegraphed late on leaving Aden.
We anchored in the excellent little harbour on the even-
ing of February sth, but some little distance from shore.
The water in many parts is very shallow, and ships are
unable to approach too near the land. At daybreals we
found ourselves beseiged by our old friends, the boat-
men.
I engaged one to take me ashore; it required some
Httle effort on my part to screw up sufficient courage to
trust myself in such a cockleshell boat, but was re-
assured on finding the men quite as skilful as those at
Colombo.
The view along the banks of the Bay is charming;
all round for some little distance inland it is thickly
wooded with groves of tall cocoanut palms and other
trees, of all shades of green, backed up by hills, also
thickly wooded. The little town, breaking through the
long variegated green line, lies a little to the left. On
landing the town is entered by a large gate; the streets
are decidedly wider than many I have seen, and are also
clean. The British soldier is often met walking about,
seemingly quite at home. The vendors of small ware
are a decided nuisance; they follow you from place
to place and hang about the doors of the hotel.
A coach plies daily between Colombo and this
place along the coast road, which is a journey well
worth taking, if there is time, but the Captain of the
ship would not give me permission, as he said the
English boat might come in at any time.
I took a drive to the cinnamon gardens, situated a
few miles inland. This was a most delightful drive


through some very pretty country. The road all the
way was excellent, and in many places thickly wooded
on either side. I don’t think I visited a prettier country.
There is not much to be seen at the gardens them-
selves. I walked about a little time, made a few pur-
chases in the shape of some ebony and cinnamon
walking-sticks to give to my friends at home.
Great was my delight in finding the sensitive plant
growing wild in large quantities along the side of the
footpath. On touching it with my stick or foot the
leaves would shrink up, and after a few minutes gradu-
ally lift up their little heads and spread themselves
once more before the world.
To illustrate how travellers are imposed upon I
will just mention a circumstance which occurred during
the drive back to town. On the road from the gardens
a man followed my conveyance for upwards of a mile
and a half, offering for sale a fine sapphire. At first
he started by asking two pounds for it, but as I took
no notice of him he gradually reduced his price as low
as ten shillings. To get rid of the man I then, for the
first time, made him an offer of one rupee. He at once
closed the bargain, calling out at the same time, “ Take,
Sahb, take Sahb, the first thing sold to-day; that’s why
Sahb get so cheap.” Of course, this valuable article
was nothing more than a piece of glass. He, therefore,
made a good thing out of his long run. This is no
isolated case; these fellows make a good thing out of
every steamer which puts into port. At night I used
to go ashore to see that sight of all sights, the wonder-
ful little firefly, with its shining blue light, in size
rather less than an ordinary small candle flame. These
pretty little insects hover about in great numbers, and
were to me a source of great interest; immediately they


come in contact with anything the light is at once
extinguished.
We sailed away from this exquisite garden on
February 9th, and directed our course in a straight
line for the great Australian colony. We crossed the
line two days after leaving Galle. The weather was
dull and cloudy overhead, which somewhat detracted
from the romantic idea generally pictured in tales of the
sea at this great event. Again, there were none of the
practical jokes which used to be indulged in on board
sailing ships, as a means of varying the monotony.
Since the introduction of steam such frivolities have
almost entirely disappeared, and have given place to a
state of things totally different, all now being cold,
stern matter-of-fact business.
On the same day we passed two ships homeward
bound; from this time the voyage was unaccompanied
with any incident worthy of note.
I passed my time chiefly reading and enjoying the
fresh sea breeze. The weather, as we journeyed south,
gradually became colder, as compared with the tropical
heat to which I had been accustomed for some months.
We sighted land on the 20th February, and the
following morning steamed through the entrance of the
fine little bay at King George’s Sound. This tiny colony
is at present quite in its infancy. The little town called
Albany is situated on the right as you enter the Bay,
overlooking the clear, beautiful water and lofty hill
which stands out in bold relief on the other side.
We remained only a few hours, but were able to
land and take a short walk into the country. It was
here that I first saw the Aborigines, and was astonished
at their hideousness. They are short in stature and
have a very dark, I may almost say black, complexion.


Their hair is black, coarse and straight, the lips thick,
nose flat, and the eyes large and wide apart.
The men and women alike are clothed in skins,
or have a rough blanket wound round the body.
I saw several with their boomerangs and spears. They
come into Albany when a mail is expected to get what
they can from the passengers. The men are very fond
of showing their excellence at spear throwing. Several
of our people placed a small coin on the top of a stick
and put in the ground perpendicularly. The native,
standing 20 yards or so away, in many instances directed
his aim so well as to strike the coin with the point of
the spear, and was not slow in claiming it as his reward.
These unfortunate people have sunk into the lowest
and most degraded state of humanity; it is quite
impossible to spread civilisation amongst them, and the
certainty of their becoming extinct is a mere matter of
time. Their food is of the most disgusting kind; they
eat almost anything that comes in their way, viz.,
worms, snakes, lizards, grubs, also the flesh of the
opossum and kangaroo; these latter are considered
quite a delicacy. They live to a great extent in the
open air, but many build small huts, made with the
branches of trees.
The next point of call was Glenelg, for Adelaide.
The whole line of coast as we approached was one
beautiful undulating landscape of rich, waving corn-
fields, which sight filled my mind with thoughts of
our own garden island, very many miles to the north-
ward.
I did not go on to Adelaide as there was no time.
We only left the mail bags and picked up others for
different parts of the Colony.


The police boarded us here and apprehended one
of our passengers, a man who joined the ship at King
George’s Sound. I did not ascertain what he had been
doing, but as far as appearances went, he certainly
looked capable of committing any crime.
Two days out from Adelaide, at 7 a.m., February
27th, we entered Port Philip. The passage between the
Heads is only a little more than a mile in width, which
affords a splendid view of the two hills on either shore.
Passing through this imposing entrance the ship at once,
as it were, leaves the mighty ocean for the smooth waters
of an immense and almost landlocked lake. It measures
something like thirty miles in any direction, and the
scenery on the banks is varied and pretty; in many
places it is hilly, and here and there are pleasantly
situated towns.
In a northerly direction lies the harbour for Mel-
bourne, near the mouth of the Yarra Yarra River and
Williams Town. Before going alongside the jetty all
our mail bags were unloaded and handed over the side
to the Post Office officials, and hurried off to town.
As we steamed up to the landing stage I kept a
good look-out for Mr. Kesterson, a gentleman I had
met in London, and to whom I had telegraphed from
Glenelg. I could see nothing of him, but about
eight o’clock a.m. the steward brought me a letter from
his wife, stating I was to go at once to her address at
St. Kilda. I left my box and other luggage on board
and took the train to Melbourne, which is about eight
miles from Williams Town.
I was at this time in great difficulties with regard
to money matters, having to spend my last sixpence to
rebook to St. Kilda.


On arriving, Mrs. Kesterton received me very
kindly, and told me that her husband was out of town,
but he was expected to return that evening. I was not
a little grieved and disappointed to find that my rela-
tions and friends at home had neglected to write stating
that I was coming. My arrival was, therefore, quite a
surprise.
There was only one letter, from my old friend,
Harry Wrightson, which had been waiting some three
months; it had been overhauled a great many times, and
my readers can well imagine, had been considered a
most mysterious document. I consoled myself with the
idea that most likely there were letters in the mail bags
I had watched with so much interest being handed
overboard only a few hours before. I waited anxiously
for their delivery, but was doomed to further disappoint-
ment, for the postman passed the house with a total dis-
regard to all my anxious watching.
I explained my position to Mr. Kesterton, who
advanced me some money; he and his wife were most
kind, and insisted upon my accepting an invitation to
put up at their house, although I urged very strongly my
desire to take lodgings in the town.
Just a month from this time I was happily released
from all anxiety by the arrival of a batch of letters,
fortunately one from home, which placed me on a proper
footing, and enabled me to discharge my numerous
liabilities.
The colonists have every reason to be proud of the
city of Melbourne; it covers a considerable area, and has
some wide streets, with good shops. The houses are
built chiefly of stone, and are much after the style of
our own in England. The principal streets are Collins
Street and Burk Street. The buildings in them are


mostly fine, consisting chiefly of Banks, Warehouses of
various kinds. Insurance Offices, and large blocks of
business premises, and much resembling those in the busy
city of London. There is no system of surface drainage
in Melbourne, so that on wet days the water runs in
perfect torrents down the roads. In front of many of
the shops, and at crossings, the guttering is spanned
by a small wooden bridge, under which at all times
there is a certain amount of water running. I have
seen some of the streets in the lower part of the town,
near the Yarra, so inundated as to be quite impassable
for foot passengers.
Our brothers in the Antipodes are quite justified in
claiming for their public buildings, which consist of
the Houses of the Legislature, the Post Office, Public
Library and Museum, a place amongst the best structures
of a similar kind in the large cities of our own Mother
Country. They have also erected a fine monument to
the memory of the great explorers, Burk and Wells;
this stands nearly at the top of Burk Street, occupying
a very good position.
The example of the Londoner is followed by the
people of Melbourne, in that they reside as far as con-
venient from the turmoil of the city, in one or other of
the various suburbs. These districts are growing with
great rapidity, and the building operations carried on
are very extensive.
St. Kilda and Brighton may fairly be considered to
rank first. They are pleasantly situated on the banks
of Port Philip. The former place has a splendid Parade
where, on fine days, the ladies and gentlemen of fashion
may be seen in large numbers enjoying the fresh sea
breezes.


There is also good sea bathing at St. Kilda. The
climate is sufficiently warm to admit of the most delicate
person having a dip in the briny any day during the
whole year, without the least fear of getting any harm.
Our house was only three minutes’ walk from the sea.
I had a season ticket and used to run down to the baths
every morning before breakfast, which I enjoyed
immensely. The portion of the sea set aside for bathing
is railed off for fear of sharks, which, I am told, are
numerous in the Bay.
Melbourne also possesses an excellent Park, situated
on the St. Kilda road; at present it is new, but in a few
years, when the trees and shrubs have had time to grow,
its attractions will be much greater.
It would be quite impossible for me to over-estimate
the hearty and warm hospitality of the colonial people;
it is certainly not surpassed by the proverbial Scotch
welcome, of which we hear and read so much.
The first aim of the Australian seems to be to make
his visitor perfectly free and easy, and at home.
In the towns every household of any pretensions
generally has an open evening at least once a week, when
the friends drop in promiscuously. The time is spent
very pleasantly; there is, as a rule, singing and music,
also card parties, chatting together, with various other
amusements. The host and hostess lay themselves out
to entertain their guests in the pleasantest possible
manner. It was in this way that I made many acquaint-
ances, which afterwards developed into close friendship.
I had not been long in Melbourne before I received
what I considered a high honour, and, at the same time,
a great kindness, at the hands of the Government of
Victoria, in the shape of the following letter:


Railway and Roads Department,
Spencer Street,
Melbourne, Secretary’s Office,
March 4th, 1878.
Sir,
By direction of the Honourable the Commis-
sioner of Railways and Roads, I have the honour
to forward herewith a free pass over the Govern-
ment lines of railway, available during your stay
in the Colony, and of which I am to beg your
acceptance.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
etc., etc.
John Paterson, Esq.
I shall always look back upon the receipt of this
letter with heartfelt thanks. It not only enabled me
to see much more than I otherwise would have done, but
also added very considerably to my enjoyment and
comfort.
It is needless to say that I made good use of the
pass. My first journey was to travel from one end of
Victoria to the other.
I left Melbourne early in the morning and took the
train to Sandhurst, remaining there all night, pro-
ceeding to Echuca the following day. This growing
town is situated on the banks of the Murray River,
which forms the boundary of New South Wales. A
fine bridge was in course of construction across the
river, intended for the extension of the railway, and also
for vehicular traffic. This will tend to open up the
country much further north, and I was told that it was
hailed with delight by all the inhabitants of the sur


rounding neighbourhood. The country in this district
and, in fact, all along the line of railway, consists
of a vast landscape of pasture land in plots of many
thousand acres, owned by the rich squatters, and used
as sheep runs.
I was anxious to stay a short time at one of these
large stations, to witness the system of working, and
have always been sorry that I had no opportunity of
doing so. Echuca is not a large town, but a very thriv-
ing one. The principal business of the place is carried
on with the different farmers in the district, and consists
of transfer of stock, sale of wool, provisions, etc.
Ballarat, where I arrived on the evening of the
first of April, the chief town of Victoria, ranks, I
believe, second to none inland. It is especially interest-
ing on account of its historical connection with the great
goldfield operations. The past glories of the district,
if such I may be permitted to call them, are distinctly
manifested, for the deserted claims which are distin-
guishable by the hillocks of thrown-up earth are as
thickly studded about the country as plums in a Christ-
mas pudding; in fact, there is scarcely a piece of vacant
land which has not been turned over in search for the
precious metal.
The town itself is built much after the style of
Melbourne. The Town Hall is a fine building, and
situated in the leading thoroughfare, in which there
are also good shops and hotels.
I thought I should be obliged to leave this district
without seeing over a mine; knowing no one in the
immediate neighbourhood, it was quite impossible to
obtain an order, and I soon learned that the miners are
not allowed to encourage strangers without this official
document. I was busy thinking how to get over the


difficulty when I remembered the kind offer of one of
the passengers on board the “ Siam.” His address
being in my pocket-book, I determined to hunt him up.
He was the manager of a mine at a small place called
Edgerton. The train took me within seven or eight
miles of the place, and I covered the rest of the distance
by buggy, travelling over some very rough country, and
arrived at the small township about six in the evening.
The hotel, at which the necessary introduction was
made, is the largest and only one visible in the
small, straggling township, the houses of which
were perched on the top and on the irregular sides
of a small hill, the approaches in every direction
being of the roughest character. The roads, or
rather, apologies for such, were full of large holes, and
pieces of timber were lying about in every direction.
All these impediments, of course, tended to make travel-
ling rather a dangerous experiment; the roads, as a
matter of fact, had never been made, and consisted
simply of tracks cut through the bush.
I found the hotel a homely and comfortable sort of
place, as far as it went. The house was built entirely
of wood; this was not peculiar to the one, for all the
others were of the same material. All the rooms were on
the ground floor, there being no upstairs, at least, so far
as I could ascertain. The whole place seemed to be
inhabited by miners, who assembled every evening in
the glorious tap-room of Mrs. Murphy, to smoke the
ever-cheerful pipe and talk over the events of the day,
not forgetting, at the same time, to indulge in a little
flirtation with one or other of the five charming
daughters of the worthy hotel proprietress.
It was one of the Australian up-country chums
before-described who directed me to Mr. Griffiths’


house. I found him a good specimen of the class of
men who, take them as a whole, are a downright hearty,
good-natured set of fellows. My friend lived in a
pretty little cottage with a nice garden round it,
I broke in upon the family circle just as two of the
little ones were saying “ Good-night ” to their father
and mother, before being packed off to bed; they were
really bonny little children. The sight was indeed
pretty, and impressed me very much, I had seen nothing
of the kind for quite six months.
I received a most cordial welcome, my fellow
passenger being surprised and delighted at my coming,
and expressed his willingness to do anything for me.
We spent a few very agreeable hours together.
At length the time arrived for visiting the workings
of the gold claim; a doctor in the village accompanied
us. We first witnessed the breaking up of the quartz
into small pieces, then the process of grinding it almost
into powder. After this it is most carefully washed, by
means of being run wet over damp flannel, the gold
remaining behind while the stone, being the lighter of
the two, runs off. This process is gone over several
times, to ensure no gold being lost.
To descend the mine we were dressed in an old
pair of trousers and blue flannel tunic, tied round the
waist, top boots, and a hat not unlike a dustman’s.
The three entered the cage at the mouth of the pit, each
with a candle in his hand; we were slowly and surely
let down about 800 feet, passing at intervals worked-out
channels, looking like long never-ending caves. At last,
reaching the bottom, we travelled along by means of a
train, pushed by men, through a low tunnel, out of
which branched in several directions other tunnels of a
similar kind. After covering some distance in the car


we got off and groped our way along a passage, not
four feet high, and often wading several inches in
water. The men, half-naked, were working at the end
of each arm of the pit with pickaxe and spade. Theirs
is certainly not an enviable position, for they have to
work very hard in all sorts of distorted positions.
My friend gave me a small piece of quartz, which
I have carefully kept as a reminiscence of the visit.
On ascending the shaft I thanked Mr. Griffith for
all his kindness, and after bidding him and his friends
good-bye, returned by coach to Ballarat, thence by
train to Melbourne, having been much pleased with all
I had seen.
I was just a little surprised and glad to find, on
my reaching town, that Mr. and Mrs. Chalk, of Bombay,
were really on their way to Australia. Their being able
to leave India was very doubtful at the time I left.
I started off for William’s Town when the ship was
expected, to give them once more a hearty shake of the
hand. They remained in Melbourne for about a fort-
night, and then crossed over to Tasmania. It was
during my stay in Melbourne that the railway was first
opened into the wide tract of country extending over
the east of Victoria, called Gippsland. I travelled by
one of the first trains, I think it was the third, which
had covered the whole distance of the line, which was
one hundred and twenty miles, or thereabouts, in
length, terminating at the township of Sale.
This was one of the most interesting railway jour-
neys I have ever taken; the country I passed through was
most varied and, in many places, very rugged. When
the train pulled up at the little stations there was quite
a demonstration on the part of the inhabitants of the
neighbourhood, assembled to witness the sight. The


people, for the most part, were stalwart, brown-faced,
stout-hearted bushmen, dressed in the wildest of cos-
tumes, with the large wide-awake Australian hat, to
shade the face from the hot sun. They looked the
picture of health and strength, and capable of any
amount of exertion and hard labour, of which there
was no scarcity in the country they were cultivating.
At frequent intervals the train passed througn many
miles of thick bush, where man had never penetrated,
except to cut the narrow pass through the forest of ever-
lasting gum trees, to lay the line of railway. In many
places the bush is so thick that from the train I could
only see a few yards into it, and on either side only a
few feet distant.
The tall, straight gum trees, thickly clustered
together, rose to the enormous height of between 150 to
200 feet. I passed through forests of this kind, extend-
ing for several miles in length. The sight was one so
grand that time can never efface it from my memory.
I remained several days at Sale, taking short tours
round the neighbourhood. In my walks I was much
struck with the sameness of the landscape, so different
to that of dear old England. In Australia there is no
beautiful Spring and Autumn, no change of the leaf,
no chestnut, beech, lime, oak, and a thousand other
varieties of trees. Even the grass is not the same rich
colour as ours; the only tree is the gum, and all around
is one sombre picture of evergreens.
There is one thing which I must not omit to men-
tion, and that is the ferns, which are found growing
wild in great varieties, more particularly the tree fern,
which reaches an immense height, and is a very hand-
some plant.


Overhead the screeching parrots, with a plumage
embracing all the colours ever invented, fly in flocks of
hundreds at a time; snakes are also numerous, but, for
the most part, harmless. Once, one fully five or six feet
long wriggled across the path in front of me, and dis-
appeared in brushwood.
The climate of Australia quite came up to my
expectations, and answered the description I had
received of it to an admirable degree. It is certainly
well suited for a person with a delicate chest. My visit
extended into the advanced Autumn, and I never found
it necessary to wear my overcoat, excepting late in the
evening. The air is dry, and although hot, it is, at the
same time, invigorating.
Before my acquaintance with the Island was many
weeks old I entertained serious thoughts of remaining
for an unlimited period, and finding some means of
obtaining a livelihood. But the receipt of a letter from
home quite altered by intentions.
Having been nearly three months in the Colony, I
began to think it time to turn my face homeward. I
had met a Mr. Wren several times at Mrs. Kesterson’s
“ At Homes,” and had become very friendly with him,
and also a Mr. La Barte. These two had come out to
Melbourne together in a sailing vessel called the
“ Devon,” and were returning by the same ship. She
was chartered by Messrs. Green, and in her homeward
voyage was to go round Cape Horn.
This was just what I wanted. Having experienced
so much hot weather on the way out, by way of a little
change decided upon the Horn route home. This would
also enable me to make a complete circle round the
world. It required no small amount of persuasion on
my part to get the Company to allot me a cabin to


myself, but at length I succeeded, and began to make
all the needful arrangements for the long sea voyage.
It was quite a matter of time going round to say
good-bye to the many friends I had made in Mel-
bourne. As the time drew near for departure I began
to realise that I had become attached to the place. I
felt indeed loathe to leave it, and downhearted at the
idea of starting. It is no exaggeration to say that the
day was one of the most miserable I have ever spent in
my life; no doubt the feeling was accelerated by the
prospect of so long a voyage at sea, coupled with the
knowledge that it would be a difficult matter to settle
down to an every-day routine in a smoky London office
after having revelled in the freshest of air and climate
for nearly a twelvemonth.
On the afternoon of Saturday, the 10th May, the
ship “ Devon,” with all her belongings, pushed off from
the pier at Sandridge, amidst the shouts and cheers of
the people ashore, mingled with the familiar sailors’
songs, as they haul the ropes on deck. We were, how-
ever, not destined to go far; anchor was cast in the
Bay, in close proximity to St. Kilda. This was most
tantalizing, and had a decidedly depressing effect on all
the passengers.
At daylight on Sunday morning we were relieved
from our suspense by the arrival of a tug boat, and ere
breakfast was over we had crossed the broad, smooth
waters of Port Philip, and passed for the second time
through the narrow Heads into the boundless expanse
of the South Pacific Ocean. After taking us a respect-
ful distance from land the tug left us. We thus parted
with the last connecting link with Australia and her
people, for how long a time, who can possibly tell?


The ship remained becalmed when she had been left
for fully twenty-four hours, but at length, to the joy
and satisfaction of all, a good breeze sprang up, and we
sailed away to our heart’s content.
The “ Devon,” having fairly started on her home-
ward voyage, those on board of her began to make
arrangements for settling down to an every-day routine.
For the first few days all were busy making their
little six-foot square home as comfortable and snug as
possible; every available space in the small apartment
was made use of. One and all seemed to be engaged in
the same business; hammering was indulged in to an
enormous extent. Carpets had to be put down, pictures
hung up, boxes put away, shelves erected, and a variety
of odds and ends required the attention of the voyager.
But, at length, all the hubbub and excitement gradually
died away, and things in general began to assume a
very different character.
Each passenger, having settled all the matter which
immediately concerned himself, began to enquire into
the affairs of his neighbour. It was not difficult
to read the thoughts of the man whom you
caught looking at you, or as far as that goes, at anyone
else, as he said to himself, “ Now I wonder what sort
of a fellow you are?” and “ How we shall get on
together for the next three or four months?”
Whispering and private enquiry was indulged in to
an unlimited extent until, at last, each having satisfied
himself that he had drained the cup to the dregs, and
was thoroughly conversant with the whole history, past
and present, of his fellow passenger.
By this means cliques were formed on board and, as
is generally the case, they were totally at variance with
each other. I allied myself with my old Melbourne


friends, Wren and La Barle, who were very thick with
the Captain; thus I became fast friends with him also.
He was a very jolly fellow, and before we reached our
journey’s end I had much to thank him for, in the way
of little extra comforts and pleasures which, but for
his good nature, I should never have received.
The wind favoured us, and we made rapid progress,
sailing on and on until we had passed round the south
of New Zealand, and were shaping a direct course for
Cape Horn. No stirring events occurred to give extra
life to the usual march up and down deck, or to stimu-
late the conversation with the officer on the watch; no
politics, no news, nothing, in fact, and the greatest
excitement prevailed if by some chance we passed an-
other ship, at a distance of twenty miles or so. A free
fight between two seamen, or the killing of a pig, was an
event of great importance, and was duly chronicled in
the “ Weekly Devon Gazette,” edited by Joseph Wren,
M.A. This periodical contained all the local news, both
afore and abaft, and articles of a most amusing descrip-
tion were contributed by the crew and passengers. As
a rule, the writer’s name did not appear, and was kept
by the worthy editor a profound secret. I regret that
I never retained a copy of the paper, for it was indeed
a curiosity of literature.
Day by day, as we neared the Horn, the weather
became most unsettled; snow, rain, and hail storms
continued incessantly. It was quite a rare occurrence for
the sun to peep through the heavy clouds; the wind was
high, boisterous and bitterly cold; added to this the
days were very short. For fully a week it was quite
dark at eight o’clock in the morning, and daylight only
lasted until three-thirty in the afternoon.


Walking on deck was carried on with the utmost
difficulty, and as for holding on, the ropes were more
like icicles than anything else. Wren, La Barte and I
took quite a pride in doing our utmost to brave the
tempest; we kept our look-out most religiously with the
officer on the watch. I was usually attired in two over-
coats, two pairs of trousers, top boots, a huge
Sou’wester, with a thick woollen scarf round my neck.
By this means I succeeded in keeping myself fairly
warm, but there is not the slightest doubt of my ever
forgetting the intense cold which I experienced.
I have a lively recollection of standing on deck one
night with the second mate, fortunately holding on to a
rope attached to the mizen mast, when the ship, without
the least warning, gave a tremendous roll, and I was
carried off my feet and suspended in mid-air, something
after the style of a boy on a giantstride.
Most of the time we were running right before the
wind, with a strong current in our favour, covering as
much as 285 to 320 miles in twenty-four hours. It was a
strange and wonderful sight to see our little ship ride
over the grand swells as they rolled on towards us.
I can think of no better analogy than to compare them
with hills, possibly 100 feet in height. As they neared
us our position seemed quite perilous. Now we were
down in the trough of the sea between two mighty hills,
and in a few minutes riding safely on the top. Each
time, on arriving at the summit, the ship appeared to be
urged forward by the currents, but was quite unequal
to the task of keeping pace with it, and, as it were, the
wave seemed to pass from under us, speeding its course
onward, only to be steadily and surely followed by an-
other, perhaps mightier than its predecessor.


I well remember the night of the 15th June, in the
evening, about 11 o’clock. I was on deck, the clouds
behind were gathering black and heavy, when, to the
great astonishment of all, a terrible squall struck the
ship without a moment’s warning; rain and hail came
down in torrents, with a terrific wind. Luckily for the
“ Devon ” it was right aft, otherwise we should most
certainly have capsized. I held on for my life to some
ship’s tackle, and although not more than eighteen feet
from the main mast, I could not see it. The night was
so dark and the rain so heavy that it was quite blinding.
Although we had very little sail set, when the squall
struck us, to those on board it felt as though the ship
had been lifted bodily out of the water and pitched
forward, after which we went through it at a most
alarming rate. The people below were terror-stricken.
The captain hurried on deck and ordered the ropes
holding the lower topsails to be let go. This being done
we were further amazed to find that the sails remained
full and the immense yards stood stationery, held by the
sheer force of the wind. When it subsided they came
down with a heavy thud, tearing the sails and doing a
quantity of other damage.
I may fairly say that our troubles were at an end
after the 18th June. On this memorable day we cleared
the much dreaded Cape Horn and, with the exception
of a snow-storm occasionally, of which we took advan-
tage by engaging in snowballing, Saloon versus Fore-
castle, or a sail carried away, or the shipping of a sea,
we experienced no bad weather.
Whales were our constant companions in these
waters; they frequently came within a few yards of the
vessel, throwing up immense fountains of water in all
directions.


The king of all sea birds must not be forgotten; he
was always to be seen hovering about us, ever eager for
a meal. His piercing and watchful eyes caught sight in
an instant of the smallest fragment of meat on the
surface of the water; he would at once dive down upon
it with the greatest precision. The Albatross is a mar-
vellous bird. He has been known to follow a ship for
several days, without resting, and when flying the out-
stretched wings appear quite motionless, but the bird
glides gracefully and very rapidly through the air.
There is great sport to be had in catching the
Albatross. We shot several when they were flying imme-
diately over our heads, but they seldom fell on deck;
we, therefore, adopted the more cruel but, at the same
time, more sportive method of baiting a hook at the
end of a long line with a piece of fat pork.
It was not long before the greedy bird devoured
the bait, and then came the fun of hauling him in. The
process was anything but an easy one, for resistance
is strong and fierce, and in many cases the line breaks
or the hook tears through the flesh of the mouth, and
he makes his escape. Until he is landed on deck it is
impossible to realise his gigantic proportions; many of
those caught were four to five feet long and, measured
from the tip of wing to wing, twelve to fifteen feet.
When safely deposited on board he creates quite a sensa-
tion; being such a huge bird, he cannot get sufficient
air under the wing to enable him to rise from the deck,
and if is really great fun to watch him wobbling about
in the most stupid manner. Everyone considered it an
act of great personal bravery to go within a yard of the
enemy, for a peck from his powerful beak would most
assuredly take a large piece of flesh out of a man’s leg.
We sometimes managed to slip a noose over the beak.


and by this means prevented mischief, but he was gener-
ally killed by a stab from a long sailor’s knife.
Our Captain did not always appreciate our little
jokes, for the bird is very sick immediately he arrives on
board, causing a great deal of extra work, as the stains
are very difficult to erase.
The Albatross is not the solitary occupant of these
cold latitudes, for in contrast with him we saw scores of
tiny Mother Carey’s chickens. These are little black and
white birds, no larger than an ordinary sparrow. It
seems so strange that such little mites should appear
quite at home in such rough and troubled waters. They
are very difficult to catch, and all our efforts in this
direction proved unsuccessful. We, however, managed
to capture a few other birds of the Petrel tribe, many
of them being prettily marked, and about the size of
an ordinary seagull.
Beautiful warm sunshine increased daily as we sailed
northward, and was greatly welcomed. We soon threw
off our warm wraps and entered into and thoroughly
enjoyed all the many delights attending a sail through
tropical waters. There are very few pleasures which
can equal a moonlight sail in a full rigged ship in these
warm and calm latitudes. One cannot but be struck
with the grandeur all around and above him. The
broad reflection of the moon upon the water, reaching
to the horizon, with ships passing to and fro in the
distance, and the innumerable bright stars shining
overhead; conspicous among them shines the Southern
Cross and North Star, both visible at the same time,
presenting a picture which it is impossible to describe,
and cannot be realised excepting by an eye witness.
To watch the sun rise in the morning and set in the
evening is another magnificent sight, and to the thought


ful man, fills his mind with wonder at the mighty and
glorious creation.
It was a long time before I became quite at home
on board ship and able to climb the masts like an old
salt. I well remember reaching the cross tree for the
first time; it was quite a red-letter day in my existence.
After this I gradually went higher and higher until
I became quite at home on the main royal yard and even
managed Jacob’s ladder without much difficulty.
The Sabbath was as strictly observed on board as it
is in the city of Edinburgh. The Captain insisted on
all hands who were not on duty coming to morning
service. The bell on the poop deck was rung for a
quarter of an hour before eleven to give the congrega-
tion time to put on their Sunday clothes; this being
another point on which the Captain was most particular.
Early in the day the apprentices all appeared in
uniform, with brass buttons and badge cap, they
arranged the saloon ready for church.
The harmonium was put into position and the books
laid along the saloon table. In good weather the service
was conducted on deck. The Captain reads the service,
La Barte helping sometimes by reading the Lessons and
Wren played the harmonium.
On fine, calm days the Captain used often to lower
a boat for us, manned, as a rule, by Wren, La Barte,
the captain of the forecastle, a middy, and myself.
We often had great fun on these occasions. One day we
saw an immense turtle floating on the water. We tried
our hardest to capture him, but could not manage it;
several times we came quite close to him, but on seeing
us he would take a dive under water and escape, and
we were at last obliged to return home without the prize.


We tried bathing from the boat, but only once;
the suffering attending the first trial was so great that it
prevented our ever making a second attempt. The sun
was so fearfully hot that it raised large blisters on our
backs, which were most painful, causing us to have
many sleepless nights. The demand for glycerine was
something stupendous, each turning good Samaritan
and rubbing the other’s back every night before turning
in.
On Saturday, the 18th of July, just two months out
from Melbourne, the “ Devon ” crossed the line. Fair
winds, good weather, favoured her, and we had every
reason to congratulate ourselves on the progress she had
made up to this time.
It was on the same afternoon that we were all
hurriedly called on deck and, to our surprise and
delight, witnessed one of the most beautiful sights it is
possible to conceive. The ship was passing through
quite a small fleet of that unique little shell-fish, the
Nautilus; the sun was shining full upon them, and the
variety of colour reflected upon their tiny outspread
sails was most wonderful. They can only be seen in
the way I have described. I could not help thinking
what a pity it was that one of these charming little
creatures could not be lifted out of the water and carried
away without at once losing all its exquisite beauty.
The good weather continued, in spite of prognosti-
cations to the contrary; splendid moonlight nights
encouraged us to arrange some kind of amusement, in
which all could join. We sent a circular note to all on
board inviting tenders for able-bodied amateur actors
and singers. The response was hearty, and quite sur-
passed our expectations. An entertainment was arranged
once a week, and a bottle of grog was to be given to


the actors alternately by the Captain, Wren, La Barte
and myself.
In our assistant steward and sail-maker we had
two most valuable men; the former was a first-rate actor
and the latter sung a capital comic song, and was
usually encored once or twice. The costumes were most
ridiculous. Sails made himself a long beard of rope
yarn, the wigs were made of the same material. The
evenings spent in this way on the quarter deck were
quite a success, and I’m sure afforded great pleasure to
all our little company. During the day we passed ?
great deal of our time in painting up the ship, and
making her look spick and span, mending ropes, etc.
We also amused ourselves in trying to catch sharks,
these water man-eaters followed us sometimes for days,
but one of the passengers, who was not of our party,
took a peculiar delight in spoiling our sport by firing
at the fish from his port window, by this means pre-
venting our having the least chance of a bite.
In these latitudes we met with several ships, out-
ward bound; one day I counted as many as twenty.
There was a great to-do on board when one came near
enough for us to speak. By this means we obtained the
latest home news, which was most eagerly sought after.
Nine out of every ten ships were British. We spoke to
a few Americans and one Greek barque, but no other
foreigner the whole voyage.
It was not long before our good winds carried us
into that curious Saragossa Sea, situated between the
Equatorial current and the Gulf Stream. For several
days before getting thoroughly into it large pieces of
seaweed were noticed floating upon the water. This, at
first, created not a little excitement amongst us, and we
were constantly being invited to come here and go there


to see another large piece. This sort of thing, however,
soon died away, and the quantity of weed began to
increase to an enormous extent, so much so that we were
quite surrounded with it, as thick as flowers in a well-
planted garden. There was a perfect hue and cry on
board for bottles; the Captain and steward were quite
besieged for them. We all had long lines, with a hook
and lead at the end, and occupied ourselves shying at
and hauling in the seaweed, which we bottled up with
salt water and kept as a curiosity.
One day we were rejoiced to see overhead a heavy
cloud gathering, which not only brought with it a little
cooler weather, but also, after a short time, a regular
tropical downpour as well. All the scuppers were
stopped up, and every available tub and bucket filled
with fresh water but, best of all, the Captain ordered a
sail to be suspended by the four corners so as to catch
the rain. He then persuaded the ladies to retire to their
cabins. After they had gone we all undressed, our
worthy skipper included, and enjoyed the fresh water
bath to our heart’s content; the rain drops were awfully
cold. We had a splendid shower bath by standing
under the sail and pulling down the corner. On another
occasion we had a duck hunt, which was great fun.
The boat was lowered on a nice, fine day, when there
was scarcely any breeze, and after pulling off a short
distance the Captain threw a duck overboard; we rowed
after her as quickly as possible, but all our efforts to
catch her were useless. The moment we got near she
would take a dive and swim under water for a great
distance, and in quite another direction. We were then
obliged to turn round and start off again, to be served
the same trick, not once but twenty times. It was
excellent sport and, finding our efforts of no avail, our


best hands took to diving. Some of the fellows appeared
to dive right on the top of the duck, but after the splash
she always turned up in one direction and the man in
another. This game was carried out for nearly two
hours, until we were obliged to give it up altogether,
and the poor bird was at last slain by a blow from an
oar.
There was a good old dog on board called Brownie.
We spent many a pleasant half-hour romping about with
him; he was a general favourite, and often came with
us on boating excursions. During the hot weather the
poor fellow was very much upset, and used to lie and
pant on deck. It was quite grievous to see him. I took
great delight in painting his kennel,, and wrote his name
in large letters over the entrance.
The Azores were sighted on the 13th August.
Tlores was reached about ten in the morning, and Coroo
at eleven. This was the first land sighted since
Tasmania. We were close in shore and had a splendid
view. The islands are hilly, and look very pretty.
The next day was the Captain’s birthday, and a
glorious time we had; champagne and cigars were
handed round ad libitum. The afternoon was spent in
his private cabin; he did all in his power to make the
day a most enjoyable one to us all.
After passing the Western Isles everyone began to
look anxiously forward to the time when the “ Devon ”
would reach England. There was a great deal of specu-
lation as to what sort of weather we were going to have,
and how long it would take us to get home. The chart
was in constant requisition, and I am within the mark
when I say that the distance was measured at least a
score of times. As we neared the Channel a great many
ships passed both homeward and outward bound, which


was of itself a sure sign that we were approaching our
destination; signalling was the order of the day, and
helped to pass away many an anxious moment. We
also fell in with a most unusual number of porpoises;
they rolled themselves over and over all round the ship
in the most playful manner. It was most interesting to
watch their many manoeuvrings.
“ Lights ahead!” was the universal cry at 8 p.m.
on the night of the 20th of August. The Captain was
worried almost to death by all sorts of enquiries, until
it was at length officially announced that the Lizard
Light was the object of attraction.
One of our passengers, an old lady of some sixty
summers, who had spent many years in Australia, and
whose husband had died there, was so delighted at the
prospect of seeing once more the land which contained all
that was dear to her on this earth, that she spontaneously
ordered champagne to be served round in the saloon
and grog to all hands, at her own expense.
I got up early the following morning and from the
main royal yard had a good view of Start Point, and
sighted no less than sixty-two ships. From this point
we were rather unfortunate, having strong head winds
and being obliged to tack alternately from the shores of
England to those of France. Off the Isle of Wight we
got rid of two passengers; they were taken on shore by
an Antwerp pilot boat. The “ Devon ” seemed totally
unable to beat her way up Channel. We returned to
Beachy Head no less than three times after having taken
as many trips over to France, until at last it was decided
to hire a tug. This was soon done, and it was not long
before the hawser was duly secured and we were being
steadily towed up Channel by a boat glorying under the
title of “ Her Majesty.”


We had a good view of Eastbourne, the coast of
St. Leonards and Hastings; sighted Dungeness at this
point. Passed a pretty little yacht; had a good cheer
from those on board of her.
The long row of lights at Folkestone and Dover
were passed about 10 p.m. on the 23rd August, and the
following day found all on board safely landed in
London.


