

A TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF BURKE AND WILLS.
THE FATE OF THE EXPLORERS.
BY HENRY KENDALL.
Set your face towards the darkness, tell of deserts weird and
wide,
Where unshaken woods are huddled, and low languid waters
glide; •U
Turn and tell of deserts lonely; lying pathless, deep, and vast,
Where, in utter silence, ever Time seems slowly breathing past;
Silence only broken when the sun is flecked with cloudy bars,
Or when tropic squalls come hurtling underneath the sultry
stars!
Deserts thorny, hot, and thirsty, where the feet of men are
strange,
And eternal Nature sleeps in solitudes which know no change I
Weakened with their lengthened labours, past long plains of j
stone and sand,
Down those trackless wilds they wandered, travellers from a
far-off land!
Seeking now to join their brothers, struggling on with falter-j
ing feet,
For a glorious work was finished, and a noble task complete;
And they dreamt of welcome faces, dreamt that soon unto
their ears
Friendly greetings would be thronging with a nation’s well-
earned cheers;
Since their courage never failed them, but, with high, unflin-
ching soul,
Each was pressing forward hoping, trusting all should reach
the goal!
****#*.#*
Though he rallied in the morning, long before the close of day,
He had sunk, the worn-out hero, fainting, dying, by the way!
Blit with death he wrestled hardly, three times rising from the
sod,
Yet a little further onward, o’er the weary waste, he trod;
Facing Fate with heart undaunted, still the chief would totter on
Till the Evening closed about him—till the strength to move
was gone!
Then he penned his latest writings, and before the life was spent,
Gave the records to his comrade; gave the watch he said was lent;
Gave them with his last commandments, charging him that
night to stay,
And to let him lie unburied when the soul had passed away !
Hearken to the brave words spoken whenhe feltthe coming end,
When he turned and told his wishes to the firm and faithful
friend:
“Closer, sit where you can hearme-this will surely soon be past,
We have struggled hard against it, but I’m too far gone to last 1
You must try to bear up longer, there is succour on our track,
If you live till it arrives here, take this watch, they lent me,
back;
Take it and the note-books with you; from the note-books
they will learn
Something of our baffled movement^ —something of our sad
return!
I have been too weak to write much, hence the records.are hut
few,
But you’ll tell them what I cannot, and I hope and trust irt you 1
And for God’s sake stay bhside me! in this wild and lonely place,
It is now a comfort to be near a.friendly face!
Tarry here till all Is over, so that you may see me die;
I shall pass away contented, knowing some one lingers by I
When you find that I have left you, do not move from hence
my bones;
Do not hide them in the darkness of a heap of dust and stones ;
Let them lie uncovered, comrade, bare and bleaching on the
land—
But this pistol, which I give you, leave it loaded in my hand!”
Through that night he uttered little, rambling were the words
he spoke; _
And he turned and died in silence, when the. tardy morning
broke!
Many memories come together whilst in sight of death we dwell,
Much of sweet and sad reflection through the weary mind must
well!
As those long hours glided past him, till the east with light
was fraught,
JOHN KING,
Sole Survivor of the Advance Party of the Expedition, and the only
living Man that ever crossed the Australian Continent.
Who may know the mournful sicret —-who can tell us what he
thought ?
Very lone and very wretched was the brave man left behind
Wandering over leagues of wasteland, seeking, hoping help
to find;
Sleeping in deserted wurleys, fearful, many night-falls through,
Lest unfriendly hands should rob him of his meal of wild
nardoo!
When he reached their old encampment, when the well-known
spot was gained,
He had yet a hope within him that his other friend remained!
So he searched for food to give him, trusting they might both
survive
Till the aid so long expected from the cities should arrive;
So he shot three crows and took them to the gunyah where
he found
Him, whom he had thought to succour, still and lifeless on
the ground 1
Weak and wearied with his journey, there the sole survivor
stooped,
And thu disappointment bowed him. and his heart with sad-
ness drooped.
But he rose and raked a hollow with his wasted, feeble hands,
Where lie took and hid the hero in the rushes and the sands;
But he, like a brother, laid him out of reach of wind and rain.
And for many days he sojourned near him. on that wildfaced
plain.
Whilst he stayed beside the ruin, whilst he lingered with the
dead.
Oh! he must have sat in darkness—gloomy as the tears he shed.
Where our noble Burke was lying—where his sail companion
stood—
Came the natives of the forest—came the wild men of the
wood:
Down they looked and saw the stranger—him who there in
quiet slept—
Down and o’er the chieftain bitterly they moaned
and wept, pj*,
Bitterly they mourned to see him, all uncovered to the blast,
All uncovered to the tempest as it wailed and whistled past,
And they shrouded him with bushes so in death that lie might
lie,
Like a warrior of their nation, sheltered from the storm and sky.
3*** * * * *
Ye must rise and sing their praises, O ye bards with souls
of fire,
For the people’s voice will echo through the wailings of your
lyre;
And we’ll welcome hack their comrade, though our eyes with
tears be blind,
At the thoughts of Promise perished, and the shadow left
behind!
Now the leaves are bleaching round them, now the gales
above them glide,
But the end was all accomplished and their fame is far and
wide;
Though this fadeless glory cannot hide a grateful nation’s .
grief;
And their laurels have been blended with a gloomy cypress
wreath!
Let them rest where they have laboured! but my country
mourn and moan;
We must build with human sorrow grander monuments than
stone.
Let them rest—for oh! remember, that in long hereafter time
Sons of science will be wandering o’er that solitary clime.
Cities bright must rise about it—age and beauty there shall
stray,
And the fathers of the people, pointing to the graves will say,
“Here they fell, the glorious martyrs, when these plains were
woodlands deep;
Here a friend —a brother laid them; here the wild men came
to weep!”
ROBERT O’HARA BURKE.
While we are yet, in reverential and grateful
sorrow, meditating on the sad end of one of
Australia’s great explorers; while the facts of a
successful expedition, alas! overshadod by a deep-
ly mournful termination, are fresh in our minds;
surely it cannot be otherwise than gratifying to
the general public to have some memorial of an
event which will hereafter form one of the most '
interesting as well as one of the saddest recoi’ds
in our national annals. The leading incidents in
the life of ther-€hief of the Expedition are neces-
sary to give completeness to any souvenir of his
heroic achievements, and truly mournful end.
Robert O’Hara Burke was sprung from an
ROBERT O’HARA BURKE. LEADER.
Anglo-Celtic race, whose highest characteristics
were loyalty, generosity, and a spirit of heroic
enterprise. The fire of the O’Haras of the
Heights seems to have been beautifully tem-
pered by the chivalrous spirit of the Norman
De Burgos in the subject of this biographical
notice, for we have it on the most undoubted
authority that the Australian Explorer was as
remarkable for benign amiability as he was
distinguished for a strong resolute will. He
possessed a temperament in which calm enthu-
siasm and decided energy were happily blended.
Nature intended him for a hero; but she ordained
that the field of his heroism should be found
where patience was more requisite than courage
—or rather, where the union of both was indis-
pensably necessary to achieve success. .
The mere dates of suclva man’s life cannot be
uninteresting to any Australian; besides certain
facts accompany those dates which help to indi-
cate how circumstances fitted him for the
glorious although in one respect mournful event
of his life. Robert O’Hara Burke was born at
St..Clerans, County Galway, Ireland, early in
the year 1822. He was one of four brothers, all
of them distinguished for intrepidity and a high
sense of honour, and three of whom at one time
held commissions in the British Army. One
fell in the Crimean War; another is supposed to
have fallen in the late Chinese War; and the
third is now, if in the service, probably in a high
position in the Dritish Army. Robert O’Hara,
to whose memory we publish this tribute, after
completing his education in Belgium, joined the
Austrian service in a regiment of Hungarian
Hussars, and there distinguished himself both
as an active soldier and a high-souled officer.
Subsequently he returned to his native country
and obtained an eminent post in the Irish Con-
stabulary, which he occupied till he immigrated"
to Australia in 1853. He obtained highly hono-
——-P»4»lo''«m«pleym^nt-in.;-MelliouruevvinxH'liich _he .
(in ! ticalk discharged hi- duties till the Rus-
sian war expanded into such vast proportions,
that he determined no longer to keep aloof from
such a wide arena of glory. He sct„out for
England, hut arrived too late to take part in
the historic struggle which drew him thither.
He returned again to Victoria, and remained in
the service of the Government till he undertook
that expedition which through so direful a cross
brought him sd bright a crown.
Burke was mild hut cheerful; courageous hut
patient; of energetic will, hut open to conviction,
and much influenced by friendly advice. He is
every way worthy of the highest honours we
can pay to his memory.
WILLIAM JOHN WILLS.
It was a fortunate circumstance for Mr. Burke,
on his undertaking the leadership of the perilous
expedition which the Exploration Society of
. Victoria organised, to find a partner so worthy
of him in all respects as Mr. Wills. The energy
and cool determination of the former was won-
derfully assisted by the enlightened enthusiasm
and generous devotedness of the latter. William
John Wills was the intellectual element of the
grand undertaking. He was pre-eminently a
student—a young man who sought for no royal
roads to knowledge, but one who entered on the
roughest discipline, content -with the hope of
working out the highest intellectual results for
himself by himself. Not that this was done
through a spirit of depreciation for the labours
of others, but because his was one of those
enquiring natures which are never satisfied with
partial revelations of truth. He was constitu-
tionally an experimentalist, and, unless allowed
to work out results according to the bent of his
genius, he would probably have sunk among that
large class of society, known as people of medi-
ocre ability. He was eminently a practical man,
although an ardent love of science elevated and
ennobled the practical character of his mind.
William John Wills was born at Totness, in
Devonshire, England, in the year 1834, and
arrived in the Colony of Victoria, in 1853, the
game year in which Mr. Burke reached it. He
was the son of a Physician, and had, under the
dare of his father, devoted many years to the
Various branches of physical science which are
necessary to fit one for the Medical Profession.
jToung Wills received his academical education
at Ashburton, a grammar school endowed by the
celebrated William Gifford and Dr. Ireland, the
jjean of Westminster. Afterwards he devoted
Himself, with dll the ardour of his inquisitive
. -iniud, tu the stpdy of Chemistry, Natural Philo-
sophy, ami Physiology. The" .sensation which
yjhe discovery M the immense gold-fields in
Australia crea’ted in England in ’52—’53 natu-
rally operated on a mind so susceptible as that of
Wills, and he consequently joined in the great
exodus from the mother country to Australia.
Witldmany other energetic and chivalrous young
men he made his way to Melbourne, then the
'grand centre of attraction for the enterprising
and enduring.
The first engagement Mr. Wills took in Aus-
tralia was that of Assistant Superintendent of
he Royal Bank Station at Deniliquin. In the
year 1854 he met his father, who came out ex-
pressly to join him, with whom he started in
business at Ballaarat. His thirst for additional
scientific knowledge —astronomy in particular—
led him to apply for a situation at the Melbourne
Observatory, which he obtained and kept, with
great credit to himself, till lie joined the gallant
Burke on tfte grand expedition to the Gulf of
Carpentaria.
Wills possessed a most amiable character.—
His attachment to Burke, his devotion to the
cause of science, his heroic endurance during
the last days of his life, and his profound but
unostentatious religious fervour, fully entitle
us to rank him among the many great men who
are an honour to our common humanity.
WILLIAM JOHN WILLS, LIEUTENANT.
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
Origin and Results of the Victorian Exploration
\ Expedition.
} Nothing could be more uncertain, not even.the Great Asian
' Mystery of Benjamin Disraeli, than the popular notions pre-
’ valent, till within the last few years, of the character of central
) Australia. People of the highest intelligence, as well as those
t gifted with vivid imaginations, held the most opposite views,
) on the subject. While one believed in the probability of a
) great inland lake or sea, another put faith in a vast central
n desert. Some thought broken chains of rocky mountains a
very likely actuality in such a region; while others maintained
) that a vast expanse of stunted forest was its most probable
) characteristic. Nobody that we know of urged the opinion
•> that the leading features of the unknown interior were (gene-
l rally) lively to be similar to those of the island-continent
) already known. Hence it is not surprising _ that British
S novelists should occasionally indulge in curious ideal sketches
1 of those parts of Australia beyond the “limits of civilization”,
5 and treat us to desolate wilds or bright oases, as fancy sug-
J gested, quite unlike anything which the Australian Settler’s
> positive experience had taught him to believe in.
\ Although the public mind was confused about this mystery,
0 there were not persons wanting who had really moderate—
) although none had or could have exact—views on the subject;
S and although all, more or less, expected, one day or another,
to hear of something startling about it, still a spirit of rational
desire to get at the truth existed amongst us, and that spirit
) has at last succeeded in realising most gratifying results.—
\ These results have been bought dearly—have been purchased
a at the sacrifice of the lives of some of the best men who ever
J came amongst us. The Bones of the Great Leichardt are
\ bleaching amongst the wilds of the interior, and, not many
St months ago, Burke and Wills became victims to their cravings
2 for discovery.
n It is a remarkable circumstance connected with the history
j of exploration in this country, that each successive expedition
? (except the first) illlustrated the mistakes of its predecessor.
It cannot be denied that in some respects cacli was an improve-
Jt ment on the went before it, still the fact is patent,
1 that none of them really did away with all former errors—that
S none of them can be pronounced complete in the details of
J their pre-arrangement. The great cause of failure, we believe,
3 has been a want of combination between all parties interested
?\ in, or responsible for, the successs of the movement. Our
\ earlier explorers—Sturt, Mitchell, and Oxley—met with diffi-
J culties which we can reasonably pronounce insurmountable.
J The reason is obvious, because at the time those intx-epid men
* faced the wilderness —a fearful phrase, by-the-way, has this
? facina the wilderness become amongst us! —the Country was
J not prepared to undertake exploration on a really broad and
r scientific scale. More ought to have been (and could have
j been) done for Leichardt; hut unfortunately more was not done,
l and Leichardt—a lamentable consequence—is now no more I
t The recent Victorian expedition was got up on a broader
5 and a more rational basis than any that went before it, still
< its last incident is full of sorrow and bitter regrets. It had
/ its origin in this wise.
0 An advertisement appeared in the Argus newspaper about
3 two years ago, in which an anonymous individual offered to
~ give the magnificent sum of One Thousand Pounds towards
0 the equipment of an expedition to explore the mysterious
J interior, on condition that an additional sum of Two Thousand
rj Pounds should ho raised for the purpose. The people of Vic-
£ toria—true to the go-a-headism which they really possess or
affect to possess—-grasped at the offer of the nameless person
just alluded to, and sent in subscriptions so rapidly that in a
V comparatively short time sufficient funds were raised for the
purpose specified. Whilst the money was pouring in from all
Sf quarters, it was proposed and carried that the general direc-
£ tion of the undertaking should be placed in the hands of a body
of savans. This was, an unfortunate determination as the
M event proved; and fOr the simple reason, that savans as a
rule, are not the most practical men in the world. Dean Swift,
6 or some one quite as satirical, once said, that “he never knew
5 a parson who knew the real value of a shilling”—we might
□ change the expression and say, we never knew philosophers
who cared much about details—their conceptions are too
sublime ever to stoop to miserable minutiae. It is our firm
belief that if a dozen plain, practical, common-sense men had
been on the Victorian Exploration committee, arrangements
would have been made, by which the lives of the explorers
would in all probability have been saved. But this is somewhat
irrelevant to our present narrative.
Sufficient funds having been procured, and Camels (an ex-
cellent idea) having been imported from Arabia for the under-
taking, nothing remained but to organise an exploring party
and appoint a leader to superintend them. This was done, and
on the twentieth of August, 1860, a thoroughly efficient body
of explorers, about a dozen in number, under the command of
Robert O’Hara Burke, who had for his lieutenant William
John Wills, set out to explore the mystery of central Austra-
lia. “They were,” writes an accurate • chronicler, “supplied
“with five-and-twenty camels, as well as horses, stores, ins-
truments for scientific observation, and everything that the
“Exploration Committee deemed desirable to ensure the suc-
cess of the undertaking. Full of high hope, and animated
“by a sense of the reliance placed upon them, and the magni-
tude of their purpose, the gallant leaders were cheered at
“their departure from the Royal Park by a vast multitude
“assembled to wish them God spedd. There was something
“in the pride, pomp, and circumstance of their setting out to
“endure they knew not what, and to unveil what no one could
“foreshadow, that called before the fancy the embarkation of
“the great explorers of the days of Ferdinand and Isabella,
“with its chivalrous aims, and its daring invitation to the
“fellowship of danger.”
We need not, O Reader, follow them through that long and
painful journey so valuable in its positive results to the gen-
eral public,—hut alas 1 fatal to those.who heroically undertook
it. People will now build monuments, and carve gilded
epitaphs, to do honour to their memory. This no one with a
particle of right feeling can object to. But far higher must
be the way we honour the illustrious dead. We must teach
our children to reverence their memories, and to study the
great achievements of their lives, so that none of the things
they did may be forgotten, or notliing that is due to them be
loft undone. The most inperisliablo monument of a great
event is its transmission from generation to generation.
THE BURIAL OF BURKE, IN THE WILDERNESS.
BURKE’S LAST LETTER.
“I hope we shall be done justice to. We fulfilled our task,
hut were not followed up as I expected. The depot party
abandoned their post. June 26—King has behaved nobly.
I hope he will be taken care of. He came up the creek in
accordance with my request.”
“June 29.—King has stayed with me to the last. He has
left me at my own request unburied, and with my pistol in my
hand.” R. O’H. B.
CHRONOLOGY OF THE EXPEDITION.
1880.
August 20.—The Expedition started from Melbourne.
December 16. —Burke, Wills, King, and Gray, (the advance
party of the Expedition) left the Dep6t at Cooper’s Creek for
Carpentaria, with three months provisions.-
1861.
February 12.—Burke and Wills reached Carpentaria, after
having crossed the continent,
April 17.—Gray died, from exhaustion.
April 21. —Brahe left the Depot at Cooper’s Creek, in the
morning. . ,
Apyil 21.—Burke, Wills, and King, arrived at the Depot, in
the evening, and were too exhausted to follow Brahe.
April 23. —Burke, Wills and King, started from the Dep6t
at Cooper’3 Creek, to penetrate into South Australia.
June 30.—Burke died, from exhaustion, having been
unsuccessful in his attempt to reach South Australia.- Wills
died about the same time.
September 15.—King, discovered "by Howitt’s party, living
with the Blacks, who were very friendly to him since Burke
and Wills’ death, treating him as one of themselves.
September 18.—Wills buried by llowitt, in the wilderness.
September 21.—Burke buried by Howitt, in the wilderness.
THE EXPLORER’S GRAVE.
BY J. SHERIDAN MOORE.
“While rolling rivers into seas shall run,
“And round tire space of Leaven the radiant sun ;
“While trees the mountain-tops with shade supply,
“Thy honour, name, and praise shall never die.”
Drydfn's Virgil.
In might of an unconquered will—
In light of an undying hope—
He said “This mission I’ll fulfil,
“And pathways through the desert ope.”
So, forth he went, the brave and mild,
To map a realm of wastelands wild!
Oh, breathe not words of bitter grief,
Nor tell us of that journey’s moil!
Oh, speak not of the fallen Chief,
Nor those who shared his death-crowned toil 1
Enough to know a desert grave
Enfolds the relics of the brave.
It was, in sooth, a high emprise,
Through trackless wilds to trace a way,
And challenges far higher prize
Than man can mete —than men will pay.
The guerdon’s won! What may it be ?
A grave beneath a box-wood tree.
Well, mountain gorge, and wildering wild,
And bickering scrub, and burning sand
No more offend: for Heaven smiled,
And won the wanderer to a land
Where cares and griefs shall ne’er annoy—
Where life’s one trance of endless joy!
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
