

r t-lrt
■P Wm^)
S 'V \ O
Tremendous
Question:
Is the Church of England the Second
Beast of Revelation xiii., and a
Branch of Antichrist ?
JIC.ICJ O
“ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteous-
ness : that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished
unto all good works.”
2 Tim. iii. 16, 17.
F. H. DODGrSON.
QTUffiournc;
John Pounceby, Queen Street




A Tremendous Question :
IS THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND THE SECOND
BEAST OF REVELATION XIII., AND A
BRANCH OF ANTICHRIST?


every truth we acquire, we acquire also propensions
to communicate it. The life which yearns to possess,
yearns also to impart —and the more of God we have the
more we are impelled to give. Nor are we thus disposed by
impulse only. Lively consciousness of duty adds to the force
of spontaneous desire. Long before logic can conduct us to
the conclusion, intuition has leapt upon it, that we are under
obligation to make our convictions the joint property of our
fellows. Without needing to wait the issue of any analysis
of our responsibilities, we feel that our apprehension of truth
is a kind of trusteeship for those who have it not; and if
other and grosser influences prevail with us to keep our light
under a bushel, or hide our talent in a napkin, no sophistry
can wholly destroy the sense we have that we are guilty of a
social wrong, and that we are defrauding others of that which
is their due. —The British Churches in Relation to the British
People. By Edward Mial. (Arthur Hall, Virtue & Co.,
London, 1850.)


Tremendous
Question:
Is the Church of England the Second
Beast of Revelation xiii., and a
Branch of Antichrist ?
' All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteous-
ness : that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished
unto all good works.”
2 Tim. hi. 16, 17.
F. H. DODGSON.
(JTUffioutne:
John Pouncebv, Qdeen Street.




PREFACE.
JS the Pope the Antichrist of Revelation ? In the sixteenth
century this was, perhaps, the most important and most
urgently practical question a believer could ask himself.
As Gilpin, the reformer, puts it, If the Pope be Antichrist, it is
our duty to leave the Church of which he is head, but not
otherwise. Just before his martyrdom, Cranmer declared
that, in his belief, the Pope was Antichrist, and that he would
have none of him. To the writer it appears that the same
question, but under a different form, confronts us now. Is the
Church of England an image or copy of that of Rome ? Is
the sacerdotalist, with his belief in apostolic succession and
baptismal regeneration, the true Churchman ? Or, on the
other hand, are the Evangelical party the true Churchmen,
and the sacerdotalists but tares among the wheat ? Who is
the representative man of the Church of England—Dr. Pusey
or Bishop Ryle ? Are the Evangelicals those referred to in
the command to come out, lest they partake of the plagues
that await the apostate Church, denounced in the latter part
of the thirteenth chapter of Revelation ?
In the following pages an answer to these great questions
is attempted. In Rev. xii. we are shown a picture of the true
Church on earth—the members of the mystical body of Christ
despised and rejected of men, even as was their Lord, the
Head. Following this, in the thirteenth chapter, we find
prefigured precisely what one might expect, mere nominal
Christianity—sacerdotal Christendom, it might be named—
under the figure of a composite beast, that recalls the four
empires of Daniel, but is almost exclusively a Graeco-Roman
symbol. The latter half of the chapter the author believes to
refer to the Church of England. He has endeavoured to show


that the symbolisation prefigures the political origin of the
Church of England, its highly anomalous position under
Henry VIII., and its subsequent establishment,under Edward
VI. and Elizabeth, as an independent Church, modelled on
that of Rome. The means for identification, however, do not
stop here. The character of the new Church—subservient to
the civil power, but arrogant and overbearing to all
dissentients —is shown to have been foretold with absolute
accuracy.
A considerable portion of this small volume is taken up by
extracts. These are earnestly commended to the best attention
of the reader. They have their value, and will, it is believed,
reply in a manner that cannot be answered to the great question
here treated. Even if the connecting matter supplied by the
present author should be regarded as mere verbiage, the Acts
of Supremacy, canons and formularies speak with no
uncertain sound, and the facts referred to in the historical
extracts are so well-established that it is impossible to question
or deny their truth.
Any proceeds that may accrue from the sale of this work will be made
over to the London Missionary Society.


INTRODUCTORY.
T T may be well to explain briefly 7 how these pages came to
-L be written. Some little while back the writer became
acquainted with a work called “ Essays on the Apocalypse,
“ with Illustrations from English History, by R. B. Saunder-
“ son (Simpkin, Marshall and Co., London, 1838),” written to
prove that the Church of England was the counterpart of the
second beast in Rev. xiii. This interpretation was to him
altogether novel and most startling. Consulting other works
of repute, he found that in the Horse the -second beast is
taken to mean the clergy of the Roman Church. In Wesley’s
notes to the Apocalypse, which are based on Bengel, it is said
that the second beast had not then appeared. Canon Birks
and the Rev. E. Bickersteth take both the beasts of the
thirteenth chapter as referring to Rome. The writer has also
seen the second beast interpreted as referring to America, and
also to the Greek Church. It cannot be necessary to show at
length that none of these interpretations meet the conditions,
or that there is not at this moment any generally accepted
identification of the symbol. Mr. Saunderson’s views ap-
peared, therefore, to be worthy of the closest examination.
This the writer endeavoured to give, with the result that he
is wholly unable to resist the conclusion Mr. Saunderson
seeks to establish. Being satisfied in his own mind of the
truth of this interpretation, it seemed a plain duty to make it
public. Two courses weie open. He might have reproduced
Mr. Saunderson’s volume (which is now doubtless out of copy-
right), but to have done so would have been to ignore the
great advance which has been made in the comprehension of
English history during the last sixty years. Besides, although
Mr. Saunderson’s general conclusions appeared unassailable,
some of his particular applications are very questionable.
Thus, he believes that the lamb’s horns refer to the Universi-
ties of Oxford and Cambridge, and that the number of the
beast is the year a.d. 1666. The writer does not believe that
either of these interpretations can be sustained, particularly
the latter. In executing his task the writer has taken his


illustrations of English history almost entirely from the first
chapter of Macaulay, partly because Macaulay is an excep-
tionally good witness, but chiefly because this chapter has
been issued by Mr. Stead in his “ Masterpiece Library,” and
is therefore universally accessible.
The conclusion it is here sought to establish is one
bitterly repugnant to Churchmen of every school, and
also to the great majority of Nonconformists. These
latter are well aware of what Christendom owes to the
great Evangelical party in the Established Church. They
rejoice in the success of their ministrations, and would far
rather assist than oppose them. We must, however, not
forget that, however unpopular the views here urged may be, if
true they will inevitably be eventually established. Truth may
be, often is, unpalatable,, but better far to fall thereon and be
broken, than have it fall on us and be ground to powder.
There is, however, yet higher ground to take. We are com-
manded by God to come out of the Churches symbolised by
the beast and his image. If, then, the Church of England be
one of these Churches, it is our bounden duty to recognise
this fact, and come out of her as a plain matter of obedience.
To do so may be painful, but “ to obey is better than sacrifice,
“ and to hearken than the fat of rams.”
It will probably be urged that this identification is
impossible, by reason of the saintly men and women to be
found in the Church of England and its branches in the
colonies. The command above quoted, which is addressed
to “My people,” is an answer to this objection. We are
taught by it to expect to find true Christians in the Churches
represented by both the beast and his image. The presence,
therefore, of true Christians in any Church is no proof that
that particular Church is not one of the Churches denounced
in the 14th chapter.
It might also be urged that if this interpretation be
correct, the truth it teaches, being of such signal importance,
ought to be found elsewhere in Scripture. I submit that it is
so found, and exactly where it might be looked for—namely,
in the thirteenth of Matthew, where our Lord is describing
in prophetic parables the future of the Church. He says, in
the 33rd verse, the kingdom of God is like unto three mea-
sures of meal, in which a woman hid some leaven. Now,
leaven, in both the Old and New Testaments, is a type
of sin, and the very word “ hid ” implies in this passage
something surreptitious and evil. The meal represents the
Church, but why are “three measures” specified? The
number three is evidently significant. The writer suggests
that the “three measures” represent the three great


Churches—the Churches of Rome, Greece and England-
typified by the two beasts of Rev. xiii. These Churches
resemble each other very closely, and exhibit a marked
contrast to the Presbyterian, Congregational, and other
Evangelical Churches that sprang from the Reforma-
tion. The leaven would seem to represent principally the
sacerdotalism, the practical denial of the new birth, and
consequent admission of the world into the Church, by which
these three Churches are undoubtedly characterised.
It is probable that many of the views expressed in these
pages, even if not original on the part of the present writer,
will be both new and strange to a majority of readers. But
that surely should be no bar to their receiving a careful con-
sideration. True, Macaulay says that, given equal abilities
and an equal desire to arrive at the truth, he is unable to see
what advantage an inquirer of the nineteenth century has
over an inquirer of the second. This dictum, though no doubt
absolutely true as to those portions of Holy Writ that deal
with our personal salvation, cannot, surely, be accepted with-
out considerable modification. The Bible, though not a
scientific book, refers at times to natural phenomena, and it
is only reasonable to expect that as science advances, and
natural phenomena become better understood, these refer-
ences will also become better-understood. Thus the Psalmist
says of the heavens (that is, of the stars) : “ They shall all
“ wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shalt thou fold them
“ up, and they shall be changed.” Previous to the invention of
the telescope, with its space-penetrating power, such a state-
ment must have seemed almost unmeaning. Since, however,
astronomers have made us familiar with the idea of suns in all
stages of decay, we can understand for ourselves that it is
strictly and scientifically true, that the stars are indeed subject
to decay, and do in very truth “wax old.” The method
whereby their glories are to be renewed is as yet a matter of
conjecture. Again, the account of the Creation in the first
chapter of Genesis, with the creation of light on the first
day, and the sun and moon on the fourth, is now known to be
scientifically accurate. Further, much of the Old Testament
consists of history, and in the historical portion the relations
of the chosen people with the Egyptians, and the Assyrian,
Babylonish, and Medo-Persian Empires, occupy an important
part. It is quite certain that the discovery of the records of
these ancient kingdoms has thrown considerable light on the
early history of the Israelites. It is, however, in the prophetic
portions that the lapse of time confers the chief advantage
on the later investigators. As an illustration, we will take a
passing glance at the prophecies relating to Rome. To us it


is a matter of history that in the fifth century the Western
Empire, which till then had been undivided, was divided into
ten kingdoms—owning, however, the supremacy of the Pope—
and that this tenfold division has remained until the present
day. We can understand that it will remain till the return
of Christ. A Christian of the second century could not
possibly have the remotest idea of what was meant by the
“ ten toes,” or how the “ beast” that had been “ wounded to
“ death ” (lit., had had its throat cut so that it died) could live
again. A very remarkable, but little noticed, fulfilment of
prophecy in our own day will illustrate still more clearly how
dependent the prophetical student is on historical fulfilment
for a full understanding of the divine predictions, and also
what a flood of light the fulfilment of prophecy casts on the
course of history. From Rev. xvii. we learn that there were
to be seven different forms of government in Rome; also that
the “ beast,” or Papacy, was to be an eighth. But of the
seven, five of these forms of government (Kings, Consuls,
Military Tribunes, Decemvirs, and Dictators—see Tacit.
Ann. I. i) had passed away when John wrote. The sixth,
the Empire, was in existence. The eighth was to rise during
the continuance of the seventh, and to be prolonged into the
time covered by the short-lived seventh. The first six and
the eighth were easy to identify, and on them writers who
hold to the truth of the Protestant, or historical, interpreta-
tion have practically agreed. Not so, however, in regard to
the seventh. No two commentators that the present writer
has met with agree as to the meaning of this symbol, and
how should they when it had not come into existence ? We,
however, living at the close of the century, can see it must of
necessity be the present constitutional Kingdom of Italy. It
is unquestionably a form of government prevailing at Rome,
and calling for recognition. If, therefofe, we allot the
seventh head to the diademed Emperors, the Gothic Kings,
Napoleon’s Roman Kingdom, or any other temporary form
of government that may have run its ephemeral course during
the existence of the Papal power, we make eight heads, or,
including the Papacy, nine. This is one too many. It seems,
therefore, to be established beyond cavil that the seventh
head is the present kingdom. This, of course, could not be
understood previous to 1870, but now seems quite obvious.
The identification, however, of the Church of England
with the second beast of Rev. xiii. stands on another footing.
It has not been suggested by any recent historical develop-
ment, and was, humanly speaking, as easy to establish in the
days of the Tudors and Stuarts as at the present moment.
The reason, humanly speaking again, why the identity was


not long ago discovered, probably is that this interpretation is
equally distasteful to Roman Catholics, Churchmen, and the
great majority of Nonconformists, and therefore most un-
likely to occur to the mind of almost every student of the
Scriptures. Mr. Saunderson does not tell us the manner in
which he first received the identification. The resemblance,
"however, between the type and antitype having been once
suggested, there is no difficulty in working out the details of
the symbolic portraiture.
It is asked on the title page whether England is a branch
of Antichrist. Before attempting a reply it is obviously proper
to explain clearly the meaning of the term. The word, it
must be premised, is a compound made of the Greek
preposition anti and Christos, or Christ. Now, anti, in
composition, has several meanings, but we need only concern
ourselves with two, as the others are altogether inapplicable.
The meanings we have to do with are—(i) in opposition to, and
(2) instead, in the place of. Instances of both significations
are common. Of the first, antidote—something given to
counteract a poison—is a familiar instance. An anti- king is a
rival king ; an a«h’-general, the general of the opposing army.
Using anti in this sense, Antichrist is an opposing Christ —•
someone who is hostile to Christ. Of the second signification
we have a notable instance in the Acts of the Apostles. The
“ deputy we read of in the seventh verse is the pro-consul,
or, as we might say, the vice-consul or lieutenant-consul. In
these colonies the Lieutenant-Governor would be the anti-
Governor. We are now in a position to see that both senses
of the preposition may be applicable to the same individual.
The Lieutenant-Governor, who discharges the functions of
the Governor during the absence or illness of the latter, is an
a«h'-Governor in a rightful sense. If, however, a subordinate
ruler, like a Viceroy under the Great Mogul, were to revolt
and exercise regal functions in his own person, while still
retaining the title of Viceroy, he would then be an anti- ruler,
in the sense of ruler hostile to his rightful lord. Now, it will
be seen that both meanings of Antichrist are applicable to the
Roman Church in the first place, and in a lesser degree to all
other Churches the chief rulers of which may claim to exercise
functions which rightfully belong to Christ alone, the one and
Supreme Head of His Church on earth. The Pope claims to
be the Vicar of Christ—that is, a Vicechrist, or Antichrist in
the good sense of the term.
Christ, however, has left no room for any earthly vicar or
representative in the Church that He has founded. To assume
such a title is, therefore, to encroach on His prerogatives and
assume the right to exercise functions that belong to Him


alone. They that do so are so far His enemies, and Antichrists
in an evil sense.
This is not the place to argue at length in support of the
Protestant historical belief that the Papacy is the system
primarily foreshadowed by the Antichrist of Revelation.
This interpretation is taken for granted in the following
pages. Those who may desire to examine for themselves the
arguments by which it is supported may be referred, among
many others, to Mede (who wrote in the 17th century), Sir
Isaac Newton, Bishop Newton, and, among writers of our own
day, to Elliott (of the “Horae Apocalypticae),”the Rev.E.Bicker-
steth, Canon Birks, Dr. Wordsworth (Bishop of Lincoln), and
Mr. and Mrs. Grattan Guinness. In “ The Approaching End
of the Age,” by Mr. Grattan Guinness (section “ Foretold and
Fulfilled ”), the reader will find full materials for enabling him
to form an independent judgment on this supremely important
subject.
With these few remarks, which might have been indefi-
nitely extended, the writer sends forth his little work, with an
earnest prayer that it may redound to the glory of the
Almighty, and contribute to a right understanding of the.
Revelation He has given for our guidance.


H XTremenbous (Question,
WHATEVER may be thought of the answer here offered
to the question on the title-page, there can be no doubt
whatever as to the tremendous importance of the question itself.
If answered in the affirmative, it shatters every claim of the
great and powerful Church of England to be a sound member
of the visible Church of Christ. It not only justifies the
position of the Dissenter, but calls on all true believers in the
pale of the Established Church to come out, and take their
place among those whom they have regarded as heretics and
schismatics. I have called it a tremendous question, and can
hardly imagine a more tremendous question than the question
whether the historic Church of England is, or is not, a branch
of the great anti-Christian system denounced in such terrible
terms in the Apocalypse. To address one’s self to such a ques-
tion involves no small responsibility, and it is with a full sense
of this responsibility that the writer offers this contribution
toward the rightful understanding of one of the most mys-
terious passages in the Word of God.
Before seeking the identification of the second beast, it is
necessary to ascertaih what is meant by the first. This beast,
the description of which occupies the first half of the 13th
chapter, is usually taken by Protestant interpreters to
signify the Church of Rome. This explanation appears
hardly adequate. The ten horns and seven heads, no
doubt, signify Rome ; but the beast was like a leopard, and in
Daniel’s vision the leopard is the symbol of Greece. The
beast is, therefore, mainly Graeco-Roman. The mouth of the
lion and paws of the bear recall the Babylonish and Medo-
Persian Empires. Further, this beast confessedly stands for
some Church or Churches. I would, therefore, submit that the
beast represents mainly the Churches of Rome and Greece,
but has some relation, though in a far lesser degree, to the
Eastern Churches that rose in the countries once ruled by
the Babylonian and Medo-Persian Empires. If, then,
the Greek Church —to say nothing of the obscure
Eastern Churches, symbolised by the mouth of the lion
and paws of the bear—is of sufficient importance to


be included in the prophetic foreview, it might reasonably be
expected that the Church of England, as the dominant Church
of the wealthiest and most influential portion of the British
Isles, should also be mentioned, whether for evil or for good.
We now proceed to the examination of the second beast,
and propose to examine seriatim the different marks given to
us for its identification.
V. ii. And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth. —
We note, in the first place, that the second beast is described
as “ another ”in reference to the first. We have seen that
the first beast is composite, and that the component parts
prefigure the Roman, Greek, and Eastern Churches; we may
therefore conclude that the second beast, which is not compo-
site, represents a Church or ecclesiastical system bearing a
certain resemblance to the Churches prefigured by the first,
and especially to Rome, as being the most important. Also,
that its rise was subsequent to that of Rome. The Church
of England dates from the revolt of Henry VIII. from the
Pope, and is consequently long subsequent to Rome. We
next note that the second beast came out of the earth, whereas
the first came out of the sea. That is to say, that there would
be a fundamental difference between the origin of the Churches
represented by the first beast and that represented by the
second. Now, the origin of the earlier Churches was spiritual..
They are either the lineal descendants of the Apostolic
Churches, or they have separated from the parent stem in
consequence of a difference in some question of faith. The
origin of the Church of England was, on the other hand,
political and earthly. The story is too well known to need
repetition here. Henry, unable to obtain a divorce from the
Pope, procured from his Parliament an Act of Supremacy,
by virtue of which the prerogatives and powers of the Papacy
were transferred intact to the Crown. Unpleasant as it may
be to write such words, it is nevertheless perfectly true that
the Church of England is a Parliamentary institution. It
was called into existence by the Parliament of Henry VIII.,
organised and dealt with by the Parliaments of Edward VI.
and Elizabeth, and given its present form by the Parliament
of Charles 11. at the Restoration. It is thus, by its political
origin, differentiated not only from the earlier Churches, but
also from the reformed Churches which sprang directly from
the labours of Luther, Calvin, Knox, and the other leaders
of that great revival. The other Reformation Churches
cannot be intended by the second beast, because their origin,
like that of the elder Churches, was spiritual. The Church
of England is the only Church that meets the description, and
therefore must be the one intended. Now, it is not too much


to say that, from the revolt against the Pope to his death,
Henry was the Church of England himself. He was the
undoubted head, but where were the members ? Not the
bulk of the population, for they were still sincerely attached
to Rome; not the genuine reformers, for they had no sympathy
with him or he with them. His abilities and force of
character, his relations with foreign powers, and, above all,
the vast sums which the suppression of the monasteries placed
at his disposal, enabled him to maintain his position of
isolation to the end of his life. His system, however, fell with
him. In his son’s reign, the Protector Somerset and his
coadjutors found themselves under the necessity of securing
the support of a portion at least of the genuine reformers,
and it is from the compromise effected between these two
parties that the Church of England, as we know it, originally
sprang. As we proceed it will be seen that the second beast
prefigures the Church of England under both these aspects—
first as Henry YHL, and secondly as the Church in the form
that it took under Edward VI., which form it has practically
retained to the present day.
V. ii (cont.) And he fyad two horns like a lamb, and he spake as
a dragon. —lt does not seem probable that either of these
characteristics refer to Henry. No doubt he spoke often
enough as a dragon, but then, on the other hand, there was
but little of the lamb about him. They represent, I venture
to submit, two marked characteristics by which the Church
of England has been differentiated from all other Churches
during the whole course of its existence. It should be noted
that the number of the horns is specified. This is surely
significant. If the lamblike nature of the horns teaches us
to look for a lamblike or submissive spirit in the counterpart,
the mention of the number leads us to expect that this spirit
will be displayed under two closely allied forms. This is
precisely what we find. The “ two horns of a lamb ” repre-
sent, I submit, the twin doctrines of passive obedience and
non-resistance so loudly professed by Anglican divines in the
days of the Tudors and Stuarts. Indeed, it was not till
James 11. laid his sacrilegious hands on her temporalities that
the Church of England, for the first time in her history,
admitted that resistance to a sovereign might in some circum-
stances be justifiable. The following extract from Macaulay’s
History reads like a commentary on the political origin and
lamblike submissiveness of the Church of England :
“ Rather than grant to the civil magistrate the absolute power of
“ nominating spiritual pastors, the Church of Rome, in the eleventh
“ century, set all Europe on fire. Rather than grant to the civil magis-
“ trate the absolute power of nominating spiritual pastors, the ministers
“ of the Church of Scotland, in our own time, resigned their livings by


1 hundreds. The Church of England had no such scruples. By the
“ royal authority alone her prelates were appointed. By the royal
‘ authority alone her Convocations were summoned, regulated, prorogued,
“ and dissolved. Without the royal sanction her canons had no force.
“ One of the articles of her faith was that without the royal consent no
‘ ecclesiastical council could lawfully assemble. From all her judicatures
‘ an appeal lay, in the last resort, to the sovereign, even when the ques-
-1 tion was whether an opinion ought to be accounted heretical, or whether
41 the administration of a sacrament had been valid. Nor did the Church
grudge this extensive power to our princes. By them she had been
“ called into existence, nursed through a feeble infancy, guarded from
‘ Papists on one side and from Puritans on the other, protected against
‘ Parliaments which bore her no goodwill, and avenged on literary
‘assailants whom she found it hard to answer. Thus gratitude, hope,
“ fear, common attachments, common enmities, bound her to the Throne.
■ ‘ All her traditions, all her tastes, were monarchical. Loyalty became a
point of professional honour among her clergy, the peculiar badge which
“ distinguished them at once from Calvinists and from Papists. Both the
“ Calvinists and the Papists, widely as they differed in other respects,
' regarded with extreme jealousy all encroachments of the temporal power
“on the domain of the spiritual power. Both Calvinists and Papists
maintained that subjects might justifiably draw the sword against
‘ungodly rulers. In France, Calvinists resisted Charles IX.; Papists
‘resisted Henry IV.; both Papists and Calvinists resisted Henry 111.
“In Scotland, Calvinists led Mary captive. On the north of the Trent
“ Papists took arms against the English Throne. The Church of England
‘ meantime condemned both Calvinists and Papists, and loudly boasted
“ that no duty was more constantly or earnestly inculcated by her than
“ that of submission to princes."
To this it may be added that the Church of England is
the only branch of the professing Christian Church that re-
ceives at the hands of the civil power as its supreme head an
individual of either sex or of another Church. Indeed, the
only qualification insisted on at this moment for the headship
of the Established Church is that contained in the Act of
Settlement—viz., that he, or she. shall be a “ Protestant.” So
much for the lamblike spirit ; now for the dragon-like utter-
ance. Macaulay has noted this characteristic of the Estab-
lished Church as it displayed itself under the Tudors :
“ It is easy to conceive the indignation which must have been felt by
“bold and inquiring spirits, glorying in newly-acquired freedom, when an
“ institution younger by many years than themselves —an institution which
“ had, under their own eyes, gradually received its form from the passions
“ and interests of a Court—began to mimic the lofty style of Rome"
As she was in the days of her first youth, such she has
ever continued to be. Under the Tudors and Stuarts she
persecuted all dissentients with merciless vigour, and, though
no longer able to persecute, she still refuses to acknowledge
the pastors of other denominations as duly accredited ministers
of the Word of God. Nor is this exclusiveness accidental—it
is a necessary consequence of her constitution, as a reference
to her canons will plainly show. It will be noted that they


enjoin universal conformity, in language that may well be
likened to the voice of a dragon :
Canon 3rd* says : “ Whosoever shall affirm that the Church of England,
” by law established, is not a true and apostolical Church, let him be excom-
" municated, ipso facto, and not restored but only by the Archbishop, after
“ his repentance and public revocation of his wicked error.”
Canon 4th : “ Whosoever shall affirm the form of God’s worship in the
“ Church of England, established by law, and contained in Book of Common
“ Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, is a corrupt, superstitious and
“ unlawful worship, or contains anything repugnant to Scripture, let him be
excommunicated,” &c.
Canon sth: ‘-Whosoever shall affirm that any of the Thirty-nine
" Articles of the Church, agreed upon in the year 1562, for avoiding
'‘diversity of opinions and for establishing consent touching true religion,
“ are in any part superstitious or erroneous, or such he may not with a good
“conscience subscribe to, let hjm be excommunicated,” &c.
Canon 6th : “ Whosoever shall affirm that the rites and ceremonies of
“the Church of England, by law established, are wicked, anti-Christian,
“ superstitious, or such as, being commanded by lawful authority, good men
“ may not with a good conscience approve, use, or, as occasion requires,
“subscribe, let him be excommunicated,” &c.
Canon 7th; “Whosoever shall affirm the government of the Church
“ of England by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Archdeacons, and the
“ rest that bear office in the same, is anti-Christian or repugnant to the
“ Word of God. let him be excommunicated,” &c.
Canon Bth ; Relates to ordinations.
Canon 9th : “ Whosoever shall separate from the communion of the
“ Church of England, as it is approved by the Apostles’ rules, and combine
“ together in a new brotherhood, accounting those who conform to the
“ doctrines, rites, and ceremonies of the Church unmeet for their com-
“ munion, let them be excommunicated,” &c.
Canon 10th : “Whosoever shall affirm that such ministers as refuse
“ to subscribe to the form and manner of God’s worship in the Church of
“ England may truly take to themselves the name of another Church, not
“ established by law, and shall publish that their pretended Church has
“ groaned under the burden of certain grievances, imposed on them by the
“ Church of England, let them be excommunicated,” &c.
Canon nth : '* Whosoever shall affirm that there are to be seen within
“ this realm any other meetings, assemblies, or congregations of the King’s
“ born subjects, than such as are established by law, which may rightly
“ challenge to themselves the name of true and lawful Churches, let him
“be excommunicated,” &c.
The last is a truly dragon-like utterance, as by it the
members of all the evangelical Churches within the Empire
are, ipso facto , excommunicated. With such a canon in
force, how is it possible for members of the Established
Church to treat nonconforming Christians as brethren ?
The eleventh verse, therefore, describes the rise of the
Church of England as subsequent to that of Rome, and also
gives three principal characteristics by which the Church
* Not having been able to procure a copy of the Canons of the Church
of England, I have been compelled to take this account of them from Mr.
Saunderson.


of England is distinguished from all the other Churches to-
which the Reformation gave birth.
But it may be said the canons have never been approved
by the Crown as the head of the Church, and therefore need
not be noticed. They have, however, been passed by the
clergy, and as they have not been ratified by the Crown they
could be repealed by the clergy without any difficulty what-
ever were there any desire to repeal them. That they are
not repealed may be taken as evidence that, if they do not
reflect the belief and opinions of the whole of the clergy, they
do represent the belief and opinions of so large a proportion
that those who may wish them repealed are too hopeless of
success to make any attempt in that direction. This, of
course, is only indirect evidence, but we have direct evidence
that the canons quoted are acceptable to a large section of
the Church of England clergy at the present day. The Rev.
Frederick Aubert Grace, M.A., vicar of Barling Magna,
Essex, has published a little work, “ for the use of families
and schools,” which has reached the fourteenth edition,
which fully bears out this position
Question 82, page 14, asks: “What pretension has the Church of
“ Scotland, as it is popularly called, to be considered a Church at all ?’’
Answer : “It is the Church which is established in that country by law,
“ and, therefore, it is regarded by the State as a true Church. Its distinctive
“ title, however, is ‘ the Presbyterian Church of Scotland ’ or 1 the Kirk,’
“ and is not in reality the Church of Scotland.”
Question 84. “Is not the Presbyterian Church of Scotland, as it is
“ denominated by law, considered by the Church as one of its branches ? ”
Answer: " No, and therefore there is a branch of the true Church of Christ
“ in that country, which, for the sake of distinction, is called the Episcopal
“ Church."
Question 85. “We have amongst us various sects and denominations
“ who go by the general name of Dissenters. In what light are we to
“ consider them ? ” Answer: “As heretics, and in our Litany we expressly
“ pray to be delivered from the sins of ■ false doctrine, heresy and schism.’ ”
Question 86. “ Is, then, their worship a laudable service? ” Answer :
“ No; because they worship God according to their own evil and corrupt
" imaginations, and not according to His revealed will, and therefore their
“ worship is idolatrous.”
Question 87. “Is dissent a great sin?” Answer: “Yes; it is in
“ direct opposition to our duty towards God.”
Question 101. “In what light are we to regard Roman Catholics? ”
Answer : “ These are in different case from 1 Protestant Dissenters.' The
“ Roman Church is a true branch of the Catholic Church.”
It is needless to point out the arrogance and intolerance of
the answers. The voice is still that of the dragon, though,
thanks be to God, those who use it are no longer able to
translate their belief into action and persecute the people of
God.
Y. 12. And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before
him. —These words point plainly to the Act of Supremacy, by


which the prerogatives of the Papacy were, by Act of Parlia-
ment, transferred to the Crown —to Henry VIII. in the first
instance, and subsequently to Elizabeth and her successors.
Macaulay has noticed this characteristic of the Reformation ir
England. It was the object of Henry, he says, to establish
in England a Church differing from that of Rome in the royal
supremacy alone. Henry, in fact, made himself his own
Pope, and, in his own person, exercised all the power of the
first beast before him. His AcX of Supremacy—26 Henry
VIII., cap. 1, 1534 —although repealed under Mary, is still to
be found in the Statute Book, as below :
“The King’s Grace to be the Authorised Supreme Head.
“ ‘ Although the King’s Majesty justly and rightfully is and ought to be
“ ‘ the Supreme Head of the Church of England, and so is recognised by the
“ ' clergy of this realm in their convocations, yet nevertheless for cor-
“ ‘ roboration and confirmation thereof, and for increase of virtue in
“ ‘ Christ’s religion within this realm of England, and to repress and extirp
“ ‘ all errors, heresies, and other enormities and abuses heretofore in the
“ ‘ same ’ ; Be it enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that the
“ King, our Sovereign Lord, his heirs and successors, Kings of this realm,
“ shall be taken, accepted, and reputed, the only Supreme Head on earth of
“ the Church of England, called Ecclesia Anglicana; (2) and shall have
“ and enjoy, annexed and united to the Imperial Crown of this realm, as
“ well the title and style thereof, as all honours, dignities, pre-eminences,
“jurisdictions, privileges, authorities, immunities, profits, and commodi-
“ ties, to the said dignity of Supreme Head of the said Church belonging
“ and appertaining ; (3) and that our said Sovereign Lord, his heirs and
“ successors, Kings of this realm, shall have full power and authority from
“ time to time to visit, repress, redress, reform, order, correct, restrain, and
“ amend all such errors, heresies, abuses, offences, contempts, and enormi-
“ ties, whatsoever they be, which by any manner of spiritual authority or
“jurisdiction ought or may lawfully be reformed, repressed, ordered, re-
“ dressed, corrected, restrained, or amended, most to the pleasure of
“ Almighty God, the increase of virtue in Christ’s religion, and for the
“conservation of the peace, unity, and tranquillity of this realm; any
“ usage, foreign laws, foreign authority, prescription, or any other thing or
things to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.”
The Act of Supremacy of Elizabeth (i Eliz., cap. i) is
much to the same effect. The title of “ Supreme Head ” is
dropped, but the reality is re-established, inasmuch as all the
powers Henry had claimed were conferred on her. She and
her successors, therefore, have exercised the power of the
first beast as fully as Henry himself.
Sec. XVII. reads: “That such jurisdictions, privileges,
“ superiorities, and pre-eminences, spiritual and ecclesiastical,
“as by any spiritual power or authority hath heretofore been.
“ or may lawfully be, exercised or used for the visitation of
“ the ecclesiastical state and persons, and reformation, order,
“and correction of the same, and of all manner of errors,
“ heresies, schisms, abases, offences, contempts and enormi-
“ ties, shall for ever, by authority of this present Parliament,


•“ be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this realm.”
In other words, all the powers, spiritual and ecclesiastical,
-of the Papal See were transferred, whole and entire, to the
Crown, as though the civil authority could by any possibility
confer spiritual powers.
In Sec. XVIII. the Crow.n is empowered to issue commis-
sions under the great seal to act on its behalf, “to visit,
“ reform, redress, order, correct, and amend all errors, heresies,
“ schisms, abuses, offences, contempts, and enormities what-
■“ soever, which by any manner of spiritual or ecclesiastical
“ power, authority, or jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be
“reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or
■“ amended.” Here we have the origin of the Court of High
Commission, the tyranny of which became intolerable in the
time of Charles I. The powers thus conferred on the Crown
.to deal with matters of religious faith and observance are
now for the most part held in abeyance, but they still exist,
and, theoretically, may be called into action at any time.
Indeed, they were actually exercised in our own day, when it
was desired to abolish the special forms of prayer for the sth
November, 30th January, and 29th May, as may be seen by a
reference to a late edition of the Book of Common Prayer,
which will be found to contain a copy of the royal warrant
abolishing these services.
V. 12 (cont.) And causeth the earth, and them that dwell
therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
In these few words we find an exact prefigurement of the
.ecclesiastical policy of Henry VIII. The reference to the
deadly wound and its healing shows that we are now to re-
gard the first beast as especially representing Rome. Trans-
lated from symbolical into ordinary language, the passage
means that the Church of England, or Henry VIII. —for in
the early days of the Established Church the Crown may be
said to have been the Church —would, so far as his authority
extended, enforce some kind of conformity with Rome. This
is precisely what Henry did. As Macaulay says, his
(Henry’s) object was to set up in England a Church differing
from that of Rome in the matter of the supremacy only. This
he effected chiefly by the enactment, first, of the Act of
Supremacy, which conferred on him all the powers and pre-
rogatives of the Papal See ; and, secondly, of the Act of Six
Articles, whereby the distinguishing doctrines of the Roman
Catholic Church received legislative sanction. This cele-
brated Act declared : First, That in the Sacrament of the
Altar, after the consecration, there remained no substance of
bread and wine, but, under these forms, the natural body and
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ were present. Secondly, That


communion in both kinds was not necessary to salvation to-
all persons by the law of God, but that both the flesh and
blood of Christ were together in each of the kinds. Thirdly,
That priests, after the order of priesthood, might not marry,
by the law of God. Fourthly, That vows of chastity ought to
be observed, by the law of God. Fifthly, That the use of
private masses ought to be continued, which, as it was
agreeable to God's law, so men received great benefit thereby.
Sixthly, That auricular confession was expedient and neces-
sary, and ought to be retained in the Church. In reference
to these Articles it was enacted, That if any, after the 12th
July, did speak, print, or write against the first article (Tran-
substantiation), they were to be judged heretics, and to be
burnt, without any opportunity of abjuration, and to forfeit
their real and personal estates to the King; and those who
preached, or obstinately disputed, against the other articles,
were to be judged felons, and to suffer death as felons, with-
out benefit of clergy ; and those who either, in word or deed,
spake against them were to be prisoners during the King’s
pleasure, and to forfeit their goods and chattels to the King,
for the first time, and if they offended so the second time they
were to suffer as felons. “ This Act,” says Burnet, quoted by
Mr. Saunderson, “ was received by all that secretly favoured
“ Popery with great joy, for now they hoped to be revenged on
“ all those who had hitherto set forward a reformation. It
“ very much quieted the bigots, who were now persuaded that
“ the King would not set up heresy, since he passed so severe
“an Act against’it, and it made the total suppression of the
“monasteries go the more easily through” (History of the
Reformation, vol. 1., p. 416). The twelfth verse, therefore,
describes in marvellously fevy words the ecclesiastical position
and polity of Henry VIII.
Vv. 13. And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire
come down from heaven in the sight of men.
14. And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means
of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast,
saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an
image to the beast, which had a wound by a sword, and did live.
Before proceeding further, it may be well to note that the
prophecy with which we are dealing is symbolical. Neither
of the beasts have had a corporeal existence. In the case of
the latter, the lamb’s horns and the dragon’s voice are
obviously symbols, intended to suggest a counterpart, to be
discovered by patient search. As these are obviously sym-
bols, we are to conclude that the “ fire” and “ miracles ” of
the verses under consideration are also symbols, the counter-
parts of which have to be discovered precisely as the counter-


parts of the lamb’s horns and dragon's voice. The “fire”
and “ miracles ” are confessedly difficult symbols to interpret,
but I submit that the function they perform will give a clue
to their meaning. They are employed bj' the second beast
in order to enforce the worship of the image of the first.
They may, therefore, well mean some pretended preternatural
sanction, whereby the second beast enforces the worship of
the image of the first.
We have seen that the first beast represents Rome, and the
second sometimes the Church of England and sometimes the
Crown, by virtue of the royal supremacy. The symbols,
therefore, teach us that an image or copy of the Roman
Catholic Church would be set up by the use of the royal
supremacy, and that some pretended supernatural sanction
would be devised which would materially assist the Crown in
its self-imposed task of forcing a new ecclesiastical system
on the nation. Such appears to be the teaching of the
symbols. Let us now see what actually occurred after the
death of Henry. His system died with him. The advisers
of Edward VI. found it impossible to maintain a national
Church, differing from Rome in the supremacy only. It was
to them a matter of absolute necessity to submit to Rome or
offer terms to the reformers.
For obvious reasons they chose the latter. Cranmer, as
Macaulay tells us, arranged the terms of the compromise
between the two parties. The nation, as the reaction under
Mary clearly shows, was, as a body, by no means averse to the
tenets or practices of Rome. The reformers, therefore,
bid not get much, and what they did get was rather
extraneous and adventitious than vital and fundamental, dhe
Act of Six Articles was repealed ; the Bible was to be read in
English ; articles of religion and a book of homilies, both of
which bear the impress of Geneva, were adopted. These were
solid gains, and for which Protestants may well be truly
thankful. On the other hand, although the Articles set forth
with great plainness the doctrine of justification by faith, they
are confused and unsatisfactory on the vitally important
subjects of baptism and regeneration. The Article on “ Good
Works before Justification ” shows that the framers of the
Articles were acquainted with conversion or regeneration
experimentally, but, from not understanding it theologically,
they confounded it with baptism, and thereby gave baptised
unbelievers a recognised position in the Church. Enable to
maintain the old system in its entirety, they modelled the new
one upon it as closely as they were able. In the language of
the symbols, they made an image of the first beast. The Book
of Common Prayer, as we have it, is chiefly a compilation


from the Roman missals, known as the “ uses ” of Sarum,
Bangor, Lincoln and York. The ecclesiastical courts were
continued in their jurisdiction. The whole machinery of the
Church was taken over unchanged. The system of Church
government by archbishops, bishops, priests and deacons was
maintained. Miraculous powers, very similar to those claimed
by Rome for her priesthood, were claimed for the priests of
the new Church. By virtue of an apostolic succession trans-
mitted from the apostles by the imposition of hands, they alone
could consecrate the sacred elements. By virtue of this
pretended succession, they also were endowed with the power
to forgive sins. Witness the office for the Ordering of Priests,
where the bishop says to the candidate for the priesthood,
“Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven,” and the order
for the Visitation of the Sick, where the priest says to the dying
man : “By his authority committed to me I absolve thee
“ from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the
“ Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” Further, the fact of the
Romanising tendency so plainly visible at the present day, is
a proof of the intimate relation that exists between the two
Churches. It is a tendency that exists in no other of the
Churches that date from the Reformation. It spreads in the
Church of England because, as we have seen, that Church
has been modelled on that of Rome, and the human soul natur-
ally, and properly, prefers the original to a copy. The above
remarks might be extended indefinitely, but I think sufficient
has been said to show that, in essentials, the Church of
England is a true copy of that of Rome, and that in particular
the “fire” and “miracles” prefigure the pretended human
priesthood and apostolic succession on which the Established
Church bases its especial claims and pretensions. The Church
of England absolutely denies the validity of any clerical
“orders” that are without this succession. In this connec-
tion I subjoin an extract from Froude’s History of England
(ed. 1863, vol. VII., page 174), which shows how this succes-
sion was transmitted from the Roman Catholic to the Estab-
lished Church. Mr. Froude is speaking of the settlement of
religion by Elizabeth, and the setting up of the new hierarchy.
The difficulties of the undertaking were very serious, as the
bulk of the population were still Romanist at heart, and it
was therefore necessary to present the new system as a mere
continuation of the old. The extract shows us how this was
effected, and is, as will be observed, a complete commentary
on the verses under consideration, even to the use of the term
“ image ”
" But if not what it (the Church of England) had been, it could retain
“ the form of what it had been—the form which made it respected, with-


“ out the power which made it dangerous. Ihe image in its outward aspect
-« could be made to correspond with the parent tree ; and to sustain the
“ illusion it was necessary to provide bishops who could appear to have
inherited their powers by the approved method, as successors ot the
apostles.
“ Three pairs of episcopal hands at least were required to communi-
“cate the stream. Six of Edward’s hierarchy, English and Irish, had
“ survived the Marian persecutions. The Bishop of Llandaff had aposta-
“ tized Out of these six, four were selected to supply in numbers the un-
“ certainty of their qualifications ; and omitting Kitchen, whose character
“ did not bear inspection, and Bale, who was a foul-mouthed ruffian,
‘‘the others —Barlow, who had been Bishop of Bath: Scory, who had
“been Bishop of Chichester; the venerable Miles Coverdale; and
'• Hodgkins late Suffragan Bishop of Bedford—were summoned by royal
“ letter to Lambeth on the 17th December (1559) to consecrate Mathew
“ Parker as Archbishop of Canterbury.”
An Archbishop of Canterbury once installed, the completion
of the image was a mere matter of detail.
V. 15. And he had power to give life unto the image of the
beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed.
This verse describes the persecutions with which the
Established Church, with the aid of the civil power, sought
to extirpate not only all nonconformity, but also the reformers
within her pale, who were a force to be reckoned with down
to the Act of Uniformity of Charles, 11., when they were
ejected by the instrumentality of the test, then for the first
time imposed, which called on them to affirm that they gave their
unfeigned assent and consent to every word in the Book of
Common Prayer. Active persecution only ceased on the
accession of William 111., his Act of Toleration marking the
first legal recognition of nonconforming Christians. Absolute
equality, however, came much later, if it has come even now.
The Test and Corporation Acts were only repealed in 1828,,
and it is only in quite recent years that dissenters have been
permitted to take their degrees at Oxford and Cambridge. It
is surely unnecessary to prove at length that the Church of
England, when it had the power, was a persecuting Church.
The treatment of the Puritans under the Tudors and Stuarts,
the cruel bigotry that sought for nearly thirty years to impose
Episcopacy and the Book of Common Prayer on the Scotch
by means of the boot and thumbscrew, are surely evidence
enough. Should any think to the contrary, I would refer
them to any accepted History of England, and he will soon
find sufficient to convince any unprejudiced mind that the
Church of England has been as truly a persecuting Church as
the Church of Rome, and that her polity, so long asshe had
the power to enforce it, was to deny all civil rights to
dissentients from her communion.


The word “ worship ” at the end of the verse is remark-
able, and surely means more than mere conformity. Worship
is due to God alone. To worship the beast or its image must
therefore be to attribute in some way the attributes of the
Deity to the Church of Rome or the Church of England.
The Church of Rome does this by promising salvation to
those who stand well with her, and pronouncing eternal per-
dition on all outside her pale. The Church of England, by
her official formularies—l say it with pain and regret —does
much the same. She teaches that in baptism a child is re-
generate. and is therefore, as the Catechism says, “ a member
“ of Christ, a child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom
“of heaven." This heaven he is to secure, not by faith in
God’s promises, but by the faithful performance of the pro-
mises made by him to God. In due time he is to be admitted
to the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, No change of heart
is insisted on, or even spoken of. Conformity with the con-
ditions prescribed by the Church, and a certain outward
decorousness of life, are all that the formularies of the
Church require. No doubt many individual members of the
Church know better and teach better, and no doubt there are
priests in the Church of Rome who do the same. These
individuals, however, do not teach the peculiar doctrines of
their Churches, but the Gospel, and in the case of Anglicans,
at least, are often largely used by God for the extension of
His kingdom. But if they personally preach the doctrines of
grace, by their official position the}' support the official
doctrines of their Churches. To put it briefly, the Churches
of both Rome and England place Church membership in the
place of Christ, and what is this but to worship the beast and
his image ? This is obviously a sin of the deepest dye. It
robs God of His glory, and throws a fearful stumbling-block
in the way of the Church member The “tare” in the
Church of England may pass a lifetime without hearing a
genuine call to repentance, or a free offer of salvation by the
blood of Christ, and should he do so, the language addressed
to him is so different from the formularies with which he is
familiar that he may easily, if he be a good Churchman, pass
it by as of no moment. Not so the “ tare ”in the Evangelical
Churches. He is reminded every day that if he is to enter
heaven he must be born again. Like his brother in the
Established Church, he may go the broad way to destruction,
but, unlike him, he does not travel the downward path in a
false reliance on his Church membership. He knows perfectly
well that a true Christian has passed through an experience
to which he is a stranger, and that, though nominally in the
Church, he yet is not of it. It is not Hr us to say which is


the more guilty in the sight of God, but there can be no
question as to which is in the greater danger, and therefore
the more in need of warning. Let us read the gth and 10th
verses of the next chapter. They will teach us the mind of
the Lord in regard to those who worship the beast and his
image. Let him that readeth take heed that he fall not into
that awful condemnation:
“ If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive
“ his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same shall drink
“ of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without
“ mixture into the cup of His indignation, and he shall be
“ tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the
“ holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb; and the smoke
“of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever ; and they
“ have no rest day or night who worship the beast and his
“ image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name.
V. 16. And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor ,
free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand or in their
foreheads. —As in the case of the “ fire from heaven and
“ miracles ” of vv. 13 and 14, so here it is necessary to remind
ourselves that we are dealing with symbols. We are not to
expect to find hands or foreheads actually branded. We have
to discover, if possible, the reality concealed under the
symbols and revealed by them. As in the former instance,
the clue will be found in the function performed by the mark.
What this function was is plain enough. It was a proof that
those on whom it was found were worshippers of the “image.
In other words, that they were members of the Church pre-
figured by the “ image ” —that is, conformists, or members of
the Established Church. Membership in the Church of
England depends on participation in the Sacraments. The
baptised infant is a member of the Church, and at baptism is
marked on the forehead with the sign of a cross. The
Communion Service is, or was till 1828, the test for adults. In
that rite the bread and cup are given into the right hand of
the communicant. To be a member of the Church of England
confers no privileges now, but under the Tudors and Stuarts
those outside her pale were deprived of their natural rights as
citizens. The “marks” may mean but little now, but in
former years they were of the most signal importance. The
next verse shows what their effect was.
V. 17. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark, or the name of the beast , or the number of his name. In other
words, that civil rights were to be denied to all dissentients
from the national Church. That such was the case is too well
known to require proof. In the verse under consideration we
are shown how the worshippers of the image are to be


recognised. They are to have the mark—■ i.e ., participate in
the sacraments ; or they are to have the name—this, I submit,
means that they are to be generally known and regarded as
orthodox members of the Established Church ; or, thirdly,
that they have the number of his name. The meaning of this
last and especially mysterious statement appears to be that
those who have the number are those who recognise and
believe in the royal supremacy. The grounds for this view,
which is novel, will be found in the remarks on the next verse.
V. 18. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count
the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man; and his number
is six httndred threescore and six. —This mysterious number (666)
has engaged the attention of Christian people from almost
apostolic times. In very early ages it was noted that the word
Latnnos contained the mystic number. He Lateine Basileia
and Apostates have also been suggested. None of
these, however, fulfil the conditions. The number is “that of
a man.” Now, the first two terms are common nouns. The
third is the name of a kingdom, and might be taken to
refer either to the Latin Empire or the prehistoric Latin
kingdom near Rome. Dismissing, therefore, these suggested
solutions as inadequate—seeing that not one of them is the
number of a man—let us endeavour, if possible, to ascertain
with precision the counterpart which is symbolised by this
number. If this can only be accomplished, we shall,
obviously, be provided with a criterion which will not only
enable us to detect and reject false interpretations, but also
afford material help to the discovery and acceptance of the one
that is true. In considering this number we note two marks
given us to assist in its identification. First, that it is “the
number of the name of the beast,” and, secondly,that it is “the
number of a man.” It will be seen further on that this two-fold
clue points to a solution which appears to satisfy every
condition of the problem. Now, in regard to the first
characteristic, it must be observed that, by a common figure
of speech, the name is not unfrequently put in the Scriptures
for that of which it is the name. Thus to proclaim the
Name of the Lord really means to proclaim His attributes
and character, His mercy, love, justice, fatherly care,
omniscience, omnipotence. We may, therefore, reasonably
expect that the counterpart of the number, when found, will
throw into strong relief the real nature and character of the
beast. In the second place, the number is “ the number of a
man.” What man ? Obviously, the head or some equally
conspicuous official peculiar to, and distinctive of, the
Churches symbolised by thebeast, but more particularly of the
Church of Rome. This will appear evident when we remember


that we are considering the composite beast under its Roman
aspect. Bat the “image,” or the Church of England, is a
copy of the first beast under this aspect. The number,
therefore, must be as applicable to the Church of England as
to the Church of Rome, otherwise we should have a copy in
which the most salient feature of the original was omitted,
and this is a contradiction in terms. We may also expect
that the number will apply, though in a lesser degree, to the
Greek Church. Passing over the Greek Church for the
present, we have to inquire whether there be in the Church
of England, as well as in the Church of Rome, an official of
high position and dignity, who either bears a name containing
the number or discharges functions suggestive of such a name.
Truth must declare that there is—that the Pope in the Roman
Church, and the Sovereign wielding the royal supremacy in
the Church of England, fulfil the conditions exactly. The
Vicar of Christ is one of the best known titles of the Pope of
Rome, and though Elizabeth dropped the title of Supreme
Head on earth of the Church, her Act of Supremacy trans-
ferred to her intact all the powers exercised by the Papacy.
She and her successors, therefore, bear in fact, though not in
name, the same relation to the Church of England which the
Pope bears to the Church of Rome. The Sovereign, therefore,
is Vicar of Christ for the Established Church. From the
Vicar of Christ to the Vicar of the Son of God is a short
and easy step, and, as we shall see. this latter title contains,in
Roman letters, the fatal and mysterious number. The words
printed in italics are Greek words, and as the first beast is, as
we have seen, composite, but almost entirely Grasco-Roman—
the Roman factor being the more important—we may reason-
ably expect to find the primary fulfilment of the prophetic
number in the numerals contained in some Latin word or
expression, with a minor and partial fulfilment in some Greek
word or expression. We have seen that the Greek words
suggested fall short of fully meeting the necessary
conditions. It will be seen, however, that these are met
perfectly in one of the titles of the Pope of Rome. An
American, in an exposition of Daniel and Revelation of little
value, quotes a letter from a traveller in Rome, who had been
present at some function at St. Peter’s in which the Pope
had taken part. His Holiness wore a headdress on which
was emblazoned in large letters, VICARIVS FILII DEI.
It struck the writer of the letter that this might be the title
referred to in Revelation, and on “ counting ” it up, he found
that it made up the trine of sixes exactly: —
VI CARIVS FILII DEI
5+ I + 100 . . +i+s • • + i+s° +i+ i + 500 . +1 = 666.


What, then, is the meaning of this official name ? It shows, in
the first place, that the Church to which it is applicable is
subject to the rule of an earthly governor, claiming powers
and prerogatives that rightfully belong to the Son of God alone.
Such a head would be impossible in a democratic Church; its
existence, therefore, proves that the Church must be hier-
archical, the head forming, as it were, the apex of a! vast
pyramid. The number is also l, the number of a man,” and
of the highest placed and most distinctive figure of
both systems. In the Greek Church much the same
system prevails. In Russia, the government of the Church
is in the hands of a Synod, all the members of which, since
the time of Peter the Great, who inaugrated the system, are
appointed by the Czar. In Greece, the King is head of the
Church. This interpretation, then, fulfils all the conditions
perfectly. It is true in its fullest extent of the Church of
Rome, and in a lesser degree of the Church of England, its
copy, and in a still lesser degree of the Greek Church, agreeing
thus in every particular with the symbol by which it is pre-
figured. Surely, a key that fits so complicated a lock can be
none other than the rightful key !
We learn, then, from this chapter that a Church was to
appear in Christendom whose origin should be later than that
of Rome, and also different from that of Rome ; that this
Church should be characterised by submissiveness on the one
hand—this submissiveness having a two-fold illustration—
and arrogance and exclusiveness on the other ; that the head
of this Church should exercise the powers that had previously
been exercised by the Pope, and should re-establish the old
worship under the new head ; that after a time the old
worship should be superseded by another, which should be a
copy or image of the other ; that this image should be pri-
marily a copy of the Church of Rome, but might be expected
to bear a certain resemblance to the Greek Church ; that all
who refused to conform to this new form of worship should be
deprived of their civil rights and persecuted ; that member-
ship in this new Church was held to depend in the last
instance on participation in some rite or rites in which the
right hand and forehead played a conspicuous part; lastly,
that the name of the head or some other high placed and
distinctive officer of the Church of Rome, and a similar office-
bearer in this other Church, should bear a title indicative of
the common characteristics of the two Churches, the numerical
value of which title was to be six hundred and sixty-six. We
have also seen that the Church of England took its origin in
the revolt of Henry from Rome nearly a thousand years
subsequent to the rise of the Papacy ; the origin of the


Church of England was political, whereas the Church of Rome
is, outwardly at least, the lineal descendant of the Church
founded there in the days of the apostles; that the
Church of England has throughout its history been
characterised by a strange submissiveness to the civil
power on the one hand, and a haughty exclusiveness to dis-
sentients on the other ; that Henry, having got rid of the
Pope for reasons of his own, proceeded to re-establish the
Roman system, with himself as his own Pope, and main-
tained this system to his death ; that after his death Edward
VI. and Elizabeth set up a Church, differing, indeed, from that
of Rome, but modelled on it, and also bearing a certain resem-
blance to the Greek Church ; that those who refused to con-
form were bitterly persecuted during the times of the Tudors
and Stuarts, and were only admitted to political rights in
1828, when the Test and Corporation Acts were repealed ;
that membership in the Church of England was proved by
participation in the Sacraments, the sign of the cross being
made on the forehead at baptism, and the bread and
wine put into the right hand in the Communion ; that
members of the Churches of Rome and England are
encouraged by their official formularies to “worship” their
respective Churches — i.e., are encouraged by their official
formularies to trust to their Church membership for sal-
vation instead of the finished work of Christ, whereas
nominal Christians in the Protestant nonconforming
denominations are aware that they are unworthy members,
and that they must repent if they would not be lost.
These latter, therefore, are in no sense “ worshippers” of their
Churches. Lastly, that the Pope claims to be the Vicar of
Christ on earth, and that all the powers and prerogatives of
the Papacy have been transferred to the Imperial Crown of
the United Kingdom ; that it is a short step from Vicar of
Christ to VICARIVS FILII DEI, and that he actually
bears this latter title ; that this title contains the mysterious
number, and its character shows plainly that the Church
ruled by a head so styled must be hierarchical, with
all that that implies. Every single characteristic of
the second beast, therefore, finds its counterpart in the
history and constitution of the Church of England. Surely
such a correspondence cannot possibly be fortuitous.
Further, we are entitled to ask whether there is any other
Church in existence that can be shown to possess all these
characteristics, or even three of them. If the Church of
England possesses all the characteristics, and no other Church
more than two or three, what grounds can there be for doubt-
ing that the Church of England is the Church intended ?


What, then, is the conclusion of the matter ? If the above
reasoning be correct, and the writer for one is utterly unable
to reply to it, it must be received as established, that in the
Divine view the High Church and sacerdotal party are the
true Church of England, and that the evangelicals, many of
whom are the very salt of the earth, are mistaken in maintain-
ing their connection with a Church that has been weighed in
the balances and found wanting. The question, therefore, on
our title page must be answered in the affirmative. We are
driven irresistibly to the conclusion, that in the eye of God
the Church of England is a copy of that of Rome, and is,
therefore, a branch of the mystical Antichrist, and doomed to
perish by the destruction pronounced nearly two thousand
years ago against that great apostacy.
Varley Brothers, Printers, 326-328 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.




00846335


