





-A. TREATISE
THE CULTIVATION
FLAX AND HEMP,
BEING A SERIES OF THE LETTERS OE ROBIN GOODEELLCW EOR THE
PROMOTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF AGRICULTURE IN THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
BY FRANCIS CAMPBELL, M. D.
Id me
Nolo scire mihi cujus sum consciu' solus
Ne damnum faciam.
Ltjcillxus.
THIRD EDITION.
SYDNEY:
SHEEEIFF AND DOWNING, PUBLISHEES,
256, GEORGE STREET.




H3355/f
/
PREFACE.
When I undertook to revise this series of letters for a third
edition, it was my intention to preface it with another “Address
to the Agriculturists of Australia,” in the glimmering hope of
inducing them to adopt earnestly and prosecute vigorously the
improved methods of tillage which have led to such surprising
results in Great Britain. But having become incapacitated from
writing through physical causes, and at the same time unwilling
to swell the price beyond the means of the humblest settler by
encumbering so small a work and that only on a specific topic, with
matters belonging to the general science, I am compelled to confine
myself to the repetition of a corrected portion of the old preface,
addressing it especially to the small farmers of these Colonies.
The “tiller of the ground” in these days of intellectual and
moral freedom is expected to be something more than a helot.
The exquisitely refined tone of social life, the progress of science,
the rapid multiplication of the human race, and the infinite variety
of artificial wants which civilisation, luxury, and fashion have
engrafted on the natural simplicity and fewness of our necessi-
ties, require that he be a thinking as well as a working animal.
To come to the point;—till a very late period men of the plough
were satisfied with the simple routine of farming as they found it;
each succeeding generation taking upon trust, unquestioned, un-
examined, the doctrines of tillage which were transmitted by that
which went before; and thus the doubtful heritage of unsound
principles passed on from father to son as rural axioms from the
dawn of history till as late as the reign of James 1., when Judge
Fitzherbert, the father of modern husbandry, made his first ap-
pearance as a successful agricultural reformer. The genius of
progress is not confined to men of education or wealth alone. It
would be a fatal mistake to suppose that the poorest peasant may


not be the author of as great improvements in his art as the
philosopher. When he has become acquainted with the mode of
deducing principles from observation, it will be just as possible
for the peasant as the philosopher, by the force of common sense
and reflection, to convert the most useless and neglected forms of
matter into sources of wealth.
It is in every man’s power to make improvements in the arts
with which he is most conversant, if he will exercise the faculties
of his mind. Why should not the humblest among you be able
to think as well as to act—to think rightly as well as wrongly,
deeply as well as superficially, scientifically as well as ignorantly,
theoretically as well as empirically, soundly as well as unsoundly,
if you will only habituate yourselves to investigate the truth of
all propositions presented to you as facts ? You plough your
land; why do you plough ? You run your furrows deep or shal-
low ; why do you so ? You spread manure over your fields ;
why do you this ? On what principles, in short, do you carry on
the operations of farming ? You cannot tell. Of course not;
you just do as others do ; and there the matter rests; because
you will neither reflect nor be taught by the experience of your
failures.
Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. —Happy is the farmer
who understands the reasons of his operations. And yet there is
no real difficulty in this. The temple of science, though difficult
to reach, is accessible to all who will climb with bold intent; and
the apparent mysteries of nature change into a clear and legible
language before the torch of investigation ; for he who sedulously
applies the faculties of his mind to the study of things around
him will soon find—
“ tongues in trees, books in running brook,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.”
When a man knows the four and twenty letters of the alpha-
bet, which he may achieve in four and twenty minutes, he may
be said to have swallowed the whole tree of knowledge in its
germ ; all he requires further is to digest it in a healthy manner.
From that moment he becomes master of a power by which he
may control nature herself, “ The improvement of our judg-
ment,” says Coleridge, “ and the increase of our knowledge on
all subjects within our sphere of action, are not merely advantages


recommended by prudence, but absolute duties imposed on us by
conscience.” Man is by nature a learning animal from bis cradle
to bis grave; tbe faculty of learning is one of tbe essential
cbaracteristics of bis kind ; to bim, therefore, useful knowledge
is just as easy of acquisition as tbat which is of no avail; and
there is no lack of suitable food for bis mental appetite ; he has
no occasion to moan over tbe want of materials, means, opportu-
nities, or useful guides to direct bim in tbe course of bis rural
studies; he will find them scattered around bim as thick as tbe
leaves of autumn; and if be cannot obtain them absolutely for
nothing, tbe half of what he spends annually on tobacco alone,
will be sufficient to purchase all tbe necessary means and mate-
rials of instruction. Whilst sedulously imbibing faithless doc-
trines, and following absurd and traditionary rules of practice,
be could, with the same facility, and tbe same economy of time
and purse, be learning bow be might best make tbe science and
practice of agriculture to harmonize, and conduce to augment bis
crops, to maintain his lands in perpetual fertility, to increase bis
gains and improve tbe qualities of whatever be produces. He
will find it less difficult and perplexing to act upon sound princi-
ples than unsound ones, unless he be a sluggard by profession.
It would astonish some of you to be told all the great advantages
which have accrued to society through the improvements made in
the arts of life by simple plodding men like yourselves. Most of
the discoveries which have proved of the greatest utility to general
society, have been made by men in the humbler walks of life. A
mere mechanic by applying the faculties of his mind studiously to one
of the commonest circumstances of life, drew from the dark and
unexplored caverns of nothing, the most luminous and astounding
discovery ever brought to light. Watt saw all the stupendous
powers of the steam engine in the vapour of his teakettle. Agri-
culture is not an exact but a progressive science. Your object in
ploughing the soil and scattering the seed is not only to produce
a certain crop, and a certain amount of that crop ; but to re-
double —nay, to increase in geometrical proportion the quantity
and improve the quality, without starving the soil which furnishes
you with its bounties. The object of the cultivator is to make
not two, but a hundred blades of grass spring up, where only one
grew before ; and the thing is almost literally possible with every


sort of plant; but it should be perpetually kept in remembrance
that plants are living beings as well as men, and like men must
be fed with a nourishment peculiar to their organisation, else
they will languish and die. They differ, however, from animals
in a number of ways, but in none so characteristically as this,
that while animals can go in search of their food—
“ Walk unsustained, and unassisted feed,
They live at once ; forsake the dam’s warm side ;
Take the wide world, with nature for their guide ;
Bound o’er the lawn, or seek the distant glade;
And find a home in each delightful shade ”
—the plant is a prisoner fixed to the spot. When scarcity or
an unwholesome quality of food prevails, the plant cannot range
the wood or scour the lawn to seek the subsistence most condu-
cive to its nourishment and structural increase and renovation.
Debarred from the advantages and supplies procurable by free-
dom of action and the power of locomotion, it is compelled to
draw its subsistence from whatever happens to be within its limited
reach ; and this may be either abundant or insufficient; it may
be the right sort or the wrong—all the necessary ingredients of
wholesome nutriment may be present or some of the principal
may be wanting ; and it may either starve and its race become
extinct in that place, or continue like a half-fed child to lengthen
out a miserable existence with only sufficient of the proper sort
of food to enable the vital actions to proceed, yet without adding
either to its size, strength, or vigor. Now this is the point to
which your skill, solicitude, and practical knowledge are to be
directed. It is to this singular destiny of the plant that all your
humanity, all your philosophy, and all your efforts must tend;
because in feeding and nourishing, and tending with paternal
anxiety this helpless being, you feed and nourish the human race.
Vegetable physiology and chemistry disclose to you what consti-
tutes the peculiar food of every different form of vegetable fife,
and through what media this is best conveyed to the tissues for
support and increment.
You have the advantage of millions of acres of as good soil as
the world contains ; I am confident it is not surpassed any where ;
and yet it has never been made to yield a tithe of what it is
capable. The sooner therefore you begin to reform your old
slovenly barbaric methods of tillage the better. It is your parti-


cular province to know the prodigious control which cultivation
holds over the whole economy of vegetable life, when it is con-
ducted according to science and universal experience. It is true
as a first principle that your skill and industry if employed right
and on suitable objects will be liberally repaid. Harte says, “It
may be worth remembering that one million’s worth of things
vendible, being productions of our own earth, and raised by our
own hands at home, will, when exported, bring a nation more
real gain than the sale of three million’s worth of goods in manu-
factures, provided the materials manufactured are purchased from
abroad.” (a)
There is an infinite number of articles for which the various
soils and climates of this extensive continent are well adapted,
and if you would take them up with resolution and perseverance,
they might be made to yield great profits, augmenting the general
wealth of the colony, while they increased your own through
means of an export arising from your agriculture. For example,
there are flax and flax seed, hemp and hemp seed, which are
commodities of enormous value to any country that can produce
them in perfection. The estimated value of flax produced in all
countries is more than twenty-six millions of pounds sterling.
“ Such,” says Tennent, in his work on Belgium, “is the supe-
riority of Belgian flax that, whilst in some instances it has brought
so high a price as £l2O per ton, and generally ranges from £BO
to £9O, not more than £9O has in any instance that I ever heard
of, been obtained for British, and its ordinary average does not
exceed £so.”—He might have added that £lOO sterling have
been paid for a single pound by weight of flax grown aud pre-
pared by hand at Courtrai in Flanders, —in short that flax
ranges from five pence to one hundred pounds sterling per pound.
Then there are linseed and hempseed oils with the valuable
oil-cakes made of the pressed seeds, which are also arti-
cles worth the farmer’s consideration, both as articles of ex-
port and of domestic use. The oil-cakes are essential in England
for fattening oxen, hogs, and poultry, and always command a
good price. The Belgians enrich. and fertilise their lands with
these cakes dissolved in liquid manure.
In recommending the cultivation of flax and hemp, I am anxious
(a) Essays on Husbandry, Essay 1., p. 24.


for the advancement of agriculture, and the prosperity of the
country, for the one is the necessary result of the other: and I
know that the propositions I have in former years laid before the
public on this subject, embrace facts as easily demonstrated as
any truth in mathematics. So that I have reason to believe the
cultivation of flax and hemp would tend to effect a momentous
revolution in your circumstances. lam convinced more and more
every day of the fact, that a trade with Europe in these articles
would be lucrative and permanent, and therefore one in which the
husbandman might embark his capital and exercise his industry
with perfect confidence. Great Britain and Ireland do not grow
the hundredth part of the flax, and scarcely any of the hemp
they require. Of flax alone, fifteen years ago, it was stated on
good authority there was imported into the United Kingdom
annually to the value £5,000,000 sterling. The case has greatly
altered in that period, for in the year 1854, Ireland was able to
export to England, Scotland, and France of flax and tow to the
value of £505,989. “ If,” says an instructive Report, (a) “at the
time this society was founded it had ventured to predict that,
besides supplying her own extensive wants, Ireland would export
in one year to the value of upwards of half a million sterling of
the raw produce of her flax fields, very few individuals would
have placed any faith in such a prediction.”
It is a popular delusion to maintain that flax is a scourging
crop. It formerly was considered so in the older countries and
that it could not be safely allowed to ripen its seed on the same
land more than twice in fifteen years, as it would completely ex-
haust the soil. These opinions are now practically demolished ;
they prevailed when the principles of agriculture and the science
of manuring, so to speak, were less understood. It is now
acknowledged that flax is not more pauperising than any of the
green crops, when it is pulled for the fibre before the seed is
ripe. Kor is it under any circumstance more severe upon the
soil than white crops in general. It may therefore be grown
again on the same land with complete success, in alternate rota-
tion with potatoes, turnips, cabbages, or even after peas and
beans for any number of years; but it should be borne in mind
(a) Fourteenth Annual Report and Transactions of the Royal Society for
the Promotion and Improvement of the Growth of Flax in Ireland.


that the land requires to he well manured for each crop; and this
is an important improvement on the celebrated Flemish farming,
where the period of flax, in their scheme of rotation, is twice in
nine years. You see then, it is only the great expense of manuring
which makes the cultivation of flax unprofitable in England.
Hence the cultivation of flax here, would be much more
profitable under all circumstances than to drudge at the pro-
duction of grain alone ; and I presume to recommend a trial of
this new production for this especial reason—that “the best use
the land can be put to is to cultivate that crop, whatever it be,
which produces the greatest profit valued in money” (5) —and that
“profit” flowing from a foreign trade in that “crop.” If the
agriculture of a country is too sickly and dwarfish to furnish a
surplus for exportation, it affords an indubitable proof that such
country is also in a poor and unhealthy condition, and never can
recover and be permanently prosperous till it has become the
arbiter of a profitable commerce from the productions of its soil.
It must not only produce cotton, sugar, wool, gold, copper, iron,
coal, flax, hemp, &c., &c., but export them.
The quantity of flax imported into the United Kingdom in the
year 1820 amounted to 532 cwts. ; ditto 1836, 1,529,116 cwts.;
showing an increase in the space of sixteen years of nearly one
million cwts. The price of dressed flax in Great Britain ranges ac-
cording to its quality from £33 to £l5O per ton generally; but it
has been known to rise to £250. Now lam disposed to doubt if any
cereal crop you have ever raised yielded you a return of only the
mean of these two extreme prices, namely, £l4O on any four
acres of your best soils; yet it is notorious that you possess the
same if not superior means and facilities as the farmers of Ire-
land, France, and Belgium, of producing the first qualities of
fibre. You have. certainly the advantage of a far richer and
greater variety of soil, and in many respects a more favorable
climate than any of those countries.
It was stated above that flax is held though erroneously to be
an exhausting crop. But supposing it were so in the old effete
lands of Europe, the virgin soil suited for flax in this country is
inexhaustible in fertility as well as incalculable in extent. The
( I ) Harte, u. s. p. 39.


1831
--
.. 5,449,388 kilogrammes
1232
3,665,226
1833
4,392,113
1834
2,698,870
1835
4,610,649
1836
6,891,991
1837
7,403,364
1838
9,459,056
constant cropping of thirty years in many places and that without
an atom of manure, has failed to diminish its productive qualities.
Every time it is stirred even in the wretched way it commonly is
stirred, the principles of nutrition seem to be as abundant and
stimulating as if it had undergone all the benefits of fallowing,
subsoiling, manuring, &c., &c. No doubt there is no crop re-
quiring more careful tillage and nicer management than flax,
both before and after the seed is sown. But it is not intended
here to advise the farmer to devote all his labour land and out-
lay on this production alone. I recommend it to be tried at first
only as a subsidiary and complementary crop, to fill out the col-
lapsed nooks of the rural purse. But notwithstanding, be the
quantity large or small that you propose to raise, if you expect to
derive profit from your land and labour, you will best succeed by
cultivating with a strict view to the nature and well being of
your crop. The soil turns a deaf ear to reason in matters which
concern its own especial functions ; nothing but a careful study
of the roots of plants, the vital processes of vegetation, the chemi-
cal conditions of the land, experience and experiment, will make
the earth smile. Hence you may be assured that a pristine do-
nothing mode of farming will only lead to disappointment.
Eussia supplies more than two-thirds of the quantity of flax
imported into the United Kingdom. Prussia, Holland, and Bel-
gium supply the rest; France sends but a very small quantity.
Nearly 60,000 tons of Eiga flax seed are imported into Great
Britain and Ireland annually from Eussia alone. In the year
ending October 5, 1853, Eussia supplied no less than 86,837 tons
of flax seed from Eiga to Great Britain and Ireland.
Five millions of kilogrammes of dressed flax were annually
exported from Belgium to England and elsewhere, on an average
of eight years, from 1830 to 1839. According to the returns of
the Belgian Custom-houses, the export has been as follows :


“ The remainder,” says Tennont, in his “Belgium,” “is re-
served for home manufacture into thread and cloth, and it is
estimated by M. Briavionne, that the cultivation of this one
article alone, combining the value of the raw material with the
value given to it by preparation, in its various stages from flax to
linen cloth, produces annually to Belgium an income of 63,615,000
francs;” nearly £3,000,000 sterling!
There is another striking fact which proves still further the
great value of this trade. We are told by the same author that
one acre in every eighty-six of the whole area of Belgium is de-
voted to the growth of flax. In the districts of Courtrai and St,
Nicholas, as much as one acre in twenty is given to it, and in the
Pays de Waes it amounts to one in ten. The number of acres
under flax in Ireland in 1854 was 150,729, and its marketable
value was roughly estimated at two million sterling. The fol-
lowing returns of the quantity of flax and codilla imported into
the United Kingdom for a period of twenty-two years, show that
the demand for this article is steadily increasing ; and also dis-
play clearly the grounds on which I have so earnestly pleaded
for a trial of the plant in the rich alluvial soil of New South
Wales :
1820 Flax and tow 532,389 cwts.
1821 Ditto 498,554
1822 Ditto : 610,106
1823 Ditto 553,937
1824 Ditto .. ~ .. .. 742,631
1825 Ditto 1,055,233
1826 Ditto 688,622
1827 Ditto 907,079
1828 Ditto 876,189
1829 Ditto 922,040
1830 Ditto 944,096
1831 Ditto 936,411
1832 Ditto 982,616
1833 Ditto 1,129,633
1834 Ditto 911,722
1835 Ditto 740,814
1836 Ditto 1,511,428
1837 Ditto 1,022,256
1838 Ditto 1,625,315
1839 Diito 1,223,730
1840 Ditto 1,256,051
1841 Ditto 1,346,843


The average annual weight of fibre produced in all countries
in the world is estimated at 400,000 tons: and the quantity of
seed at 2,000,000 quarters. The annual average value of seed is
estimated at £6,000,000, and that of the fibre at £26,000,000.
Since 1857 when these averages w ere struck the quantity produced
has greatly increased.
F. C.
Tarlan Lunatic Asylum , August 2, 1864.
X
PREFACE,


INTRODUCTION.
Flax has been known from time immemorial; and from its first dis-
covery until the present time it has been esteemed one of the most
useful and necessary articles of domestic economy. The earliest
record of it we possess is to be found in Exodus ix., 31, where we
are made acquainted with it under very peculiar circumstances.
Among the numerous losses occasioned to the Egyptians by the
plague of hail, the destruction of this valuable crop takes a pro-
minent place. The words of the passage are these :—“And the
flax and the barley were smitten ; for the barley was in the ear,
and the flax was boiled.” The term “boiled” gibgnol
literally, the capsule was on the flax, and which the Septuagint
have rendered crnepparLCov, coming to seed, implying that
the capsules containing the seed were fully formed, a fact which
shows incontestably that the crop was nearly ready for pulling
when it was “ smitten by the hail.”
A respectable author theorizing on the antiquity of linen,
supposes it to have been invented previous to the Deluge, because
Noah slept in a tent. But the fact of Noah sleeping in a tent is
no valid reason for supposing that the tent was made of linen;
seeing that Noah had other more convenient and suitable materials
at hand. There is a closer verisimilitude in the supposition that
Noah’s tent was made of wool, or of the hair of the goat, the
camel, or the horse, all which articles he must have had in abun-
dance in the Ark during his twelve months’ voyage. Such are
the materials of which the Arabs and other wandering nations of
the East manufacture their tent-covers at this day, and there is
no doubt they observe precisely the same customs now which pre-
vailed among the first families of mankind. The customs of
nations make slow and imperceptible changes: those of semi-
barbarous people, under ordinary circumstances, never. Coarse
woollens are justly supposed to have been the first wrought clo-
thing, in which man arrayed himself from motives of comfort.
Of the Egyptian flax we know almost nothing. Pliny (a) says,
“It is less strong than the other sorts, but more valuable. There
are four kinds produced in Egypt, called after the places where
they grow, namely the Tanitic, Pelusiao, Butic, and Tentyritic.”
(a) Nat. Hist,, xix. i.


I have’examined many pieces of the ancient celebrated fine linen
of Egypt taken from mummies two and three thousand years old;
but I have never seen a single specimen finer than coarse Irish
shirting, though there has been found occasionally on certain
mummies a cloth as fine as muslin ; and we learn from Herodo-
tus {a) and Pliny (5) that the Egyptians manufactured at any rate
a very fine yarn, as manifested especially in two corslets made by
order of King Amasis from linen thread of singular tenuity, one
of which, the Greek Historian says, “was presented by this
monarch to the Lacedemonians :it consisted of fine twisted linen
thread, thickly interwoven with figures of animals, and embroid-
ered with gold, and cotton or tree-wool (et pioia-i ano £v\ov). The
threads of which it was made were worthy of admiration, seeing
that each contained three hundred and sixty-five strands.” Pliny
adds in proof of the fineness of the thread spun by the Egyptians,
a description of the other corslet which the same king dedicated
to Minerva in her temple at Mindus in Rhodes, every thread con-
sisting like the former of three hundred and sixty-five strands (c).
It is probable however that the mummy linen was ordained by
their laws to be always of one specific texture, which being now the
only specimens to judge by, may be the reason why some have
sneered at the fine linen of Egypt.
The Roman writers like the Greeks, mention various sorts of
flax and linen; and also no doubt derive their names from some
characteristic of the material, or from the places in which they were
produced or manufactured. The best, according to Pliny ( d ) was
obtained from Setabis, a city of Castile in Spain. It seems to
have been an exceedingly fine linen or cambric, chiefly used fur
handkerchiefs.
Nam sudaria Setaba ex Iberis
Miserunt mibi muneri Fabulus,
Et Verarmius. (e)
Setabis et telas Arabum sprevisse superbo,
Et Pelusiaco filum componere lino. (/)
Pliny mentions another “ wonderfully fine” flax, called Carl asm.
It was produced in Hither Spain, and the linen made from it
received its “ exceeding whiteness” from a rivulet in Tarragona,
which possessed the quality of bleaching in an extraordinary
degree : it was very high in price, and held in greater estimation
( a ) hi., 47. {I) u - s.
(c) For more on the Xt vo6copa£ see 11. ii., 529 and 830. Corn. Nep. in
Vita Iphicratis: Suetonius in vita S. S. G-albse.
(: d ) xix. 2, Alcaeus apudAthen. 6copaK.es re vecoXivoi.
(e) Catullus XII. 14.
(/) Silius Italicus, hi., 373.


than satin is at the present time. It would appear to have been
worn only hy the wealthy and great :
—turn croceam cblamydemque sinusque crepantes
Carbaseos falvo in nodum colligerat auro. («)
Ne, precor adscencis tanti sit gloria Bactris,
Eaptave odorato carbasa lina duci. {b)
Quintus Curtius, speaking of the Indians says, their country
is full of flax —terra lint ferax , Sfc. —corpora usque ad pedes carhaso
velant, xiii, 29. This cloth was employed anciently as awnings
to keep the sun off the theatres which were built without roofs :
Carbasus ut quondam magnis intenta theatris
Hat crepituxn malos inter jactata trabeisque. ( c)
Flax was in very general cultivation on the continent of Europe
in the time of Pliny, especially among the various tribes of the
Keltic. He says the Cadurei, Caleti, Euteni, Bituriges, and the
Morini who are supposed to be the remotest people of the earth,
and even the whole of Gaul, make sails— vela texunt, of this sub-
stance. Indeed, he adds, even our enemies beyond the Ehine
(the Flemings and the Dutch) do the same ; and their women
are acquainted with no garments so beautiful as those which they
manufacture from flax. In Germany, he continues, they fabri-
cate their linen in vaults dug underground, which is also done in
Italy in the Allian territory between the rivers Po and Ticinus,
where, after the Setabi of Castile they make linen of the third
quality; for the Eetovini bordering on the Allianse, and the Faven-
tines on the iEmilian Way, are famous for making linen of the
second degree of fineness. The Faventine fabrics on account of
their superior whiteness, are always preferred to the unbleached
Allian. For fineness, closeness of texture, and whiteness,
that of the Eetovini is equal to the Faventine, but it has no
nap, which is considered an advantage by some, and a disadvan-
tage by others. The country of the Pelignians in Italy also pro-
duces a good sort of flax, than which none is whiter or more like
wool, &c. (d) See also Tacitus de Moribus Germanorum.
None of the Greek authorities with which I am acquainted,
furnish any information concerning the culture, preparation, and
manufacture of this plant. The historians pass over these pro-
cesses in silence, as if every one were perfectly conversant with
them and required no written instruction. It is to be regretted
that we are, and must remain, almost entirely ignorant of the
ancient Egyptian maxims of husbandry, especially those applica-
ble to flax. Pliny and Columella however inform us pretty fully
of the modes of managing it as practised in Italy in their time ;
{a) Ain., xi., 775.
(c) Lucretius, vi., 108.
b) Propertius, iv., iii., 63.
\d) Nat. Hist., xix., 2.


and it is likely enough their methods were taken from the Egyp-
tians ; the land of the Pharaohs being then a Roman Province.
It is further probable that the rural economy of the Egyptians
at that time was nearly the same as it was at the foundation of
their country. They were forbidden on pain of death by the laws
of their religion to make the least innovation upon any of the
rules written therein, whence it is but reasonable to conclude
that the principles handed down to us by the Roman authors are
the same as those of the most ancient inhabitants of Egypt. The
following remarks embrace all that remain to us of their mode of
cultivating and dressing this plant: —
Ancient Culture and Management of Flax,— Columella ii,
10, says, Elax ought not to be cultivated unless it will yield great
increase in the region where you grow it, and the price it brings
encourage you; for it is in a particular manner injurious to the
land. It requires to be sown on a very rich and moderately
humid soil, and is to be committed to the earth from the beginning
of October till the beginning of December—a calendis Octobris in
ortum Aquilse. A jugerum of land —which is two-thirds of an
English Acre, or 27,850 feet—is sown with eight modii of seed
that is, about eight pecks Winchester measure. —Some choose to
sow the seed as thick as possible on poor land, that the flax may
come up small and very fine; and they say that if it be sown in
strong rich land in the month of February, ten modii must be
allowed to one jugerum.
Pliny, U. s., informs us “ That flax is sown mostly upon a gritty
(sabulosus ) soil after one ploughing; and no plant grows more
rapidly, for it is sown in spring and pulled in summer ; it is there-
fore injurious to the soil.” These are all the strictly agricultural
precepts respecting flax that Pliny delivers. He then jumps to
the signs of ripeness in the next chapter. “The ripeness of the
plant is known” he continues, “by two signs, namely by the
swelling of the seed in the boll, and by the colour turning yellow.
It is then pulled up and collected into handfuls, which are sus-
pended with the roots upwards to dry in the sun for one day.
The maniples are afterwards turned the contrary way, and hung
with the roots downwards, for five days more, that the seed may
fall from the top into the middle of the bunch. Then, after
wheat harvest the stalks are immersed in water warmed by the
heat of the sun, and pressed down by some heavy substance, for
there is nothing so buoyant. You may know when the macera-
tion is complete, by the woody membrane becoming loose ; they
are finally inverted as before, and dried in the sun. When they
are dried, they are to be beaten upon a stone with a tow
beetle, stupario malleo. The part next to the bark is called tow,
which is the worst of the flax, and generally fit only for the wicks
of lamps. But even this is combed with hooked iron combs,


until it is freed from every portion of bark. The inner part, or
flax itself, is more various in its qualities, according to its degree
of whiteness and fineness. The combing and dressing of flax
require particular skill; for when it is well dressed and the flax
good, every fifty pounds of the plant ought to yield fifteen pounds
of dressed flax.”
The Geoponica of Constantine IY., are very brief on this sub-
ject. “Max,” says that collection of rural precepts, lib. ii., c. 40,
“ rejoices in a miry soil; it is sown from the end of September
till the sth of January .” This answers to the Egyptian time of
sowing.
Palladius copies Columella, Hoc mense ( Octoheris ) lini semen
seremus si placet, quod pro malitia sui serendum non est, nam
teme über exhaurit. Sed si vellis, loco pinguissimo et modice
humido, seretar in jugero octo modus. Aliqui macro solo spissum
serunt: ita assequuntur, ut linum subtile nascatur. Lib. i. in
mens Oct. Tit. 2.—Now a word on the ancient textures.
The Hebrews had various names for linen, but we are not
always sure what property or quality was expressed by the
several terms which are met with in the original text of the Old
Testament. There cannot be a doubt that the early translators,
erroneously called the Septuagint, were in a better position both
as to time and place than we, to settle the precise acceptation of
these several designations; and that they did so as far as their
knowledge of scientific distinctions extended. This, however,
was equally limited and indefinite, leaving to their successors a
source of inextricable perplexity. In reading ancient works
wherein the raw materials of which the various textures then in
existence were manufactured, we find to our embarrassment,
flax, cotton, wool, and even silk sometimes indiscriminately
written for one another. For example the appellative wool is
flax and cotton; flax is wool, cotton, and silk; cotton is wool,
flax, and silk; and flax again is cotton-wool, silk, and some-
times asbestos, and the fibres of the spartum or spartus (Lygeum
spartum), of which the ancients made their cables, (a) It would
(a) 11. ii. 135 ; Thucyd. iv. 48 ; Pliny Nat. Hist. xix. 9,xxiv. 40.
be unjust, therefore, to blame our modern translators if they did
not at all times catch the precise sense of the Hebrew through
the Septuagint version.
You will find WV? the finest linen; ntDU’Q simply linen; *l2
linen; p~iD very fine linen; and in the plural, linen tunics ;
DETD carpas, carbasus, —linen, or a sail made thereof. All
these appear to correspond to the Greek \lvov, 2lvBcov and [ivottos ;
the Latin Linum , Linteum and Byssus ; and our Cymric Llyn,
Erse Lyn, and Geelic Lin in all their acceptations ; for in the
different languages to which they belong, they are, with the
exception of the last three, extended indifferently either by


catachresis or negligence to cotton, wool, and silk, as I have
already noticed; the Keltic Llyn, Lin, and Lyn are confined
exclusively to the generic term flax and its textures like the
Hebrew. But whether the European names implied varieties or
qualities of the raw material, or of the tissues manufactured
from it, or whether they involved the names of the places where
the plants grew, or the fabric was manufactured, as in the case
of calico from Calicut in the Deccan ; cambric from Cambrai in
Belgium; muslin from Mosul on the Tigris; nankin from
Nankin in China ; and holland from the Dutch Netherlands, is
not always easy to determine.
There is, however, I think, a certain distinction visible in the
Hebrew names for flax, and its tissues, which may be worth
adverting to here. Whenever W& shesh is met with it almost
invariably signifies fine linen. In Gen. xli. 42 ; Exod. xxv. 4,
xxvi. 1, and 31, xsviii. 42, xxix. 28, where it is repeated three
times, the word is uniformly translated fine linen, and once fine
twisted linen ( "\WO mashezor) -q Bad is simply linen—linen
breeches, Exod. xxviii. 42, and once linen breeches of fine twisted
linen, Exod. xxx. 28; and simply linen in Ezekiel ix. 2. nt3K>Q
Pishtah is another term signifying simply flax and linen in
every situation where I find it used. Sadin —fine
linen; ( a ) this word without question is the etymon of the
English Satin, and probably also the Hebrew or Arabic form of
the Sanskrit root. It is the crivScov of the Greeks, and the sin don
of the Homans, from Sindhu the Sanskrit name of the river
Indus —Indus incolis Sindus appelatus. (5) The name was at
first appropriated to a linen of exceeding fineness like cambric or
muslin, and like them also expressed the name of the place
where it was originally manufactured. But sindon afterwards
comprehended every quality of linen from the aerial gauze to
the substantial clothing of a ship.
In the Hebrew Bible sadin always signifies a fine and costly
linen (c), and appears to have been woven in short stated lengths
somewhat in size and shape like a modern sheet, and to have
been fit for wear the moment it came from the hands of the
weaver; in the plural, DTID sedinim, it invariably means an
article of dress answering both to the inner garment or shirt,
represented by the hayks of the Arabians, the x tTcav the
Greeks, and the tunica of the Romans, in the one case ; and to
the outer, the or cloak, in the other. In short, these
sedinim were to the ancient inhabitants of Palestine and Syria
precisely what the Hayks are at the present day to the Bedawlns
with whom it is sometimes the under , sometimes the upper, and
occasionally the only covering of the body; as in the case of the
(«) Proverbs xxxi. 24. (b) Pliny Nat. Hist. lib. vi. cap. 23.
(c) Proverbs xxxi. 24.


boy mentioned by St. Mark. («) A condition of one of the riddles
proposed by Sampson to the Philistines was to furnish thirty
sedinim, sindons, or Hayks, to the fortunate expounder. (5) These
sedimin answer likewise to both the tunica and the Fallia of the
Romans. Though this fine linen is supposed to have been
originally a product of the Indian loom, there is every reason to
believe that it was manufactured in Tyre at a very early period,
and obtained the epithet Tyrian either from the place,
some peculiarity in the tissue, or some excellence in the finish.
I have already shown that Sindons were square pieces of cloth of
a fixed length and breadth forming dresses completed in the
loom and fit for wear without further adaptation, and it shows
that the stability of fashion is sometimes more durable than
empires. We find the same simple dresses mentioned as in
common use, by Ausonius, fifteen hundred years later than the
days of Sampson—
Pner, eja surge : et calceos
Et linteam da sindonem (c)
“ Boy; bring me my shoes and cloak ; ” and that they were thin
and insufficient coverings for the body in cold weather is con-
jectured from the unfavourable contrast these linen garments
make, in the words of Martial, with the warm shaggy cloak
called endromis.
Eidehis ventos hoc muneri tutus et imhres
Non sic in Tyria Sindone tectus eris . (cl)
There were three kinds of this particular article of dress in use,
the Indian, the Tyrian, and the Byssine; the first and second
were perhaps distinguished by their style of getting up ; and the
last by its natural yellow colour. But some considerations lead
me to believe that the fabric which went by the name of Indian
and Tyrian sindon were one and the same, and that both were
manufactured at Tyre, Sidon, or Egypt, for the great Phoenician
export trade ; and I am the more disposed to this belief by the
fact, that calico has been the staple product of the Indian loom
from time immemorial. But be that as it may, the sindon of
the Greek and Roman authors from the time of Herodotus, if not
earlier, is found to be a very different stuff from the delicate
tissues mentioned in writers of a remoter age, when the govern-
ment of Israel was a Theocrasy : and the renowned fine linen of
Egypt when subjected to careful examination may be generally
said to dwindle into the common coarse texture used for every
domestic purpose, from the wearing apparel of the living fisher-
man, to the winding-sheet of the defunct monarch. Herodotus
speaks of this linen in both capacities. After describing the pro-
\a) Chap. xiv. 51-52 ; see also Matthew chap. xxvi. 59.
[h) Judges chap. xiv. 12. (c) In Ephem. Farechas.
(d) Epigr. vi. 19.,


cess of embalming, he says the body is then wound up in bandages
of byssine linen — avvbovos pvcrcnvrjs reXapacn Kararerpr]pevoicn —((?),
which, after all, may be only unbleached linen; and, again,
treating of the domestic habits of the Egyptians, he says the men
have each a sweep-net with which they catch fish by day and sleep
securely under by night; for if they reposed under their blankets
or in a linen wrapper— cnvftovi —they would be bitten through it
by the gnats ( h ). Sophocles speaks of this material in a state of
thread twisted into a halter, pircorei tnvdovos (c), and I only advert
to the circumstance to intimate my belief that the name implies
something more remote than the fabric; and that sindon in its
absolute and primitive signification more probably meant simply
yarn or a variety of flax, than cloth. The short shirt without
sleeves worn by the Cynic philosophers under their plaid was also
called a sindon, and some of these worthies to assert their inde-
pendance of the conventional habits of social life in those days of
universal suffrage, threw aside even the outer covering, and in
magnanimous defiance of all the rules of decorum walked about
publicly in simple cuerpo, of which Crates the Snarler was a
bright example.
By the way, this illustrious disciple of Diogenes was a small
wag as well as a Cynic. The use of a square wrapper in ancient
times, as at present, to cover the front of the bodies of his cus-
tomers while subjected to the soothing ministrations of the barber
was only another application of the utilitarian sindon; hence
when Crates was taken before the magistrates of Athens for
his philosophic indecency in parading himself before the people
with nothing on but a sindon to cover his nakedness —on aivdova
r]fi(f>LecrTo, {d) he proposed in justification of his offence to show them
even the polished gentleman and scholar Theophrastus also abroad
with only his Sindon on; and leading them forthwith into a
barber’s shop hard by, he pointed out the great naturalist, master
of eloquence, and teacher of two thousand pupils, sitting
at ease under the indifferent covering of the barber’s shaving-cloth.
I have already adverted to the lad mentioned by St. Mark with
a linen scarf (sindon) thrown over his naked body, ( e ) which in
the next verse he threw off again and for some unexplained
reason took to his heels, as when the trained runner throws off his
endromis on starting in the race. Again in St. Matthew we are
presented with the mournful spectacle of Joseph affectionately
wrapping the body of Jesus in a clean sindon— cnvßovi Ka.6a.pa, or
linen shroud (/).
These passages, quoted almost at random, are intended to show
that whether the ancient Sedinim in the time of the Judges of
(a) Lib. 11., cap. 86. ( b ) Lib. 11., cap. 95.
(c) Antig. 1222. (d) Diogenes Laert. in vita Gratis Theb.
(e) Mark, chap, xiv., 51, 52. (/) Matthew xxvii, 59.


Israel 1140 years before the Christian Era, was a really fine, or
only a coarse texture, the modern sindon, so to speak, was but a
very indifferent article and not superior to ordinary linen shirting.
pi linen, lawn, cambric, /3 va-a-os, Byssus, flax, linen, lint.
I once thought this word was Egyptian, or Pelasgian, or San-
skrit in its origin. I believe however after much research, that
its etymology is Hebrew. Pausanias states that byssus was not
to be found in any part of Greece except in the vicinity of Elis in
Achaia, that the byssus of the Greeks is not inferior to that of the
Hebrews, and that wherever the soil in that district is suited for
the cultivation of them, the inhabitants sow hemp, flax, and
Byssus (a); from which it appears that it was either a
distinct species or a notable variety of flax; and was chiefly
characterised by its golden, or bright croeine color, like the tunica
of Cupid in Catullus (£), and was both very fine compared with
the textures of that early age, and -very expensive, splendid and
glossy. That it was many degrees above the ordinary productions
of the loom is beyond doubt, when it is recollected that from its
gorgeous appearance are derived the /30-o-tm (c), those
soft, elegant, and dignified expressions which excite in the mind the
ideas of rank luxury and munificence. The truth of its superiority
and costliness is attested by Pliny, who pronounces it to be “ the
highest object of delight to our women.” (d) “ That it is cultiva-
ted about Elis in Achaia, and is reported by an ancient authority
to have sold in former times at the price of gold, 20 grains by
weight of it costing four denarii.”
I must repeat here that there is great—almost ‘ insuperable—
difficulty in identifying the fine linen of Scripture, whether linen
°f Egypt or linen generally; because in reading the Septuagint
version along with the ancient text, the words pishtah, bptz,
shesh, and caepas, though expressing different materials will be
found almost uniformly rendered by these translators flax and
linen. Bad appears to imply a common quality of linen ; at least
it is never translated with the epithet fine ; pishtah, flax and linen
indifferently, is the flax which was smitten with the plague of
hail; butz is simply linen; caepas, linen, sailcloth, and sometimes
fine linen ; ( e ) Shesh is everywhere fine linen, and in one or two
places costly linen, and when high value is implied it is
sometimes translated fine twisted linen, as in Exodus; (/) but in
truth it is impossible now to determine which of the three quali-
ties is meant there. The old Hebrew Commentators, however,
think because shesh signified both the number six and the twist
or yarn of which the fine linen of Egypt was manufactured con-
fa) Eliacis, Lib. v., cap. 5, and Lib. vi., cap. 26. (5) Ixiv., 134.
(c) Cselins Ehodigenus Antiq. Lect. Lib. xii., cap. 39.
(d) Nat. Hist., xix., 1, 2. ( e ) Esther i., 16.
(/) xxvi., 1, xxviii., 6, 8.


sisting of six filaments, that shesh therefore signifies that celebrated
texture. Again in the passage of Ezekiel ( a ) — shesh be-rekemah
Mitzraim, shesh is translated pva-aos, byssus, by the Septuagint,
and in our version “fine linen but some believing that the word
absolutely means cotton, concluded for no other reason but because
it is joined here with Egypt, (Mitzraim) that it ought accordingly
to be translated cotton. Aben Ezra, however, calls it the finest,
whitest, and most costly kind of linen. May it not have some
affinity to W'W Shaiesh marble, from its whiteness ?
The utter ignorance of the ancients with respect to the natural
history of vegetable productions imported into the W est by the
merchants trading to the East has been the occasion of a most
perplexing terminology as I have partly shown. For, leaving
the confusion of the earlier and later versions of the Scriptures,
we find the same embarrassing catachreses in ancient works of
general literature ; and the same author will be detected applying
one and the same term to many analagous materials, whether raw
or manufactured. If a substance resembled wool it was unhesi-
tatingly denominated wool absolutely, if sweet in taste, it was
honey. So the cotton pod of the plant, or the cocoon of the
bombyx were called flax or wool. Cotton was tree-wool, or tree-
flax, and the silk on the mulberry was the wool of the leaves. It
was the same with respect to the materials when manufactured
into cloth, every article bearing the slightest resemblance to
wrought flax was a linen. Herodotus, Theophrastus, Philostratus,
Mela, Pliny, his “ ape ” Solinus, Quintus Cur tins, Arrian, and
Pollux, in their notices of India and Arabia speak of trees
bearing wool, and trees bearing flax. Curtius, (I) describing the
Indians, says their country is full of flax — terra Uni ferax, &c.—.
and corpora usque ad pedes carbaso velant , both clearly meaning
cotton. Pollux says byssus is a kind of flax, Xivov tl ei,Bos, growing
on trees in India, (c) and Virgil asks, “Why should I mention
the forests of Ethiopia whitening with soft wool, and the fine
fleeces (of silk) which the Seres comb from the leaves?”
Quid nemora Ethiopum molli canentia lana ?
Yelleraque ut foliis depectunt tenuia Seres ? ( d)
Pliny (<?) speaking of the Seres or northern Chinese, says lanicio sil-
varum nobilis perfusam aqua depectentes frondium canitiem, clearly al-
luding to silk—and again 2Ethiopia JEgypto conterminus insignes
arbores non fere habit prceter laniferas (wool-bearing) ; and in a
third place (/) he mentions another tree product which he calls
linteum, flax, found in the Persian Grulf different from that of the
Seres. The tree bears capsules the size of a quince, which, on
coming to maturity burst, and display balls of down, and they
{a) xxvii., 7. (5) xii., 2. (c) Onomast. vii., 75
(d) Georg. ( e) vi. 20. (/) xii. 21.


make garments of this expensive linen —Ex quihus vestes precioso
linteo facient. This is cotton plain enough. Theophrastus {a)
has "bequeathed to us a sufficiently full description of these trees
to leave little doubt on our minds what they were. Speaking of
the Indians he says, “ the tree from which they obtain their
clothing has leaves like those of the mulberry but smaller, and
the whole shrub ( <pvrov ) resembles the dog-rose. They plant
them in rows in the fields, and when seen at a distance the
plantation presents the appearance of a vineyard.” This cannot
be mistaken for anything less than the gossipium—perhaps the
G. Herbaeeum which is indigenous to India and the Levant.
The Gossypium vitifolium, no doubt comes nearer to his curt
but clear description; but I believe this variety is confined to
South America, the Mauritius, and to Celebes in the Indian
Archipelago. Of the other wool-bearing plant to which he
alludes, he says it has a leaf like the vine, but smaller.
Yet I think that there is here a confused description of both
the cotton plant and the Chinese mulberry tree—the morus
multicaulis. The Chinese, even to this day plant these trees in
rows as above described, which they never allow to grow much
higher than the large eastern cynorrhodon to which in general
appearance, it bears a striking resemblance. It is said they
keep them down to this standard by constant pruning, because
the finest and most costly silk is obtained from the leaves
preserved tender and jucy by this system of dwarfing. Philos-
tratus in vita Apollon, (b) writes that the people dwelling along
the banks of the Indus are clothed in linen garments, for the
byssus grows abundantly in the fields ; and Arrian in his Expedi-
tion of Alexander, states that the Byssus grows on a tree similar
to the poplar, but with leaves like those of the willow. Again
when Apollonius beheld the byssus which he calls a flax,
gathered from the trees, he was highly pleased, because the
material resembled the dun coloured threadbare cloaks </><««
TpijSavt worn by the Grecian philosophers.
Reverting to Byssus proper. W ith respect to the epithet byssine
invariably adjected to the term linen by Herodotus when des-
cribing the cloth in which the Egyptian embalmers wrapped the
dead, it is most probable that it applies exclusively to linen of
a gold color either made of that particular variety of flax known
to the ancients by the name byssus, or at least of the common
flax dyed of a similar hue. It must be borne in mind that
of all the enormous quantity of swathing that has been unwound
from the swarthy tenants of the Egyptian catacombs and tombs,
in modern times not a single specimen of cotton cloth has yet
been found on them, and this fact leads in the meantime to
(a) Hist. Plantar, Lib. iv., cap. 5-9.
( b) Lib. xi., cap. 9.


the inevitable conclusion, that in his notices of the material
enveloping the mummies, the Father of History speaks of cloth
manufactured from some species of flax, and flax alone; and
whenever the adjective byssine is conjoined with the name of any
texture at the epoch of Herodotus whether wool, linen, calico, or
silk the further and only inference to be drawn is, that
it has reference only to the color of the staple. So when
iEschylus and others allude to articles of dress with this epithet,
as the irenXoL fivcrcrivoi of the Persians, (a) they can only be
understood to imply that those ample shawls whatever the
material of which they were composed might be, were of a lively
crocine color. Poor lovelorn Simsetha went alone to the festival
trailing her beautiful golden tinted muslin tunic. Bvaa-oio KaXov
avpaiva ytrwm (b) ; and the unhappy Pentheus is cautioned to
throw Byssine robes around his naked body — o-reiXat vw apcjn
xpcort fipcrcnvovs irenXovs (c). But when we read in the Apocalypse
“ It was granted unto her that she should be arrayed in pva-cnvov
XapiTpov km Ka.6a.pov (d) -“a byssine (tunic) white and clean,” we
are staggered with a contradiction in terms. The word linen
is not in the passage : that tunic, ytrcoz/, the principal female
garment of ancient times, is understood in this place there can
only be one opinion. It should therefore be rendered “ a yellow
tunic bright and clean.” (e) The same inconsistency runs through
the 14th verse, where the Heavenly Host are clothed in yellow
mantles (yAa/xwS es understood) white and clean, because if these
scarfs were byssine, and such is the text, it is plain enough they
could not be white.
Byssus, besides being a species of yellow flax, is also said to
be a purple dye ; thus, /3 vo-o-lvov is defined nopfpvpov (/); and
fivcrcros crppaLvei fUacppv es. Tropcjivpas ; that is, “Byssus signifies a
purple dye.” (y) Commentators, however, ignore these defini-
tions ; and they seem to have solid grounds for their dissent. I
am not aware that any other Greek or Roman authors besides
the two foresaid lexicographers have given so unnatural a twist
to this word, which, wherever else it is met with as noticed
above, implies only flax of a yellow hue, and its fabrics. The
Hebrew variety alone being superior to the Grecian in this
particular (A); so that there is no doubt left in the mind
respecting the color of the unwrought material at least.
I have already adverted to the fiva-cnva pppara, the paradoxical
byssine words, which, from the costliness, beauty, and limited
use of the article, one would be led to think meant elegant and
choice expressions. Be that as it may, they are the coinage of
(a) Perses. 125. (h) Theocrit. Idyll, ii. 73, and the Scholiast.
(c) Enrip. Bacch. 715. (cl) Revelation xix. 8-14.
(e) Pausanias u. s. (/) Suidas in verhum.
(g) Hesychius in vocem. (A) See also Catullus Ixiv. 135.


the vindictive Queen Parysatis, the mother of Artaxerxes and
the younger Cyrus, and wife of Darius Ochus, who is reputed to
have said “that in conversations carried on between a King (of
Persia) and a subject, Bussine words should be used,” (a) meaning
perhaps, words suited to the magnificence of royalty, expressing
both in sound and sense, grandeur, dignity, and elegance. The
critic and scholar Ooelius Ehodigenus, after studiously cogitating
“ Quidnam altissimi sensus mulier complecti ea sententia voluisset ,”
comes to the conclusion that Byssine words are those which ex-
press sublimitatem, magnificentiam, nitorem, quoque et auctoritatem.fi)
that is majesty, magnificence, elegance, and gravity. Johannes
Alexander Brassicanus, on the same apophthegm, settles the
question more briefly thus, “ Byssina verba vocat (Parysatis) gum
nitorem habeant cum gravitate mixtum (c).”
Now, in the days of Hesychins, and of Suidas in particular,
the terms purple and royalty might be considered synonymous.
The sovereignty was the purple, and the purple was empire,
and this exclusive idea was so inured in the human mind, that
for centuries the purple abstractly inspired more awe than the
mortal whom it consecrated. May it not have happened, then,
under circumstances when all that concerned royalty, whether
thoughts, words, or deeds, ideas or entities, centered in the pur-
ple —even in the absolute term purple, that of these two lexico-
graphers—the one accurate enough, and the other, his “ape,” the
one may have assumed, without much thought or investigation, and
the other adopted the assumption, that these Byssine expressions
signified in truth and reality words meaning or expressive of the pur-
ple colour of the Royal Pallium ? lam inclined to believe that
the signification of byssine words had relation rather to the golden
colour, the high price and the general sumptuousness of the
apparel, than by an abstract and forced analogy to the imperial
or regal purple.
Carbasus ( DQI3 Carpas) signified, when first discovered in
Europe, a rare variety of flax indigenous to Spain, from which
an exceedingly white and delicate texture was manufactured,
distinguished from all other linen by its splendour and tenuity.
Of this fabric Pliny {d) says, “the province of Hither Spain pro-
duces a linen of surpassing whiteness, a quality effected by the
water of a stream which washes the city of Tarragona. The
fineness of it is wonderful; it was in this province that linen
cambric (carbasus) was first invented,” that is, manufactured.
This production of the Spanish loom was held in high estima-
tion, and as its rarity and manufacture must have made it costly,
(«) Plutarch. Moral. Script. Duhner, ed. vol 1., p. 206.
( b ) Antiquse Lectiones, Aid. Ed. 1516, p. 242.
(c) Erasmi Adagia. Ed. 1612, p. 1408.
\d) Mat. Hist. xix. 2.


it could only have been worn by the wealthy and great; and it is
no inconsiderable proof of its transcendent properties to find
Father Tyber enveloped in a mantle of this cambric.
cum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus. («)
and Chloreus, the warrior-priest of Cybele, wearing a yellow
cambric scarf—
—turn croceam chlamydemque sinusque crepantes
Carbaseos fulvo in nodum coUigerat auro (5).
That the finest linen of Egypt bore no comparison with this deli-
cate and aeriel tissue, requires no other confirmation than the
biting pleasantry of the poets and philosophers of antiquity
regarding its transparency as an article of female dress; and
when Grecian and Eoman ladies could appear in public clothed
only in a single tunic of this gauze, content to conceal their
charms by a smicket of glass, we cannot wonder such a covering
was distinguished by the expressive epithets of toga vitrea, ventus
carbaseus, nebula linea, and ventus textilis (e).
Flax seems to have been the only material employed in the
manufacture of sailcloth from the earliest times. We read of
flaxen sails in the Biblical records of the Hebrews, and we have
no reason to doubt that Argo was wafted to the shores of Colchis
by means of flaxen wings, and that the first recorded Periplus of
Africa under Necho, owed its success to linen sails. Textures of
flax were thus employed through all the Grecian naval expedi-
tions (dj. There were manufactories of sailcloth in Greece ; we
have some proofs of one in brisk trade at iEgina, more than four
hundred years before the Christian era {ej. Flaxen sails were
also the clothing of the ships fitted out during the second Punic
war, two hundred and fifty years later (/); and we know from
Cicero (g) and others that they continued to be used in this
capacity till the subversion of the Eoman Eepublic. In the
meantime, carbasus, carbasina, vela, had been steadily supplanting
every other epithet, and becoming the almost exclusive and ap-
propriate appellative of sailcloth, and sometimes used metaphori-
cally for the sails themselves.
et aurae
Yela vacant tumidoque inflatur carbasus austro. An. iii. 357
•A sea
That almost burst tbe deck, and from the ladder-tackle
Wash’d a canvass climber.— Shakspear.
(a) Mn. viii., 32. ( h) Ain. xi. 775.
(c) SeePetronius Arbiter Sat. v. 22. Tibullus El. iii. 2. Hor. Sat. 1. 2,101.
( d) See Homer throughout.
(e) iEschylus in Suppl. 121, Aristophanis Kanae, 369.
(/) Livy, xxvii, 45.
( g) Cicero in Verrem. Catullus iv, 4.


It was employed, too, for tent covers — tabernacula carbasis in-
tenta velis colocabat , as well as for awnings of theatres {a), as
observed above.
Although the term DB"0 carpas (carbasus) is etymologically the
Sanskrit karpasa, which signifies cotton and calico, 1 cannot dis-
cover any certain instance in the Hebrew language in which it
bears this meaning. In the few places where the word is found,
it distinctly implies linen or sailcloth of linen. But when Quintus
Curtius, in his Alexander, says, treating of the Indians and their
customs, terra Uni ferax, inde plerisque sunt vestes, &c.—•
corpora usque ad pedes carbaso velant, he simply states that the
country abounds in cotton, and the people wear calico robes
reaching to the feet, employing carbasus in its pure Sanskrit
sense. For Curtius was well acquainted with calico, which, in
his time was in common use in Europe, having been introduced
from Egypt long before his epoch, as varieties of gossypium
had abounded in Upper Egypt from time immemorial. It is
worth remarking that carbasus is still retained in the carbaso of
the Spanish language in its primitive European acceptation,
namely, a fine kind of flax, and practically the sail of a ship, the
precise meaning of it in the Old Testament. May not carbaso
rather than cannabis be the correct derivation of our English
canvas ? It seems to harmonize better with the genius of the
Spanish and English languages. By softening the b into v according
to the custom of the former, the pronunciation would be carvaso,
which the English ear and use would very easily smooth into
canvas, like Gibralter, from Gibel Tarif, Copenhagen, from
Kjobenhaven, Leghorn, from Livorno, and a hundred other
instances.
Odovr] Othone, linen. Arrian calls it silk, o 6ovrj, arjpiKov (b).
Hesychius defines it aivftcov linen or a linen garment (c). Othone
is not the raw material of any fabric, but a texture from flax
which seems to have been used for every purpose to which linen
can be applied, from the sail of a ship ( d ) to the delicate veil of a
goddess.
A vtlko S’ apyevvrjcn odovrjcnv (<?)
We find othone, a sheet, a towel, and a shroud for the dead(/) :
it was used for shirts —iariv odovp pvrruoo-T] tKaras (y) and for female
undergarments.
romS’ at pev Xerrras oßovas eyoi>, &G. (h )
Hippocrates applied it in bandages for wounds ( i ); and Galen as
(a) Pliny xix 6, who says carbasina vela primus in theatre duxisse tradi-
tur Lentulus Spinther.'—B. Lib. viii., cap. 29.
( h ) Periplus Mar. Erythr. (c) in vocem.
{d) Lucian Jup. Trag. 46. (e) 11. iii., 141.
(/) St. Luke, xxiv., 12. (p) Lucian in Proteo Cynico.
(h) 11. xviii., 595, (t) Officina Medici.


lint, charpie, in the same office («), just as we employ lint in
modern times'.
Gro to ; I’ll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
T’apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him. ( b )
Othone, however, had the reputation of being' a very fine linen,
as may be gathered from many authors; and, like sindon, it was
not only a fine white linen, but also a special article of dress, as
we have shown from Homer and Lucian, where it is sometimes a
shirt and sometimes a smock. Pliny, speaking of the various
linens, makes mention of one which he names othonium, and calls
it a fourth kind of linen made from the fibres of a marsh reed,
supposed to be the arundo donax (c).
A/xopyts, from the island Amorgus, one of the Sporades in the
Grecian Archipelago, was an exceedingly fine species of flax, of
which those aurce textiles, those thin, transparent vestments were
made called Amorgine robes. These garments were very costly
on account of the scarcity of the material and the fineness of the
fabric ( d ), its cultivation being confined to this small island alone.
The cambric of Amorgus in delicacy and tenuity appears to have
resembled the Byssine gauze, and like it to have been worn on
some occasions by the ladies of Greece as a lure for the gratifica-
tion of lascivious passions, to which I can only allude in the
original through the crystal smicket of Lysistrata.
Et yap Kadouped' evdov evrerpippevai
KCLV rol? X iTCDVOi(TL T °LS dfJLOpyIvOLS
yvp.val Trapiovpev. (fl)
(а) De Locis in Homine 111 and de Faciis.
(б) Shakespeare, Lear. (c) Nat. Hist, xix., 2.
( d) iEschinus contra Timarchum 14, 3, Pollux in Onomast., Lib. vii.,
cap. 5, Coelius Rhodigenus in Antiq. Lection. Lib. xii., cap. 40.
( e) Aristoph. Lysist. 149.


THE CULTIVATION OF FLAX.
CHAPTER I.
Quid ? Sine lino yEgyptio esse non possumus ?
Trie. Pollio in vit. Galibni nnon.
Would any one suppose that our letters related to the science of Triptolemus,
and that the question which of us two cultivated his land in the best
manner, was mooted in them ! That science, however, is the first of all,
and without it there would he no traders, no countries, no kings, poets,
and philosophers. The produce of the soil alone constitutes true wealth,
Frederick the Great to Yoltaire.
Common Flax, Linum TTsitatissimum , is the first Species of Class 5,
Order 5, Pentandria Pentagynia, Nat. Ord. Linese, G. 590.
As this species of the plant is neither general, nor, in my opinion,
indigenous to this country, and perhaps not familiar to many
persons who would wish to know it, I shall enumerate its general
characters. The stem is green, leafy, round, smooth, slender,
erect, nearly of the same thickness through its whole length,
rises about two feet and a-half high, and is branched, with a
pannicle at the top. The leaves are lance-shaped, alternate both
on the stem and branches, smooth, sessile, and standing up-
wards at a very acute angle with the stem. The flowers are
blue, spreading into funnel-shaped blossoms ; the petals are five
in number, as are also the leaves of the calyx, which are ovate
and sharp-pointed. The flower is succeeded by a globular cap-
sule, about the size of a garden pea, crowned with a sharp spine,
which forms the essential character of the Linum Usitatissimum.
This capsule contains ten cells, with one elliptical, smooth,
shining brown seed in each.
There is no essential difference of species or variety in the flax
used in the British Isles. But the French distinguish the plant
into a number of sorts, which may be only accidental distinctions,
arising from soil and mode of cultivation. Por example, they
speak of the warm or tadpole; the cold; the large , and the mid-
dling, which last is cultivated extensively between Valenciennes
and Brussels. It is much taller than the others, producing a
staple of extreme fineness, and is the flax most in use. There
c


are, moreover, a summer flax and a small flax, the latter being*
very fine, and furnishing the best material for the manufacture of
lace.
Every country or district rejoices in some little pet
national or local peculiarity in the cultivation and treatment of
this crop, which each considers the best absolutely—or, with
more logic, perhaps, the best under their conditions of latitude
and climate. On careful examination, however, it mostly hap-
pens that the principles which form the groundwork of their
usages are the same throughout; the differences, where they
exist, lying scattered among unimportant details. The following
chapters, therefore, are intended to convey not only exact infor-
mation respecting the general routine of flax and hemp culture ;
but also a notion of any small divergencies which may have crept
into the universal practice. Whatever improvements have been
introduced lately in the usual system, shall be mentioned in their
proper places.
CHAPTER 11.
SOWING THE PEOPEE SEED TIME.
The question, what is the best time for sowing flax in this
country ? can only be answered by an extended periphrasis.
The time of sowing depends upon several circumstances, such
as climate, soil, and situation ; and in this country the hot winds
ought especially to be considered. It may be premised too, that
early sowing has the advantage over late in every country. Sup-
pose, for example, you sow here at the beginning of the second
month of winter, or even in the middle of it, the seed would no
doubt remain stationary in the ground during the rest of the season,
but it would be ready to spring up as soon as the genial weather
set in ; for it is a great advantage to have the crop well above
ground before the extreme heats of our climate begin to parch the
soil, or the weeds to become luxuriant and impede or choke the
tender plants.
It is to be borne in mind that in whatever region the plant is
cultivated, it is invariably ready for pulling about three months
after it is committed to the earth, the time varying a little accord-
ing to the latitude of the place, and temperature of the climate
from which the seed has been brought; also, that if it is cultiva-
ted for the sake of the fibre, it must be pulled a little earlier; if
for the seed, it is to be allowed to ripen perfectly, which will
require some days longer; but it may be laid down as a general


rule, that flax is fully ripe in fourteen weeks from the time of
sowing.
From these data then, it is the business of the experienced
colonist to choose the most congenial three months of the twelve
for the growth of this plant; namely, those three months in which
the crop shall he perfectly secure ftom the destructive influence of
hot winds, and in which, at the same time, there is the fairest
chance of sufficient moisture. Thus the question might he con-
sidered as settled. For with the foregoing facts and your perfect
knowledge of the nature of the seasons to guide your choice you
can hardly fail to decide upon the fittest time for putting in your
seed. Yet before coming to a final determination as to the most
suitable period for this process in Australia, it will neither be
labour lost nor time misspent, if we enquire briefly into the
practice of those nations who have had most experience in the
cultivation of this valuable crop ; the enquiry may still further
enable you to settle the question by the analogies which the
climates and seasons of the Northern hemisphere may furnish you.
Egypt is considered to be the birthplace of flax. The inhabi-
tants, an industrious and utilitarian people, always made the most
of everything in which the elements of usefulness existed; and we
have reason to believe that their experience in the cultivation and
manufacture of this material extended from near the foundation
of their country immediately after the flood, until the conquest of
it by the Saracens in the ninth century. The knowledge of the
Egyptians in every department of this branch of industry, there-
fore, must have been almost perfect. During that long period
they must have discovered the most eligible times for sowing, as
well as the best modes of managing the plant through every stage
of its progress to the loom. Now, in many particulars, there is a
striking similarity between Egypt and this country, especially in
the matter of climate; and it appears to me that the rules and
maxims drawn from the experience of so many ages, may, all
things being equal, be safely admitted as equally applicable to
the same branch of rural economy in Australia.
We learn from Exodus IX., 31., that “ the flax was lolled ” at
the time when it was “ smitten ” by the storm of hail. This
plague happened on the fifth day of Abib, which was both the
first month of the Hebrew year and the first month of barley
harvest among the Jews and Egyptians. Abib, for which the
Chaldee name Nisan was substituted after the return from the
Itabylonish captivity, signifies an ear of corn ; and the month in
all likelihood received that name from the fact that this corn was
generally in the ear in the latitude of Memphis at the beginning
of this month. The Jewish year being regulated by the lunar
periods, commenced on the new moon nearest to the vernal equi-
nox or 21st of March. “ The feast of the harvest ” was held on


the 16th of Abib, when “ the first ofthe first fruits of the land,”
namely, a shegf of barley, was offered in sacrifice, and the harvest
began on the 17th.
Hence then we have undoubted evidence of the precise time of
sowing flax in ancient Egypt from the testimony of Moses him-
self, who states that “the barley was in the ear,” and “the flax
was boiled,” or nearly ripe, on the sth day of Abib, corresponding
nearly to the 26th day of March; which proves beyond a doubt
that the seed time of this plant was about the last quarter of the
December moon preceding; and this is further corroborated by
another Biblical fact, that the barley harvest uniformly commenced
twelve days later than the date at which this hail-storm is said to
have happened. So that, allowing full three months for the
growth of the flax, we fix the seed-time about the period above
stated, namely, the end of December.
In proceeding down the Nile from the torrid into the temperate
zone, we find the seed time and harvest to be about one month
later for every three or four degrees we descend. Thus, at
Syene, under the tropic, the wheat and barley are sown in Octo-
ber, and reaped in January—at Girja, they are sown in Novem-
ber, and reaped in February, and at Memphis, the ancient city
of the Pharaohs, and the scene of the plagues, they are sown in
December, and reaped in March, precisely as they were at the
time of the Exodus of the Israelites. I may remark here also,
that the land of Groshen lay on the eastern side of the Nile, oppo-
site the nome or province of Memphis.
It is clear, therefore, that between a large portion of Austral-
asia and Egypt, you have the several analogies of climate,
seasons, parallels of latitude, and fertility of soil. What more
can you desire to induce you to imitate the ancient Egyptians in
the sowing and general management of this crop ? May we not
suppose, too, that one of the two great physical causes which led
them to choose the Autumno-hibernal period to commit this im-
portant crop to the earth was, because that season was perfectly
secure from the scorching hot winds, which begin to blow in
Egypt in April, and continue at intervals till the beginning of
June. This cause should weigh equally with the colonists of
Australia. They ought, like the Egyptians, to sow at that time
which their experience of the seasons and weather has taught
them is most remote from the influence of this pernicious
wind.
Their second probable reason for sowing at this time is als®
one which should strongly influence the choice of the colonial
husbandman, namely, the certainty of moisture. The irrigation,
by which the overflowing of the Nile restored fertility to the soil
and prepared it better than the longest fallow for the reception of
this seed, has a faint analogy to the rainy season of other


countries. And though we cannot, with perfect adherence to
truth, distinguish any part of the year in our climate, Tby the
title of rainy season, yet it is indisputable, that there is a certain
period of months here which is more subject to showers than
others. If this period, therefore, is found to coincide also with
that part of the year which is safe from the blighting effects of
the Australian hot-winds, it will be a most fortunate coincidence ;
and a good reason why the practice of the colonial farmer should
correspond exactly to that of the ancient Egyptians.
It was probably owing to the same causes that the Homans
sowed their seed from the beginning of October to the beginning
of December, thus giving the plant a long range of favourable
weather, because the hot-winds blow in Italy at intervals, during
part of the spring, summer, and autumnal months. Such was
the general seed time for flax in ancient Italy; for, I place little
reliance on Pliny’s dictum, who says it is sown in spring, in
opposition to Yarro, Columella, and Palladius. Besides, the
Geoponica, which are a collection of rural precepts, extracted
from the agricultural writers of all countries, and all ages, by order
of the Emperor Constantine Copronymus, also recommend sowing
before winter. In Italy, at the time of Petrus Crescentius, of
Bologna, who wrote on husbandry in 1300, flax was sown
in April. But, he adds, that it is also sown before winter
in warm climates, where the frost is not so severe as to injure the crop.
Both in Italy and France, at the present day, it is frequently put
into the ground in autumn, which is a season particularly condu-
cive to more abundant crops of seed. “In the southern provinces
of France,” says Duhamel, Elem. d’Agrieult., vol ii., “they sow
a part of their flax in September and October. This is in the
ground all the winter. The other flax is sown in spring ; this
yields less flax ; but being finer, it is more valued than that
which is sown in autumn. lam of opinion that the flax sown in
autumn, yields better seed than that sown in spring.” The same
course is still followed there. The ordinary season for sowing in
the United Kingdom, is from the last week of March to the
end of April. The inhabitants of the Ukraine, in Pussia,
in the same parallel of latitude as Great Britain, sow their flax
from the end of May, to the tenth of June, and the crop is ripe
from the end of August to the end of September. After winter,
perhaps the next best months for sowing this crop in our division
of the continent, would be August, or to avoid the frosts, Sep-
tember. But, at whatever time the seed is put in, cloudy weather
should be chosen for that purpose, as a hot and dry air tend to
retard or prevent the seed from vegetating.
The usual seed time in the warmer latitudes of Europe, &c., as
I have just mentioned, is before winter, in order to avoid the im-
moderate heats of the summer and autumnal months, which


might injure this crop. I am convinced that a similar course
ought to he 'punctually followed in this country. The winter
with us is doubtless the most genial season of the whole year,
without being so severe as to incommode the plant or retard its
growth ; whereas, the heats of summer are intense, and might be
utterly destructive to this valuable crop, which, I fear,
would shrink into nothing under the first afflatus of a hot-wind.
Sown, therefore, about the end of June, or the beginning of
August, the crop would be in full flower and ready to gather by
the close of spring, before it could be affected by any particularly
unfavourable weather. In temperate countries, which are not
infested with hot-winds, the earlier the seed is sown in the season
the better is the crop in quality and quantity. Trusting to past
experience, we have little occasion to dread an excess of moisture,
even if the winter should be somewhat more showery than usual,
for the inclination of the land upon which flax is to be sown,
ought, in all climates, to be such as would not retain the moisture
long on its surface. Surface moisture, long continued, would
assuredly kill the plants. The following memorandum has been
handed to me by a neighbour of mine, Mr. W. , in conse-
quence of my letters on the cultivation of Max and Hemp in the
Maitland Mercury some months previously; and it shows
clearly that flax may be cultivated safely at any season of the
year in this colony. “ October 4th, 1847, sowed a quantity of
linseed ; from the 28th of this month to the 20th of November, the
weather was dry and hot with strong winds, when it changed to
thunder with rain, which continued for a few days. The crop
came up generally on the 24th of November, and was pulled the
22nd of January.” Many of the farmers in the vicinity of Mait-
land grew flax experimentally, like Mr. W , and were
uniformly most successful, though the seed in most cases was
committed to the earth at random as to the season and weather.
CHAPTER 111.
OE THE PROPER SOIL.
Having fixed upon the best time for sowing flax, the next
question to be settled is whether the crop is to be cultivated for
the seed or for the fibre; and if for the fibre only, what quality
is intended to be produced. These are essential considerations,
and they ought to be well weighed before the plough is laid to
the furrow; for, although perfect success in these aims depends
equally upon the quality of the soil, yet I firmly believe the same


soil is not exactly suited to all. Each will require one somewhat
different from the rest. It is not sufficient to say vaguely, that
this or that soil is best adapted to the growth of flax. General
maxims on a matter of such vast importance only tend to bewilder.
The rules of an art ought to be as special and precise as possible.
To come more closely to the point; the soil which is favourable
to the production of quantity and weight of material will be more
or less adverse to the growth of fine fibre; when flax is cultivated
for the staple, the seed is inevitably sacrificed as to its fitness for
sowing; and when it is raised for the seed, the fibre on the
other hand, is necessarily greatly deteriorated. Nothing so
directly influences the quality of flax as the soil upon which you
may fix your choice. This is the reason why no part of Belgium
can furnish such fine flax as Tournai.
Almost every soil will produce flax, provided it have a good
bottom, and is neither too dry nor too moist. Lord Kaimes
observes that “ flax is a thirsty plant.” If the subsoil therefore
is moist, or capable of retaining moisture, it is an advantage of
the first importance. In fact, a moist subsoil would appear to he
indispensable to the successful cultivation of flax. As a proof of this,
the province of Zealand, in Holland, is celebrated for the fineness
of the flax it produces, and the cause is said to be the nature of
the soil, which is deep, stiff, and watery. The water does not lie
on the surface, which would destroy the crop, but at a foot and a
half and two feet below it, and this supplies constant moisture to
the roots of the plant, without macerating them. Gravelly soils,
although recommended by Pliny, and cold wet clay, are perhaps
the most wwcongenial of all to the nature of this plant; but in
this colony deep sandy loams, on a clay subsoil which retains the
moisture, will produce first rate flax, as well as excellent seed.
The land, however, ought to be drained, and subsoiled a year
previous to sowing. In France and Belgium, in order to avoid
the effects of surface moisture the farmers lay off their flax-plots
in gentle ridges.
The soil which is best adapted for flax in general, that is, such
as will produce the greatest quantity of staple, or good sound
seed, charged with oil, if that be the object, is a deep, rich, friable
clay loam, which abounds in vegetable matter. Moist and stiff soils
are more favourable to the quantity than to the quality of fibre.
They produce a great abundance of flax, and a much better kind
of seed than that which is raised on finer and lighter land. But
on the other hand, when flax is grown on lighter soils, the quan-
tity is sacrificed to the fineness of the fibre, for a light, deep,
mellow soil is best suited to the production of fine flax. I should
therefore prefer, before all others, newly broken up ground, par-
ticularly the loose fine brush land, as most likely to yield the
finest and richest crops. But as a general caution, and one par


ticularly applicable to these colonies, it must be borne in mind that
to produce the finest fibre, or largest quantity of seed, when such
is the desire of the farmer, the land should neither be too rich
nor too poor. Any land that will produce good wheat will also
yield good flax and flax seed. New cleared lands produce excel-
lent crops of flax in Russia, after burning them over, and harrow-
ing in the seed with the ashes.
The strong alluvial deposits of the Hunter, and of many other
rivers of the colony, would be second to none on the face of the
globe for the production of flax, if they were well worked,
subsoiled, and pulverised. The rich deep earths there, which have
grown several crops of a different sort are the best adapted for
flax, and sea-sand and broken shells incorporated with this soil,
plough-deep, so as to render it loose and pulverable, would be
an excellent sort of manure for it. Besides, as a means of coun-
teracting the excessive cohesion of the particles, and of rendering
the earth perfectly friable, and better fitted to imbibe and retain
sufficient moisture, its advantages would be incalculable, not only
with respect to flax, but every crop that one could desire to raise.
I need scarcely add, that strong clays, and land with a rocky or
loose and gravelly subsoil, are the worst that could be chosen for
flax—none is so likely to disappoint the hopes of the farmer.
In Europe where the land has been under cultivation for many
centuries, and the fertility of it maintained and renewed by arti-
ficial means, a common practice is to sow flax after any green crop
which has succeeded several years of pasture. In England,
Scotland, and Ireland, it is grown after potatoes, horse-hoed
turnips, cabbages, and hemp if the ground has been previously
well manured; this was formerly the practice in Elanders, is
still in Italy, and some of the fenny counties in England, then
turnips, and lastly hemp again. These crops extirpate weeds
most effectually by means of the previous manuring, cleaning,
and fine tilth to which they are subjected ; and this is the cause
of their being so well adapted as previous or preparatory crops.
The same principle should be observed in this country. It is true
we do not generally grow what are technically called green crops;
but the same object is gained by using either newly broken-up
ground, or sowing after that crop, whatever it may be, which
leaves the ground cleanest.


CHAPTER IV.
PREPARATION OE THE SOIL.
I wish here to make the reader acquainted with the best modes
of preparing the ground for flax, as practised in different places
and at different times, by which he will perhaps be able to deter-
mine the system of tillage best suited to the climate, soil, and
seasons of these colonies. And this will be the more easily effected
since the leading principles of every system whose primary object
is the production of flax, are the same, namely, to give depth and
richness to the soil, to pulverise the earth into a fine mould, to
attend to the moisture, to extirpate weeds, and to make the
ground resemble as nearly as possible, a well-cultivated garden,
both in its more perfect state of tillage and its uninterrupted
course of productiveness. I have shown in Chapter I, that the
ancients have transmitted to us a very scanty amount of practical
information on this subject. What they have furnished us with,
however, I have already laid before you; but there are a few
observations on the manner in which they prepared the earth for
this crop in the twelfth century, which appear so reasonable and
consistent with science and experience, that I shall insert them
here, without apologising for having recourse for information to
the stores of antiquity. Knowledge is the common inheritance
of all times, and the exclusive property of none. It is our concern
then to seek it where the most useful is to be obtained, whether
in the moth-eaten record, or in the prim modern lecture.
First. — Of the method generally practiced in Italy to the twelfth
century. I say generally, because I infer from the words of
Crescentius, that he is describing the system of farming which
had been most in use in his time. He spent thirty years in
travelling and examining the various methods pursued in different
provinces of the old empire. He says— Fiver sas ac varias opera-
tiones collentium rura vidi : and this is surely sufficient to justify
the conclusion, that he has given us only those maxims of hus-
bandry which were most commonly followed till the time when
he composed his system of husbandry in 1300.
Crescentius assuming the seed time to be spring, says the land
ought to be ploughed before winter, that the clods maybe reduced
to powder by the frosts; and after winter it is to be ploughed as
soon as possible a second time. It is then to be left until it have
received the advantage of rain, and again ploughed five or six
times till it is completely pulverised. But the ploughings must


be performed in this manner : the first course is to be very deep ,
the second less so, and every subsequent stirring to be more
superficial than the preceding, to the last. The seed is then to be
sown from the middle to the end of April, and ploughed in.
On the last operation, I must record a caveat; for however
successful the ploughing in of linseed may have been in the time
of the Senator of Bologna, and ploughing in must be the inter-
pretation of his words — terra super semen aratro revoluta (vertentia
glebas aratro , Ovid) —it would be a most dangerous precedent to
modern farmers. The practice is now unknown, or if ever known
and followed, it is properly abandoned. Because if linseed were
buried deep in the soil, it wotdd not vegetate ; and no ploughing
however light the implement, could be confined to less than a few
inches. With this exception, and it is an important one, this
ancient mode of preparing the ground for flax by frequent
ploughings is admirably adapted to the object in view, if we
consider it in its proper bearings.
The first ploughing of the course was manifestly intended to
have the same effects as those produced by our modern trench
and subsoil-ploughing, to give depth to the soil and a receptacle
to the moisture from whence the roots of the plant might have a
constant supply, without being immersed in it; for the root of
flax penetrates deep, even to half the length of the stem above
ground. The subsequent stirrings were meant to blend inti-
mately the earth turned up by the first deep aration, with the
superficial and effete surface soil, as well as to pulverise and
clean it. Thus, some of the immutable principles of cultivation
were well understood in the gloomiest period of the dark ages.
Second.—The Flemish system of preparing the ground for flax. —
This is extremely elaborate, and, in the outset, expensive. But
these disadvantages, as far as they go, only prove the more indu-
bitably the great value of this crop, and the liberal profits ac-
cruing from it. The chief aims of the Flemish system of culti-
vation are depth of soil, richness, uninterrupted production,
freedom from weeds, &c., &c. Fallows, except on strong clayey
soils, are now nearly abolished, by which innovation the agricul-
tural produce is much increased. But as every thing in the
Netherlands is grown with a reference to flax, it will not be
labour lost if you make yourselves acquainted with the general
scheme of rotation practised by the Flemings.
The Flemish courses of rotation depend entirely on the quality
of the soil. The Eev. Thomas Eadcliff, in his Eeport on the Agri-
culture of East and West Flanders, has therefore distributed the
land into a number of divisions according to its predominant
qualities. Of these, the soil of the second and third divisions is
described as a good loam, mixed with a portion of sand, which
produces a variety of crops. The rotation on these divisions is as


follows: —“ 1. Wheat upon manured fallow ; 2. Clover, top
dressed with ashes ; 3. Oats and Turnips the same year, without
manure ; 4. Flax, highly manured with urine and rape cake ; 5.
Wheat; 6. Beans. Or, in lieu of the last three crops, thus—4.
Fallow, manured; 5. Eye; 6. Wheat; 7. Beans, manured; 8.
Wheat; 9. Oats; 10. Turnips; 11. Eye; 12. Tobacco, three
times ploughed and richly manured; 14. Wheat; 15. Hops,
with abundant manure. This last crop remains generally five
years, and the ground is aftewards fit for any kind of produce.”
An experienced farmer will at once pronounce these to be very
severe rotations ; yet by the judicious and liberal application of
manure the ground is never out of heart. It constantly grows
some useful crop. Their management of the soil is unexampled.
The present course generally “ consists of from four to five crops,
and a clear fallow, but this varies according to the soil and the
nature of the articles in demand.” Contrast this with the fol-
lowing rotation, which would bring flax in once in ten years :—“ First
year, potatoes; second year, barley, laid down with grasses;
third year, cut for soiling; fourth year, pasture; fifth year,
flax, or the one-half might be better in flax, the other in oats,
so that, with the return of the rotation, which would be in five
years, the flax coxdd be put on the ground, which, in the last
rotatory course, was under corn, throwing a range of ten years
between the flax crops coming into the same ground.” The same
authority states that—“A gentleman of much practical know-
ledge, recommends the following as being the most profitable :
1. oats, after the grass and clover; 2. flax pulled in August,
then ploughed and harrowed in with 2 cwt. guano and 2 cwt.
gypsum, then sown with rape; 3. potatoes or turnips, well,
manured; 4. wheat, sown in spring, with clover and rye-grass;
5. hay and clover; 6. grazing; 7. oats; 8. flax and winter
vetches, guano as before mentioned ; 9. turnips, well manured;
10, barley, sown with rye-grass and clover ; 11. clover and hay;
12. grazing; 13. oats.” ( a)
The preparation for flax, according to Eadcliff, is as follows :—•
The field intended for the crop, after two or three ploughings and
harrowings, is backed up in the centre and ploughed round in
but one set, so as to leave it without any furrow. The heavy
roller is drawn across the ploughing by three horses, the liquid
manure is then spread equally over the entire surface, and then
well harrowed in by eight or nine strokes of the harrow, with
wooden tines of less than three inches, and the surface, to con-
clude the operation, is again carefully rolled.
Spade trenching is a valuable practice almost peculiar to
( a) From a note, page 37, of the Fourteenth Eeport and Trancactions of
the Eoyal Society for the' Promotion and Improvement of the Growth of
Flax in Ireland, &c.


Slanders, but it has been more especially confined to the Pay de
Waes, where it has formed a principal feature in their cultivation
for many cepturies. It is performed once in every rotation, as it
is supposed to increase greatly the fertility of the soil, besides
giving rest to the upper surface, exhausted by many rotations,
and bringing the lower soil into activity which has not only had
the advantage of repose, but the fertilising influence of the
manure which, in a light porous soil, must have descended to the
lower stratum. This constant habit of deepening the soil, not
only renovates and maintains the fertility by bringing up fresh
and vigorous soil and mixing it with the old, but diminishes the
necessity for manure and abridges the number of ploughings; so
that, in the end, the Flemish husbandry is not so expensive as it
appears.
The land around Courtrai, which is situated on the river Lys,
in West Flanders, is a good deep loam, more light than heavy.
This district has been long celebrated for producing the best flax.
The soil is not naturally so rich as that of the reclaimed land
known by the name of Polders, which will be found in Eadcliff’s
first division, but the productions of the soil are of a much finer
quality and of a more valuable nature. These advantages are
entirely owing to the more perfect system of cultivation carried
on in this department. A sixth-part of the arable land in the
Waes district is trenched every year ; but where this is not done
at once with the spade to the depth of about twenty inches, they
accomplish it gradually by making every year a number of nar-
row drains a foot wide and from twelve to eighteen inches deep,
between the six feet wide stitches in which the land is laid by
the plough. The earth taken out by these drains is spread evenly
over the land after corn is sown. When the land is again
ploughed next year, these water furrows are shifted a foot on
each side; so that in the space of six years the whole soil is
deepened and completely mixed with the upper soil and the
manure which has been laid on during that period.
In preparing for flax in this district, it is usual to plant potatoes
or colsat (Brassica Campestris) with a double portion of manure.
After either of these crops, wheat follows with a slight manuring ;
then rye, succeeded by turnips the same year, which are taken up
and housed in September or October. This successive cropping
and manuring cleans and fertilises the land which, by every
rotation is rendered more and more fit for the important crop to
which all the preceding are only preparatory. After a little more
manuring if necessary, it is ploughed into stitches before winter,
and then left to the influence of the frost and snow to mellow and
pulverise. When the winter is over, the ground is again subjec-
ted to two or three deep ploughings and harrowings, which form
the final preparation. The surface is then laid as fiat and smooth


as a flower border, without any furrows. But where there is a
probability of the water lying on the surface, the ground is divi-
ded with water-courses. The liquid manure is now spread equally
over the soil, which is then borrowed carefully and left a few days
for the manure to sink in. After this it is harrowed once more
and the seed sown.
Third. —Whatever land is intended for flax in the United
Kingdom, it is invariably broken up before winter in sufficient time
to receive the advantage of the frost and snow. This is an excel-
lent preparation as it both mellows and enriches the soil. In
spring you cannot work the land too much. One ploughing on
light loam will be sufficint after grain crops : the heavier loams
answer best after long fallows, and they should be trench-ploughed
once, worked deep by three good ordinary ploughings, well
manured, and the manure intimately mixed with the soil, which
should then be harrowed, rolled, and smoothed before the seed is
sown, and again rolled after it is in. When potatoes are to pre-
cede flax, the [land should have a double share of manure, that
part of it may remain for the benefit of the flax. If it is to suc-
ceed a corn crop, the ground is to be broken up early for the
winter frosts, and to have a large proportion of manure laid on
the surface; peat-ashes, gypsum, which is also followed by great
success, weeds, and clay burnt in a smothered fire, wood-ashes,
and bone dust, are superior to anything for this crop. They
retain moisture and destroy insects which are apt to prey upon
the roots of the plant; the land is ploughed again in spring. But
it is to be observed that stable manure should not be applied imme-
diately before sowing, but some months previously. Five bushels of
salt an acre is an excellent manure to plough in. Lime is used in
clay soils; but its use is questionable on the lighter lands, espe-
cially if two or three other crops have not intervened ; abundance
of manure however is indispensible on these, which repay all the
labour and expense by the excellence of the crops they yield.
Recapitulation. —Flax being a thirsty plant, it should be sown
on such situations, and the soil so managed, as to secure sufficient
moisture for the roots of the plant by frequent and deep ploughing.
The subsoil plough should be used at least once, but not less than
a year previous to the sowing. The bottom and surface soils to
be well incorporated by the lighter ploughings and harrowings,
and after being finely harrowed, should be heavily and closely
rolled before sowing the seed, which should never be covered
more than an inch deep, and when it is covered it should be har-
rowed with a fine harrow, and rolled. Weeds are to be kept
under by all means, an object which will be effected to a certain
extent by the previous ploughing and harrowing. The lands then
to be laid as level as possible, and made as smooth as a flower
border ; otherwise the plant will ripen unequally, which will be


a great disadvantage in the pulling, and a detriment to the
quality of the staple. Spade husbandry is always preferred in
Holland and Belgium.—What an advantage it would be to the
Australian settlers, to have Coolie labour for this easily managed
crop!
CHAPTEE Y.
PONDS POP STEEPING THE ELAN.
The first operation which should be performed after the crop
is in the ground, is the formation of ponds for watering the flax
after it is pulled. Indeed, in order to prevent delay and confusion
at a time when they might cause irreparable loss, I would advise
all the apparatus necessary for the steeping process to he prepared
during the winter preceding the crop, supposing the seed to he
sown in the spring; for in this ease in particular, it will be a
saving of time and expense, to do every thing in its proper order,
and to have all things in readiness for each succeeding operation.
The number of acres in crop determine precisely the size of the
ponds, since the produce of each acre requires a pool forty feet
long three to four feet deep, and six feet wide, filled with water
to near the surface. They should be dug if possible in a clay bed,
and the sides well rammed to prevent leakage ; for it is essential
that the water should not diminish during the time the plants are
in steep. The water should be fresh and soft, and let in a few
weeks before the flax is ripe ; and it is indispensable that the pit
be at a distance from all shade, that it may have the full advan-
tage of the sun and atmosphere ; but at the same time well fenced
in from cattle and every domestic creature, because the water in
which flax or hemp is steeped is injurious to animal life.
Many flax growers make their pits much more capacious than
the proportions I have given; but the dimensions stated above
will be found quite sufficient for every purpose. After the pond
is completed, it will be advisable to drive strong hooked pegs of
this form \ into the sides of it, opposite each other, and at the
distance of five or six feet apart; they should also be a little below
the surface of the water. These pegs may be made of forked
branches, cut in the form represented, the longer limb being the
part which is to be driven into the ground. Their use is this :
When the flax is all properly disposed in the pit, a number of
poles corresponding in length to the breadth of the pond are laid
across, and their ends fixed in the hooks, which keep them firm
a little way under the water. Wh.en thus placed, they represent
as it were a number of joists laid across the pond. Other poles


are then inserted under them, in a contrary direction, forming a
sort of inverted floor. By this contrivance, the flax, which is
exceedingly light and buoyant, is kept steadily and evenly down
a few inches below the surface of the water during the macera-
tion. These, with plenty of water and a quantity of straw to
shade and protect it, compose the furniture of the pond, which is
now ready to receiv e the crop. Many persons contrive, where it
can be done, to keep a small stream of fresh, clear, soft water,
constantly running in and off the pond. But I believe the general
voice is against the practice of renewing the water in any degree
whilst the flax is in steep. The same water, however, should not
be used twice, but changed, and the pool cleaned, before other
flax is put into the hole.
CHAPTER VI.
CHOICE OF SEED.
Success in the growing of flax depends more upon the selection
of proper seed than people are aware of. Nothing in the whole
course of preparation for this crop is so necessary as care in this
particular ; for nothing is so apt to frustrate the hopes of a hus-
bandman as improper seed. _No man should attempt to raise a
crop of flax with seed which is more than one season old. The seed
of last year’s growth should sink readily in water, and crackle
and blaze when thrown in the fire. If he neglect this caution,
it is ten to one but he will find when he expects to see a regular
and healthy crop, that much of his labour has been in vain.
There is no doubt that a few seeds of any age will come up and
become vigorous plants ; but a few plants will be a poor reward
for his great preparatory labour and expense.
But disappointment in the first crop is not the only evil that
v ould be likely to arise from this incaution. The temper and
genius of the Colony are such, that one disappointment at the
beginning would probably lead to a total abandonment of all
future attempts to prove the real value and lasting importance of
this commodity. Failure from such a cause would be ascribed by
the irresolute and timorous, to unfitness of climate and soil. Old
habits are difficult to abandon. The eternal rotation of maize,
wheat, and tobacco, is so deeply rooted in the constitution of the
settlers that it has become a second nature, and many of them
will die growing maize, wheat, and tobacco, or will continue to
grow them until they have not a seed of each left to perpetuate
the infatuation. Even when their hopes are repeatedly blasted
by the malignity of the seasons, or their toils rewarded with the


ignominious price of two shillings a bushel for their wheat, and
ninepence (a) for - their maize, they cling to their old custom of
raising this wheat, and tobacco, with the tenacity of misers, and
contemplate with fear and trembling the perpetration of an act of
infidelity to this pauperising routine which has reduced them to
the level of serfs.
To men who thus wed themselves for better and for worse to a
bad habit, innovation sounds like a voice from the tomb. If they
are for once lured from the beaten path, and meet with the
smallest difficulty in the outset, they are discouraged, and imme-
diately retrace their steps. It is a conviction of this fact which
makes me so anxious to impress upon those who would try the
production of flax, the great necessity of choosing good seed.
Total or partial failure would inevitably ensue from the choice of
bad ; and all further proceedings in this new branch of our rural
economy would cease before its advantages had been felt or
proved; and from a mere act of ignorance or incaution, one of
the most remunerating branches of industry would be left to the
energy and enterprise of some future generation to bring into
useful operation ; and thus the foundation of an enriching export
trade would be left without a superstructure.
I entertain not the smallest doubt, from the specimens of lin-
seed I have seen and used in this country, that the article till
lately advertised in Sydney, was both old and of a very inferior
quality ; most likely brought originally from America to England,
and after going the round of the British markets, sold to some
speculators there, and by them sent to Australia. I know from
an experience of fifty years, that the lest linseed is seldom if ever
used for medicinal purposes; and it is pretty certain that most of
the seed hitherto consigned to this Colony was sent for no other pur-
pose. Satisfied of these facts, and knowing also that old seed,
which is entirely useless to the grower, is as good as the
freshest and best for all the purposes of the medical practitioner, it
was but reasonable that I should look upon the seed advertised for
sale with some suspicion, and even assume that it was altogether
unfit for any of the objects which agriculturists have' in view.
Having, I believe, been one of the first to recommend this en-
riching and rational speculation to the agricultural portion of the
Australian public, I naturally feel anxious for the success of the
enterprise, whether it be undertaken by few or many. With this
exception, I have no end to attain in advising caution in the
selection of flax seed; for lam so convinced of the inutility and
fallaciousness of old linseed to the farmer, that sell it who may,
I would advise no one who wishes well to his own interests to
purchase it for sowing.
If any one however should still desire to try the old seed on
(«) Written in 1845.


account of its greater cheapness, or has already procured some,
let him he advised not to sow it extensively at first, or put him-
self to any great expense or labour in preparing much ground
for the purpose of raising a crop. It would be more prudent to
sow it on a well prepared patch of ground, as an experiment to
raise seed for future crops. He ought, if the experiment succeed,
to pick out all the best of the plants—the tallest and finest stems,
with fewest branches at the top and the largest bolls, and reserve
the seed of these for next seed time. He may thus raise enough
to serve his purpose. By a little attention during the growth of
the plant, and after the seed is ripe, it will be easy to determine
the quality and fitness of it for producing either a good staple, or
seed profitable for crushing.
There are three sorts of seed in use —the Eiga, the Dutch, and
the American. The universal voice is in favour of the Eiga ;
but the Dutch ripens soonest, and produces both greater crops
and a superior quality of flax, and is best adapted for the
heavier soils. The seed imported from Eiga used formerly
to be in greatest estimation, but it is found to produce a much
coarser staple than the others; it yields, however, a larger
quantity of seed, and is consequently the most useful sort
to those who wish to grow flax for the seed only, as it will of
course afford a greater proportion of oil than either of the
other two. American seed yields a fine staple, but it is unequal
to the Dutch in the quantity of flax, and to the Russian in the
amount and quality of its seed. The plants produced from it
have more branches at top which are wasted in the scratching,
therefore they are not so prolific in fibre as the Dutch and Eiga.
On these grounds it is now generally rejected.
There is one unfavourable circumstance connected with the
Russian seed, more particularly that which is imported from
Odessa. It is that the value of all the seed from that quarter
is much diminished, and its usefulness to the farmer materi-
ally lessened, by a constant admixture of the seeds of trouble-
some weeds, such as the Camelina Sativa, and the varieties of
Cuscuta or Dodder. It is particularly infested by the latter,
which is one of the most troublesome and pernicious weeds in
the field.
The Camelina Sativa, or Gold-of-Pleasure may be rendered
innoxious by care, as it rises to the height of three feet, and may
be known by its small yellow flowers and very large pouches on
the stalks. It can therefore be pulled out before the flax is ripe.
But the common Dodder, Cuscuta Europsea, if allowed to exist
in the field, can only be eradicated by the destruction of the crop
to which it adheres parasitically. This troublesome epilinium,
found in all the temperate climates, is a true parasite, although
its root be not fixed in the object of its attachment. It closely


embraces the stems and branches of plants, twists round them,
and strikes a number of minute suckers down upon their bark,
and then absorbs from the plant aud the air its whole subsistence ;
but it is an erroneous opinion that its seeds strike' roat into the
plant. This species of the dodder is a white or reddish looking
annual.
Decandolle says the slender and simple radicle descends into
the earth, and the plumule equally simple and cylindrical, rises
like a thread; if it finds no other living plant near it, it dies ; if
it finds one it surrounds the stem, and from the points of contact
proceed hollow tubercles or suckers which plant themselves in the
bark, and suck the juice which has been elaborated by the plant
attacked; then the root becomes obliterated and dies, and the
plant lives from that time forward by its suckers only. This pest
may be known by its presenting the appearance of a cluster of
living threads, which it throws around the branches of every plant
within its reach ; and, like the gigantic polypus of the Indian seas,
destroys whatever it once embraces within its deadly folds. When
allowed to ripen it produces large quantities of seed which is
usually thrashed with the flax seed, and is again sown with
it the succeeding year, and by this means the evil is propagated
to the serious injury of the crop and disappointment of the
cultivator. I have expatiated somewhat diffusely on this plant
on account of its destructive qualities. It is one recommen-
dation to the American flax seed, that it is nearly free from this
weed.
The best seed should weigh about 84 lbs. to the imperial
bushel, is oily to the feel, heavy, plump, shining, and of a bright
brown color. When a given measure of the same sort of linseed pos-
sesses these characteristics in an eminent degree, hut grown on different
soils, are weighed separately, the heaviest is that which should he chosen
as fittest for all agricultural purposes. I repeat, great care is neces-
sary that the seed be perfectly clean and free from all other seeds,
which, if sown along with the flax seed, only embarrass, and
increase the trouble of weeding. For this reason, before sowing,
it should always be sifted through a sieve whose meshes are of
such a size as to permit not only all lesser foreign seeds, but also
the smaller and shrivelled portions of flax seed that may be
present, to permeate.
All seeds sown for a number of years successively on the same
soil are found to acquire a constitutional tendency to deteriorate ;
and there is no doubt of the general correctness of the proposition ;
and the discovery of this fact has given origin to some of the most
useful maxims of husbandry which have directed the operations
of the cultivator almost ever since the dawn of the science. Seeds
as well as soil love a change, say the Geoponic writers, but the
seed is always to be transferred from abetter to a worse. Yirgil


has expressed himself with his usual elegance and accuracy on
this natural tendency in seeds to degenerate, (a)
On this very important topic the following observations are
highly deserving of the farmer's consideration and remembrance.
They apply equally to seeds, plants, and animals.
Plants not indigenous to a climate have a constant tendency to
deteriorate. When you transplant the natives of one climate and
soil to others which are to all appearance equally favourable, or
even superior to their own, they notwithstanding degenerate in
the course of time, and become unprofitable in cultivation.
Wherever you plant seed which has been brought from a warm
sandy soil, it will for a few seasons grow quicker, and ripen
earlier, than the same species or variety of seed from a different
kind of soil.
On the contrary, the seed of plants reared on cold stiff land,
yields later crops than common, even when planted in a warm
soil.
A poor soil will at first produce strong and vigorous plants, if
the seed have been grown on very rich land. But no soil, how-
ever rich, will at first produce strong healthy plants or good seed
from those which have been brought from a poor hungry soil.
These dogmas should be rigidly attended to, because whatever
alteration is effected in the constitution of a plant by a change
of climate and situation, is commonly transmitted to all the
offspring.
Therefore, according to these principles, all seeds which man
has appropriated to his use, where they are not indigenous,
should be constantly changed both in their species and varieties.
It is the want of attention to this necessary precaution that has
operated so po verfully in deteriorating the wheat and tobacco, in
the districts of the Hunter. Constant importation of fresh seeds
from different climates and soils are absolutely necessary to ensure
good plants and seed, free from all internal or constitutional
taint.
Another cause of the deterioration of seed is the want of rota-
tion of crops. The same seed should not only never be sown
twice in succession on the same land, but the same species or
variety should not be sown successively, even in rotation with
other crops.
The Dutch and Belgians have long acted on such principles
with prodigious success, for they never have bad seed or indiffer-
ent crops from what they sow. They keep up a constant succes-
sion of importations of linseed, and to this they are in a very
great degree indebted for the general superiority of their flax.
(a) Degenerare tamen, ni vis humana quotannis
Maxima qnseque maim legeret; sic omnia fatis
In pejus mere, ac retro sublapsa referri.—Georg. I. 198.


“ One source of superiority,” says Tennent in his Belgium,
“which the farmer of Holland and the Netherlands enjoys, is
derived from the fact of his saving the seed of his own flax. In
the first instance he imports as we do from Riga, seed which
yields a strong and robust plant the first year ; its produce is then
preserved and sown a second time when it becomes more delicate
in its texture, and the seed then obtained is never parted with by
the farmer, but produces the finest and most valuable plant. As
this, however, in time deteriorates, it is necessary to keep up a
constant succession by annual importation of Northern seed, which
in turn becomes acclimated, refined, and superseded by the next
in rotation.” —Yol. 1., p. 142.
With proper care, therefore, when once good seed has been
introduced into this country, there will be no difficulty in keeping
up a constant supply of as good as any that can be imported.
This may be done in different ways by the same rule. We have
variety of soils ; and a certain portion of land, but always some-
what different from that which is appropriated to the general
crop, ought to be devoted every year to the production of seed for
the ensuing year; and for this purpose it should be sown thin.
Or, farmers of different districts could exchange seed with one
another ; and by this means also an unfailing supply of fresh and
vigorous seed, fit for all soils, may be obtained at little expense,
and without the smallest necessity for importing. Seedsmen
should also ticket the seeds they may have for sale, according to
the district where it is produced. By such means, cultivators
would have it in their power to choose that which would be most
suitable to the land on which they intend to sow.
CHAPTER YI.
QUANTITY OE SEED MODE OE SOWING.
No person ought to begin sowing until the ground be smoothed,
levelled, and compacted by a heavy roller. And as linseed is
slippery and cannot be held in the baud, it is taken firmly between
the thumb and two fingers, and scattered in short quick casts ;
and it is absolutely necessary that it be spread with perfect
equality if possible, which could be better effected by the seed
sowing machine. But before committing his seed to the earth,
the farmer should settle with himself whether it will be most
profitable to cultivate for the seed or for the fibre : because the
quantity of seed per acre will depend in some measure upon his
intentions. Without saying anything of the particular object in


growing flax, Columella ii., 10, directs a jugerum to be sown with.
eight modii of seed ; that is between eight and nine pecks to three-
quarters of an English statute acre. He adds that some persons
choose to sow the seed exceedingly thick on poor ground, macro
solo , that the flax may come up slender and fine.
In Great Britain and Ireland farmers were formerly in the habit
of cultivating the plant for both purposes at once, and thereby
produced neither in perfection. The quantity of seed generally
used is about two bushels and a-half to the acre. Some, espe-
cially Irish farmers, put in as much as three bushels ; but in this
case the seed from the crop will be of less market value. When
the object is to raise seed, whether for the purpose of crushing or
for future crops, the rule both in the United Kingdom and on the
Continent, is to sow thin. This gives room for the plant to thrive
vigorously. But then it invariably grows short, thick in the stem,
and coarse in the fibre ; and consequently productive only of
coarse flax. What is lost, however, in the inferiority of the
quality, is gained in the perfection of the seed. For the plants,
from having abundance of room, and better ventilation, are
enabled to throw out plenty of side branches, producing, of
course, a greater number of capsules, and larger and better seed ;
and it appears to me that drilling would greatly conduce to this
result. Carefully performed, this operation would beyond doubt,
ensure the most healthy plants, the greatest number, and the very
best sort of seed. Besides, h has the several advantages of cheap-
ness, requiring less labour than the broad-cast way, and in the
great saving of seed ; about six pecks of seed will be fully suffi-
cient for an acre when the drill is employed; whereas, sown
broad-cast, either by hand or by the machine, two and a-half
bushels would be about the proportion required. The land is
prepared in the usual way, but the best and strongest soil should
be chosen for seed. If it is to be drilled in, the distances between
the drills will depend upon the intended mode of after-culture.
If the hand-hoe is to be used, narrow spaces will be quite suffi-
cient ; but if the horse-hoe, horse- plough, or cultivator are to be
employed, twenty inches apart will be space enough. By either
of these methods or by a triangular harrow with handles so as to
be able to press it down heavily or lightly according to circum-
stances, the land may be kept in excellent tilth at little expense ;
the rows must be weeded by hand. By these means the weeding
and cleaning of the ground, the most essential operations in the
cultivation of flax, are greatly facilitated, the expense and labour
lessened, and the plants uninjured by trampling.
If the husbandman decide on growing flax for the sake of the
fibre, he should sow thick broad-cast on a fine light loam, newly
broken up if possible, or on a good soil, which is neither too rich
nor too poor, and has not produced flax for some time before. If


it be his intention to produce fibre fit for lawn, cambric, or lace,
the quantity of seed must be nearly double that usually sown;
the thicker it is ’sown, the finer will be the fibre. The Flemings
sow nearly three bushels to the acre, very evenly, and cover the
seed by a bush harrow or hurdle. On the lightest soils the land
after sowing is rolled, or the seed is trodden in with the feet, as
gardeners do with fine garden seeds. Most commonly, however,
the traineau or drag, is drawn over the land, which both smooths
it and covers the seed to a sufficient depth, which should in all
eases be about an inch. The traineau is a simple instrument,
consisting of a square wooden frame like that of a harrow, with
boards nailed closely on, forming a flat smooth bottom, it is drawn
over the surface of the ground to smooth it and cover seeds. Let
it be borne constantly in mind, the quantity of seed is to be regu-
lated by the quality of the soil; good ground requires less and
bad more.
The reason why flax seed is recommended to be sown thick, is
this :—When sown thick, the stems run up tall, slender, and fine,
with few or no branches ; and as the finest and thinnest stalks
contain the same number of textile filaments as the thickest and
coarsest, it follows that the more fine we can render the stem, the
more fine and valuable will be the flax.
But in raising fine, tall, slender stems, there is great danger of
their being laid on the ground by the lightest winds, and the
gentlest showers ; and this mishap would completely spoil the
crop. To obviate such a misfortune, the French, who produce
the finest flax in the world, and the people about Courtrai in
Flanders, who also grow a very fine tall variety, pursue a method
which enables them effectually to support the crop during the
whole time of growth. They fix stakes in the ground about eight
or ten feet apart, in parallel rows right across the field. On these
stakes, which are from twelve to fifteen inches above the surface,
they fasten horizontally long slender rods, and thus form a num-
ber of rows of fight fencing by which the plants are completely
secured against all accidents arising from the weather. There is,
however, an improvement on this method, which is not so gene-
rally used ; they place stakes in the ground, as in the other mode,
all over the field, at equal distances from each other. To these
they fasten cheap rope yarn instead of poles. The parallel
fines thus formed are then intersected by others of the same kind
running across them at right angles, and in this manner is formed,
as it were, a large net, in the meshes of which the crop is per-
fectly supported. When the flax is pulled, these stakes and fines
are taken up as they proceed in the operation, and laid carefully
aside under shelter for future occasions. In some places where
the seed has been sown very thick, with the intent to raise a crop
of the finest quality, as soon as the plants have been carefully


weeded, the flax-growers stick forked stakes into the ground ten
to sixteen feet apart, in rows three or four feet wide; the height
of the stakes above the ground does not exceed nine or ten or
twelve inches. Poles of proper length are then placed on the
stakes from fork to fork, and across these are next laid in close
and level order, a thick layer of brushwood like the sticks which
gardeners use to support their peas. This will be more intelli-
gible to those who have seen the frames formed of branches which
the tobacco-growers in this Colony place over their beds to protect
the seed and the young plants from the cold by night and fierce
solar heats of the climate by day. When the flax reaches this
loose bushy roof, it finds no difficulty in penetrating between the
loose rods, and then it is supported and protected from all the
effects of the roughest weather, while the earth at the roots is
kept moist and clean, and the plant shaded from too much sun.
On the continent some growers are in the habit of planting large
beans in the flax bed to give support to the slender stems.
When the crop is to be pulled it is seized above the rods, and
each handful is laid upon them, where, if the weather be fine, it
may be left two or three hours. It is then carried into the shade
near a barn, where they continue to spread it out four or five
days, always taking it in at night, or on the least appearance of
rain. These operations are continued till it is perfectly dry :
great care must be taken to prevent heating in the barn.
By these acts of unwearied care and diligence, the farmer is
seldom deceived in his expectations. As he leaves nothing to
chance, so his industry and prudence generally secure to him the
precise measure of reward upon which he calculates. And, as
Mr. Andrews, speaking of the Irish flax growers, justly observes,
“from a mere handbreadth of ground, the peasant will often derive
the means of support for his family for a whole year; as he
frequently obtains from five to seven shillings a-pound for his
flax.”
The seed then, is to be scattered thick or thin, either broadcast
with the hand or with broadcast sowing machine, according to
the object of the farmer; after which it is to be covered either in
the Flemish method, by the traineau, or lightly, by a double close
fine harrow. Flat level land should be water-furrowed, but none
else ; and on all occasions ground should be rolled, both to retain
the moisture and close the earth round the seeds, to cause a more
uniform, vigorous, and simultaneous vegetation. In this country
every kind of soil might be advantageously rolled after sowing
flax seed.


CHAPTER YII.
MODES OE WEEDING.
Weeding is a process of the greatest moment in the cultivation
of flax; it is essential to the very Existence of the crop that the
land he perfectly free from weeds. From the moment the seed
is in the ground, therefore, the attention should be directed to
this object. The growth of the flax at this time should be less
a matter of anxiety than the eruption of weeds; which as soon
as they begin to appear, should be unceremoniously eradicated,
that the young shoots may neither be encumbered and suffocated
by a crowd of intruders, nor bereft of their due share of aliment,
by a gay concourse of greedy and insatiable epicures. The Bel-
gians are so particular in this respect, that they never give the
least chance to a weed to grow, carefully eradicating the smallest
visible particles ; so that the ground appears rather to have been
sifted than harrowed.
If the crop be in drills with the intention of raising seed, the
operation of weeding will be neither difficult, tedious, nor expen-
sive ; as the soil may be kept sufficiently clean by the horse-hoe,
in conjunction with a little manual labor ; for drilling is a mode
which admits most freely of the full measure of tillage, and
weeding is one of its least dispensable processes. But when
the seed has been sown broadcast, as is always the case when the
production of profitable fibre is the intention, the weeding forms
one of the most essential items in the expense and labour of cul-
tivation ; yet it is imperiously demanded for the safety of the crop.
As soon as the plants are two or three inches above the ground,
in France, Flanders, and the United Kingdom, the weeds are
carefully removed by women and children, who creep carefully
forward on their hands and knees, using all due precaution not
to injure the tender plants more than can be helped. For this
purpose, on the continent of Europe, coarse pieces of cloth are
tied on the knees, and the weeders proceed onwards with their
faces to the wind, which assists the young flexible stems that have
been bent down by the pressure of the knees, to rise up again.
The operation is repeated till the height of the crop renders it
impracticable, and perhaps unnecessary. This mode of weeding
is, nevertheless, undoubtedly injurious, and might be superseded
by sowing flax after green crops, such as turnips, potatoes, &c.
Sometimes it is weeded by turning in a flock of sheep among the
plants. This must be done with extreme caution, however, since


if they are admitted too soon, they destroy the plant by reason of
its tenderness, and if too late, they invariably break it down.
The proper time for their admittance is when the plant is abont
five inches above the ground. They eat np all the grass and
weeds, leaving the flax untouched and almost uninjured by their
feet. If this mode of weeding be adopted, the more sheep turned
in the better ; for by that means the process is sooner at an end.
Flax grows very rapidly, and if sheep were allowed to range
over the field more than a day or two the consequences to the
plant might be serious, and the loss occasioned irreparable. The
sowing in winter in this colony would be attended by this advan-
tage, that the crop would be less incommoded by weeds than if
sown at any other season. When young, flax is very tender and
more easily injured and impeded by weeds than any other culti-
vated plant, for which reason no other plant should ever be allowed
to grow with it. Some persons recommend sowing clover, lucerne,
or carrot seed, along with the flax, or during its growth, partly
from motives of economy, and partly because flax being a social
plant, they believe that it will grow better in company with
other plants than alone. This doctrine, to say the least of it,
appears extremely absurd, if not dangerous, inasmuch as it is in
direct contravention of one of the most essential and practical
rules in the economy of flax-growing, namely, cleanliness of the
land.
Taking the intent of the recommendation as you may, it seems
contradictory to all the maxims of flax-growing; the ground
occupied by carrots, lucerne, clover, or any other crop, cannot be
densely covered at the same time by flax ; in which case it would
grow up scanty and be useless as a scheme of profit; and as the
principal aim of the farmer in cultivating this plant at all, is to
produce the most abundant crop and the best quality of fibre, the
plan proposed can result in nothing but disappointment and loss ;
because the flax will grow stunted, coarse and branchy, from
having too much room to spread laterally. These are results
which no colonial farmer who regards his interest ought to hazard,
seeing that he has abundance of land for every purpose. If the
scheme be good for anything, it can only answer for raising seed;
and that can be done more advantageously another way. The
second reason is no better than the first, since the vigor and
health of the plant to a very great extent, and the value of the
fibre altogether, depend upon the total absence of weeds. Nor
does it in the least alter the principle, whether the plant growing
in society with it be a cultivated or a wild one, it is still a weed
to the crop. Upon the whole then the proposal seems to me an
unfeasible theory for this country. The true guide of the farmer
is universal experience, and I would advise him to follow that
best guide, and avoid social flax-growing. I have seen in my


wanderings a very large amount of flax-culture in various coun-
tries, but I never knew this scheme carried out exceptwhere land was
very scarce. Social weeds are emblems of social man; they pro-
ceed together amicably enough whilst they continue on a perfect
equality, whether it be in poverty or wealth. But the force of
the analogy is chiefly perceived in those exceptions where one
plant gets the start of the others ; for he no sooner perceives his
superiority than he starves them. Hemp is of this selfish nature,
but flax is weak and falls a prey even to its intimate but stronger
companions. In short, the bold and vigorous weed, like the strong
man, follows—
The good old rule, the simple plan,
That he should take who has the power,
And he should keep who can.— Wordsworth.
CHAPTEE Yin.
SIGNS OF RIPENESS PULLING.
Here too, the object of the grower must be the guide. It de-
pends upon his intention, whether the plant shall be allowed to
ripen fully, or whether it shall be pulled when in full blossom
while the seed is yet immature. In other words, whether he
intends to cultivate for the seed or for the staple.
When flax is the object, it is best to pull the plant when the
blossoms are fully blown, and beginning to fade, for the blossom
is the index of perfection. The fibres of the plant are most per-
fect when it is in full flower, and not till then. At that period it
yields the whitest, the strongest, and the finest flax. But every
moment it is allowed to grow after these phenomena, the textile
filaments begin to deteriorate, and lose the quality of excellence.
The fibres grow brown, coarse, and harsh, and become even less
strong and durable, When the Russians desire to have fine flax,
they pull the plant while the stalk is yet green, the capsides only
beginning to change color, and the'seed quite flat.
All organic things go on improving till they arrive at the
point of perfection; and then, occording to the length of time
spent in coming to the acme, they either immediately begin to
decline, or continue stationary for a period proportioned to their
length of life. Man lives longer than any quadruped of six times
his own weight, and he remains at the period of perfection,
without the faintest evidence of decay, for the space of fifteen
years. The oak laughs at the term of human existence ; it sees
hundreds of generations glide past before it has arrived at maturity,
and hundreds more sink in eternity, before it feels a symptom of


corruption : but the rapidity with which the plant under con-
sideration rises to perfection, allows it bnt a momentary
pause :— cito maturum , cito putridum. We have only time to
say, it is perfect when it begins to wither. One of the best tests
of due ripeness is, when the plant is approaching the state of
maturity, to cut the ripest capsule across on an average stalk,
and if “the seeds have changed from the white milky substance
which they first show, to a greenish color, and are pretty firm,
then is the time to pull.” This criterion is nearly the same as
that which regulates the pulling in Belgium. The point of time
generally observed there, is between the falling of the flower and the
formation of the seed. Taken up at that period the fibre is said to
be finer and more substantial than at any other time. -The
Belgians continue to pull the flax before it is ripe ; and to plant
with fresh seed every year. In England, this crop from time
immemorial has been pulled in the month of July. Tusser, more
than three hundred years ago, says in his directions for July—
Now pluck up thy flax for thy maidens to spin,
First see it well dried and timely got in.
In France the time varies from June to August, guided by the
same signs of ripeness.
Some practical men say, when very fine flax has been produced,
the proper time to pull it is when the stem begins to turn yellow
at the bottom. This sign very nearly corresponds with the blos-
soming ; for in both eases the seeds are still unripe and of little
value, either for seed or for oil; although in Elanders and Great
Britain, where abundant food for cattle is a paramount considera-
tion, they are not lost but are subjected to the crushing apparatus,
to express what little oil they contain, and the cakes, like those
from more mature seed, are employed for fattening cattle, &c.
But there is a number of other important circumstances con-
nected with the process of pulling, on which the quality of the
flax, and of course, the price mainly depend, which also the cul-
tivator would be wise to keep constantly in view. The flax,
which is most homogeneous, that is, the flax which is all of the
same degree of fineness, &c., will always, ceeteris paribus, com-
mand a better price than that in which there are two or more
qualities mixed. Now flax seed intended for the fibre being
universally sown broad-cast and very thick, the human hand is
not so perfect, nor the human step so true, but that there will be
some irregularities in the distribution of the seed; the soil
of a field also, however limited in extent, has seldom one uniform
character ; and there are always more or less varieties in every
parcel of ground; moreover some parts will be higher, or lower,
more dry, or more moist, than other parts. Sometimes it will be
deep and shallow in the same locality, and sometimes the subsoil


will be good and retentive, or gravelly and porous and some
seeds may be more deeply covered than others ; in a word, there
are innumerable causes continually at work, both in the soil and
the atmosphere, which exert a more or less partial influence on
the growth of the plant, and occasion some to come sooner
into flower than others, some to grow tall and slender, and
some short and coarse. It is a proper attention to these facts
then that constitutes the secret of pulling so as to insure flax of
uniform fineness.
The puller therefore must gather by themselves all such plants
only as are come to the same state of ripeness, and all as near as
possible of the same size, leaving those not yet sufficiently mature
until they are ripe. The Dutch method of taking up the plant is
an excellent one. They seize them close below the bolls, by which
means they avoid the shortest stalks till they have disposed of the
long handful; they then take up the short stems, and lay them
by themselves ; and thus without any additional trouble, the two
sorts are kept apart ready to be steeped in separate ponds, or at
different times. In a word, during the operation of pulling, the
plants ought to be sorted, and the different sizes placed by them-
selves ; by u hieh means you prevent much trouble and con-
fusion.
The practice commonly followed in England, Ireland, and
Scotland till lately was, as soon as the crop presented the general
appearance of ripeness, to pull the whole at once, mingling the
ripe and the unripe, the tall and the stunted, the fine and the
coarse, in one mass; which act of imprudence occasioned the
British flax to consist of a variety of qualities, shades, and strength,
which greatly depreciated its value. Because, in tb e act of steeping,
the coarse and the fine, the mature and the unripe, undergoes the
process of putrefaction at unequal times, and the flax suffers
material injury accordingly. Such carelessness might be excused
were the difficulties of culling insurmomrtable, or the trifling ad-
ditional diligence required unrewarded. The full length of the
stem when ripe is two and a-half to three feet. But neither the
unripe plants are so difficult to recognise as to create any delay,
nor the short and coarse ones so doubtful as to be mistaken in
the operation; for these irregularities of the crop happen more
frequently in distinct patches than in promiscuous intermixture.
The Dutch method is now generally followed.
The finest and driest weather should be chosen for pulling flax,
and the work should be accomplished as expeditiously as possible,
the operator carefully avoiding every weed. The utmost care is
to be taken also, that the plants be perfectly dry when they are
pulled, otherwise the quality of the material is liable to be injured,
and the discoloration produced by the sun on the green fibre,
difficult to remove. The operation, therefore, should not com-


mence until tlie sun lias been two or three hours above the hori-
zon. If the whole crop could be taken up in one day, it would
be so much in. favor of the flax. As soon as it is pulled, it is
bound in very small sheaves, and at once put into the water to
steep. It is absolutely necessary to keep the root ends even.
This requires additional trouble and time, these, however,
are ultimately repaid.
There is another method which is frequently adopted as being
more convenient, and which, by the way, would be the most suit-
able practice for these colonies, where sufficient water is not
at all times at command ; it is this ; as soon as the flax is pulled
it is laid in separate parcels, spread out on the grass, and allowed
to dry for twenty-four hours. It is then made into small bundles,
or as much as a man can grasp in his two hands, keeping that
part which lay on the ground, outside: these are tied loosely
close to the seed end, and ten of them placed together in stocks,
with the root end resting on the ground; all the part of the
sheaf below the band being well spread out, in order to expose
the whole of the stems more completely to the sun and air, and to
prevent the rain or dew from lodging among them, which would
damage the color and quality of the staple.
When the bundles are perfectly dry, they are tied firmly in the
middle like sheaves of wheat, and with the roots placed as evenly
as possible, they are either stacked in the open air, or housed, as
best suits the convenience of the farmer. The most experienced
flax-steepers of Russia, part of Flanders, in France, and
Holland, in some parts of which this process is a distinct
trade, prefer allowing the flax to lie in the stack till the
next season. In this case it is best to house it and ripple
off the capsules at leisure during the winter, whether the
seed is to be saved or not, this operation being necessary in the
one case, and useful in both ; because it facilitates the admission
of the water into the heart of the plant by the broken ends on
which the bolls grew, which contributes greatly to the simulta-
neous putrefaction of the gluey cellular membrane, and accelerates
the separation of the bark. This practice of keeping the
seed on the plant is countenanced by the important fact that the
seeds of all plants after they are pulled, continue to ripen on the
stalks as long as any moisture remains.
When seed only is the object of the farmer, the plant should be
left to ripen perfectly. The period of full maturity is known to
have arrived when the leaves fall, the stalk becomes yellow, and
the seed brown, plump, and firm. The plant may then be pulled,
and the capsules either taken off immediately by the ripple, or
they may remain on until the whole be dried together in the usual
manner, and afterwards thrashed in the common way; or they
may be stacked under shelter until the seed is wanted. In


Ireland and the greater part of Flanders the flax is mostly rippled
on the field as soon as it is pulled.
But when both flax and seed are desired in the same crop, a
middle course with relation to the time of pulling is to he adopted.
It should not he pulled until the flowers have faded, and the seed
in the capsules have acquired a brownish color and some degree of
firmnees. Mr. Lee’s instructions for saving the flax and seed,
and also the time for pulling the crop will serve as a useful rule
here. “ Flax,” he says in his pamphlet, “should he pulled when
the lower part of the plant begins to turn yellow, and when, on
opening the pods, the most forward of the seeds are found in a soft
state, and the middle of the seeds is green ; while the seed is
quite soft the flax shcudd he spread on the ground in bundles
about as much as a woman can grasp with both hands, and it
should remain so till the upper part is dry : in fine weather it
will be dry in twenty-four or forty-eight hours ; the bundles should
be then made up, with the dry part inside, and then set up into
stocks of ten bundles each, to stand on the ground till the whole
is dry, pods and all; the seed will then be ripe, and the flax will
be in the best state ; it may then be stacked, housed, or worked ;
great care should be taken to keep the root ends even.” It is,
however, a doubtful principle which dictates the growing of flax
for seed and for staple in the same crop. Both must necessarily
be somewhat inferior in their qualities to that which is cultivated
specifically for either the one or the other purpose alone. What
the seed gains, is lost by the fibre, and that which imparts to the
fibre its highest value, renders the seed less valuable, and only
fit for inferior domestic uses. From this cause the British till
lately if not still, were behind all the rest of Europe in the quality
of their flax and their linseed. Other countries devote particular
spots of good rich soil to the sole purpose of raising seed, while
their general crop designed for flax, is placed under a different
economy, and so managed as to unite in one, all the qualities
which render it excellent, namely—fineness, strength, whiteness,
and durability of staple. This is the cause why foreign seed has
always been found so much superior to domestic : it is also one of
the causes why so much flax is imported into Great Britain and
Ireland. Should a crop happen to grow short, thick, and coarse,
and throw out a number of side branches bearing seed, the hus-
bandman, whatever may have been his original intention, will
find it most to his advantage to attend to the indications of nature,
and allow the plants to become perfectly ripe, and look to the seed
only, which will liberally reward his industry and prudence. If
it is intended to have the crop steeped according to any of the new
expeditious methods of conducting that process, ‘ ‘ the Courtrai
system ” as it is called, of drying and preparing the flax is recom-
mended as best for the purpose, especially for those of Schenk and


Watt; and is as follows : —“The flax stems should be put together
in bunches, about one half larger than a man can grasp in one
hand, spread a little, and laid on the ground in rows after each
puller ; the bunches laid with tops and roots alternately, which
prevents the seed-bolls from sticking to each other in lifting. It
should be stocked as soon after pulling as possible, and never
allowed to remain over night unstooked, except in settled weather.
The stocking should go on at the same time as the pulling, as,
if flax is allowed to get rain while on the ground its color is
injured. A well-trained stooker will put up the produce of a
statute acre, or more, in good order, in a day, with two boys or
girls to hand him the bunches, The flax should be handed with
the tops to the stooker. The handfuls, as pulled, are set up, rest-
ing against each other—the root ends spread well out, and the
tops joining like the letter A. The stooks are made eight or ten
feet long, and a short strap keeps the ends firm. The stooks
should be very narrow on the top, and thinly put up, so that they
may get the full benefit of the weather. In six or eight days at
most, after being pulled, the flax should be ready for tying up in
sheaves of the size of corn sheaves. It is then ricked, and allowed
to stand in the field until the seed is dry enough for stacking.
To build the rick, lay two poles parallel on the ground about a
foot asunder, with a strong upright pole at each end. The flax
is then built the length of a sheaf in thickness or breadth. The
bottom poles should be laid north and south, so that the sun shall
get at both sides of the rick during the day. In building, the
sheaves should be laid tops and roots alternately, built seven to
eight feet high, and finished on the top by laying a single row of
sheaves lengthwise, or across the others, and then another row
as before, but with the tops all. the same way, which gives a slope
to throw off rain, and finished by putting on the top a little straw
tied with a rope. In this way, if properly built, it will stand
secure for months. It can be stacked at leisure, or put in a barn,
the seed taken off during the winter, and the flax steeped
in the following May; or it may be kept stacked, without
receiving any injury, for two or three years or even longer.”*
* See “ Fourteenth Annual Report and Transactions of the Royal Society
for the Promotion and Improvement of flax in Ireland, &c., for the year ending
1854.”


CHAPTER IX.
METHODS OF RIPPLING.
Rippling is a simple operation, by which the seed-bolls are
separated from the plant. The work is done by drawing the
flax in handfuls through the teeth of an iron comb, fixed in the
centre of a block of wood : it is made of half-inch square rods of
iron 3-16ths of an inch apart at the bottom, half-an-inch at the
top, and 18 inches in length. The j>oints should begin to taper
three inches from the top. Two persons sitting opposite each
other on the two respective ends of the block in which the rippling
comb is fixed, perform the operation at once. The flax is taken
by the root end, and by giving it a slight twist with both hands,
the top of the handful spreads out like a fan. In this state it is
then quickly and forcibly drawn twice through the instrument,
which effectually completes the process. The spaces between the
teeth of the comb are too small to permit the capsules to pass
through, and they are broken off by the jerk, and received in a
basket or cloth spread under the machine.
We learn from a has relief in one of the painted chambers of
the Grottoes of El Cab in the Thebaid, representing a plot of
ripe flax in ancient Egypt, where the crop and the labourers are
seen engaged in the various occupations of the harvest field, that
the method of rippling in use at the present time is in effect
almost identical with the oldest mode of detaching the seed vessels
from the stalk, ever practised in the world.— The rippler is the
first figure on the left, and his apparatus is simply a piece of
plank, having a row of spikes set horizontally in one end, which
is raised on a prop about twelve inches high ; on the other end
which rests on the ground the left foot of the operator presses, so
as to keep the instrument steady while he draws the maniples of
ripe flax skilfully through the comb to break off the capsules.
When the flax is cultivated only for fibre, whether the water-
retting is to take place immediately or to be deferred for an
indefinite time, it ought to be rippled as soon as it is pulled. If
it is produced for the seed, perhaps this operation had better be
deferred until the plant is dry, and then the work is executed under
a shed, and the flax either bound up and stacked, or carried
directly to the water and steeped.
There is another mode of rippling, if a species of thrashing may
be so termed, which is generally employed when the flax is fine,
and intended for more delicate fabrics, it is this—when the capsules


are dried and brittle, the flax is taken in handfuls by the root in
the left hand and beaten upon a block of wood or thick board by
a flat wooden instrument, similar to a cricket bat, held in the
right hand. By this operation the capsules are broken and the
seed collected on a sheet spread beneath. As in the former
method, the flax is either bound up and stacked, or immediately
carried away to be steeped as may be most convenient to the pro-
prietor.
Eippling is always to be performed, whether the seed is intended
to be saved for any purpose or not, for the reason given in Chap-
ter YIII; and a wide sheet should be placed under the ripplers,
to receive the seed. If the operation has been executed imme-
diately after pulling, and the flax is not to be steeped immediately,
it should be placed to dry as directed, and the strictest attention
to be paid to see that it is thoroughly dried before it is either
stacked or housed ; otherwise it may heat and the crop be lost.
If it is stacked with the bolls on, it is liable to be seriously injured
by the mice, which are very fond of the seed, and devour it
greedily. They must, therefore, be prevented from carrying on
their depredations. The preservation of the seed is an essential
consideration both as a means of profit, and if it be good, as a
matter of convenience for future crops. But the ravages of these
vermin would very soon greivously disappoint the farmer in both
intents, as they might tend to discourage him from the lucrative
occupation of flax growing. In binding up the sheaves after
rippling, the roots should always be kept as even as possible,
and while the operation is proceeding, the flax should again be
carefully sorted, by placing the different sizes and qualities apart
by themselves at the right hand of the rippler. For no two sorts,
sizes, or qualities, should be steeped in the same pit at the same
time, as the maceration would proceed unequally, and the fibre
by that means suffer in its quality; if, for example, coarse and
fine plants be tied up in the same bundle, the coarse will be fully
macerated some time before the fine. Flax at the present day is
not allowed to stand in the field more than one day, but is carried
to the ponds as soon as rippled.
As every act of imprudence, hurry, or mismanagement in this
crop in particular, has a decidedly injurious effect on the quality
of the staple, I need not add that the natural consequence is a
diminution of the price, and corresponding disappointment; against
both of which evils I am most anxious to guard you, at the expense
of a little prolixity and repetition. It may be as well to add here
that in Ireland all flax is recommended to be rippled on the spot
at the time of pulling, because it is grown there entirely for the
sake of the fibre.


CHAP. X.
MANAGEMENT AND PRESERVATION OF THE SEED.
If the flax has been allowed to dry thoroughly with the capsules
on, and has been afterwards rippled from the stack, the bolls are
to be crushed and broken by some form of thrashing, in order to
extricate the seed from the cells. But if the capsules have been
broken off from the ends of the stems at the time of pulling, they
are to be spread out in a sheet and left in the sun to dry, taking
care to have them frequently turned. The seed is then to be managed
precisely after the manner of grain; it must be winnowed, care-
fully sifted, perfectly cleaned, and made as dry as possible before
it is laid up. When it is thus prepared it is stored ; but it must
be spread thinly on the floor and kept well ventilated and dry,
by frequently turning it to prevent heating. Mr. Gr. W. Andrews
says, “ Even where it is determined to pay little respect to the
maturity of the seed, in order to insure the greatest degree of
fineness in the fibre, the seed will be valuable, either for feeding
cattle or crushing for oil. It is found that given in small quan-
tities, it is nutritive beyond any other food for cattle, and that it
tends in an extraordinary degree to promote their health and
vigour, and check their inflammatory tendency, &c. —Nine bushels
from an acre is a very low rate of produce, and the expense of
preparation is moderate. The loss of such a quantity of seed,
both to the nation and individuals, is most serious ; and the care-
lessness which permits it unpardonable. The estimated breadth
of land sown on the average in Ireland for ten years, was 87,106
acres. The seed at 455. per acre, would therefore be worth
£195,988. Surely, such wanton waste of property will not be
continued.” In 1854 the loss would have amounted to £365,090 ;
but the Irish farmers had taken the hint and they are now making
strenuous and laudable efforts to add the value of the seed to their
other profits. Mr. Andrews proceeds :—“ When the bolls are
separated from the stalks by the ripple, they are so green that for
some days they have a great tendency to heat. They should not,
therefore, be allowed to accumulate, but be riddled and spread
upon a winnow cloth, and soon after passed through fanners,
which will blow off the green leaves, and facilitate the preserva-
tion of the bolls. If spread not deeper than three or four inches
on a boarded floor, a free current of air being admitted, and
turned for a time twice, and afterwards once in the day, they will
soon become quite dry, and if the weather be fine, it will be useful


to spread them daring the day upon a winnow cloth in the sun,
returning them at night to the loft. Small farmers who have not
a hoarded floor, may with attention dry them sufficiently on a cloth
in the sun, carrying them in the cloth into a house at night. The
less the bolls are broken, the better the seed will keep. By break-
ing the bolls with a wooden mallet, and passing them when broken
through bark fanners, the seed will be separated from the chaff;
and even the chaff will be found a wholesome and nutritious
mixture in the food of cattle. So great is the benefit to the flax,
by taking off the seed before steeping, and so valuable i's the
seed, even for feeding or crushing, that even in a very wet
season it should be taken off though it might be necessary to
resort to a corn kiln, in order to dry the bolls. If such an alter-
native be necessary, let the heat be very gentle. To obtain seed
in the highest perfection for sowing, a small quantity of the crop
should be permitted to stand on the foot till the seed shall be
nearly all changed to a brown colour. It should then be stocked
till dry, and stacked, or housed till spring, when very gentle lashing
will beat off the seed, which will be then in very superior condition.
The flax should then be kept until the season of steeping the new
crop, when it should be put into a pool by itself, as it will require
longer time in the water than green flax. The deterioration in
the quality of this portion of the crop will be more than compen-
sated by obtaining seed of prime quality for sowing.”
After rippling, the Russians spread the bolls out thinly on a
dry floor, over which the wind circulates freely, and turn it twice
a day. When it is perfectly dry, the capsules open spontaneously,
and the seeds are thrashed out like other kinds of grain.
CHAPTR XI.
DIFFERENT MODES OF STEEPING.
There is no less variety in the modes of steeping flax, than
there is caprice displayed in the numerous ways of preparing the
bundles for the water, and of disposing them in the pit, as prac-
tised in various countries, and in different districts of the same
country. Each has a method of its own, and that is always sure
to be the best. These differences appear to me a sufficient evi-
dence that any of them may be followed with perfect safety and
equal success, provided the process be conducted with care and
skill. One great principle directs them all—the complete disso-
lution of the cellular tissue ; so that not only the fascicles of tubes,
but the individual tubes themselves shall be perfectly disunited by
the annihilation of this connecting medium, without being injured


"by excessive maceration. This is the main object of watering
flax : and if the same end could he gained hy any other more
speedy, less troublesome and disgusting means, the inventor ought
to he presented with a mural crown.
Before describing the particular methods now in vogue, it is
necessary to premise that there is not one of all the processes of
flax-husbandry on which so much depends, as the watering. The
quality, the color, the amount, and, in short, the general excellence
are all very greatly influenced by the degree of skill or negligence
with which the operation is conducted. I wish to impress upon
cultivators the importance of care and vigilance in this process.
I wish to convince them, that whatever system is pursued, it
requires to be watched with uncommon attention even by the
skilful and experienced; indeed, both skill and experience are
indispensable to the due and faithful management of the macera-
tion. For when the process is carried too far, the strength and
durability of the fibre are impaired, the color injured, and all
its qualities deteriorated : and when it is performed imperfectly,
every succeeding operation is less effective, grievous waste is
occasioned, and the value of the flax will by no means be equal
to that which has undergone the due degree of watering ; still it
is better it should be under than over-watered. Having men-
tioned the object of steeping, and the injuries to which flax is
liable from the injudicious management of this operation, it is
necessary to state also, how injury from oversteeping happens.
When this process is carried to excess, the effect is disorgani-
zation of the whole vegetable structure. The fibres, notwith-
standing their prodigious strength, are only the sap vessels of the
plant, transparent cylindrical tubes, either single or in fascicles,
of variable length, packed closely side by side, glued together,
and surrounded and supported by cellular tissue, a substance in
some degree analagous to that membrane in the human body
which bears the same name, contains the fat, and invests both the
muscles and the single fibres composing these muscles, and binds
them all firmly together; like this tough membrane too, the cellu-
lar tissue of the vegetable forms the softest and most soluble
part of the plant. Now the rationale of steeping is this ;—During
the process of maceration, the water at first dissolves this general
investing membrane, and by this means the bundles of vessels or
fibrous tissue that were held together, are separated. But the
steeping would be insufficient if the process were to stop there, —
the flax would be extremely coarse, and the dressing of it would
occasion immense loss, because the fibres themselves are still
closely united by the interstitial membrane. When the operation
is prolonged, the water next dissolves that part of the cellular
tissue which is interposed longitudinally between the fibres and
glues them together, and the effect is, that each fascicle of vessels


then separates into an infinite number of fibrils, or single tubes
•which form the flax; and the more these bundles are divided
under certain limitations of watering, the more fine and silky is
the lint. But when the maceration is carried too far the conse-
quence is the dissolution of the whole plant fibres and all, into a
homogeneous mass. From these remarks then, I think you will
clearly understand the great importance of skilful steeping, and
that it is a process which demands the utmost care and atten-
tion to all its details. But passing over many of the older
methods of steeping flax, I will describe only the best of those
that have continued in use since the beginning of the present
century.
As soon as flax which has been cultivated for the fibre, is
rippled, an operation which ought never to be omitted, whether
the seed be worth saving or not, it should be made up into
bundles about the thickness of a man’s thigh, and carried imme-
diately to the pond. The bundles are to be tied rather loosely,
but securely, about six inches from the roots, with bands made of
dried rushes, which will neither discolor the flax nor rot in the
water. These beets, as they are called, are then to be put into the
water with the root end downwards in a sloping direction, and in
regular rows, either in a crate like that used on the river Lys,
to be described below, or in a pool excavated on purpose, such as
that described in Chapter YIII. When the frames or pit is filled
with the beets in loose contact with each other, the common way
is to cover them with straw, or sods with the grassy side
down, and then with boards or any other weight just sufficient to
keep the flax below the surface of the water, without pushing it
to the bottom, between which and the root ends of the sheaves
there should be a considerable space, that they may have free
power to descend, when the decomposition of the cellular tissue
comes to that stage which is indicated by a copious escape of gas.
When this occurs, the flax sinks spontaneously, and it is the
important moment from which the care and vigilance of the farmer
must be dated. From this point his observations are to commence,
and be repeated twice or thrice a day in this warm latitude,
where a few hours too much of fermentation might spoil all.—The
fact is, the flax should be taken out of the pool as soon as the
acetous fermentation ceases.
Formerly the tops of the sheaves were recommended to be
turned downwards because the seed ends were thought to run
into decomposition more quickly than the root ends of the
plant; and as decomposition is proved to proceed more rapidly
towards the surface of the water, the parts less disposed to undergo
this process were on that account placed nearer to it ; by
which arrangement the general decomposition was supposed to
commence simultaneously and be maintained in well proportioned


activity not only through the whole bundle, but through the
whole plant.
It was also given as a reason for placing the beets in the pond,
head downwards, that when the seed end is uppermost, vermin
are said to breed there in great abundance, which occasion con-
siderable detriment to the plant. But if the bolls have been rippled
off as they doubtless ought to be under all circumstances before
steeping it would appear immaterial as far as the tendency to
breed vermin is concerned, which end of the plant is at the sur-
face or which at the bottom. The usual practice is as above
stated, though there is much reason in the older process.
In some places when the crop is of the finest description, the
flax is prepared for the water in this manner—The beets are laid
head to head, each overlapping the other about one-third of its
length and thus they proceed building it up until the bundle is
between four and five feet high : it is then tied in the middle and
at each end, wrapped up in clean straw, and laid in the water on
its broadest side. When the pond is filled the bundles are kept
under water by the contrivance described in Chapter Y., namely,
by placing long poles across the pool and fixing them under
hooks, and then inserting others under these in a contrary direc-
tion, which keep the flax some inches below the surface of the
water.
When these letters were written, the fashion of watering flax
in Belgium appeared to be a material improvement on the more
ancient practices. It was invented in effect by Monsieur J. E.
D’Hont D’Arey, Member of the Agricultural Society of Ghent,
early in the present century ; since which time it has undergone
a variety of modifications by others, not always to the best advan-
tage. We have the clearest evidence, however, that flax steeped
strictly according to the principles he has established is greatly
improved both in quality and quantity, and consequently enhanced
in value above flax watered in any former manner. His system
is founded on certain laws of vegetable decomposition which
indicate by a regular and constant train of phenomena the precise
time when the farmer should expect the maceration to be on the
point of completion ; so that a novice cannot fail to know within
a few hours the proper time to withdraw the flax from tfie steep.
The principle which he has established is, that stagnant water
is the most efficacious for the following objects : Ist, to give flax
a fine color ; 2nd, to be able to know precisely, without the possi-
bility of mistake, the moment when the flax is sufficiently steeped ;
3rd, to preserve both the strength and the quality of the flax ;
4th, to effect a saving of the material in scutching and heckling,
of more than ten per cent. ; sth, to preserve the waters and air
from infection, and the fish from being destroyed. His process
differs also from the common practice, in four material points :


Ist, in placing the bundles vertically in the steep instead of hori-
zontally, according to the old method; 2nd, in immersing the
flax by transverse poles, with that degree of weight annexed,
which shall not push it down to the bottom, but leave it the power
to descend spontaneously towards the conclusion of the steepage ;
3rd, by leaving at first a space of at least half a foot between the
bottom and the roots of the flax ; 4th, by renewing the water at
stated intervals. On this last point he afterwards changed his
opinion and practice, convinced that the same water, but in larger
quantity, was the most effectual steep, a strong well-regulated
putrefaction being indispensible to render flax silky and fine in
the dressing. He increased the dimensions of his pools, so as to
double the usual quantity of water in proportion to the amount of
flax to be steeped, as he found that abundance of stagnant water
not only decomposed, but annihilated the gum, an effect not to
be produced by a change of water. He states that the spontaneous
descent of the steeped flax is an indication of its being nearly
sufficiently watered, since, at the moment when the particles of
air ■which the plant contains have all escaped by the dissolution
of the cellular tissue, the entire mass quits the transverse poles,
and settles spontaneously at the bottom of the pool. That at this
moment it is necessary to be on the watch, to take out a handful
of flax, to dry it, and to examine the state of the gum, which trial
should be repeated every six hours, for the purpose of seizing the
moment when the gum is wholly decomposed, and before the
filaments of the flax have begun to suffer in quality. This is a
gigantic march in advance of the old practice, which was to cram
the pool with sheaves thrown in without the smallest regard to
order, some lying upon the bottom, others rising near, or above
the surface, and all pressing too heavily upon each other, where-
by the water was hindered from communicating freely with all
parts, so as to ensure a perfect, well regulated, and uniform putre-
faction throughout every part of the plant, and all parts of the
mass at the same time.
The chief merit of M. D’Hont D’Arcy’s invention consists, in
my view of the case, in the effects of placing the bundles vertically
in abundance of stagnant water, with sufficient room for them to
sink as soon as the escape of gas renders them heavier than the
water. Eor these phenomena —the extrication of the gas and
the descent of the bundles —are unerring indications of an unvary-
ing law of organic decomposition, which point out with the pre-
cision of a chronometer, the exact point of time when the steeping
process is nearly complete. This is a most valuable discovery to
the cultivator of flax, whether he be experienced in the various
operations through which it must pass before it is ready for the
market; or only a neophyte in the numerous operations of agri-
culture aud rural economy.


In the Pays de Waes, the flax is steeped according to this
method in stagnant water as soon as it is pulled ; and this is the
practice which has gained the greatest share of approbation in
Belgium, and is recommended officially to the Belgian flax-growers
by the Soeiete de la Liniere of Brussels. Justice compels me to
state here also that the method of steeping at Courtrai has never
been found to succeed anywhere beyond the River Lys.
The general opinion is in favor of steeping flax green, immedi-
ately after it is rippled ; for by that means the fibre is rendered
whiter and finer, the linen made from it of a pure silvery hue,
and the operation sooner at an end. The Russians too, prefer
stagnant to running water for both flax and hemp ; and the
larger the volume of water the better, as it gives a whiter and
purer color to the fibre ; they also prefer muddy or slimy bottoms
to their ponds, with which they sometimes cover the flax and
hemp after it is laid in the pit. This last practice, however, is
exceptionable.
Steeping about Courtrai is a distinct trade, and carried on as
many trades are, more as processes perfected by habit than as
operations conducted according to fixed laws, or on scientific prin-
ciples. Their mode is this ; —The handfuls of flax as they are
made up in the field, are placed together side by side with the
root and seed ends in alternate succession, until they form a
bundle about a foot in diameter; but the maniples are so placed
that the roots project a few inches at each end, in such a manner
that when the bundle is placed on either end, it still rests on the
roots only. This device, let me observe, may save the tender tops
of the plant from injury, but it does not, as it is intended, conduce
in the smallest degree to an equalized and simultaneous fermen-
tation throughout the whole mass. The putrefactive process is
always stronger and commences sooner near the surface of the
water, a fact well established by the effects of the ebbing and
flowing of the tide on dead animal or vegetable matter, which
uniformly hasten more rapidly into decomposition when only
partially immersed in the water, or left on the bants by the tide,
than when fully submerged and defended from the action of the
sun by a slight covering of water. The tops of the plants are the
parts in which the process of decay first commences in steeping.
But neither the Courtrai system nor Monsieur D’Hont D’Arcy’s
is conducted according to that principle; if he had placed the
sheaf vertically, with the top doivnwards and the root upwards,
towards the surface, a plan which I contend is always to be pre-
ferred to that now followed in Ireland, he would have rendered
the process of decomposition more regular, the end of the plant
more prone to decay being placed in that part of the pool where
the principle of putrefaction was least vigorous, and the more
obdurate brought near the surface where it was active. All parts


of the plant would then have been influenced in their due propor-
tions by the putrefactive process—But to return.
When the maniples are collected into bundles, of the proper
size, as described above, they are tied at both ends and placed
vertically in an open square box or crate, consisting of eight strong
upright posts, to which are nailed at equal distances from top to
bottom, three oak rails on each side, forming a frame ten feet
square and four deep. The bottom is formed of a number of
strong battens like the rails, nailed at small distances apart to
admit the water freely. Each box is divided into four compart-
ments by a framework similar to the sides. These are filled with
the bundles placed on their ends and packed closely together.
When the box is full it is covered with boards upon which stones
are laid to make it sink in the water. The whole cargo is then
immersed in the Eiver Lys until the top of the case is covered
six inches by the stream. The bottom which is kept at a distance
from the ground, and the top thus submerged a considerable way
below the surface, the water comes in complete contact with every
particle of the plants. The box is held in its place by posts
driven in the river for that purpose.
This method was formerly considered so superior to every other
in Flanders, that the flax was sent from all parts of the country
to be steeped in this river, the water of which, in the estimation
of the Fleming, is peculiarly adapted to this process. Great
attention is paid to the flax while it remains immerged in the
water ; it is watched with the most anxious care, and strictly
examined every day. But when the time usually allowed for
maceration according to the temperature of the air, is nearly ex-
pired, they examine it several times every day to see whether the
bark and the fibre can be yet separated with that degree of facility
through the whole length of the stem, which their experience
informs them is the index of sufficient decomposition ; when they
are satisfied on this point the flax is taken out of the water.
This method of steeping, like the ancient one, requires great
experience to recognize at once the phenomena which indicate the
precise time to withdraw the flax. But the steepers of Courtrai
are in a great measure brought up to the trade, and are seldom
at fault; their attention is unremitting, knowing how much their
skill and precision affect the quality and value of the trust con-
fided to them.
After steeping, the flax is stored for twelve months, a plan
which they say is found to improve the quality of the fibre so
greatly that it is generally kept in the straw, to speak techni-
cally, a long time after it has undergone this process. In Eussia,
when the flax is taken out of the water, it is placed on the root
end for a few hours to drain; after which it is spread out thinly
on the grass, where they leave it undisturbed for fourteen days.


It is then carefully turned, and left for fourteen days longer. It
is now collected into small stacks until it is perfectly dry.
There is a modification of these methods now (1844) practised
in Ireland with uncommon success, in so much that the gentle-
man who so strongly recommends it, obtained the gold medal of
the “ Agricultural Improvement Society of Ireland,” in 1843, for
the superiority of the flax prepared according to his mode of
steeping. He makes choice of water which is clean, clear, and
free from all mineral impregnations; and prefers the water of
large rivers to all other sorts: and he considers it injurious to
the color and quality of the flax to allow the water, if it is good
and soft, to stagnate in the pond before putting in the plant.
In filling the pond, he puts in two large layers, each somewhat
sloped, with the root end of each downwards. The sheaves are
placed in the water rather loose than crowded, and laid carefully
straight and regular ; nor is the water let into the pond till the
first layer is put in. “ A good stream of clear water should if
possible always pass over the pond ; it carries off the impurities,
and does not at all impede due fermentation.” I much fear this
method, excellent as it appears, will be the least practicable of
all in these anhydrous colonies.
As soon as the flax has given indications of sinking to the bottom,
the best way to know the moment when it is sufficiently watered,
is that practised by the Dutch; which is to take some stalks of
average fineness, and break the woody part across in two or three
places about three inches apart, at the middle of the length;
seize the wood at the lower end, and if it will peel off freely for
the length of those three inches without breaking or tearing the
fibre, it is a sure test that the plants are sufficiently steeped.
It will be necessary to repeat this trial three or four times a day
in this semi-tropical region, where the heat of the water in sum-
mer is so great as to accelerate in an unusual degree the process
of disorganization; and where as far as regards the influence of
heat in the process, we have as much to fear from too much, as
from too little watering.
Before closing this chapter, I ought to state for the information
of the intending flax-grower, that since the year 1810, there have
been invented several ingenious but simple and useful machines
for dressing flax. They are constructed to perform every opera-
tion in the most perfect manner. Those of Hill and Bundy more
especially, were said to deserve commendation for their extreme
usefulness and simplicity, since they completely and effectually
supersede all the processes by the hand to which flax was for-
merly subj ected to prepare it for the loom, not excepting even the
tardy and troublesome one of steeping, which alone would have
been an invaluable improvement.
These inventions are exceedingly simple and so easily managed,


that women, children, and old infirm people can perform the
operations as well as men. They are two in number ; the first
removes the boon, and the second dresses the flax to any degree
of fineness, even for cambric or lace, without impairing the length
or the strength of the fibre. Wherever flax is cultivated, there-
fore, they must be considered as of the highest importance on
account of their simplicity, usefulness, and economy. But in
those countries where labour is scarce , instruments which will per-
form with ease and expedition the work of many hands in a
short space of time, must be an acquisition ranking in the first
order of industrial advantages. The machines of Hill and Bundy,
are both cheap and portable, which are additional recommenda-
tions. In a word, they seem to have been invented and destined
for this colony, by the immense saving they effect. lam
now (1864) bound to add, however, that notwithstanding the
great expectations entertained of these machines on their first
announcement, the results of many careful experiments prove
that they do not supersede water-retting. The flax dressed by
them without steeping is always rough, coarse, and unkindly in
the working, and no advantage obtained as to weight or quantity
over the old methods. But in the subsequent processes the
machine is of inestimable value.
Two later systems of steeping flax on an extensive scale are now
in operation. The one is known as Schenk’s method, and the
other, or steam method, as Watts’. They are found to be very
successful, especially with regard to flax pulled and dried
according to the Courtrai system.
CHAP. XII.
GRASSING OR DEW-RETTING
Spreading on the grass, or grassing, is the next operation after
the steeping; and being a process of considerable importance,
should be carefully and accurately performed. The object of this
proceeding is to complete what the maceration has left unfinished.
In the best regulated steeping there will frequently be some parts
of the flax in which decomposition has been less effective than
in the rest. The spreading on the grass is intended to complete
such imperfections by bringing all parts at last equally under
the influence of the putrefactive process, in order that the fibre
may separate easily from the woody matter.
When the flax is to be withdrawn from the water, it should be
handled with the utmost care, each beet being taken up singly,
and well rinsed to clear it of the filth and impurities with which


it is encumbered ; and the bands being loosely tied, great care
and steadiness are required, as a little ineaution or negligence
now would easily injure the crop. The flax is then to be spread
evenly on the grass.
An excellent method of spreading the flax in countries subject
to violent winds, is to begin laying down the first row at the end
of the field nearest to the point from whence the strongest wind
usually blows, spreading it out evenly and thinly with the roots
opposite the wind. The next row is spread in the same manner,
but with the root ends overlapping the seed ends of the first.
Thus every succeeding row fixes down the one before it; and when
the whole crop is disposed of, a rope is fixed across the last,
which in a measure binds down the whole. Fine weather should
always be chosen for this operation. In the course of a day or
two however the flax is able to bear showery weather, which is
useful in cleaning the plants, and in softening and improving the
fibre. It ought to be turned once a week.
The flax should not be taken off the ground until it is suf-
ficiently grassed, and fine calm dry weather is indispensable for
this operation. The grassing season, more especially when the
flax is about to be taken up, affords another excellent opportunity
of attending to’the different qualities of the crop, which should be
again carefully sorted, both in regard to the quality of the flax
and the sufficiency of the grassing, as well as the length, colour,
and thickness of the stems.
The method of grassing about Courtrai was formerly considered
the best of any, and is as follows : —taking advantage of the finest
and driest weather, the bundles are untied, and the maniples
spread out to dry in even rows on a clean smooth grassy surface,
where the sward is kept short and even for this use alone. In
spreading out the handfuls, each row is made to overlap the other
by two or three inches ; and when it is turned, the operation is
performed with great facility and saving of labor by the women,
to whose lot this part of the labor generally falls in Flanders and
Holland; they thrust a long slender pole underneath the row,
near where the one overlaps the other, and thus turn it gently
and easily over, so that when the whole is turned, the rows still
overlie each other as before, but in a contrary direction. After it
has remained in this state for about ten days or a fortnight until
it is quite dry, and has become brittle, and some of the fibres
separated spontaneously from the stem, it is tied up in bundles as
before, and carried under shelter to await the subsequent pro-
cesses. The flax should by no means be taken off the grass until
it is perfectly dry, and the weather fine. During the time it is
exposed to the air, it is frequently examined to prevent the pro-
cess of dew-retting, as it is called, from proceeding too far, A
good indication of its having lain long enough on the grass is


when the boon crumbles easily in the hands upon being rubbed
between them, and the fibre separates readily through the whole
extent of the plant. It is of the greatest importance to the quality
and strength of the flax that the herbage on which it is spread
be very short and clean ; for when grass or weeds are allowed to
grow over it as it lies, they tend to rot the fibre, or discolor and
otherwise injure the quality of the flax: and it is absolutely
necessary that the day be dry, and moderately calm when it is
taken up. There is a very simple method of dew-retting prac-
tised by some extensive and successful flax-growers in Ireland
They spread the flax thin, evenly, and so carefully separated,
that even the plants scarcely touch each other. In this manner
it is left to season from three to five days , hut never longer. —Com-
paring the climates of Ireland with our own, I should imagine
two days of an Australian sun would be fully equal in its effects
to five of the hottest days in Ireland. The method' of drying at
present followed in Flanders is to devide the bundles into four
parts and set them up on the root ends spread out circularly as
wide as possible on the pround, while the tops are kept close. In
this manner they are soon dry enough to be stacked or housed.
I shall close the subject of flax with a quotation from the
speech of the Eev Mr. Huxtable at the Annual Meeting of the
Sturminster Agricultural Society, in December, 1844, which will
show my authority for an assertion made in the body of this
work:—
“ If we wish to estimate the value of a flax crop, we must recol-
lect the following facts for which, as well as for the information
which I possess on the subject, I am indebted to that able and
patriotic gentleman, Mr. Warnes, jun., of Trimingham: —The
importation of flax (from Belgium chiefly) amounted to more than
£5,000,000 a-year—viz., a sum very nearly equal to the amount
of poor-rates of all England, and the value of this fibre consists
chiefly in the labor expended on it. Now, besides these
£5,000,000 paid by England for foreign labor, £2,000,000 or
£3,000,000 more are sent annually out of this country for linseed-
cake ; and what stuff is it ? I appeal to any gentleman who has
examined it with a microscope, to bear witness what incon-
gruous and worthless materials it is, in a large measure, composed
of—mustard and refuse seeds, &c. Yet we are continually send-
ing away all this money—observe, gentlemen, money—not, as
the free traders would wish us to believe, British manufactured
goods in exchange. An instance of this was cited the other day
at the Arundel Agricultural Meeting. A gentleman stated that
five or six ships, loaded with linseed cake left their cargoes at
Hull, without laying out a shilling in goods, or even drinking a
pint of beer, carrying off pure bullion.”


THE CULTUEE AND MANAGEMENT OF HEMP.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY OBSERVATIONS.
Though, almost all the hemp used in Great Britain and her
dependencies is imported from Russia, where it is more exten-
sively cultivated than in any other country on the globe, particu-
larly in the southern and western provinces of that empire, yet as
long ago as 1718, when a combination of the Russians and Swedes
compelled England to have recourse to her colonies, North
America, at that time a British colony, supplied her with not
only enough for her own use, but a large surplus to export. The
British Government had indeed always evinced a strong desire to
encourage the cultivation of hemp on a large scale in the British
empire, and the inducement of considerable bounties had not been
wanting to turn the thoughts of agriculturabsts to this important
branch of industry. In 1796 the sum of £15,000 was proposed
to be distributed among the most successful cultivators of flax and
hemp ; and again in 1786, a bounty of more than 20s. an acre was
given to encourage their growth in England and the colonies.
But finally, when the influence of Napoleon closed the ports
of the Baltic against our commerce during the war, the supply of
hemp for the navy became an object of greater solicitude to the
British Government than ever ; and, as I understand, the patriotic
proposition was made, to establish and encourage the cultivation
of this plant both at home and in some of the British colonies, in
order that the national supply might not in future be exposed
to the interruptions contingent on war. Canada, whose climate
bears a strong resemblance in many of its features to that of
Russia, was fixed upon for the experiment; and accordingly it
received the most liberal encouragement from the mother-country.
The best hemp for naval purposes had hitherto been found only
in Russia ; but the samples sent home from Canada fully realized
the hopes entertained in England. In quality it was found equal
to the best of the Russian, and in length of fibre much of it
equalled even the Italian. So far the Canadians had succeeded.
But neither strength, length, nor fineness of fibre, is sufficient
alone to stamp its excellence. The Canadians failed in one of the


most essential points connected with the management of hemp.
They could not approximate the tact of the Russians in the art of
sorting. The long and the short, the coarse and the fine, were
promiscuously dressed and packed together in the most careless
and culpable manner. This was a fatal error; for it blasted in
the bud a promising lucrative trade. The sterling value of hemp,
as well as of flax depends chiefly if not entirely on the accuracy
with which the varieties of quality and of size are selected and
sorted. From ignorance or neglect of these important particulars,
notwithstanding the anxiety and the efforts of the British Govern-
ment to promote this colonial trade, and the tempting inducements,
held out at that time by English merchants, and in spite too, of
the exorbitant price that foreign hemp commanded owing to the
Milan and Berlin decrees of Buonaparte, the Russians remained
the principal sellers in the market. The Canadian hemp was
unmanageable, and not to be relied on in such important and vital
concerns as the British navy and the mercantile interests of the
country ; and this not from any fault of the article itself, but from
its mismanagement from beginning to end.
It is well known that the hands acquire an incredible degree
of dexterity in manual operations, and the eyes an unerring pre-
cision in judging of objects upon which they have been long and
constantly exercised. This valuable result of habit has enabled
the Russians to excel every other people in the dressing, sorting,
and packing, but more especially in sorting this commodity. Each
class into which it is distributed has its different price, as well as
its particular use ; and these are the reasons why Russian hemp
always commands a ready market. These facts prove the ad-
vantage of system rigidly maintained ; the results of it prove that
order is paramount to every other consideration, insomuch that
an article which in the main may be far superior, never obtains
equal success, if all the qualities and sorts of it are huddled in-
differently together, as was the case with the hemp from Canada.
The failure of the Canadians, however ought not to discourage
Australian farmers from undertaking the cultivation of hemp. I
have adverted to their miscarriage only as a warning to you
against your besetting sin of carelessness and negligence in get-
ting up articles of export. If men really expect to derive any
permanent benefit from industry, system and scrupulous care
must be the ruling maxim of every operation, from the sowing of
the seed even to the stowing of the prepared article in the ship’s
hold. Precaution, followed up by unwearied attention to the
different sizes and qualities of the plants, as far as the quality
can be discerned in the plant, and a proper selection and classi-
fication of them not only made at first, but maintained through
every process to which it is necessarily subjected, may be fairly
expected to serve in a great degree in place of the peculiar tact


and judgment in sorting and packing which the Russians have
acquired from long experience. Such care and attention would
have gone far to render the Canadians dangerous competitors to
any rival in the 'English market.
To ensure a ready market for an export from a new country,
appears to depend on three conditions. The article must either
be a useful novelty —the only sample of the kind in the market—
or the lest of the kind offered for sale. But as the first two rest
on rare occurrences, and as hemp and flax are common and old-
fashioned commodities, offered by numerous competitors, they
come under the third condition. It is with this we have to do ;
and it is on this natural law of trade I would urge intending
hemp growers to prepare their first samples in such a manner as
to excel, if possible, those of every rival in the trade. Laudable
ambition is one of the most useful and ennobling passions of the
human heart; and why should Australians continue obnoxious
to the reproach of being destitute of this essential principle,
knowing that the interests and reputation of the colony, and
their own prosperity depend upon its unceasing activity.
The last time I visited Sydney, ( a ) a very worthy gentleman,
a Member of the Legislative Council, for whose opinions generally,
I have great respect, speaking in allusion to my papers written
in the cause of the agriculturalist, used these emphatic but un-
complimentary words respecting colonial apathy—“ There is no
use in writing for the people of this colony ; you will make no impres-
sion on them if you write on till doomsday ; you are only casting pearls
lefore swine!' 1 ' 1
Experience has taught me, however, that this opinion is not
altogether correct. But whether or not, as lam myself now one
of the swinish multitude, and having a strong fellow feeling for
the race, I consider it my duty, indeed I feel myself instinctively
driven by an irresistible impulse, to go on in the good work and
share my pearls such as they are, with all my porcine brothers.
Apathetic and obstinate as they are, perseverance may yet render
them docile by the same law which makes the drop hollow out
the rock — not hy force , lut ly frequent falling.
A prejudice is easily raised among buyers, against an export
from a new country, which does not come up to the common stan-
dard. Now, sometimes from no fault in the article itself, but
from neglecting some mere apparent trifle in the previous prepara-
tion or after management, this prejudice will be excited, and when
once raised, it becomes quickly diffused and deeply rooted ; an
occurrence which is always dangerous to the interests of the
country which exports the production. For it might happen that
the commodity was of such general value and importance to the
whole community, that this first miscarriage might become a long
(a) In 1844.


continued obstacle to the prosperity of a young country. Preju-
dices are not easily removed, because they are commonly deep,
and always disproportioned to their cause, and whilst they con-
tinue, every interest depending upon the success of the enterprise,,
perhaps those of a whole nation, suffers from the unlucky and
indefinite postponement of the reasonable expectations of the
people. The bad consequences of it spread far and wide ; —the
sources of industry are obstructed :—poverty multiplies in fright-
ful proportions diffusing its effects, misery and crime, like an
overwhelming torrent; suspicion and distrust acquire an unnatural
intensity, credit fails, and population decreases, because the
character of the country has fallen in the estimation of those
nations whose high opinion it ought to be the supreme duty and
interest of rising colonies to cultivate and merit. The mightiest
rivers rise from the smallest sources; and so the most grievous
misfortunes frequently originate in apparent trifles; if imprudence,
apathy, or dishonesty, renders abortive an important branch of
general industry, the disastrous consequences are not confined to
it alone, but extend through every link of the chain which binds
all the interests of society in one. Let the fate of the Australian
beef exported serve as an instructive example.
If you should again export beef even of the most unexception-
able quality, I doubt not that it would be long looked upon with
suspicion, which by a natural consequence will extend to every
other commodity proceeding from this quarter. Had it been our
fate at that time to have possessed no other resourse—no other
valuable export to sustain our existence as a colony, or our
honor as a British people, except the returns which our flocks pro-
mised, it is not possible to picture in the mind the state of wretch-
edness, want, and disappointment to which we should have been
reduced when the report of that miserable failure reached the
country. Thank God, it was otherwise with you ; but the case
is by no means impossible. The unlucky speculation, if you are
wise, may yet be turned to good account. Experience is a severe
taskmaster; but the lessons you learn from that best teacher
will be worth mines of gold in your future transactions with the
world. Should you therefore undertake the cultivation of hemp
and flax for exportation, I implore you for your own sakes, I
implore you in behalf of future generations, I implore you for the
reputation of the land you dwell in, whether it be your natural or
adopted country, to be scrupulously careful and attentive to every
particular however small, that can add to the superiority of the
commodities you prepare for export. You have powerful, skilful,
and vigilant competitors; and I can assure you that there will
not be a single degree of unusual attention paid, nor one moment
spent in bringing the article to perfection, as to the dressing, the
packing, the sorting, and even to the loading of the ship, but will


be liberally recompensed in tbe higher prices which your skill,
industry, and diligence will enable you to command. But to re-
turn from this digression.
The price of hemp fluctuated greatly during the long war, and
was sometimes exorbitantly high. In 1792, it was £25 per ton ;
and in 1808 it had risen to £llß. Since the peace, however, the
price has had a smaller range and has fluctuated occasionally
only between £25 and £SO per ton. But during the last few
years, which form the best criterion, it has scarcely ever risen
above £3O, and never fallen below £25 the ton. There is another
thing to be observed, as worth remembering,—the price of hemp
in the English market is almost uniformly highest in the months
of May, June, July, and part of August, the demand being
greatest in these months : the price is lowest in September. The
average price for a number of years past, therefore, may be safely
taken at about £27 per ton of 2,240 pounds.
The great national advantages accruing from the cultivation of
hemp, will be better understood from the following computa-
tions.
One hundred and eighty thousand pounds weight of hemp are
required to rig completely a first-rate ship of war; and if four
acres produce on an average one ton of hemp, a single first-rate
man-of-war will require the produce of 320 acres to furnish her
with a complete outfit.
In a period of sixteen years. Great Britain imported, each year
from Russia, as follows :
Tons of Hemp. Acres. Average Cost.
1825 21,829 the produce of 87,316 £546,725
1826 17,900 „ 71.600 448,500
1825 21,829 the produce of 87,316 £545,725
1826 17,900 „ 71.600 448,500
1827 28,670 „ 114,680 706,750
1828 25,214 „ 100,856 630,350
1829 18,746 „ 74,984 468,450
1830 25,250 „ 101,000 631,250
1831 27,000 „ 108,000 675,000
1832 29,700
1833 26,326
1834 35,029
1835 34,332
1836 29,301
1837 38,610
1838 36,473
1839 49,778
1840 34,218
138,800 737,500
105,304 658,150
140,116 175,725
137,328 758,300
117,204 731,525
154,440 965,250
145,892 911,825
199,112 1,284,450
136,872 855,450
The largest import I have met with up to the present date,
1854, took place in
1788 58,464 „ 240,000 1,460,600
But for several years past the importation of hemp into the
United Kingdom has exceeded that, ranging about 60,000 tons,
valued at one million eight hundred thousand pounds sterling.
As to hemp seed, —in the year 1857, 4,727 quarters were im-
66
THE CUL'TTVATIOK ASH MANAGEMENT OF HEMP.


ported into Great Britain at the estimated value of £10,636
sterling.
I must observe here that the production of fibre is not the only
thing on which the farmer has to reckon in the cultivation of
hemp : the seed forms an important item in the calculation ; and
therefore, in estimating the probable returns, the value of the
seed must be taken into the account. Hempseed yields an
excellent oil for burning and many other domestic uses.
The cultivation of hemp is exceedingly simple, and requires
little if any attention from the time the seed is put in the ground
until the plant is ready for pulling, which generally happens in
ten or twelve weeks; and if there be flax and hemp-dressing
machines available, the after processes are easy and uncomplica-
ted, though nice. But the most delicate and essential part is the
judicious and accurate selection and classification of the different
qualities and sizes, and keeping each assorted by itself, through
all the operations.
About six cwt. of prepared hemp, and twelve to thirty bushels
of seed, are the usual produce of an imperial acre, which may be
doubled by sowing thin; one plant has been known to yield
seven pounds and a half of seed ; the profits, including seed and
oil, may be estimated at ten to twelve pounds sterling. Such
are the data from which the farmer has to draw his conclusions
and frame his resolves.
CHAPTEE 11.
THE HISTOEY OF HEMF.
Cannabis sativa, common hemp, Bioecia Pentandria L ., and
JJrticaceai J., is the only known species ; although in its botanical
characters it is nearly allied to the nettle, with which it also
agrees in its general appearance. It is an annual plant, dioecious,
or male and female, the stems nearly simple, erect, rising from
six to twelve feet high, according to soil and temperature, and
covered with rigid hairs. The leaves are alternate, or opposite,
digitate, and stalked; the leaflets five in number, narrow,
lanceolate, sharp-pointed, serrated, rough, and pale green on the
under surface; the uppermost leaves have only three leaflets.
The male flowers are in small loose spikes, pendulous from short
stalks at the axils of the upper leaves, with a calyx of five
spreading, narrow, lanceolate sepals containing five stamens.
The female flowers are single, but appear in close leafy clusters
at the junction of the upper leaves and stems and consist of a
roundish calyx split half way down into two parts, and contain a


simple one-celled ovary bearing a lenticular seed, and terminated
by two awl-shaued stigmas.
It is supposed to be a native of Persia, and is found growing
wild among the bills and mountains in the north of India, and in
various parts of Asia, Africa, and Europe ; it is cultivated all over
the globe, and thrives equally in all climates; for while it defies
the utmost rigors of Siberian frosts, it supports without injury the
fiercest ardor of the solar heats of India. But it rises to a much
greater height in the warm than in the cold latitudes. In Russia
and other parts of the north of Europe and of America it seldom
exceeds six or seven feet, whereas in some parts of the south of
Europe, as in the Bolognese territory, and the Terra di Lavora,
the ancient Laborium, in Campania Felix in Italy, where it is
cultivated extensively, its height frequently exceeds eighteen feet,
and yields an extremely fine and beautiful fibre. This fact accords
exactly with what Pliny related of the same plant eighteen hun-
dred years ago. He says, the hemp from Alabanda, a city of
Caria in Asia Minor is the best; the next in quality is from
Mylasa, another city of Caria, but as to its height, at Rosia in the
Sabine country in the neighbourhood of Rome it grows as tall
as a tree.— Nat. Hist., Lib. xix., cap. 56.
Herodotus is the first author who mentions it. Speaking of
the Scythians, in Lib. iv., cap. 74, he says hemp grows in Scythia,
and is exceedingly like flax ; but hemp, whether wild or cultiva-
ted greatly exceeds it in thickness and size. The Thracians make
garments of it, like those made of linen. He adds that it is also
used for the purpose of exciting effects similar to intoxication.
Hesychius, at a much later period, mentions it also in nearly the
same terms. Dioscorides, Lib. iii., cap. 148, describes its uses as
a potent medicine, but is silent respecting its other applications.
He also mentions a wild cannabis, which, from the figure given
of it by Matthioli in his learned commentaries on that author,
does not correspond in any respect with the species under conside-
ration. Matthioli states that in some places the male stalks are
used to make charcoal for the manufacture of gunpowder. Pliny,
u. s., says hemp is sown in the beginning of Spring, a Favonio ,
and the thicker it is put in, he observes, the more slender and
fine the fibre will become. When the seed is ripe it is gathered
just after the autumnal equinox, and dried in the air, in the
sun, or by means of smoke. The plant is pulled after the
vintage, and is decorticated and cleaned by the laborers when
the work of the day is over— lucubrationibus. Crescentius,
de Agricultura, Lib. iii , cap. de Canapo , informs us that it
required the same climate and soil as flax ; but it is not
necessary to plough the land so often. “Yet, those who cultivate
hemp for cordage, ought to sow it in the richest soil where it will
grow very tall and thick yielding a great proportion of tow from


the thickness of its bark. The more thin it is sown the more
branchy it will grow. When a finer quality of hemp is required,
it should be sown thick, in a moderately rich and loose soil, where
it will come up without branches. It is sown in the middle of
April or March, and must be kept clear of weeds. It is pulled
when the seed is ripe ; but the male is gathered when it turns
white, about ten days before the female. The whole are then
macerated together in water, until the fibre separates easily from
the stalk.”
In the wild state the stem never arrives at such perfection as
to be of any use in the arts. It is, therefore, carefully cultivated
even in those countries where it abounds sown by the hand of
Nature, and grows freely in any country and any soil. I found
it growing wild in the greatest luxuriance on the sandy banks of
the river Hunter, near Singleton. But whether it had been
originally introduced into that part of New South Wales by some
settler, or whether the plant be indigenous, I have not yet been
able to ascertain. This spontaneous crop appeared to cover about
an acre of an extremely loose sandy loam, in a small flat which
had been formed by the dislocation of the high bank into the bed
of the river, by the overflowing of which most of the vegetable
and earthy mould has been washed away. The plants were all
vigorous and healthy, and upon the whole the crop looked dense
and evenly. They were about three feet high, but as they were
not in flower at the time when I passed the spot, I conclude they
had not come nearly to their full height. I regret to say I have
not had the opportunity of examining the fibre of these plants;
but I hope to be able, before long, to give some account of the
dressed fibre of a cultivated specimen from seed gathered on the
same spot. A few months previous to my visit to the Upper
Hunter a gentleman of that neighbourhood called my attention
to the fact which I have been detailing,—that the hemp plant
was growing wild on the banks, or, to use his own expression,
“.on the sharp sand of the river ; ” and he was so polite as to
send me a dried female plant with the seed still in the ovaries.
Now that circumstance has enabled me to speak with some con-
fidence of the fitness of our climate and soil to this valuable plant,
because I have carefully cultivated the seeds thus obtained.
They were sowed on a small patch of rather light clayey loam,
incumbent on a clay subsoil. The place where the experiment is
in progress had received a slight dressing of manure and borne
a crop of potatoes the year before. The ground was dirty and
overrun with weeds; and all the preparation it received was a
shallow breaking up with the heavy farm-hoe, and smoothing with
the rake. The seed was put in on the 18th of December 1844,
and the plants made their first appearance in fair and thick array
on Christmas morning. Since then I have watched the progress


of these reclaimed savages with much attention and solicitude. The
rapidity of their growth is prodigious, being at the average rate of
two inches and three-quarters every day since they were a foot
high, about the -18th of January. They of course spring up more
rapidly after rain than in dry weather. But I must observe,
that for the first six weeks after sowing* they had to contend with
all the disadvantages of extreme drought; yet the average growth
has been what I have stated; and I have reason to presume that,
had the tallest of the crop not been broken down and destroyed
by the late unusually destructive storm of hail which fell in
irregular lumps as large as hens’ eggs, they would by this time
have reached the height of ten or eleven feet. Those that escaped
the calamity were fully two feet shorter ‘than the former, and
their height at this moment of writing (3rd March) is eight feet.
This incident furnishes important data for the consideration of
the cultivator. It settles one fundamental question —it dispels
all doubts that might be raised respecting the fitness of our
climate and soil for the production of hemp. But there remain
other points of essential interest to the agriculturist yet to be
considered, namely, the expense of cultivation, or, in other
words, the amount of extra labour, above the ordinary establish-
ment of the farm, the value of hemp in a commercial point of
view, the reasonable amount of gain likely to accrue to the
grower, and the question of being able to compete with the
Russians in dressing and sorting the material. On these ques-
tions I trust I shall be able to satisfy the intending hemp-grower,
and hold out some reasonable inducements for his launching into
this speculation as soon as he can procure good seed.—l repeat,
that the country cannot flourish permanently, until the farmer
shall raise from his fields a variety of exports.
CHAPTER 111.
THE SOILS BEST ADAPTED TO HEMP.
It is a matter of the greatest moment to the interests of agricul-
ture that the farmer should possess a perfect theoretical as well
as practical knowledge of soils and their properties. When he is
master of this important science and has also obtained a general
acquaintance with the economy of plants, he is distracted by no
torturing uncertainty about what is fit and what is unfavourable
for his : he is able to decide correctly without a
moment’s hesitation, on the situation most congenial to the crops
he would cultivate; and confident in the soundness of his
premises he readily deduces the system of tillage which is likely


to conduce most to their perfect development. He who is best
acquainted with the nature of plants is likely to he the most
successful cultivator of them.
Without just notions on this subject, and a keen appetite for
knowledge, the agriculturist perseveres in the fruitless amuse-
ment of playing at a perpetual game of blindman’s buff, or like
the paradoxical son of Phlegyas, who both follows and runs away
from himself— Volvitur Ixion ; et se sequiturque fugitque. Some
men, from the intensity of their self-esteem contemptuously
reject all instruction from others, satisfied of the sufficiency and
comprehensiveness of their own limited acquirements. Others,
from a conceited obstinacy would not swerve from the old path
if a mine of gold were the reward of their deviation. These men
never felt the hallowed glow of patriotism. Their country owes
them no gratitude, and their offspring no blessing. Yet their
object is to accumulate wealth; and their degree of success for
the most part corresponds with the volume of their public spirit,
and the wondrous unity of their character.
I wish to impress upon cultivators that it is the soil and
climate which are the principal causes of difference in the
qualities both of hemp and flax, and no exertions of art can
equal that produced by these natural agents. Wherever the
plant is situated for the time, there is its home. A plant like an
animal is an organised being, and will only thrive in its fullest
perfection in the soil and climate of which it is a native. The
cultivator, therefore, should make it the object of his chief
solicitude and care, to render its abode wherever it be, as con-
genial to its nature as circumstances will admit, and to direct his
attention to all its wants, and to all the means contributing to its
proper nourishment, with a diligence so strict and vigilant, as to
leave nothing undone to ensure its healthy and vigorous growth.
But as this is not a treatise on agriculture, I offer these observa-
tions to the reader’s notice with no other view but that they
may serve as a useful memento.
Although as I have jnst stated, hemp grows in every climate
and every soil, those best adapted to it are the rich, dark,
vegetable sorts, and the deep, mellow, sandy loams. If the
black vegetable soils had a good share of shell marl of the sea
beach blended with them, which is the best possible manure for
such lands, they would be prodigiously improved by it. But
wherever the plant is to grow on this great island, it is indespen-
sable that the soil be deep, with a sound retentive subsoil
inclining to moist. It grows well also on light mellow soils.
But stiff white clays should be rejected if they are moist, as in
that case they are technically speaking too cold. Hemp requires
a warm soil. Yet, if clays be dry, they are equally uncongenial,
because they are too compact and too tenacious to imbibe from


the atmosphere sufficient moisture for a plant of such rapid and
vigorous growth, especially in dry seasons, or in climates subject
to prolonged droughts. Saturated aquatic soils, such as the
paludal tracts near the embouchure of the Hunter, and in other
districts of the Colony, are likewise improper for hemp as long
as they remain imperfectly drained. Hemp rejoices in its due
share of moisture, but not in a wet soil, in which it would
macerate and decay; for water is only the solvent and vehicle of
the food of plants; so that an excess of drink might render it
dropsical. I have said this plant loves a warm bed. The black,
rich, and all the darker soils absorb heat quicker, and, under
ordinary circumstances retain it longer, than those of a lighter
color, especially if they be moist. This property of retaining
heat which belongs to the dark sorts is derived from the organic
matter they contain, black earths being very imperfect conductors
and radiators of caloric. If the rich black and brown loams
containing a large proportion of vegetable and animal remains,
should happen further to be mixed with a considerable quantity
of alumina or carbonate of lime, they are thereby rendered the
richest of all soils, and on that account they are the more
suitable to the cultivation of hemp. Because in soils whose
components are so advantageously combined, the organic
nourishment they contain is longest preserved; and in them the
plant has a copious and undiminished supply of the richest
nutriment during the whole period of its existence. Hemp has
been grown on the same land in Suffolk for seventy years in
succession, but in this case the land required liberal manuring
for each crop.
In respect to soils, no country in the world can boast of any
better fitted for the cultivation of hemp than New South Wales.
Of course, I speak with confidence only of those parts of the
Colony with which I am in some degree acquainted by personal
observation. But from the best sources of information lam led
to believe that every part of Australia is equally suited for the
production of flax and hemp. Of those districts of the country
which I know, I shall only enumerate the alluvial tracts, and the
drained swampy lands in the districts of the Hunter, the
Wollombi, the Williams and the Patterson Rivers ; the aquatic
meadows of the Parramatta River, where they have been drained,
the low flat lands of the Hawkesbury, the Nepean, and the fine
rich loams of the Shoalhaven. To these may be added the
elevated and dried beds of former lagoons, and the basins of
lakes, which have been filled up to the general level, by the
detritus of mountains, and decayed organic matters on the
surface of the circumjacent grounds, which are washed down in
rainy seasons by the sheets of water that dissolve the surface
of the hills at those periods like a melting glacier; and running


into the ravines, swell and form irresistible torrents, sweeping
before them every moveable object with all the fury and
magnificence of cataracts.
There are numerous small verdant meads of various dimen-
sions formed by the debris of the higher levels, carried in this
manner into the water-courses which meander along the flat
country, and are deposited where the torrent has lost its impetu-
osity, and flows calmly forward. For as soon as the velocity of
the stream becomes less than that which removed the detrition
and mud, the heavier particles descend to the bottom, and the
lighter substances, as the silt and decayed vegetable matters, are
floated to the sides, and adhere to the banks, or to any other
remora that may he in their way. Thus, in the course of time,
from the unfrequency of these torrents, the banks contract and
the bottom rises into islets, which coalesce afterwards by the
medium of fresh depositions, and form the fertile patches to which
I have been adverting. These effects are more rapidly produced
and more conspicuous in the beds of only occasional torrents and
streams : because in the intervals of repose vegetation proceeds,
and claims a considerable share in this process. Examples of the
rapid disintegration of mountains, and of the elevation of the
bottoms of small lakes may be seen in progress in several parts
of the valley which is formed by that broken water-course or
system of lagoons, commencing in the ravines of the Sugar-loaf
range of mountains, and after trending with its numerous bran-
ches in a westerly direction, and forming in its course a multitude
of small alluvial flats, terminates by a variety of embouchures in
the river Hunter. The most extensive basin of this chain of
alternate ponds and fertile holms, whose bottom has been raised
up to the common level, is that portion of the valley called Brook’s
Flat, which now, from being a lake, is become a fine arable vale
with an excellent soil for every agricultural purpose.—ln a word,
the whole inland parts of the colony abound in rich spots of this
description ; which, wherever they are found may be advanta-
geously applied to the produce of flax or hemp.
In concluding this chapter I would urge upon all who contem-
plate hemp-growing, that the land on which this plant will succeed
best, must be dry, rich, deep, containing a fair portion of organic
matter, some sand, and a sound bottom ; but above all it should
be what is technically called warm. It is even better for hemp to
have a warm poor soil than a rich cold one. It abhors cold light
clays ; nor will it thrive on low bottoms saturated with water, be
they ever so rich. Hemp is a plant whose root not only descends
deep in the soil, but extends by innumerable fibres horizontally;
indeed I am not acquainted with any other plant of so quick a
growth that requires so strong a pull to eradicate it from its seat
in the ground. A few days ago I pulled up with considerable


difficulty a male plant of those I mentioned in Chapter 11., -whose
fusiform tap-root descended perpendicularly in the soil to the
depth ol fourteen inches —tantum radice in Tartara tendit. This
proves two essential points in the cultivation of hemp. The soil
ought to be deep for the roots to penetrate vertically, and the
ground should receive a perfect tillage and a complete pulveriza-
tion, to give them freedom and space laterally. The land which
has grown hemp for two or three years—l am alluding to the rich
deep flats on the banks of rivers—will, without doubt, afterwards
produce very superior samples of wheat to those yielded by the
same soils at present. Besides, nothing is better calculated to
clean land both of insects and weeds than this crop. On the
small patch of ground which I lately devoted to the experiment,
not one weed ever appeared above the surface : the ground was
as clean between the plants as if it had been weeded every day.
Hemp is useful to the farmer in another point of view. It has
been long asserted that when sown near any valuable crop, which
is subject to the ravages of grubs and caterpillars, it completely
banishes them. The method among the old gardeners was to
sow a belt of hemp round their gardens or particular beds, to
preserve them from the depredations of insects.
CHAPTER IV.
EEEPAKATION OE THE SOIE.
In this country, where there is so great an abundance of new
ground and rich soils at command, where there are such extensive
tracts of deep mellow loams containing inexhaustible stores of
extractive supplied by the vegetable and animal matter they con-
tain, for the nourishment of plants, though the tillage is easy and
inexpensive it should be done on right principles: and these
principles are to give ample room vertically and horizontally to
the easy growth and extension of the roots of the plants ; for
unless they be unencumbered and have plenty of space, the plant
Mull never be vigorous nor perfect. When the organs that supply
the nourishment are pinched and intercepted in their search after
food by insurmountable obstacles, such as those which imperfect
tillage leaves in their way, it will as necessarily starve, shrink in
its dimensions, and degenerate in its qualities, as that child will
become dwarfed and stunted, from which poverty or chance
withholds the allotment of nutriment necessary to sustain it in
health and vigour, and contribute to its due increment. It is
essential then, that every cultivator should know and remember
as a rural maxim—and lam addressing myself only to those who


do not know, that the more freedom a plant enjoys in a suitable
and well tilled soil, the more ample and fibrous the root will
become; and the more ample and vigorous the root which is the
stomach of the plant, the more strong healthy and robust will
be the crop. Because, after all that has been said of the virtues
of soils, the growth of the plant depends less omtheirrichness and
adaptation than on its power to absorb from them the peculiar
nourishment they afford; and this faculty of absorption cannot
come into perfect operation unless there be an adequate number
of absorbing fibres, and a well pulverised soil.
The land destined for hemp should be ploughed twice—once
deep with a trench or subsoil plough, and once with a common
one. Where a regular trench plough is wanting, a good substi-
tute may be made of the ordinary plough by divesting it of the
mould board. A good old strong plough is best for this work ;
and the readiest way of using it is to follow in the furrow made
by the ordinary implement. If the soil be deep, the furrow should
be made to correspond. But when there is a trench or subsoil
plough at hand, the trenching should precede the ordinary plough-
ing ; and in making the first furrow, the instrument should be
made to enter as deeply as possible for the reasons I have given
above. The ground is then to be carefully harrowed, and the
clods comminuted by any of the patented clod-crushing rollers,
that may be accessible. The second ploughing should be given
as soon as the farmer finds it convenient; but before the seed is
put in, the soil should be made perfectly absorbent, by careful
and uniform pulverisation.
This country being obnoxious to frequent and long droughts,
is a circumstance which disheartens many industrious and actively
disposed men from attempting useful and promising experiments,
or making beneficial improvements ; and induces them rather to
look forward with doubt and hopelessness to the likelihood of
profitable returns to their labours, than to innovate with alacrity
and confidence on old practices. But there can be no donbt that
a more perfect system of cultivation introduced and vigorously
conducted, would produce all the results they labor for, but despair
of attaining. For even the ruinous effects of drought may be coun-
teracted to a great extent by the aid of the collateral sciences.
On the rich lands of this country manure would be a superfluous,
or at best a doubtful advantage. In fact, in general it is not
yet necessary under good tillage. The only thing of the kind
really wanting, as I have observed above, and which if applied
would be a highly important, as well as a permanent improvement
in respect to every sort of crop, is a copious dressing of shell marl
given to those soils which are rich, black, and deep. Without
this they will always be too tenacious for perfect division of their
particles, from their containing a large proportion of alumina,


and therefore less capable of affording due nourishment to plants.
Many of our finest arable lands are in this predicament, the
quantity of alumina in many soils amounting to thirty or forty
per cent., so that in dry weather they become as hard as a brick-
floor. Such a manuring would have the effect of rendering them
the most perfect and useful soils for every species of vegetable
production : with a liberal application of it they might bid defiance
to the most protracted droughts; because, when sufficiently blended
with this, and sand to overcome permanently their excessive tena-
city, they are in a perfect state of fitness both to attract and retain
moisture in the hottest and driest weather.
But the application of the principle of attraction is not confined
to the rich tenacious soils. Its application is general; and the skilful
and intelligent cultivator will see the advantage of extending to
all his arable lands the invaluable capacity of absorbing moisture
from the atmosphere , a result which can only be obtained by perfect
pulverization which brings into action this first element of fertility,
and almost ensures a perpetual abundance of healthy and vigorous
crops.
In preparing the ground for seed then, the soil 'should be so
thoroughly comminuted as to convert the whole surface into a
system of the finest capilliary tubes, opening to the atmosphere,
and absorbing its refreshing moisture. When the farmer con-
ducts his operations with a view to this simple principle of
hydraulics, he will achieve the highest purposes of his art, and
he will then, but never till then, be enabled to fill up with his
own hands the full measure of reward his most sanguine hopes
could anticipate : for he has overcome the most formidable'obsta-
cle which nature can oppose to his success. When the soil is
pulverised to a sufficient depth, and the deeper, cceteris paribus,
the better, the power of absorbing is not only augmented and
rendered more certain, but the power of retaining the moisture
imbibed becomes almost perfect. When the earth is so prepared,
it attracts moisture from the atmosphere, even during the day,
in the hottest and most sultry weather, and in the night the dews
are literally drank in by every pore from the surface to the sub-
soil. It is no excuse for neglecting the most useful principles of
agriculture, to plead the additional labor their adoption would
require. The success attending their application far more than
balances the outlay.
CHAPTER Y.
TIME OF SOWING, AND QUANTITY OF SEED.
The observations made on these particulars in treating of flax,
are equally applicable to hemp. It has been already mentioned
that I grew a small quantity of hemp with unexpected success,


at an unpropitious season of the year, when the tender plants had
to contend with the disadvantages of a long drought and hot
winds. They surmounted these indeed, and became tall, strong,
and stately plants, rising from eight to twelve feet; but lam
convinced, nevertheless, that I did not choose the proper season.
For although hemp is not a plant that will grow in a saturated
soil, or in a shallow wet subsoil, it is equally certain it will not
in general thrive without a due share of moisture ; nor would I
again expose such a crop to the malignant influence of the Austra-
lian hot winds. For these reasons lam induced to think, that
the time I have recommended for sowing flax is also the most
proper season for putting in hemp. It would then escape the
chance of being blasted by the sultry breath of the north-west
wind, or stinted in its dimensions by the want of moisture. As
to the seed time in England, it is often sown in April, but the
month of May is commonly reckoned the fittest season for this
crop. Frost can never hardly be a consideration in the climate
of New South Wales. However, it is as well to know that this
plant is intolerant of frost, and should be sown at such a time of
the year as to be secure in that respect.
The quantity of seed will in some measure depend on the in-
tention of the farmer. If he desire to raise tall slender stems,
and a fine staple, he will sow thick ; if to produce strong, robust,
and perfect stalks, he will put in less, and give it room to grow.
The usual quantity per imperial acre on good land, is from two
and a half to three bushels. If the Scotch acre is used, that
being one-fourth larger than the imperial, it will require more
seed in proportion. The Irish acre again is two roods and a
half larger than the imperial, so that it requires half as much
more than the standard acre. Some farmers put in as much as
four bushels to the statute acre, and some when it is sown with
the corn sowing machine, use only about a bushel and a quarter.
Hemp seed was formerly sown broad-cast, it not being thought
useful to plant it in drills ; because neither weeding to any
extent, nor hand or horse-hoeing was necessary. Like flax,
it must be only slightly covered: when buried more than an inch
at most in the soil, it does not come up, and the more finely the
land is worked the less seed is required. Moreover, when the
soil is well pulverised all the plants if the seed be good, have a
chance of quickening, and therefore most of them will appear in
fine, even, and regular order, and nearly of an equal height and
size at first. The seed should be harrowed in with a light bar-
row armed with fine and short tines, and if the soil be loose, a
light roller drawn over it cross wise by one horse to close the
earth about the seed will be of essential service to the crop.
Birds are very fond of this seed, which is an additional reason
why it should be carefully but not deeply covered. They should


be frightened away till the plants are a few inches above ground,
and the weeds kept under for a week afterwards. When the
seed is sown thick, an extravagant practice, of which I cannot
discover the reason, cross lines or slender fences such as were
described when treating of flax, are sometimes necessary. In
order to produce the most useful and highest priced hemp it
should be remembered as a rule of practice, that it ought never
to be sown either too thick or too thin : to pursue a middle course
with this commodity is the most profitable.—lt is now (1864)
found that hemp may be advantageously sown in stitches with
the corn-sowing machine, or ploughed in like wheat so that the
crop will still be in drills a few inches apart. This method
which is no doubt preferable to the older systems, requires at
least one half less seed, which alone is no small advantage. Be-
sides, by sowing in this form of drills the male plants can easily
be removed by hand, either when very young, or when they can
be readily distinguished by their flower, thereby leaving the
female crop to ripen and produce the greatest amount of seed
and the best quality of fibre.
CHAPTER VI.
THE TIME OF PULLING AND STEEPING.
I have already stated that the male and female flowers of
hemp grow on different plants ; wherefore in England the male
is vernacularly called fimhle hemp, and the female carle or seed
hemp. The male plant forms about one-fourth of the entire crop,
and is more delicate and slender than the female, a circumstanco
which in ancient times probably gave rise to the unscientific in-
version of the order of nature, the seed-bearing plant being called
the male or carle in old authors, and the barren plant the female,
femble, or finable, for they seem to have one and the same
etymology. This botanical misapplication of the sexual dis-
tinctions prevailed till very recently. Thus old Tusser :
Good flax and good hemp, for to have of her own,
In May a good huswife will see it he sown:
And afterwards trim it, to serve at a need,
The fimhle to spin, and the carle for his seed.
This sexual arrangement occasions some difference in the time
of pulling, and it is most important to remember this circum-
stance, as the male hemp which is of little value, the fibre being
naturally of very inferior quality, is ready to take about five
weeks earlier than the female. On account of this'difference in
the time of ripening the male has the additional name of
summer hemp, and the female of winter hemp.
Hence, in order to facilitate the operation of pulling, it appears
necessary that the land should be laid into stitches of a few feet


in breadth to enable the gatherers to reach across to the crown
of the ridge for the male plants, while he can walk along the
furrows without trampling the females, which, under all circum-
stances must be left to become perfectly mature. Slight furrows
will be sufficient for this purpose; and they will serve also as a
guide for the sower in distributing the seed if he sow broad cast.
The whole field must nevertheless be made as level as a flower-
border, so that deep furrows and high ridges would be quite incon-
sistent with this necessary measure. In taking the plants there
is no difficulty in distinguishing the males from the females, the
flowers being so remarkably unlike each other. But each may
also be easily discerned in another way. The male plants having
effected the purpose assigned to them by nature begin to fade
and droop immediately, while the females continue youthful
green and vigorous for the space of at least four weeks longer.
The males then are known by their faded flowers, their
yellowish, drooping leaves, and the whitish color of their more
slender stems. These when pulled are tied up in small sheaves,
each with a double band; they are then either dried and stacked;
or immediately steeped like flax. With respect to the female
portion of the crop, in Russia and other parts of the continent of
Europe, when the seed is to be saved, as soon as the plants are
pulled they are set up upon the root-ends against the fence,
paling or any other convenient place where the wind can
penetrate, and left there according - to the weather until they are
perfectly dry. The roots and top ends as far as the seed are
then cut off, the former being thrown away and the latter
thrashed out and cleared immediately. In some parts when the
seed is net wanted, the hemp is carried to the water as soon as
it is pulled and put into the steep immediately. However, when
the plants are dried before steeping as in Russia, they are
housed in such a way as to have a free exposure to the air, yet
securely defended from any degree of damp or wet. But it is
always best to steep immediately after each sexual portion is
gathered, as it then requires less maceration.
The process first suggested in the Gentleman's Magazine is so
much superior to every other method, both in point of cheapness
and cleanliness that it ought to be universally adopted where
steeping is thought necessary. It is extensively used on the con-
tinent of Europe with both flax and hemp and is simply this,
the plants whether green or dried are steeped two or three hours
in hot water in which soft soap is dissolved, and then taken out
and treated as described below. This method has the ad-
vantage of saving time and labour, and is “as effectual in sepa-
rating the fibre from the woody matter as watering and grassing
for weeks.” But if the ordinary method for steeping be preferred,
four or five days in this country will be found quite sufficient.


It is then spread out thinly on any clean short grassy bed,
secure from cattle, and carefully turned every day; this opera-
tion is continued for about six weeks, until it is thoroughly dried,
when it is gathered into bundles, either for immediate prepara-
tion, or being laid aside for future use. In the year 1854 it
is mentioned in the Eepoet of the Eoyal Society foe the feo-
MOTION AND IMPEOVEMENT OF THE (xEOWTH OF FLAX IN leELAND,
page 43, that There are two new systems of steeping or retting
flax on a large scale, now in operation. The one is by hot
water, or what is called Schenck’s method; and the other by
steam or Watts’ method. In both cases they are conducted on
a large scale by persons who purchase the flax straw from the
farmer, as pulled and dried on the Courtrai system. Both plans
are protected by patents, and authorization to adopt them must be
had of the patentees. There can be little doubt that the same
or similar inventions with a little modification would be appli-
cable for hemp as for flax.
It is gratifying to me at the termination of my labour to learn
that the cultivation of hemp is not viewed with indifference by
other colonies, and that its uses are not likely to be confined to
one or two purposes as has hitherto been the case. Its applica-
tions are infinite, and will probably before long supersede many
of the costly constituents of female clothing now in vogue.
Patient experiment is rapidly unfolding qualities in this inesti-
mable commodity, which were never before supposed to exist. I
repeat, therefore, that it is gratifying to me, and must be en-
couraging to our farmers to know that hemp has become an
object of interest to one of the most acute and persevering nations
of the earth : and that although the cultivation of it is in a great
measure abandoned by the Canadians, it is taken up by their
active and enterprising neighbours, who in preparing the fibre,
according to the latest improvements in the process of steeping,
seem to have developed its ultimate properties to the fullest ex-
tent: for, by macerating it in “ water, heated to one hundred and
sixty degrees of Fahrenheit, it forms an entirely new staple of that
invaluable fibre ; it becomes silky—more delicate and beautiful
than the finest flax; and that when the process is properly car-
ried into execution, this new article will supersede cotton.”
This great heat has the effect of perfectly disorganising the
cellular tissue which glues the fibres together with such tenacity
as to furnish only a comparatively coarse material under the or-
dinary mode of steeping. By the present process the cellular
tissue, which glues the fascicles of tubes together, is dissolved
and the ultimate single fibrils are separated, so that the staple
produced must necessarily be as delicate “as the spider’s most
attenuated web,” seeing that they are so fine as to be visible,
only through a microscope.
The End.




, • «« ■. ,
. * . Ms , « * w . ... _• ' seU
'■: - • i -■
