



J y 5 -
#. ™ I
~ „'s *f"~~ 7
/Wrx /iiA '" / > 7
. ...
i
.
;,/* ' /*7 / „ !
-//t ■•■ J? 2^
V''f~t -■


[ From the Annals and Magazine of Nattjbai 'Histoby for
April 1872.]
A Trip to Queensland in search of Fossils.
By Dr. George Bennett, F.L.S.
To the Editors of the Annals and Magazine of Natural History.
[Gentlemen,
I have been favoured by my friend Dr. George BennetQ
F.L.5.,. of Sydney, Now South Wales, to whom I was in-
debted for the specimen described in my ‘Memoir on the
Pearly Nautilus,’ and for valuable materials while investi-
gating the generative, economy of the Marsupialia and Mono-
tremata, with the following account of his excursions in quest
of materials for the work on which I am now engaged, de-
scriptive of the fossil mammals of Australia.
The notes of the localities and conditions under which these,
fossils are found may be, perhaps, not .uninteresting to the
readers of the ‘ Annals.’
Richard Owen.]
“ My deae Owen,
“ It will no doubt cause you. some surprise when you receive this
communication informing you of my having visited. Queensland, the
. principal object of my visit being with the view of examining the
fossil deposits, collecting what I could during my short sojourn, and
mailing arrangements with friends to aid me, by pointing out to them
the localities on the creeks &c. most likely to be attended with success.
That I was correct in : considering those places I selected suitable
was shown by the successful results attendant on my explorations,
to the no little surprise of my companions, : I left Sydney for
Brisbane on the evening of the 3rd of November, and arrived at
Brisbane on the morning of the (Ith. ; The following day I was in-
troduced to the Hon. J. P. Bell and other members of the Govern-
ment; and Mr. "Walsh,.the Minister for Works, finding my visit was
for scientific purposes, gave me a free pass over all the railways, of
the colony. Mr. A. B. Buchanan, M.L.A., also gave me a letter to
Mr. Beattie, the superintendent of his station at Chinchilla, where
he expected I, should find some fossil deposits. The principal places
I visited for fossils, and where I found, as others some years pre-
viously had also. discovered, the richest deposits, were the Gowrie
Creek, on the Gowrie station, the property of George King, Esq.,
M.L.A., df Sydney, and King’s Creek, Clifton station, the property
of W. B.- Tooth, Esq. At the former place I received the kindest


assistance from the proprietor’s sons, Mr. George Beresford King and
Mr. Henry King ; at the latter a -welcome and every aid from Mr. W.
B. Tooth himself. The consequence was, in the very brief time allowed
me to, explore the creeks, the weather being fortunately very
favourable, I made a collection which I hope you will find of some
utility; moreover promises have been made to me by those gentle-
men and many others to send me from time to time such specimens
as they may be able to collect; and this has already been done by
Mr. G. B. King, first by a fossil crocodile’s tooth having been left for
me at Gowrie Junction station, on my return from Warwick, and
afterwards by the discovery of some fossil jaws with teeth in situ,
and an important tradition respecting these extinct animals obtained
from one of the aborigines : this was embodied in a letter addressed
to ine at Ipswich, previously to my departure from Brisbane. The
letter is dated ‘ Gowrie, Becember 1, 1871,’ and is as follows:
‘ Since you left we have discovered a few very valuable fossils ; one,
apparently belonging to the Diprotodon ?, is almost a complete jaw,
with all the molar teeth and the two front teeth similar to those in
the lower jaw of the kangaroo as far as position is concerned, but
being more round and without the sharp cutting-edges. Another is
part of the left side of the lower jaw, seemingly part of the jaw-
bone above described, and this has two perfect (molar ?) teeth and
one broken tooth; the others are vertebrse and smaller bones. I
have had a long conversation with “Charlie Pierce,” an aboriginal,
relative to these fossils; and he avers that they are those of an
animal long since extinct, known to the natives by the name of
“ Gyedarra.” Tradition.among them has handed down the appear-
ance and habits of this animal for generations; but Charlie says he
never paid much attention to the descriptions 'that have been given
to him, but imagines the animal was as large as a heavy draught-
horse, walked on four legs, the same as any other four-footed beast,
eating grass, never went any distance back from the creeks to feed,
and spent most of its time in the water, chiefly in enormous holes
excavated in the banks. I told him he must mean some other ani-
mal; but he spoke most and asserted that the bones we
have been finding are those of the animal of which he was speaking,
and that at one time the bones were very numerous about the
Gowrie water-holes, where his forefathers had seen the animals
themselves sporting about. I again asked him if they did not live
on the leaves of trees; and his reply was that they were never seen
to feed on them, but always on grass, the same as a horse or bullock.
I will see if more specimens can be procured, and send them after
you to Sydney.’
“ On the 9th of November I left Brisbane for Ipswich by coach,
and from Ipswich to Dalby by the railroad, where I arrived at 7 p.m.
On the following morning I left Dalby for Jimbour, the station of
the Hon. J. P. Bell, who had kindly invited me. There are no fos-
sils to be obtained at this and other stations in the vicinity, except
when wells are dug. A small jaw with well-preserved teeth was
given to me by Mrs. Bell (probably of a kangaroo), which had been


found on Jimbour Plains, 140 feet beneath the surface, when dig-
ging a well; a large bone had also been found with it, but was lost.
A tusk given by Mrs. Bell to Mr. Anthony Trollope, when visiting
this place a short time since, was also found on this station when
forming another well. At another station near Jimbour, Mr. G.
Morris Simpson, of i Bon Accord,’ near Dalby, presented me with
some fossil teeth and bones .procured there, and with a memorandum
accompanying them, dated Nov. 21, 1871, as follows: —‘ The ac-
companying bones were dug out of a well which I have had made
in the centre of the large plain which extends from Jondaryan on
the Oakey Creek, on the north, to Tandilla, on the Condamine, on
the south. They were got at a depth of about fifty feet from the
surface, imbedded in a sort of sandy drift. It would seem to me as
if the head of the animal had come in the line of shaft, the rest of
the bones being probably on one side.’ I have all these hones kept
together for your examination, with Mr. Simpson’s memorandum
respecting them; they are fine tusks, but broken, and one perfect
molar tooth, fragments of the skull, and other parts. On passing a
station of Mr. Simpson’s, on the 16th of November, on my return
from Jimbour to Dalby, I met him superintending the sinking of a
well: no water had been found at a depth of 131 feet, but a quan-
tity of small fragments of fossil bones, of no utility, and some teeth;
the latter were small; he gave them to me, and they are sent to
you.
“ On the 14th of November, my son, Mr. G. P. Bennett, and my-
self left Jimbour for the Chinchilla station, the property of A. B.
Buchanan, M.L.A., and arrived there on the 16th. Mr. Bucha-
nan’s superintendent was absent; but one of the men pointed out
to us a rock which Mr. Buchanan supposed contained a fossil head :
this was not apparent; but several other rooks of a similar forma-
tion cropped out of the ground about 20.0 yards from the Condamine
river, and near a deep gully which, during heavy rains, carried off
the water from the higher range of hills into the river. The parti-
cular rock Alluded to, said to contain fossils, was of small size, being
only eight feet long by six feet in breadth; and the only fossils
visible were fragments imbedded in a hard grit or breccia. The
surface of the rook was with some force removed in flakes by the
use of the pick, and with them some fragments of fossils; but the
mass of the rock was so very firm as to resist all our efforts,, and to
completely blunt the edge of the pick, At this part, sloping down
towards the gully, a quantity of fragments of fossil bones were
found scattered over the surface, among which was a fossil kangaroo’s
incisor tooth: all these are sent,-to you in the collection made at
Chinchilla, together with some tusks, teeth, &0., collected by Mr. T.
J. Beattie. We left Chinchilla on the morning of the 15th of No-
vember, and arrived atWarrawarra, the station of Mr. Henry Thorne,
who informed me that he had a long time since some fossil bones,
which he supposed were still about the house; but when he went
in search of them, he found the children had thrown them away, he
could not find put where ; and thus, no dbuht, many important fos-


' '* >t -** "' •' B<', however, very kindly (more so as they
wire l-'isy shearing at ike time), look some men and drove with us
to Iky banks of the river Condamine, on the station, where he
thought some fossils m%ht found,, when in a short time we pro-
OTbed-those in the coleetion sent from the Warrawarra station. Wo
rethfnedvi# Jimbourtfii the evening, a distance of fifty miles. On
the 17th of November I arrived at Gowri© ‘-station, where, in the
creek running through, tie "station, so many important fossil bones
had previously been obtained. I was at first at a loss; how to com-
mence my explorations; having mo one with any previous knowledge
of the places to direct mb; "I was thus left to my own resources.
So I-drove to tie) creek; butob|B®ld at first only Irgh hanks, either
withbplain surfaces of hed loath or rich Hack alluvial deposits, with
a few piuir.-sseiiltered about, in some parts grooved with water-
channels more or loss deep, but nothing toiindicate deposits, fossil
6r'dfherwi'se r ; or I c-ame upon other portions of lie hanks dense
it i tati i h ' ii the narrow running stream was in many
places dimtist ,®hf)kedf with tie-dense masses of reeds and rushes : all
combined formed a scone rod uninviting lo an ‘explorer of fossil
remains. I? soon left this’ useless; part of the creek, and, driving a
few miles further down, stopped, and then descending,walked along
the banks for a shorf distance, and at last came upon a bank which
eXoited my attention; it, consisted of id hi vial soil, with concretions
of marl, strata of water-worn pebbles, and remains of perfect and
broken' unir-ilve and bivalve snobs. This locality I regarded as
favourable fort CoiimehciMg; my search for fossils ; and I was right in
mySSSSfjecture; for I was gratified, and still further induced to per-
severe;; by finding several fragments of fossil bones imbedded in this
hank. I then observed two teeth projecting from th'hsoil; with the
well-known dulbhlue colour, from vivianite, and, by careful digging
around it, obtained the portion of the’jaw marked, in tie«collection
sent to you. 1 (iowiic. A’ - the first acquisition of any importance.
On excavating sime distance around this specimen, not a vestige of
any other portions of the jaw or any other kind of fossils could he
discovered ; hut, extending my search in the same line to the bed
of She- creek, and close ; to whet®. the water was flowing, I found a
largo lower portion of a femur deeply imbedded in the soil (marked
Gbwrie, B) ; and this explains how so many of the fossil bones are
found in the be® of the creek, having been washed down from the
hanks during perhaps years of heavy rains and flood*; and then,
during the intense heat of summer, the creek became dry; for, as
life man (an old shepherd) who drove'me said, he was present when
Mr. Isaac found and dtig out the large head and ether remains from
the Creek; burthen, he stated, ‘ there was no running stream then,-'
hut only dried-up water-holes.’ : It was observing this peculiar
formatibn of water-worn pebbles and shells on the banks that led
me : tb ! Suppose ;that the fossil remains were to bo found in-those
Idealities wldfe' t&s stratum was found; and wherever I observed
similar appearances on&the : banks of creeks, I explored them, at-
-1 ended wilh more or less success, and at last obtained a key to more


successful explorations, which I afterwards followed up during my
visits to Gtowrie, and also when at King’s Creek, Clifton, not for-
getting, also, to examine the bed of the creek near those positions
when the dry season would permit. By pointing out. these localities
to others, they have been equally successful, as the acquisition of
valuable specimens can testify; and my friends both at Cowrie and
Clifton have promised to follow up the researches from time to time,
and forward the specimens obtained to me. The univalve and bi-
valve shells, before alluded to as found both entire and in fragments
in the strata, are still living in the creeks ; and T have sent one of a
species of Unio, or river-mussel, obtained in King’s Creek, where
both living and dead shells could be obtained in any quantity. The
Darling Downs are plains of great extent, more or less undulating,
with a background of hills of various picturesque forms, and ranges
of mountains, some open forest, others densely wooded and in many
parts edged with open forest, and diversified with dense scrubs of
various species of Eucalypti, Casuarince, Acacice, &d. &c. The
plains are rich in grass, growing in a fertile black soil, which ex-
tends to a great depth (to judge from some of the banks of the creek,
from 30 to 40 feet, and from the digging of wells, from 121 to 157
feet), imbedded in which are often found concretions of carbonate of
lime, many of which were shown to me. Dispersed through the
grass are a number of beautiful flowering shrubs and plants, which
enhance the beauty of the plains, especially after rains. Marl was
also obtained both on the banks of the creek and in digging wells;
and as marl consists of clay containing a small admixture of lime,
binding it together into a loose crumbling kind of stone, it assumed
various* forms when dug out or seen on the banks; and it was often
mistaken for fossil bones. l am inclined to consider that the plains
of Darling Downs were originally lakes, similar to a lake now ex-
isting on the boundaries of the Halliford and St.-Ruth stations,
called the ‘ Broadwater,’ which is said to be about, four miles in
circumference' and two miles across; but it is not of a great depth.
'When I saw it, the surface of the water was covered with a number
of wild ducks swimming about, and at some distance I could per-
ceive several black swans. This lake is surrounded by large trees,
of Eucalypti &c.; and in the water close to the flat shore dense
masses of the white and also of the blue water-lilies ( Nelumbium )
were growing. It is probable that, in the course of time this piece
of water will also be filled up, and become similar to the downs.
“ When sinking wells, after finding a great depth of rich black
soil, the clay and sandy drift is arrived at, and then again ah
alluvial deposit (so it has been mentioned to me) to the depth of
nearly 200 feet. When fossils are found in the bed of the creek or
in the banks, they have no doubt been disturbed by the heavy rains
which occur in this tropical climate, and have gradually drifted with
the percolating water, together with pebbles, fragments of stones,
shells, &c., through the soft soil towards where the waters naturally
flow —that is, towards the creeks, where they have been found, and
in most instances in a'very friable condition ; whereas when pro-


cured by digging wells, they are found in a perfectly dry condition,
or nearly so. Thus, from what I have seen of the soft nature and
scattered state of the bones when found, I do not consider it at all
likely that a complete skeleton will be found at one place, not even
of the comparatively smaller extinct species of mammals, unless by
some extraordinary chance an excavation should be made on a
sandy drift, which is not very probable. My reason for stating this
is, that, when a large bone or portion of a head is discovered, on
examining about the immediate locality it is seldom or never that
any further remains are found, though perhaps, a few yards distant
some remains of a perfectly distinct animal are detected; but se-
veral miles distant, or in another creek, such as Oakley, Gowrie,
or King’s Creek, more portions of a similar kind of animal would be
discovered, as if they had drifted miles away, and the decayed por-
tions of the animals, before becoming fossilized, had passed through
the 'soft alluvial soil in various directions, aided by the action of
water. This may account also for the bones of various species of
the extinct animals being found about the same locality. Judging
from the fossil remains, the mammals now extinct must have existed
in great numbers; for thequantity of small fragments of bones that
could be collected is enormous, and there is not so much difficulty
in procuring specimens in situations I have before mentioned as in
obtaining them in a perfect, or partially perfect state. It often occurs,
when, collecting fossils, that one observes a bone projecting from the
soil, and, on digging around it, the slightest concussion, although
apparently remote, will cause it to crumble into minute fragments.
When excavated from the soil in a soft state, it is advisable to leave
them untouched and exposed to the air, when they soon become hard
and capable of removal. The height of the banks where the fossils
were found varied from one to six or seven feet.
“ On the 20th of November I left Gowrie for Dalby and llalli-
ford station, having made during my short visit a very interesting
collection of fossils, which are. forwarded to you; and on the 23rd I
returned to Gowrie, where a few fossils, collected during my ab-
sence, awaited my arrival, and were added to my collection. In the
evening I left for Clifton station, by railroad, where I arrived at
7p. m. On the following morning, in company with Mr.W. B. Tooth
and his son, we explored ‘ King’s Creek.’ At this place, as at
Gowrie, I pointed out the most probable places in which fossil re-
mains might be found. King’s Creek in many places is a noble
stream of water; and it was only in the more shallow parts that we
Could pursue our researches with success. After a drive of some
miles we observed an isolated conglomerate pebbly rock of some
size, with the creek running close to it; we alighted and examined
it. This boulder appeared as if it had been detached many years
before from the adjoining bank; and under a shelving ,portion of it
‘ fairy martens ’ (Oollocdlia Ariel of Gould) had constructed their
curious and elaborate bottle-shaped nests, in which white eggs and
young just hatched were observed. This species always builds in-
land, and congregates about the squatters’ verandas and near the


water. This conglomerate rock (of which I have given a rude
sketch) appeared to be likely to have fossils ; and after some search,
resulting only in a few fragments, the perfect tooth (Clifton, A) was
found at the base. This rock consists of marly concretions, in which
A conglomerate Boulder on the bank of King’s Creek.
large and small pebbles or fragments of stone were imbedded, more
or less rounded by the action of water. Ko more fossils were ob-
tained from this rock after a further search. We afterwards explored
other portions of the banks of King’s Creek ; but as this creek ex-
tends by its winding course over a large tract of country, much was
left for future investigations. From my previous experience, I only
explored those sites where I observed a similar stratum and appear-
ance of the banks as obtained at Cowrie; and the result in a short
time far exceeded my expectations. One circumstance I remarked
at this place was, that, at the particular sites alluded to before, more
fossils were found imbedded in the soft soil near the running stream
of water in the creek - than at Cowrie, having most probably been
long since washed down by the heavy rains and floods from the
banks, and left undisturbed. The collection obtained from this
creek is sent to you; and having pointed out to Mr. W. B. Tooth
the places where fossils might most likely be obtained, he has pro-
mised,to send me any he may be able -to procure. Thus in my brief
visit to Queensland I so far attained the object I had in view when
I left Sydney, not only to observe and judge for myself respecting
the localities where the fossil remains you have described had been
found (which I did not see, as no one at the station could identify
the sites), but observe for myself in what particular situations ad-
ditional fossils could most readily be found. This I did discover,
. and pointed out to others the areas most likely to yield them without
unnecessary fatigue and loss of time. In this I consider I have in
a great measure succeeded.


“ I took .with me to Queensland your memoir on Diprotodon, the
engravings of which excited the admiration'of all who saw them.
Many readily recognized several of the bones delineated, and ex-
pressed their surprise at the great accuracy with which they were
represented, even, as many remarked, to the ‘marks of age upon the
hones.’ The ‘ old bones ’ (by many considered useless, and thrown
away, or which, as some informed me, were broken to discover if
they were really bones or stones assuming their forms) they never
imagined could he so treated by palaeontologists, who they were not
aware possessed the power, until they saw these works, of depicting
the ancient race of Australian animals, re-forming them into living-
structures, imparting to these long extinct animals the motion of
animated life, and, as fossils bear the marks of their relative anti-
quity, are enabled to fix the date of the rook in which they are found.
I remain, my dear Owen,
Your sincere Friend,
“ Oboese Bennett, M.D.”
“ Sydney, New South Wales.
. “Dec. 22, 1871.”


.
, ’


