

A TRAVELLED ACTOR
TURNE R AND HENDERSON,
Booksellers and stationers,
IMPORTERS OF FANCY GOODS,
By Richmond Thatcher.
A PLAIN STATEMENT OF FACTS.
TO THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
WE believe that a firm adopting an original title for its place of business, had the exclusive and
the best possible right to it; but other houses, we suppose, destitute of originality, have
meanly chosen to APPROPRIATE the NAME OF OUR ESTABLISHMENT in Advertisements,
and actually as a Trade Mark. This, though a tribute to our success, is SO UNSCRUPULOUS
and. FLAGRANT an INJUSTICE to us that we believe the people of New South Wales will
mark their dissatisfaction by advising their friends NOT TO BE MISLED as to the position of the
ONLY and ORIGINAL PALACE EMPORIUM, HAYMARKET, SYDNEY.
And of the Firm which has served them long and well,
(SIGNED) ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS,
PALACE EMPORIUM,
HAYMARKET, N.S.W
PRICE SIXPENCE.
VISIT THE NEW PREMISES,
16 & 18 HUNTER STREET,
And select your Presents from the
Splendid Assortment of NOVELTIES.




Actoi
most
the VERY BEST OF EVERYTHING.
jydney.
Orting Men,
{ire now the
lupplied with
Cali and nee th<i Champion I
BOWDEN’S CLUB HOUSE HOTEL,
I
(9
Corner of CASTHEREAOH and HUNTER STREETS, SYDNEY,
f Within 20 yards of the Tramway Terminus.j
BILLIARDS. First-das* Wines,, Ates, and Spirits,
Superior Accommodation for Boarders. Terms, strictly moderate.
JOSEPH C. BOWDEN, Proprietor.
MASON BROTHERS.
MERCHANTS,
SPRING STREET, SYDNEY.
FOE
John Walker and Sons Old Highland Whiskey.
J. Sorin and Co’.s Brandies.
J. T. Gayen’s Schnapps, Geneva and Old Tom.
&e. &e. &c.


THE TRAVELLED ACTOR.
BY RICHMOND THATCHER.
“ What sights I would see, what a man I would he, if I had hut a thousand a
year ! ” says that unsophisticated yokel, Reuben Ruff, to his mentor, Gaffer-Grey,
who rebuked him, as we all know, and read him a lesson on the vanity of human
wishes. Reuben’s ideas of foreign travel were, no doubt, restricted to a trip to
the Continent, and a jaunt in a diligence, which was the accepted notion of
travelling afar in those days, when the qualification for the Travellers’ Club was
having made a journey five hundred miles in a direct line from England. Had
the aspiring chawbacon lived in our day, and possessed the gumption, he would
have sighed or studied to be a popular star actor. Then the world would be open
to him where to choose. The fast train, with Pullman’s luxurious lounges and
bed-chamber, the mighty ocean liner, the coach, the caravan, the palkee, would
have been at his command. Without his thousand a year—which would not,
now-a-days, be of much service to him—he could see sights,
From Greenland’s icy mountains
To India’s coral strands.
In the exercise of his profession he could traverse continents, cross oceans, and
pierce mountains, while the wonders of the world could be as familiar to him as
the lanes and fields,of his native village. “ Officially,” as Admiral Porter, K.C.8.,
observes, he could “ study the New Zealander, who is to moralize on the ruins of
London from the wreck of its chief bridge—play to the fierce Zulu, so lately at
issue with England’s ruler -as to the possession of his country; and take in
Australia, the western and eastern seaboards of America, the inland cities of that
continent and some parts of Egypt ; get a sight of Polynesia, and Hawaii, the
capital of the Kameahamas, within the year, and be back to his club —the Junior
Garrick—scarcely receiving more than the conventional salute from his fellow-
members—his absence would have been so comparatively brief ; no longer than
when he commenced acting he would have been away doing the Manchester
circuit. To prove that this is not supposition or romance, we can instance stars
who, well within the time mentioned, have fulfilled engagements in Adelaide,
Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane, in Australia, several towns in New Zealand,
including the particular portions whence Macaulay’s “Maori” must be drawn—
Honolulu—San Francisco, Chicago, New York, some towns in Canada, Cape
Town, and parts of South Africa, not omitting Petermaritzburg, now in possession
of the Boers, and, in addittion, have thrown in a night at Port Said, at the entrance
of the Red Sea, stayed a day in Fiji, and done a trip to Paris. What sights the
Travelled Actor, who is, perforce, an accomplished and observant gentleman, must
have seen during that twelve months! Let us accompany him from London
through merry England and its pleasantest portions, to Plymouth, where he will
find a palatial steamer, say of the Orient Line, waiting off the Hoe, or breakwater,
with steam up, ready to whisk him off. He will thus escape the Channel, but he •
must encounter the short roll and green seas of the Bay of Biscay. But with fair
luck, even this portion of the voyage will lose all terrors. In his ocean home, as
large and better populated than an English village—for he will have some six
hundred fellow-passengers, the crew included—he has princely quarters, and a
table not to be surpassed on shore at the best hotel; a clubroom; music saloon,


SYDNEYS
ABE THE MOST
CONVENIENT & ECONOMICAL HOTELS
IN THB CITY.
Single Bedroi
hy the weeh,
Or Set. uigHtly.
I MEALS AT ALL HOURS. |
A Liberal and Varied Bill of Fare
AT LOWEST BATES.
THE SPACIOUS REFRESHMENT ROOMS,
Together with READING BOOMS,
WITH THE LATEST NEWS OF THB WORLD.
BILLIARD ROOMS, with of ilcock’s super! Tables,
AND
CHESS. DRAUGHTS. & DOMINOES,
For those who love the quiet of these Games, all combine
to make the
COFFEE PALACES
Jl fcuvor'ite Bvervirtg {Resort.


where he can perform upon, or listen to, the organ and piano; a reading and
smoking room, where he has but to touch an electric bell and his wants are
supplied by means of a “ lift,” that realises the quick appearance of things
thought of in a fable ; a barber’s saloon; and every convenience ever devised.
Every day he can gratify his tastes for sport, for there are races and jumping
matches on a deck 150 yards long, and heavy “sweeps” upon the day’s run.
The night rarely passes without a ball, concert, or amateur performance, tiring of
which he may turn his attention to cards, or any game of chance known to mortal
man. Should he desire it, the chief engineer will show him the most complicated,
yet effective machinery ever invented—huge masses of metal of every shape,
revolving or plunging up and down, or athwart, or eccentrically, and driving, by
means of Brobdigazian cylinders and pistons, and hissing steam, a monster that
displaces nearly ten thousand tons of water; at a rate thought unattainable but a
few years ago. The captain, who, as a rule, is partial to travelled actors, will give
him an insight into the mysteries of navigation, and explain how, by reflecting
the sun on a piece of silvered glass, and calculating its movements and place in
the firmament, the exact position of the ship can be determined to a yard. From
the chief officer he can glean an idea of the management required to give an
account of a small army of men, each expected to fulfil the functions which
machinery imposes upon the works of a watch, or the component parts of an
engine. The purser, if agreeable, can explain his system of book-keeping, as
intricate as recording the transactions of a bank, and as infalliable. In fact, he
can glean interesting intelligence from all the heads of departments—the steward,
who marshals an array of seventy servants; the cook, who presides oyer an
insatiable furnace; the butcher, who keeps a fast diminishing farm-yard, and
slaughters more cattle and sheep than many London tradesmen in a good way of
business, not to mention scores of fowls, ducks, and turkeys. There are endless
matters for observation on board, not the least being the noblest study of mankind—
man—for human nature afloat develope its quaintest phases, and our Travelled
Actor can flirt, or scandalise, or engage in intrigues as profound, though not so
important, as ever itussian diplomatists conceive. All ibis, besides the wonders
of the firmament and the mighty ocean! Leaving Finisterre on the port-hand—for
he is going south—he may get a sight of the Cbast of Portugal off Lisbon ; the
Azores, or Western Islands—the great source of our (England’s) foreign fruit
supplies being on the other side, and encountering a mild trade that his floating
township laughs at and uses to keep its fires drawing, he will make St. Vincent if
the supply of coal seems in need of replenishment. The few hours he will get
ashore here will enable the Travelled Actor to enjoy a fairy-like scene in and
around Mindello and the Porto Grande, and cause some reluctance to encounter
the coming heat about the Line. However, the inconveniences of this part of the
pilgrimage are considerably reduced. His wardrobe—private, and not pro-
fessional—furnishes plenty of light clothing. There are awnings galore and
windsails everywhere, in his state-room port-hole included; all his beverages are
iced; and the nights in the Ashantee hammock, slung on the hurricance deck,
are far from unenjoyable. One consolation he will have, namely, that the vessel
is steaming out of the heat nearly 5° a day. The Cape de Verde left, he will
steer a course to skirt the Western Coast of Africa, and so get out of the influence
of the trades, and, perchance, he may get a distant sight of the great continent,
or even if the wind comes from the land, have a shower of red dust from the
desert. Nothing much, however, will be met with to relieve the monotony of
travel save what takes place on board till the Cape is reached, and the good ship
anchors under the glorious Table Mountains, rising perpendicularly in one
unbroken cliff for over three thousand feet. It matters not whether the cloth of
of cloud is laid or the huge mountain stands out in relief against the sapphire sky,
Table Mountain is always a glorious sight, and if the Travelled Actor be inclined,
and is a good climber, he can seek its summit, and see a gigantic panorama
beneath him. Presuming that our voyager is not going to the Diamond Fields,
or to Port Elizabeth, or Durban, or any of the towns in the South African circuit,
there is plenty to be seen. He can drive or ride to Heidelburg or Constantia, or


PUNCH’S HOTEL,
Punch’s Corner,
pm AMi mm smiira, mmm
F. FUN€M 9 Proprietor .
The most celebrated Hotel in the City, so long occupied by the
late lamented JAMES PUNCH.
The reputation of this Rendezvous and Hostelry is fully sustained by the
Proprietor, whose facilities for purchasing in the best markets enables him to
supply the very best of everything.
A PRIVATE BAR. BILLIARDS.
o
OLENMORE DAIRY,
RUSHCUTTERS’ BAY.
Pure Country MILK delivered at customers’ houses.
HOTELKEEPERS wanting eally good & pure MILK
SHOULD GIVE THEIR OHX3EXIS.
N.B, —Supplies the " Bulletin ” Hotel.
LESSEE, J. L, F. KEOGH.
THE ONLY HISTORIC HOUSE LEFT STANDING IN SYDNEY.
Scene of the Triumphs achieved by
And other Great Lights of the Profession.
FEWLY IR.EITOV.A.TIEID,
And possessing the Finest Seating Area of any house in the Australias.
Managers, Stars, and Speculators, should apply for Terms to
E. D. HAYGARTH.


round the. Lion’s Rump, and see in the town the most agreeably varied life and
different races to he met with anywhere, for the place is not to he eclipsed for
variety of people and costumes. There is a good theatre, too, at the Cape, and
Captain Disney Roebuck, the enterprising lessee, will be happy to give him an
engagement. Supposing him, however, to he bound for the Australias, he will
embark at the docks—built at enormous cost, after hundreds of vessels had been
lost through dragging from the anchorage in Table Bay—and passing the huge
breakwater, rejoin his ship, which will steam out and make well for the southward
to clear the Agulhas Bank, at the extremity of Africa. The next day, just as sure
as water boils when sufficiently heated, or the tax-collector calls when his time
comes, a westerly wind, which blows in those latitudes all the year round, will be
experienced, and the good Orient liner will plunge and roll before it, making,
with the difference in time for going East, some three hundred and thirty or forty
miles a day. The nights are cold now. The entertainments are given in the saloons,
and light clothing is discarded. The sea is mountainous, but the vessel is so large
and long that the motion is not unpleasant. Nothing is seen but wave and cloud,
and some immense albatross, and other sea fowl. Three weeks have passed
between England and the Cape, and eighteen more days elapse before Cape Borda
Light, on the western extremity of Kangaroo Island, that stands across St.
Vincent Gulf, where Adelaide is situated; is observed. Then up go
rockets, if it be night, which, seen at the lighthouse, announce that an Orient
liner has arrived, and the intelligence is flashed all over the Australias before
many hours elapse. The next morning, soon after daylight, the ship will steam up
along the coast of South Australia, and anchor off the Semaphore, where
launches will run her passengers ashore and trains take them on to Adelaide, one
of the cheeriest, handsomest, and most prosperous cities in the colonies, with its
main street choke full of noble and commodious buildings. Here the Travelled
Actor can, if of good reputation, get a short season at a theatre almost as large as,
and in no ways inferior to, any house in England or America (the Royal), and
there are “ the areas,” and many other places in the colony, where he can find
scope for his energies.
Though hot in midsummer, the climate of South Australia is delightful, while
its fertility, especially in the matter of wheat, and possession of copper and wool,
render the colonists, as a body, prosperous in a high degree. The surroundings,
too, and the views from the foothills are enchanting. Our friend, the actor,
having finished his season, and received criticisims —and let us hope encomiums—
from two really fine papers, the Tizer and Register , will make for the East. This
time he will take a coaster —one of the fastest little steamers afloat—and embark
at the port some seven miles from Adelaide, and go down a big sheet of water, the
estuary or river leading to the Gulf. Forty hours after getting through Backstairs-
passage, between Kangaroo Island and the mainland, will take him to Melbourne,
the capital of Victoria, thtrty-five miles up Hobson Bay, or Port Phillip, at the
entrance to which is the Rip, a turbulent and often dangerous swirl of water. Our
Travelled Actor will now be in a colony inhabited by a people yielding to none on
the face of the earth for independence, and the progress they have made in an
incredibly short space of time. Where forty years before, wild blacks and
kangaroos roamed on land declared uninhabitable, and abandoned by the Govern-
ment surveyors, stands Melbourne, the prince rather than the queen of the
Southern Hemisphere. Everything here is princely and magnificent; the streets,
the public buildings, churches, theatres, and stores. Everywhere about are the
evidences of wealth, enterprise, and order. Sandridge, the deep-water port, and
the river Yarra-Yarra leading to the city, teem with ships—huge warehouses rear
their fronts to the sky ; railways extend in all directions ; factories send up smoke
from a thousand chimneys, for the manufacturers are “ protected” by high import
duties. The chief theatre (the Royal) is not much smaller than the Drury Lane,
and the Town Hall is larger than the great Free Trade Hall in Manchester ; while
the churches, the Houses of Parliament, and other buildings are colossal. Here
the Travelled Actor will, if popular, net a fine income, for the public love sport as
well as play ; and 100,000 of them will gather to see their Cup run for. It would


iierne hi wmmmm mmm .
To Passengers desirous of avoiding the Heat and Discomfort
of the Red Sea.
OVERLAND ROUTE TO GREAT BRITAIN,
THROUGH AMERICA,
Under contract with the New South Wales and New Zealand Governments, 1881.
The magnificent steamships of this line, the CITY OF NEW YORK, ZEA-
LANDIA, CITY OF SYDNEY, and AUSTRALIA, leave Sydney every fourth
ihursday at 3 p.m.
THROUGH FARE TO LONDON—FIRST CLASS, £66 AND UPWARDS.
For rates of passage and freight, and all other information, apply to
GILCHRIST, WATT & CO., General Agents,
1 BENT STREET, SYDNEY.
fllteemltli ini «f ifiscs,.
Established 1869. Incorporated by Act of Parliament 1873.
CAPITAL (75,000 SHARES OF £4 EACH) £300,000.
BBSBBVE FTJJSrP - - £116,894.
HEAD OFFICE — GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
Directors—The Honorable Sir John Hay, K.C.M.G., Chairman, Henry Mort, Esq.,
Geo. S. Caird, Esq., The Honorable William Busby, M.L.C., The Honorable
Philip Gidley King, M.L.C. Manager—F. A. A. Wilson. Secretary—Hec-
tor Allen. Auditors—James Scroggie, Esq., and H. E- Cohen, Esq. Lon-
don Bankers —The National Provincial Bank of England. London Agency,
30, Great St. Helens—Director, Edward Chapman, Esq.; Agent, George JH.
Alexander, Esq. Branches : 587 George Street, Brickfield Hill —J. B. Mar-
key, Manager; Redfern—A. H. Hudson, Manager.
THE NEWCASTLE DIRECTORY
AND ALMANAC FOB 1882.
Now being compiled, and will bfe published by the end of December next.
Advertisers are requested to send in their favours, to the Newcastle Herald and
Advocate office, as early as possible, and also for our
CHRISTMAS SHEET ALMANAC,
THE NEWCASTLE MORNING HERALD
AND
MIKTER.S’ ADVOCATE,
The only paper reaching the whole of the Northumberland District.


take pages to tell of the wonders of this young giant amongst British possessions;
and our friend’s stay in the metropolis will be agreeable, for the suburbs are fine;
and when he goes to the provinces there is a grand field for enterprise in the
numerous up-country townships, on the gold fields, and in the agricultural
districts. From Melbourne he will still go east—this time in one of the A. S. N.
Co’s, fleet of steamers, to Sydney, and lucky he will be if the master be one
Clark, a paragon amongst “ skippers.” Skirting Wilson’s Promontory, he will go
north, fifty odd hours being an average passage to the capital of New South
Wales, to reach which he enters the lovliest paradise ever imagined. Port
Jackson, or Sydney Harbour—deep, and capacious enough to hold all the navies
of the world—studded with lovely islets, fringed with verdure of surpassing
beauty, its waters blue as Beckett's preparation, its skies serene, its villas
picturesque, and its bays near the city, which stretches along and around Darling
Harbour, full of ships ; Sydney Harbour need not fear comparison with Naples,
or any other place. On shored the bustle and prosperity of its sister cities to the
west are repeated, though Sydney, having been laid out before such matters were
understood, or such strides were anticipated, lacks Melbourne’s or Adelaide’s
symmetry; nor can it boast the former’s extensive trade and magnificence, t Still,
its buildings or those of recent structure, are palatial; its chief theatre is hand-
some and commodious, and all its institutions indicate progress and prosperity.
Here, again, our actor can command liberal patronage, and can go to the country
when his metropolitan season terminates. The chief provincial circuit lies over
ranges traversed by a railway—one of the wonders of engineering skill, and
affording views of surprising grandeur, while it opens up a country rich in coal,
iron, gold, grazing lands, and fertile plains, such as the Spies of old never saw.
From Sydney, our actor may run down to Hobart Town, in Tasmania, another
terrestial paradise, and so across to Lauceston in the north by railroad, everywhere
meeting with beauties of landscape that would shame Italy or Switzerland, and he
will probably go north to Brisbane, the capital of Queensland, a vast expanse of
land, boasting industries and resources unbounded, and possessed of, literally, all
the wealth of the Indies, and much of its climate and products. This part of his
journey will take in Rockhampton and the northern gold fields, which will make
him acquainted on his passage with the great Barrier Beefs, that skirt the eastern
coast of the continent. Queensland will finish our Travelled Actor’s Australian
travels, for he will not probably go west to Western Australia, which is too isolated
and too sparsely populated to attract his notice, and all he may see of this colony
will be when he takes the Peninsula and Oriental mail steamer for home, in
which case he will call for a few hours at King George’s Sound. But this time
we will suppose him to have engagements in America, and so accompany him on
board of a Pacific mail steamer, or one of the tmien Company’s fleet bound for
New Zealand. Presuming the first-named choice be made, our protege finds
himself on board a vessel little inferior to the one described at the outset of his
travels—in fact they claim to be more luxurious ; and, being built for speeding
over a summer sea, they possess great faculties for enabling the travellers to forget
the heat of the tropics. Some of those liners are American built and manned,
and some English, and their crews vie with each other in giving passengers the
most satisfation, though both sail under the same flag. We may expect a blow
now, for the coast of New Zealand is like that of the “ much vexed Bermoothes,”
and we are not sorry on the sixth day to sight the Three Kings, round the North
Cape, and steam inside the Great Barrier Island into the Hauraki Gulf, and so up
the Waitemata, the harbour of Auckland. If we were an inlet, we might exclaim :
“If we were not the Waitemata we would be Sydney harbour ! ” for both are
pretty well much of a muchness for beauty ; for if Port Jackson has deeper water,
and more nooks, and comers, and villas, and ships, the glades about the shores of
the Waitemata are greener, and the vegetation more luxurious. Oysters abound
on the rocks, and no lovelier pic-nic grounds could be wished for." Auckland is
in some respects a fine town, but since it ceased to be the seat of Government, and
the wars with the natives ended, it is somewhat dull. * It has, however, all the
institutions required by the Anglo-Saxon colonists, including a theatre that will
t Written a year ago.—E. T. * Ibid.


HENRY BILLS,
mm AW® AWIMAi S£At£W/
CIYiCTJLjIYi QUAY'.
Takes his own Birds from the Nest, Trains and Educates them, and Guarantees
satisfaction. Every kind of Native and Imported Birds, Monkeys, etc., etc.
N.B. —Bills supplied the Bulletin Menagerie, and refers the Public to Mr.
Richmond Thatcher.
PRIZE
WINES.
AWARDED
SILVER MEDALS
AT PARIS
FOR
HERMITAGE.
DINNER WINES 10s. per dozen.
SHIRAZ ) Fruity \ 1A _
MADEIRA j Wines / i4S * ” ”
BURGUNDY) Dry } 91fl
RIESLING y Wines S ”
AWARDED
SEVEN PRIZES,
SYDNEY
INTERNATIONAL,
&c., &c.
VIN ORDINAIRE
3s. 6d.
PER GALLON.
<
G. H. STEPHEN & GO.,
Wine Growers and Merchants,
13 Bridge Street.
FRUITY WINES
6s.
PER GALLON.
M. E. MEYERS,
(BMMMIP W, IMQIMm a IDIMn,
By Special Appointment to H.R.H. the Duke of
Edinburgh, &c., &c.
MCCOY S CHAMBERS,
16 PARK STREET.
: o :
Addresses Illuminated unsurpassed for Designs and Execution. Specimens on
view.
TERMS—MODERATE.


hold £125 ; and anything new that our friend, the travelling star, brings is sure
to be appreciated. The beauties of Auckland do not end with the harbour, which
boasts the romantic Island of Kauau, the property of Sir George Grey, from
whence the Maori prisoners escaped. New Zealand is only nine miles wide here,
and we can driye to the Manakau, and even play a night or two at Onehunga, the
township there. Then there file Otahuhu and Drury, and lots of lovely spots to
visit; and Auckland is a pretty town itself, the Maories frequenting the streets
with their wares, giving the place a romantic tinge. Our friend from here may go
down to the Thames Gold Fields or to Coramandel, in the Gulf ; and, presuming
that he can wait over a month, or say two or three, there is, stretching south,
twelve hundred miles of country, possessing thriving cities and townships, that
can support opera companies with expenses amounting to £5OO a week. Going
south by the east coast, he can play Tauranga, where the native Maori is seen in
his most primitive state; and Poverty Bay (Gisborne), the scene of the massacre
by Te Witi, who left scarcely a white to tell the tale after his escape from
Chatham Island, for both these places have dramatic halls. About here (Tauranga)
are the famous hot springs, to which the Geysers of Europe are not fit to be
compared. After Gisborne comes Napier, a considerable place and province, and
after that we enter Cook’s Straits, and reach Wellington, the capital of the colony,
being very lucky if we don’t get a gale off Terawiti, the bluff at the entrance to
the harbour (Port Nicholson). However, the Union Company have staunch and
swift steamers, and he will be little inconvenienced. Wellington is the Agram of
Polynesia; and the inhabitants affect wood instead of stone for buildings, and
boast the largest building of the latter material in the world. It is a fine city, and
has a good theatre, though its splendid Opera House was burnt down lately. The
site of Wellington was chiefly reclaimed from the sea, and none but the actual
witness can imagine what progress has been made in twenty years. Still keeping
the east coast after coming back through the Straits, our actor will call next at
Christchurch, another Aladdin-like city that has sprung up almost in two decades.
Christchurch, seven miles from Lyttelton, reached by a railway, a mile of which
goes through a solid hill of rock, is surrounded by some of the finest agricultural
and pastoral country in the world. To the south of Christchurch are the Plains
of Canterbury, where one man, in more instances than one, shears a million of
sheep, and there are arable plains hundreds of miles in extent fit for the plough
without a bit of clearing to be done. Below Christchurch, reached by land or
sea, are Omaru and Timaru, two good, prosperous show towns, and then comes
Dunedin, a marvel of enterprise, transformed since the first gold rush of 1861 into
a city of palaces. By rail and coach the Travelled Actor can visit scores of places
that have sprung up under the auspices of mining and agriculture ; and when he
is ready, the boat or train will take him to Southland, and its capital, Invercargill,
which boasts a good theatre and several halls. All along this coast grand and
majestic scenery is met with, but it must pale its ineffectual fires before that of
the West Coast, where, by going through Poveaux Straits, we can see Milton, or
Milford Sound, the ne plus ultra of majesty and magnificence, and call in at
Hokitiki, one of a score of gold fields in Westland; catching a sight of Mount
Cook, over 13,000 feet high, and so up to Nelson, the sleepy hollow of the colony,
albeit a charming township, choke full of pretty walks and drives, and all that is
soothing. Next he will make Taranaki, under the most majestic of all conical
mountains, Mount Egmont, over 8,000 feet in height, and as symmetrical as a
sugar loaf; and so to the Manakau, and over to Auckland, where the Pacific
mailboat will be again at his service, and he will be ready to leave these wonderful
new homes of Englishmen, which are among the brightest jewels in England’s
crown ; being for climate, variety and beauty of scenery, as well as the energy and
love of order of the colonists, without parallel on the globe or in the world’s
history. The Travelled Actor will be ungrateful and wanting in appreciation if
he does not leave Auckland’s lovely harbour with a sigh, though he is bound for
the vast continent which Russell lauded so highly as the “ Land of the West; ”
but before he has passed Cape Colville he will have settled things in his berth, get
his billet from the purser at mess, and be prepared for the enjoyment of one of


TTii FBMM,
Sydney’s best Barber has got a Saloon,
With nice easy chairs, in a well furnished room,
Across from the ROYAL this Figaro dwells,
Twix the METROP’ and BULLETIN, well known hotels.
He is a Shaver so easy; his Razors are keen;
His style of Hair Dressing—the best. ever seen ;
Your custom, if given, he’s bound to retain,
For you’re certain to call upon A T.T.T!ivr again.
THOMAS ALLEN, Hairdresser, fee,
Castlereagh Street,
BIARIT OWOBIITI TOIAVIB
.A.. SHADLBE,
73 HUNTER ST., SYDNEY,
w. mtm,
ANE
LIVERPOOL ROAD, ASHFIELD.
-IMttao
ill 1 Ittlilßi
(LATE HOLLAND), "
BILL POSTER
To all the Theatres & leading Busings Houses in the City,
m mmmm
Opposite Barrack Street, SYDNEY.
Men can be engaged to carry Boards through the City and Suburbs.
ESTABI.ISHED 30 YEARS.


the pleasantest passages in his round of globe-trotting. A few years ago he would
have made a call at Levuka, the capital of Fiji, or Kandavu, an island in the
group, but the subsidisers of the mail contract soon got tired of that dangerous
detour , and he will steer a a course north, for Honolulu, on the other side of the
Line. Blue skies, smooth seas, an occasional sight of a sail, or “an island of the
blest” in the South Pacific, are all the outside detraction from the monotony of a
fortnight’s steaming to Hawaii, in the Sandwich Islands, but on board he will
find plenty to relieve him from ennui, and if he cares for the dolce far niente pure
and simple, he can be suited. His saloon, fitted with Pullman seats, his stretch
of upper deck as big as a cricket field, the shaded alley-ways and capacious
quarter deck, offer every facility for lounging or sport, and he can assist in the
production of newspaper, get up “ sweeps,” or matches at athletic sports, and join
in the inevitable hilarity. In a very few days, however, he will catch it hot, and
find “ Old Sol ” over head; but with ice, and shade, and windsails, the incon-
venience is reduced to a minimum. On the fifteenth day, if he does not meet
with a breakdown, the realms of King Kalakua will heave in sight, and be
regarded with much interest, and a twelve-knot-an-hour speed will soon bring him
under Kalea, the celebrated volcanic mountain. The vessel steams round a
sand-spit, and there are all the glories of a tropical island; banana and cocoa-nut
groves, sugar plantations, native villages, and the picturesque town of Honolulu,
the “ true valley of rest,” such as Dr. Johnson pictures in “ Easselas.” If it be
night when the ship goes alongside the wharf, and on the right side of twelve, the
inhabitants will all be found up dancing or listening to the music of the King’s
Band, or that of a man-of-war. Honolulu eclipses Naples for the far niente
business, and, in some respects, for scenery beats both Naples and Sydney; for no
one who have ever seen the flora of these • islands can allow a landscape to be
perfect without the graceful wave of the cocoanut and the banana-tree, and the
indescribable hue inside a coral reef. After a breakfast at the Hawaiian Hotel, in
which boiled or fried bananas and fruits of all descriptions are conspicuous, our
traveller will hire a carriage, driven by a Sandwich Islander, and go across the
island to the Pali, where there is a huge precipice, over which one of the
Kamehameas drove his foes on to a plain thousands of feet beneath, where now,
as far as the eye can reach, plantations, backed by water like the liquid depths of
a professional beauty’s eye, are seen. The wonders and delights of that drive defy
description. There are, besides the foliage referred to; kanakas, the women
riding straddle-legged in “ baggy breeks ” that actually make the process look
graceful; waterfalls, mountains, pretty churches, elaborately decorated graveyards,
and the most wonderful flowers, and orange groves. Then in the town one can
shake hands, on very small provocation, with the King, and promenade the
grounds of the public domain and listen to his native band—an excellent one
indeed. Except on the wharf, where hundreds of coolies are carrying coals and sugar
in mats and huge bunches of bananas, there is nothing in Honolulu suggestive of
that ugly curse imposed on Adam and bequeathed to his descendants, namely, work.
There are shops and stores and warehouses, but one would expect to see in them
bits of china and brick, and such things as the children play with. There is a
curious Chinese quarter, too, worth a visit; but the initiated know that further
on, at San Francisco, we shall see John much as he is in Canton and Shanghai.
Another week at sea and the high land of the western coast of North America
will gladden the eyes of the pilgrim, who steams through the golden gate leading
to what the Yankees call “ God’s country.” From the harbour, San Francisco is
not an inspiring sight, though the huge Palace Hotel looms out and the wharves
are terrifically big. On landing, however, one is soon aware that the place lies
over everything in every way. There are the biggest hotels, the biggest theatres,
the biggest blowers,* the biggest everything else in San Francisco. Here our friend
the travelled or travelling actor can do the best or the worst business in the world ;
but if he be lucky, he will probably thoroughly enjoy himself. He will be asked,
How he likes our climate,” and whether he has “ seen our seals ” a thousand
times a day, and will drive out to view the later lions of ’Frisco snorting on the
rocks at Cliff House, some nine miles off, taking in the other “ lions,” the Lone
*(I don’t allude to Tom M’Kay, the General Agent for the Burlington and Quincy Railroad.)


VIG ORINE
A Delicious, Sparkling, and Invigorating Drink,
Which, as its name implies, is a Life-giving Beverage, and contains in an easily
assimilable form the essential constituents of the
Handsomely put up in pint and quart champagne bottles, and is (par excellence,)
the Beverage
For Balls, Bionics, Fetes, Banquets, and all
festive occasions.
“It is an elegant preparaticfh, and will no doubt be much in demand in cases
where alcoholic stimulants would be prejudicial.”— The Chemist and Druggist.
“ Brilliant and clear, of rich colour, a delicate aroma and delicious taste, the
sparkling “ Yigorine ” will doubtless be highly appreciated by all teatotallers, as
well as by the public generally.” —The Temperance News.
“The drink will doubtless make a welcome addition to the list of non-alcoholic
beverages.”— The Age.
“ It is a very pleasant beverage.”— Daily Telegraph.
Hi Hill TISSUES,
Over 120,000 have already been sold.
UVVENTOK «Sc
FROFRIETOB
S. ROWLANDS,
Mineral Ijiatcr and jjordial Manufacturer,
DANA STREET, BALLARAT,
AND
I
MELBOURNE.
WHOLESALE & RETAIL AGENTS—
The Sydney Coffee Palace Hotel Company, Limited.


Mountain Cemetry,the residence of the Bonanza Kings, and the Park, on the way.
He will, of course, stop at the Palace Hotel, with its thousand elegant rooms, its
wonderful lifts, and score of indescribable marvels. He will make the acquaint-
ance of Peter Beam, Tom McKay and other railway agents, the most splendid and
agreeable fellows in the world. He will see Kearney and Market Streets after the
Saturday matinees, full of gorgeously-dressed and highly-enamelled women in
Parisian costumes and Cape diamonds, There are are plenty of things to be seen
in ’Frisco, and when his season is up he can go to Carson or Yirginia City and
put in a few weeks, and if he likes, run down south by the Southern Pacific Rail-
way to British Columbia and the famous Yosemite. In due course he will prepare
for the seven day’s journey east, 3,000 miles to New York, and take the cars,
armed with a ticket about a yard long. It is a wonderful week’s travel across the
continent; over the Sierra Nevadas and Rocky Mountains, past the much over-
rated but still enjoyable scenery that railroad agents have made us so familiar
with by means of pictures, the Holden Horn, the Devil’s Slide, the American
River and the Canyons, and he will go over the Alkai Plains, and get his eyes and
ears full of beastly dust, and see, perhaps, a few antelopes and deer or a biron, if
he be lucky. And maybe he will get out at Ogden and run down to Utah, and,
perchance, play to the elders in the pretty and commodious theatre there. But
won’t he be glad to get to the Council Bluffs and Omaha, 2,000 miles from
’Frisco, and have a dining-car put on to his train! The travelling star will
hardly pass Chicago without playing in one of the palatial theatres ; but we will
picture him going on east to New York by the Burlington and Quincy, Michigan
Central, North-Western (through part of Canada, and in sight of the Niagara Falls)
and Erie lines, the last day’s journey down the Susquehana being simply grand, and
so to the great city. In New York, of course, he will see more splendour than
comfort, and admire the great Brooklyn Bridge, the Greenwood Cemetery, Henry
Ward Beecher, Doran and Sohfer’s (where he can get oysters cooked in a score of
ways), the Central Park, the lager dives, the life assurance and newspaper oflices,
and dead heaps of other things ; and supposing him bound home, he will take a
White Star Liner, and scud post-haste across the Atlantic to Liverpool, joining in
the “ pools ” and “ sweeps,” and keeping up the fun with the swell “ drummers ”
and other passengers. This time he has gone from Australia by the Pacific route,
but if he has not engagements in America he will take the Peninsular and Oriental
Line from Glenelg, near Adelaide, and call at the queer little village of Albany,
King George’s Sound. Some travelled actors have gone across the dreary sterile
wastes between Albany and Perth, the capital of Western Australia. The writer
of this has done so, and deserves a thousand pounds for making that awful
journey. Western Australia, though small—the population of the colony is not
much over 20,000 —is not a bad sort of place, and there are good halls in Perth and
Freemantle and show-rooms in York, Toodyay, Bunbury, the Yasse, and other
towns. However, being bound through, our traveller will steam away for the
Indian Ocean and the Red Sea, sighting Cape Guardafui at the entrance of the
latter. Then come Aden and Suez, with the curio vendors, donkey drivers, and
other thieves, and after that the Canal, with its awful monotony and heat, that
make death something to be yearned for. Should our travelling actor have time,
he will, of course, run over to Alexandria and Cairo, and see the pyramids, and
broken-nosed, but still majestic, Sphynx, and be robbed and lied to by the sheiks.
In all probability, however, our friend will go by the canal, and have a jolly day
ashore at Port Said, on the borders of the Mediterranean, a place th at owes its
raison d'etre to the cutting of the canal, and harbours thirty thousand all-fired
gamblers, Jew traders, Arab cut-throats, and other nice characters. There are a
cafi chantant with a female band, a Mahommeddan mosque, an Arab, and a Greek
town, and any amount of such institutions here, and spirits are sixpence a bottle;
while greater temptations exist to buy things one does not require than anywhere
else in the universe. It is a treat to get into the Mediterranean and know what it
is to be cool; and the three or four days brings one to Italy —to Yenice, if the
line be the Peninsular and Oriental; or Naples, if we are on board of an Orient
steamer. In either case there are a million marvels to be seen and admired ; and,


THE BEST TEBMINATION TO A TREAT ATiTHE PLAY
IS AN
OYSTER SUPPER
AT
EMERSON’S PALATIAL SALOON,
KING STREET,
NEAR THE THEATRE ROYAL STALL’S ENTRANCE.
Suppers of all kinds. Luncheons. Game in Season and Every Delicacy.
Emerson’s Oysters stand alone for Flavour.
DUBLIN ! ! DUBLIN 2 ! 2
TTa,m and Eggs, Ham and Eggs, 6d., 6d. Nothing in New South Wales to come up to it. The
DUBLIN MAN’S HOTEL, 635 George Street, Haymarket, where the best Beers and Liquors are
served only. A free luncheon over the bar from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m, and from 8 p.m. to 12 midnight.
The best meals only fid. You can have Eggs and Bacon, fid; Ham and Eggs, 6d. One trial will
prove the fact.—Entrance right through the bar to the dining-room. Bottle of English Ale, 9d ;
Boar’s Head Porter, (large stone bottles) Is.; large Schnapps, 3s. 6d.—Everything in the trade at
low prices.
Private Room for Ladies and Gentlemen upstairs. Luncheon from 10 to 1 a.m., and Bto 12 p.m.
Remember t Make no mistake ! I intend to sell the very best Article at the very lowest figure.
Dozens and half-dozens of Wines, Beer, or Porter sent round by cart to families, for cash only.
Quart bottle of Sherry, 2s. fid.; the very Best Red Wines, 2s. {quart bottle); Cask of English Ale,
containing 4 dozen quarts, £llos. Liberal allowance to wholesale buyers, in and out of bond.
Don’t forget the cheapest place for half-chests of Tea; also in small and large quantities. Ham
and Eggs, Bacon and Eggs, Cup of Tea or Coffee only fid. During the week and until further
notice, will be presented a Burletta in one act called
HOW SHALL I DINE ? Or, If You Like It, Lunch It!
The Characters by the full strength of the Company.
Every evening at six o’clock, the Celebrated Farce entitled
TEA AAUID TUiRAtsT OUT.
ADMISSION SIXPENCE.
Remember the DUBLIN MAN’S HOTEL, 635 George St., Haymarket.
FREDERICK EAMMON,
mommm, wake & clock mm,
AND
MANUFACTURING JEWELLER,
126 KIHG STREET, SYDNEY.
Agent for James Hammon cmd Sons, London.


if tired of sea travelling, one can take train for England. It is expensive,
however, and by remaining on board we are soon taken through the Gut of
Gibralter, and past Spain and France, to Plymouth, or Southampton. This is but
a brief resume of what a travelled actor sees during his professional career, and it
does not take in more than a small percentage of sights and institutions he meets
with. As a rule he is a gentleman and man of observation, and enjoys peculiar
facilities for indulging his love for acquiring information. His society is
courted, and folks vie with one another in showing him attentions, and making
him acquainted with any phemomena or beauty of the district he happens to visit,
while his remuneration, if he be popular, is princely, Still it is not at all “ beer
and skittles” with the star. He must study hard and undergo much before he
reaches the top rungs of the ladder of fame, and during his travels endure many
fatigues and hardships. The labour, too, of a whole night’s performance is more
arduous than many people would imagine, and the sight of a star at the wings
after the exit, or in the hands of his dresser, would choke off many an aspirant for
Thespian honours.
The foregoing meagre description of a travelled actor’s experience was written
in order to introduce Mr. Alfred Dampier, a gentleman who had practically
undertaken the journeys detailed, and is probably the most travelled actor in the
world. Since starting for Australia, under engagement to Messrs. Coppin and
Co., for the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, in 1873, Mr. Dampier had visited
England twice, New Zealand, Hawaii, America, Can da, Egypt, Italy, and other
countries, and is now about to make a third tour of the world via South Africa,
and it will be interesting to learn how he climbed the ladder of fame. We, there-
give a short of biography of
Mr. Alfred Dampier.
Mr. Dampier is 35 years of age, and at a very early period in life became a
member of the Ellistonian Dramatic Club, of London. His first appearance on
any stage was in the Gem Theatre, Catherine Street, Strand, as Lcifio in the time-
honoured play of “ Isabelle,” The play is not known now, save to readers of
extinct dramas; and the temporary refuge of Thespis, the Gem, is likewise no
more, being occupied by the building where the paper is printed, which street
arabs call “The Yekko.” After that Mr. Dampier followed the bent of his
inclination and went circuit, “ when acting was acting my boy,” and before the
star system by which he has since profitted so much, spoiled the rosy game of
circuit favourites and managers. He started out with Messrs. Jackman and
Morgan, on the Northampton circuit, and played responsible business for them in
the birth-place of his great Master, Stratford-upon-Avon, and elsewhere. In
1863 the Ellistonians gave a performance at Saddler’s Wells, the piece being
“ Love’s Sacrifice,” and Mr. Dampier was cast for Matthew Elmore. The London
Press of the period contains a glowing acconnt of the grace and fire and pathos of
the young actor. Following up his metropolitan success as an amateur, Mr.
Dampier went to the provinces with his hands strengthened, and as an accepted
actor of merit, and promise, and during his travels—which extended pretty well
all over England—he formed the acquaintance and won the esteem of the
brightest lights of his profession. In 1873—being then only 27 years of age * —Mr.
Harwood, the manager of the Old Drury, of Australia, visited England on behalf
of his partners, to select a leading man and stage manager for the Theatre Royal,
Melbourne, and after due deliberation and weighing of advice, including that of
Madame Celeste, selected Mr. Dampier for the position. Our hero was then at the
Theatre Royal, Manchester, and before he sailed he was the recipient of a God-
speed, that for success and brilliance has not. been eclipsed in the “ second city of
England.” On his last appearance the piece was “Romeo and Juliet, Miss
Wallis being the heroine, and Mr. John Ryder, Friar Lawrence —Mr. Dampier
playing Mercutio.
Before this, Mr. Dampier had married Katherine Alice, the daughter of T. H.
Russell, Esq., a Royal Academician, of the Holle’s Great Bar, near Birmingham,
who had presented him with two daughters, and the “.family” left with Mr.
Dampier in Messrs. Money, Wigram and Co.’s “ Suffolk.”
*Mr. Dampier, not Mr. Harwood.


COT THIS OUT, IT MAY SAVE YOUR LIFE I
mm
I Ilf IB!
Boschee’s teaaa Syrup!
Has the Largest Sale of any Patent Medicine in the 'World.
Every Man, Woman cf Child should Buy Them, Try Them, Use Them.
GREEN’S AUGUST FLOWER
Will'cure you of Dyspepsia, Liver Complaint, Sour Stomach, Sick Head-
ache, Costiveness,-Nausea, and all Diseases caused by Indigestion.
Sample Bottles to try, 6d. ; large size, 3s. 6d. Try it and
you will be convinced in its wonderful virtues.
BOSGHEE’S GERMAN SYRUP
Will cure you of Consumption, Coughs, Colds, Pneumonia, Hemorrhage
of the Lungs, Whooping Cough, Asthma, Bronchitis, Pleurisy, and
all complaints of a Pulmonary nature. Samples to try
sold at the low price of 6d. ; regular size, 3s. 6d.
Ask your Chemist to give you a copy of “ Green’s Pictorial
Almanac,” free. The above Medicines may be had
from all Chemists and Druggists throughout
the Colonies.
WM«l© fej ILUOTT 8808., Sjdwy & Briibau,
SOLE WHOLESALE AGENTS,
Who will supply the Trade with Glass Signs, Almanacs, and all hinds of
Advertising Matter free.
Kempthorne & Prosser, Dunedin, N.Z-; Rocke, Tompsitt & Co.,
Melbourne ; A. M. Beckford & Sons, Adelaide.


5£
&
Law ! she were terrible
bad, surely, and if it
had’nt been for
Wizard Oil
she’d have gone off,
poor thing.
JACKSON & MORTON, Tailors & Mercers,
102 KING STREET, SYDNEY.
IHP Parties in the Country desiring perfect fits in garments, without visiting
town, should send for J. & M.’s Self Measurement Card.
Mr. Dampier’s reign at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, was a memorable one,
and under his stage direction, Ristori, Janauscheck, Mrs. Scott-Siddons, and
many other stars made the acquaintance of Victorian playgoers. At the termina-
tion of his engagement, Mr. Dampier, who, at intervals, notably at pantomime
time, had, in the interests of the Royal management, visited the principal centres
of population in the colony, started on a starring tour, and visited New Zealand
where his tiny daughters, who inherit in no small degree their father’s histrionic
abilities, made their debut.
Mr. Dampier’s departure from Melbourne was marked by an enthusiasm
unknown in connection with the colonial stage from the time of Brooke. At the
movement made to recognise the ability and genius he had brought to bear upon
the management of the chief theatre in Australasia, names for the executive
committee poured in from all sources—those of judges, statesmen, doctors,
lawyers, and the representative men of all classes ; the press being
conspicuously prominent. The presentations were numerous and costly; while
the address, drawn up and read publicly on the stage upon the occasion
of the farewell benefit, would have been rank flattery were it not so
truthful and genuine. After this, as we have said, Mr. Dampier started on
his travels, and won golden opinions everywhere he went. He travelled in New
Zealand, meeting with experiences that, detailed, would read like a romance.
Then he went to Sydney, intending to stay for a fortnight, and played four
months. His “Hamlet” led to a discussion on the colour of the Prince’s hair,
that in the press took precedence of politics and everything else. Melbourne
followed, and the idol of the public there was well rewarded for his engagement.
After a season in Adelaide, Mr. Dampier went to America, and all through the
Union won from the press and public, enconiums that, bestowed upon a young
and—in that continent—unknown man, were triumphs. In New York he met
Mr. Habberton, the author of “ Helen’s Babies,” who vowed that Mr. Dampier’s
children realised his conception of those tiny torments Budge and Toddie to the
life. After playing in America and Canada, Mr. Dampier crossed the Atlantic
and made a short stay in England late in the year 1880, and followed Mr. Creswick
at the Surrey Theatre. His professional London debut was in the quadruple
characters in “The Royal Pardon,” a drama by Pettitt and Conquest, and though
by no means calculated to evoke his full powers or test his capabilities, he won an
instantaneous and universal success. The notices of the London press, were with-
out a single exception, not only favourable but fervid, and general regret was
expressed that the reign of pantomime precluded him from continuing his
metropolitan career either at the Surrey or some north-side Theatre.


SEND FOR PRICE LIST AND SAVE MONEY.
WASHINGTON H. SOUL,
Patent Medicine, Druggists’ Sundries, and Perfumery Depot,
17V PITT STREET,
EVERY ARTICLE GUARANTEED GENUINE.
Pills, cough mixtures and lozenges, oils, embrocations, sarsaparilla, blood mix-
ture and purifiers, worm medicines, cooling draughts and powders, including
remedies for the
CURE AND ALLEVIATION OF ALL COMPLAINTS
of the stomach liver, lungs, kidneys, bowels, eyes, teeth, hair, skin, &c., compris-
ing consumption in its early stages, asthma, bronchial affections, nervous debility,
indigestion and dyspepsia, constipation, diarrhoea, piles, gout, sciatica, rheuma-
tism, ringworm, and all other skin diseases arising from whatever, cause. Also
enemas and syringes of all kinds, breast-relievers and other appliances. Pood of all
kinds for infants and invalids. Feeding bottles and fumigators, and other goods for
either the nursery or sick room, besides articles of everyday use in the household, at
LONDON AND NEW YORK PRICES.
N.B.—ALL GOODS FOR THE TOILET, AND OF ALL MAKERS.
SEJ/D FOR PRICE LIST, FREE.
Goods carefully packed, and forwarded by railway, steamboat, or coach, to all
parts of the colony; or to any port in Queensland, Tasmania, Yiotoria, New
Zealand, or Fiji. Three pounds’ worth, carriage free ; one pound's worth to any
of the suburbs of Sydney, or by steamer to Newcastle or Morpeth, carriage free.
WASHINGTON JET. SOUL ,
177, Late 221, PITT STREET, Next PUNCH’S HOTEL.
Close at 7 o’clock ; Saturdays at 10 o’clock.
ALL USE IT. IT IS AT EVERY PICNIC.
IT IS IN EVERY KITCHEN.
It gives the finish to every dish, for gravies, soups, game, fish, or cold meats. It
assists digestion and increases the appetite. It has a place at Government House,
and is seen at every respectable artizan’s. The protectionists use it because it is
colonial, the free-trader because it is cheap. It is the especial favorite with all
classes because, as one of the Sydney clergymen wrote, “ It is the best yet made.”
It is the
AUSTKALIAN RELISH,
Made fty WASHINGTON H. SOUL., 221 Pitt Street,
And sold by every storekeeper. Price, one shilling.
THE AUSTHALIAKT relish
Possessing the most delicious flavour for fish, game, wild fowls, curries, gravies, cutlets, steaks,
chops, and roast meats.
PATRONISED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR AND LADY ROBINSON.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
The 1 following extracts have been selected from letters received to this date, and the manufac-
turer respectfully solicits the patronage of the general public of the Australian colonies.
From His Excellency the Governor and Lady Robinson. —“ lam directed by His Excellency the
Governor and Lady Robinson to return you many thanks for your kind present of six bottles of the
Australian Relish, and lam further directed to say that they consider it most excellent. They in-
tend to use it regularly at Government House, and to recomjnend it to others.”
From T. S. Mort, Esq. —“ I like your Australian Relish much, for whilst it is a gentle spur to
the appetite, it does not appear to have anything in it likely to do harm to the stomach.”
From a well-known Clergyman in Sydney.—“ I think lam acquainted with all sauces, but your
Australian Relish is, in my judgment, the very best yet produced, and is quite distinctive in character.”
Sold retail by all grocers and storekeepers throughout the Australasian colonies, and wholesale by
all wholesale houses and the Manufacturer,
WASHINGTON H. SOUL, 221 Pitt-street.


ADDENDUM.
I wrote the foregoing for Mr. Jackson, of Mitre Court, Fleet-street, London,
publisher and proprietor of The Fireside Companion, a journal of very large circula-
tion ; at a time when I used almost daily to enjoy the society of the subject of the
sketch and his estimable family. I shall always look back to those days of plea-
sant companionship spent with Mr. Dampier, his wife, and their two clever and
amiable little girls, Lily and Rose, as the pleasantest of my recent sojourn in the
old country. Alfred had then a star engagement at the Surry Theatre, and I
frequently accompanied him and Mrs. Dampier to that old historic house, which,
during the engagement, did a business it had not seen for many months, and after
a pleasant yarn in the dressing room, which invariably carried us back to “ dear
old Australia,” and, on my part, a stroll round by Spurgeon’s Tabernacle, and the
many other places of interest in the locality, we would take conveyance back to
King’s Cross, where both of us lived. The hours, spent in that home circle, of
which I was privileged to be as one of the family were delightful. A smoke, a
drop of the cratur, a crack about old times, during which we often wondered
what Australian friends were doing, an interchange of opinions as to the respec-
tive merits of that country and England and America as places of residence, a
hearty shake of the hand and fervent “ good night,” were the chief features of the
entertainment, but we were strangers in a foreign country; we English all by
birth, yet Australian in association and longing, and consequently we got lots of
comfort from the attrition of minds that regarded absence from the colonies as
exile.
With Mr. Dampier I met numbers of London celebrities, and I never knew a
man make a better impression than he, while the press, without exception, was
warm in its praise—a great thing for London, considering that the whole of the
notices were accorded spontaneously and without the slightest soliciting or
Kootooing. The one universal wish of the London critics was that Mr. Dampier
should be seen in a more legitimate piece and in a Middlesex side theatre.
It was a pleasure to get the morning and weekly papers and see the forcible
impression my friend created.
Thus I would read in
“The Daily Telegraph.”
“ Mr. Dampier, with powerful voice, expressive features, good figure, and an
evident knowledge of all the business of the stage, speedily gained the favorable
opinion of the very numerous and enthusiastic audience assembled.”
This is praise indeed, coming from the Hubert Stanley of all London papers,
for the Telegraph carries more weight than any of its contemporaries ; the Times
not excepted.
“ The Era”
criticised the performance at great length, and its notices are more sought after by
professional people than those of any other journal. It said, “ The great attrac-
tion of the night was the first appearance of the popular Australian actor, Mr.
Alfred Dampier, who speedily succeeded in justifying the reputation he has won
in the colonies. ”
“ There cannot be a doubt that he is an actor of great merit, and we feel con-
vinced of what we saw of him last night, that his Colonial friends only did him
justice in their cordial commendation.”
The notice throughout was full of praise.
“ The Referee,”
said, “ Mr. Alfred Dampier has made a hit at the Surry.”
“ The Critic.”
“Mr. Dampier’s ability shines out remarkably. His greatest hit was as Victor
Mouchard, and that was simply perfection.”


XITSXJI&-A.ITCE COXXFyvXTY-
JT Ire, Life and Annuities
UNLIMITED LIABILITY. Assured incur no liability of partnership. The
only Company which has protected the rights of the Assured in all the Colonies.
ASSETS
Capital Paid up £245,640
Life Reserve 3,174,303
Fire Reserves 1,500,000
Other Funds 1,257,442
Balance Profit and Loss 144,580
£6, 321,065
FIRE LOSSES paid ll gtralia, £611,346.
Insurance against loss by Hush Fires and Gas Explosions.
HEAD OFFICE FOR ATTSTR AT.TA
62 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
M. "W. S. CLARK, Res. Secretary.
D. 0’ CONNOR,
Family and Shipping Butcher
WILLIAM STREET,
Supplies the Principal Restaurants & Hotels.
The Licensed Victualler’s Gazette
AND
Sportsman’s Guide to N, S. Wales.
Started October 22nd, 1881.
The recognised organ of the Trade, edited and Conducted by the best
writers in the Colony. Sub-Editor EIOHMOND THATCHER, Price 3d.
R. KINNEAR BROWN, Proprietor.


“European Mail.”
“Following the example of Mr. Irving and Mr. Booth ; won golden opinions.”
“ Lloyd’s Weekly.”
“ From first to last he had the sympathy of the audience.”
“Sunday Times.”
“ Mr. Dampier acted with a force and breadth of style.”
“The Critic.”
“ Dagobert is splendidly played by Mr. Dampier.”
“ Anglo-Australian ” in the
“Eubopean Mail.”
“ I look to hear of his making a great name in London.”
“Fact.”
“ There are only three actors now playing in London who can be placed in
the same category with Mr. Alfred Dampier—Messrs. Irving, Booth, and Charles
Warner.”
“The Daily Teleobaph.”
“ The force of his acting always intelligent, won for him the most enthusi-
astic applause of a thoroughly sympathetic auditory.”
“Lloyd’s Weekly”
declared “ the mingling of pathos and humor superb.”
The writer of
“ York House Papers ”
declared him “ a sound, first rate actor.’ ’
“ Reynolds’ Newspaper.”
“ The impersonations were full of spirit and thoroughly well rendered.”
“The Morning Post.”
“ The success of of the drama depended upon Mr. Dampier, who is likely to
be a favorite. He was called before the curtain and enthusiastically cheered.”
“ The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News.”
“ He is a good actor ”
“The Sportsman.”
Mr. Dampier reminds us, not unpleasantly, of Mr. J. S. Clarke (one of Lon-
don’s greatest comedians). He got a well deserved and hearty welcome.”
“The Weekly Budget.”
“ Australians may well be proud of their protege.”
“The Weekly Dispatch.”
“Mr. Dampier’s versatility is surprising, and he will become a great favorite
with London audiences.”
“The European Mail.”
“ Mr. Dampier has sprung at a bound into high favor. He will make his
mark in this great metropolis of ours.”
“ Fact.”
“ He is equally clever as the sot, the strolling Hamlet, the old Frenchman, and
the deformity.”
“ Funny Folks ”
suggested that Mr. Dampier should play Hamlet, with Mr. H. J. Byron as
Polonius. But I tire of extracting, and cease, though highly favorable notices from
the Globe, Echo, Morning Advertiser, Court Journal, and many other influential
papers lie before me.”


THE
ANGEL HOTEL,
PATRICK PUNCH,
(Brother of the late lamented James Punch,)
PEOPRIETOE.
This celebrated Hotel has not its superior
in the City for Lunches, and the quality
of the Liquors of all kinds dispensed.
H. R. WOODS & CO.,
PBINTBBS
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION OF POSTER,
PRINTERS OE THIS PAMPHLET.
BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY
Opposite Hyde Parle, Sydney,
HARRY G. ROWELL,
Proprietor.
the mmmm mmim m mm,
SPLENDID FAMILY SUITES.


Mr. Dampier’s ambition to play at a West End theatre at last bade fair to be
realised. Mr. Edgar Ray, a gentleman well known of yore in Sydney, was
manager for the Gattis, and he wanted to make terms for Mr. Dampier to play the
star part in “Michael ShogofE ’’ at the Adelphi, but Mr. Holland, the enterprising
but very eccentric lessee of the Surrey had a contract with him and held him
to it. Mr. Harry Jackson, another old-time Australian, also made advances, and
wohld have welcomed our friend to the Princess' in the interests of Mr. Gooch,
but the Holland obstruction again stood in the way. Mr. Dampier then played
another season at the Surrey with a success we wot of here, and would have
continued, but a previous arrangement had been made to take “ The World ”
there from Drury Lane, and when that was withdrawn, and Alfred prepared to
resume, Mr. Conquest fore-closed on Mr. Holland’s property, and that much
troubled manager tried to sub-let Mr. D ampier’s services at a profit, but in the
meantime the chances were gone. Mr. Charles Warner had been secured by the
Gattis, and Mr. Gooch had let the Princess to Mr. Wilson Barrett, of Leeds fame,
who played his own stars and pieces. Then Mr. Holland asked Mr. Dampier to
release him from his contract, and Mr. Holland then, in his own words, ‘ ‘ went
to devote himself to the Herculean task of getting out of his difficulties,”
and Mr. Dampier having seen his dream of ambition rudely dispelled by the
troubled entrepreneur; refusing all offers to go to the provinces, which he con-
sidered of less benefit or importance than resuming his position as an Australian
favorite (especially seeing that the summer approached); took ship for dear old
Sydney.
Altogether Mr. Dampier’s visit to England was eminently satisfactory, and
one of the most congratulatory features about it was the opportunity it afforded
him to make the acquaintance and win the friendship of a number of distinguished
literary men, including Mr. Charles Reade, Mr. Henry Pettitt, and Mr. George R.
Sims (“Dagonet,” author of “Crutch and Toothpick,” “ Mother-in-Law,” &c.)
from whom he acquired, not only many ideas of interpretation, but the right to
produce their pieces in Australia.
The foregoing was the essence of the criticism accorded Mr. Dampier during
my stay in London. He resumed his engagement after I left for Australia, and
from his scrap book I extract the following comments :
“ The Critic.”
“ Was a well deserved success.”
“ York House Papers.”
“ His Jean Valjean is vigorous and truthful.”
“ Sunday Times.”
“ The audience was moved to spontaneous bursts of enthusiasm.”
“ The Sportsman.”
“ Capable and possessed of considerable dramatic abilities. Lily and Rose are
’ highly intelligent.”
“ Referee.”
“ The people in the house fairly deafened me with applause —tried their hardest
to lift the roof off the theatre.”
“ Standard.”
“His acting is at all times vigorous and impressive.”
“ The Era.”
“ Calls forth again and again the enthusiastic plaudits of the audience. It
was good to listen to the mighty roar.’’
“Weekly Dispatch.”
“ Earnest, forcible, arid graphic style of acting. Lily and Rose share the
honors of the night.”


STEAM TO LONDON.
SHORTEST PASSAGE BY 7 DAYS.
1881.
The following Royal Mail Steamships belonging to the
ORIENT STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY,
LIMITED,
AND THE
PACIFIC STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY,
Will■ leave SYDNEY regularly at Fortnightly Intervals
FOR
MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, and LONDON, via the SUEZ
CANAL, calling at NAPLES.
ROUTE. —The route homewards is through the Suez Canal, calling
at, Suez, Poet Said and Naples, where First and Second Class
Passengers are at liberty to break their journey, proceeding by a later
steamer in which there may be room. The route from England is via
the Cape of Good Hope.
For Plans and full particulars, apply to
G. SKELTON YUILL,
General Manager in Australia,
267 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


THE GIDDY MIDDIES,
A Tale, with a Purpose, that Discloses itself.
Advertisers can have copies of this Book at £7 10s. per 1000.
LITTLE CHAP I.
“Ah, ugh, ough ! ” with a yawn and a stretch.
“Now then, George, you needn’t kick like that; and I think you might cut
your nails. It seems to he always Friday with you.
“ Go it Albert, put on side because you will some day wear a Crown, and I
may never have half a one. Just like you.”
“ Now, George, you know I never play the future King with you, but you do
stretch those legs of yours, till I fancy I’m a rooster getting the worst of it in a
fight.”
The speakers were two interesting youngsters lying in bed in the nursery of
H.M.S. Bacchante. Sentries walked stolidly to and fro at the cabin door, and
trim serving maids glided in and out of the adjacent apartment, busily preparing
for the morning meal.
“ How did you like the feed at Government House yesterday, George ?
“ Very well. Didn’t old Dalton go in for the Australian Kelish ? ”
“ My word,” said George, with a twinkle, “and didn’t it make him eat.”
“ Bather! I say Al, I'must get some for Grandma ; you know how bad her
appetite is when the taxes don’t come in well, or she hears of the blowing up of
a Czar.”
“Ah! it wouldn’t be a bad move. We have both exceeded our allowance of
pocket money, and it would please her. This Soul must be a clever fellow. I
have read his book. But they say he is ruining the chemists.”
“Bother the chemists, Al, its the people, my boy we must consider—the
paramount people.”
“ George,” said Al, “ I’ll do tubbies first, so you stop in bed. Wouldn’t it
be jolly if we could cart ourselves out to Wigzell’s and get a plunge in his splen-
did baths ? ”
“ I believe you! They talk about their harbour, but I’m blessed if I don’t
think Wigzell’s is the jolliest place I’ve seen since we’ve been here.”
“ And I too ; and can’t he do your hair ? ”
“ Oh, scrumptious,’’rejoined Albert. While the heir-apparent to our throne
bathed, George carefully read the Newcastle Morning Herald and then glanced
over some illustrated papers supplied to the fleet by Turner and Henderson, from
their palatial book store and fancy repository in Hunter-street.”
“ George ! ’’ cried Albert suddenly from between his hands in which he field
the soap, “It’s a beastly bore being princes ; young Effingham, of the Carysfort,
got away yesterday and had such a spree. He’s got no old buffer to look after
Mm, and he went up to the Bulletin Hotel and had such a lark with Thatcher and
Moore’s dingo and the menagerie. Then he went to Bowden’s Club House Hotel,
a jolly place, with a better billiard room than there is in England, and after that
he got down to a splendid fellow’s place, next to the Queen’s Theatre, the only
historical house left standing in Sydney—Larry Foley’s : and Larry, who is cham-
pion ef Australia, showed him some fine sport. He’d be the fioy to knock
grandma’s enemies about.”
“ Did he go on board then ? ” asked George.


BURNETT’S COCOAINE
FOR THE HAIR.
Pebmature Loss of the Hair, which is so common nowadays, may be
entirely prevented by the use of
BURNETT’S COCOAINE.
It has been used in thousands of cases where the hair was coming
out in handfuls, and has never failed to arrest its decay, and to promote a
healthy and vigorous growth. It is at the same time unrivalled as a
dressing for the hair. A single application will render it soft and glossy
for several days. Try it and be convinced that it is the best HAIR
DRESSING in the World.
For Sale by all Chemists, Fancy Goods Dealers, &c.
WbolmU by BABSOV, KOZBAU & CO.,
STSNST.
BURNETT’S
ACTA de wzomunz.
For the Complexion and Bath, also a Delightful Perfume.
Its odour is that of an exquisite bouquet of choice and delicate
flowers, without too much of that peculiar sweetness so common in
French and German Waters, which at first are agreeable, but after
exposure to the air become sickening. It is the reverse with
BUSHBTTS mu A BE FLOBIMEL.
The longer it is subjected to the action of the atmosphere the more
refreshing and delicious its aroma becomes. Ask for it and see that
you get it.
For Sale by all Chemists, Drapers, and
Fancy Goods Dealers.
Wholesale by BARRON, MOXHAM & CO., Sydney.


“ No,” said Albert, “he went np to Rainford’s Cambridge Club Hotel. The
poor fellow has been nearly ruined by the beastly trams, but he keeps a jolly good
hotel, and plays a fine game of billiards, and hasn’t he got a billiard room neither.”
“ I know the place,” said George, “ Tony Yilliers stayed there and said the
style was equal to the best London hotels.”
“I wonder,” asked Albert, “if you could get one of the girls to pinch us a bottle
of lemonade.”
“ No,” said George, “no lemonade. I’ll get Maria to sneak us a bottle of
Rowland’s Yigorine that Mr. Dalton drinks ‘ to sustain his failing powers,’ he
says. He brought it from Melbourne. It sets a fellow up for the day.”
“ I know Nervine does,” said George. I suppose it’s all the same.” I like
both of them better than Zoedone that they make such a fuss about in England.”
“ Whose got my tie ? ” asked the elder brother ; “ the one I purchased so
cheaply from Jackson and Morton in King-street.”
“I don’t know; I havn’t,” said the other. Did you go to Jackson and
Morton’s ? ”
“ Yes, and down to Simon Israel’s, the Dublin Mans, on Brickfield Hill,
where I was astonished at the price of stores and liquors. If Simon had known
he was serving a .”
“Now, Al,” broke in the other, “ put it in the Licensed Victuallers' Gazette
at once, and let everybody know it. ”
“ Or Sydney Punch," rejoined the future king, good humoredly.
“Ah! Punch," said George, “ that is something like a paper. Yes, this is a
great country for newspapers; look at the Western Independent, published at
Bathurst, and the Newcastle Morning Herald, and the Parramatta Times, and the
Federal Australian," and the “Bulletin."
“ I-see you’ve been to Thatcher’s,” said Albert, “ and looked at his files.”
“ Oh, yes,” said George, when I was doing the Ilaroun Alschid business. I
think Dick suspects me, for he gave my glass an extta wipe when I was there
last.”
“Oh, then he didn’t know you; he’s too democratic for that. But what
did you drink ?
“ Well, don’t let on to Mr. D., or he’d tell the mater. I had a drop of the
real Walker Whisky, from Mason Bros, (wholesale). It’s the safest and the most
palatable, and not a headache in a case of it.”
“ Ever been to Emerson’s ? ” asked George of Albert.
“ No, but Stuart of Stuart goes, it’s a jolly oyster saloon in King-street; that’s
the place to get oysters and fish and game, and a gocd steak or chop.”
“ I believe Scott of Scott, my boy. And Eve’s. Did you go there?’’
“ Eve’s ! of course, on the other side nearly opposite the stalls entrance to the
Theatre Royal. A grand fellow is Eve, and his Excelsior Mixture beats all the
best navy tobaccos hollow, so our coxswain says.”
Then the boys proceed to dress in No ; we cannot mention the things
they put on, for Sydney clothiers as a rule, are too near-sighted to advertise.
BIG CHAP II.
Earl Clanwilliam sat in his state cabin, reclining in a patent chair from the
American Novelty Company’s fine store, near the site of the old Yic., while speci-
mens of their many ingenious and useful inventions lay scattered on a table within
ken of his keen gaze. He had far from recovered from his late attack, though a
pungent aroma disclosed the fact of his having freely applied Erank Weston’s
Wizard Oil, so there was a certainty of his restoration to health, especially as empty
bottles of Bosohee’s German Syrup and Green’s August Elower denoted that he
had partaken of those never failing remedies of world-wide fame, and must soon
regain his former robust condition. He daintily applied his Cocoaine, a sure


p. JLoise,
Fiactleal Onlti? md
HI
First-class Garments of the Highest Fashion, Shrunk,
AND OF THE
BEST WORKMANSHIP.
i§« viis sisaai.
m&ML
Situated in Castlereagh Street, near its junction with King Street
in the busiest part of Sydney, and close to the Theatre Royal now
(October, 1881) occupied by the GHOST and SPECTRESCOPE.
Decorated in the highest Style of Art, and seats one thousand persons.
To rent for Concerts and high-class Entertainments, Managers, and
Speculators should apply to
D’ARCY READ,
Proprietor.
T@ limpii, Stan mi Hwatrieal Spwnlaton
THE GAIETY THEATRE
CASTLEEEAGH STEEET,
Has proved the most remunerative for Stars and the Management in the
Annals of History. HE. FEED. MARSHALL, The MONTAGUE-TUENEE
OPEEA OOMPANY, and Me. ALFRED DAMPIEE, played the MOST success-
ful Seasons there, it is now leased to Mr. L. M. Bayless for four years.
JOHN SOLOMON, Proprietor.
Sep., 1880. TO WHOM APPLY.


pain restorative, and having finished his breakfast, most of the concomitants which
were from Mark Isaacs’ Corporation Stores, in the Haymarket, while the rich milk
in his Cocoaine left not a doubt that it came from the Glanmire Dairy at Rush-
cutters’ Bay, he applied the delicious perfume known as Agua de I’lorimel to
his handkerchief.
“ Alphonse,” cried the Earl to his Kanaka valet, “ this cloth, whence comes
it?”
“ Prom Hordern’s,” replied the servitor.
“Which Hordern’s ? ” demanded the irascible Earl, “there seems to be so
many of them.”
“ An’t please your Earlship, there be two of note —J. L. Hordern, of Pitt-
strqet, and Anthony, of that ilk and the Haymarket. Their ads. may both be
found in the Travelled Actor, and their businesses are colossal.”
“ Good,” cried Clan william, “ tell the paymaster-general to go down to the
Mercantile Bank for the two millions sent out to pay the men of the squadron,
and buy me a thousand shares in that great institution if they are to be got.”
Alphonse bowed.
“ And, Alphonse,” he added, “ call in at the Liverpool and London and Globe
Insurance Company and tell the manager that I shall live some time yet to pay
premiums on my ten thousand pounds policy.”
The servitor retired, and the Earl rang for the deputy-assistant boatswain’s
mate.
“ The meat,” he cried, “is it from the emporium of the celebrated legislator
and flesher, Daniel O’Connor? ”
“ It are,” cried the swarthy tar.
“It be,” corrected the Admiral, “ its primeness might have told me so; get
the starboard fore to gallant yard manned, and I will desport me in the waters of
Cavill’s Baths at the Bay of Lavender, with my young royal masters. The great
professor will teach me to swim in three lessons, and the ancient Dalton shall lave
his lithe limbs in the limpid empyrean, fenced in by the great natator, after which
I will repair me to Sydney by the North Shore Perry, and taking the celebrated
Angel Hotel on my way, drop in upon my friend, Prank Punch, at the corner of
Pitt and King Streets, to see if any of my brave tars are at that great rendezvous.”
L’Envoie.
Matilda came out in a vessel of the Orient Line in search of Charles, and the
luxuries she enjoyed on board made her thoroughly sorry when the voyage
terminated, especially as she fell desperately in love with one of the officers on the
way out. She first sought her long lost lover at the Coffee Palace (both No’s. 1 and
2), knowing that the accommodation at those grand institutions would tempt a
gentleman of Charles’ proclivities, but he had gone home by the Pacific Steam
Navigation Co.’s steamer Zealandia, in order to avoid her and the heat of the
Red Sea.
One night, at D’Arcy Read’s Ghost entertainment at the Victoria Hall, she met
Edward Jones, a young actor, flushed with the generous wine from Stephen and
Co. of Bridge-street (Ivanhoe brand), served up at a banquet at which he had been
presented with an illuminated address beautifully engrossed by Myers, of Park
street, the young Thespian proposed marriage. He had been shaved by Allen of
Castlereagh-street, near the Bulletin Hotel, and looked too lovely. His hair shone
with Cocoaine dressing, and he was prepared with Agua de Plorimel. He fell in
love at first sight with her, and in the morning sent her a bird from Harry Bills’
shop on the Circular Quay, a bird that he knew must win a lady’s heart. Matilda
accepted him and he gave up his quarters at the Oxford Hotel where he had been
so comfortable, and led her to the Shadier, of Hunter-street, prepared the
wedding feast and made the bride’s cake. Lewis drove the happy pair to church
in his wagonette, and the ring was from Hammon’s, m King-street. Loise, the
practical tailor, made the bridegroom’s clothes, and they lived happily ever after-
wards at the Bulletin Hotel. J ones left the stage and made a fortune through
investing in a company that used Denny’s Patent Improved Percussion Separator
and Concentrator.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in_the year 1860, ty Frank Weston, in the
Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the southern district of Louisiana, U.S.
THE
GREAT AMERICAN REMEDY,
WESTON'S
■WIZAED OIL,
Price— HALP-A-CROWN.
For Internal cmd External Use. Cures Rheumatism, Gout, Neuralgia,
and all Nervous and Inflammatory Aches and Pains.
Protected by Letters Patent and Copyright Registrations, in all the
Australian Colonies.
WESTONS MAGIC PIIuLS
(SUGAR COATED.)
PRICE HALF.A.CBOWN.
These valuable Pills may justly be considered one of the greatest benefits modem
pharmacy has conferred on the human race; and it is only since pharmacy,
in connection with chemistry, has advanced with such gigantic
strides, that the active principles of these Pills have been
discovered.
Patentee and Sole Proprietor I—FRANK 1 —FRANK WESTON.
WHAT’S THE CHARGE ?
Hasn’t been to the “Bulletin Hotel” for a week,
your Worship.
Six Months—NEXT CASE I


PATENT IMPROVED
a „
•n o
H 9
CO V
to
O +3
. H
» J
Ibh:
CO fcS
a a
60 <3
si a
Tit
. o
pa
P 02
C 8
£ ® ®
d 2
,—T S -g
® S ?
£ 2 -*a
Ws
SbH Ph
All kinds of Mining and Agricultural Machinery bought and sold.
ESTIMATES GIVEN FOR
DENNY'S Patent Grinder and Amalgamator
DENNY'S Patent Mechanical Furnace for roast-
ing pyrites at a cost of ss. per ton,
DENNY'S Patent Combustion Furnace, saves 25
per cent, of fuel in boiler furnaces or brick-kilns.
DENNY'S Patent Wool Press.
DENNY'S Improved Percussion Tobies, for sepa-
rating fine gold, floured mercury and pyntes
from tailings, made to operate at the end of
copper table.
Composition for covering naked parts of boiler
and steam pipes, thus adding to the power of
boiler and saving fuel.
This gold-saving Machinery will extract 90 per cent, of metal, gold or silver, from pyrites
Plans and Estimates given for all descriptions of Mining Machinery.
Contracts taken for the supply and erection.
Second-hand Engines and Boilers always on hand.


LAVENDER BAY.
Under the Management of Professor CA VILA the
Channel Swimmer.
SWIMMING :
XST These Baths deserve to be well patronised, being romantically situated at
Lavender Bay and well kept and managed. One can leave by the North Shore Ferry,
have a nice outing and a bath, and be back within the hour. —Evening News,
Oct. 3rd. Parties leave the Bulletin Hotel every afternoon for the Baths.
SWIMMING TAUGHT.
THE SUBSCRIPTION
TO
“SYDKTESY PUNCH’’
IS NOW
One Guinea per Annum or ss. 6d. per Quarter (in advance) ;
Otherwise, 6s. 6d. Quarterly.
Its large and rapidly increasing Circulation renders it an INVALUABLE
MEDIUM FOE ADVERTISERS. As a matter of fact, its Circulation has CON-
SIDERABLY MORE THAN DOUBLED since July Ist.
august 3lst. im Castlereagh Street .
A. LEWIS,
PROPRIETOR.
WAGGONETTE TO BE FOUND AT CAB STAND,
Wgnyard Square, York Street,
Balls and Parties attended. Terms Moderate.


I AM A PUZZLE,
DRINK OF ME AND YOU WILL FIND A BENEFIT.
Study out the above and profit bv it.
HUME & PEHRUM,
MANUFACTURERS OF ALE KINDS OF
AERATED WATERS ' AND CORDIALS,
PATENTEES OF THE WORLD-FAMED
ITBBTIITE.
IMPORTERS, PATENT PROPRIETORS,
ANALYTICAL INVENTORS.
HUME <Sc IPHIG-HyTJM:
Use only the purest materials in all their
Goods, which stand pre-eminent in
the Sydney Market.
LABOEATOEY AND MANUPAOTOEY,
REOENT STRBBT.
SYDNEY.


AMERICAN
. s o a*
•efc*
k h *
*1 H
NOVELTY COMP;
HOptiTY pOl
'V DEPOT%OE%Tim WORLT
;v Jf«or tk« tub «/ ffc. V’vcfotya Theatre.
-O" —V- % ■'■ I
»
- . -r'v ■, - 4 .
1 "-''New YtMrJc Office': 98 Chembers-BtreeW -7' \
SahTran disco Office : 537 Markat'-gfreev ,
(ui'
5 -
A$ B »
g £§3
H 6> ft.
as
O >o
*
” Go*
'^Fi^nret
/
S£*<
Cy-
,.o\-
&
o v
<&
&
<r*S
o
5
4^
j.V
*Pv
i>
v
c^
V
t* HOTEU
<p e
<r
\°
' “A*
a®- A*
>* ,4-
&
ap*
A'
<*%>
V*
.V A'
> e
vi®
rf*
cm, 1, WI.SZELL
PRACTICAL
HAIRCUTTER,
Ladies’ and Gentlemen's
HA I RDKJCSSEH,
jitage ani JStmt dlig ||ktur ;
IMPORTER OF
Human hair, Jt*erfumrry, Fancy Ooods t &c» t
139 & 141 OXFORD-ST., SYDNEY,
OPPOSITE PALMER STREET.
Awarded Prize Medals for Ornamental Hair Work.
Now Open, Oxford BATH ROOMS for Ladies and Gentlemen.
«v°*^
Travelling
Trhnks*
■ Bags, Ac., ■
Jewellery,
Cutlery,
Stationery,
Toilet
Articles,
Brackets,
Clocks, r T’;
Watches
and '
Useful
uveniious.
A
VJ
Ai
85.
j<WH
Albert to George , “ Well, dear boy, where shall
we go to-day ?’
Geoboe : “ Why! to Wigzell’s for one of his
delicious Baths. The best thing we have had during
our visit.”
City of Sydney Printing Co., 151 Bridge Street.
