

A TREATISE
ON THE
EVOLUTION
HISTORICAL ORGANISM,
Rev. WILLIAM FINLAY BROWN.
PAEKBS
Dugald Cameron, Printer and Publisher,




A TREATISE
ON THE
EVOLUTION
HISTORICAL ORGANISM.
Rev. WILLIAM FINLAY BROWN.
PARSES =
Dugald Cameron, Printer and Publisher,




PREFACE
Amidst the multitude and diversity of historical phenomena there is a tendency
to the consciousness of unity in proportion as the phenomena are clearly and
distinctly understood. There is no work yec written revealing and elaborating
the structure of the scientific and philosophic mechanism underlying historical
phenomena. Such a work would be of some service to the student of history, for
without the consciousness of such a scientific and philosophic groundwork, there
is confusion in the classification of historical phenomena. The aim of this work
is to determine the scientific and philosophic structure underlying historical
phenomena, and thus be a guide to the student, who in working out the svstem
can discern a definite order at every step in his progressive study of the subject.
The structure, being universal and impersonal, is a transcript of the living fact*
the movement of the absolute to a determined end through the medium of its
mechanism. This system is an effort to present a transcript of the whole histori-
cal process in living union as it has been, and as it is ; a thing which no work
written on the subject has ever yet accomplished. The scientific and philosophic
gioundwork, through which the historical process is possible, represents th e
historical constitution of the universe, and is thus common to the race—a fact for
all men, and for every age. The scientific mechanism is an expression of the
disintegration and differentiation of the absolute ; the integral departments of
that mechanism, both essential and organic, are capable of an objective expres-
sion in the form of diagram ; and, if the integral departments, then also the
organic whole. The first diagram exhibits the structure of the scientific
mechanism of the absolute. Each integral department has also a diagram illus-
trating its scientific mechanism. The method of communicating knowledge by
means of diagram is one of the best, if what the eye perceives be in strict accord-
ance with what the mind conceives. The more abstruse and abstract the subject
the more need for such a method, for the diagrams bring all our knowledge of
the facts and principles to scientific centres, and so reduce what might otherwise
be regarded fragmentary to scientific form. That there should be a repetition of
certain words and phrases in the elucidation of this scientific mechanism is also a
necessity. No one would ever think of making the elements of Euclid pleasant
reading- Because Geometry is an exact science, there must be a repetition of
certain words and phrases in the demonstration of any problem, or in the verifi-
V -O
v' m


cation of any theorem ; and in this Science of all the Sciences there must be a
repetition of certain words and phrases in the demonstration of the scientific and
philosophic order of the ground mechanism. The nomenclature of this work
almost springs from the scientific mechanism of the absolute. Greek words
indicating a variable, yet rigidly, determined process, have not the same fixity of
meaning as words representing natural objects. There may be a slight shade of
difference in the meaning attached to these words in the first diagram from that
attached to them by the Creeks ; but for the purpose for which they are used in
this work they have a definite meaning, and they are therefore the most suitable,
dunamia hinema, energeia, entelecheia, with their corresponding equivalents, a
power, a movement, a process, and a completed work. The hinema is the
motion of the dunamis, from th e dunamis to the entelecheia through the medium
of energeia. which is the actuality of the dunamis and hinema ; while the hinema
and energeia are 1 rought to_their appropriate < rganic resultant in the entelecheia-
The three unities, the Absolute, the Essential, and the Organic, correspond with
the two well-known departments. Ontology and Psychology, the latter of which
includes the two departments of the schntific mechanism of the Absolute ; the
Essential unity, with its co-ordinate differentiated factors gnosis, aisthesis,
boulesis cognition, emotion, and volition ; the Organic unity, with its disinteg-
rated factors, the scientific and the moral ; the religious and the aesthetic ; the
political and the social ; causality and tehology. The Absolute is u»ed of the
ego prior to its contact with the pheuomnal, that is, prior to its disintegration,
differentiation, and objective embodiment in the essential unity and in the organic
unity. Ihe power iff disintegration and oifferentition is inherent in the dunamis
which is an t ndmited, pt tential, spiritual energy; and through the medium cf
the phenomenal, both n ental and material, it becomes conscious of that power as
an absolute ego in all its inherent possibility of rnanfestation. The expressions
co-ordinate differentiated factors of the essential unity, and disintegrated
factors of the essential unity are not usual; but they are used in this work as
being the most comprehensive, as well as the most accurate aud expressive, in
the description of the scientific groundwork. Ihere has also been a distinction
preserved throughout the wotk which is of the utmost importance—the distinc-
tion between the scientific and speculative aspect ot reason. These two aspects
of reason are unconsciously blended by almost every writer on the subject, and
therefore confusion follows in dealing with historical phenomena. In dealing
with the phenomenal there is a necessity to use such words as internal and
external, subjective and objective, as it is through the medium of these that the
consciousness of an absolute unity is possible, for such words are constituent
factors in the unity of experience. But experience, however fragmentary it may
appear, is an expression of, and therefore in close correspondence with the
a'>solute, the disintegration, differentiation, and qualitative discrimination of
IV


which will correspond with the phenomenal ; for the absolute the essential and
the organic are all involved in the fact and unity of experience, and the value of
experience is determined by the degree of development reached in each. The
expressions, scientific mechanism, and phenomenal content of the absolute are
also unusual, but the vast range of historical phenomena justifies the use of such
convenient expressions. Nor must the absolute ego, the finite, be confounded
with absolute Being, the infinite. The use of such words and expressions as
enumerated above may be regarded as a regulative principle in determining the
relation between the absolute and the phenomenal. The determination of the
relation of the absolute ego to the phenomenal and to the infinite includes all that
is possible to reason. Since historical phenomena are common property, the
main value of this work might be regarded as consisting in the originality of the
plan, however defectively it may be conceived and worked out in each integral
department, and in the scientific mechanism as a whole. The Author, in this
first part of the work, has not to dissuss nor solve any problem, but to show
where the problems occur in the system, for they have all their place and setting
by necessity in the mechanism of the absolute as embodied in the phenomenal,
and in the process of organic development. The problems reach a solution at the
proper crisis, when occurring in the system. The first volume is merely an
abstract exhibiting the scientific and philosophic mechanism of the absolute in
all its integral departments, both in the essential unity and in the organic unity,
as developed on the groundwork of the external material system under the con-
dition.! of time and space. It is a continuous enunciation which has to be
\ erified by its concrete embodiment, both in the lives of individuals, and in the
histories of nations. It is also hoped by the Author that the work may help to
create a renewed interest in the effort to determine more exactly the scientific
and philosophic groundwork underlying historical phenomena.
April 6th, 1897.




CONTENTS.
Preface iv.
Chap. I—lntroduction—Evolution of Historical Organism.
Scientific and Philosophic Groundwork 1—27
Chap. ll.—Scientific Disintegration and Differentiation and
Organic Development ... ... ... ... ...28—88
Chap. Hl.—Organic Development. Regulative Principles and
Laws 89 —48
Chap. IY—The Essential Unity. Co-ordinate Differentiated
Factors. Cognition, Emotion, Volition ... ...49 —68
Chap. V.—The Organic Unity. Scientific Aspect of Reason.
Disintegrated Factors. (1) The Scientific. (2) The
Moral. (3) The Religious. (4) The ./Esthetic,
(5) The Political. (6) The Social. Speculative
Aspect of Reason Disintegrated Factors. (1)
Causality. (2) Teleology ... ... ... ... 69 —136
Chap. Vl.—Relation of Disintegrated Factors —(1) Scientific
to Scientific. (2) Scientific to Speculative... ...137 —144
Chapter Vll.—Concrete Embodiment of Scientific Ground-
work—(l) In Life of Individual. (2) In History of
Nation... ... ... ... ... ... ...145—153
Books of Reference 165—160


LIST OF DIAGRAMS.
Chap. ll—Scientific and Philosophic Groundwork—Diagram I
Chap. IV.—Essential Unity. (A) (B)
Chap. V.— Organic Unity. (1) Scientific Factor (A) (B) (C)
(2) The Moral.
(8) The Religious.
(4) The
(5) The Political.
(6) The Social.
(7) Causality
Chap. Vl.—Relation of Disintegrated Factors—(A) (B)
8


CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.
Scientific-and philosophic groundwork of historical organism. Review-
of works. Sehlegel—Philosophy of history. Buckle—History of-
civilization. Draper—lntellectual development of Europe.
Spencer—Study of Sociology ; Data of Sociology. Guizot
History of Civilization. Hegel—Philosophy of history. Science—
Philosophy. The philosophy of history..
The determination of the evolution of the historical organism includes-
an examination- of the scientific and philosophic groundwork which
underlies, and therefore gives unity to the historical process. The
authors who have written on the subject of the philosophy of history
are few in number,, and from the extensive and intricate nature of
historical phenomena, and the peculiar or complex quality of the
progress ; it follows, that such authors must ever be limited in number..
These are the authors, however, with whom we have most to do in the
present work,, whose- researches have been tending to the revelation
and discovery of the scientific and philosophic groundwork which
underlies, and therefore historical phenomena.. The value of
the work of each author is determined by its place in the grade of.
development of the scientific mechanism of the historical organism
since the fuller the development, the more complete, and therefore
the more complex the scientific mechanism. The authors who have
written on the various integral departments, both of the Essential.
Unity, and of the Organic Unity, are more numerous, since the subject
is more limited, and therefore distinct and definite, and clearly con.
conceived. There is also a large number of authors who have
written on the relation between the co-ordinate differentiated factors
of the Essential Unity, cognition, emotion and volition, and also on the
relation between the disintegrated factors of the Organic Unity—the
Scientific and the Moral, the Religious and the the Political
and the Socia 1 ,. Causality and Teleology. The value of each work is


determined by its place in the grade of development in that factor,
for its place is fixed by necessity in the development of the scientific
mechanism of each co-ordinate differentiated factor of the essential unity
and disintegrated factor of the Organic Unity, since the fuller the
development the more complete and therefore the more complex
the scientific mechanism. The works of such authors will be
considered in their order ; but the works of those authors who have
written on the subject as a whole first claim our attention. A
philosophy of history elaborating the scientific and philosophic
groundwork underlying historical phenomena has not yet appeared;
that is to say, no author has conceived and elaborated and given
an expression to the scientific and philosophic groundwork of the
absolute. Each author has found it needful to begin by some kind
of introduction, and in each, the introduction, since it reveals the
plan, is the most important part of the work. A criticism of the
introduction is thus a criticism of the work so far as it is Scientific
and Philosophic, for it must reveal the method of procedure adopted
by the author. If the fundamental conception of the scientific and
philosophic groundwork is wanting, a criticism of detail is useless ;
for fragmentary detail, and a detail springing from a scientific and
philosophic groundwork aie two distinct things. In the introduction
of each author there is the enunciation of certain principles which
are continually repeated in various forms—a thing which at once
reveals their importance. In almost every case there is an absence
of scientific and philosophic connection ; they are merely fragmentary
reflections on the subject, and not an exhibition of the scientific
and philosophic groundwoik. Some of these statements will be
selected from the work of each author for examination that the
above statements may be verified. The title of F. Yon Schlegel’s
work is the “ Philosophy of History.” But departing from this
title, he resolves the whole work into a treatise on the Religious
factor, and draws the material of all the other factors into it in a
more or less fragmentary fashion, though there is no distinct con-
sciousness of the scientific relation of those factors. “ The Philosophy
of History” is not a theory standing apart and separated from
history, but its results must be drawn out of the multitude of


historical facts, and, as it were, spring up of themselves from bare
observation. In the philosophy of history we have not to do with
any system, any series of abstract notions, positions, and conclu-
sions, as in the construction of a mere theory; but with the
general principles only of historical investigation, and of historical
judgment. The most important subject and the first problem of
the philosophy of history is the restoration in man of the lost
image of God, so far as this relates to science. Should this
restoration in the internal consciousness be fully understood and
really brought about, the object of pure philosophy is attained.
To point out historically in reference to the whole human race,
and in the outward conduct and experience of human life, the
progress of this restoration in the various periods of the world
constitutes the object of the philosophy of history. There are
three mighty principles in the progress of mankind—the hidden
ways of providence delivering and emancipating the human race ;
next the free will of man doomed to decisive choice in the
struggle, every action and sentiment springing from that freedom ;
then the power permitted by God to the evil principle. Man’s
resemblance to his Maker constitutes the first foundation stone
of history, the idea of divine justice relating as it does to real
life and all its mighty phenomena forms the second.” In these
extracts the scope and object of the philosophy of history are
referred to, as well as the scientific principle regulating the his-
torical progress ; but the statements contained in these extracts,
though important, considered even in the most favorable light,
are merely fragmentary reflections on the subject, and not a
revelation of the scientific and philosophic groundwork of the
historical organism. That groundwork as described below includes
the consciousness of an Absolute Unity, an Essential Unity, and
an Organic Unity; the transition from the Absolute to the
Organic through the medium of the Essential under the conditions
of time and space; the disintegrating energy of the dunamis
into the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential Unity ;
and into the disintegrated factors of the Organic Unity as the
regulative principle of the historical process; reason, intuitive,


discursive, scientific and speculative; as the regulative principle of
Historical phenomena ; the Scientific principle of universal know-
ledge with its two departments, the Natural and the Supernatural
corresponding with the Scientific and Speculative aspects of reason ;
the simultaneous progressive and harmonic relation of the factors,
both of the Essential Unity and of the Organic Unity. The
whole scientific and philosophic groundwork, as a rational synthesis
and an expression of the Absolute as thus conceived was not
present in the consciousness of Schlegel when he wrote his work ;
hence the tendency to magnify the religious factor.
Nor again, on examining the “ History of Civilisation ”by
Buckle, can evidence be found that he had a clearer consciousness
of the scientific and philosophic groundwork, though most of the
historical phenomena bearing on the subject are exhibited in some
part of the work. He has certainly a defective enumeration of
disintegrated factors as seen in the following quotation—“ Trade,
commerce, manufactures, law, diplomacy, literature, become organ-
ised into separate studies.” Here trade, commerce, and manufac-
tures are differentiated data of the Social organism ; law and
diplomacy refer to the Political; literature to the /Esthetic ; while
philosophy is not a factor neither of the Essential Unity nor of
the Organic Unity, but an organic compendium of all the factors ;
and is the scientific setting of the phenomenal in the Absolute,
as well as the setting of the scientific phenomenal in the Absolute.
That he has not an accurate conception of scientific disintegration
and differentiation, nor of the simultaneous and harmonic progres-
sion of the factors both of the Essential Unity and of the Organic
Unity included in the process is evident from the fact that he
confounds the two kinds of factors ; the co-ordinate differentiated
factors of the Essential Unity with the disintegrated factors of the
Organic Unity. He regards the moral and intellectual the two
factors of progress, but tries to show that the intellectual is more
important than the moral. The intellectual, be it understood, is
equivalent to the Essential Unity, the three co ordinate differentiated
factors of which are Cognition, Emotion, and Volition. But if, as
will be shown afterwards, where the one is in operation, the others


are present in some degree ; and since these are an expression of the
absolute ego through the medium of the Essential, there can
be no conflict between them, as there is none in the absolute.
The two departments, that is, the intellectual and the moral,
cannot be compared. The intellectual being equal to the Essential
Unity, and having the three co-ordinate differentiated factors,
Cognition, Emotion, and Volition ; there can be no claim to a
i elative supremacy by any of these, as they are all included in the
scientific mechanism of the Essential Unity, and therefore needful
to the completeness and unity of consciousness. The Moral is a
disintegrated factor of the Organic Unity, and though the two
diffeientiated factors Emotion and Volition are important as
departments in the scientific mechanism of the Moral, yet the two
cannot legitimately be compared ; that is, the Essential Unity as
a whole cannot be compared with a disintegrated factor of the
Organic Unity. As in the case of the factors of the Essential
Unity there is a balance preserved to the possibility of a rational
consciousness; so in regard to the disintegrated factors of
the Organic Unity. There can be no claim to a relative
supremacy by any one since they are simultaneous expressions of
the Absolute, and essential to the completeness and unity in our
consciousness of the evolution of historical organism. Buckle is
also defective in dealing with the process of organic development.
All authors who have written on the subject now affirm that there
is such a process, but none show it. The following quotation is a
specimen of what is often repeated “ From the barbarous stage to
the summit of civilisation there is a long series of consecutive
steps and gradations.” This is merely a general statement sup ■
posed to represent the process ; bat the principles in operation in
the process are not shown. He manifests a fair knowledge of
the scientific principle regulating the course of the transition as
may be seen by his references to the laws of nature, and to the
influence of climate.
In the work of Draper, called “ The Intellectual Development of
Europe,” there is no evidence that he had a clearer and more
accurate conception of the scientific and philosophic groundwork,


though he comes somewhat nearer it than Schlegel and Buckle,
His enumeration of the disintegrated factors is just as defective as
that of Buckle, as may be seen in the following quotation : —“ There
are five intellectual manifestations—Philosophy, Science, Religion,
Literature, and Government.” In this enumeration there are three
disintegrated factors of the Organic Unity—“ Science, Religion,
and Government.” Literature is a subordinate department of the
aesthetic factor, and philosophy, as stated above, is not a factor,
but an organic compendium, or a ground mechanism of all the
factors. Then again it will be seen that from the following
passage he confounds the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the
Essential Unity with the disintegrated factors of the Organic
Unity ; and as in the case of Buckle, he tries to show that one
is more important than another. “In it the direction of evolution
is toward the intellectual, the whole aim of development is for the
sake of intelligence ; the intellectual has always led the way in
social advancement, the moral having been subordinate thereto ;
the former has been the mainspring of the movement, the latter has
been passively affected. So again—a system working only through
the Moral must sooner or later "come into antagonism with the
intellectual; and if it do not contain within itself a means of
adaptation to the changing circumstances, it must in the end be
oveithrown,” What has been said on Buckle applies also to
Draper, for where consciousness of the scientific and philosophic
groundwork is wanting, there can be no consciousness of the
simultaneous and harmonic progression of the co-ordinate dif-
ferentiated factors of the Essential Unity, nor of the disintegrated
factors of the Organic Unity. There seems to be a conflict
between them, one claiming a supremacy over the others. The
principle of disintegration pervades his work, as may be seen
from the defective enumeration of the disintegrated factors; but
since that enumeration is defective, and therefore not exhaustive, he
cannot be conscious that the process of disintegration is scientific.
That the principle of development pervades his work there can be no
doubt, but he is not conscious that it is an organic process ; and he
uses the expression “progress of humanity” for that process.


There is evidence in the work, however, that he was conscious of
some principle regulating the process of organic development, but
it is not stated in scientific form. There are merely general
statements made bearing on the natural and supernatural sides of
the principle; the Natural which includes the two departments,
the Physical—with its subordinate branches, the organic and the
inorganic—and the Spiritual; and the Supernatural, referring to its
influence of development. “ The government of the world is
accomplished by immutable law, and the laws of nature never
vary; law has controlled the inorganic world, and caused the
earth to pass through varied physical changes or conditions; the
invariability of that law is indicated by the numberless ages
through which it has bean maintained ; and its universality by
its holding good in the life of the meanest individual. Man is
the last term of an innumerable series of organisms, which under
the domination of law has in the lapse of ages been evolving.
An ethnical element is necessarily of a dependent nature; its
durability arises from perfect correspondence with its environment.
W hatever can affect that correspondence will touch its life ; as
long as these influences remain without change the form that
has been produced will last without any alteration \ for such a
permanent form in the case of man we may adopt the designation of
an ethnical element. In thus asserting the immutability, univer-
sality, and paramount control of primordial law in the government
of the world, there is nothing inconsistent with the free action of
men, yet it is none the less true, that these contradictory conditions
co exist, freewill and fate, uncertainty and destiny. The order of
development in the life of the individual and in the life of the earth
are the same, their common features indicating a common plan ;
the sameness in the manner of their progression points to their
dependence on a law immutable and universal. But if the
individual proceeds in his development according to law, and if
the life of the earth in its varied forms is under universal and
immutable law, must not the same principle apply to society ? The
individual may be under the eye of providence, but society is under
the finger of law. The march of individual existence shadows


forth the march of race existence ; there is a progress for races
of men as well marked as the progress of one man. The life of
a nation flows on in a regular sequence determined by invariable
law proceeding in a perfectly definite course. In these extracts
the reference to the three kinds of development is valuable. A
process of development is going on in the individual, in society,
and in the earth; and there are also statements, pointed but
general, bearing on the scientific principles regulating the process of
development ; but, being fragmentary, their full value is not seen.
The important works of Spencer, “ Data of Sociology, and
Study of Sociology,” supply a vast amount of phenomena of
various kinds used in the structure and growth of the social
organism. Spencer’s conception of disintegration and differentiation
is confined to the social and political, and therefore there is no
enumeration of differentiated factors, nor of disintegrated factors ;
but he confounds a temporary bias of an individual, or of an age,
with these factors. Both the “ Data of Sociology, and the Study
of Sociology ” admit that there is a scientific groundwork, but that
there is a great difficulty in obtaining it. In the “ Study of
Sociology ” especially, it is obvious that the scientific groundwork
is defectively conceived by the author; and it is equally clear that
he will never reach an accurate and exhaustive conception of it by
the method adopted in that work. There is a large use made by
the Author of the structure and growth of the physical organism
as a symbol of the structure and growth of the Social organism.
This is admissible to some extent, but the analogy fails when
carried out into complete detail. “In Biology the first step in the
production of any living organism, high or low, is a certain
differentiation, whereby a peripheral portion becomes distinguished
from a central portion ; a differentiation of the original homogeneous
mass into a co-ordinating and a co-ordinated part is the indispensible
initial step ; for along with social aggregation there goes organisa-
tion of some kind. The primary differentiation between the
regulative and the operative part is followed by a further differentia-
tion in the internal arrangement of the two parts, a development
in the regulative and regulated structures.” The scientific ground-


work and growth of the Social organism. This is admissible to
some extent, but the analogy fails when carried out into complete
detail. In Biology, the first step in the production of any living
organism, high or low, is a certain differentiation, whereby a periph-
eral portion becomes distinguished from a central portion; a
differentiation of the originally homogeneous mass into a co-ordinat-
ing and a co-ordinated part is the indispensible initial step ; for
along with social aggregation there goes organisation of some kind.
The primary differentiation between the regulative and operative
part is followed by a further differentiation in the internal arrange-
ment of the two parts, a development in the regulative and
regulated structures.” The scientific groundwork is of a certain
structure, and has disintegrated departments which perform distinct
functions. Structure and function are inseparable. Spencer asks,
what is the normal course of social evolution ? does there exist an
order among those structural and functional changes through which
societies pass ? There exists in the individual organism a duplex
relation between structure and growth. What then is that relation ?
for there must be a correspondence between them. Spencer cannot
determine that relation because he has not the conception of the
scientific and philosophic groundwork of the structure. In no part
of these two works is there any evidence that he has such a conception.
He holds that there is a social science, but that there is a great diffi-
culty in obtaining a clear and accurate conception of it, and because of
that difficulty he has failed to reveal it in its scientific form and order.
The Social organism with Spencer means the Social and Political
factors, or as he calls them, “ the regulative and regulated structures.”
These are the only departments in the state, and therefore so far his
conception is Scientific. In these works he sees most clearly the
relation between the Social unit and the Social aggregate, and to a
very large extent the whole structure of the Social Science as he calls
it hangs on that relation. “Itis an error to say there is no Science
of man because the events of a man’s life cannot be foreseen ; it is
equally an error to say that there is no Science of Society because
there can be no prevision of the occurrences which make up ordinary
history; as Biology is to Anthropology, History is to Sociology. Given


men having certain properties, and an aggregate of such men must
have certain derivative properties which form subject matter for
Science, The properties of the units determine the properties of
aggregates ; there lie beneath the phenomena of conduct not forming
subject matter for Science, certain vital phenomena which do form
subject matter for Science.” But while making such admissions as
these, and bringing a large mass of matter under review, there is no
exhibition of the Science. This principle of the relation between the
Social units and the Social aggregates is one of the simplest and of the
most common generahzationsof history. It is soclearthatit onlyneeds
stating, and it is repeated in various forms by every writer on the
subject; for it constitutes one of the main principles in the structure
of the scientific groundwork ; the properties of the aggregate are based
on the properties of the individual; just as the universal is based on
the particular ; as the former has a meaning in relation to the latter,
the Social aggregate has its distinctive meaning in relation to the
Social unit; as is the unit, so is the aggregatein the whole historical
process. In this statement too there is the germ of the principle of
organic development, a thing which is defectively conceived by
Spencer on account of defect in the consciousness of the scientific
and philosophic groundwork ; and if the process is defectively con-
ceived, the principle regulating the process must share in the defect.
That principle which has two departments, the Natural and the
Supernatural, is dealt with merely from the side of the Natural,
which includes the Physical and the Spiritual; for he thinks that
there is nothing Scientific in our consciousness of the Supernatural ;
and therefore reason in such a case can only have the Scientific
aspect, not the Speculative one.
In the following extracts from the work of Guizot, “ History
of Civilization in France,” there is evidence that he was thoroughly
familiar with all the historical phenomena : but that he was wanting
in the consciousness of the scientific and philosophic groundwork,
and as a consequence, there is no scientific and philosophic distri-
bution of historical phenomena. There is a continuous repetition in
the effort to enumerate the integral departments of the groundwork ;
or rather, it seems like an unconscious effort to enumerate those


departments. In the following extracts, for instance, the confusion
is apparent. “ From all I have said it is evident that the history of
civilization might be treated in two methods, drawn from two
sources, considered under two different aspects. The historian
might place himself in the heart of the human mind for a given
period, a series of ages, or among a determinate people ; he might
study, describe, relate all the events, all the transformations, and all
the revolutions which had been accomplished in the internal man ;
and when he should arrive at the end he should have a history
of civilization amongst the people and in the period he had
selected. He may proceed in another manner, instead of pene-
trating the inner man he may take his stand, he may place him-
self in the midst of the world ; instead of describing the vicissitudes
of the ideas, the sentiments of the individual being, he may
describe external facts, the events, the changes of the Social
state. These two portions, these two histories of civilization are
closely connected with each other ; they are the reflection, the
image of each other; yet they may be separated, perhaps, indeed
they ought to be so ; at least at the onset, in order that both one
and the other may be treated of in detail, and with perspicuity.
For my part I do not propose to study with you the history of civil-
ization in the interior of the human soul; it is the history of external
events of the visible and social world that I shall occupy myself
with. I had wished indeed to exhibit to you the whole fact of
civilization, such as I can conceive it in all its complexity and
extent ; to set forth before you all the high questions which may
arise from it. At present I restrict myself, mark out my field of
inquiry within narrower limits. It is only the history of the
Social state that I purpose investigating. I shall take care here not
to fall into pure philosophy ; not to lay down some ratiocinative
principle, and then deduce from it the nature of civilization as a
result. There would be many chances of error in this method,
and here again we have a factor to verify and describe. Take all
the facts which compose the history of a nation, and which we are
accustomed to regard as the elements of its life. Take its insti-
tutions, its commerce, its industry, its wars, all the details of its


government. Then again there are, moreover, facts which properly
speaking we cannot call social individual facts, which seem to interest
the human soul rather than the public life ; such are religious creeds
and philosophical ideas ; sciences, letters, arts. These facts appear
to address themselves to man with a view to his moral perfection,
his intellectual gratification, ; to have for their object his internal
amelioration, his mental pleasure, rather than his social condition.
At all times in all countries, religion has assumed the glory of
having civilised the people. Sciences, letters, and arts, all the
intellectual and moral pleasures, have claimed a share in this glory.”
Such statements as the above are often repeated, and might be mul-
tiplied to show the confusion, but these will suffice. The principle
of organic development, so far as it relates to what he regards the
constituent elements of civilization is well understood and expressed
in a great variety of ways. The principle so often repeated by
Spencer is the one which Guizot regards most important in the
history and progress of civilization. “We shall find that all the
groat developments of the internal man have turned to the profit of
society ; all the great developments of the social state to the profit
of the individual man. Two facts, then, are comprehended in this
great fact : it subsists on two conditions and manifests itself by two
symptoms, the development of social activity, and the development
of individual activity ; the progress of society and the progress of
humanity. If we interrogate history properly properly so called, if
we examine what is the nature of the great crises of civilization, of
those facts which by individual consent have propelled it onward;
we shall constantly recognise one or other of the two elements I have
just described ; they are always of individual or social development;
facts which have changed the internal man, his creed, his manners,
or his external condition, his position in relation to his fellows.”
His grasp of the scope and object of civilisation, as well as of its
constituent elements and the process of organic development is
shown in the following quotation:—“Civilization is one of these
facts, a general hidden complex fact, very difficult I allow to des-
cribe to relate, but which none the less for that exists, which none the
less for that has a right to be described and related. We may ask


as to this fact a great number of questions. We may ask—it has
been asked—whether it is a good or an evil. Some bitterly deplore
it, others rejoice at it. W'e may ask whether it is an universal fact,
whether there is an universal civilisation of the human species, a
destiny of humanity ; whether the nations have handed down from
age to age something which has never been lost, which must
must increase, form a larger and larger mass, and thus pass on to
the end of time ? For my own part I am convinced that there is in
reality a general destiny of humanity ; a transmission of the aggregate
of civilisation ; and consequently an universal history of civilization
to be written. But without raising questions so great, so difficult to
solve, if we restrict ourselves to a definite limit of time and space, if
we confine ourselves to the history of a certain number of centuries of
a certain people ; it is evident that within these bounds civilization
is a fact which can be described, related, which is history. I will at
once add that this hisfory is the greatest of all, that it includes all.
And indeed does it not seem to yourselves that the fact civilization is
the fact par excellence ; the general and definitive fact in which all
the others terminate, into which they all resolve themselves. Take
all the facts which compose the history of a nation, and which we are
accustomed to regard as the elements of its life ; take its institutions,
its commerce, its industry, its wars, all the details of its government;
when we would consider these facts in their aggregate, in their
connection, when we would estimate them, judge them, we ask in
what they have contributed to the civilization of that nation ; what
part they have taken in it; what influence they have exercised over
it ? It is in this way that we not only form a complete idea of them,
but measure and appreciate their true value.” Then again, “ I
scarcely think it necessary to remind you that it is not the history of
events properly speaking which we are considering; that which
occupies us is the history of civilization ; this is the general and
hidden fact which we seek under all the external facts which
envelope it. Thus events, social crises, the various states through
which society has passed interest us only in their relation to the
development of civilization. We inquire of them solely in what
respects they have opposed or assisted it ? what they have given to


it; and what they have refused it ? In the commencement of
these lectures we defined the nature of civilization. We attempted
to investigate its elements. We saw that it consisted on the one
hand in the development of man himself; of the individual; of
humanity ; on the other hand, in that of his external condition in
the development of society. Whevever ve find ourselves in the
presence of one event, of a system, or of a general condition of
the world, we have this double question to ask of it: what has it
done for or against the development of man, for or against the
development of Society ?” After all, whatever external events may
be, it is man himself who makes the world. It is in proportion to
the ideas, sentiments, and dispositions—moral and intellectual—of
man that the world becomes regulated and progressive ; it is upon
the internal condition of man that the visible condition of Society
depends.” We shall find that all the great developments of the
internal man have turned to the profit of society ; all the great
developments of the social state to the profit of individual man.
We find one or other of the two facts predominating, manifesting
itself with striking effect, and impressing upon the movement in
progress a distinctive character. It is sometimes only after a very
long interval of time, after a thousand obstacles, a thousand trans-
formations, that the second fact developing itself comes to complete
the civilization which the first had commenced. But if you examine
them closely you will soon perceive the bond which unites them.
The march of providence is not restricted to narrow limits ; it is not
bound, and it does not trouble itself to follow out to-day the conse-
quences of the principle it laid down yesterday ; the consequences will
come in due course when the hour for them has arrived ; perhaps not
till hundreds of years have passed away, though its reasoning may
appear to us slow, its logic is none the less true and sound. To
providence time is as nothing. It strides through time as the gods
of Homer through space. It makes but one step, and ages have
vanished behind it. If from history we extend our inquiries to the
nature itself of the tw r o facts which constitute civilization, we are
infallibly led to the same result. There is no one who
experienced this in his own case. When a moral change is operated


in man, when he acquires an idea or a virtue, or a faculty more
than he had before—in a word, when he develops himself individu-
ally, what is the desire ? what the want which at the same
moment takes possession of him ? It is the desire, the want to
communicate the new sentiment to the world, about to give realiza-
tion to his thoughts externally. As soon as a man acquires any-
thing, as soon as his being takes in his own conviction, a new
development assumes an additional value ; forthwith he attaches to
this new development this fresh value, the idea of possession. He
feels himseif impelled and compelled by an inward voice to extend
to others the change ; the amelioration which has been accom-
plished in his own person. We owe the great reformers solely to
this cause, the mighty men who have changed the face of the world
after having changed themselves ; were urged onward ; were guided
on their course by no other want than this. So much for the altera-
tion which is operated in the internal man ; now to the other. A
revolution is accomplished in the state of Society; it is better
regulated; rights and property are more equitably distributed
among its members ; that is to say, the aspect of the world becomes
purer and more beautiful; the action of government, the conduct
of men in their mutual relations more just, more benevolent. Do
you suppose that this improved aspect of the world, this ameliora-
tion of external facts does not re-acc on the interior of man, upon
humanity ? All that is said as to the authority of examples, of
customs, of noble models, is founded upon this only; that an
external fact, good, well regulated, leads sooner or later more or
less completely to an internal fact of the same nature ; the same
merit; that a world better regulated, a world more just, renders
man himself more just; that the inward is reformed by the outward
as the outward by the inward ; that the two elements of civilisation
are closely connected, the one with the other; that centuries, that
obstacles of all sorts may interpose between them ; that it is possible
they may have to undergo a thousand transformations in order to
regain each other ; but sooner or later they will rejoin each other.
This is the law of their nature, the general fact of history, the
instinctive nature of the human race. I think I have thus not


exhausted the subject; very far from it—but exhibited in a well
nigh complete, though cursory manner the fact of civilization. I
think I have described it, settled its limits, and stated the principal
the fundamental questions to which it gives rise. I might stop here,
but I cannot help touching on a question which meets me at this
point; one of those questions which are not historical questions
so-called, which are questions; I ill not call them hypothetical,
but conjectural questions of which man holds but the one end, the
other end being permanently beyond his reach ; questions of which
he cannot make the circuit, nor view on more than one side ; and yet
questions not the less real, not the less calling upon him for thought,
for they present themselves before him despite of himself at every
moment. Of these two developments of which we have spoken, and
which constitute the fact or civilization, the development of Society
on the one hand, and of humanity on che other; which is the end,
and which is the means ? Is it to perfect his social condition, to
ameliorate his existence on earth that man develops himself, his
faculties, sentiments, ideas, his whole being? or rather, is not the
amelioration of the social condition the progress of society itself the
theatre, the occasion, the mobile of the development of the individual
in a word, is society made to serve the individual, or the individual
to serve society ? On the answer to this question inevitably depends
that, whether the destiny of man is purely social, whether society
drains up and exhausts the whole man, or whether he bears within
him something extrinsic, something superior to his existence on
earth ? A man whom lam proud to call my friend, a man who has
passed through meetings like our own to assume the first place in
assemblies less peaceful and more powerful ; a man all whose words
are engraven on the hearts of those who hear them—M. Royer
Collard—has solved this question according to his own conviction at
least, in his speech on the Sacrilege Bill. I find in that speech these
two sentences—“ Human societies are born, live, and die on the
earth ; it is there their destinies are accomplished .... but
they contain not the whole man After he has engaged himself to
society, there remains to him the noblest part of himself, those high
faculties by which he elevates himself to God, to a future life, to


unknown felicity in an invisible world. . . . We persons, indivi-
dual and identical, veritable beings endowed with immortality ; we
have a different destiny from that of states. I will add nothing to this.
I will not undertake to treat the question itself. I content mjself
with stating it. It is met with at the history of civilization. When
the history of civilization is completed, when there is nothing more
to say as to our present existence, man inevitably asks himself
whether all is exhausted ? whether he has reached the end of all
things ? This then is the last, the highest of all those problems to
which the history of civilization can lead. It is sufficient for me
to have indicated its position and its grandeur.” In these extracts,
then, it is obvious that these four things are treated : first, the
method that might be followed in determining the process of civiliz-
ation ; then the constituent elements ; in the third place the process
of organic development; and lastly the goal to which that process
leads. In regard to the first of these he wisely shifts his ground,
—the internal and the externa! are not two histories of civilization
as he calls them ; rather they are the image, the reflection of each
other. The one could not be followed exclusively without the other,
they are the two sides of the one method ; the one historical method
of which the factors are given below. Reflection, observation, and
experiment are not divided, the former representing the internal,
the latter the external; as is the consciousness of the internal, so
is the consciousness of the external in the whole process. The
Absolute has the power of dual movement in the evolution of the
historical organism ; but when examined more closely it is found
that this dualism vanishes ; the movement is the expression of the
Absolute through the medium of the phenomenal under the condi-
tions of time and space; and the phenomenal is merely the husk of
the Absolute, but a husk which indicates its quality and tendency.
The phenomenal is the rational conductor of the Absolute in all its
integral departments in every grade of its evolution. In regard to
the constituent elements, since there is no conception of the scien-
tific and philosophic groundwork, there is no consciousness of
disintegration and differentiation \ and therefore there can be no
distinct and exhaustive enumeration, neither of the differentiated


factors of the essential unity, nor of the disintegrated factors of the
organic unity ; hence the constituent elements both of the essential
and organic are thrown about without any consciousness of scienti-
fic order and relation, as shown in the defective enumeration in the
above extracts. Many of the statements, though good, are merely
reflections on the subject; but they do not get beneath the phe-
nomenal to grasp the structure of the science. The individual and
society are the two constituent elements in the process so far as he
conceives civilization as the all important fact; but there is no
accurate analysis of all that is included in the individual and in
society. Each of these in turn includes all the structure and
phenomena both of the essential unity and of the organic unity ;
and both in the individual and in society they are brought into a
living and organic union. In his treatment of the process of
organic development he makes use of general statements merely ;
the process is never in any case demonstrated. Since there is no
consciousness of disintegration and differentiation, the scientific
principle regulating the process of organic development cannot be
distinctly conceived. To understand this principle is to understand
the process of development. In that process of the development the
individual and the development of society are included ; or as
Guizot describes it:—“ All the great developments of the internal
man have turned to the profit of society, and all the great develop-
ments of the social state to the profit of the individual man ; the
development cf social activity and the development of individual
activity ; the progress of society and the development of humanity.”
But in determining the progress, the scientific principle must be
understood. It is one thing to see and state the result, but quite
another thing to show the principles in operation leading to the
result. The process is scientifically and philosophically determined
through the medium of the principle. That principle is of the
nature of universal science ; the two factors of which are the
Natural and the Supernatural; the former includes |the mental and
the material ; there is a gradual advance in each from the minimum
to the maximum of consciousness f as is the grade in the develop-
ment of the one, [so is the grade in the development of the other


along the whole line of transition while the consciousness of the Super-
natural will depend on the grade of development reached in the consci-
ousness of the Natural, as the order of the latter is determined, the
nature of the former will be the more clearly and distinctly under-
stood. This leads to the consideration of the goal to which the process
of organic development tends. Ihe highest possible attainable good is
the complete development of the scientific and philosophic ground-
work of the Absolute in the individual, and the consciousness of that
development. The Absolute carries with it the results of the process
in every department, both of the Essential and of the Organic ; and
is dimly conscious of something in addition that can only be covered
by the word destiny. About the goal, however, little need be said,
as the last extract reveals that the author had a clear conception of
the matter.
Hegel, in his “ Philosophy of History,” has the clearest, most
accurate, and most exhaustive conception of the scientific and
philosophic groundwork of history. He is conscious that the process
of disintegration is scientific, and that the procees of development is
organic ; but his statements are general, like the enunciation of a
geometrical problem ; between the enunciation and the result the
work is not shown. The steps in the disintegration, differentiation,
and organic development must be consecutively followed until the
resultant is reached. “ The idea is the inner spring of action ;
everything in rhe'history of the world is a manifestation of the idea of
spirit. The State is the embodiment of the idea so far as developed.
Objectivity involves the rise of differences which make up a total of
distinct spheres of objective spirit. The form under which all that
the State includes is brought is the whole of that cycle of phenomena
which constitutes the culture of a nation—morality, art, science,
government, and religion. The spirit of a nation, concretely mani-
fested, expresses every aspect of its consciousness and will; the
whole cycle of its realization, its religion, its polity, it legislation, its
ethics, and even its science, art, and mechanical skill, all bear its
stamp. His enumeration of disintegrated factors here is not ex-
haustive. In the first enumeration the factors of the Speculative
aspect of reason are wanting—Causality, and Teleology—and one of
19


the scientific aspect of reason is also wanting--the Social. In the
second enumeration, the factors of the Speculative aspect of reason
are again wanting. Polity is the political organism ; but legislation
is a subordinate department of the political; while mechanical skill
is a subordinate department of the Social organism. There is an
effort at an exhaustive analysis of the process of disintegration ; he is
clear on the process of organic development. The life of the ever
present spirit is a circle of progressive embodiments which, looked at
in one aspect, still exist behind the other, and only as looked at from
the other point of view appear as past. The life of the ever present
spirit comprehends all the earlier steps which have unfolded them-
selves independently in succession ; but what spirit is, it has always
been ; distinctions are onlj the development of this essential nature.
The grades which spirit seems to have left behind it still possesses in
the depths of the present. Universal history exhibits the gradation
in that spirit whose substantial purport is the consciousness of free-
dom. The analysis of the successive grades in their abstract form-
belongs to Logic; in their concrete aspect to the philosophy of spirit.
The first step presents the immersion of spirit in nature ; the second
shows it as advancing to the consciousness of freedom ; the third
step is the elevation of the soul to its pure universal form, that state
in which the spiritual essence attains consciousness and feeling of
itself These grades are the ground principle in the general process.
“ The abstract conception of change gives place to the thought of
spirit manifesting and developing, and perfecting its powers in
every direction which its manifold nature can allow. Universal
history is the exhibition of the divine absolute development of spirit
in the highest forms ; that gradation by which it attains its truth
and consciousness of itself. In regard to the scientific principle
regulating the process of organic development he is defective ; his
statements are general, like enunciations. History is the development
of spirit in time, as nature is the development of the idea in space.
Here is a reference to the two factors of the Natural, the physical—
organic and inorganic—and the spiritual, which is equal to the
Scientific aspect of reason. Space is essential to the development of
the idea in nature, as freedom to the development of the idea in


history ; while time is common to both. He makes reference to the
Supernatural side of the Scientific principle under the name of
providence. This side of the principle corresponds with the Specula-
tive aspect of reason. Thus Schlegel make most of the religious
factor in his treatment af the subject; Buckle and Draper of the
intellectual; Spencer of the scientific ; and Guizot of the political in
relation to the philosophical ; while Hegel gathers up everything
under the grasp of the conception which is the central principle of
his philosophical system, but in no case is there a consciousness of a
groundwork which is wholly scientific and philosophic, and therefore
exhaustive. No one who has yet written on the subject has been
able to place the whole of historical phenomena in the structure of
the scientific mechanism of the Absolute ; and, therefore, though all
the systems produced are more or less scientific and philosophic, as
they must be to some extent in dealing with the phenomena, yet
they are all defective up to the degree in which the consciousness of
the scientific mechanism of the Absolute is wanting. The true idea
of history, and the true idea of the philosophy of history are insep-
arable ; but since that idea has been wanting, neither history nor the
philosophy of history could be written as it should. Philosophy,
history, and science are equally general in the evolution of the his-
torical organism. History supplies all the phenomena qualitatively
differentiated in time and space Science arranges and classifies all
the phenomena qualitatively differentiated in time and space.
Philosophy determines the relation of all the phenomena quahta -
tively differentiated, arranged, and classified in time and space to
the Absolute. History is the record of the Scientific disintegration,
differentiation, and organic development and objective embodiment
of the Absolute, both in the lives of individuals and in the histories
of nations. The philosophy of history is the determination of the
relation of all historical phenomena embodied in the Scientific me-
chanism in all its integral departments, and as a whole to the
Absolute. The historical process had to run its course before the
Scientific mechanism involved in and necessitating the historical
events could be conceived ; that is, before the idea of spirit could be
conceived, either in the absolute, or in the essential, or in the
21


organic form ; its development in the life of the individual and in
the history of the nation was needful to some extent, for what had
not been developed and embodied in some degree in the concrete
form could not be conceived. All historical events are now known
to be the result of the development of Scientific Principles, both in
the life of the individual and in the history of the nation. An ar-
bitrary concatenation has given place to scientific principle and
mechanism. Every historical fact has a setting in a group of cir-
cumstances from which its meaning and importance are derived.
The evolution of the scientific mechanism of the Absolute is the
rational framework of history, and the rational conductor of all his-
torical phenomena. The philosophy of history is the science of all
the sciences, incorporating all integral departments in one organic
whole, through which the Absolute reveals and becomes an object
to itself. But if the mechanism of the Absolute be an organic
whole, then the subordinate departments can and must have mathe-
matical exactness in treatment. If there be exact science in one
department, then there must be exact science in every department ;
and if in all the integral departments, then also in the organic whole,
for one thing in relation necessitates all things in relation.
If there be “ exact science ” in the various departments of
Cosmology and Psychology, then also in Ontology ; for
the motion of the Absolute through the medium of its me-
chanism must be rational both in the life of the individual
and in the history of the nation. In what sense, then, can the
expression exact science be applied to the self-determining of the
Absolute ? The scientific disintegration and differentiation of the
Absolute is the groundwork of the historical process on the spiritual
side ; or the self-determining energy of the Absolute is the regula-
tive principle of the historical process and all its phenomena,
lleason is not phenomenal, but contact between the Absolute and
the phenomenal is effected through the medium of reason ; as con-
tact between the mental and material is effected through the medium
of space. The objective embodiment of the Scientific disintegration,
differentiation, and organic development and self-determining energy
of the Absolute is the State ; which is the harmony of the individual


with the universal will; or the harmony of the Social unit with
the Social Organism, and with the Political organism. That em-
bodiment must be scientific, and the measure of the possible, for the
universe is constructed on a rational principle ; for if there be exact
Science, that is, a scientific mechanism in each integral department
of Cosmology and Psychology, then the evolution discerned in the
historical transition must be a rational The expression,
“ exact science,” cannot be applied to this universal and regulative
science in the same sense as to its integral departments—the special
Sciences In all these there is a fixed and progressive order gradu-
ally revealed to consciousness ; and if in all the integral departments
then also in the Science of all the Sciences—the organic whole—
there must be a scientific mechanism ; a axed and progressive order
gradually revealing itself to human consciousness. In the structure
of the Scientific groundwork there is as much exactness as in the
science of Geometry, or Trigonometry. A system is needed that is
final in Scientific form, though not complete in development; a
groundwork which because universal and impersonal is beyond dis ■
pute ; and this groundwork is revealed in the Scientific disintegra-
tion, differentiation, and organic development of the Absolute. The
Absolute and the Organic have a reciprocal tendency to adjustment
through the medium of the Essential; the Scientific accuracy of
the one is determined by the consciousness of the Scientific disin-
tegration and differentiation of the other. There can be no disrup-
tion between the Absolute and the phenomenal; they are mutual
exponents of each other’s condition in each grade of the transition
in the evolution of the historical organism. There is thus a gradual
a[ proximation to an exact Science in history, each advancing grade
in the historical process being more scientific than the antecedent
one ; for the full development of the organic is the Scientific expres-
sion of the Absolute through the medium of the Essential. The
movement of the individual or of the national spirit through the
medium of this groundwork is always rational in some degree; the
greater the vice actuating the spirit the weaker the reason ; the
greater the virtue the stronger the reason. The instinctive with
which the selfish and vicious are associated forms the obstacle to the
23


complete adjustment between the Absolute and the Organic. It is
at once the medium of and the hindrance to that adjustment. This
work traces the graduated disclosure of the Absolute through the
medium of its mechanism which has the three departments.
Scientific disintegration, differentiation, and organic development;
and determines the harmony between the Absolute and the phenom-
enal in each grade of the transition ; as is the grade in the disinteg-
ration and differentiation of the Absolute ; so is the grade in the
development of the phenomenal. Each grade in the transition thus
tends to a more complete adjustment between the Absolute and
the phenomenal. No special Science can be treated in detail, but
only so far as the fundamental principles are concerned, and in
relation to the mechanism of the organic whole. The system being
a transcript of the historical order of the universe so far as its con
stitution can be determined in the process of development, must be
a system for every rational being, about which, and in itself there
Can be no diversity of opinion : for no mere matter of opinion,
nothing arbitrary, can be admitted into it more than into the Science
of Geometry, the figures of which have their place in space for
every mind regulated by reason. The system reveals the graduated
disclosure of the complex scientific mechanism of the historical
process, and is not concerned with arbitrary and fragmentary
statements about it. But since this groundwork is equally as
universal, and impersonal and self-evident as the groundwork of the
Sciences of Geometry and Trigonometry, and being an expression of
the Absolute, and therefore corresponding with its disintegrations
end differentiations, the system is exhaustive. It is no mere ring
of the Sciences, but a scientific and philosophic procedure, as
revealing the reciprocal tendency to adjustment between the
Absolute and the Organic through the medium of the Essential ;
as comprehending and transcending the varied acquisitions of
history, reducing the vastness and diversity of the object of reason
to order ; exhausting the possible so far as known, and remaining
open for the possible so far as unknown ; for the organic has not yet
been an accurate and final expression of the Absolute. But if this
scientific groundwork be objective and impersonal, then the essential


and organic principles can be tabulated in an objective form ; and
these together are an expression of the scientific mechanism of the
Absolute. The mechanism can be determined objectively, just as
the order of geometrical principles or any objective science of the
Natural, for they are not obtained from introspection merely, but
from observation and experiment in the historical process. The
individual is a very small factor in the development of this vast
structure. He may discern the Scientific disintegration, differentia-
tion, and organic development, and give expression to it as dis-
cerned, and so far as discerned ; but it is beyond his control. The
organic development of that scientific groundwork to its appropriate
organic resultant is impersonal ; and with the same unerring
certainty as the motion of physical law. This scientific mechanism
with its three unities—the Absolute, the Essential, and the Organic
has been extracted from history, for nothing connected
with the evolution of the historical organism in the history
of the world has ever been lost The structure and me-
chanism of that organism persist amid all external changes ; and
the historical organism includes and transcends every phase of the
Social organism. A work is of no special value if it deals merely
with the data of the subject without presenting an original scientific
groundwork. What is needed is an absolute scientific system,
that is, a scientific system, an expression of the Absolute ; a system
of all the systems already produced, that will comprehend, transcend
and reduce to scientific order all that has been done ; showing the
place and relative value of each system in the system What
students want is a clear conception of such a scientific groundwork
which is involved in and so necessitates the aggressive movements
of human history ; and of this groundwork there must be a clear
conception before anything can be learned as it should. The
isolated facts are nothing in themselves scattered about through
time and space, and out of their relation to the scientific mechanism
of the Absolute in all its integral departments. The data, that is,
historical phenomena—for these are qualitatively differentiated
will find their own place in the system when the scientific and
philosophic groundwork is understood. There is an effort made in
25


this work, as note*! above, to exhibit such a system, that it may be a
guide to the student through the vast mass of what has been
written on the subject. The work is thus an implement by which
the student can not only bring to a scientific focus and determine
the value of what has been done in the past, but also anticipate in
some measure what may be done in the future ; for a scientific and
philosophical system and expression of the Absolute will include
and suggest all that can or may he written on the subject. But it
is different again from all other works on the subject in that it is
concerned with essentials onlj, so far as the order of their develop-
ment can be determined. Points end fragments belong to the
common consciousness. Principles to the scientific and philosophic
consciousness. Without a knowledge of this scientific groundwork
is confusion in historical phenomena, and therefore there
there is nothing scientific nor philosophic in the historical conscious-
ness. The authors mentioned above may have a fair knowledge of
all the departments in the field of history ; of the different depart-
ments of science ; of the various systems of philosophy ; they may
generalise on the historical facts, classify the different departments
of science, and interpret the fundamental principles in the philo-
sophical systems; but such generalisations, classifications, and
interpretations, however well mastered and strung together, do not
satisfy reason, which is the essence of all science, and the regulative
principle of all phenomena historical, scientific and philosophic ;
nor is it of much importance to the student who knows and feels
that there is more than this needed before he can discern and
understand the meaning of the historical process. In the above-
mentioned works there is no doubt contact with the phenomena of
the scientific mechanism of the Absolute at some point; but that
contact is not only arbitrary, is is also confused, for there is
no scientific groundwork disc rned from the first as a guide to the
mind, and to give systematic coherence to the matter. The isolated
historical facts have not their true meaning apart from a clear
consciousness of their relation to the scientific mechanism of the
Absolute. This work may not be in some senses regarded as pro-
ducing m.ich that is new in regard to the phenomenal content of


the Absolute in any of its departments ; Vmt it p’aces a 1! the
material regarded old in a scientific and philosophic order. This
itself is an important fact in the effort to determine approximately
the scientific and philosophic groundwork underlying historical
phenomena, both in the life of the individual—representative men in
each integral department of the Essential Unity, and of the Organic
Unity, and in the history of the nation—that is representative
nations of the world. All historical phenomena must reveal the
unity of the scientific mechanism of the Absolute. The problem of
philosophy, however, and of the philosophy of history will never be
solved till the relation of the Absolute ego to the ultimate qualita-
tive constituents of matter has been exactly and finally determined.
Science has to determine the nature and constitution of these
ultimate qualitative constituents. The scientific mechanism of the
historical organism is the anatomy of the Absolute ; and when the
reciprocal order of that mechanism has been determined in all its
departments it will be seen that man has invented nothing ; that he
has solved no problem ; but that he has only verified and utilised
the universal order which has been imparted by the process of
rational gradation to the human consciousness .


CHAPTER 11.
Scientific disintegration, differentiation and organic development of
mechanism of historical organism.
Absolute ego—External material system, its mechanism and content —
Groundwork of abstract Science, and of concrete Science —Unity of
internal spiritual system— Essential unity : co-ordinate differenti-
ated factors —Organic unity ; disintegrated factors—Mechanism of
Absolute and intuitive expression of its rational energy, and there-
fore a rational synthesis — Entelecheia — Psyche, LogiJce includes
reason, intuitive, discursive, scientific, and speculative—Reason :
The regulative principle of all historical phenomena, and chief
constituent element of consciousness—Dunamis, the prius of all
spiritual and mental operations - Ontology Psychology and
cosmology—Transition from Absolute to Organic—Province of
philosophy— Dunamis, Kinema, Energeia , Entelecheia —Regulative
principle of historical process —Regulative principle of historical
phenomena—Two distinctive aspects of reason : Scientific and
speculative—Scientific mechanism and content in all factors of
Essential Unity and of Organic Unity—Regulative principle of
Organic development—Piinciple regulating process of Organic
development is of the nature of universal Science, and includes the
Natural and Supernatural— Properties of internal spiritual system
—Consciousness, space, providence—Possibility of consciousness of
God—Re’ation of hi man and divim—Reason not inventive—Prob-
lem of philosophy unchangeable: Method, subjective, objective —
Philosophy of history—Factors of histoiical method : introspection,
observation, experiment—lnduction—Deduction—Historical con-
stitution of universe—Definition of Science and Philosophy—Phil-
osophy of history defined - The Absolute is conscious—The Organic
Unity the synthetic work of reason—Harmonic correspondence
between Absolute and phenomenal— Consciousness of Absolute Ego
and of Absolute Being neither Agnosticism nor Mysticism—Consci-
ousness of freedom—The Summum Bonurn—Simultaneous consci-
ousness of Absolute ego with all its processes.
The Absolute ego being a living organism, and having a scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content is an unlimited potential
energy from the minimum to the maximum of consciousness.
Through the medium of the external material system in its various
departments—space, matter, and motion—the Scientific mechanism
and phenomenal content of the Absolute are determined and


Scientific Groundwork of Historical
Organism.




developed. The Absolute postulates the external material system
as the condition of the externalisation—-disintegration, differentia-
tion and organic development—of its scientific mechanism. The
Absolute is related to the phenomenal—mental, material, and
spiritual--through the medium of its mechanism ; and so far as can
be discerned from historical data, it can only reveal itself through
the medium of this complex scientific mechanism ; for there is in
the Absolute an immianent tendency to disintegration,differentiation
and organic development, which processes assume an external form
through the medium of phenomenal, mental, material, and
spiritual—space and matter being the groundwork, the former'of
abstract science, the latter of concrete science. The Scientific
mechanism of the Absolute with its phenomenal content expresses
every possible mood or state possible to it. There are no divisions
in the internal spiritual system, but a disintegration of the Absolute
into the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essental Unity, and
into the disintegrated factors of the Oiganic Unity, which together
constitute its mechanism. The rational energy of the Absolute is
in the integral departments of the Organic Unity, through the
medium of the integral departments of the Essential Unity ; for the
disintegrated factors of the Organic Unity are all the intuitive
expressions of the Absolute, and therefore the first form of consci
ousness, or th: first operation of the Absolute through the medium
of the constituent elements of consciousness. The internal spiritual
system having its own mechanism, and phenomena and laws is a,
rational synthesis ; there is a valid logical order in each department
and in the whole The Scientific mechanism of the Absolute with
all that has given it an objective expression is a rational synthesis
from the initial disintegration of the Absolute till the final stage in
the entelecheia is reached. The psyche loyike which includes every
possible aspect of reason—lntuitive Discursive, Scientific, and
Speculative—is the regulative principle of historical phenomena, as
well as the chief constituent element of consciousness. But the
intuitive aspect has various degrees of strength and clearness,
passing from the weakest phase through the subsidiary mental
processes discrimination, comparison, analysis, synthesis, generalisa-
29


tion, &c., to the discursive, and thence to the scientific and
speculative aspects. The internal spiritual system has three forms
of unity—the Absolute, the Essential, and the Organic; the
Absolute dunamis, the prius of all mental and spiritual operations,
corresponds with what is usually known as Ontology—the doctrine
of Being. The Essential Unity, psyche logike, with what is usually
known as Psychology—the phenomena of mind in all its integral
departments, and as a whole. The Organic unity entelecheia with
what is usually known as the phenomena of spirit. The external
material system corresponds with what is usually known as
Cosmology. Ontology has nothing to do with phenomena, but with
that which underlies or transcends phenomena—the Absolute
Psychologyfdeals with mental phenomena; Cosmology with mate-
rial phenomena ; the Organic unity with spiritual phenomena. The
Organic unity and the historical organism are identical; the province
of philosophy is to show how the Absolute is related to the pheno
mena of mind; and to the phenomena of matter; and to the phe
nomena of spirit. Thus between Ontology and Cosmology, that, is,
between the Absolute and the external material system there comes
the Essential unity psyche logike, and the Organic unity entelecheia ,
and on the gn undwork of the external mat< rial there is a transition
from the Absolute to the Organic through the medium of the
Essential. These three departments, the phenomena of mind, the
phenomena of spirit, and the phenomena of matter, thus constitute
an involved unity in the constitution and organic development of
the scientific mechanism and phenomenal contents of the Absolute
'ihe Absolute is subjectivity revealing itself through the medium of
the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential unity gnosis,
aisthesis, boulests, which are all included in the psyche logike ; and
of the disintegrated factors of the Organic unity—the Scientific and
the moral, the Eeligious and the Esthetic, the Political and the
Social. Causality and Teleology, which are all included in the
entelecheia. The transition from the Absolute to the Organic
through the medium of the Essential is energeia, that is, from
dunamis to entelecheia through the medium of psyche logike ; and in
each grade of the transition there is an actuality in the energeia , for


both kinema and energeia, whatever grade may be reached, are always
embodied in the entelecheia. The qualitative, disintegrating and dif-
ferentiating energy of the Absolute is the regulative principle of the
historical process ; there can be nothing in the entelecheia that was
not in the dunamis ; and there must be that in the entelecheia that
was and is in the dunamis in same degree. Reason—intuitive nous ,
discursive dianoia, scientific episteme, and speculative—is the regula-
tive principle of historical phenomena. It is not phenomenal, but the
regulator of all phenomena, and the first expression of the Absolute.
It regulates the mechanism and j; henomena of each integral depart-
ment of the Essential unity and the mechanismand phenomenaof each
integral department of the Organic unity; and therefore it regulates
the relation between the Absolute and its Scientific mechanism. It
has, however, two main and distinctive aspects, the Scientific and the
Speculative, the former dealing with the nature and constitution the
latter with the origin and destiny of the universe. The Scientific
aspect has three co-ordinate differentiated factors in the psyche
logike, gnosis , aisthesis, boulesis ; there are also six dis-
integrated factors in the entelecheia —the Scientific and the Moral,
the Religions and the the Political and the Social. The
Speculative aspect has two disintegrated factors, Causality and
Teleology. The Scientific aspect not only determines the nature
and constitution of the phenomenal, but it also determines the Sci-
entific setting of the phenomenal, both mental and material, in
time and space. The Speculative aspect of reason is identical with
its own energy, and can never have a formulated object like, or as in
the Scientific, for the object to be attained is the determination of
the origin and destiny of the universe ; nor can it ever be verified
like or as the Scientific ; but there is as much certainty in regard to
it as in regard to the Scientific, resembling the certainty experienced
when the Absolute is the content of consciousness. This disintegra-
tion, differentiation, and organic development as embodied in the
phenomenal under the conditions of time and space constitute the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute.
The Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the internal
spiritual system, and the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal


content of the external material system are both involved in the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the Organic unity.
But the Scientinc mechanism and phenomena! content of the
Organic Unity, and the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal con-
tent of the Essential unity include the Scientific mechanism and
phenomenal content of the Scientific aspect of reason, and the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the speculative
aspect of reason, which together constitute the Scientific mechanism
and phenomenal content of the Absolute. If there be a Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content in each integral department of
the Essential unity, and in each integral department of the Organic
unity ; then there must be a scientific mechanism and phenomenal
content in the Absolute, of the mechanism of which the essential
and Organic are the constituent departments. These disintegrated
factors of the Organic unity are necessities of the Absolute, and
constitute the structural essentials in the frame work of history.
They are the positions of the Absolute in its processes of disintegra-
tion, differentiation, and Organic development, vhich reason must
occupy in determining the order of the historical process ; for this
Scientific disintegration, differentiation, and Organic development,
that is, the transition from the Absolute to the Organic through
the medium of the Essential, is the one universal fact to which
history bears testimony ; or, rather, it is the fact which constitutes
history. This disintegrating energy does not result in an arbitrary
division, for there are no divisions in philosophy, nor in the philo
sophy of history ; each is an expression of an Absolute unity, for
these factors are developed in and extracted from the Historical
process. The disintegration and differentiation of the dunamis in its
process of Organic development is regulated by a Scientific prin-
ciple. Since consciousness of the Scientific mechanism and pheno-
menal content of the Absolute is at a minimum in the stage of un-
conscious identity with nature, there is a gradual advance from the
stage when there is no consciousness ofjan Absolute unity, dunamis ,
and no conception of the Essential unity, psyche logike \ nor of the
Organic unity entelecheia ; nor of the transition from the dunamis to
the entelecheia through the medium of phsyche logike, which is


energeicr, and consciousness is at a minimum : up to the period when
the conscious identity—scientific and philosophic—is reached, that
is, when there is a distinct consciousness of the Absolute, and of
the Essential, and of the Organic in themselves, and in an insepar-
able relation, and consciousness is at a maximum. But there
must also be a Scientific principle regulating the order of historical
phenomena in the process of Organic development. Reason is not
phenomenal, but the regulator of the phenomenal, and the first
expression of the Absolute. It is the instrument of the Absolute in
the Scientific disintegration, historical adjustment, and organic
development of the phenomenal; and the Scientific accuracy of that
adjustment is determined by the degree in which reason has been
developed; for reason adopts and adip:s the Scientific principle in
ordering the phenomena of the historical process The Absolute is
the Essential substance and formative energy in the disintegration
and Organic development of its mechanism ; while reason is the
regulative principle of all its phenomena. What then is the
scientific principle, and how does it operate in regulating the
phenomena of the historical process ? The Scientific principle is of
the nature of universal Science, the extreme factors of which are
the Natural and the Supernatural corresponding with the Scientific
and speculative aspects of reason. In the Natural there are two
departments, the internal spiritual system, and the external material
system—the internal with its three unities, the Absolute, the
Essential, and the Organic ; and its fundamental properties, non-
extension, non-resistance, and freedom. Unity and self-determina-
tion are also fundamental properties. The constituent departments
are the mental faculties : the Acquisitive —which equals internal
and external perception, which again are equal to Cognition,
Emotion, and Volition—the Retentive and the Reproductive. Con-
sciousness is the general ground of all mental phenomena, while
reason, intuitive, discursive, scientific, and speculative is the regu-
lative principle. The external with its fundamental properties,
Extension, Resistance, and Necessity, has a mechanical motion,
acting only as it is acted on. Unity is also a fundamental property
of the external. The constituent departments are the organic and


inorganic. Space is the general groundwork of all material phe-
nomena, and gravitation is the regulative principle. The Super-
natural includes all the Sciences relating to the Divine Being, and
his relation to the Natural. The consciousness of providence is
inseparable from the Scientific and philosophic groundwork of
history, or from the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute; for the
universe considered as to its external material system, and internal
spiritual system, and historical constitution, which determines the
order of the relation between these, postulates the Divine and
eternal as its ground and explanation. Consciousness of God is only
possible through the development of the Scientific mechanism of the
Absolute ; and the degree reached in the latter determines the
clearness, strength, and accuracy of the former. The Supernatural
is as much an integral department of the Scientific mechanism of
the Absolute as the Scientific, or the Moral. It is the connecting
link between the human and divine. As the natural side of the
Scientific principle is developed, that is, the mental and material,
there is a corresponding distinctness in the consciousness of the
Divine Being, and his manifestation the Supernatural ; for the
Supernatural is implied in the Natural, the infinite in the finite.
Reason as regulative principle in adjusting the phenomenal to the
Scientific mechanism of the whole historical process cannot invent;
it can only determine and verify the system of order revealed in and
through the medium of the internal spiritual system, and of the
historical constitution ; for this is the problem of the philosophy of
history—to determine the order of the transition from the Absolute
to the Organic, through the medium of the Essential; or to determine
the order of the historical constitution of the universe as thus based
on the internal spiritual and external material. But since that
problem is given in and revealed throughjthe medium of the order of
that historical constitution, it can never change, being determined
in the Absolute, it is ever the same, beneath and accounting for all
the transitional variations in the history of the race. All that can
be known, is known because of, and in relation to it. But the method
as well as the problem is given in the historical constitution of the
universe, for the true conception of the problem leads to the true


conception of the method. The philosophy of history is the his-
torical method, and since that method determines the of the
transition from the Absolute to the Organic through the medium
of the Essential, it must unite, comprehend, and transcend the two
main factors in the acquisition of knowledge—‘internal perception
and external perception—for thete have been repeated efforts made
to determine the order both of the internal spiritual and of the
external material; the former is called the subjective or metaphy-
sical method, having as implement introspection, with experiment
induction and deduction as factors to determine the order of the inter-
nal spiritual; that is, consciousness with its constituents and content;
the latter is called the objective or scientific method, having as
implement observation, with experiment induction and deduction as
factors to determine the order of the external material; that is,
space matter and motion, with its fundamental properties and con-
stituent departments. But these two departments, that is internal
perception and external perception, the s ibjective and the objective,
are used merely as factors in determining the order of the synthetic
historical process in the constitution of the universe. That histori-
cal constitution determines what is Scientific and what Philosophic.
Science is the determination of the order of the Scientific mechanism
of the external material system in its various departments, and of
the order of the Scientific mechanism of the internal spiri-
tual system in its various departments, or the Scientific setting
of the phenomenal, both mental and material in time and
space; but philosophy is the determination of the order of
the relation of both these systems or departments to each
other and to the Absolute ; or the Scientific setting of the pheno-
menal, both mental and material, as embodied in time and space in
the Absolute ; for time and space are modes through which the
Absolute reveals and actualises itself in relation bo the phenomenal.
These are the constituents in the Scientific and Philosophic ground-’
work of history. The philosophy of history is the determination of
the scientific disintegration and differentiation of the Absolute
under the conditions of time and space; and the organic develop-
ment of those disintegrated and differentiated departments through


a materialistic medium. If consciousness of the Scientific mechanism
and phenomenal content of the Absolute be at a minimum in the
stage of unconscious identity with nature, then there can be no
conscious beginning with this framework of Structural Essentials ;
but that framework is implicit in the beginning, and revealed in the
historical process. The Scientific principle mentioned above which
regulates the process of organic development with the disintegration
of the dunamis is important in the disposition of the complex phe-
nomena of the historical organism It is the absolute that is
conscious, and through the medium of the internal and external in
reciprocal development the Organic unity or historical organism the
synthetic work of reason is elaborated as the Scientific expression of
the Absolute. But between the disintegration of the Absolute and
its Scientific mechanism and Organic development, there is always a
harmonious correspondence in each grade of the transition ; that is,
the mechanism of the Absolute with its disintegration, differentia-
ation, and Organic development and rational synthesis all correspond
at each grade of the transition, from the initial disintegration when
they are at a minimum ; and with the degree of movement in each
of these there is a corresponding clearness of consciousness in the
Absolute ; and that degree in which the Absolute has revealed and
developed itself is always embodied in the Essential and Organic
departments of the Scientific mechanism ; and therefore in the
external material, for every movement of the Absolute tends to the
revelation of the order of the historical constitution of the universe
in some degree. The individual in whom ana the nation in which
reason has been most fully developed have discovered in some degree
the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute from the Scientific struc-
ture of the phenomenal, and given expression to it as discerned and
so far as discerned. It is the Absolute that is conscious, and with-
out the consciousness of the Absolute there can be no scientific
consciousness of phenomena. We are conscious of the Absolute as
distinct from and the cause of the consciousness of the phenomenal as
psychological processes Gonsciousnecs of logical thought is impos-
sible without consciousness of the universal ; and a logical conscious-
ness of the phenomenal is impossible without a consciousness of the


Scientific disintegration and differentiation of the Absolute. It is
the ground unity of the internal spiritual system, that is, the phe
nomena and mechanism of each integral department of the Essential
unity, and the phenomena and mechanism of each integral depart-
ment of the Organic unity; and of the external material system,
that is, the phenomena and mechanism of e«ch constituent depart-
ment, organic and inorganic. The Absolute is thus the ground and
cause of the consciousness of the phenomena and mechanism of the
Essential and the Organic; and it has a position in the phenomenal
as embodied in its Scientific mechanism in each grade of the tran-
sition. In the usual sense of affirmation and negation nothing can
be either affirmed or denied of the Absolute. There can only he a
consciousness of it by inference and implication as the substratum
of the Essential and the Organic ; and that its disintegrations and
differentiations are a Scientific order through the medium of these ;
but of the Absolute in itself and apart from the phenomenal both
Essential and Organic nothing can be affirmed or denied, so far as
the ordinary forms of knowledge are concerned, though it can be a
content of consciousness which is neither Agnosticism nor Mysti-
cism. There is a consciousness of the Absolute as distinct from the
Consciousness of the phenomenal. There can be no consciousness
of freedom by the ordinary forms of knowledge, but a consciousness
of the Absolute and a consciousness of freedom are identical, for the
true consciousness of freedom is wanting if there be no conscious-
ness of the Absolute. The full development of the Scientific
mechanism and its perfect concrete embodiment both in the life of
the individual and in the history of the nation is the highest possible
attainable good, the sumraum bonum which includes all possible
pleasure and happiness, and therefore good. But consciousness of
freedom and of the Absolute and of the summum bonum will be in
proportion to the grade of development reached in the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute, both in the
life of the individual and in the history of the nation ; for a consci-
ousness of these can only be experienced when a certain degree in
the transition has been reached. When there is an exact correspon-
dence both in conception and objective embodiment between the


Absolute and Organic through the medium of the Essential, then
the history of the nation having reached that experience is at an
end ; that is, the historical consciousness of the universe is com-
plete, when the order of the universe and the consciousness of it are
identical. The full development of the Scientific mechanism of the
Absolute is the verification of the absolute order of the universe.
The unity of the Absolute transcends both internal and external in
the fact of consciousness with all its constituents and phenomenal
content. What is the relation of consciousness with its constituents
and phenomenal content to space ■with its constituents and its phe-
nomenal content ? That which discerns the internal and external
transcends both, and is the Absolute as related to them, and they
are subordinate and subjective as related to it. We are conscious of
consciousness ; and we are conscious that we are conscious of space.
The Absolute is the necessary and structural synthesis of all phe-
nomena through the medium of its mechanism ; but it also makes
its scientific mechanism objective, ordering its ow r n disintegrations
and differentiations and the procedure of its Organic development
through the medium of reason in all its aspects as regulative prin-
ciple, from the minimum to the maximum of consciousness. There
is also a simultaneous consciousness of the Absolute with all its
processes, for it is conscious of its own differentiated forms in the
Essential unity, and of its own disintegrations in the Organic unity ;
and it is equally near to the integral departments of the Essential
unity and of the Organic unity, which are therefore ‘equally objec-
tive as related to the Absolute. The Absolute has an integration,
a unity underlying the disintegration, differentiation, and Organic
development. The mechanism, the integration, and the energeia
correspond in the whole, and in each integral department; and in
each grade of the transition, the whole energeia of the Absolute
corresponds with the whole mechanism of the Absolute. Each
integral department, both Essential and Organic, in the Scientific
mechanism of the Absolute has its own Scientific mechanism, and
therefore its own distinctive series of conceptions. The Scientific
mechanism of the Absolute has also its own distinctive series of
conceptions.


CHAPTER 111.
Obganic Development.
Relation between Absolute and Organic—Origin of Organic development
—Factors of Scientific and Speculative aspects of reason—Each factor
has a Scientific mechanism and a phenomenal content ; and in each
there is process of disintegration, differentiati >n, and organic develop-
ment—Possibility of Consciousness of Absolute—Essentials to con-
sciousness of phenomenal—Co existence of succession, space, and
time—Mechanism and content of Absolute developed in conjunction
Relation of entelecheia to dun amis —Unconscious development—
Evolution of integral departments—Simultaneous and harmonic
advance in Ontology, Psychology, and Cosmology—Cosmology and
the Infinite ; the extreme terms between and inclusive of which the
evolution proceeds—The regulative principle of organic development
—Scientific principle regulating the order of historical phenomena in
ttye process of organic development—Extreme factors of that prin-
ciple, the natural and the supernatural—Groundwork of conscious-
ness—Time and space : expressed conditions of the Absolute—Uni-
verse postulates the Divine Being as its ground and explanation
Possibility of the consciousness of God—Consciousness of the super-
natural—Relation of infinite to finite —Organic development of Sci-
entific mechanism a rational synthesis—ldentity a continuous invari-
ability of the Absolute, the condition of consciousness—History
defined Unconscious identity with nature Development—
Relation between dunamis and entdechela —Objectivity and disinteg-
ration—The Absolute as variable and invariable—The principle of
continuity—lnstinctive motion Self-determination —• Unconscious
development—The necessity of development —Continuous identity of
mechanism of Absolute—Spirit in individual and nation corresponds
with degree of development—The summum bonum complete develop-
ment of mechanism of Absolute—Distinction between ideal and
Absolute, and relation between them —Complete development of the
Absolute, and of its mechanism the last result of history.
In the preceding chapter it has been shown that the Absolute has a
scientific mechanism and a phenomenal content. The relation
between the Absolute and the Organic is that of a scientific disin-
tegration, differentiation, and organic development through the
medium of the internal spiritual system and external material
system. There are no divisions in the internal spiritual system,
nor in the external material system, nor in the historical organism.


The Absolute in its self-determining energy begins the process by
externalising itself through the medium of the processes of disinteg-
ration, and differentiation; for there is a qualitative disintegration
of the Absolute, and a differentiation of the data in each disinteg-
rated factor. Thus the externalised qualitative disintegrated factors
or the Scientific aspect of reason are, the Scientific and the Moral,
the Religious and the the Political and the Social The
disintegrated factors of the speculative aspect of reason are Causality
and Teleology, These are the disintegrated departments in the
scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute. But
there is also a Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content in each
integral department of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute ;
that is, in each co-ordinate differentiated factor of the Essential
unity, and in each disintegrated factor of the Organic unity. There
is an impersonal gravitation of principles to scientific centres in
every department of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute. In
each there is a process of disintegration and differentiation needful
to the development of its mechanism and content. The disintegra-
of the Scientific is shown in the various departments of Science ; of
the Moral in the different method of Ethics ; of the Political in the
various possible forms of government; of the Social m the various
possible orders and structures of Society ; of the Religious in the
various systems actual and possible representing Religion ; of the
Esthetic in the different varied standards of the beautiful and sub-
lime ; of the Speculative in the various theories of the origin and
destiny of the universe ; and because of the Absolute as groundwork
each factor tends to redintegration through the medium of the
disintegrating process; and each disintegrated factor forms an
integral department in the Scientific mechanism of the whole.
Consciousness of an Absolute unity is only possible in relation to
this Scientific disintegration, differentiation, and organic develop-
ment ; and consciousness of the phenomenal in Scientific order is
only possible, because of the Absolute as groundwork. There is a
consciousness above the phenomenal, since the Absolute has a con-
sciousness of itself above all its operations. The distinctive things
essential to the consciousness of the phenomenal are co-existence


and succession in which space and time or motion are necessarily
implied. But the Absolute has a consciousness of itself distinct
from phenomenal co existence and succession. Each integral de-
partment, both Essential and Organic in the Scientific mechanism of
the Absolute has its own distinctive series of conceptions ; but the
scientific mechanism of the Absolute has also its own distinctive
series of conceptions which appear in the transition. The Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute are developed
in conjunction. The Absolute has an internal formative principle
as revealed in its Scientific mechanism ; or it is a living organism,
an Unlimited potential energy. The entelecheia is determined in the
dunamis ; there can be nothing in the entelecheia that was not in the
dunamis , and there must be that in the entelecheia that was in the
dunamis in some degree. The Absolute is conscious of the whole
mechanism in each integral department, and in each grade of the
transition from the minimum to the maximum of consciousness.
But the development to a large extent and for a considerable period
is unconscious. The evolution of the Scientific mechanism’of the'
Absolute includes the evolution of the Scientific mechanism of all'
the differentiated factors of the Essential unity, and of all the dif-
integrated factors of the organic unity; hence the expres-
sions Social evolution, Political evolution, Religious evolution,
.Esthetic evolution, &c. ) and the evolution of the Absolute corres-
ponds with the evolution of the mechanism of these integral
departments of the historical organism. This is the Scientific
groundwork in whicn all the problems occur, each in their own
place and at their own time in the evolution of the historical
organism. la the evolution there is a simultaneous and harmonic
advance in all the great underlying departments, Ontology, Psych -
ology, and Cosmology. Between Cosmology and the consciousness
of the Infinite this evolution of the hictorical organism proceeds,
for both the material and the infinite are equally general as regards
the Absolute, touching the Scientific mechanism in each integral
department at «very point, and in every stage of the transition.
The regulative principle of Organic development is that advance-
ment in the determination of the order of the Scientific mechanism


of the internal spiritual system, necessitates a corresponding advance
in the determination of the order of the Scientific mechanism of the
external material system ; and. the degree in which the order of the
Scientific mechanism of the internal and external are developed will
determine the degree in which the order of the Scientific mechanism
of the Absolute is developed. This principle, because important, we
invert here, though given in the preceding chapter. Since
ousness of the scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the
Absolute are at a minimum in the stage of unconscious identity
with nature, there is a gradual advance from the stage when there is
no consciousness of an Absolute unity, dunamis, and no conception
of the Essential unity, psyche logike ; nor of the Organic unity
entelecheia ; nor of the transition from dunamis to the entelecheia
through the medium of psyche logike which is evergeia, and consci-
ousness is at a minimum, up to the period when there is a conscious
identity with nature ; that is, scientific and philosophic ; when there
is a distinct consciousness of the Absolute, and of the Essential, and
of the Organic, and in an inseparable relation, and consciousness is
at a maximum. But there must also be a Scientific principle
regulating the order of historical phenomena in the process of
Organic development. The Absolute is the Essential substance
and formative energy in the Scientific disentegration, differentiation,
and Organic development of its mechanism. Reason is not phe
nomenal, but the regulator of all phenomena, and the first expres-
sion of the Absolute. It is the instrument of the Absolute in the
historical adjustment of all phenomena in the processes of disinteg-
ration, differentiation, and organic development; and in each grade
of these processes ; the Scientific accuracy of that adjustment is.
determined by the degree in which reason has been developed ; for
reason adopts and adapts the Scientific principle in ordering the
phenomena of the historical process. What, then, is the Scientific
principle, and how does it operate in regulating the phenomena of
the historical process. ? The Scientific principle is of the nature of
universal Science, the extreme factors of which are the Natural and
the Supernatural, corresponding with the Scientific and Speculative
aspects of reason. In the Natural there are the two departments,


the internal spiritual system, and the external material system.
The internal spiritual system has fundamental properties and con-
stituent departments ; the former are non-extension, non-resistance,
and freedom ; and therefore self-determination ; the latter are the
mental faculties, the Acquisitive—which includes the co-ordinate
differentiated factors of the Essential unity—Cognition, Emotion,
and Volition—the Retentive and the Reproductive, that is, Memory
and Imagination. The Scientific mechanism of the Absolute is the
only possible groundwork of Consciousness, that is, Consciousness in
any degree is only possible because of the Scientific mechanism of
the Absolute. Time and Space are the expressed conditions of the
Absolute in its processes of disintegration, differentiation, and
organic development in and through a phenomenal medium. These
like reason and the conceipts are the expressions of the Absolute,
and therefore space and time, and the categories are not phenomenal.
Reason, intuitive, discursive, Scientific and Speculative, makes use
of the categories in determining the order of material phenomena
under the conditions of time and space. The external ma-
terial system has also fundamental properties and constituent
departments; the former are extension, resistance, and necessity,
from which it follows that its motion is mechanical, acting only as
it is acted on ; the latter are the organic and the inorganic. Space
is the groundwork of all material phenomena, and gravitation is the
regulative principle. The Supernatural includes all the Sciences
relating to the Divine Being, and his relation to the natural. The
consciousness of the Divine Being and therefore of providence is
inseparable from the Scientific groundwork of history, for the
universe considered as to its internal spiritual system, and external
material system, and historical constitution, which determine the
order of the relation between these ; postulates the Divine and
eternal as its ground and explanation. Consciousness of God in any
degree is only possible through the development of the Scientific
mechanism of the Absolute ; and the degree reached in the latter
determines the clearness, strength, and accuracy of the former.
The consciousness of the Supernatural is as much an integral depart-
ment of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute as the Moral or


the Esthetic. It is the connecting link between the human and
the divine ; as the natural side of the scientific principle is developed
there is a corresponding distinctness in the consciousness of the
Divine Being, and his manifestation the Supernatural; for the
Supernatural is implied in the Natural, the Infinite in the Finite,
The Scientific mechanism of the Absolute in all its integral depart-
ments during the processes of disintegration, differentiation, and
Organic development is permeated by a continuous rational synthesis,
from the first stage of the externalisation of the dunamis till the
final stage in the entelecheia is reached. The whole mechanism is
the elaborative work of reason, which adjusts the phenomenal in all
its departments and grades to the disintegrations of the Absolute by
applying the Scientific principle regulating the process of Organic
development. Reason, as the regulative principle of historical
phenomena, is common to each co-ordinate differentiated factor of
the Essential unity, and disintegrated factor of the Organic unity,
and therefore to the mechanism and content of the Organic whole
The rational synthesis must be continuous because of the identity of
the Absolute in its various grades ; otherwise there could be no con-
sciousness of the disintegrating, differentiating, and developing
processes. The Absolute is identical and invariable from the first
to the final stage in the disintegration, differentiation, and organic
development. This identity is the main condition of consciousness.
In the process the Absolute, the Essential, and the Organic thus
become an involved unity ; and hence as an involved unity, that is,
as the synthetic work of reason in the Essential and Organic it is
variable. History is the record of the Scientific disintegration,
differentiation, and organic development of the Absolute through a
phenomenal medium under the conditions of time and space ; or it
is a record of the continuous effort of the Absolute to realise its
Scientific mechanism in an objective form in its phenomenal content
through the medium of the processes of disintegration, differentiation
and Organic development under the conditions of time and space.
The Absolute in a state of unconscious identity with nature begins
with a germ of infinite possibility, containing its substantial exis-
tence in an undeveloped form, as the object and goal which it reaches


only in its organic resultant; for it is an unlimited potential energy
in all its variable processes from the initial stage of disintegration
and differentiation till the final stage is reached. The end is
already determined in the germ, the entelecheia in the dunamis ; and
there must be that in the Organic that is in the dunamis in some
degree. In the process there is in the Absolute a variable and an
invariable identity, including all possible varied phases in the tran-
sition ; and a continuity from the first externalisation of the dunamis
till the end determined is embodied in the entelecheia The progress
appears as an advancement from the imperfect to the more perfect,
but the dunamis must not be understood only as the imperfect, but
as something which involves the opposite of itself as a germ ; for in
it the perfect and imperfect inhere; and in the transition the
imperfect gradually vanishes as the complete form of the entelecheia
is reached, and thus the perfect is embodied It is the Absolute
that is conscious, and between the Absolute and Organic in the
process of embodiment there seem to be a continuous conflict
through the medium of the phenomenal ; and in each grade of the
transition each factor of the entelecheia t is becoming more accurately
realised ; the whole of that cycle of phenomena with its circle of
progressive embodiments which constitutes the culture of a nation
is but the embodiment of the Absolute in an objective form ; for
objectivity involves the rise of disintegrations and differentiations
which constitute the Scientific mechanism of the Organic whole,
An absolute is only thinkable as involving a Scientific
tion, differentiation, and Organic development, which processes all
tend to the realisation of the end determined. It is a transcending
identity which takes the place of a dualistic variation of which tbe
Essential and Organic are factors. The invariable is implicit in the
variable, for as the Essential varies so must the Organic, and both
must vary with the Absolute ; for the determination of the order of
the Scientific mechanism of the one necessitates a corresponding
determination in the order of the Scientific mechanism ©f the other.
The Absolute is invariable, but as involved with the Essential and
organic in a disintegrating, differentiating, and developing process, it
assumes a variable form. The principle of continuity implies the


variable and the invariable as well as some measure of resistance to
the development of the Scientific mechanism. It is the Abso
lute that is conscious, and the development is through the medium
of consciousness. The movement of the external material system,
and the movement of the instinctive physical organism is mechan-
ical ; but the mpvement of the Absolute is free, self-determined,
transcending and utilising the others. The instinctive has cogni-
tion, feeling, and volition, without reason as a regulative principle ;
but the instinctive alone, and the instinctive as associated with
reason are two distinct things ; without reason it is irrational, but
when it is associated with reason as a constituent part of one nature
it is not irrational. The process in the physical organism of plant
or animal involves the existence of a latent germ of bsing, an inter-
nal formative principle which is both variable and invariable ; a
potentiality realising itself in organised natural objects in a variety of
parts continuous in operation frqui the first indication of life till the
final stage in the^process is reached. That process being unconsci-
ous is direct and unhindered:, as between the idea of the organic
form in germ and its realisation through the suitable phenoiiienal
medium until the complete, development is reached, no disturbing
influence can intrude ; {.he .natural process is a peaceful growth
mediated by suitable, external conditions, and is invariably repeated,
nothing new appearing, in the repetition. The structure is already
determined in the germ,,and the transition,is a gradual revelation pf
that structure. Th.e, unconscious only needs the conditions of
growth, the,,suitable environment- The, organic structure, in the
physical is always repeating ,so, must, the transition from, the
Absolute to the Organic.through, the mejjjum of the Essential, both
in the individual and in the nation; but if the. Organic unity
entelecheia, as wpik of reason through, the medium of
the disintegrating ans .differentiating energy of the dunamis be
obtained in the, historical,process, ( then the nation in -which .this
elaborative work embodied must be an Organic unity,
permeated by an Essential unity, and a rational synthesis. Nations
me systems in the historical : iconsciousness as there are material
systems in space; and when‘this transition has been effected once


it is done for the race. In no one individual or nation has the
transition been complete, though it has been repeated up to various
grades in both, coming nearest its organic resultant in the most
highly cultured individual and nation. The individual and the
nation are developed simultaneously ; and in harmonic progression.
The Absolute in all its disintegrated and differentiated departments
is most perfectly embodied in the most highly cultured individual
and nation. But since the Absolute must advance to the Organic
in some degree, both in the experience of the individual and in th«
history of the nation ; then both individual and nation will find its
own place in some grade of the transition ; and when one individual
and one nation are examined, that is, the most highly cultured in
each case, these are types for all others ; for the Scientific mechanism
and phenomenal content of the Absolute are identical among every
people, and form the groundwork in the experience of every indivi-
dual and in the history of every nation. Those nations are of most
importance in the philosophy of history in which the transition has
been most complete, and the Organic unity entelecheia most fully
developed. The individual minds which act as the exponents of the
advance of these disintegrated factors are the minds to be examined.
But the spirit both of the individual and of the nation wall corres-
pond with the degree of development reached in the scientific me-
chanism and phenomenal content ; and those individuals and nations
in whom that mechanism has been most fully developed are the
minds that influence the destinies of nations, and the nations that
influence the destiny of the world. The Summum Bonum is real-
ised in the complete and harmonic development of the whole
Scientific mechanism of the Absolute, and in each integral depart-
ment. The whole historical process must be seen in living union,
as it has been, and as it is. A view of the whole mechanism and
the end to which the process of evolution is tending, will keep all
optimistic and pessimistic reflections in a rational equilibrium. A
philosophy of history elaborating the Scientific principles underlying
the historical order has not yet appeared. In the past there has
been merely a grouping among historical phenomena to construct
that mechanism ; hence without a clear conception of the whole


Scientific mechanism or groundwork of the Absolute, reflections on
the subject would be fragmentary, defective, meagre, and extreme,
whether relating to optimism or pessimism. The ideal and the
Absolute are two different things, the former having an existence in
human consciousness because of the latter; and as is the grade in
the development of the Absolute and its mechanism, so the ideal
will shape itself and stand in a rational harmony with the grade of
development reached in all the integral departments of the mechan-
ism. There is a growing complexity and a rational harmony
between the Absolute and its mechanism, and the phenomenal. If
then this Scientific groundwork of the Absolute be the central fact
of the historical process, then philosophy is not the last product of a
nation’s life, but is present from the first movement of disintegration
and grade of the transition ; for the effort to determine the nature
and constitution, the origin and destiny of the universe is involved
in the experience of humanity, from the first movement of the
Absolute, when experience is most indistinct and confused, till the
final stage of development is reached ; when experience is consci-
ously discerned as a scientific and philosophic order; an expression
of the eternal fitness of the Absolute in its complete disintegration,
differentiation, and organic development.


CHAPTER IV.
Essential Unity.—Co-ordinate Differentiated Factors
Cognition.
The Essential unity the centre of the relation between the Absolute
and the phenomenal, a rational synthesis—Each factor of the
Essential unity is also a rational synthesis—Reason the central and
regulative principle of Essential unity and its factors—lnternal
spiritual a subjective system of order qualitative and quantitative
—External material an objective system of order, qualita-
tive and quantitative—Reason and gravitation regulative prin-
ciples—Consciousness and space—Relation between internal and
external a rational synthesis, of which factors are sensation per-
ception, and conception—Transition from perception of individual
to conception of universal—Reason uses abstract science, and all
factors of historical method as implement—lnternal and external
related through the medium of physical organic system endowed
with sensitive organism—Qualitative disintegration of general
sensitiveness—Psychological structure of mind the conductor pf
reason—Possibility of contact between the internal and external —
Sensation, perception, and conception—The concept the rational
synthesis of the phenomenal - Qualitative discrimination—Biology
central Science of Organic, which with Morph dogy is common to
three subordinate departments : Botany, Zoology, and Palaeont-
ology—Logical order of inorganic—Relations between organic and
organic and inorganic and inorganic, and between the organic and
inorganic—Rational order of space —Conception is the central
principle of relation Ultimate qualitative constituents of
matter Matter incapable of definition—External perception—
The relation of the Absolute ego to the ultimate qualitative consti-
tuents of matter—Factors of historical method—lndividual and
universal—Theories of Nominalism, Realism, and Conceptualism
—lmpossibility of legitimate comparison between these because of
qualitative difference.
The above diagram is an effort to exhibit the mechanism of the
relation of the Absolute ego to the ultimate qualitative constituents
of matter. The Absolute ego has a Scientific mechanism which is
the only possible groundwork of consciousness ; and therefore


through that Scientific mechanism alone the order of that relation
can be determined. That part of the mechanism which determines
the relation between the Absolute and the phenomenal is the
Essential unity, psyche logike, which is an expression of the dunamis
The co-ordinate differentiated factors, Cognition, Emotion, and
V olition, gnosis , aisthesis, boulesis, are the expressions of the psyche
logike , the rational soul or Essential unity, as shown in the formula,
AA A| A D . The second factor of this formula includes the first, and
the third includes the first and second. The first factor A A repre-
sents the soul revealing itself as cognition, for prior to the act of
cognition there is the consciousness of the power to know. The
second factor Ag represents the rational soul as manifesting its
power to feel—feeling being of two kinds, feeling proper and emo-
tion ; for prior to the consciousness of sensation there is the consci-
ousness of the power to feel The third factor A D represents the
rational soul as revealing itself in the form of volition ; for prior to
the act of volition there is the consciousness of the power to act.
Thus A g ° represent the processes Cognition, Emotion, and
Volition ; while A, which represents the rational soul is common to
all the processes. This consciousness of the power to think as dis-
tinct from the act of thinking, of the power to feel as distinct from
the different experiences of sensation and emotion ; and of the
power to will as distinct from the separate acts of volition is an
indication of the presence of the Absolute underlying the psyche
logike in all its disintegrated and differentiated departments. No
one of these co ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential unity
can ever be the sole occupant of consciousness; where the one is the
others are present in some degree Their operation is simultaneous,
though one factor at any given moment may be more prominent
than the others The Essential unity is in itself a rational syn-
thesis ; their is a valid logical order in the whole ; but each co-
ordinate differentiated factor of the Essential unity is also a rational
synthesis ; there is a valid logical order in each, if in the whole.
Reason nous in its varied aspects, intuitive, discursive, scientific,
and speculative, is the central and regulative principle of the Essen-
tial unity in all its differentiations, The internal spiritual is a sub-


Essential Unity
FACTORS COGNITION, EMOTION, and VOLITION.




active system of order qualitative and quantitative, having funda-
mental paoperties and constituent departments. The fundamental
»roperties are non extension, non-resistance, and freedom, and
herefore self-determination. The constituent departments are the
mental faculties, the Acquisitive ; which includes the differentiated
tors of the Essential unity, Cognition, Emotion, and Volition ; or
n other words all that is possible to be perceived of the internal and
f the external; the Retentive which is usually called memory, and
etains all the knowledge acquired of the internal and of the ex ter -
ml ; the Reproductive, usually called imagination, which reproduces
,11 the knowledge which has been so retained. Consciousness is the
oppressed condition of the existence of the Scientific mechanism of
he internal spiritual system. But the external material is also an
»bjective system of order qualitative and quantitative, having funda-
nental properties and constituent departments f l he fundamental
iroperties are extension, resistance, and necessity; the constituent
epartments are the organic and inorganic. Space is the expressed
ondition of the existence of all material phenomena, and of the
ystem of order in which they are embodied ; and gravitation is tbe
egulative principle. The determination of the relation between the
absolute and the phenomenal is the determiuatio i of the relation of
e order of the Scientific mechanism of the internal spiritual system,
o the order of the Scientific mechanism of the external material sys-
em. Time and space are theexpressedjconditions of the Absolute in its
irocesses of disintegration, and organic development in and through a
ihenomenal medium. Consciousness is the internal form of space,
md space is the external form of consciousness, while time is the
mity of both; and the Absolute transcends the whole If the
nternal spiritual be a subjective system of order and a rational
ynthesis ; and if the external material be an objective system of
irder and a rational synthesis, ; then the relation between the
nternal and external must be a rational synthesis ; as is the
;rade in the development of the internal in all its departments, and
,s is the grade in the development of the external in all its depart-
nents, so the rational synthesis will correspond. What the two
■xtreme terms of the relation are will determine what it will be at


any stage of the transition. There is thus a gradual advance from
the period of unconscious identity with nature —a primitive syn-
cretism—to the period of conscious identity ; that is, Scientific and
philosophic, is conceived, and the Scientific mechanism of cognition
is revealed. The transition is gradual from the perception of the
individual to the conception of the universal ; but continuous
analysis is the groundwork of the consciousness of the rational
synthesis from the primitive syncretism till the conscious identity is
reached. Reason by the use of Abstract Science —Logic and Mathe-
matics as implement—uses all the factors of the historical method—
observation, experiment, induction, deduction, and reflection to deter-
mine the order of the Scientific mechanism of the internal spiritual
system ; and the order of the Scientific mechanism of the external ma-
terial system ; and the nature of the rational synthesis between them.
The internal spiritual system is related to the external material
system through the medium of the physical organic system endowed
with a sensitive organism. There is the consciousness that the
physical organic system is conditioned by and exposed to tho influ-
ences of the external material system in its various departments ;
and there is the consciousness that there is a general sensitiveness
of material conditions either favorable or adverse to the well-being
of the physical organic system. This complex sensitive organic
system implies a system of order in the material; because the
internal is Scientific the physical organism through which it reveals
and relates itself to the external must also be Scientific ; for it is
through that organism that the consciousness of a rational adjust-
ment between the internal and the external is possible. But there
is also a qualitative disintegration of the order of the external
material system into its various departments corresponding with the
organs of the sensitive system. These are all the media of external
perception through which reason is related to the external. Reason
is the regulative principle and elaborative faculty ; but it can only
move through the medium of a rational conductor which has already
been determined for it; that is, the psychological structure of the
mind as its groundwork, the main faculties of which are the Acquis-
itive, the Retentive, and the Reproductive ; and it operates in the


same way in the Retentive and Reproductive as in the Acquisi-
tive ; for reason is not phenomenal, but the regulator of all
phenomena. The first form of consciousness of the internal
spiritual system is rational intuition. The first form of
consciousness of the external material system is sensible
intuition. Perception is of the internal and of the external; of the
subjective and of the objective ; of consciousness and of space. It
discerns the order of the mechanism of each in relation to the other;
but viewed in relation to the internal it is called rational or intro-
spective ;in relation to the external it is called sensible ; yet it is
one as a fact of the Absolute in that it transcends the distinction
between the internal and external,subjective and objective, conscious-
ness and space. The antithesis between the Absolute and the phe-
nomenal necessitates the use of such expressions, but the power of
perception is not limited by the use of such words as internal and
external, which departments are equally objective as related to the
Absolute. The relation between the internal and external is that of
a rational synthetic procedure of which the factors are sense, sensi-
bility, sensation, perception, and conception. Sensation reveals the
existence of objects ; perception the qualities of objects ; and con-
ception the relations of objects. Sensation is the prius of this
dualistic form of perception, and both sensation and perception
in conjunction constitute the prius of conception. Reason cannot
think the individual alone; it discriminates, compares, and trans-
forms sensuous intentions—perceptions—into conceptions. The
The concept is not phenomenal, but an instrument brought by
reason, and used in the rational synthesis of the phenomenal. The
individual which has a qualitative and quantitative existance or
particularity is given in the order of the external material system,
whose constituent departments the organic and inorganic include
all possible groups. The idea is of the individual, the conception is
of the universal. The external is an objective system of order, but
a rational contact with it is only possible through the medium of
the conception It is that by means of which the consciousness of
a rational synthesis is jpossible ; the intuitive is perceptive of the
fact of individual existence, and exercises a discrimination of qualit-


ative difference in the determinate forms of being in the animal
and vegetable kingdoms. The discursive is conscious of the order of
existence, and elaborates the concept as the result of discriminating
relation ; every distinct organic form, both in plant and animal is
an idea ; for every idea is organic An idea and an individual are
identical. The central Science of the Organic is Biology, which
with the science of Morphology is common to the three subordinate
factors—Botany, Zoology, and Palaeontology. There is a disintegra-
tion of life into the two departments, plant and animal; and a
qualitative differentiation connected with each distinct organic form
both in plant and animal. The inorganic also falls into the logical
order which is discerned in the organic Since thought is only possible
through the medium of this mechanism, the relation between the
Absolute and the ultimate qualitative constituents of matter has to
be determined. All relations are conceived to exist between the
organic and the organic ; and between the inorganic and the inor-
ganic ; and between the organic and the inorganic ; the first is the
logical, the second is the mathematical and physical, the third is the
biological. The relation in logic is based on the nature of the
object, so that the relation is internal. Logic shows the rational
order of the organic to the organic in their different forms and
relations ; furnishing the principles of extension and comprehension,
division and definition, in determining the relation between the
individual and the universal; species and genus. These principles
also determine the validity of the syllogistic process of reasoning,
both inductive and deductive. The mathematical relation is based
on the co-existence and position of objects. The mathematical
branch of abstract Science shows the rational order of space in
determining the relation between material bodies. The measure-
ment which determines the rational order of space is the Science.
Every relation must be reduced to the form of a conception, or
rather, the conception determines the form of the relation ; and that
the series of mathematical conceptions may be determined, there is
a qualitative disintegration of space and a measurement of it by
geometrical principles. The relation of the inorganic to the inor-
ganic also includes the physical. Abstract Science deals purely


with conceptions; and the determination of the conception is the
determination of the scientific relation. What are the ultimate
qualitative constituents of matter ? is there a qualitative and b quan-
titative difference between them ? is there a graduated scale of these
ultimate constituents corresponding with the scale of mental concep-
tions usually formed ? Matter cannot be defined till there is a clear
and distinctive consciousness of these ultimate qualitative constitu-
ents ; and therefore what is called external perception cannot be
understood till that is done. So far, matter has not been known ;i:
is only the order in which it is embodied that is known. External
perception has only been conscious of an orderly synthesis of phe-
nomena ; Imt the relation of the Absolute ego to these ultimate
qualitative constituents of matter has not yet been determined. The
Scientific mechanism of cognition, the rational synthesis will be
complete when its phenomenal content is thus understood; but
there must be a suspension of judgment on many things till the
nature of these ultimate constituents is determined. No new method
will be needful in the process of determining their nature. The
method that has carried the work so far 'will complete the process.
From the sensation to the conception, that is, from the perception of
the individual to the conception of the universal ; and from the per-
ception of the isolated fact to the conception of universal law, all the
factors of the historical method, observation, experiment, induction,
deduction, and reflection, with their subsidiary processes, discrimin-
ation, comparison, generalisation, abstraction, analysis, synthesis,
are used indetermining the order of the Scientific mechanism of the
internal; and of the external; and of the rational synthesis between
them. As the order of each is determined the implement grows
stronger, but when the stage was reached in which the universal
was determined and conceived, a question arose as to which was the
more real—the individual or the universal—in the effort to determine
which ; there are three distinct theories Nominalism asserts that the
individual is the real, and that universals have an existence only in
name. “ Universalia post rein.” Realism asserts that the univer-
sal is the real “ universalia ante rem ” ; while conceptualism occu-
pies an intermediate ground between Nominalism and Realism,


“ universalia in re.” There can be no legitimate comparison be-
tween the individual and the universal as to which is the more real ;
since both are constituents or integral factors of the Scientific me-
chanism ; the individual is phenomenal, but the universal as a pro-
duct of reason and a regulative principle is not phenomenal, and
therefore cannot be compared with the individual. This qualitative
difference between them prevents the comparison as well as the fact
that they are both essential to the rational synthesis of experience
and consciousness.


Emotion.
Mechanism uf physical organic system—Cosmological side—Psychological
side—Rational synthesis—Progress from instinctive to the rational
Mechanism of each factor the same—Corstituents and content
of emotion—Qualitative discrimination—lmpressions and unity of
consciousness—The first form of conscious relation—The sensorium
aistheterion —Sense, sensibility, sensible, intuition, sensation
Material content of social organism—Central principle love of life
—Relation of reason and instinct in realising the material content
—No exhaustive classification of emotions—The most general are
moral, aesthetic, and religious—Each has a norm of feeling, includ-
ing an Absolute standard, and the consciousness of an end —Poten-
tial nature of norm—The law of attraction and repulsion—Sym-
pathy and antipathy—Limits of the expression ot emotion
Qualitative discrinination ®f moral distinctions—Relation between
pleasure and virtue ; and between pain and en o-
tions indicate an intricate aesthetic mechanism Qualitative
discrimination of aesthetic distinctions —.Esthetic end The
aesthetic standard—Religious emotion . its mechanism and content
—Standard subjective and objective—End —Religious distinctions
—Transition from visible and material to invisible and spiritual.
There is a Scientific mechanism in the external material system,
and there is also a scientific mechanism in the internal spiritual
system ; the former is an objective system of order both qualitative
and quantitative ; the latter is a subjective system of order both
qualitative and quantitative But the internal spiritual is related to
the external material through the medium of the physical
organic system endowed with a sensitive organism. This
complex sensitive organic system implies a system of order in
the material ; because the internal is scientific, the physical organ-
ism through which it reveals and relates itself to the external
must also be scientific ; for it is through the medium of that relation
that a rational adjustment between the internal and jthe external
is possible. The physical organic system has two sides in determin-
ing this adjustment; as related to the external material it has the


Cosmological, and as related to the internal spiritual it has the
Psychological; feeling and emotion indicate an intrical mechanism
in the internal, and in the external, and in the physical organism.
Here, too, there is a rational synthesis of three departments in a
complex experience. The progress in this factor is from the consci-
ousness of the instinctive to the consciousness of the rational; and
as is the grade reached in the development of the internal, and of the
externa], and of the physical organism, so will be the grade reached
in the deteimination of the order of the rational synthesis. The
Scientific mechanism of each co-ordinate differentiated factor is the
same, though the content may differ. The different experiences of
sensation and emotion constitute the content ; the capacity of feel-
ing and the susceptibility of emotion are the constituent factors of
that content. The principle of qualitative discrimination is common
to each factor of the Essential unity, for there is a consciousness of
diversity in the different experiences of sensation and emotion ; but
a unity in that which is conscious of such diversity The instinc-
tive has cognition, feeling, and vo’ition, and would then be irrational
because of the absence of reason as regulative principle ; and be-
cause there is no consciousness of the degree of power to think and
will its motion is mechanical or fatal ; but when the instinctive is
associated with reason as a constituent of human nature, it is not
irrational. 'There is a Scientific mechanism in each member of the
physical organism, and in the whole. These are all the media of
external perception ; the impressions on each member and on the
whole organism are reduced to unity in the unity of consciousness.
The impression on any organ of the sensitive system is the first
form of the conscious relation between the internal and the external ;
the central organ of the sensitive system is the brain ; the capacity
of receiving impressions through the mode in which we are affected
by objects is called sensibility. The Sensorium aistheterion is the
place in which th« impressions are reduced to sensations in the
unity of consciousness. Sensation is that state of mind produced
by an impression on an organ or sense, the impression being trans-
formed into a sensation in the unity of consciousness; the order
would thus be sense, sensibility, sensible intuition, sensation. The


physical organism and the instinctive are inseparable, the sensations
originating in the Organic system are in every case associated with
the realisation of the material content of the Social organism, the
central principle of which is the love of life, the twoofactors of
which are the instinctive tendency to preserve and reproduce. The
tendency to preserve includes the organic wants of the instinctive, as
food, clothing, and shelter; the one datum of the tendency to
reproduce is the love of sex. In the natural energy of the instinc-
tive there is a normal operation preserved preventing extremes. In
realising the material content of the Social organism the feeling is one
either of pleasure or pain ; if the natural energy De unhindered, the
feeling is one of satisfaction and therefore pleasure ; but if retarded
the feeling is one of dissatisfaction, and therefore pain ; for States
of pleasure are connected with an increase, and statesof pain with an
abatement of some or all the vital functions.” Whatever tends to
an increase attracts, and whatever ten Is to a decrease repels the
instinctive. In the purely instinctive organic sensitive system
consciousness of the organic wants comes merely with the returning
want; but in the nature of which ths instinctive and the rational
»re constituents, there is the power of anticipation which has
and aversion as its inevitable concomitants; and also a
qualitative discrimination in degrees of pleasure and pain in the
working of the organic system. The above diagram shows the re-
lation of the instinctive to the rational. No classification, that is.
no exhaustive classification of the emotions is possible ; for they do
not belong exclusively to the rational, nor do the sensations and
feelings belong exclusively to the instinctive ; but the Absolute ne-
cessitates a rational synthesis of the whole To determine when the
instinctive ends and the rational begins is hardly possible. Certain
groups appear in the process of Organic development as the result
of the conjunction of the instinctive and of the rational Nothing
in the process is wholly instinctive, and nothing wholly rational.
These two factors are indissolubly conjoined in the whole transition.
But the physical organism has also a psychological side ; and in
dealing with the higher constituents of human nature feeling
assumes the form of emotion. There is a Scientific mechanism in


the internal spiritual system as a whole, and therefore in each
factor both of the Essential and the Organic. Those with which
there is an immediate concern in the present chapter are the Moral,
and Religions. The moral intuition has a Scientific me-
chanism and a phenomenal content being a spontaneous expression
of the Absolute ; it has a norm of feeling which includes the abso-
lute moral standard, and the idea of an end ; this norm is potential
and capable of complex disintegrations and differentiations. The
development of the moral intuition includes the development of this
noun in its process of disintegration and differentiation, as well as
the development of the absolute moral standard. The mechanism
and content are simultaneous in development, and have an objective
expression in a moral system. The law of attraction and repulsion
is common to all the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essen-
tial unity. Sympathy and antipathy are the extreme factors of the
groat la'R regulating the moral nature in relation to others ; and all
possible expressions of emotion take place in or between these factors.
It corresponds with the law of attraction and repulsion in the ma-
terial ; for the soul can be attracted and repelled by appropriate
stimuli ; the emotions of the moral intuition indicate an intricate
moral mechanism regulating the relations of the moral units. There
can be a unity of sentiment as to the adjustment of moral relations.
The quality of an action is determined by reference to the absolute
moral standard. When the action either of an individual or a
nation conforms to this standard there is approval, approbation, and
therefore pleasure ; but when by reference to this standard an action
either of an individual or of a nation is proved defective, then there
is disapproval, disapprobation, and therefore pain. There can be a
discernment by sensible intuition of what is straight, as also by
th« moral intuition of what is right. The moral obligation follows
conviction. There is a sympathy with what conforms to the Abso-
lute moral standard ; that is, with the virtuous ; for sympathy is a
word which includes all the affections and virtues ; and there is an
antipathy to what is defective when tested by the absolute standard ;
that is, to the vicious ; for antipathy is a word closely related to all
the passions and vices. Pleasure is associated with virtue, and pain


with vice. The Scientific mechanism in its grades of development
obtains an objective expression in a moral system. The operation
of this dualistic moral relation of sympathy and antipathy reveals
the fact that this mechanism and moral system are understood The
moral intuition exercises a principle of qualitative discrimination
between the extremes of virtue and vice; for between these two
factors of the moral relation all possible expressions of emotion take
place ; jut as between the two extremes of attraction and repulsion
all the minor movements of attraction and repulsion are included.
The law in the material is mechanical, there is no consciousness of
it; but in the moral there is a consciousness of its operation. The
is also an integral department of the internal spiritual
»
system, and as such has a scientific mechanism and a phenomenal
content which are developed in conjunction and simultaneously.
The aesthetic intuition, like the moral, has a norm of feeling which
includes the absolute aesthetic standard, and the consciousness of
an end. This norm is potential, and capable of varied and complex
disintegrations and differentiations. The development of the aes-
thetic intuition includes the development of the norm in its pro-
cesses of disintegration and differentiation, as well as the develop-
ment of the absolute aesthetic standard. The emotions of the
aesthetic intuition indicate an intricate aesthetic mechanism regu-
lating the judgment, for there can be a unity of sentiment in regard
to the adjustment of aesthetic phenomena in relation to the absolute
aesthetic standard. The great law of attraction and repulsion
regulates the judgment in the deciding of the value of aesthetic
phenomena. The principle of qualitative discrimination of the
various degrees of beauty and sublimity between the extreme terms
of the aesthetic relation is just as active as in the moral. Sympathy
and antipathy are the extreme terms of the relation ; and with
these terms are associated the agreeable and the disagreeable, the
pleasurable and the painful. The end is the full development of the
consciousness of the beautiful and sublime. The absolute aesthetic
standard can never obtain an objective expression. This is also true
of the moral standard, but the Scientific mechanism of the aesthetic
intuition can obtain an objective expression in an aesthetic system


In proportion as a work of art approximates to the absolute aesthetic ■
standard, there is the consciousness of attraction, that is, between
the work of art and the aesthetic intuition there is a sympathy, and
therefore a consciousness of the agreeable and the pleasurable;
but in proportion as a work of art is deft dive when tested by the
absolute aesthetic standard, there is the consciousness of repulsion ;
and therefore an experiei.ee of antipathy, and its concomitants the
disagreeable and painful. Pure aesthetic pleasure does not even
include the personal element of the desire to possess that which is
the source of pleasure. The Religious being an organic department
of the internal spiritual system has a Scientific mechanism and a
phenomena l content which are developed in conjunction and simul-
taneously. The religious intuition, like the moral and aesthetic,
has a norm of feeling which includes the absolute religious standard,
and the idea of an end. This norm is potential and capable of
varied and complex disintegrations and differentiations The de
velopment of the religious intuition includes the development of the
norm of religious feelings in its processes of disintegration and dif-
ferentiation, as well as the development of the absolute
religious standard. Here too the principle of qualitative
discrimination is in operation in determining between the true and
the false ; holiness and sin, as between virtue and vice in the moral;
and beauty and deformity in the aesthetic The emotions of the
religious intuition indicate an intricate religious mechanism regulat-
ing our relation to God and his truth ; to self and our condition,
and to others as well as our duty to each. The standard is more
definite in the religious than in the Moral and ; in a sub-
jective sense it is called conscience, and in an objective sense the
will of God There is a system of divine truth an expression of the
divine will, which is consistent with the nature of the Absolute ego ;
though that system in its rational order has not yet been distinctly
conceived, and fully developed. The progress in this department is
from an unconscious identity with the material to a conscious unity
with the spiritual and invisible. Conscience, the subjective
side of the standard, gives unerring testimony as to truth and false-
hood, holiness and sin, right and wrong, according to the grade of


of development reached, or the light possessed in regard to conduct
So that there can be a certain consciousness when the objective side
of the standard is approached. Subjective development and the
objective standard must correspond. In reaching the standard both
subjectively and objectively there is approbation, approval, and
therefore pleasure ; but in failure there is disapprobation, disappro-
val, and therefore pain ; the pleasure and pain corresponding with
the degree of approximation or failure. Here too the great law
regulating the Moral and relations is in operation ; there
is sympathy with the true and the good, but antipathy to the false
and the bad. The end to be attained is the full realisation of the
absolute religious standard in the individual consciousness and con-
science ; and therefore the complete development of the individual
religious life, and an external expression corresponding with the
divine word ; and the complete development and organisation of the
universal, that is, the church Emotion has its own subjective and
objective stimuli in each of these departments; the subjective and
objective inhere in the absolute religious standard.


Volition.
Absolute ego and its differentiated expressions, freedom, self-deteimina-
ti on —Volition a distinct eneigy of the Absolute —Mechanism and
content of volition—Progress from impulsive and capricious, to
rational and universal—Begulative principle of progress —Instinc-
tive and rational have distinct tendencies —The Absolute transcends
and modifies both— Unconscious realisation of end—Conscious
realisation of end—End of volition—Between the conception of an
end and its realisation the intervention of moral law—Moral dis-
tinctions : motives, means, and ends—Volition indifferent to
quality of moral distinctions—The relation of pleasure to the real-
isation of an end—Unconscious tendency to a definite end—The
summum bonum a rational synthesis in each factor of the Organic
unity; and in the mechanism of the Absolute—Exact Science of
Essential unity —lcoinos vo vs, koitiaisthesis.
The Scientific mechanism of each factor is the same, though the
content may differ. In the Absolute there is an eternal fitness for
the embodiment of the phenomenal in its mechanism ; but a con-
sciousness of that fitness is only possible when the Scientific me-
chanism of the Absolute has been in some measure developed. The
Absolute being free and unlimited is self-determined in relation to
the phenomenal through the medium of reason ; but limits itself in
the co ordinated differentiated processes—Cognition, Emotion, and
Volition ; but while there is the utmost freedom in the Absolute,
there is the utmost necessity in its expressions. The Absolute is so
close to its differentiated expressions that the freedom is often trans-
ferred to its expressions ; but we cannot speak of the freedom of tho
processes, for these are merely expressions of the Absolute, which
transcends all phenomenal restriction. The consciousness of this
power to think and feel and will has to be accounted for, the phe-
nomenal operations do not account for the power to produce them,
and the consciousness of that power Volition is a distinct energy
of the Absolute, having a constitution and province of its own
64


independent of the province of Cognition and Emotion ; but because
of the Absolute as groundwork, in the operation of each the Scienti-
fic mechanism of the others is involved. These factors are not only
co-ordinate, but they are also correlative. In Cognition, as reason
is weak, thought is confirmed ; in Emotion, as reason is weak,
feeling is strong ; and in Volition, as reason is weak, the will is
capricious. The progress in Volition is from the capricious and
impulsive, the stage when the sensual and selfish and individualistic
tendencies are strongest; to the rational and universal and benevo-
lent, the stage when the sensual and selfish and individualistic ten-
dencies are weakest; for these are gradually diminished in power in
the transition to the rational both in the individual and in the
nation ; and that process is not voluntary, but compulsory ; the
balancing of relations between individuals in the state is the regula-
tive principle of the progress. The power of self-determination and
the consciousness of that power is distinctive of reason in conjunc-
tion with the instinctive. The possession of reason as the regulative
principle of all phenomena implies a rational synthesis of all the
integral departments of the \bsolute. It is supreme in regulating
each part separately, and gathers up the whole into a rational syn-
thesis The above diagram shows that the instinctive and the
rational inhere in the physical organism. Tne instinctive has dis-
tinctive tendencies, and makes for a definite end ; but the instinctive
is not wholly instinctive, and the rational is not wholly rational ;
these tendencies and ends are modified in relation to each other.
The instinctive has cognition, feeling, and volition in some degree
without reason as regulative principle; but the instinctive alone
and the instinctive as associated with reason are two distinct things ;
as associated with reason the instinctive is not irrational. The
Absolute transcends both and is the ground of adjustment between
the instinctive and the rational. Self-determination anl the con-
sciousness of an end are inseparable both in self and in others. The
Absolute can control the instinctive phenomena of the physical
organic system in its relation to the external material system and
internal spiritual system to reach any determined end through the
medium of reason, the regulative principle of all phenomena. In


the instinctive there is an end determined, and every movement in
physical organism tends to the realisation of that end ; but there is
no consciousness of it, and in realising that end there is also a ■
development of all the data of the instinctive and rational; for all
subjective experience implies a relation to the objective in various
forms and modes. The primary end of volition is the realisation of
the material content of the Social organism ; the central principle
of which is the love of life ; the two main factors of which are the
instinctive'tendencics to preserve and reproduce. But since other ra-
tional beings seek the realisation of the same end, there is a reciprocal
limitation of individual volition ; for that realisation can on'y be ob-
tained on certain conditions sanctioned by the universal volition Be-
tween the conception of an end and its realisation the moral law inter-
venes, the consciousness of right and duty being related to conception
of an end ; which is also implied in the moral law. Will intervene?
between the rational and the instinctive, and seeks possession of the
externa! material so far as it gratifies selfish ends, or tends to the
realisation of the material content of the Social organism. Every
act of volition is the centre of a Scientific mechanism which incor-
porates all the differentiated data of volition, that is, motives, means,
and ends ; the absolute standard of the Moral, and of the Religion v
Volition has no standard of its own, but, as stated above, its me-
chanism includes that of the Moral and Religious. A motive is an
object so operating on the mind as to produce either desfre or aver-
sion ; and is addressed either to the instinctive or to the rational
part of human nature. Volition in itself is indifferent 1i the quality
of the end, to the motive and to the means used ; the end may he
vicious, the motive base, and the means forbidden ; yet there is a
correspondence between the determinations of the will and the
qualify of the nature. The vicious nature adheres to the standard
most resembling it; that is, the selfish and the individualistic, the vir
tuous nature to the standard most resembling it, that is, the universil
and benevolent. The quality of the Absolute, whether virtuous or
vicious is revealed through the medium of the Scientific mechanism,
but that mechanism is independent of the quality, and is used both by
the virtuous and the vicious alike, whether consciously or unconscß


ously. The moral quality of the Absolute either advances or
retards the progress of the Scientific mechanism. Virtue seeks the
perfect adjustment and development of all the essential data and
relations included in that mechanism If the Absolute be virtuous,
then reason governs volition ; but if vicious, then volition governs
reason in the form of impulse or caprice. The whole process in the
Scientific mechanism is referred to the absolute moral standard that
the end, motives and means used, may be tested from the human
side ; then to the religious standard, which is subjective—conscience
—and the objective, the will of God, that it may be tested from the
divine side. But whether the Absolute be virtuous or vicious, there
is a pleasure both in the achievement of an end and in the end
achieved; that both in the active process and in the completed
process "whether it be the primary end of the instinctive or some
other end determined by the rational ; the higher the end the greater
the pleasure; for the higher the nature the higher the motives
actuating it, and the higher the end. In realising the primary end
there is a gradual revelation of the Scientific mechanism and pne
nomenai content of the Absolute, which is the end of the rational
There can be a working to a defi lite end, though there is no consci-
ousness of it; for a long period the history of the human race was
tending to the realisation of the Scientific mechanism and pheno-
menal content of the Absolute ; but- there was no consciousness that
the national or universal activity was leading to that, for there was
no consciousness of the end. The development of the Scientific
mechanism and the phenomenal content of the Absolute is the end,
whether consciously or unconsciously before the human race ; though
there can never be an exact determination as to the grade of develop-
ment that will be reached ; but to this end the historical process
tends. To desire and will the good and true and do the right for
their own sake, is the best and highest that can be done both by
individual and nation in any stage of the historical process. This is
indeed the summum bonum, which includes all other subor-
dinate ends ; and when this stage is reached the will has attained a
rational equilibrium, and a consistent repose and freedom. Here
then is Science, and exact Science, too. All men must think, feel,


and will through the same medium and similar conditions. There
is a common medium of thought, for cognition has a Scientific me-
chanism and phenomenal content common to the race ; koinos nous.
The constituent e ements and rational processes of that mechanism
ate common to every mind in its normal condition. There is also a
common medium of feeling, and under similar conditions koxnais-
thesi>, a physical organic system endowed with a sensitive organism.
There is also a common medium of volition ; the autonomy of the
Absolute expressing itself in and through the medium of the Scien-
tific mechanism of volition, with all its constituent differentiated
data, motives, rmans, and ends. In the process the development
is from the unconscious to the conscious in each co-ordinate differen-
tiated factor of the Essential unity, and in each disintegrated factor
of the Organic unity. The rational synthesis peimeates each factor
both in the Essential unity and in the Organity, becoming clearer
and stronger in proportion as the mechanism and phenomena of
each factor are developed, till the end in each is attained, and the
summum bcnum reached But when the summum bonum is
reached in each factor, then also in the organic working of the
Absolute, which includes the factors both of the Essential and
Organic in 'its mechanism. When the Organic is a complete ex-
pression of the Absolute through the medium of the Essential, and
the spit it both of the individual and the nation corresponds, then the
highest possible good has been attained.


CHAPTER V.
Organic Unity.
Disintegrated factors.—Scientific aspect of Reason,
The Scientific
Scientific factor—Constituents and cot-tent of consciousness—Energy of
Absolute ; how expressed—Constituents of entelecheia , kinema,
and energeia, &c—Space and matter conditions of rational motion
Relation of Absolute to its disintegrations and differentiations
Identity of motion, of reason, and fact of consciousness—Abstract
Science the implement of reason—Space—material phenomena—
Gravitation—Properties and constituent departments of external—
The external an objective system of order, qualitative and quanti-
tative—Organic, branches of Science—lnorganic, branches of
Science—Ultimate qualitative constituents of matter—Science de-
fined— Physical organic sensitive system—Medium of external
perception—Relation between internal and external —Transition
from sensation to conception—Unity of perception Modes of
matter —-Classification of the Sciences—Philosophy of the Organic
Biology, central Science —Morphology—Botany— Zoology—Palae-
ontology—Organic chemistry—Anatomy and physiology, etc
Phih isopliy of the Inorganic—Chief departments : Inorganic
chemistry, Physics and Astronomy—Ultimate constituents ; is
there a qualitative and quantitative difference between them ?
Modes of matter- Abstract Science : Logic and mathematics
Various kinds of relation—Rational measurement of space, force,
and motion—Geometry, Trigonometry, and Conic Sections—Grav-
itation—Dynamics and Mechanics—Chemistry—The problem of
the Scientific factor —The concept the unity of the internal and
the external —The possibility of a statement of the unity of the
relation—The relation of ultimate qualitative constituents to per-
ception— Philosophy of the unconscious.
This chapter gives a synoptic view of Ontology, Psychology, and
Cosmology in their inseparable relation. These departments are


the main constituents in the philosophy of the Scientific mechanism
of the Absolute, and to determine the fixed and progressive order of
any one department in any measure is to determine the fixed and
progressive order of the others in a measure corresponding. The
internal spiritual system has two departments, the Absolute and the
phenomenal—Ontology and Psychology. The duvamis, the Absolute
ego, has been described in the chapter on Scientific disintegration,
and also in some measure when treating to the Essential unity.
Here it may be affirmed as the central fact of Ontology, being that
which is conscious ; and the three departments, Ontology, Psych-
ology, and Cosmology, in endlessly combined forms are the constitu-
ents and content of consciousness External perception gives the
content of consciousness, the qualities of objects ; but internal per-
ception gives the constituents of consciousness, the structure of the
mind, the Scientific mechanism of Cognition. The power of motion
is inherent in the Absolute, there being in it an imminent tendency
to Scientific disintegration, differentiation and Organic development.
The order of its motion is discerned in the structure of the Essential
unity, and of the Organic unity or historical organism. These in-
tegral constituents in the Scientidc mechanism of the Absolute are
its own expressions,, for there can be nothing in the Organic that is
not in the Absolute, and there must be that in the Organic that is
in the Absolute in some degree. The Absolute, the Essential, and
the Organic thus become an involved unity in the process of real-
istic externalisation. The inherent activity of the Absobite reveals
itself in self-realisation, which takes place in and through the
medium of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute. Self realisa-
tion and self-disintegration are co-ordinate in the process of organic
development, but it reveals itself in self-determination, which is the
result of the freedom of the Absolute, and is essential to the process
of self-realisation and organic development. Kinema , the motion
of the Absolute, takes place in two directions in the Scientific disin-
tegration and organic development in the historical organism. In
the one case it is called the energeia, that is, an actualising of the
disintegrations and differentiations of the Absolute from the mini-
mum to the maximum of consciousness. In regard to the other


Scientific Factor.




iere is no suitable word to express the order of the relation betw .- a
he integral departments both of the Essential unity and of the
)rganic unity. The energeia refers to development of the structme
•f the mechanism of each integral department; the other
suitable one could be found to express the relation
leiween the integral departments would, with energeia , form the
onstituents of entelecheia. The two former are equaLy related to
he latter, and the whole three to kinema ; these are all realised in
he realisation of the mechanism of the Absolute. Space and mat-
er are the main conditions of rational motion, and therefore of
onsciousness, the former being the ground work of abstract Science,
he latter the groundwork of concrete Science. There can only be a
ransition from the Absolute to the phenomenal through the medium
f space. There is no division in the internal spiritual system, but
. disint a of the Absolute into the co-ordinate differentiated
actors of tbe Essential unity, and disintegrated factors of the
)rganic unity. There is a simultaneous consciousness of the
absolute with all its processes, for it is conscious of its own
iiterentiated forms in the Essential unity, and of its own disiuteg-
ations in the Organic unity, and it can only reveal itself in and
hrough the medium of its scientific mechanism. But the Absolute
s equally near its own expressions, that is, the co-ordinate differen-
iated factors of the Essential unity, and disintegrated factors of the
itial unity, and therefore the three departments, the Essential
the Organic unity, and the Scientific mechanism of the ex-
ernal material system are equally objective to the Absolute.
Reason, the psyche logike , is the first expression of the Absolute,
hat is, it is simultaneous with the disintegrating energy ; the latter
s the regulative principle of the historical process ; and reason in
ill its aspects, intuitive, discursive, scientific, and speculative, is the
egulative principle of historical phenomena. The first form of cou-
iciousness of the internal spiritual system is rational intuition, for
ntuition is the first expression of the Absolute in its effort to deter-
nine the order of the universe. But as that order is determined
hrough the mechanism of the Absolute, each differentiated factor of
ie Essential unity, and disintegrated factor of the Organic unity,


has its first form of consciousness in intuition. Consciousness is
simultaneous with its constituents and contents. The motion of
reason and the fact of consciousness are identical, for these are
inseparable, as reason is the regulative principle of all phenomena,
both mental and material, as well as the main constituent element
of consciousness. It is the regulative principle and eiaborative
faculty, but it can only move through the medium of a rational
conductor which has already been determined for it. It can only
move on the psychological structure of the mind as its groundwork,
the main factors of which are the Acquisitive, the Retentive, and the
Reproductive. It operates in the same way in the Retentive and in
the Reproductive as in the acquisitive, for reason is not phenomenal,
but the regulator of all phenomena. Reason is intuitive nous, re-
vealing the fact of definite forms of beings ; and discursive dianoia ;
and Scientific, episteme revealing the order of the relation between
definite forms and beings; and speculative, which deals with the
nature of the Absolute, both human and divine ; and the relation of
the divine to definite forms of being—of the relation of the infinite
to the finite. Reason with abstract Science, that is, Logic and
Mathematics as imp'ement uses all the factors of the historical
method with other subsidiary intellectual processes to determine the
order of the internal spiritual system, and of the external material
system, and of the historical organism. The internal spiritual
system having its own phenomena and laws and mechanism is a
rational synthesis ; there is a valid logical order in each department
and in the whole.
Space is the groundwork and condition of the existence of all
material phenomena, and gravitation is the regulative principle.
The fundamental properties of the external are extension and resist-
ance ; the former having its various degrees of magnitude ; the
latter with its various degrees of resisting energy according as the
body is solid, liquid, or gaseous. Necessity is also a fundamental
property since the material in all its departments acts only as it is
acted on. The forces determining its motion are external to it.
The material system has quantity and quality in space, and there-
fore co-existence ; and because of the motion of everything in the


73
.
material system it has succession. The constituent departments are
the organic and the inorganic. There is no division in the external
material system ; having a scientific mechanism and laws and phe-
nomena of its own, it is a rational synthesis; there is a valid logical
order in each department and in the whole. It is an objective
system of order, qualitative and quantitative, there is a disintegration
of the universal order into it two constituent departments, the
Orgrnic, with its various branches of Science, and the inorganic,
with its various branches of Science. But there is also a qualitative
differentiation of matter into its ultimate constituent elements.
From the ultimate constituents up to the most complex
combinations of these constituents, there is one system
of order pervading the whole; or, in other words, from the
smallest ultimate qualitative constituent up to the Science of as-
tronomy, which deals with the order of the relations of the largest
bodies, there is one system of order disintegrated into various
departments according to the quality of the [relation between the
ultimaee constituents, as well as the qualitative nature of the consti-
tuents themselves. The scientific factor deals with the general
principles and method of science, and the groundwork and
phenomena common to all the Sciences. It has nothing to do with
the details of any Science. Science, episteme, is the determination
of the order of the Scientific mechanism of the internal spiritual
system in its various departments ; and of the order of the Scientific
mechanism of the external material system in its various depart-
ments ;or the Scientific setting of the phenomenal, both mental
and material, in time and space. The ground problem of science
is to determine the fixed and progressive order, that is, the nature
and constitution of the internal spiritual system ; and the fixed
progressive order, that is, the nature and constitution of the external
material system in its various departments and combinations ; and
to follow up that order in its various combinations till there is a
clear consciousness of the ultimate qualitative constituents of matter.
Thus the whole of the external meterial system as to its nature and
constitution is jthe domain of concrete Science, for all concrete
Science has objective phenomena, or is capable of being presented


objectively. The scope of each Science appears in the process of
development, and cannot fall into its place in the general mechanism
before its time. The internal spiritual system is related to the
external material system through the medium of the physical
organic system endowed with a Scientific organism. There is a
consciousness that the physical organic system is conditioned by and
exposed to the influences of the external material system in its
various departments, and there is a general sensitiveness of material
conditions either favorable or adverse to the well-being of the
physical organic system. But there is also a qualitative disintegra-
disintegration of this general sensitiveness into departments each
corresponding with a special organ of sense. This complex Scien-
tific organic system implies a system of order in the material;
because the internal is Scientific, the physical organism through
which it reveals and relates itself to the external must also be
Scientific, for it is the medium of the rational adjustment between
the internal and the external; but there is also a qualitative disin-
tegration of the order of the external material system into the
various departments corresponding with the organs of the sensitive
organic system. These are all the media of external perception
through which reason is related to the essential. Our knowledge of
the properties of the external is derived through the medium of the
integral department of the sensitive organic system. The full
development of the relation between the order of the sensitive
organic system and the order of the external material system is the
best classification of the Sciences ; for there are integral depart-
ments in the external corresponding wuth the integral departments
of the sensitive organic system ; and as there is a general ground-
work of unity underlying the sensitive system, so there is a ground
of unity underlying the integral departments of the external.
These are all the media of external perception through which reason
is related to the external. It has been said that the external
material system having a Scientific mechanism is a rational syn-
thesis, an objective system of order both qualitative and quantitative ;
but there is no division in it, rather it is a qualitative disintegration
of the universal order into its constituent departments, the organic


and the inorganic ; and a further differentiation of these into their
integral departments, as well as a qualitative differentiation of mat-
ter into its ultimate constituent elements. The relation between
the internal and the external is that of a rational synthetic pro-
cedure of which the factors are sensation, perception, and concep-
tion. Sensation reveals the existence of objects, something external
to that which is conscious of sensation ; perception, the qua’iiies of
objects ; and conception, the relations of objects. From the sensa-
tion to the conception, that is, from the perception of the individual
to the conception of the universal; and from the perception of the
isolated fact to the conception of universal law, all the subsidiary
intellectual processes mentioned above are at work in the acquisition
of knowledge. These factors, which are processes, are based on the
mental faculties—the Acquisitive, the Retentive, and Reproductive
while consciousness is the general groundwork. The Absolute
transcends these three processes mentioned above, sensation, per-
ception, and conception. It is conscious of these manifestations,
and is conscious of that consciousness. Perception is one, but the
principle of discrimination and therefore the law of relativity applies
to the phenomena involved in the fact of perception, both mental
and material. The Absolute can only be conscious of the order
embodied in matter through the medium of its properties ; the first
form of consciousness of the external system is sensible
intuition, a thing which is only possible because of the fundamental
properties of the external. There can as yet be no definition of
matter, it can only be affirmed that there is a consciousness of it in
certain modes and qualitative differentiations. The ultimate quali-
tative constituents cannot be defined, because not known The
external material is an objective system of order, qualitative and
quantitative, and the clearest and most comprehensive consciousness
of that order is the best classification of the Sciences. That order
must be measured as a whole in its integral departments before the
unity of the Sciences can be discerned, and a rational classification
established. Space and motion are the main conditions of the
rational motion of the Absolute in its process of realistic oxternalis-
ation, the former being the main essential of the groundwork of


abstract Science, the latter the main essential of the groundwork of
concrete science. The first constituent part of the external is the
organic. The physical organic system has a spiritual side as related
to the internal, and a material side as related to the external. To
determine the order of the organic department of the external
material system, and the nature and constitution of the ultimate
qualitative constituents of matter is one of the main departments of
inquiry in modern Science. The philosophy of the organic includes
all the departments of Science in what are called the animal and
vegetable kingdoms. Biology is the central Science of the organic
constituent department, but there are three subordinate depart menls
included in it, as Botany, Zoology, and Palaeontology, each of which
has a series of qualitative differentiations in the various orders and
classes. Biology, Morphology, and Organic Chemistry are common
to the departments Botany, Zoology, and Palaeontology. Biological
Science may be regarded as both subjective and objective: subjec-
tive as related to the physical organic sensitive system associated
with reason ; but objective as related to Botany and Zoology proper
as well as to Palaeontology, which three, as noted above, are the
subordinate factors of Biology. Botany is usually known as the
vegetable kingdom, with all the distinctive departments related to
and included in it. Zoology is usually known as the animal king-
dom, with all the distinct departments related to and included in it.
Palaeontology, with all the distinct departments of extinct species
related to and included in it both in the animal and vegetable king-
doms. Science is the embodiment of conceptions in all its integral
departments. There are distinct Scientific conceptions belonging to
the organic. The relation of life in a physical organic sensitive
system to the environment is the department of Biological Science.
It unites the internal and external through the medium of a physical
organic sensitive system; it also unites the organic and inorganic
through the medium of the vital and formative principles, both in
plant and animal. The relation of life, that is, the vital and forma-
tive principles to matter as appropriated and assimilated into the
organic form, and the further relation of the principle of life to the
ultimate qualitative constituents is an important subject in modern


Science ; as well as the genesis of life, instinct, and consciousness,
and the relation of life, instinct, and consciousness. The whole
history of medical science reveals the fact that the physical organic
sensitive system is a system of order as related to the internal and
external. The Anatomy, Physiology, and Organic Chemistry of the
physical organic system are important in determining its relation to
its environment. Pathology refers to the disorder of that system,
Materia Medica and Therapeutics to the healing process. The
inorganic is the groundwork of the organic Biological Science
appropriates the ultimate qualitative constituents in definite pro-
portions in the organic form, for they can be combined in the
organic and inorganic. Chemistry determines the proportions in the
combination. In thus determining the order of the relation between
the organic and the inorganic, the extreme terms of the relation
must be understood, that is, the nature and constitution of the
organic and the nature and constitution of the inorganic. Biol-
ogy is equally related to both. If the order of the Scientific
mechanism of the external as a whole were conceived and determined
and if the relation between the organic and inorganic, and between
the internal and external were determined and developed, and
if the instinctive were preserved in its normal operation in its rela-
tion both to the organic and inorganic by reason then there would be
no such thing as disorder in the physical organism. The second
constituent department of the external material system is the in-
organic. The philosophy of the inorganic usually includes what is
placed under the title of Natural Philosophy, the chief de-
partments of which are Inorganic Chemistry, Physics, and Astron-
omy, which all have their subordinate and kindred departments.
To determine the order of the inorganic department of the external
material system, and the nature and constitution of the ultimate
qualitative constituents of matter is one of the main departments of
inquiry in modern Science, or, rather the philosophy of the inorganic
and of the unconscious is the problem. The nature, constitution,
and the relation of these ultimate qualitative constituents have to be
determined. What then are these three ultimate qualitative consti-
tuents ? Is there is a qualitative and quantitative difference between


them ? Is there a graduated scale of ultimate constituents corres-
ponding with the scale of mental conceptions as given in the gram-
mar of Science, viz., ether unit, prime atom, chemical atom,
molecule, particle, body, &c. ? The determination of the nature
and constitution and relation of these ultimate constituents is
essential to the completeness of the Science and Philosophy of the
inorganic. There is no division in the external material system,
but a disintegration of the universal order into the constituent
departments of the organic and inorganic, and a further disintegra-
tion of each of these constituent departments into various branches
of science, according as Ihe matter is solid, liquid, or gaseous. The
nature, constitution, and relation of these ultimate qualitative con-
stituents determine these modes. Each mode of matter has its own
special sciences, and all the modes are held in subjection to one
universal law. Space and the law of gravitation are common to all
the departments, whether constituent or subordinate ; from the
smallest ultimate qualitative constituent up to the largest mass of
matter in the universe, there is one general system of order pervad-
ing the whole. The inorganic includes what is usually known as
the mineral kingdom, which is the department of Inorganic
Chemistry Chemistry deals with matter in its three modes, solid,
liquid, and gaseous, and it disintegrates into the so-called chemical
elements. The mineral kingdom presents us with solid bodies, and
has the so-called subordinate branches, Physical Geography, Geology
and Mineralogy. It also determines the constituent elements of
bodies in a liquid or gaseous condition. Physics, like Inorganic
Chemistry, is the centre of a group of Sciences in the inorganic,
dealing as it does with atmospheric phenomena, ai.d the so-called
chemical elements in organic relation, whether in the solid, liquid,
or gaseous condition. Acoustics, Optics, Light, and Heat, as well
as Electricity, and Magnetism, and the different theories of gases
are subordinate departments. Astronomy, the third department of
tbe Inorganic, is also the centre of a group. The law of gravitation
with the sciences of Mechanics and Dynamics, .and the Science of
Kinetics, with Geometry, Trigonometry, and Conic Sections deter-
mine the astronomical order of the external material system. The


Scientific Factor




relation between bodies of magnitude and at variable distances, but
each fixed in its orbit, is the department of Astronomy. What then
is the relation of the motion of these ultimate qualitative constituents
to the orderly astronomical motion of the whole system ? The
nature, constitution, and relation of these ultimate qualitative con-
stituents, the nature, constitution, and relation of bodies in the
serial conceptions of magnitude have to be determined. Space and
matter are the fundamental conditions of the external material
system, the foimer being the main essential of the groundwork of
Abstract Science, the latter being the main essential of the ground-
work of Concrete Science. There is no division in the external
material system, but a disintegration of its fixed order, nature, and
constitution into the two constituent departments, the organic and
the inorganic ; and a farther disintegration of these into the various
branches of Concrete Science; as well as the disintegration of matter
into its ultimate qualitative constituents. Space is the fundamental
condition of Abstract Science which deals purely with relations ; and
the relation in each department reduced to Scientific form is the
Conception The external material system is a rational synthesis ;
but the internal spiritual system is also a rational synthesis. The
Absolute with its Scientific mechanism, the essential and the organic
in all their integral departments, is related to the external material
system through the medium of the physical organic sensitive system.
That relation is a rational correspondence from the smallest ultimate
qualitative constituent up to the compound body of the greatest
magnitude. The revelation of the order of the external corresponds
with the revelation of the order of the Absolute. The concrete can
only be known through the medium of the abstract. It has been
said above that Abstract Science is the implement of reason ;
and that reason is the implement of the Absolute in determining the
order of the external material system. All relations arc conceived
to exist between the organic and organic, and between the organic
and the inorganic The first is the logical, the second is the mathe-
matical and the physical, and the third is the biological, which
includes the fact of external perception as well as the relation of life
to its environment. The relation in Logic is based on the nature of


objects, so that the relation is internal. Logic shows the rational
order of the organic and organic in their definite forms and relations,
furnishing the principles of extension and ccmprthtnsion, division
and definition in determining the relation between the individual and
the universal. These principles also deteimine the validity of the
syllogistic processes of reasoning, both inductive and deductive The
mathematical relation is based on the co-existence and position of
objects. The mathematical branch of Abstract Science shows the
rational order of space in deteimining the relation between material
bodies; the measurements which determine the rational order of
space is the Science Every relation must b« capable of being re-
duced to the form of a conception ; and that the series of mathe-
matical conceptions may be determined, there is a qualitative differ-
ence in the measurement of space, that is, there are various kinds of
figures such as the circle, ellipse, triangle, rectangle, parallelogram,
square, etc. Hence the Sciences of Geometry, Trigonometry, and
Conic Sections are used in determining the order of mathematical
relations, and therefore of malh( malical conceptions, for space is
measured by geometrical principles in determining the relations
bitween material bodies ; but mathematical relations are based on
succession as well as co-existence. Space is the abstract of all ma-
terial phenomena, and the gtneial ground in the deteiminaticn of
relation ; and since matter is held both in a variable and in an invari
able position, there must be a law cc-extensive with space which
constitutes the material a system rational and orderly. Gravitation
is the fundamental principle holding the Scientific mechanism of
the material in order; the law of attraction and repulsion being
determined by the mass and relative distance of the bodies from the
central mass But the Scientific order of the law of gravitation and
the Science of Astronomy are identical The Science of Astronomy
is the most extensive of the external material system; all other
sciences have their being and meaning in it, being co-exteusive with
space ; and the regulative principle co extensive with space is grav-
itation. Extension and resistance (inertia and gravity) are both
associated with matter in motion. Space is the groundwork, while
motion and force are associated with matter. Motion, force, and


space can be measured by geometrical principles; mechanical mo-
tion is only possible because of space, but there is a qualitative
disintegration of motion as of space, and therefore there is a varied
order as in the straight line, circle, ellipse, &c. The Scientific order
of the law of gravitation and Astronomy are identical as noted
above ; and the order of that law is to a large extent determined
by the Sciences of Mechanics and Dynamics, the former of which is
a concrete embodiment of the principles of Geometry. The principles
of Kinetics, Dynamics, and Mechanics are all brought to a Scientific
centre in the Science of astronomy. The determination of the
rational order of space through the medium of qualitative disinteg-
ration, that is, mathematical figures and the determination of the
laws of motion through a like qualitative disintegration constitute
the fundamental part of the order of the system. 00-existence and
succession are necessarily implied in determining mathematical
relations ; but the relation of the inorganic to the inorganic also
includes the physical as well as the mathematical. Abstract Science
deals purely with conceptions, and the determination of the concep-
tion is the determination of the Scientific relation. In the inorganic
department of Concrete Science a scale of conceptions was advanced
beginning with ether unit and ending with body. The objective
correspondents of these conceptions, and their relations separately
and in combination is the subject. The elementary bodies known
to Chemistry and the ultimate qualitative constituents are two dis-
tinct things. The relations of these ultimate qualitative constituents
and the relations of chemical elementary bodies are two distinct
things. These ultimate qualitative constituents and their relations
get below all chemical bodies and their relations. They are com-
bined in definite proportions and under various conditions, and so
producing the threefold state mentioned above, solid, liquid, and
gaseous. According to the shape, nature, magnitude, and motion of
these ultimate qualitative constituents, so is the quality of their re-
lation. But as there is as yet no distinct and definite name for these
constituents, so there is no distinct and definite name for the rela-
tions. There are different names for bodies and their relations, from
the elements of Chemistry up to the bodies of the greatest magni-


tilde with which Astronomy deals The determination of the order
of the Scientific mechanism of the external material system from
the smallest of these ultimate qualitatve constituents up to the com-
pound body of greatest magnitude is the problem of the Scientific
factor; for there is one system of order in the external, and a disin-
tegration of that order into the various departments of Abstract and
Concrete Science. It has been shown that the internal spiritual
system is a system of order qualitative and quantitative, having its
own Scientific mechanism and phenomena and laws; and that
there is a fixed and progressive order in the internal in all its de-
partments. Consciousness is the groundwork of the internal spiri-
tual system, aud reason is the regulative principle ; that is, consci-
ousness is the groundwork of the structure of the internal with all
its phenomena and laws. It has also been shown that the external
material system is a system of order qualitative and quantitative,
having its own Scientific mechanism and phenomena and laws, and
that there is a fixed and progressive order in all its departments.
Space is the groundwork of the external material system, and gravi-
tation is the regulative principle, that is, space is the groundwork of
the structure of the external with all its phenomena and laws. What
then—to refer to some things which have been already mentioned—
is the relation between these two systems ? Can that relation be
exactly determined ? What is common to the two systems as to
groundwork, phenomena, and laws ? What progress has been made
in the direction of finding an absolute unity, if such be possible ?
What is the relation of space with its phenomenal content to con-
sciousness with its structure and phenomenal content ? of the
quantity and quality of the internal to the quantity and quality to
the external ? of the co-existence and succession of the internal ?
to the co-existence and succession of the external ? There
is a fixed and progressive and Scientific order in the physical
organism through the medium of which a conscious connection
between the internal and external is possible. Since therefore in
this organic sensitive system there is a fixed Scientific
order, and being related both to the internal and external, there
must be the utmost harmony between the two systems. The rela-


Scientific Factor.




ion between the internal and external is that of a rational synthetic
>rocedure of which the factors are sense, sensibility, sensation, per-
jeption, conception Sensation reveals the existence of objects ,
perception the qualities of objects ; and conception the relations of
obects Sensation is the prius of this dualistic form of perception,
and both sensation and perception in conjunction constitute the
prius of conception. The concept is not phenomenal, but an instru-
ment brought by reason and used in the rational synthesis of the
phenomenal. The individual which has a quantitative and qualita-
tive existence or particularity is given in the order of the external
material system. The idea is of the individual, the concept is of
the universal. The external is an objective system of order quali-
tative and quantitative ; but a rational contact with it is only possible
through the medium of the concept; for it is that by means of w 7 hich
the consciousness of a rational synthesis is possible. The concept
is the unity of the two systems the internal and the external ; and
it is an absolute unity so far as the order of the external is concerned,
for it is an expression of the Absolute It is not phenomenal, but it
unites the phenomenal both of the internal and of the external.
The spontaneity of the Absolute is manifest in the fact of perception.
In the act of perception there is a distinct and simultaneous consci-
ousness of each system, that is, of the internal and of the external.
Perception is one, but discerns simultaneously the mechanism and
phenomena of each. It is, however, called internal being of the
whole range of the mechanism and phenomena of the internal ; and
external being of the whole range of the mechanism and phenomena
of the material; but consciousness of internal alone is not possible ;
and consciousness of the external alone is not possible ; as the men-
tal and material form one concrete reality, the union of the two is a
rational (identity —reason being identical with its object—and both are
essential to the scientific and philosophic unity of consciousness.
But reason is common to both systems, for in all its aspects, intuitive,
discursive, scientific, and speculative, it determines the order of the
scientific mechanism and phenomena of each. Reason is merely an
instrument of the Absolute, which is equally near the order of the
mechanism and of the pkenomena of each system in the fact of per-


ception. There is no division in the internal; there is no division
in the external ; nor is there a division between the internal and
external. The Absolute postulates, but transcends the dualism ; for
that dualism is the possibility of consciousness ; and it is the Abso-
lute that is conscious. The Absolute transcends the dualism of
space and consciousness, and therefore the order of the phenomena
and mechanism and laws of the external; and the order of the phe-
nomena and mechanism and laws of the internal. Henco the order
of the external is the order of the internal embodied in the pheno-
mena of matter ; and the one condition is common to both ; regarded
externally it is called space, and internally it is called consciousness.
The determination of the order and development of the scientific
mechanism of the internal is the determination of the order and
development of the scientific mechanism of the external.. The
order of the material is an extei nalisation of the order of the mental.
The external is thus the content of the internal, the differentiation
of material forms corresponds with the differentiation of logical
forms, that is, the phenomena of consciousness have their objective
correspondents in space, and if so, then the Nomology of the internal
must be identical with the Nomolcgy of the external; and the co-
existence and succession of the internal with the co-existence and
succession of the externa:. The order of the external material system
and consciousness of it are identical in every grade of the progress.
The Absolute is common to both, and in transcending the dualism
and in operation it is simultaneous in discernment, and spontaneous
in its connective energy. Keeping out of view the old discussions of
Idealism and Materialism, the only other scientific and philosophic
consciousness of the relation in the present stage of our knowledge
is that of an identity. There has not been, and there never can be,
a clear and final statement of the unity of the relation, till the
nature and relations of the ultimate qualitative constituents of matter
are determined and conceived. There is only a dim consciousness
as yet of the properties of these constituents in their combined form
in what is now called matter in its various modes ; but the isolated
constituents are not known, and there has almost been as much done
as can be done in the direction of conceiving the unity of the rela-
81


tion between the two systems, till the nature and relations of these
ultimate qualitative constituents of matter are determined. The
nature and relation of the internal spiritual are understood up to
grade of development reached; the nature and relations of the
external material are understood up to the grade of development
reached ; and the relation between the two systems is conceived in
strict accordance with the grade of development reached in each ; as
is the one, so is the other, and therefore the consciousness of the
relation will correspond. The identity of the relation is in the con-
sciousness of the order which is common to both ; but of the ulti-
mate qualitative constituents either in isolation, or in their com-
bined form, through the medium of which this order appears there
is no certain knowledge, when the nature and relations of these
ultimate constituents are determined, that knowledge will modify
our consciousness of the order of the internal and of the external,
and therefore of the relation between them. The philosophy of the
inorganic and unconscious is yet far from being exhausted.


The Moral
Relation of Moral intuition to Absolute Scientific mechanism—Relation
between rational and instinctive—Transition from instinctive to
rational—Development of Scientific mechanism of moral—Prime
end of instinctive — Content of social organism—Relation of plea-
sure and pain to realisation of content —Conflict of Social units in
realising content Relation of realising material content to moral
mechanism—Norm of feeling—Moral distinctions —Absolute moral
S' .ndard—ldea of an. end-" Moral standard and Social aggregate
Freedom—Legal system —Attraction and repulsion—Sympathy
and antipathy —Virtue and pleasure, pain and vice—Qualitative
discrimination —theories and morals—An End is arbitrary or
e reniial—The true End given in the fact of existence—The End of
the moral factor —Full development of moral mechanism last
result of history—Unity of instinctive-Unity of rational —The
simtnum bonum —The external stage in moral mechanism —The
internal in moral mechanism —Daiwok and conscience—Re-
lation of end in each factor to universal end of Absolute—Scienti-
fic groundwork of moral intuition —Right, duty.
The Moral intuition is a spontaneous expression of the Absolute.
Each factor of the Organic unity is a qualitative disintegration and
externalisaiion of the Absolute through the medium of the essential ;
for there can be nothing in the Organic that is not in the Absolute ;
and there must be that in the Organic that is in the Absolute in
some degree. The moral intuition has a Scientific mechanism
springing from the Absolute, which is of gradual development and
conception in determining the relation between the instinctive and
the rational. This mechanism, and the transition through which it
is revealed, has no distinctly conscious beginning ; but it is implicit
in the beginning, and revealed in the historical process. There is a
gradual advance from the stage of unconscious identity with others
an instinctive unity—when the consciousness of the Scientific me-
chanism of the moral is at a minimum, and the moral capacity is
weak, up to the stage when a conscious identity—rational unity—
86


with others is reached, and the consciousness of the Scientific me-
chanism of the moral is at a maximum, and the moral capacity is
strong. It has been shown that the external material is an objec-
tive system of order, qualitative and quantitative; and that the
internal spiritual is a subjective system of order, qualitative and
quantitative ; and that the internal is related to the external through
the medium of the physical organic system endowed with a sensitive
organism. The instinctive and the spiritual are thus the two
extreme terms in the mechanism of the moral factor. The deter-
mination of the order of the relation between the instinctive and’the
spiritual reveals the Scientific mechanism of the Moral. As the
order of the instinctive and of the rational is determined, the consci-
ousness of the mechanism of the Moral will correspond ; for between
and inclusive of these two terms the consciousness of the Moral is
only possible. The instinctive has its own distinctive tendencies
and ends. The rational has its own distinctive tendencies and ends ;
but as neither of these is separate from the other the ends of the
instinctive and the ends of the rational blend ; the former leading
to the evolution of the latter. Nothing in the process is wholly in-
stinctive, and nothing wholly rational. These two factors are indis-
solubly conjoined in the whole transition, and in the development
of the Scientific mechanism of the Moral. The prime end of the
instinctive is the realisation of the material content of the Social
organism, which end is given in the fact of existence. The central
principle in the realising of that content is the love of life, the tvo
main factors of which are the instinctive tendency to preserve and
reproduce. In realising this material content the feeling is one
either of pleasure or pain. If the natural energy be unhindered the
feeling is one of pleasure, and therefore satisfaction ; but if retarded
the feeling is one of pain, and therefore dissatisfaction. But plea-
sure and pain, as well as desire and aversion, are common to the
instinctive and to the rational; so arise the consciousness or the
differentiated data of the Scientific mechanism of the Moral. But
since the Social units are all seeking the realisation of the same end,
there must be conflicting interests ; the severity of the conflict being
determined by the number of the units, and the grade reached in


their development. The Scientific mechanism of the Moral is
essential to the rational realisation of the material content of the
Social organism ; as the form of a plant is essential to the appropri-
ation and assimilation of matter that the concrete expression, both
of form and matter may be embodied in one organic whole. But
the development of the form and the embodiment of the matter
proceed simultaneously ; the grade of the one determines the grade
of the other. The effort at realising the material content in any
measure brings into consciousness the Scientific mechanism of the
Moral in a corresponding proportion ; the development of the me-
chanism and the realisation of the content being simultaneous. The
Moral intuition has a norm of feeling which includes a consciousness
of moral distinctions ; an absolute moral standard ; and the consci-
ousness of an end. This norm is thus potential and capable of
varied and complex disintegrations and differentiations. The devel-
opment of the Moral intuition includes the development of the norm
with all it contains. The emotions of the Moral intuition indicate
an intricate moral mechanism regulating the relations of the moral
units. There can be a unity of sentiment as to adjustment of
moral relations. The above diagram shows the mechanism of the
Moral intuition. The end of the instinctive is already given in the
fact of instinctive existence, but that end can only be realised on
conditions sanctioned by the social aggregate. The Scientific me-
chanism of the Moral determines how the means shall be obtained
for the realisation of the material content of the Social organism,
through the medium of a legal system ; which holds the Social units
in order, and is an expression of the mind and will of the Social
aggregate; for only in the Social aggregate and as a unit of the
moral system has the individual importance. There is a legitimate
realisation of that content, and in its realisation the object of the
legal system is to secure freedom to each by regulating the relations
or the Social units. That system implies that individual energy
must be directed in a certain way to obtain the requisite means.
Each Social unit has a right to freedom when he does not infringe
on the freedom of others, or hinder them from obtaining the re-
quisite means. The legal system takes no notice of the instinctive,


The Moral Factor.




but of the method of obtaining the means to gratify the instinctive.
It limits the sensuous and capricious, which are closely associated
with the instinctive, and thus secures freedom ; the lower the grade
of development the more of the sensuous, selfish, and capricious ;
the higher the grade of development the more of the true conception
of freedom, and therefore of the rational, universal, and benevolent.
Each social unit has to regulate the instinctive for himself. The
legal system is as nearly as possible an expression of freedom as
conceived in any grade of the transition. The instinctive and the
rational are thus the two extreme terms of the moral factor ; and in
determining the relation the order of the Scientific mechanism of
the Moral is determined. Sympathy and antipathy are the extreme
terms of the great law regulating the moral nature in relation to
others ; and all possible expressions of emotion take place in or
between these factors, corresponding as it does with the law of at-
traction and repulsion in the material. The quality of an act is
determined by reference to the absolute moral standard. The norm
of feeling differentiates itself into the consciousness of moral dis-
tinctions, which are applied to the quality of an act; the motive
also being considered in close conjunction with the act. When the
action either of an individual or of a nation conforms to this stand-
ard there is approval, approbation, and therefore pleasure ; there is
a sympathy with what conforms to the absolute standard, that is,
with the virtuous ; for sympathy is a word closely associated with
all the affections and virtues ; but when by reference to this standard
an act either of an individual or of a nation is proved defective,
there is disapproval, disapprobation, and therefore a general recoil of
feeling. There is an antipathy to what is defective when tested by
the standard, that is, to the vicious ; for antipathy is a word closely
associated with all the vices and passions. Pleasure is associated
with virtue, and pain with vice. The moral intuition exercises a
principle of qualitative discrimination between the extremes of
virtue and vice, for between these two extremes all possible expres-
sions of emotion and passion take place ; just as between the two
extremes of attraction and repulsion all the minor movements of
attraction and repulsion are included. The different theories of


morals or methods of ethics are merely so many efforts at determin-
ing the structure of the Scientific mechanism of the moral as a
system. Diversity of opinion shows variety in the moral environ-
ment and in the grade of development, and not that there is no
Scientific mechanism in the structure of the moral; while this
diversity continues that mechanism has not been fully developed.
Each method is determined as to its quality by the idea of an end ;
but these ends are merely fragments of the one system, and are all
included in the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute, An end may
be arbitrary or essential; the former is a temporary thing, the latter
is given in the fact of existence. That which fluctuates cannot be
an end. Happiness or pleasure is not an end given in the fact of
existence, and therefore cannot be an objective end for the race.
These are merely fluctuating subjective experiences having no posi-
tive existence apart from the graduated development of the Scientific
mechanism of the Absolute ; and coming merely as a consequence
of the adjustment and development of all essential relations in that
mechanism, whether relating to the Social unit or to the Social
organism. They are moments essential to and indicating the devel-
opment of the Scientific mechanism in each disintegrated factor, and
in the organic whole. According to the grade of development
reached in each factor both in the life of the individual and in the
history of the nation; so is the consciousness of pleasure andhappiness;
and according as the development is retarded so is the consciousness
of pain and misery. These experiences are concomitants of the
revelation of the Absolute in its various departments and grades, and
the consciousness of qualitative difference in pleasure and pain, will
be in proportion to the degree of development reached in the Scientific
mechanism of the Absolute both in the life of the individual and in the
history of the nation. As is the grade in the development of the
Scientific mechanism of each factor, so is the grade in the develop-
ment of the Scientific mechanism of the organic whole ; and there is
a corresponding experience in the consciousness of pleasure and pain,
of happiness and misery. The true end is given in the fact of
existence, and is an impersonal groundwork ; the full development
of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute, both in the life of the


individual and in the history of the nation. But it is through the
medium of arbitrary or temporary ends that the end given in the
the fact of existence is developed and conceived. The end of the
moral factor is the determination of the order of the Scientific me-
chanism of the moral intuition ; and the embodiment of the order of
that mechanism, both in the lives of the moral units and in the
history of the nation. The mechanism of the moral determines
what is right both for the individual and for the nation ; hence the
conscious virtue of each is the moral end ; and the nearest possible
approach to that is the nearest possible approach to the summum
bonum in that factor, Tne consciousness of that order and its
rational embodiment in the life is the end—the conscious realisation
of all the potentialities of the moral intuition. But the mechanism
of the moral must not be judged as to its ultimate form by any phase
it may present during the transition. The full development of that
Scientific mechanism is the last result of history. These phases are
numerous, but two of them stand out distinctly among the others in
the transition from the consciousness of the instinctive unity to the
consciousness of the rational unity. These are the external and the
internal. The external is the stage when there is an instinctive
unity ; there is no consciousness of subjectivity with its rights;
and therefore there is an unconscious identity with others, and an
identity of interest, with an unquestioning obedience to an external
authority as seen in the family, and in the patriarchal, and in the
clan stages. There is also an instinctive unity in the first grade of
the civic state after the clan stage, on which also is based an identity
of interest, and in which there grows up an external authority—a
morality of rule and custom—enforcing an individual and collective
obedience. The internal is the stage when the mechanism of the
moral is consciously assuming a Scientific form. It is the stage of
rational unity, and conscious identity with others ; and therefore of
identity of interest based on rational unity. Rational conviction
shows the consciousness of a standard. The individual judges of the
quality of an act, and of what ought to be done for himself. The
full development of the external is the initial stage of the internal.
The Pagan oracle is the centre of the external; but the daimon, or


conscience is the centre of the internal. There is also an effort made
to give the internal as then conceived an objective expression in a
moral system. But these two stages, that is, the external and the
internal, are in conflict in every stage and grade of development,
through which the human race has passed. In both there is a
great number and variety of grades. Diversity of opinion on moral
questions shows the conflict, and the conflict shows the grades of
development. The internal, from the nature of the case, must
have the victory, for it, means the development of the consciousness
of freedom. Each disintegrated factor of the organic unity has an
end ; as there are different departments there are different ends ;
but as the different departments are integral factors of the one
organic whole, the different ends are included in the one universal
end of the Absolute, the summum bonum. to ariston agathon. As
the Scientific mechanism of each department is developed, the
Scientific mechanism of the organic whole is by so much developed.
The moral intuition as observed above is a spontaneous expression
of the Absolute, and consciousness of the Scientific order of the
moral involves the consciousness of freedom, and therefore of the
Absolute. The consciousness of freedom is determined by the
grade reached in the development of the Scientific mechanism ; and
the consciousness of the Absolute is determtned by the conscious-
ness of freedom. The Scientific mechanism of the moral is dis-
cerned only in proportion to the degree of clearness and distinctness
with which these are discerned ; and it culminates in the determin-
ation of what is right and of what is duty, both for the individual
and for the nation.


The Religious.
Development of religious intuition—Scientific mechanism of religious
factor—Natural and Supernatural—Human and Divine—Disinteg-
ration in consciousness of Divine—Reason, faith—Religious dis-
tinctions—Absolute religious standard, and consciousness of an
End—Mechanism of moral a rational synthesis—lnitial stage of
religious intuition—Unconscious identity with material—Polythe-
ism, two kinds : Naturalistic and Anthropomorphic—Astronomical
order and religious development—The influence of natural and
supernatural Anthropomorphic polytheism Mythology and
ceremonialism—The External oracle—lnternal oracle—Polytheism
and Monotheism—One religion having two forms, the Human and
the Divine—The Divine has two forms, the Ceremonial and Essen-
tial—Cosmology—Theology Anthropology Soteriology—Cere-
monial groundwork—The miracle—lts relation to Polytheism
Conflict between external ind internal—Ceremonial and Essential
ReHgious freedom—Departments in development of divine truth—
The relation of external material system to Divine Being,
The Religious Intuition is a spontaneous expression of the Absolute,
there can be nothing in the Organic that is not in the Absolute ;
and there must be that in the Organic that is in the Absolute in
some degree. The religious factor seeks to determine the Scientific
mechanism of the relation between the Natural and the Supernatural,
and therefore the relation between the human and the divine ; the
human being included in the Natural, and the Divine in the Super-
natural. The religious intuition has a Scientific mechanism and a
content of its own. The central principle of that mechanism is a
norm of feeling which is potential, and capable by the processes of
disintegration and differentiation of revealing itself in religious dis-
tinctions ; an absolute religious standard, and the consciousness of an
end. Faith and reason are the extreme terms of the relation between
the Natural and Supernatural, as well as of the Scientific mechanism
of the religious factor ; reason on the human side, and faith on the
side of the Divine. There is a gradual advance from the period of


unconscious identity with nature when the consciousness of the
Scientific mechanism and content of the religious is at a minimum,
and the religious capacity is confused and weak : up to the stage
when there is,a consciousness of the Supernatural as an Absolute
Supreme, as distinct from, but as essentially related to the material
universe and its historical constitution ; when the consciousness of
the Scientific mechanism and content of the religious is at a maxi-
mum, and the religious capacity is clear and strong. Between the
extremes of this transition the mechanism and content are developed
in conjunction and simultaneously. All the factors of the historical
method, that is, observation, experiment, induction, deduction, and
introspection are used in determining the the Scientific
mechanism and content of the religious. That mechanism is a
rational synthesis in which faith and reason blend, neither operating
without the other. The external material is an objective system of
order, qualitative and quantitative. The internal spiritual is a sub-
jective system of order qualitative and quantitative. The physical
organism through which the internal is related to the external is
also a system of order, through the medium of which there is a con-
scious adjustment. These are all included in the Natural, and as the
order of these departments of the Natural is determined, there is a
corresponding clearness in the consciousness of their relation to the
Supernatural. There is no conscious beginning with the Scientific
mechanism and content of the religious ; the determination is
gradual and impersonal, and both mechanism and content are
implicit in the beginning, and revealed in the historical process. In
the initial stage the consciousness of the Natural and the Super-
natural of the Self correspond There is no clear and distinct
conception of the Natural, nor consciousness of the Supernatural, nor
of self, nor of the relation between them. The consciousness of
these is at a minimum, and in the development of the Scientific
mechanism of the religious the progress is simultaneous and har-
monic. Between the two extremes mentioned above the develop-
ment takes place, and the advance in the content is from Polytheism
and Monotheism. Polytheism is of two kinds—Naturalistic and
Anthropomorphic. The first phase of polytheism is a period of


unconscious identity with nature. The external material system
first attracted attention. This materialistic groundwork is essential
to the development of the mechanism of all the disintegrated factors
of the organic unity ; but in the early stage the religious seems
more closely connected with the internal than any other. The order
astronomical and otherwise of the external material is determined in
the development of the Scientific mechanism of the religious factor.
As is the grade in the consciousness of the order of the one, so is the
grade in the consciousness of the order of the other. The influence
both of the Natural and of the Supernatural was felt, though there
was no clear conception of the former, nor consciousness of the
latter. The vague feeling of the Supernatural easily identified itself
with the mysterious operations of the Natural ; hence there was no
clear consciousness of a distinction between the Natural and the
Supernatural; they were identical. The external material has con-
stituent departments, the organic and the inorganic, which also have
their differentiated factors. As this order came gradually to be con-
ceived there was a corresponding disintegration in the consciousness
of the Supernatural. Each factor of the constituent departments of
the Natural had its correspondent in the Supernatural. In the
inorganic, sun, moon, stars, and such phenomena as thunder, light-
ning, rain, etc. In the Organic, the vital powers of the material in
producing and reproducing both in the departments of Botany
and Zoology. But the factor of the constituent departments that
corresponds with the Supernatural is personified, and personal rela-
tions attached to it. The personality is mystic, and hence a vague
mythology and ceremonial system gather round each. In the
Anthropomorphic phase of polytheism the Supernatural comes to be
regarded as behind the Natural in its various departments, but as
distinct from it, and is conceived under some form human or other-
wise. The movements of natural phenomena are movements of a
deity, or of some creature of the imagination above the rank of the
Natural, regarded either as benevolent or malevolent, according as
the individual experience is beneficial or otherwise. The various
branches of art were under the control of some genius of the imagin-
ation. The deity in human form behind the material object, and the


operation of physical phenomena is an advance on the naturalistic
object personified. But there is also a corresponding advance in the
mythological and ceremonial garb, and divine activity in human
affairs is more certain. Through all this materialistic search after
the Supernatural there is some change in the experience and there-
fore in the condition of the Absolute ego, or that spiritual power in
its effort to determine the relation between the Natural and the
Supernatural. An advance in the Natural necessitates a corres-
ponding advance in the consciousness of the Supernatural ; and
therefore in the rational power which discerns the growth of the
relation. From the primitive syncretism to the most fully developed
form of the mechanism, all the factors have a simultaneous and
harmonic progression ; a fact which obtains an objective expression,
which serves as en exponent of the progress. The external oracle
and its superstition belongs to polytheism in both its phases; but
there is a clearer consciousness of its relation to the Supernatural in
the anthropomorphic period of polytheism than in the Naturalistic pe-
riod. But the full development of the polytheistic system led to the
consciousness of an internal oracle ; a fact which shows the advance
in a subjective, as well as in an objective sense, and leads to the
monotheistic consciousness of the Supernatural. The advance from
polytheism to monotheism takes the form of a conflict between the
external and the internal oracles. The inward, which sought to
free itself from the restrictions of the external, was an advance to
the consciousness of conscience. The Supernatural has a place in
the most fully developed mind as an Absolute Supreme. He is
distinct from all the factors in the constituent departments of the
Natural—organic and inorganic—and from all the forms, human or
otherwise, formerly ascribed to them ; and from all departments of
human life and branches of art, and from the historical constitution
of the universe. When the Scientific and philosophic investigation
of nature began, Naturalistic and anthropomorphic polytheism were
undermined, and the way was thus opened for a renewed effort to
determine the Scientific mechanism of the relation between the
Natural and the Supernatural. That relation eludes the grasp of the
most fully developed reason. The polytheistic disintegration in the


“S he Relig


■


isciousness of the Divine is not a failure. To the pagan mind it
3'a necessary step in the search after God—a stage in the evolution
iie mechanism of the religious factor. In that disintegration the
nciple of qualitative discrimination was developed to a remarkable
as shown in the classical distinctions of the provinces of each
ity. There is one religion which has two forms, the human and
e Divine. All polytheistic forms are human in origin and materi-
istic. The Divine form of religion has two aspects—the Ceremo-
al and the Essential—that is, the Scientific mechanism of the
ligious has a body of truth as above, the Ceremonial and the
ssential, and an external organisation. This Divine form was
•vealed when a rational conception of the nature and kingdom of
od was possible. Both in the polytheistic and monotheistic sys-
ims the Supernatural is conceived as related to the external material
nd Divine intervention in human affairs is a certainty. Cosmology
3 the Scientific term fo»- the systematic description of the external
lalerial system. Theology is the Scientific term for the description
,{ the Supernatural, and the systematic arrangement of Divine truth,
Anthropology is the mediating factor between these extremes ; and
,he Soteriological idea is the centre of the positive religious truth of
he Scientific mechanism of the religious factor, and is of Divine
revelation ; for God spoke when a rational conception of his nature
md kingdom was possible. The dualism of the religious factor con-
sists in the ceremonial and essemial, the external and internal,
The ceremonial groundwork was needful before the Essential could
be revealed or understood ; and because the Essential had to be applied
and to permeate human life and history the ceremonial had to be
developed in human life and history. A people had bo be selected
that the ceremonial institutions might be embodied and developed in
their life and history, as symbols of the Essential; and when the
ceremonial was developed as a complete symbol the Essential was
revealed. Both in the period of the development of the ceremonial
and of the revelation of the Essential the miracle appears as an expres
sion of the presence and intervention of the Supernatural. In the Cere-
monial period the conflict is carried on with the polytheistic divinities
of Egypt, Canaan, Babylon, Syria, and Persia. In the period of the


revelation of the essential with the polytheistic divinities of Greece,
Rome, and Germany ; as well as with those of India, etc., in modern
times. But even when the ceremonial is fully developed, and the
essential fully revealed, there must be no blending of the one with
the other in the Scientific mechanism of religious truth ; for such
blending is the cause of endless confusion and conflict. Only in the
true presentation of the essential truth of that relation between the
Natural and Supernatural, the human and the Divine, can there be
a consciousness of religious freedom and its objective existence as a
fact. The ceremonial and the essential, the external and the internal,
are not meant to be in conflict; but both are needful to the full
development of the Scientific mechanism of that relation, and of the
religious consciousness But the ceremonial and essential periods
have each an external organisation corresponding with the object
each has in view. The form in the ceremonial period was of Divine
revelation and direction, because a part of a system that was
meant to be a symbol There is a diversity of opinion as to the form
of the external organisation in the period of the essential. What-
ever form be adopted, there must be freedom for the development of
the Scientific mechanism of the religions factor, and its embodiment
in the life of the individual, and therefore in the history of the
external organisation—the Church ; for it is merely an institution
leading to the discernment and development of the essential, having
to determine and preserve Divine truth both in the ceremonial and
essential periods. There is a Scientific mechanism in the external
organisation as well as in the truthof Divine revelation. The history
of the development of Divine truth reveals the "departments of
apologetics, systematic theology, etc. The form of the external
organisation in the ceremonial period was a heirarchy ; for during
the period of the development of the ceremonial the nation was
chiefly a Theocracy. In the period of the Essential various forms
prevail in the structure of the external organisation, a subject
which will be treated in its proper place when dealing with the
development of the religious factor in each nation. But even after
the development of the ceremonial and revelation of the Essential
there is an effort again made to determine this relation. The


application of Scientific and philosophic principles to determine the
nature and constitution of the objective order of the natural leads to
a clearer consciousness of the Supernatural, and the extremes
being thus understood, the relation is the more likely to be accu-
rately determined.


The Esthetic.
The relation of /Esthetic intuition to the Absolute, and to factors of
organic unity —Tn what Esthetic intuition consists —The develop-
ment of /Esthetic intuition—The phenomenal content of the
Esthetic factor—The Scientific mechanism of Aesthetic intuition
—Norm of feeling—Absolute Aesthetic standard —Consciousness
of end—Nature of noim Value of Aesthetic phenomena—Quali-
tative discrimination—Aesthetic distinctions—Basis of Aesthetic
content two fold—Materialistic and Rationalistic, or Spiritualistic
—Beautiful and sublime—Constituents of Aesthetic content —the
whole range of external material ; and the whole range of the
phenomenal content of Scientific mechanism of the Absolute—
National life and history presented through the medium of lan-
guage by artist in two main forms : (a) Prose, Literature, History,
Science, Philosophy, Oratory, Fiction, Ac ; (b) Political litera-
ture; ballad, epic, lyric, drama, tragedy, comedy, music, rhetoric.
—Rational correspondence between mechanism and content of
aesthetic factor from minimum to maximum of aesthetic conscious-
ness—Spontaneous synthesis of aesthetic intuition —Full develop-
ment of the mechanism of aesthetic intuition the last result of
history.
The Aesthetic intuition is a spontaneous expression of the Absolute.
Each factor of the Organic unity is a Scientific disintegration and
externalisation of the Absolute through the medium of the Essen-
tial ; for there can be nothing in the Organic that is not in the
Absolute, and there must be that in the Organic that is in the
Absolute in some degree. The .Esthetic intution consists in dis-
cerning the unity of the ordinary, of the Scientific, and of the philo-
sophic consciousness ; the unity of the individual and universal, of
the intuitional and conceptual, of the concrete and abstract ; the
relation between the internal and external, and the giving of an
artistic expression to the internal in and through the medium of the
external. There is a gradual advance from the period of uncon-
scious identity with nature, when the Scientific mechanism of the
Esthetic consciousness is at a minimum, and the Esthetic capacity


101
is weak, and the most crude efforts of artistic expressions appear :
up to the stage when the Scientific mechanism of the Esthetic
consciousness is at a maximum, and the Esthetic capacity is strong ;
when the highest expressions of artistic effort appear. In the whole
process from the minimum to the maximum of the Esthetic consci-
ousness every aesthetic effort corresponds with the Absolute. The
phenomenal content of the Aesthetic factor is different from the
content of all the other factors, though the mechanism is
the same ; but each factor, both as to its mechanism and content,
forms a rational synthesis ; and the different factors of the histori-
cal method—observation, experiment, induction, deduction, and
introspection—are used in determining the order of the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content. The Esthetic intuition has a
norm of feeling which includes an absolute .Esthetic standard, and
the consciousness of an end. This norm is potential, and capable
of varied and complex disintegrations and differentiations. The
development of the Esthetic intuition includes the development of
the norm in its processes of disintegration and differentiation, as
well as the development of the Absolute Esthetic standard, and the
consciousness of an end. The emotions of the Esthetic intuition
indicate an intricate esthetic mechanism regulating the judgment;
for there can be a unity of sentiment in regard to the adjustment of
aesthetic phenomena in relation to the Absolute Esthetic standard.
The law of attraction and repulsion regulates the judgment in de-
ciding the value as aesthetic phenomena. The principle of qualitative
discrimination between the extremes of the Esthetic relation is just
as active in the Esthetic as in the Moral. Sympathy and Anti-
pathy are the extreme terms of the relation, and with these go the
agreeable and the disagreeable, the pleasurable and the painful.
The end is the full development of the Aesthetic intuition or consci-
ousness, which includes the disintegrations and differentiations into
Aesthetic distinctions, and the Absolute Aesthetic standard. This
standard can never obtain an objective expression, a thing which is
true also of the Moral ; but the Scientific mechanism of the Aes-
thetic intuition can obtain an objective expression in an Asthetic
system. In proportion as a work of art approximates to the


Absolute Aesthetic standard, there is the consciousness of attraction
by means of sympathy, and therefore a consciousness of the agree-
able and pleasurable ; but in proportion as a work of art is defective
when tested by the Absolute Aesthetic standard there is the consci-
ousness of repulsion, and therefore an expression of antipathy and
its concomitants, the disagreeable and painful. Aesthetic pleasure,
to be pure, must not even include the personal element of a desire to
possess that which is the source of pleasure. The Scientific mechan-
ism is embodied in and revealed through the medium of the phe-
nomenal content, as the form of the physical organism through the
medium of the matter. The basis of the Aesthetic content is two-
fold—materialistic and rationalistic, or spiritualistic. The external
material is an objective system of order qualitative and quantitative,
the constituent departments of which are the Organic and Inorganic.
Through the Aesthetic intuition coming into contact with the order
of the external material its Scientific mechanism is developed. The
Organic includes all the different departments of the vital and in-
stinctive. The Science of morphology, which includes the depart-
ments of Botany and Zoology, furnishes the consciousness of the
beautiful as revealed in the forms and laws of thought; the consci-
ousness of beauty, as well as its opposite, is given in the form and
colouring both in Botany and Zoology. The Inorganic furnishes the
peaceful and attractive aspect on a large scale ; heaven with all its
host, sky, sun. moon, stars, etc. ; earth with all its variety in struc-
ture and physical appearance—mountain, plain, hill, dale, landscape,
forest, ocean, sea, river, lake. The idea of the L o ganic is that
of the sublime which furnishes the peaceful and attractive aspect of
the material on a large scale ; for the conception of magnitude is
related to the idea of the sublime. But a view of nature on a large
scale creates a subjective correspondent, a feeling of awe, which
almost passes over into a feeling of insecurity, and therefore fear.
The grand and majestic are also associated with the idea of the
sublime. The other extreme of the Inorganic is the idea of the
terrible, which is associated with the movement of the elements on
a large scale ; and here the feeling of positive dread is excited by
accident, devastation, wind, waves, floods, fire, volcanoes, thunder


The /Esthetic Factor.




and lightning, earthquakes, kc. The different aspects of the phy-
sical as seen in the seasons are also included in this enumeration.
Nature is eloquent because she is permeated by the Science of
Rhetoric in her aesthetic aspect. There must in every scene be a
due proportion of the Organic and Inorganic to produce an aesthetic
effect. The beautiful and the sublime must in some measure blend
in every natural scene in which there are three elements—the
material, the formal, and the ideal ; that is, the Organic, the Inor-
ganic, and the Spiritual. The modes and laws of matter give the
ideas of the sublime and terrible ; the forms and laws of thought
give the idea of the beautiful, that is, the formal element; but the
ideal content of the scene is also an expression of the Absolute ; the
material, the formal, and the ideal are given by nature, and are
inseparable in producing the Aesthetic impression. Reason gives
the formal, but only through the medium of the material, and the
ideal through the medium of the material and formal. The
aesthetic intuition determines the integral departments in its
relation to the external material system, both in the Organic and in
the Inorganic ; or, as they are usually called, classification of the
various branches of art. But the aesthetic intuition also works on
the phenomenal content of the Organic unity ; the whole range of
the phenomenal content of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute
furnishes data for the realisation of the Scientific mechanism and
phenomenal content of the factor ; that is, all the factors
of the Organic unity in its transition from the Absolute to the
Organic through the medium of the Essential : the whole circle of
essentials, with its cycle of progressive embodiments. The rational
has thus a wide field, including every department in human life and
history. The nation gives a complete expression to its life
in all its departments in a work of art. Each department
in the mechanism of the Organic unity is represented, and the
Esthetic genius combines the essentials of the whole in a work of
art, the best of which appear at or as the culmination of periods in
individual and in national life. The facts of the life and history of
the nation are represented through the medium of language by the
artist in th« two main forms—(a) Prose Literature : History, Science,


Philosophy, Oratory. Fiction, &c. ; (b), Poetical Literature: Ballad,
Epic, Lyric, Drama, Tragedy, Comedy. The artist has free access
to every department of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute ;
but he must know the regulative principles in every department of
knowledge to accomplish his end. Ballad and Epic forms of poetry
relate to heroic events, and refer chiefly to periods of activity ; Lyric
records experiences of memorable reflection—not introspection—in
which discontent, sadness, and sorrow appear, as well as joy and glad-
ness. Because the theatrical forms, Drama, Tragedy, and Comedy,
embody and represent the essential principlesin operation in the varied
departments of human life and history, there is such a keen interest
taken in them. But everything included in the phenomenal content
of the Absolute can be put in a poetic form and set to music, which
is not a Science, but is expressed in an Esthetic form through the
medium of Scientific principles. Music is not instinctive to man,
but is an essential principle in the soul, through which it seeks an
outlet. The instinctive furnishes the power of sound in a modulated
form. There is a fixed scale from the mere chirp up to the most
complex and therefore musical sound. We imitate the natural law
of sound on musical instruments. The spiritual has more varied
forms for aesthetic expression thandhe material, though the latter is
the groundwork for the Esthetic realisation of the Spiritual. The
Esthetic intuition determines its own integral departments in each,
but that intuition is only possible through the medium of a mechan-
ism that is Scientific ; just as thought is only possible through the
medium of definite forms. The Science of Rhetoric is the regula-
tive implement in the production of any work of art, or in the realis-
ation of the phenomenal content of the Esthetic factor. In each
department of art the regulative implement seems to assume a dif-
ferent form. There is a rhetoric of painting, sculpture, and music,
as well as poetry and oratory, and in each case the artist must know
to use the Esthetic implement. But there is a correspondence
between the instrument, the Esthetic intuition—which includes the
norm expressing itself in .Esthetic distinctions—and f the Scientific
mechanism. The grade of development reached in the one deter-
mines the grade in all the others : and all constitute the Esthetic


capacity and consciousness. Between the stage when the /Esthetic
consciousness is at a minimum, and the stage when the /Esthetic
consciousness is at a maximum, there is an infinite variety of grades,
all of which pass through and modify the /Esthetic intuition. The
./Esthetic intuition can discern and represent the secret and order of
the phenomenal content in some degree even during the stage of
unconscious identity with nature. Its power to discern determines
its power to represent; and both its power to discern and represent
are determined by the grade of the transition along the whole line
of development. When the Scientific mechanism is fully revealed
the intuition is strong and clear, for the strength and delicacy of the
intuition are determined by the grade of development reached ; and
when art in all its departments is in an exact correspondence with
the Absolute, then the .Esthetic consciousness is at a maximum.
The Scientific mechanism is complete, the intuition has attained its
strongest, clearest, and most delicate stage. The spontaneous syn-
thesis of the ./Esthetic intuition is the charm of the Esthetic factor.
The Absolute standard, though incapable of expression, is involved in
the intuition-and in the whole mechanism. But since thisis developed
mainly through the medium of individual exertion, opinions about
it will vary with the grades of development reached ; for diversity
of opinion is a consequence of development. But v the full develop-
ment of the Scientific mechanism is the last result of history; and
though it obtains a different conventional expression in each nation,
yet the Scientific mechanism is identical, being an expression of the
Absolute. It must not be judged as to its ultimate expression by
any temporary phase it may assume during the process ; but not
only can the integral departments of the Organic unity separately
be embodied in a work of art; the Scientific mechanism and pheno-
menal content of the Absolute as a whole can also be embodied in
one work of art; and the degree of development reached in the
environment of the artist will be recorded as it exists. The essen-
tial principles must be in living operation at the stage when repre-
presented, for it could not be conceived and produced without such
an indispensible presupposition. Such a work of art as an Epic is
thus an historical fact—a compendium of all the essential principles
in operation at the period when produced.


The Political.
Relation of Political factor to Absolute —Political Organism, a rational
synthesis—Groundwork of Political Science—Mechanism and con-
tent of consciousness—Objectivity of freedom—Mechanism and
content of consciousness developed in conjunction—Law of develop-
ment—Nature of State—Relation of consciousness of Supreme
power to Absolute—The necessity of a governing system —Origin
of the State—Theories of the Social contract—Content of Political
organism—Disintegration of Supreme power—Two factors in the
mechanism of Political organism—External and internal ; the
nature of each— External oracle—lnternal oracle—Patriarchal Clan
and Civic stages—The religious element in the State—Mythology
and morality—lnternational law —Gnothi Seauto^i— Consciousness of
subjectivity and rational organisation—Relation of mechanism in
Essential nature of Social unit to mechanism of Political organism—
Representation—Legal system two-fold : civil and criminal—Viol-
ation—Civil injury and crime—Penalty—The legal system as
related to development—Political Science a conventional but also
a rational expediency—ln what sense is the State a work of art ?
Can there be a theory of the State ? Evolution of Essential prin-
ciples admits of no reverse—Reserve of the Absolute.
Each factor of the Organic unity is a spontaneous expression of the
Absolute through the medium of k the Essential. The Political or-
ganism is therefore a spontaneous expression of the Absolute, for
there can be nothing in the Organic that is not in the Absolute ;
and there must be that in the Organic that is in the Absolute in
some degree. Each disintegrated factor of the Organic unity is a
rational synthesis, having a Scientific mechanism and content of its
own. The mechanism is always the same, though the content may
differ; and all the factors of the historical method, as noted above,
are used in determining the order of the development of the Scienti-
fic mechanism of the Political as of the other factors. The transi-
tion from the Absolute to the Organic, through the medium of the
Essential, forms the groundwork of a sound, progressive, political
Science. The mechanism and content are developed in conjunction,


the one in and through the medium of the other. The content of
the Political is the consciousness and objectivity of freedom ; and
the Scientific mechanism of the Political is the apparatus which
secures it. The first effort at realising the content of the Political
organism necessitates a corresponding advance in the development
of the Scientihc mechanism of the Political organism of the
Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social
units. The advance is simultaneous in content and mechanism till
the final effort is made which secures the final and matured expres-
sion of the Political organism. There is a gradual advance from
the stage when the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of
the Social units takes the form of an unconscious identity with
Society ; and there is no consciousness of individual right and in-
terest ; but an instinctive unity, an unquestioning obedience, and a
corresponding crude and simple form of Political organisation : up
to the stage when the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature
of the Social units is conceived and fully developed, and takes the
form of a rational identity with Society ; and the highest form of
Political organism is reached. The State is the harmony of the
Scientific mechanism of the Political organism with the Scientific
mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units ; and the
more complete the adjustment between the two the more fully is
the content realised ; and the more fully is the Social unit conscious
of that realisation ; for the complete development and adjustment of
both in each grade of the transition is the end to which the evolu-
lution of history is tending. Between the grade of development
of the Scientific mechanism of the Political organism and
the grade of development of the Scientific mechanism in the
Essential nature of the Social units, there is always a cor-
respondence ; and when there is a perfect correspondence between
the Absolute and Organic, through the medium of the Scientific
mechanism, both in the Political organism and in the Essential
nature of the Social units, the highest form of Political organism is
reached; but its development is the last result of history ; for it
means] the full development and the complete adjustment of all
relations between the Social units, end between the Social units and


the Political organism. The consciousness of supreme power is a
spontaneous expression of the Absolute; the vice, selfishness, and
weakness of the Social units necessitate a governing system. The
origin of the State cannot be determined, as it had no distinct and
conscious beginning. Its origin, so far as can be discerned, was an
unconscious necessity, not an institution following from conscious
deliberation. The different theories of the Social contract are merely
so many efforts to account for the origin of the State. The Scientific
mechanism and content are developed in conjunction, the content is
the consciousness and objectivity of freedom in connection with the
order of events which procures it. The object of the Political or-
ganism is to secure freedom to each of the Social units in realising
the material content of the Social organism. There can be a Scien-
tific disintegration of this supreme power of the Political organism,
consisting in the varied possible forms in which that power may be
vested ; as Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, &c. The form in
which that power may he vested is of little importance if there be
freedom for the development of the Scientific mechanism in the
Political organism ; and for the development of the Scientific me-
chanism in the Essential nature of the Social units. In the Scienti-
fic mechanism of the Political organism there are two differentiated
factors ; the External relating to the external affairs of the nation,
and which gradually tend to and are associated with diplomacy and
international law ; but it has also many minor departments. The
Internal relating to the internal affairs of the nation, tending to and
associated with civil and criminal law ; but it too has many minor
departments. Supreme power, with its conventional divisions, leg-
islative, administrative, judicial, and executive, watches over the
differentiated factors in all their minor departments and details.
P>oth in the Political organism and in the Social units there is the
principle of qualitative discrimination and a rational discernment
exercised of what ought to be. The what-ought-to-be in any grade
of the transition will depend on the grade of development of the
Scientific mechanism in the Political organism ; and of the grade of
development of the Scientificmechanism in the Essential natureof the
Social units. If the mechanism of the Political organism be a rational


synthesis, and if the mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social
units be a rational synthesis ; and since the State is the harmony of
the two mechanisms, the what ought-to-be must be to the same
extent rational as the Scientific mechanism of the Political, and the
Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units.
Between the stage when the Political consciousness is at a minimum,
that is. when the Scientific mechanism of the Political organism is
not discerned, and the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature
of the Social units is not discerned ; and the stage when the Political
consciousness is at a maximum, that is, when the Scientific mechan-
ism of the Political organism is discerned, and the Scientific me-
chanism in the Essential nature of the Social units is discerned ; the
Political organism assumes two main forms with various grades in
each, the External and the internal. In the external form of the
State the Scientific mechanism of the Political organism and the
Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units is
not clearly conceived ; yet there was a measure of unconscious cor-
respondence between the mechanism of the Political organism and
the nature of the Social units as then conceived. The Religious,
Moral, and Political factors are closely associated, or rather they are
unconsciously identical ; for there is no clear consciousness of disin-
tegration. The external oracle, which gives unity to the external
form of the State, represents a distinct form of Scientific mechanism
of Political organism ; but it is a necessity in the juvenile stage of
historical evolution. In this external form the Social organism has
three distinct grades, the Patriarchal, the Clan, and the Civic,
which grades also present many different phases. Supreme power
first centres in the head of the family, and is thus based on natural
relations, having at this crisis no visible Scientific mechanism.
There is an unreflecting confidence in him, and obedience to him,
with an attachment to his person. There is no claim because no
consciousness of separate personal interest and right ; but from this
there is a transition to the Clan stage. A man of physical and
moral excellence and intellectual ability is chief among the patri-
archs of nature ; and he must in bravery and courage, as in intel-
lectual ability and physical and moral excellence, be above the


crowd before his right to power is unquestioned. Here, also, there
is an identity of interest and attachment to his person, and a
morality of rule and custom. From the Clan stage there is a neces-
sary transition to the first form of the Civic state. This was an
external conventional system with an identity of interest, for the
Social units. The welfare of the State was everything, the indivi-
vidual being of minor importance. The religious element was used
to make the Social units obedient so as to preserve unity and uni-
formity ; both the religious element and the morality of rule and
custom were stronger than in the Clan stage. Through the medium of
Mythology in conjunction with the Moral and Religious embodied
in artistic forms, the external form of the State was made very at-
tractive, and the patriotic sentiment was very strong; but it could
only preserve its unity and uniformity by being exclusive —a thing
also needed for the purpose of defence—and so long as that exclu-
siveness continued a system of International Law could not be
developed. But there is a necessary transition from the External to
the Internal form of the State; the full development of the former
is the initial consciousness of the latter. The gnolhi seauton
indicates the mediating stage in the transition, and introduces the
main epoch in the development of the Scientific mechanism of the
Political organism ; and of the Scientific mechanism in the Essen-
tial nature of the Social units. The Internal oracle represents an
entirely different form of Political organisation from the External.
AVhen the inward oracle was conceived in opposition to the outward,
the External inclusive unity and uniformity of the pagan state was
broken, after which followed the stage of rational disintegration and
organisation. The consciousness of subjectivity meant a rational
disintegration of the Religious, of the Moral, and of the Political;
and an effort to determine the Scientific mechanism of each, for the
transition from the External to the Internal implied in the gnothi
seauton is the origin of the consciousness of the development of the
Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units ;
and therefore of the development of the Scientific mechanism of the
Political, and of the Religious, and of the Moral; for there must be
a rational correspondence between the Social unit and the integral


The Political Factor.


V


departments of the Absolute in the evolution of the historical organ-
ism. The spiritual nature of each Social unit is now conceived to
be a complex Scientific mechanism ; and out of this the Scientific
mechanism of the Political springs. The Scientific mechanism of
the Political organism must be in strict harmony with the Scientific
mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units, a thing
which is the first consideration in the Internal form of the State ;
and is the groundwork and strength of the State. There can be no
government proper till this transition is begun. The State when
each Social unit has consciousness of subjectivity has a rational
unity and uniformity; and the mechanism of the Political now
assumes the form of a constitution. The power is in the Social
units with the consciousness of subjectivity and they can delegate that
power ; so the representative system is a necessity in the rational
groundwork of the state. Before the principle of representation was
introduced the selfishness of the governing system came into conflict
with the selfishness of the Social units ; hence the continuous con-
flict of interests. When the exclusiveness of the external was
broken down the development of a system of international law be-
came possible. It has been shown above that the Scientific mechan-
ism of the political has two differentiated factors, the Internal and
the External; the former relating to the internal, the latter to the
external affairs of the state. The organisation of Supreme power
applied to internal affairs has its main work in regulating the rela-
tions of the Social units in realising the material content of the
Social organism. The legal system, which is of a two-fold nature,
civil and criminal, is the apparatus which determines how the means
are to be obtained to realise that content. The existence of a legal
system implies the existence and irreversibility of a complex scientific
mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units, and that me-
chanism in the Essential nature of the Social units involves a system of
elations of which there must be no violation in realising the material
content of the Social organism. The two departments included in the
word violation are Civil injury and Crime. With these the Political
organism is chiefly concerned in regulating the relations of the
Social units. A penalty in various forms and grades is inflicted in


the case of each violation which should always be tempered with a
corrective element. The legal system can never be in advance of
the grade reached in the development of the Scientific mechanism of
the Political organism, and of the grade reached in the develop-
ment of the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the
Social units. It can only embody and protect the results of the
various grades as they appear in the consciousness and history of the
race ; and leave the mechanism open for more complete development
and adjustment. In what sense, then, can it be said that there is a
Science in (he Political organism, and that the State is a work of art ?
Between the External and Internal form of the State there can be
no comparison, the moral and religious systems being quite distinct
in each. But while the External and Internal forms co-exist in the
one State, and are mutually exclusive, the Internal must be the
ruling power ; as the External has endless complications which en-
slave. But the essence of the Internal form is freedom. History
reveals that the State is the development of a Scientific mechanism
founded on the development of a Scientific mechanism in the Essen-
tial nature of the Social units. The Scientific mechanism of the
Political is thus most critical as the data are borrowed from all the
other integral departments of the Organic unity ; and of the Essen-
tial unity in some degree. The Scientific mechanism of the Politi-
cal assumes the form of a conventional expediency. But there can
be such a thing as Scientific or rational expediency ; for an expedi-
ency founded on the development of the Scientific mechanism in the
Essential nature of the Social units, and on the development of the
Scientific mechanism in the Political organism must be Scientific in
tbe same proportion as the mechanism in each is Scientific; for the
Political organism is a rational synthesis. Between the minimum
of the Scientific mechanism of the Political organism and the maxi-
mum of that mechanism ; and the minimum of the Scientific me-
chanism in the Essential nature of the Social units and the maxi-
mum of that mechanism ; there is a scheme of gradation, and
between the development of the two mechanisms there is a rational
correspondence along the whole line of transition. If there be any-
thing of an art about the Political organisation it must be in adapt-


ing the Conventional to the developing complexity of the Scientific
mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units. There may
be some degree of theorising as to the best methods of adapting the
conventional to the Essential in the process of development. But
if the State have a Scientific groundwork based on the Scientific
mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units ; and if that
groundwork be impersonal and of gradual revelation, and therefore
beyond the control of individuals ; there can be no such thing as a
theory of the State. It had an existence, and travelled many stages
on its prescribed orbit before theories as to its origin began. Bat
since the mechanism in the units and in the Political organism is
progressive, the opinions of the units will vary with the grade of
development reached. The same Scientific mechanism is found in
each of the Social units, and in every nation, though in various
grades. This developing complexity of the Scientific mechanism in
the Essential nature of the Social units, and in the Scientific me-
chanism of the Political organism can never a be reversed. When
revealed in human consciousness, and embodied in the Scientific
mechanism of the Political organism as well as in the other integral
departments of the Organic unity there can be no reversion by those
Social units to a grade through which they have passed. He who
tries to effect such a change may think himself a benefactor to the
race ; but he is not acting on a principle justified by reason and his-
torical judgment and experience ; and therefore he attempts the
impossible. As the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of
the Social units is developed, and as the Scientific mechanism of the
Political organism is developed, there must be a corresponding adjust
ment between the two. Nothing can resist the disintegrating poten-
tial energy of the Absolute. It has always an unlimited power in
reserve apart from what is revealed in its disintegrations and dif-
ferentiations. This reserve resembles the law of gravitation which
holds the all material bodies with their attractive and repulsive proper-
ties in their place in the order of the external material system. The
Scientific mechanism of the Political organism through the medium
of the legal system holds all the Social units in their place, that is,
in their just relations to each other. The relation of the individual


and of the Political organism to the land is a problem which under-
lies and affects all the integral departments of the Scientific mechan-
ism of the Absolute. Whatever conventional system has been or
may be adopted and developed the rational groundwork of the his-
torical organism is more or less developed. Variety in conventional
form is important, and that conventional order will always corres-
ponds with the degree in which the rational groundwork has been
developed. But whatever conventional form may be adopted so long
as the Absolute is vicious, there will still be defect; for vice in the
Social unit implies a corresponding measure of vice in the State.
This subject will be treated when dealing with the concrete embodi-
ment of the Scientific groundwork in the histories of the leading
nations, as well as the Science of Political Economy ; which is the
regulative one in the raising and management of the material re-
sources needful for the operations of the Political organism. The
central conception of military law is strategical science, which will
also be treated in its place. In these three departments the principle
of expediency is the regulative one, which in turn is founded on
principles irreversible in the evolution of the historical organism.


The Social.
Relation of Social organism to Absolute—Scientific mechanism and material
content of Social organism—Scientific mechanism of rational syn-
thesis—The groundwork of the Social organism—Law of develop-
ment — Mechanism and content developed in conjunction
Mechanism in the nature of the Social units—Mechanism of the
Social aggregate—The harmony between the two—Relation of
Social organism to the Political organism—Object of Social Organ-
ism—Object of political organism—Relation between instinctive
and rational—Social economy—The Legal system—Conditions on
which the material content of the Social organism may be realised
System of relations between Social units—Rational procedure for
each unit—Conflict between Social units—Social economy—Prin-
ciple of utility—Capital and labor—Preservation and reproduction
Monogamy—No conflict between the operation of Scientific prin-
ciples—The Legal system, penalty, corrective element— Freedom,
justice—The State the explanation of history, and an End in itself
—Theories of Social life —Rational adjustment of essential relations
in Social units, and in Social organism.
Eacli factor of the Organic unity is a Scientific disintegration and
externalisation of the Absolute through the medium of the Essen-
tial ; for there can be nothing in the Organic that is not in the
Absolute ; and there must be that in the Organic that is in the
Absolute in some degree. The Scientific mechanism in each factor
is the same, though the content may differ. But each factor having
a Scientific mechanism and a phenomenal content must also be a
rational synthesis. The mechanism and content are developed in
conjunction and simultaneously; the one in and through the me
dium of the other; and all the factors of the historical method,
observation, experiment, induction, deduction, reflection are used in
determining the order of the development of the Scientific mechan-
ism of the Social organism as of the other factors. The Social
organism is thus a spontaneous expression of the Absolute, and the
transition from the Absolute to the Organic through the medium of


the Essential forms the groundwor k of a sound progressive Social
Science. Between the stage when the consciousness of the Scienti-
fic mechanism in the Essential constitution of the Social organism
is at a minimum, that is, when the Scientific mechanism of the
Social organism and the Scientific mechanism in the Essential
nature of the Social units is not discerned ; and the stage when the
Scientific mechanism in the Essential constitution of the Social
organism is at a maximum, that is, when the Scientific mechanism
of the Social organism and the Scientific mechanism in the Essen-
tial nature of the Social units are discerned ; there is a gradual
advance from the stage of an unconscious identity with Society when
the most crude form of Social organism exists : up to to the stage
of a rational identity with Society, when the highest form of Social
organism is realised. The Social organism is the harmony between
the individual and the universal ; that is, between the Scientific me-
chanism in the Essential nature cf the Social units, and the Scien-
tific mechanism in the Essential constitution of the Social aggregate,
there is a Scientific and therefore a harmonic relation. But that
relation cannot be determined without the intervention of the Poli-
tical organism. "What then is the relation between the Political
organism and the Social organism ? If there be a Scientific me-
chanism in each, and if that Scientific mechanism be founded on
the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units,
then there must be a Scientific piinciple in their relation ; as is the
grade in the development of the one, so is the grade in the develop-
ment of the other along the whole line of the transition. The
object of the Social organism is the realisation of the material con-
tent by each one of the Social units ; and the object of the Political
organism is to secure freedom to each one of the Social units in the
realisation of that material content, and to administer justice in
determining the Scientific order of the relations between the Social
units. The content of the Political organism—that is, freedom—is
the groundwork for the realisation of the material content of the
Social organism ; and in that freedom the Scientific mechanism in
the Essential nature of the Social units, and the Scientific mechan-
ism in the Essential constitution of the Social aggregate are devel-


oped. What then is the Scientific mechanism and what the material
content of the Social organism ? The mechanism and content are
developed in conjunction and simultaneously. The material content
has distinct reference to the instinctive constituent of human nature,
the central principle of which is the love of life, which has two chief
departments, the tendency to preservation and reproduction. But
the instinctive, as has been shown, is not irrational, for instinct
alone, and instinct as associated with reason, are two distinct things.
As associated with reason it forms part of the constitution of a com-
posite nature which has its meaning only as permeated by a rational
synthesis in all possible experience. In determining the relation
between the instinctive and the rational, or between the individual and
the universal, the Scientific mechanism of the Social organism is de-
veloped ; and in that mechanism there are three constituent depart-
ments ; the Science of Social economy; the Scientific mechanism of the
Moral; and the Scientific mechanism of the Legal system. The Social
organism, as well as the Political organism, passes through various
grades. It has been shown that in the development of the Scientific
mechanism of the Political, the State has two forms—the External
and the Internal; and various grades in each. The External is
quite a different form of Political and Social organism from the
Internal; but the effort to realise tne material content proceeding on
the same principle is common to both. The material content of the
Social organism must only be realised on certain conditions, that is,
the realisation must be in strict harmony with the Scientific me-
chanism in the Essential nature of the Social units. Since there is
a Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units,
and if the Scientific mechanism in the Essential constitution of the
Social aggregate be based on the Scientific mechanism in the Es-
sential nature of the Social units ; then it follows that there must be
a Science in the system of relations between the individual and the
universal; the Social unit and the Social aggregate. There must
be a rational procedure for each of the Social units in realising the
material content. But one form of rational procedure can never
come into conflict with another form of rational procedure. If there
be conflict then there must be some violation of the normal working


in the system of relations between the Social units. The condition
on which the material content may be realised is the expenditure of
individual energy by each one of the Social units, or its equivalent
in the direction sanctioned by the Political organism ; for that
energy must be exerted in harmony with the freedom of others.
But if, as has been shown, there is a Scientific mechanism in the
external material system ; if it be an objective system of order
qualitative and quantitative ; and if there be a Scientific mechanism
in the Essential nature of the Social units ; and if there be a Scien-
tific mechanism in the system of relations between the Social units ;
then, their individual energy in obtaining the means to realise the
material content and in conveying it to others imply a Scientific
groundwork. The groundwork is freedom, and there must be a
rational energy or its equivalent in realising the content. The prin-
ciple of qualitative discrimination acquired from experience in the
Social decides about the utility and the quality of material as the
medium of realising the content. The principle of utility is the cen-
tral one in the Science of Social economy ; with which are associated
the principles of supply and demand ; which is the regulative Science
in the management of the material resources of the Social organism.
All the great organic divisions or branches of industrial art regu-
lated by the principle of division of labour are included in this
Science; and the problem beneath all these departments is the
relation between capital and labour. The greatest disputes in mod-
ern times are about the means for realising the material content of
the Social organism. The Science of Social economy is related to
both departments in realising the material content, not only to pre-
servation, but also to reproduction ; but more directly to the former
than to the latter. In reproduction the State is affected to a large
extent by the relation, whatever its quality between the Social units.
Monogamy is the relation most in harmony with the Scientific me-
chanism in the Essential nature of the Social units: and of the
Scientific mechanism in the Essential constitution of the Social
organism ; and with the Scientific mechanism and content of the
Political organism. The differentiated Sociological data in the de-
velopment of the Scientific mechanism of the Social organism are


The Social Factor.




>ught into consciousness in the development of the Scientific
■chanism of the Moral ; and in the development of the Scientific
;chanism of the Legal system. But the operation of the Scientific
nciples can involve no conflict. The power of the instinctive and
3 selfishness of the Social units, since some are of a low grade of
velopment, lead to the violation of that system of relations ; for
ice each Social unit seeks the realisation of the same end, and
ice there is a variety of grade in development and varied circum-
inces, there must be conflict, and therefore violation. All possible
ilations are included in the categories of civil injury and crime,
le Legal system determines what is a violation, as well as the
nalty to be inflicted; in the gradation of which the corrective
ament is implied ; for when there is an infringement on the free-
>m of the Social units there is an intervention by the Political
ganism through the medium of the Legal system. It has been said
at the State has two forms, the Internal and the External. The
■inciples regulating the realisation of the material content are the
ime in both forms of the State; but more fully developed in th«
iternal than in the External ; for the stage of the Internal is the
jriod of rational organising in every department, that the external
■ganisations may be an exact expression of the Scientific principles
meath them. The adjustment of relations must follow from the
cientific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units,
oth factors of the Scientific mechanism of the Political organism,
rat is, the Internal and the External, are related to the Social
[•ganism, because the relations of the Social units are both internal
id external. Freedom and justice imply the removal of every ob-
,acle affecting both the Internal and External relations of the Social
nits. The consciousness and objectivity of freedom are followed by
ae consciousness and objectivity of justice ; which is the chief
ling that should be sought in determining the relation between the
ocial units. But besides the Political organism thus regulating the
flations of the Social units, both individually and in the Social
ggregate, there are departments relating to the general good both
iternal and external, beyond the control of the Social units which
, must undertake. Thus the Scientific disintegration and Organic


development of the Absolute takes the form of a Social organism.
The Scientific mechanism of the State is the explanation of history ;
there can be no history where there is no State, for in the State the
Scientific mechanism of history is brought to a focus. The Social
organism at every grade is an embodiment of the degree which the
Essential has reached in the transition to the Organic. These grades
are so varied that they cannot be computed, for it may be that in no
two of the Social units has the same grade been reached in the
transition ; hence the variety of judgment and action even in the
smallest State. But the complexity of the Scientific mechanism
both in the Social units and in the Social organism, varies with the
grade of development. The absolute social standard, the highest
form of the Social organism, is the last result of history, and is only
reached by the perfect adjustment of all relations between the Social
units in strict accordance with the development of all the Socio-
logical data of the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of
the Social units. The End is not only that the content may be real-
realised, but also that the consciousness as well as the objectivity of
freedom may be attained as embodied in the legal system, which
obviates every obstruction, both internal and external, of the Social
organism. The State is thus an end in itself ; and the consciousness
of freedom and the Absolute will be in proportion to the grade of
development of the Scientific mechanism in the Essential nature of
the Social uniqs ; and in the essential constitution of the Social
aggregate. The higher the form of the Social organism reached the
more acute the competition in realising the material content ; and
the higher the nature developed in the Social unit. When the Social
environment is so exacting in realising the material content, there is
speculation about various theories of social life ; and among them
Socialism in its various forms is discerned and takes a prominent
place. Its criticisms have led to a fuller development of the Scien
tific mechanism in the Essential nature of the Social units ; and to
a fuller development of the Scientific mechanism of the Social ag-
gregate. What is wanting in certain periods of the transition is a
more complete adjustment of existing Social relations and arrange-
ments, not a radically different form of Social organism, but an
120


adapting of theconventionalto the developing complexity of the Essen-
tial. When there is ignorance of the Scientific mechanism in the
Essential nature of the Social units, and of the Scientific mechanism
in the Essential constitution of the Social aggregate ; a new form of
Social life is sought; bat no form can be permitted which comes
into conflict with the freedom of the Social units in their individual
expenditure of energy to realise the material content of the Social
organism. The relation between absolutes is determined through
the medium of the phenomenal; or the Absolute determines its
relation to other absolutes through the medium of the phenomenal
in conjunction with its Scientific mechanism.


Speculative Aspect of Reason.
Mechanism and content of Absolute Ego—Scientific and Speculative aspects
of reason—Scientific mechanism of Speculative—Problem of Specu-
lative—Reciprocal development of Scientific and Speculative—
Nature and constitution— Origin and destiny—Distinction between
Scientific and Speculative—Relation of Scientific to Speculative —
Relation of reason to Scientific and Speculative—Causality and
Teleology the extreme factors of Speculative aspect of reason —
Relation of design to Causality and Teleology—ln what sense is
there a possibility of the consciousness of God—Speculative aspect
of reason identical with its own energy—Relation between reason
and faith—Unity of transition from Scientific to Speculative is
faith—Proofs socalled of divine existence : Ontological, Cosmolog-
ical, and Teleological—Absolute Being transcends all proof—Ag-
nosticism, Mysticism—Contact between Absolutes—Relation be-
tween feeling and the consciousness of God.
The Absolute ego has a Scientific mechanism and a phenomenal
content. In that mechanism reason has two distinctive aspects, the
Scientific and the Speculative But each disintegrated factor in the
Scientific aspect of reason has a Scientific mechanism and a phe-
nomenal content ; and each content is also a rational synthesis.
But the Scientific and Speculative aspects of reason with their
factors constitute the whole mechanism of the Absolute ego; and
since in the Scientific aspect of reason all things are in Scientific
relation—for one thing or department in relation necesitates all
things in relation—and since the Scientific and Speculative const!
tute the whole mechanism of the Absolute ; therefore the Specula-
tive must have a Scientific mechanism and a phenomenal content.
What then is the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of
the Speculative aspect of reason ? It has been shown in regard to
each disintegrated factor in the Scientific aspect of reason, that the
Scientific mechanism is developed in relation to the realisation of
the phenomenal content, which latter in the Speculative takes the
form of a problem—the determination of the origin and destiny of
the universe. In the Speculative, as in the Scientific, the mechan-
122


ism is developed in relation to the realisation of the content. Being
an integral department in the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute,
and as in each disintegrated factor in the Scientific aspect of reason
there is a gradual advance in the Scientific mechanism and pheno-
menal content, the one in and through the medium of the other ; so
in the Speculative there is a gradual advance in the Scientific me-
chanism and phenomenal content. The degree in which the order
of the nature and constitution of the universe is determined is the
degree in which the origin and destiny are determined ; as the order
of the Scientific is determined the order of the Speculative is deter-
mined in the same proportion, from the s'age when consciousness of
the Absolute Being is most indistinct and materialistic, and therefore
at a minimum : up to the stage when consciousness of the Absolute
Being is most distinct and Spiritualistic, and therefore at a maxi-
mum ; for all the disintegrations of the Absolute ego are present in
the minimum, and advance in harmonic proportions to the maxi-
mum of consciousness ; and of objective reality, when the Scien-
tific mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute are fully
realised and developed. The Speculative aspect is distinct from the
Scientific aspect, and is the highest effort and expression of the
Absolute ego. The Scientific has to determine the nature and con-
stitution of the universe, which includes the determination of the
order of the external material system, and of the internal spiritual
system in reciprocal development ; as well as the determination of
the order of the Scientific mechanism of the historical constitution
of the universe. When the order of the Scientific aspect of reason
is determined, the order of the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal
content of the Speculative follow. But reason, in determining the
order of the Scientific, transcends that order, as it cannot stop with
the consciousness of the individual, but must go on to the conscious-
ness of the universal ; so it cannot stop with the fact of Scientific
order, but in each grade of Scientific determination it must from its
own irresistable energy in determining the order of the Absolute in
its correspondence with the phenomenal go on to account for the
fact of Scientific order. The origin and destiny of the universe, Cau-
sality and Teleology are the extreme factors of the Speculative aspect


of reason, and ultimate in our consciousness of the Scientific mechan-
ism and phenomenal content of the Absolute. But design is the
mediating factor between Causality and Teleology ; and since design
is identical with the Scientific, and reason is identical with its object
it must be identical with design. Thus Causality, Design, and
Teleology measure the historical process, and are identical with the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute. In
the Scientific mechanism of the Speculative there is a consciousness
different from the consciousness obtained through the medium of
Cognition, Emotion, and Volition. In all the departments of the
Scientific, reason is identical with its object, and there is a conscious-
ness different from the consciousness obtained through the medium
of Cognition, Emotion, and Volition. In all the departments of the
Scientific, reason is identical with its object, and there is a conscious-
ness of the identity of that relation ; but in the Speculative, reason
is identical with its own energy, because its object has not as yet
been exactly determined. The Speculative aspect of reason can
never have a formulated object such as an organic form, which is
seen in the Scientific aspect of reason. It can only be identical with
its own energy in the effort to determine its object—the origin and
destiny of the universe. One side of the Scientific mechanism of
the Speculative is known, the other is unknown ; for beneath the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute Ego
which can be known, there is Absolute being which cannot be known
by the ordinary Scientific forms of knowledge. This Absolute is
usually said to be in the spiritual as force in the material, and
sometimes the word inscrutable is applied to it; and the conscious-
ness of the inscrutable acts in the spiritual as the consciousness of force
acts in the material. This is the region of faith with its concomitants,
hope and fear which is the centre of the Scientific mechanism of
the Speculative, and not merely an arbitrary operation of the Abso-
lute ego ;but a movement as legitimate and universal as the differ-
entiation into the factors of the Essential unity, or the disintegra-
tions into the factors of the Organic unity. Faith is the unity of
the transition from the known, the Scientific episteme ; to the
unknown, the Speculative agnostos theos, the Absolute Being, the


unknown God. The grade of development in determining the order
of the Scientific episteme determines our consciousness of the
agnostes theos ; and the power of the Speculative is determined by
the grade of development reached in episteme ; and our conscious-
ness of agnostos theos the Absolute Being, the extreme terns of the
Scientific mechanism of the Speculative. There can be a conscious-
ness of the Absolute Being, though it is the unknown. As the
order of the Scientific is determined the consciousness of the Abso
lute being becomes clearer and stronger ; but there can be no proof
of his existence by any possible form of argument—Ontological,
Cosmological, or Teleological. Since one factor of the relation is
unknown, neither subjectivity nor objectivity can be affirmed of it.
There is nothing on which reason can operate unless inference and
revelation. In the Scientific, demonstration is possible because
the data are objective and subjective, and therefore rational. Abso-
lute Being transcends all proof, but consciousness of it is possible in
some degree. So again in a similar sense the Absolute ego trans-
cends all possible proof; it is unknown, unless by its manifestations,
that is, its disintegrations and differentiations, and yet consciousness
of it in itself is possible in some degree. The consciousness of the
Absolute will be c.ear and strong in proportion as the relation be-
tween it and the phenomenal is determined; for its existence is
inferred from the disintegrations and differentiations underlying the
phenomenal. But there can be an intelligible consciousness between
one ego and another. It is a relation without the consciousness of
phenomena ; a relation between things in themselves, not Agnosti-
cism, and not Mysticism ; that is, between Absolutes not in time
and space contact is possible through the medium of the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute in time and
space, so far as that mechanism and content represent the disinteg-
rations and differentiations. The relation of the phenomenal should
be an index of the relation of Absolutes ; as agreement in the phe-
nomenal indicates agreement in the Absolutes ; for there can be a
relation between Absolutes through the medium of the Scientific
dsintegrations and differentiations without the phenomenal mechan-
ism. As the disintegration of the Absolute proceeds the conscious-


ness of that relation becomes clearer and stronger. It is the relation
of one form of being to another without phenomena. Between the
Absolute ego and Absolute Being there is no relation such as is
established by phenomena, either mental or material; but religious
feeling is the expression of that relation in the phenomenal form.
Reason is not phenomenal, and in the Speculative aspect it deals
with what is not phenomenal, the Absolute Being in his relation to
origin and destiny of the universe.


Disintegrated Factors.
Causality
Relation of Causality to Absolute ego—Reason, Scientific and Speculative
Simultaneous development of external, internal, and historical
constitution—Science defined —Reason transcends the Scientific
fact, and becomes Speculative—Reason accounts for tlie origin of
the universe—Relation of the Absolute Being to the universe as to
its origin, and historical constitution —The universe constructed on
a rational principle—Systems of Speculative Philosophy —Number
limited by Absolute ego— Constituent departments of Causality—
Consciousness of Absolute Being—Consciousness of Absolute Ego
How Absolute ego is conscious of Absolute Being—Absolute ego
limited by its own mechanism—Consciousness of Absolute Being
apart from the phenomenal-Infinite and finite—Agnosticism,
Mysticism—Absolute Being as cause —Meanings of Causality—
Analogy cannot express the relation of Absolute Being to the
universe—Exclusion of false systems.
In the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute ego it has been shown
that reason has two distinctive aspects—the Scientific and the Specu-
lative. The external material is an objective system of order quali-
tative and quantitative having fundamental properties and constituent
departments. The internal spiritual is a subjective system of order
qualitative and quantitative, having fundamental properties and
constituent departments. The Scientific aspect of reason determines
the order of the Scientific mechanism of the external material system
as revealed in it various properties and constituent departments ;
and the order of the Scientific mechanism of the internal spiritual
system as revealed in its various properties and constituent depart-
ments ; and the order of the relation of their reciprocal developments
in the historical process in developing the Organic unity ; for as the
two former are developed the historical evolution advances in the
same proportion. Science, then, is the determination of the order of
127


the Scientific mechanism of the external material system, and of the
order of the Scientific mechanism of the internal spiritual system in
their various departments; or the Scientific setting of the pheno-
menal both mental and material in time and space. Eeason is the
regulative principle reducing the external and the internal to a
Scientific mechanism, an expression of the Absolute. If, then,
reason be the regulative principle of the internal and of the external,
and of the historical constitution ; and if the Scientific mechanism
of the Absolute ego be a rational synthesis, the universe must be
both an expression and an embodiment of reason. But reason in
determining the fact of Scientific order in both systems and in the
historical evolution transcends that fact, for it cannot rest in the
objective fact; and in transcending it becomes Speculative. By its
own irresistable energy it goes on to account for the origin of the
universe ; and therefore by transcending the Scientific fact it is in
direct contact with the Absolute Being as the cause and ground of the
universe in its various departments, material, formal, and spiritual.
The Speculative aspect of reason includes every possible system of
speculative philosophy, and these systems must all have their place
in the development of its Scientific mechanism. How many of these
systems can there possibly be ? The number is limited by the
Absolute ego, which is the ground work of the whole, transcending
every possible system. There can only be a limited number of the
disintegrations of the Absolute ego, and since that ego is the com-
mon ground beneath all the Speculative systems, the number is
limited by its disintegrating and differentiating energy. These pos-
sible systems are the constituent departments of the factor of
Causality ; and they are the possible modes for the energy of the
Absolute ego in its effort to determine the origin of the universe.
It has been shown above that the external material is an objective
system of order qualitative and quantitative having fundamental
properties and constituent departments; and that the internal
spiritual is a subjective system of order qualitative and quantitative,
having fundamental properties and constituent departments ; and
that there is a mutual relation and a reciprocal development between
the two on account of the Absolute ego as groundwork, resulting in


the origination of the Scientific mechanism of the historical consti-
tution of the universe. Here, then, are three systems of order, the
External, the Internal, and the Historical. In each there is a dis-
integration of that order into its various constituent departments.
But these systems again are merely factors in the one universal
system of order. How, then, is the Absolute Being related to the
origin of this universal system of order of which the External, In-
ternal, and Historical are the integral departments ? The Absolute
ego is conscious of the Absolute Being, and of its own relation to
the Absolute Being ; and it is also conscious of the Absolute Being
as the cause of the universe. The consciousness of the Absolute
Being is a spontaneous expression of the Absolute ego ; and as the
Scientific mechanism of the Absolute ego is determined and devel
oped, the consciousness of the Absolute Being will correspond ; that
is to say, the consciousness of the Absolute Being in clearness and
strength will correspond with the grade reached in the development
of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute ego ; the more compre-
hensive and complete the development of the Scientific mechanism
as an expression of the Absolute ego, the stronger and clearer is the
Absolute Being to the human consciousness. The Absolute ego
can only act in and through the medium of its own disintegrations
and differentiations, and organic deve'opment, so far as the pheno-
menal is concerned ; but in relation to the Absolute Being it can
act without the phenomenal. The Absolute ego is conscious of the
Absolute Being as distinct from the consciousness of its own Scien-
tific mechanism ; for there can be no consciousness of the Absolute
Being by any of the ordinary forms of knowledge. It is a contact
between Absolutes, and the word inspiration is the nearest possible
to express the consciousness. The fact of self-consciousness implies
the consciousness of the existence of the Absolute Being, the rela-
tion being often expressed in the words; the consciousness of the
Infinite is implied in the consciousness of the Finite. But the con-
sciousness of existence implies the consciousness of relation. The
relation between the Absolute ego and Absolute being is a relation
without the consciousness of the phenomenal, which is neither
Agnosticism nor Mysticism ; but the normal expression of the


Absolute ego according to the complexity of its disintegrations and
differentiations, as well as the process of organic development, in
whatever grade reached ; and there can be a consciousness of that
relation though it can not be determined by the ordinary forms of
knowledge or modes of expression. The consciousness of isolation
is not possible to self-consciousness. But the Absolute ego is con-
scious of the Absolute Being as the cause of the universe. The
Absolute ego in its offort to determine the origin of the universe as
to its external material system, and internal spiritual system, and
historical constitution postulates by its own spontaneous and irresist-
able energy the Absolute Being as its ground and cause ; and there
cannot possibly be a final divergency from this tendency. From the
lowest grade to the highest possible in the transition, that is, from
the minimum to the maximum of consciousness, the conscious-
ness of the Absolute Being has always been associated with the
universe as its ground and cause ; and this consciousness of the
Absolute being as the cause is as much an expression of the Abso-
lute ego as the moral or the religious, or any other factor ; that is to
say, the consciousness of Causality is not an arbitrary movement of
reason—for reason has no arbitrary movement—but it is an expres-
sion of the Absolute ego ; and is simultaneous in expression and
development with the disintegrated factors of the Scientific aspect of
reason. The Absolute ego seeks the solution of the problem of the
origin of the universe in the Absolute Being, for it is as natural for
the Absolute ego to be conscious of Him as the Efficient cause, as it
is for reason to draw conclusions from rational data. The consci-
ousness of Causality is a spontaneous expression of the Absolute
ego ; but the Causality of the Absolute ego, that is in regard to
human production and the Causality of the Absolute Being, that is
in regard to the origin of the universe are two distinct things ; the
agent in the former case is known, and seen, and has the material
on which to operate ; the agent in the latter case is unknown and
invisible, and has no material on which to operate No analogy
can possibly express the relation of the Absolute Being to the
universe and its historical constitution, either as to its origin or
its continuance; because of the impossibility of conceiving the


Causality
* INTERNAL SPIRITUAL.


• * •


bsolute Being by the ordinary forms of knowledge ; yet the Abso-
te ego is conscious of that relation, though there is no word to
cpress the relation of which it is conscious, and excludes two main
ies of reflection which come more or less into contact with all
>eculative systems. The consciousness of the Absolute Being as
sternal to the material universe and its historical constitution is
ut of the question ; and the consciousness of the Absolute Being as
lentical with the material universe and its historical constitution is
,lso out of the question, so far as the testimony of the consciousness
if the Absolute ego is concerned. The general position taken up on
ejecting the Absolute being as cause and ground is to try and make
he universe as to its external material system and internal spiritual
system, and historical constitution yield its own solution ; which
efforts or speculative systems will be considered in their order as
they occur in the histories of the leading nations. The universe in
every aspect is beyond human control, and in itself there can be no
satisfactory solution of its origin formed.


Teleology.
The universe constructed on a rational principle—Consciousness only pos-
sible through the medium of Scientific mechanism of the Absolute
• —Design—Consciousness of an end inseparable from a rational
synthesis—The universe being constructed on a rational principle
is working up to a definite end-M hat is the Telos 1 Reason
cannot stop with the consciousness of the Absolute Being as
Efficient cause—ln transcending efficiency it reaches finality—The
Telos is the termination of the evolution of the historical consti-
tution of the universe—The destiny of the Absolute ego and the
Telos are identical—The summum bonum Absolute ego and
Absolute Being—Reason discerns that there never can be an exact
correspondence between the Scientific mechanism and the energy
of the Absolute ; and therefore postulates some other State when
the Telos can be realised. The Absolute cannot rest in the con-
sciousness of the external, nor of the internal, nor in any grade of
development reached; it has nocommensurateenvironment in space
and time--Personality- Relation of Phenomenal to Telos—The Telos is
determined in the Absolute—Ends are essential and arbitrary —
Energy of Absolute above the conditions of time and space—Com-
mensurate environment beyond the phenomenal.
It has been shown that the Absolute ego has a Scientific mechanism
and a phenomenal content. So far as the phenomenal is concerned,
the Absolute can only act in and through the medium of this Scien-
tific mechanism ; that is, consciousness is only possible in any degree
through the medium of the development of this Scientific mechanism
in some degree. It has also been shown that the disintegrating and
differentiating energy of the Absolute ego is the regulative principle
of the historical process ; and that reason, intuitive, discursive.
Scientific, and Speculative is the regulative principle of historical
phenomena ; that the Scientific mechanism corresponds as nearly as
possible with the disintegrations and differentiations of the Absolute
ego ; and that that mechanism is permeated by a rational synthesis.
But it has also been shown that there is a Scientific principle regu-
lating the process of organic development, having two factors, the
132


Natural and the Supernatural. In the former is included the rational
development of the order of the Scientific mechanism of the internal
spiritual system in correspondence with the rational development of
the order of the Scientific mechanism of the external material
system ; for the degree in which the order of the Scientific
mechanism of the internal is developed determines the degree in
which the order of the Scientific mechanism of the external is de-
veloped. In the latter is included the providential interference of
the Absolute Being, both as an unknown God, and as a God known
by revelation. Buc each factor of the Scientific mechanism that is
both in the Essential unity and in the Organic unity is a spontane-
ous expression of the Absolute ego ; for nothing can appear in the
Scientific mechanism—that is, in the departments of the Essential,
and of the Organic—-that is not already in the Absolute. Since then
the historical method with all its factors introspection, observation,
experiment, induction, and deduction is used in determining the order
of the development of the Scientific mechanism of each co-ordinate
differentiated factor of the Essential unity and of each disintegrated
factor to the Organic unity ; and the order of the development of the
Scientific mechanism of the Absolute ego as a whole ; the whole
system of the universe is constructed on a rational principle. De-
sign being the visible unity of the external material is co-extensive
with its Scientific mechanism, as the Absolute ego is the invisible
unity of the internal spiritual system. But if the universe in all its
integral departments and as a whole be constructed on a rational
princip.e, then the complex motion of the universe must be working
up to a definite end. The consciousness of a Telos is inseparable
from reason as the regulative principle of an organic rational syn-
thesis. Reason cannot stop with the consciousness of the Absolute
Being as an Efficient Cause. Since the consciousness of the Telos is
a disintegration of the Absolute ego, there is the consciousness of
the Absolute Being as the Final Cause. What then is the Telos to
which the historical constitution of the universe is working ? The
historical constitution includes the three departments, the external
material, and internal spiritual, and the historical process. The
ct nsciousness of the Telos is inseparable from these. What then is


the destiny of the Absolute ego of which this Scientific mechanism
in the evolution of the historical organism is an expression ? The
realisation of the destiny of the Absolute ego under phenomenal
conditions so far as can be determined is the exact correspondence
of the Scientific mechanism with the disintegrating and differenti-
ating energy of the Absolute. When the Scientific mechanism is as
uearly as pessible an exact expression of the disintegration, differen-
tiation, and organic development of the Absolute, the Summum
bonum in its highest degree is realised. But as the Scientific me-
chanism is only developed in various grades both in the individual
and in the nation, the Summum bonum in conscious realisation will
also correspond with the grade reached both in the individual and in
the nation. The highest type of man has the highest grade of the
Scientific mechanism, and the highest consciousness of the Summum
bonum ; and as a consequence the least of vice and most of virtue ;
for there can be no consciousness of the Summum bonum without
the consciousness of the right attitude of the Absolute ego to the
Absolute Being. But reason in discerning that the Scientific me-
chanism can never be in an exact correspondence with the disinteg-
rating and differentiating energy of the Absolute in phenomenal
conditions transcends that Scientific mechanism with its phenomena,
thus postulating another state of existence, and is in relation to the
Absolute Being as the Final Cause of the universe and its historical
constitution. The Absolute ego cannot rest in the consciousness of
the order of the Scientific mechanism of the external material sys-
tem, nor in the consciousness of the order of the Scientific mechan-
ism of the internal spiritual system ; nor in the consciousness of
any grade of spiritual development yet reached. Tt cannot find a
commensurate environment in time and space. Since the material
can only serve a temporary end, and the Absolute cannot rest in any
degree of development it may have reached, and since the Scientific
mechanism can never be an exact expression of or in an exact cor-
respondence with the disintegrating and differentiating energy of the
Absolute ego, there is already the consciousness of another State.
Its own intrinsic worth with its corresponding aggressive energy
points to another State, though it cannot determine in regard to the


nature and constitution of that state. Nothing can be known any
more distinctly about it in these phenomena! conditions than about
the Absolute Being. The Absolute ego, whose complete develop-
ment is above the conditions of time and space, and therefore inde-
pendent of phenomena, turns from its present environment to that
State, as it turns from the order of the material to the Absolute
Being as its cause. It transcends the most complete development
of the historical constitution of the universe. The consciousness of
human personality is a consequence of the development of the Scien
tifie mechanism of the Absolute in whatever grade reached ; for
consciousness in these phenomenal conditions is only possible
through the medium of that mechanism, and that consciousness of
human personality becomes more clear and distinct as the develop
ment advances, reaching the climax of consciousness of personality
when it transcends the conditions of time ana space ; that is, when
its environment will be commensurate with its Absolute nature ; for
in regard to its own destiny as in relation to the Absolute Being
it can act without the consciousness of the phenomenal; though
there is the same corresponding measure of uncertainty in the one
as in the other. This is the only legitimate logical thoroughfare
out of the phenomenal. The Absolute ego, as noted above, has a
form of energy independent of the phenomenal, and therefore above
the conditions of time and space—the energy of the speculative
aspect of reason. The Telos is determined in the Absolute ego, and
the consciousness of it is determined by the degree reached in the
development of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute ; with the
advance of the former the consciousness of the latter becomes
clearer and stronger. The Scientific mechanism of the Absolute
ego is both personal and impersonal, and the destiny is both personal
and impersonal; but the end determined in the Absolute ego must
not be confounded with the end to be realised by each integral de-
partment of the Organic unity. The end to which the historical
constitution of the universe is tending, and the destiny of the Abso-
lute ego are identical. That end is the complete development of the
Scientific mechanism of the Absolute both in the life of the indivi-
dual and in the history of the nation. The Summum bonum of the


Absolute ego includes the Summum Bonum of each integral depart-
ment of the Organic unity. No experience in the transition such as
pkasureor happiness can be regarded as an end in any legitimate
sense ; for these are merely fluctuating subjective experiences, hav-
ing no positive existence apart from the Absolute ego; coming
merely as a consequence of the adjustment and organic development
of all the essential relations in the nature of the Social units. The
consciousness of these always varies with the grade reached, and
with the moral quality of the Absolute ego ; but all these ends of the
integral departments, whatever they may be, are realised in the his-
torical organism, and included in the Su mmum Bonum of the his-
torical constitution of the universe. The consciousness of an end,
like the consciousness of the Absolute, can only be reached in a high
degree of civilisation. If there could be a clear consciousness of the
end from the initial disintegration of the Absolute that consciousness
of the end would regulate the transition, and place all conflicting
theories in their true light in relation to the whole. The Summum
Bonum, the highest possible attainable good, includes the complete
development of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute, both in
the lives of the Social units, and in the history of the Social organ-
ism.


CHAPTER VI.
Relation of Disintegrated Factors of Organic Unity.
Ontology and Speculative aspect of reason—Regulative mechanism
of Absolute ego—Scientific mechanism of Absolute ego—■
Relation of Absolute ego to time and space—Relation of
Absolute to phenomenal—Relation of Absolute to its regu-
lative mechanism, and to its Scientific mechanism—Consti-
tuents of regulative mechanism—Reason and Essential unity
—Reason and Organic unity—Simultaneous expression
Simultaneous and harmonic progression—Diversity of Abso-
lute, but no exclusiveness nor conflict, nor contradiction—
No conflict in reason—Between the factors of the Essential
unity no conflict—-The Absolute determines the relation
between its disintegrations and differentiations— Law of
development in disintegration and differentiation—Compari
son of factors and various grades of developmmt— Subjec-
tivity and objectivity—Harmonic relation and grades of
development—Reasoning from known to unknown—Con-
flict and subjective opinions—Scientific and Speculative
aspects of reason—Relation between the factors of each
Grades in factors of each—Anatomy of historical organism
—No conflict between disintegrated factors of the Organic
unity, and the differentiated factors of the Essential unity—
If there be a Scientific mechanism in each factor of the
Essential, and a rational synthesis of the whole ; and also
in the mechanism of the Organic ; and a rational synthesis
of the whole ; then the relation between the Essential and
Organic must be a rational synthesis—Distinction between
Social organism and historical organism—Distinction be-
tween Absolute and ideal.
Ontology deals with Being in its Absolute condition, and with the
regulative mechanism df the Absolute ego as related to the Scienti-
ric mechanism and its phenomenal content. The Speculative aspect
of reason is the implement in all departments of ontological re-
search. The Absolute ego being in itself a living organism has in
itself a regulative mechanism, which expressed and realised in phe-
137


nomenal conditions—motion and space—becomes the Scientific
mechanism. It has been shown that the Absolute, which is above
the conditions of time and space, becomes externalised in time and
space through the medium of its regulative mechanism, that is, a
qualitative disintegrating and differentiating energy which, embodied
in the phenomenal, becomes its Scientific mechanism. The regula-
tive mechanism determines the unity between the Absolute and the
phenomenal. There can only be a consciousness of the Absolute ego
through the media n of its regulative mechanism, which mechanism
—as noted above—in phenomenal conditions becomes the Scientific
mechanism ; and therefore there can only be consistent thought of
the Absolute as related to the phenomenal through the medium of
its regulative mechanism. The consciousness of the Absolute ego.
and of the regulative mechanism, and of the Scientific mechanism
between the Absolute and the phenomenal is inseparable. This
regulative mechanism includes every possible expression of the
Absolute, both in the Essential unity and the Organic unity. It has
a ndcan hav« no embodiment in time and space, being merely the
expressed motion of the Absolute in every possible form. Thus the
Absolute reaches the phenomenal through the medium of its regula-
tive mechanism, and of its Scientific mechanism. The regulative
mechanism includes the disintegrating and differentiating energy of
the Absolute ego, which is the regulative principle of the historical
historical process. Reason is the chief principle of the regulative
mechanism of the Absolute ego in its transition to the Scientific
mechanism and its phenomenal content. The co-ordinate differenti-
ated factors of the Essential unity with reason as regulative principle
have a common Scientific mechanism. Reason is co-extensive with
these factors, and the Scientific mechanism of each ; and both reason
and the factors in conjunction constitute the psyche logike. The
Essential unity is thus a rational synthesis. Bat each co-ordinate
differentiated factor has a Scientific mechanism of its own and is
distinct in performing its own operation, yet its meaning is not
understood apart from its relation to the organic whole. History
reveals that the differentiated factors are simultaneous in their ex-
ternalised expression and development; and that during the whole


Relation of Disintegrated Factors
COMPLETE AND HARMONIC DEVELOPMENT.




transition there is a graduated simultaneous and harmonic progres-
sion. In all the intermediate grades, from the period of unconscious
identity with nature when consciousness is at a minimum, to the
period when the Spiritual is conceived as distinct from nature and
consciousness is at a maximum ; there is a graduated, simultaneous
and harmonic progression in each of the factors. There is a unity
of relation between the factors of the Essential unity, because of the
unity of the Absolute ; and there is a diversity in the factors of the
Essential unity because of the possible differentiating energy of the
Absolute. 'Where the Absolute is the groundwork there may and
must be diversity, but there can neither be exclusiveness, nor con-
flict, nor contradiction. In the Absolute there can be no conflict;
and in the differentiations of the Absolute there can be no conflict.
If, then, there be a common Scientific mechanism in the Essential
unity with reason as regulative principle ; and if since there is no
conflict in the Absolute there can be none in its differentiations ; nor
in reason, which is the first expression of the Absolute ; and if the
factors be simultaneous in their expression and development, and the
corresponding power of reason is determined by _that development,
then between the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential
unity, Cognition, Emotion, and Volition ; there can be neither exclu-
siveness, nor conflict, nor contradiction ; where Cognition is there
Emotion and Volition are present in some degree ; and where
Emotion is there, Cognition and Volition are present in some degree ;
and where Volition is there Cognition and Emotion are present in some
degree. There is thus diversity in the fundamental operations; but the
ground mechanism of the Essential unity is regulated by an Abso-
lute unity, through the medium of reason as regulative principle.
But if there be a Scientific mechanism in one factor then there must
be a Scientific mechanism in all the factors ; for one thing in relation
necessitates all things in relation ; and with the principle of co-
ordination in the differentiated factors there must be a simultaneous
and harmonic progression in the development of the Scientific me-
chanism of each factor. The Absolute determines the relation of
its differentiations. The regulative principle in determining the
relation between the differentiated factors is, that, as the Scientific


mechanism in the compared factors is determined and developed,
the relation between the factors is also determined and developed.
The relation is determined by the grade reached in the development
of each factor ; and there must be a clear consciousness of that
grade before the relation can be determined. Nor can there be a
conflict again between the disintegrated factors of the Organic unity.
All the factors of the Organic unity are spontaneous expressions of
the Absolute ego, and each factor has a Scientific mechanism of its
own corresponding with the disintegration as an expression of the
Absolute, But the Absolute determines the relation of the factors
in the process of disintegration ; and in the Scientific mechanism
which corresponds with that disintegration. But since these factors
are spontaneous expressions of the Absolute, and simultaneous in
their expression ; there must be a simultaneous and harmonic pro-
gression in the development of the Scientific mechanism of each
factor from the first externalised disintegration, till the full develop-
ment of the Absolute is reached. This unity of relation in disin-
tegration and development, that is, the harmonic progression deter-
mines or constitutes the Organic unity. In each disintegrated
factor of the Organic unity there is a gradual advance from the min-
imum to the maximum of consciousness ; from the stage of uncon-
scious identity with nature when the Scientific mechanism is at a
minimum, to the stage when there is a conscious identity with
nature, and the Scientific mechanism of each department is at a
maximum. The regulative principle in determining the relation
between the disintegrated factors is that, as the Scientific mechanism
in the compared factors is determined and developed, the relation
between the factors is also determined and developed. The relation
is determined by the grade reached in the development of each
factor. To understand the relation between the factors, the factors
themselves must be understood up to the grade of development
reached. If there be a harmonic progression in the development of
the Scientific mechanism of the disintegrated factors, then there
must also be corresponding harmonious relations between the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the factors them-
selves. The same grade must be reached in the mechanism and


content of each factor before the harmony can be consciously dis-
cerned ; but not only objectively must this harmonic progression be
realised, the subjective development of the individual must also cor-
respond with the grade of development reached in the factors, before
the harmony is discerned. When subjective and objective have
reached the same grade the harmonic relation is determined. Fac-
tors cannot be compared which have reached various grades of
development, both as to Scientific mechanism and phenomenal con-
tent. All along the line of organic development there must be a
harmonic relation if the same grade is reached in each factor ; but
there can be no consciousness of such an harmonic relation if the
same grade is not reached, if there be degrees of difference in the
grades. The transition from factor to factor has only a rational
significance if both have reached the same grade of development.
If both have not reached the same grade, it is reasoning from the
known to the unknown—a process which can never be justified in
determining the relation between the factors. The transition from
grade to grade in the same factor is also a transition from the known
to the unknown ; but this is different from a factor which is qualita-
tively different. The phenomenal content in its fragmentary form
in each factor was understood to some extent before the Scientific
■mechanism of each was conceived ; but the development of the
Scientific mechanism in each factor is simultaneous with the con-
crete embodiment ; they are found to develop in reciprocal order.
There is a conflict in the concrete embodiment of the disintegrated
factors which seems to those not understanding the Scientific and
philosophic groundwork a conflict among the factors themselves.
The conflict is subjective, arising from an incomplete development,
both in the subjective and in the objective. But the variety of grade
in the developm:nt of individuals necessitates opinions which regard
the factors in conflict; whereas the opinions held by the people who
have reached various grades are in conflict about the factors ; but
there is no conflict about the factors themselves ; nor between them,
when the Scientific mechanism is understood. There is no conflict
in the Absolute, nor in reason, which is the central principle of the
•-■oregulative mechanism ; and if the Scientific mechanism, being an


expression of the regulative mechanism, be a rational synthesis,
there can be no conflict in that mechanism ; and if not in that
mechanism as a whole, then there can be no conflict in or between
the integral departments. Reason cannot be in conflict with the
phenomena which it regulates. Before it could on any rational
ground be affirmed that there is any conflict, there would need to be
a suspension of judgment till the complete development had taken
place in each factor ; and the subjective experience corresponded
with the objective embodiment. If there be any possibility of con-
flict it is usually subjective, and appears in the effort to determine
the relation between the factors of the Scientific aspect of reason ;
and those of the Speculative aspect of reason. It has been shown
that there is a Scientific mechanism and a phenomenal content in
each disintegrated factor of the Scientific aspect of reason ; and that
there is a Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content in each
disintegrated factor of the Speculative aspect of reason ; and that by
a harmonic progression in the organic development the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content of each advance in harmonic
proportions, and therefore in an inseparable relation. The Specula-
tive is distinct from the Scientific, and is the highest effort and
expression of the Absolute. The Scientific aspect determines the
Nature and Constitution, the Speculative aspect the Origin and Des-
tiny of the universe. The grade in the development of the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content in the Scientific aspect of
reason determines the grade in the development in the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content of the Speculative aspect of
reason ; and if there be an organic development in the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content of each, th<m the relation be-
tween the two must be one of Scientific accuracy. In all the de-
partments of the Scientific reason is identical with its object; but
in the Speculative reason is identical with its own energy, because its
object has not been exactly determined. Though in the diagram the
Speculative factors are represented as blank, yet the grades exist be-
tween them and the Scientific just as between the factors of the
Scientific. As each advancing grade in the development of the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of the Scientific as-


Incomplete Development of Dismt3g-
rated Factors




pect of reason makes us more distinctly conscious of the order of the
external material systemj; so there is a corresponding advance in the
clearness and strength of our consciousness of the Scientific mechan-
ism and phenomenal content of the Speculative, that is, as conscious-
ness gains strength by progress in the Scientific, it also gains a corres-
ponding degree in the Speculative ; for if the nature and constitution
of the universe be accurately determined, theorigin and the destiny are
the more likely to be approximately determined. The grade reached in
theSpeculativehasjust as much importance andjinfluencein the move-
ment of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute as its correspond-
ing grade in any factor of the Scientific. The Organic development
of the anatomy of the historical organism necessitates all the disin-
tegrated and differentiated factors to be in harmonic relation, and
therefore in simultaneous and harmonic progression ; the develop
ment is complete when there is a clear consciousness of the Absolute
and of Freedom, and of the Scientific mechanism as an expression of
the Absolute in all its integral departments, both in the Essential
unity and in the Organic unity. Nor can there be a conflict again
between the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential unity,
and the disintegrated factors of the Organic unity. Each co-ordin-
ate differentiated factor has a Scientific mechanism with reason as
regulative principle ; but these co-ordinate differentiated factors with
reason as regulative principle, construct a Scientific mechanism for
each disintegrated factor of the Organic unity. In determining the
order of the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content of each
disintegrated factor of the Organic unity, all the factors of the
Essential unity are present in some degree with reason as regulative
principle ; that is to say, the Absolute uses psyche logike in all its
differentiated departments to determine the order of the Scientific
mechanism of each disintegrated factor of the Organic unity. If
there be a simultaneous expression and harmonic progression in the
co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential unity ; and in the
disintegrated factors of the Organic unity, and if both the Essential
and Organic be a rational synthesis, and if reason be the central and
regulative principle in each of them, then the degree of development
in the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential unity deter-


mines the degree of development in the disintegrated factors of the
Organic unity. The Absolute underlying both corresponds with the
grade reached in each. If there be no conflict in the Absolute there
can be none in the Scientific mechanisms of the integral departments
of the Essential and Organic, which correspond with the disintegra-
tions and differentiations of the Absolute. The Social organism
it is at any grade or during any period, and the Historical organism
are two distinct things. The Historical organism has a scientific
and philosophic groundwork for the human race, and includes every
phase of the Social organism from the minimum to the maximum of
consciousness ; and in the transition from the minimum to the
maximum there must be a careful distinction drawn between the
Absolute and the Ideal ; the latter is an expression of the former,
the ideal is conceived because of the existence of the Absolute as
groundwork; and the value of the ideal is determined by the degree
in which the Absolute is disintegrated and its corresponding Scien-
tific mechanism developed ; for the ideals have all their place in the
process of organic development. The clearest conception of the
mechanism of the Absolute, and the clearest consciousness of the
Absolute itself will produce the highest ideal.
144


CHAPTER VII.
Concrete Embodiment.
Historical Organism—Mechanism and constituents—External and
Internal—Law of Progress—Unconscious development—
Summum Bonum—Concrete embodiment of Scientific me-
chanism of Absolute—Absolute and Phenomenal—Freedom
and Necessity, Cause and Effect—-Self-determination —Social
organism and its content—The Rational and the Instinctive
—Harmony of factors of Essential unity and of Organic
unity—Friction in concrete embodiment in Subjective side
of evolution—Relation of individual to Organic development
and concrete embodiment—lndividual energy sanctioned on
definite lines—lsolation impossible—Realisation of same
end —The man of genius in each factor, both of the Essen-
tial unity and of the Organic unity—Psychology, Logic, and
Rhetoric—The place of the man of genius fixed by necessity
in the evolution of the Scientific mechanism in each depart-
ment and in the whole—Consciousness, Ordinary, Scientific,
Philosophic—Subjectivity and objectivity in development
Consciousness of an end reveals, determines, and regulars
the line of progress—Optimism and Pessimism.
There is now before us a complete view or description of the Scien-
mechanism of the Absolute and therefore of the Historical organism.
The Internal spiritual is a rational synthesis ; there is a valid logical
order in each department and in the whole. The External material
is also a rational synthesis; there is a valid logical order in each
department and in the whole. But the Historical organism is also a
rational synthesis; there is also a valid logical order in each
department and in the whole. There is a fixed and progressive
order in the Internal in all its departments ; there is also a fixed and
progressive order in the External in all its departments ; and there
must also by necessity be a fixed and progressive order in the His-
torical organism in all its departments, since the Internal and


external are the Scientific antitheses in the groundwork of its de-
velopment. In the three systems there is thus a simultaneous and
harmonic progression ; as is the grade in the development of the one
so is the grade in the development of the others along the whole line
of the transition. The Scientific mechanism of the Historical organ-
ism is a rational synthesis, but the evolution of that mechanism is
also a rational synthesis, both subjective and objective. There is no
conscious beginning with the order of the Scientific mechanism of
the Internal, nor can there be a conscious beginning with the order
of the Scientific mechanism of the External ; nor with the order of
the Scientific mechanism of the Historical organism. At this stage
there is an unconscious identity with nature an unconscious
syncretism, but the growth of experience out of which the
Historical organism is evolved reveals the distinction as
well as the Scientific mechanism of each, for there is a gradual
advance till the order of each as to Scientific mechanism and phe-
nomenal content is determined. The grade of development in the
order of the one necessitates a corresponding grade of development
in the order of the others, till the period of rational syncretism or
synthesis is reached. The structure of the Historical organism in
any grade of its development is determined by the grade reached in
the development of the Scientific mechanism of the Internal, and of
the External, Reason is the regulative principle of all possible his-
torical phenomena, and therefore the Historical organism must be
permeated by a continuous rational synthesis, that is, in the evolu-
tion of the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content. It has
been shown that the full development of the Scientific
mechanism and phenomenal content of the Historical or
ganism both in the life of the individual and in the his-
tory of the nation is the highest possible attainable good—the
Summum Bonum—- including the highest possible attainable pleasure
and happiness. What then is the order of the concrete embodiment
of this Scientific mechanism of the historical organism ? It has
been shown that that mechanism has differentiations each of which
has a Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content, which are de-
veloped in conjunction ; and that it has also disintegrations, each of


which has a Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content, which
are developed in conjunction. The phenomenal content is the me-
dium between the Scientific mechanism and its concrete embodi-
ment in each factor ; for the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute
includes the Scientific mechanism of each co-ordinate differentiated
factor of the Essential unity ; and of each disintegrated factor of the
Organic unity ; and the phenomenal content of the Absolute includes
the phenomenal content of each co-ordinate differentiated factor of
the Essential unity and of each disintegrated factor of the Organic
unity. In each of these factors the mechanism and content are
developed in and through the medium of the other. As is the grade
in the development of the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal
content of the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential
unity, so is the grade in the development of the Scientific mechan-
ism and phenomenal content in the disintegrated factors of the
Organic unity along the whole line of transition; and the degree of
rational embodiment will correspond with the grade of development
in the Scientific mechanism of the differentiated factors of the Es
sential unity, and of the disintegrated factors of the Organic unity.
But if there be a Scientific mechanism and a phenomenal content in
the factors of the Essential and of the Organic ; and if the mechanism
and content be developed in conjunction ; and if the Scientific
mechanism in each receive a concrete embodiment through the
medium of the phenomenal content; and if the embodiment cor-
respond in grade with the grade in the development of the Scientific
mechanism, then the concrete embodiment of the Scientific mechan-
ism of the Absolute must be rational at every stage. As is the
grade in the development of the Scientific mechanism, so is the
grade of rational embodiment along the whole line of transition ; for
the concrete embodiment is simultaneous with the development of
the Scientific mechanism ; and is through the medium of the pheno-
menal content. The distinctive characteristic of the Absolute is
freedom, and the disintegrations and differentiations are the sponta-
neous expressions of that freedom. There is the utmost necessity in
the phenomenal, the regulative principle of which is cause and
effect; or antecedence and consequence; but there is the utmost


freedom in the Absolute which is always self-determined. As there
can only be a consciousness of the Absolute in relation to its disin-
tegrations and differentiations, there can only be a consciousness of
freedom in relation to the phenomenal conditions procuring it. The
concrete embodiment of the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute,
as well as the development of that mechanism, takes place between
the extremes of freedom and necessity, and the development of the
Scientific mechanism is simultaneous with the process of concrete
embodiment. In the realisation of the phenomenal content of the
Social organism, the scientific mechanism and phenomenal content
of the Absolute are gradually conceived and embodied in the con-
crete form. In the effort to realise that content there is the initial
step in the development of the Scientific mechanism, and therefore
also of the concrete embodiment. That content must only be real-
ised by the adoption of certain forms of action sanctioned in the
evolution of the Historical organism. The central principle in the
historical process is the conflict between the rational and the instinc-
tive, the former having a spiritualistic, the latter having a material-
istic basis. The instinctive is the medium between the rational and
the phenomenal ; the rational being more closely related to the
Absolute, the phenomenal to the instinctive. The instinctive is not
irrational; there is a Scientific order in it as associated with the
rational, and it is because of this that the consciousness of a concrete
embodiment is possible. In the stage of unconscious identity with
nature there is no consciousness of the Scientific mechanism, nor of
the phenomenal content, nor of the concrete embodiment. Consci-
ousness is at a minimum. The transition from this unconscious
identity with nature to the consciousness of the Scientific mechanism
and the phenomenal content of the Absolute and the process of con-
crete embodiment is the Historical process. The development of the
Scientific mechanism and the process of concrete embodiment may
go on even when there is no consciousness of it, the development
and embodiment being both subjective and objective. It has been
shown that there is no conflict in the co-ordinate differentiated fac-
tors of the Essential unity, nor in the relation between them, nor in
the disintegrated factors of the Organic unity, nor in the relation


between them, nor in the relation between the Scientific mechanism
of the Essential and of the Organic. Because there is no conflict in
the Absolute, there can be none in its disintegrations, nor in its dif-
ferentiations, nor in the Scientific mechanism which correspond with
those disintegrations and differentiations ; but there must be a con-
flict in the process of concrete embodiment; and that conflict is in
the subjective side of the evolution. All the friction in every de-
partment in the history of each nation shows that the Scientific
mechanism of the Absolute is being embodied in the concrete form.
What then is the relation of the individual to this process of con-
crete embodiment, and to the development of the Scientific mechan-
ism in that process. The embodiment and development take place
both objectively and subjectively. The place and importance of the
individual are determined in the Historical organism by the grade in
which the Scientific mechanism has been embodied, developed, and
determined. The action of the individual is most clearly seen in the
early stages of the transition ; but in the process of evolution the
action of the individual is not so much discerned as the operation of
principles involved in the structure and development of the Scientific
mechanism. The whole struggle of the concrete embodiment begins
with the effort to realise the phenomenal content of the Social organ-
ism. This is the prime end in the process of concrete embodiment
in the realisation of which each individual must move on the lines
sanctioned by the evolution of the Historical organism. No indivi-
dual can be isolated from the Scientific mechanism and its concrete
embodiment; the effort to realise that end advances the evolution of
that mechanism: and its concrete embodiment in some degree, both
subjectively and objectively ; since the evolution of that mechanism
is both subjective and objective, personal and impersonal. Between
and inclusive of the subjective and objective the mechanism of the
Historical organism is evolved, the central principle of which evolu-
tion is the relation between the rational and the instinctive. It has
been shown that in the process of organic development in each factor
both of the Essential and of the Organic, and therefore of the Scien-
tific mechanism of the Absolute as a whole, there is an advance
from grade to grade from the minimum to the maximum of consci-


ousness. All individuals seek the realisation of the same end—the
phenomenal content of the Social organism—and there is room for
each in the structure of the Historical organism. Each one finds
his place, and some excel. There are some men deserved called great
in dealing with the Absolute, others with the Essential, and others
with the Organic. The greatness of the man is determined by his
relative position in the evolution of the Scientific mechanism of the
Historical organism. His place is fixed in definite grades. The
psychologist deals with the whole scope of the Essential unity in all
its integral departments, the Scientific mechanism of the rational
soul in its relation to the phenomenal; a mechanism which includes
the whole province of mental philosophy proper ; with Logic and
Rhetoric. The ordinaryman in these departments may be able to
form some conception of the grade reached in the development of
the Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content ; or he may with
difficulty grasp the conception of the grade reached ; and his work
will always correspond with that conception. Some are adapted for
the abstract discernment of the development of the Scientific me-
chanism ; others for the advancement of the concrete embodiment.
But in each critical period there is always a man ■who understands the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content and concrete embodi-
ment better than others. The abstract discernment of the evolution
of the Scientific mechanism, and the concrete embodiment are the
same to him. He is the man of genius, and he sees the possibility
of a'further development, for he discerns the whole scope of the
Scientific mechanism and phenomenal content in so far as they have
been developed and embodied in relation to the crisis when he is
introducing the change. He merely introduces the advance, for the
development of this mechanism is impersonal, and beyond the con-
trol of any individual or of any organisation. He is thus master of
the circumstances in every critical period in whom the Scientific
mechanism has been most fully developed ; and this necessitates it
to obtain an objective expression corresponding with the subjective
grade reached. The name of the great man is usually identified with
the change in whatever department. Others in the same depart-
ment master with difficulty what has been done ; but he being the


man of Genius, and acting from a clear consciousness of the end to
which his action is tending advances the development of the Scien-
tific mechanism and of its concrete embodiment. His discernment
of the Scientific order is so clear that his action seems intuitive, and
conflicting interests do not impede his action ; for his genius makes
the management of the individual or of the organisation an easy
matter. But what has been said above in regard to the Essential
will also apply to the disintegrated factors of the Organic unity.
Each factor has a mechanism of its own determined in the Absolute
and the development of that mechanism is through the medium of
its phenomenal content and concrete embodiment. The greatness
of the man in each of these departments, whether as a Scientist, or
Moralist, and Artist or a Theologian, a Politician, or a Social Re-
former, &c,, is determined by his relative position in the development
of the Scientific mechanism. All these factors are simultaneous in
expression, and harmonic in progression. The place of the great
man is fixed by necessity in the evolution of the Scientific mechan
ism ; at definite intervals he appears, and with an intuitive glance
discerns the whole scope of the Scientific mechanism up to the grade
of evolution reached. He sees the possibility of farther advance, as
well as the necessity, and leads the movement acting from a clear
consciousness of the end to which his action is tending. But from
the Genius in the co-ordinate differentiated factors of the Essential
unity, and in the disintegrated factors of the Organic unity, there is
an advance to the man of Genius who deals with the Scientific me-
chanism and phenomenal content of the Absolute as a whole. The
man who can discern the order of the development of the Scientific
mechanism of each, both of the Essential unity and of the Organic
unity in harmonic relation to the Scientific mechanism of the whole
as an expression of the Absolute, and advance the embodiment of
that even in the midst of the most conflicting circumstances, is the
man of Genius. Men of this kind are not so numerous as those in
the separate factors ; but here also some are adapted for the abstract
discernment of the development of the Scientific mechanism, others
for the advancement of the concrete embodiment; the man who can
do both excels others. His place is fixed by necessity, and his


greatness is determined by his relative position in the evolution of
the Scientific mechanism of the Absolute. In determining the rela-
tion between the Absolute and the phenomenal, he is familiar with
every possible qualitative difference in consciousness—ordinary,
Scientific, and philosophic—and therefore he too acts from the
clearest possible consciousness of the end to which his action is tend-
ing. He discerns the whole scope of the Scientific mechanism and
phenomenal content of the Absolute in so far as they have been
developed and embodied, in relation to the crisis when he is intro-
ducing the change. He discerns the development from grade to
grade in the Scientific mechanism of each factor, both of the Essen-
tial and of the Organic, and in the Scientific mechanism of the
Absolute; and he is merely the instrument in introducing the
the advance, for the evolution of the Scientific mechanism is imper-
sonal and beyond ihe control of any individual or of any organisation.
That mechanism may be more fully developed objectively than sub-
jectivity, in the history of the nation than in the life of the
individual ; but it must be brought to a living focus in the consci-
ousness of the individual, that its power may be consciously deter-
mined as an expression of the Absolute. The man in whom that
mechanism has been most fully developed is the greatest man so far
as knowledge is concerned. Wisdom is the result of developed
reason. He is conscious of the evolution of the Scientific mechan-
ism as an expression of the Absolute, and of the Absolute as the
unity and groundwork of the phenomenal ; and reason moves in all
the integral departments of that mechanism with an instinctive
freedom. The evolution of the Scientific mechanism of the historical
organism is working to an end determined in the Absolute ; the
progress in ail the integral departments both of the Essential and of
the Organic is to that end. If there were no end so determined
there could be no conception of progress. Nothing about the end,
though not yet revealed, can contradict what has been revealed, so
far as it has gone or will go, till the full manifestation has taken
place. The relation between the rational and the instinctive is the
central principle in the evolution of the Scientific mechanism and its
concrete embodiment; so long as the rational and instinctive exist


in conjunction the same wants appear, and the same phenomenal
content must be realised. The end is the Summum Bonum, which
is the complete development of the Scientific mechanism of the
Absolute in all its integral departments and as a whole, both in the
life of the individual and in the history of the nation. This mechan-
ism in its evolution has reached some grade in each individual and
in every nation; and the grade reached determines the degree of the
Summum Bonum realised. The stern work of the world is the con-
crete embodiment of the Scientific mechanism ; the realisation of
the Summum Bonum ; the bringing of the race up to it both sub-
jectively and objectively. Those who can discern it are under ne-
cessity, for there follows from it a conviction of duty in regard to
the training of humanity. The great mass of men cannot rise to the
consciousness of the evolution of the Scientific mechanism of the
Absolute ; yet they can be conscious of advance in any factor and
take advantage of it, moving as freely in an unconscious freedom as
the man who is conscious of freedom, and of the Absolute. To see
this system in all its manifold bearings and various grades is to see
all that is possible to the human race. A clear grasp of the evolu-
tion and embodiment of the whole mechanism will establish optim-
istic and pessimistic reflections in a rational equilibrium. Neither
will have an undue influence on the man who can discern the whole
in relation to any critical period. To show the evolution of the
Scientific mechanism of the Absolute and its concrete embodiment,
both in the life of the individual and in the history of the nation is
the object of the remainder of this treatise. In the Scientific ground-
work we are dealing with the Anatomy of the historical organism ;
but in the concrete embodiment with the Biology and Physiology.
THE END


• ,


Authors.
Ueberweg
Lewis
Ladd
Spencer
Lotze
Hamilton
Seth
Seth
Belfort Bax
Schlegel
Hegel
Draper
Buckle*
Guizo(|
Flint I
Freem'an
Freeman
Froude
Pleotez
Keightly
Nicolas
Blair
Nichol
APPENDIX.
Books of Reference,
Introduction—Chapter I.
Work.
History of Philosophy
History of Philosophy
Introduction to Philosophy
Principles of Psychology
Metaphysics
Metaphysics
Kant to Hegel
Hegelianism and Personality
The Problem of Reality
Philosophy of History
Philosophy of History
Intellectual Development of Europe
History of Civilisation
History of Civilisation
Philosophy of History—France, Germany
Methods of Historical Study
Unity of History
Short Studies on Great Subjects—
(a) The Science of History
(b) Scientific Method Applied to History
Epitome of History
Epitome of History
Chronology of History
Chronological Tables
Chronological Tables—Ancient and Modern
155


CHAPTER 11.
Scientific Disintegration and Differentiation.
Authors
Hamilton
M amel
Morel!
Hamilton
Lotze
Bain
Kant
Spencer
Suliy
Bain
Carpenter
Lewis
Hegel
Schlegel
Grote
Stewart
Drummond
Caird
Caird
Guthrie
James
Spencer
Sully
Baine
Cyples
Veitch
Bain
McCosh
Works
Metaphysics
Philosophy of the Conditional
Problem of Reality
Mental Philosophy
Lectures on Logic
Lectures on Logic
Mental Science
Critique of Pure Reason
Principles of Psychology
Outlines of Psychology
Senses and Intellect
Mental Physiology
Study of Psychok gy
CHAPTER 111.
Organic Development.
Philosophy of History
Philosophy of History
Moral Ideals
The Unseen Universe
The Ascent of Man
The Unity of the Sciences
The Progressiveness of the Sciences
Problem of Philosophy at Present Time
Spencer’s Formula of Evolution
CHAPTER IV.
The Essential Unity.
\ Principles of Psychology
Principles of Psychology
Principles of Psychology
Senses and Intellect
Mental and Moral Science
Mind and Body
Process of Experience
Institutes of Logic
Emotions and Will
Intuitions of the Mind
156


CHAPTER V.
The Organic Unity.
Scientific Factor.
Authors
Works
Jevons
Pearson
Bacon
Newton
Stewart
Mill
Radcliffe
Huxley
Guillemin
Tait
Helmholtz
Guthrie
Whewell
Green
Janet
Kant
Bain
Calderwood
Spencer
Sidgwick
Stewart
Huxley
Harris
Grote
Birks
Bentham
Martineau
Ryiand
Principles of Science
Grammar of Sciences
Novum Organum
Principia
The Unseen Universe
Realm of Nature
Proteus, or Unity in Nature
Introduction to the Study of Nature
The Forces of Nature
Lectures on Some Recent Advances in Physical
Science
On the Relation of the Natural Sciences to the
Totality of the Sciences
Three Kingdoms of Nature
Spencer’s formula of Evolution
The Moral Factor.
Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy
Prolegomena of Ethics
Theory of Morals
Critique of Practical Reason
Metaphysics of Ethics
Moral Science
Handbook of Moral Philosophy
Data of Ethics
Methods of Ethics
History of Ethics
Outlines of Moral Philosophy
Evolution and Ethics
Romanes Lecture
Moral Evolution
Moral Ideals
First Principles of Morals
Principles of Morals and Legislation
Types of Ethical Theory
Outlines of Psychology and Ethics
157


The Religious Factor.
Authors.
Work.
Lotze
E. Caird
J. Caird
Muller
Abbott
Martineau
Birks
N. Smyth
Balfour
Bushnell
Mozley
Argyles
Kant
Butler
Gladstone
Spencer
M urphy
S. Baring Gculi
The Philosophy of Religion
Evolution of Religion
Philosophy of Religion
Lectures on Religion
Evolution of Christianity
Study of Religion
Supernatural Revelation
St. Giles’ Lectures, Faiths of the World
Religious Feeling
Foundations of Belief
Nature and the Supernatural
Lectures on Miracles
Philosophy of Belief
PLibbert, Lecture 1881, The Origin and Growth
of Religion
Religion within the Limits of Pure Reason
Analogy and Sermons
Studies Subsidiary to the Works of Butler
Ceremonial Institutions
The Scientific Basis of Faith
Origin and Development of Religious Belief
Ruskin
Kant
Knight
Bourke
Flower
W 7 hately
Biair
Campbell
The Factor.
All his works
Critique of Judgment
Outlines of the History of .Esthetic
On the Beautiful and the Sublime in Nature
Fashion and Deformity
Rhetoric
Lectures on Rhetoric
Philosophy of Rhetoric
158


Authors
Amos
Freeman
Willoughby
Maine
Amos
Platt
Kant
Lawrence
Erskine
Lorimer
The Political Organism.
Works
The Science of Politics
Comparative Politics
A Study in Political Philosophy
Ancient Law
Science of Law
Unity of Law
Philosophy of Law (Hastie)
Principles of International Law
Elements of Jurisprudence
Institutes of Law
Institutes of the Law of Nations
Giddings
Spencer
Kidd
McKenzie
Argyle
Letornou
1 J
Fawcett
Jevons
The Social Organism.
Principles of Sociology
Data of Sociology
Study of Sociology
Social Evolution
Social Philosophy
Unseen Foundation of Society
Sociology
Evolution of Marriage
Political Economy
Po'itical Economy
Janet
Flint
Iverach
Henslow
Fiske
Spencer
Platt
Calderwood
Causality.
Final Causes
Theistic and Antitheistic Theories
Is God Knowable ?
Theory of Evolution of Living Things
Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy
Darwinianism and Other Essays
Evolution
The Unity of Law
Philosophy of the Infinite
159


Janet
Final Causes
McCosh
Butler
The Method of Divine Government
Analogy and Sermons
Gladstone
Studies Subsidiary to the Works of Butler
Apologetics of the Christian Faith
Hetherington
On the Relation of the Natural Sciences to the
Totality of the Sciences
Conflict Between Science and Religion
Natural Law in the Spiritual World
The Ascent of Man
Theory of Evolution of Living Things
Concrete Embodiment.
Past and Present
Heroes and Hero Worship
The Man of Genius
Histories of the Ruling Nations of the World in
Ancient Times
Histories of the Ruling Nations of the World in
Modern Times
CHAPTER VI.
Relation of Factors
CHAPTER VII.




