

|f- c fa :
'll ? ' A TREATISE
'■'H SERICULTURE
!*fe
i
u\
in
QUEENSLAND.
s
• ;
0.
MRS. ANN TIMBRELL,
• 6
DESIGNER AND MANUFACTURER OF
LEATHER WORK.
WAX FLOWER MODELLER ; ALSO




A TREATISE
ON
SERICULTURE
QUEENSLAND.
/
MRS. ANN TIMBRELL,
WAX FLOWER MODELLER ; ALSO DESIGNER AND MANUFACTURER OF ORNA-
MENTAL LEATHER WORK.
BRISBANE:
PRINTED AT THE COURIER GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE, GEORGE STREET.
1866.


“ LA SOIE C’EST DE L’OR,”—SILK IS GOLD. —
Bulletin la Societe d'Encouragement pour Vlndustre Rationale.
Possum multa tibi veterum proecepta referre,
Ni refugis, tenuesque piget cognoscere curas.—


TO HIS EXCELLENCY
Bix ffrpsmi §ofomt t
KNIGHT GRAND CROSS OF THE MOST DISTINGUISHED ORDER OF ST. MICHAEL AND ST.
GEORGE, CAPTAIN-GENERAL AND QOVERNOR-IN-CHIEP OF THE
COLONY OF QUEENSLAND, AND VICE-
ADMIRAL OF THE SAME.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
X DO MYSELF THE HONOR OP DEDICATING TO YOUR EXCELLENCY, WITH YOUR
excellency’s KIND AND GRACIOUS CONCURRENCE,
THIS HUMBLE TREATISE UPON
Sericulture tu (Hueenislantu”
YOUR EXCELLENCY’S PATRONAGE AND ENCOURAGEMENT, EMBOLDEN ME TO INDULGE
THE H'OPE THAT THIS LITTLE WORK MAY CONCILIATE PUBLIC FAVOR,
AND CONDUCE TO THE ENERGETIC DEVELOPMENT
OF A NOVEL BUT LUCRATIVE
INDUSTRY.
THE VERY GENEROUS, AND HIGHLY LIBERAL, SUPPORT WHICH YOUR EXCELLENCY HAS
AT ALL SEASONS EXTENDED TOWARDS ENHANCING THE POLITICAL AND IMPROVING
THE SOCIAL ELEMENTS OP THIS COLONY, WILL ALWAYS BE THANKFULLY
APPRECIATED BY A GRATEFUL PEOPLE, WHO RECOGNISE IN YOUR
EXCELLENCY THE FIRST REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BRITISH
CROWN WHO EVER OCCUPIED A VICE-REGAL
POSITION IN THE WELL-FAVORED,
AND PROGRESSIVE TERRITORY
QUEENSLAND.
WITH DEVOUT PRAYERS FOR THE HAPPINESS, AND LONGEVITY OF YOUR EXCELLENCY,
LADY BOWEN, AND FAMILY,
I MOST RESPECTFULLY SUBSCRIBE MYSELF, YOUR EXCELLENCY’S
VERY OBEDIENT AND HUMBLE SERVANT,
ANN TIMBRELL.
Prize Medallist of the Dublin Industrial Exhibition, 1865, for Victoria—Cultivated
Silk.
Brisbane , June, 1866.


LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
Sir G. F. Bowen One
Lady Bowen ... One
Robert G. W. Herbert One
Henry Buckley One
Henry Johnson One
Western Wood One
C. Lilley Two
E. Bring One
E. W. Lamb One
E. L. G. Drew One
E. E. G. Johnson One
Robert 8. Scott , One
F. E. Salisbury One
Edward Dcighton One
Edwd. S. Y. Spencer One
W. Tully One
' H. W. Haseler One
R. Austin One
T. S. Henzell One
Charles Tiffin One
F. O. Bryant One
Alfred Nightingale One
Thos. R. Dickins One
F. O. Darrall One
Walter Hill One
Edward Green One
James Honeyman Two
John S. Hill One
George Harris Two
W. De Traine One
A. B. Pritchard One
James Piper One
E. Oliver . ... One
E. W. Fegan One
W. J. Costin ; One
t Arthur Martin One
W. E. Alexander One
James Berkley One
James Bryden Ore
Alfred E. Jones One
!> Andrew Anderson One
\ Webb Brothers One
J. G. Simpson One
J Spring Hill Mechanics’ Institute per J. G
[ Simpson * Two
Oh. Morrell One
W. Cowley One
John Mark well & Son One
W. H. Ellerker One
Alex. Stewart One
John Cochran One
Fraser & Buckland Two
Wm. Keith One
H. P. Abbott Two
W. Newton One
W. A. Curphey One
John Stephens One
Do. for South Brisbane School of Arts ... One
T. F. Smith One
E. M. Stewart One
Joseph Kolm & Co Two
D. L. Brown One
Henry Box Son & Co One
T. H. Dnmack One
James Warner One
John Darttal One
Bright Bros. & Co Two
George Eaff & Co Two
J. Lewis One
Perry 8r05.... One
Mills Thomson One
N. Lade One
Dickson & Duncan Two
Alex. Archer Two
Edward E. Drury One
Sydney Moore One
James Gibson One
Graham Lloyd Hart One
John P. Lynne One
Joshua Ebenston One
J. S. Turner ... One
W. H. Day One
H. S. Massie One
S. L. Lloyd One
Edwin Herbert One
Jas. Cowlishaw One
A. J. Hookings One
Arthur Halloran ... One
Reynolds Ball One
Rev. J. Bliss One
/
>
i


INTRODUCTION
A Brisbane Daily* Journal of Saturday, 18th
November, 186-5, contained an original article
upon the “ Drought,’’ which for some consider-
able period had seriously affected ag icultural
enterprise, and impoverished the pastoral ele-
ment of Queensland, The writer thus rea-
soned upon the resources, latent,
of this country:—
““ With us we have been accustomed to look
to pastoral pursuits as the"(sole staple of the
colony. It is not one at all conducive to g ’eat
intellectual or commercial improvement. From
Ecclesiasticus to Shakespeare, the bucolic mind
has not been regarded as of the highest stand-
ard; and very probably the monotonous and
confined nature of the occupation may have
had much to do with this. If these periodical
droughts were to serve no other purpose than
to remind the Aust alians that this kind of in-
dustry is not to monopolise their attention—
that theie a;e other occupations to which such
a visitation would- not be so suddenly and
thoroughly destructive, they may be regarded
as eminently beneficial. It is variety of work,
—variety of channels for thought and labor, —
which, rightly employed, make a people great.
The dull routine of one everlasting and uni •
versal grind, conveited the pastoral Egyptians
into slaves ; and in the hour of famine, left the
potato-growing Irishman helpless. But while
things are as they are, and until mature ex-
perience teaches us the real value of the coun-
try in which we live, there is another lesson
whiali this anticipated drought should lay close
to our hearts that of prudent thrift and
mutual forbearance. We have to look forward,
if the present season should continue, to a
period of difficulty and trial —of pecuniary
stringency, such as might affect the wealthiest
—of consequent suffering, such as might appal
the stoutest.’’
The sentiments embodied in the preceding
quotation indicate a national requirement, and
may be advantageously cited by a political
economist in promoting the development of a
substantial and enduring resource of native
industry and wealth. Hitherto, the capabili-
ties of the Australian soil and climate have
been either intentionally ignored, or ignorantly
misunderstood. Divine Providence has lavished
abundant and multifarious blessings upon the
country of our adoption : while Man, in the
execrable selfishness of his unregenerated and
exclusive nature, perverts the free gifts of a
beneficent God to foreign usages, as a means of
acquiring either inordinate power or colossal
fortune, at the sacrifice of Christian principle,
and not infrequently of moral rectitude. Thou-
sands upon thousands of pounds sterling are
wantonly dissipated on the race course, and at
anniversary regattas, while the patrons and
umpires of such diversions delude themselves
into a false belief that they are displacing a
masculine energy, and setting a brilliant example,
by their participation in such frolics. Bit these
gentlemen are doing nothing towards enhancing
the hsppiness of mankind. Tneir little diver-
sions on the grand-stand, and at aquatic spirts,
may be quite as harmless as insect or fox-hunt-
ing, maiden speechifying, barouche driving,
tasting medaD, appreciating cameos, sketching
columns, and cheapening gems, but the prudent
and the reflective members of society ridicule
such pastimes as utterly unproductive of solid
advantages to the ’general Commonwealth.
Not that such pleasures, if they be considered
so, ought to be contemptuously discarded and
altogether abandoned; hut because an unre-
strained indulgence in such pursuits is cal-
culated to disorganise the public mind, and to
involve the generality of the people in prac-
tices of extravagance utterly unbecoming
either their heritage or destiny.
It was said by a modern author of world-wide
celebrity, “that he who made a single blade of
grass to grow where none appeared previously
—■that he who could produce two grains of
wheat from ground which had only yielded
one grain in former years—conferred a greater
benefit upon society than all the warriors who
ever conquered; than all the statesmen who
ever ha ’aligned ; or than all the poets who ever
rhymed;’’ and can there be a nobler aim—is
human nature capable of more e'evated and
refined exertions —than those which tend to
improve the social condition of the people in
general, and also contribute to elevate and
solidify the political, aye, and the commercial
character of the country in particular? Who-
ever, then, shall devise a means whereby
pauperism and suffering shall be vanquished,
whjle happiness and independence shall he
substituted, must assuredly deserve well of the
community, and be adjudged entitled to re-
spect and encouragement, as an honorable re-
cognition of patriotic and Christian effort. The
colony of Queensland app-ars hitherto to have
been restricted in the quality of her produc-
tions ; and her resources, which are so abun-
dant and promising, have been virtually dis-
regarded. The pastoral element, like_ Aaron’s
rod, has consumed every other consideration,
and limited the enterprise of our settlers to
periodical expo ts of bid's, tallow, and wool.
The cultivation of cotton meets with only
qualified patronage, while the rearing of sugar-
cam s, with an ulterior view to the distillation
of rum, cannot be generalised without the re-
strictive interference of a legislative taxation I
And this in a new country I—in1 —in a colony, be it
remembered, where thousands of aerts are still
unoccupied, although there are innumerable
families in existence perishing for the ordinary
susteiitations of hum »n life! B tter would it
be to throw open the unalienated territories to
optional settl ment, and to unlock the lands
to private enterprise, than to enact invidious
and oppressive laws whereby the energies of the
1


people are paralysed, and the country aban-
doned as a ste ile and barren desert.
}Vhen quite a girl, I was accustomed to cul-
tivate silkworms, much to the annoyance of a
very amiable but indulgent parent, who ap-
peared to object to my little favorites crawling
over the window blinds of the room appropriated
to their culture. The passion, which possessed
me in my youthful days, has gtadually acquire d
strength and intensity from time; and ever
since my arrival in Australia, I have been
animated by an inc a ssant df sire to acquire dis-
tinction as a s°riculturist: but it was not until
the year 1860 that I was enabled to devote my
attention to this interesting pursuit, when I
purchased from a Mr. Macdonald, then resident
in Burke-street East, Melbourne, thirteen silk-
worms for twelve shillings. On the following
year I procured a few eggs from a Mr. Jackson,
of the department of public lands, and likewise
a small quantity from Dr, Mueller, the indefati-
gable and respected curator of the Melbourne
Botanical Gardena. From these sources I suc-
ceeded in rea ing, during the silk season of
1862 several thousand worms ; and on the Bth
December in that year the Melbourne Argus
published a communication, of w hich the fol-
lowing is a transcript:—
“ The Silkworm.— lt may not be generally
known that the silkworm was originally ab-
stracted from Chinese Tartary by two French
priests, who were commissioned from Paris to
procure a number of chrysalides. The Chinese
were, in former years, so tenacious of this
interesting and valuable insect that the man-
darins, or magistrates, adopted every pre-
caution against the possibility of this useful
worm being stolen; and a rigorous search
was invariably instituted by the Chinese
authorities of all articles exported from their
country, lest any of the silkworms might have
been secreted in merchandise bv foreign
traders. But these precautions only tended
to the .adoption of an ingenious system of
fraud; for it is on record that the two priests,
who were commissioned from France to pro-
cure some of the worms, contrived to secrete
the chrysalides in two walking-sticks of hollow
cane, the mandarins of China never suspect-
ing that this Parisian scheme was being prac-
tised so artfully against them. It is an
historical fact, however, that the extensive
silk factories now in successful operation on
the European continent had their origin in
this plot, and the ingenious purloiners were
actually entertained at a banquet in Paris, in
recognition of such signal success. Prom
France the silkworm was gradually introduced
into England and other countries. Looking
at the wonderful properties of this worm, it
is matter of astonishment that the cultivation
of silk should not have been hitherto en-
couraged by Victorian capital, especially as
the climate and soil of this country are so
admirably adapted to the propogation of the
mulberry tree, upon which the worm chiefly
feeds. There is now on view at Mr. White-
head’s, opposite the Argus office, in Collins-
street, a beautiful assortment of 1800 cocoons,
all ready for the winding machine; and Mrs.
Timbrell has successfully roared upwards of
2000_ worms during this season. The splendid
specimens of the worm thus presented to
public exhibition go far to fortify the previous
assertion made as to the adaptability of Vic-
toria to a profitable and) extensive cultivation
on a large and remunerative scale.”
The above paragraph was inserted withjthe
italic addenda “ communicated ” attached at
the end of the sentence; and although ap-
parently written for Victoria exclusively, its
contents apply with equal force and truthful-
ness to Queensland : in fact they might be
appropriately adopted with reference to, or in
connection with, Australia generally.
On Saturday, the 20th December, 1862, an
Exhibition of Colonial Industries was opened
by Sir Henry Barkly, K.C.8., then Governor
of the Colony of Victoria, in the
Institute, at Geelong; and No. 674 of the
printed catalogue read thus :
“ Silk, 1800 cocoons, and silk winding ma-
chine, exhibited by Mrs. Timbrell, f Mel-
bourne,”
This sample attracted much admiration at
the time, and an offer was made to the
authoress by Mr. Henry Cordell for the pur-
chase of the same, but refused.
On the sth April, 1864, the Board of Agri-
culture of Victoria offered a series of pre-
miums for best samples of colonial wines,
tobacco, silk, cotton, hemp, and hops; and
the following extract from the official notice
will show the amounts guaranteed in the
department of sericulture:—
Premium—Best sample of silk in reel or in
cocoon ~ .. ~ £2O
Ditto to the person who has best promoted
silk culture in the years 1863-4 .. £l5
Ditto to the person who has best promoted
white mulberry culture in the years
1863-4 £l5
The conditions under which these premiums
were awarded were as follows :
Competitors for the premium for best sam-
ple of silk, in reel or cocoon, produced in the
colony by themselves, will be required to fur-
nish information as to quantity produced,
when, and under what circumstances, and such
further particulars as to culture as may be
important to the public. The locality, aspect,
distance from seaboard, altitude, &c., &c.; the
rearing of the worms from which the silk was
obtained, and, also, the general mode of treat-
ment pursued, to be furnished by the compe-
titors.
Full particulars to be given by competitors
for the premium for silk culture; and when
mulberries have been planted, the same con-
ditions as attached to the other premiums,
with reference to soil, locality, &c., &c., to be
complied with.
Similar conditions were imposed upon com-
petitors for the premium connected with the
department of white mulberry culture.
Accordingly I became an exhibitor of
colonial silk, and a competitor for the first
Government premium. On the 12th July,
1864, I obtained from Mr. J. M. Matson, se-
cretary to the Melbourne Board of Agricul-
ture, a document, of which the following is
a copy:—
“ Board of Agriculture Office,
“ Melbourne, Tuesday, July 12, 1864,
“ Received from Mrs. Ann Timbrell, of 62
Sackville-street East, Collingwood, in compe-
tition for the premium on Victorian Silk
Culture, the following property :
2


1 MSS. Treatise upon “Sericulture, with
declaration attached
1 Glass Shade, containing Raw Silk
I Box, containing Floss, or Web
1 Box, containing Cocoons and some Eggs
1 Box, containing Moths, Insect and Ohry-
sali
1 Winding Machine, with four cocoons
wound upon it, and one reel of Silk,
(Signed) “ J. M. Matson,
“ Secretary.”
At a later period, in the same year, I for-
warded additional samples, and obtained the
following acknowledgment from Mr. Secretary
Matson; —
“ Board of Agriculture, Melbourne,
“ Monday, December 19, 1861.
“ Received from Mrs. Ann Timbrell, of 52
Sackville-street East, Colling wood, the under-
mentioned samples of silk in competition for
the published premium:—
1 Oblong Box, containing six compart-
ments —
(1) exhibiting 500 cocoons.
(2) „ 500 „
(3) „ 500 „
(4) „ 500 stripped cocoons,
and some floss.
In all 2000 cocoons.
(5) contains 18 cocoons in paper
pockets, with samples of floss
silk.
(6) contains four papers of samples
of wound silk in skeins, and one
paper of China imported silk.
“ I also acknowledge to have received with
the foregoing a Supplementary Treatise to
Mrs. Timbrell’s July pamphlet upon Seri-
culture in V ictoria.
(Signed) “J. M. Matson,
“ Secretary.”
At a subsequent date, and in the following
year, I forwarded to the Board of Agriculture,
Melbourne, a further exhibition of 2810 co-
coons, as verified by the following docu-
ment ;
“ Board of Agriculture,
“Saturday, January 7, 1865.
“Received from Mrs. Timbrell, of 52 Sack-
ville-street East, Collingwood, the undermen-
tioned boxes of Victorian cultivated raw
silk :
No. 7 contains about 500 cocoons.
8 „ 800
9 n 137 f,
10 „ 150
11 * 120 „
12 „ 800
13 „ 300
14 „ 246 „
15 „ 257 „
Total 2810 cocoons.
(Signed) “J. M Matson.”
In the sixth annual report presented by the
Council to the Board of Agriculture, and laid
before the Victorian Parliament by his Ex-
cellency the Governor’s command, there ap-
peared the following published report by the
judges of silk ;
“ The undersigned have the honor to report
to the Board of Agriculture the result of their
examination of the samples of silk sent in for
competition for the Government premiums.
They are happy to be able to state that, after
careful inspection, they are unanimously of
opinion that the specimens exhibited were
superior to their anticipations, and such as to
justify a belief that silk of a superior order
may, in time, be expected to be produced
in Australia, Only four persons competed,
but the quantity shown by one was consider-
able, and the quality of two of the four very
fair.* The strength of the tissue was suffi-
ciently good to render the silk fairly market-
able, although not equal to the European
standard; which is attributable chiefly to
there not being as yet a superior class of silk-
worms in the country. The reeling, likewise,
had been carefully done; but, from want of
experience and a trained instructress, it was
not executed in the manner required to sell
the silk in the French and Italian markets.
These are merely the defects incidental to
every new industry inaugurated by volun-
teers, which are easily removeable, and in no
respect affect the success of this, the first
systematic attempt to ascertain the sericul-
tural capabilities of Australia. To proceed
to the award. In recommending the premium
of £2O to be allotted to Mrs. Timbrell, the
judges do so on account of a good average
quality being, in this instmce, combined with
quantity. The quality was not superior to
that of the specimens exhibited by Mrs.
Lewis, but the quantity was far greater. The
industry and care manifested by this lady ap-
peared to give her justly the preference. At
the same time, as the quality of the specimen
exhibited by Mrs. Lewis is equally satisfactory,
the judges would respectfully recommend a
second prize of £5 to be assigned to her, if the
funds are available and the board should ac-
quiesce. The specimens exhibited by Mr.
Ross were upon the whole good, but were de-
ficient in quantity, and the quality was like-
wise not equal to that of the two first exhi-
bitors. They do not attribute this either to
want of skill or care in Mr. Ross ; and, as that
gentleman lias displayed a laudable activity
in the promotion of sericulture, they beg to
recommend him for an honorable mention.
The fourth lot was inferior in quality, but not
so much as to discourage the exhibitor from
future attempts. The undersigned would re-
spectfully submit to the board the following
recommendations, in case of a similar or
larger sum being granted for the encourage-
ment of sericulture in the year 1865;—1.
That the number of the premiums be in-
creased and the amount diminished, as it is
probable that the quality of future samples
will closely approach each other. 2. That
exhibitors of cocoons may be equally entitled
to the premiums with those of spun silk, as
the export of cocoons is easy and practicable.
3. That the board would bo pleased to exer-
cise its influence in favor of the introduction
of a superior class of silkworm from Italy,
France, Persia, or China. 4. 'that the board
would, if they approve, recommend the re-
newal, and, if possible, an increase of the
Government grant. —(Signed) M- L. King, A.
Maktelu, J. J. Stutzeb, Jas. Reid.”
This document boars date. March Ist, 1865,
and is enrolled amongst the Parliamentary
Records of Victoria.
On the 4th February, 1865, I received the.
3


following communication from Mr. Secretary
Matson: —
“ Board of Agriculture,
“ Melbourne, February 3, 1865.
“ Madam, —I have the honor to inform you
that the premium of £2O has been awarded
to you for the exhibition of silk, and that I
shall have much pleasure in paying you that
amount whenever it is convenient for you to
call at these offices to receive it.—l have the
honor to be, Madam, your very obedient
servant,
“ J. M. Matson.
“ Mrs. Ann Timbrell.”
On the 7th February, 1865, I received the
following letter from the same gentleman :
“ Board of Agriculture,
“ Melbourne, February 7, 1865.
“ My dear Madam, —Will you kindly state the
amount you are desirous of obtaining for your
collection of silk, including both cases. I
may mention that, although the Board is
anxious to secure the collection, the funds at
its disposal are very limited. The exhibition
will be made in your name.—Very faithfully
yours,
“ Mrs. Timbrell.” J- M. Matson.
Under the circumstances —this opportunity
being the first exhibition of the hind which
had occurred in the colony of Victoria , and with
a view to stimulate sericultural enterprise
among the people I tendered the whole
quantity of raw silk for the nominal figure of
£10; and, in reply, I received a letter, of
which the following is a copy :
“Melbourne, February 11, 1865.
“ Dear Madam, —Your collection of silk is
accepted by the Board at the price named by
you, viz., £lO. So soon as the money is pay-
able, I will inform you of it.—Very faithfully
yours, dear Madam,
“ Mrs. Timbrell.” “ J. M. Matson.
The Melbourne morning papers, in publish-
ing a progress report of articles forwarded to
the Commissioners appointed to make ar-
rangements for transmitting goods to the
Dublin Exhibition, made the following an-
nouncement, in enumerating a long catalogue
of products:—
“The beautiful collection of silk by Mrs.
Timbrell, to whom was awarded the first prize
lately given by the Board of Agriculture, has
been secured for transmission to Dublin.”
The entire quantity was accordingly sent
to Ireland by the steamship Great Britain;
and the Melbourne Argus, of Friday, Septem-
ber Ist, 1865, published the preliminary report
of one of the Dublin Commissioners to his
Honor Sir Redmond Barry, puisne judge, and
one of the Victorian Commissioners, from
which report the annexed extract will be suffi-
cient in this place :
“ Case, No. 54.—Mrs, Timbrell’s collection
of silk arrived with the glass in one of the
small show cases broken, and cracked in
another. In some of the cases the divisions
had shifted, and the samples slightly mixed.
I have had the divisions reinstated, the silk
carefully replaced, also the glass put in, and
they now make a very interesting collection
and are much admired.”
Thus far have I considered it expedient to
introduce myself to the Queensland public,
relying upon the contents of authentic reports
and official records to establish the profes-
sional connection which has existed between
sericultural pursuits and my personal ex-
periences in that direction ; and having now
adopted Queensland for my future abode, I
present myself to the people of this colony
as a'person zealously interested in such a source
of profitable industry, and as one who reposes
implicit confidence in the natural capabilities
of this country for becoming, at no distant
period, a silk producing territory. lam not
disposed to speculate or theorise upon so im-
portant a branch of national economy, and
shall, therefore, in the following pages, care-
fully restrict my observations to what is
solely practical and substantial , merely re-
marking that I have faith in Australian ten-
dencies, and view the rising colonies on the
seaboard of New Holland as constituting so
many integral portions of a federal nationality,
whose greatness, power, and influence, in
future years, shall elevate the land which we
now inhabit into a vast and flourishing, as
well as an opulent and a felicitous Empire.
One pleasing duty yet remains to be performed
ere I conclude these prefatory observations.
My most grateful acknowledgments are publicly
due to Mr. Walter Hill, the respected and able
director of the Botanical Gardens in Brisbane ;
also to Mr. William Moore, of Milton, farmer ;
and likewise to Mrs. Bliss, of St. John’s parson-
age, William-street, for their exceeding liber-
ality, and great kindness, in supplying me with
mulberry leaves for prosecuting my experi-
mental operations during the silk season of
1865. lam compelled to confess that, had it
not been for the very encouraging co-operation
which I invariably experienced in the quarters
mentioned, my exertions in the cause of seri-
culture in Queensland would have been much
crippled, and the results proportionately
meagre; but, with the generous aid which I
have periodically derived from the parties
indicated, I am now enabled to make an ex-
hibition of no inferior character: while, I
humbly trust that my efforts to develope a new
source of industry, and my desire to stimulate
enterprise, and to direct energy into the
channel of sericulture, may not go unrewarded
by the local government; but that the
ministers of the day, who control the political
destinies of this sunny land, may take my case
into favorable consideration, and make me a
special grant of ground adapted for a mulberry
plantation, to enable me during the remainder
of my tenure here, to consecrate both time and
inclination to so delightful and humanising a
pursuit.
I do not ask for much : half a dozen acres of
good arable soil will be abundant; and I give
a public pledge that such land shall be so
cultivated as to contribute in a conspicuous and
exemplary manner to the advancement of
Queensland, and the happiness of her people.
God has been gracious in His providence ;
why should man be niggard in his policy ?
Virtuous energies, when righteously inspired
and prudently exercised, will assuredly merit
and command success.
Queensland will yet be a powerful and a wealthy
country, if her sons and daughters prove faith-
ful to her claims. Let her advance! Let her
progress onwards, be characterised by all that


is ennobling in nature and honorable in enter-
prise: the sun of prosperity shall then shine forth
with a sustaining effulgence; imparting a
healthful vitality to human labor, and gather-
ing from the domains of nature every pro-
duction calculated to enhance and perpetuate,
not only private independence, but national
happiness.
With these preliminary remarks, I close the
first part of the present Treatise; in the hope
that not only the reader but the public, that not
only mankind but the members of my own sex
also —will be indulgent to any apparent but
unintentional errors, either in language or sub-
stance, which may be embodied throughout the
future pages.
ORIGIN AND
Tradition assigns to China the credit of
being the country where the discovery of silk
was effected; and, if the legend speaks truth-
fully, we are justified in ascribing to the beauti-
ful Silinghi, chief wife of the Celestial Emperor
who reigned 2700 8.C., the honor of utilising
that novelty. It appears from an ancient
chronicler that the wives of the Chinese were
emulous of providing their lords with some new
and rich habiliments; and that the amiable
Silinghi, while wandering in a contemplative
mood through the grounds of the palace,
noticed sundry oblong glossy substances sus-
pending from the branches of a wild mulberry
tree which grew in the Emperor’s garden.
Her ingenious mind and natural disposition for
industry combined to indicate the direction of
her movements, and secretly possessing herself
of large numbers of the previously neglected
cocoons, Silinghi, in due course of time, and by
assiduous application, succeeded in producing a
gorgeous raiment for the Emperor, which not
only astonished the merchants of those days,
but virtually eclipsed all the former textures of
apparel.
Mons. Martelli informs us that about 1500
8.C., a wandering horde of Tartars poured down
upon a Chinese province inhabited by a people
named Serendi, who were esteemed the most ad-
vanced in all China for their production of silk ;
and the unfortunate inhabitants, unable to re-
sist the invasion, deserted their native soilj and
fled to India, where they established themselves
in peace, and applied with greater diligence to
their favorite pursuit. The Phoenicians bartered
foreign goods in exchange for silken fabrics, and
the Egyptians and Greeks subsequently em-
barked in the same commercial intercourse.
The art soon passed into Persia, and in the
year 970 b.c., the reigning Shah sent a present
of several pieces of silken stuffs to an Indian
nabob.
Pliny, the naturalist, speaks of a plant which
he observed in Sicily, the description of which
corresponds with the black mulberry, but he
makes no mention of the silkworm; and history
informs us that, during the acme of the Roman
empire, Trajan, being entreated by his wife for
a robe of silk, made answer that all the money
in his treasury would not suffice for so costly an
investment, while Heliogabulus was censured
for extravagance because he entered the Roman
capital in a silken costume.
It was in the year 552 a.d., that the Emperor
Justinian despatched two monks to China to
procure some silkworms’ eggs, which the emis-
saries accomplished; the monks returning by
Constantinople with a quantity of the seed se-
creted in the interior of their walking canes,
when a sumptuous banquet was given in honor
of the propitious event.
HISTORY.
The wild mulberry tree flourished on the
coasts of the Morea, and so far as western ef-
forts went, Greece, at one period, threatened to
monopolise the interest of the silk trade; but
in the year 1130, Roger, King of Sicily, subju-
gated the Morea, and introduced sericulture to
the notice of his people. The Italians, seeing
the enormous profits realised by the Sicilian
merchants, resolved to imitate the example;
and hence originated the fundamental founda-
tion of the national greatness of the Italian re-
publics.
The mulberry tree and the silkworm were
introduced into France by Charles of Anjou,
after his conquest of Sicily, and upon the re-
turn of that prince to assume the crown left him
by his brother, Charles YIIL, when a particular
friend of the king’s, planted on his estate at
Languedoc, the first mulberry trees that ever
grew in French ground; and, nothwithstanding
the innumerable impediments with which this
new industry had to contend, sericulture com-
prises, at the present day, the principal source
of wealth in the southern provinces of France.
James the First of England, and Peter the
Great of Russia, exerted themselves to the ut-
most to establish silk factories in their respec-
tive kingdoms; and even Holland, as well as
Sweden, in the northern latitudes, strove to
emulate other countries.
Henry the Fourth of France devoted much
of his time and energies to consolidating and
improving sericulture in that country ; and en-
trusted to Olivier de Serres the management of
an extensive magnannerie, kokh, or breeding-
house, erected in the gardens of the Tuilleries;
but, unfortunately, the murderous stiletto of a
fanatic priest put an end at once to the hero of
Navarre, and, for a season, to the cultivation of
the silkworm: when things continued in a
languishing condition until the art of sericulture
was indefatigably revived by Colbert, statesman
to Louis the XIY., who compelled the landed
proprietors to plant a certain number of mul-
berry trees per acre, on their estates, and as a
compensation, he announced a premium of 24
sous for every healthy mulberry tree of three
years growth. This energetic proceeding cost
the Government about a million sterling—an
expenditure to which the ministers who hold
office at this day in Queensland would probably
hesitate to commit themselves. But, mark the
consequences. In less than ten years from the
promulgation of the above law, the annual re-
venue of France, from her sericultural sources
alone, was equivalent to the total sum thus ex-
pended, while the silk produce of the country
.was valued at about eight millions yearly! It
constitutes, now, a source of national industry,
providing employment for nearly one-third of
the population in France, while the merchants
find access to an ample supply of one of the
5


richest staples known to commerce. Such
being the case on the Continent of Europe,
where difficulties of a most formidable character
have been gallantly surmounted, what is there
to prevent Queensland from participating in a
similar advantage, seeing that the mulberry
flourishes almost spontaneously in her soil, and
considering that the geniality of our temperature
is admirably adapted to a successful prosecution
of this interesting industry F
STATISTICS.
(Original and Collated.)
The oldest newspaper in the world is pub-
lished at Pekin, and has made an appearance
once a week for the last 1000 years, inscribed
upon a broad sheet of Chinese manufactured
silk.
Personally, I have always, while in Australia,
whether in Yictoria or Queensland, caused the
eggs to be deposited upon clean dry white calico,
or white note paper, which I afterwards pack
in card-board boxes, and put away in a dry
place. I have even had the eggs in this condi-
tion covered over at the bottom of a clothes
chest or trunk ; so that what previous authori-
ties have advanced respecting the necessity of
providing ventilation, does not apparently ap-
ply in these countries. I have great respect for
the opinions of such gentlemen as Martelli and
Nerevy, but nevertheless, I must yield the pre-
ference to the teachings of practical experience.*
On an average, it will be ascertained that
about 65 full-formed cocoons will weigh one
ounce; and twelve ounces go to the pound
weight of silk —with the floss on, of course.
The value of floss silk at the factories of
England is represented by respectable authority
to be between £5 and £6 per one pound
weight: but as this estimate only refers to the
floss, or waste silk, which constitutes the outer
covering of each matured cocoon, it follows that
the marketable, or commercial value, of the
raw silk , perse., must be considerably in excess
of that figure : however, this is a question on
which I am incompetent to speak with any
degree of certainty.
France produces above six millions, and im-
ports above two millions worth of raw silk
annually.
The export of wrought silk from England to
Australia, in the year 1859, amounted to the
value of £139,000.
One acre of land planted with mulberry trees
in full growth yields 8000 lbs. of leaves, which
may be sold at 2?. 6d. per cwt., so that the
farmer may depend upon an annual return of
£lO per acre (the average return of land in
France is from £3 to £4 per acre), besides the
enhanced value accrued to his land, which is
not less than twice or three times its primitive
value; so that one acre of agricultural land,
averaging from £3O to £4O, when under common
crops, will, when planted with mulberry trees,
be worth £6O, £BO, and even £lOO.
It may be generally depended on, as a rule,
that all eggs numbering anywhere about 40,000
per ounce are worthless. Of perfect, healthy
eggs it will never be found that more than
37,000 to 38,000 are required to weigh an
ounce.
Each female moth, if not allowed to lay for
more than eighteen hours, will deposit about
350 eggs. An ounce of eggs (numbering about
38,000), will therefore be the produce of some
110 females; but as it is necessary to allow for
imperfect cocoons and other incidental circum-
stances, it is usual to reckon that 250 cocoons
are required to produce one ounce of eggs.
A good method of keeping silkworms’ eggs is
to put them in some dry place during the win-
ter, and when the summer comes round again}
place them every day in the sun to hatch.
Another method is to put them into a wooden
box, on a shelf in a damp cellar (under ground
is the best), allowing them to remain there
until spring of the following year, when they
must be removed for hatching.
The editors of the Family Friend , in their
useful miscellany entitled “Facts for Every-
body,” recommend the fallowing method of
dealing with —“ Silk Worms’ eggs —Place the
eggs in drawers made of wood, or strong
paper; and when the leaves of the mulberry
are full-grown, hatch them, either by the heat
of the sun or in a small room where there is a
fire. In about six or seven days, the silkworm will
issue from the eggs, in the shape of a small
black hairy caterpillar. In feeding them, take
great care that the mulberry leaves are dry;
for this purpose, gather a quantity required for
two or three days, if the weather looks showery,
and lay them in an earthen vessel in a cool airy
place, but not exposed to draught. Keep every-
thing about silkworms as clean as possible, and
remove all extraneous substances. When the
silkworm refuses its food, and makes silky traces
on the leaves, pin together papers in the shape
of inverted cones, open at the top, and fix them
against the wall. Place a worm in each, and
leave them to spin.”
The eggs are of a yellowish hue at first, but
after the lapse of a few hours, in this colony,
they change color to a dark grey, or neutral
tint; from being weak and soft, they also be-
come solid, and are not easily crushed by pres-
sure between the fingers.
Mons. Martelli recommends that the eggs
should be folded as loosely as possible, and sus-
pended from the roof in the baskets formerly
used for the cocoons, so that they may be
thoroughly ventilated and kept free from damp,
which, as well as too much warmth, is apt to be
prejudicial to the eggs. In this situation, he
Mons. Martelli, in his admirable hand-book
upon “The Silkworm and its Pood,” says :
“ The life of the silkworm under the form in
which it issues from the egg, is divided, as is
generally known, into five distinct portions or
stages, by a remarkable provision of nature. As
soon as the first of the young worms begin to
says, they may be preserved until the first ap-
proach of hot weather, when they must be
packed in boxes, and kept in a cool place until
the spring again produces its supplies of silk-
worms’ food.
•I desire, in this place, to acknowledge, with gratitude,
the kindness of Captain H. D. Pitt, A.D.C. to his Excel-
lency the Governor of Queensland, for lending me, on Ist
December, 1865, a small pamphlet upon the ‘‘Silkworm,’’
of which Mr. James Beuzevillo is author.
6


make their appearance, it is necessary, with
great care, to separate them from the eggs still
unhatched. This is done by the aid of the
tender mulberry leaves, which must be placed
on the cartoons of eggs at this period, and which
will shortly be found, on their removal, crowded
with little black worms with shining heads and
bodies covered with hair. The temperature
should be regulated to 80 degrees or 84 degrees
Fahrenheit, and great care must be taken to ad-
mit no bad smells into the hatching room, a
single breath of which will probably affect, in
some greater or less degree, the health of the
worms. Their food, at this stage, should be
changed seven or eight times during the twenty-
four hours. From the fourth to the sixth day
of their existence, the young worms leave off
eating, and gradually sink into torpor. The
first sleep of the worms lasts about a day and a
half. On their awakening, they cast their skins,
and enter upon a new lease of life with a
greatly improved appetite. The worms are now
lighter in color than when first hatched. Food
should then be given to them every four hours.
The temperature should now be kept within 72
degrees and 76 degrees Fahrenheit. Four to
six days is the duration of this, the second
stage. About thirty-six hours of torpor carries
the worm into its third period, when it assumes
a much lighter color than before. The atmos-
phere should be kept between 72 degrees and
74 degrees until after the third stage is passed.
During this term, they grow immensely ; should
be supplied with fresh leaves (chiefly of the
white mulberry) every four hours, and have
clean beds provided for them every three days.
The worms occupy six days in their third stage,
at the expiration of which time the worms sleep
for about thirty hours, when they discard their
former skins, and become incredibly ravenous,
requiring large supplies of leaves. The food
should now be changed every five hours; the
room must be constantly re-ventilated, and,
provided that the temperature does not fall be-
low 72 degrees, there is nothing to apprehend
from the admission of fresh air. The fourth
period lasts seven or eight days, during which
time the beds should be cleaned at least thriqe.
The fourth sleep of the worms lasts about thirty-
five hours, on recovering from which they eat
voraciously, and their color becomes almost
white. Fresh leaves should now be given every
three hours, and a large quantity will be found
necessary. The cleansing of the beds should
take place every second day during this stage,
which continues for about ten or twelve days,
when the worms betake themselves to the frames
and borders of the shelves, seeking a suitable
location for the manufacture of their cocoons,
which occupies eight days.”
Care must be taken that the leaves are not
cut from the mulberry trees with knives, for
the sap of the leaves becomes acidulated by con-
tact with a metal blade, and must assuredly be
prejudicial to the worms. The safest plan is
to pluck leaves with the hand.
The Working Man's Friend and Family In-
structor, for Saturday, April 10, 1852, says:—
“ In the reign of Henry the Sixth, the art of
spinning and throwing silk had been introduced
into England by a company of silk-women, of
what country is not known. These females, in
a petition to the British Parliament, stated that
Lombards and other Italians imported such
quantities of threads and ribbons, and other
silk products, that they were impoverished. To
protect them an act was passed (1455), prohi-
biting the importation of the articles which
they fabricated.”
The same authority also asserts that five
millions of pounds sterling are annually paid by
England for the importation of silk !
Mr. J. Nerevy, of Yarraberg, near Richmond,
in the colony of Victoria, says that the whole
cost of a cottage apparatus for breeding silk-
worms and reeling cocoons need not exceed an
expenditure of £lO or £l2. He likewise in-
forms us that Mr. Robinet, the proprietor of
the largest sericole establishment in France, a
most able sericulturist, and judicious writer,
has declared that in a new country the sericole
industry cannot be expected to take deep root
unless it is initiated by a large model establish-
ment, which is a nursery, not only of plants
but of worms of the right description, and at
the same time a training school for reelers and
breeders.
France has recently erected in her young
colony of Algeria a vast model and experimental
sericole establishment, under the superinten-
dence of two eminent sericulturists, to the
benefits of which institution the children of the
poor are admitted for training.
A nephew of Mr. John Deane Wells, of
Talbot, Victoria, writing from Daijeeling, in
Bengal, under date 13th November, 1864, says:
—“ The moth cuts its way out of the cocoon in
about eight days after the cessation of its being
formed (the cocoon). It lays its eggs and dies,
the eggs hatch very quickly, and the worms
should be fed on mulberry leaf, chopped fine ;
the young tender leaves should be selected for
use. The worm casts its skin three times dur-
ing its growth, as it grows exceedingly fast, and
the skin cannot grow (or stretch) sufficiently
fast to keep up with the growth of the body.
At each of these times the worm is subject to
fever, and often 50 per cent, die at one or other
of these stages. After the last change the
worm in a day or two begins to get restless, re-
fuses its food, and constantly raises its head,
and appears to search for small branches or
something of the sort on which to commence its
cocoon. You must now carefully remove the
worms from the round wicker trays. These
trays should be flat, with a long piece of
some sort of plait put round and round, so as
to form narrow paths like a maize, if I may use
the expression. The plait is of course put per-
pendicularly to the plane of the tray, and the
worms immediately begin to fasten their thread
on the side of the walls of the tray and spin.
During their spinning they are put out in the
sun to assist the deposit of the gum, and pre-
vent its clogging the thread; if the gum con 4
geals the thread will not wind. The silk itself
is but a gum that is expressed through two ori-
fices in the head of the worm, and must consist
of two different sorts of gum, as it is only on
the gum from the two orifices meeting and com-
ing in contact with the air that it forms silk.
If the worm is pulled apart when spinning the
result is gut —I mean the article sold for fishing
purposes under that name— a clear proof the
two streams of gum mingling cause some chemi-
cal action to take place. When the worms have
made the cocoon, those you wish to keep for
seed must be carefully stored in the breeding
7


room, which must be quite separate from the
dwelling house, and carefully guarded at all
times from the smell of tobacco, cooking, and in-
deed all strong scents of any kind ; onions and
garlic kill the worms. In Italy the man who
feeds the worms (and here also) keeps a separate
suit of clothes to put on when entering the
breeding house, and never smokes during the
time the worms are coming to maturity. The
worms from which you intend making silk (or
rather the cocoon) must be exposed to the sun,
the hotter and more direct the rays the better ;
this kills the worm within the cocoon, and pre-
vents its cutting its way out. Those cocoons
reared in wet weather are worked olf after severe
exposure to the sun, until you feel the worm
inside quite dry and crisp. Those hatched dur-
ing long continuance of dry weather are baked
in an oven.”
I extract the following information from an
admirable work, bearing the humble and un-
pretending title of “ Cottages of the Alps.” The
writer says:—“ The French raise 3,000,000
dollars worth of raw silk every year, and the
breed of silk worms (iombyx morij is a matter
of importance, and there is a central society of
sericulture in France to watch over the silk pro-
duction. The main object is to obtain cocoons
of a large size, composed of a long-, strong, very
fine, even and lustrous thread. There are three
main varieties of silk worms: the “ Sina,”
the “Syrie,” and the “Novi.” The “Sina”
is noted for the pure whiteness of its silk,
the thread of which is fine, but weak and
lustrous. The “ Syrie ” variety is of a larger
size, produces a cocoon abundant in silk,
but the thread is rather coarse, and
inclined to a greenish tint. The “Novi”
race is small, but the cocoons are firm and well
made, and the silk has a yellowish tint. Thus
there are good qualities and defects in all, and
it takes the best points of three classes of silk-
worms to form a perfect worm. Can the
principles of breeding be applied to these sin-
gular insects ? Well, at the Great Exhibition
of 1851, Count de Bronski, of St. Selves, near
Bordeaux, in France, showed some specimens
of a new breed, the cocoons being remarkable
for their large size and regularity of form, nod
the silk for the unusual strength of its thread,
its natural pure white color, its fineness and
lustre; combining the three prime merits of
the different breeds. How were the cocoons
obtained? In 1836, Major de Bronski reared
separately the eggs of the three fundamental
varieties. In 1837, he set apart cocoons of
“Syrie ” and “Novi,” and on the exclusion of
the image, or perfect insect, he associated the
males of the “Novi” with the females of the
“ Syrie the hybrid ova being hatched in the
year 1838. In 1840, he associated the males ex-
cluded from the large cocoons of the black worms
with the females excluded from those of the
white worms. In 1841, he associated the
“Sina” males with the hybrid females ob-
tained from the above crossings of the “ Novi ”
and “Syrie” breeds. He at length succeeded
in obtaining a race of silkworms not subject to
disease, producing large and equal sized co-
coons, of a pure white color, the silk of which
is equal in all its length, strong and lustrous,
and yielding an average length of thread of
1657 metres, or 1156 yards, English measure-
ment.”
In the Illustrated Exhibitor and Magazine
of Art , published in 1852 by Cassell, of La
Belle Sauvage Yard, Ludgate Hill, London,
and in vol. 1, page 179, the following article ap-
pears, under the cross-head of “ Statistics of
the Silk Manufactures of Great Britain” :
“The silk employed in our manufactures is, like
cotton, wholly derived from foreign countries,
whence we import it in three different states,
viz., raw, waste, and thrown.
“ Raw silk is that form of the material which
is obtained on winding off the thread of several
cocoons (envelopes which the silkworm has spun)
together, passing the combined thread round a
hollow frame or reel. The skeins thus obtained
are called hanks of raw silk, of which there
were imported from the various undermentioned
countries in 1849, the following weights, viz. ;
British India, 1,804,327 lbs. ; China, 1,845,525
lbs.; Turkey, Syria, and Egypt, 318,824 lbs.;
Italy, 241,048 lbs. ; France, 313,016 lbs. ; and
from various other countries, smaller quantities
amounting to 468,732 lbs.; giving a total of
4,991,472 lbs., of which 473,340 lbs. were re-
exported, leaving a balance of more than 4£
millions of pounds for our home manufactures.
“Waste silk is composed of the floss-silk
which covers the cocoons (which is removed
previous to winding off the raw silk), and of the
waste obtained in the operations of spinning
and throwing. Of this there were imported in
1849 from Italy, 993,776 lbs. ; from France,
268,016 lbs.; and from other countries, 166,992
lbs.; making a total of 1,428,784 lbs.; of which
52,976 lbs. were re-exported, leaving upwards
of 1,376,000 lbs. for home consumption,
“ Thrown silk is the raw silk which has gone
through the various operations of winding,
cleaning, doubling, and twisting or throwing,
and is in the state ready to be woven into silk
and satins. Of thrown silk England imported
in 1849, from Italy, 5232 lbs. ; from France,
419,726 lbs.; and from other countries, 189,812
lbs.; making a total of 614,770 lbs. ; of which
132,662 lbs. were re-exported, leaving a surplus
of upwards of 482,000 lbs. for home use.
“ In the winding, spinning, and throwing of
this raw and waste silk, so as to fit it for the
loom, and in weaving the silk so spun and
thrown, into fabrics of various kinds, there were
employed in 277 factories 42,544 people (12.667
males, and 29,877 females), of whom 2385 are
boys and 4766 girls under 13 years of age;
3214 males between 13 and 18 years of
age; 25,111 females above 13 years of age ; and
7068 males above 18 years of age. The number
of spindles employed in spinning and throwing
the raw silk was 1,225,560, and the number of
power-looms for weaving 6092; these spind'os
and power-looms being set in motion by the aid
of 2858-horse steam power, and 853-horse
water power. The countries in which these
silk factories are situated are as follows, viz. :
In England—Cheshire, 97; Lancashire, 29,
Derbyshire, 24; Warwickshire, 23; Yorkshire,
16; Somerset, 15; Worcestey, 13; Gloucester,
7; Essex, 6; Middlesex, 4; Norfolk, 4;
Devonshire, 2; total, 240.”
“In Scotland —Lanark, 4 ; Renfrew, 1 ;
total, 5. Grand total (England and Scotland),
245 factories. Ireland has none.
“ The figures above do not, however, repre-
sent the total number of persons employed in
the manufacture of silk goods. In some
8


branches of the trade, as, for instance, that of
ribbons, the manufacture is still for'vhe most
part a domestic one, the spinning and weaving
being carried on in the cottages of the work-
people.
“ The total number of persons employed, in-
cluding dyers, scourers,’makers'of machines,
foremen, clerks, &c., may be safely estimated at
not less than 70,000.
* The silk manufacture exhibits another
she went on breeding silkworms at Newland,
and winding off their produce, till not only was
she convinced that the insects could be properly
reared in England, and that good silk might be
produced in sufficient quantities to become com-
mercially valuable, but that lady had the proud
satisfaction of being recognised as the first to
introduce a new description of labor into the
market.
The manner in which she reared the worms,
and increased the stock of their food, is as sim-
ple as it is interesting. She commenced her ex-
periments —as far back as 1836 —by ascertaining
the best variety of mulberry tree; and that
which subsequent experience led her to prefer
above all others was the morns multicaulis of
the Philippine Isles. [The Horticultural and
Agricultural Society, or the Acclimatisation So-
ciety of Queensland, would do well to obtain
sprays of this tree.] The luxuriant crop of
leaves formed by this variety of tree, and its
easy propogation in open grounds, rendered it
peculiarly fitted for the purposes ; and with
careful training and manuring, the size which
the leaf attained in Hampshire almost equalled
that of its native country. She found, ‘too, that
the difficulty hitherto experienced in rearing the
silkworm was not near so great as she had an-
ticipated, Equable warmth throughout the
period of the insects’ existence, cleanliness, clas-
sification, and ventilation, with a due regard to
the suitability of the food to the age of the silk-
worms, she found to be the essential elements
of successful management. The silk produced
was pronounced by the most eminent manu-
facturers to be equal in every respect to the best
imported from Italy ; and Mrs. Whitby, by her
own efforts, proved that English grown silk
might be made a lucrative undertaking. But,
unfortunately for the interests of trade, this lady
died before the manufacturers became fully
aware of her valuable labors. Several articles
composed of silk grown at Newland were ex-
hibited in the Crystal Palace by Messrs. Houlds-
worth, of Manchester; and since the Exhibi-
tion, many attempts have been made, and are
now being made, to carry out the original idea
of the lady in question.
Mr. Cassell remarks] that he has inspected
some ladies’ dresses and shawls made entirely
from English silk.
With the view of ascertaining the average
length of thread produced from cocoons culti-
vated in Brisbane, Queensland, I wound off
half a dozen on Wednesday evening, the 22nd
November, 1865, by means of a machine of my
own construction, turned by the hand, with a
revolution of two yards to each rotation. The
result was as follows :—lst cocoon, 276 yards ;
2nd cocoon, 288 yards ; 3rd cocoon, 270 yards;
4th cocoon, 296 yards; sth cocoon, 264 yards;
and 6th cocoon, 340 yards; giving a total
measurement of 1736 yards; ora mean average
of 289 yards to each cocoon, exclusive of the
floss.
In order to resolve a controversy concerning
the disputed weight of raw silk produced in
Australia, I weighed a quantity on Thursday,
the 23rd November, 1865, at my residence near
to Petrie Terrace, Brisbane; and I carefully
ascertained the following results: —I found that
65 cocoons, with the floss silk on, and after
baking, (having of course, the chrysali dead
9
instance of the good effects which have arisen
from the removal of legislative interference and
protection. In 1821, 1822, and 1823, when the
restrictive system was in full vigor, the raw and
thrown silk imported did not exceed 2,329,000
lbs., whilst that of 1850 amounted to 7,159,134
lbs., or more than treble.
“The total quantitys’of raw'’and waste silk
imported in 1851 was 6,184,532 lbs., and 412,636
lbs. of thrown silk ; making a grand total of
6,597,168 lbs., from which, if we deduct 712,587
lbs. re-exported, we' obtain a,, net total of
5,884,581 lbs,; and if we reckon 250 cocoons
[This estimate appears to be erroneous. So far
from 250 cocoons weighing 1 lb., I have ascer-
tained, from practical experience, that, on the
average, 780 are required ] to the pound, in
weight, wo find that the labors of no fewer than
1,471,145,260 silkworms were requisite to spin
the silk required for the British manufactures.
«Whilst our importation of [cotton manu-
factured goods is comparatively trifling, that of
manufactured silk goods amounts to a consider-
able sum, the weight of those imported|;from
France and other parts of Europe in 1851 being
583,093 lbs., and the silk goods of Indian manu-
facture 444,723 lbs.; a large proportion of the
Tnrli?m silks are [re-exported, as well as some
portion of the Continental silks. We have no
means of ascertaining the quantity or value of
silk goods annually manufactured in this
country^ln 1851, we exportcd,British manu-
factured silk goods to the amount of £755,962,
and of silk mixed with other materials, £378,969,
silk yam and thrown silk of the value of
£196,438 were also exported.”
With reference to the efforts which have been
made in England in the direction of Sericulture,
although it has been frequently stated that no
silk has been cultivated in that country, I do
not hesitate, from motives of justice to the
laudable enterprise manifested by a memb r of
my own sex, to re-publish in this place the fol-
lowing brief and gratifying statement from page
327 of the previously cited authority.
Mr. John Cassell, the renowned bibliopole
and publisher, says, in connection with the sub-
ject of English grown silk, that nearly all the
raw silk used by the manufacturers of Great
Britain is imported from China, France, and
Italy ; but in consequence of the difficulty some-
times experienced in obtaining it in sufficient
quantities, and of the necessary quality, at-
tempts have been made at diffierent times to
breed silkworms, and grow the raw material at
home. The most successful experimentalist in
this sphere was the late Mrs. Whitby, of New-
land, in the county of Southampton. en-
thusiastic was she in the pursuit of her project,
that she imported mulberry plants from the
Philippine Islands, and silkworms’ eggs Irom
Italy, in order to test the capabilities of the
English climate. For more than fourteen years


inside), were required to weigh one ounce;
consequently 780 cocoons will weigh one pound.
But taking the cocoons promiscuously, in order
to weigh down the scale to one pound, I
ascertained that only 750 baked cocoons, were
required. The disparity, I presume, arising from
the difference in size of a miscellaneous assort-
ment. I likewise discovered that 202 cocoons,
from which the moth had eaten its way out,
were necessary to weigh one ounce : or, 2424 of
these go to the pound weight.
The following article, from the Australasian ,
on silk worms and mulberry trees, will con-
clude this portion of my subject;—
OE THE INSECT.
In feeding the insects remember that what
they most want are perfect quiet, cleanliness, a
steady temperature, and constant food. Do
not let children go near them, and never go near
them yourself if you have been smoking, The
warmer the room, under 80 deg., the faster they
will grow. The leaves must be perfectly free
from damp, and the fresher the better. On the
average, though it varies regularly with the
age, they should be fed at least four times a
day.
It is almost hopeless tts attempt reeling the
silk in the colonies. Bad reeling will reduce
the price one-half. There is, however, no
difficulty whatever in sending the cocoons com-
pressed to Marseilles, or Genoa, or Leghorn.
They will compress into one-third of their space
without injury to the silk. In this way the
great French and Italian houses receive their
supplies from the Levant and Turkey. The
Australian silk grower, therefore, need only
trouble himself about getting the cocoons, and
can draw for a half advance for the produce
shipped, just the same as for wool.
It is a common objection to the profit of silk-
growing, that labor in Australia is too dear.
The answer is, that if the temperature of
the room is kept ns high as 75 deg., the whole
process ought to be over in a month, and the
only labor requisite is that which, except for
such purposes, is waste. A clever quiet girl of
ten is not only as fit, but fitter to manage silk-
worms than a man.
OE THE PLANT.
There are three kinds of the mulberry good
for silk-growing, the Manilla (Morus multi-
caulis), the Morus Alba, white or Italian mul-
berry, and Morettiana, a variety of the second.
The first and third are excellent as adjuncts ;
they grow greatly quicker and throw out more
leaves than the Morus Alba, but are inferior in
quality. The silkworm, be it remembered, is
merely the animated means by which a
quantity of vegetable pulp is converted into
tissue. As are the leaves, so will be the silk.
Beckoning in the price of the freight, the
Australian must either grow first-class silk or
none at all. His mainstay, therefore, must
be the Morus alba, supplemented by the others.
In Australia the white mulberry has generally
been grown from cuttings: it is better from
seed, (1) because the tree lasts longer, (2)
because it can be grown from seed to any
extent, and the sine qua non of the sericulturist
is to plant profusely. The seed should be of
first-rate quality, be steeped twenty-four hours
before sowing, and if in a greenhouse so much
the better.
If the mulberry is grown as a hedge or bush,
it can be stripped, at least to some extent, as
early as the third year. If as a standard, it
must be grafted. •
The Silkworm and its Products.
(From Facts for Everybody.)
The silkworm is the caterpillar of one of the
family Bombycidae, systematically known by the
name of Bombyx Mori. The eggs are globular,
and about the size of a mignonette seed ; they
may be purchased in Covent Garden market,
London, at the rate of about ten shillings per
ounce. The good ones are Of a pale slate or
ash color ; whilst the imperfect ones are of a
light yellow tint; the moth is of a] light
cream color, with transverse hands of a
darker tint on the anterior wings, and a crescent-
shaped central mark; the body, which is
encircled by rings of a darker tinge, is covered,
as are also the wings, with long velvety feathers,
giving a particularly soft, thick, and warm look
to the insect; the antenna) are also thickly
feathered. The eggs arc hatched in the spring,
almost simultaneously with the bursting into
leaf of the mulberry trees, upon which they live,
and the little worm immediately commences
eating the young leaves which are provided for
its nourishment. It is about eight weeks
in arriving at maturity, and during that period
changes its skin at four or five different
moultings. When about to cast its skin it
ceases to eat for some length of time, and exists
in a state of perfect repose or stupor, with the
forepart of the body slightly raised. It remains
in this torpid condition a sufficient time for the
new skin, which is now forming, to become
sufficiently mature and strong to enable the
caterpillar to burst through the old one. As
soon as the moulting is over, and the caterpillar
has recovered from the exhaustion which its
transition efforts have produced, it commences
eating voraciously, and increases in size very
rapidly.
The silkworm when full grown measures
about three inches in length, and is at first of
a slate color; but, as it increases in size it be-
comes paler, until at maturity it arrives at nearly
the same tint as the moth itself. When it has
arrived at this state, about ten days after the
last moulting, the caterpillar seeks some con-
venient spot for the spinning of its web or
cocoon. The silk is elaborated in two long
tubular vessels lying on either side of the
stomach and intestines, and terminating in a
single tube opening in the lower lip of the
worm. The silk bags, as the vessels containing
the liquid gum of which the delicate thread
of silk is composed are called, are closed at their
lower extremity, from whence they taper
gradually to a greater width in the middle, and
contract towards the head, when they unite
with the spinnaret, or spinning tube.
Having now described the insects themselves
we will proceed to watch > their progress from
the eggs to the spinning and winding of the
cocoon. During the winter months the silk-
worm-grower preserves the eggs in linen bags
with great care, and as soon as they begin to
burst into life in the spring, they are gently
laid in flat wicker baskets lined with sun-baked
clay, where they are supplied with the young
10


and delicate leaves of the mulberry. At this
time the tiny worms are scarcely larger than
cheese mites, and therefore, for the first few
days, but a small quantity of food is consumed.
As it is essential that the whole of the eggs
should be hatched at about the same time, so as
to ensure the budding leaves for the young
brood, if any of the bags, from cold or otherwise,
are later than the others in bursting into life,
the peasants carefully wrap small quantities of
the eggs in woollen materials, and carry them
about their persons, until the artificial warmth,
thus applied, produces the desired i result.
[This custom prevails extensively in Anglo-
India, Syria, and China.] For the first week,
the worms are kept in these wicker-baskets,
fresh leaves being given to them three or four
times daily. At the end of the first week they
have generally grown to the size of about half
an inch in length, when the period of the first
moulting has arrived, and the worms be in a
torpid state for a period of two days. The
caterpillars which have survived this operation
are then carefully removed from the wicker-
baskets, and placed in the kokh, which has been
arranged for their reception. The kokh, or
silkworm-home, is a low thatched building formed
of sun-dried bricks, with trellised windows
covered with myrtles and other trees, so as to
exclude birds and serpents: but, at the same
time so as to admit of a free circulation of air.
In these kokhs are long ranges of mat shelves,
attached to poles and ranged one above another,
with about one foot space between each range.
On these shelves the silkworms are placed by
the attendant peasants, and plentifully supplied
with mulberry leaves, which are now devoured
in such quantities as to render it necessary to
lop off, and supply them with, the small twigs
from the trees. During the two weeks succeed-
ing the first moulting, large branches are
lopped from the trees every morning, and
brought to the kokh, and by this means the
leaves are preserved in greater freshness, and
are profusely sprinkled along the shelves by the
peasants. About this period the second change
of skin takes place, and after this torpid con-
dition the worm wakes up with renewed
strength and vigor, and with considerably
increased voracity of appetite. From this time
the caterpillars grow prodigiously ; they never
cease eating, day nor night, and the noise of
their feeding, on first entering the kokh, is said
to be quite as loud as a heavy shower of rain
falling on a thatched roof, and to resemble the
incessant clipping of thousands of little
scissors. (This noise would be exceedingly
dangerous in Queensland sericole establish-
ments, unless due precautions were judiciously
adopted to exclude tarantulas, spiders, insects,
and other vermin, whom such noise might
attract to molest the worms.)
By the time the worms have attained
their full maturity and growth, they have
generally denuded of their foliage the whole
plantation of mulberry trees, and the attendants
therefore look anxiously for the time when they
shall cease eating ; this they do suddenly, and
again fall into a state of stupor, which lasts
about two days. On again awaking to activity,
the silkworm, for the first time since it came
into life, shows signs of restlessness, and crawls
hastily about in search of a retreat. As soon
as this restlessness is perceived, the attendants
carry in a quantity of dried twigs and branches,
and carefully scatter them over the worms, who
take to them with such avidity, that, in the
course of an hour or two, not one will be found
who has not selected for itself a spot whereon
to weave a silken bed.
As soon as the caterpillar has fixed upon a
place for the formation of its cocoon, it attaches
long threads of glutinous matter or silk from
side to side, and thus continues to work until it
has woven around itself a hollow envelope of
light tissue-like texture. As it does not move
or change the position of the hinder part of its
body, but continues moving its head from side
to side, attaching and drawing the thread from
point to point, it follows naturally that, after a
time, its body becomes enclosed by the net work
thus created. The work is then continued from
one thread to another, the caterpillar moving its
head, and spinning in a zig-zag manner, bending
the fore part of its body back so as to spin in
all directions within reach ; and the position of
the body is only changed for the purpose of
covering the part which was beneath it with
silk. As the web is thus spun by bending the
fore-part of the body back, it follows that the
silkworm very soon encloses itself in a cocoon
very much shorter than its own body, and the
work is thus continued with the worm in a bent
position. Thus the worm, by pure instinct,
forms a cocoon which is just sufficient for its
purposes in the chrysalis stage, and not guided
by its present proportions. During the season
of spinning, the silkworm decreases considerably
in length, and by the time it has completed its
cocoon, has diminished its size by one-half.
The cocoon consists of three distinct layers
of silk ; the first loose and flossy ; the second
of a closer texture ; and the inner coating finer
and glued or gummed closely together, forming
a compact surface. After building the cocoon,
the silkworm divests itself of its caterpillar
garment, and is at once transformed into a
chrysalis. In the chrysalis state, the little
creature remains for about a fortnight, during
which period the delicate and beautiful limbs of
the moth are being formed.
At the end of this period a slight swelling of
the chrysalis indicates that a new life is about
to appear ; a rupture down the back succeeds,
and, by degrees, the snowy moth emerges from
her horny shell into the hollow silken chamber
of the cocoon. There, after fluttering for a
few minutes, it emits a fluid which has the
power of softening the silk at the pointed end
of the cocoon, through which the moth soou
afterwards bursts into dfe and activity. [This
operation, however, only applies to those
cocoons which are unbaked, and from which the
silk has not been removed. In cases where the
silk-fibre has been previously wound off, and
the chrysalis exposed in a condition of nudity,
it becomes necessary to deposit the chrysalis in
clean dry bran to undergo the final trans-
formation.] The cocoon tas.es about five days
incessant and unceasing labor in its formation,
and when finished is egg-shaped, and about an
inch and a half in length.
It must be borne in mind that the silk com-
posing the cocoon is spun out by the worm in
one continuous thread, from the first commence-
ment to the completion of the fine lining ; the
11


length of this thread varies in some small
degree, but generally the continuous unbroken
thread produced and spun by each worm is
about one thousand feet. Of course as the
value and use of the silk depends upon its
perfect length being preserved, it would be very
prejudicial to allow the moth to be formed in
those cocoons which are intended for use. A
sufficient quantity having been set aside for
producing eggs for the next season, the rest are
either exposed to the broiling sun, or placed in
a furnace until the poor little creature is stifled
in the very beautiful edifice which its ingenuity
has formed, and which is so soon converted by
excessive heat into a living tomb. This done,
the grower opens the soft external covering of
floss-silk, and removes the harder cocoon. This
floss-silk is afterwards brought to a manufactured
state by spinning.
The cocoons are now formed into hanks
ready for use by the manufacturer. For this
purpose small furnaces are raised, adapted to
the occasion, on the top of which is placed a
vessel of water. Into this water a number of
the cocoons are thrown, and the heat of the
water soon softens the gum or glue, and renders
the separation and proper winding of the
delicate threads a matter of easy accomplish-
ment. The reeler is provided with a whisk of
flue twigs bound together, and cut off evenly at
he ends, and -with this the manipulator’gcntly
stirs and presses the cocoons in the water“till
the loose threads become entangled on its
points. The whisk is then raised with the
threads attached, and removed from it, while
the ends are drawn through the fingers of the
operator, who collects ten, fifteen, or twenty-
threads together, and passes them through
small loops, or eyes, in a reeling machine. This
apparatus very simple, consisting only of a
hollow wheel, upon which are attached the ends
of the threads, while a person turns the handle.
By this means, fifteen or twenty cocoons are
unwound at one time, and as each is drawn off,
another layer is substituted, and thus a con-
tinuous thread, composed of many cocoons, is
produced.
Value of Raw Silk in the London Market.
A gentleman writing from Darjeeling, in
Bengal, under date 13th November, 1864, to his
relative at Talbot, in the colony of Victoria,
whose remarks I have previously quoted, and
who seems to understand something of iithe
subject, upon which he speaks, says : —The first
part is coarse, but is sold at from £5 to £6 per lb.
in London. (Surely its cultivation in Queens-
land must prove to be a lucrative commercial
undertaking.)
ADDRESS OF THE AUTHORESS TO
My purpose in compiling this treatise is insti-
gated by a desire to introduce a useful industry
into Queensland; and my claims to public
consideration are firmly based upon the
foundation of experience in the field of
sericulture. I may perhaps, be excused for
indulging in a little honest egotism on this
occasion, inasmuch that I was, personally, the
pioneer of this particular avocation in the
colony of Victoria; by which expression, I
mean to say that I was the first exhibitor of
silk grown in that country; and, in con-
firmation of this statement it is only necessary
that I should refer my readers to the published
report made by the judges of silk in Melbourne,
on the Ist of March, 1865, where special and
distinct mention is made by Messrs. M. L.
King, A. Martelli, J. J. Stutzer, and Jas. Reid,
to this, “ the first systematic attempt to ascer-
tain the sericultural capabilities of Australia.”
Such is the borrowed language of the report in
question.
Several persons had previously written books
upon the question, and the public press oc-
casionally devoted a column to its praises ; but
no one ever pretended to present the public
with any tangible result of labor in this direction,
before the date of my exhibition of silk on the
12th July, 1864; then, and not until then, did
a host of amateur sericulturists deluge the
Melbourne journals with contributions upon the
subject: but, even then, no competitor ap-
peared from their serried ranks to contest with
myself the honor of production. Mrs. Lewis, of
Prahran, was the only lady who came forward
at the time, with any samples.
The colonists of Queensland have, in this
instance, a new arena of honorable industry
presented to them for occupation. Sericulture
offers to its votaries and patrons a novel and
THE COLONISTS OF QUEENSLAND,
lucrative sphere of labor; while the results
accruing from its proper and legitimate culti-
vation are of a certain and substantial character.
The fluctuations of a monetary system —the
periodical depressions of ordinary trade —the
precarious state of a labor market —cannot ex-
ercise any deleterious influence upon 'silk
products. It is virtually and essentially,'to* all
intents and purposes, in all countries and under
every phase of political government, a bona fide
investment, a sure and steady mine of national
wealth.
Many public writers have theorised upon this
interesting subject: but, after reading all the
effusions which have emanated from the
cacoethes scribendi of modern litterateurs, the
mind sustains a painful impression that there is
a something wanting:—that the vacuum in our
natural history requires to be filled up with
some further and more solid substances.
The age in which we live is emphatically a
progressive one; the march of intellect; the
energy of enterprise; the pursuit of science:
all have their respective holds upon the minds
of this generation. We exist in practical times:
when the vagaries of mere dreamers, or the
speculations of the visionary, have no attractions
for the intelligent sections of mankind: and
such being so, I do not hesitate in now coming
before the people of Queensland with an
earnest appeal for their co-operation in deve-
loping the rich resources of this eminently
favored and sunny land.
I have hitherto presented to my readers a
series of opinions upon the silk question, culled
carefully from the most reputable authorities.
I have adopted this arrangement, because it
originally occurred to my mind when I applied
myself to the compilation of this work, that
in order to give it weight and authority with
12


the people, it was necessary to incorporate in
these pages the published sentiments of others,
before I presumed to intrude my personal
opinions upon public attention.
MY PERSONAL EXPERIENCES.
It is unnecessary to trouble the reader, or to
encumber these folios, with any account of my
mode of treatment of silkworms in Victoria. I
am now writing especially in the interests of
Queensland; and shall, therefore, exclusively
restrict my remarks to what has been my
practice in this colony.
Previously to my leaving Melbourne, on
Monday, the 18th September, 1865. I noticed
that some of the eggs deposited by the silk-
worm moths of the preceding year, had hatched,
and I was in possession of young worms as
early as the 24th of August. lam aware that
this date will be considered very late in the
season for young silkworms to put in their
appearance in Queensland ; but the difference
in the geographical position of the two colonies
of Victoria and Queensland will account for the
disparity. In the first mentioned country the
young silkworms make their appearance about
the middle of September; although an ex-
ception to rule occurred this year, when, as I
have already stated, I had some silkworms break
their shells as early (for Victoria) as the 24th
of August. In Queensland, however, they
usually begin to come into existence about the
latter end of July ; at all events, I may mention
that I arrived in Brisbane on the 24th
September, and about the 30th of that month,
had a personal interview with Mrs. Hockings,
the lady Mayoress, who then presented me
with eight full-grown worms, two of which
commenced spinning immediately, and as that
lady showed me about fifty cocoons, from out of
which the chrysali had not protruded, besides
informing me that she had moths then de-
positing eggs—and as the duration of a silk-
worm’s ephemeral existence barely extends over
ten weeks —it may be inferred from such com-
putation, that, in Queensland, the silkworms
appear as early as the middle of July.
Being in possession, then, of some silkworms
at the date of my departure from Melbourne,
and being anxious to import into this colony
the same generation of silkworms that I had
cultivated so successfully in Victoria during
five years, I was obliged to provide myself with
a small mulberry tree, densely covered with
foliage, and planted in a monster flowerpot,
which was securely encased inside a wicker-
basket, in order to have at hand, during the
passage between Melbourne and Brisbane, an
ample supply of fresh leaves for my young
favorites. Other silkworms made their ap-
pearance daily, during the run; and I re-
marked that, the nearer the steamer approached
the climate of Moreton Bay, so in a propor-
tionate ratio did the eggs become more numer-
ously and rapidly hatched. As soon as I had
selected a dwelling house, ofi' Petrie Terrace,
I erected a shelf about seven feet from the floor,
and so placed that it should not touch the
wall of the room. This precaution appeared to
be necessary in order to prevent spiders or ants
from molesting the worms. Upon this shelf I
arranged a row of card-board boxes, about 1£
by 1 foot in size; and deposited in them the
young silkworms, which of course, in that
position, were amply supplied with fresh
mulberry leaves, at least three times a-day.
I allowed the silkworms to continue in that
condition until they had undergone two
changes, and had attained a medium growth.
At the expiration of five weeks, I constructed a
shelter outside the house for the reception of
the larger worms, by suspending long planks
from nails and cordage, taking care to fence the
kokh, or breeding-house, well in with clean
calico, so as to exclude all insects, without
diminishing the free current of pure air. I
retained them in this position for three weeks,
and commenced classifying the silkworms which
indicated a disposition to spin. The early
worms that I had imported from Melbourne
on the 24th September, at which time, they
were fully four weeks old, began forming their
cocoons on or about the 26th October t and, on
the 15th November, I baked as many as a wheel-
barrow could well contain, in Mr. Ball’s oven
in Petrie Terrace. From the 26th October
until the end of November, I was daily
occupied in separating fresh spinning worms
from the general lot, either by depositing them
singly, in small paper pockets, in the shape of
inverted cones, or in arranging cotton-gauze for
them to select their own places wherein to build
their cocoons. Silkworms are exceedingly fond
of spinning in fabrics of such a texture. They
require to be kept as much as possible in the
shade: in fact, almost entirely secluded from
the glare of light: they dislike noise, and ought
to be touched as seldom as possible. They are
excessively timid in their nature, and do not
thrive under frequent disturbances. Bad
smells are fatal to the health and longevity of
the insect; the fumes of tobacco, or the ex-
halations of putrid substances and decayed
vegetables, as well as the smell of varnish,
paint, or any strong esculent, will destroy the
worms. I have even noticed that they are
affected by the odour of a newspaper, damp
from the press; and I imagine that the moisture
of such periodicals, together with the smell of
printing ink, is peculiarly obnoxious to them.
On the 20th November, I was unfortunate
enough to lose upwards of 400 fine silkworms
through a portion of the calico covering drop-
ping, and thus leaving an aperture for some
fowls to enter. On the 23rd November, I
baked a second lot in Mr. Ball’s oven : and an
additional quantity was likewise subjected to the
same process on the 27th, at which date I
had only about two dozen worms requiring
food. From the time of being hatched to the
commencement of spinning, the silkworm lives
eight weeks in Queensland ; but the climatic in-
fluences of this country appear to render the
worm more forward in this colony than
in Victoria. This assertion is corroborated by
the discrepancy which exists between the
periods of their relatively first appearance in
other latitudes : in the southern districts of
Australia, where the climate is comparatively
cooler than in Queensland, the silk worm is
considerable slower in passing through its
various stages of existence.
Having selected an optional number of
cocoons from those which I might have ap-
propriated for baking in an oven with a tem-
perature of, say, 140 degrees Fahr.; I allow,
13


in some instances, the chrysali to work their
way out in the final formation of beautiful
moths, from which the seed is derived for
future insects. In other cases, when inclined
I have been accustomed to reel off the silk by
means of a winding machine, turned by the
hand, at a revolution of four yards and a
quarter to each rotation in measurement. As
soon as the chrysalis becomes exposed in a con-
dition of nudity, through the application of this
process, I deposit it in fresh clean bran, observ-
ing to only partially cover the creature, so
that it may have air. (It is best however, to let
the moths eat out, in order to secure good eggs
for the next season.) In this state I leave it
until, in the course of nature, the last transfor-
mation occurs, when the moth is placed upon
calico or white sheets of paper, whereon to de-
posit eggs for the next silk season. But the
process of reefing silk in the Australian colonies
is unnecessary, as the merchants prefer receiv-
ing their consignments in cocoons, from which
the silk is separated in the factories by the
agency of adequate machinery; and, as many
years will probably elapse before its introduc-
tion into these colonies, we must, for the pre-
sent, make a virtue of necessity, and not at-
tempt too much with the limited appliances at
our command.
In constructing a kokh, or breeding-house,
for silkworms in Queensland, the shape should
be circular, with doors placed east and- west,
and windows all round, but about the centre of
the rotunda. The outer wall should be made
of quartering, covered securely with canvas,
having a promenade and verandah about six
feet broad, so as to exclude the intensity of the
Queensland temperature. There should be a
space of three feet between the inner side of the
outer wall, and a range of shelves for the recep-
tion of the silkworms. In the immediate centre,
a small stove should be erected, having a pipe
leading upwards through the roof, which must
have a pyramidal form, and be of a good height.
Around the stove-pipe, at the top of the build-
ing, I would have an open space made in the
roof, for the escape of obnoxious gases, but so
constructed that no rain should be able to de-
send into the interior. As a provision against
very sultry weather, when the rays of the sun
might be too intense for the constitution of the
insects, I would endeavor to create, by means of
a windsail suspended across the outside doors,
an artificial atmosphere. The shelves could be
made of any width, but constructed of very
wide canvas, of exceedingly coarse manufac-
ture, to allow the excrescences of the insects
to drop through into a trough underneath,
whence it could be conveniently removed at
leisure. The dung of the silkworm forms
excellent manure, for mulberry tree roots in
particular, and may, in an extensive silk-
growing country, become so abundant as to
supersede the employment of guano for agricul-
tural purposes.
Whenever the weather was showery and
damp, a fire could bo lighted in the stove to
warm the interior, and counteract the effect of
undue moisture arising from rain.
When the weather proved sultry and op-
pressive, the windows could be thrown open for
the admission of air, and the windsail at each
entrance put in motion to create an atmosphere.
One of the authorities whose opinion upon
the breeding of silkworms I have quoted in a
former page, has not hesitated to suggest that,
in close weather, the ground or floor of a kokh
should be sprinkled with water. To such a
course I should most decidedly object, as damp-
ness is prejudicial to the Worms, and the very
process of sprinkling water to cool the air, must
necessarily have the injurious effect of occasion-
ing that identical moisture which it is so
essential to subdue. I think the principle which
I have recommended for observance in the con-
struction of a suitable silkworm home will be
found to combine all the requirements which are
necessary to be provided in consulting the vicis-
situdes of this climate.
The position of the kokh must next engage
our attention.
I am decidedly inclined to the opinion that
the building should be erected upon an eminence
of undulating land, in the midst, or centre if
convenient, of the mulberry plantation. The
proximity of the home to trees from whose
foliage the food is derived, must, of course, be
stipulated for, not only as a convenience, but an
essentiality, for the violence of rough or incle-
ment weather would be partially restrained by
the surrounding plantation, while an abundant
supply of leaves would always be close at hand
for administering to the cultivation and nourish-
ment of the worms.
And now, the inevitable question of available
labor arises, to affect the whole scheme. How
am I to treat this important subject impartially,
and, at the same time satisfactorily ?
I will admit, as a starting point, that in all
amateur experiments conducted by unassisted
individuals per se, that considerable vexations,
trouble, and annoyances have to be endured
and overcome in pursuing sericultural engage-
ments. Undivided attention is requsite to rear
silkworms properly, and there are very few
persons in Queensland —with a disposition in
this direction —who could conveniently devote
their whole time and consideration to the in-
sects. The thousand and one cares attendant
upon, or inseparable from, a general order of
domestic duties in the management of a humble
homestead, continually require the vigilance and
exertion of a mistress over the household ; and,
where those duties are faithfully dis-
charged in a legitimate and regular manner of
methodical system, little spare time remains at
the optional disposal of a matron to be em-
ployed in other avocations.
Hence, in rearing silkworms, assistance is a
desideratum which conuot be dispensed with,
even under the most auspicious circumstances.
But what kind of assistance is it that becomes
most needed ? Is adult labor an inevitable and
arbitrary necessity ? I answer most emphati-
cally in the negative. Adult labor is not an es-
sential element in the practical discipline and
arrangement of a sericole institution. Juvenile
labor is sufficient. The unostentatious, meek,
and unpretending services of a dozen girls,
averaging the intelligence of say twelve or four-
teen years of age each, would be quite equal
to the requirements of such an establishment
if judiciously trained, and properly instructed j
and, permit me to add in this place, that while
many private families would, under such a sys-
tem, find an accessible market for the employ-
14


ment of their children, at a reasbnable rate of
wages ; so, likewise, the colony generally would
derive a national advantage from the introduc-
tion of an industry which would open up a new
field for the employment of youth, while it con-
tributed to develope and enrich the integral ele-
ments of society.
It has frequently been a vexed question with
modern politicians—“ What are we to do with
our boys ?”
My reply to these gentlemen is, extend
every encouragement, and grant every latitude
to the erection of sericole establishments ;
minister your influence and co-operation in
opening up and utilising this propitious
arena of novel industry; strive to promote
and stimulate private investment and public
enterpise in so laudable and intelligent a
direction; and then there will come a spon-
taneous and ready answer ; then will there re-
spond a favorable and gratifying rejoinder —to
the hackeneyed interrogatory, “ What are we
to do with our children ?”
The juvenile inmates of our orphan asylums
—the urchin Bedouins who infest our public
thoroughfares to the shame and scandal of civi-
lised communities, and Christian churches, will
then have an eligible field presented to them for
pursuing an honest and profitable occupation.
Personally, I should not hesitate to pledge my-
self to the employment of a number of poor
girls, during the silk seasons, as a means of en-
abling me to prosecute so lucrative and interest-
ing a calling.
In Syria, in Italy, in China, in the silk-pro-
ducing districts of Anglo-India, and cultivated
Persia, the labor, in this particular department,
is invariably performed by either women or
children.
There is another topic in connection with my
proposed system of training silkworms fin
Queensland, upon which itj may be requisite
that I should offer a few observations.
In the construction of the Jcokh , or silk-worm
house, for breeding and 'cultivating, I have re-
commended that the shelves appropriated to
their accommodation should be of a circular
form, extending all round the interior of the
building. In order to render what I am about
to say intelligible, we will suppose that this cir-
cular shelving contains twenty-four compart-
ments. It may be divided into any number of
partitions at the whim, option or caprice, of the
cultivator; but, for the purposes of present
argument, it is only necessary to go upon hy-
pothesis, and to imagine that there are no more
than two dozen divisions, or separate parts, in
the whole range. Well, then, supposing we
have but twenty-four shelves to attend to.
Each of these compartments contain, say, from
250 to 300 eggs, in the first instance —that
being the average extent of one female’s deposit.
Now, we must suppose that in each of the 24
apartments so constructed I have placed 250
eggs, from which as many silkworms will, in due
ellluxion of time, according to the provisions of
nature, gradually emerge. I shall then have
250 silkworms in each division, I would now
instruct one of my young assistants to commence
with the first division, and lay mulberry
opened out dry over the worms. Passing from
No. 1, she could proceed to the next, and spread
out a layer of fresh dried opened leaves over
the worms contained in that compartment.
Then go on to the third, and so on to the end.
By the time she had gone round the whole tier
or entire range of divisions, the worms in the
first compartment will have eaten up all the
foliage from the leaves with which they had
been supplied at the outset; and there will be
found remaining the “ skeleton form ” of the
leaves so devoured, in the shape of minature
net-work ; the fibre of each leaf which the silk-
worms abandon constituting so many distinct
ingredients in the formation of this said net-
work. Another girl could now relieve the
former attendant, and administer a fresh sup-
ply of leaves to the respective compartments of
the breeding shelves ; and the worms, by in-
stinct, would retire from or desert the refuse of
their former loaves, and betake themselves to the
fresh provision supplied by my little handmaid.
Having gone her round in the manner previously
performed by her predecessor, a similar result
would ensue. The leaves deposited by her in
the first division will, by the time she shall have
administered to the twenty-fourth, have as-
sumed the identical appearance already noticed
as occurring in the former case; they will all
become denuded of their vegetable qualities, and
nothing but the fibres of the leaves will remain.
These fibres or skeletons, will contribute their
share or quota in the construction of a dry bed
for the seclusion of the worms at the various
stages of their periodical transitions. Fresh
layers of leaves being perpetually provided, the
fibres would proportionatly increase until, in
process of time, there would be formed quite a
thick bed, so to speak, of perforated fibres, ad-
mitting air to such worms as should dive down
amongst them, while they underwent their re-
spective transformations. The dung or ex-
crescence discharged by the active worms would,
as a matter of course, descend downwards
through the apertures so created among the
skeleton leaves, and be received at the bottom of
the canvas or division in which the worms
were classified ; so that, by this process —which,
be it observed, is especially a new feature in
sericultural operations, and has never been re-
ferred to by any previous author who ever
wrote on the subject—perfect cleanliness would
be ensured, the worms would be provided with
nourishing food, and also have prepared for
their various changes a comfortable bed where-
on to secrete themselves whenever they wish for
retirement from the residue.
Of course, in this arrangement I have gone
upon mere hypotheses as to the numerical
quantity of silkworms which might be deposited
in each division. I have said 250 or 300 merely
to illustrate a principle which occurred to my
own mind in the construction of a suitable
JcoJch adapted to the climate and circumstances
of Queensland; but it by no means follows as
a necessity that there might not be a larger
number of silkworms bred in each compartment
of the rotatory shelves. The cultivator will al-
ways be at liberty to place as many as he likes
in each division, being only careful to avoid
over-crowding the insects, and allowing them a
free current of pure air, unaffected by noxious
vapours, impure exhalations, and unpleasant
smells of any and every description.
Last silk-season (1864) I separated the moths
from out of those cocoons which yielded white
16


eilk from the others, to ascertain if it was not
possible to procure a finer quality of white silk
from that breed exclusively ; and the result has
been that I have obtained a splendid production
of silk much whiter than I have ever previously
cultivated. This season (1865) I have separated
a larger number of the same description, to as-
certain how the insect is likely to thrive when
kept distinct from the other qualities. It must
be borne in remembrance that color always in-
dicates the species ; thus : —White is “ Sina
green is “Syrie;” yellow is “ Novi.” This in-
teresting classification was originally discovered
by Count de Bronski, of St. Selves, near Bor-
deaux, in France, in the years 1836 and 1837.
I do not remember, just now, that there is
anything further to add under this section. I
do not consider it is necessary for me to enter
more minutely upon the subject of silk cultiva-
tion ; as the veriest tyro amongst us, even little
boys and girls from twelve to sixteen years old,
possess some idea of how to rear these interest-
ing insects. The method of cultivating a dozen
worms efficiently, is nothing more nor less than
the system epitomised for conducting an exten-
sive sericole establishment. What one worm
requires is precisely identical with what a
million silkworms may need, namely, attention,
nourishment, cleanliness, and atmosphere.
It is easy enough to theorise a system, and to
write eloquently "upon any subject, without be-
ing practically intimate with its experiences ;
but, in my case, I come before the community
of Queensland, not in the character of an
amateur—not in the spirit of a visionary. I
present to the people of this highly-favored
territory, not the crude speculations of an un-
practised mind, but the solid results of positive
acquaintance’with that branch of industry upon
which I speak.
PRINTED AT THE “ COURIER ’’ GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE, GEORQE-3TREET, BRISBANE.




