

THE CASE
OF -
• SUSAN NIXON.
1881.




A TRUE COPY
OF THE
DEPOSITIONS
TAKEN AS EVIDENCE AT THE INVESTIGATION
BY THE
CITY CORONER OF SYDNEY,
RELATING TO
A RECENT CASE OF GASTROTOMY.
ROM FRIDAY, MAY 27/A, TO SATURDAY , JUNE 4/A, 1881.
WITH APPENDIX.


PUBLISHER'S NOTICE.
At the outset of the investigation at the Coroner’s Office, Sydney, on
the recent case of Gastrotomy at the Sydney Benevolent Asylum, the City
Coroner Henry Shiell, Esq., J P., by the desire of Dr. Warren, made the
request that none of the evidence should be published in the papers until the
case was concluded, and as none of the newspapers have published the evidence
in extenso, it has been considered advisable that the whole of the depositions,
extracts read from medical works by the witnesses, together with all letters
in reference to this case, which have appeared in the Sydney Daily Press,
should be laid before the Facuity at large. I have therefore undertaken to
perform this duty, and now present in the following pages a verbatim copy of
the evidence given, which will enable those members of the profession who
were not present throughout the proceedings, to form their own opinion of the
merits of this unfortunate case.
L. BRUCK,
Medical Publisher.
35 Cas/lereagh Street North, Sydney,
ibth June, 1881.


INTRODUCTION.
The subject of the following investigation was a patient at
the Sydney Benevolent Asylum in March last, who, after
undergoing the operation of gastrotomy under the hands
°f Br. Warren, assisted by other surgeons, died of peritonitis,
on the 20th of the same month. The inquiry was first
initiated on Friday, May 27th, 1881, at the Benevolent
Asylum, where the jury was empanelled, after which a
special train, leaving the Bedfern Railway Station at 9.40
a.m., conveyed the coroner, the jury, and the witnesses in
the case to Rookwood. The party then proceeded to the
Haslem’s Creek Cemetery, where the deceased had been
buried, when the body was exhumed under special instruc-
tions from the coroner. A post mortem examination
having been made by Dr. Gillman and Dr. McKay, the
coroner, together with the jury and the medical gentlemen
engaged in the case, returned to town by another special
train, which arrived at Redfern shortly after 11 o’clock.
The proceedings were resumed in the afternoon at the
coroner’s office, and now the plain facts are left to speak
for themselves.


The Jury in this Case consisted of the following
Gentlemen :
Mr. PATRICK R. LARKIN, Foreman.
„ DAVID HAYES.
„ PRIOR MOORE.
„ CHARLES F. BURNEY.
„ JOHN WOOD.
„ william McDonald.
„ JAMES MARTIN.
„ JOHN W. FL ANN AO AN.
„ PHILIP HART.
„ THOMAS CHAPMAN.
„ JOSEPH DAVIS.
„ HENRY FOSTER.
Mr. J. M. CURTIS, Solicitor, wlio appeared on beliali
of Dr. Warren, stated on the second day of the inquiry (Wed-
nesday, June 1), that he had been requested to attend by Dr.
Warren, who was unacquainted with the manner in which
such inquiries were conducted, and the proper mode of examin-
ing witnesses.


DEPOSITIONS
As Sworn and Made at the Inquest on the Body of one Susan
Nixon, before Henry Shield, Esq., J.P., City Coroner,
Sydney, on the 27th of May, 1881, and the Ist, 3rd, and 4th
of June, 1881.
Jirst glay.
Friday, Mat 27th, 1881.
• William Edward Warren , M.D. et Ch. M. Queen's Univ.
IreJ., 1873, on oath states :—1 am a legally qualified Medical
Practitioner and Visiting Medical Officer of the Benevolent
Asylum. The dead body viewed this forenoon by the
Coroner and jury in my presence in the Church of England
Burial Ground, at the Necropolis, at Haslem's Creek, is that
of the late Susan Sarah JN’ixon, who was received into the
Benevolent Asylum on Wednesday, the 16th March last,
and was operated on by me on the 18th of the said month,
and died on Sunday, the 20th day of the said month.
R yt h e
Coroner
Isabella Morgan, on oath states:—l reside at Albury
House, Burns’ Street, Petersham, with my husband; the
deceased, Susan iNixon, whose remains were viewed by the
Coroner and jury in my presence, in a coffin, at the
Neciopolis, Haslem s Creek, tliis morning, was iny sister;
she was thirty-two years of age, a native of Albury in New
South Wales; she was a widow at the time of her death, and
had been so five years ; she had been living at Cootamundra
until March last, when she came to Sydney to get medical
advice ; I had no reason to suppose she was pregnant; she
was the mother of two children who are alive ; on a Wednes-
day in the month of March last, the Wednesday before the
20th of the month, she left my place to go to the Benevolent
Asylum, saying Dr. Schuette had advised her to go there to
be under Dr. Warren’s eye; she said nothing about an
operation; she said Dr. Schuette had given her a note to Dr.
Warren ; I never saw her alive after that Wednesday.
By the
Coroner.


Phillip Sydney Jones , M.D. et L. S. A. Lond., 1860;
F. R. C. S. Eng., 1861, on oath, states lam a legally
qualified Medical Practitioner; I first saw the deceased
Susan Nixon on the 21st of December last, she came to my
consulting room, stating she had a lump in her side, this
lump she had observed some two or three months, and that
prior to its appearance she had suffered a good deal of pain
in the same part; I examined her and found a tumour about
the size of a child’s head at the full term, occupying the
right side of the abdomen in its lower part; it was such a
swelling as led me to believe it was an ovarian cyst, but
there were certain other signs which made me doubtful that
pregnancy also existed, but of that I could not be sure, I had
my doubts; my diagnosis was ovarian cyst and doubtful
pregnancy ; she led me to believe, although she did not
directly say so, she was a married woman ; I told her to go
home, to wear a supporting bandage when the tumour
increased very much in size; I saw nothing more of her
until the 14th March, this year, when Dr. Schuette came
into my consulting room and said he should like me to see a
woman I had seen some months before, and whom he
thought to be suffering from some unnatural form of preg-
nancy ; I went into Dr. Schuette’s room and examined the
patient whom I believe was the same woman I had examined
in December, she told me she was ; after examination but
without passing a sound, which I did not consider prudent to do,
I told Dr. Schuette that I was disposed to agree with him as
to his diagnosis; we consulted together in the matter, and I
suggested that as she lived far away from medical assistance
he should ask Dr. Warren to take her into the Benevolent
Asylum for observation ; that is all I know of the case
personally ; my opinion was that it was a case of extra
uterine fcetation ; at the time I saw the woman I did not
consider operation necessary, but symptoms might arise at
any time to render such requisite; an operation is not
indispensably necessary in every case of extra uterine
fcetation.
Thomas Henry Gillman, M.D. et Ch. M. Queen's Univ.,
Irel., 1870 ; L. Mid. K.Q.C.P., Irel., 1870, on oath, states:—
I am a legally qualified Medical Practitioner, residing in
Wynyard Square; on this morning, in conjunction with Dr.
McKay, I made a post mortem examination on the body of a
woman, identified as that of one Susan Nixon, at the Rook-
wood Cemetery ; I found the body to be in a very fair state
of preservation, especially those portions to which our atten-


tion was specially directed, viz.,—the abdominal and pelvic
regions; T found unmistakable evidence of extensive peri-
toneal inflammation; the uterus and both ovaries were
missing, I found a silk ligature encircling the vagina, at
what would be about its juncture with the uterus, also two
l a1tures J that had been applied to bleeding vessels;
the bladder and rectum were intact, and no injury had
apparently been inflicted on the bowels in the immediate
vicinity ; the cause of death was, I believe, peritonitis; on
removing the clothes I noticed that the abdomen had been
opened, in length about five inches, from the umbilicus
down.
IQ aa ßudol f S f huette , M.D. Goettingen, 1865; L.S.A., Lond.,
p’ ° n oath states:-I am a legally qualified Medical
Practitioner, residing at 16 College Street; I saw the
deceased, Sarah Nixon, on the 14th of March, when she told
me she was suffering from an ovarian cyst, for which she had
consulted Dr. Jones m December, 1880; upon inquiry I
found out that she had been a widow, and that she had given
birth to two children ; on examination I found that she was
pregnant, and the pregnancy seemed to be of an abnormal
c aracter; 1 made an internal and external examination, and
they led me to the same opinion, that it was an abnormal
pregnancy; I did not use the uterine sound ; I requested her
to see r -J ones (as he had previously seen her) the following
ay, which she did ; I saw Dr. Jones and told him about the
case, that he had seen her formerly, and that he had
< fi la f'? 1 0Sed • aS hav i ng an ov arian cyst, and that he would
nd her now m an advanced state of pregnancy, apparently
ra uterine ; Dr. Jones examined her in my presence, and
came to the same diagnosis, and we both advised her to go
to the Benevolent Asylum, which suggestion she willingly
accepted, and I gave her a letter to Dr. Warren, stating my
opinion of the case, and asked him to admit her into the
Benevolent Asylum ; I saw Dr. Warren on the 17th of March,
(my note to him was written either on the 14th or 15 th of
that month), m my own house, when he informed me that he
was going to operate on the 18th of March ; I asked him if he
a onsU i!^fi on j on the case ; he fi aid “ yes,” he consulted
with Drs. Milford and Clune, who both advised him to
operate ; 1 further enquired what gentlemen were going to
assist him, and he informed me of several names, and 1
advised him to ask Dr. Wright to apply the chloroform; the
operation was performed on the 18th ; when the patient
was in the operating room on the table, Dr. Warren asked if


anybody present would examine the patient, calling on me
in particular, when I said “ No, I know all about it;’/ I was
at the time busy with something else ; the operation was
then commenced by Dr. Warren, assisted by Dr. Milford an
myself, Drs. Clune and Cox attending to the instruments,
etc Dr. Wright administering the chloroform, Drs.
Marshall, McLaurin and Hogg being spectators ; the opera-
tion is that known in surgery as Gastrotomy ; It was com-
menced by Dr. Warren making an incision in the usual
way, the tumour coming in view of a long oval shape ; it was
incised and the foetus removed ; then the whole mass was re-
moved and the ovaries as well; the bleeding, which was very
triflin< r , was subdued, and the wound stitched up and dressed ;
I then left; It was not necessary to remove the uterus; it
was taken ’for a cyst; when the abdomen was opened and
the tumour came in view, I found that my diagnosis was in-
correct, and that it was not a case of abnormal pregnancy ; it
was not one under the circumstances requiring an operation ;
the discovery that it was not a ease of abnormal pregnancy
was not made before the uterus was severed from the body ;
it was possible to have seen, after the opening of tne
abdomen, whether it Was a case of normal or abnormal preg-
nancy before the uterus was separated from the body ; it that
discovery had been made, the proper course would have been
to have allowed the foetus to remain, brought the wound to-
gether, and the patient would thereby have a better chance
of life ; the operation was skilfully performed, and every pre-
caution taken ; I would not have operated at that stage
of pregnancy, even supposing that it had been extra uterine ,
I do not think an operation of such a serious nature should
have been undertaken without a previous consultation , when
I recommended her to go to the Benevolent Asylum I told
her it was for observation, and that probably an operation
would be necessary ; the operation lasted almost an hour and
a half ; she never told me she was pregnant; she was between
seven and eight months pregnant.
I took you aside before the operation and asked you if you
were going to operate, and upon your saying yes, I told you that
if it was my case I would not operate ; I am not aware that
many medical authors advise the operation of Gastrotomy
at the very period of gestation to which the deceased had
attained, even if it had been a case of extra uterine preg-
nancy ; I did not hold the tissues of the uterus while you
severed the attachments.


Charles McKay, M.T). St. And. 1843, L.R.C.S. Edin.
1848, being duly sworn states on oath:—l am a legally
qualified medical man and reside in Sydney: This day 1
visited the Rook wood Cemetery and in conjunction with Dr.
Gillman made a post mortem examination of the body of a
woman, who had been exhumed, having been in the grave, it
was said, about nine weeks ; I found an incision about six
inches long, extending from the umbilicus to near the pubis
through the integuments and muscles; the uterus and its
appendages had been previously removed ; there was evidence
of acute peritonitis during life sufficient to account for the
death of the woman ; Dr. Warren was present and recognised
that body as that of a woman named Susan Nixon, on vfhom
he performed an operation in the Benevolent Asylum,
Sydney.
Inquest adjourned until Wednesday, the Ist of June,
1881, at nine o’clock in the forenoon, at the Coroner’s office,
for further evidence.
By the
Coroner.
<Seronii glap.
Inquest resumed this Ist June, 1881, at 9 a.m., at the
City Coroner’s office, in pursuance of an adjournment.
Isabella Morgan, recalled and resworn, states : —The note
produced, marked exhibit A, is one I received from my sister,
Susan Nixon, on March the 20th, 1881, and is in her own hand-
writing, the note bears the date, Sydney, 17th March; on the
previous occasion of my giving evidence here, I stated that
the deceased was a widow; that is not correct, she had been
apart from her husband for five years, and she obtained a
divorce from him last year.
By the
Coroner.
Eliza Elric, on oath, states lam matron of the Bene-
volent Asylum; I remember the deceased, Susan Nixon,
whose body was viewed by the Coroner and jury in my
presence on Friday last, at the Rookwood Cemetery, enter-
ing the Asylum on the 15th of March last; she went home
on that evening and returned the following morning, when
she was formally admitted ; on her admission she told me she
was in the family way, and that she had gone to Drs. Jones
and Schuette, and Dr. Jones was of opinion at first that she
had an ovarian tumour, hut afterwards he and Dr. bchuette
came to the conclusion that it was pregnancy, but that the
B
By the
Coroner.


child was not in her womb, and that an operation would be
necessary before the child could be brought into the world ;
she told me that her husband had been dead either five or
three months, I am not certain which ; I made a minute for
the Ladies Committee in these words:—“Susan Nixon,
widow, applied for admission, bringing a letter from Dr.
“Schuette to Dr. Warren, our Medical Officer. Emergency
“ case, form to be filled in next meeting of Committee,
‘further particulars required, it being an abnormal case
that minute was made on the 15th of March, and on the
following day I admitted her, under instructions received;
she was examined by Dr. Warren on the 17th of March, in
my presence ; after the examination was performed, he and
I went through the building and selected a room for her, and
he directed me to have it prepared for a separate ward for an
operation ; I did so, and the patient was prepared for the
operation, which came off on the 18th, in my presence; she
had not been examined by any other medical man but Dr.
Warren, between the time of her admission and that of the
operation ; Drs. Milford and Schuette assisted Dr. Warren
in performing the operation, and the anaesthetic was adminis-
tered by Dr. Wright, and Dr, Cox applied the carbolic spray
that was used; the operation was actually performed by
Dr. Warren ; I did not hear any of the other medical
men present express an opinion as to the expediency or the
inadvisability of the operation ; the deceased did not take
any exception to the operation ; she was very anxious to have
it performed; I heard Dr. Warren say—“ Gentlemen, would
any of you like to examine the patient any further before I
commence ; not one of them availed themselves of that invi-
tation ; I have no recollection of Dr. Schuette going aside
with Dr. Warren and speaking to him; I was trained as a
nurse at St. Thomas’ Hospital, London, and received a certifi-
cate of competency ; the deceased, after the operation, was
regularly attended to by Dr. Warren ; she was seen twice
daily by Drs. Milford and Warren ; on Sunday, the 20th, un-
favourable symptoms set in, and she gradually sank, and died
that evening about seven o’clock ; after the operation was
performed she received every care and attention that her case
demanded, and I nursed her myself ; after Dr. Warren ex-
amined the deceased on the Thursday, he said to her, “ Mrs.
Nixon, are you aware that this is a very serious thing that will
have to be done she then said that Dr. Schuette had ex-
plained all of that to her; after that Dr. Warren asked me
what religion she was, and he said he thought it would be ad-
visable that she should see a clergyman previous to the


operation, and the Eeverend Mr. Grarnsey had an interview
with her that afternoon ; Dr. Warren told the deceased that
it was a very dangerous operation, and that it possibly might
have a fatal result, and he also told her that few people re-
covered from it; I remember Dr. Warren telling her the
operation was necessary, the membranes might rupture or
give way, and sudden death might ensue ; no change took
place in her apparent condition between the time of her ad-
mission and that of the operation being performed ; the de-
ceased lived about 55 hours after the operation; when the
operation was performed, a living female infant was taken
from her by Dr. Warren, and lived about twelve hours ; it had
apparently attained between seven aud eight months of
uterine gestation ; I saw Dr. Warren make a careful exami-
nation of the deceased on the Thursday ; he used the stetho-
scope ; he used the vaginal speculum, and afterwards intro-
duced the uterine sound ; it was nearly covered with the
ordinary mucus to the extent of about three inches and a half.
I was present during the whole of the operation.
When Dr. Warren said to the deceased that the mem-
brane might rupture or give way, he meant by that, that if
an operation was not performed, that it might possibly
occur and that death might ensue ; Dr. Warren told the
deceased that the operation was going to be performed on the
assumption that the foetus was not in the womb.
The deceased told me on her admission that Drs. Jones
and Sehuette had diagnosed her as suffering from extra
uterine pregnancy; Dr. Warren examined her in my
presence, and he came to the same conclusion.
lam a trained nurse ; Dr. Warren saw the deceased on
the 16th of March, the day of her formal admission, he then
gave instructions that she should be left very quiet, and
kept reclining on the bed ; the reason he gave for so direct-
ing was, the pregnancy being abnormal, he said to me, that it
was quite possible a rupture might take place ; she told me
that Dr. Sehuette had told her that an incision would have
to be made in the abdomen ; that he had told her the
operation was one of extreme danger ; I don’t remember her
saying anything further; before the deceased was placed on
the operating table, she was in the adjoining room ; it was
apparent to the medical men present that the deceased was
in the adjoining room ; it is a general custom that a patient
going to be operated on is in a room close by ; the medical


men present had an opportunity of examining the patient if
they had so wished ; Dr. Schuette took part in the operation
and assisted Dr. Warren in it.
William Edward Warren, Surgeon, recalled and resworn,
states : —I am a Doctor of Medicine and Master in Surgery of
the Queen’s University, in Ireland ; I am also on the roll of the
Legally Qualified Medical Practitioners of New South Wales,
and am visiting medical officer of the Benevolent Asylum,
which is the Lying-in Hospital of the city of Sydney and of
the colony; I have been in practice for eight years, and have
been connected with the Benevolent Asylum for over two
years ; I first made the acquaintance of the deceased woman,
Susan Nixon, on Tuesday, March the 15th, when she brought
me the letter produced, marked exhibit B, from Dr, Schuette
couched in the following words : “ Dear Warren,—Bearer,
“ Mrs. Nixon was examined by me for ovar-cyst, but I found
“an extra uterine pregnancy; she lives a long way up
“ country, I therefore advised her to go to the Asylum, and
“ I send her to you with the view that you might take her
“ in. Yours truly, R. Schuette.” Upon that note I made the
following memo : “ The above case ought to be admitted,
“W. E. W. 15/3/81.” I despatched her to the Institution
with the letter as I knew that the committee was sitting
there at the time transacting business ; I went over there
myself a few minutes afterwards and I saw the matron ; told
her it was an urgent case, and that it ought to be admitted
at once ; that same evening I happened to be at Dr.
Milford’s house, where I met Dr. Milford, Dr. Schuette, Dr.
Cox and Dr. Clune, we were transacting some business in
connection with the dinner that was about to take place in
connection with the New South Wales Branch of the British
Medical Association ; we decided in holding the dinner if
possible in Mr. Neade’s room, in Liverpool Street, and with
that intention went there; as we were going over I thanked
Dr. Schuette for sending me the case, remarking that it was
both a rare and an interesting one, he replied, “You need
“not thank me, you would not have got the chance had I
“ been able to have made arrangements for operating on her
“ myself, I could not do so in St. Vincent’s Hospital in con-
“ sequence of its being an obstetric case, and it is notone that
“ I could make arrangements for in a private house,” adding
something about the monetary circumstances of the patient;
after a short interval he said “You might let me know on
what day the operation will take place, as I would like to be
present.” I replied I would not think of operating on the


patient without giving him the opportunity of witnessing it;
immediately afterwards Dr. Clune said that he also would
like to be there, and I promised to let him know ; when we
arrived at Mr. Neade’s door, Drs. Cox, Clune, and Milford
went in, Dr. Schuette, who was smoking a cigar at the time,
remained outside ; I, considering that this was a good oppor-
tunity of going into the case with him, remained outside also,
and we agreed, granting that my diagnosis coincided with
that already made by Dr. Jones and himself (I having
understood from him that Dr. Jones also had examined the
patient and come to the same conclusion), the sooner the
operation of gastrotomy was performed the better; I made
a careful examination of the patient on the following morn-
ing, Wednesday, March the 16th, and gave instructions that
the patient was to be kept in bed, that she was not to be
allowed to exert herself in any way, as rupture of the cyst
might take place at any moment and death rapidly ensue;
on exTmining her, I found the abdomen enlarged, and on
examining it with my hands, the internal enlargement was
found to be very movable, moving from side to side and
being quite different from what one generally finds in an
ordinary case of pregnancy ; I took careful measurements of
the patient with a tape measure and satisfied myself that
pregnancy existed in consequence of feeling the movements
of the child and hearing, by means of the stethoscope, the
child’s heart beating ; on examination through the vagina,
I found that the neck of the womb was not shortened in any
way, as I might expect to find in a case of normal pregnancy
which bad arrived at that stage of gestation in which my patient
was ; the entrance to the womb or os-uteri was rather more
open than is usual; on keeping the forefinger of my right
hand against the neck of the womb and moving the abdomen
with my left hand the motion thus given did not appear in
any way to influence the position of the neck of the womb,
or to cause any movement in it; 1 also tried what is
known in an obstetrical case as ballotment but this gave a
negative result; I then left my patient and decided on
making an examination, both with the speculum and the
uterine sound, declining to give a positive opinion as to her
condition, at the same time being satisfied in my own mind
that the diagnosis already made by Drs. Jones and Schuette
was the correct one; that diagnosis I was given to under-
stand was extra uterine foetatiou ; on the following day,
Thursday, March 17th, I examined the patient again, adopt-
ing a similar method to that used on the previous day, but


using in addition the speculum and Simpson’s uterine sound ;
I found on examination by the speculum that the os-uteri
was rather more open than usual, a condition which I might
expect to find in a case of extra uterine pregnancy; there
was also some creamy discharge issuing from it; the cervix-
uteri or neck of the womb was not at all shortened ; the
paper produced, marked exhibit C., is a rough diagram of
the uterus, one ovary and fallopian tube; No. lis the os-
uteri, No. 2 the cervix uteri, No. 3 the ovary, No. 4 the fallo-
pian tube, which conveys the ovum from the ovary into the
uterus, where in normal pregnancy it becomes well ferti-
lized, and where the foetus remains until parturition
takes place ; in extra uterine pregnancy the ovum never
reaches the inside of the womb, but becomes fertilized or
fecundated at some point before it reaches the inside of the
womb ; on examination through the vagina with my finger, I
found an enlargement anterior to the uterus, between it and
the bladder and towards the left side ; on passing the uterine
sound I found that it passed very easily a distance of three
and a half inches into the uterus ; in a uterus in its normal
condition the sound only passes two and a half-inches ; after
passing three and a half inches I tried turning it (the sound)
round, to pass it gently, further at different points, I could
not succeed in doing so, it being arrested by what I believed
was the inside of the womb ; the fact of its passing three and
a half inches helped to confirm the opinion that I had formed
of the case, as in cases ot extra uterine pregnancy we invari-
ably have the womb enlarged; as a result of the history of
the case of the symptoms described to me by the patient, and
as a result of the two minute examinations which I had
made I was quite satisfied that it was a case of extra uterine
pregnancy, probably of the ovario-tubal variety, and believed
that she was between seven and a half and eight months ad-
vanced in pregnancy; I informed the patient of what I believed
to be her condition, telling her that I advised her to have this
operation performed on her, explaining that the abdominal
walls would have to be laid open ; she replied that she under-
stood her condition, as Dr. Schuette had already explained it
to her, as well as the operation to which she would have to
submit; I put before her the great risks of the operation, and
also told her that by submitting to it she would have a better
chance of life ; that that was my opinion at the time, that the
operation was likely to give her a better chance of life than
any other course that could be adopted, assuming that it was
a case of extra uterine fetation ; I don’t wish to convey the


idea that a patient must die if she happened to be suffering
from extra uterine foetation, if an operation be not per-
formed, but that operation at the time I selected was more
likely to save her life, than if I had either postponed the time
for operating, or decided on not operating at all; after
finishing the examination of the patient, I selected the best
ward in the Building, which was set aside especially for her,
and her alone; that same ev.ning I called on Dr. Milford,
who is one of the surgeons to the St. Vincent’s Hospital,
gave him the particulars of the case, told him the opinion I,
Drs. Jones and Schuette had formed of its nature, and also
told him of the course which I proposed to adopt, asking him
for his opinion as to the advisability or otherwise of operating
without delay, he taking it for granted that we were correct
in our opinions at to the nature of the case, fully coincided
with me as to the advisability of operating without delay ; I
did not have a consultation at the patient’s bed-side, inasmuch
as I knew that two men of eminence in the profession had
formed the same diagnosis, and as there was no regular con-
sulting staff connected with the Institution whom it would have
been my duty to confer with ; on March the 17th, the day of
my final examination of the patient, and the day preceding
the operation, I called on Dr. Schuette to let him know the
hour appointed for the operation, and to ask him to act as
one of my principal assistants, telling him that Dr. Milford
was going to assist me also ; he asked me had I seen anybody
else about the case; I replied, “ Yes ; I had a consultation
“with Dr. Milford, and had gone into the matter with him,
“ and he was of the same opinion as I was;” I never stated
that either Dr. Olune or Dr. Milford had a consultation with
me at the bedside, or in the presence of the patient; I never
stated that Dr. Clune was also of opinion that the case ought
to be operated on; I never asked Dr. Clune for his opinion,
either in favour of or against the operation ; Dr. Schuette
also asked me who was going to assist; I told him I intended
asking Dr. Clune to administer the chloroform ; at his (Dr.
Schuette’s) suggestion, however, I decided on using
Bi-Chloride of Methylene instead, and at his wish I agreed
to ask Dr. Wright to administer it; I mentioned to him the
names of some others who were likely to be present; we then
went into the question as to the advisability of removing the
ovaries or not, and decided to remove them; on the same
evening I saw Dr. Clune at his house, when we hunted up a
number of cases bearing on the subject; I produce a treatise
on the Science and Practice of Midwifery, by Dr. Playfair


volume 1, page 192, to show how errors in diagnosis have
occurred in similar cases:—
“ A curious example of the difficulties of diagnosis is recorded by
Joulin. in which Hugnier and six or seven of the most skilled obstetri-
cians of Paris, agreed on the evidence of extra uterine pregnancy, and
had, in consultation, sanctioned an operation, when the case terminated
by abortion, and proved to be a natural pregnancy.”
Granted that this was a case of extra uterine fcetation, it
meant certain death to the child, whereas by operating it gave
the child a chance; with reference to the mother, the
probabilities were that rupture of the cyst would take place,
and had that rupture happened, the shock, in all likelihood,
would have caused death in a few hours ; had she survived
the shock she still would have had, very likely, some internal
haemorrhage which would have caused her death ; had she
survived the haemorrhage she would have still had to run the
risks of peritonitis and blood poisoning from the absorption
of putrid matter into the system ; my reasons for immediate
operation were, that the woman was well advanced in preg-
nancy, and that the child was healthy and strong ; also,
because rupture of the cyst might have taken place at any
moment, and my patient might have died before surgical
assistance could be procured ; I now proceed to quote a few
authorities in support of my determination to operate at that
particular stage of pregnancy ; the first is from “ Diseases of
Women,” by Lawson Tait, page 183, published in 1877 :
“ After the diagnosis of a case of extra uterine pregnancy has been
satisfactorily determined, the question arises, what is to be done with
it ? If the child is still alive, and near the full term, I beiieve it to be
our duty to operate.”
The next is from Barnes’ work on the Medical and Surgical
Diseases of Women, page 442, published in 1873 :
'■ Very eminent men have advised the operation. Thus Sevret,
Gardien, Velpeau, and Kiwisch urged it, and that at a time when
abdominal surgery was imperfectly understood, when its dangers were
really greater than now, and when they were thought to be even greater
still. In recent times, Koeberle, whose authority is especially to be
valued on account of his great experience and success in ovariotomy and
gastrotomy for extra uterine gestation, pronounces himself decidedly in
favour of the proceeding. Dr. Keller, the author of an excellent
memoir on extra uterine gestation, after carefully weighing the argu-
ments for and against, decides in favour. He calls to mind that
dangerous accidents may ensue quickly upon the child’s death ; that the
cyst has on several occasions burst during the early days of false
labour, and that haemorrhage and peritonitis may quickly prove fatal.
Mr. Lawson Tait, who has recently performed the operation three
months after term, found the child’s head in the pelvic cavity adherent
to the cyst. He urges the probability of this accident as a reason for
operating before term, or as soon as possible after it.”


Then from Dr. Playfair’s Work, pages 192 and 193; also
from page 201 :
“ So that the most we can say is, that when the general signs of
pregnancy are present, associated with the other symptoms and signs
alluded to, the suspicion of tubal pregnancy may be sufficiently strong
to justify us taking such action as may possibly spare the patient the
necessarily fatal consequences of rupture. If the diagnosis was quite
certain, the removal of the entire fallopian tube and its contents by
abdominal section would be quite justifiable, and probably would
neither be more difficult nor more dangerous than ovariotomy ; for at
this stage of extra uterine fcetation there are no adhesions to complicate
the operation.”
« The tendency of medical opinion is-rather in favor of immediate
operation, which is recommended by Velpeau, Kiwisch Koberle,
Schroeder, and many other writers whose opinion necessarily carries
great weight. The arguments in favour of immediate operation are
that, while it affords almost a certainty of saving the child, the risks to
the mother, great though they undoubtedly are, are not greater than
those which may be anticipated by delay. If we put off interference
the cyst may rupture during the ineffectual efforts at labour, and death
at once ensue ; or, if this does not take place, other risks, which can
never be foreseen, are always in store for the patient. She may sin * t
fror.i peritonitis, or from exhaustion, consequent on the efforts at
elimination, which, in the majority of cases are sooner or later set up,
so that, as Barnes properly says, the patient’s life may be said to be at
the mercy of accidents, of which we have no sufficient warning.
Then from Practice of Midwifery, by Dr. Roberts, published
in 1876, pages 131 and 132: —
“In the year 1868 I collected and tabulated thirty-three cases of
gastrotomy performed for extra uterine pregnancy; of these sixteen
mothers recovered, and four children were born alive, showing that the
maternal recoveries were nearly 50 per cent. These favourable results
I think, warrant the presumption that gastrotomy may fairly be placed
amongst the legitimate operations of surgery.’
I now proceed to the operation ; all the necessary prepara-
tions preliminary to the operation were duly made, and the
hour appointed for it, 11 a.m.; there was considerable delay
before commencing the operation, in consequence of Lister s
Carbolic Spray apparatus not working properly ; when every-
thing was arranged, the patient was placed on the table, Dr.
Schuette kindly applying the Mclntosh sheet to the abdomen ;
the anaesthetic was administered by Dr. Wright, and I made
the incision in the usual manner through the abdominal walls,
my assistants were Drs. Schuette and Milford ; Drs. Cox and
Clune attended to the instruments ; Drs. McLaurin, Marshall
and Hogg were spectators; before making the abdominal
incision I asked Dr. Schuette if he would like to make a further
examination before I proceeded with the operation ; as he
however did not accept the offer, I made the incision ; I have
c


no recollection of asking anybody else, I may have done so,
but Ido not remember; after opening the peritoneum I came
on what I believed to be a cyst containing the child, I made an
incision into it, and abstracted the child, which was alive; I
then removed the placenta, which came away very easily ; I
then removed what I believed to be the cyst; before making
the incision into the uterus, I passed my hand round it to see
if there were any adhesions to the neighbouring organs; after
making the incision into what I believed to be the cyst, there
was considerable haemorrhage, and it was found necessary to
ligature two arteries of considerable size, which were in the
walls of the womb; after the removal of the uterus, both ovaries
were removed in consequence of haemorrhage, the inside of
the abdomen was very carefully sponged so as to be certain
there was no bleeding going on at the time of the abdominal
walls being stitched up ; a glass drainage tube was inserted
into the womb, carbolic dressings being applied ; the patient
was then properly attired and removed from the table to the
bed ; she recovered nicely from the effects of the anesthetic
and in a short time expressed herself as feeling pretty com-
fortable; my reasons for not distinguishing the difference
between the uterus and a cyst until before the removal are as
follows: —A cyst, if it existed would have very much resembled
the uterus, I was so thoroughly convinced of the correctness
of my diagnosis in consequence of the result of my examination
which I got from the uterine sound, I was also under the
impression that the uterus was underneath at the time I
passed my hand behind to feel for adhesions, in fact, until the
post mortem examination had been made I believed that there
had been a malformation of the uterus, and that I had removed
the upper segment of an hour glass shaped uterus ; I also wish
to state that no doctor present offered any opinion adverse to
the propriety of the operation before I commenced it; even
had I discovered that it was the uterus, after I had made the
incision into it, I still would have removed it in preference to
stitching up the wound in the uterus and leaving it where it
was, I would have done this, believing that by so doing I would
be diminishing the risks of peritonitis and blood poisoning,
and thus give a better chance to the patient: my views on
this point are coincided with by Professor Parro, of the Uni-
versity of Pisa, a surgeon of European reputation, he recom-
mends removal of the uterus in Caesarean section in preference
to stitching up the wound in the uteries, he read a paper on
the operation, at the International Medical Congress, held in
Turin, in 1876 ; the mortality resulting from this operation is
less than the mortality after Caesarean section, as ordinarily


practised ; the reference to Professor Parro’s operation is to be
found in the Clinical Review of Bologna, page 29 ; the patient,
after the operation, received every attention medical skill could
give; Dr. Milford kindly saw her morning and evening of each
day with me, and I saw her by myself at other times as well;
on the evening of her death, which took place on Sunday the
20th of March, about 55 hours after the operation, Dr. Milford
and I called on Mr. Shiell to whom we explained the particulars
of the case ; the removal of the ovaries, and the uterus was
not the cause of death, had it been, she would have died of
shock within a few hours after the operation, or else from
haemorrhage; the cause of death, as proved by the post mortem
examination, was peritonitis supervening on gastrotomy,
and this is the cause of death in by far the largest
majority of cases, where death occurs after all abdominal
operations.
It was possible after the abdominal incision had been
made, to determine by careful and minute examination,
whether the diagnosis that had been previously made of extra
uterine foetation was correct, but the manipulation required
in following such a course might have caused the intestines
to extrude from the abdomen, and done serious injury to the
patient; had it been observed after the incision had been made,
that it was a case of normal and not abnormal pregnancy, it
would have been possible then to arrest the operation, and
brought the edges of the abdominal wound together.
There was a great mistake on this occasion, and through
this mistake the diseased lost her life ; the uterus and womb
are one; it is possible for the uterus to be removed, and the
patient live, the operation has been done successfully several
times.
The only reason that I can give for three medical men
forming the same wrong diagnosis, is that the child was higher
up in the uterus than is usual.
In all probability, if the operation had not been performed,
the woman would have gone through her usual time, and been
safely delivered.
About half-an-hour, I think, elapsed between the making
of the incision, and the time of the wound being stitched up.
Dr. Schuette did not call me aside in the operating
room, and say, “if this case was mine I would not have the
operation.”


There was no appointment with Dr. Milford, but I went
to his house to consult with him about the case; the operation
was performed with the utmost care; the peritonitis, which
caused the death, was not from any want of care on my part;
I have made special study of the diseases peculiar to women,
and I have been the means of establishing an out door depart-
ment in connection with the Lying-in Hospital, for the special
treatment of uterine cases; I have had other capital cases
at the Benevolent Asylum, since the operation on the diseased,
two cases of craniotomy, which turned out very successfully,
in the last of these cases I was kindly assisted by Dr. Milford;
another reason why the error in the diagnosis was made, is
that I think the uterus was displaced laterally.
Inquest adjourned, till Friday, the 3rd of June, instant,
at nine o’clock in the morning, at the City Coroner’s office.
By
Mr. Curtis.
Uhirii
t
Inquest resumed, this third day of June, 1881, at 9
o clock in the morning, at the City Coroner’s Office.
Frederick Milford, M. et L. Mid. R.C.S., Eng., 1856 ;
M.D. Heidelberg, 1856; L.R.C.P., Lon., 1868, on oath,
statesl am a legally qualified Medical Practitioner, re-
siding in Elizabeth Street; I have been a Hospital Sur-
geon during the last twenty-three years; I was two years
surgeon of the Brisbane Hospital in Queensland, and I
have been surgeon to the St. Vincent’s Hospital in
Sydney during the last twenty-one years; on the evening
of the 14th or 15th March last, as well as lean recollect, Dr.
Warren called at my residence and had some conversation
with me upon matters connected with the British Medical
Association, and informed me that he had a case of extra uterine
fetation sent to him for operation at the Benevolent Asylum ;
he asked my opinion whether I considered it advisable to
operate at once, at the period of gestation at which the woman
was, between the seventh or eighth month, or would it be
more prudent to wait until after the full term of gestation
had passed ; I considered the matter for about half-an-hour,
and with the aid of such authorities as I could consult in my
own library, I arrived at the conclusion that the life of both
mother and child had a better chance of preservation under
By the
Coroner


the very perilous condition in which they were placed, if the
operation were performed at once than if it were put off, delay
meant certain death to one, and almost certain death to the
other; I asked Dr. Warren if he were satisfied as to the
nature of the complaint under which the woman was suffer-
ing ; he told me he was, and that Drs. Schuette and Jones
had carefully examined the case previously to its admission
into the Benevolent Asylum, and were of the same opinion ,
he then asked me to assist him at the operation, and we had
some further talk with regard to the various instruments in
the operation for Gastrotomy; the* doctor did not desire to
consult with me on the case, and I, out of a feeling of delicacy
did not propose a consultation, as I did not belong to the con-
sulting staff of the Benevolent Asylum ; he was satisfied that
his own opinion, fortified by those of the eminent practitioneis
mentioned by him, were sufficient; I agreed to assist him at
the operation, which he informed me would take place on the
18th, and that he had secured the services of some of the
practitioners of Sydney to assist him; I attended at the
Benevolent Asylum on the morning of the 18th, and I found
the instruments laid out, and on looking over them found that
there was something missing; I left the institution and went
home to my own house and procured it; in the room were,
besides Dr. Warren and myself, Drs. Schuette, Wright,
McLaurin, Cox, Clune, Hogg, Marshall, and the matron and
her staff of trained nurses ; everything seemed to be arranged
properly and carefully for the operation of Gastrotomy; I have
operated myself, and assisted in the operation eight or nine
times; I did not hear Dr. Warren request anybody to examine
the patient; he may have done so during my absence ; the
patient was placed on the table in the usual way, and the
limbs being adjusted, the waterproof sheet was applied over
the abdomen by Dr. Schuette, who acted as assistant together
with myself; Dr. Wright administered the amestlietic (Bi-
Chloride of Methylene), Drs. Cox and Clune attending to
the instruments —Dr. Clune to Lister’s Spray apparatus, and
Dr. Cox handed such instruments as were necessary and
called for by the operator; Mrs. Elric and two of her young
ladies kept all the sponges warm in a solution of carbolic acid,
and handed them as required ; when one was soiled it was
immediately rinsed out in the warm solution and again made
ready for use ; I mention this to show that extreme care was
taken, and the desire of all persons connected with the Bene-
volent Asylum to do all in their power to make the operation
a success, and save the lives of both patients; the matron
standing with the sponges had an excellent opportunity of


seeing all that passed ; Drs. McLaurin and Marshall stood at
the foot of the couch, Dr. Warren and I on one side, Dr.
Schuette.on the other, Dr. Wright at the patient’s head /dur-
ing the time the operation lasted the carbolic spray used for
purifying the atmosphere was playing over and around the
wound; the reason why the carbolic spray was applied, was
to prevent the germs in the atmosphere being present, or
coming in contact with the wound, an additional precaution
m general use in this operation ; when the anesthetic had
been administered in sufficient quantity to prevent the patient
from being conscious of pain, the first incision (about five
inches long) was made into the abdomen; it was very care-
fully dissected, and the peritoneum incised ; when the tumour
came into view it presented the aspect of a large oval body in
which was the foetus ; it was incised and the foetus removed ;
the placenta was also taken away; there was considerable
haemorrhage from the sides of the wound, necessitating the
application of three ligatures to the arteries; I should have
mentioned, also, that previous to the incision a large trocar
was introduced into the tumour; the uterus and its append-
ages were then removed ; all haemorrhage was restrained by
ligature, and the abdomen carefully sponged out (a most im-
portant proceeding in cases of Gastrotomy); the wound was
then stitched up, the sides being accurately adjusted,
and m the lower part of the wound a glass tube
was placed to allow the escape of any fluid which might
possibly accumulate during the next supervening week or
ten days ; I then left and next saw the patient comfortably in
bed that evening, she did not complain of pain but made a
remark of a jovial character relating to the small amount of
nutriment which she was directed to receive ; I tried her heat
and her pulse and was perfectly satisfied with the state she
was in at that time ; I afterwards saw her four times previous
to her death ; about 36 hours after the operation, the patient
began to show signs of peritonitis, which accumulated in spite
of treatment, until she died from the effects of that complaint
at the end of fifty-six hours; all medical men are liable at
times to error m diagnosis; I now quote from Playfair’s
Ireatise on the Science and Practice of Midwifery, volume 1,
page 192 (passage already quoted by Dr. Warren, see page 17)
to show how easily an error in diagnosis may arrive ; I now
quote from Barnes on the clinical history of Surgical and
Medical Diseases of Women, page 442, published in 1873,
(see Dr. Warren’s evidence, page 16), it is one of the text
books of the age, and contains almost all the most recent
knowledge on the subject on which it treats ; Barnes, Rams-


botham, and Grailey Hewitt confirm me (especially the
former author) in my opinion that the best course to pursue
in order to save the lives of both mother and child was to
perform the primary operation ; in confirmation that my
opinion was correct, I quote from the work of Lawson Tait,
on the Diseases of Women, published in 1877 ; Lawson Tait
is surgeon to the Birmingham Hospital for Women, and
consulting surgeon for the diseases of women to the West
Bromwich Hospital, he is Fellow of the Obstetrical Societies of
London, Dublin, and Edinburgh, and foreign member of the
Obstetrical Society of Berlin, page 183 (see Dr. Warren’s
evidence, page 16); passage quoted'from page 201 of Play-
fair’s work, vol. 1, (see Dr. Warren’s evidence, page 17) ;
with reference to the removal of the uterus, it was done with
the idea that it was the cyst covering the child, and that in
my opinion was the best course to adopt to save the life of the
woman ; my reasons for that are, that the organ, especially
its peritoneal covering, had been in the course of the operatic
interference used, somewhat bruised and excessively lacerated;
had it been allowed to remain in the abdomen its presence
would have given rise in my opinion to a more acute and
excessive attack of peritonitis than if it had been removed as
it was ; that is my opinion ; I can refer to (in the works I
have mentioned) the names of many of the the most famous
obstetrical surgeons who have removed both uterus and
ovaries, they are Clay, Heath, Burnham, Pean of Paris,
Himbolt, Parkman, Peaslee, Koeberle, Baker Brown, Spencer
Wells, Sands, Buckingham, Storer of Boston, Cutter of
Newark, Wood of Cincinnati, Hackenburg of Hudson, Attlee
of Philadelphia, Webber of Cleveland, and Gaillard Thomas
of New York, to show that they had also removed the uterus ;
in my opinion, under the circumstances of the operation, the
removal of the uterus was the proper course to adopt;
supposed that after the incision had been made into the
abdomen it was discovered that it was a case of natural
pregnancy and the further proceedings of the operation not
being carried out, I doubt whether the patient would have
been much benefited thereby; peritonitis which almost
invariably follows a wound of the abdomen, and the shock ot
the operation would induce premature labour, and the violent
action of the uterus acting on the inflamed serous membrane
would in all probability hasten death ; in the Bologna Clinical
Review (Revista Clinica di Bologna) of the 15tli Feb., 1877,
page 29, occurs the passage of which I now read the
translation:—


Professor Parro on Utero-Ovarian Amputation as a supplement
,T°™ E . C^SAR , EAN Se ction, Milar Frotetti, Richiedi, 1876
This is a work deserving great attention by those who take interest
in the progress of obstetric art and science, because by its means a
quite new direction is given to the operative measures used in the per-
formance of Caesarean section. This operation is seldom performed at
the present day owing to the induction of abortion or premature labour
in these cases in preference, yet is now and then necessary. The
COm n rWg the statl . stlcs of amputation of uterus and ovaries
w th those ot section, thought that the mortality of the latter
operation would be much reduced by amputation ot the lacerated uterus,
iqe following considerations made him confident in his belief:— Ist.
1 hat I the Caesarean section is performed on women in the full vigour of
health, while the amputation of the uterus and ovaries is performed
Tfl bld chan ? e * *“ the uterus an d ovaries have occurred and
affected the general health of the patient. 2nd. That the principal
causes of mortality, viz., haemorrhage, purulent collections H in the
peritoneum the absorption of matters which may give rise to general
infection of the organism are obviated by the very nature of the
operation itself. Now that the infectious diseases of the puerperal
state are better studied than they were in the past, and now that it
is known that the large placenta! wound in the uterus is apt to give rise
to pya2mia septicoemia and peritonitis, the rationality and utility of this
process which aims to do away with a source of so much danger, can
not certainly be underestimated. Convinced of the correctness of his'
views the author waited for an opportunity to carry them into practice
and this opportunity first presented itself to him on the 21st May, 1876
A woman at the full term of pregnancy having a pelvis so deformed
that, after consultation, it was decided that there were no other means
T e J^* P °if S f lb f • but the P er / ormance of the Cassarean section
presen.ed l itself to him. The operation was performed, and uterus and
ovanes afterwards removed. The woman made an excellent recovery
though at that time puerperal fever and hospital gangrene were prevalent
at the hospital of Pisa where she was operated on. The reviewer of
Professor Parro s work then thus concludes his article :-An innovation
on the Caesarean section, so rational and crowned with so splendid a
success, we wish with all our hearts that all obstetric surgeons would
put into practice for the purpose of proving by numerous good results
the advantage of such an operation. We are glad to think that to
such an advance in the obstetric art is attached an Italian name.—
P. Sacchi.”
The removal of the ovaries and the uterus after the Ctesarean
section has been performed successfully by Professors
Praum and Spartli of Vienna, Hegar of Freiburg, Muller of
Berne, &c.
I have no recollection of either Dr. McLaurin or Dr.
Marshall saying, on the tumour coming into view and before
the incision was made, “that is the uterus;” I was within two
teet of them, lam satisfied no one said so; I saw Dr. McLaurin,
about a minute or two after the tumour came into view, present
the stethoscope to Dr. Warren, but as it would afford no
information then, it was returned ; at the time the tumour


came into view it was thought it was a cyst, and not the
uterus, and no one suggested to the contrary; on the abdominal
incision being made, and the tumour coming into view, I heard
Dr. Schuette ask Dr. Warren to put his hand behind the tumour
and feel for the uterus, Dr. Warren did so, and then I heard
him say, “this is the cyst, and I believe the uterus is down
here,” that was previous to the incision into the supposed cyst;
I did not examine the deceased, Susan Nixon, previous to the
operation; I was consulted as to the propriety of the operation;
in my opinion the safety of the child was insured by an
immediate operation being performed, and that of the mother
increased, assuming that this was a case of extra uterine
fetation; if it was my own case, I would have operated on the
patient at that particular period of gestation, and I would do
so to-morrow if I had such a case; Gastrotomy is an operation
by which both the woman and child have a better chance of
life than if it were not performed, and I therefore think that
it is necessary in such cases; assuming the operation to have
been necessary, it was in my opinion skilfully performed; it
was possible on the abdominal incision having been made, to
determine by careful examination, whether or not the diagnosis
that had been made, that this was a case of extra uterine
fetation, was correct; had that discovery been made, it was
possible for the operation to have been arrested, and given the
mother and child a chance for life, but it would not have been
a better one.
Dr. Schuette assisted Dr. Warren to the best of my
recollection in securing the ligatures.
By a Juror.
I had no idea that it was the uterus that was being
removed, until after it was separated from the body, my reasons
for not believing so, was, that the uterine cyst, which we
expected to behold, would so closely resemble the tumour in
view, that it would be rather a difficult matter to distinguish
one from the other; a very accurate and long examination,
which we did not consider necessary, as we had no doubt of the
nature of the part presenting, would have incurred important
delay and thereby increased the danger of the operation; the
handling of the parts, which an accurate examination would
require, would also tend to decrease the chances of the
recovery of the patient; Dr. Schuette and myself were well
able to see all the operation; the operation up to the prepara-
tions to close the wound, I think lasted about half an hour,
and the medical preparations for closing the wound, took some
time ; the laceration of the uterus, which I referred to in
my evidence, was not from unskilfulness in operating.
By
Mr. Curtis,
Solicitor.


While the operation was going on, I heard Dr. McLaurin
say to Dr. Schuette, “wliat are you goingtodo now, Schuette?”
and Dr. Schuette said, “1 don’t know what they are going to
< 7 ) » (referring to me and Dr. Warren); there is no consulting
staff at the Benevolent Asylum that I am aware of.
Horatio George Anthony Wright , M.R.C.S. Eng. 1850,
L™ l d- 1851, on oath, states : —I am a legally qualified
i ledical Practitioner, residing in Wynyard Square ;on the
evening of Thursday, the 17th of March last, about six o’clock,
lh\ Warren called at my house and told me that he was
about to perform an operation on the following morning at
the Benevolent Asylum, on a woman who was suffering from
extra uterine pregnancy, he asked me if I would like to be
present, I told him I would come ; I went to the Benevolent
Asylum on the following morning a few minutes past eleven
o clock , in one of the wards I found everything prepared for
an operation ; Drs. Warren, Schuette, Milford, Cox, Clune,
Bogg, and the matron of the institution and her staff were
present; some delay occurred in consequence of the carbolic
spray apparatus being out of order; I conversed with Dr.
Warren and asked him on what symptoms he based his
diagnosis of the case, he told me that he could feel the uterus
ummpregnated in the pelvis ; that he had passed the uterine
sound and that it showed the cavity of the uterus to be only
inches in extent; he also told me that the abdominal
mass could be moved in any way from side to side without in
any way influencing the movements of the uterus ; assuming
these facts to be perfectly correct, I was quite satisfied that
the operation was one which after due consideration was
justifiable ; he told me that he had examined the patient and
that she was pregnant between 7 and 8 months ; Dr. Cox
shortly after returned with a carbolic spray apparatus from
tle Infirmary, and the patient was then brought into the
operating room ; I had not seen the patient before that; she
was placed on the table ; Dr. Warren came to me and asked
me if I would administer the anaesthetic; I examined the
patient s heart and lungs with the stethoscope to see whether
she was in a fit state to take the anaesthetic, and finding she
was so, I commenced to administer it, in a few minutes she
became fully under the effects of it and I informed Dr.
Warren of her being so, and he began the operation ; Drs.
Mliford and Schuette were acting as liis assistants ; the con-
stant attention which the administration of the anasstlietic re-
quired, prevented me from minutely observing the details of the
operation, as 1 could only from time to time give attention to


it; I saw the supposed cyst opened after it had been tapped
by the ovarian trocar, and a living female child removed by
Dr. Warren ; I saw the supposed cyst examined and I con-
sidered it very much like the uterus and told Dr. Warren I
thought it was so, he replied “No,” that he could feel the
uterus deep in the pelvis behind the cyst; I asked him to
allow me to feel it, and I passed two fingers deeply down in
the pelvis and I said I could not feel it (the uterus); Dr.
Warren replied “ Yes, I am sure it is there, I can feel it ” ;
soon after this the attachments of the tumour were ligitured
and it was cut off with a knife ; I examined it immediatety
after and found it to be as I thought, the pregnant uterus
with its membranes still attached to the inner surface ; the
os and cervix uteri were contained in the ligature which
embraced the vagina, the ovaries were subsequently removed ;
the patient then became very weak, I gave her ether instead of
the former anaesthetic, until the termination of the operation ;
the greatest care was taken by Dr. Warren to restrain all
haemorrhage and to remove all blood by frequent sponging of
the abdominal contents ; afterwards the wound was closed by
sutures.
It was after the incision had been made and the child
removed that I expressed my opinion that it was the uterus ;
undoubtedly after what had been done the only safe course
was to extirpate it; I did not hear Dr. Warren invite
those present to examine the patient; previous to the
administration of the anaesthetic, I saw Dr. Warren address-
ing Dr. Schuette (standing aside) but I did not hear what
passed ; at the time of the tumour coming into view and
before the incision was made, I heard Dr. McLaurin say
“ that is the uterus ” ; I thought it was said to Dr. Marshall;
I did not hear Dr. Warren say anything in reply, I did not
see Dr. McLaurin hand him the stethoscope ; previous to the
incision being made, I heard Dr. Schuette say to Dr. Warren
“ put your hand behind the tumour and see what you have
got,” to the best of my recollection Dr. Warren did so, and
said there were no adhesions to the tumour; I heard him
say words to this effect, “ this is the tumour, and the uterus
is down here” ; I did not examine the deceased Susan Nixon
previous to the operation; I knew nothing of the case
previous to the patient being placed on the operating table;
there was nothing in her appearance to indicate that an
immediate operation was required; assuming that this was
a case of extra uterine foetation and that it was my own case,
1 would not have operated at that period of gestation (between


the 7th and Bth month ) unless there were special and exigent
circumstances as would justify my so doing; the special and
exigent circumstances that would, in my opinion, justify an
operation, are the coming on of the symptoms of labour
coupled with signs of internal hsemorrhage and the almost
absolute, certainty that the pregnancy was extra uterine ; in
my opinion gastrotomy is not necessary in every case of extra
utenne foetation ; assuming that the operation was necessary,
m my opinion it was skilfully performed ; the discovery that
it was not a case of abnormal pregnancy was not made by the
operator until the uterus was opened, it was then absolutely
necessary to do what was done, and remove the uterus and its
appendages ; on the abdominal incision having been made,
I believe it was possible then by careful examination to have
determined whether or not the diagnosis of extra uterine
; it that were possible and the discovery
had been made that it was a case of natural pregnancy, the
operation could have been arrested at that stage; after the
laceration had been made in the uterus, it was absolutely
necessary to remove it.
_ The mouth and neck of the womb, which were embraced
by the vaginal ligature, were left in the patient.
In cases of operation for extra uterine foetation it is not
necessary always to remove the uterus, though many eminent
authorities have advocated that course ; Drs. Milford and
Schuette assisted Dr. Warren ; I can’t say that one took a
more active part than the other.
Rudolph Schuette, M.D., recalled, on oath states In my
previous examination I stated that I would not myself have per-
formed the operation ; my reason for saying so is simply that I
thought the time for observation of the patient was too short;
I said to Dr. Warren that I thought the Benevolent Asylum
was the best place for the woman to be sent to, but that if I
could have made arrangements for observing her myself, I
would not have sent her ; I assisted Dr. Warren in the opera-
tion , I took an active part in it; my activity was displayed m
preventing the intestines from falling forwards.
I remember on the tumour coming into view, I said to
Dr. Warren, “ Put your hand behind the tumour and feel for
adhesions and the uterus he did so, and I believe he said,
it is all free, the uterus is there.
I have only had three cases of what were supposed to be
extra uterine foetation ; one proved to be really so, and the


other two were not; I believe Dr. Warren was justified in
doing what he did during the operation ; if I had taken the
uterus for the cyst I would have done as he had ; I think on
the tumour presenting itself that Dr. McLaurin said “ Is not
that the uterus,” or “Is that the uterus,” I am not certain
which ; I stated that I would not have performed the opera-
tion at that stage, that I should have deferred it; I did not
say to Dr. Warren previous to the day of the operation to
defer it, but on the day of operation I said that if it was a case
of mine I would not operate.
It was about lialf-an-hour before- the operation was com-
menced that I told Dr. Warren if the case were mine I would
not operate now ; when the abdomen was opened it was not
distinguishable by ordinary observation whether it was the
uterus or a cyst that presented itself; Dr. Milford held the
uterus whilst it was being removed ; It was the evening that
Dr. Warren took the case into the Asylum that 1. made the
observation that if I had the means of observing the patient I
would not have sent her to the Asylum ; lam quite certain,
as far as I can recollect, that the words I made use of are
what I stated now.
Philip Sydney Jones, M.D., recalled and resworn,
states :—I have a recollection of many years ago removing an
irreducible inverted uterus under the impression that it was a
polypus of the uterus ; the patient in that case perfectly re-
covered ; It was not by the operation of Gastrotomy.
m __
Gastrotomy in my opinion is not necessary in every case
of extra uterine fetation prior to the death of the child; assum-
ing that this was a case of extra uterine fetation, and that it
was my own case, I would not have operated at between seven
and eight months of pregnancy unless urgent symptoms set
in, and when I saw the woman some three or four days be-
fore, there was nothing in her appearance to necessitate an
immediate operation ; it was not, in my opinion, necessary, a
uterus having been opened by mistake, to extirpate it.
By the
Coroner,
Supposing I had been induced to attend at an operation,
and on seeing the case I did not approve of an operation
being performed, I would have certainly stated so to the
operator at an early period before, the operation if an oppor-
tunity occurred ; I would certainly not have assisted in an
operation which I disapproved.
James Charles Cox, L. et L. Mid. 1856, F, 1858, R.C.S .
D., 18 61,Edin., being duly sworn, states lam a legally
B y
Mr. Curtis


qualified Medical Practitioner, residing in Hunter Street; on
1* rid ay, the 19th of March, the day of the operation on the
deceased, Susan Nixon, I)r. Warren called at my house about
9 o’clock in the inornin, and asked me. if I would lend him
a large carbolic Spray, as he was going to operate on a case
of extra uterine foetation at 11 o’clock that morning \ I told
him that I thought my spray was not large enough* for such
a formidable operation, and offered to borrow one for him at
the hospital, particularly as it was for the use of another
public institution; I made some enquiries about the case,
and asked Dr. Warren if he had passed the sound into the
uterus ; he told me he had; I said I was glad of it, as it was
his principal safeguard ; about the time of the operation, a
little after the time he said he was going to perform, having
obtained the carbolic spray as promised, I went down to the
Asylum to see that it was all right; when I got there I found
it would not work satisfactorily, and I told Dr. Warren that
I would go back and get another one, which I did ; when I
arrived with the second spray, I found they had succeeded in
getting the other one to work ; the woman was then placed
on the operating table, and Dr. Wright had commenced to
use an anaesthetic ; Dr. Warren asked me to be good enough
to look after the spray during the operation, and see that it
was kept in proper working order ; I was not quite satisfied
with the spray when I saw it working, and went at some
distance away to get the other spray in order in case of acci-
dent ; while I was doing this the walls of the abdomen had
been opened ; I came back to my position ; Drs. McLaurin
and Marshall were standing just in front of me; on looking
at the parts at some considerable distance I remarked what
is that round smooth mass exposed there; Dr. McLaurin
made the remark that he thought it was the uterus; Dr.
Warren, Dr. Milford, Dr. Schuette seemed carefully and
quietly examining it and the surrounding parts ; Dr. Warren
then took his knife, apparently intending to make an inci-
sion into it; Dr. McLaurin said “ Are you sure Warren that
is not the uterus,” or words to that effect; Dr. Warren then
said “No, the uterus is all right here ;” Dr. Marshall then
said “Pass your hand round it, make yourself sure,” and
apparently he seemed to take his advice ; Dr. McLaurin then
suggested to hand, him a stethoscope, but I don’t think Dr.
Warren heard him ; an incision was then made in the
tumour and the child exposed and removed ; the cord was
cut and tied, some bleeding vessels were tied, and some deep
ligatures were applied, and the mass which contained the
child was held up by Dr. Milford; Dr. Warren asked me to
hand him a pair of forceps, such as are used in ovariotomy;


I handed it to him, and it was applied to what I thought was
the cyst, which was held up by it; I said, what is that you
have got hold of, it is very like the uterus ; Dr. Schuette
turned round and said (putting his hand behind the tubes),
“ the uterus is lying here/’ and Dr. Warren said, “ It is the
sac that contained the child;” I said, I beg your pardon for
interrupting you ; the mass was then divided and taken out;
I did not see the case before the operation, and was never
asked to examine her in consultation or otherwise; I did not
see the operation in all its details, as I was much engaged
with the carbolic spray, keeping it supplied with solution,
and seeing it was burning all right; towards the latter part
of the operation I saw Dr. Wright go up to the gentlemen
who were operating, at Dr. Warren’s request, and put his
finger deep down into the pelvis
I did not examine the deceased before operating ; I never
saw her until she was being placed under the anaesthetic ; I
was not consulted as to the propriety of the operation ; in
my opinion Gastrotomy is not necessary in every case of
extra uterine fcetation, but it is perfectly justifiable; assum-
ing that this was a case of extra uterine fcetation, and that it
was my own case, I would not have operated at that period
(between the seventh and eighth month) of gestation, unless
there was some special and urgent necessity for so doing, and
unless I was urgently requested by the patient; Dr. Warren
had lots of authority to justify the operation, although no
urgent symptoms had developed themselves ; Barnes, on the
Medical and Surgical Diseases of Women, page 438, says :
“ The decision is extremely difficultthat opinion refers to
the advisability or not of operating before urgent symptoms
develop themselves; he mentions that one surgeon had
operated in nine cases in the primary operation, when seven
children and four mothers were saved; he mentions, also,
that the same surgeon had met with eight other cases in
which the operation might have been performed with advan-
tage, but in all the opportunity was lost; it is possible, in
my opinion, on the abdominal incision having been made, by
a careful examination, to verify the accuracy or otherwise of
the previous diagnosis ; had that been done, and that it was
then discovered that it was a case of normal and not abnormal
pregnancy, the operation could have been arrested at that
stage ; it was not a hurried operation, everything was done
calmly, coolly and carefully, and the three operators, I believe,
did their best to discover it ; assuming that the operation was
necessary, it was in my opinion carefully and skilfully per-
■ By the
Coroner.


formed ; this was the first time I ever saw the operation of
Gastrotomy, never having had any cases in my practice, but
I have seen the operation performed for ovariotomy very
often.
To the best of my belief, it was Dr. Milford who held up
the uterus whilst the attachments were being severed ; I have
had four cases of extra uterine foetation in my practice ;no
operation was performed in any of these cases ; the first case
was that of a young woman in her first pregnancy ; I made a
post mortem examination, and found that the cause of death
was the rupture of the cyst; the next case was that of a
young woman who knew she was in the family way, but labor
never came off; I examined her after about fifteen months after
the time she believed she had become pregnant, and found a
large abscess in the lower part of the abdomen, which I opened,
and extracted a large mass of a child in a decomposed state; she
died after lingering a wretched existence ; I saw a third case
where the child was discharged through the vagina between
the bladder and the uterus; I lost sight of this case after
watching it for eighteen months ; her health was then
thoroughly broken down from the effects of discharge; the
fourth case was one of early pregnancy, where the lady was
struck down at a moment by loss of blood internally ; decom-
position seemed to rapidly set in, and pointed at an abscess
into the vagina, which I opened, and the child was rapidly
discharged from it, and the woman recovered ;in the two
cases which I knew to be fatal, and the third which I believe
ended fatally, had the operation of Gastrotomy been per-
formed, I believe it was quite possible for the patients to
have been saved ; in the deceased, Susan -Nixon's case, I was
not aware that it was the uterus was taken out until after it
was taken out; I saw -Dr. Clune examining it, and I went
round to where he was doing so ; he said —“ This must be
uteiine substance, could it have been a cornuate develop-
ment;” I said, “ It is the womb, and the greater part of it;”
no man could, without a careful examination, determine
whether it was the uterus ; on the occasion of my going to
Is'eade’s with several medical men on the evening of the 15th
March, I recollect Drs. Warren and Schuette remaining out-
side whilst I and some others went into .Ncade’s ;it I had
been conversing the evening before an operation with the
intended operator, and I was opposed to the operation being
performed, I would have taken that opportunity to object to
the operation being performed ; after the abdominal incision
had been made, and the discovery then been made that it was


the uterus that was exposed, if the incision had been sewn up
I don’t think there would have been much chance of the
patient surviving.
It is not possible in a case of extra uterine pregnancy
for a child to be born in the natural way ; the difference of
opinion regarding operating is, that continental surgeons, as
a rule, recommend that the operation be performed at a
primary stage, and English obstetric surgeons recommend
waiting till symptoms develop themselves to necessitate an
operation.
Inquest adjourned till Saturday, the 4th of June instant,
at 9 a.m., at the City Coroner’s office.
Jourth |)aß-
Inquest resumed this 4th of June instant, at 9 a.m.
Michael Joseph Clune, L. etL,. Mid. K.Q.C.P . et L.R.C.S.
Irel., 1872, on oath states lam a legally qualified Medica'
Practitioner, residing in College Street; on the night of the
15th March last I met Dr. Warren at Dr Milford’s house ;
Drs. Milford, Schuette, Cox. Warren, and myself were pre-
sent ; We all went over to Mr. Neade’s, in Liverpool Street;
Drs.'Milford, Cox and myself went inside, Drs. Schuette and
Warren remained outside ; Dr. Schuette asked Dr Warren
if he would let him know the time fixed for the proposed
operation ; I requested Dr. Warren also to invite me , we
then parted ; on the night of the 17th March Dr. Warren
called on me and requested the loan of the most recent
authors on extra uterine foetation; he remained about two
hours reading up cases with me from various medical journals
and obstetrical works; before taking his departure, he in-
formed me that he was about to operate on the following
morning at half past ten, and invited me to be present then
at the Benevolent Asylum, and to take charge ot the instru-
ments ; he told me that all arrangements had been made and
that Drs. Schuette, Wright, Cox, and Milford, were each
allotted their respective parts in the operation ; I called at
the Benevolent Asylum on the following morning, the 18th
of March, arranged the instruments, and by the aid of one of
the nurses prepared the carbolized ligatures ; up to this time
I had not seen the patient; Dr. Cox and myself returned
homewards for the purpose of getting our carbolic spray
apparatus, as the one in the Benevolent Asylum was not
then in good working order; on my return the patient was
E


on the operating table, already dressed with a Mclntosh
sheet and the anaesthetic was being administered by Dr,
Wright; immediately before the first incision, Dr. Warren
addressed himself to Dr. Schuette and asked him if he would
make another examination, he replied, as far as my memory
will go, “ I know all about it” ; the operation commenced
by Dr. Warren making the abdominal incision, assisted by
Drs. Milford and Schuette ; the anaesthetic was administered
by Dr. Wright; myself and Dr. Cox attended to the instru-
ments, Drs. Marshall, McLaurin, and Hogg stood at the foot
of the operating table looking on ; the operation went on and
was completed in about (I think) half an hour or three-
quarters of an hour ; a tumour was handed to me which I
received in a basin ; on placing it in another basin containing
cold water I observed the tumour to contract, I then called
the attention of Drs. McLaurin and Marshall, by signal, to
where I was to remove a doubt which I entertained as to the
nature of the tumour ; on further examination on laying open
the mass, I discovered it was the uterus, and having satisfied
myself that it was so, I immediately took my departure ;
during the operation, before its removal, I heard Dr.
McLaurin say to Dr. Marshall, “is that the uterus ?” ; the
manner in which I was engaged precluded my observing the
various steps of the operation ; I saw a living female child
removed from the woman ; the presentation of the child was
with the back towards the abdomen of the mother in a
natural position; I feel assured that Dr. Warren and those
who were immediately assisting him were under the impres-
sion that a cyst existed, in as much as I heard no comment
or suggestion made by any in immediate attendance on him
or assisting him, that it was the uterus, until I heard Dr.
McLaurin make the remark to Dr. Marshall “Is that the
uterus p ” I heard some say in reply, “ It is nothing of the
kind ; lam unable now to say who that was ; that remark
of Dr. McLaurin’s was made before the incision into the
supposed cyst.
Assuming that it was a case of extra uterine foetation
and that the operation was necessarj 7 , in my opinion, it was
skilfully performed ; I did not at any time examine the
patient, nor did I suggest the advisability of an operation,
not having seen the patient till dressed and placed on the
operating table, a tew minutes before the incision was made
into the abdomen; I was never consulted as to the advis-
ability of an operation; 1 have no recollection whatever of
my having suggested anything in reference to the case to


Dr Warren ; the patient appeared to be in a proper condi-
tion to undergo the operation if it were necessary and
everythin" was g done with a view to relieve her of her difficult?
and her supposed dangerous condition; assuming that this
was a case of extra uterine foetation, the woman could no
have expelled the child naturally, and an operation wou <
have been necessary at some period with a view of giving 1
mother a chance of life; assuming that the discovery ad
been made before the incision into the uterus that this l ad
been a case of normal and not abnormal pregnancy,
have been arrested,-tho„ g h by so domg he
chances of the woman’s recovery would not have oeen
increased, but the incision and the
having once been made into it, I consider that it was .
yVarren’s best course to proceed with the operation and
remove it.
Durin" my professional career I had n ver met with any
ease of extra uterine foetation ; when I left, they were sewmg
un the wound, and as I saw that it was the uterus that had
hcen removed I left; my duties also were at an end , if the
case had been mine, 1 would have waited for some urgent
symptoms to have set in before I would operate ; every case
must be decided on its merits.
By a Juror
Henry Norman McLanrin, L. et L. Mid. B.C.S. ‘‘
Eiin.. 1857, on oath states:-I am a legally I' ,al,fled “e
r>r*a c+itioner residing in Macquarie btreet ; I went to the
operation at the Benevolent Asylum, in company with Dr.
Marshal] 1 on the 18th of March last, under the impression
that it was a case of emergency, were
assistance on entering the room i men for fte p 0
KfoperaS" n apologired for our intrusion and
fte a opltion a Itrffbegan wSIn h ‘Dr * Warren cut
through the walls of the belly, I saw a tumour a] Pj>“ r 41 \,
pprtre T said to my left hand neighbour, that is the ut .e™ B >
fthTn said to Dr.Varren, •• that's the uterus ' he said -efc
nn the uterus is only three and a half inches lo: „ >
Marshall then said, “ put your hand down and see if you^can
feel the uterus in its proper place, r (( , u t er us
me to do so and some one (of the operators) said the uterus
is all right ’’’; the operator (Dr. Warren) then made prepara-


my n po f “ke? P “d
you will hear the placenta” a to°this '” 7 slethosco P e and
t-hA f.rrvara, * piacenta, to this, no answer was given •
after w” 8 CMd - W f d '»™ >
drew fbra i B ®P arated > -L’r- Warren assisted by Dr.
Zy S‘4 % *<*
part of the room, aud shortly “° tW
and had no previous oTthe™* 611 * B P ectator >
wi is E
233 antf 234 In
ing .hJmortS'ty i! he lb »« > abl *) show,
term and left to^natu"maf heS "Passing d
mortality of extra uterine ■ f SSUmed to h e the ordinary
operative interference, if vvfll or . be y° nd k without
tables that this mortality is over q ,"5 £?™P a r*son ° f the three
patients who were subjected to f h ' g ( her l L han that of those
child. J dtQ the operation for the removal of the
for °‘ G ‘«'°‘o<ny per-
-32 died, a mortality of Si.dTper cen! 3 ° m ° therS Hved -> nd
examined with some°cafe ri by a v r ariofsautho ndary operations hav e been
but the comparative merits of thfV ° n .' extra pregnancy,
mined. R yon tau JhtThl \ h * tw ° ,°P erat 'ons are as yet undeter--
“ seventh whmT* tire viahTr lT*?* to “
Pleuck recommends g it only when the ch ‘ nfant 1S certain *”
Duges, Flores Mareno, Chambon Garden d V S | a IVe ’ n Capuron - Ma rc
Boudelacque, all recommended it’after thf’ IS PeaU ’ Desorniea ux, and
interests of both mother and child Th ‘ Wa f V ’ able - and ia the
triumphs of the ovariatnmistc <->f eu- ' WOnder fu 1 and glorious
proveS that the abdoS TZ e™ld °K^" d E "e'“ d h * d ”»• Te‘
tion with the hope of tZ • s “ b )'«« d *° severe motila-
tion was met as well as the authoritatiff^ SU '° n . Wlth whlch th is opera-
been quoted gives great weight *ve experience of many who had
" if ,he -


“ die without making an effort to save it.” Protherre Smith would operate
when the child is viable. Meadows writes: *' To me it seems an
“ imperative duty when we know that we have not only a living but
“ according to all experience, a viable child, say at the seventh month
“and upwards we should do our very utmost to rescue that life from its
“ position of danger ” He then adds : “ Thrt resort to gastrotomy is
“ to be the recognised and orthodox rule in all cases of extra uterine
“ pregnancy when the child is living and has arrived at what is termed
“a viable age.” Behier bel eves “that the operation shou'd be per-
“ formed without hesitation when the woman is at t<-rm, and a living
“ infant extrac ed. In a discussion at the Obstetrical Society of London,
in 1864. Greenhalgh said “that ;f he had known that the abdominal
“tumour of Mr. Cook’s patient had coi tafned a dving chi d, he would
“have perform d gistrotomy, have saved the child, and given the
“ mother a chance of recovery.” Dr. G Braxton Hicks supported this
opinion, and added that if the infant had been dead he would not have
operated. Kiwish and Keller likewise recommend gastrotomy to save
the child. In addition to these we have the opinion of four experienced
ovariatomists in four of the primary operations. These are Mr. J.
Baker Brown, Mr. Tait. Dr. W. L. Attlee and Koeberle. d his opera-
tion is therefore advised by the highest authorities of this century, and
certainly where two human lives are in such great jeopaidy. it is no
small thing to save one, even if it is that of a tender infant whose
chances of reaching mortality are small, &c., &c.”
Tbe propriety of operating in each particular case must, in
my opinion, be left to tbe judgment of the surgeon in attend-
ance ; it is extremely difficult to diagnose a case of extra
uterine pregnancy ; it was my impression at the time the
tumour presented, that it was the uterus, and I sa ; d so ; had
that been my case, and the discovery was made before the
incision was made I should have sewn the abdominal wound
up, as I think I would thereby have given the woman a better
chance of life.
Mr. Curtis then asked the following question :—Do
you think there could have been much chance of the
patient surviving had she been stitched up after abdominal
incision, taking into consideration the active movements of
the child in the uterus, and the likelihood of premature labor
coming on, and the violent contraction of the abdominal
muscles, which would then ensue ?
To which Dr. McLaurin answered: —“The prospect
would not have been promising.” Travelling round the
table, Dr. Schuette was between me and Dr. Warren;
what I said to Dr. Warren was, “that’s the uterus,” Dr.
Clune then on my left hand, I should think quite close enough
to hear what 1 said ; I am perfectly certain that what I said
was, “ that’s the uterus;” in the course of my experience
as a medical man, I have made mistakes in diagnosis,
I remember the passage in Parry’s work on extra uterine


pregnancy, page 203—“1n the other case (tubal gesta-
tion) the foetal sac might be extirpated, or if this was
not possible, the supra cervical portion of the uterus and its
appendages could be removed with a better prospect of the
woman s recovery than she would have after rupture of the
cyst;” the use of the stethoscope at tile time I profferred it
would not have decided whether the mass was the uterus or
a cyst.
George Marshall, M.D. Glas. 1849, L.R.C.S. Edin. 1850
on oath states lam a legally qualified medical practitioner*
residing in Lyon’s Terrace, Liverpool Street; on the*
morning of the 18th of March last, I was at the Sydney
infirmary, when 1 heard that Dr. Warren was about
to perform an important operation, at the Benevolent Asylum;
I in company with Dr. McLaurin went to the Benevolent
Asylum to witness the operation; on our arrival there the
woman was on the operating table, and Dr. Wright was
preparing to administer the anaesthethic; the abdominal
section was performed by Dr. Warren in the usual way, as
has already been described by the former witnesses, and as
soon as the supposed cyst was visible, Dr. McLaurin said to
me, ‘ that’s the uterus,” and he asked Dr. Warren, “is that
the uterus,” the answer was, “it is not the uterus Dr.
Schuette said to Dr. Warren, “put your hand round and feel
it it is free, I said at the same time, “feel if you can find
the uterus, and be sure that you do feel the uterus,” the
answer I got was, “ the uterus is all rightthere was then
some talk about the proper place to open the supposed cyst
so as to avoid injuring the placenta ; Dr. McLaurin offered
his stethoscope for the purpose of examining the cyst, to
ascertain the position of the placenta, the stethoscope was
not accepted ; the supposed cyst was then opened, and the
child extracted ;on seeing Dr. Warren cutting off the ovaries,
i asked him what he was cutting, he made no reply and went
on with the operation, and when he commenced to cut off the
supposed cyst at its lower part, I asked him again, “ what are
you going to cut there,” and he said, “ the peticle;” I exam-
ined the supposed cyst after it was taken away, and found it
was the uterus, and I then left.
I had no previous knowledge of the patient, I had never
seen her until she was on the table, and was not consulted as
to the propriety of an operation; I have never had to deal
with any cases of extra uterine foetation during the course of
practice, I lie preponderance of opinion of medical authorities,


who have written on the subject of extra uterine fcetation, is
in favor of a primary operation; in cases of extra uterine
foetation, the child cannot be expelled naturally ; the child
being a viable one ; an operation at that stage would give the
child and m >ther a better chance of life, the child would have
no chance at all if an operation was not performed; gastrotomy,
in my opinion, is the correct thing in almost every case of
extra uterine foetation ; I did not see the child moving in the
supposed cyst before it w*as extracted.
Eliza Elric, recalled, on oath .states : —I think that
during the operation I was in a position to hear anything
that had been said in an ordinary tone of voice ; I did not
hear Dr. McLaurin say to Dr. Warren “ That’s the uterus” ;
I did not hear Dr. Marshall say to Dr. Warren “Put your
hand down and feel if the uterus is in its proper place” ; I
did not hear Dr. McLaurin say to Dr. Warren “ Take my
stethoscope and you will hear the placenta ” ; During the
operation the room was very quiet, there was no confusion
whatever.
William Edwavd Warren, Surgeon , recalled, on oath
states: With reference to the handing of the stethoscope
to me, some person handed me one but I did not make use
of it, for the following reasons: It would not have given me
any information as to whether it was the uterus or a cyst,
and as I proposed adopting the operation of complete excision
of the supposed cyst and its contents, I did not conside’ it
necessary to find out the exact position of the placenta; had
I proposed to adopt the operation strongly recommended by
some operators, of opening the cyst and letting the placenta
gradually discharge itself through the abdominal wound, I
most certainly would have used the stethoscope ; in this
instance, it would merely have delayed the operation a little
longer; with reference to the remarks by onlookers, I never
heard any to the best of my belief except one made by Dr.
Clune. he, at the time I was about severing the uterus, asked
me what was that, alluding to the part I was about to cut
through, I roplied, it is the petiole, by that meaning the junc-
tion between the supposed cyst and the uterus ; I think it
was Dr. Clune made this remark, but I am not quite certain,
it may have been Dr. Cox; the only other remark that I can
remember was from one of my assistants (Dr. Schuette) who
as 1 was about to do so, asked me to pass my hand behind the
supposed cyst and feel if it was free, I did so, and felt what
I believed to be the uterus below; while doing this Dr.


Schuette cautioned me not to let the intestines protrude ■ in
answer to this request of his I said to him “ I believe I feel
the uterus, or words to that effect; this reply of mine to I>r
Schuette s request, I believe Dr. JMcLaurin has mistaken for
a reply to his question ; I also wish to state that the ovaries
were not both removed until after the removal of the uterus •
uterus f^tLl! r fidentb / ore i remoVal ° f the uterus > that the
according T)T A SUpp ° sed c y st J 1 that
according to Dr. Cox s evidence Dr. Schuette was of the
he^aiTlb 011 f 6CaUSe “ I p . uttin l ? his hand behind the pubis
he said the uterus is lying here”; the only reason I can
felt 11318^^' 1^118 been “ ade is ’ that what we
lelt vas the long and firm cervix uteri or neck of the womb
bv tb h p v aS n ° f en \ oved but was left in the patient embraced
the rrJfhaT Igat f ures \ Wl th reference to the authorities,
mtf oi! T ° PI T On 18 decided] y in fa vour of primary
Toted bv Dr M r r 1086 BtatlBtics have been a^eady
Fvh At/ D ( / lcLaUnU ’ says m pa S e 203 °f bis work on
nancv^flTf 6 -Pregruancy, ‘‘ln the other case (tubal preg-
ri eAA Sac mig / be extirpated ’ or if this was not
possible, the supeacervical portion of the uterus and its
appendages could be removed with a better prospect of the
~ B ~ y AS e W ° Uld haVe after a rupture of the
cjfat , my diagnosis ot the cases under notice was ovario-
tubal pregnancy, meaning extra uterine pregnancy of the
vario-tubnl vanety ; wnh reference to the advisability of
stitching up the wound in the abdomen and peritoneum had
the mistake m diagnosis been discovered before the incision
was made into the uterus, I am now clearly of the opinion
alter carefully thinking over the matter and weighing^very-’
tlm beTT “'"A 16 Baid ° n Gach Side of lbe question! that
the best thing to do was to proceed with the operation and
remove the uterus ; I do not say that I would have done it
at the time, but I do say, that I would do it if I should
happen to be similarly situated on any future occasion
This was my first operat : on in gastrotomy for supposed
extra uterine foetation ; I would not have operated in such a
ase merely for the purpose of information, certainly not.
T a/tT fi 0 ,- 1871, on oath states
J. 00l pi-'TI Qualified Medical Practitioner residing
a 261 Elizabeth Street; I have met with one case of extra
uterine foetation in my practice, and have assisted at several
operations of gastrotomy; my own opinion is, that gastro!


tomy is necessary in almost every case of extra uterine
fetation, and I think it is good practice in such operations to
remove the uterus and ovaries as well; some authorities
advocate that course and it is the course that is now in
practice by its advocates ; I have no personal knowledge of
the surroundings of the case which forms the subject of this
inquiry.
In the case of extra uterine fetation I had I operated
it was only a two months’ pregnancy and I simply used the
trocar, and it had a favourable issue.
By the
Foreman
I would not have used a trocar in an eight months’
case of pregnancy, it would not be of any use to do so.
By
Mr. Curtis.
In all the authorities you will find cases cited where a
wrong diagnosis has been made and operated upon ; I would
have removed the uterus in performing the operation in the
case under notice ; the incision having been made in the
uterus, I think it was the proper course to adopt.
By a Juror.
George Fortescue, M. R.C.S. Eng., 1800, M.B. Land., 1861,
on oath states: —I am a Legally Qualified Medical Practi-
tioner, residing in Lyon’s Terrace, Liverpool Street; it never
occurred to me to see a case of extra uterine foetation, the
condition is a very rare one ; the opinion as to the primary
operation in cases of extra uterine foetation appear to me to
be about equally divided, but there is an equal number good
authorities on either side ; it appears to me, however, that
owing to the growing knowledge of abdominal surgery and
what precautions are necessary in it, that there is a growing
opinion in these cases of extra uterine foetation which are
undetected and untreated in their earlier stages, that it is
better to face the immediate risks of the primary operation
than to wait the numerous dangers which attend the false
labour and the death of the foetus, which are in a very large
proportion of instances fatal; and such is my own individual
opinion.
By the
Coroner.


THE VERDICT OF THE JURY.
We find that the said busan Nixon, at the Benevolent
Asylum, m the city of Sydney, on the 20th day of March 1881,
died from peritonitis supervening on the operation of gas-
trotomy, performed on her by Dr. William Edward Warren
che visiting surgeon of the Institution, on the 18th of the said
month, under the mistaken diagnosis that she was suffering
nom extra uterine pregnancy, in which diagnosis Drs. Philip
Sydney Jones and Rudolf Schuette fully concurred; we are
further of opinion that the operation was demanded at the
time it was performed, that it was not undertaken rashly and
without due consideration, that it was skilfully performed, and
that the deceased was subsequently properly attended to, but
that there was no consultation on the case previous to the
operation.
We are clearly of opinion that the practice of having serious
operations m a public institution, without previous consultation,
is reprehensible and should be forthwith discontinued, and that
the (xovernment or other authorities responsible for the efficient
management of such Institution should appoint without delay
a medical and surgical consulting staff to each such Institution.
The City Coroner Henry Shielt, Esq. J.P., then spoke the
following words“ Now that the verdict of the jury has been
returned I have no hesitation in expressing my entire con-
currence in the conclusions they have arrived at. They have
given effect to views I held, but which I of course, abstained
before from expressing. The verdict having, however, been
given, 1 am now at liberty to state what were the'conclusions
1 had arrived at.”
® r ’ Warren, addressing the Coroner and the jury said:—
“ 1 be & return my best thanks to his Worship the Coroner
and all the other gentlemen here for tho very careful manner
m which this inquiry has been conducted. You have given a
great deal of time and devoted your best attention to the
matter, which, of course, has been of a particularly trying
nature to me, feeling, as I did, that my future prospects
depended upon the result of the inquiry.”


APPENDIX.
From the Sydney Morning Herald , yune g, 1881.
THE RECENT CASE OF GASTROTOMY.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, —Referring to the recent case of fatal gastrotomy, and the
verdict of the Coroner’s jury, in which our names are mentioned, it is
but justice to ourselves to remark that we were, for reasons that will be
evident to every medical man, debarred from using the most important
aid in diagnosis, namely, the uterine sound. Had the employment of
this instrument been justifiable at the time we saw the patient, we
should probably have arrived at a different conclusion.
By inserting this letter in your next issue, you will oblige,
P. SYDNEY JONES, M D.
RUDOLF SCHUETTE, M.D.
College Street, June 7, 1881.
DE. WARREN’S REPLY.
From the Sydney Morning Herald, June io, 1881.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
S»r, —I had not intended to enter into any newspaper correspondence
in connection with the case of Mrs. Nixon, recently operated on at the
Benevolent Asylum with such an unfortunate result, but feel'called on
to take up my pen in consequence of a letter on the subject in your
issue of this morning, signed by P. Sydney Jones, M.D., and Rudolf
Schuette, M.D. They state that they did not use the uterine sound
when making their diagnosis; and I reply that they should not have
given a positive diagnosis of the patient’s condition without its use. If
they were certain of their diagnosis there could have been no possible
objection to the use of the uterine sound; if they were doubtful they
should have used it, in order, if possible, to clear away their doubt
because it would have been better to have risked bringing on a prema-
ture labour by its use than to (without its use) have risked gastrotomy,
or left the patient to blind chance. Had they used it, 1 have not the
slightest doubt but that they would have been further convinced of the
correctness of the opinion they had already formed. I may state that I
declined to give a positive opinion about the case myself until after the
use of this instrument, which I have been in the habit of using daily for
years past Previous to the present case no one was justified in form-
ing a positive diagnosis of extra-uterine pregnancy without the use of
the uterine sound; and now that it even has not been infallible, it is my
intention to urge on the profession the necessity of dilating the cervix
uteri and making a digital examination of the inside of the uterus in
all cases of supposed extra-uterine pregnancy, before having recourse to
operation. No man is justified in using the uterine sound in these
cases, unless he is nearly positive before its use that his patient is
suffering from extra-uterine prenancy. Should he neglect to use it


then, he has two courses open to him, viz , either to operate on his
patient without having exhausted all the means at his disposal for
diagnosing the case (which would be unjustifiable), or to leave his
patient alone, feeling convinced in his own mind that she was suffering
from extra-uterine pregnancy. By adopting the latter course he acts
in direct opposition to the opinion of nearly all the eminent surgeons
of the age who have given careful attention to the matter, and his
patient (should his diagnosis be correct) is liable to sudden death at
any moment One of the medical witnesses at the late inquiry said
that I was perfectly justified in operating though he would not have
operated himself. On cross-examination he related three fatal cases of
extra-uterine pregnancy (occuring in his own practice), in which the
operation of primary gastrotomy had not been adopted, and he further
acknowledged that had this operation been adopted in these cases the
lives of these three women would have had a fair chance of being spared.
I am sorry that it seems that Drs. Jones and Schuette are desirous not
to acknowledge the responsibilities which they have incurred in con-
nection with this case. My object at the inquiry was to truthfully
justify my every act but at no other person’s expense, from the time
that I first saw Mrs. Nixon until I signed her death certificate. This I
have done to the satisfaction of the Coroner and the jury who were
engaged in the inquiry, and who gave every attention to the case, as
well as to the great majority of the profession present during the
inquest. In a few days, members of the profession not present will be
able to see from the evidence the strong reasons there are for perform-
ing primary gastrotomy in all cases of extra-uterine pregnancy at that
period of gestation to which the late Mrs. Nixon had arrived. With
reference to the remark which has been made, that five of the medical
witnesses who were present at the operation were opposed to it, while
only two were in favour of it, I take it that the fact of these gentlemen
either assisting at or being present at the operation is satisfactory proof
of their entire concurrence with the necessity of gastrotomy at the time
or at all events that they were not antagonistic to it.
Yours, &c., W. EDWARD WARREN, M.D.
243 Elizabeth-street, June 9.
From the Sydney Morning Herald , June /j, 1881.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —I have no intention to occupy your columns in the discussion
of a purely professional subject—namely, the propriety or impropriety
of using the uterine sound in the case of Mrs Nixon at the time I saw
her. I shall only point out, in passing the contradictory opinions ex-
pressed by Dr. Warren. In the early part of his letter, in your issue of
yesterday, he remarks that if Dr. Schuette and myself were doubtful of
our diagnosis, he should have used the uterine sound ; and, later on, he
states that ‘ no. man is justified in using the uterine sound in these
cases, unless he is nearly positive before its use that his patient is suffer-
ing from extra uterine pregnancy. The question of the degree of the
responsibility incurred in this unfortunate case is, however, a public one,


and as Dr. Warren has raised it lam compelled to state the facts. My
evidence at the inquest clearly shows that I altogether disapproved of
the operation at the stage of pregnancy which the patient had reached,
and that I declined to attend at its performance. My responsibility tdlen,
consists in having expressed an erroneous opmion as to the nature of
the complaint—an opinion, I may here remark, which I should have
taken measures to confirm or refute had the patient remained under my
observation. Dr. Warren’s responsibility consists in not only having
formed an erroneous opinion, but in having performed an unnecessary
operation, which proved fatal. —Yours, &c.,
College Street, June to. P. SYDNEY JONES, M.D.
From the Sydney Morning Herald , June 14, 1881.
TO THE EDITOR. ,
Sir-in reply to a letter from Dr. P. Sydney Jones, which appears
in your columns of to-day, I beg to remind him that he st
rush into print, and that his letter of June 7, was one which l could not
pass over in silence. In his letter to which lam now p y §> „q t
sophistically, but most illogically, to prove that in my letter of
have contradicted myself. I have not done so in any way. 1 a ™ an 15
nearly positive (mark you, not quite positive) about a sub l e^’ ' t f ° ’
as a matter of course, that there still must exist in his mind a even
though it be a small one, of the truth or otherwise of the subject under
his consideration. Dr. Jones’ evident desire, as shownl by his two
letters is to leave the impression that he would have corrected the
second wrong diagnosis he made, had he had further opportunities for
examining the case. This however, does not at all follow as a matter
course, as more eminent surgeons than Dr. Jones or myse v
similar errors before now. 1 now learn for the first time that he declined,
either for the reasons he assigns, or for any other reason, to be present
at the operation. As he now acknowledges that he held sac . h str°nj-
views on the subject before the operation, it, in my opinion was
his duty (connected as he was with the case) to give utterance to them.
The operation at the time selected (granting that the diagnosis was
rorrecU was advisable not only in my opinion, but in the opinion of the
iTo i y of the surgical authorities of this century.-Yours, &c.
great majority w EDWARD WARREN, M.D.
24 T Elizabeth Street, June 13, 1881.
* * Letters similar to the foregoing appeared in the Sydney Daily
Telegraph , and Sydney Evening News.
From the Sydney Evening News , June ioth, 1881.
T 0 THE EDITOR.
The letter of Dr. Warren, which was published in your issue
conveys in its closing sentence, an insinuation to the effect
of yesterday. , . > rs who were spectators of the operation, either
that all tn«s were nQt oppose d to it. Now this insinuation is not


warranted by the facts of the case. Several medical men were present
at the operation merely as spectators, and it is surely not fair to repre-
sent them as approving of it. Dr. Marshall, Dr. McLaurin, and, I be-
lieve, Dr. Cox, were present as spectators, had no previous knowledge of
the case, and could not therefore reasonably either approve or disap-
prove of the operation. It was natural for them to wish to be present
as spectators of such a rare operation, and also natural for them to
think that, as the case had been diagnosed by men of professional
eminence the operation was necessary, in order to give the patient the
only chance of saving her life. lam informed that whilst the operation
was in progress a doubt in Dr. Marshall’s mind induced him to throw
out a precautionary suggestion, which, if it had been attended to, might
have led to the detection of the mistake, and certainly nothing more
could have been done by him or any of the other spectators unless they
had taken the knife out of the operator’s hands. It is perfectly absurd
to suppose that, without an opportunity of examining the patient, they
could have known that the diagnosis was wrong and the operation un-
necessary. I have no connection either with the case nor the profes-
sion, and merely put the matter in its true light before your readers from
a sense of justice to the gentlemen concerned.—Yours, &c.,
FAIR PLAY.
From the Sydney Evening News, Jun* nth, 1881.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir,—With reference to a passage in “ Fair Play’s” letter, in which
he alludes to some remark made by Dr. Marshall during the recent
operation, I must inform him the evidence on this point is quite contra-
dictory, and that neither the operator nor the great majority of those
present ever heard Dr. Marshall make any remark of the nature “ Fair
Play ” alludes to.
Everybody present was, I believe, under the impression before the
operation, that it was a case of extra uterine pregnancy, approaching
the latter end of the eighth month of gestation, the child being still
alive; and, surely, had the opinion been so general that (even granting
the diagnosis to be correct) operating at that stage was not advisable, I
might expect to have heard that opinion openly and generally
expressed.—Yours. &c. (
W. EDWARD WARREN, M.D.
243, Elizabeth Street June 11, 1881.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, Like ’‘Fair Play,” lamin no way connected with any of the
medical gentlemen concerned in this case, and do not know Dr. Warren
even by sight. But it is self-evidently certain that when eight learned
medical men are about to take part in (either by actual assistance or by
their presence, thus according it their concurrence), it was the duty of
each of them to have asked Dr. Warren, “ Have you used the uterine
sound ? Dr. Cox, lam informed, did so, and receiving an affirmative
answer, said, 1 Then you are all right.” From all accounts, it appears


that the symptoms presented were thoseofahnormal
being assumed, the operaUon »“ hlve taken plai, when
otherwise rupture of the fall ®P‘“ ; mme diately. Had this not been
death would have ensued aim ~ the other medical men in
assumed then an almost errorr was/ „ (otherwise) they could
lending their countenance to an p t professional etiquette
Sg Seme T n h wh«ed Dr P Wa„e„, and ye. try
SitaTif £ on .0 his shoulders, f
Yours, &c.
From the Sydney Evening News , June 13 , 1881.
TO THE EDITOR. .
sir _l wish briefly to set “ Fairer Play ” right on a point about
which he has fallen into —or innlttee'n treated well by Dr.
he has not attempted to avoid mtaot c P nduct has been in
acted towards me t e p th t of a man and a gentleman.—
every way, all through this EDWARD W ARREN, M.D.
Yours, &c.,
243 Elizabeth Street, June 13-
TO THE EDITOR.
Si.,-™-" 8 '\^rra;rsrnc^Jro\e^.“e"S
I think it only justice to the jury y h t o doctors fully concurred
,o form any other oonetaon than two do
had he thought tha, the diagnosis teas
wrong. ,«• „ fnrm hnt one opinion of these two gentlemen, who
The P»Utc “ed a success, to have taken every
were prepared, had the opera P the operat ion resulted so un-
credit, but whose//o throw the whole blame and responsibility upon the
fortunately, seems evidence before the coroner and jury in
principal .nd straighdorward manner-taking the utmost
th e most fra k J f h - w i th holding nothing. lam I may add,
painS Sv quite unacquainted with Dr. Warren.—Yours, &c.
personally qu 4 oNE 0 F THE JURY.


From the Sydney Daily Telegraph , June 14 , 1881.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —There is on old saying, and a very true one, “ when certain
persons fall out honest men get their own.” 1 cannot help thinking,
(owing fortunately to a breach of professional etiquette) that the public
by the various letters which have appeared in the Press from the medical
men, now know more of the secret than was elicited at the Coroner s
inquest. Granted that a mistake and a fatal one was made, the question
to a layman arises, why, whilst the operation was partially performed,
and when grave doubts (as appears by the evidence) were audibly ex-
pressed as to whether the supposed ovarian cyst was not the uterus
why then was not such an examination made to discover the truth, and
when discovered, why was not the uterus allowed to remain intact. Had
this course been pursued the patient might have had a better chance of
life. I cannot admire the action of gentlemen attempting to shield
themselves from their responsibility, but believe it is fortunate for the
public. This, no doubt is only one of the many cases which never see
the light of day. It is but the other day, at Melbourne, that an opera-
tion was performed in which a sponge and surgical instruments were
sewn up inside an unfortunate patient. Result —Death, and this fatal
mistake was made public only through professional jealousy. I think
the operator, in candidly confessing his error, has cast a sad reflection
on those gentlemen who really share the responsibility and desire to
avoid it.—Yours, &c.
Sydney, 12th June, 1881.
Walter Akhurst & Co., “ Troedel’s,” Printers, York Street, Sydney.


INTERCOLONIAL
tmpkc | §ffiq t
L. BRUCK, Manager,
35, CASTLEREAGH STREET NORTH SYDNEY.
been established
fflasus- £“^“S r “ %££&;S2&
no cha rg e ~ niade J.
pa rt „" e sh h ip S : r* “"S^]^r^i“ c “ sso 7 and "?■*■*
oA disposing of their practices will for ,1 are desirous
will be received in stdct f ° rward “ s full particulars (which
be effected. confidence), a» immediate transfer will probably
ca.* Hn'fiSi Zffti ZZtZLTr?:?’- Who ""
investment, can
* 4 Z^be.
medical book-keeping.
if prepared to nn£l, Z£ t * Sp6Cial Branch of his Business, and
or otherwise bvl ho and Balancin g of Books, annually
□referred at ’th* th °r° u g hl y efficient clerks, at his own offices, or, if
preferred at the residence of Medical Gentlemen (in Sydney and
Suburbs), and when desired, will likewise make and send out the accounts
TERMS AS PER AGREEMENT.
35, CASTLEREAGH STREET NORTH, SYDNEY.


IN JULY, 1881, WILL APPEAR
the FIRST NUMBER oi
THE AUSTRALASIAN
MEDICAL GAZETTE,
Being the Official Organ of the Combined
° Branches of the British Medical Association.
ITS CONTENTS WILL EMBRACE:
Original Lectures, Original Contributions,
Important Cases Illustrating Hospital Practice,
Transactions of Medical and Scientific Societies,
Editorials on Current topics,
Cleanings from the best of the Medical and
Allied Journals,
Medical, Dental, and Pharmaceutical News,
Correspondence,
etc., etc, etc.,
Hid all such features, as the progressive nature of Medical,
Surgical, Dental, and Pharmaceutical Science may mdi-
:ate; every care being taken to make the Medical
Gazette” a journal of practical, as well as ot ocienti c.
value ; one that the busy Medical Practitioner the Phar-
maceutical Chemist, and the Dentist will not care to be
without ; and one of particular value to them in thei
respective spheres.
THE AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE IS PUBLISHED MONTIILI.
TERMS— Yearly Subscription, 12s. Half-Yearly,
08 od. to Members of the various branches
and to Non-Members, 18s. and lOs. respectively.
Advertisements for, and Subscriptions to this journal may be for-
warded to the
OFFICE OF THE AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE,
35, Castlereagh Street North, Sydney.
