

MYLES’S
SIDE-NAIL SYSTEM
ILLUSTRATED BY NINE WOODCUTS.
Being a Paper read before the Philosophical Society by
GEO. HAMILTON, Esq., J.P.
ADELAIDE :
FREARSON AND BRO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS.
1877.




T IR/ E AT I S E
Ifglcs’s %mtm
SHOIiTC HORSIS.
jLLUSTI\ATED BY
Being a Paper read before the Philosophical Society by GEO.
HAMILTON , Esq., J.P.
F(Of2L
Btolaftf£:
PREABSON AND BEO,, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,




0-4'tT
|]rcfaa\
Adelaide, January 8, 1877,
In publishing this Treatise my sole object is to bring
before the Public of South Australia a system of Shoeing
Horses, which, in my opinion, is the best extant.
I lay claim to no originality in treating the subject ;
1 have merely extracted from “ Miles’s Book on ths Horse’s
Foot” such portions as I consider of consequence to the
system he advocates, and I have condensed, for the con-
venience of the Public, the most important portions of his
book into a simple treatise, as it is possible that many
persons who would not feel inclined to read the hook would
not object to glance over the “Treatise.”
GEO. HAMILTON.




.A. TRE ATISHU
Miles’s Side-Nail System of Shoeing Horses.
For many years I have entertained the idea of bring-
ing prominently before the South Australian public
a system of shoeing horses, which has been adopted
by me and practised on all horses of the South Aus-
tralian Government which have been for a time or
permanently placed under my control. The system
which I wish to advocate, and which I wish to make
universally known, is set forth in a book entitled
“ Miles on the Horses’ Foot,” and is known as
“Miles’s Side-nail System and my only object in
coming before the public is to turn the attention of
the owners of horses to the hazards they run in
leaving the treatment of their horses’ hoofs to un-
skilful persons, and to prejudiced, ignorant, though
probably honest-meaning, men. Treatises on horse-
shoeing often display much erudition with respect to
ancient practices, and much knowledge is shown
respecting the systems pursued by different nations ;
but although this method of treating the subject is
very pleasing and entertaining, it has, in my opinion,
one drawback—that of destracting the attention by
directing it to several systems instead of attracting it
to one that offers - the most reasonable rules for placing


an iron shoe on a horse’s hoof without interfering
with its healthy action, or destroying its natural for-
mation. It would not serve ray purpose to treat at
length on any system of shoeing but that which
I have already quoted, but it will be well just
to glance at the “Charlier shoe ” and the “Good-
enough shoe ” for the purpose of seeing why Miles’s
shoe is preferable in these Australian colonies to
either of these other shoes. Both the Charlier and
the Goodenough shoes have the advantage of giving
the hoof a firmer hold of the ground than the Miles’s
shoe offers ; but this advantage is to be purchased at
a price of such a reformation in shoeing that, in my
opinion, the Australians would not be inclined to
accept it on those terms. The different kinds of
pavements in towns in old countries will doubtless
require some new kind of shoes to secure the horses’
feet from damage, and to prevent a too heavy strain
on the back sinews; whereas in Australia we require
shoes that will suit horses on town pavements, on
main roads, on bush roads, or in places where there
are no roads at all; and for many years to come we
must be content to put up with blacksmiths who,
while they could easily shoe a horse according to
Miles’s system, would scratch their heads and ponder
for a long time before they would adopt that of
Charlier or Goodenough. The great advantage, as I
shall presently show you, in the Miles’s method is that
it allows the expansion of the hoof, perfect freedom
of action, and this, as I trust I shall be able to make
manifest to you, is a matter of the utmost importance,
and any system of shoeing whatever that neglects
this great desideratum is, and ever must be, so imper-


feet as to be positively useless in carrying out the
end attempted to be secured in shoeing horses at all,
namely, that of protecting the hoof from wearing
away by contact with hard roads, and saving the
horse from pain when the horny hoof becomes too
thin to guard the sensitive hoof within the horny
Avails from direct contact Avith the hard ground.
The formation of the hoof, as my diagram Avill pre-
sently slioav you, is peculiar. It has in its centre a
■joint known as the “ navicular ” joint, guarded by
nature against all interruption Avith its functions, and
so especially protected that nothing but wilful perse-
verance in a bad system of shoeing could ever cause
it to change its natural state so far as to introduce a
painful disorder known as the “ navicular ” disease.
Not being a scientific person my treatise will contain
only those technical terms Avhicli must be used in my
treatment of the subject uoav introduced, and they
Avill be limited to a very small number, my object
being not to display any learning on my part, but to
present to you in a plain practical Avay the benefits
to be derived from a system of shoeing, Avhich em-
braces many advantages over the old practice, and
rejects all its faults ; at the same time it must be
confessed that the laws of nature are still outraged
Avhen the civilised state of society compels man
to make contrivances to protect the horse’s hoof by
means which nature itself has not provided. We
have taken the horse from its wild state, and trained
it to become a useful servant to man, and Ave are
called upon by every generous impulse to make its
servitude as pleasant to the horse itself as its services
are valuable to us, and Ave can only do this by care-


fully studying its structure and habits, and avoiding
introducing any innovation which would injure the
former or interfere with the latter. Patient, noble,
faithful, generous, and brave, this beautiful animal
has been for ages man’s enduring servant and his
attached friend. Nature has endowed him with many
virtues, and almost all his vices have been the result
of bad education. We take this noble animal from
his free pastures ;we break him in. Alas ! how
much cruelty is practised in that process. We put
iron on his feet, and iron in his mouth, often indeed
—very often regardless of the pain we inflict by the
injudicious manner in which this is done ; and my
object at present is to point out that the interests of
the owners of horses always suffers when the animals
they own are improperly or cruelly treated. The
feet and legs .of the horse are the most important
portions of the animal in carrying out the duties it is
called upon to perform, and it is not an unfrequent
occurrence to find a horse in every way healthy and
vigorous rendered perfectly useless from bad shoeing.
One would imagine that every owner of a horse
would endeavour to render his property as valuable
to him as he possibly could, and to avoid everything
that had the effect of deteriorating his property. No
person would employ a man to cultivate his land who
knew nothing of agriculture, or to keep his books who
knew nothing of booking, or to attend to his ailments
who knew nothing of physic. But although people
will not act thus, yet they will hand over their horses
to their grooms and coachmen as if they had a
thoroughly scientific knowledge of the structure and
requirements of the animals they take charge of.


These grooms and coachmen take the horses entrusted
to them to a blacksmith as ignorant as themselves to
be shod, and to a saddler equally ignorant of the
structure of the horse’s mouth to be bitted ; and then
when from bad shoeing and bad bitting the horses
become useless or unmanageable their owners look to
O
other causes than those that are manifest to persons
who have given the subject even a cursory study.
No deep study is required to become acquainted with
the structure of the horse’s hoof: and although
many books have been written on shoeing in clear
and simple language, yet as the idea prevails that
this subject is not of importance to nine-tenths of the
persons owning horses, these books have not attracted
the attention they deserve. There has been difference
of opinion among the writers on this subject. Re-
specting the expansion of the hoof as it touches the
ground and receives the weight of the horse on it, some
writers have asserted that no expansion takes place ;
others have just as strongly urged that the hoof is
capable of expansion, and does expand with the action
of the leg. In my opinion Mr. Miles sets this matter
at rest. After repeated experiments during ten years
on his own horses Mr. Miles found that the hoofs of
these horses were elastic, and that they did expand,
and he naturally infers that if the expansion of the
hoof Avas apparent in his horses, it would be to a
greater or lesser extent the same in other horses.
He confesses, hoAvever, that he has found some horses
Avhose feet, from a long series of bad shoeing and con
finement in stalls, have almost lost the poAver of
expansion, but as this was the necessary consequence
of the treatment they had received, he was neither


disappointed or surprised at the result. He then
describes the method he adopted to ascertain the
fact of expansion of the hoof, and, to my mind, his
conclusion is a correct one, and the elasticity of the
hoof is fully established by it. As this is a point
on which his system turns, it will be necessary to
dwell upon it at some length. The horse’s hoof is
divided into horny crust or wall, sole and frog. The
horny crust is secreted by the numerous blood-vessels
of that soft protruding band which encircles the upper
edge of the hoof immediately beneath the termination
of the hair, and is divided into toe, quarters, heels,
and bars ; its texture is insensible, but elastic through
its whole extent, and, yielding to the weight of the
horse, allows the horny sole to descend, whereby
much inconvenient concussion to the internal parts
is avoided ; but if a large portion of the circumference
of the foot be fettered by iron and nails it is obvious
that that portion at least cannot expand as before,
and the injury to internal structure commences and
continues until the foot becomes unsound and the
horse useless. The toe of the fore foot is the thickest
and strongest portion of the hoof, and is consequently
less expansive than any other part, and therefore
better calculated to resist the effect of the nails and
shoe. The thickness of the horn gradually diminishes
towards the quarters and heels, more especially in
the inner side of the foot, whereby the power of
yielding and expanding to the weight of the horse
is proportionately increased. Thus it will be evident
to any person that by confining this portion of the
hoof by bringing the nails down on the inner quarter
the expansion of the hoof is prevented. lam now


alluding to the fore feet only ; the structure of the
hind feet, as far as regards the walls, is somewhat
different, where the strongest part is distributed over
the quarters and heels. The horny sole covers the
whole inferior surface of the foot excepting the frog.
In a well-formed foot it presents an arched appear-
ance, and possesses considerable elasticity, by virtue
of which it ascends and descends as the weight is
either removed or applied to it. The descending
property of the sole calls for especial consideration
in directing the form of the shoe, for if the shoe be
so formed that the horny sole rests upon it, it cannot
descend lower, and the sensitive sole above becoming
squeezed between the edges of the coffin-bone and
the horn causes inflammation, and perhaps abscess.
The effect of this squeezing of the sensitive sole is most
commonly witnessed at the angle of the inner heel,
where the descending heel of the coffin-bone forcibly
pressing the vascular sole upon the horny sole,
ruptures a small blood-vessel, and produces what is
called a corn, but which, in fact, is a bruise.
The frog is evidently designed for very important
uses, and no part undergoes so much change from
bad shoeing or exhibits it so soon as the frog. The
foot of a horse from four to five years old when first
shod will be found large and full, with considerable
elasticity ; the cleft, Oval in form, open and expanding,
with a continuous well-defined and somewhat elevated
boundary; the bulbs at the heels fully developed,
plump, and rounded. By bad shoeing the fulness
and the elasticity will diminish, the bulb shrink, the
cleft become narrow, the oval form disappear, pre-
senting only the miserable remains of a frog.


The bones proper to the foot are three in number
—the coffin-bone, the navicular-bone, and part of the
coronet-bone. They are contained within the hoof,
and combine to form the coffin joint. The navicular-
bone (the smallest of the three) becomes the most
important connected with the subject of shoeing, for
upon the healthy condition of this bone, and the
joint formed between it and the tendon which passes
under it to the coffin-bone, and is called the navicular
joint, mainly depends the usefulness of the horse ta
man. This small bone lias the upper and under sur-
faces and part of one of the sides overlaid with a thin
coating of gristle, and covered by a delicate secreting
membrane, very liable on the slightest injury to
become inflamed. It is unfortunately so placed in
the foot as to be continully exposed to danger, being
situated across the hoof, behind the coffin-bone, and
immediately under the coronet-bone, whereby it is
compelled to receive nearly the whole of the weight
of the horse each time that the opposite foot is raised
from the ground.
The coffin-bone consists of a body and wings, and
is fitted into the hoof, which it closely resembles in
form. Its texture is particularly light and spongy,
arising from the quantity of canals or tubes that
traverse its substance in every direction, affording
to the numerous blood-vessels and nerves a safe pas-
sage to the sensitive and vascular parts surrounding
it, while the unyielding nature of the bone effectually
protects them from compression or injury under
every variety of movements of the horse.
The coronet-bone is nearly square ; it is situated
partly within and partly without the hoof; it sup-


ports the pastern-bone, and rests upon the coffin and
navicular bones.
The sensitive sole, or, as it is sometimes called,
the fleshy sole, is about the eighth of an inch thick,
and is almost entirely made up of blood-vessels and
nerves.
The sensitive frog includes not only the part cor-
responding to the sensitive sole, but also the peculiar
spongy, elastic substance which intervenes between
it and the navicular joint, and Alls the space between
the cartilages. The proper sensitive frog is thicker
and less finely organised than the sensitive sole, pos-
sessing fewer blood-vessels and nerves.
O ## # # #
The navicular joint, the least injury to which
entails such disastrous consequences, is merely a sort
of false joint or bag, formed between the under sur-
face of the navicular-bone and the upper surface of
the tendon of the muscle which bends the foot by
acting on the coffin-bone. It is situated beneath and
O # # # ,
somewhat behind the coffin joint, and is lined through-
out by a delicate secreting membrane for the supply
of the fluid necessary to the even sliding of the tendon
over the bone, after the manner of a pully.
Any diminution of the quantity of fluid, either
from inflammation of the membrane or other cause,
will produce friction of the sides of the bag upon
each other, and lay the foundation for that train of
fatal effects which must ensue under such circum-
stances to a part so constantly employed as the
navicular joint, namely, first, inflammation of the
membrane, then ulceration and absorption of the
gristle, and, lastly, disease of the bone itself, a speck
of which no larger than a pin’s head produces


lameness that defies all the power of man to cure,
and dooms the horse to a life of pain and misery for
the rest of his days.
I have now put before you a slight hurried sketch
of the structure of the horse’s hoof, and it must be
apparent to you that great care should be exercised
in putting an iron shoe on a foot thus delicately
formed; and yet we know from experience that
thousands of horses are shod by men who are utterly
ignorant of the structure of the hoofs they operate-
on, and scarcely any of them are aware that a joint
most delicately and beautifully arranged exists in the
centre of the horse’s hoof, or that bad shoeing in-
evitably brings on a most painful, unseen, and in-
curable disorder, and which, from the impossibility
in reaching its seat, can never by any means be
eradicated. Such being the case, is it not strange
that amiable, humane, and intelligent owners of
horses so far neglect the animals they possess as to
leave them entirely in the hands of, and at the mercy
of, servants and tradesmen who, without study or
forethought, follow, without knowing why, an injurious
practice of shoeing which has destroyed so many
hoofs, and which has doomed many a horse to a life
of agony and uselessness ?
I cannot think that many owners of horses are
aware of the danger their iiorses are exposed to from
the treatment they receive from ignorant, wilful, and
unfeeling servants, and I hope my feeble effort in
directing your attention to the pain and ruin a horse
may be reduced to by adopting an injudicious system
of treatment may have the effect of inducing you to
think seriously on a subject which perhaps up to the


present time has not been deemed by you worthy of
your consideration.
In the paper I now put before you I intend
to treat solely and entirely on Miles’s side-nail
system in shoeing horses, and to point out what
errors it rectifies and what evils it avoids; and
although the general treatment of the horse by per-
sons entrusted with its management is a subject on
which much can be said, yet I will avoid travelling
beyond the treatise I have in hand, in the hope that
when your thoughts have been directed to the
numerous evils which have so long prevailed, and the
fatal results they have led to, in shoeing alone, you
will be inclined to consider carefully how far the
general management of the horse by the ignorant
persons into whose hands he is put is open to reform
and improvement.
An opinion is generally received that the shape of
a perfect foot is circular, or very nearly so. It is
this opinion that leads the generality of smiths to
reduce the foot to this shape as soon as possible.
There are very few things so little varied in nature
as the form of the ground surface of horses’ feet, for
whether the hoof be high-heeled and upright or low-
heeled and flat, large or small, broad or narrow, the
identical form of ground surface is maintained in each
so long as it is left entirely to nature’s guidance. The
outer quarter back to the heel is curved considerably
and abruptly outwards, while the inner quarter is
carried back in a gradual and easy curve/"' The
advantage of this form is so obvious that it is a
O
* Plate 1. Figure 2.


matter for wonder it ever should be interfered with.
The enlarged outer quarter extends the base, and
increases the hold of the foot upon the ground, while
the straighter inner quarter lessens the risk of
striking the foot against the opposite leg.
The operation of paring out the foot is a matter
requiring great skill and judgment; it is moreover a
work of some labour when properly performed. It
will be found that the operator errs much oftener by
removing too little than too much—at least it is so'
with parts that ought to bo removed, which are
sometimes almost as hard and unyielding as a flint
stone, and in their most favourable state require coii-
siderable exertion to cut through. The frog, on the
other hand, offers so little resistance to the knife,
and presents such an even, smooth, clean-looking
surface when cut through that it requires more
philosophy than falls to the share of most smiths to
resist the temptation to slice it away, despite the
knowledge that it would be far better to leave it
alone.
It would be impossible, however, to frame any
rule applicable to the paring out of all horses’ feet.
The seasons and the difference in the growth of some
horses’ feet will require varied treatment. The
object to be obtained is to reduce the horny sole to
such a point of elasticity that the internal parts of
the foot may benefit from it, a state of things very
essential to the due s performance of their general
functions.
The corners formed by the junction of the crust
and bars should be well pared out, particularly on
the inside, for this is the common seat of the corn.


It is preferable to pare the bars down to a level with
the sole, or nearly so, avoiding every approach to
what is called opening out the heels, which means
cutting away the sides of the bars, so as to show an
apparent width between the heels, which is a mere
illusion, purchased at the expense of impaired power
of resistance in the bars, and ultimate contraction of
the feet.
With regard to the frog, as a general rule it would
be better to leave it alone, and never allow a knife
to touch it. The frog has less power of producing
horn than any other part of the foot. The effect of
shoeing diminishes this power by obstructing the
expansion of the hoof, and thereby exposing the
membrane which secretes the horn to undue pres-
sure. The size of the frog compared with the cir-
cumference of the foot in a horse long accustomed to
be shod will not exceed one-tenth or one-twelfth of
the whole circumference, whereas in the natural and
unshod foot it occupies one-sixth. This dwindling
down to one-half the proper size is more the effect of
paring than of shoeing. The layer of horn that
covers the frog is thinner in substance and more
delicate in texture than that of any other part of the
foot, and when once destroyed is very imperfectly
and sparingly reproduced. * The first stroke of the
knife removes this thin horny covering altogether,
and lays bare an under surface totally unfitted, from
the moist, soft texture, for exposure either to the
hard ground or the action of the air, and in conse-
quence of such unnatural exposure, .it soon becomes
dry and shrinks, until at last the protruding, plump,
elastic cushion, interposed by nature between the


navicular joint and the ground, and so essential to
its preservation, is converted into an unyielding
apology for a frog, to be seen in the foot of almost
every horse that has been regularly shod for a few
years.
The frog is provided within itself with two efficient
modes of throwing off its superfluous horn—the first,
in small bran-like scales, which, becoming dry, fall
off in a kind of whitish scurf; the second, and rarer
occurrence, is called casting the frog—a thick layer-
of frog separates itself in a body, and shells off to
full as deep as the usual paring with the knife ; but
nature never removes one horny covering until she
has provided another beneath, whereas the knife
removes the horny covering, but is unable to substi-
tute any other in its stead. The best way, therefore,
is to leave the frog to itself, as I have said before.
I now come to a very important part of the sub-
ject, namely, the number of the nails required to fix
the shoe, and the position in which these nails should
be put. Miles says there is a notion very generally
entertained that the foot receives its form from the
shoe, while the truth is that the shape of the shoe
cannot possibly influence the shape of the foot, for
the foot being elastic, expands to the weight of the
horse in precisely the same degree whether it be rest-
ing upon the most open or most contracted shoe. It
is the situation of the nails, and not the shape of the
shoe, that determines the form of the foot, and
whether the shoe be wide or narrow, if the heels and
quarters of both sides be nailed to it, the foot will
inevitably become smaller and smaller, and the heels
more and more contracted. If the nails be put on


the outside quarter and toe, leaving the heels and
quarters of the inside, which are the most expansive
portions, free, no shape of the shoe can of itself change
the form of the foot.
I will not detain you with a tedious description of
the shoe which Miles deems the best for his purpose.
It is his system of nailing it to the foot that I wish
to direct your attention to. One circumstance to be
considered is one of vital importance to the subject,
namely, the number and situation of the nails which
are to secure the shoe to the foot. If they be
numerous and placed back in the quarters and heels,
no form of shoe be it ever so perfect can save the
foot from contraction and navicular disease; if, on
the contrary, they be few and placed in the outside
quarter and toe, leaving the inside quarter and heel
quite free to expand, no form of shoe is so bad that
it can from defective form along produce contraction
of the foot.
Mr. Miles sets down the number of nails to be
used on the fore feet as five, and relates several cir-
cumstances that have come under his notice in support
of his opinion. He also, for reasons before stated,
fixes the position of the nails as three on the outer
quarter and two on the inner toe. Among other
anecdotes he mentions in his book I quote the follow-
ing, and as it forcibly represents the effect of his
system in a practical way and supports his theory, I
quote it at length. He says about this time I learned
that a commercial traveller, who was detained in
Exeter on account of an accident, had for some time
past employed only five nails placed in the outer
limb and toe of his horse’s fore shoes, upon hearing


which I made a point of seeing him, and he informed
me that he always performed his journeys on horse-
back ; that they averaged full five thousands miles a
year ; and that his comfort necessarily depended very
much upon the freedom of action and safe-going of
his horse ; that some time ago he found him stepping
short and going tenderly, and consulted a veterinary
surgeon about it, who advised his being shod with
five nails only—on the one-sided plan of nailing—
asserting at the same time that he had recommended'
and employed that plan very • extensively with the
most beneficial results. It was accordingly tried,
and he very soon had the gratification of feeling his
horse move under him with a firm and confident step,
most unlike that to which he had lately been accus-
tomed. He told me, says Mr. Miles, that further
experience had only confirmed his first impression,
and that he should continue to shoe on the same
principle, with the Sime number of nails; that the
first pair of shoes set at rest all his doubts and fears
respecting the security of the plan, for he had occa-
sion to ride his horse in the new shoes thirty miles a
day for the first six days in succession, and that they
were as firmly attached to the feet at the end of one
hundred and eighty (180) miles as they were at the
commencement of the journey, and that they con-
tinued firm until the horse was reshod, which did
not happen for five weeks.
Mr, Miles in his appendix writes thus: —The
undue weight attached to the opinion of smiths and
stable people, by the great majority of horse masters,
is a matter very painful to contemplate—it is the
humiliating submission of conscious ignorance to the


imperious dictates of inferior minds upon a subject
where a very few hours of earnest and well directed
study would impart a degree of knowledge more than
sufficient to expose the shallowness of their advisers,
and enable them to throw off their thraldom, assert
their legitimate influence, and promote the comfort,
usefulness, and durability of their horses.
With these remarks I fully agree, and it is for the
purpose of putting the tendency of them in operation
that I have undertaken to read the paper now put
before you. The tone of Mr. Miles’s book is so
simple, so plain, and yet so earnest, and the infor-
mation he imparts so clear and convincing, that it is
a pleasure to read it. Surely some consideration
should be shown to the horse for the faithful service
he renders to man.
From the time the horse is placed into the hands
of the horsebreaker up to that when he either dies
neglected in the bush, or is sent to the knacker’s
yard to be killed for the sake of his hide and hoofs,
lie has to pass through a life of toil, often suffering
fatigue, pain, and partial starvation. If the poor
creature had a voice that could speak in a language
we could understand, how many a sad tale of suffer-
ing we would hear ; but as it is all his illtreatment,
all his disorders, all his cruel suffering, must be
patiently and silently borne.
The responsibility of the master to the horse does
not cease on ■ the payment of the purchase-money.
He is bound by every call of humanity, by every tie
of duty, to consider how the means in his hands for
rendering the services of his horse bearable and his
life painless are to be used, and it is his duty to study


to a certain extent the structure of his horse’s foot
before he sends him to an ignorant smith to be shod.
If he will not do this, from want of leisure or from
a love of ease, he should at least secure the services
of a person to shoe his horse who has some superior
knowledge of his profession to that attained to by
the numerous smiths who are entrusted with the
difficult task of nailing an iron shoe to a delicately
organised foot. It is painful to think of the injury
that is in daily operation in almost every forge in the'
colony, and it is humiliating to know that well-
educated, intelligent men will not or cannot see how
ignorant prejudice is ruining their property, and how
a persistent perseverance in a wrong system has been,
and is creating, a painful disorder, and dooming that
noble servant and valuable friend to man—the horse
—to a lifetime of excruciating pain. I must confess
that the knowledge that this evil exists has caused
me for many years much painful thought, and the
circumstance that my position brings me daily in
contact with horses has led me to ponder over the
subject until I have felt that I was guilty of culpable
neglect in not exerting myself in some way to remedy
this existing evil, but prejudice has such deep roots
and such a firm hold that it becomes a difficult task to
eradicate it, requiring much patience, energy, and per-
severance, and I waited for some person of more im-
portance and of greater ability than I possess to take
the subject up and deal with it, but finding that this
was not done, I felt compelled to take some action in
the matter, and this treatise is the result.
The principal point in horse shoeing to be con-
stantly kept in view is the preservation of the


elasticity of the hoof, and to accomplish this the frog
must be retained in its integrity, and the bars must
be left to perform their natural functions—that of
keeping the heels open, and preventing contraction
of the foot. If this simple rule be followed little fear
need exist respecting the shoeing of our horses.


%
. V


DESCRIPTION OF PLATES.
PLATE I.
Represents the near foot of a pony five years old ; it had been but a few
times shod, and is a good example of what may be called a perfect foot.
FIGURE I.
Shows the ground surface of the hoof prepared for receiving a shoe.
a. —The toe rasped away to receive the turned-up shoe.
a 1. —The inner toe.
a 2.—The outer toe.
h I.—The inner quarter,
h 2.—The outer quarter.
c I.—The inner heel.
a 2.—The outer heel,
d d d. —The sole.
c c. —The crust or wall of the hoof.
//. —The bars.
g g. —The commissures.
h k I. —The frog,
i' h. —The part immediately under the navicular joint.
< k. —The oval cleft of the frog.
11. —The elevated boundary of the cleft.
i i, —The bulbs of the heel.
FIGURE 11.
Shows the outer side of the same foot with a shoe attached ; it also partly
shows the interior of the hoof.
a. —The toe of the shoe turned up out of the line of wear.
h h. —The shoe represented of the same thickness from toe to he'd.
c. —The clenches.
d. —The hollow for receiving the coronary substance which secretes the
horn.
c. —Thin horny plates that line the wall. There are 500 elastic laminae
or plates which surround the coffin-bone, in conjunction with a corresponding
number of homy laminae lining the crust, and are known to be the sustainers
of the superincumbent weight in the unshod natural foot by forming a dove-
tailed union of immense strength. These numerous elastic springs elongate
under pressure, and the horny box relaxing at the same instant, the concus-
sion of the foot is obviated.


PLATE 11.
Represents the detached bones of the foot.
FIGURE I.
The coronet-bone.
a. —The under surface, which forms part of the coffin joint.
b. —The upper surface, which forms part of the pastern joint.
c. —Roughened surfaces for the insertion of tendons.
FIGURE 11.
The coffin-bone.
a. —The toe, showing its elevation from the ground line of the sides of
the bone, as also its notched appearance.
b h. —The wings.
c c. —Holes for the passage of the arteries which supply the sensible
covering of the bone and the bone itself with blood.
d d. —Surfaces which form part of the coffin joint.
e. —The body of the bone much roughened for the attachment of the
sensible laminae, and thickly studded with holes for the passage of blood-
vessels.
FIGURE 111.
Two views of the navicular-bone.
a. —The under surface.
1. —The surface which, with the tendon passing under it, forms the
navicular joint.
2. —A roughened surface for the insertion of a tendon.
i. —The upper surface.
I.—The surface by which the navicular-bone is joined to the coffin-bone.
2 2.—The surface which forms part of the coffin joint.
3. —A deeply roughened surface for the attachment of the strong
ligament which binds the navicular-bone to the coffin-bone.
FIGURE IV.
A section of the foot.
1. —Coronet-bone.
2. —Coffin-bone.
3. —Navicular-bone.
a. —Wall.
b. —Sole.
c. —Cleft of frog.
d d. —Frog.
e e. —Fatty or elastic cushion.
g. —Sensative frog.
h h h. —Tendons of muscles which bend the foot.
i. —Part of the pastern-bone.
It It. —Tendons of muscles which extend the foot.
l. —The coffin joint.
m. —The navicular joint.
n. —The coronary substance.
o. —The sensible laminae, or covering of the bone.


PLATE 111.
FIGURE I.
Represents a section of the foot when, by bad shoeing, it has become so
diseased that its functions have ceased to possess healthy action.
e. —Represents the hardening of the fleshy or fatty frog, caused by the
contraction of the foot having destroyed its elasticity.
g. —The sensative frog is now subject to the direct pressure of a hard
substance, instead, as in its healthy state, of an elastic one.
c. —The navicular joint now rests also upon an unyielding surface, and
the tendon on which it rests, bearing upon a hard surface, wears away, and
eventually breaks, bringing the entire fetlock on the ground.
/. —The bulb of the heel has been reduced, and no longer offers the
opposition to the ground, which in its healthy state saved the concussion,
and preserved the action of the inner structure.
FIGURE 11.
Represents the section of a hoof in a healthy condition.
FIGURE 111.
With the assistance of this plate we shall obtain a clear idea of the
relation it bears to other parts of the foot in general, and the navicular joint
in particular.
a. —ls a broad flat mass of horn projecting upwards into the middle of
the elastic cushion, and is called the “ frog stay,”
h }>. —Arc two homy projections rising into the cavity of the hoof
formed by the commissures. They each at b support the fleshy frog.
c c. —Arc portions of the same projection, and are situated just under
the two ends of the navicular-bone, and mark the point on either side where
diminution of the natural elasticity of the fatty frog would be felt with the
greatest severity by the navicular joint, for under most favourable circum-
stances the quantity of cushion between these points and the navicular joint
cannot be very large, and hence the importance of doing all we can to pre-
serve its elasticity as long as possible.




PLATE I


PLATE II


PLATE XXX


▼
