

, A
TRIP UP GEORGE’S RIVER
“ILLUi
SYDNEY NEWS,”
7- „
SYDNEY : r . x
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO., PRINTERS, V
108 Pitt Street.. A \V\
108 Pitt Street..




nays/rfgr/
At-6-77
% Crip up Ceorge’s giber.
FROM THE
Illustrated Sydney Slews.
“ There seems always a deep interest in exploring the source of
a river,” says an American writer. “It is wonderful to perceive
how from a noteless fountain, or a shallow brook, that a bold
stream should spring on which navies ride. A fulness of
thought springs up, as on visiting the birthplace of an illustrious
man; not one who is remembered by blood shed upon the
earth, but by deeds of benevolence that cannot die. ” And so
it truly is ; we have felt this “fulness of thought” when
tracing the course of the tiniest mountain creek or sedgy
rivulet. Therefore it was with feelings of no little pleasure that
we accepted the kind invitation of the Hon. Thomas Holt, of
the Warren, to join a party of excursionists up George’s River*
in the first place because we felt convinced that the trip would
be a pleasant one; and secondly because it would serve to
gratify our exploring proclivities. We knew that “George’s
River ” ran into the south-western corner of Botany Bay, and
that the old town of Liverpool was situated some thirty miles
by water from the river’s mouth ; but we knew absolutely
nothing of the space lying between those two established points
in our knowledge. So true is it that—
The traveller goes
To muse at Thessaly, or strike his lyre
Beside Geneva’s lake, or raptured mount
Ben Lomond’s cliff—pouring o’er other climes
The enthusiasm which his own might -well inspire.
But in order to atone for our erstwhile indifference to the
beauties that nestle about the environs of our own city, be-
hold us on the morning of the 10th September, seated on the
knife-board of the ’bus that conveyed one instalment of the
town visitors to the place of general rendezvous— Sans Souci,


Botany Bay. A curious assemblage we assisted to make up on
our arrival—some 150 or 200 individuals—members of both
Houses of Parliament, judges, lawyers, merchants, civic
dignitaries—all, for this occasion at all events, agreeing on one
point —to be as free from care as was the lovely sylvan spot at
which they were assembled. As a very good preface to an
exploring expedition commend us to such an enticing breakfast
as that provided by our thoughtful host —on the occasion
referred to—under the sheltering wings of Sans Souci. The
steamer Pelican brought round from Sydney, soon took on
board her living freight, and with the signal of “ turn ahead ”
our voyage d'exploration commenced in earnest. Away we
steamed leaving Tom Ugly’s Point—with Sans Souci—in the
distance, together with
TOM UGLY'S POINT.
the Government Punt, which there conveys passengers to the
commencement of the road to Illawarra. As the steamer
proceeded comments on the appearance of the river began to be


very freely used. To most of us present the scenery was
entirely new, and therefore perhaps the more enjoyable
although as reach after reach opened to the view a general
opinion was expressed that a more lovely river for a steam-
boat excursion could scarcely be desired. The extreme width
of some of the creeks and reaches caused us some surprise, as
we were hardly prepared for such evidences of its capacity and
of the volume of splendid water which is continually poured
into the sea. Every now and again, some interesting object of
the landscape would burst upon the side; sometimes a bold
headland, looking, Narcissus-like, at its image in the placid water
—sometimes a piece of verdant sward sloping itself to the river
edge and trailing its green garments in the tide—or perhaps
some quaint tree—such as that of which our artist made a
hasty sketch—cropping out suddenly from the bank.
TREE ON THE BANKS OF GEORGE’S RIVER.
The banks, generally, resemble those of Middle Harbor, the
course of the river being for the most part over a rocky bottom.
The tortuous windings of the stream are of the most fantastic


character, so much so, that even a few miles from Sans Souci,
it would puzzle a stranger to find his way back again to Botany
Bay. Some of the tributary creeks emptying themselves into
the main stream are as wide as the river itself, and this would
serve to thoroughly bewilder any unlucky boatman, who tried
to find his way without a guide. Such an one would experience
the feelings expressed by Collins, the early colonist and histo-
rian, who says: —“ In many of these arms of Port Jackson,
when sitting with my companions at my ease in a boat, I have
been struck with horror at the bare idea of being lost in them,
as, from the great similarity of one cove to another, the recollec-
tion would be bewildered in attempting to determine any rela-
tive situation. Insanity would accelerate the miserable end that
must ensue.” Among the many tributaries contributing to
swell the volume of water over which we steamed, was the
Woronora—which embouches into it, and is apparently equal in
capacity.
MOUTH OF THE WORONORA KIVEE.
Onward still the Pelican took her way, ’and we divided the
pleasant time between noting the lovely alternations of land-


scape, and adding to our store of geographical knowledge. We
found that the source of the river was far distant, on the south
of the road from Appin to Bulli, near the ‘ ‘ Green Swamps, ”
where it is entered on Sir Thomas Mitchell’s map as Tuggerai
Creek. After flowing for about twelve miles in a notherly direc-
tion it receives Bulli Creek and O’Hare’s Creek, then Bow Bow-
ing Creek, and Bunbarry Curran Creek. On the Botany side of the
dam at Liverpool it receives Cabramatta Creek, Prospect Creek,
Orphan School Creek, Harris Creek, Williams’ Creek, Dedman’s
Creek, Mill Creek, Salt-pau Creek, and the Woronora Paver. We
are not at all certain about the orthography of Dedman or Dead
Man’s Creek—as to whether it derives its name from that of a
person, or whether it has some melancholy legend associated
with its earlier history, as to “how the sprites of injured men
shriek upward from the sod. ” Although the latter might render
it the more romantic and interesting to some, we cannot say
that such is the view to be taken of it. In either case, our
artist jotted down its features in his skotch-book, and here we
reproduce it.
dedman’s, or dead man’s creek.


Occasionally a break, or bit of clearing, lends a pleasing
charm to the scenery. Places where the axe of the early set-
tler has left its mark on the forest, opening lanes and frontages
to the water’s edge, and where no longer
The bending trees
Adjust their branches, by the mirrow’d tide.
Strips of fence indicate land once under cultivation ; but in
most of these clearings time begins again to assert itself, and
the undergrowth and young forest run riot over the improve-
ments of the early settlers. One of the most noticeable of
these gaps along the dark wooded shore is the spot known as
the “Government Quarries.” The river here opened into a
splendid reach—the banks, save where the clearings before
spoken of had been made, being clothed with forest to the edge.
VIEW NEAR OLD GOVERNMENT QUARRIES.
We had entered upon the afternoon, and our course was still
upward and onward, when the aspect of the weather began to
change, or rather, to resolve itself into rainy squalls, so that


it was determined here to end our excursion for that occasion,
the steamer having voyaged some eighteen or nineteen miles up
the river, attaining a point within half a dozen miles of Liver-
pool, beyond which place the river of course is impassable for
all craft on account of the dam there constructed, and about
which so much has been said. The steamer’s head was rounded,
and we took a comprehensive glance at the highest point at
that time reached by a steamboat, our artist plying his pencil
to produce a memorial of the event, which we here give.
HIGHEST POINT BEACHED SEPTEMBEB 10.
Between one and two o’clock an excellent dinner was served
on board, to attack which Mr. Holt’s guests were not at all
averse—the genial weather and pleasure of the trip having had
a most appetizing effect. Of course “water” had been one of
the chief topics of conversation by most on board during the
excursion, and the rival schemes for supplying Sydney with
water were pretty freely discussed. After luncheon, Mr. T. S.
Mort proposed the health of the Hon. Thos. Holt, and, after
some very complimentary observations, said : The present com-


pany were indebted to liim (Mr. Holt) for the information be
bad afforded them with respect to this splendid river. He be-
lieved Mr. Holt had done good service in making them
acquainted with George’s River—they were amazed at its capa-
city for storage, (Hear, hear.) Whatever course the Legisla-
ture might take, he was satisfied the services rendered that day
by Mr. Holt would not be lost. (Cheers.) As one of the points
noticed on the way up as suitable for an upper dam was Kan-
garoo Point, we here introduce an illustration of it.
KANGAROO POINT.
Continuing our observations of the remarks made at the dinner,
table, Mr. Mort said—He (Mr. Holt) had shown them a source
of supply sufficient to furnish an abundance of water to the
largest city ever congregated together, (Cheers.) The Rev.
Dr, Lang cordially agreed with his friend Mr. Mort. It was
his conviction that the experiment Mr. Holt had proposed to
the colony ought, by all means, to be tried before we went to
the Blue Mountains for water, or to the Nepean. There would
be an abundant supply in these splendid lakes. He considered


Mr. Holt to be one of the great patriots of Hew South Wales.
Professor Smith, President of the Water Commission, ad-
mitted that “after having seen this river the scheme looked
much more tempting. There was no doubt that it would be a
most magnificent reservoir. Mr. A. K. Smith, C.E., of Melbourne,
said that “ twelve months since he had had occasion to visit
George’s Eiver, and to speak in its favor before the Sydney
Water Commission, and from what he had seen that day he was
more than ever convinced of the feasibility of the scheme.”
During the passage down the river, note was taken of the
principal bays. These are known as Double Bay, Oyster Bay,
Gawley Bay, Woolooware Bay, Townsend’s Bay, and Oatley’s
Bay. Of the last-named picturesque locality we are able to
furnish our readers with an illustration.
oatley’s bay.
Since the George’s Eiver picnic some very interesting corres-
pondence has taken place in the newspapers. Mr. John Young,
the contractor for the Exhibition Building, &c,, who has had
considerable experience as an engineer in embanking navigable


rivers, constructing canals, weirs, &c., in England, said, in a
letter addressed to the Herald, “ he considered it quite practi-
cable to construct a dam across George’s Elver at Tom Ugly’s
Point, or Kangaroo, at a moderate cost, and both safe and secure.
A sluice could be formed (not in the dam) that would scour all
the salt water out of the reservoir above the dams before they
are completed, and as the salt is in solution, it would go out
with the water. ” He has examined the plans and sections of
the Nepean scheme, and it presents to him all the features of a
very costly, and, after all, a doubtful one, while the George’s
River is not a complicated or doubtful one, and he believes
would not cost more than one-third of the expense of the
Nepean scheme.” He adds, “the absence of mud-flats
and swamps, cultivation or dwellings of any kind, or in fact
anything to contaminate the water, while the steepness of the
sandstone banks, and their uselessness for any purposes of
trade, point it out as a great national res ervoir, already made to
hand, which should be taken advantage of, to give an abundant
supply to this and the future population.”
ROCKY REACH.


Mr. Lennox, a veteran engineer, 82 years of age, who has
executed works of considerable importance in England, this
colony and Victoria substantiates Mr. Young’s views. He says
he “ can see no difficulty in making a dam on the lower part of
George’s River for the purpose of securing a plentiful supply of
good water for the city of Sydney. Neither the floods nor the
tide rise there to a great height. There is no difficulty com-
parable to works that he (Mr. Lennox) has been engaged upon.
At the entrance to the Gloucester and Berkely Canal, on the
Severn, where the tide rises forty feet in three hours, they had
walls to keep out the water while the basin was being excavated,
the locks built, and afterwards to hold the water until the ships
could enter the canal. The wall facing the river was a mile
long ; the end wall about 300 yards in length, with an entrance
gate for ships at the angle. If, at any time, the water in
George’s River is found insufficient, they might (he says) turn
the Nepean water into George’s River.” Although there is no
probability of the water in George’s River being found insuffi-
cient until the population of Sydney is numbered by millions, if
is some satisfaction to know that we can make use of the Nepean
water, as an auxiliary, if at any time we should require it, by a
natural water-course instead of the artificial one, 63 miles long,
recommended by Mr. Moriarty, which the City Engineer (who
has had incomparably more experience than Mr. Moriarty)
estimates it would cost, including interest on the payments until
the works were completed, about four millions, or £240, 000 a
year for interest. As the Honorable Treasurer estimates an
income tax of 6d. in the £ to produce only £lOO,OOO a year, it
would require an income tax of nearly Is. 6d. in the £ on the
entire colony to pay interest on the cost of supplying Sydney
with water. With respect to the salt water, Mr. Lennox says :
“ A sluice (not in the dam) would scour all the salt water out
of the reservoir above the dam before it is completed, and as the
salt is in solution, it would go out with the water. When the
Liverpool dam was being constructed, he (Mr. Lennox) allowed
the salt water to run off at low tides, so that, before the dam
was completed, the water was fresh and good, but the people


were afraid to use it until Dr. Hill (the colonial surgeon) tested
it and said it was quite good. This accounts (Mr. Lennox
says) for the water being longer salt, after the dam was
repaired, than it was when it was first made.” And “ the site
for the Liverpool dam was,” he says, “ selected more for a
crossing-place than a dam.” (A dam at either of the three
points, Cummins, Tom Ugly, or Kangaroo, would shorten the
distance to Illawarra and the southern coast districts about 20
miles!) Sir Thomas Mitchell, in the evidence he gave before
the special committee of the City Council, March 12, 1850, says
—“ The weakest point in the character of this great city—for a
great city it is likely to be—is the present insufficient supply of
water. The basin of George’s River contains 150 square miles ;
its highest sources are always flowing, and are elevated 2200 feet
above the level of the sea, at Madden’s Plains, on the range at
the back of the Illawarra. The basin of a river extending 150
miles superficially, and having sources 2200 feet above the sea,
flowing over rocky beds, not encumbered with mud, or where
there could be much absorption, would form the finest supply
of water in the world.” With respect to George’s River as a
water supply, the following most important facts, as regards
quantity, were stated by Dr. Garran, at a meeting of the Royal
Society :—Discharge down George’s River in a dry year, 1869
92,600 millions of gallons ; ditto, ditto, for the first six months
in 1870 —265,540 millions of gallons. Compare the above with
the following :—Present consumption of Sydney—lsoo millions
of gallons ; present estimated maximum—2ooo ditto ditto ;
future anticipated demand, 12,000 ditto ditto. It will be seen
from the above that the quantity of water running down George’s
River in the dryest season is more than sixty times the present
consumption.
Dr. Garran, at the conclusion of his speech before the Royal
Society, on the 21st Sept., said : “ The best natural protection
we could give manufacturing industries in Sydney was an abun-
dant supply of water. We must have a supply from which we
could afford to waste, and until we had that we should not have
a supply on which manufacturers could rely. He thought there


were three things that manufacturers wanted, —cheap coal, cheap
water, and a rapid method of discharging refuse, which would
not be likely to bring them into Law Courts. He did not know
any place where these three things could be so well obtained as
at Botany Bay. There were a great many miles frontage in
Botany Bay and its tributaries, where coals could be dis-
charged. ”
We cannot better describe the scheme for supplying Sydney
with water from the George’s Eiver than by reprinting the sub-
joined remarks by Dr. Garran, which were printed in the form
of a pamphlet, and distributed to the visitors on the occasion
of this trip :
GEORGE’S RIVER AS A SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY
FOR THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
I. —THE NATURE OF THE SCHEME.
The George’s River, rising to the south of Sydney, drains an
area of 375 square miles, of which by far the greater proportion
is unpeopled, and likely for a considerable to remain so. The
whole of its tributaries converge into an estuary through which
its waters discharge into Botany Bay. A dam thrown across
the river near its mouth, and such as would effectually keep the
salt water from the fresh, would turn the lower part of the
river into a large fresh water reservoir. The tidal influence at
present reaches as far as Liverpool, a distance of not less than
twenty-six miles by the stream fro m Sans Souci. At Liverpool
a dam was, in the early days of the colony, constructed to keep
the salt water from the fresh, in order to furnish the township
of Liverpool with fresh water, and which it has been quite
successful in doing. The project now suggested is in reality
nothing more than doing the same thing on a larger scale,
namely, making another dam lower down, to store a larger
quantity of water for the supply of a larger population.


There are several sites on the river at which dams could be
constructed. At three of them, namely, at Sans Souci, at Tom
Ugly’s Point, and at Kangaroo Point, there is the very great
advantage of a natural rocky weir, over which the surplus
waters could be discharged. The peculiar shape of the river
with its jutting headlands and bays, is most happily adapted
by nature for the constructions of reservoirs, for these pro-
montories serve the double purpose of narrowing the river so
as to diminish the work in the construction of a dam, while at
the same time they offer the greatest facilities for the forma-
tion of a waste weir. Two other points lower down the
estuary have also been pointed out as admitting of the construc-
tion of dams, namely, from Stripper’s Point to Pelican Point,
and from Doll’s Point to Towoah. At these points the estuary
is very much broader than higher up, but the depth is propor-
tionally shallow. The advantage of making the dam at either
of these places would be that a larger reservoir would be
enclosed; the disadvantages would be twofold First, that
the lowness of the banks would not admit of the water being
raised materially above high-water mark; and secondly, a
considerable area of salt marsh would be included in the basin,
and a longer time would be required for the water to become
sweet. The banks are highest at Kangaroo Point, and though
by making the dam here the area of the reservoir would be
smaller than if it was made lower down, still it is more feasible
at this point to give the dam great elevation, and so by increas-
ing the depth of the reservior to compensate for the diminution
of area. Which site would, on the whole, be the best for a dam
is a matter requiring more minute investigation than has
hitherto been given to the subject, but the general scheme of
turning the lower part of the George’s River into a fresh water
basin is not necessarily identified with any one particular mode
of its execution. There are several ways of doing it, and the
detailed enquiry has yet to be wrought out as to which would
prove the cheapest, the safest, and the most efficient.


II. —THE ADVANTAGES OF THE SCHEME.
Ist. The necessity of an extensive conduit to bring the water
near to Sydney is avoided.
The existing channel of the river furnishes that conduit ready
made. The cost of making and maintaining artificial works is
therefore to that extent superseded, and the water is brought
free of cost to a point within not more than ten miles of the
suggested reservoir on the high land at Petersham, or of the
mains which at present supply Sydney. That distance is all
that will require an artificial conduit, and even that length
will be largely utilised, because the pipe will pass through
suburbs of rapidly growing population in which the demand
for water will furnish a revenue. The more westerly suburbs
of Petersham, Ashfield, and Burwood, along the line of railway,
which are fast thickening with population, could also be easily
supplied from the George’s River basin, as the course of the
railway towards Parramatta runs roughly parallel with the
channel of the river.
2nd. The reservoir will be sufficiently capacious to hold an
ample supply even for a long drought.
A dam at Sans Souci would create a reservoir of about 4,000
acres in extent, and if the fresh water were raised only a foot
above high-water mark, it would store not less than 8,000 million
gallons, and for every foot that the dam was raised there would
be an increase of the storage to the extent of 1,000 million
gallons.
3rd. This reservoir, so capacious, would be constantly sup-
plied.
The proportion of the rainfall that runs down the Nepean and
Cataract rivers was measured by the Commissioners, and apply-
ing their observations to the somewhat larger watershed of the
George’s river, the quantity that would have passed out at its
mouth would, in 1869, the year of their observations, have been
92,600 millions of gallons. That year, however, was rather a
dry one, and the quantity would be larger in an average year.


The quantity passing down the river during the first six months
of the present year will, on the same basis of calculation, have
been about 265,540 millions of gallons. But this season has
been most unusual, if not unprecedented. Even in a year of
absolute drought such as has never yet been known on the
coast, the reservoir would not be nnsupplied. Several of
the tributary streams have never yet been known to cease
running, and out of the large watershed of 375 square miles,
some water will always be discharged. And whatever
the water-shed yields, and that is not absorbed or evaporated,
must pass into the reservoir, so that even a day’s rain would
make a perceptible contribution. A very slight rainfall over so
large an area, would be sure to send something into the basin.
The probabilities of a reservoir so supplied ever becoming ex-
hausted are almost infinitesimally small, but if such an event
ever could happen, the basin would be replenished by the first
day’s rain. The area of the water-shed, and the fact that all
the water that drains off the surface must pass into the reser-
voir and can only run to waste when the reservoir is full, is a
consideration of great advantage where long droughts have to
be provided against. It ought also to be borne in mind that in
dry weather the showers are mostly along the coast. It often
rains smartly on the coast, when it is dry at Parramatta or Pen
rith. A large part of the George’s River water-shed is close to
the coast.
The present actual supply to Sydney is 1,500 millions of gal-
lons. It is estimated that if there were no stint the city would
use 2,000 millions gallons. The possible consumption for a year,
however, is estimated by the Commissioners at 12,000 millions
gallons. The capacity of George’s River to meet any imaginary
demand may be seen by a comparison with the above figures,
the discharge down the river in the dry year 1869, and in the
first half of the year 1870, thus
GALLONS.
Present consumption 1,500,000,000
Present maximum demand 2.000 000 000
Present maximum demand 2,000,000,000
Future anticipated demand 12’000 000,000
Discharge down George River, 1869 .. .. 92,600^000,000
Ditto ditto for the first six months of 1870 .. 265,540,000,000


These figures may serve to show how well the reservoir would
be kept full, and how little chance there would be of the water
in it ever getting stagnant.
4th. The necessary works are simple and comparatively
cheap.
They consist of a dam, a pumping engine, and perhaps a dis-
tributing reservoir, about ten miles of piping, and nearly the
whole of the latter may be laid along roads. The cost of a suit-
able dam has been estimated by Mr. Mayes, C.E., at £60,000.
The cost of the pumping machinery, of the ten miles of piping,
and of the incidental works, might bring up the whole outlay
to £250,000.
111. - OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.
In the course of an interesting and prolonged discussion of
this subject, at meetings of the Royal Society, several objec-
tions were urged, and more or less replied to. The principal of
these are as follows :
Objection 1. —The salt water would not be effectually washed
out, or, at any rate, not for a long time.
Answer. —The objection takes no sufficient account of the
enormous quantity of fresh water annually rolling down the
river. A dam could not possibly enclose more salt water than
the reservoir could contain up to the level of high and spring
tides, and assuming this to be 7,000 million gallons this would
be mixed in the course of even a moderately dry year with thir-
teen times its bulk of fresh water. During the first six months
of 1870 it would have been mixed with thirty-five times its bulk
of fresh water. The process of sweetening would therefore go
on with great rapidity.
Objection 2. —The soil, especially that of the fore-shores at
the head of the bays, is saturated with salt.
Answer. —These salt marshes will either give out the salt
that is stored in them, or they will not. If they do not, no
harm will be done to the water —if they do, the salt so given
out will be carried away.


Objection 3.—One-third of the area of the watershed con-
sists of Wainamatta shale. Wells sunk in that shale yield very
brackish water, and the water drawn from water-holes in creeks
traversing that shale is also in dry weather very brackish.
Answer. This estimate of one-third of the area is guess-
work, and may, on inquiry, prove to be excessive. The water
that drains off it into the river will be mostly flood waters
passing rapidly over the grass-covered surface, and will not
have come sufficiently into contact with the shale to be appre-
ciably injured. Only that portion of the water will be con-
taminated which percolated through the shale, and this will not
be very much, as the shale is not very pervious and does not
readily absorb or discharge water. Samples taken from the
water-holes during a dry season that have been subjected to
prolonged evaporation are not fair specimens of the average
quality of the water that will run into the river during the year,
as they furnish a concentrated solution of shale water. The
water above the dam at Liverpool receives the drainage of the
Bunbury Curran Creek, which has been specially objected to as
strongly impregnated with shale. Yet the water at Liverpool
has never been found unfit, either for the purposes of the paper-
mill, or of that of the wool-washing establishment, neither of
which could carry on satisfactorily if the water were bad. The
town of Liverpool has always been supplied from the George’s
Bi\er above the dam, as have also the railway locomotives, and
this water, therefore, has stood the double test of its fitness for
manufacturing and for domestic purposes.
In discussing the purity of water, it is necessary to dis-
tinguish between the quality best fitted for lavatory, and that
best fitted for alimentary, purposes. For mere washing,
water cannot be too soft, as every increase of hardness involves
a waste of soap. But for use as a beverage, water may be too
pure. The Encyclopedia Britannica, in an article contributed
jointly by Drs. Letheby and Lankester, describes a good water
as follows :—“ A water which contains about 20 grains of saline
matter in the gallon, of which about 12 or 13 are carbonate of
lime, from 2 to 3 sulphate of lime, from 2 to 3 common salt,


Chloride of sodium (common salt)
Chloride of magnesium ..
Carbonate of magnesia
Carbonate of lime
Sulphate of lime
Silica and peroxide of iron
Grains per gallon.
25 72
3 45
2-48
2 00
110
110
Total inorganic matter
35-85
and with not more than two grains of organic matter, is
generally well suited for domestic purposes.”
That portion of the George’s River water which comes off
the sandstone area would be very pure —that which comes oft
the grass lands overlying the shale might be slightly affected
by the qualities of the soil, and that far smaller proportion
which had percolated through the shale would be impregnated
with the earthly matters the shale contains. The South Creek
runs almost entirely through shale country, and its water
furnishes a fair sample of what may be called shale water. An
analysis by Professor Smith shews that it contains the follow-
ing ingredients :—The creek was in its average condition.
The water was clear and colorless, no smell, taste faintly saline,
but not unpleasant. The components of the dry residue may
be represented as follows :
The total solid matter found on evaporation was 38 ‘7 grains ;
substracting the above 35 - 8 from this, leaves 2'83 for organic
matter. There, may, however, be a little potash iu this matter,
but it was not looked for, and if present, it would go in the
above analysis to the credit of the common salt. The hardness
was 9°.”
The South Creek not only drains a shale district, but a dis-
trict occupied for agricultural and grazing purposes. The pro-
portion of salt contained is under 26 grains to the gallon. Nor
does lime or oil exist therein in undesirable quantities. The
exceptionable element is the magnesia, but this would not be
injurious for alimentary purposes, and does not exceed 6 grains
to the gallon.
It must be remembered that in the George’s River the shale
water will be very largely diluted by sandstone water, and that


the general average quality of the -water at the point from
which it would be drawn for city supply, would be quite satis-
factory. It would be a waste of money to finesse too much
about the quality of the water, and to go to an enormous
expense simply to attain to a theoretical degree of purity. The
water from the Trafalgar fountains in London, and which, by
the advice of Her Majesty’s physician, was laid on to the palace,
contains 68 94 per cent, of saline matter. The water at the
Royal Mint contains 44 grains per gallon of solid matter ; that
of the New River Co., 194 ; the East London Waterworks, 234 >
the Kent Waterworks Co., 29f ; the Hampstead Water Co., 354
to 40 grains per gallon of solid matter.
Objection" 4. —The river receives the sewage from the paper
works, the wool-washing establishment, the Benevolent Asylum,
and the town of Liverpool, in addition to the drainage from the
homesteads on the watershed.
Answer. —The paper-mill is not a serious objection. The pollu-
tion from this particular kind of manufactory has been especially
enquired into in England, because there are several paper-mills
on the Thames, from which the greater portion of the London
supply is drawn. Dr. Macadam Stephenson, in a paper read
before the Social Science Association, says—“ Sewage differs
from the discharges from mines and many chemical works and
other manufactories. Thus a stream having many paper works
on its banks, and having discharged thereinto much liquid
containing organic matter, does not putrify or exhale noxious
gases, provided the water is in motion. ”
At the Asylum the earth-closet system is in operation
satisfactorily. Only the surface drainage from the town of
Liverpool passes into the river/as there is no subsoil system of
drainage. The wool-washing establishment certainly discharges
into it undesirable matter, but this is a valuable liquid manure,
and ought to be employed for irrigation. The population at
present settled on the watershed is scattered and is mostly
remote from the river banks. The sewage that has been found
so injurious to rivers in England is the concentrated sewage
from towns ; but there is nothing of this Icind on the George’s


River. The contamination at present is exceedingly small, and
can be kept so ; and if it existed in far greater quantity than
it does, its effect would be inappreciable when diluted with the
large quantity of water that comes down. Mr. Johnston, the
analytical chemist of the Victorian Government, when called
upon lately to report as to the corruption of the water of the
Van Yean by animal matter, stated that it would require 3,000
bullocks to be decaying to affect in any appreciable degree the
large body of water in that reservoir.
In England the evil has been that great towns pour their
arterial drainage into little rivers, and rivers with only a
languid current. Here the case is altogether reversed. V e
have only a little village discharging merely its surface drainage
into a large river, subject to the cleansing influence of heavy
floods.
Objection s.—This scheme loses the advantage of gravita-
tion, and involves the perpetual cost of pumping.
Answer. —The great merit of gravitation is that it maintains
a constant pressure. This advantage is equally conferred if the
water is pumped into a reservoir sufficiently elevated to give
the desired pressure. The continuity of a supply on a gravita-
tion system is dependent on the permanent maintenance in
good order of the conduit in its entire length. This involves
a risk quite as great as that of the maintenance of pumping
engines in good order, especially as duplicate engines can be
constructed, thus maintaining always a reservoir of water in
case of accident. It is easier to have a reserve engine than a
reserve conduit. Mr. Bell estimates the cost of pumping at
present at under £2 per million gallons, and that by engines by
no means adapted to the work.
Objection 6.—A dam could not be constructed that would
withstand the force of the floods and be impervious except it
were made of solid masonry, the cost of which would be
enormous.
Answer. —Dams of rubble stone and earth have been con-
structed both in India and Italy to withstand more violent
shocks than those to which one on the George’s TRiver would be


subjected, and such dams are safe provided their weirs are sb
constructed as to give ample discharge for,-- the waste water,
which can easily be done in the George’s Elver. The town of
Philadelphia i
to that proposed for the George’s
the Schuylkill, which has a strong
A navigable rivef,
, and of which the
3 it, and the fresh
tide rises six feet, had a dam thrown across it, and the fresh
water banked up six feet. The bed of,the river is partly mud
and partly rock. On the muddy portion, loose rubble stones were
thrown to make the dam. On the
part the dam was formed
by crib-work, and the whole backed up by rubble stone and earth.
The construction was comparatively cheap. It has lasted now
several years. It has been found to its purpose excel-
lently. Some differences in detail would be necessary in con-
structing a similar one in George’s Eiver, but the precedent is
sufficient to prove the practicability of such an undertaking.
Objection f. —A dam would close the navigation of the
river, and give rise to serious claims for compensation.
Answer. —The navigation is at present useless, being con-
fined to a few Wood boats, or an occasional fishing or pleasure
party. The advantage of making the water fresh would, to
. most landholders, be more than a compensation for closing an
unsuited navigation; but if such claims sho 1 arise, a lock
could be constructed, as at Philadelphia, if the cost of the
lock would not be greater than the cost of compensation.
</
f
Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., Letter-press Printers, 108 Pitt-street, Sydney.
