

A VISIT
TO
THE DIGGINGS;
OR, •
*> - ()Vl
irfcrtcfjrs of Australian Hife.
JAMES CHARLESWORTH.
CHATHAM;
PRINTED BY R. BECK, 58, HIGH STREET.
1855.


GOLD LICENSE.
No. 185
The Bearer
having paid the Sum of Two Pounds, on account of the
General Revenue of the Colony, I hereby License him to
mine or dig for Gold, or exercise and carry on any other
trade or calling on such Crown Lands within the Colony
of Victoria, as shall be assigned to him for these purposes
by any one duly authorised in that behalf.
This Licence to be in force until and during the month
of and no longer.
Commissioner.
Regulations to be observed by the persons digging for Gold or otherwise
at the Gold Fields.
1. This License is to be carried on the person, to be produced whenever
demanded by any Commissioner, Peace Officer, or other duly autho-
rised person, and is not transferable.
2. No Mining will be permitted where it would be destructive to any line
of road which it is necessary to maintain, and which shall be deter-
mined by the Commissioner, nor within such distance around any
store as it may be necessary to reserve for access to it.
3. It is enjoined that all persons on the Gold Fields maintain a due and
proper observance of Sundays.
4. The extent of claim allowed to each Licensed Miner is twelve feet square,
or 144 square feet.
5. To a party consisting of two Miners, twelve feet by twenty-four, or 288
square feet.
6. To a party consisting of three Miners, eighteen feet by twenty-four, or
432 square feet.
7. To a party consisting of four Miners, twenty-four feet by twenty-four,
or 576 square feet : beyond which no greater area will be allowed in
one claim.


VISIT TO THE DIGGINGS.
I left Gravesend on the Bth of November, and arrived
at Melbourne on the 18 th of March. I landed with the
sum of one halfpenny, which I picked up on board the
ship ; the next day I went on tramp with my swag on
my back to look for work. After three days walking I
came to a place called the Black Forest, here I got a job
under the Colonial Government to fell trees and make a
road, being the main road to the Gold Fields. Previous
to this road being made many hundreds were robbed,
and a great many murdered. It is 13 miles through the
forest—the distance from Melbourne to the Bendigo and
Mount Alexander diggings being 110 miles. During
the 18 days 1 worked on this job, by piece-work learned
£25. I then went to Bendigo. When I arrived, there
were 80,000 miners besides women and children on
these, the richest and most extensive diggings that had
been found —they were also the most easy to work.
I have known them to sink holes two and three feet deep
from the surface in an hour or two, but sometimes the
gold would be found on the surface in digging with a
knife —on the other hand, on these same fields, myself and
others have gone as low as twenty and from that to thirty
feet below the surface—alongside those who had made
their fortunes—working for months without success.
I only got four ounces of gold. I have worked 100


tons of coals a-day in England, and it is easy compared
to the labour at the Gold Diggings—the labour is so
severe because the soil generally is very hard. Again,
when you open a piece of ground you are eager enough
to get to the bottom to ascertain whether it is a golden
hole or a blank, one will frequently ask another “ have
you bottomed yet ?” this inquiry is made because the
gold lies among the earth and quartz in the shallow sink-
ings, being from four to six inches from the pipe clay,
which the gold cannot get through. 1 have known
men to sink 30 feet through the pipe clay to find
another bottom, and often be unsuccessful. The country
has a most extraordinary appearance. When I first
went there, I went to the top of the highest hill I could
find on a clear day, and as far as I could see all around the
earth seemed torn up, and the same process is now going
on ; those who first opened the ground, unless they got
two or three ounces to the tub would leave it, and begin
in a fresh place ; others would follow them and wash
their dirt over again, perhaps this re-washing would be
performed by five or six different parties following each
other at various times. The remark has been frequently
made by myself and others upon the appearance of the
gold fields that it seemed as if a man had dreamt where
the gold was to be found, and had jumped out of bed
and run with his pick and shovel to dig on the exact
spot to find the treasure. Many a time my mates and
myself have worked until our hearts ached, close beside
the same hole where other men had made their fortune
in a few days, while we, on the same piece of ground
could not find the smallest speck of gold to reward our
weary toll ; this often caused us to curse the day we left
old England. At that time I worked hard for six weeks
and did not get a quarter of an ounce of gold. At last
I became so tired of it that I sold my tent and tools, and
went to town. Many thousands did the same. I went
to an auction and bought a few things with what little
money I bad left—took a heavy swag with me, and


went on tramp to the same gold fields again. On the
road I sold my articles to great advantage, for in a fort-
night I realized £9B. Then I went digging again, and
during two months got only four ounces of gold, and
this was scarcely sufficient to find me in salt whilst work-
ing at the mine. I sold my tent and tools a second time,
and went on tramp again to the town. I stopped there
until I was tired, so I took the steamer for Geelong, and
went to try my luck at the gold fields of Ballarat. The'
distance is 65 miles, over a mountainous country, and
I was knocked up for several days from over fatigue
in carrying a heavy load. I now made my mind up
not to leave the gold fields until I had accomplished
the purpose for which I had left England ; or, like
many more, be buried in the gold fields. I was tired of
tramping about the Colony. In the first few weeks I
had walked my big toe-nails full of blood, and in a few
days after I lost them, so I can assure my readers from
experience, that I had not much pleasure in leaving
old England to go to Australia. It is of no use for any
one to think of going to the gold fields unless they can
work hard, and put up cheerfully with all sorts of rough
fare and usage. I could defy many to beat me at this
work, yet several times have I been hauled up out of our
hole completely exhausted. Our proper time was six
hours for a spell, and sometimes we would be four or
five hours of that time sending up nothing but water.
Our hole was 151 feet from the surface, at the Gravel-
pit fiat of Ballarat, being about a mile and a quarter dis-
tance from where the large Nugget was found. I have
O OQ
many a time looked down the same hole, wishing that I
might be as lucky, at the same time I had a golden hole,
and did not know it until months afterwards ; there
were ten of us in the party, we used to work five during
the night and five in the day. The measurement allowed
for our ground was 24 feet square, we worked these six
deep holes thus, we timbered them all the way down, we
jagged them in at one end, and pegged them at the other,


to make the shaft as strong as we could; it requires 1700
slabs 3 inches thick to go down, and as there is so much
water it loosens the earth and makes it very dangerous
to work, so much so that it frequently happens both by
day and night, that some are smothered. Standing on
the top of some of the shafts they are really frightful,
their shape reminding you of a corkscrew. The one that
I was at work in, when at the bottom I was afraid to
look up, for the sides bulged so that I thought every
minute it would fall in and close over us ; in general
they are worked 3 feet 6 inches by 2 feet 6 inches, the
reason is that the smaller the diameter of the hole the
stronger it is. On one occasion we left our shaft after
sinking 104 feet, thinking to have a day or two’s rest,
while the other holes around us were sunk down to our
level, so as to help draw the water from us ; when we
came the next morning there was 85 feet of water in our
hole, this cost us eleven weeks hard work, night and
day to get out, and it was a most heartless job, for we
did not know whether it was a golden hole or a blank.
We worked five months and three weeks at that hole
before we saw a speck of gold. We sunk right down on
the gold and dirt mixed together. I filled a tin pan
about two gallons, cleaned it myself, and took it up to
the commissioners for them to take care of for us. It
weighed 112 J ounces. After we reached it we got it in
four days and nights. It took the ten of us 14§ days to
wash the gold from the dirt. We then sold the hole to
a company of twenty men for £9OO. This we did be-
cause it was so wet. I marked the ground out myself,
and from the time I began until I left it was just six
months and a half, during which time I had full fifty
different mates.
I now left the diggings for Geelong, and went from
there to Melbourne, where I entered on board the first
ship that was bound to London, the “ Swarthmore,” of
Liverpool. We had been to sea but a few hours when
we had to take to the pumps, and this labour we con-


tinned for six successive weeks night and day, until
we arrived at Otaheite, there I bought my discharge,
and made the best of my way to Wahoo, one of the
Sandwich Islands, from thence to San Francisco, Cali-
fornia, then to Panama. I came across the Isthmus, part
of the way by mules and part by railway to Chagres,
from thence I sailed to New York. I then proceeded to
Philadelphia, from which place I sailed to Liverpool,
and now that I am safely landed once more in England,
after an absence of two years and three months, I never
wish to go to the gold nelds any more, for I have had
enough of that work.
The following Letter from a Friend will show how things are
going on now in Australia.
Melbourne, 12th January, 1855.
Dear Friend, — I write these few lines to you
hoping you are in good health, as I am at present ; we
arrived here in safety after a passage of one hundred
days. lam sorry to say that this land is at present in a
very bad state. There are thousands of men walking
about the streets looking for employment and cannot get
it. Not a single passenger in our ship could procure a
place of any kind in Melbourne, yet the papers say
“ you can get instant employment on landing,” but do
not believe it, there is more poverty here than any man
in England would believe, wages have fallen from £l
per day to 30s. per week. Mechanics of all kinds are
here, who would work for their bare support, but even at
that they cannot procure work, some people say that the
cause of all this is the over supply of goods in the market,
and the unpopular act of the Government, which has
caused Englishmen to take up arms and raise the standard
of Rebellion. The day is not far off when the Colonies
will force their just claims from their rulers. Should
they be denied the rights and privileges of Englishmen
on their petition to the Queen, they will declare their
independence. The poor man is taxed here before he


can dig the gold, instead of there being an export duty
on gold when leaving the Colony • if this were carried
out it would add more to the revenue than the present
license for digging, for this does not bring enough
to pay the policemen for looking after the diggers to see
if they all have the license. The papers here are crowded
every day with bankrupts, which will ere long make it
a ruinous country. The provisions on board the ship I
came out in were very small in quantity, but having made
myself generally useful in several ways, such as serving
out stores, I gained the goodwill of all the passengers,
and last but not least, the smiles of the ladies. We
had four deaths and five births on board our ship.
Through the kindness of one of our passengers, a Mrs.
Harding, I stopped with her several days after my land-
ing ; she has behaved very kindly to me, and I shall
ever remember her ; I have now left her and packed up
my few things to go to the diggings ; she called in on
my departure, and came to the wharf to see me off.
Dear Friend, I never thought this country was what it
is. I have tried everywhere for something to do for
the last week, but could not succeed. I went out to
Simpson’s Creek, 17 miles from town, and have returned
again the same night—but I must say farewell. I shall
not forget if fortune favours me. A man has just asked
me for 2d. and another for a glass of beer, which I gave
to them. Believe me, I remain ever your sincere and
affectionate Friend and well-wisher,
J. C.
A few months back there was no copper money passed
in the Colony, and you would have been troubled to find
a beggar, this shows what an alteration has been made
in so short a time. I would advise all those who have
wives and families, if they have got anything like a living
at home, not to go to Australia.
J. CHARLESWORTH.
8
