













A VISIT
TO THE
ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS,
EK3' IPEffi lEH®H3Kr® IP.&IBIE.
INTERSPERSED WITH
A FAMILIAR DESCRIPTION OF THE MANNERS AND HABITS OF THE
ANIMALS CONTAINED THEREIN.
A PLEASING COMPANION TO JUVENILE VISITORS OF THIS DELIGHTFUL
PLACE OF RECREATION AND RESORT.
CAREFULLY CORRECTED TO THE PRESENT TIME
BY J. BISHOP,
WITH TWELVE COLOURED ENGRAVINGS, OF SCENES IN THE GARDENS.
THO 8 - DEAN & Co. 35, THREADNEEDLE STREET,
Price One Shilling.




A VISIT
THE ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS.
“ My dear Richard,” said Mr. Bacon, to his son,
one evening, “to-morrow will be your birth-day;
and I purpose giving you and your sister Clarissa
a treat, by taking you both to London, by the
Railway, to see the many fine things that are
exhibited in the Zoological Gardens, in the
Regent’s park.”
“Oh! thank you, papa,” replied Richard, “that
will indeed be a treat;” and without waiting for
further remarks, he left the room, to convey the
welcome tidings to his sister Clarissa.
Next morning, the young folks were awake at
an earlier hour than usual: and the time that
A/.ftqirfUjtZi
' 21.1.13


elapsed before the nursery-maid made her appear-
ance to them, seemed particularly lingering.
Breakfast was soon over, for they had but little
appetite that morning,—and within as short a time
as the necessary preparations of dress, admitted,
Mr. Bacon, and Miss and Master Bacon, were
on their way to London, in a train on the Great
Western Railway, which ran close by the town
in which Mr. Bacon resided.
So absorbed were the young folks in anticipat-
ing what they should see in the Zoological
Gardens, of which they had heard so much, that
even the rapidity of the railway train seemed
scarcely equal to their wishes; and on their arrival
at the terminus at Paddington, they betrayed the
greatest impatience to reach the Regent’s park,
to which a coach soon conveyed them.
When the delighted party entered the Gardens,
they with much pleasure noticed the very tasteful
manner in which they were laid out; the flower-
beds, which were large and numerous, contained


the choicest and loveliest flowers, in full bloom;
the walks were broad and nicely gravelled; and
the various places in which the animals were kept
were erected in the prettiest style imaginable.
So many new and pleasing scenes appeared
before the sight of the young party, that they
hardly knew which way to direct their attention.
The Pheasant aviaries, which they first came to,
contained several beautiful varieties of the gold,
silver, and pencilled birds of the kind, and some
other rare birds, principally from the eastern parts
of the world; which the young folks admired very
much—Passing on by the terrace, now admiring
the many beautiful flowers which presented them-
selves to view in every direction, then gazing
around them, they, on looking onward, observed
an enclosure, within which was a paved pit, with
a high pole upright in the centre: here they saw
several Brown and Black Bears; and were for a
moment alarmed at seeing two of them climb up
the pole, as readily as a cat would run up a tree.


Their fears, however, ceased, when they observed
that they could not come near them, and then
they were much amused at their tricks. Richard’s
papa, with a long stick, kept for that purpose,
handed the bears an apple and a bun, which they
readily took and eat, and looked about for more.
“ These Bears/’ said Mr. Bacon, “ were brought
here from remote parts of the world; the large
Brown Bears are found in the coldest and most
northen parts of Europe and America, and in-
habit the vast forests and mountains of those
dreary regions. The Black Bears are from North
America; and the Cinnamon Bears come from
that part of North America called Hudson’s Bay.
In the few summer months those cold countries
enjoy,” continued Mr. Bacon, “ the American
Bears get very fat and plump; but no sooner does
the long winter set in, than these solitary animals
retire, some to a hollow tree, some to a hole in
the earth, or a recess in a rock: and there, in a
kind of sleep, pass the dreary season, with no




other food or nourishment than what they derive
from their paws being continually in their mouths.”
On turning from the Bear pit, the young party
were rather surprised to see a number of Pigeons
in a Dove-house on the roof of a neighbouring
building, and Richard asked his papa why they
were placed there, as he thought pigeons too
common to be curious.
“ Pigeons,” said Mr. Bacon, “ are common: but
there are some varieties which are curious, either
in their appearance or their habits; this kind is
remarkable for their singular manner of tumbling
over and over as they fly; whence they are called
Tumblers. Here are also several Carrier Pigeons,
a kind peculiarly useful in conveying information
from one place to another.”
On descending from the Terrace, they came to
a large and elegank.cage or aviary, in which, in the
fine summer months, a number of the most beau-
tiful Parrots, Maccaws, and Cockatoos, are kept;
some were climbing up and down the sides of


thair cage; while others were gamboling in and
out a double hoop slung from the top, sometimes
clinging by their strong claws, and holding on by
their crooked but powerful beaks. The variety of
lovely colours and splendid tints, of this choice
assemblage of beautiful birds, much delighted the
young folks, who thought they should never be
tired at looking at them.
“Maccaws, and Cockatoos,” said Mr. Bacon,
“ are natives of the West India Islands, and the
warmer parts of America. Some are from the
East Indies, and other parts of Asia. But beau-
tiful as they are in appearance, these birds, in one
respect, resemble the hawk tribe, in having, like
them, strong, feathered feet, and short, hooked
bills. Most of the birds of the hawk tribe are
of a cruel disposition, and subsist principally on
small birds, and animals; which they tear to pieces
with their hooked bills, while they hold it firmly
with their strong claws, under their strong, short,
feathered legs.”


In the Llama house, to which they next came,
was one of those singular animals, nearly as large
as an ox, and of a milk-white colour. It was
brought from South America, where they are used,
fed, and treated like horses. Here were also a
Dromedary and a Camel, to which Mr. Bacon
drew attention, as exhibiting an instance of the
wisdom of Providence in furnishing the natives of
the East with animals in every way so well suited
to their wants; compelled, in trading from one
country to another, to pass over immense tracts
of desert, the Oriental or Eastern people require a
beast of burden whose endurance of toil and thirst
can meet the difficulties and dangers of the jour-
ney.—The Camel and the Dromedary, nearly alike
in appearance, except that the Camel has but one
hump on its back, while the Dromedary has two,
possess these powers of endurance in an extra-
ordinary degree. They are both furnished with an
internal bag, or reservoir, capable of containing
ten to twelve gallons of water, which they can


drink at pleasure, and thus travel several hun-
dreds miles without requiring a fresh supply. Their
feet are broad and spreading, fitted for travelling
over sandy places; while their great strength
in bearing burthens, and their docility to their
master, render them valuable and indispensable.
The party now came to the Lawn, which was
neatly enclosed, and in the middle of which was
a pond, with a very pretty fountain rising from a
kind of rocky grotto, playing its jet of water
in a fine rain-like shower. In this pond were
many curious sorts of foreign and British Swans,
Geese, Ducks, and other water-fowl, wild and
tame. Among these, Mr. Bacon directed Richard’s
attention to the Cormorant, an erect-looking bird
something about the size of a goose, with sooty-
coloured plumage: “This bird, said Mr. Bacon,
“may justly be called the glutton; it lives upon
fish, but eats so many at a time, as to become
almost gorged. Its greediness, however, is made
useful to mankind in many countries, particularly


in China, and the eastern parts of the world. A
cord is tied round its neck, not so tight as to in-
jure the bird, but sufficiently so to prevent its
swallowing. With several Cormorants perched on
the edges of his boat, the fisherman rows to that
part of the stream that he thinks will suit his
purpose; here he sets to work: the birds, pre-
viously taught, dive down, catch each a fish, and
bring it to their master. This is repeated till
enough are caught: the strings are then taken off
their necks, and they are rewarded with a plenti-
ful share of the fish taken.”
“ The greater part of the birds you see there,”
said Mr. Bacon to his children, “ are called
aquatic, or water-fowl, from their subsisting
principally in the water; to suit them for which
mode of life, nature has given them a close, light,
feathery covering, and webbed feet. Some of the
birds in this enclosure, such as the Cranes, the
Storks, and the Herons, are not able to swim;
but only to wade along the edges of rivers and


ponds; they usually frequent marshy swamps;
and live on worms, frogs, small serpents, and
other reptiles and insects. These you may readily
distinguish, being the tallest among these birds,
and not having webbed feet. Another difference
between the wading and the swimming birds, is
that most of the swimmers have a broad bill, like
that of the goose and duck; while the w T aders
have generally a long narrow bill, like that of the
snipe. In both these instances, as well as in their
feet, you see the goodness of Providence, in
furnishing every creature with the means of best
enjoying the life granted to it by its Creator.”
These birds, when not in the lawn, are to be
found in the adjoining aviaries; which at this time
contain several Storks, Herons, Spoonbills, Cranes,
a Secretary Vulture, and crested Curassows; and
near to this were the enclosures in which was a
Seal, several white Pelicans, and two or three
Emus, a bird somewhat resembling an Ostrich,
but more bulky.


“ Look at that Seal,” said Mr. Bacon, directing
the attention of the children to that curiously-
formed animal, “and you will observe that its
head somewhat resembles that of a dog, the
skin or covering is like that of an otter, and the
feet and tail, or rather fins, like the fins of a fish:
they are found in the northern climates, and are
seen in great numbers amidst those regions of
eternal ice and snow.
“ The Pelican of the wilderness,” continued
their papa, “is a noble bird: it is found in Asia
and Africa, and feeds on fish, which it deposits
in a large pouch hanging from the under part of
its large beak, and capable of containing a large
quantity of this kind of food.—The Pelican is a
bird of a very indolent nature, and not by any
means the kind mother that feeds its young from
its own breast, as represented in the writings of
former days; it is not until impelled by hunger oir
the outcries of its young for food, that it will stiir
from its perch or nest; it then flies to the sea-


shore, and stores its pouch with fish, with which
it returns to the young, and disgorging the fish,
feed them in turn. It must be from this mode of
feeding its young, that the idea of feeding its
young from its own breast took its rise.”
In the Court-yard, to which they now came,
were long iron cages, in which were several more
varieties of Bears; some of which were brought
from the northern parts of Europe; the others
were American varieties, and brought mostly from
America by the Hudson’s Bay Company, a society
of merchants, who trade with the native American
Indians, for furs, skins, and similar articles.
After passing through the Court-yard, the
party came to an enclosure, in which, in separate
divisions, were several Wolves, European and
American Foxes, Racoons, Kanguroos, and some
varieties of the Deer and Antelope kinds.
Mr. Bacon here directed the attention of the two
children to the kangaroos: “ That singular animal,’’


18 VISIT TO THE ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS.
said Mr. Bacon, “ was brought from New South
Wales, by the natives of which its flesh is con-
sidered a delicacy; it is perfectly harmless, and
somewhat resembles the squirrel, both in appear-
ance and habits of life, except that, as you see,
it is considerably larger in size.”
Near to these enclosures were ranges of dens,
in which the larger animals were kept. Here were
an Hyena, an Asiatic .Leopard, a Sloth Bear, and
several varieties of Eagles and Falcons.
These animals, said Mr. Bacon, on entering
the enclosure in which the dens were situated,
“ deserve particular attention. This is the Sloth
Bear, the idlest of the whole sluggish race; in-
deed, idleness is its chief characteristic: when this
animal climbs a tree, upon the vegetation of
which it subsists, it eats not only the leaves, biut
the bark also; and then, unable or unwilling to
descend, falls to the ground, where it remains
immoveable, until hunger again compels it to
ascend another tree.




“ The Hyaena is a fierce and somewhat cruel
animal, and may be considered as uniting in itself
the principal characteristics of the Wolf and
the Leopard tribes; its very look is that of fierce
and untractable savageness, which its snarling
growl does not in the least diminish.”
“ Those eagles,” added Mr. Bacon, “ are large
and powerful birds; but as w r e shall see more of
them by and by, we will reserve our remarks on
them till then.”
The great strength evident in the appearance
of the Eagles elicited several observations from
Master Richard, while his sister looked surprised
when told that there were birds, the Condor, for
instance, much longer and stronger than even the
Eagles.
In a temporary building near to the dens, were
several kinds of the Deer, Antelope, and Goat
tribes. Of these, the Antelope particularly took
Clarissa s attention, from its symmetry of shape,
and peculiarly light and -agile form. Her papa


informed her, that this animal is the swiftest
in nature; and that its eyes are so remarkably
beautiful, that in the eastern part of the ivorld,
it is considered a compliment to compare the eyes
of a lady to those of the Gazelle, or Antelope.
There was also in the building, a curious shell-
covered animal, something like the Tortoise, and
called the Weasel-headed Armadillo, which on fine
days is put into one of the open enclosures; where
it amuses itself, or rather occupies its time, with
continually running about, as if in search of a
hole in which to hide itself from public gaze.
The party now left the dens and enclosed build-
ings, and again had the pleasure of viewing
the open gardens, where they admired the many
beautiful flowers which at every turn presented
their varied and lovely bloom to the eye of the
spectators. In this part of the Gardens they saw r
the Goat-house, built on the top of a heap of
stones, and were much delighted with the curious
sorts of Goats and Sheep within the enclosure.


“ one of these Goats,” said Mr. Bacon, “ is the
Cashmere Goat; it was brought from Persia; and
from its singularly fine hair are manufactured the
beautiful and valuable Cashmere shawls; those
made in the East Indies are peculiarly fine and
beautiful, and are often sold for a very large
sum of money.
In a square wire enclosure, on the opposite
grass plot, were carefully sporting two or three
kinds of Deers, Zebras, and other animals, occa-
sionally put in here for exercise. Clarissa parti-
cularly admired the Zebra, and said it was the
prettiest among the quadrupeds, its skin was so
delicate and so very handsomely striped.
In the vicinity of this grass-plot were several
moveable aviaries, in which were some beautiful
varieties of the Pheasant, Partridge, and British
and foreign game birds; among these, the Gold,
Silver, Purple-breasted, and Chinese Pheasants'
were particularly conspicuous, from the rare'
beauty and loveliness of their plumage.




Following on to the extremity of this walk, our
party came to a large pond, in which were three
pretty islands, fitted up for the occasional
retreat of the Swans and Geese, which were
swimming in full majesty about the lake. Here
weie wild White and Black Swans, and several
varieties of Geese, and Ducks, together with
many other water-fowl; who seemed to be by no
means shy, but were amusing themselves and
their beholders with feats of swimming and div-
ing, and other aquatic diversions.
Master Richard had advanced a few paces
onwards, when all on a sudden he exclaimed.
£f Papa, sister, do make haste; here is a great
White Bear swimming in the water!” The party
soon reached the enclosure which contained the
object of Richard’s curiosity, and there saw the
Polar Bear just stepping out of a large tank.
This animal seemed in continual motion, always
walking to and fro, or round and round, every
now and then putting one of his feet into the


tank, to keep himself wet; and was so far sociable
as to pick up and eat pieces of bun or biscuit
thrown to him.
“ This Bear,” said Mr. Bacon, “ was brought
from that part of the world called the Polar
Regions, and, on that account, is termed the Polar
Bear. Amid eternal snow, on large fields of ice,
Bears, similar to this one, are to be seen, wan-
dering about in search of food, which consists
of fish, and, now and then, the dead body of a
whale, a sea-horse, or some such dainty, upon
which they feed with apparent relish.
On leaving the Polar Bear, they next came
to —what they had been long wishing to see —the
Monkey-poles; and here Richard and Clarissa
were highly amused by the tricks of these mis-
chievous animals, and the agility they displayed.
From the Monkey-poles, they proceeded onwards,
and on passing a large cage, in which was kept
several Vultures, Mr. Bacon reminded Richard
of the short feathered feet, and strong hooked




bill, before noticed in the Hawks, as proving
their possessor to be a bird of prey.
By this time they had come to the noble refresh-
ment room erected in the Gardens for the
convenience of its visitors: here our party en-
tered, and regaled themselves upon some fine
fruit, pastry, ices, and other niceties; after which
they rambled into the Parrots’ and Maccaws’
winter-house, in which, except for a short space
of time in the summer months, those beautiful
but noisy birds are kept: the elegant and varied
plumage of which much pleased the young lady
and her brother.
Soon after leaving the Maccaws’ winter-house,
the party came to another den and pond, in
which were several varieties of the Gull tribe; a
race of aquatic birds that, as Mr. Bacon informed
Richard, live principally on fish, and frequent the
neighbouring seas, in pursuit of their finny prey,
particularly in those seasons when the numerous
tribes of the herring, the mackerel, and other


fish, migrate from one part of the ocean to
another, or approach the shore to spawn. Then,
indeed, the flocks of Gulls and other Sea-Fowl,
which follow those countless shoals, are immense;
and being well aware, by natural instict, of their
arrival, they summon each other to the banquet
by their cries; and in so doing, give a timely and
useful notice to the fisherman to prepare his nets
for the approaching harvest.
Adjoining this place, and opposite the Monkey-
poles, our party observed another cage and pond,
with a cavern-like building in the middle, made
for the purpose of exhibiting the manner in which
the Otter takes his prey.
Eastward of the Otter Cage, an enclosure for
Land Tortoises presents itself; in which are
several curious specimens of this singular animal.
Miss Clarissa looked surprised when informed that
it was the shell of these unsightly animals that
furnished so many young ladies with their most
beautiful combs.




Leaving those enclosures, our party next came
to the Monkeys’ winter-house, and there saw a
very large collection of Monkeys, Apes, and
Baboons, of several kinds, and from most parts
of the world. In the large cages in front of their
respective apartments, and to which they all have
ready access, these animals are allowed to range
at liberty in the day-time, during the summer,
and in the warm weather; and here their droll
tricks were really amusing. Our young friends
weie particularly delighted with their antics.
A lady standing rather close to the monkey
cages, oppressed, probably, by the heat of the day,
loosened the ties of her bonnet, to gain a breeze
of refreshing air. A gale of wind at that mo-
ment raised the bonnet from her hand, and at
the same instant, one of the Monkeys, watching
the opportunity, snatched away her cap: in an
instant he was in the midst of his mischievous
brethren, tearing it to tatters, and chattering
most rapidly. Despite of the endeavours made


by the attendants to regain it, the cap was torn
to atoms, to the no small vexation of the owner.
In the year 1835, Queen Adelaide honoured
these Gardens with a visit; and while her Majesty
and her attendants were observing the tricks
of these mischievous animals, one of them
snatched a purse with several sovereigns in it,
from the hands of one of the maids of honour,
and swallowed it. The keeper, who was at hand,
soon seized the pilferer by the throat; but it was
not without much trouble that Pug was made to
revoke the golden meal from his pouch.
At a short distance eastward of the Monkey
house, were two ponds, in which were several
kinds of the Goose, and the Duck, and Teal spe-
cies, and other aquatic and water-fowl, continually
diving in and about the water, to the great amuse-
ment of our youthful visitors. In the pond were
also Golden Carp and Gold-fish; one or two of
which every now and then made their appearance,
and then dived deeper into the water, as if unused
to the gaze of company.


Passing beyond the Monkey-house, the Beaver
enclosure was the object which next took their
attention. Here these singular and industrious
animals have a rocky kind of house or cells,
rising in the midst of a piece of water, to convey
as near an idea as possible of their nature and
habits. But what surprised Richard most was, to
hear that, in North America, in which country
they are found in plenty, Beavers associate to-
gether in societies, erect their own habitations,
and are their own timber-cutters, carpenters, and
bricklayers, their teeth answering the purpose of
saws, and their tails that of wheelbarrows and
trowels.
Returning from the Beaver enclosure, the atten-
tion of the young friends was taken by observing
in a long aviary a number of small birds, of the
Pie and Finch kinds, from the small Wren to the
gentle Dove and stately Hawk; including Spar-
rows, Goldfinches, Fieldfares, Thrushes, and other
English birds, such as are to be seen in most parts


of England. Richard and Clarissa were at some
loss to know 7 why birds so commonly to be met
with, should be taken such care of; until their
papa, in answer to their enquiries, gave them to
understand that, to form a complete collection of
Birds, so as to encourage the study of Natural
History, specimens of the most common as well
as of the rarer kinds, were equally essential.
Eastward of the Beaver enclosure is a building
in which are several large birds of the Hawk
species, among which are Eagles, Vultures, Fal-
cons, Goshawks, and Buzzards; all birds of prey,
as .Richard was now able to point out, by their
feathered feet and strong hooked bills. “The
Falcon,” said Mr. Bacon, “ was, in former times,
the companion of ladies and gentlemen, who,
whenever they went out on a sporting excur-
sion, were attended by their Falcon and their
Greyhound. Eagles are powerful birds, and often
do much mischief; being able to take away young
lambs to their nests, which are always built in the


most inaccessible places. The Vultures are, per-
haps, the ugliest of the race; but they are of great
service in the eastern parts of the world, where
they are found. They destroy the Crocodiles’
eggs in great numbers, which would otherwise
come to life, and infest the rivers and lakes: and
they also devour all kinds of carrion and filth,
which else would putrify and taint the air; so you
see, even Vultures are useful.”
After passing the Falconry, they came to the
Parrot-house, in which they saw a great many
beautiful varieties of the Cockatoo, Maccaw, and
Pan oquet tribes. This house, our party were
informed, wms the winter house of these lovely
biids; many of which, in the warmer months, are
put into the avairy previously mentioned.
Here, also, in boxes, wired at the top, were
several snakes; and notwithstanding that Clarissa
was assured they could not hurt her, she could
hardly be persuaded to look at them. Reposing
upon a soft warm blanket, was a small Boa


Constrictor snake, prettily marked, something
like the tiger, for which reason it is called the
Tiger Boa.
“In the hotter climates,” said Mr. Bacon,
“ snakes range at large in the immense forests;
and there they are indeed a fearful race: the one
you see, belongs to a variety which often grows
to thirty and even forty feet long, and are strong
and powerful enough to prey upon sheep, deer,
and even bullocks. With their ample bodies
folded round the branches of a tree, they watch
the approach of the herd, or some straggler;
and no sooner does the unconscious beast come
within reach, than it darts upon the unfortunate
victim, and winds itself round its body: in vain
the captive attempts to escape; it is quickly
subdued, and the insidious reptile having by its
great muscular strength crushed every bone,
next proceeds to swallow the whole animal;
after which, becoming gorged and helpless, it
exhibits a deplorable picture of gluttony and in-


action: it is, while in this state, often found out,
and killed by the Indians.”
The Cattle shed and yards now present them-
selves at this part of the Gardens, and behind
them are the Owls" cages. Here are Owls of all
sorts, sizes, and colours; looking most mopingly,
with their eyes shut, and dozing away their time;
some of them as serious and grave as a set of
nodding counsellors at the bar, with powdered
heads, starched ruffles, and nothing to do.
Among the animals in the Cattle-sheds, is a
Burmese Pony, formerly the property of King
William the Fourth, and a present from His
Majesty to the Gardens. There is also a specimen
of the Singsing Antelope, and a Brahmin Bull.
This fine animal was brought from India, were
it is held in the highest veneration, and is an
object of religious worship.
Southward of the Cattle-shelds, is the Dove-
cote, in which are several species of Doves and
Pigeons, and other birds of a similar kind: and




opposite to the cote is an enclosure in which
several small quadrupeds are exhibited.
Another Eagle aviary now presents itself to
view, in which are several kinds of these powerful
and ferocious birds. Near the Eagles’ house is
the Guinea-Pig enclosure; at the sight of which,
the young visitors were much pleased, the little
animals, of all sorts, sizes, and colour, being in
continual motion, and well deserving the name
given to them, that of restless Cavey: some were
not larger than mere rats, and full of life and
motion; while the more sedate but venerable
kinds had attained to a size nearly approaching to
that of a small rabbit. At a little distance from
the enclosure stands the Wolfs’ den, in which are
two of these noted animals; George did not much
like the looks of these sheep-eating animals, but
was pleased at seeing a quadruped of which he
had often read.
Returning from this place, and passing the
Eagle aviary, our party next came to the pond


for Swans, Geese, and other web-footed birds,
swimming or walking about in all directions. In
preceding further towards the lawn, they came
to some more large aviaries, and near to them an
enclosure, in which are several Cranes, Storks,
Herons, Curassows, and other large and small
wading birds. And in another, westward of
these, is the Pelican enclosure, in which are the
White Pelicans before described.
Onr party having reached the Tunnel w T hich
unites the two Gardens, and feeling themselves
fatigued, sat down on the chairs provided for that
purpose; and after resting a time, again proceeded
forward. Passing through the Tunnel, a large
elegant cage met their view, in which were
several British and foreign Squirrels, the nimble-
ness of their movements much amused the
young folks.
Eastward of the Squarrel’s cage, at the ex-
tremity of a long path, is the large room, or
Repository, in which the beasts of prey are kept.




the young folks were wending their way thither,
when a deep, loud growl, striking upon their ears,
caused them to halt for a moment in theii pro-
gress: but encouraged by an assurance that no
fear need be entertained, they went forward, and
entered the Repository, in which were a Lion and
Lioness, a pair of Tigers, a Leopard, an Ocelet or
Tiger Cat, a Puma, a Lynx, and a number of
other animals of the Cat tribe; as also other ani-
mals of the Dog and Fox tribes.
“ Here,” said Mr. Bacon, pointing to the noble
Lion, who, with a stately, but sullen aspect, was
continually looking to and fro, as if impatient of
a confinement irksome to his nature: “here are
the mighty king of beasts and his royal consort.
The Lion, you observe, has a graceful mane, which
.adorns his stately shoulders, and gives him a very
majestic aspect; a dignity in which the Lioness
has no share, she being without that graceful
ornament. —In the forests and immense plains of
Asia and Africa, where these ferocious beasts
range at pleasure, they are indeed to be feared


Between the Lion and the Tiger, in their native
wilds, a terrific combat, probably originating in
a dispute for prey, sometimes takes place; and
then, indeed, these powerful animals exert thei
amazing strength to the utmost.”
“ And there,” continued Mr. Bacon, “ are the
stately Panthers and noble Leopards, whose fero-
cious aspects proclaim them to be the much-
dreaded tyrants of the Asian and African forests,
their very appearance stikes terror into all lesser
animals. In some respects, these quadrupeds,
and all of the same kind, as well as the Lion,
resemble the domestic Cat, except that their
strength and ferocity are as much superior as
their size is greater. Like puss, they have all
strong sharp claws, which they can stretch out at
pleasure: and, like her, can readily climb trees.
These also all take their prey by surprise, gene-
rally by springing upon it from an ambush or
secret hiding place.
The Leopard or Panthers are as ferocious


as the Lion and the Tiger, from which they differ
but little in size or strength. The Tiger Cat,
the Puma, and the Chittah, or Hunting Leopaid,
are animals of similar and smaller kinds, and of
somewhat less ferocity. r ihe Hynea is known by
its appearance differing from the Tigei or Cat
tribe, and from its more nearly resembling the
Wolf species.
Returning from the Repository, they came to the
cages and kennels for the Wolf and Dog kind:
here were Wolves, Wolf-Dogs, Jackals, British and
foreign Dogs, and other similar quadrupeds. I
have heard,” said Richard to his papa, “ about some
of these beasts, such as the Wolf, and the Jackal;
do pray tell us something more about them.”
“My dear boy.” said Mr. Bacon, “ yon here
behold animals of a very different nature: some
of them are considered useful to mankind; while
others do him material injury. The Wolf, for
instance, has, in all ages in the world, been looked
upon as a cruel and rapacious robber; they asso-


ciate in herds, and commit great ravages among
flocks of sheep and other domestic animals; and
w 7 hen very hungry hesitate not to attack children
and even grown persons; hence they are much
feared by the peasantry in the countries in which
they are found.”
“Are there any Wolves in England?” enquired
Clarissa of her papa. “ No, my dear,” answered
Mr. Bacon, “ there are not; nor have there been
for very many years; but formerly, when a great
part of England was covered by forests, there
were plenty of these animals: to get rid of them,
some of our kings, who reigned before the time
of William the Conqueror, accepted, in lieu of
tribute, a certain number of Wolves’ tongues: by
which means the whole race was soon destroyed.”
“ That animal,” said Mr. Bacon, pointing to
the Jackal, “ is often called the Lions’ Provider,
you must not understand by this that the Jackal
really intends to hunt for the Lion; yet he is often
the means of providing him a meal. When the


Jackal is in pursuit of any animal, he keeps up a
loud kind of howl; this is often heard by the
Lion, or other beast, which joins in the puisuit,
and comes in for the prey; while the Jackal is
obliged to wait for his share till the interloper has
made an end of his meal.”
Mr. Bacon now directed the attention of his
children to the Dogs, of which there were several
varieties. “That noble fellow,” said their papa,
pointing to a large, fine-looking Dog, “ is called
the Dog of Mount Saint Bernard: it is one of a
kind that is peculiarly serviceable to mankind.—
Among the Alpine mountains, in Switzerland,
where the snow is to be seen at all times of the
year, there live a society of good religious men,
who make it their duty to take care of and
entertain travellers. It often happens that per-
sons who are obliged to travel among these
mountains, lose their way, from the difficulty of
tracing the path among the snow, and from the
danger they are in if they take a wrong direction.


—Aware of the peril in which travellers are
placed, the good monks of Saint Bernard train
several of these Dogs, to go in all directions, and
look out for wayfaring travellers; should any such
have missed their road in the mountain passes,
these sagacious and noble Dogs rarely fail to
trace them out, and lead them to the monastery,
where they are well received and hospitably enter-
tained; or, if too weak to walk there, the faithful
Dog posts back and obtains the needful assistance
to convey them there. Many a poor traveller has
been saved by the timely aid afforded by the
sagacious Dogs of Mount Saint Bernard.”
Proceeding in a westerly direction from the
Repository, and again passing the Squirrels’-cage,
onr party came to a kind of shed in which they
beheld a curious animal termed the Nyl-Ghau,
which, in the language of the country wherein
they are found, (Tartary), means Blue Bull.—
This curious beast is a mixture of the Horse,
Deer, and Bull kind, resembling all those three


animals, in some particulars, but not in all.—
The young specimen now kept in the Gardens,
w 7 as born there.
Westward of this building is a Paddock, in
which the Ostriches are sometimes turned out; and
here also are occasionally seen several Kanguroos,
an animal which seems to unite in itself some
peculiarities of the large Rat species and the
Beaver kinds: its fore paws are very short, and
its hind legs extremely long; so that by this con-
formation it is enabled to take very long leaps,
and thus escape pursuit. It is very gentle in its
nature, and is a native of New South Wales.
While the young party were looking at and
admiring the nimble movements of the young
Kanguroos, of which there were several in com-
pany with their mother, a something startled
them, and in an instant the whole of them disap-
peared, having jumped into a kind of pouch
which nature had provided the mother with, as a
means of security and protection for her young.




Westward of the Paddock is an extensive
building, erected for the purpose of receiving
some of the larger quadrupeds. Here, at pre-
sent, are some fine specimens of the Wapeti Deer,
and the Elk, the largest of the Deer species.—
These animals are found in the most northern
parts of America, and in Greenland, where they
are particularly serviceable to the inhabitants, as
at once furnishing them the means of travelling
and with food; proving to the natives of these
cold and cheerless regions as valuable and useful
as is the Camel to the wandering tribes of the
Arabian deserts.
In the same enclosure with the Kanguroos,
some varieties of the Deer species, as w 7 ell as
some Pea-Fowls, are sometimes exhibited; and in
another enclosure, our party saw several other
kinds of Deer, Sheep, Goats, and Zebras.
Still further Westward, is the building occupied
by the Elephants and Rhinoceros, near to which
are the paddock and bath, wherein the Elephants


air and bathe themselves in fine weather.—Here
are two of these noble animals, one much larger
than the other; and our two young friends were
much amused by the ready manner in which they
obeyed the orders of the keepers; Clarissa even
summoned courage enough to give one of them
a bun, which the Elephant swallowed in an
instant, and then looked as if he would have no
objection to more.
“ The Elephant,” said Mr. Bacon, “is a native
of Asia and Africa, and is one of the most sociable
and tractable animals in nature, exhibiting in
its actions a degree of sense little short of reason
itself. Yon noticed how handy it was with its
trunk, which, as you may have observed, is a most
wonderful piece of nature’s mechanism: by the
aid of this, the Elephant can perform the most
astonishing feats, and do almost all that human
beings can do with their hands; it can, with the
help of a small piece of gristly flesh at the end of
the trunk, which answers for a finger, tie or untie




a knot, collect flowers and tie them up in a
bouquet, unlock a door, and even pick up a pin
from the ground. In India, Elephants are much
prized, and used as beasts of burthen, or to add
to the ease and consequence of the great: when
used on pleasure parties or state occasions, a
tower is fixed on their backs, and in this, several
persons can conveniently sit. Elephants are also
used for drawing heavy loads, shipping, &c. in all
which purposes, their amazing strength is of the
greatest service.”
The young folks listened with much attention
to their papa’s description of the wonderful powers
of that noble animal; and they had the pleasure
of witnessing several curious feats which these
Elephants performed; and among others, they saw
the smaller one rise out of the bath, at a short
distance from the house.
Under the same roof as the Elephants’ house is
the building in which the Indian Rhinoceros is
kept. This singular animal is in shape some-


thing like an overgrown hog, with a short strong
horn rising from the top of his snout. Its skin
is bullet-proof, and seems like leather laid on in
folds.
At a short distance from the Elephant’s house,
are several curious animals of the Hog kind,
called Peccaries and Tapirs; and towards the
western extremity of the Gardens, in one of the
keeper’s houses, is a room, at the door of which
were several beautiful Maccaws, and in the inte-
rior of which were kept a number of small
animals, as Monkeys, Lemurs, Oppossums, Cats,
Bats, Squirrels, &e.
Beyond the keepers’ apartments is a capacious
and commodious building, with an extensive
paddock attached, in which are several of those
singular and interesting animals, the Giraffes, or
Cameleopards, certainly the prettiest and most
attractive objects at present in the Gardens.
In answer to an enquiry made by Mr. Bacon,
our party were informed that these rare and beau-


tiful animals are, with but one exception, the only
Giraffes ever brought alive to this country. They
were procured from Arabia, and after a series of
difficulties, and the greatest attention and exer-
tion, landed in England, in June, 1836.
The attention of our young friends was so com-
pletely taken up by the appearance of these rare
and beautiful animals, that for a few minutes they
did not ask a question; their sight being at length
gratified, they asked a number of questions, of
the answers to which, the following is a brief
statement.


The Giraffe is a native of Arabia, and the other
parts of Africa: it stands from fifteen to twenty
feet high, and feeds on the young and tender
branches of trees, the leaves of which it easily
collects by means of its tall stature and long
tongue; it is particularly delicate, and the great-
est cleanliness is essential to its preservation.
Its hind feet are comparatively short, but this
deficiency is more than made up by the extreme
length of its fore feet: its neck is also long and
slender; and its head, which resembles that of the
Deer kind, is peculiarly graceful. In disposition
it is mild and gentle, and by kind treatment it
soon becomes familiar, even with strangers.
When in its native plains, it associates with
others of the same kind, being fond of society.
The keeper informed our young party, that he had
seen it shed tears when separated from its com-
panions, or when it no longer beheld the Arab
who used to attend upon them.
When in its native plains, its pace is very rapid,


particularly when flying from pursuit or danger,
the swiftest horse could not keep pace with it; if
in its progress it comes to a hilly or mountainous
tract of country, it bounds along with surprising
rapidity, and crosses the ravines with incredible
speed. When pressed by its enemies, which are
numerous, and some of them very powerful, it
defends itself by striking severe blows with
its feet, and often compelling its antagonist to
retreat.
Our party thanked the keeper for his informa-
tion; and having eompleted their survey of the
Gardens, they returned home; and little else was
heard of for weeks afterwards, but something re-
lative to Richard and Clarissa’s visit to the Zoolo-
gical Gardens in the Regent’s Park.
FINIS.
DEAN AND CO, PRINTERS*
THREADNBEDLE-StREKT.






1508
00270076
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


