







Vft Larne Images | , . < |||M -~tt?-o?i> •rC’tr^^ Roj^gevin
An gar o a or C 16 Image FUafortt
l ’ ' ■ flbl ' W<J <>■■■■■ j (Water)
y | Great ! 'vr.u-i- \ fev; ' : . RAPA- NUT I
House wheiy vjspjerano KaA gi- <c3' 0 R
Krni~haksjL-U'ina.-.Ta va.Klouiul'.-, *&,/ .■ A'
.JL& EASTER ISLAND
Ship Rock
<T> ( Soutl1 Pacific Ocean
bio, Sa ■*»«*«
to accompany the Paper hv
Cooks Bay is iw Lot. 27° S' South. j j Palmer, Esq T . e R.N.
Lon. 109° 2+' West .
EdV* ¥elle.r.
Published/ (hr the. Journal aftheRoyaL GeographicaJj Society hy J.Murray,Alhem/irle/Sirecr.,Iondorh2870.


lII. —A Visit to Easter Island, or Rapa Nui, in 1868. By
J. Linton Palmer, f.e.c.s., Surgeon of HALS. Topaze.
Read , January 24th, 1870.
This little island, wliicli has been rendered celebrated by the
gigantic stone images which are so plentiful in it, is also so
isolated as to require the special notice that it is in 27° B's. lat.,
and 109° 24' w. long., about 2000 miles from the South American
coast, and 1000 from Pitcairn Island, or the Gambler Islands.
It is mentioned in the voyages of many navigators, who in their
notices of it do not always agree. In the account of the voyages
of Captain Cook, the names there given to the island we found
to be those of districts in it. I have given the native name,
which originates from the fact, that many generations ago, a
large migration to it took place from the island of Oparo, or
Eapa-iti (Small Eapa). This island is about 1900 miles due
west of Easter Island, which from its greater size was called
Eapa Nui or Great Eapa. In length it is about 12 miles, and
in breadth 4 miles, somewhat like a cocked-hat in shape, the
base towards the south ; the ends are high and bluff, and there
is a tall hill, 1050 feet, an extinct crater in its centre. It is of
volcanic origin, and abounds in craters, but these have been
extinct for so long that no tradition of their activity remains.
As they are of interest, I may mention the position and names
of some of these craters.
1. Terano Kau. —This is a very large one at the south end of
the island; in diameter it is about a mile, and is 600 or 700
feet deep. The bottom, which is fiat and 1200 yards across, is a
bog, with reeds and sedge, and many pools here and there;
these were found to be 26 or 30 feet deep. There is a zigzag
path to the bottom of the crater, as a farm-garden has been
made by a settler, Captain Bornier. At the south side of the
crater is the gap by which the last lava-flow escaped, and the
north side is pretty well clothed with Hibiscus, Broussonetia, &c.
2. Terano Hau, not far from the centre of the island, is very
much smaller, and is dry. This is the source of the red tuff
which has been quarried to form the head-dresses, or crowns, of
the large trachyte images, as the material can be found in mass,
here only.
3. Otu-iti. —“ The little hill,” which is at the north-east end of
the island, is very similar to Terano Kau, but of smaller size.
It stands isolated in a large plain, and furnishes the grey lava
(Trachyte) of which all the images are made. The largest
images, and the only ones now erect, are at this hill.
Hear the Terano Hau is a rounded hill of obsidian; it is


capped with a white earth apparently argillaceous. I was not
on it. All the hills are rounded, and the soil on their slopes
and in the intervening valleys, being nothing but decomposed
lava, is very fertile. I should say that there are many small
blocks of harder lava mixed with the soil, which render walking
over the island very tiring, the paths being just broad enough
to put one toot in, and necessitating a swinging gait, very
irksome to acquire. The whole island is volcanic; I did not see
t.ny sedimentary deposits, nor diatom-earth. Eoggfewin, who
visited the island in 1722, but whose narrative is to be received
with caution, says that, “the island was full of trees, which
weie in full fruit; this has never been corroborated by subse-
qnent visitors. There were boles of large trees, Edwardsia,
coco palm, and hibiscus, decaying in some places, when we
visited the island, but, though La Perouse left fruit trees with
the inhabitants, we saw no traces of them. Erom the size of
some of the paddles and rapas, large trees must have existed.
Just now the only approach to wood is found in the sheltered
nooks, bushes of 10 to 12 feet high, of hibiscus, Edwardsia,
hi oussoneha, &c. The rate of growth of these is extremely
slow. J
As to the supply of fresh water on the island, a good deal of
misapprehension has existed. In several of the craters there
are many deep pools of it; in those of the Terano Kau these
are fully 2o feet deep, and I have tasted it pure and fresh from
many places, near the shore. At Winipoo, not only is there a
subterranean reservoir (to which a tunnel leads from the face of
the cliff), but on the very sea beach the natives have made a
mstern to catch the water which distils from a little runnel.
1 did not see that the natives had sunk any wells. On the road"
irom Otuiti are many pools of small size, but the natives warned
us not to drink of them. They chew, to appease their thirst while
journeying, sugar-cane, which is even now, though uncultivated,
abundant, or sweet potato. At meal times they use salt water
as seasoning with their vegetables, and this must have led to
tlie belief that they used it alone, from the absence of fresh
water. At Otuiti I was told distinctly that there was no water,
except thatin the pools of the crater.* As to the water of the
sulphur spring mentioned in Cook’s voyages (and which is close
t°. terano Kau), we found that though it had a distinctly
mmeial taste, it was not very unpalatable, and in sufficient
quantity to satisfy our pretty large and thirsty party. The
rocks in most of the gullies are evidently stream-worn, but
* ®.°* ““ ma ■' 110 'water, none at all—a pleasing notice to us when
parched with thirst, and at sundown!


now not the smallest brook exists. The soil, as a rule, seems
moist enough not to require particular irrigation.
The coast line is bluff, irregular, yet not much indented.
The slope of the land is more gradual to the south-east shore,
where the cliffs are of varying heights. At the ends of the
island, as much as 800 feet, at Angaroa (Cook’s Bay) is a
sandy beach. This, though an open roadstead, is the best
anchorage. The swell and surf round the island frequently
prevent any chance of landing. This was the case with JELM.S.
Portland in 1852—also with Captain Amasa Delano, in 1808.
There are not many outlying rocks —very little seaweed was to
be seen, although La Perouse says it was used as food. Its
name was then go-e-mon, it is now au kd There was plenty of
flat sponge on the rocks and boulders at the landing place.
We did not take any fish with the line, but at some time
there must be some, and large ones too, if one may judge by the
size of the hooks, made of stone, with which the natives used to
take them. Large flying-fish are not uncommon, and I saw
plenty of small fry, close inshore ; several nets we obtained have
small (| inch) meshes. Crayfish, which are taken by the
natives diving for them, and crabs, are common and good;
shellfish also. I saw no oysters, but there were plenty of
univalves, and, in the stone houses at the Terano Kau, there
was an abundance of the shells of a small periwinkle (piripi),
Nerita.
As in the rest of Polynesia, no quadruped has been found
peculiar to the island. The rat is in great abundance. Pigs
have been landed by some visitors: but were not allowed to
breed. Koggewin says hogs were domesticated: there is no
name for such a beast in their language, and I did not find any
drawing of such in the mural paintings at Terano Kau. Birds
were quite as scarce; some sea fowl wnre seen, but the ordinary
domestic fowl was the only other bird; and these were in suffi-
cient number. Small birds altogether absent.
Eeptiles. I was told some one had seen a lizard, but this was
a solitary instance; and in questioning all those who had been
wandering over the island I was answered negatively, nor did I
see one myself. Ko snakes exist.
No coleoptera were collected, but I think I saw one or two
species. Centipedes exist. I saw no butterflies except one
very like the Cynthia cardui, and one like the Sulphur Butterfly
so common in England. Flies wnre exceedingly annoying to any
one in places out of the free current of wind. There were no
mosquitoes. Fleas were in myriads even in a grotto at Anakena
(La Perouse Bay). But no collections were made of the fauna
of the island, which is meagre enough.


The vegetables which were cultivated were the sugar-cane,
like that of Tahiti, very good, and now found self growing in
numerous parts. Several kinds of yams. A remarkably good
sweet potato, white, and when raw very like the chestnut in
taste, and in this state is used to quench the thirst of the natives
when travelling. It is very good also when cooked. There
are no coconut-palms now growing, but boles of large ones are
to be found. A wild gourd is common, 'it was used formerly
for water-bottles. The tii-plant is pretty plentiful, but is put to
no other use than for wattling of the grass houses, and as javelin-
shafts. Of flowering plants we saw but few. The vervain,
Verbena officinalis, is common everywhere, growing into bushes
of as much as 4 feet in height; but it was imported some years
since in a French ship, M. Bornier told me. None of the
fruit trees, left by La Perouse, could be found. I saw no tobacco
plants. Of ferns there are some very beautiful, of the genus
Asplenium, and several new varieties have been sent to Kew
Gardens. Sedges and other bog plants grow in great profusion
in the craters which are wet, but I regret that I was not able to
collect any for an herbarium. The hill sides are covered with a
fine grass which serves capitally to fatten animals, if we may
judge by the state of some sheep now there.
The look of these people has been commented on by all
visitors. Mendana (1566) says, some were almost white, and
had red hair. They were so well shaped and of such stature
that they had much the advantage of the Spaniards. La
Perouse contradicts (1722) Eoggewin’s account as to their
enormous height, and in many cases, singular leanness; but
speaks favourably of them, and passes a high encomium on the
beauty and form of the women, who he says, resemble Europeans
in their traits and colour. Cook coincides. The Jesuit priest
Eugene (1864) says the same; that they most resemble the
Marquesans of all the other Polynesians,—many quite white, he
says. We found them, in 1868, although under great disadvantage
at the time of our visit, robust enough, and well grown, and
they had a more European cast of countenance than the rest of
the natives of the islands we visited. Three of the crania from
a burying-place at Winipoo were brought home, two of which are
in the College of Surgeons, London. The tracings and measure-
ments of the other were sent to Prof. Huxley. In disposition they
are friendly, affable, and merry, excessively indolent, very fond
of finery and adorning themselves. La Perouse says they had
an amazing fondness for the hats of their visitors; we found our
trowsers equally coveted. The men, says Frere Eugene (1864),
were in their habits all thieves, and distrusted one another, and
as the island abounds in caves and hiding places, these were


always in request for shelter of the filchers. They are very
patient of hunger, which they will rather suffer than work.
Very dexterous in plaiting and carving both wood and stone;
chips of obsidian are used for the farmer material, instead of
chisels; they used obsidian flakes for razors and for their javelin
heads. They practised circumcision.
The women, says La Perouse, were fond of coquetry, which
there seemed no disposition on the part of the men to restrain,
nor were they jealous at it. Captain Amasa Delano, 1808, bears
similar testimony.
Their mode of cookery was very simple. The various mate-
rials for the repast were wrapped in leaves, and baked in an
underground oven filled with heated stones. They did not shed
the blood of any animal, but stunned it ; or suffocated it in
smoke (like the Fuegians).
Cannibalism was practised. Four or six years since some
Spaniards were eaten. From some remains, and native testi-
mony, we were led to infer that human sacrifice took place, and
burnt-offering was part of their religious worship.
The ground is so fertile, that a few days’ work suffices to keep
any family in subsistence for the entire year. Hence “ they
have no idea of agriculture,” says Pere Eugene. Yet the whole
of the island has formerly been under cultivation, and rahui-
stones are met with in every direction.
In consequence of the strong winds, the paper-mulberry
( Broussonetia) was cultivated in small enclosures, with stout
stone walls of about five feet high. The inner bark of this
shrub served to make the mahute (matue) for the blanket-coat
of the men, which they called nua.
Both sexes wore the maro, as commonly used in Polynesia.
The men wore a cincture of woman’s hair, as thick as a finger,
and finished at each end by a tassel. The covering was a
mantle over the shoulders, and fastened at the throat. This
nua was made of paper-mulberry for the men, and of fine grass
for the women; and, says Captain Delano (1808), it was fastened
round the waist, for them, and so hung nearly to the ground.
The mantle was either w'hite or made with brown patterns on it.
Both sexes used pigment for the skin; the men use not only
earth of all colours, but also the sap of plants. The women
were permitted red pigment only.
Tattooing was practised by the women more elaborately than
by the men, and completely. In 1852 it was noticed, in par-
ticular, that they had a row of dots over the forehead, close to
the hair, which ran down to the lobes of the ears. The women
gather their hair into a knob at the crown of the head.
Both sexes wore ear-ornaments. The lobes were pierced, and


distended very much. Large wooden ornaments, or the ver-
tebrae of sharks, were inserted. Koggewin says the priests
wore great balls of wood hanging to their ears; some of these
were sold to us, they were of the size of a fist, and carved
into faces and joined together. They told us these were used
at the dances. At their dances the men wore a gorget made
of hard wood, lunate in shape, and each end terminated in a
head; the concavity was worn uppermost, the profile of the
face in the oldest gorgets was very aquiline. Also coronets
of feathers, made like a modern hat without the brim; some
we saw had the feathers radiating, like a flat diadem. They
were usually made of dark metallic-looking hackles of the com-
mon fowl. La Perouse says they much coveted the hats of the
Trench.
In their hands, in place of weapons as used by the Maori,
they carried short double - ended paddles, which they named
“ rapa.” This had some symbolic meaning, as it occurs con-
tinually in the carvings and paintings, and also in the tattooing
on the women’s backs (1852). It would seem to be a human
trunk, as at one end there is usually a face, and at the other a
short phallus. It was not used for rowing.
Their weapons were the patoopatoo, or mere, a short club
like that of the Maori; but I did not see any made of bone or
stone, only of wood. They did not know the use of the sling.
They used a pike for thrusting, and a javelin for casting; they
both had heads of obsidian, the shafts made of pourou (hibiscus)
and Til ( Draceena, terminalis) ; the javelin was thrown under-
hand, with the little finger foremost, and no throwstick Avas used.
When an adversary was disabled, he was knocked on the head.
They avoided bloodshed, and as the javelin-head was made for
cutting more than for piercing, the legs and arms Avere more
aimed at. The spear-shafts aa t o saw were sometimes made of the
stems of palm-leaves.
We saAV no large Avar-clubs. The chiefs carried as a baton
of office, a long staff as thick as the Avrist, a little expanded and
flattened at the loAver end, and at the upper carved into a head,
Avith a double face, and eye-balls of obsidian were inserted.
From the scarcity of wood, no canoes noAV exist; if Ave except
a feAV worn-out ones in a cave near Mataveri. In 1852, several
Avere seen; they were made of small pieces of AA'ood very
adroitly seAvn together, the proAV and stern much raised, and
they had an outrigger. As well as canoes, they used swimming
pilloAvs, much like a very large elephant’s tusk, made of sedge,
rushes, &c. They resembled much the “caballitos” which are
used on the Peruvian coast; but I suav none at this visit. The
people are very good swimmers.


They did not offer any fishing lines for sale, and the only
hooks we saw were the large ones called “ rou,” made of stone,
and which were of some age, and scarce, about three inches
across the head. They are not in use now. The nets were
made with small (half-inch) meshes, and from their size used for
the small fry.
The houses are low and long, like a canoe upset; we find a
good account of them in Cook; Delano saw them, in 1808, fully
200 feet long; in 1852, the Portland saw some fully 120 feet
long, generally 60 or 70; in 1868, the Topaze found them about
30 feet long (and smaller), 12 to 14 feet broad, in height s§feet.
The big houses were assembly halls, and were raised on low
stone walls, on which a thatched roof was placed.
The ordinary house is made of a framework of sticks, on which
grass is thatched. It is windowless, no hearth nor fire; an
aperture in the side, about 18 or 20 inches square. This is
closed by a net to exclude the fowls, and, as the natives pack
pretty closely in these, the heat and noisome smell are inde-
scribable.
There were some massive square buildings, built of unmor-
tared stones, some 20 or 30 feet square, and 6 feet high, with
little square apertures of a foot in size, here and there, at the
ground level. These, we were told, were hen-houses, and fowls
were in them ; but it seems unlikely they were made originally
for this purpose, as some very similar, but with white-washed
tops, were used, we were told, for sepulture.
There were three principal feasts, or occasions of rejoicing,
during the year ;
In spring (September), there was a great gathering at
Mataveri. The people dressed themselves in their best, and
remained there for two months. Athletic sports, running races,
&c., were the order of the day. In summer (December), the
feast of Paina took place. It is specially noted that each
brought his own provisions. The ceremony ended by the erec-
tion of a column of boughs; this was the Paina. In the winter
(June, July), the large houses were built, and the people met
for dancing, and held choral meetings, chanting songs, in which
the same, couplet was often repeated. These meetings were
called Arcauti.
Their monarchy w r as elective; after the death of the sove-
reign, all the High Chiefs met together near the Terano Kau,
and the candidates, with the view to prove their capability,
descended the cliff there, swam to the islets, and, having got
sea-fowls’ eggs, returned with them. The successor was chosen
by superior dexterity. The son of the last king, Eoto-pito, was
alive four years since. M. Hornier, the French settler, told us


that on one occasion, being storm-bound in his boat on the islet,
bis crew swam to the island for food, with which they returned;
so that this narration may not be fable.
The earlier voyagers thought that idols were worshipped by
these people. Rogge win gives the names of their gods as Tau-
pi-co and Dago; that fires were lighted before the idols at sun-
rise, and that the priests who ministered were shorn. But we
found that the Moai or Platform images were not worshipped,
and that the people believed in one God—a spirit—sexless, whom
they Called Make-Make, the Creator—and that mankind, his
children, but not by reproduction, were made by him from the
earth; not by plastic agency, but by growth, like plants, &c.
They repudiated the idea of a female‘deity. The Jesuit Father
Eugene, 1863-65, noticed, in his letter to the Superior of his
Order, that although they had “ household gods ” suspended to
the roof of their dwellings, they did not worship them. The
priests uttered the wishes of the god, oracularly,; also his re-
quirement of human sacrifice, and subsistence —by which they
lived.
The taboo and rakui were here in full force, as in the other
islands. By taboo, I mean that prohibition as regards man ; by
rahui, as regards property and crops. The symbol of the rahui
was a cairn of three or four stones, piled on one another ; the
upper one very frequently white-washed. If a man planted
ground, he immediately dotted the place with these cairns.
We did not find out whether there was any belief in a future
state, yet it seems probable. After death the corpse was wrapt
up in a bale of sedge and grass, and laid on the papakoo, or
cemetery-terrace, the head pointing seawards. There was also
another way by wrapping the corpse in tappa (native cloth), and
lowering it into the cleft of a rock, or some inaccessible place.
Some were seen by our people in such a position at Anakena,
La Perouse Bay. ‘There were also burying-places inland. The
small image Hoa Hava was the genius, so to say, of a cemetery
at Mataveri. “ Plenty, plenty dead here,” said the guides; but
we saw no platform, so that the corpses must have been buried.
Yet so great is their aversion to promiscuous interment, as in
Christian burial, that just before our visit a woman (whose child
died shortly after birth, and had been so interred), rose in the
night, and, after digging up the corpse, carried it two or three
leagues to the papakoo of her tribe. Since the Peruvian raid,
all the survivors have been massed together at Angaroa. I hat
burnt sacrifices were offered, we found, by there being pillars
here and there, on which were marks of fire, and in some in-
stances charred bones near them. We were told these w T ere of
Heaka —victimes (French translation).


The papakoo, or cemetery, is a terrace or platform, generally
near the sea, made of rolled sea stones, and faced seawards by a
strong wall of large irregularly square stones, fitted together
without cement. The ends of the terrace were whitened; they
were usually about 100 yards long. One or two had no facing
wall, being probably unfinished. There were a few inland, but
I have no notes of them, except that on the flank of the Terano
Nan, near Winipoo, there was a moated enclosure, on one side
of which was a raised terrace overgrown with grass. This, we
were told, was a papakoo. Near it a small trunk image—Libi
Hoahava ; where there W'as a small image we were led to infer
a papakoo had existed.
Some square tombs, but for what class of individuals I could
not learn, have been adverted to.
No images were placed on the papakoo terrace in the same
way as the structures now to be described. These are to be
seen on nearly every headland, as a rule pretty close to the sea,
and being built on sloping ground, the sea-front is always the
taller. They vary much in size. I will describe a pretty per-
fect one, which I have called the Fifteen-image Platform.
Seawards, just where the ground becomes broken as it nears
the cliffs, is built a very stout wall. Its height is much obscured
by fallen rubbish, broken images which have toppled over, and
rank vegetable growth, reeds, &c.; but it seems to have been
about seven or eight yards high. The stones of which it is
made are large and irregular, both in size and shape, though
more or less four-sided. Some are fully six feet in length. They
are fitted together very exactly, without any cement. This wail
is built flat and level at the top, about 30 feet broad, by 100
paces long, squared at each end, and parallel to the shore in its
long direction. This constituted, in fact, the platform, on which
were the slabs which served as pedestals for the images.
Landwards it seemed to be not much more than a yard high,
and on that side also was much ruinated, especially at about the
centre. Before it, in the same direction, was a smooth space, or
terrace, of the same length as the platform, but at least four
times as broad, and this terminated in front by a low facade, or
step, built of stone, and about as high as that of the platform
seemed to be from the same point of view. The terrace sloped
gently to this step, and the sides were built square and raised
above the adjoining ground, so as to join the ends of the plat-
form. The image platform was strewn with bones in all direc-
tions. They were old and weatherworn, but bore no marks of
fire on them. The images had been thrown down in all direc-
tions, and were all more or less mutilated. The debris prevented
my seeing if there was any crypt under the image pedestals, or


in the platform, as at Winipoo, and the openings must have been
at the ends of the platform, or at its sea-front, I think, if any
existed.
At the south-west end of the island, at the sea edge of the
Terano Kau Crater, are a number, say eighty or more, of houses
of great age, now unused, mostly in good preservation, which are
built in irregular lines as the ground permits, their doors facing
the sea. Each house is oblong-oval, built of layers of irregular
fiat pieces of stone, the walls about 5| feet high. The doors
are in the side, as in the present grass huts, and of about the
same size. The walls are very thick, 5 feet at least, which
makes the entrance quite a passage. On entering, the walls are
found to be lined with upright slabs, say 4 feet high, but not so
broad Above these, small thin slabs are ranged like tiles, over-
lapping and so gradually arching till the roof-opening is able to
be bridged over by long thin slabs of some 5J or 5 feet, which
are not more than 6 inches in thickness and 2 feet in width.
The inner dimensions of the “hall” are about 16 paces long by
5 paces wide, and the roof is fully 6J feet high inside, under the
centre slabs. The passage leading to it is paved with slabs, under
which is a kind of crypt, or blind drain, which extends to the
distance of about 6 feet outside, where also it is covered with
flat slabs and is of the same dimensions as the passage. It is
carefully built of stone, squared and dressed; it ends abruptly
and squarely.
In these drains, I was informed, the dead men heated were
kept till required for the feasts. Outside the hall, and at right
angles to it, are smaller chambers which do not communicate
with it, and each of which has a separate door from the outside.
We were told that these were generally the women’s apartments.
The upright slabs which lined the hall, and those of the roof,
were painted, in red, black, and white, with all kinds of devices
and figures, some like the geometric figures of the Mexicans,
some birds, rapas, faces, Eronie (a curious mythic animal like a
monkey with a bird’s head); M’hanus,or double-headed penguins.
Symbolic figures of Phallic nature (Hiki-Nau), rude tracings of
horses, sheep, and ships with rigging were found in a few. These
were very new, and misled some to the idea all were equally
recent, and the houses also, which we were told was not the
case. There was no appearance of pavement in the hall, and in
many of them enormous quantities of a univalve—a maritime
Neritina—which had been used for food. It w r as in one of these
houses the statue Hoa-haka-nana-Ia was found. It was the only
one there, we are told.
Near these houses are some remains apparently of very great
age—the sculptured stones on the brink of the sea cliffs at the


Terano Kau. They are at the place where the last lava-flow
issued, and quite overlook the sea, which is directly under them.
The blocks are of various sizes, carved in situ into rude tortoise-
form, or have odd faces shaped on them. The nowain bushes
and grass much obscure them, and had my visit been at any
other time than mid-day, I should have sketched a good many,
but I was very pressed for time. I could not learn their signi-
ficance., These are very numerous, even to hundreds. I began
to count them, but found them to be so plentiful as to make it
lost time. They are almost always on platforms, but now all
have been thrown down; except in the crater at Otuiti, and
outside it, where they are in the earth only, and in groups, not
in rows, and here even very many are prostrate. They are
made of but one material, a grey, compact, trachytic lava, found
at Otuiti, where there is a distinct slide for them to be removed
by, and where there are still imperfect ones to be found. They
are trunks, terminating at the hips—the arms close to the side,
the hands sculptured in very low relief on the haunches. They
are flatter than the natural body. The longest I measured was
37 feet; the usual size, 15 or 18; the small ones, as Hoa Hava,
sor 4-J- feet. These were more boulder-shaped. The head is
very flat; the top of the forehead cut off level so as to allow a
crown (hau) to be put on. This was not done till the image was
on its pedestal on the platform. In the giant images at Otuiti,
outside the crater, the head seemed to project before the line of
the trunk, which we did not notice in the others. The face and
neck of these measured full 20 feet to the collar-bone. They
were in the best preservation. Those inside the crater were of
large size, but weatherworn, apparently the oldest in the island,
and also many were prostrate. They differed a little in profile
from those in the other parts of the island. The face is square,
massive, and sternly disdainful in expression; the aspect always
upward. The peculiar feature is the extreme shortness of the
upper lip, or the upthrust of the lower one, which would
produce the same appearance. This gesture is sometimes seen
now among the natives. The eye-sockets are deep, close under
the brows, and, as far as we could make out, eye-balls of obsidian
were inserted in them; but we were not fortunate enough to
find any. The nose broad, nostrils expanded, the profile varying
somewhat in different images. The ears were always sculptured
with very long pnedant lobes.
The beautifully-perfect one Hoa-haka-nana-Ia (each image
has its own name), now in the British Museum, was found in
the stone house called Tau-ra-re-n’ga, at the Terano Kau. It is
elaborately traced over the back and head with rapas and birds,
two of which much resemble the apteryx. It was coloured red
VOL. XL. N


and white when found, but the pigment was washed off in its
transit to the Topaze. Its height is 8 feet, weight 4 tons. It
was buried waist deep in the ground, and had no crown. Its
face, like those of the rest, turned from the sea. It was the
only one under cover, although it was reported that there were
some in a cave on the sea-shore. This arose from the miscon-
ception of some mural paintings found there. The house in
which it was found was a small circular one (20 feet across) into
which two small dark chambers opened.
The crowns were always made of the same red, vesicular tuff
found in the Terano Hau, down the outside slope of which as
many as thirty were waiting for removal to their several plat-
forms. The largest I measured was 10-J- feet in diameter, but
they varied very much in size, at Anakena to only 2 feet across.
In shape they were short, truncated cones, or nearly cylindrical.
Some of the very large images have such small tops to the head
that it would seem difficult to fit them with a crown.
The principal track of the images from Otuiti is by the Coast
Eoad, on either side of which they are found, face downwards.
On the Mid Path of the island I found but two or three. Many
were found also from Anakena; but there was a great part of the
island untraversed. All accounts go to the same point, that it
is on the coast these images are most abundant.
The implement used for carving these statues was a long
boulder-pebble from the shore, like a rolling-pin or huge incisor!
The chisel edge was produced by chipping it, and rubbing it
down afterwards on obsidian. We saw but one. This was pre-
sented to Commodore Powell, and is now in the British Museum.
It was called Tingi-tingi. It was noticed that on many of the
statues little projections were left; these were portions harder
than the chisels.
The number of images on the platforms is very variable, and
also their size is by no means uniform. They always faced
landwards. At the fifteen-image platform five of them are
quite dwarfs in comparison with the rest.
In La Pdrouse’s voyages it is said that the image platforms
were used as Morais, and Cook says that they were the sleeping-
places {i.e. tombs) of the chiefs. We found that the word Moral
was never used in reference to any papakoo or cemetery of the
tribe. Each image, and some of the stone houses also, had
their proper name. Beechey surmises that these are relics of a
past age, as in some now desolate islands he visited he saw
similar terraces and images. In Maldon Island I was informed
by a visitor that under the guano similar platforms existed,
without images. In the Marquesas the images were made of
wood, and there is no doubt, from signs on Easter Island, that


sufficient wood existed to have made wooden images long since
the fabrication of these trachyte statues, which as material
would hardly have been chosen fibr ease or rapidity in working.
And besides, only one chisel ha® been found; nor could any
others be procured.
At a little distance from this terrace, and about the centre
point, was a short pillar or cylinder of red tuff (vesicular lava),
standing in an area paved with large, smooth, sea-worn stones.
It stood on a low slab, which was of the same material, and
which served as a pedestal. It was about 6 feet high, and as
much in diameter; the top was flat, and cut away on each side,
so as to make a step or shelf. On it I found two skulls, very
much perished, which, from the dentition, I judged to be those
of youths of twelve or fourteen years old. The faces of the
skulls were directed towards the platforms. At Winipoo there
is one similar. The upper part is paved with smooth sea-stones
of the size of a dinner plate. Tlhe measurement of the pillar,
which is oval, is 7 feet by 5, and it was feet high. It stood
also in a paved area.
Cremation Stone. —Again, in a direct line from this, landwards,
at about 80 or 100 yards from the platform, is one of the low-
slanting saddle-topped pillars used for cremation (burnt sacrifice).
It is also of red tuff, but was nott more than 4| or 5 feet high.
The finest I saw was at Winipoo), of which I append a descrip-
tion. In a paved area, similar to (that of the last-described pillar,
is a pillar of red tuff, feet sqpiared and or 8| feet high.
The top projects forwards, and ends in two horns, with deep
saddle-shaped notch between theim; each horn had a face traced
on it, in low relief—face surmomnted with a crown (hau), but
that to the north-west had crumibled away (from the action of
fire?). The projecting part is tterminated at the breast, and
lower down a round projecting mavel is marked. Just above,
where the pillar joins the area,, the fingers are sculptured, in
low relief, fiat, and clasping the Ihips, as in the images.
We were told heaka (victims)) were burnt here, and at the
foot of one of these pillars at Winipoo we found many burnt
bones. The pillars were in number at least one for every image-
platform.
With respect to the former of these two pillars. In the most
excellent description by M. deßovis, Lieutenant de Yaisseau and
Surveyor of Poumotie group, published in the Government
Annuaire de Taiti, p. 292, he says: “II y avait sur le parvis
une sorte de parvis dalle en pierres plates devant I’autel (before
the Morai), une enorme pierre plate, un pen plus elevee que les
autres; le prince s’y plapait tout nu pendant la consecration.”
It was here the maro-ura (red maro or breech-cloth) was put on
n 2


the new prince by the priest, as a symbol of royalty, in the sight
of all people. It was at the great Morai of Opoa this was done
in grandest pomp. If, as has been surmised, and it seems war-
ranted, that these flat forms were over the chiefs’ tombs or family
vault, the images being, as on the Bustum of the Romans, an
effigy of the departed, this stone may be the place of hereditary
succession, and the Cremation stone the place where slaves or
prisoners of war were burnt at the death of the chief, to attend
on him in the spirit-world.
M. de Bovis says the missionaries carried away the sacred
stone of Opoa to another place, in order that the kings might
be consecrated, without idol-worship ; so to say so great was the
idea of the natives of its value.
Lares or Household Gods, ‘ Domestic Idols ’ of Fere Eugene. —
These_ are generally male figures, about a foot in length, made
of solid dark wood (Toro miro or Edwardsia), a little bowed
forwards, and suggesting the idea that they represent flayed
carcases. The profile, differing from the images, is strongly
aquiline—the mouth grinning, the ears with long lobes, and eye-
balls of obsidian are inserted. There is a small tuft on the chin;
the arms by the side, the hands on the thighs, but not clasping
them. These figures are very well carved.
The female figures are much ruder in execution, flatter and
larger—a small tuft on the chin also; the attitude that of a
pancake Yenus de’ Medici.
Besides these, there were a quantity of very odd figures carved,
representing lizards, sharks, fowls, nondescripts. Some of these
are in the possession of the Rev. Mr. Bearden.
On the heads of the male images are carved in very low
relief the most peculiar figures, evidently mythic—double-
headed birds, fishes, monkeys, lizards; some figures too in which
no likeness to anything can be traced. These are on the male
figures. I saw but one female figure thus adorned.
These lares were not worshipped, and though the present
people still carve them, we could not find that they were aware
of the significance of the mythic emblems which they copy.
Traditions.~We could learn very little of their antecedent
history, and but little of their traditions. It is a current belief
that many generations since a large migration hitherwards took
place from Oparo or Rapaiti, the leader of the swarm being
Tu-ku-i-u, who, after arrival, abode for some time near Otuiti,
where he caused the images to be made. That subsequently he
went to reside at the Terano Kau, in the stone houses. That
the images followed him by night, walking of their own accord,
and that that accounts for the places where they are found face
downwards about the island (see parallel destruction of giants,
180
Palmee’s Visit to Easter Island in 1868.




