

pfefTH rPixn
rj , 7-?-io
A '■ A
v j| A VICTORIAN
PILOT: P
((i) , o«,
0? SJCETCHIES n . 9
■’'ffiif 'd;',
OF THE
■ fl VICTORIAN PILOT SERVICE, fe
M ' fe
. Mm
€® _ ,
By “THE-MARK-THREE."
o\d \■. . C/O
<<o f rlx
llr C,0
NEALE * CO., PRINTERS, WILLIAMSTOWN.
1884,




VD Vy. \\ AmkkOvv
A VICTORIAN
SEA PILOT:
SKIETCHIES
OF THE
VICTORIAN PILOT SERVICE,
“THE-MARK-THREE
NEALE & CO., PRINTERS, WILLIAMSTOWN.
iBB4.




PREFACE.
The extreme favour with which a series of articles recently
published in the Chronicle , under the heading of A Victorian
Sea Pilot, have been received by the public of this district has
induced the publisher to reproduce them in pamphlet form, as,
he informs me, the run on these issues of the Chronicle which
contained the articles was greater than he had provided for. It
is satisfactory alike to writer and publisher that the sketches
were accorded a favourable reception. The former fully realizes
the fact that to the subject rather than to the manner in which
it was treated, the large amount of general interest taken in the
articles is due. He takes the present opportunity, therefore, to
thank his readers for the indulgent manner which they have
borne his many shortcomings. It is to be hoped that the
enterprise of the publisher will be well rewarded, and that through
this pamphlet a large number of new readers will be found who
may be interested to learn something concerning the professional
life of that amphibious creature, A Victorian Sea Pilot.
“ Bt-the-Mark-Three.”
I Villiamstown, May 15, 1884.




A VICTORIAN SEA PILOT.
Chapter I.
“Oh, pilot, ’tis a fearful night,
There’s danger o* the deep.”
If there is anything for which Port Phillip is justly proud it is
for the superiority and thorough efficiency of the Victorian Pilot
Service. Comprised as it is of men possessing not only the
requisite knowledge for the discharge of arduous and, at times,
extremely difficult duties, but also endowed with especial skill in
the use of that knowledge, and possessed of no ordinary amount
of coolness and quiet pluck, it is not to be wondered at that
shipowners visiting this port speak in glowing terms of a service
which is a pride and credit to the colony. To the unprofessional
mind, the men who board vessels at the Heads and supersede
the sailing master for the few hours necessary to bring a vessel
to her moorings in the Bay, are not called upon to do a great
deal, and the remark is sometimes made concerning them,
u How much better than going to sea !” Those who know the
smell of tar, however, and would not be at a loss if called upon to
send down a royal yard or rig out a stun’sail boom, need not be told
that the Victorian Pilot is subject to risks and dangers with
which but few pilot services in the world are associated. Some
of these clever people whose knowledge of a Victorian pilot’s
work becomes at once accurately defined when they talk of
u sending the pilots to sea for their living,” might do worse
than take a trip in one of the company’s schooners, and possibly
they would discover that life is not all “ beer and skittles” to a
Victorian pilot. In order that they might understand the thing
aright, let them go through the Heads while there’s about half
a gale of wind blowing [from the sou’-west, and a good heavy
rip on ; and let them stick to the pilot whose turn it is to
board the vessel a few miles outside the surging rip, accompany
him on his journey from the pilot boat to the ship, go on board
with him and come back to town determined for the future to—
“Praise the sea, but keep on land.”
For the idea that possesses some very worthy folks—who are not
to be blamed in the least for their inability to make a wall-and-
crown, or still less to preserve their internal evenness when “ tossed
upon the bosom of the mighty deep” during an excursion trip to
Geelong—that piloting and shelling peas occupy a place in the
same category of easy tasks, is the most absurd in the world. On
the contrary, it would be difficult to mention any profession which


and thoroughly as does the Victorian Pilot Service. That this is
requires the exercise of every faculty of mind and body so wholly
not an exaggerated statement may he easily shown. Take any
peaceful profession in life and in it knowledge and skill are,
generally speaking, sufficient to ensure success. But not only
must our pilot have the most accurate knowledge of his work, not
only must he know how to use that knowledge under a great
variety of circumstances, not only must he be equal to every
emergency in a profession which is literally made up of emergencies,
but frequently, and just at the time when all these things are
most wanted, he is exposed to great personal danger, which no one
more practically realises than himself. Then it is that a weak man
would waver, and then it is that the pilot has to show himself a
man of courage, for without this faculty his skill and knowledge
would be useless. Of course, shipmasters, like pilots, have
frequently to perform their duties when face to face with personal-
danger, and sometimes even with certain death, but among ship-
masters, even, there are few who would care to tumble about out-
side the Heads in an open boat on a dark night, and with a heavy
sea running. And what sailor would net prefer to fight out a gale
of wind on the blue water with a good offing or a fair distance
from the land t > tackling it on a lee shore ? None. But it is
on a lee shore that the Victorian sea pilots look for their living.
The present Pilot Board of Port Phillip was incorporated in
the year 1854. This Board is the governing power of the two
companies into which the pilot service is divided, under the dis-
tinctive titles of No 1 and No. 2 Company. Prior to the establish-
ment of the Board the pilots worked as civil servants, being paid
fixed salaries by the Government, the latter bearing all the expenses
and undertaking the general management of the service. This
system did not, however, work at all satisfactorily ; hut in the
year 1854 the Government entrusted the management of the
service to the pilots themselves, requiring them to purchase the
necessary plant, find all the expenses of maintenance, and pay
themselves out of the pilotage fees exacted from all vessels trading
to the port whose masters did not hold exempt certificates. The fees
determined upon at that time were, for sailing vessels 15d. per ton,
and for steamers lUd per ton, the maximum charge being fixed at
£IOO. Since then the fees have been repeatedly reduced, and
stand at present s£d per ton for sailing vessels, and 4|d per ton
for steamers. On the Ist of last month a further reduction
came into force, which knocked off the half-penny per ton
from the fee charged against sailing vessels, and fixed the maximum
charge for the latter at £4O, and the maximum for steamers at
£25. From these fees a reduction of Id per ton will he made in
favor of the river pilots in cases where vessels go up to Yarraville,
Footscray, or Melbourne. Previously the river men had their own
tariff, entirely distinct from that of the sea pilots. It will thus be
seen that the pilots are not going to get too much for their labor,
if the shipowners and other agencies that operate upon the


governing powers know it. Not long ago it was proposed that
the Government should resume the control of piloting work in
connection with Port Phillip, and that pilots be again paid fixed
salaries. Whether any improvement would be effected if that idea
were carried out is a very open question indeed. Past experience
has shown that while governing themselves, paying themselves, and
competing among themselves, the pilots of Port Phillip are ever
on the qui vive, ever anxious, industrious, and painstaking. The
more work they can accomplish the greater the company’s
dividend at the end of each month. But give them fixed
salaries, put them on the well-known and muchadmired
admired “ Government stroke,” and it is pretty safe to say they
are not likely to flurry themselves any more than Customs’ officers
or—well, Railway Commissioners. As was the case under the old
system of Government control, one or two of the salaried pilots
would always be found doing a long “ watch below” on the sick
list, and if there was rather much “ rip” on, probably they would
discover dangers in going out that are not twice thought of in the
present service. Convert the pilots into civil servants, give them
good salaries, three weeks’ leave in the year, and the rest of the
et ceteras, with which we delight to pamper our public officers, and
those who at present keep vigilant watch and ward at the Heads
will be the gainers, rather than the community ; and, more
especially if pilotage fees are but subjected to a little further
pruning, it should suit no one better than the pilots themselves if
they are relieved of their responsibility to make the service pay,
and get snug salaries for the mere perfunctory discharge of their
duties. The Liverpool Marine Board have been thinking of
putting their pilots on salary, but although the matter has been a
good deal discussed, I have not heard that the idea is yet carried
into effect—indeed it can be easily understood that the Liverpool
Board, like the Victorian Government, are more inclined to let well
alone than make experiments at the risk of destroying the efficiency
of their service. And, so far as this port is concerned, if past
experience be used for any practical purpose it will point to the
necessity of avoiding a system which has proved unsatisfactory,
and preserving one in which every satisfaction has been obtained.
At the same time, it is only reasonable to suppose that should the
pilotage fees suffer much further reduction, very few good men are
likely to offer themselves for the existing Victorian service. At
present, the pilots are no doubt the pink of the profession.
Some few there are who have retired from the pilot service, after a
quarter of a century’s continuous work, independent men, but these
cases are rare, and as the “ good old times” have gone from the
pilots quite as much as from other colonists, it is not likely they
will be followed by many others of a similar character. Landsmen
don’t light their pipes with £5 notes these times, and pilots no
longer get 15d per ton as fees for guiding veesels through the
intricacies of Port Phillip harbour.
There are twenty-two sea pilots in the port of Melbourne,


divided, as I liave said, into two companies No, 1 and No. 2.
Each company’s takings are kept separate, and, after paying
working expenses, the dividends of each are divided equally among
its members on the first of the month. One percentage of
pilots’ earnings is retained by the Pilot Board, for the Superannuation
Fund, and a further one per cent, for administration of the service.
This fund now amounts to nearly £40,000, and from it
aged and retired pilots are paid an allowance, the amount
of which depends upon the length of the recipient’s service.
Each company is possessed of a fine schooner especially adapted
for the difficult and dangerous work of the outside station. The
Rip, which belongs to No. 2 company, was built especially for the
service at St. Johns, New Brunswick, to the order of the pilots.
She is 90 tons register, and over 26 years old. Before this schooner
was ready for her colonial work she cost No. 2 company something
like £4,500. The schooner Mavis was originally a pleasure yacht,
and was bought in England for No. 1 company by Capt. James
Dean. The Mavis cost £4,000, and although a nicer looking craft
than the Hip is not so strongly built. Both vessels are fore-and-aft
schooner rig, and each carries eight regular hands, all told. These
consist of the mate, second mate, four able seamen,, a
cook, and a steward. The steward of each boat is likewise
providore. The schooners themselves are well found in every-
thing, the standing and running gear of each vessel being
thoroughly overhauled while she is lying on the inside station.
At the Bluff, as Queenscliflf is called in the service, a
carpenter is constantly employed by the pilots at joint work for the
two companies, His business is to patch up the boats, and keep
the schooners in good general repair. At the present time the Rip
is laid up undergoing an overhaul, which is to cost something like
£SOO. Not long ago £2OO was spent on the same vessel. When
the Rip is out of Jhe carpenter’s hands the Mavis is to come up for
overhaul. During the time a schooner is laid up, the opposition
company’s vessel has to be chartered, the rate being fixed at £5
per day. In addition to the vessels at the Heads each
company has a fine sailing boat here at Willliamstown, also
a skiff for light weather or calms. Each company also employs
a man to look after its boats and attend the pilots while in
Williamstown. It is the boatman,s duty to look out for his-
compay’s pilots, and take them off to vessels in the bay. When
not engaged at this he is supposed to be always on the alert for his
company’s interest, to dodge about the Pilot office, watch the marine
telegrams, and assist the pilots generally. It may be
easily understood that so much plant and such an extensive staft is
only maintained by the pilots at a heavy monthly outlay, amd as
each company has to depend entirely upon its luck while doing its
turn on the outer station, it will be readily observed
that the purely speculative element enters largely into the
affairs of the pilots, and conduces to their vigilance. Un-
like Government officials, and in some respects similar to


commercial men, their incomes fluctuate with good times and bad
times. Indeed there’s so much “ going it blind” about Victorian
piloting, that if all the old “ shells ” engaged at it were converted
into civil service “ barnacles” they’d begin to feel like land-lubbers
if only for the want of the “ backing and filling” to which their
incomes, like themselves, had been so long subject. Piloting in this
port is in many respects similar to whaling, in which, as some of my
readers may not be aware, the dollars depend entirely upon the
amount of blubber operated upon, and the quantity of oil stowed
away in the hold. So with the pilots. Each company stays eleven
days on the outside station, and the pilots have to make the best use
of their time, hoping for south west winds, and for tonnage to come
just fast enough to keep them going without forcing them to haul
down their commission flag.
Chapter 11.
The sea, the sea, the open sea,
The blue, the fresh, the ever free.
Life on board of a pilot schooner has its lights and
shadows like everything else worldly, the aspect of the weather,
rather than the condition of the markets being a matter of
never-failing interest to the watchful pilots. What is merely
a common-place subject ashore in fraught with the deepest
interest to those whose fortunes are “ cast upon the troubled
waters.” The smart schooners of the Victorian Pilot Service
are the outcome of many years of danger and difficulty, and
in their sea-going capacities will bear favorable comparison
with any vessels of the kind in the world. Indeed, only vessels
of an exceptional character could keep their positions beating
about the Pip as these schooners have to. As I have said,
each schooner remains on the outside station for eleven days,
during which time all is fish that comes to her net. At the
expiration of that period she is relieved by the opposition
company’s vessel, who, in her turn, takes eleven days buffeting
about, and what fortune the gods may send her. Wfien a
schooner takes her place on the outside station she generally
carries about six pilots, and is in command of the last one
whose turn it is to board a ship. The relieving vessel slips
her moorings on the morning of the day appointed for the
beginning of her outside work, and goes out through the
heads and close up to the schooner on duty. Possibly the
latter has had an unprofitable turn, but whether or not a
bright lookout is kept that forenoon on the chance of seeing
a sail. Unlike cricketers it is during the outings, and not in
the innings, that the pilots run up their financial scores, and
the prospect of boarding another pilot or two before resigning
the outside station for eleven days to the opposition company is
quite sufficient to keep all hands on the alert on the morning
of the last day. Perhaps a sail does heave in sight, but the


wind is light, the schooner on duty close in to the land, and
the sun already near the meridian. Every nerve is strained to secure
the vessel, but “time, oh I” is called, watches are compared, down
goes the flag without further ado, and while the relieved pilots mutter
their prayers in an undertone the schooner stands in for the Heads.
Meanwhile the relieving boat has run up her colors, the red and white
pilot flag, and is beating out to the approaching vessel. The boat is
lowered, the pilot boarded, and soon the stranger, under skilful
guidance, is following in the course of the relieved pilot schooner
through Port Phillip Heads. So far, so good. But, see, the sky is
lowering, and as the day advances the wind freshens up to a stiff
breeze from the sou’-west. During the afternoon the pilots have been
amusing themselves reading, fishing, or pacing the deck on the look-
out for sails, just as the fancy moved them. The schooner has been
employed all the afternoon reaching to windward, and drifting back
with her sails just touching the wind. Now night comes on, and she
is hove-to under storm canvas, for the wind has increased to a fierce
gale, the sea is running mountains high, and the dark, black, angry
waters look like living monsters, who threaten to swallow up the frail
craft and her human freight. A bright light has been run up at the
foremost head, and a flash light is shown every fifteen minutes. No
side lights are allowed, for there is no “ rule of the road” for a pilot
boat, it being her duty to take care of herself under all circumstances,
and keep out of the way of everything as best she can. But what is
that twinkling light alternately appearing and disappearing among
the waste of waters away in the direction of Cape Otway ? What can
it be but the masthead light of a steamer ! And now all is attention
on board the watchful pilot boat. Slowly the light approaches, and
the schooner stands out for it. Now the green side light is
occasionally made out, and presently up goes the blue light, the signal
for a pilot. By this time the steamer and the little schooner have got
so close together that the visitor to the pilot boat who has come out
for a trip feels convinced that he is doomed to be run down, and tries
to think of the long-neglected prayers of his youth. The schooner is
pitching and bumping on the stormy waters, the wind whistles through
the rigging in a Avierd, unearthly fashion, to the accompaniment of the
surging of the billows, and the spray dashes over the rail as the little
vessel poises herself for a moment on the crest of a mighty Avave, and
then rushes headlong down, down, until the visitor, avlio shuts his eyes
and holds on as he never held on before and does not Avant to again,
thinks she’s never going to stop. “ Grood Heavens !” he mentally
exclaims, “ How in the name of fortune is the pilot to get on board ?”
It is certain that the querist Avould not for Avealth untold be tempted
to let go his own hold for a moment, and though he did think of
returning to town, as to attempting to get on board that ship—well,
he’s not mad yet, Avhatever may be the eventual outcome of his
maritime experiences. Surely, he thinks within himself, these pilots
carry theirlives in their hands, and as he happens to be a shreAvd business
man, he mentally resolves that if he is but spared to set his foot on
terra Jirma again, the life insurance company of Avhich he is a director


will issue no more policies to sea pilots if he can help it. In the midst
of his reveries and speculations a stentorian voice is heard above the
raging elements giving the order “lower away the boat.” Instantly
the men jump imo her, and the next moment the boat, which had been
previously hanging in the davits, is in the water. There is no rush, no
hurry, no evidence that anything unusual is being done. “ Goodbye”
calls the pilot as he tumbles over the side in a fashion that
suggests all the early lessons associated with the visitor’s catechism
days, and the boat drops astern. Only the twinkling light she
carries gives an idea of her position. Now it is seen here, now
there, and no one on the schooner can tell what happens until
the boat is under the bows again, minus the pilot, who has got on
board the ship in some manner altogether inexplicable to the
nnnautical mind, and not easily understood by any but those who
are continually engaged at such precarious work. Meanwhile,
the pilot, soaked to the skin, has groped his way in the dark,
strange vessel to the bridge, where he is greeted by the captain
with a “ Glad to see you on board, pilot,” and who now resigns
his charge. If the vessel is a steamer the order is generally
“speed ahead,” if sailing vessel with a south-west wind
“ square away.” There she goes, right through the
wrathful rip which hisses its mad defiance of the intruder upon
its gambols. “By Heavens,” exclaims the captain, who had
never visited the port before, “ I have always heard the rip was
bad, pilot, but had no idea it was anything like this.” Now the
vessel safely passses the treacherous Lightning Rock lying hidden
on her starboard side, while the sea breaks heavily on the
Lonsdale Rock on her port, and now she enters the narrow
opening and passes through Port Phillip Heads. Safely through
the passage she continues her way, and her course is
shaped for the South Channel. Inside the Heads all is com-
paratively plain sailing for the skilful pilot. Vessels of a heavy
draught of water only are brought up the South Channel, the
others steering a shorter course for the Bay up the West Channel.
In the channels, the leadsman’s services are brought into constant
requisition, and as he hauls up the lead line he calls “ by-the-
mark three” or whatever depth is indicated by the marks on
which he lays his hand. According to a recent regulation, every
candidate for the position of sea pilot has to serve a probationary
period as leadsman. When a vessel is brought up to her moorings
in the Bay, the pilot goes ashore, and if he is a Williamstown
man is, of course, home. Possibly the captain who was so glad to
see him when he came on board forgets to say “ Good-bye,” but
pilots ought never to complain of that, or we should at once con-
clude that though they might know a great deal about the sea
they are precious ignorant of the ways of the world. Perhaps the
pilot who brings a vessel up resides at the bluff', in which case he
has to return to Queenscliff as a passenger, unless he gets a
chance to take some ship to sea.
To return to our friends on the outside station, which, I


think, we had better accomplish by a species of mental telegraphy
for there is no train to the bluff till morning, and even if we got
that far we could scarcely get on board the schooner. The
simplest thing we can do then is to make a mental bound, and
here we are again on board the schooner, with the day just breaking.
The wind has lulled a little now, and in the kind daylight two or
three other vessels that have shown up are supplied with pilots and
make their way through the Heads, And so the days and nights
pass, the shipping is brisk, and although a couple of the
company’s pilots have been picked up from outgoing vessels and
two others have came out in a tug, the supply of pilots is running
short. Meanwhile the opposition schooner has been undergoing
her usual overhaul while lying at her moorings on the inside
station. When she came in the pilots all went ashore, the sails
were stowed and the vessel left in charge of the mate. The latter is
now virtually captain, and keeps a sharp look-out for his company’s
interest. This übiquitous individual always seems to know how
many of the opposition pilots are still outside, and he keeps the bluff
men of his own company well informed on this point. During the
day you will frequently find him up at the look-out station, quizzing
everything with the great Government telescope. In the morning
he keeps an especial look-out for any vessels that might have passed
the boat outside, and run in with a signal for a pilot flying. In
that case, he hurries off to the pilot next in turn and “ sharp’s the
word and quick the action” to get him on board and thus snatch a
ship that should belong to the other company. I need scaacely say
such opportunities rarely occur. Although the boat on the inside
station is undergoing such cleaning up and renovating as is
considered necessary, she is always kept ready for sea, and as the
south-west wind with which we began our piloting experiences has
freshened up again to halt a gale, we will see the necessity for
having the schooner at all times ready for emergencies. Ships
have been coming in freely during the few days of the station that
have elapsed, and now at eight o’clock in the evening of the fourth
day the indefatigable and ever watchful mate breaks in upon the
privacy of the next pilot in turn to say, “ There are only two pilots
left outside, and there were four large vessels off the Otway at sun-
set.” “Oh ! that’s good,” is the reply, “ You have the boat
ashore for me at twelve o’clock and we will go out with the ebb
tide.” For, as I don’t think I have yet stated, should the
schooner on the outside station be unable to board enough pilots to
meet the demand, she has to haul down her flag, and the opposition
schooner can take up her work until a fresh supply of the exhausted
company’s pilots is procured. At midnight, then, three of the
“bluff” men go off to their schooner on the chance of the other
company running snort, if only for a few hours, and giving them an
opportunity to “ steal” a ship or two. The wind has increased in
violence and it is now blowing a strong gale. “ Set the storm
trysails, and double reef a staysail” cries the skipper, the mooring’s
are slipped, and the schooner begins to beat out. This is not so


very difficult, despite the gale, for a ten-knot current is setting out
through the Heads. Before long, the rip is approached—the
dreaded rip, before which, ever the hardiest pilots will sometimes
quail, and small wonder at it. There is not much of it to be seen,
though, for a darkness that can almost be felt has cast its pall over
everything. Now the leading lights on Shortland’s Bluff have
become almost two in one, the pilot in charge of the schooner roars
out “ Haul out the bowline and put down the helm,” and round she
spins on the other tack, just on the edge of the rip. “ Keep your
fore sheet to windward, and lay aft here, quick” is the next order,
“ shut the companion and look out for yourselves.” By tnis time
the little vessel has drifted into the boiling, seething maelstrom, in
which she pitches and jerks so violently that it takes the men on
her deck all their time to hold on. Presently the mate roars,
“ Look out there,” and the hands who have been hanging round
the mainmast ready for a jump, clamber up the hoops as high as
they can reach. There is a roar and a crash as the sea breaks over
her, and the men are fastened down with the weight of water on
them, and scarcely know how or where they are. Talk about
hydraulic pressure, the men who hang on for dear life while a heavy
sea sweeps the decks of their vessel are good authorities on that
subject. It doesn’t last long, thank heaven, and as soon as breath
is recovered the skipper cries out, “ Are we all here, boys?”
"All here” is fortunately the general response. “I think she’s
through it,” says the skipper, “ Let draw,” and with that the
•chooner begins to forge ahead and beat an offing, the while,
pitching and lurching most violently. On looking round it is found
that the sea has clean swept the decks, washed the boats out of the
davits and carried away a portion of the bulwarks, but these are
the mere trifling eventualities of the pilot service, and all are
perfectly content that the number of the ship’s company remains
intact. When that fatal sea broke over the Rip some years ago
the consequences were much more terrible ; but even then
only such as those engaged in the pilot service may at any
time be liable to in the execution of their duties. Daybreak finds
our enterprising schooner about eight miles outside the Heads, and
within about a mile of her rival. Two large vessels are hove-to in
the offing, each flying the Union Jack, which is the signal for a
pilot. The proceedings are watched with interest. Presently the
schooner on duty gets to leeward of the large iron ship nearest her,
lowers the boat and puts a pilot on board. This is easier said than
done, for sometimes the boat is about ten feet above the vessel’s
rail, and looks like going right on board with a rush, while at other
times it is about twenty-five feet below the rail, and the ship appears
to be coming down on top of it. Eventually, however, the pilot
gets on board, safe and sound, even though he is permeated with
brine. The boat returns to the schooner, which gets down to
leeward of the other vessel, supplies him with a pilot, and, by
Jove ! down comes the commission flag. This is what our ad-
venturous spirits of the opposition have been watching for and fully


expecting. Up go their colors, for another large vessel is descried
in the offing. “ Let draw,” is the order, and the schooner stands
out to windward to take up the business at whicli her rival has
become temporarily exhausted. The latter is now in charge of the
mate, who must be guided by his own judgment as to whether he
will run her in, or remain where he is on the chance of some of his
own company’s pilots coming out. He decides to stay out, and has
the pleasure of seeing the other schooner supplying a pilot to a
large American ship, which means from £3O to £4O to the other
side. But their game is about played out, for here’s a tug boat
hired by the company or pilots at a cost of £ls or £2O
coming through the Rip with the flag of the company whose outside
station it is flying at the masthead. She has pilots on board, and
the privateers thus cut short in the midst of their maritime thefts,
are trying to make out how many. “ Ha,” says the skipper of the
latter, “ the beggars are keeping below, so that we can’t count them.
Keep close and we’ll find out how many go into the boat.” Four
pilots are eventually made out, and up goes the regular schooner’s
flag again. “Up with the helm,” cries the privateer skipper, “ we’ll
just get in on the last of the flood. Pity we lost our boat but we’ll
likely find her somewhere on the beach.” The schooner gets inside
and picks up her moorings again, having been out about nine hours,
all perfectly satisfied that they got a ship for their trouble. Such
are some of the experiences at the “bluff,” but, generally speaking,
each company w r atches its own interests so closely that its rival
gets but few chances to “ steal a ship.”
Chapter 111.
For in the word—that fatal word—howe’r
We promise—hope —believe —there breathes despair.
Boairling a vessel in Hobson’s Bay for the purpose of
taking her to sea is not by any means such a serious undertaking
as tumbling on board a strange vessel in the dark, outside the heads.
Many of my readers have doubtless been among the crowd that
invariably watches the departure of the mail steamer. W hat a
scene of confusion is there! What hurrying of lumpers and
tumbling about of cargo and luggage ! What shouting and
whistling, to be sure ! The train which has conveyed the numerous
passengers from Melbourne has also brought their hosts of friends
and relatives who came down to bid them a final hon voyage.
Such a crowd of well-dressed prosperous looking people, as are
assembled on the mail pier, speaks volumes for the wealth and
importance of Victoria. There is a young colonial, who for the
first time has severed the maternal apron strings, and is now
about to begin the first stage of the grand European tour. Of
course he brings his whole family, or, to speak more correctly,
the whole family come, to see him off. The fond father is giving
his son a parting word of advice, and is explaining some matters
in connection with which the phrase “ letter of credit frequently
occurs in the conversation, and in which the youthful voyager


appears to take the deepest interest. The anxious mother and
the fond, but withal somewhat jealous sisters, are inspecting the
place where the young man is to sleep, and where in a few short
hours he will probably be struggling in the throes of vial de mer.
There are some English swells who have been “ doing” the colony,
and who are now about to begin the return trip, their geographical
knowledge, at least, considerably improved by their sojourn in
Victoria. Their surprise at finding that the colonials were white
folks and almost as cultivated, if not so supercilious as themselves,
has by this time worn off, but they have some pretty steep yarns
about Australia ready for their friends at home. Here also,
dodging about in his shirt sleeves, is another specimen of English,
swelldom. But a few months ago he came out in handsome
style; a saloon passenger by the mail boat, his avowed purpose
being to astonish the natives of Victoria with his grand airs,
and magnanimously disposed to take a paltry £IOOO a year in
some public office. He was not particular what it was, and, if
the salary were but good enough, he would take the Governor-
ship as readily as anything else. But now, circumstances a
change tout cela, he is a wiser and considerably sadder man, and
in his anxiety for “ home sweet home,” he has undertaken to
discharge the auduous duties of “Jimmy Ducks” in return for
his passage in the mail steamer. Poor fellow he dosen’t take
kindly to his work, and it’s rather hard luck that some of the
more fortunate companions with whom he was “ hail fellow well
met,” on the outward voyage, have chosen that steamer for
their return journey. This is indeed the unkindest cut fate had
dealt him. But we have really nothing to do with all these
people, as our business is with the little quiet man who has just
gone on board, and having taken up a position on the bridge
begins to give orders to all and sundry. The last parting glass is
hurriedly quaffed, the last embrace given, and the visitors rush
up the gangway to obtain good positions in the crowd which
clusters at the end of the pier. The English swells adjust their
eye-glasses and ogle the girls who are madly waving handker-
chiefs, and throwing kisses in such a promiscuous manner that
there’s no telling to whom they will fall, and amid cries of
“ Good-bye,” “ Write soon,” “ Don’t forget,” “ Pleasant voyage,”
etc., etc., the steamer moves slowly away from the pier. The
lightship is passed about four o’clock, and the vessel’s course is
shaped for the south channel. By eight o’clock she reaches the
Heads. The evening has turned cold and miserable ; there is a.
stiff breeze blowing, with occasional heavy squalls of rain, and
the pilot, who has been on the bridge four and a-half hours, is
beginning to feel chilled and stiff. The steamer passes the
Heads, gets a good offing, and a blue light is burned as a signal
for the pilot boat. This is answered by a flash from the watch-
ful schooner, and presently the latter shears by and drops her
boat. This the steamer’s people cannot see, but keep a look out
for the bright light she carries, which dances amid the surging


waters, flashing for a moment as the boat rises an the crest of
the wave, and disappearing as she sinks into the trough of the
sea. The steamer’s engines are stopped. She is now lying with
the sea well on her bow in order to give the boat a lee, and
rolling like a log. Presently the boat gets alongside, and the
captain of the mail steamer wishes the pilot “ Good-bye.” “ Don’t
forget to post the letters pilot, will you 1 By Jove, I’d rather
you than I went in that boat a night like this.” “Oh we’re
used to it captain,” is the hearty response, “ Good-bye ” and
with that the pilot tumbles over the side. He hangs on to the
ladder for a moment, watches his opportunity, finally springs for
the boat, and lands nicely amidships. Certainly he was
unfortunate to bark his shins in coming over the side, and he
happened to jump on one of the boatmen’s arms, giving him a
nasty bruise, but these are the mere bagatelles of the pilot
service. Before the boat manages to shove off, though,- the
steamer goes ahead slow, and whew! a torrent of hot water
rushes from the discharge pipe in her side, drenching and
parboiling the occupants of the boat, and half filling the latter
with water. The pilot and his crew, blinded and nearly
smothered, get out of the way as best they can, narrowly
escaping being ground to pieces with the steamer’s propeller as
they pass her stern, and the latter goes grunting on her course.
Meanwhile those in the boat have lost sight of the pilot
schooner’s light, and the schooner has also lost the run of the
boat. A heavy squall of drizzling rain comes on and speedily
cools the victims of the hot bath, which the mail steamer had
presented as a sort of parting memento. There is nothing for
it now but to keep the boat’s head to the heavy chopping sea
and wait till the squall passes. Eventually the wanderers are
made out by the schooner and picked up in a half frozen
condition. A change of clothes and a drop of something hot
works wonders, and soon the pilot and his men ure themselves
again and ready for fresh dangers, quite content to turn either
in or out as occasion may require.
The cruising ground extends to about twelve miles out-
side the Heads. The boats are not allowed to go more than
twelve miles off nor is it generally desirable they should go so
far. With a south-west gale blowing, though, they keep well
off, and if the weather is thick, often lose sight of the land
altogether. Of course, the pilots when cruising do not care to
get too far away, as a vessel wanting a pilot might come inside
of them and even take the Heads, when she would probably
be boarded by the opposition company. It will be seen, there-
fore, that the closer to the entrance of the Heads a boat works,
the less the probability of losing any vessels. The continual
beating out and drifting to leeward rendered necessary by
cruising about in such a confined space on the rock-bound
coast of Port Phillip, is very severe on the gear of the
schooners, and makes the cost of maintaining them very much


greater than if they were merely engaged in plain sailing.
The navigation outside the Heads is all done by landmarks or
leading lights, compasses not always proving sufficiently reliable.
Once inside the Heads the channel courses are easily pricked
off on the chart. Vessels taken to sea are usually left with
about four or five miles of offing outside the Heads.
Notwithstanding the competitive character of the two
companies into which they are divided, the most perfect entente
cordiale existe among the pilots of Port Phillip. They are
famed for their hospitality, and visitors to the schooners when
on the outside station are numerous. Among these are often
many social celebrities, members of Parliament, merchants,
Government officials, barristers, journalists, and all sorts. If a
man feels seedy in this country it is generally because his liver
is out of order, and a good shaking up will work even greater
wonders than Holloway’s pills. I don’t know where he can
obtain this so thoroughly and effectively as in the company of
the hard-working, but withal hearty fellows, a large pro-
portion of whose lives is spent cruising in the rough piloting
grounds of Port Phillip. Visitors, as I have said, are always
made welcome, and if they are of a jovial temperament,
especially so. Quite lately a visitor to the pilot schooner Mavis
insisted upon getting up an amateur concert on board, and the
way in which “ Wait till the clouds roll by” was rendered by
the company so deeply affected the sharks and other marine
creatures that they must have retired to weep over it, for not a
fin was seen for several days afterwards.
An old colonial skipper whom many of my readers will
remember and may perhaps recognize from my reference to
him, used to always wind up his one speech by saying, “ Now,
ladies and gentlemen, I feel that I am getting into shoal water,
so I think I’d better drop anchor.” This is about the condition
in which I now find myself, but although I have already gone
far beyond the limits prescribed for this sketch, before coming
to a literary anchor, I will give one yarn from the many good
ones current in the Victorian Pilot Service. Here goes for the
shortest I can think of. Some years ago when female
emigration was in full swing, a pilot once boarded a large
emigrant ship and had to wait outside for the turn of the tide.
He was quickly surrounded by a number of the emigrant girls,
who had asked all sorts of questions but were particularly
anxious respecting a ship that had sailed for Melbourne just
before theirs. “Did she arrive all safe, pilot?’ they asked.
“No,” replied the pilot in a serious tone, “She was lost and all
on board perished.” “Oh dear, oh dear!” cried the terrified
girls, “how did it happen?’ “Well,” said the son of Neptune,
“ it was just this way, the ship got this far all right and was
boarded by a pilot, but a lot of d d girls got around him
asking him questions and taking his attention from his duty, so
the ship was smashed to pieces on Point Lonsdale there.” The


speed with which those girls scattered can he more easily
imagined than described. There were no more questions asked,
and the pilot was left to discharge his duty in peace and
quietness.
A line or two about Mr, Reid, secretary of the service, and
I am done. It is customary now-a-days when speaking or writing
of a public officer to give his nationality, college or school in
which he was brought up, and the offices he w'as cradled in
before blossoming into maturity, but in my opinion such
twaddle is quite unnecessary to the issue. I don’t know and I
don’t care what nationality Mr. Reid boasts of, nor do I know in
what department of life he acquired his fitness for his present
station, but this I do know, and the pilots doubtless agree with
me, that a more methodical, thoroughly competent, and withal
courteous and gentlemanly officer, could scarcely be found to
fill the important post of secretary to the pilots of Port Phillip.
K. G, Neale & Co., Printers and Publishers, Parker Street, Williamstown.








