

A VICTIM
OF
MEDICAL ETIQUETTE
AND
THE TRUE STORY OF AN
UNPARALLELED STRUGGLE
FOR JUSTICE.
PRICE: TWO SHILLINGS.
AUTHORESS: MARGARET TRATFORD.
THOMAS BINNS, WRITER.






A VICTIM OF MEDICAL ETIQUETTE
AND THE TRUE STORY OF AN
UNPARALLELED STRUGGLE FOR JUSTICE
THE VICTIM.
Authoress: MARGARET TRATFORD
THOMAS BIN NS, Writer.
Printed by G. W. Brown, 30 Railway Place, Newmarket
for the Publisher, Mrs. M. Tratford, 243 Franklyn
Street, Melbourne. /


CONTENTS.
Chapter Page
Introduction. ... ... ••• 6
I In which some Introductory Observations
are indulged in ... ... • ••• 12
11. —ln which certain matters usually con-
sidered of importance are promptly
disposed of, while others more per-
tinent to the object in view are dealt
with ... ... ••• ••• 14
Hl.—An Accident and its Consequences ... 18
IV. —ln which Tratford visits Dr. Chas. Ryan
and undergoes three severe surgical
operations ... •»* ••• 22
V.—Which speaks of various matters, and
concludes by providing the answer to
an old riddle —“When does a man
cease to be a man ? ” 2 5
VI. Tratford is forced to his employment,
with what result shall be seen ... ... 28
VII. Which records several visits to Dr. Ryan,
and how the wife is driven out to earn
a living for the family 3 1
VIII. Another Visit to Dr. Ryan, followed by
a visit to Dr. MacKenzie, and what
occurred in both instances ... ... 35


IX. —In which a great, powerful organisation
is introduced ... ... ... ... 39
X. —In which is recorded several interviews
with the “Profession,” and how the
wife was served a scurvy trick ... 43
XI. —Tratford is taken to Dr. Moore, who
ultimately agrees to perform an
operation on him ; which is done ... 48
XII. —Which principally deals with Corres-
pondence between the Association
and the Commissioners ... ... 53
XIII. —Devoted to a further record of Corres-
pondence between the same parties
after satisfactorily establishing the
fact “ That truth is stranger than
fiction” ... ... ... ... 60
XIV. —Which continues, for the most part,
to record the battle between the
Association and the Commissioners,
and how the former displayed the
white feather, and deserted the man’s
cause ... 65
XV. —Which illustrates how the opinions of
Doctors may be as divided as the
poles. Tratford being given to
understand by one (as usual) that
there is nothing the matter with
him, and a few minutes after is
ordered into the Hospital by another 75


XVI. —ln which a remarkable interview with
a Doctor is recorded, and another
with the Premier ... ... ••• 8l
XVII. —ln which Tratford is subjected to a
medical examination by Dr. Grant,
and the expectations based thereon... 87
XVIII. —Tratford receives a Xmas box. Is in-
formed in effect that, unless he
resumes work, the entire System
might stop. And the wife displays
unpatriotic objections ... ••• 9°
XlX—Tratford does not go to work, and the
wheels still go round; the army of
holiday revellers remaining in sub-
lime ignoronce of the crisis ... ... 95
XX. —“ Fresh Engines ” are put upon the
rails, and fresh hopes are engen-
dered ; while the guinea that evaded
the grip of Dr. Boyd is mopped up
by the Profession after all 99
XXI. —ln which the Premier takes a hand,
and makes a discovery that staggers
him, as we believe it will the reader
also ... ... ••• ••• ••• io 4
XXII. —ln which it is suggested that a prefer-
ence is being shown for playing the
game in the dark. With the record
of other details ... ••• ••• 1H


XXIII —ln which Mrs. Tratford has an oppor-
tunity of observing how conceit is
humbled ; and the family enjoys a
change of scene T x $
XXIV.—In which hope is nearly abandoned.
But concludes with the promise of a
startling development later on ... \ 2 \
XXV -~ The Department appears in a new
role, which immeasurably supports
itsdi s ni *y ... 124
XXVI.—In which it is shown how a dozen yards
of Roman satin is made to play an
important part in the settlement of
a vexed question
XXVII.—In which it is shown how the inter-
ference of the Roman satin is followed
by immediate results. Tratford is
compensated at last ... ... I^6
XXVIII. In which is recorded a justification
for this work and an acknowledg-
ment of a grave responsibility x^ 2
XXIX. In which a Melancholy Peace is vouchsafed
the Tratfords. Disturbed only by the
sound of wrangling in the camp of their
tormentors
... 146


INTRODUCTION.
Up to the occurrence of the events recorded in
this work, Mrs. Tratford, the wife of a labouring
man, found ample employment in the management
and conduct of her home, the great world beyond
being little more to her than an indisputable fact,
'['he result of the accident to her husband had the
same effect in her home circle that is too often the
experience of the poor when the breadwinner for
the family, incapacitated by accident, becomes him-
self wholly dependent on those who formerly looked
confidently to him to secure the means of sub-
sistence.
This was the transformation that drove her out
canvassing from door to door, disposing of the pro-
duce of her handiwork in the heartrending effort to
provide the means of support, not only for herself,
but for her invalid husband and child.
Were this all, terrible as it was, there was nothing
in her experience so unique—as has been hinted—
to justify calling public attention to it. But while
she was engaged in this struggle, she was fiercely
conscious of the fact that his employer—m this
case a Department of the Public Service—was with-
holding from her husband the modest compensation
provided to be paid in such cases, going the length
of branding the unfortunate man a malingerer, so
that it might evade liability in respect of his
incapacity.


Few people would credit—she least of all—that
such things could happen in a community that
prides itself on its love of justice, and it might
easily occasion a feeling of shame in every unit of
it that the time was not wanting when the instru-
ments of this man’s torture justified their conduct
as necessary in the public interest.
Tratford incurred a severe strain while engaged
lifting heavy timbers in the discharge of his duty,
resulting in a rupture in the groin and kidney dis-
placement. Will anyone be bold enough to say
that such effects should baffle medical science in
this age? Or that, in such operations as might be
necessary to effect a cure, there should have been
reasonably any risk of incurring so terrible and
incurable a disease as abdominal adhesions? At
any rate, as the sequel will show, while doctors—
except when they did so unwittingly-refused to
commit their opinions to paper, they were yet not
fh Trt t 0 Verb . ally declaring (what is beyond doubt)
that the initial operation performed on the man was
responsible for the fact, and hinting that careless-
ness was the cause.
It must be borne in mind that the initial
operations were performed by the Chief Medical
Officer of the Railway Department (Dr. Chas
Ryan), who thereafter declared—for obvious
r and SO sh~S at K the man SimplV lm^lned himself ill!
* W ° rk ’ persisted « this
Ivina ™ hen -unawares to him-Tratford was
I>mg on a bed in the Melbourne Hospital after
avmg been further operated on by Dr. Moore.


The Railway Department, fortified by the reports
of Dr. Ryan, with the dual object, no doubt, of
screening its own medical officer and evading the
payment of compensation, stubbornly refused to
admit the man’s obviously real condition, and con-
sequently exceptional brutality was, on several
occasions, practised on the helpless invalid.
Railway employment is akin to soldiering (during
active service) in the degree of risk to life and limb
incurred by those who pursue it. Indeed, the cam-
paigner has decidedly the advantage, for injuries to
Railway men in the pursuit of their more peacefu
calling' are usually associated with a degree of
mutilation exceeding in horror that to which the
soldier is subject from the weapons of an enemy.
Where there is, then, so prolific a liability to
terrible accident, is it any wonder that the rank ana
file of the Service views with uneasy disfavour the
practice employed in allocating compensation?
Sometimes half-pay is allowed, sometimes full
pay • but the character of the payment, and especi-
ally’its duration, depends upon the report of one
man drawing the pay of the Commissioners, viz.,
the Department’s Chief Medical Officer.
So manifestly one-sided an arrangement must
stand condemned in the meanest judgment, and it
is incredible that those placed at the head of a
public department should be bold enough to flout
the community’s sense of justice by resorting to 1 •
An error of judgment in determining such matters
carries with it the infliction of much misery where


already, possibly, severe injury has been incurred.
The officer, then, whose single report determines
such matters —were he unquestionably proo
against every influence—would yet require to don
the armour of infallibility. Certainly he should not
be open even to the charge of “ unconscious bias.
And can he escape this imputation, drawing the
pay of the Commissioners, the party to whom the
injured man must look for compassionate allow-
ance? With what average success the reader may
judge from Tratford’s experience.
In the case under notice, the officials conduct
was as reprehensible as would be that of a mag-s-
----tiate who insisted on adjudicating upon a case in
which he was himself one of the parties to the
action, for Dr. Ryan’s conduct time and again was
impugned. Moreover, the Department took no
steps to look beyond him, and, when ultimately it
did do this, actually accepted a nominee of Dr.
Ryan.
The struggle to bring the Railway Department to
admit its obligation is not the only phase in this
remarkable case. There is another side to it which
provides food for reflection to every unit in the com-
munity, high and low, rich or poor, as seen in the
man’s experience with the Medical Profession, and
the refusal of doctors to commit to paper any state-
ment of the man’s case in conformity with their
verbally expressed diagnosis.
They, without exception, considered the man’s
condition as serious, and, in some cases, expressed


wonder that he was alive. They knew he was in
need of nourishing food, while he was without the
means to secure it, and that the Department was
improperly withholding the compensation paid in
such cases ; that he could not possibly follow his
employment; that the man was worrying under a
threat to dispense with his services. Yet they
refused to lift a finger or say a word to remove the
stigma branded on him by Dr. Ryan, that virtually
ho was a malingerer.
Moreover, though another operation was, in their
judgment, essential to afford the man temporary
relief, none would undertake it, till Dr. Moore,
importuned by the man’s wife, out of sheer pity—
to use his own words—sneaked him into the Mel-
bourne Hospital and performed it.
From the point of view of the Profession, the man,
having been made a mess of, was wanting in due
respect to the fraternity by not decently dying, so
that his poor, mutilated carcase, with the evidence
of its butchery, might be put beneath the cold turf.
Nature—or the abuse of Nature—-from time to
time imposes the disability of physical suffering
upon us ; and when this happens, no one so welcome
as the physician, the manner of whose slightest nod
or smile brings a cold dew' to the brow or hope to
the heart of the poor patient.
Used, then, as we are, to these attentions, who
can measure the despair of an invalid—a one-time
powerful man reduced to the helplessness of a babe
—from whom the Profession recoiled as though he


■were a viper? And why? Simply because to have
anything to do with him involved some question of
etiquette! ! !
The estimation in which the Profession is held
may well inspire a degree of pride in those who
practice it, but they must not presume on this by
subordinating the relief of human suffering to mere
childish and ridiculous formalities. Human beings
are not mere chattels, but something so much above
them that those who undertake the relief of their
physical sufferings have a duty to perform in so
doing paramount to every other consideration,
whatsoever it may be.
Mrs. Tratford has suffered so much, and yet has
so much to endure in contemplating the hopeless-
ness of her husband’s situation, that she feels she
would fail in her duty did she not endeavour to
save others from a like experience.
The blessed fortitude with which a gracious God
endowed her alone enabled her to bring to a suc-
cessful issue against well-nigh insurmountable
obstacles her fight for justice. And is there any
return so adequate she can make as the exposure
of the abuse, the practice of which brought so full
a measure of suffering in its train?


CHAPTER I.
In which Some Introductory Observations are
Indulged In.
At the outset we hasten to assure the reader of
this little work that, in arranging the facts and
features of this extraordinary case, every effort will
be made to refrain from indulgence in comments
that might in any degree obscure the issues.
Mrs. Tratford, who shall hereafter be spoken of
as in the third person, believes it her bounden duty
to secure such benefit to others as might accrue
from the exposure of the vicious cruelty to which
she and hers were subjected during a period of
four years. She has, therefore, very willingly made
available the proofs and documents upon which the
fabric of this narrative is raised.
Little or nothing is known by the public of the
inner working of that great bureaucratic institution,
the Railway Department.
Although the Railways are public property, the
owners are rigidly excluded from any acquaintance
with the working of the system, and are required
to be content with the presentation of an ambiguous
balance-sheet once a year. Beyond this, the
management might as well be conducted from some
obscure spot in the moon, in so far as any know-
ledge of its methods is concerned.


Moreover, it has so far hidden its secrets well,
for, although the system reeks with abuses, no one
has yet been found with sufficient temerity to
expose them. In its relationship to its servants,
much that would certainly interest and astonish the
public might be written. At any rate, the dis-
closures in this case may suggest —what will be true
enough—that there is hardly a corner of the whole
great architectural pile that would not smell the
sweeter for the flooding of a little of the light of
public criticism.
So far as the part played by the Medical Pro-
fession is concerned, it is fortunate, and of course
essential to the production of such a work, that suf-
ficient evidence has been gathered, and will, for the
most part, be adduced to satisfy any reasonable
and unbiassed mind that Tratford was a victim of
unmerited heartlessness and cruelty. Denials will
probably be indulged in, but refutations never.
A criminal standing in the dock, and asked to
plead, will, while conscious of his guilt, mutter a
“ Not guilty,” if he entertains a hope that the evi-
dence to be adduced by the prosecution is weak.
The appeal in this case, though, shall be to
Caesar, and those whose conduct shall be impugned
will find that a justice-loving public will demand
something more than a mere negative denial (if
the expression can be excused) in refutation of
positive assertion, supported by substantial evi-
dence and reasonable deduction.


CHAPTER II.
In which Certain Matters Usually Considered of
Importance are Promptly Disposed Of, while
Others, More Pertinent to the Object in View,
are Dealt With.
Concerning the antecedents of William Tratford
nothing need be said. The information—were it
available—though it would possibly be interesting,
is not material to the purpose of this narrative;
and this is probably a very fortunate circumstance,
for, were he tapped upon the question, the chances
are Tratford would be disinclined (from ignorance)
to enlighten us upon the point. But this much is
certain—though he has never been heard to boast
about it—that he can claim quite as ancient a
lineage as can many much more eminent people,
who base upon this fact alone a special claim to
distinction, while, ignorance being bliss, he enjoys
one advantage over the eminent people referred to
iii that he is not called upon to excuse or blush for
the rascally proceedings of his ancestors.
Relieved of the necessity, then, of fitting our
subject to a pedigree, and contemptuous of the
difficulties which will hereafter beset us, we take
up with another—the only one of our own creation
—and combat the contention of the fatalist, who
will argue that the fact of Tratford’s suffering was
provided for w the Book of Fate. Putting
their finger knowingly on some remote event or


occurrence, these people will prove to anyone s
satisfaction that here is the evidence of design,
and, elaborating their argument, employ as
stepping-stones a whole myriad of ensuing circum-
stantial trifles that brings them without mishap to
their goal.
Now, if there is anything in the reasoning of
such people, it follows that, as Tratford’s existence
was a first essential to his suffering, the whole
thing can logically be traced to the fact that some
male in the long roll of his ancestry, strolling down
the street one day, was smitten with a pretty girl,
a little affair that ended up, in the course of a
thousand years or so, in the production of William
Tratford.
In the light of his experience of life, he himself,
if he were asked, would probably express the wish
that the ancestor in question had gone down the
street on some other day, and winked at an
altogether different pretty girl, in which case he
would have enjoyed a quite different personality
(which is not so much the matter), and probably
an altogether more happy destiny (which is). We
do not believe the matter capable of scientific
adjustment, and faith we have none, holding
strongly to the view that we may look nearer home
for any necessary explanations, and account for
his misfortune as the left-handed reward for a
virtue, in that, in short, he was too conscientious
a workman—a bad habit, and being such only to
be acquired.
Certainly, it was an ill day for him that he cast


his eye up at a hoarding, and allowed it to rest
with exultant anticipation on an invitation pre-
sented in bold type to become a candidate for
employment in the Railway Service, and, succeed-
ing, live to learn that the rose which felt so soft to
his touch had been transformed into a nettle, with
the power to fatally wound him.
William Tratford entered the Victorian Railway
Service on 17th August, 1888, as line repairer,
being then in his twenty-fourth year.
As in the case of all candidates for such employ-
ment, he was required to submit to a severe
medical test before securing the appointment,
which he passed with ease, the examining doctor
paying him the compliment of observing that he
had rarely had under his hand so physically power-
ful a man.
Tratford was, and is still, a man of very even
temperament, quiet and unassuming in manner.
He found, outside of working hours, his pleasure
and recreations for the most part within the circle
of his own home. Thus it was that he avoided
the temptations that assail the average working
man’s progress through life, and which too often
prematurely bow down the finest specimens of phy-
sical manhood.
To a temperate and steady course through life
is mainly due the fact that, at the time of the acci-
dent, hereafter to be recorded, he had completed 17
years’ service in the Department without ever hav-
ing known an hour’s illness, or having in the least
degree impaired his magnificent constitution.


During the whole of this long period he had
never, on any pretext, absented himself from his
employment, and, what will speak volumes for his
capacity as a workman, his conduct had never
once been called in question. In a word, the
man’s departmental record sheet was as clean at
the completion of IT years as on the inauspicious
day he entered the Service.
Such an experience in the Railway Service.
although probably not unique, is yet very rare, for
he is a lucky man against whom the slightest
irregularity is alleged who escapes condign
punishment, the real merits of the case notwith-
standing, tired officialdom having an airy way of
acting on presumptions of guilt rather than trouble
to dissect the evidence advanced in support of pro-
testations of innocence.
Remembering the excellence of
record, one’s wonder is enhanced at the almost
malicious cruelty with which this man was after-
wards treated. What was there in his past record
to support even a suggestion that he might be a
malingerer?
Certainly, in all the circumstances of the case,
and with the certain knowledge that an accident
had occurred, had the Commissioners been
actuated by a desire to meet out even justice, they
would have sought the opinions of other medical
men in the face of so startling an allegation.
When they did do what they will no doubt claim to
be this, the merit of it will inspire disgust in the
mind of any fair-minded man, as the sequel will
show.


CHAPTER III.
An Accident and its Consequences.
On June 20th, 1905, Tratford was engaged in
following his usual occupation in Spencer-street
Yard, and, with others, was employed in the
renewal of crossing timbers—that is to say,
replacing old, worn timbers employed in support-
ing the lines of way at those points where a num-
ber of lines converge. Timber, otherwise of the
same dimensions, but quite twice the length of the
ordinary sleeper, has to be used. In this case the
pieces were 10 x 5 green hardwood, 22 feet in
length.
Tratford and four others were in the act of lift-
ing one such piece when he felt a severe wrench in
the groin and stomach, which stretched him upon
his back, in which position he remained, suffering
great pain, till the completion of the day’s work,
which, fortunately, was near at hand.
As soon after as possible he made his way home
as best he could, and throughout the ensuing night
he suffered severe pain, and consequently passed a
feverish and restless night. The following morning
this man, who had never known the experience of
absenting himself from duty, dragged himself once
more to work, and, although there was no diminu-
tion of the pains, he remained at his post till the
close of the day’s work, without, as he admits him


self, really being of any service to his comrades.
Another night of suffering and sleeplessness, and
the next morning he again essayed to take up his
duties; but when he made the effort signal failure
resulted, and he was sorrowfully compelled to
throw down his tools and return home.
Before doing this, the usual report of the occur-
rence was prepared and taken charge of by his
superior officer. For the benefit of the uninitiated,
it is as well to observe that the absence of this
report disentitles the employe to any payment of
sick allowance while off through injury, even
though the circumstances of his case would other-
wise warrant it.
Every requirement, then, being complied with,.
Tratford dragged himself home to bed (June 22nd).
Total incapacity to a man so unused to illness of
any sort was bound to occasion the utmost alarm
in his domestic circle, although there is a dis-
position in general to underrate the possible effects
in the case of a strong man like Tratford. How-
ever, the wife showed no disposition to leave any-
thing to chance, and immediately sought the advice
of the lodge doctor, who, while professing doubt
as to the full and exact nature of the injury sus-
tained, was clear upon one point, that a severe rup-
ture of the groin had resulted, a A .d ordered the
wearing of a truss, which was immediately pro-
cured.
This, however, did not bring the hoped-for relief,
especially as the severest pains were distinct from


those produced by the rupture, and were alto-
gether distinct in locality, and repeated examina-
tions by the lodge doctor failed to locate the nature
of the injury, to which they were ascribable.
In this condition of doubt and suffering the man
continued for some time, and as there appeared no
prospect of solution of the one or diminution of
the other, and as, so far, the Department was
silent on the all-important question of sick pay, he
determined to make another effort to get to work,
consequently he sought from the Department “light
employment.”
On the Ist of August, then, he resumed duty,
having been allotted work on the “ tip ” at Spencer-
street, where, with a long-handled shovel, he was
engaged levelling off the heaps of rubbish as they
were discharged from drays along the fringe of the
heap.
In the light of what afterwards occurred, extra-
ordinary to relate, he remained, with some slight
variations in his employment, steadily at work till
April 20th following, a period of nine months.
His condition during this period was miserable
m the extreme, returning home from his work day
by day to cast himself, in a weak and suffering
state, upon a bed, from which he rarely rose till it
was again time to proceed to work, while the
absence of any specific cause to account for his
condition was a source of alarm and anxiety to his
wife.


In this condition of affairs, as has been said,
matters continued till April 20th, on which date
he began his annual holiday of ten days, hoping to
gather during this short spell sufficient strength
for renewed efforts.
In this, however,, he was disappointed. Failing
to gather strength, he was unable to resume duty
on May 2nd, and a medical certificate of unfitness
was in due course forwarded to the Department.


CHAPTER IV.
In which Tratford Visits Dr. Chas. Ryan, and
Undergoes Three Severe Surgical Operations.
There was now the most serious cause for alarm.
It was eleven months since the date of the acci-
dent, without his having experienced any cessation
of his sufferings, or, worse still, any explanation
o f the cause, while his condition was so weak that
he could not even perform the lighter employment
he had managed to pursue during the past nine
months.
The lodge doctor (Dr. O’Donnell) had him under
examination now no less than three times in one
week, but, still failing to locate the primary cause
of the trouble, recommended his examination by
another medical man, and to this end furnished the
man’s wife with a memorandum to Dr. Chas. Ryan,
in which was set out a short history of the case,
with a request that the man be examined, and he
(Dr. O’Donnell) advised of the result.
Accordingly, Tratford, accompanied by his wife,
waited upon Dr. Ryan, who, after an examination,
declared emphatically that the man was suffering
from “ gall stones,” and that he would arrange for
his admission to the Melbourne Hospital, with a
view to a dual operation for gall stones and rup-
ture.
On the man’s wife protesting against the pro-


bability of gall stones being responsible for her
husband’s state, in that the pains which he (Dr.
Ryan) now ascribed to that cause began with the
accident, which also caused the rupture, the doctor
replied that he " understood his business,” to which
she as promptly replied that “ he might understand
his,” but that “ this she knew, that gall stones did
not come in a day.”
However, ridiculous as the doctor’s assumption
appeared to be, the mysteries of the art are beyond
the ken of the layman, and the trust poor
humanity is compelled to repose in science is never
more manifest that in our relations to the science
° f medicine, and in due course Tratford was
admitted to the institution and subjected to an
operation for gall stones, performed by Dr. Chas.
Ryan on May 16th (1906).
The operation disclosed the fact that gall stones
did not exist, and the doctor, lecturing a contin-
gent of students gathered subsequently round the
man’s bed, and speaking of the case as a most
interesting one, admitted his error.
What discovery the surgeon may have made is
within his own knowledge, but subsequent events
would go to show that the operation already per-
formed, useless for the purpose for whiqh it was
designed, at least laid bare the secret cause of the
man’s sufferings, for on May 30th, just fourteen
days after the first operation, two fresh operations
were performed, one for movable kidney, and the
other for rupture; and now, presumably, the whole
cause of the man’s sufferings was revealed.


Shortly put, the original strain had occasioned
a severe rupture in the groin and kidney displace-
ment, and for nearly a year the latter effect had
remained undiscovered; and let this be remem-
bered, in the light of the odium afterwards
attempted to be put upon this man, that for nine
months out of this period he had continued at his
work with the fortitude of a lion.
No attempt is made to attribute blame for the
non-discovery of the man’s complaint over so long
a period, especially so far as Dr. Ryan is con-
cerned, for he had not seen him, except as already
detailed. But he had undoubtedly committed an
error of judgment (probably excusable) in his
original diagnosis of the case.
The man had now, within the short period of a
fortnight, no less than three severe surgical
operations performed on him, and, three weeks
after the latest, was discharged from the hospital,
presumably in a fair way to recovery. Before he
left the institution, however, he felt that some-
thing had given way in connection with the opera-
tion for refixing the kidney, while, also, he was
beginning to experience sharp, shooting pains
round the incision made at the first operation for
gall stones; but mention of the fact brought the
reassuring reply “ that it was nothing.


CHAPTER V.
Which Speaks of Various Matters, and Concludes
by Providing the Answer to an Old Riddle,
“When Does a Man Cease to be a Man?”
From one point of view, the result of the opera-
tions was satisfactory, for, although the accident
had occurred nearly a year before, it was now only
too patent that his present condition was entirely
due to it. The result was that the Railway Depart-
ment granted him full pay as from May 2nd, the
date on which he should have resumed duty after
holidays. Needless to say, this was a great boon
to his family, the members of which, with himself,
were for the present removed beyond the reach of
want.
The manner in which this sick allowance is made
has one serious demerit, for the Department
habitually withholds payment for the expired
month till well into the ensuing one, and, conse-
quently, the payment of it is so suggestive of
reluctance that, with the knowledge that the
Department reserves the right to discontinue it at
any moment, the feverish expectation with which
the payment is awaited is only a trifle less distress-
ing than the knowledge that it has been definitely
discontinued.
Apart from this, if Tratford had to suffer, there
was a tremendous difference in doing so in mys-
terious ignorance of the cause and the now certain


knowledge, within their possession, of the nature
of his malady, while, in the ordinary course of
events, there was no reason why he should not
make rapid recovery.
But this is the very thing he did not do. As has
been said, he had certain misgivings that every-
thing was not right when he left the hospital, and
he returned home simply to go to bed, where he
remained, suffering severe pains in the back and
around the first surgical wound, and failing
entirely to gather strength.
At the end of a month his lodge doctor, puzzled
by his symptoms, ordered him away to Echuca for
a month, in the hope that the change might effect
some improvement in his condition. This advice
was acted upon, but Tratford returned home at the
end of the period rather worse than better for the
change. Waiting for him on his return was an
instruction from the Department, directing him to
present himself for medical examination by Dr.
Ryan, a custom freely employed by the Depart-
ment, especially in such cases as are enjoying the
indulgence of accident pay.
A peculiar circumstance may be mentioned in
this connection, in the fact that the Department
takes no account of the possibility of a sick person
being unable reasonably to leave his bed in
response to a direction to submit himself for
examination, and a case is within the knowledge
of the writer of a man forced to leave his bed for
this purpose against the orders of his medical


attendant, under a threat of dismissal should he
fail to do so.
However, Tratford presented himself before Dr.
Ryan, as directed, and the following remarkable
scene was enacted:—
Dr. Ryan: “What! Are you not at work yet?”
Tratford: “No, sir. My lodge doctor ordered
me away to Echuca to see if I could recover my
strength, and I have come back feeling no better.”
Dr. Ryan: “ I don’t care what your lodge doctor
says. I’ll see that you go to work.”
And thereupon, without submitting the man to
any examination, or evincing the slightest curiosity
as to his condition, he wrote a report, which
declared the man fit for duty, and handed it to
him.
Tratford, as in duty bound, handed the report
to the sub-head of his Branch, and crawled home
to meditate, in the intervals of his sufferings, on
the extraordinary rapidity with which a man—in
the Railway Service —forfeits the claim to be con-
sidered such if he has been foolish enough to get
injured in its employ, and admits his pauperism by
becoming the object of its bounty.


CHAPTER VI.
Tratford is Forced to His Employment, with what
Result Shall be Seen.
The “exhaustive” examination to which Tratford
had been subjected, depicted in the last chapter,
was not long in bringing results. In the course of
a few days, this invalid received instruction to pro-
ceed to Warburton to perform flag signalling
duties, employment that would, as his instructions
set forth, have necessitated living in a tent.
He immediately waited upon the Head of his
Branch, and protested his total unfitness to take
up the duty allotted him, especially as it involved
the exposure incidental to living under canvas.
Dr. Ryan’s report, stating his fitness for work,
was then read out to him; but he protested that
the doctor had neither questioned nor examined
him. The cold official reply was that they (the
Department) were paying Dr. Ryan, and were
bound, consequently, by his report, and that Trat-
ford would have to go to work; but the instruction
to proceed to Warburton was cancelled, and the
following substituted:—
Way and Works Branch,
3/io/’o6.
Memo, for Repairer Tratford.
I have to inform you that you are transferred to
Mr. Steiger, Spencer-street, temporarily.
You will require to report yourself to Mr. Steiger,
Spencer-street, on 4th inst., for duty.
Signed by
E. W. BALLARD, for Chief Eng. W. and W.


At the date of the issue of this peremptory com-
mand to resume duty just four months had elapsed
since the occurrence of the dual operation by Dr.
Ryan for kidney displacement and rupture, and the
old mystery that had held in its keeping the nature
of his malady had only been supplanted by
another.
The man, instead of gaining strength, was
slowly losing his grip under severe suffering.
Vvhat was now the matter, and what was the
cause? The lodge doctor was genuinely puzzled,
and, judging by Dr. Ryan’s emphatic declaration
sc recently that there was nothing the matter with
him, he, as the operating doctor, could not, at the
time of the operations, have anticipated even the
possibility of complications, hence would not
believe that, where there was no room for such,
such had ensued. Or did he already suspect that
results had followed that tended to reflect on him-
self professionally, and hope, by denying such, to
ease the gravity of the position by dragooning a
sick man into a healthy state? This is admittedly
a fairly strong presumption, but the reader will
form his or her own opinion on the facts pre-
sented.
Tratford got no relief from the operations, but
principally did he suffer from sharp, shooting pains
around the incision made at the useless operation
performed for suspected gall stones.
To return to our narrative. Tratford, in spite of
his wife's entreaties, reported himself for duty as
directed (October 4th, 1906)


It was at first intended to put him to work on
what is called the scrap-heap —work that would
have involved exposure to the weather; but when he
reported for duty, his superior, very kindly, pitying
the man’s obvious helplessness, substituted light
employment under cover—to wit, cleaning tricycle
parts, the machines being raised on a bench before
him ; and it was so painfully apparent that, if com-
pelled to stand to the work he would not be able
to continue, that the foreman provided him with a
box to sit on, and he was compassionately advised
to “ sit there and draw his money.”
Whereas, in the course of this narrative, it is our
disagreeable task to freely apportion blame, it is
a real pleasure to record Tratford’s heartfelt grati-
tude to Mr. Thorne and other officers for seemingly
little kindnesses at the time, that meant so much
to him.
Notwithstanding that those over him encouraged
him in every way, he was compelled, at the end of
four broken days’ work, to give in, and was unable
tG resume on the fifth; and with this pitiful effort,
under the lash of brutal compulsion, of a once
powerful man to do something for his own sup-
port, Tratford’s career as an industrial worker has
ceased for ever, though the occasion has since not
been wanting when his stomachless employer
again made the effort to force him to the treadmill.
But of this anon.


CHAPTER VII.
Which Records Several Visits to Dr. Ryan, and
How the Wife is Driven Out to Earn a Living
for the Family.
Tratfords late experience did not tend, we need
hardly say, to any improvement in his condition
ihe very contrary was the case. Hi* lodge doctor,
consequently, was again appealed to, but stated
his inability to do anything for him. “ Dr. Ryan,’
he observed, “having operated on Tratford the
case was his, and he (Ryan) should know what was
the matter with him.”
The consequence of this was, in the attitude
taken up by Dr. Ryan, that the man was in a fair
way to being denied medical attention of any sort •
and, although the lodge doctor continued to the
end to supply medical certificates of unfitness to
0 , hls employment, he seemed to consider the
man s condition more Dr. Ryan’s business than his
own.
However, he indited a further request to Dr
Ryan, requesting a re-examination of Tratford in
view of the bad turn he had taken, following on’his
late attempt at work.
Armed with this, and accompanied by his wife
he presented himself before Dr. Ryan, whose first
question was a demand to know “the object of
bringing him there.” The wife replied by detailing


what the lodge doctor had said, and placed the
letter in his hands.
He then submitted Tratford to an examination,
at the conclusion of which he declared that the
man might be a bit weak, but that otherwise there
was nothing the matter with him,” and advised
asking the doctor for a prescription for Eastons
Syrup (sometimes vulgarly termed dog medicine),
every dose of which he took, while it temporarily
brightened him up, left him in a still weaker con-
dition when the effect had worn off. The result
was he did not persevere with it, the lodge doctor
substituting a mixture containing morp ia, oil
dose of which produced so serious an effect that
he could not continue to take it either.
Tratford’s condition getting seriously worse the
distracted wife then sought permission of the lodge
doctor to call in fresh medical advice; but the
request was refused, on the grounds that the case
was Dr Ryan’s, to whom she had better, again take
him and to whom he thereupon indited yet another
letter, requesting an examination of the pabent
and that he (Dr. O'Donnell) be advised of the
result.
Once again, then, Tratford (now always accom-
panied by his wife) waited on Dr Ryan, w o a
sight of the disconsolate pair, obsened irritably
that there was nothing the matter with . e man
“He has got over the operation I P erfor ® e °"
him,” he emphatically declared, to which his wi
replied, “He has never recovered the operations,,
on the contrary, he has been an invalid ever since.


The result of the interview was that Dr. Ryan pro-
mised to write to the lodge doctor and inform him
what was the matter.
A promise never fulfilled.
The recent attempt to force Tratford to work,
needless to say, indicated a disinclination on the
part of the Department to continue the payment of
accident pay, and the opinions since expressed by
Dr. Ryan (its Chief Medical Officer) quite prepared
Tratford for the receipt of the following memo-
randum :
November, 1906.
Memo, for Labourer Tratford, c/o Mr. Steiger.
Please note the Commissioners have granted you
ful] pay from 9th ult. to 30th inst., being lost time
on account of injury received by you in June 190 s
and have decided that you will not be granted any
nirther .eave with pay on account of the accident.
Signed by
C. E. NORMAN, Chief Engr. of Way and Works.
Thus did the Department decline to accept any
further responsibility for the man’s condition. It
may be that it did not believe he continued to
SUffe u’ £a bUt 14 is the invariable ra le to endeavour
to shuffle this responsibility after payments have
been continued for six months. And it is a sig-
nificant circumstance that proceedings at law
under the provisions of the Employers’ Liability
Act, must be initiated within that period.
To the Tratford family it meant facing a new
and terrible problem, for the means of support for


the whole family would have to be provided. The
small accumulation of savings got together in bet-
ter days had disappeared in providing sick neces-
sities, and the unfortunate wife, it might readily
be admitted, might well have despaired at the pros-
pect before her had she not, in reality, foreseen
the situation, determined her course of action, and
prepared for it by occupying such time as she could
spare from household and nursing duties in the
manufacture of an assortment of useful and orna-
mental articles of women’s and children s attire, in
the disposal of which she now tramped from door
to door, and soon became a well-recognised figure
in almost every suburb of Melbourne, leaving her
husband to the care of her twelve-year-old
daughter during long hours of absence daily; and
by means of this uncongenial employment, pursued
with untiring energy, and with a devotion rarely
excelled, she was enabled to keep her home
together right up to the end of the events
recorded in this narrative.


CHAPTER VIII.
Another Visit to Dr. Ryan, Followed by a Visit to
Dr. Mackenzie, and What Occurred in Both
Instances.
By every mathematical calculation, the amount
ol energy consumed by the new and heavy respon-
sibility imposed upon this woman would leave her
with little to devote to any other purpose, but the
fact is that, for every demand made upon it, she
generated an abundant supply, and she had now
not only to provide a livelihood for her family, but
two other purposes in view. One was to secure
proper medical attention for her husband, with a
view to unravelling the mysterious cause of his
illness and its removal, and the other to induce
the Railway Department to grant a restitution of
the sick pay allowance, or, as there appeared no
prospect, after now eighteen months from the date
of the accident, of her husband being again able
to follow his employment, the payment by the
Department of the lump sum gratuity provided to
be paid in such cases.
In pursuance of the first of these two latter
objects, she again waited on Dr. O’Donnell, who
could suggest nothing better than a further visit
to Dr. Ryan, on the latter’s return from Sydney,
Tratford, in the meantime, to bear up as best he
could.
This advice was acted upon ; but Dr. Ryan, when


waited on, again declared that there was nothing
the matter with the man,” but qualified this opinion
by adding “that he was suffering from neuras-
thenia.” Asked by the wife to interpret the term,
he replied “ that the man fancied he was worse than
when operated on, and it had preyed on his mind,
and he (Dr. Rvani would get him to work, and
make him use his arms and muscles, and he would
come out of the nervous state into which he had
worked himself.” The wife replied, “You tried
that a little while ago, and it lasted four days.
The fruitless interview wound up with a further
promise to communicate with the lodge doctor,
which met the same fate as the last.
In view of a claim afterwards advanced by Dr.
Ryan, when he found that another doctor had
operated afresh on fratford, that he had been will-
ing to do so, it is well to remember that he did not
again see Tratford right up to the date on which
he advances this claim, and he now dismissed the
man, after, as we have seen, stating his symptoms
as those of neurasthenia, for which, presumably,
the idea of an operation would be ridiculous.
The result of this last visit was that it was only
too plain that any hope of Dr. Ryan doing anything
for the patient must be abandoned. The wife, con-
sequently, again waited on the lodge doctor, and
pressed for permission to call in Dr. G. Syme ; but
again the lodge doctor refused, on the reiterated


grounds that the case was Ryan’s.
The situation was well-nigh intolerable, and the
wife, m desperation, sought the advice of the lodee
secretary (Mr. Crosbie), who stronglv reToZ
mended consulting Dr. L. C. L. Mackenzie, and
take°n to fh T (19 ° 7) ’ Tratford wa *
after af II a gCnt eman ’ s consulting-room, and,
and eXP ' a " atlon ° f her hus band’s sufferings
and symptoms, the doctor was asked to examine
zZr e ’ and> if he thought the man unfit f-
ork, to give a certificate to that effect, the object
of securing the certificate being to assist the p"-
Pose of bringing the Railway Department to a
proper recognition of the man’s state.
Tratford was then stripped, and, at the sight of
h mU ‘ llated body, the doctor ln ap s aren °
astonishment, observed, “Science in PP ,
alive?” to which she “ Wth
and fresh air.” He then advised, in the n’s !
sent serious state, the addition of a little spirits
he doctor, after examination, stated that
another operation was necessary, but agreed a
the suggestion of Mrs. Tratford tn r n


(his fee), he wrote out and handed a certificate in
the following terms to Mrs. Tratford:—
I beg to certify that Mr. Tratford is suffering
from debility,the result of the three severe operations
he has undergone.
He also complains of severe pain around the
upper frontal wound, and shooting to the back,
has also had several fainting spells during exertion,
and at rest. Under these circumstances Ido not
consider him fit for work.
Signed by
L.C. L. MACKENZIE, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S., Eng.
The interview, which certainly promised some-
thing definite, then ended.


CHAPTER IX.
In which a “Great, Powerful” Organisation is
Introduced.
At this stage we must commit the usually unpar-
donable offence of digressing somewhat, but, as
we have reached that point in the narrative, before
hinted at, where two separate (yet converging)
objects are to be pursued, it is necessary, if the
sequence of events are to be kept abreast, that they
shall be alternately dealt with. In this instance,
however, we need offer no apology, promising that,
after all, the path we now pursue will bring the
reader once again to the consulting-room of Dr.
Mackenzie.
Tratford, or, we should say, his wife, had no
intention of accepting tamely the Department’s
decision to deny further liability on account of the
accident. He being a member of the Amalgamated
Society of Railway Employes, the existence of
which society is mainly justified as a medium
through which employes may seek redress for their
grievances, it was resolved to enlist its militant
energies on his behalf, and with this object the
secretary of the organisation was visited.
But, before recording the part played by the
society on Tratford’s behalf, we may be permitted
to offer a few observations regarding it.
This society, or union, presents all the outward


and visible signs, at the head of which is a
euphonious title in support of the proud distinction
it claims of being “ the most powerful organisation
of workers in the Southern Hemisphere.” The
grounds, however, upon which this portentous
claim is based are flimsy enough when the mag-
nitude of its pretensions are considered. Cer-
tainly, it has a membership of several thousand,
but the number is comparatively insignificant when
the size of the army from which it recruits is
considered. Moreover, its membership is a vary-
ing quantity, for although it attempts to support
its proud reputation by a contribution of per
month only, even this small sum is “ too much for
the average employe, unless the association can
show it is doing something. The result is it
expends its energies in worrying the Department
for insignificant concessions, which, when secured,
are paraded as evidence of its “power” and activity.
But, when it comes to seeking the redress of a real
injustice, no Yankee colonel ever climbed down
with the same feverish alacrity as did this same
“ powerful ” organisation when, as the sequel wil
show, it deserted Tratford’s cause at the behest of
the Commissioners, notwithstanding that it
believed his cause to be just, and that, above all
things, it claimed that injustice, like an evil spirit,
shrivelled up at its touch.
So serious a grievance as that which Tratford
laboured under would amply justify the existence
of such a society as the one in question claimed to
be. But Tratford, like many more from the tern


porary shelter of the same fools’ paradise, would
learn that it possessed neither the machinery nor
the inclination to compel respect for the ethics of
justice.
The secretary of the association, Mr. T. Binns,
had only just previously permitted himself to be
coaxed out of the Service to take up the position,
from which, however, he was to resign before the
climax was reached in this case.
Mrs. Tratford, as we have said, waited upon this
gentleman, to whom she fully stated the facts of
the case, and he undertook, with the sanction of
the Executive of the Union, which he would secure,
to take up the matter with the Commissioners,
expressing his ready willingness, at the same time,
tc be of any other service to Tratford that lay in
his power.
The Society’s interference began with the
despatch of the following memorandum to the Com-
missioners :
Amalgamated Society of Railway Employees,
January 4th, 1907.
To the Secretary for Railways.
Sir, —
The determination of the Commissioners to discon-
tinue the payment of wages to Repairer Tratford, as
from November 30th last, has imposed great hard-
ship on him and his family. The accident which
occasioned his illness was not his own fault, as is
evidenced by the fact that he had been granted full
pay for so long. And just now he is again seriously


ill, and a further operation is necessary. lam
directed respectfully to request a reconsideration of
his case.
* (Signed by) PRESIDENT.
Mrs. Tratford’s faith in the power of the Union,
combined with her anxiety for a settlement with
the Department, occasioned frequent visits to the
Society’s rooms about this time. But officialdom
h not to be hurried out of its stride, however
urgent the demand, and the length of its stride in
general may be gauged from the fact that it occu-
pied a month and four days in replying to the
Society’s communication ; and there was nothing in
the reply, as shall hereafter be seen, that would
justify an expenditure of more than five minutes
in its compilation.
♦The Commissioners decline to recognise the Secretary
of the Union if he is outside the service, thus neces
tating correspondence being signed by the P *
This practice strictly accords with the Departmental r
pugnance to the outsider in general.


CHAPTER X.
In which is Recorded Several Interviews with the
“Profession,” and How the Wife was Served a
Scurvy Trick.
On the morning following the visit to <Pr. Mac-
kenzie, Mrs. Tratford, as arranged, again waited
on that gentleman, all expectancy to hear what
the arrangements were to be for the consultation;
but the doctor informed her that he had been too
busy to attend to the matter, but “would do so that
day.” “And, by the way,” he continued, “ I gave
you a certificate to give the man’s association. I
have been thinking about it, and if you return it to
me to-morrow morning I will hand you a better
one for this purpose.”
The woman, all eagerness to secure any more
effective instrument that would assist the battle
with the Department, hurried away to the secretary
of the Society, in whose hands the one already
received from the doctor, along with all other
papers pertinent to the issue, had been put, and
informed him of the doctor’s promise. This
gentleman, influenced by a vague suspicion,
advised the retention of the original, but ulti-
mately gave way, after taking an exact copy of
the document, as already reproduced.


Armed with the original, Mrs. Tratford waited
on the doctor the following morning, who, taking
the certificate from her and putting it in his pocket,
then informed her that “ he would have to wash
his hands of the case,” giving for reasons that
“ Ryan was an older doctor than himself, and, as
they met daily at operations, clubs, and lectures,
he could not interfere in the case behind his
(Ryan’s) back; and the latter being a bad-
tempered man, he could not go to him drawing
attention to the mess made of the man.” More-
over, “ Ryan would not tolerate interference in any
case that had gone under his hands.”
When the woman had recovered somewhat the
effect of this staggering declaration, she timidly
reminded him of his promise to furnish a better
certificate in lieu of the one she had returned. To
this he replied that “ he would withdraw the cer-
tificate,” referring to the one in his pocket, and
“ would not give another.” Her indignation being
now fairly roused, she asked, in these circum-
stances, for the return of her half-guinea. To
this she received the unblushing rejoinder “ that he
had given advice for it.” “Advice!” replied Mrs.
Tratford. “You have given none, and taken back
the certificate.”
It might have been under a sudden impulse of
pity, or, going to the other extreme, with some
idea of justifying to his conscience the retention
of the money, which he gripped with the tenacity
of death, that he proceeded to assure her that “ not


for £SO could she get a doctor in Melbourne to
take the case. Certainly, were Tratford’s experi-
ence his own, and one doctor had made a mess of
him, he would try and get attention from another ”
(valuable advice in the circumstances), and
advised her “to return to her lodge doctor, and
compel him to stick to his patient, and see him
through.”
And thus was brought to an end this strange
interview, and with it was extinguished the ray of
hope that, since the original visit, had illumined
the domestic horizon of this unfortunate family;
while Dr. Mackenzie, “ honourable ’’ exponent of
an honourable profession, raised a pleasant jingle
ir his pocket with half-guineas and such like, one
o r which at least he had done nothing to earn, and
the scraping together of the fractional parts of
which had meant many weary miles of tramping
from door to door of Melbourne’s spacious suburbs
by a well-nigh broken-hearted woman.
Black despair is the only fitting term to denote
the outlook in the Tratford family at this time.
Such an astonishing experience as that just
recorded would be calculated to wear out the
energies of the unfortunate wife when added to the
strain imposed by long nights devoted to watching
an invalid, and equally long days spent at employ-
ment that tore at the heart-strings of a woman to
whom the world, its temptations and trials, up to
the occurrence of this experience, was bounded by
the four walls of her modest home. But this extra


ordinary woman, with the image of her suffering
husband ever before her, was not to be daunted in
her fierce resolve to have the mystery of these suf-
ferings solved ; and yet another effort was made to
enlist medical attention, and Tratford was taken
to Dr. Thomas, who was asked to examine and
advise, and, if he considered the man unfit for his
employment, to give a certificate to that effect.
His fee was paid, and the man was then stripped
and examined, and an explanation was given of
the different operations to which he had been sub-
jected. The result was that the doclor considered
the man seriously ill, but he refused to give a cer-
tificate, telling the wife abruptly that “ she must
look for such to the man that had done the cut-
ting.”
As no explanation of the man’s condition had
been tendered, or advice as to his treatment given,
and the certificate refused, a request was here also
preferred for the return of the money paid, to which
the doctor replied “he had given advice for the
money.” Mrs. Tratford, no longer to be trifled
with, signified her determination “ to remain where
she was till she got either the certificate or the
return of her money;” and the matter was settled,
and the retention of the fee guaranteed, by his
handing her a certificate couched as follows:
I have examined William Tratford and find him
incapable of following his employment.
(Signed) GEO. F. THOMAS,
Leg. Qual. Med. Prac,
Dated i^/i/’oy.


And with this subtle and voluminous opinion—
which luckily bore beneath his autograph his
imposing title, but for which no coal-heaver would
have exacted the price of a pint of beer—she had
to be content. And the unhappy pair wended their
way home.


CHAPTER XI.
Tratford is Taken to Dr. Moore, who Ultimately
Agrees to Perform an Operation on Him, which
is Done.
The woman’s patience was now exhausted. The
apparent impossibility of getting any doctor to
touch the case, it being, in their judgment, Dr.
Ryan’s business, while the latter declared most
emphatically that there was virtually nothing the
matter with the man, while the man himself
an obvious wreck, created an intolerable situation;
and no later than the same evening of the interview
with Dr. Thomas, Mrs. Tratford waited on the
lodge doctor, and, pleading with him to do some-
thing for her husband in his extremity, reminded
the doctor that “ her husband had been a member
of the A.N.A. Lodge for 16 years without ever
receiving a pennyworth of benefits from it till the
occurrence of v the accident.” Continuing, she
informed him that “as he was Tratford’s lodge
doctor, and was conversant with the case from the
beginning, and aware of the extent of his suffer-
ings, she expected him to stand by her husband,
and see that he was given proper medical attention,,
as she was not going to stand by while he went to
his grave for want of it.” This was straight talk,
but without bringing immediately the desired


effect, the doctor replying: “Well, there it is. You
will not get a doctor to take the case, as it is
Ryan’s,” to which she replied, “ You know Dr. Ryan
says he got over the operations, and that there is
nothing the matter with him.” And again she ex-
pressed a desire to call in Dr. Syme, and asked for
the assistance of a letter to that gentleman, but
this was refused.
Warming, then, to her subject, she asked,
cynically, “ whether, if a drunken man was lying
in a gutter dying, he should be left to his fate;
and, if not, why was her husband, a steady,
respectable man, forced to suffer for want of medi-
cal attention?” And she declared that “she would
most certainly go to Parliament House, and see
if she could not there find some gentleman that
would compel the doctors to give this attention.”
We do not wish to impute that it was the threat
of exposure that brought the desired effect, but
certainly it had to be made before the doctor sug-
gested, as he now did, that “ she should consult
Dr. Wm. Moore, of Collins-street.” To this Mrs.
Tratford readily acquiesced, and Dr. O’Donnell
then handed her a letter for that gentleman as fol-
lows :
Kindly examine William Tratford, and let him
know what is the matter, as Dr. Ryan operated on
him some time ago, and he does not seem to recover,
and the people are sick and tired of going to him.
(Signed) M. O’DONNELL,
Med. Prac.


Without delay, Tratford was taken to Dr.
Moore’s surgery, and that gentleman, after a care-
ful examination, informed Tratford that he was
suffering from “ abdominal adhesions,” and he
would write to Dr. O’Donnell and so inform him.
Next morning the wife waited on the latter, who
read Dr. Moore’s statement of the case, which,
with pleasing promptitude, had already come to
hand; and the nature of Tratford’s malady being
now determined, Dr. O’Donnell advised her to take
the sufferer back to Dr. Moore, “ and fight it out
with him.” He then indited another letter to Dr.
Moore, explaining that the man’s illness had been
of long duration, and pressed him “ to take Trat-
ford into his ward in the Melbourne Hospital, and
operate on him,” as the nature of his complaint
demanded.
Armed with this precious document, and a vision
o l Dr. Moore’s firm, but kindly, face, the wife hur-
ried away to the latter’s surgery, hoping she knew
not what, and handing the letter to that gentleman,
he, on perusing it, declared emphatically that “ he
would have nothing to do with the case.” “He
could not,” he said, “ go to Ryan and tell him he
had made a mess of the man.”
The despair of the woman must have been but
too obvious when she declared that “ she was dis-
tracted,” and that “ she had now no other course
open to her but to enlist the interference of the
authorities, and that she would go with this pur-
pose straight to Parliament House.”


The doctor wavered for a moment between the
promptings of pity and allegiance to a foolish
etiquette, and the battle was won.
He informed her that “he deeply sympathised
both with her and her husband, and, out of pity for
the poor fellow’s sufferings, he would do what he
could for him.” Continuing, he assured her “he
would have actually to sneak him into the hospital
unawares to Ryan, for if the latter finds out he is
there, there will be a row.”
Thus did this doctor, who was also a man, dis-
charge. in the highest degree of the functions of a
noble profession. Impelled by the humane sym-
pathy that is its inherent perfection, he threw down
and trampled on the cursed barriers of etiquette,
so much more dear to the heart of the average
practitioner.
And there are a couple ai pair of professional
ears into which we might whisper the simple sen-
tence, “ Here was there no fee charged.”
A bright gleam of hope now shot across the
restricted horizon of this unfortunate family. The
grim prospect of a knife being once more inserted
in the man’s already mutilated body would seem
to offer little incentive to joy; but most people
have to learn that grief and joy are relative quan-
tities, and the prospect ahead of Tratford now, if
compared to a condition of good health, was miser-
able in the extreme; but even such a prospect, with
the hopeful expectations it engendered, when com


pared to his state of mysterious suffering and help-
lessness during the preceding nineteen months,
was joy indeed.
Had they known that the disease now ascribed
to him by Dr. Moore was really incurable, and that
the most that was to be expected from the pro-
mised operation was a temporary respite from his
sufferings, they would have had little occasion for
congratulation. But this fact they were unaware
of, while, on the other hand, did they not now
know that his disease was known? And was he
not now to have the benefit of the best surgical
attention Melbourne could give him? They asked
for no more, and hope could not run higher.
Dr. Moore had requested Mrs. Tratford to call
again in four days, and when she did so the doctor,
repenting his former announcement, informed her
*' that he could not have anything to do with the
casebut, again relenting, he handed her a letter
for Dr. Amess, of the Melbourne Hospital, the
result of which was that Tratford was admitted to
the institution, where an operation was performed
on him on February 4th (190 T).
The operation proved the accuracy of Dr.
Moore’s diagnosis of the case. Tratford’s intes-
tines, it was found, had grown to the abdominal
wall on the site of the first operation performed by
Dr. Ryan.


CHAPTER XII.
Which Principally Deals with Correspondence
Between the Association and the Commis-
sioners.
We have now reached the pivot on which the case
for Tratford hangs as against the Railway Depart-
ment, which, so far, had not favoured the Society’s
communication with a reply.
The operation just recorded proved the man to
be suffering from something very different to the
reiterated opinions expressed by Dr. Ryan, and
upon whose reports the Department repudiated
liability for the man’s state, while, still more
serious, Dr. Ryan’s attitude, and the refusal of
other doctors to interfere, had meant the denial of
relief to the sufferer for so long a period. What-
ever was the occasion of the adhesions, the fact
remains that Dr. Ryan, above all men, should have
been the first to discover it; and, by his inability
cn refusal to do so, to him is due the man’s pro-
longed suffering from a dangerous disease that
another doctor, at a single examination, correctly
diagnosed.
The operation, as we have said, took place on
February 4th, and Tratford remained altogether an
inmate of the institution for three months, without


prospect of ultimate cure, for, in the nature of
things, the operation could afford only temporary
relief, for the surfaces of raw flesh facing one
another on the intestines and abdominal wall were
bound to re-unite in the course of a little time—a
melancholy anticipation actually to be realised in
this case.
At last, on February Bth, the Railway Depart-
ment replied to the Society’s communication in the
following memorandum:—
February Bth, 1907.
To the President of the Amalgamated Society of
Railway Employes.
Sir, —
In reply to your letter of January 4th requesting
that further consideration be given to the case of
Repairer Tratford, I am directed to intimate that
Tratford has been granted full pay for 214 days, and
under all the circumstances it is considered he has
been fairly treated, especially as his present com-
plaint is aggravated neurasthenia, which cannot be
directly attributed to the rupture sustained in 1905,
or to the subsequent operation performed.
(Signed by)
THE SECRETARY FOR RAILWAYS.
/
This communication, needless to say, had been
penned in sublime ignorance of the fact that Trat-
ford was at that moment lying in the Melbourne
Hospital, having, four days before, been subjected


to a fresh operation for a disease very definite and
distinct from that ascribed to him in this precious
document.
Ordinarily, it would be expected that, having
tumbled ingloriously into the slough of its own
mixing, it would have no option but admit the posi-
tion. But a long and successful record of evasion
and denial bred a contempt for the shafts of rea-
son, and smothered any latent fear of possible
exposure. Moreover, who was this Tratford?—a
mere contemptible atom of humanity, a miserable
labourer!
The governing body of the Society meeting but
twice a month involved a delay in replying to the
Commissioners’ communication, but at its next
meeting consideration was given to the matter, and
the secretary was directed to re-submit the case,
along with such medical testimony as could be
secured in support.
This accounts for the secretary’s presence in Dr.
Moore’s consulting-rooms on February 25th, in an
endeavour to secure a certificate certifying to Trat-
ford’s condition from that gentleman, which, after
the display of considerable reluctance to commit
any statement to paper, was given.
The following communication was then for


warded to the Commissioners: —
Amalgamated Society of Railway Employes,
March 2nd, 1907.
To the Secretary for Railways.
Sir, —
Your letter of February Bth, stating that the Com-
missioners declined to grant the request for a con-
tinuance of sick pay to Repairer Tratford, has been
considered, and I am directed to again urge that
consideration should be shown to him. Tratford’s
present illness cannot reasonably be shown to be
distinct from that which followed the accident, and
for which he received full pay to the end of
November. Long before this latter date he en-
deavoured to induce Dr. Ryan to perform an opera-
tion, and, failing, after some difficulty, Dr. Moore
was induced to do so, it being apparent that the man
was dangerously ill. Dr. Moore’s certificate js
attached, with others, and proves that Dr. Ryan, in
stating Tratford’s complaint to be neurasthenia, and
that only, was wrong—the sickness has been a con-
tinuous one, and there is no reasonable doubt that
Tratford’s present sufferings are directly traceable
to the accident, and the subsequent operations per-
formed.
(Signed by) THE PRESIDENT.
To this was attached, along with Drs. Mackenzie
and Thomas’ certificates, the following:—
This is to certify that, at the request of Dr. O Don-
nell, of North Melbourne, I saw Mr. W. Tratford
on January 16th, 19°7- I considered that he was
suffering from intra-abdominal adhesions, and that


his symptoms were due to this cause. Subse-
quently I operated on him in the Melbourne Hos-
pital, and found adhesions, as I had suspected.
These were freed, and he is now making good pro-
gress towards recovery.
(Signed by) W. MOORE, M.D., M.S.,
Surgeon to the Melbourne Hospital.
25/2/’o7.
I certify that William Tratford is now in the Mel-
bourne Hospital, and has been operated on again
by Dr. Moore for adhesions between the intestines
and the abdominal wall, on the site of the old scar.*
(Signed by) M. O’DONNELL, M.B.
February 15th, 1907.
To this somewhat formidable array of evidence
in flat contradiction to its own and Dr. Ryan’s
assertions, the Department, hurried somewhat out
of its stride, possibly by the gravity of the position
into which it had unwittingly got itself, and replied
on March 13'th as follows:
To the President of the Amalgamated Society of
Railway Employes.
Sir,—
Adverting to your communication of the 2nd inst.
In regard to the cessation of accident pay to Re-
pairer W. Tratford, I am directed to further inti-
*Original surgical wound performed by Dr. Ryan for
gall stones. I


mate that, on further reference, the Railways
Medical Officer certifies that the adhesions for
which Tratford has recently undergone an opera-
tion were not due to the operation for rupture, and
Dr. Ryan also explains that he was agreeable to treat
Tratford, but that he absolutely declined to undergo
a further operation.
The statements in your communication are there-
fore erroneous, and in view of the fact that the
Department is not responsible in any way for his
present condition, and that Tratford has already
been granted 214 days leave on full pay, the Com-
missioners consider he has been treated very
liberally, and cannot sanction any further payment
of accident pay.
(Signed by)
THE SECRETARY FOR RAILWAYS.
This communication is an almost inconceivable
piece of brazen effrontery. The declaration now
that Dr. Ryan had been anxious all along to per-
form a fresh operation is a flat contradiction of its
own statement a month before. Moreover, no one
had said—a denial, therefore, was premature —
that the adhesions had occurred on the site of the
operation for rupture. It was on the site of the
operation ia search of mythical gall stones where
the trouble had ensued. This the Department was
not prepared to deny. To evade the issue, then,
was the next best thing. And, again, how was
Ryan able to certify at all as to Tratford’s present
condition, seeing that he had not had him under


observation since he incorrectly diagnosed his
symptoms as due to neurasthenia?
But, in view of the comments evoked in the
Society’s answering communication, we may
refrain from indulgence in others that would be
repetitive in character.


CHAPTER XIII.
Devoted to a Further Record of Correspondence
Between the Same Parties, After Satisfactorily
Establishing the Fact that “Truth is Stranger
than Fiction.”
While matters were so proceeding outside, an
incident occurred within the sanctuary of the Hos-
pital, in the early days of Tratford’s domicile, well
worth recordng, and which evidences the fact that
the figment productions of the imagination can
never equal in strangeness the coincidental occur-
rences of prosaic life.
It has been said that Dr. Moore had literally to
'‘sneak” Tratford into the institution, to obviate
a possible row with Dr. Ryan; and, although the
fact could not be kept secret (vide the character of
the Society’s correspondence), it was yet due to a
chance shuffle of events that he (Dr. Ryan) stood
one day at the foot of Tratford’s bed, face to face
with his one-time patient.
It appears that lying in Dr. Ryan’s ward await-
ing an operation for appendicitis was a patient
who, taking a sudden bad turn, necessitating
immediate attention at the hands of a surgeon,
and Dr. Ryan not being available, the services of
Dr. Moore were requisitioned.


The operation performed, the man was there-
upon transferred to a bed opposite Tratford in Dr.
Moore’s ward.
In due course, Dr. Ryan, feeling himself pro-
bably in some way obligated to the man who had
been deprived the benefit of his skill, and on whose
account other surgical attention had had to be pro-
cured, visited him in his new quarters.
On the occasion of his first visit, the sight of the
nurses and other hospital attendants—all of whom,
conversant with Ryan’s treatment of Tratford, were
anxious to avert his discovery—ranged, apparently
dutifully, at the foot of his bed, but really with the
object of blocking the doctor’s view, and unable
to repress a furtive smile at one another, was suf-
ficiently ludicrous, notwithstanding the grim
tragedy hidden behind this little bit of dramatic by-
play.
The effort to avert discovery, However, was vain,
for, on a subsequent visit, Dr. Ryan, turning
round, discovered the object of his aversion, and,
stepping to the foot of the bed, demanded to know
the reason of his being there, observing that “he
had no right to be so.” To which Tratford, who at
another time might have replied by knocking him
down, now, for the very best of all reasons, gave
no answering sign.
And, admittedly, we have no higher authority
than significant nods and whispers indulged in by
members of the hospital staff in support of the


statement that warm passages ensued between the
two surgeons in consequence.
The last communication from the Secretary for
Railways evoked the following reply from the
Association:—
Amalgamated Society of Railway Employes,
March 20th, 1907.
To the Secretary for Railways.
Sir, —
Adverting to your communication of March 13th,
relative to the request for a continuance of sick pay
to Repairer Tratford, I am directed respectfully to
reply that my letter of March 2nd contained no state-
ments that are erroneous, for although Dr. Ryan
now states that he was willing to treat Tratford,
but that the latter refused absolutely to undergo
another operation, the fact is, no such opportunity
was held out to him, and he consequently could
not refuse. Dr. Ryan’s statement is inconsistent
with the fact that Tratford was compelled to seek
from other doctors this attention, all of whom, with
the exception of Dr. Moore (who reluctantly under-
took to do it), refused, on the grounds that Dr.
Ryan, having performed the previous operations,
should undertake this one, and though Dr. Ryan
now states that he made this offer, it yet appears,
from your letter of February Bth, that up to then
he would not consider another operation necessary,
for therein Tratford is credited with suffering from
neurasthenia only. And, again, although it may
be difficult to say how these adhesions occurred, the
emphatic assertion now advanced by Dr. Ryan that
they did not result from any previous operation
appears to be somewhat hazardously advanced, for


he has not had Tratford under examination since
the date when he diagnosed his complaint incor-
rectly as neurasthenia only.
This is a fact, that, up to the time of the accident,
Tratford was a man who never knew a day’s illness,
and the adhesions occurred round the incision made
at a former operation. It is impossible, therefore,
to separate his present illness from the conse-
quences of the accident referred to. A statutory
declaration is attached from Tratford bearing out
our statements, and this Council trusts that the
Commissioners, who would not knowingly inflict an
injustice on the man, will see their way to continue
the payment of sick pay till such time as his health
has been restored.
(Signed by) THE PRESIDENT.
Copy of statutory declaration referred to in the
foregoing memorandum, taken before Mr. Thomas
Noonan, J.P.: —
I, William Tratford, declare that I was operated
on by Dr. Chas. Ryan, the Medical Officer of the
Victorian Railway Department, on May 30th. 1906,
because of an injury received while in the perform-
ance of my duty, from the date of which opera-
tions I continued to suffer, and, in consequence,
presented myself before Dr. Ryan on many occa-
sions up to the middle of January, 1907. On no
occasion did Dr. Ryan offer to perform a further
operation on me. On the contrary, he insisted that
I was not suffering from any illness sufficiently
severe to incapacitate me from duty. Neither did
I, on any occasion, refuse to undergo a further
operation.
And I make this declaration, etc., etc.
(Signed) WILLIAM TRATFORD.


The character of this correspondence might well
indicate a determination on the part of the Society
to employ, if need be, every legitimate means for
bringing the Commissioners to a proper sense of
their obligations; but it must be remembered that
the conduct of the Union’s case was entirely in the
hands of one man (the secretary), who occupied a
position somewhere between the devil and the deep
sea; for, while he endeavoured to present a deter-
mined front to the other side, he was only too con-
scious of, and so hampered by, the supineness of
the crowd that followed while it led him, and,
without express instruction, had no powers of
initiation.
Thus it was that the Commissioners, who had
thoroughly measured the strength of their antago-
nist, contemptuously permitted several months to
elapse before favouring its latest communication
with a reply, the Union employing no insistence in
a matter of pressing urgency.


CHAPTER XIV.
Which Continues, for the Most Part, to Record the
Battle Between the Association and the Commis-
sioners, and How the Former Displayed the
White Feather, and Deserted the Man’s Cause.
While this departmental deadlock continued,
Tratford, discharged from the hospital, returned
home once more to be nursed by his wife and
daughter, for he quickly relapsed into the con-
dition of wretched helplessness that preceded his
admission to the institution, the adhesions, which
had for a time been fused, being again in process
of uniting, and there was now no room to doubt
that this once strong man would remain a per-
manent invalid, requiring so long as he might live,
and as a necessity to the prolongation of his life,
a fresh operation from time to time.
Compelled, then, to face the inevitable in this
direction, for a time at least, attention was centred
m the effort to bring the Department to recognise
its obligation to pay compensation, for without it
the wife’s efForts alone stood between the family
and starvation.
But long, weary delays occurred, during which
this wife dared not relax her efforts to keep the
home together; and while she met with much kind-
ness from many to whom she endeavoured to dis


pose of her wares, she had to submit to all the
rebuffs and taunts incidental to the profession of
the pedlar.
But it was sometimes very hard to bear, as, for
instance, on one occasion, knocking at a suburban
villa, the “ lady” of the house, on opening the door
and observing the purpose of the caller, remarked,
with a lofty cynicism, “ Fancy opening the door for
the likes of you!” and closed it viciously in her
face.
With that partiality for the use of proper names
that is characteristic of this narrative, we wo»ld,
if we could, give this “ lady’s ” to the world, so that
it might, by knowing, appreciate the source of this
refined example of good breeding.
On May 24th the long-expected reply to the
Society’s latest communication came to hand, and
read as follows: —
To the President of the Amalgamated Society of
Railway Employes.
Sir,—
Adverting to the further request made by your
Society that accident pay be continued to Repairer
Tratford, I beg to sav that on further reference the
Railways Medical Officer states positively that he
did express his willingness to perform a further
operation, and he is equally positive that Tratford
declined to undergo it. But, apart from that phase
of the question, the Commissioners do not consider
that the Department is responsible in any way for
the present condition of Tratford, and as he has
already been granted 214 days’ leave of absence on


full pay, it is considered that he has been treated
very liberally, and the Commissioners are not pre-
pared to authorise any further payment of accident
pay to him.
(Signed by)
THE SECRETARY FOR RAILWAYS.
This decision very naively put on one side the
contentions and contradictions advanced by the
Union, and attempted to dispose of the subject
behind a profession of past liberality.
Heaven help the average railway man injured in
pursuance of his duty, if, in the same circum-
stances, the treatment meted out to this man is
evidence of liberality!
The Department’s reiterated reference to the
payments made to Tratford as liberal in scope was
intended probably to convey the inference that
over-liberality was really the case.
At the next meeting of the Society’s Council the
secretary brought the matter again under notice,
and, in doing so, pointed out the futility of further
proceeding by correspondence with the Commis-
sioners, who, as he put it, “though virtually
defeated, were the people behind the gun, and
refused to pay.” Continuing, he pointed out that
there were now only two courses open to the Union.
One was to drop the case, which could not be done
if the existence of the Union was to be justified,
and the other to carry it either to the Minister for
Railways or to Parliament, or to both, if need be,


and by one or all of these means secure redress for
a serious injustice. He concluded by recommend-
ing that the latter course be pursued, and the
necessary authority voted him to prepare the case.
After a long discussion, it was resolved —“ That
the case be prepared for submission to the Minister
for Railways, subject to the approval of the Com-
missioners.”
This latter provision, considering that it was
against the Commissioners’ own ruling that the
interference was to be sought, will astonish our
readers, and readily suggest the farcical nature of
the proceeding, which, in reality, was intended to
effect no more than the presentation of an appear-
ance of militant energy —the usual manner by
which it advertised its activity to the satisfaction
of its members.
Proceed without this sanction it would not, as
subsequent events will show. The masterly Tait
had long since given both the individual employe
and the Unions to understand that any appeal
beyond the Commissioners, without their permis-
sion, would bring in its train some terrible, but
unspecified, penalty.
Thus, while railway men are encouraged m
general to consider themselves citizens, and
expected in private life to discharge, in a social
sense, the duties of such, their industrial master
by bluff and threats, deprives them, in a word, of
that appeal to the highest tribunal in the land that
is supposed to be enjoyed by its humblest citizen.


Certainly, the individual, believing his bread and
butter at stake, may be excused if he tamely sub-
mitted; but it was indeed a triumph for the Com-
missioners and their policy that a “great, power-
ful ” organisation should permit itself, with such
puny weapons, to be bludgeoned into submission.
Notwithstanding that, in these circumstances, the
attempt to reach the Minister would almost inevit-
ably result in failure, the following statement of
the case was prepared for submission:—
June, 1907
Amalgamated Society of Railway Employes.
To the Honorable the Minister of Railways.
Sir, —
I am directed most respectfully to submit for your
most earnest consideration the case of William Trat-
ford, an employe in the Railway Service.
This man, as the subjoined statement sets forth,
was most seriously injured during the discharge of
his duty, in consequence of which he has been
unable to follow his employment in any capacity
since April 20th, 1906. During the period follow-
ing up to 30th November, he was granted full pay,
but from the latter date all payment by the Com-
missioners has ceased, they (the Commissioners)
averring, on the reports of the Department’s Medi-
cal Officer, that Tratford’s illness since is in no
way traceable to the accident or the subsequent
operations.
This Union most respectfully submits that the
contention of the Commissioners is opposed to the
facts, and the reasonable deductions to be drawn
therefrom; and as the ma» was the sole support of


his family, which is now reduced to a condition of
destitution in consequence of his inability to follow
his occupation, this Union most humbly appeals to
you to see that justice is done, a-nd that he is paid
for the period , since 30th November last, and as it
does not appear that he will ever again be able to
follow his employment, he is granted such compen-
sation as is usually allowed to employes perman-
ently incapacitated through accident from the dis-
charge of their duties.
Then followed the subjoined statement, referred
to in the above memorandum: —
HISTORY OF
WILLIAM TRATFORD,
Railway Employe.
Entered the Service 17th August, 1888, as Line
Repairer.
Medically examined on entry into the Service, and
passed.
State of health up to the time of accident—
Excellent.
Date of accident —20th June, 1905.
Particulars of Accident—Engaged re-timbering
crossing's in Spencer-street Yard, and met with a
severe strain while lifting heavy timbers. Returned
to duty following morning, but was unable to work,
and remained off duty, 22nd June to 31st Ju y (in-
clusive), the Department granting full pay for the
whole period.* Resumed for light duty on August
*This was three months after he had again resumed
duty.


Ist' at various employments, but was compelled,
through the effects of same injury, to take annual
leave on 20th April following (1906), but was unable
to resume at the expiry of leave on May 2nd. Was
then medically examined by Dr. Chas. Ryan, and
ordered into the Melbourne Hospital, where, on
May 16th, an operation was performed by Dr. Ryan
on the stomach for gall stones. But it was found,
as a consequence of the operation, that such did not
exist, but that Tratford was suffering from rupture
in the groin and displacement of kidneys. A second
operation was necessitated, both in the groin and in
the back, and it was performed by Dr. Ryan on
May 3°th. Was discharged from the Hospital on
June 20th, but, failing to make recovery, was
ordered to Echuca by Lodge Doctor (Doctor O’Don-
nell). Returning from Echuca, still suffering the
effects of injury and operations, was examined by
Dr. Ryan, and ordered to light duty in Inspector
Cameron’s shop. Commencing October 4th, worked
four days only, being permitted to sit down while
engaged cleaning tricycle parts, but went off duty
again on the 9th October, and has never since
resumed. From the time that Tratford was unable
to resume on May 2nd, after holidays, full pay was
granted him to 30th November, when same was
discontinued, the Department averring that the
Medical Officer of the Department had reported that
Tratford’s illness subsequent to 30th November was
not consequent on the injuries received. Tratford’s
illness has been continuous. He was last examined
by Dr. Ryan about middle of January (current
year), who then, and at previous examinations, in-
sisted that he should go to work!
fratford’s health being serious, it being evident
that the rupture still existed, and that some evil
effects Had followed the operations performed by
Dr. Ryan, he had seen other doctors independent of


his Lodge Doctor (Dr. O’Donnell), who was in con-
stant attendance on him, and all agreed that the
man’s condition was serious, and that another opera-
tion was necessary, but that Dr. Ryan should per-
form it. Ultimately, Dr. Moore was induced to
perform an operation on Tratford by which he re-
moved adhesions between the intestines and the
abdominal wall, on the site of the old scar —i.e., the
incision made at a prior operation performed by Dr.
Ryan.
Tratford’s condition continues serious, and there
is no reasonable probability of his recovery, for, as
medically feared, these adhesions appear to be in
process of recurrence, and his condition now —four
months after the operation—is serious.
Reference to the correspondence will show that,
acting on the report of the Department’s Medical
Officer, the Commissioners deny any responsibility
for Tratford’s present condition, averring that there
is no connection between his present illness and the
accident, and subsequent operations performed by
Dr. Ryan (see Secretary for Railways’ letter of
February Bth, which states that Tratford is suffer-
ing from aggravated neurasthenia only, while
actually four days previously Tratford had been
operated on for abdominal adhesions in the Mel-
bourne Hospital, the fact being brought under
the notice of the Commissioners in the Society s
letter dater March 2nd). Dr. Ryan then states that
he offered to perform an operation on Tratfoid, and
the offer was declined. Dr. Ryan had not, how-
ever, seen Tratford since he had previously ex-
pressed the opinion that the complaint was aggra
vated neurasthenia. The statement, then, is in-
consistent with the opinion up to then expresse
by him in regard to Tratford’s condition (for pre-
sumably an operation would not be necessary for


neurasthenia), and also with Tratford’s own con-
duct, for the certificates will show that the man, in
desperation, sought the aid of other doctors, and
ultimately Dr. Moore was induced to operate on him
—proof that he was not averse to go under an
operation.
Reference to the copies of medical certificates
leaves no room for doubt how these adhesions oc-
curred, and certainly it cannot be reasonably main-
tained that their occurrence is distinct from the
injury, and the consequent subsequent operations
performed by Dr. Ryan. Tratford is a ruined man,
and will probably never be fit to work again, and
as he has a family depending on him, his inability
to follow his employment for so long a time has
reduced it to a condition of destitution.
To this was attached copies of all correspondence
on the subject, with certificates from medical men,
and the whole submitted to the Commissioners, with
a most respectful request that permission should be
given to lay the case before the Minister for Rail-
ways.
It did not require the gift of prescience in any
large degree to foretell the fate of such a request,
which was promptly refused. And the fact that
such had been preferred at all was to the Commis-
sioners the rattling of the dry bones of the organi-
sation in their ears. The Union got what it looked
for.
The refusal of the Commissioners to grant an


appeal beyond themselves was brought up at the
next meeting of the Society’s Council, and the Secre-
tary signifying his intention, in any circumstances,
of carrying the matter further, it was resolved that,
while the Secretary could take the matter to the
Minister for Railways, he was to let it be understood
that he was acting independently of the organisa-
tion, and merely exercising his right as a citizen.
And thus ingloriously came to an end its interfer-
ence on Tratford’s behalf.
Believing, as it undeniably did, that injustice,
bringing misery and suffering into a home, was
being persisted in, it yet was not even sufficiently
pot-valiant to risk a bout with the Commissioners
in the effort to secure redress. When, as shall
afterwards be seen, this man’s wife won the case by
her own efforts, one finds it impossible to repress a
feeling of disgust.


CHAPTER XV.
Which Illustrates How the Opinions of Doctors
may be as Divided as the Poles, Tratford being
given to Understand by One (as usual) that
there is Nothing the Matter with Him, and a Few
Minutes Later is Ordered into the Hospital by
Another
The close of the last chapter blocked up the only
recognised avenue to justice open to Tratford, for
although in this case, as in others, other means
might be employed, and the shadier they are—very
often—the larger probability of success.
Tratford had no experience of these devious by-
ways, and the chances of success looked hopeless
indeed.
These prospects were now centred in the inter-
view it was hoped would be arranged between the
secretary of the organisation and the Premier (as
Minister for Railways), and the influence of Mr.
Prendergast, M.L.A., was enlisted in the effort to
secure it.
This, however, could not be arranged in a day,
or a week, being, in fact, a matter subject very much
to chance, and in the meantime it is our duty to
record other happenings.


On July 27th Tratford received the following De-
partmental instruction: —
Way and Works Branch,
July 27th.
Memo.
I am directed to instruct you to report yourself to
the Railways Medical Officer, Room 103, at 2 p.m.
on Tuesday, 30th inst., for medical examination.
(Signed) M. STEIGER.
Very reluctantly indeed was this instruction
obeyed, for experience of these interviews had in-
spired the wife with a dread of consequences, Trat-
ford, in his condition of helplessness, exhibiting
almost terror at the prospect.
Certain, then, that no good could result, the first
intention was to ignore the instruction; but the
advice of the Union secretary being sought, he de-
clared it absolutely imperative that Tratford should
obey, as, although he was not receiving pay from the
Commissioners, he was still in the service, and the
probability was that neglect to obey the order would
be charged against him as an act of insubordina-
tion, and this offence being punishable with dis-
missal, a questionable solution was provided the
Department of a persistently disagreeable difficulty
if it chose to resort to it.
The result was the man and his wife waited on the
doctor, and being kept standing for some time wait


ing in the corridor, Tratford took a bad turn, and
presented anything but a pugnacious appearance
when called into the room (which might be lucky
for some people).
The following characteristic dialogue then took
place:—
Dr. Ryan: “Well, what is the matter with you?^
Mrs. Tratford (as spokesman): “He is very weak
and helpless, and has just taken a bad turn while
waiting.”
Dr. Ryan: “He has got over the operations I per-
formed on him?”
Mrs. Tratford: “No, he has not. His present
condition is due to them.”
Dr. Ryan (taking the man’s arm) : “If I was to
cut into the fleshy part of his arm, and it healed
alright, he would still imagine that he was suffering
terribly. From getting on his nerves, it has now
gone to his brain” (pointing significantly to Trat-
ford’s head), “and he merely fancies that he is
worse.”
Mrs. Tratford: “Do you remember seven months
ago, when Tratford was last before you?”
Dr. Ryan: “Yes.”
Mrs. Tratford: “You then said there was nothing
the matter with him, and that you would get him to
work, and you know what became of the attempt,,
and what has happened since.”


Dr. Ryan (after a pause) : “That will do now.
Good-day.”
Mrs. Tratford: “The examination is a farce, as I
knew it would be, but we were ordered to attend,
and had to do so.”
And this, as near as possible word for word what
was spoken, represents entirely the result of this
meditated medical examination. The man was not
examined at all, but Tratford had the consolation to
add to his positive sufferings that in Dr. Ryan’s
judgment his brain was affected.
Whatever excuse there might have been for both
the man and his wife taking leave of their senses,
there was none for he or they who attempted to
brand this man, in possession, as he was, of all his
faculties, with the taint of insanity.
It was heaping insult upon insult, and piling the
lot on mortal injury, raising a monument of injus-
tice, the apex of which, stretching beyond the clouds,
groped about in grinning defiance, searching out the
springs of heavenly justice, that by a look it might
pollute them.
In another way Tratford was the loser every time
by these interviews, for the result served to keep
him out of any recognition by the Department of
the true merits of his case.
Leaving the doctor’s presence, Tratford was put
upon a tram and taken direct to the surgery of Dr.
Moore, and his fee being paid, he was asked to


examine Tratford and define his present condition.
After examination, the doctor stated he would see
Dr. Boyd with a view to arranging for Tratford’s
admission to the latter’s ward in the Melbourne Hos-
pital, but refused to either give a certificate or make
any comments on his condition. And with this she
had to be content.
In the course of a few days the doctor handed Mrs.
Tratford a memorandum to the Superintendent of
the Melbourne Hospital, with the object of securing
Tratford’s admission to the institution, as he had
promised.
In due course the letter was presented, and Trat-
ford attended as an out-patient for a week, when he
was admitted and put to bed in Dr. Boyd’s ward
(August).
Once again, then, this unfortunate being became
an inmate of this institution. Hope he could have
had none, and we have never attempted to sound the
depths of his despair.
But we may be sure that, lying there, with noth-
ing better to do than measure the tread of time by
the monotonous ticks of the clock, the grim spectre
of the surgeon’s knife haunted his thoughts by day,
and filled his dreams at night.
Here Tratford remained “under observation” for
some time, and ultimately it was announced that he
would again be transferred to Dr. Moore’s ward for
surgical attention, this time for rupture in the back


(supposed to have been cured by Dr. Ryan), and
the removal once more of the adhesions, which, as
feared, had again resulted.
Upon this determination being arrived at, Mrs.
Tratford declared that in his present weak condi-
tion, and in view of the fact that temporary relief
at most was all that could be afforded him by the
operations, she would not risk his life under them.
She preferred to have him an invalid than court his
death. She expressed a wish, therefore, for his
discharge, so that she might give him the benefit of
a change in the country before subjecting him once
more to the ordeal of the surgeon’s knife. To this
the Hospital authorities readily agreed, and Trat-
ford again left the institution.


CHAPTER XVI.
In Which a Remarkable Interview with a Doctor is
Recorded, and Another with the Premier.
The chances of Tratford getting a change to the
country, however, were not too bright. The means
of the family would hardly permit of such a luxury,
unless their fowl-yard should suddenly emulate that
of the fairy tale, and produce a specimen with the
miraculous capacity to lay golden eggs. There was
only one other chance, and it promised about equal
prospects of success, and depended upon the Rail-
way Department becoming suddenly repentant of
its attitude.
‘While the prospects from the poultry-yard were
quite as good as the alternative offered, the effect
would be produced in that case without human
effort or interference. Attention, therefore, was
directed to the latter source, and the Society’s
secretary advised that Dr. W. Boyd, under whose
“observation” the man had been for so long, should
be asked to give a certificate certifying to his condi-
tion ; and, armed with this, he undertook to reopen
the question with the Commissioners, and request
a reconsideration of their heartless determination.
In pursuance of this advice, Mrs. Tratford called
upon Dr. Boyd, and, putting a guinea on the table


near her hand (she was getting cunning from ex-
perience), informed the doctor who she was, and
explained that “she was anxious to give her hus-
band the change to the country, as arranged, when
he left the institution.” The doctor, who expressed
himself as deeply interested in Tratford’s unfortun-
ate situation, applauded her desire to provide a
change for him, and advised hei “if he should give
evidence of improvement at all in the country to
keep him there, and only bring him down when the
operation would be absolutely imperative to save his
life, as he never could by such means secure per-
manent relief.”
Explaining, then, that the real purpose of her
visit was to get a certificate that would assist to
that end, he declared most emphatically that “he
would do nothing of the kind,” although, as she
informed him, all his suggestions went for nothing
were she unable to secure some consideration from
the Department that would enable her to accomplish
them. And without the certificate she had no
hope.
But nothing would induce this doctor to commit
to paper the slightest reference to the case. The
consequence was, Mrs. Tratford, taking up the
guinea, informed the doctor that she could not
afford to pay that sum, unless she was given the ser-
vice it was intended specifically to payfor. But, she
said, “she would send the secretary of the Association
to him, who would perhaps be better able to explain
the real purpose of securing the certificate. The
doctor jumped to his feet, and, striking a fighting


attitude, declared savagely “that he did not want
to see the individual in question, that his valuable
services had been wasted,” and then, like a true
gentleman, showed her the door. It is impossible
to stifle the reflection that, while this man could
make a boor of himself at the disappearance of the
slippery guinea, his cupidity was not powerful
enough to break through the barriers of etiquette
by committing to paper anything that would ever
so remotely reflect on a professional brother.
The broken-hearted woman left one gleam of
satisfaction only lighting her way in the fact that
her hard-earned guinea had not gone to support
arrogance and insult.
But the proposed change to the country had, per-
force, to be abandoned. For, unless new ground
eould be broken, it was worse than useless to-
approach the Department. And, so far, the expec-
tations from the fowl-yard remained unrealised.
The complicated avenues through which we have
conducted the reader in following the details of this
remarkable case have now converged for a time;
but, unlike the effect usually produced when many
waters meet, the streams of hope flowing away from
the junction, the track now to be pursued was the
narrow, winding by-way of despair. In a word,
hope was centred in the effort of the Association
secretary to secure an interview with the Premier.
But, first, this interview had to be secured, and
even then success was but a remote contingency.


However, as it now appeared the only means left,
the effort was persisted in. Mr. Prendergast,
M.L.A., who had the arrangement for it in hand,
by persistent hammering at the right door for
several months, the desired interview was arranged.
At the time appointed, accompanied by Mr. T.
Crosbie, the secretary of Tratford’s Lodge, who had
kindly consented to be present, and Mr. Prender-
gast, the secretary (Mr. Binns) waited on the
Premier at Parliament House.
The whole being seated, Mr. Prendergast opened
the ball by reminding the Premier that the business
in hand referred to a man of whose case he had
frequently spoken to him, and introduced Messrs.
Crosbie and Binns. The Premier (Mr. Bent),
turning, then, to the latter, said, “Now, tell me all
about this man.” Whereupon Mr. Binns, first
impressing upon the Premier that, the Railway
Department having refused to permit the Union,
as such, to approach him (Mr. Bent), he was there
simply as a private citizen, and in no way was he
acting for the organisation. He had, he said, been
intimate with the case from the beginning, and
knew that injustice was being done.
A full statement of the case, as concisely as pos-
sible, was then presented, and a copy of the case,
as prepared for the Minister, was handed to Mr.
Bent for his consideration.
Mr. Binns, concluding, observed that “he would


exact a promise from the Premier in the man’s
behalf that either he (Mr. Binns) should be per-
mitted to be present in Tratford’s interest when the
opposite view was presented by the Commissioners,
or he, as representing the weaker party, should be
.given the advantage of the last word in reply.”
The request was supported by Mr. Crosbie, who
enlarged upon the suffering and hardship that was
consequent on the Railway Department’s refusal to
perform an act of bare justice.
Mr. Bent asked what was specifically the demand
on the man’s behalf, and Mr. Binns replied “that,
as it was now beyond doubt that the man was per-
manently incapacitated, he should be granted the
equivalent to three years’ pay in a lump sum it was
the custom to pay in such cases. This would en-
able the wife to procure proper attention for the
invalid, and set her up in some little business;
also that, as the settlement had been so long
deferred, the Railway Department should be re-
quired to pay sick allowance from the date of dis-
continuance to the date of settlement.”
Mr. Bent then replied that “he was deeply im-
pressed with the view of the case, as presented ”
and was good enough to say “that he was disposed
to think a grave injustice had been done,” and
summarised his intentions by declaring “that he
woui d wait on Dr. Moore, and, as man to man,
btam from him his view of the case, and if he


supported that just presented, he would pay the man
the compensation demanded.”
The Deputation, after thanking the Premier,
withdrew, and for once the star of hope was in the
ascendant.


CHAPTER XVII.
In Which Tratford is Subjected to a Medical
Examination by Dr. Grant, and the Expectations
Based Thereon.
The most sanguine expectations now centred in
the result of the interview just recorded. The
promise of the Premier was so manifestly sincere
that at first it was easy to find excuses for delay.
Have not these great men got so much to attend to,
and do not the wheels of officialdom grind slowly?
Tratford—however urgent his need—could not ex-
pect that his (little) affair should take precedence
to important matters of State policy, such as, for
instance, the quality of the red tape that in future
would be used to carefully bind up such affairs as
Tratford’s before relegating them to oblivion.
Day by day, week by week, the next move in the
grim game was awaited, and impatience stilled for
a time by ascribing the delay to the simple reasons
above quoted; but when nearly several months had
elapsed, and never a whisper had leaked out of what
was doing, it was impossible to repress the worst
feelings of despondency. For the approach to the
Premier was a forlorn hope, and should it fail,
I ratford’s last chance of securing redress was gone.
A letter was then addressed to the Premier by


Mr. Binns, reminding him of the interview already
detailed, and pressing him to concede a further one,
the presumption being that the Railway Depart-
ment, having got the ear of the Premier, had suc-
ceeded in destroying the good impression in Trat-
ford’s favour already created, and the last word was
wanted on the man’s behalf.
What seemed like an indirect reply to this almost
immediately followed, Tratford receiving the fol-
lowing instruction from the Railway Department: —
Office of Chief Engineer of Way and Works,
November 14th, 1907.
Memo, for Labourer Tratford.
Please arrange to report yourself to Dr. Grant, two
doors from Exhibition-street, on the south side of
Collins-street, at 12 noon to-morrow (Friday), 15th
inst., for medical examination.
(Signed) M. St., Asst. Engr.
The inference was strong that some interference
on the part of the Premier had resulted in the
Department being compelled to seek testimony in
this case, independent of Dr. Ryan’s, and this im-
pression was strengthened by the fact that this was
the first occasion on which the Department had sent
the man to any other doctor.
The value of these presumptions, however, as
shall hereafter be seen, was worthless, the real
motive behind the act being in pitiful contrast to
the hopeful expectations engendered.


As directed, Tratford (with his wife) presented
himself before Dr. Grant, who ordered him to par-
tially strip for examination. This done, the de-
tails of the operations performed were gone into,
and carefully noted, the doctor offering, from time
to time, expressions of pity on the man’s condition.
An observation dropped by him relative to the
operations caused Mrs. Tratford to observe that an-
other operation had been intended, and was really
pending, the man being supposed by the Hospital
authorities to be away in the country gathering
strength for the ordeal. Dr. Grant most emphati-
cally stated that, “were he in Tratford’s place, he
would not allow a surgeon to touch him with a
pole after the mess he had been made of,” and
advised the wife “not to permit the fifth operation
till it was absolutely essential for the preservation
of his life, as when it was done there would be no
permanent cure, as there was nothing that could be
put between the wall and the intestines to prevent
their reuniting.”
The examination was a lengthy one, and the
manner and speech of the doctor induced a san-
guine hope that, as he was of the Department’s own
choosing, his report would have a beneficial effect in
Tratford’s favour.
Thus were the first impressions formed of Ihe
interview in prospective, strengthened by the actual
reality. But the sequel will show that Dr. Grant’s
opinions were to be made, subject to other in-
fluences than the merits of the case before


Tratford again heard of him. But, in the mean-
time, a period of inactivity was supported by hope-
ful expectation.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Tratford Receives a Christmas Box—is Informed, in
Effect, that unless Pie Resumes Work, the Entire
System might Stop, and the Wife Displays
Unpatriotic Objection.
We now reach Christmas, 1907 —two and a half
years after the accident which ushered in such a
period of doubt, misery, and suffering to this family.
In the interim the daily round of duties had to be
performed, and an effort was made by the wife to
improve the fortunes of the family by opening a
small milliner’s shop in Spencer-street, to be pre-
sided over by the young daughter during the ab-
sence of the mother daily in pursuance of her
calling, the evenings and nights being spent betwixt


attention to the invalid and the production of such
articles likely to find a ready sale through either
avenue.
Two days before Xmas a formidable-looking
letter, left by an excited postman, the envelope of
which declared, in bold print, that no less a person
than “His Majesty” had a communication to make
with them, seemed to whisper a pleasant Xmas sur-
prise, and, certainly, when the trembling fingers of
the wife had laid bare the contents, fulfilled at least
the latter half of the expectation. It ran as fol-
lows :
A
Office of Chief Engineer of Ways and Works,
December 23rd.
Memo, for Repairer Tratford.
As the Railways Medical Officer reports you are
fit for light duty, I have to inform you that you must
resume work under Inspector Cameron on 26th inst.
ED. BALLARD, Engr. of Way.
Consternation, horror, and the total eclipse of
every hope was the first and lasting effect pro-
duced by this extraordinary and brutal epistle. And,
remembering the season chosen for the perpetration
of this piece of grim satire, malignity had, with
a vengeance, poisoned the shafts with which it
wounded this unfortunate family.
Doctors were ordering this man to recruit his
general health by a change in the country —(he


could not get)—to fit him for fresh surgical opera-
tions, while this medical officer of the Depart-
ment, who had not seen the man since the examina-
tion (so-called) held on July 30th, just
six months before, airily and lightly declared the
man fit for work!!!
The receiver is sometimes said to be worse than
the thief. In this case, who was the worst —the
hireling who could make such a report six months
after seeing the man, or those who, fully aware of
its value, paid for it?
This new trouble was first taken to the secretary
of the Association, whose astonishment and indigna-
tion were beyond bounds, but who informed the
woman that “he was powerless officially to move in
the matter, but undertook, if she would wheel the in-
valid to the works in a chair, to draw public attention
through the press to the case, and advised her to
go to the head of the man’s branch and glean such
information as she could as to the motive for this
new move.”
Accordingly, Mrs. Tratford waited on Mr. Bal-
lard, whose signature appeared at the foot of the
callous document, and, explaining the purpose of her
visit as arising out of the instructions to her hus-
band to resume duty, asked for an explanation.
In reply, she was informed that, in a report
dated December 12th, Dr. Ryan had stated that
Tratford was fit for duty. She replied, “Ryan had
not seen her husband since July,” and that “conse


quently the report was a fraud.” Mr. Ballard then
informed her that “there was a report also from Dr.
Grant, which, when read, was almost a reproduction
of Dr. Ryan’s.
The effect produced on the woman by the read-
ing of Dr. Grant’s report beggars description.
There was such evident collusion in the production
of the precious documents that she boldly declared
than “Ryan’s was a fraud, and Grant’s no better,”
and detailed to Mr. Ballard all that had occurred at
Dr. Grant’s examination. She then declared that
“she would procure and submit a certificate from
Tratford’s lodge doctor declaring his unfitness for
work,” but she was coldly advised that it was use-
less, that “there were already too many certi-
ficates there, and that, if she brought two dozen
Ryan’s word would still be taken, as the Department
paid him.” She then declared that “she would
wheel him to the works in an invalid’s chair and
insist upon performing his duty for him.” And
with this threat she left.
Lest the reader should be disposed to attach
blame where it is not due, and as we have not by
any means started out in the production of this work
to secure the scalp of everyone whose duty (too
often disagreeable) brought them in contact with
this case, we hasten to acquit Mr. Ballard of any
responsibility. He was simply an official carrying
out the instructions of his superiors (the Commis-
sioners). Outside of this, his manner towards the


unfortunate woman was marked by kindness and
sympathy.
The author hardly dares permit himself to com-
ment on the situation as it now stands.
Long experience of the service and its methods
enabled him to see that the Department would adopt
every possible means other than those prompted by
justice to dispose of this man and his grievance.
His dogged insistence in remaining above the sod
closed the door to one avenue of immediate escape
from a disgraceful situation, from which it felt it
could not retreat without loss of dignity or risk of
exposure.
It is a fair presumption, then, that the real pur-
pose behind this latest move was to obtain an oppor-
tunity of dealing with Tratford under the regula-
tions for insubordination by his refusal to obey the
instruction, and, getting rid of him by this means,
thereafter refuse to touch the question of his claim,
upon the grounds that he was a dismissed and dis-
credited employe, unworthy, as such, of considera-
tion.
Humbly, and before heaven, we most reluctantly
make these comments, but a circumstance now to
be introduced settles any qualms we might have
entertained as to the accuracy of this view, the pre-
sentation of which is reserved for the next chapter.


CHAPTER XIX.
Tratford does not go to Work, the Wheels still
go Round, the Army of Holiday Revellers Re-
maining in Sublime Ignorance of the Crisis.
Christmas Day, with all its delights and joys,
being relegated to the past by this hilariously happy
family, and Boxing Morning ushered in, the anxious
wife, determined to put into execution the threat to
take her husband to the works in an invalid chair,
which had been requisitioned for the purpose, mighf
have been observed at 6 o’clock—like some prospec-
tive holiday-maker—making an anxious survey of
the weather prospects. But already, at this early
hour, a strong north wind raised an impenetrable
curtain of dust, and the prospect generally indicated
a blazing, disagreeable summer’s day, totally un-
fitted to the projected little excursion, and likely,
combined with the excitement that would be engen-
dered by the delightful exercise of the treadmill,
to have an injurious effect on the invalid. (She
doubted the truth of the maxim that “joy never
kills.”) With rare constancy, then, she threw away
this opportunity of becoming an “interesting
widow,” and abandoned the enterprise.
Now, Mrs. Tratford (who was well drilled by this
time) knew perfectly well that, once ordered to duty,


Tratford’s non-appearance could only be excused by
substituting a medical certificate of unfitness.
Without this precaution the culprit (whoever he
is), without further ado, stands charged with “ab-
sence from duty without leave.”
She therefore wended her way, without loss of
time, to the lodge doctor, who had regularly fur-
nished a monthly certificate of unfitness, with the
purpose of securing one for the present urgent occa-
sion.
Explaining to the doctor that Tratford had been
ordered to duty that morning, the doctor replied that
“it was useless, as the man would never work
again.” She then explained the need of a certifi-
cate of unfitness, but where no objection had ever
previously been raised, she was met with the aston-
ishing response: “Let this farce come to an end.”
Asked what he meant, he replied: “Coming to him
for certificates for the Railway Department. There
was no possibility,” he said, “of her husband ever
getting compensation from the Department, which
would take Ryan’s report in preference to any num-
ber of others that she might tender.’ Asked
whether, “in his own judgment, Ryan was not
wrong?” he replied: “In this case might is right.
After assuring him “she would yet get justice,
she persisted in her demand for a certificate. He
then informed her that “he had met Dr. Ryan, who
had assured him that Tratford had no hope of suc-
cess, and his (Dr. O’Donnell’s) certificates, month


by month, only served to remind him (Dr. Ryan) of
the unsuccessful operations he had performed, and
requested him (Dr. O’Donnell) to discontinue giving
them, and let the matter drop, as the man could
never work again.” Mrs. Tratford, under the
stress of urgency, persisted, but it was only after a
threat to report the doctor’s refusal to the lodge
authorities that the certificate was furnished.
It ran as follows:
I certify that William Tratford is not able to
resume work. He is suffering from muscular and
nervous debility, and is hardly able to walk. There
is no hope of his resuming work, in the immediate
future at any rate, as the adhesions of the abdominal
viscera to the abdominal well still continue.
(Signed) N. M. O’DONNELL, M.D.
26th December, 1907.
Mrs. Tratford hurried away, and putting the certi-
ficate into the hands of Tratford’s foreman, ex-
plained the difficulty she had met in the effort to
secure it, receiving in reply the kindly and sympa-
thetic assurance that, while she was able to tender
them, her husband’s position could not be interfered
with.
And thus, by a hair’s breadth, was a critical situa-
tion averted, and Tratford’s right to be considered
an employe of the Department saved to him.
And are the conclusions expressed on the situation
set forth in the previous chapter justified, or was
the direction to proceed to work, and the interesting


chat between the two doctors just recorded, a mere
coincidence? Who shall say? But who can con-
demn as unmerited the horrible inference?
But while the result was a nominal victory to
Tratford, the experience showed the determination
of the Department to resist to the uttermost his
claim to compensation.
In fact, the prospect was never so dim. The Pre-
mier had either been won over by the opposite side
or had forgotten all about it.
Every effort to secure redress had failed, and
beyond a determination in the woman’s mind to get
justice somehow, there was no active agency at work
on Tratford’s behalf.
New efforts would have to be made, and new
agencies employed.


CHAPTER XX.
Fresh “Engines” are put upon the Rails, and Fresh
Hopes are Engendered, while the Guinea that
Evaded the Grip of Dr. Boyd is Mopped Up by
the Profession, after all.
In pursuance, then, of the purpose outlined in the
last paragraph of the preceding chapter, we find this
undaunted woman, early in January, paying a visit
to Mr. Edgar, M.L.C., into whose sympathetic ears
she poured the tale of her husband’s misery and her
own unparalleled struggle for justice, and that
gentleman, listening to the extraordinary story, and
making due allowance for the incoherency only too
evident in the telling, asked her to seek out Mr.
Evans, M.L.C., and relate, just as she had done to
himself, the circumstances of the case, and he under-
took, in conjunction with that gentleman, to inter-
fere to the best of his ability in Tratford’s behalf.
And the promise was made with such evident sym-
pathy that her wounded heart was buoyant again
with a gleam of hope, that rose like a Phoenix from
the ashes of her despair and disappointments.
Always obeying implicitly the advice or instruc-
tion of those whose assistance she sought is one of
the most meritorious features of this woman’s con


duct throughout this trial, and she now lost no time
in ferreting out the Hon. W. J. Evans (himself an
old Railway man), whom she found at his private
residence. Having told her story here, again she
was most kindly listened to, and assured that every-
thing possible would be done to secure justice.
But several months were to elapse before any tan-
gible effect was produced by the interference of these
gentlemen, but the number of communications in
Mrs. Tratford’s possession from their pen evinces
the genuine interest taken and felt by these gentle-
men in Tratford’s behalf.
In the meantime, the following memo, was sent
to Tratford: —
Office of the Chief Engineer of Way and Works,
March nth, 1908.
Memo, for Labourer Tratford.
I have been instructed by the Chief Engineer of
Way and Works to ask you to call at his office on
Thursday next, 12th inst.
Signed by
J. CAMERON,
Inspector of Ironwork.
Needless to say, these polite invitations had long
ceased to occasion pleasurable feelings in the breast
of either Tratford or his wife.
But they had the same effect as commands, and to
obey them, then, was felt to be imperative. What


new move was projected could only be discovered
by obedience, and consequently, for both reasons,
1 rattord being too ill to comply, his wife attended,
and was shown into the room of Mr. Rea, Chief
Clerk. Explaining that, her husband being too ill,
she was there in response to the request for his at-
tendance, she was bluntly told “to go back and send
Tratford down to explain why he had not gone to
work on Boxing Day, as directed.” Mrs. Trat-
ford replied that “her husband had been too ill, and
that several certificates (including one at the time)
had been handed in explaining his unfitness, and
that, moreover, she could not now send him down
as he was too ill.” “I do not care,” said this over-
considerate official; “you must go back and send him
down to himself explain.” To this was replied
that she would go back and get another certificate
from his doctor.” “Bring no more of them here ”
was the gentle rejoinder; “we have too many of them
already and the Department, which paid Ryan and
Cxrant for theirs, will act upon them.”
But whatever was the purpose that would pro-
bably have been disclosed had Tratford been got
before this evangelist, it remains in obscurity, for
the wife went away, and sent in a medical certificate
of unfitness. A few days after this experience, with
a view to multiplying the medical testimony on her
us and s behalf, Tratford was taken to Dr. Marma-
u e Rose, and the wife, putting his fee on the
table, requested that the patient should be examined


and a certificate given as to his fitness or otherwise
for duty.
Experience had by this time taught her to be shy
of saying too much, and she naively put it that the
man being a Railway man, such certificates were
necessary to excuse absence from duty.
The man was then partly stripped, and many
questions asked in explanation of the hacking about
his body had been subjected to, all of which were
parried, however, by a promise to enlighten him on
the conclusion of the examination.
This done, the doctor stated the man’s condition
as serious, and his complaint incurable, and wrote
out and handed the following certificate to the wife.
March 16th, 1908.
I hereby certify that William Tratford is suffer-
ing from the effects of internal injuries, and is
thereby unfit for duty.
Signed
J. MARMADUKE ROSE, M. 8., Etc., Etc.
Mrs. Tratford then explained to the interested doc-
tor that “Tratford owed his present state to the
treatment of Dr. Chas. Ryan, who had,” as she said,
“butchered him, and who,” she said, “had ever since
succeeded in keeping the man out of his rights. And
it was,” she continued, "with the object of securing
justice for her husband, in spite of Ryan’s efforts,
that she needed the certificate.”


'‘Do not say anything against my most intimate
friend/’ said Dr. Rose, fiercely; but, calming down,
he importuned both her and her husband not to men-
tion what had passed between them on this visit, to
which a reply sufficiently evasive, but non-commit-
tal, was given, and the pair wended their way home,
with another guinea’s worth of medical testimony in
their possession, of what advantage to them the
sequel will show.
On March 24th the first tangible effect of the in-
terference on the part of Messrs. Edgar and Evans
was indicated in a memorandum received from the
latter gentleman, which informed them that the Pre-
mier had agreed to hold an inquiry into this case on
March 30th, and requesting that both Mi;, and Mrs.
Tratford should be present.
Once again, then, did the vagaries of fortune plant
a new hope in substitution of the host of demolished
ones.


CHAPTER XXI.
In which the Premier Takes a Hand, and Makes a
Discovery that Staggered Him, as We Believe it
will the Reader also.
The close of the last chapter has opened the por-
tals to one of the most extraordinary contained in
this record. The Hon. Thomas Bent, although he
had previously had the facts of this case presented
to him, like all great men, had to support his mighty
reputation by duly forgetting all about it as soon as
the harrowing tactics were relaxed, and the whole
matter was now to be gone over (apparently) de
novo.
Tratford and his wife, on March 30th, attended
at the Premier’s office, and while they are standing
in the vault-like corridor, waiting for the summons
that would bring them into the awe-inspiring pre-
sence of the great, it was pitiful to note how long
suffering had worn the spirit of the man. It was he
now who was the reliant creature, led not only by
the hand of the woman, but by her will.
What a change, too, this cruel experience had
wrought in the character of this woman! Or at
least she had developed a determination and forti-
tude the possession of which she could have had no
previous conception of. But, believing her hus-
band to be the victim of gross injustice, her simple


nature held resolutely to the belief that right would
ultimately triumph, and it was the slights and im-
putations put upon a sick man that fired her per-
sistency.
In due course they were called into the presence
of the Premier, there being present also Messrs.
Edgar and Evans, M.L.C.’s, Mr. Prendergast,
M.L.A., and a representative of the Railway Depart-
ment. Mr. Bent opened the inquiry by reading
Dr. Ryan’s certificate, and then, looking at Tratford,
addressed him as follows:
“This man says you are fit for work, and insinu-
ates you are a malingerer?”
Tratford: “I am no malingerer, sir. I only wish
I could do some light work—l would be only too
glad.”
Mrs. Tratford (interrupting) : “Allow me, sir, to
show you my husband’s body, and how he has been
hacked about, and he is still suffering, and you can
form your own opinion.”
Railway Representative (interrupting) : “Madam,
these gentlemen are not medical officers.”
To which sage observation no reply was given.
Mr. Prendergast then laid bare in detail the facts of
the Case, and laid stress especially on the unfortu-
nate situation in which the man was placed between
the Department, on the one side, and the medical
profession on the other, and begged of the Premier


to bring the matter to an end by compelling the
Railway Department to admit an obvious fact—that
the man was a physical wreck because of, and con-
sequent on, the accident that had happened him.
Mr. Bent (to Railway Representative): “Whalt
work do the Commissioners want this man to do?”
Railway Representative: “Light duty.”
Mr. Bent: “What do you call that?”
Railway Representative: “Screwing up nuts and
bolts.”
Mrs. Tratford (interrupting) : “At the Railway
Offices at Christmas I was informed that he was to
commence at light duty, and shortly to be trans-
ferred to his usual employment.”
Railway Representative (to Mr. Bent) : “There is
another certificate there from Dr. Grant in support
of Dr. Ryan.”
Mr. Bent, after reading the certificate out, turned
to the Department’s representative, and in a mean-
ing way observed:
“Who authorised Dr. Grant to examine and re-
port on this man?”
Railway Representative: “The Commissioners,
sir.”
Mr. Bent: “But who suggested it?”
Railway Representative (innocent dove): “Dr.
Ryan, sir!”


Mr. Bent (angrily shoving the two certificates
across the table) : “I thought so; these certificates
correspond. Where is Tait? We will have him
here !’*
Railway Representative: “He is away on tour,
sir.”
Mr. Bent: “Well, see he is here when he returns.”
Mrs. Tratford then handed in Dr. Rose’s certifi-
cate.
And Mr. Bent promptly verified the impression
made upon his mind by the certificates of Ryan and
Grant by ordering a medical examination of Trat-
ford by two of Melbourne’s leading surgeons, and
m the discussion that ensued as to the choice of
such, the Railway representative, a fitting subject of
such a master, had the unblushing effrontery to
nominate Drs. R ya „ and Grant; but his zealous in-
tentions were promptly smothered by the Premier
bluntly declaring: “We have had too much of them
a ready. And a choice was made of Drs. Moore
and Rennie, Mr. Bent adding that he would take Dr
Rose s opinion as a third authority. And the origi-
nal order for the production of the almighty Tait
was revoked, and the inquiry adjourned till the re-
ports of the medical officers were available.
Before adjourning, Mr. Prendergast, turning to
Mrs. Tratford, asked “if she was satisfied,” but she
declared “she would not be so, in view of what had
een said, till the Premier had seen her husband’s


body and the manner in which he had been cut
about.”
The Premier agreeing, Tratford’s body was bared,
and the operations and their effects explained, Mr.
Bent expressing his heartfelt sympathy for the man
and his suffering.
Need we stop to comment on the disgraceful and
humiliating position a Department of the State was
placed in by the proceedings of this enquiry ?
To call forth an expression of opinion from the
Premier of the State (apparently only too well
founded) that virtually a great State Department
could stoop to arrange connivance between two doc-
tors, with the express object of doing an unfortu-
nate man out of his modest rights, or at least shel-
tering itself behind such with the same object, im-
plies the existence of a condition of affairs that re-
flects on cherished institutions in a manner that
might well occasion a feeling of shame to every unit
in the community.
Moreover, the attitude of the Department ad-
mitted of no equivocation. It went to the enquiry,
not with any purpose to assist the Premier to a just
decision on the case, but expressly to influence the
case against Tratfqrd, and this is proved by one cir-
cumstance in the fact that such medical testimony
as would support its attitude towards the man only
was tendered. The certificates from Dr. Moore
and others that would tell in the man’s favour, and


which were in the hands of the Department, it with-
held.
No later than the day following the enquiry, the
Railway Department, with a haste only to be ac-
counted for by due reference to the source from
which the instructions emanated, forwarded to Trat-
ford the following polite document:
Commissioners’ Office,
March 31st.
Memo, for Repairer Tratford.
Will you please attend at Dr. Moore’s consulta-
tion room, No. 2 Collins-street, Melbourne, for
examination by Dr. Moore and Dr. Rennie, at
twelve o clock to-morrow, Wednesday, as arranged
yesterday by the Honourable the Premier? g
(Signed) L. C. McCLELLAND,
Secretary for Railways.
Tratford, as directed, presented himself for exami-
nation, Dr. Moore expressing to Tratford, at its
close, his wish to do anything in his power for him
and inviting him (Tratford) to come to him when
this Railway business was over. Needless to say
their reports are not for reproduction here.
The archives of the Railway Department (if a
worse fate has not befallen them) hold them
securely, and every application since to the Depart-
ment, the Premier, and Minister for Railways of the


succeeding Government for a copy of these and
other documents bearing on the case—which, had
we them, would permit of much extended comment
—has been met with a refusal.
However, this much can be definitely stated, that
the reports of the doctors declared Tratford’s total
unfitness for work, and certified to the need of a
fresh surgical operation.


CHAPTER XXII.
In which it is Suggested that a Preference is being
Shown for Playing the Game in the Dark, with
the Record of Other Details.
The reader is probably now looking for the end
of this remarkable fight for justice. But he or she
must curb their very natural anxiety to reach the
climax, as must the author, who would ask nothing
better than, at this stage, to announce the victory
of weakness and justice against power and wrong,
and, writing “Finis” beneath, put down his pen.
But, as we have said, the end is not yet, and
neither is there any explanation for the delay that
now ensued.
The cause, whatever it was, is not above the
boards, and as our acquaintance with the m.oves in
this game stop short of those that were made be-
neath them, the reader, like the writer, must remain
—for ever, probably—uninformed of their nature.
“Pulling strings” is a vulgarism used to denote
the employment of ulterior influences in the disposi-
tion of a contentious matter, and there is no escap-
ing the obvious inference that pretty powerful ones
were operating to prevent a settlement of this case.
While the Premier’s next intentions were anxiously
awaited, he could not be induced to make any an-


nouncement of them. All the approaches of Messrs.
Edgar and Evans having reference to the matter
only prompted in reply an irritable and vexatious
evasion of the subject, which seemed to suggest that
no good was to be gained by touching it, and it was
soon evident that this effort, like those that preceded
it, was doomed to failure.
The unappreciated lull that ensues presents an
opportunity we would sooner have been deprived of
to offer a few observations regarding the domestic
situation of this family at this time.
As we have shown, the responsibility for its sup-
port had been transferred from the husband to the
wife, and while now, as all along, the share of the
former, in the intervals of physical suffering (un-
mercifully few), was confined to the impotent de-
spair of helplessness, the wife found her responsi-
bilities suddenly increased in an alarming degree.
During the three years that had passed covering
the period of Tratford’s illness the family had been
assisted in a manner common enough among the
poor, by letting portion of their habitation to
lodgers. These, however, at this time consisted of.
a woman and her two children only, the former o
whom being now prevented, through illness, from
following her usual employment, the Tratfords
found themselves not only deprived of the advan-
tage of the modest rental that had been paid but
this second family being reduced to a state of desti-
tution, its support became a charge on her earnings


also. It is a fact that during many weeks this half-
dozen persons had to be maintained on a weekly
sum of not more than ten shillings, while the pros-
pect for the coming winter was even more serious.
The heart sickened, then, at the apparent betrayal
of the recent hopes for success.
But Mrs. d ratford refused to accept tamely the
situation forced by crying need. Messrs. Edgar
and Evans were importuned more assiduously than
ever to press for a settlement, and that these gentle-
men made every effort to secure it is in evidence.
But it was not till the latter end of June that any
sign was received that the question still retained a
spark of life.
A letter was then received from Mr. Evans, re-
questing that Tratford be once again brought before
the Premier. This was arranged for June 26th.
Mr. Evans’ letter stated that he hoped finality would
now be reached. Is it to be wondered at, then, that
in spite of every disappointment, these people should
attend this meeting with every hope of success?
d his interview was of an informal character, and
resolved itself into an effort on the part of the mem-
bers of Parliament to induce the Premier to make a
definite decision, which he bluntly refused to do:
but Mr. Prendergast pointed to the straitened cir-
cumstances of the family, which now, owing to the
length of the protracted struggle, was very acute.
Sir Thos. Bent then promised that he would see


the Commissioners and secure a settlement in three
weeks, and with a view to keeping his promise, a
medical certificate from Dr. O’Donnell was handed
to the Premier, in which it was stated as imperative
that Tratford should be taken as far north as posr
sible for a change, and recommending for preference
Queensland.
The Premier then reiterated his promise to
arrange with the Commissioners for a settlement,
and evinced the liveliest interest in the suggestion
to take Tratford away, and directed Mrs. Tratford
to make the necessary arrangements, and as she did
not think he could stand the journey beyond Sydney,
he stated he would order the issue of a rail pass to
that capital for the family, and most kindly gave her
a sum of £lO to assist this benevolent object
Fortified with a promise, given by Messrs. Edgar
and Evans, that they would keep the Premier to is
word, arrangements for the journey were entered
into, in the confident belief that on the return a
settlement in Tratford’s favour would be made.


CHAPTER XXIII.
In which Mrs. Tratford has an Opportunity of Ob-
serving how Conceit is Humbled, and the Family
Enjoy a Change of Scene.
Mrs. Tratford’s experience during the three years
that had elapsed since the accident made her very
suspicious of the punctuality of Government Depart-
ments. Mr. Bent had promised a pass to Sydney,
without which the means of the family would not
permit of the trip being undertaken, but it was a
venturesome thing to break up a home in anticipa-
tion of the receipt of the flimsy piece of paper that
would open the door of the train to them, and which,
if the officials were left to their own devices, might
come along to some wondering descendant when
the millennium would be ancient history.
She therefore determined to get the precious docu-
ment into her hands while the promise was warm
ant. with this object resolved to visit the Secretary
for Railways, whose department would control its
issue.
Mr. McClelland, the official in question, she had
never met, but his bold and flourishing signature as
it had so often appeared at the foot of correspon-
ence announcing the Commissioner’s implacable
determination to resist Tratford’s claim to compen-


sation, reacting on her imagination, pictured a being
with the stature of a giant, and with about as much
commiseration in his natural composition as might
be found in the heart of a pyramid. A natural
curiosity, then, to meet the man whose personality
(next to Dr. Ryan’s) had seemed to stand between
her husband and his rights, combined with the first-
named object, brought her to the door of this gentle-
man’s office a few days after the visit to the Premier.
But getting into the presence of the latter is easy
by comparison with the object she had now in view.
The mail-clad warriors who hedged his person, and
whose business it is to look important and solemn
(as they decently should, considering the vastness
of the army which toiled under sweated conditions
to provide their opulent support), had to be satis-
fied that she was insusceptible to bluff, and too ob-
stinate to be refused before she succeeded in her
object.
Announcing herself as Mrs. Tratford when she
entered the presence of the Secretary, she stated
that “she was seeking a pass to take her husband to
Sydney for a change.”
The audacity of the demand first met with a stare
of astonishment, and then the cold official rejoinder
that if “Tratford wanted a pass he must make appli-
cation in the usual way.” This simple creature had
to learn that those placed near the throne in this ser-
vice are not to be approached with impunity, and
certainly not with outrageous demands of this sort


(distinguished visitors engaged—on the cheap—in
gathering material with which to libel our institu-
tions afterwards, being excepted), and she and the
subject were dismissed with a nod.
She apologised (as she should) for the intrusion,
excusing herself on the plea that, the Premier hav-
ing promised the pass, she thought she could secure
it there, and then prepared to leave. But mention
of the Premier” made her the centre of a new in-
terest, and she was politely asked to take a chair
(there was no fear of wounding the dignity of the
fuiniture now), and the kindest inquiries made of
her husband, and much sympathy expressed for his
unfortunate state, all of which shows, by the way,
how the official and the individual may differ, though
they are both represented by the same personality
Not even one of the distinguished visitors already
referred to could have been as promptly accommo-
dated as Mrs. Tratford now was.
With all the grace that (usually) accompanies a
kind and generous act, not only was the pass pro-
vided. but it was endorsed as available for the ex-
press train, and she left, unschooled in Picksniffian
virtue, wondering at the effect produced by the
magic word “Premier.”
The home, which had been kept together with so-
much assiduity, was now broken up, the furniture
stored, and on July s th Tratford, in a very ill state
and his wife, exhausted in mind and body by the


incessant strife, taking their daughter with them,
left for Sydney.
About this trip little need or can be said, the days
when the weather was fine being spent viewing,
from a convenient locality, the moving picture of
Port Jackson.
Never once did Tratford run amuck during this
visit, for which some cynical people will probably be
disposed to give him little credit in the circum-
stances ; but the truth is, that in any set of circum-
stances he would be unlikely to do so, and therein
he differs from certain very good-living old gentle-
men (with a past), who support a reputation for vir-
tue under a natural compulsion to abandon their
amorous proclivities.
The resource of the woman, however, was forcibly
illustrated in the fact that, landing in a city strange
to them, they remained there for a period of nine
weeks, on a total expenditure not exceeding £ll.
At the end of this period the return to Melbourne
was made, the journey being noted for nothing more
than the eager expectation of being met with a
favourable settlement of Tratford’s claim. They
arrived in Melbourne during Fleet Week, and imme-
diately went into lodgings, while, needless to say,
no time was lost by the wife in ascertaining the
position of affairs. Mr. Evans was first visited, and
he most regretfully informed her “that nothing had
been done, as the Premier could not be got to move
further in the matter.”


This, then, was what they had returned to meet—
the non-fulfilment of a promise, faithfully given, and
the now (sure) destruction of their last hope
Knowing full well that at the Railway Depart-
ment, above all places, she had little to hope for, it
was a desperate purpose, unsupported by any rea-
sonable expectation, that took her in that direction
again, but once more she presented herself at the
door of the Secretary for Railways’ Office, and
breaking down the defence of the Spartan sentinels
on duty outside the fort, she again stood in the pre-
sence of that gentleman, and one of the chairs creak-
ing its approval, she was asked to take a seat.
She came, she said, for information as to the exact
position in which her husband’s case now stood, and
(something had happened in the interim, all the
suavity of manner having disappeared) she was in-
formed that “he (the Secretary) was then engaged
in the preparation of a report for the Commissioners
on this case indicating a heap of type-written mat-
ter at his elbow—but he offered her the comlorting
assurance “that there was nothing in it that would
secure her husband any consideration beyond the
allowance of sick pay he had already drawn.”
Asked if she could be made aware of the contents
of the report, or be permitted to peruse it (presump-
tuous creature!), he replied that she would never
know its contents. Asked if Tratford was going
to be asked to be present when the Commissioners
considered its contents, he replied: “No ”


“Well, then,” she retorted, “it is the evident in-
tention to condemn him without his being heard,
but to this rude observation she received no reply
beyond that “if she came down in three days time
the Commissioners’ decision would be announced to
her.”
Repressing a desire on her part to launch out into
the merits of the case, “he declined,” he said, to
go into the case with her. He had a melancholy
engagement to attend—the funeral of Sir George
Turner’s son—that afternoon.”
Thus was she peremptorily shown the door, out
of which, ahead of her, flew the last vestige of that
hope which had sustained this woman in a fight no
fictional stoic could have sustained.


CHAPTER XXIV.
In which Hope is Nearly Abandoned, but Concludes
with the Promise of a Startling Development
Later On.
Once again, then, the old pitiless round of duties
had to be taken up, and Melbourne’s suburbs re-
sounded to her tread as she meandered from door to
door in the effort to dispose of the products of her
labour at night, when, with sewing machine drawn
to the foot of her husband’s bed, she employed her
ingenuity in the production of such articles of mer-
chandise as her experience recommended.
She herself states that, although the battle ap-
peared now to be hopelessly lost, she still felt—as
simple minds will—that in some way justice would
assert itself. And it speaks volumes for the buoy-
ancy of her temperament that, in spite of the crush-
ing disappointments she had experienced, and the
wretched state of poverty to which the family had
now been reduced, this faint glimmer of hope still
sustained her.
But a letter that was now received from Mr. Evans
almost extinguished this last sustaining spark. It
informed her that the existence of the Government
was challenged, and in the present political outlook


the Premier could not be induced to move in the
matter, and a political crisis, she knew, would pro-
bably settle for ever Tratford’s claim for compen-
sation.
We have said that she was still sustained by a
lingering hope that something favourable to their
prospects would happen, but for the most part she
was filled with the gloomiest forebodings for the
future.
It was a heavy responsibility to know that upon
her own unaided efforts depended the support of her
family, while her inability to secure her invalid hus-
band the needs common to such was a severe trial
to a devoted wife.
Unquenchable as was the fire that consumed her,
it flickered at the prospect.
Is it a fact that the hour which precedes the dawn
is the darkest? The writer, a phlegmatic sort ot
individual, is disposed to view with cynical contempt
the application of such aphorisms to the occurrences
of life, but yet it is a fact that never had the pros*
pect of a settlement in this case looked more hope
less than at this time. And yet the dawn was
breaking —though they knew it not and with one
more trial to this devoted wife’s endurance, in the
form of an intolerable insult, and one more effort—
a supreme one—she was to do something more than
sip the nectar of victory; she was to grasp its
sceptre with both hands.


This Railway Department, having made up its
mind to a certain course of action, was brutally
insusceptible to any or every influence that might
induce other corporations or individuals to change
their mind. It had made many tactical blunders in
its conduct of this case, as the reader will admit,
without so far being called upon to pay the price
usually exacted for such. But it was now to be
guilty of an act that exposes its generalship to ridi-
cule ; and having averted defeat for so long, it by a
single perfidious act made it possible for the miser-
able creature whom it despised to grasp the laurels
of victory.
The evil-doer is said to be certain to effect his own
destruction if he is permitted a liberal allowance of
hemp. We will indulge the reader in at least one
astonishing illustration of the truth of this, and
entertain him or her, at the same time, with the
exposure of the intolerable system of espionage this
Department claims the right to employ where its
servants are concerned. And this benevolent pur-
pose we will reserve for a new chapter.


CHAPTER XXV.
The Department Appears in a New Role, which
Immeasurably Supports Its Dignity.
We are not engaged on a work of fiction, from
which circumstance we enjoy one immunity at least
in not being called upon to put any tax upon the
imagination in the production of incidents, or char-
acters, to sustain the narrative. But we are under
one serious disadvantage, for while the novelist may
arrange his puppets to produce just such effects as
will commend the story to the reader’s fancy, we are
compelled to confine our record to the narration of
facts in the order of their occurrence, and though the
sequence of events will fortunately lead us to just
such a culmination as the novelist usually finds the
best recommendation to his work, the reader has
been tortured by being compelled to wade through a
monotonous series of disappointments without one
single experience from which pleasure might be
derived. The reader must now derive his or her
own compensation from the balance of the narrative.
During the early part of November Mrs. Tratford,
returning home tired and dispirited with a hard day s
work, the woman with whom they were lodging in-
formed her that a man had called during the day,
and representing himself as a detective, had sub


jected her to a fishing inquiry as to how Mrs. Trat-
ford got her living, and generally as to her character,
to which she had replied that, while the family lived
very decently and unobtrusively, she thought that
these enquiries had better be put to Mrs. Tratford
herself. He then stated that he represented the
Railway Department, and would call again.
Needless to say, the unfortunate woman was not
only indignant, but distressed, at this new indignity.
To think, after all they had endured, and still en-
dured, that she or her family were being subjected
to the same attentions that might be given to a sus-
pected criminal was bitter indeed. And, as she ob-
served, what right had the Railway Department to
pursue such enquiries? Her husband had not
drawn any pay for two years and a half, the Depart-
ment taking no responsibility for him.
Did it think that necessity, occasioned by its own
cruelty, had forced her to a career of crime; and not
content with such satisfaction as this might give it,
desired to sound the depths of their degradation,
and, like a fiend, gloat over it?
Had necessity brought about such results, who,
it might be asked, would have been responsible?
As punctual as evil always is, this limb of the law
duly presented himself, and stating he was Detec-
tive Borsum, and that he had been sent by the Rail-
way Department to make a few inquiries, proceeded,
with all the cunning offensiveness characteristic of


his profession, to cross-question the woman as to
her mode of earning a living, etc., etc., and indicated
his desire, or intention, to push these inquiries
amongst her neighbours, by asking which amongst
them would be able to speak with any degree of
authority as to her character and habits. She re-
plied to his enquiries by persistently denying his
right to subject her to any such examination or in-
dignity, and this was the extent to which his curi-
osity was satisfied.
He then stated that she was required to attend the
Commissioners’ office on Monday (now Friday), to
which she replied that the Commissioners could
make any communication they pleased in writing,
but was assured that nothing further would be put
on paper having reference to this case.
Being importuned to promise to attend, she re-
plied that she would consider, and with this negative
assurance the attractive visitor left to report to his
eager masters the result of his honourable mission.
The following morning (Saturday), too upset by
the proceedings just recorded to take up her daily
pilgrimage, Mrs. Tratford determined on a visit to
Mr. Edgar, who informed her that they had failed
utterly to induce the Premier to move in the matter
of Tratford’s affair.
She then informed that gentleman of the new
indignity imposed upon her, and of the demand that
she should attend the Commissioners’ office on
Monday.


Mr. Edgar’s reply, prompted by the indignation
the recital aroused, was “that the Commissioners
had overreached themselves this time,” and advised
her to be in attendance on Monday, hear their deci-
sion, and demand it in writing.
“He would then,” he said, “brook no further delay
or evasion, but from his place in Parliament demand
the production of the papers .in this case, and deal
with it on the floor of the House.”
Mrs. Tratford then left, agreeing, in deference to
Mr. Edgar’s wish, to attend the interview on Mon-
day.
Too hurt and unsettled, as has been said, to pur-
sue the round of Melbourne’s suburbs that day, and
with the prospective loss of Monday before her like-
wise, she yet could not afford to neglect entirely the
means of livelihood; so—whatever good angel it was
that inspired her—she proceeded to a store and pur-
chased a quantity of Roman satin, and set herself to
its manufacture into aprons, a task she pursued
through Saturday and Sunday with such assiduity
that by Monday morning a good dozen were com-
pleted.
At the time appointed for the interview Mrs. Trat-
ford made her appearance at the door of the Secre-
tary for Railways’ office. Carrying in her hand a
little box, with nothing more offensive in it than the
dozen Roman satin aprons already referred to, and
satisfying the devoted sentinel at the door that it did


not contain a bomb (which, as the result will show,
should be called a lie), she was once again (this time
at his request) in the presence of the Secretary for
Railways, and, taking a chair opposite him, put her
package on the corner of the table. The dignified
official cast his eye inquisitively for a moment at
the innocent-looking package, and he may be ex-
cused (being without the knowledge) if at this stage
he failed to appreciate the virtue of its contents,
the fact being that Mrs. Tratford herself failed to
do so, her modest aspiration being to combine busi-
ness with her visit (the time for which latter she
could ill afford), and dispose of the aprons amongst
the curled darlings, none knew better than whom
the trial she had sustained and the position she
stood in. However, we must curb this habit of
anticipating events, and proceed with them in the
order of their occurrence, and we venture to say no
one will begrudge a separate chapter to the record
of the interesting interview that now followed.


CHAPTER XXVI.
In which it is Shown How a Dozen Yards of Roman
Satin is Made to Play an Important Part in the
Settlement of a Vexed Question.
Mrs. Tratford, on entering the room, was invited
to take a chair, which she did, patiently waiting for
the decision that was to be announced to her, and
which—we had better state it now—was destined to
remain undivulged. Instead, the following drama-
tic scene was acted without rehearsal:—
Mr. McClelland: “I asked you to call here a month
ago, and you never did so; so I sent a gentleman to
you to make a few enquiries, but especially to ask
you to attend here to-day.”
Mrs. Tratford: “You have added insult to injury
by sending a detective to my lodgings to find out
how I was earning my living. If you wanted to
know, why did you not send a letter, or a
to ask me to attend? I would have come down
and given you the information you so much desired.’^
And then opening the box, and drawing forth an
apron, which she spread over the horrified official’s
table, she continued:—
“This is how I get my living. Ido this work at


night, until the small hours of the morning, and on
Sundays, in the intervals of doing my other work
and attending to my husband, and hawk them, with
other things, round the suburbs all day, and I sell
them as reasonable as they can be got anywhere
(this with a malignant sparkle in her eyes). If
you could purchase a few from me now it would be
a great help to me, for I have, otherwise, wasted
much valuable time in coming down here.”
Mr. McClelland (rising indignantly) : “Mrs. Trat-
ford, you have insulted me. And I could order you
out of this office.”
Mrs. Tratford (with feigned surprise): “What!
order me out of the office for trying to earn an
honest living for an invalid husband and my daugh-
ter ! And you so anxious to know what lam doing
that you must send a detective to enquire in the
neighbourhood. This is honest work, even if it
had to be done on Sunday.”
Mr. McClelland (to the clerk in attendance):
“Retire, please.” Then to Mrs. Tratford: “I would
not wish it for anything that this should get about.”
Mrs. Tratford: “It is a long lane that has not got
a turn, Mr. McClelland, and I think it is my turn
now. You may be better educated than me, but I
will put this case more plainly to you than you will
care about hearing. I suppose Dr. Ryan’s return
from England in a few days makes you anxious to
present him with a clean slate —a slate with the
name Tratford rubbed ofl; but, believe me, that will


never happen” (and she looked as if she meant it)
“till my husband gets justice. And now, this is the
tale I tell from door to door of every suburb of Mel-
bourne while I sell these things.
“I tell how that my husband was a Railway em-
ploye, who never knew a day’s illness in seventeen
years of service till he met with an accident, which
should not have entailed his ruin, till the medical
officer of the Department effected it by three unsuc-
cessful operations, from the effects of which he
never can be cured. And the whole support of a
family is now cast upon me, because the Railway
Commissioners have conspired with its doctor to
save the latter’s reputation, and to do this deny the
truth of my husband’s condition, and refuse him the
compensation he is entitled to by law.”
Mr. McClelland: “Dare you say that again?”
Mrs. Tratford (unabashed) : “Dare I say it?
When Sir Thomas Bent, Premier of Victoria, dared
to say it, and, what is more, he cast back at your
representative the false certificates of your doctors?
Where, at that enquiry—if your intention was to be
fair to my husband—were all the certificates given
by Dr. Moore and others which certified in my hus-
band’s favour, and which were then in your posses-
sion, that they, too, were not produced? You put
forward those only that told against him, and which
you paid to get with that object, and withheld every-
thing that spoke for the man! Call the Commis


sioners in here, and I will say to them what I am
saying to you!”
Mr. McClelland: “But, Mrs. Tratford, you did not
trust us. You went to members of Parliament.”
Mrs. Tratford: “Is my husband a man?”
Mr. McClelland: “Yes.”
Mrs. Tratford: “He was a member of his Associa-
tion. Was he any the less a man for that?”
Mr. McClelland: “No.”
Mrs. Tratford: “Well, who had a better right to
fight his case than the Association, and did it not,
through correspondence, keep this case before the
Commissioners for over a year, and did not two
deputations endeavour to present the case to the
Commissioners personally? On the last of which, did
not Mr. Tait interrupt at the mention of Tratford’s
name, and say he would not hear any more of this
Tratford case? What, then, was Ito do, or where
could I turn, in my extremity, but to those whose
efforts might meet with better success?”
Mr. McClelland (weakly shuffling the points
raised) : “The Railway Department had to wait and
see if Tratford would ever be able to do light work.”
(This without a smile.)
Mrs. Tratford: “The Railway Department was
waiting to see if my poor husband would die and
carry with him to the grave the mystery of his suf-
ferings, and relieve the Department of the respon


sibility for the payment of the miserable compen-
sation.”
Mr. McClelland (shifting his direction with the
agility of a weathercock, and weakening visibly
under the influence of the storm he had raised) :
“Well, Mrs. Tratford, we had to be careful of the
public money.”
Mrs. Tratford: ‘‘Don’t talk to me of care for the
public money. Who paid for the jaunt of fifty
members of Parliament to Mount Buffalo and back
by special train, and the jaunt of the Premier and his
friends to England, and other little picnics of this
sort ? But when it comes to the payment of com-
pensation to a working-man who has been ruined,
then we hear of care for the public fugds.”
Mr. McClelland (who, to do him justice, had
melted under the fire of her eloquence) : “Mrs. Trat-
ford, will you trust me till Friday?”
Mrs. Tratford (pretending she expected it) : “How
can I trust you after the experience I have had?”
Air. McClelland: “If you will trust me I will be
your friend. Suppose, for instance, I recommended
the Commissioners to pay Tratford £100; you know
it would be done. Well, there is nothing to prevent
me from recommending, say, £200.”
Mrs. 1 ratford : “Dare you do anything of the sort?
Even if such an amount equalled the total compen-
sation due to him, which it does not, what is it but
a mere pittance, with which I could do no more than


take him for a change somewhere, while I would
have to continue the old struggle to support him.”
Mr. McClelland: “Well, will you trust me till
Friday? Come down at three o’clock on that day,
and I will be able to say definitely what will be
done.” He then handed Mrs. Tratford a sum of ten
shillings.
Mrs. Tratford: “What is this for? Oh, you have
bought five of my aprons” (taking this number out
of the box and spreading them on the table before
him).
Mr. McClelland (rising): “Put them back in your
box. I will present it to you.”
Mrs. Tratford: “I take charity from no man,
neither do I beg of any. When I come here it is
to seek justice, not charity.”
Mr. McClelland (soothingly) : “Well, Mrs. Trat-
ford, I will buy your aprons, and will now present
them to you.”
Mrs. Tratford :“I cannot take charity. You have
purchased them. Take them home to your wife.
She does not want them? Well, to your daughter.
She is too young? Well, to your wife s maid. She
would not wear them? Well, get your lady to pre-
sent them to the Benevolent Asylum. There is
honest value in them, even if they were made on a
Sunday. The employment was necessary and
honest. Indeed, Mr. McClelland,” she continued^


and this time she meant it, “I regret having to dis-
pose of them to you, but while I have been here I
have been unable to earn the means for our support,
and on Saturday also I was too upset, consequent
upon my experience of Friday, to do so, and my
earnings are not so good that I can afford to lose so
much time.”
And then, promising once more to attend on Fri-
day afternoon, she took her departure, leaving be-
hind sufficient Roman satin to give each of the tired
army of officials a mournful memento of an occasion
when the dignity of the great architectural pile was
trailed in the gutter.
The woman hardly touched the ground, so light at
heart was she, as she almost ran along the street in
the direction of the Flagstaff Gardens, where it was
usual for her husband to sit bathing in the sun-
shine during fine weather, and, first informing
him of the great stroke of business she had done in
the disposal of the aprons, satisfied his curiosity by
a recital of the whole occurrence, which almost
raised the hair on the terrified creature’s head. For,
with studied delicacy, she had given him no inkling
previously of the meditated interview.


CHAPTER XXVII.
In which it is Shown how the Interference of the
Roman Satin is Followed by Immediate Results.
Tratford is Compensated at Last.
The cup of victory had been dashed from the lips
of Mrs. Tratford now so often that she felt it would
not do to place too much reliance on the fulfilment
of the latest promise. Such past masters in the art
of shuffling would, as likely as not, when Friday
arrived, forget or ignore all about the experience of
Monday, and take up an altogether different atti-
tude. But this Railway Department is as sensitive
in proportion, where its own feelings are concerned,
as it is callous in its concern for the feelings of
others, and the incident of the Roman satin, sug-
gested by its own impudence, would, she felt,
through the feeling of shame engendered, be an im-
portant factor in determining the decision to be
come to. Moreover, the reputation of the Depart-
ment, like that of the evil-doer in general, was in-
volved, not in proportion to the measure of its guilt,
but in the degree of exposure to which it might be
subject. And it was a disconcerting element to
imagine this woman going from door to door of
Melbourne’s suburbs giving tongue to such a story
as that she had compelled the Secretary for Railways


to listen to at the recent interview. “Care of the
public funds” he had advanced as the reason for
delay in performing an act of bare justice. But
what was it now about to do? It had refused jus-
tice on the merits of the case, and employed every
contemptible device to defeat its ends, and now,
right or wrong, if Tratford was a malingerer fifty
times over, the public money would be employed to
save the reputations of individuals and cover up the
perfidy of the Department.
lo the Tratford family it seemed as if Friday
would never come. The resourceful wife, who felt
only too sensitively the hopelessness of the struggle
to support with her two hands the needs of this
family, already outlined a life of comparative com-
t°^,f°r them aII if onl y Fr >day should bring with it
tuinlment of the promise given.
Punctual, then, to the minute on Friday, she at-
tended at the Secretary’s office, and was informed by
a clerk m waiting that the Commissioners had
armed at a decision, substantially, to pay-what had
been fought for all along-the modest gratuity of a
lump sum equal to three years’ pay, calculated on
tratford s average earnings, but that it would be
necessary for the decision to be ratified by the Cabi-
net before the amount would be available for pay-
ment. With her head in a whirl, and her heart in
an ecstasy of delight, she left to carry the good news
o him for whom she had fought so hard a fight, and
o bring a smile of appreciation to whose face she


would endure any experience or any torture, and we
may be sure that if the payment satisfied (and it
did) she had nothing to complain about.
She made it her business immediately to seek out
Messrs. Evans and Edgar, both of whom, from the
first moment of their interference, had honestly
striven to bring about a successful result, though
without avail.
Meeting the former, and being a little vain of her
victory, the announcement of which she withheld for
a time, she informed him that she had been to the
Railway Offices in connection with her husband s
case, to which he replied that, wherever else she
might go for sympathy or assistance, that was the
very last place to seek it, as he had himself conclu e
after many errands to the same place But when
she had enumerated to him all that had occurred his
hearty satisfaction, as he assured her that it was t e
Roman satin that did it, was a real delight.
We are nearing the end now of this remarkable
fight for justice, and if the denouement gives plea-
sure to the reader, the writer is simply
have reached the one real, substantial delight that
came to this unfortunate family throughout this
trial, which had now lasted three and a half years,
and it would ill become us to defer the recor o
succeeding events merely to gratify a desire to air
our philosophy at this stage.


On November 17th, 1908, the following memo-
randum was received:—
Commissioners’ Office.
Sir, Adverting to your application for the pay-
ment of compensation in connection with certain
injuries sustained by you in June, 1905, I now beg
to intimate that, whilst the Commissioners are not
prepared to admit that the Department is in any war
responsible for your present condition of health, it
has been decided to deal with you under the provi-
sions of the Employers and Employes Liability
Act, and grant you a gratuity of £328, subject to
the execution of the necessary deed of indemnity
and arrangements will be made for the payment of
the money as early as possible.
I may add that as soon as the money has been
paid your connection with the Department will be
formally terminated.
vant haVe the honour to be > sir > your obedient ser-
(Signed) L. McCLELLAND,
Secretary. -
The circumstances of the family made it impera-
tive that the matter should be expedited, and Mr
Evans promised to secure the Treasurer’s sanction
to the proposed arrangement without delay. And
the very next day she received the following com-
munication 6
State Parliament House, 18/11/08.
Dear Mrs. Tratford,—
Re the compensation, I find on inquiry at the


Treasurer’s Department that the Premier has agreed
to the Railway Department’s proposal, and you
should receive a cheque for £328 not later than
Monday next.
I need hardly say I am very pleased to know it
is satisfactorily settled, and you deserve every credit
tor the way in which you have so persistently fought
for fair treatment on behalf of your husband.
Yours faithfully.
(Signed) W. J. EVANS.
Events moved rapidly now, and no later than
November 23rd a memorandum was received from
the Railway Accountant, requesting Tratford to call
at that office to sign the necessary papers and re-
ceive the money.
Has anyone got any doubt that this appointment
was kept?
Our assurance must be accepted (for this one inci-
dent of the tale) that, punctual to the moment, Trat-
ford and his elated wife presented themselves at the
door of the Accountant’s office, and without un-
necessary delay, every requirement being satisfied,
the cheque was handed over. And thus was ter-
minated, entirely to the satisfaction of one party at
least, a struggle against unparalleled odds men
would have shrunk from, and only one woman in a
generation could have sustained.
The moment of victory is the moment for forgive-
ness, so, smothering down the choking sensation the


remembrance of all her trials produced, she led her
reluctant husband (the place gave him the shivers)
up to that same office where she had displayed to
such advantage the Roman satin aprons, with the
object of saying good-bye to the Secretary, and
thanking him for the tardy justice meted out so nig-
gardly at last. That gentleman (released from the
trammels of officialdom) was as nice as only himself
knows how to be, shaking hands with them both ex-
pressing genuine regret for Tratford’s state of
health, and refusing any credit for the settlement,
the whole of which, he said, was properly due to his
devoted and persistent wife, but for whom, he can-
didly admitted, so happy a consummation never
would have been attained, and finished up by offer-
ing to be of any service to them that lay in his
power.
I his was an offer too good to be declined (even by
a woman who never accepted charity), and with a
merry twinkle in her eye, she suggested: “What
about another pass to Sydney?” That would enable
her to give her husband another change of scene.
Ihis was readily promised, and they turned away
she happy to see the outside of a place associated in
her mind with so much suffering and with the
wreckage of her one-time stalwart husband; while
he remembered with regret that he was no longer
a Railway man, and humble friendships formed
during seventeen years of service must now be for-
gotten At this moment Tratford thought more of
those things than of the irretrievable ruin his too
faithful service had brought him.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
In which is Recorded a Justification for this Work,
and an Acknowledgment of a Grave Respon-
sibility.
We believe the facts presented in this work amply
justify its production. Yet we fully appreciate that
a heavy responsibility attaches to a record that
affects the reputation of people well known and of
high repute, against whom the breath of calumny
has never blown. Before, then, finally dealing with
the fortunes of the Tratford family, interest in whom
(so far as this work is concerned) vanishes with the
culmination of their trials, we feel it necessary to
relate the reasons that finally determined upon this
form of exposure.
After the return from Sydney, to which place the
Tratford family had migrated (as forecasted in the
last chapter), Mrs. Tratford determined to bang
the man to justice who, in her judgment, had been
responsible for so much rum and suffering. With
the express purpose, then, of instituting an action
for unskilful treatment and malicious libel, the
papers were put for investigation and report in the
hands of a leading firm of solicitors.
The firm in question, Messrs. Hickford and
Balmer, after the most careful consideration, were


reluctantly compelled to return the papers, Mr.
Hickford observing regretfully when doing so “ that
she (Mrs. Tratford) would have to submit to this
treatment of her husband. It seems a ridiculous
thing for a firm like ours to have to admit our
helplessness to do anything in the matter, owing to
the impossibility of inducing a single doctor to
stand by you, and without this there was no hope
of redress.” Such cases as Tratford’s were
invariably buried beneath the turf, the etiquette
which hedged the profession obviating exposure.
Mrs. Tratford, however, still determined that jus-
tice should assert itself, placed the papers in the
hands of another firm of solicitors, Messrs. Kauff-
man and Snowball, who also undertook to inves-
tigate the matter. This they did, and here again
the papers were regretfully returned, Mr. Kauffman
observing that it would be easier to attempt to shift
the North Pole than get one of these doctors to
stand up for what was right in this case. He
assured her of his deepest sympathy for Tratford
in his sufferings; and had the firm succeeded in
getting one doctor to stand by them, they would
have been only too glad to institute proceedings,
but they had failed in the effort.
Importuned, however, by Mrs. Tratford, this firm
agreed to make one further effort to secure the con-
currence of a certain doctor, who had befriended
Tratford through his long illness, but, again failing,
they were reluctantly compelled to abandon the
idea, Mrs. Tratford assuring Dr. Kauffman that if


it took her ten years she would have justice. It
now, therefore, devolved upon her to do what the
best legal talent in Melbourne shrank from accom-
plishing.
The machinery of the law, then, could not be put
in motion unless other people specially honoured in
this narrative should show a disposition to invoke
it, in which case all parties in the matter will be
accommodated.
Those who suffer much owe much, and, if this
ks true, Tratford’s indebtedness is a heavy one;
and if the shadow which oppresses him can only
be raised when he has discharged it, he must bear
the burden to the end. Certainly, although many
have suffered in the same way, Tratford’s experience
was unique in that it was so crowded with incident
and material that exposure was rendered possible.
The matter now rests with the public, which,
being the paying and suffering party, it behoves it
to look to its own protection.
If we want to send mere greetings to a friend,
the care of the missive is entrusted to a public
official liable to summary dismissal should he abuse
his office. It is paradoxically tragic that we should
be content to entrust the higher concern of human
life to the care of individuals over whom, prac-
tically, thre is no control, who do as they please,
and charge as they please, too often, indeed, in
this latter respect, acting as though the collecting
of fees was the only article in their profession, as


has been vividly illustrated in this narrative. The
author, however, is under a restraint to limit his
comments in this direction, in view of possible even-
tualities; and, indeed, is there anything he could
say in this connection that would speak half so
eloquently as will the simple story of Tratford’s
sufferings?
Finally, to have failed in this record would be a
crime as morally black as would be the act of a
man who withheld from some poor drowning atom
of humanity the saving influence of a life-buoy.


IMPORTANT.
CHAPTER XXIX.
In which a Melancholy Peace is vouchsafed the
Tratfords’. Disturbed only by the sound of wrang-
ling in the Camp of their tormentors.
We have now reached the end of our task, and,
although at the outset we pretended to a measure
of contempt for the difficulties that would beset us,
we have yet found them of no mean order, and at
least we may claim that not a single confidence has
been betrayed.
Tratford, with his devoted wife and daughter, as
has been said, were enabled once again to enjoy a
change to Sydney, this time with less regard to
principles of economy. Their stay lasted six weeks,
during which time, while Tratford in particular
enjoyed such benefit to his health as the change
might afford, plans for the future were discussed
and matured. It need hardly be said that the
debates at these councils were protracted and
minute, for no one knew better than the resourceful
wife that, unless the sum of money her persistency
had won was made instantly reproductive, it would
soon disappear, leaving them in a more hopeless
situation than that from which they had just been
relieved. Accordingly, on the return to Melbourne,
the family went into lodgings while a profitable
means for investment was determined on, and
ultimately a shop in Franklin-street was taken, that


cute people, with ideal business instincts, would not
look at, and being renovated, fitted, and stocked,
under the able management of the energetic wife,
almost immediately began to show profitable results.
And it will be a pleasure to those who have fol-
lowed the fortunes of this family through its pro-
longed trial to know that the returns from the little
business quite guarantee the family against any
relapse to the conditions which necessitated, on the
part of the wife, the heart-breaking service, with
all its distressing experiences, she was called upon
to render for its support. She is quite as t|usy a
woman as ever she was, but every service is a
labour of love, and she is no longer under the neces-
sity of separating herself for an hour from those
who need so much her care and solicitude.
It will, to some people, seem a ridiculously small
sum of money to effect so much; but, in the hands
of so energetic a manager, it means the difference
between perpetual penury and comparative opu-
lence.
Under this head, then, nothing more need be
said.
The only other reference we need make of neces-
sity concerns Tratford himself. He, poor fellow*,
makes no progress towards recovery, nor never
shall, the very nature of his malady precluding it.
To Tratford, then, the delights and pleasures of life
(viewed from a worldly standpoint) are a back
number. He enjoys, however, no small measure
of compensation in comparing the serenity of their
present situation with the unintermittent strife of
the past four years, while we need hardly say his


home is made cheerful and comfortable for him by
the unwearying attentions of his wife and daughter.
It will be necessary for him to shortly undergo a
further surgical operation, and the length to which
his life can be prolonged will depend upon the num-
ber of such his constitution can support.
When the weather is fine he is taken to the Flag-
staff Gardens, where he sits for hours in the day
chatting to others who, like himself, are physical
wrecks before their time, or to old, worn industrial
veterans, who look back over a lifetime of sorrow
and incessant toil, and forward to the near approach
of an eternity of rest (undue compensation), and
here he remains till one or the other, wife or
daughter (do you think they ever forget?), come to
bring him home.
It is not too much to say that, were it not for the
inestimable benefit conferred by these gardens,
Tratford’s life could not be prolonged, and, indeed,
it was their proximity to the little shop that was the
highest recommendation to the latter. In the mean-
time, and while life lasts, he is very proud of the
little woman who fought so brave a fight for him,
and who is actually so unfashionable as to be more
devoted to him the more helpless and dependent he
becomes, and both have agreed that when the hour
of separation arrives, his body, if possible, shall be
taken to sea and risked amongst aquatic sharks
rather than hand it over to certain land creatures
of a like species, that go under another name. But
if is our privilege to hope that this day may yet be
far distant for this Victim of Medical Etiquette.


APPENDIX.
In view of the disclosures contained in this work
the following extract from the leading columns of
the Age newspaper, of August 2nd, 1907, will be
found interesting. It ran as follows :
The great majority of Victorian citizens will
cordially agree with the remarks made by the City
Coroner yesterday in recording his verdict on the
death of Mrs. Comerford. There were circum-
stances, indeed, attending that tragic happening
which may be said to have warranted even stronger
reflections than the Coroner permitted himself to
use. The expert evidence taken at the inquest
showed that, although Mrs. Comerford died primarily
from fatty disease of the heart two hours after
giving birth to a child, her death was hastened by
hemorrhage, and her life might have been sensibly
prolonged had surgical assistance been available.
The reasons assigned for the withholding of such
aid from the unfortunate woman in her hour of bit-
terest need are such as stir the least emotional mind
with pity, shame, and indignation. It appears that
her husband—now a widower—had engaged a local
surgeon, Dr. MTnerney, to attend Mrs. Comerford
in her confinement. On the evening, however, that
she became ill Dr. MTnerney was absent when
called upon to render his promised services. Mr.
Comerford thereupon endeavoured to procure an-


other physician. Conscious that it was a case of
life and death, he hurried to the houses of one sur-
geon after another. Some were out, one sent a
message stating that he was ill in bed, but two were
at home, and presumably neither ill nor engaged.
Yet both these gentlemen declined to attend the
dying woman on what was practically a plea of
etiquette. She was Dr. MTnerney’s patient; there-
fore they would not as much as see her.
Mr. Comerford finally gave up his ineffectual
efforts and returned home at midnight to find his
wife a corpse. There is something quite horrible in
this apparent revelation of professional indifference
to human suffering. We must not, however, allow
our judgment to be led astray by the accidental
occurrences in this case. That Mrs. Comer-
ford actually died unattended by a surgeon is a
fact that called pointed attention to a very common
practice among medical men; but we have to re-
member that her death was not directly due to neg-
lect. In all probability hundreds of cases of sud-
den illness occur in Melbourne every year—that do
not fatally result—which instance the medical pro-
fession’s rigid observance of foolish rules of eti-
quette. The patient for some reason cannot imme-
diately obtain the services of the household physi-
cian. Another is sent for, and from some undis-
closed motive refuses to attend. He pleads eti-
quette. It is another doctor’s case. He has no
right to interfere.
In other cases the relatives of a person danger


ously ill, although having confidence in the attend-
ing physician, may desire to obtain a second opinion.
The physician is always willing enough to be so
assisted, but the medical man whose opinion is
desired, if by chance not a friend of the former,
seizes the occasion to embarrass him. fie replies
that he cannot meet Dr. So-and-So in consultation.
It is a matter of etiquette. "Dr. So-and-So has at
such a time done such a thing. Etiquette there-
fore forbids me to meet him.” It matters nothing
that a life is imperilled by this childish behaviour.
The physician looks upon the patient rather as the
chattel property of his rival than as a man or a
woman. The consideration of human interest is
eliminated. It is not too much to say that this sort
of procedure constitutes a very grave blot upon the
profession. It is a blot that the public interest
demands should be erased. Physicians should re-
member that they are in a very substantial sense
servants of the public. They may argue that they
have an absolute right to confer or to withhold
their services at their own pleasure. Legally this
may be so, but they owe both a great moral and a
great financial debt to the people which should pre-
vent them from raising such a plea. They actually
are indebted to the people for the opportunity of
practising their profession. It is true that they pay
certain fees from their own pockets for the instruc-
tion which enables them to become physicians; but
do they imagine that the University which confers
on them its diplomas subsists upon their fees? The
mversity, on the contrary, is a public institution,


founded and largely maintained by public endow-
ments. Our physicians, therefore, are public bene-
ficiaries, and they cannot escape from the position..
But, apart from this question, a profession whose
raison d’etre is the service of humanity simply caters
for contumely when it sets its own petty dignity
above considerations of humanity. To prate of
etiquette when a human life is at stake not only
discredits the individual who prefers an excuse so
mean and base, but his action fastens a stigma upon
a noble profession. The Medical Association would
be well advised to revise its code of etiquette in
such a fashion as to render impossible a retetition
of such altogether regrettable incidents as the
Comerford inquest laid bare.






