

A visit to
Wollombi
Npf
919.442
V831


A VISIT TO WOLLOMBI
and CUMNAROY
(Jerry's Plains)
performed in August 1827;
with certain reflections arising from the journey,
narrated in Eight Letters published in
'The Australian' 24 August - 17 October 1827
This is the 35th title in the Documents & Facsimiles Series
published by popinjay publications
P.O. Box 221
Woden 2606
Australia
First published in an edition of 25 copies on
2 April 1990




A VISIT TO WOLLOMBI
and CUMNAROY
g~ iflii DEAL has been said of these two favoured districts, to
the north-west of Sydney, that they were well watered in the
fiPj-j/lg driest season, and that when most other parts of the Colony
were burnt up, the cattle in Wollombi and Cumnaroy were up to their
dewlapc in the richest grass. This was an important point to ascert-
ain* and as "one pair of eyes is worth two pair of ears" I could not
be satisfied without ocular proof.
As the fine native grasses of this Country have been,
since the foundation of the Colony, the main source of our
prosperity, and are eminently so at the present moment; and I trust
will continue so, you must not be surprised at our attaching so much
importance to them, and endeavouring by all means in our power, to
discover and avail ourselves of them. The grass is the gold of New
South Wales; and by means of it in enabling us to maintain and
improve our thousands and tens of thousands of fine woolled sheep,
we have raised ourselves in a few years from a wretched and paltry
convict colony, to a rich, flourishing, free, and happy people.
I am sorry to say we are not known in England, and
emigration to New South Wales can hardly be said to have commenced.
Each man here, has been hitherto too "content with his own good",
and left to others the task of writing and describing the advantages
of the Country. When a Member of Parliament is said to have talked
of throwing a bridge over Bass' Strait, between Van Diemen's Land
and New South Wales, a strait that is upwards of a hundred miles
across in the narrowest part, what degree of ignorance may we not
expect to find among the less informed part of the people of England
as regards this Colony?
There are no doubt many little obstacles and annoyances
the respectable settlers must put up with, but in comparison of the
great end and possessions to be obtained by perseverence in this
Country, such obstacles are nothing; they are like the spike nail
which, for a minute or two, once arrested the launch of a line of
battle ship, while the drums and trumpets were sounding and the
streamers waving in the wind, all of a sudden the stupendous fabric
refused to move, but the trifling impediment was immediately
perceived, and brushed away, and the magnificent vessel glided away,
into her destined element, amid the shouts of a multitude. So it


will be with New South Wales, nothing can hinder her march of
prosperity; new orders may intimidate, and regulations may annoy
quit rents may distress, excises and stamps may impoverish, but they
are all in vain, and we are sure to get on in spite of them all.
While you are picking your way with your umbrellas, through the
puddles of your dirty London, we are enjoying purple skies, and one
of the most congenial and equable climates on the face of th ( e globe.
To this splendid climate, and its peculiarly character-
istic dryness, we may attribute the rapid increase and improvement
of our Australian fleece, which is already enriching thousands, and
bids fair in the course of ten or twenty years, to be the most
important production, next to sugar, raised by Englishmen in any
part of the world. All we want are hands to work, and mouths to eat;
and the worst which you and all good men on the other side of the
waters are deprecating, with the greatest sincerity and Christian
forbearance, viz. the increasing demoralization of the lower orders
in England and Ireland, is to us the most cheering intelligence you
can impart, for it ensures to us a regular continuance of prison
population, without which nothing could be done - our farming
operations would be suspended - our flocks would go untended and
astray; and as to our herds it would be
"Hie meas errare boves (ut cernis)."
But there is no chance of this, so long as your excellent Game Laws
and Insurrection Acts remain in force.
But to our journey - - the first stage from Sydney is
Parramatta, fifteen miles, over a road that would do credit to any
turnpike trust in England. The occasions are so few that call for
particular eulogium on the high individual at present at the helm of
public affairs in this Colony, that when the roads are mentioned, I
am eager to snatch the opportunity of recording my humble mead of
praise to His Excellency Governor Darling, for the highly improved
state of the public roads in every direction throughout the Country,
and the suffrage of a weary traveller, on a jaded horse, at the end
of a dusty journey, are preferable to
"The painted flourish of a courtier's praise."
Parramatta is a remarkably pretty place, and even in England would
be considered the largest and handsomest village there. It reminds
one of the fine villages on the sea coast of Suffolk, which are the
neatest in the kingdom. Parramatta, rural as it is, has received the
[illegible], and no doubt among the high destinies that await it, it
will either be the seat of government, or of the metropolis of
Australia. My Lord Bishop of Parramatta would sound as well as
Bishop of Barbadoes; and as the Americans, to whose history we are
often forced to refer for precedents, have found it convenient to
remove the seat of government for each State, away from the sea port
towns, to others of less pretensions in the interior, so I predict
it will be, ere long, in New South Wales. Then might that constant
eye-sore called the government domain, occupying the best half of


the town and harbour of Sydney, be dispensed with, and given away or
sold to such enterprizing individuals as would build wharfs and
warehouses, to the great benefit and embellishment of the port.
Parramatta, however, is not without its government house
and garden; and, although the former is not adapted for large public
entertainments, it is a very neat and substantial building, is a
great deal more convenient inside than it appears to be, or when
seen from the town. Besides the government house, Parramatta has
many other excellent public buildings; among which, the Female
Penitentiary, and the Commissariat Stores, shine conspicuously. They
are both on a very extensive scale; and buildings of less magnitude
would deserve mention in much more important places, than a descrip-
tion of Parramatta.
The inns in this town have been long and justly celeb-
rated. A competition, very useful to the public, has long obtained
between the two principal ones; and it is at length become difficult
to say which is the best. It is like the houses in Harrowgate, those
who have no objection to noise and mirth go to the Dragon or Granby,
while such as wish comfort and quietness will prefer the Crown.
I am thus particular about the inns, as wishing to make
the most of them, for lam sorry to say you will find no more
throughout the journey.
■ OST TRAVELLERS go to this part of the country by sea, but
"Never go by water when you can go by land", was a favourite
saying of the Romans, and so excellent was the nature and
arrangement of their public roads, in comparison with their coasting
vessels, that we need not be surprised it should have become a
maxim. The Roman despatches were conveyed throughout the Empire with
a celerity superior, if possible, to the mail coach establishment of
Great Britain, and a letter could be conveyed from the wall of
Antonine, near Edinburgh, to the city of Jerusalem, upwards of 400
Roman miles, in twenty days! This splendid road ran as follows
From Edinburgh to York 222 miles
York to London 227
London to Sandwich 67
Sandwich to Bologne 45 ( a ferry)
Bologne to Rbeims 174
Rheims to Lyons 330
Lyons to Milan 334
Milan to Rome 486
Rome to Brundisium 360
Over the ferry to Dyrrachium 40
Thence to Constantinople 711


To Ancyra 283
To Tarsus 301
From Tarsus to Antioch 141
From Antioch to Tyre 252
From Tyre to Jerusalem 168
Total miles 4081.
Every six miles along this immense line there were
erected a guard house and stables; and at every house were kept in
readiness relays of forty horses for the convenience of the public,
and for forwarding the government despatches. Some of the Emperors
fancied they could never eat sea fish, unless they were 500 miles
from the coast; and it was along this magnificent road that the
horse soldiers were seen galloping with a snapper or dish of
anchovies, at the rate of twenty miles an hour, for the Emperor's
dinner, when he was fighting with the Gauls in Upper Germany; and it
was along this road, also, that Generals and Patricians were
frequently told to go to prison; they needed no constables or guards
to escort them safe; it was impossible to escape - every six miles
was a station, and they reported themselves accordingly throughout
the journey.
From the sublime to the ridiculous, they say is but a
step, and as what they call the road to Wollombi is at present the
worst of all possible roads that ever was traced by human foot in
any country on the face of the earth, I could not resist the tempt-
ation of contemplating, by way of contrast, these grand Romans of
old, and their famous roads, many of which I have travelled over, as
good now as they were two thousand years ago! It was these gigantic
undertakings for the public good, employing hundreds of thousands of
men, and giving a rapid circulation to the riches of the Empire,
that called down on many Emperors and Governors, otherwise unworthy,
the never dying praise of the Latin poets.
But to turn from great things to small, the road to the
Wollombi was commenced about two years ago at a place called Pye's
corner, on the Windsor road, about four miles after you leave
Parramatta. It was begun with great spirit, and considering the
limited means at the disposal of the Government, it has been
continued very steadily, up to the present time. The distance from
Pye's to Wiseman's Ferry, on the Hawkesbury, is thirty-four miles,
fourteen of which is already a fine broad avenue through the forest,
cleared and stumped, three and four rods wide, and smooth enough to
drive a coach and four.
At the top of Castle Hill the eye is regaled by one of
the finest views near Sydney. Numerous patches of green wheat
enliven the monotony of an extensively cleared district, while the
old Lunatic Asylum and several cabins of small settlers, with their
stacks and fencing, add a variety and a sort of antiquity to the
place that looks cheerful and happy. The eye of taste cannot help


Parramatta, and the fine view well repays the casual visitor for his
time and trouble.
Riding through the silent and thickly wooded forest of
Dural, the sudden crash of an enormous tree (iron bark) notified our
near approach to the iron gangs making the road. About fifty men,
all with chains around their legs, were employed a little beyond the
huts at the Chain of Ponds, under an overseer from the Prisoners
Barracks - some in falling, some in stumping, some in burning off:
while others, with large handspikes were rolling the trunks of the
prostrate trees to the side of the road It was a black and busy
scene, in the midst of solitude, and reminded one of many a German
legend, and the forest scenes described by the popular writers of
that ingenious and original people The men touched their caps as I
walked my horse past them, and before the clanking noise of their
irons was lost, it became necessary to look for the path and the
marked trees.
The fine broad road of fourteen miles was now finished,
being the produce of two years constant exertion, and there remained
twenty miles through the bush, over a stony and barren ridge to
Wiseman's Ferry. These transitions from a broad road, as smooth as
velvet, to a rugged foot-path, very often hardly perceptible,
scratching your face with the impending boughs, or knocking your
knees against the besetting stumps, afford excellent opportunity for
reflecting on the utility of road gangs, and I was sorry, instead of
fifty, that five hundred men were not employed in [two lines
illegible! present progress of this grand and important Northern
road: and as it is exactly one hundred miles from the huts at Dural
to the Hunter River at Cumnaroy. or, as it is vulgarly called,
Jerry's Plains, I fear it will be, according to this calculation
eight years before the road is finished.
There are three gangs altogether on this road, between
the huts and the ferry but, although their complement is fifty men
in each gang, they are hardly ever complete. While the sentences of
some of the men are daily expiring; others sham sick or run away;
and notwithstanding the constant reinforcement from the different
police offices, it is with the greatest difficulty a gang maintains
a strength of thirty eight or forty men.
The returning to the old system of prisoner overseers,
instead of the privates in the Staff corps or Veterans, has been
attended with great success. Each gang has its overseer; and above
the whole is placed an active and intelligent officer of the
Veterans who acts as Justice of the Peace for the District, but who
is principally employed in keeping in order these twice and thrice
convicted incorrigible offenders
In the most difficult part of the road, and where the
danger of going wrong is greatest, some good Samaritan has nailed a
board to a tree, with these words, "Horse road to Wiseman's", and,
owing to this friendly notice, very probably many have escaped a
night's lodging in the bush. Although on a lofty ridge, the path


continues level all the way to the Hawkesbury, and without the
interruption of a single stream of water; so that the progress of
the road party will not be impeded by bridge-making, in the whole
distance of thirty-six miles.
At Maroota, a district so called by the aboriginal blacks
about four or five miles before you arrive at the Ferry, it has been
proposed to build a township, but this is evidently not the spot
calculated for a town: without as much soil on their sand stone
rocks as would grow a cabbage, no population could be maintained. It
would be no doubt desirable to have a house half-way between Bests
and Wiseman's, to shelter and refresh the weary traveller, but more
than this can hardly be hoped for centuries; and when towns are so
scarce in New South Wales, with all the advantages of secure havens,
fruitful soils, and navigable streams, it cannot be expected that
the barren, elevated rocks of Maroota can ever assume a greater
importance than they enjoy today.
A mile or two from this place, the gentle Hawkesbury
bursts into view, in a deep dell below you, and the descent to
Wiseman's house, by the new zig-zag road, down the ridge, is pictur-
esque and romantic in the extreme. The landscape is complete and
imposing, and would enrich the portfolio of any of our Colonial
artists. I found it was a land of hospitality and abundance, and by
the attentions of mine host of the Ferry, soon forgot the fatigues
of a stupid ride through the bush, of forty miles.
B INHERE CAN hardly be a prettier place than Wiseman's Ferry,
rttJplaced at the confluence of two gentle but navigable streams,
between lofty ridges, whose sterile and frowning
sides offer a fine contrast to the green richness of the cultivated
fields below; this part of the Hawkesbury is particularly elegant.
If the new road had done nothing more than opened out a
communication with this fertile country in the neighbourhood of the
first Branch, it would have been worth all the labour that has been,
and that is intended to be, applied to it. Locked up hitherto from
all access, except by an uncertain sea voyage, or a circuitous route
by Windsor, a letter, even in the unfinished state of the road, may
now be received at the Branch, from Sydney, the same day it is
written. This is a vast improvement gained already to the public.
The abrupt and precipitous termination of the ridge at
Wiseman's presented to the inspector of the roads a very formidable
difficulty, which is now overcome, a zig-zag road having been
quarried out to the bottom, at a very easy descent, evidently the
result of great skill and perseverance on the part of the engineer,
and another gang would enable him to complete all the difficult


The Hawkesbury, at Wiseman's Ferry (engraving from Picturesque Atlas of Australasia,
ed. Andrew Garran)


parts, if not the entire road, as far as the Ferry by Christmas
1828, and, looking to the vast importance of this line of rosd, and
the valuable countries to be connected by it I hope no expense or
exertions will be spared to complete it, as fast as possible. Grass
and water are to be found at very convenient distances for sheep and
cattle, by descending either on the right or left, down the ridge;
and from a useless, barren, stony range thickly beset with scrubs,
and almost impervious to man and beast, this road, if well supplied
with gangs, will be the grandest improvement in the country.
An almost Egyptian fruitfulness is the characteristic of
the River Hawkesbury. An unwearied cropping for forty years has
produced no diminution of fertility in these alluvial edgings along
the banks; and, although you may look in vain for the furnishings
and elegancies frequently to be met with in England in the houses of
men who farm their own estates, the settlers on this celebrated
River seem to enjoy a rough abundance that would put to the blush
many a genteeler district of the Colony; and, what is still more to
their credit, they practice a most praiseworthy hospitality; and the
weary traveller has no sooner got his foot out of the stirrup, in
the huts of the poorest settlers, than the ready rasher or a plate
of sausages, that will some day be as famous as Bologna, are set
before him, unasked, and without an observation.
I confess I have been more suprised and pleased at the
delicacy of many instances of hospitality among the aged Hawkesbury
settlers, where no hope of payment or remuneration could influence
them, and, to a total stranger, than by any thing of the kind, else-
where in New South Wales. Most countries, I believe, are hospitable
in proportion as their situation is remote, but then, their remote-
ness, a common cause of poverty, has nothing to offer, in general,
but the rudest fare, like the goats-milk cheese in the valleys of
the Oberland, or the poor bannock in the Highlands of Scotland. This
is not the case on the Hawkesbury; notwithstanding their remoteness,
they exhibit a profusion in their houses, and in addition to the
usual produce of a farm, many of them [one line illegible; and are]
never without their chest of hyssop tea, and a hogshead of London
porter.
Strange, that with all their means of education, their
families are suffered to remain in the most undeterred ignorance. I
can only speak of some; though it is a lamentable fact, that you may
often find in the families of the Hawkesbury settlers the "maiden of
blushing fifteen" unable to read or write, and when you consider
that they are not untouched virgins, it is the more remarkable, for
they have commonly some portion or other of cattle, houses or land.
An experiment seems to have been recently made here, and
in many parts of the Colony, to diffuse morals and education among
the poorer settlers, by means of a class of well meaning men called
Catechists, who travel from place to place giving exhortations on
the Sundays, in the settlers' barns, and mustering and drilling the
little children on the work days; but I regret to say a manifest
indisposition seems to prevail towards their itinerant labours;


THE ILLUSTRATED SYDNEY NEWS.
[Arim, 16, 1867.
WISEMAN'S FERRY, AT THE JUN[?]TION OF THE HAWKESDURY AND M'DONALD RIVE[?] [S[?]AGE 147.]


neither laymen nor clergymen, the catechists don t seem as yet to
have conciliated the settlers; and as they wear no shirt collars -
comb their hair straight over their forehead - and preach and pray
without a book; they generally preach to empty benches, except
ticket of leave men, who are obliged to attend, or they would lose
their liberty.
When the catechists were first appointed, they were
considered and called "parsons", and the unmarried female farm
servants were generally provided with a partner in the distant
districts, and only waited the arrival of the parson to join hands,
and make them happy:- but when they arrived, and declared themselves
not qualified to perform the marriage ceremony, distrust and disapp-
ointment, among this class, succeded to feelings of anxiety and joy:
and this sort of half and half parson has never since been relished
among them. With the large and increasing revenues of our Australian
hierarchy, no doubt provision will be shortly made for a resident
clergy, who will be graduates, if possible, of one of the English
Universities, and thus diffuse round the circle of their influence a
respectability and example of life and manners highly valuable in
our unformed society, which, like all infant colonies, is most
anomolous and crude.
But this digressing will never do; for, at this rate, we
shall never reach the Wollombi, forty miles; and such a forty miles
is not to be found in New South Wales On a good horse and level
road, we think nothing of forty miles in this Country, and trot it
easily in five hours; but it must be a good horse that will go from
Wiseman's house to Mr Pinch's hut in ten. The road is by no means
easy to find, although the trees are notched all the way, and in
many places you may observe the path for several miles, but as there
is not a vestige of any thing human the whole distance, neither
house nor man, nor animal of any kind to be seen the sensations are
far from agreeable; for, should any accident befall you or your
horse, or unless you push on as fast as possible, you will have to
"bush" it for the night, which in the cold month of August, without
a cloak or the means of obtaining fire, would be no joke on this
lofty ridge.
The punt carries you across from Wiseman's to Hugh
Dogherty s, which offers a very eligible situation for a town on the
northern bank, and where the first branch, as it is called, joins
the main river, which is deep enough to admit a vessel of three
hundred tons to come up from Broken Bay, and lay alongside. It has
been matter of surprise that this fine river should be able to boast
of no town or even village at its mouth. With the exception of the
Po, the estuaries of most rivers in Europe shew some sort of town;
therefore, it is doubly remarkable that a large river like the
Hawkesbury running through a fruitful and populous country, should
not have a town or port in or near Broken Bay.
Many persons will contend that Sydney has been badly
placed, and that it ought to have been built at the mouth of the
Hawkesbury, but I cannot agree with such an opinion, thinking Sydney


could not have been more happily placed, in one of the most splendid
havens in the world. There are many local difficulties in Broken
Bay, in respect to land carriage, not to be found in port Jackson,
and which no doubt influenced the authorities in not selecting the
important harbour for the site of a sea port town
The end of a letter is not the place to begin the desc-
ription of a fine country like the Vale of Wollombi , so I refer you
to my next.
FIVE miles from the ferry of the Hawkesburv, you come to
source of the Wollombi , a very useful though shallow
stream. meandering for a hundred miles through a romantic but
narrow valley, 'till it falls into the Hunter at Cunnaroy. These
thirty five miles resembles the Blue Mountains, in miniature, from
Emu Plains to Collett's Inn. Less bold and lofty, but equally rough
and rocky, this narrow ridge presents a perfect luxuriance of
botanical curiosities; from the vulgar Casuarinas and Hauthorrhoeas,
to a host of the most splendid Banksias, and the smaller species, of
Acacias. But the road is too long and difficult, at present, to
allow of much looking about you.
At the twelve mile hollow a path turns off to the right,
down the ridge, towards Mangrove Creek, and Brisbane Water, on the
sea coast. This hollow is a good place to encamp, there being plenty
of good water and grass; but as the middle of the ridge is the most
difficult, it is more prudent to break the neck of the journey
before you halt by first surmounting the steep declivities of the
Gibba Gunha, which may be considered the colo of this newly
discovered road, and the only embarrassing part which the gangs will
have to encounter throughout the line. It is about thirteen miles in
extent: and would give employment to two hundred men for twelve
months, to make it passable for wheel carriages.
There is no other difficulty worth speaking of; and in
every place abundance of materiel for road making is at band, and
very few trees require cutting down, and those only of small growth
-no swamps -no rivers to cross, or bridges to make; so that when
we consider that this new line is forty-five miles shorter than the
Bulga road, and upwards of thirty shorter than the line first
discovered by Mr. Blaxland, junior, then there can be no room for
hesitation which of the two to choose, and from what is now the
worst road in the colony must, if proper justice is done to it,
become the best, and in a short space of time all travelling to the
North, will be by this new route through Dural and the Wollombi. If
any man be sceptical as to the importance of iron-gangs, let him
travel this wild, solitary and now difficult and dangerous path, and
he will come back convinced.


On a razor-back ridge, averaging eight hundred feet above
the level of the nearest waters, with no trees to interrupt the
view, the horizon is terminated on all sides by very distant hills -
you see yourself in this large space of wild untrodden country, a
weak and solitary being, far from the busy hum of men, and in help-
lessness inferior to the beasts. Before you is the Wollombi range,
on the left the Bulga, to the right the Wyong and Broken-back
Mountains towards the coast, while the traveller pushes on over
rocks and stones, now looking at the sun, to see how the time goes,
and now for his lost track, and for some hours remains the centre of
solitude more striking and complete than even on the road to
Bathurst.
The establishment of iron-gangs was a master stroke of
colonial policy, and deserves for its immense advantages to super-
sede the use of gaols and hulks, and penal settlements. Compare the
squalid, unwholesome, half naked idleness of the inmates of the
Sydney gaol, with the hardy, robust, well fed and well clothed
appearance of the chain gangs, and the contrast is astonishing.
Whilst the one system is the foundation of public wealth, diffusing
and perpetuating security and plenty in a lone and distant wilder-
ness, and doubling the value of every acre of land in the neighbour-
hood of their labours; the other is replete with vice and bad
example, and confirming all the evil habits of laziness and sloth.
The same in the hulk - strapping fellows, six feet high, who would
be well employed in falling trees or splitting rocks, are eating the
bread of idleness, and wearing out their sentences in a listless
monotony, of having nothing to do.
With regard to the other remaining punishment in New
South Wales, called penal settlements, as the opportunity of
visiting them is invariably denied to the inquisitive stranger who
may sojourn a few years away from his native land, in this distant
colony, in order to shorten his road to better fortune (for the
longest way round is often with travellers the shortest way home), T
am at a loss to give an opinion. All, however, concur in this, that
penal settlements are attended with vast expense and trouble to the
government; and, singular to say, one of the greatest difficulties
experienced in the maintaining them is, how to find employment for
the hundreds of men constantly sentenced there by the courts. The
old system which prevailed under Sir Thomas Brisbane's government,
of growing wheat and maize at these establishments, and on sale to
the settlers, on account of the crown, with the view, as it was
said, of paying their expenses, has been wisely and universally
abandoned by the present government, as least as far as
circumstances will admit, and the recent sales of their over-grown
flocks and herds, by public auction, is an earnest how willing they
are to relinquish all sorts of farming and grazing speculations to
private enterprize. The men who have been sentenced, therefore, to
Port Macquarie, and whose terms sre not expired, now find, I have
been told, a profitable employment in catching butterflies, stuffing
regent birds, ducks, moles and flying opossums for the Sydney
market; and, while we settlers are knocking up our horses, and
almost breaking our necks clambering up the rocks of the Wollombi


road, these gentlemen at Port Macquarie, for want of something
better to do, are enjoying themselves in the repose of a luxurious
climate; and, like the French prisoners in England, carving boats,
ships and houses for sale, or arranging their collection of beetles
and animated straws, in neatly glazed boxes, for consignment to
Sydney.
Seven years to an iron-gang, and fourteen years to an
iron-gang; or even, in extreme cases, to be worked in irons for the
term of their natural lives, would be preferable sentences in a
newly settled colony like this, to similar terms of transportation
to penal settlements which appear, from all accounts, only to be
penal in proportion as they withdraw the prisoners from their old
associates, which the system of iron-gangs as well provides for.
The main objection raised against these gangs, is the
facility with which the men effect their escape. No wonder. The
chains in some cases are of such a fashionably light construction,
that Macheath himself would hardly grumble at their weight, and as
one leg is always released from the irons, under the idea that a man
cannot work with both irons on, and often from the humanity of the
overseer both are taken off. Such indulgences as these, which are
frequently repaid with ingratitude and absconding, it would be well
to deal out more sparingly. At Marseilles and Lisbon the prisoners
employed at the public works are heavily ironed on both legs: and
when they are collected together, to return to their sleeping
places, they are marched through the streets of those cities two and
two, with a heavy chain all down the middle, connecting them
together in a solid mass, like the traces of a team of horses.
But enough of a such a painful subject - not such are the
reflexions that in a manner force themselves on the attention of the
traveller as he rides over this unformed road.
As the sun sank beneath the hills, the green valley of
the Wollombi appeared in sight, and in another hour a large fire,
and the barking of innumerable dogs, told me I had arrived at the
end of this day's journey.
SHE TOIL of the journey was now over. From barren rocks and
Ipfty unsheltered solitudes, the path here descends into a
rich and grassy vale, adapted to all the wants and enjoyment
of man'. A white and shining lake points out the source of the
mountain stream Wollombi, which runs its serpentine course of nearly
a hundred miles, till it joins the Hunter at Cumnaroy.
Near this lake, at the head of the valley, is the spot
intended for an inn; and a more romantic situation could not be


selected, nor one more suitable to the convenience of the traveller.
'Twill be the Collett's of the Northern road; and, if the manage-
ment fall into the hands of the liberal proprietor of Wiseman's
ferry, or one of his sons, there is no doubt we shall have one of
the best inns in the country.
The government have very considerately (in one or two
instances) lately remitted the payment of the licence to individuals
establishing inns in remote situations, by way of encouragement to
such undertakings. There is a prevailing want of inns throughout the
settled districts of New South Wales; no doubt attributable to the
difficulty and expense of obtaining licences for the sale of
spirituous liquors. Twenty-five pounds sterling every year, for the
privilege of keeping a public-house, is a large sum, even in the
heart of a crowded sea port town like Sydney; but, a hundred and
fifty, or two hundred miles in the interior, this sum becomes
excessive, on account of the scanty population in those distant
parts. I have often thought that some scale of duty might be devised
proportioned to the value of the house, and the distance from a
market town; and in cases where new houses are built, for the
reception of travellers, more than ten miles from any public-house,
a free licence might be given for three years, with great service to
the public, and without any detriment to the Colonial Fund.
The only house, if house it can be called, at the head of
the Wollombi, is a miserable hut, partly formed of leaves, of bark,
and part of logs, but exposed to every wind from heaven. The night I
arrived there, it was piercingly cold; and although there was a fire
in large enough to roast a sheep, the wind rattled through the
sides of the frail tenement, as if it had been a hen-coop, and in
the middle of the night I discovered that
"The very dogs, instinctively, had left it."
For laying down in the canvas tent, in preference to the thing of
bark, I found myself surrounded by about fourteen or fifteen large
kangaroo dogs, which had been starved out of the hut, and one by one
taken shelter in the tent. 'Twas a wretched night, and but for the
fortunate visitation of these warm bed-fellows, I must have been
almost a mummy by the morning. With nothing but my saddle for my
pillow, and a single blanket for covering, worn thread-bare enough
for a fishing net, I shall long remember this as the coldest night I
have felt in New South Wales.
But joy cometh in the morning; and the welcome sun, which
was, however, a long while rising from behind these lofty hills,
soon dispelled the frosty whiteness on the grass, and then all was
brightness, life and verdure. The happy parrots were hopping from
bough to bough, sporting their green and ruby plumage in the sun,
while the swift and gentle kangaroo was leaping down the mountain
side to take his morning drink in the fresh stream below.
Those who are fond of travelling in the bush of New South
Wales,


"ignotis errare locis, ignota videre
Flumina ,"
would be delighted with the romantic vale of Wollombi• and, in ( a few
years more, when the present wilderness of uncultivated nature is
exchanged for the cheerful pursuits if rural industry, this little
district will be one of the most pleasing in the colony.
'Tis unfortunate that the valley is so narrow; in some
places the mountains recede to a distance of a mile on either side
of the stream; while on others they almost come down to the margin
of the water. Several sections have been already taken, and there is
still room for many more, but grants in this limited country should
not exceed a square mile, or 640 acres at the most, otherwise they
would include too much of the mountain side.
About twelve miles down the valley, there is a fine
opening on the right, which leads through a beautiful country in the
direction of Newcastle, where Mr. Crawford and several other gentle-
men have taken land. Our road lay straight forward, and by two or
three hours' riding, the valley became gradually broader; and,
thirty miles from the foor of the ridge, I had the gratifying sign
of a four-rail fence, and in a few minutes more was inside one of
the most picturesque and comfortable cottages in that country.
The sun had sunk out of sight, behind these Alpine hills,
and, as I had been nearly ten hours riding thirty miles, you may
suppose there are some difficult places in the road. A number of
small tributary streams fall down the hills, and join the Wollombi,
and the stranger who travels this road, for the first time, has some
difficulty to find out the proper crossing places.
As soon as I had seen my horse disposed of in his welcome
stall, my host proposed a walk through his cultivated ground, while
there was yet a few minutes left of twilight, and I was equally
surprised and pleased that a youth, hardly eighteen years of age,
should have displayed so much of perseverance, taste, and judgment,
in the laborious undertaking of a first settlement in the bush. It
has had its reward; and him of whom I used to think,
"Wisdom and truth were all he had,"
I found possessed of houses and lands, horses, sheep, and cattle,
besides a knowledge and sagacity in rural affairs, that would do
credit to maturer years. We returned to the cottage and a blazing
fire; and the preparations for supper convinced me that my young
host, to his other good qualities, added that of knowing how to make
his friends comfortable:
"Oh, Hesperus! thou bringest all good things,
Home to the wesry, to the hungry cheer."
We had an excellent supper, and though the wind rushed through these


lofty hills, at the opening of the Wollombi, with something of its
accustomed violence, we were in a tight little cottage, and enjoyed
our glass of punch, and a few games at backgammon, till it was past
midnight. The morning tints displayed this little Switzerland to
great advantage; hill above hill rose close around us, and the
opening of the valley to the north shewed us the fertile flats of
St. Patrick's Plains, about ten miles distant. What a difference of
country produced by three days' journey from Sydney, viz.
From Sydney to Wiseman's 49 miles
From Wiseman's to the head of the Wollombi 40
From the head of the Wollombi to St. Pat. Plains J>6
1*25
From the barren sands, iron-stone and pipe clay, around
Pert Jackson, to the rich and grassy margins of the Wollombi, and
the still richer alluvions on the banks of the Hunter!
HIS IS the country called by the native blacks Cumnaroy, or in
in their quick mode of pronunciation, Commaroy. It extends
along the main river for twenty-five to thirty miles, from the
mouth of the Wollombi to the mouth of the Goulbum, and contains
about fifty or sixty thousand acres of excellent Tone line illeg-
ible] vulgarly called Jerry's Plains, and the Ttwo words illegible]
Little Flat. The dividing range between the waters that fall into
the Hawkesbury, and those that fall into the Hunter here, abruptly
terminates within three miles of the river forming the Southern
boundary of Cumnaroy. The black precipitous sides of the lofty Bulga
as it is called, present a fine contrast to the green carse below,
generally abounding in rich grass, but now, after a six months'
drought (August) and depasturing two or three thousand head of
cattle, it is for the most part brown and bare, and partakes more of
the character of an extensive stock-yard, that a district justly
celebrated for its rich and abundant pasture.
Two or three small settlers it seems have "sate down", as
the natives term it, on small grants or purchases, not exceeding one
or two hundred acres, amidst the rich and hitherto unoccupied flats
of Cumnaroy, and have been driving a most gainful trade, by taking
in cattle at eight shillings per head per annum; principally
belonging to settlers on the Hawkesbury. One of these individuals, I
was credibly informed, although possessed of only two hundred acres,
was taking charge, as it was called, of twelve hundred head of
horned cattle. The consequence is, that the herds roam about in
every direction in search of grass in these dry seasons, without any
regard to trespassing on their neighbour's lands, and in another


year or two, were this system allowed to continue, the ground would
he so firmly tramped down, as to he incapable of producing any
thing.
'Twas only yesterday, as it were, that this fine district
of the country, called Cumnaroy, attracted notice. For want of
Surveyors the admeasurement of it has not been commenced to this
day, and the first section lines were only drawn within these few
months. To this cause the public and even those in office knew
nothing about it, and thus, perhaps the finest part of the River has
been the last occupied; for it was in vain to think of getting
information on the spot from the interested stock-keepers - they did
not relish the approach of new settlers; but on the contrary, wanted
to hold possession as long as possible; and when the Johnny Newcomes
in search of land began to make enquiries, the common answer was,
"there's no land here, sir: you must not come here; this is my
master's; it extends for some thousand acres up the river, and then
it joins Mr. so-and-so; therefore, you see, every inch is taken all
about here; but there's capital land on the other side of yonder
hills, and none of it taken." Such was the usual story, and being
all considered as Gospel, away rode the new settler in the direction
pointed to, only to hear, perhaps, some other equally "true"
account.
When the additional surveyors arrive, of course, these
difficulties and disappointments in procuring land will not recur.
But, after all, what signifies a little difficulty or a little
disappointment, in comparison of the advantages and absolute value
of obtaining two or three thousand acres in such a country and
climate as this! You are no sooner than thirty or forty miles
distant from the sea coast of New South Wales, than you are in one
of the finest countries in the world, and the ruddy English
complexions of the women and children, stamp the soil and climate at
once as excellent. The yellow bilious looking cheeks of the Canadian
settlers are here unknown, and the fatal extremes of climate at
once, from a furnace to an ice-house, as experienced even in Upper
Canada, are not known in New South Wales.
There, the sound of an axe to cut a hole in the otherwise
impenetrable forest never ceases; and the English settler, on his
little paltry grant of fifty or sixty acres, wears out a life of
hardship and fatigue, in clearing as much land as may suffice to
keep himself and his family in the necessaries of life. It is still
worse in the United States; there you have a fickle and variable
sky, an atmosphere alternately very hot and very cold, very moist
and very dry, very misty and very clear, Bnd a temperature so
changeable, that in the same day, that you will have spring, summer,
autumn and winter; a Norwegian frost, and an African sun! And how is
it at the Cape of Good Hope? In the words of a British officer,
travelling in that country, "at the Cape of Good Hope" says he, "we
are either in an oven, at the funnel of a pair of bellows, or under
a water-spout - and while sometimes it does not rain for thirty-four
months, enough to make a puddle in the road, at other times it has
fallen in such torrents, as to carry off 180,000 sheep, in the


course of six weeks, in one district."
How different the picture in New South Wales! How
superior her mild and Italian climate, her generous soil, her open
healthy downs, and wide spread natural domains! Happy the man who
knows properly to estimate the advantages of an early settlement in
that fine Colony;'who, while enjoying the healthy and secure leisure
of a pastoral life, raises, with small exertion, a certain and
independent fortune for himself and family, and sees every body
around him easy and happy.
Brgfj HE WISDOM of the English government in giving large grants
of land, of two and three hundred acres, to respectable
emigrating to New South Wales, is strikingly
exemplified in the rapid prosperity of the settlements on the
River Hunter. What was five years ago an unknown desert, inhabited
only by a few wandering families of half-starved wretched blacks,
living upon the precarious rats and grubs which nature, "stern
ragged nurse", threw in their way, is now a settlement of English
gentlemen, extending above one hundred miles along the banks of a
beautiful river, occupying nearly ha If-a-mi Hi on acres of land, and
who can reckon among them, a property in houses and improvements,
horses, sheep and cattle, of five hundred thousand pounds,
independent of their land! Such has been the astonishing result of
holding out a liberal inducement to men of respectability and
capital to emigrate to this Colony from Great Britain.
No doubt, a few abuses did occur, and, in many instances,
the grants have been sold, as soon as they were received, for five
shillings an acre. But every thing, however good, is liable to
abuse; and the misfortune is, that the abuses of this system were
too much insisted on, while the good effects which it produced have
been kept a secret. 'Twas reserved for New South Wales, and that too
during the administration of a Governor not at all remarkable for
any other than private virtues, to shew an example of colonization
superior to any thst history can furnish. Unlike the vast
territories that were granted in America, at their first settlement,
to the adventurous and reckless spirits of that age, who settled
with sword in hand, and became frequently either pirates or
buccaneers, and knew no medium between wealth and ruin, the grants
in New South Wales have seldom exceeded three thousand acres. This,
though a speck (only on the map of Australia, is a large piece of
land, sufficient to maintain four or five hundred head of horned
cattle, and certain of raising in five or six years, an independence
for the settler and those that belong to him.
The usual grant of land I have stated as three thousand
acres, but it is seldom so much, hardly ever exceeding four sections


or square miles; which, however, is a larger slice, and would require
a wall or fence ten miles long to enclose it, and would he a very. 1
long walk' between breakfast and dinner. 1 You, who think'it is a good
ride from Hyde Park'corner to Hounslow Heath, may. 1 not be aware that
it is exactly the same distance round each of our farms’ in Hew South
Wales! >
'Tis not the extent alone of these grants but their
extreme beauty and fertility in most of the settled parts of the
Colony.).that constitute their value. 1 At St. 1 Patrick's Plains* about
CumnaroyV and the higher parts of the Hunter, along its banks, the
soil is a rich vegetable mould, from three to twelve feet deep, but
generally averaging three to four feet, and as productive as the
market gardens of Battersea.
Of course, I speak' only of the flats along the water,
which, however, are frequently large pieces of ground, sometimes
being two or three hundred acres on each grant.’ In the rear, the
country every where rises into dry and gently swelling hills, along
the descent of which, you may generally see the sauntering shepherd
with his white sheep roaming before him, nibbling the short grass
and beautiful blue vines and other habaceous plants, with which the
interior of this fine country so plentifully abounds. This man was,
perhaps, a poacher, tried at the York Assizes - transported for
seven years to Hew South Wales, is now as peaceable and good a
subject as his Majesty possesses, and would not return to England if
he could. He touches his hat to you as you go by;' you see by the
state of his apparel and healthy cheeks, that he belongs to a
respectable and good master. You may trust your life with him -. good
treatment and rural pursuits have made him an altered man.
The rich yellow tint upon the grass, and the lengthening
shadows from the handsome apple-trees, remind you the sheep are
returning to their fold. The shepherd stops and tells you that his
number is right, and points out where another flock' is coming over
the hills, and as the tinkling sound of their bells fades upon the
ear, you ride on through your own park- with a glow of satisfaction
at the scene around you, and the constant increase of your flocks
and herds.
In another generation, if not sooner, the Hunter will
most likely be the garden of Hew South Wales. It is exactly in that
parallel of latitude (33 deg.) which Lord Bacon has somewhere
pronounced as combining more natural advantages than Bny other
position on the globe;' for while removed equally from both extremes
of heat and cold, you may here enjoy the fruits of the most opposite
climates, and thus we see in Hew South Wales, what is not met with
in other countries, the raspberry and other berries of the Horth of
Europe, bearing fruit under the shade of a plantain.
But even now, in its comparatively rude state of nature,
the country about the Hunter is every where picturesque and
beautiful. When the road by Wiseman’s is completed, and a bridge is
thrown across the Wollombi, on the road from Patrick's Plains to


Cumnaroy, the two principle obstacles in the way of improvement will
be removed. Nothing can be done without the means of communication. 1
Our progress in prosperity hinges upon our facilities of communic-
ation;' and the three most essential requisites in New South Wales
are roads- roads - roads! As often as our want of rivers is thrown
in our teeth, we should be able to adduce the excellency of our
roadsl 1
IST MUST NOT surprise you that in the perplexing multiplicity of
business, in which our local government is engaged, this
interesting part of New South Wales has been comparatively
51 overlooked. Besides the want of roads and bridges, there is a
universal complaint of the difficulty, not to say impossibility, of
obtaining assigned servants, and the consequence has been, that the
district of the Hunter has been compelled to pay a larger sum in
money wages to free laborers than perhaps all the Colony put
together.
This has prevented many valuable improvements going on in
the upper parts of the river, where the settlers, not having much
rough work* to do in clearing and burning off, are anxious to employ
their time in putting up substantial fences and comfortable houses,
mills, barns and stables. It is enough to put one out of all
patience to read the trashy nonsense given in evidence before the
House of Commons by an individual who has not been in the country
these six years, about the difficulty of finding employment for the
prisoners when they arrive from England! The difficulty of finding
employment! Why it might rather be said that every thing is in this
country at a stand still for want of hands, especially for bricky-
makers, quarriers, carpenters, masons, blacksmiths and wheelwrights.
Population - population is what we want in New South Wales. This
country is no more like what it was six years ago, than the infant
is like the man. Six years, though a short period in an old country,
is almost a generation in a new colony, where the first settlers are
naturally active and impatient, always inclined to anticipate the
future grandeur of their exertions, rather than sit down contentedly
with what they have.’ This is one of the many causes of the rapid
prosperity of our settlements in Australia.
The want of one or two resident surveyors in the upper
and lower districts of the River Hunter, continues to be a serious
inconvenience to those who have land, and those who are in search of
it; but as this is an evil soon likely to be remedied by a consider-
able reinforcement of surveyors from London, it need not be enlarged
upon.
The greatest blemish to the pleasing map of the Hunter is
in those constantly occurring green patches marked C R, or Church


Resterves;. of which ,there are upwards? of forty 1 di3tribated, as? you'
see, up and down this river, none smaller than two thousand acres;
and most of them four thousand acres; each. 1 Thesfe reserves l .are some,
day; or other to he. appropriated to townships, churches; schools;
&C. 1 , Sc.V’hut when is. the often ssked, hut never answered, question. 1
For want of towns, in the interior we have, neither
churches; persons., surgeons; blacksmiths, millers or markets. If you
want to sell your wheat, or buy a handsaw, you must send to Sydney 1 ,
one hundred and fifty miles distant, whereas if townships were
marked out, and building allotments distributed with a judicious
discriminating li be ra li ty. 7 among the settlers; in the district, inns
would be established, countiy. 1 shops opened, and a mutual barter set
on foot between the farmer and the dealer in tea and sugar. Then
would ground, now worth nothing, by the progress of the village, in
time sell, as it already does in Sydney, at ten and twenty guineas
per foot. 7 - Indeed, it has always been considered that countries,
not blest with navigable rivers;, were much more in want of interior
towns than others, which could carry 1 their produce to the coast by
boats.’ A fine country like the Hunter is already worthy of two or
three inland towns, and as settlers like to see as much as possible
done in their own time, and to have a little comfort and repose
after the toil and heat of the day, a wise government could hardly
please the people better than by urging forward the improvements in
the interior as fast as possible.
Although New South Wales is one of the finest and
healthiest climates in the world, many families dislike removing to
their farms; owing to the present difficulty of procuring medical
advice, saying, what should we do if taken suddenly ill, fifty or
sixty miles from any'medical man? - But it is due to this fine
country to say, that such a case as this seldom happens; and a
higher compliment was never paid to any country than the reason
which a very sensible and respectable M. D. once assigned to me for
removing to Bengal, viz;., "that New South Wales was such a healthy
colony that it would starve a Doctor."
I remember reading in London an impudent fabrication,
called as account of Van Diemen '3 Land, in which that island was
called an earthly Paradise, and a good deal more of the same stuff,
for the base purpose, it is believed, of inducing some ten or a
dozen ignorant Johnny Raws in London to pay their passage money to
the author, who was also charterer, and who almost implied that if
they would go in his ship he would make their fortunes in Van
Diemen's Land! Poor Devils! Fortunes, indeed, in Van Diemen's Land?
Look'' at their public newspapers, and in their columns of Fi. Fa.
actions and sales by the Sheriff, and then judge of the prospects
which the settler has offered to him in that colony.
Take at a venture an extract from a paper before me,
called The Colonial Times of 14 Sept. 1827. "Van Diemen's Land is
now completely over-run with stocky which, running without proper
attention, are daily degenerating, inasmuch, as on Tuesday last,
about fifty head of horned cattle were sold by auction at the


average price of thirty shillings per head!"
Take another extract from the Hobart Town Gazette of the
following day, in which the Editor is supposed to be speaking -
"Very good Irish butter may now be had at 2 s. per lb. This is much
cheaper than it can be produced even in the most favourable situat-
ions in this island!" So that this Van Piemen s Land people who have
been described as inhabiting a land flowing with milk and honey, are
recommended to purchase rancid salt butter from Sligo and Cork at
two shillings sterling per lb., being so much cheaper than the
settlers can possibly make it for! This reminds one of an old Irish
woman, well known in Hobart Town, who asked a friend of mine seven
shillings and six pence per pound for fresh butter, and on his
remonstrating with her at the high price, she cut him very short,
and with a profanity something bordering on the ludicrous, assured
him that J s C t himself should not have it at a fathing less!
How different and how superior the present state and
prospects of New South Wales, may be judged by an extract from a
Colonial paper, which I will now give you, of the present week; viz.
The Australian, of Sydney, 10th October 182 17 . "At the Parramatta
fair on Thursday last, Mr. Riley, of Raby, was offered four hundred
and fifty pounds sterling, for ten sheep." This difference in price
is owing to the superior breed and the unlimited pastures of New
South Wales.
But there is no wish in this Colony to provoke a
comparison with Van Diemen's Land, although we certainly desire that
you will not do us the bad compliment to suppose that Van Diemen's
Land and New South Wales are one and the same country. All we say
here, is, "come and see"; and if you succeed in obtaining a grant of
2,560 acres on the banks of the Hunter, or the Manning, or the
Hastings, as you most likely will, you may consider yourself a
fortunate man: fortunate, not because there is a scarcity of fine
land, for there are millions of acres still to give away, but
because you will be in a pleasant and abundant country, with a ready
sale for all you can send to market, and your only care will be the
improvement of the fleece, and your daily occupation
"To see your ewes graze and your lambs suck."
We have already on the River Huntera large number of respectable
resident settlers, with their wives and families and they are daily
increasing, even higher up than Cumnaroy; and I cannot imagine any
manner of life more agreeable to a man of moderation, and with a
well constituted mind, than what is daily exhibited in this favoured
district of New South Wales.
My friend is one instance out of: msny. I found him
in the midst of a small but happy family, surrounded with as many
comforts as a gentleman at home could command with a thousand a
year. He assured me that the only three wise actionsof his life had
been to leave off business - to get married - and to go to his farm
at Hunter's River. Though young in years, he was old in business,


sick of its anxieties and risks, and was on that account determined
to leave off while he was a winner. When he first csme into the
country, he could scarce distinguish barley from oats - had never
shot a bird in his life; and if any body had asked him the
difference between a wether and a ewe, he could not have told him.
Now, he was as wise as his neighbours; and these very pursuits which
formerly were strange and repulsive to him, were now the source of
his constant enjoyment. He had not been in Sydney for months; her
crowded and dusty streets were his aversion - so that he got his
letters and his "Australians" pretty regularly, he did not take much
interest beyond the country.
"Oh! let me still with simple nature live,
My lowly field-flowers on her altar lay,
Enjoy the blessings that she meant to give,
And calmly waste my inoffensive day!
But for the news of the change in the English ministry
and the intense interest excited by the newspapers, announcing Mr.
Canning's elevation to the Premiership, which arrived as our horses
were brought out, my friend had promised to call on some neighbour-
ing settlers, saying that very likely in our ride we might kill a
kangaroo. But I was quite well pleased to stop at home, particularly
as on the morrow I had to take leave, and a long journey homewards,
neither of them at that time particularly pleasant.
Since the introduction of the Saxon sheep at the settle-
ments on the Hunter, the flocks belonging to the numerous settlers
are fast improving in the quality of their wool; the cattle also are
becoming every year more and more like the English breed. It has
been up hill work for many of the settlers as yet; but the increase
of stock is so prodigious, that another year or two will repay them
for all their labours and expense.
I must not omit to mention that one of the most striking
peculiarities of the settlements on the Hunter, is the sad
deficiency of female population - you hardly see any women or
children. If the English government would remedy this, by sending
out even one thousand families, it would soon make wonderful change
for the better in the complexion of this country. This horrible
disproportion between the sexes, is the very worst thing its enemies
can say of New South Wales. To see a great strapping bog-trotter,
upwards of six feet high, from Drogheda or Kilkenny, making your bed
or squeezing the butter in your dairy, are oddest sights, and such
as custom itself can never reconcile. Rather than these, we would
prefer the very sweepings of Fleet street or Essex-bridge.
The journey was now over; after a six hours' sail, in one
of the old Brighton and Dieppe packets, that is now, they say,
coining money on the coast of New South Wales, I was landed, after
eleven days absence, in the red streets of Sydney.






Extract from:
MINES, WINES
AND PEOPLE
A History of Greater Cessnock
by
W.S. PARKES, JIM COMERFORD, DR. MAX LAKE


3
Landholders on South Arm of
Wollombi Brook
i
Oxonian in the Wilderness: Heneage Finch
HENEAGE FINCH, son of the Hon. E. Finch. Vice-Admiral, R.N.,
and grandson of the Earl of Winchelsea, might have spent his young
manhood upon a circuit of country mansions and London town-houses and
Continental watering-places. He chose instead to devote his life to the public
service in the wilderness of New South Wales and became one of the earliest
settlers in Greater Cessnock. On coming down from Oxford, with a Master of
Arts degree in mathematics, he completed a course of instruction under an
eminent surveyor and obtained from Earl Bathurst, Secretary' of State for the
Colonies, an appointment as assistant to Surveyor-General John Oxley in
New South Wales with a salary of £250 a year; accompanied by his wife,
Eliza, he arrived at Sydney in 1824 in the ship Grenada.
As an earnest of his devotion to the public service, he completed tasks on
the Wollombi and in adjacent areas with diligence and precision, locating and
measuring settlers’ farms and traversing and mapping ridges and streams;
under canvas at his base on the Wollombi, he prepared literate and
deferential reports, all in a comely round-hand style.
By way of official approbation, Heneage Finch, then twenty-three,
received instructions in 1825 to find a line of road for wheeled traffic which
should connect Hunter’s River with Sydney more directly than two perilous
bridle tracks, each crossing the Hawkesbury at Windsor, too far upstream
and too far to the west: the first of these, built by convicts along John Howe’s
line of 1819-1820, passed through the Bulga to Patrick’s Plains on Hunter’s
River; the second, beaten by hooves and boots along John Marquet
Blaxland’s line, passed down the left bank of the Hawkesbury before turning
north through the valley of the Lower Branch (or Macdonald River).
From Castle Hill, on the road from Sydney to Windsor, Heneage Finch
headed North across a narrow ridge and halted on the heights overlooking


Solomon Wiseman’s on the right bank of the Hawkesbury River: this should
be his crossing place. Before him he saw the escarpment of the great central
barrier, ‘the blue mountains’, the range dividing the valleys of the Hawkes-
bury and Hunter’s River, rising sheer above the left bank; and, a little
upstream, the entrance to the valley of the Lower Branch (or Macdonald
River). Though Blaxland’s beaten bridle track passed through this valley,
Finch had no desire to follow or amend it; for although it later earned for
Blaxland a grant of 1000 acres, it persisted too long against the grain of close
contour-lines and too far west of the valley of the Wollombi before swinging
east to the site of Laguna and descending to Milbrodale, where it connected
with Howe’s bridle track through the Bulga.
Seemingly taking advantage of the local knowledge of R. A. Wiseman, son
of Solomon Wiseman, who had already pointed out to Surveyor-General
Oxley a line of road to Hunter’s River (for which he later received a grant of
640 acres), Finch chose to scale the escarpment of the central barrier. From
Wiseman’s, then, Heneage Finch and party swam their horses, one of which
drowned, directly across the Hawkesbury. Moving downstream a mile or two
in search of a suitable gradient, Finch began the ascent and arrived at a


pleasant glade, Twelve Mile Hollow, on the summit. Seemingly taking
further advantage of the local knowledge of R.A. Wiseman, who, then or
later, had land near by at Frog Hollow, Finch headed north across the Judge
Dowling Range, with the Lower Branch (or Macdonald River) on his left and
Mangrove Creek on his right, and passed through the sites of Hungry Flat and
Dennis’s Dog Kennel. Twenty-three miles out of Wiseman’s, he stood upon a
northern edge of the central barrier and there gazed down into the headwaters
of the South Arm of Wollombi Brook. Descending to the meeting of the
waters at the site of Wollombi, he turned up the North Arm of Wollombi
Brook, passed through the sites of Millfield, Campbell’s Cessnock, Native
Dog Hill (Sawyer’s Gully), Bishop’s Bridge, and Stony Creek (Farleigh),
and halted at Maitland, about 126 miles out of Castle Hill. From Maitland he
continued downstream and arrived at Newcastle on 23 December 1825.
FROM THIS ELEGANT PIECE of exploration Finch returned to field
work. In his field book of 1826 he tabulated a ‘Traverse of Wollombi Brook &
adjacent country South of Hunter River’. Among pen-and-ink sketches he
wrote the word, Tomalpin. In the meantime, his discovery of a new line of
road inspired settlers at Wallis Plains to renew their agitations for the
building of a cart road.
A copy of a Memorial from the settlers of Hunter River requesting that
a suitable line be opened from Sydney was transmitted to Captain
Dumaresq by the Colonial Secretary on April 18, 1826. and that
officer was asked to give his immediate attention to the making of this
line of road, “which is now become of great importance”. Little time
was lost by Captain Dumaresq in giving effect to this instruction, and
work was commenced on it late in May, 1826.
Heneage Finch must have been gratified by the initiative of Solomon
Wiseman, who at once eliminated one of the main difficulties in his line of
road by installing a punt, large enough to carry thirty head of cattle across the
Hawkesbury River at the chosen crossing place.
He must have been even more gratified by the decision that hundreds of
convicts should commence the building of his Great Northern Road, one lot
of gangs working out of Castle Hill towards his chosen crossing place and
another out of Newcastle towards the Wollombi, the evident intention being
that they should meet on the central barrier, ‘the blue mountains’ or dividing
range. Omitting convict overseers, the government in 1828 had 502 convicts
at work on the Great Northern Road: 3 83 of these ‘Double distilled Villains’
(or secondary offenders) worked out of Castle Hill in seven road parties and
iron gangs, and 119 worked out of Newcastle, one of two road parties or iron
gangs being stationed between Newcastle and Wallis Plains and the other
between Wallis Plains and the Wollombi. For the superintendence of the
‘Double distilled Villains’ working out of Castle Hill, Governor Darling had
appointed a subaltern officer as assistant road-surveyor, and for those
working out of Newcastle and Wallis Plains, a probationary assistant road-


surveyor, one, Mr Patrick Campbell, responsible in the first instance to
surveyor Heneage Finch.
Finch knew that gangs on his Great Northern Road must find the going
hardest when cutting the ascents to the central barrier, from the Wollombi
and the Hawkesbury sides alike.
In 1828, when gangs working out of Castle Hill completed the zig-zag
descent to Wiseman’s, he rode down from the Wollombi to find an easier
ascent of the Hawkesbury side of the central barrier. Reporting to the late
Surveyor-General John Oxley’s successor, Major Thomas Livingstone
Mitchell, who had served in the 48th Regiment of Foot, he stated that he had
found a ridge upstream near the mouth of the Lower Branch (or Macdonald
River) by which the road builders might effect a saving of two miles in the
distance to the summit (which led to the re-naming of Twelve Mile Hollow as
Ten Mile Hollow).
Finch must have been astounded when the government, seeking an
assistant road-surveyor who should supervise the cutting of his amended line
of ascent, which required the erection of an immense and complicated system
of buttressed dry-wall masonry, and culverts, and gutters picked out of solid
rock, selected Lieutenant Percy Simpson, then in retirement as a settler at
Cooranbong. Finch had reason to distrust the lieutenant, who, though lacking
professional qualifications, had recently drawn attention to himself by
contending that the Great Northern Road should deviate from Finch’s line by
passing generally north-east from Twelve Mile Hollow to Maitland by way of
Mangrove Creek, Cooranbong, the gap in the Myall Range, and the valley of
Mulbring or Wallis Creek: this line, recently discovered by John McDonald,
a convict servant of Robert Crawford of Ella-long, had been rejected by the
government in favour of the retention of Finch’s line by way of the site of
Wollombi; from whence, the government argued, a branch through the site of
Broke might afford access to the upper reaches of Hunter’s River and the
grasslands of the Liverpool Plains. Any fears which Heneage Finch had that
Lieutenant Percy Simpson might botch his Great Northern Road proved
groundless: Simpson proved to be a superb practical engineer.
FOR THE CUTTING of the ascent on the Wollombi side of the central
barrier Heneage Finch himself, though continuing to stand by for field work,
became directly responsible in 1830, by which time Mr Campbell had
extended the Great Northern Road from Maitland into the Wollombi.
Finch’s work force comprised 27 Road Party, 29 Road Party, 42 Road Party
and 7 Iron Gang, each of fifty or sixty convicts, a bridge party, and sundry
mechanics such as blacksmiths, carpenters and sawyers: perhaps 300 men in
all.
To sustain his ‘Double distilled Villains’ Heneage Finch required an
overseer in each gang to adhere to messing regulations:
He will himself in the presence of the Men see the Meals, when cooked,
fairly divided amongst them, the Maize and the Sugar of the Ration of
each Man to be cooked in a quart of water and to be put out to boil at 10


o’clock on the Evening before it is required for breakfast, in order to
allow of the Maize Meal being perfectly boiled. The remainder of the
rations, viz., 1 lb of Meat, 1 lb. of Flour, 1 Vi oz. of Salt to be cooked for
dinner, a portion of which each Man should be taught to reserve to
afford him a supper.
This daily sustenance slightly exceeded the amount allowed to soldier-
settlers on the Wollombi (and greatly exceeded the amount allowed a century
later to unemployed men throughout Greater Cessnock).
For the sake of the health of his ‘Double distilled Villains’, Heneage Finch,
transmitting Mr Campbell’s requisition for stores, increased the number of
blankets: he had examined those in use and found them so worn and thin as to
be of little use.
I beg to add that the situation where the men are to be employed chiefly
in the vallies of the Wollumbai exposed them more than any other in
this part of the Colony, to a cold and damp atmosphere.
While desiring that his ‘Double distilled Villains’ should be properly clad,
Heneage Finch deplored the fact that in order to receive their new clothing
issue they must march out of the Wollombi to Maitland and there be mustered
before a magistrate.
You can easily conceive the disorder and confusion occasioned by the
several bodies from travelling together a distance of forty miles which
are heightened to the extreme by the whole of the overseers getting
more or less intoxicated on their arrival. If this could be dispensed with
or if a magistrate could be requested to meet them many ill effects might
be avoided.
For the hobbling of members of his 7 Iron Gang (which had for one of its
overseers the convict, John McDougall), Finch depended upon the wisdom
of Mr Du'maresq, formerly Inspector of Roads and Bridges, who,
finding that the irons, which are brought from England, were from thin
construction easily got off... ordered deep basils to be made of flat
iron, and the iron to be of three sizes, varying from about six to nine
pounds ...
BY SEPTEMBER 1830 Finch’s men had cleared the line of the six-mile
ascent from Murray’s Run to Bucketty and a further six miles across the
central barrier to Dennis’s Dog Kennel. Seemingly at Ramsay’s Leap (or the
Convict Drinking Trough), where the road hung on the side of a precipice, the
men had increased the prescribed breadth of the road to fifteen feet. Finch
and his convict road-workers had accomplished this work with inadequate
equipment, materials and manpower.




