

r ihG (
ft&’b /
VOYAGE
MADRAS TO SWAN RIVER, KING
GEORGE’S SOUND,
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
LIEUT. COL. HANSON,
QUARTER MASTER GENERAL OF THE MADRAS ARMY.
PRINTED BY G. W. AND J. RUSSELL, STATIONERS,
BOOKSELLERS, AND BINDERS.




Madras, 25 th July, 1832.
My Dear
The following Letter was written to my friend Capt.
Butterwortii, after I had sailed from Hobart Town,
on my return to India. I had made no notes whatever, to
guide me in my statements, but trusted simply to memory,
when I endeavoured to describe to him, the countries I
had visited. On reaching Madras, I found the subject of
emigration, to be one of deep and increasing interest, and
I was so generally requested by my friends to shew any
Journal, I might have written, that I at length determined
to meet their wishes, and at once save myself from further
“cross questioning," by printing this Letter, and distri-
buting it among my personal associates.
It would be~the height of absurdity, if I were to de-
precate the censure of those persons, who may receive a
copy of the communication, or solicit them to excuse any
errors of style, composition, fyc. fyc. The Letter whether
it be silly or useful, I intend solely for the benefit of
those friends, who think of going South instead of North
when they retire from the Service. I have merely printed
it, because I find it more convenient to do so, than to
circulate so many copies in Manuscript, and for my part,
I cannot understand why a Printer's devil, should alter
the character of the production in any way, and render
that public, which I maintain to be as private, as any
other private Letter in your possession. Be that as it
may, however I hope most sincerely, that no part of the
communication (if they do chance to see it) will give
offence to my Friends in the Southern Hemisphere. You


have asked 'me for truth, and I give it to you to the best
of my conscience and ability. There are many however,
particularly in Tasmania, who may consider me prejudiced
when I attempt to describe the state of their Society; they
should remember however, that the mind of a stranger is
prone to correct observation, and that I have no object in
the estimate 1 have endeavoured to form, of their present
condition, beyond that of speaking the truth, to those
numerous Friends in India, who have been listening to
exaggerated statements of Tasmanian hospitality, and the
comforts __ of a Hobart Town fire side.
My worthy friends of the Swan, can never be forgot-
ten. The [kindness and attention I experienced there,
during my sojourn amongst them (to use the favorite
expression of a friend of mine) “will ever retain upon
myjnind, the vivacity and freshness of recent events” ; and
if ever you should contemplate a similar voyage, I hope
you will be as fortunate in the ship that conveys you, and
as happy'jwith your friends, as I was during my passage
to Swan. I hope you will be blessed with such a
craft as the Cruizer, and the society of so excellent, so
experienced, and so warm hearted a Commander, as my
friend Captain Parker of the Navy.
I remain,


On board the Lord Lyndork,
At sea, January, 9, 1832.
My Dear Butterworth,
The climate of Swan River, in the winter
season, is as favourable to health as can well be
imagined. lam told, however, that the heat of
summer is nearly equal to the heat of India;
and, though less debilitating to the constitution,
it is frequently very oppressive. The great
drawback to this settlement is the present intri-
cate navigation into the harbour. Reefs of rocks
extend seaward from Rottenest Island, Pulo,
Carnac, &c. &c. ; and, although there is a safe
channel into Cockburn’s Sound, yet the passage
requires a pilot; and, in the event of a westerly
gale, the ship would be obliged to beat off a
dead lee shore. For the six summer months,
however, from October until April, there is no
difficulty of access whatever. Land and sea
breezes prevail regularly during this season;
and Gage’s Roads, though open to north-west
winds, affords a safe and secure anchorage.—
The town of Freemantle is yet in its infancy.
The site is chosen on the south bank of the Swan
River, which here disembogues itself into the
sea. There is a troublesome bar at its entrance,
requiring skill and attention to cross ; but there
is a thoroughly sheltered bay in its immediate


vicinity, where all passengers should land in the
first instance, and take a favourable opportunity
W sending their loaded boats into the river.
The first impression of a stranger is certainly
unfavourable; he sees nothing but an apparently
poor soil, upon which the town of Freemantle
is building; and until he is shown the actual
produce of “ Mother Earth,” it will be difficult
him to imagine that it is capable of giving
any sort of vegetation. When he does see,
however, that this apparent sand produces the
finest vegetables in the world, he cannot permit
himself to remain any longer in doubt. There
was an excellent little inn established when I
was there, the “ Stirling Arms,” at which the
comforts were fair, and the charges moderate.
Several good stone and brick houses were in
progress, the property of respectable settlers;
and, indeed, all classes seemed to be governed
by the same praiseworthy spirit of industry and
good feeling towards each other. The distance
by water from Freemantle to Perth, I should
calculate to be about twelve miles ; but the land
road is much shorter, and upon it, half way,
there is an inn, at which the traveller can obtain
refreshment.
The town of Perth is at present the capital of
the colony, and the site of it is well chosen ; it
is situated on the north bank of the Swan River,
having a picturesque little mountain at its western
extremity, named Mount Eliza, upon which, at
some future period, it is proposed to build a


government house. I may say that the society
of the place is hospitably personified; for though
their means are somewhat limited, yet they share
them with the kindest “good will.” Stone
and brick houses are here also in rapid progress;
one of the latter, the property of Captain Irwine,
the Commandant, was nearly finished when I
came away, and a most excellent house, I am
certain, it will prove to be. Stock of all kinds
thrive and multiply at a prodigious ratio.
Poultry is becoming very abundant, and pigs
were running wild in the jungle. Goats would
appear to like the climate vastly, for they are so
exceedingly prolific, that they seldom produce
less than three at a birth. The materials for
building are excellent. Capital bricks are made
at Perth, and the lime-stone is of the first quality.
There is also a quarry of free-stone at Mount
Eliza, from which an industrious settler, Mr.
Jaikes, had nearly completed an excellent cot-
tage on the face of the hill, where he
was rearing vines, with every prospect of success.
The Canning river joins the Swan immediately
below Perth, and I regret much that I did not
visit the locations there. At a short distance
above the town, there are shoals in the river,
called “ The Flats,” over which a loaded boat
would have difficulty to pass, except at high
water. I crossed my gig, however, at all periods
of the tide, the crew merely shoving her over
the sand for a distance of about one hundred
yards. From the vicinity of the Flats, a canal


has been constructed by the civil architect, Mr.
Rively ; and, if it succeeds, it will be a work of
vast importance, as it cuts off, I believe, nearly
three miles of water carriage, by the regular
course of the river.
I write from memory ; but I think the first
thriving farm on the north bank, above Perth, is
called the “ Yorkshire Farm,” from a number
of agriculturists, natives of that country in Eng-
land, having congregated there, though I believe
each man’s property is separate and distinct.
Here the soil may be said to assume quite a new
character. The sand, so much complained of
by a parcel of prejudiced visitors, is but partially
seen; and there were certainly as fine crops of
wheat and other grain in the ground when I was
there, as could be found in any part of the world.
Proceeding up the river, you arrive at Captain
Byrne’s, Mr. Brown’s, Captain Currie’s, of the
navy, Mr. Drummond’s, and various other pro-
perties below Guildford.
I regret to say that the names of the numerous
proprietors have escaped my memory ; but this
I can say with perfect confidence, that they are
all of them happy and flourishing, notwith-
standing the squibs you have heard in India
respecting their destitute condition, &c. &c.
Currie’s place does him the greatest credit, —
his garden is full of the very finest vegetables,
and he has built a most comfortable little brick
house, where I was much indebted both to Mrs.
Currie and himself, for comfort, kindness, and


hospitality, during my various voyages up and
down the river. The township of Guildford,
on the south bank, is fast assuming a very re-
spectable appearance. The Governor has built
a little cottage ornee in its immediate vicinity,
and it is difficult to imagine a more beautiful
situation.
The house is considerably elevated above the
general level of the country. The site is chosen
at a turn of the river, commanding a view along
two extensive reaches, and the land in front of
it being all meadow land, very beautifully
studded with forest trees, you may, without
much effort of imagination, conceive yourself
placed in the midst of a gentleman’s park at
home.
The breed of horned cattle introduced into
the colony is, lam told, very valuable. I con-
fess myself to be ignorant upon this subject;
but the sixty head I saw at the Governor’s farm
appeared to me splendid animals. The horses
imported are also of the finest blood. Mr.
Henty has one, an entire horse, which he values,
and, I am told, with good reason, at £ ISOO.
In, fact, I may say, that every branch of the
breeding department is thriving wonderfully.
Ido not like to enter into particulars, lest my
lady friends should be shocked. A splendid
farm adjoins the Governor’s estate, the property
of Sir James Home; and the land, as I pro-
ceeded up the river, was as fine as any land in
the world. 1 not only speak from my own ob-


servation, but I speak from the testimony of a
first-rate gentleman farmer, Mr. Brockman,
whose produce this year will fully justify the
praise I am bestowing upon it. His fields of
wheat, and, indeed, grain of every description,
were as rich and productive as in any part of
the world ; and both the mutton and beef from
his estate were equal, in my opinion, to well fed
meat in England.
Captain Irwine possesses a location still higher
on the Swan, which, for variety and beauty of
prospect, surpasses every thing I saw below it;
but Mr. Brown, the Colonial Secretary, who is
the most distant settler, from being nearer the
mountains, will, I think, by and by have more
capability at his command, particularly if he
could conjure up his namesake, “Capability
Brown,” to assist him in beautifying his pro-
perty.
I made an excursion to the Upper Swan, as it
is called, with my friend, Mr. Shole, and I had
great pleasure in visiting every family on each
side of the river, by whom I was received with
the most kind and unbounded hospitality. Never
shall I forget Mrs. Brockman’s most delicious
breakfast, so worthy of an English farm, and
so peculiarly acceptable after a night’s noisy
bivouac, amongst a set of most excellent but
very jovial fellows , I was also fortunate
enough to meet in Mrs. Tanner, the sister of
two of my Indian friends; and I had the
pleasure of rejoicing her by very late and


satisfactory accounts, of both her brothers at
Madras.
We pursued our journey about six miles
beyond the most distant farm, —that of Mr.
Brown, already mentioned, until we reached the
foot of the Darlings range of mountains, having
passed over three or four miles of extensive
meadoAv land, covered with the richest grass,
and with scarcely a single tree to interrupt the
prospect.
The pasture upon Mr. Brown’s property is so
exceedingly rich, that I am told his flocks were,
many of them, getting blind from sheer fatness ;
and I beg it to be understood that, in stating this
fact, I am stating nothing very marvellous, as
such is the common result of overfeeding, and
I can safely declare that, in my life, I never
tasted finer mutton than was produced from his
grass.
The natives of the country offer the only
interruption to the settlers’ perfect comfort, and
they certainly have, in many instances, proved
themselves exceedingly treacherous. Before,
however, they are wholly condemned, for what
may appear to us a vindictive and revengeful
character, it should be stated that the better
part of society are ignorant what provocation
these poor wretches receive. The lower orders
on the Swan hold the life of a native at no value,
and there was young man, the son of a gentle-
man, who shocked me, by saying that he had
been out all the morning, and had had but one


shot at a Black ! ! Governor Stirling is exerting
every power he possesses to correct this evil;
but the Governor cannot be every where, and
when these poor devils find that they are shot
like wild beasts, it is natural to suppose that
human beings, in so savage a state, will seek
for some means of gratifying their revenge.
Their ideas upon this subject are very peculiar;
they attach criminality, generally, to the place
where the injury has been received, and not to
the individual who has inflicted it. This ren-
ders the atonement more distressing; for they
watch near the spot like a cat for its prey, and
the first person who may appear, is quite certain
of being assaulted ; they throw one or two
spears, and whether they kill, wound, or even
miss their object, I am told they consider the
atonement sufficient, as I hear it has been satis-
factorily proved that they seldom attempt any
further violence.
Their idea of personal property must be also
founded on very savage notions. They naturally
consider us to be foreign intruders; and when
they see their kangaroos, upon which they
chiefly depend for food, destroyed by our people,
it will be difficult to imagine that the crime of
helping themselves to a little of our kangaroo
(mutton) can be considered by them a very
heinous offence. They would certainly appear
to have some redeeming qualities, in situations
where they have not been treated with unkind-
ness. They are sad thieves, though, and cannot


be trusted within arras length of food. Their
tribes, however, have been frequently met by
our gentlemen, singly in the jungle, and upon
these occasions they have been invariably civil
and good natured. Two of the most eminent
explorers in the country had but recently re-
turned from a very interesting excursion into
the interior, to trace the course of a river beyond
the Darling range of mountains, and these gen-
tlemen, Mr. Moore and Ensign Dale, informed
me that they were twice in the power of con-
siderable tribes, and that once they even slept
together on the same spot, without the slightest
appearance of hostility having been evinced.
On the contrary, they were extremely kind and
good natured, and after having been together for
twenty-four hours, they parted the very best of
friends.
It is difficult to imagine any race of savages
more degraded in the scale of humanity, than
the wretched aborigines of Australia ; they are
hardly one remove from the brute creation, and
appear to be totally destitute of any sort of fixed
habitation. They live in tribes, and wander
about the jungles in search of food, the supply
of which, it may be easily imagined, is both
scanty and precarious. The only skill they dis-
play is in throwing their spears, and this they
certainly do with surprising precision, hitting a
very small object at the distance of eighty or a
hundred yards. With this weapon they spear
fish and kangaroos; but snakes, lizards, and


indeed every sort of reptile, is relished by them
as excellent food ; and when they fail to obtain
this disgusting species of nourishment, they sub-
sist on a sort of bulbous root, which is abundant
in the forests, and which they find a tolerable
substitute for keeping life and soul together.
They are perfectly naked, and exhibit the most
emaciated and skeleton-like appearance. Their
speed and agility are very surprising ; they
mount like monkies to the tops of the highest
trees, with no other assistance than that which
they derive from small notches, cut as they
ascend, with a rude stone hatchet, barely deep
enough to admit the points of their toes. The
difficulty of either learning their language, or
of teaching them ours, is very considerable, and
this difficulty arises out of a cause that is nearly
ludicrous. Their powers of imitation are very
extraordinary, and whatever question you ad-
dress to them, they immediately repeat. If you
say to them, “ What’s the name of this ?” they
instantly reply, “ What’s a name ais ? If you
repeat your inquiry, and hold up the article for
inspection, they continue to echo every word
you say, until you are literally driven out of all
patience. They appear to have no system of
religion whatever, though they are certainly
very superstitious, and betray great reluctance
to separate from their tribe during the night
time. As well as I could understand from the
natives of King George’s Sound, they think
they are haunted by the ghosts of the dead.


Mr. Dale discovered something like a religious
symbol during one of his excursions into the
interior ; but this was the only instance of the
kind that came to my knowledge during my
stay in Australia; he described an extremely
rude figure of the sun, which was cut in the
rocky part of a cave, I think somewhere near
the town of York. Like all savages, they are
much addicted to theft, and appear to have no
sense of gratitude for any favours that may be
conferred upon them. Captain Irwine, who
commands the detachment, endeavoured all in
his power to attach them to his soldiers, from a
sense of obligation; he fed them liberally from
his stores, and treated them with all possible
kindness ; but the nature of the animal defeated
all his exertions, and they were at length dis-
missed, after repeated robberies. Though ap-
parently deficient in general intellect, they are
certainly blessed with abundance of cunning;
they have become thoroughly acquainted with
the nature of our fire arms, and fully understand
that the piece must be reloaded before it can do
them a second injury. When they deliver their
spear, they endeavour to distract your attention
from themselves, generally, by calling out,
“ Kangaroo,” and then it is melancholy to say,
how frequently they succeed in slaying their
victinis. The men who are most exposed to
injury, are shepherds attending their flocks, as
they are necessarily alone ; and since the savages
have tasted our mutton, they are on the constant


look out for stray sheep. On the first formation
of the colony, they were much alarmed at our
dogs ; but though they still hold them in great
respect, they are not so terrified at them as for-
merly. If a shepherd were to wear a sort of
defensive armour, such as a plate of tin, fashioned
to the shape of his body, I am quite sure their
spears would not penetrate the metal; and if
they once they found this shield was impervious,
they would become less daring in their attacks
upon property.
Providence appears to have decreed that they
shall gradually exterminate each other ; for they
invariably destroy some individual of a neigh-
bouring tribe whenever a member of their own
has paid the debt of nature: this practice will,
of course, double their bills of mortality. They
bury their dead, I understand, in a sort of sitting
posture ; and I am told they hold the graves of
their friends in the greatest veneration.
The town of York was established whilst I
was at Perth, —a township upon the banks of
a river beyond the Darling range, (which, by
the way, I have just mentioned as the scene of
Mr. Moore’s and Mr. Dale’s excursions). I
could give you a sketch of its position relatively
with the low country; but it would be unbe-
coming in me to trench, in the slightest degree,
upon the province of Mr. Rowe, the
General. He is well known to the public as
the very able assistant of Captain King, the
Australian Maritime Surveyor; and he will, I


trust, shortly give the world a general map of
this very interesting colony.
This said town of York was thriving fast
when I came away ; the communication had
been thoroughly established ; and a very in-
teresting lady, Mrs. Byrne, was on the point
of starting with her husband and young child,
to share the fortunes of the first settlers. A
road was also - projected between the Swan
River and King George’s Sound, the latter place
having been abandoned as a penal settlement,
and attached to the government of Western
Australia.
A most difficult and enterprising journey had
been accomplished a short time before I arrived,
between the Swan River and King George’s
Sound ; it Avas conducted by Captain Bannister,
late of his Majesty’s service, and a feAV other
fearless individuals Avho accompanied him. The
distance betAveen the tAvo places, as the cvoav
flies, is about 250 miles; but as they had no
other guide than a compass, and no correct
means of ascertaining their situation, by astro-
nomical observations, they unhappily deviated
from the straight route, and when it is remem-
bered Avhat mountains and forests they had to
traverse on their journey, it cannot be matter of
astonishment to find that they reached the south
coast of New Holland, eighty miles to the Avest-
Avard of their destination. Their cattle all died
from fatigue; and they Avere themselves reduced
to subsist entirely on shell-fish, picked up from


the rocks. Happily they fell in with a tribe
of good, humane natives from King George’s
Sound, by whom they were generously suc-
coured, and conducted, at length, to the end of
their eventful and enterprising journey,—worn
down to the last extremity, poor fellows, by
famine, fatigue, and all their concomitant evils.
Bannister, however, is now as fresh as ever;
and perfectly ready to start upon a second ex-
cursion of the same nature. He has written a
very interesting account of his journey ; and he
describes the country generally which he passed
over, as equal in beauty and fertility to any
country in the world.
A fishing establishment has been formed at
Rottenest Island, which promises to furnish an
excellent article for exportation. The snapper,
a fish about the size of a cod, is caught in great
abundance upon the coast; and, when cured,
is, I think, equal to any salt fish I ever tasted.
The salmon is also an excellent fish for the same
purpose, which is, I believe, caught in the Swan
River.
A small dock-yard near Perth is also giving
proofs of maritime science, under the auspices
of Governor Stirling. Two vessels are now on
the stocks, one of them, I believe, is private
property ; but the other, of about fifty tons bur-
then, is intended as a government schooner, to
ply between the capital and the minor settle-
ments on the coast.
I attended the second or third market day


after my arrival at Perth, and bought fine fresh
butter for 4s. 6c?. a pound ; potatoes for 9c?.,
and vegetables at the same scale of price. In
short, during my stay there for two months, I
neither heard or dreamt of any want; and I
will appeal to those friends who occasionally
breakfasted with me, whether I had not on my
table as excellent a meal as they would wish to
sit down to. I cannot speak of my dinners, as
my friends were too hospitable, ever to permit of
my dining at home.
Whilst writing on the subject of supplies, I
could wish that you had seen an entertainment,
given by the Governor, to the ladies and gentle-
men of the colony. I think you would have
acknowledged that the whole affair would have
done credit to any part of the world. We
quadrilled and waltzed until midnight, sat down
to a sumptuous supper, laid out for a hundred
and fifty people, returned to the dance, enlivened
by champagne, and separated only when the
rising sun began to smile upon our orgies.
Both a Literary and Agricultural Society have
been formed at Perth. I had the honour of
being present at one of their meetings, and I
was much flattered at being elected an honorary
member. They have petitioned Government at
home upon various points,—one of them, I be-
lieve, suggests the means of obtaining manual
labour, and this is the only point upon which I
venture to differ with my worthy frieuds at the
Swan. I do differ, though, after having seen


the splendid public works, which have been
erected, and are now in progress, at the sister
colony of Van Dieman’s Land, erected by means
of penal labour.
The inhabitants of the Swan River may justly
pride themselves on the individual respectability
of each emigrant; and it is certain that they
may sleep safely, with all they possess, under a
“ Wicket opening with a latch but if a man
embarks on a project of this description, with
the view of benefiting his family, and of esta-
blishing himself in a new country, he surely
does not intend to live, like Robinson Crusoe,
for five-and-twenty years in a wilderness, and
gradually subside into a country labourer, with-
out endeavouring to restore to his wife and
family as large a portion as he can of the
luxuries and comforts they have quitted. This
picture may be somewhat overdrawn ; but I
maintain that, until cart and carriage roads of
communication are constructed, there will be
no sort of enjoyment to the settler, beyond the
mere animal pleasure of eating and drinking,
and superintending the management of his own
farm, I have heard it said, that Government
intend sending out some thonsands of poor
labourers, to perform the work that may be
required of them ; but let me ask, in reply,
who is to pay these labourers their hire. We
all know the settler will have but limited means
to defray the expense ; and, if he has means at
all, he will surely apply the labour to his private


property, where lie is certain to reap personal
and immediate advantage from it Even to
preserve roads in repair, after they are first
formed, is not only expensive in itself, but it
requires also that the countries through which
they pass shall be well peopled, and capable of
affording the necessary labour. If, therefore,
the horror of having convicts within sight of a
man’s property, shall operate so forcibly with
my friends at the Swan, as to prevent them
from being sent to the colony at all, I really do
not see that the settlers have any prospect of
solid enjoyment, beyond their own rural habita-
tions, for a very long time.
If the Indian Governments could be prevailed
upon to send a few hundreds of their transported
convicts to form public roads on the Swan River,
the aid they would afford would be most in-
valuable ; and the climate, though cold in
winter, would not, I am certain, be unhealthy.
The expense of maintaining them would be
inconsiderable to the Government; and, as the
line of black and white would be a very marked
distinction, I do not see that the settler, under
this arrangement, would have cause to dread the
slightest contamination to society.
The season of the year at which possession
was first taken of the Swan River, may be said
to have proved one of its greatest misfortunes.
The governor and public functionaries arrived
in the very depth of Avinter, when. fe\v or no
tents Avere provided for their accommodation,


and no sort of covering' liad been prepared on
shore. They landed, in the first instance, at
Garden Island, about nine miles, by water, from
Freemantle ; and the season, even for winter,
being unusually severe, the poor ladies and
children were, all of them, exposed to the most
harassing privations, and obliged frequently to
sleep under umbrellas, as their oidy covering
from the rain. Merchant ships, with all sorts
of supplies, flocked at the same period to
Gage’s Roads. It was in vain, I understand,
that Governor Stirling represented the insecurity
of the anchorage ; the masters persisted in
braving the dangers of the season, and the con-
sequence Mas inevitable, that a great many
merchant ships were successively driven on
shore.
It is unnecessary to dwell upon the unfavour-
able impression which the public must have
received from these unlooked-for misfortunes.
The inclemency of the seasons, —the dangers of
the place, and the sufferings of the first adven-
turers, Mere, all of them, magnified in a manner
that is scarcely credible.
One gentleman, well knoMn in the colony,
had freighted a ship with property of every
description, to become an extensive proprietor of
land ; but, having unfortunately touched at the
Cape of Good Hope for refreshment, he was
there shown so gloomy a picture of the settle-
ment, and told such unfounded tales of their
misery and distress, that he actually sold off the


whole of his live stock, and lost, by that mea-
sure, the enormous sum of ,£BOOO.
The loss that was sustained by the under-
writers, in the first instance, must have proved
an additional source of dispraise to the colony.
Though ships may lie as safe in Cockburn’s
Sound as in any harbour of the world ; and for
six months of the year a westerly gale is never
known, yet strange to say, an impression dif-
ferent from the truth, appears to obtain, in Eng-
land ; and now, lam told, an insurance is not
procurable at all.
It is not among the least of its misfortunes,
that so considerable a time has been permitted
to elapse, without any communication with the
Government at home. We were the first even
to bring the intelligence to Captain Stirling, that
he was promoted from Lieutenant-Governor to
be Governor and Commander-in-Chief of West-
ern Australia. The gratifying information,
though tardy in its arrival, produced the glad-
dest sentiments throughout the whole colony.
I hope I shall be pardoned for saying that, in
my humble judgment, there could not possibly
have been selected a man more fit for the
arduous, irksome, and responsible situation he
fills, than Captain Stirling, llis firmness of
character, and steadiness of purpose, under all
the trying vicissitudes to which he has been
exposed, is far beyond any feeble praise I can
bestow. His paternal kindness and consider-
ation for every class of settler, has deservedly


secured him the confidence and esteem both of
high and low ; and he possesses, at the same
time, so sanguine a spirit of enterprise, and so
great a love of bushranging, that it is impossible
to come within his ken, and not feel excited by
his influence. If the home authorities, how-
ever, have not been as frequent in their com-
munications as might have been expected, the
Admiral on the Indian station, Sir Edward
Owen, has done every thing in his power to
cheer up their spirits. In the short space of
two months there were two men-of-war called,
to ascertain their wants ; and there cannot be a
doubt but this distinguished officer, on his re-
turn to Europe, will bring the condition of the
colony, to the particular notice of the Home
authorities.
Several minor settlements have been formed
since the establishment of Western Australia,
I believe there was a party sent to Geographe
Bay, immediately south of the Swan, but the
anchorage was so completely exposed to westerly
Avinds, during the Avinter season, that the place
has been since abandoned.
Another spot has been chosen, named Port
Augusta, of Avhich I shall have occasion to speak
as I proceed. This port is formed by the pro-
jection of Cape LeAvin, and the rocks south of
it, Avhich protects the anchorage entirely from
Avesterly Avinds ; and, as the Avinds from the
eastAvard are mere summer gales, I think the
place Avill speedily establish its OAvn reputation.


There has been a most extraordinary fatality
amongst the medical men since the first esta-
blishment of Western Australia. I think it is
eleven or twelve who have either died, ran mad,
or been drowned since the formation of the
colony. One doctor was literally drowned on
the Flats above Perth, where a boat can scarcely
swim. They show you a spot, about three
yards wide, which they call “ The Doctor’s
Hole,” where they say he contrived to take his
departure ; but how he managed it, I am at a
loss to guess, except in the way of a Yahoo
acquaintance of mine, many years ago at Hy-
derabad, who rose from table considerably ele-
vated with Charles Russell’s claret, and tumbled
into a tank in front of the Residency, about two
feet deep. The hero fancying he must be out
of his depth, struck out most manfully ; but
finding the Aveight of his clothes was fast sinking
him below the surface of the water, he resigned
himself to his melancholy fate , and Avould
have been inevitably droAvned, if one of the
party* had not heard the splash, and kindly
Avalked into the Avater to put the fool upon
his legs.
The Sulphur, sloop-of-Avar, commanded by
Captain Dance, is stationed for the service of
this colony ; and as she has been a considerable
time from home, and in Avant of various sup-
plies, she Avas to sail in the month of October
for the minor ports, and then proceed for refresh-
♦ Frank Russell, 1 believe.


merit to Van Dieman’s Land. This was too
tempting' an opportunity to be lost, as Captain
Dance very kindly offered me a passage.
We had the satisfation of conveying the
Governor and his family to King George’s
Sound, for it'hose extreme kindness and atten-
tion, during 'my long stay, it is impossible I
can feel sufficiently grateful. Mrs. Stirling is
a Mangles, the sister of my friend Charles
Mangles, whom you knew in command of an
Indiaman. My previous knowledge of her
brothers, and of other branches of her family,
proved a passport to her kindness ; and I can
safely say, that neither herself or any person
belonging to her can ever be forgotten by me.
On our way to Port Augusta, which we first
visited, we established the exact position of a
most dangerous shoal, about fifteen or sixteen
miles from Cape Naturalist, according to Mr.
Periam, the master of the Sulphur, the outer
breaker bears from the Cape about north by
east, and extends about three-quarters of a mile.
This would be a fatal shoal for any ship to strike
upon. Captain Dance, however, says that, in
bad weather, the sea breaks upon it mountains
high, which, in the day time, would give suffi-
cient warning of its vicinity. God help the
unfortunate bark that might strike upon it in
the night.
There is also a dangerous ledge of rocks
running seaward, from the land, immediately
north of Cape Lewin, on which a fine ship


was lost a short time ago. How the wiseacre
managed to get his vessel, upon so palpable a
danger, is matter of astonishment to any L man
who knows any thing of navigation.
We arrived at Port Augusta about three days
after we sailed from Cockburn’s Sound, and
Remained there about twenty-four hours. We
found the party gradually progressing in all the
arts of colonization, and Captain Molloy, the
Resident, up to his ears in business. Mrs.
Molloy, a very interesting young woman,
plains sadly of solitude ; but, as she appears to
be in the way “ Ladies wish to be, who love
their lords,” she will not be long without
occupation.
The natives in this neighbourhood are said to
be friendly, and the soil appears most produc-
tive. The town will be built upon the face of a
rising ground, looking south upon the sea, and
a few years will possibly show a passing stranger
one of the most picturesque little sea ports in
the world, Mrs. Molloy’s garden abounds with
the choicest flowers ; but I am sorry to say, I am
unable to describe them more particularly, than
that they are all of them very fragrant, and very
beautiful. The ship having merely called to
land supplies at Port Augusta, we got under
weigh the following afternoon, and bent our
course towards King George’s Sound.
Here we were somewhat unfortunate in our
progress, as we passed to Leeward of our port
during the night. A little government schooner.


the Helen, commanded by a superb little fellow,
Lieutenant Preston, of the navy, was off the
harbour on our arrival, having - beaten us in the
passage most lamentably. We ■were just able to
lay up for Baldhead, the entrance to the Sound,
when, ye gods ! there came a “ sneezer ” from
the shore, as Jack would say, which made every
sail grin again ! I thought it would have torn
the masts out of the ship ; we bore up to it,
however, and were kept at sea seven days
longer, merely from being a mile and a half
too far to the eastward. Preston hugged the
land, as sailors say, during the night, and got
into the Sound the following morning. At
length, however, we did arrive, and anchored
the ship in Prince Royal Harbour, which, in
point of perfect safety, is equal to any port in
the world. We carried in four and a half
fathoms, the shoalest water, and were embayed
in a basin as smooth as a mill pond.
King George’s Sound is a settlement that well
deserves the praise I had heard bestowed upon
it; it possesses every natural advantage the most
sanguine emigrant can desire, and is blessed
with a climate it is impossible to eulogise too
highly.
The site for the town is well chosen, between
two moderately high mountains, connected with
each other, by a ridge of excellent soil, from
which water of the. purest quality is trickling
down in natural and abundant rills to the beach.
It is strange to find that King George’s Sound,


though so long occupied as a penal settlement
from Sidney, exhibits at this moment hardly a
vestige of man’s works ; what the convicts can
have been about, during the many years they
have been stationed there, it is difficult to
imagine. Mr. Carew, the present Commandant,
declares, that the most positive orders existed,
not to erect a single dwelling-house or public
work, of any description, beyond the miserable
huts that were necessary for the cover of the
party. What the object of such dog and man-
ger policy could possibly have been, the high
authorities in Eastern Australia can best explain.
Mr. Collie, the Resident of the place, had, from
his very slender means, erected a comparatively
comfortable little dwelling-house, for the Go-
vernor and Mrs. Stirling, which they occupied
on their arrival. It is close to a Government
garden, about two miles east of the town, on the
slope of a long declivity, stretching down to the
sea, and commanding a most superb view of
the entrance to the harbour; with Baldhead
and its gigantic cliffs frowning defiance to the
south, and J3reak-sea Island stretching its rocky
protecting arms far across the anchorage.
The Government garden, under the fostering
care of Dr. Colley, gives the most satisfactory
proofs of what can be done in this genial and
delightful climate. lam told the penal settle-
ment carried away with [them every particle of
seed they could possibly scrape together, and,
of course, left the gardens very badly supplied.


They have shown, however, a very proper
spirit on the occasion, by foregoing the use of
potatoes altogether, and devoting the whole of
their stock to seed. The coming crops will
amply repay them for their very prudeht policy,
and in the mean time, they have abundance of
cauliflowers, cabbages, beans, peas, and almost
every other esculent vegetable.
The good land in the immediate neighbour-
hood of the town, may be said to run in patches
of fifty and a hundred acres. The site of the
Government garden, which I have already
noticed, is of the richest possible soil. The
Scotch gardener told me there was nothing on
earth that would not grow upon it. The vein
continues down the face of the mountain to-
wards the sea, about one hundred acres, pos-
sibly, until it arrives at an extensive swamp and
back water, where the soil becomes poor and
sandy. Fifty acres of this rich soil, the Go-
vernor has given me a grant of, and I have
called it Torrens, in memory of the steadiest
and warmest friend that man was ever blessed
with.
We were accompanied, in the Sulphur, by
Mr. and Mrs. Cheyne, a Scotch gentleman and
his wife, who have come to this hemisphere,
with the view of being permanent settlers ; and
I must say, I think them, in every respect, most
highly qualified for the undertaking. He is a
man of the most Stirling probity; and Mrs.
Cheyne having been brought up to a country


life, possesses every branch of requisite know-
ledge for managing a farm. They have brought
with them a couple of Swedish wooden houses,
most excellent of their kind ; and what is of
equal value, they have brought a couple of
quiet, hard-working Swedish servants to put
them up.
It was ray intention to have sent down some
stock for the farm, from Hobart Town, together
with implements of husbandry, &c.; but jou
will see, when I reach Van Diemen’s Land, how
enviably I was situated, with • respect to the
means of purchase, and how completely an
Indian, untutored in his financial arrangements,
is at the mercy of the monied men in the south.
I did, however, leave with my friend, Mrs.
Cheyne, Jour laying hens, and three laying
ducks, dividing this extensive property between
us, and permitting my share of it to increase
and multiply. I have written to Mr. Cheyne,
explaining my disappointment, and he may rest
assured that my next letter will be more satis-
factory.
To the east of the large inlet which contains the
sound, or anchorage, there is another harbour,
called Oyster Harbour ; the entrance to which is
too shoal for vessels of any burden, but a capital
basin for small craft. Preston took his schooner
there to smoke her, and 1 believe he laid in five
fathoms water, within a few yards of the shore ;
into this harbour a considerable river discharges
itself, called French River, and the land upon it


is said to be of a very fine quality. The Go-
vernor paid it a visit before I came away, and
he was doubtful at first whether Oyster Harbour
would not be the most eligible place for the
principal settlement. He has now decided
otherwise, however, and I am rejoiced that he
has done so; for the advantage of a safe and
capacious port to an infant colony is incalculable,
and particularly in these stormy latitudes. In-
deed, I think it impossible to look upon Prince
Royal Harbour, without acknowledging that
it is capable of containing half the fleets of the
world.
The natives here are in habits of the kindest
communication with the settlement. They are
sad bores, however, where there are ladies ; for
they come in and go out of your house, with
as much coolness and sang froid, as they would
go in and out of their own temporary hovels.
As I have already said, they are terribly de-
graded in the scale of human beings, almost
below the standard of the brute creation. They
have taught them decency, however, at King
George’s Sound ; but in situations where they
have no communication with Europeans, they
walk about, both men and women, as naked as
they were born.
The projected road of communication with
the Swan River, which I mentioned in a former
part of this letter, has already made very con-
siderable progress ; part of the detachment of
soldiers have been employed upon it, since the


arrival of Dr. Colley, and they have already
penetrated upwards of twenty miles. I had
some conversation with one of the men, and he
described many portions of the country, through
which he had passed, as being exceedingly
beautiful. He moreover told me, that water on
the track was abundant, and that the greatest
distance they had yet passed, without a stream,
was little more than three miles.
The native Chief, Nakainah, was dressed up
in a most splendid uniform, to be given to him
as a present, after he had accompanied the
Governor into the interior, upon a journey he
was then contemplating. It was a motley dress,
no doubt. Maude, the First Lieutenant of the
Sulphur, furnished a black coat; I furnished a
red one, with which the black coat was trimmed,
—collar, cuffs, pockets, &c. &c. The shoulders
were then surmounted by a pair of my largest
embroidered epaulettes, and every variety of
button was used that could be collected in the
ship ; “ thereby (Maude said) to represent
every department of the State.” The man
was so delighted, when he found it was to be
given to him on his return, that his gestures
were quite ridiculous.
I should mention that, on Break Sea Island,
there are a vast number of European dogs,
evidently the produce of animals left there, by
ships passing. How they manage to subsist
themselves, it is difficult to conceive ; but there
they certainly are, and if a ship, in coasting


along the shore, fires a shotted gun at the rocks,
she will be speedily answered by the loudest
barking.
Every material for building is most abundant
at King George’s Sound ; the lime-stone is ex-
cellent ; but the sea-shells are piled up in such
enormous heaps upon the beach, between the
two harbours, that I should infinitely prefer
them to any other lime. The shells are pre-
cisely the same as those with which we make
our far-famed chunam at Madras.
There cannot be the slightest doubt, in my
opinion, but that King George’s Sound possesses
local advantages far, far superior either to New
Holland or Van Diemen’s Land. After it attains
any thing like comparative respectability as a
settlement, it will, I am confident, supercede
the whole of the Australian countries east
of it.
Let any man of common sense examine a
map of Australia, he will see, at once, the geo-
graphical superiority of its position, either as
respects India or Europe. It is so completely
within reach of Cape Lewin, that a breeze of a
few hours will secure a passage round this only
difficulty, and a ship may then go away with a
flowing sheet, to any part of our possessions in
the East Indies.
It is worthy of remark, also, that King
George’s Sound is the most southern land on
that part of the Continent; nearly a degree
more south than Cape Lewin, and, consequently,


that distance to windward of it. If a ship
should start, in the first instance, with a fair
wind, and it should afterwards become scant
from the southward ; compare this, I say, with
the struggle we are now making, in as fine a
merchant ship as ever swam, to beat in the very
height of summer, 1500 miles to the westward !
We left Hobart Town fifteen days ago, and we
have not yet advanced one-third of our voyage.
I may further say, that during the whole of that
period, we have been plunging about in westerly
gales, and some days have made a distance of
only fine miles.
On the contrary, at King George’s Sound,
during the whole of the last winter, the com-
gmunication was never interrupted with Swan
Uiver ; a ship has only to watch her opportunity
for putting to sea, and in twenty-four hours she
may be sailing north, with a fair wind to any
part of the eastern or western world. The
south-east trade will secure her passage to the
latter.
If you want a harbour, where can you obtain
one more complete as to safety, than that in
King George’s Sound ? It is, in many respects,
superior to the Derwent at Hobart Town; for
the entrance being narrow, the shores might be
fortified to resist any invading maritime force,
and these fortifications would be again com-
manded by heights in their immediate vicinity.
If you want climate, I maintain that the climate
of King George’s Sound is equal to any climate


in the world. As a sanatarium for India, it
would be invaluable. The weather is neither
so bleak, so boisterous, or so trying to the con-
stitution as that of Van Diemen’s Land, and yet
it is far cooler than the climate of Sidney, par-
ticularly during the summer months, the hottest
period of which never raises the thermometer
above 74°. The range, whilst I was there,
during the month of November, was from 70°
to 73°.
Further, I may ask, does not every ship, on
her outward-bound voyage to Australia, pass the
very threshold of the harbour? and who will
deny that a merchant must find it much more
profitable to dispose of a cargo at the nearest
port, than to proceed 1500 miles farther to the.
eastward, in search of a market, and remaining
there probably six months longer before he can
attempt to return ?
It is surely quite impossible to deny these
stubborn facts. In short, I cannot help sus-
pecting, that our friends to the eastward, are
fully aware of the truth and the prejudice at Van
Diemen’s Land, which, I must say, obtained
against Swan River, was only proof to me of
what I now assert.
If an Indian takes a voyage to Hobart Town, he
feels no small degree of anxiety, lassure you, about
his return. The southern passage cannot be
attempted, except in the very height of summer;
and, as I have already said, we are at this
moment an instance of the difficulties to be


experienced, even at this period of the year,
when sailing to the westward.
One of the great advantages which Hobart
Town boasts of, is the whale fishery ; but this
is surely an advantage that the whole of this
coast is equally possessed of! I can only say,
we saw more fish there, than we ever saw off
the south end of Van Diemen’s Land; and I
am sure that, from the second day after we
started, until we entered D’Entrecasteaux Chan-
nel, we never experienced a moment, in which
a boat could have lived, much less have gone to
harpoon a whale.
I shall most probably again discuss with you
the merits of this south-west harbour. Mean
time I may state, that we sailed from thence
early in December, and reached Tasmania, as
it is now called, in about ten days, having en-
joyed the delightful treat of a gale of wind,
nearly the whole of the passage.
The land to the south of the island is so
marked, that there is no mistaking it. We
were off the Mew Stone at day light, and snugly
anchored in the harbour by sun set. It was on
a Sunday evening that we reached Hobart Town,
and we found it as quiet as a country church-
yard at midnight. After paying our respects to
the Governor, we returned on board the Sul-
phur, and disembarked again the following
morning.
Upon landing* I found a great difference
between the bustle of Monday morning and the


quietness of Sunday night. The McQuarrie
hotel was my first place of abode ; but I found
it so exceedingly noisy, from the number of
lodgers it contained, that I removed to some
excellent apartments in a house belonging to
a Mr. Solomon, one of the most eligible and
elevated situations in the .w hole town.
I must candidly acknowledge, that the place
far exceeded my most sanguine expectations.
The streets are wisely laid out, of very broad
dimensions, and the houses, generally speaking,
are most respectable in their appearance. Shops
of all kinds are very numerous, and some of the
female shopkeepers are very beautiful. One, a
Mrs. Swan, was the prettiest woman I had seen
for a long time, and she was surrounded by one
of the finest families of children I ever beheld.
Mrs. Dance said, when she saw some nine of
them coming into the room, with their rosy
cheeks and smiling faces, that she could not help
thinking they were part of a school. All that
I saw reminded me of home. There was nothing
Asiatic to be seen or heard, except, perhaps,
occasionally a ship Lascar jabbering Hindostany
in the street. Every thing was much as one
sees it in a respectable country town in England.
Of course there were occasional gaps, where the
original wooden houses are slowly decaying;
but I have no doubt that two years will see
those spaces entirely filled up, and the three prin-
cipal streets, which run parallel to each other,
will then be at least a mile long. There were


public criers, proclaiming auctions ; fishermen,
crying oysters; and bakers’ boys, hot mutton
pies ; so that I really felt as if I had been sud-
denly transported to England. We all dined,
on the day of our arrival, at the mess of the
63rd, and a most elegant and comfortable repast
we enjoyed. Colonel Logan I found to be an
intimate friend of my brother. He is a very
distinguished officer, and served nearly the
whole of the Peninsular campaign in the rifles.
By the way, we were talking of a book, lately
published, called “ Adventures of the Rifle Bri-
gade.” Logan says he knows the author well.
By his account, he is a most excellent officer,
but a little too partial to one particular battalion;
—he suppresses many anecdotes of the others.
One he related to me, which the author knew
to have occurred, and which certainly deserved
to be recorded.
The battalion, in crossing the Douro, were
exposed to so severe a fire from the enemy,
that Logan thought at one time they would be
compelled to retire. In the midst of the strug-
gle, an Irish soldier turned round very coolly
to his comrade, exclaiming, “ By Jasus, Pat,
now that we have got ourselves into the door,
the French will, I fear, be after driving us out
of the window .”
The following morning, I was comfortably
settled in my new lodging, and hitherto all my
arrangements had proceeded very satisfactorily.
1 was fully impressed with the conviction, that


I should be a sojourner in this part of the world
for a very considerable time. There are many
slips, however, between the cup and the lip,
and this is one from which I should desire to
guard all my wandering friends, when they visit
Van Diemen’s Land, at some future period.
I had brought letters of credit upon India,
and authority to draw either upon Madras or
Bengal, as it might best suit my convenience.
I bad made no arrangements whatever for
drawing upon England. I accordingly went to
a monied friend, and found to my astonishment
that bills upon India were not worth a farthing,
—that they were not even negociable at any
discount, —and that except I had the means of
drawing upon home, I should be at the farthest
end of this inhospitable land, without a penny
of money to bless myself with.
Here was a most vexatious predicament to be
placed in. My expenses would be considerable,
and my means would be of no avail; and,
although I was told that the advantage of
drawing upon home would be that of obtaining
my money at par—namely, pound sterling for
pound sterling , yet I was informed, when about
to affix my signature to the draft, that I must
pay five per cent, premium for having the
value of my bill guaranteed.
I need not express to you my opinion of this
sort of par. I knew, from the best authority,
that bills upon England were above par; and I
subsequently proved the value of mine, by ob-


taining pound sterling for pound sterling
from a perfect stranger, and without any deduc-
tion of five per cent, for having my signature
guaranteed.
So much for the pecuniary difficulties of an
Indian traveller. 1 saw at once there must be a
termination to my Australian adventures, as it
was quite impossible I could permit myself to
pay twenty per cent, for money, which I under-
stood to be the usual rate of interest, and not to
be obtained, even at that rate, without local
security.
I should further state to you, that a measure
has been lately enacted, which, I think, will
puzzle the brains of any liberal-minded financier
to defend. It is notorious that the intrinsic
value of a sicca rupee, if paid into the London
Mint, is something more than two shillings
sterling; and at this rate the coin has passed
current, I believe, since the first formation of
the colony. Beware now, however, how you
take sicca rupees to Tasmania ; the value has
been reduced to eighteen pence; and my poor
friend, Mrs.
•, who had purchased twenty
thousand of them, at a high price in India, to
form a fair and just remittance to Van Diemen’s
Land, found, to her horror and astonishment,
that she had lost five-and-twenty per cent, of
her capital, and that her sicca rupees were re-
exported to the Isle of France hy some of her
friends , and there sold for bills upon England
.at 2s. Id. sterling. This must, of course, be


the consequence of depreciating the value of any
species of circulating medium ; the direct result
of such a measure will surely be to withdraw
every Indian coin from the colony. lam no
political legislator myself, but I should like to
hear the arguments that could be urged in
defence of such a system, particularly as I
understand, that a very few years ago, the
scarcity of small coins was so extremely em-
barrassing, to all the mercantile transactions of
the colony, that people of every class were
obliged to pass notes of hand to each other, in
payment of the smallest sums below one pound
sterling.
My stay at Hobart Town under these circum-
stances became exceedingly limited ; and, as I
found upon inquiry, that a splendid merchant
ship, the Lord Lyndoch, was upon the eve of
sailing for India, I at once determined to make
my conge. Here I am, therefore, tossing about
the Southern Ocean, with strong westerly gales,
but with every possible comfort a man can look
for at sea; and 1 may truly say, that Captain
Luscomb, the Commander, deserves my grateful
acknowledgements, for all the unremitting kind-
ness I have received from him.
Thus the shortness of my stay prevented me
from making as many excursions into the interior
as I could have desired, and this, as it may
naturally be supposed, was matter of no small re-
gret to me. I was anxious to go over to Laun-
cestown, which I had heard very highly praised,


and I received a very kind invitation from Major
Breton, of the 4th, who commands a wing of
his regiment there, but the speedy departure of
the Lord Lyndoch rendered this visit imprac-
ticable.
The great kindness and attention I received
from ray military brethren, of the 63d, will most
certainly be remembered by me as long as I
live. Colonel Logan, Captain Briggs, and, in-
deed, all the officers, received me more on the
footing of an old friend, than that of a stranger
whom they had never seen before. Major Breton
was equally attentive to me ; but he, like myself,
was a bird of passage ; and I only regret that I
was unable to partake of his kindness at his own
head quarters. Here, however, the hospitality
of Hobart Town ceased. Not another resident
gentleman * invited either myself, or my guests,
inside of their doors during my stay. It was
true they called and left their cards, and we
paid them a similar compliment in return ; but
with this act of empty courtesy all further com-
munication ceased. You might, five minutes
afterwards, have met your card visitor in the
street, and not have known him from Adam !
I had heard so much said in praise of the
good feeding of this colony, that my expecta-
tions in the department of supply were not a
little excited. The season also being Christmas,
I thought, of course, we should have been
* I am wrong’, in not mentioning Mr. Hill, of the navy,
who was kind and attentive during our stay.


blessed with good butcher’s meat. I was much
mistaken, however ; for I found the beef not
only most execrably bad, but what was worse,
it was most abominably scarce. During the
whole time I was there, we only obtained this
sort of dead horse once or twice. The mutton
was certainly better ; but even that was inferior
to our stall-fed meat in India. Every other
article of life was abundant, and the vegetables
were uncommonly fine; but there was scarcely
any fruit in season, though it was past mid-
summer, and we heard of nothing the whole day
long, but of the delicious pears and plumbs, &c.
which would be in season by and by.
The best article of food in Hobart Town was
bread. I never recollect to have tasted the staff
of life more truly, I may say, delicious, than I
did there. There is a peculiar nuttiness in the
flour, if I may be allowed the expression, that
renders it excessively gratifying to the palate.
I have heard, since I left the island, that their
wheat is entirely exempt from the weavel.
Whether this be the case or not, I never lasted
bread more truly delicious.
The society of the place appears to be in a
most unpleasantly divided state ; it was impos-
sible to be otherwise than amused at the vehe-
mence with which persons,, perhaps, would dis-
claim all party feeling against each other, profess
the utmost Christian charity towards all within
their ken, and yet terminate their oration by a
cutting phillipic against some unfortunate damsel,


whose superior attractions might possibly be
her only fault, or, I should say, her only mis-
fortune.
There was one most unhappy case; but I
shall forbear to mention names. A very in-
teresting, and, I am told, a very beautiful young
woman, was found guilty of being more attrac-
tive than her neighbours ; she was a general
favourite with the gentlemen, being lively,
unaffected, and accomplished. The breath of
scandal, I am told, had never visited her repu-
tation, and she was a married woman, under the
protection of her husband. Will it be believed
possible, that the testimony, or, I should say,
the assertion, of a wretched female convict, —a
servant in her own house, —should be received
as evidence against her established character;
and, though her husband and her friends were
satisfied that the whole was an infamous fabri-
cation, and challenged the strictest inquiry, yet
no satisfaction was given, and the poor young
creature has been driven altogether from
society.
What would our Indian friends say to this
sort of inquisitorial proceeding ?—They would
probably say, that an Indian gentlewoman was
her own mistress, and under no other guidance
than her husband’s sense of propriety.
The prisoners, as they are called, being very
numerous, I suppose the nature of such a com-
munity lenders caution to be an imperative
principle with the good people of Van Diemen’s


Land ; there are no means of distinguishing - one
class from another, and the laws of society so
strictly forbid any kind of social intercourse
with the proscribed, that if a stranger accosts
you first, you may be certain he is an authentic
character.
Governor Arthur deserves the most unqualified
praise, for the splendid system of internal police
he has introduced throughout the whole colony.
When he first assumed the reins of government
at Van Diemen’s Land, the condition of society,
lam told, Avas lamentable. There was no sort
of decency observed, even amongst the higher
classes, and to cleanse this augean stable of its
impurities, was the first important duty he had
to perform. I have been told, however, from
the best authority, that, in the prosecution of
this good work, he encountered the most de-
cided opposition, and that the violent and un-
founded accusations of a few reckless and dis-
appointed individuals had, at one time, nearly
occasioned his removal from the government.
Amongst the public works that will reflect
the highest credit upon his administration, is a
spacious wharf on the south-west face of the
harbour, at which ships of the largest burden
may discharge their cargoes, with as much ease
as they could be discharged from a lighter.
The work is not yet completed ; but I paid it a
daily visit during my short stay there, and I was
quite surprised at the rapidity with which it
went forward. lam told that forty pounds for


every ten feet of frontage upon this wharf has
been already refused by the proprietors of the
land.
An abundant supply of the purest water has
been also brought a very considerable distance
in pipes from the mountains to supply shipping,
and in the same manner leaden pipes were con-
veying water, or, I should say, were being laid
down to do so, to every part of the town. This
will prove a most valuable addition to the com-
forts of the inhabitants, as I hear the town and
shipping were previously but very ill supplied.
The military barracks, on a rising ground to
the west of the town, forms a pleasing and
picturesque object, as you enter the harbour;
and the snowy summit of Mount Wellington in
the distance shows a lover of the magnificent,
that he will have an ample field for studying the
sublime and beautiful amongst the rocky cliffs
of Tasmania.
The streets are becoming gradually Mac-
adamized, the result of penal labour; and,
unlike my worthy friends at the Swan, the in-
habitants are delighted with the intelligence they
have received, that no more convicts are to be
sent to Sidney, but that all are in future to be
sent to Van Diemen’s Land.
The Government garden, about two miles
from Hobart Town, on the banks of the Der-
went, deserves to be particularly mentioned, as it
certainly is one of the most beautiful spots I
ever visited. It is wisely chosen as to distance


also; both ladies and gentlemen are not ashamed
here of making use of their legs ; and, when
adopted as an evening’s walk to a party, it is
certainly a delightful lounge.
I thought of my young friends in India when I
wandered through the walks, —of their showing
me, with so much delight, a highly-cherished
sweet-brier, or double-stalked geranium. When
here I fancy they M ere measuring stature with
myself, and you know that I am no dwarf.
The garden abounds with every description of
European fruit; but I regret to say there were
none of them ripe. The apples are said to be
the finest in the world ; close to the Government
garden there is an abundant quarry of most
beautiful free-stone, with which the whole of
the town is gradually being built. This mate-
rial will add much to the beauty of the streets.
A Government house, on a large and mag-
nificent scale, was intended to be erected in the
vicinity of this garden, and this expense, I
understand, was actually sanctioned from home.
The erection, however, was unwisely deferred
from time to time, until at length the spirit of
economy, which pervades all our councils in
England, produced a countermand, and now I
suppose it will never be built, though the yearly
repairs of the old Government house would, I
understand, have been more than sufficient to
pay the expense of a new one. One dreadful
evil, has been completely put down by Governor
Arthur, —I mean that horrible scourge to the


colony, the bush rangers. I hear that there is
not a single convict on the island at this moment,
be accounted for, and this may cer-
tainly be recorded as one of the greatest blessings
of his government.
The stories told me, of the frightful atrocities
committed by these abandoned wretches, are
scarcely credible. lam sorry to say, however,
they are too true. The expense of putting them
down, I am told, was enormous, but the end
surely justified the means. Military pursuit
was found to be unavailing, and Government
were obliged to have recourse at length to the
most liberal rewards. This speedily sapped the
foundation of their confidence in each other; a
transported felon, for life, could hardly resist
the temptation of a free pardon, and a reward
of <£loo. The treachery of a few of their
associates speedily produced discord and distrust
among them; and the authorities proceeding
steadily with their object, and hesitating at no
expense, succeeded at length in completely
putting them down.
The natives are comparatively very insignifi-
cant, and are only to be found in the most
unfrequented part of the island. There is
some good, I may say, arising out of every evil;
for the exterminating principle that guides these
unhappy wretches, in their war Avith the whites,
renders bush ranging noAV (except in large num-
bers) a business of no trifling danger.
The Governor, Avith that spirit of humanity


by which he is characterised, is collecting the
poor creatures, I understand, and locating them
on Great Island in Basses straits, where sheds
have been erected for their cover; and food, I
hear, is found in abundance. Their whole
population, however, was represented to me as
being very small; and I much fear, from what I
learn, of their ferocious and unforgiving charac-
ter, that this unhappy war will continue to be
a war of extermination ; such were the dreadful
cruelties, Colonel Arthur told me, to which
they were exposed from the early settlers, that
it is now quite impossible to persuade them
there is either honour or honesty in a white
man. There is no security in mildness. The
recent murder of Captain Thomas, and his ser-
vant, who allowed themselves to be beguiled
into the wood, by a party professing the kindest
feelings, is proof positive that a settler must
allow of no sort of friendly intercourse.
As I said before, the system of police disci-
pline introduced by Colonel Arthur, is one. of
the greatest blessings of his government. You
may now traverse the whole island, from one
end to the other, and feel perfectly assured
there is not the slightest probability of being
molested. There are capital inns for the ac-
commodation of travellers, at proper distances,
on the principal roads; and, I am told, the
country residents in the interior are blessed with
a few grains of hospitality more than their
brethren at the capital.


Where society is surrounded, as it is at Van
Diemen’s Land, by the wicked and profligate
of both sexes, it is natural to suppose that the
finer feelings of our nature become deadened
and blunted, by what may certainly be called a
daily intercourse with criminals. Prisoners of
both sexes are allotted to residents upon such
easy terms, that if gentlemen rear their own
stock, they may literally be said to have labour
for nothing. When male servants live on a
separate establishment, as in the management
of a farm, for instance, little evil example is to
be dreaded. But the case is widely different,
when female servants of this description are
admitted into the bosom of a family, and be-
come domesticated as one of its members.
I would sicken you by a detail of the enor-
mities I have related. Where mothers have
too late discovered the result of such pernicious
association, and where the servant has been most
exemplary in her outward conduct, inducing the
fullest belief, that she was in every way de-
serving of confidence. These are sad deduc-
tions from family comfort; and, for my part, I
am astonished how a consideration of any kind,
particularly one of a pecuniary nature, should
shut a mother’s eyes to the probable result of so
dangerous an intercourse.
There is another consequence arising out of
this state of society, which, I think, must be
apparent to every new comer. I know it
struck me very forcibly,—l mean the apparent


indifference with which the commission of an
atrocious crime is contemplated by society in
general, and the perfect sang froid with which
a man tells you, that three or four unfortunate
devils are to be hung the following morning.
The cause is obvious. They are living in the
midst of criminals, whom the law has already
spared ; if a felon commits a heinous offence,
it would be dangerous to extend mercy to him
a second time; and, in many instances, where
the kind feelings of a Judge would plead in
behalf of the criminal, he knows that the state
of society requires the stern sentence of the law
to be rigidly executed ; and hence the mind
becomes familiarised with a constant succession
of capital punishments.
There was a case occurred whilst I was at
Hobart Town, which, I think, establishes the
truth of what I say beyond a doubt, and which
did excite some degree of general interest and
commisseration, even with the Hobartonians.
No man will venture to impugn the amiable
character of the person who at present presides
over the criminal juridiction of the colony.
A young man was tried for a crime which
the state of society renders it imperatively
necessary should be punished by the law with
unrelenting rigour. The facts were not of an
aggravated character, but barely within the
grasp of the law, and I think that a criminal
elsewhere would have escaped with even a
moderate punishment. Here, however, example


was necessary, and the unfortunate prisoner was
condemned to death.
On the morning 1 of his execution, when the
culprit was actually on the scaffold, the Go-
vernor summoned a Special Council to recon-
sider his case, and see if it was not. possible
that his life might be spared. They continued,
I am told, in anxious deliberation for an hour
and a half, whilst the prisoner surrounded by
his execution party, was buoyed up with a hope
of pardon. At length, however, the fatal
mandate arrived ! mercy could not be ex-
tended to him ; and I was told by an eye
witness, that be beard his fate in a transport
of rage, and in this state be was launched into
eternity.
Hobart Town, to a stranger, has few attrac-
tions beyond climate and scenery. Of public
amusements there are none; and, except at the
Government house, and with ray worthy friends
of the 63rd, I had no opportunity of mixing
in society. Every person whom I accordingly
met in the street, or elsewhere, appeared to be
oppressed by a load of business, as Major B.
said ; if by any accident you over heard a con-
versation between a knot of Tasmanians, you
might rest assured that money was the sole and
entire subject of their speculations.
The Governor, I am told, discourages every
species of public entertainment, although he
gave an excellent ball himself whilst I was
there, to Avhich all the beauty and fashion of


the place were invited. He is the best judge
of these matters, no doubt; but I confess to
yon, after our habits of general gaiety in India,
and our uninterrupted good fellowship at the
Swan River, both my guests and myself, were
confoundedly tired of looking at our own white
walls.
Two very intimate friends of mine were resi-
dent on a farm, about six miles beyond New
Norfolk ; and though I was much hurried, after
I had actually taken my passage on the Lord
Lyndoch, I was determined, at all events, to go
thus far, that I might give myself one oppor-
tunity of seeing the country. We accordingly
started, in an excellent carriage, on the 26th of
December, nearly Midsummer day ; and I con-
fess, I was never in my life more delighted with
any journey.
A stage coach, with an excellent team of four
horses, drives daily from Hobart Town to New
Norfolk. The road is excellent the whole way,
and it certainly had need be, for in all my life,
I never saw a man drive as my coachman drove
on this occasion. “Devil take the hindmost”
appeared to be bis motto; and the horses cer-
tainly did take every thing at nearly the top of
their speed. Up hill or down hill, it was all
the same to coachee ; and, in turning sharp
upon one occasion, I thought we should all have
been soused in the Derwent. My friend, how-
ever, performed his work well; his cattle were
of excellent blood ; and, though we started


rather late upon our journey, we reached our
destination in excellent time.
I have already told you, that 1 am Avriting
from mere memory, on board the Lord Lyn-
doch ; and, as I am no good hand at describing
rural scenery, 1 must be careful not to indulge
myself in any romantic flights.
After leaving Hobart Town, the road passes
through a country, very generally studded Avith
farm houses ; many of them surrounded by land
in high cultivation. You arrive on the banks
of the Derwent, after having driven a feAv miles
from the toAvn, and the landscape then becomes
singularly diversified and beautiful. The clear,
cold blue of the water reminded me much of
the mountain streams in SAvitzerland ; and it is
difficult to imagine any thing more grateful to
the sense, than the odour you inhale, from the
fragrant meadow lands, on each side of the road
to Ncav Norfolk.
Of this last place, and its beauties, it is im-
possible to say too much. I Avish, from the
bottom of my heart, 1 was gifted Avith a portion
of Walter Scott’s descriptive poAvers, that I
might convey to you some idea of the en-
chanting spot, for it certainly deserves that
epithet. You kuoAV that I have travelled over
the greatest part of Europe; and, even in the
most sunny spots of SAvitzerland, I never beheld
any place more romantically beautiful. The
toAvn is yet in its infancy ; but the locations are


nearly all of them disposed of. The site is
chosen on the green sedgy banks of the Der-
went, which here becomes a very prominent
and picturesque feature in the landscape, as the
rapidity of its current is considerably increased,
by being confined within high mountains, though
the stream continues navigable for miles higher
up, until it reaches a rocky picturesque little
fall, which cannot fail, with the scenery about
it, to excite the admiration of every one.
The summer of Van Diemen’s Land, I should
consider to be much colder than the summer of
England. The day chanced to be about the
longest in the year, and yet there was a bracing
elasticity in the atmosphere, I never felt before
in any part of the world. Flowers of every tint
and every hue were unfolding their beauties to
the genial warmth of a summer sun ; and we saw
the fruit trees of an European climate, bending
to the ground, beneath the weight of the most
prolific abundance.
What could be more delightful to a hot-
winded Indian, than the scenery I am at-
tempting to describe to you ? The little country
inn at which we baited our horses in New Nor-
folk, was the very acme of comfort and clean-
liness, and the bustling industry, so manifest in
every department of a country life, made me
almost regret that I had determined upon taking
my departure.
On arriving at Hobart Town, the following


day, 1 found the Lord Lyndoch in readiness
to sail, and I accordingly embarked upon my
return on the 27th December.
I wish to write to you upon the subject of a
residence in Tasmania, as fairly and disinte-
restedly as I possibly can ; and when I honestly
state the impressions I received, both from men
and manners, during my short stay there, I
surely cannot be suspected of harbouring any
sort of prejudice, either for or against the
colony.
You must be aware, with myself, how much
the blessings of the southern hemisphere were
dwelt upon by during his stay at Madras.
You know that we heard of nothing but com-
fortable fire-sides, and horse-shoe tables. Hos-
pitality unbounded, and society of so recherche
a character, that our only difficulty would be,
where to select our associates. Tf, therefore, I
have not experienced these blessings myself, I
cannot be expected to extol them ; and as this
communication is intended to enlighten some
of our common friends, I shall not effect my
purpose, if I hesitate to write honestly and speak
the truth.
I should say that the very structure of society
in Hobart Town, as I found it, conveyed to me
the impression, that it was a great deal under
the influence of military discipline. This
must necessarily have arisen out of the strict
surveillance that has obtained in the colony,
since its early establishment, and this, I think,


will necessarily strike at the root of every thing
like independent intercourse for many years.
As for hospitality, Avhere did I experience it ?
or where did an officer of the Sulphur experience
it, except from our excellent friends of the
63rd ? They say it flourishes in the interior ;
but even there I can assert, that an old brother
officer, to Avhom I Avas introduced, by one of his
most intimate friends in India, never even con-
descended to reply to his letter, much less tempt
me Avith the sight of a “ horse-shoe table,” and
a bottle of delicious “ port Avine if you quit
the society, Avhich, in India, may be termed that
of the higher class, —I mean the public servants
of Government, you associate Avith men of equal
respectability as gentlemen, but, according to
my impression, Avith men Avhose tone is that of
utter radicalism. With this caste, I found that
Government could do nothing well. One man
Avas provided for because he Avas a favourite Avith
the Governor ; another, because he Avas recom-
mended by Lord Wellington ; and another, be-
cause he Avas supposed to have been useful to
some man in authority.
Noav this encounter to people of our habits
in India, is more unpalateable, even than the
still and subordinate quietness of the Whigs, I
have first mentioned. We are, I flatter myself,
respectful and obedient to authority, but Ave are
nothing more. And if Ave saAv any influence
exerted to regulate the tone of society, or inter-
fere Avith the domestic pursuits of a family, Ave


should stare with some astonishment, at either
of the three Presidencies of India. In fact it is
nonsense to speak of society, there is none
except what I have already mentioned. If you
ask a man why there are no sort of public
institutions, he tells you that authority is unfavor-
able to “that sort of thing.” If you remark,
that there is never a ball, or a public entertain-
ment in the colony, you are told that the Gover-
nor dislikes any sort of dissipation ; and if you
were to hint at a play, or any sort of theatrical
amusement, I verily believe the man’s hair
would stand on end.
You therefore know when you land at Hobart
Town, that you are destined to an inn, until
you can settle yourself comfortably, and I would
recommend you to introduce yourself as speedily
as possible, to some wandering Indian like your-
self, who has ceased to calculate upon “horse
shoe tables” and “comfortable fire sides.”
When I left the Colony, there were several
Bengal gentlemen in treaty for landed property
near New Norfolk. One in particular, had
completed a purchase, and I hope most sincerely
his friends will follow his example; for there
an Indian traveller may hope for some society,
and be independent of patronage at Hobart
Town.
The penal settlements dependent on the colony
exhibit also the most melancholy proofs of the
dreadful state of degradation to which human
nature can be driven by punishment and misery.


There is one at Me Quarrie Harbour, on the
western side of the island, to which the com-
munication by land is next to impracticable,
and which continues to be carefully preserved
so by Government, with the view of preventing
the escape of the convicts.
I was told that man condemned to a penal
settlement knew no hope whatever of liberation;
tnat he was banished there for life, and com-
pelled to linger out his days in hard labour and
misery. The stories I was told of their crimes
in confinement were too revolting to be re-
peated ; and many cases were mentioned to me,
of two or three of these wretched prisoners,
having attempted to escape, and after pene-
trating the forests, and suffering the most incre-
dible hardships, they would murder each other
for food ; and when finally one might arrive of
the party, he would declare on the scaffold, that
he came purposely to seek death, as he could
support life no longer.
This is the dark side of the picture, which I
feel myself compelled to exhibit to you, after all
the exaggerated accounts we have heard in
India, of the blessings of this far famed land
of promise. With all these drawbacks to en-
joyment, however, you may assure yourself of
one of the finest climates in the world, —per-
petual spring, and perpetual verdure; but if
ever Swan River, or King George’s Sound shall
arrive at one-fourth of the internal prosperity
now enjoyed at Van Diemen’s Land, I think


any man would be mad to go farther to the
eastward, in search either of health or property.
The climate, particularly at King George’s
Sound, is even superior, I think, to that of Van
Diemen’s Land ; and it is absurd to say, that in
a vast continent like that of Australia, the soil
shall not be found as fine, and the advantages as
great, as in any other part of the Eastern world.
One of the objections to Swan River and
King George’s Sound is, the poorness of the
earth, in the immediate vicinity of those places.
This fact, I grant, to a certain extent at Swan
River, though I have proved that it is capable
of producing every sort of esculent vegetable
for a family, as fine as any part of the world ;
but this I altogether deny at King George’s
Sound, as in the immediate neighbourhood of
the town, there is the richest soil imaginable,—
soil that; has given the most abundant crops,
wherever its richness has been tried.
In short, they may say what they please of
the : relative value of these different Australian
settlements ; but there is one fact, which I wish
from, jny heart fit was ,in my power to deny,
rather; than assert, and that was, the illiberal
prejudice that obtained against my friends at the
Swan River, whenever I heard : them spoken of
at Van Diemen’s Land. One man, told me that
the whole country was a desert of sand ; another
man, with affected commiseration, lamented the
fate of the , unfortunate wretches, who were
to starvation there; and a third assured


me, that he spoke of the poorness of the soil
from personal observation, though I found upon
inquiry that lie had never quitted the shore
about Freemantle. You might just as well
judge the richness of an inland county in Eng-
land by the bleak downs on the sea coast near
Brighton.
From all I could learn during' my stay at
Hobart Town, I am thoroughly convinced, that
the life of a settler there, is in the first instance,
as miserable as in other newly established colony.
Log bouses are much the same I fancy, in all
parts of the world ; but at Swan River and King
George’s Sound, you feel that you are surround-
ed by honest men ; that your life and property
are safe, however large or small the latter may
be, and that although you may not have quite
as much labour at your command, you are
tolerably sure of reaping the fruits of it.
What are the proceedings for example of a
new settler and his family, when they first arrive
at Hobart Town ? He obtains land under certain
regulations, together with a number of convict
servants, to assist him in the management of his
property ; he then proceeds into the interior,
and commences to locate himself, probably at a
distance of twenty miles from any sort of society,
except that of his own circle, and he knows that
his labouring servants, both male and female,
are unhappily of abandoned characters; he must,
therefore, watch them with a lynx’s eye, to obtain
any thing like decent labour. Further than this,


I was told, by persons best qualified to know
the truth, that these convicts, having no spur to
action, beyond the fear of punishment, were
literally required to be driven to work; and as
the means of punishing them before a magistrate,
would involve the necessity of a long and ruin-
ous absence to the settler, it was only resorted
to in cases of extreme necessity, where every
other means of inducing good conduct had
failed.
Compare this, 1 say, with the establishment
of Mr. Tanner, one of the most distant settlers
on the Swan ; he had erected a most comfortable
wooden house, by means of free and industrious
servants. His wife and family, were as comfort-
able as it was possible to imagine them to be,
under similar circumstances ; his female atten-
dants, were as correct, and as well behaved, as
they could be found, in any family at home;
and our party sat down to as comfortable a
dinner, as 1 ever partook of in my life. Every
thing appeared prosperous and thriving. I
walked over his grounds in the immediate
vicinity of the house ; and upon crossing a knoll
within a few hundred yards of his residence, 1
came suddenly on his farm yard, with all his
stock and servants comfortably housed, and one
of his principal men busy as the proprietor of a
shop, which served as a little emporium of
supply to the whole neighbourhood. I may say,
that in this infant colony, the crime of robbery
is unknown. Indeed, 1 saw no precautions


against it. My own house at Perth was un-
locked during ; the whole of the time I was at
Swan River, and I felt that my property was as
safe as if it was deposited in the Tower of
London.
Now, Lwill ask any fair and unprejudiced
inhabitant of Van Diemen’s Land, whether he 1
could leave his house in the woods with that
confidence of its safety, which I have just de-
scribed, and whether a mother, when she quits
her residence for a day, in many parts of the
country, is not ; compelled to send her family to
the protection of the nearest neighbour, or
suffer the greatest possible anxiety during her
absence.
It may be said,in reply to this part of my
letter, that I am arguing against myself, as I
have already pleaded in favour of sending con-
victs to Sw r an* River, although opposed to the
washes of the present inhabitants; I beg, there-
fore, to explain, that I think their number
should be limited ; —that their labour should be
exclusively confined to the execution of public
works; —that it should not be in the power,
even of the Government, to assign them as
private servants to any family ; —and, in short,
that they should be exclusively employed in
the construction of roads, and* of other objects
of public utility.
After the law has passed sentence on a cul-
prit, it may be idle for any man to draw com-
parisons between one convict and another ; but


it is certain that I should have less apprehension
of evil from a poor' country clown, 1 who had
been transported for snaring - game - to feed, pro-
bably, a starving - family, than I should be from
a shop-lifter who would commit murder, without
any compunction of conscience, if he- was in-
terrupted in the progress of his villainy. This
is a distinction I have heard drawn in. Tasmania;
and where the system of convict servants, so
universally prevails, I consider it to be a most
excellent one. In Swan River and King
George’s Sound, however, 1 would most care-
fully guard against the introduction; of ■ any
felon into the bosom of a family .
I have already said, that the minds'of people
become blunted by an association 1 with; vice ;
and, though daily instances occur of the dreadful;
consequences resulting from the practice of re-
ceiving female servants of this description-into
families, yet, strange to say, the cheapness of a 1
convict overrules - every other consideration, andi
the mother discovers, when too late, the conse-
quences that have resulted from her mistaken
economy.
I have now endeavoured to give you, as briefly;
and as fairly as Impossibly can, the impressions I ;
received during my late visit to the southern;
hemisphere. You will say they are far different
from what 1 had expected, after the gilded'
anticipations we received from .. Like
all pleasurable anticipations, I suppose they; fall
short of the reality ; I, therefore, conclude this


letter, by summing up the substance of my ad-
vice in a few words, as regards settling in either
of these colonies.
A man with a large family and small means,
should go to Swan River or King George’s
Sound ; —to King George’s Sound, preferably,
if the place improves, as I hope it will do, when
its capabilities are known. If a man has a
large family and competent means, though not
sufficiently affluent to permit him to reside in
England, he should, in my opinion, proceed in
the instance to Van Diemen’s Land, and there
judge for himself. But, if a man be affluent,
and compelled to leave India, on account of
health, and anxious for employment to protect
him from ennui, he cannot possibly have a finer
field for his abilities, than by freighting a vessel
of 200 tons, and proceeding direct to King
George’s Sound. He should take with him a
good establishment of artificers, to commence
building a house immediately; and he should
be supplied with a store of every thing he may
require for his family and servants during the
space of one year; as I have no doubt that
stock of every kind is at the present moment
increasing to abundance at the Swan River, and
that between this settlement and King George’s
Sound, there will be speedily a constant and
uninterrupted communication.
Before I conclude this long letter, I should
mention a circumstance, which certainly appears
to me most extraordinary. The island of Java,


from whence the most abundant supplies could
be drawn, for Swan river, is within three weeks
sail of that settlement, and there are numerous
merchants who would gladly send vessels with
provisions and stock of all kinds, if they dare
do so, without the certainty of being captured ;
but as it appears that any foreign flag would
immediately become a prize, to the Sulphur
sloop of war, they are, of course, unable to
render that succour to the inhabitants, which
would be a source of comfort to the one, and
great profit to the other. Such, however, are
the navigation laws ; and to this hour a Dutch
flag has never been seen there. I could write
a deal more upon this very interesting subject;
but, as I intend to write a letter, and not a
volume, I shall now subscribe myself,
Your sincere and attached friend,
J. Hanson.
Guildford; Printed by G. If'. J. Uussell.
