

A YOY A G E
FROM
AUSTRALIA TO ENGLAND.
AN INTERESTING ACCOUNT
ALL INCIDENTS OCCURRING ON BOARD THE BLACKWALL LINER “DOVER CASTLE,”
R. K. DEACON, COMMANDER, ON HER VOYAGE FROM MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA,
TO LONDON, COMMENCED ON THE 18tH DAY OF APRIL AND CONCLUDED
ON THE BOTH DAY OF JULY, 1867, PUBLISHED ON BOARD THAT
SHIP AS A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER UNDER THE TITLE OF THE
“ DOVER CASTLE NEWS,” CONTAINING A DAILY LOG,
SHIPS SPOKEN WITH, &C., &C.,
DESCRIPTIONS OF ISLANDS, &C., PASSED ON THE PASSAGE,
JOHN G. HORSEY,
(ONE OF HER PAS!
IENGERs).
LONDON:
PUBLISHED AT THE STEAM PRESS, 23, LISLE STREET, LEICESTER SQUARE,




A YOY A G E
FROM
AUSTRALIA TO ENGLAND.
AN INTERESTING ACCOUNT
ALL INCIDENTS OCCURRING ON BOARD THE BLACKWALL LINER “DOVER CASTLE,
R. K. DEACON, COMMANDER, ON HER VOYAGE FROM MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA,
TO LONDON, COMMENCED ON THE 18tH DAY OF APRIL AND CONCLUDED
ON THE 30tH DAY OF JULY, 1867, PUBLISHED ON BOARD THAT
SHIP AS A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER UNDER THE TITLE OF THE
“ DOVER CASTLE NEWS,” CONTAINING A DAILY LOG,
SHIPS SPOKEN WITH, &C., &C.,
DESCRIPTIONS OF ISLANDS, &C., PASSED ON THE PASSAGE,
JOHN G. HORSEY,
(one of her passengers).
LONDON:
PURLISHED AT THE STEAM TRESS, 23, LISLE STREET, LEICESTER SQUARE.
1867.
[entered at stationers’ hall.]


. ‘ .2. ■
LONDON;
PRINTED AT THE STEAM PRESS,
23, LISLE STREET, LEICESTER SQUARE, W.
1


P E E F A C E.
My object, whilst producing the few pages contained in this little pamphlet,
has been more with a view of amusing and instructing our friends ashore as to a
life at sea than giving news each week to my fellow passengers on board ship, for
there one person is often quite as conversant with all that is going on as another —
be he officer, seaman, passenger, or editor.
Still in the latter respect my fellow laborer, Mr. Adolph Sansost, and I
have been gratified each Saturday morning during the voyage with the crowding of
eager readers awaiting the distribution of copies, and we have often received high
encomiums for this “hit* on some popular subject or that “quasher” of the “little
game ” of so and so.
I may compare our ship at sea to some secluded country village where every-
body is perfectly well acquainted with everybody elsc’s business and affairs, and
amongst whom a joke against one or another within the limits of their little com-
munity, forms at the expense of the latter a topic of conversation for days together
—and the Dover Castle Neivs to it’s only newspaper whose tiny columns are expected
to contain and read in search of, some humourous comment on such prevailing joke;
and when I add that these occurrences take place daily, the comparison will serve
to illustrate to our friends ashore the interest that has been taken in these pages.


Indeed there is no one line, apart from the news of the week, but has implied a
something to be enjoyed at the expense of a “victim” amongst us. Having,
however, avoided distinct personality, I have offended none.
Those who desire to send a full account of their voyage back to the Antipodes
or elsewhere are enabled, without attempting a long letter on the subject (which
could not within reason contain half the news) to send this pamphlet. I have left
behind me very dear friends in Hokitika (N.Z.) and also in Sydney, and judging
by my own desire to send them an account of our proceedings on board ship, have no
doubt there are many who will likewise gladly avail themselves of this opportunity.
I have carefully prepared a daily log to enable those who wish to trace our
ship’s course upon a map.
JOHN G. HORSEY.
11, Ciiarlewood Road, Putney, Surrey,
August Ist, 1867.


iThe Dom o*a;jtli' Ups.
.A. vJOXJE^UNTAIL.
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Black wall, 1,300 tons burthen, R. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
[Saturday, May 4th, 1867.
No. 1, with Supplement.]
TO OUR READERS.
Following the custom of Journalists ashore,
we commence this, our first issue, with a few
remarks to you. No doubt there are many of
our fellow passengers, who having before
undertaken one or more voyages between
England and Australia, will not look upon our
attempt at the establishment of a weekly
paper as one without precedent, but will*
remember the success nearly always attending
such a step, and such persons will, no doubt
at the same time bear in mind, that that suc-
cess depends as much on themselves as us, for
we are in a no better position to hear all that
is going on within the narrow limits of our
vessel than any one of them. To them, there-
fore, we appeal to acquaint us from time to
‘time with any little items of news that may
with propriety be included in our few columns,
either verbally or in writing, we care not
how; and those of our readers who never
remember the issuing of a paper periodically
during a ship’s voyage, we may inform that it
is, and always has been, when carefully
managed, not only a source of a little amuse-
ment to all who take the trouble to read it,
but a medium for putting them in possession
of a faithful report of incidents and occurrences
taking place during the generally tedious
period of a long voyage; of raising a little
harmless merriment at the expense of indi-
viduals w r ho should always remain nameless;
of apprising those in ignorance of any pro-
jected steps to be taken either for comfort or
amusement amongst ourselves ; of any useful
proposition, whether emanating from ourselves
or our correspondents, and in fact of carrying
out on a small scale, all that usually ashore
is solely dependent on a newspaper for pub-
licity; and when, if w'c are successful, our
voyage is terminated, we can prevail upon our
numerous fellow passengers to subscribe a few
shillings, we intend to print in the form of a
small pamphlet, all our papers in one—it is
needless to say that such a step would enable
us to put all our friends and acquaintances
without delay or trouble, in possession of a
faithful report of our present voyage to the
Old Country. We believe that on board the
steam ship, “ Great Britain,” lately, a printing
press was kept and a very neat and useful
paper issued weekly, and on the termination
of the voyage a summary of the whole was
liberally distributed at a nominal charge to all
her passengers, who eagerly sought for copies.
We have no such convenience, but can hope
for the same result if we obtain the concur-
rence and assistance of our fellow passengers.
Of whatever matter is tendered to us for
insertion, we faithfully promise to keep a pro-
found secret the name of the author, but
reserve to ourselves the right to reject any-
thing we disapprove of.
There is some little reluctance, we believe,
existing aboard as regards assisting us in filling
our few pages, on the ground that should we
publish any scandal, the result may prove
quite the contrary of amusement —but w r e
promise that at no time shall we insert any
communication, whether in the form of a
letter or otherwise, that will have the slightest
tendency to cause unpleasantness or to point
scandalously to any person. We are aware
that wc arc without the jurisdiction of any


Court of Law, but trust we arc possessed of
sufficient common sense not to place ourselves
in such a position as to incur the displeasure
of any amongst our fellow passengers.
We shall include a weekly log prepared as
carefully, fully, and correctly as the limited
information we are able to obtain will permit
us, commencing from the time of our departure
from Melbourne.
We fear in so small a community as ours we
shall not be favored with many advertise-
ments, but if we should, we shall make a
nominal charge for inserting them, and any
Sums received (after acknowledging the re-
ceipts from time to time) will be held towards
augmenting our printing fund. Should any
be unfortunate enough to lose, or others for-
tunately find, we believe an advertisement
would be a certain mode of finding the finder,
or on the other hand of discovering the right
owner. Our charges will be on the following
scale, viz: —One shilling and sixpence for
four lines, each containing six words and
under, and sixpence for every additional two
lines of six words each or less.
We propose to write four copies of each
weekly paper. One to be left in the saloon,
2nd cabin, intermediate and steerage, on the
Saturday morning, and we beg that all may
be returned to the Editor, Mr. John G.
Horsey, on the Monday morning following,
to whom all communications may also be
given.
We do not desire any payment for our
exertions, for we believe we are using them
in a good common cause. If successful through
the co-operation of our fellow passengers, all
we aim at will be accomplished, if not no
blame can be attached to us. Should there be
any liberal enough to deem our trouble worth
recognition, we can only say, that being
but human, we shall never refuse “comforts”
tendered in any shape, except money.
In conclusion, we must crave the indul-
gence of our readers from time to time, should
our columns contain any little defects; for
although we have to thank two gentlemen on
board for their kindness in allowing us the use
of their cabins for copying our papers, yet,
with a desire to inconvenience them as little
as possible, we intend to settle our proofs in
our own berth, w.hich is situated in the very
midst of noise, cooking, crying children, and
other innumerable interruptions distracting to
an Editor’s ears, even such small ones as ours.
BIRTH.
On Sunday, April 21st, at 6 o'clock p.m.,
about 12 miles E.N.E. of the Kent Groupe of
Islands, and only 37 hours after leaving Port
Philip Heads, the wife of Mr. Jonah Brit-
nell of a daughter.
Divine Service has. been regularly held;
twice on Sundays and on each Wednesday
evening since our departure from Melbourne,
by the Rev. Mr. Bradney and the Rev. Mr,
Farr.
OUR VOYAGE.
A fortnight has passed since our departure
from Port Philip Heads, during which period
we have experienced little else but fair winds
and fine weather. In another place we publish
our Log. We have about 240 passengers on
board, few of whom have suffered from that
distressing complaint sea-sickness. A few
pale faces appeared during the first days, espe-
cially amongst the ladies and children, who
then had to depend to a great extent on the
sterner sex for the usual delicacies in food, and
for that attention always required by them on
first leaving the land; but we believe that,
owing to the great confusion attending the
first few days of such a voyage as ours, and
the great number of their unsettled fellow
passengers, they were very uncomfortable and
ill-provided in all parts of the ship, except the
saloon. True, there was abundance of good
fresh meat, potatoes, &c., for those who had
the appetites to consume them, but the valetu-
dinarian only sickens at their smell. Who that
has ever suffered from sea-sickness can remem-
ber, during that distressing time, enjoying the
sight of fat pork, beef, or potatoes ? No fault
was, however, attributable to anybody for these
shortcomings and annoyances—no time had
elapsed sufficient to establish messes—jthe
galley was besieged by hungry crowds—hook
pots, tin dishes, tea pots, pannicans, Ac., &c-,
were flourished over and amongst the heads of
2
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


anxious multitudes, whilst those who every
moment successfully pushed and crawled out,
laden with some description of edible, appeared
one and all glad to once more see the sky.
Our friend, the cook, whose face shone brightly
from perspiration, was driven to his wit’s ends,
and in spite of the usual growlings on such
occasions, somehow or other, always managed
to get through his work satisfactorily; cer-
tainly a few complained of having got nothing,
but then others complained of having had too
much —all the same in the end. But after two
days had passed all were enabled, by the forma-
tion of messes, to settle down as comfortably as
circumstances would permit, up to which time,
as we have said, the sick were ill-provided
with arrowroot or whatever light food they
might desire or require. The fresh meat and
potatoes ceased with our troubles, and we
(excepting of course the saloon) are “ on ” salt
provisions.
Our captain and his officers are everything
that we can desire, and most attentive and
considerate towards us. We do not wish to
flatter, nor do we in saying, that we never met
in any ship in which we have travelled such
civility and attention from those in command
as on board this vessel during the two weeks
we have been at sea. Nor must we forget Dr.
Webb, who has been most indefatigable in his
exertions to preserve health, and establish
cleanliness amongst us; a day never passes
but he may be seen carefully inspecting the
numerous berths, and, like onr chief officer,
Mr. Harrison, no little necessity that we have
had to call attention to, has met with anything
but kind attention at his hands.
We have been favored generally with fine
weather, and always with dry decks, and being
in a staunch vessel which, although light,
knows how to behave herself, we could not
have found less inconvenience aboard any other
ship of the same tonnage as our “Castle.”
PETITION.
A petition, drawn at the request of the third
cabin and steerage passengers by Mr. J. G.
Horsey, and presented by him with 96 signa-
tures to Captain Deacon on Saturday night
last, praying for the use of our present galley
for the steerage and 3rd cabin only, and the
removal of the second class cooking to the
saloon galley has been, in a great extent,
kindly granted. We have no doubt our friends
in the second cabin will be as pleased as the
third and steerage to escape the inconvenience
lately experienced, owing to the great number
of passengers depending on the one galley,
whilst the larger one was used but for few.
Our cook has now only to boil water for the
second cabin, and if this were likewise trans-
ferred to the other, our petition would have
obtained all we required.
A STRANGE CROW.
About ten o’clock on Tuesday evening last,
the crowing of a “ rooster ” might have been
heard on the main deck. A Seagull, who hap-
pened to be out late, informed us that he
observed several corkless “ Byass’s ” floating
astern, and that upon flying over and taking a
“ lunar ” down the mainmast, saw a few cozy
persons enjoying themselves on deck; he
waited until two staggered below (the ship was
rolling very much) and then the party broke
up. He wants to know whether the rooster
was a real “ bird ” or only imitation, and, if
so, whether there is any connection between
the crowing, the suddeu breaking up of the
party upon the descent of two, and the
“ Byass’s ” astern ?
SHOCKING DEPRAVITY.
There is a magpie, whose body is consigned
to a gin case, in the third cabin, who is given
to whistling profane tunes on the Sabbath.
We trust he will take a hint and discontinue
such sacrilege in future.
OUR LOG.
Thursday, April 18th, 1867. —Hauled off the Sand-
ridge Railway Pier, at half-past 3 p.m., with
about 240 passengers bound for London, in tow
of the steam-tug Sophia, and anchored at 5
o’clock off Williamstown. A fine moonlight
night.
Friday, April 19tii. —Commenced early clearing
decks, &o. At 9 a.h., the Aberdeen Clipper,
Omar Pasha, was towed past us to sea, also
bound to Loudon. At 11, hove up anchor, and
tug started with us down the Bay. Decks cleared
for sea during the day. Anchored inside Port
Philip Heads (off Queenscliffe) at 8.30 p.m. A
fine moonlight night. Learnt from returning
tug, that the Omar Pasha , was outside, off Cape
Otway (if so, she is bound round the Cape of
Good Hope).
3
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Ist Day (at Ska) Saturday, April 20th. —Anchor
was hove up at 2.30 a.m., and at 5 tug started
with us through the Heads—made sail. Wind
very light and fair. At 6 the tug cast off, and
Pilot left us. Running to the eastward along
the coast. Several small craft around us. At
8 p.m., passed Wilson’s Promontory Light.
2. Sunday, April 21st.—Light winds and fine
weather. Abreast and to the northward of the
Kent Groupe of Islands at 9 a.m. Late in the
day discovered the Omar Pasha, about four
miles to leeward, both of us on the port tack.
Wind heading us.
3. Monday, April 22nd. Light winds. Omar
Pasha about four miles to leeward on the port
tack. At 8 A.M., wo went about on the same
tack, both ships hoisting their ensigns at the
peak. She made more sail and we hoisted Royals.
Lat. at noon; 39° 6' S. Long.: 148° 37' E.
Distance (run in 24 hours) 49 miles. An island
in sight on the starboord bow. At 5 p.m. the
Omar Pasha crossed onr bows, distant only about
a mile, and we went about after her. At 9 p.m.,
we sent a sky-rocket up, and she answered with
another. She appeared much to windward
of us.
4. Tuesday, April 23rd.—Fine, with light winds.
The Omar Pasha not visible. Lat. at noon : 40°
15' S. Long. : 149° 26' E, Distance, 79 miles.
At 4 P.M., running on our course with increasing
wind. Making about 10 knots.
5. Wednesday, April 24th.—Strong breezes and
fine weather. Running about 10 knots on our
course. Lat. at noon : 42° 33' S. Long.: 151°
59' E. Distance, 181 miles. Breeze con-
tinues.
6. Thursday, April 25th. —Fine weather with
lighter breeze than yesterday, hauling aft. Fore
topmast stunsail set on port side. Lat. at noon :
44° 47' S. Long.: 156° 20' E. Distance, 232
miles. Fine dark night.
7. Friday, April 26th.—Foggy with light rain and
but little wind —yards squared. Lat. at noon :
46° 16' S. Long.: 160° 33' E. Distance, 201
miles. (Latitude by account only to-day.) Fog
and rain continued throughout the day and
night.
8. Saturday, April 27th. —Cloudy with light
rain, but not foggy. Lat. at noon : 47° 19' S.
Long.: 163° 33' E. Distance, 139 miles. Fine
night with light wind aft.
9. Sunday, April 28th—Commences with clear sky
and fine fair breeze. A large ship (with painted
ports) in sight, running on same course as our-
selves. At 8 a.m. sighted the Snare Islands on
the starboard bow. Wind increased to very
strong breeze. Passed about two miles to the
northward of the Islands at ito 10 a.m. The
other vessel passed to the southward of the
these rocks, and was lost sight of astern. Lat.
at noon : 47° 56' S. Long.: 167° 8' E. Dis-
tance, 177 miles. The strong breeze continues
throughout the day.
10. Monday, April 29th. Cloudy, with light
breeze aft. Making very little headway all day.
Lat. at uoon : 47° 48' S. Long.: 172° 15' E.
Distance, 208 miles. In the evening very foggy
with rain. No wind. (The days are getting
very short, and the weather cold and damp.)
11. Tuesday, April 30th. —Cloudy, with light rain
and but little wind. Lat. at noon; 47° 36' S.
Long.: 174° 43' E. Distance, 100 miles. About
dusk the wind a little stronger. Weather foggy.
Wind still fair. Ship rolling heavily.
12. Wednesday, May Ist.—Weather still foggy
with light rain and wind. Lat. at noon : 47°
11' S. Long.; 179° 28'E. Distance, 196 miles.
Day concludes with a continuance of same
weather. (Here we pass the 180th meridian of
longitude.)
13. Wednesday, May Ist. —Light wind aft with
fine weather. Lat. at noon : 47° 00' S. Long.:
177° 56' W. Distance, 107 miles. At about £
past three p.m. commenced to blow, with heavy
squalls and rising sea. Running before the wind.
Top-gallant and Royal sails stowed. Closes
with gale and very heavy sea. Ship rolling
heavily, and shipping much water. Two hands
at the wheel.
14. Thursday, May 2nd.—Commences with increas-
ing gale and heavy sea. Canvas reduced to
double reefed mizen topsail, foro and main lower
topsails, foresail and jib. Lat. at noon : 46° 30'
S. Long.: 170° 57' W. Distance, 287 miles.
Strong gale and very heavy sea. Ship running
at great speed before it and laboring heavily.
At about | past 3 p.m., during a violent squall,
a heavy sea struck the ship on the starboard
quarter, sweeping over the vessel and inundating
the’tween decks, causing the greatest consterna-
tion amongst the passengers, all the lee berths
being several feet under water. Set to work
baling out as quickly as possible. About \to
4 another and still heavier sea struck us on
the starboard beam, falling with great force on
the ship, flooding the decks, deck-houses, saloon,
and ’tween decks ; putting out the galley fires,
carrying away their smoke funnels ; sweeping off
the deck-house all the heavy spars, sheep pens,
bales of hay and lumber ; much injuring the
long boat; knocking out two of the lee ports;
displacing the lee top-gallant rail, and, besides
much other damage, adding many feet of water
to the already flooded ’tween decks. Passen-
gers engaged until late baling out the water,
and the crew clearing away and lashing the
wreck. About 9 p.m. the ship was suddenly
taken aback, but happily was got off again before
accident occurred.
15. Friday, May 3rd. —Commences with strong
breeze and heavy sea. About noon, more
moderate. Mainsail and top-gallant sails set.
Lat. at uoon : 44° 59' S. Long. : 166° 25' W.
Distance, 210 miles. Weather finer towards
night. Ship still rolling heavily. Sea gradually
settling down. Passed a vessel on the port side
at 10 p.m.
* This day is repeated upon crossing the 180th meridian
to regulate time.
TUB DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Supplement to ti)e poncr gasife Stems
Mo. I.]
[Saturday, May 4th, 1867.
Owing to the rough weather lately experienced
we were unable to issue the first number of
our payer on Saturday, hut trust in future
to he more regular. We add this supple-
ment, as, owing to the length of our address
and arrears of Log, our space teas too
limited to contain the news up to Friday
night.
THE GALE OF THURSDAY
LAST. '
In this number of our paper we had closed
the article “ Our Yoyage ” before the com-
mencement of had weather, hut now add a
brief account of the change.
On Wednesday night the first appearance
of rough weather caused a reduction of can-
vas, and tAvo men were placed at the wheel,
owing to the heavy sea then running. Thurs-
day commenced with a perfect gale, and our
ship was pitching and heaving very heavily
in a furious sea. At 11 A.ir. we were flying
before the gale under double reefed mizen
topsail, lower fore and main topsails, reefed
upper ones, foresail and jib. Yery few pas-
sengers appeared on deck, and those who did
found great difficulty in keeping a footing—
sea sickness again prevailed, and Avhat Avith
confusion, pitching about, and constant soak-
ings, everything was as chilly and miserable
as possible. The only amusement existing
Avas the mishap of some person, who after
sliding across the deck with a Avet jacket
Avould (perhaps pulling others with him) en-
joy a plunge hath in the scuppers—the wrath
of those who, had they not been thus dragged
from safety would have escaped misfortune,
often adding to the farce. But these innocent
enjoyments soon gaA'e way to fear, danger,
and destruction. About half-past 3 r.ji., at
a time when the gale was at its height, Avith
an awfully grand sea running, a heavy squall
struck us, the spray flying by in shoAvers—
scarcely a passenger Avas on deck, and those
Avho were, had sought some spot in safety and
shelter. This was most fortunate, for had
the after events occurred two hours sooner,
there must without doubt, have been se\-eral
lives lost. Of a sudden a heavy sea struck on
the starboard quarter, sweeping with great
force over our labouring ship, and causing


everyone to hold fast to prevent being swept
overboard. The vessel trembled violently
after the blow —a second of quietness fol-
lowed—and down came tons of water on our
decks, rushing with frightful force down the
main hatchway, and flooding the cabins on
the ’tween decks to a depth of about 3 feet;
here were assembled upwards of a hundred
passengers, amongst whom the consternation
was indescribable —yelling and shouting from
the men —screaming, praying, and cries for
salvation from the women —crying from the
children —the surging waters rushing to and
fro with the motion of the ship—all formed a
combination of confusion, which, for a few
minutes was terrible—the children were res-
cued by the men from their perilous positions
of being half drowned, who then, with the
assistance of the seamen, commenced with
buckets to bale out the water. A quarter of
an hour elapsed, and confidence was again
restored, when of a sudden the vessel heeled
over to port, and coming up again, was struck
by another sea of still greater and more fright-
ful force than the first —the tremendous shock
was succeeded by the usual second of fearful
dread—the trembling vessel was hove down
again on her beam ends, and a deluge of
water fell upon her decks, flooding again the
saloon, second berths, deck, and intermediate
cabins, first drenching and throwing down
those employed baling out, and adding by
several feet, to the already immersed between
decks —sweeping off the deckhouse all the
heavy spars, sheep pens,trusses of hay, lumber,
&c., weighing many tons, injuring the long
boat; knocking away two of the lee ports;
displacing .the upper rail to leeward ; putting
out the galley fires, and carrying away their
smoke funnels. Fortunately no lives were
lost, although we much regret that the ship’s
butcher was partially buried in the debris, and
sustained much injury, four of his ribs being
broken. Our third officer (Mr. Sprigens) we
believe had a very narrow escape of being-
washed overboard, as had several of the pas-
sengers -who had to swim on the quarter-deck
to recover themselves. Much as wo regret
the accident to the butcher (who is the
greatest sufferer) we have to be thankful that
no lives were lost. There was, certainly, the
awful alarm of “A man overboard!” in the
evening, but happily it proved false. In the
saloon, as well as in the second and third
cabins, the fright, confusion, and uncertainty
was very great, everybody fearing momentarily
a repetition of the danger, whilst all ac-
quainted with nautical matters, knew well the
terrible consequences which might then result,
but, providentially, none occurred. Let those
ashore imagine about 200 tons of water dash-
ing upon a vessel, and they have a slight idea
of our position. All inconvenience, however,
soon afterwards ceased, except the want of hot
water for tea, consequent upon the fires being
put out, and nearly all the passengers had re-
tired before nine o’clock to their wet bunks,
the crew working late at the wreck. At 9
o’clock, from some unexplained cause, the
ship suddenly broached to, and, but for the
active measures taken by the officer of the
watch, we might soon have been tossing about,
a helpless wreck, if not worse. This, the
greatest danger of all, was least noticed, and
concluded our troubles. We trust the worst
day of our voyage is over.
6
THE HOVER CASTLE NEWS.


(The Oori’r (Pastlc Rcini.
.A. CTOTJIE^Isr.A.II.
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “ Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Blackwall, 1,200 tons burthen, B. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 2.]
[Saturday, May 11th, 1867.
Prayers were read in the saloon on Sunday
morning last, and in the evening Divine Ser-
vice, held in the second cabin, by the Rev. M.
AV. Bradxey, —also, on Wednesday evening in
the third cabin, by the Rev. Mr. Parr. The
second meeting of the Sunday classes for
children will take place in the third cabin, on
Sunday next, at 2 p.w.
We are rapidly approaching the colder re-
gions, and may hope within a fortnight, with
favourable winds and weather, to clear the
much-abused Cape Horn. Each day, as we
increase our latitude, we may expect the tem-
perature lower than the previous one. Pockets
are already in great requisition for the hands,
and every one hurries about puffing out clouds
of steam, like so many locomotives. To many of
us, who have for years been accustomed to the
heat of Australia, these damp and foggy latitudes
prove very unpleasant. In keeping with the
fog and cold, we have a fair share of rain, so
that in these respects we want for nothing.
The sun has, within the last few days, once
or twice kept us company for an hour or two,
but the climate down here does not seem to
agree with him at all, for his visits at this
winter season are few and far between. We
believe we may very soon expect to bo
amongst icebergs, but trust they will be far
enough off for our glasses.
Cape Horn, which is very lofty and covered
with wood, is situate in latitude 55° 56' S.,
and longitude 67° 20' AV. On Thursday last,
at noon, our distance run from Port Philip
Heads was 3,578 miles, and we believe we have
about 2,000 more between us and the Cape,
which, at the average rate we have already run,
will take eleven days. Our average day’s run
up to mid-day on Thursday, was 177 miles.
When off the Cape we shall have accomplished
a good third of our voyage.
The very favourable reception throughout
the ship, given to the first issue of the Dover
Castle News has been a source of great pleasure
to us. AVe arc happy to find amongst our
fellow-passengers so much promised support,
and the universal acquiescence in our arrange-
ments at present, and in those of the future,
with reference to printing the whole of our
records on arrival in England. AA r c now have
no doubt of success.
AVe could not expect however, amongst so
many, to escape one or two hyper- critics, who
are fonder of serving out uncharitable ridicule
rather than credit for our pains. One of the
few, finding doubtless that ridicule was un-
supported, turned Disbeliever, and, having
carefully searched our lines for a peg to hang
his disbelief upon, flatly denied by way of relief
to his feelings, our statement referring to the
Butcher’s unfortunate accident. AVe can only


repeat that oar statement was quite correct,
and advise our too wise friend to follow our
example by always satisfying himself by en-
quiry, before making a positive statement.
That the Butcher did break four ribs, subse-
quent enquiry has confirmed. We shall always
endeavour to confine ourselves to the truth.
We intend, in fine weather, to keep an
editor’s box on deck for letters, &c., which
will be finally emptied at 5 p.m. on Thurs-
days.
We can accept no communication unless en-
dorsed with the author’s name, whether in-
tended for publication or not.
FIRE.
We cannot help noticing the great extent
of carelessness existing around us with regard
to the use of matches. We have seen children
throwing them about as playthings, and have
witnessed the very dangerous practice amongst
adults, of using them to search for missing
articles amongst heaps of clothes and bed
clothing, to save the trouble of lighting a lamp
—surely they cannot think of the terrible re-
sults attending a conflagration at sea, and of the
great uncertainty of preserving many of our
lives in case of such a calamity, to say nothing
of property. We are glad that our smoking
friends in the third cabin are not only firmly
resolved not to smoke themselves, but to re-
port the name of any who should attempt it.
We regret that on Wednesday night last,
three steerage passengers w r ere seen indulging
in the weed in their cabin, and sincerely
trust that they will in future cease to practice
so dangerous a habit.
SHOCKING ACCIDENT.
On Monday evening last a woman was taken
to the Hospital, from her residence in Cockatoo
Alley, suffering from a wet bed* We were
happy to find on enquiry last night that she was
out of danger.
* Caused by a leakage through decks.
NOTICE.
We intend next week to publish a brief ac-
count of Cape Horn, and the following week of
the Falkland Islands.
May 7th, 1867.
To the Editor of the Dover Castle News.
Dear Sir, —Allow me to thank you as a
fellow-passenger for the task you have under-
taken, in your efforts to supply us with a
newspaper during the voyage.
Although I have no sympathy with the
views you have expressed in the first issue
respecting the arrangements of the ship with
reference to the passengers—and think the
statement touching the quantity of water ship-
ped dui'ing the late gale incorrect, it appearing
to me, that the Dover Castle would not now
have been afloat if she had borne the burden of
200 tons of water —notwithstanding, your paper
is characterized by much that is excellent and
meritorious, and so long as it is carried on
according to promise, it will have my hearty
support.
Wishing you every success in your jour-
nalistic labors,
I am, yours faithfully,
(We thank our correspondent for his kind
expressions towards us, but regret that he
should stand at issue with us, respecting the
quantity of water shipped during the gale. We
fear that he has little knowledge of such
matters. Our statement is believed to be quite
correct by several of experience aboard. To
prevent, however, any doubt in future, we will,
if possible, retain the next sea and weigh it. —
Ed. D.C.N.)
AN UNFORTUNATE.
A little more than a week since, an unfor-
tunate native of the country we have left (an
Opossum), might have been observed in the
third cabin. We have to chronicle his disease
—he was found suspended by his chain, but
whether the result of accident or of premedi-
tated suicide, we are unable to state. His body
was unceremoniously committed to the deep,
minus the skin.
8
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


FIGHTING COOKS.
We submit to our “ Doctors ” that, having
consulted several legal authorities, we are of
opinion that they have no more right to fight
than cocks —at the same time, a few pannicans
of boiling water would settle the business
quicker than fists, and shed no blood. There
is no provision against this.
THE STRIKE OF OUR VOLUNTEERS*
These Volunteers are not of that class, who
on shore, parade the streets luxuriating in
martial ambition at the expense of the govern-
ment (or rather of the public), striking terror
in the breasts of nobody, and doing nothing
(certainly getting nothing for it but coughs and
colds), but are more useful, and decidedly less
ornamental —at least so far as dress is con-
cerned. Our Volunteers may be (or rather
may have been, for they are no more) termed
“Nautical Volunteers,’’ their arduous duties
being to pull ropes, and pull too, they do, with
all their might, always at the precise time
when their more experienced brother-pullers
are resting between their “ pulls.” These
enthusiasts have been a recognized institution
when pulling was wanted, but slighted and
abandoned always at a time when the boat-
swain’s whistle piped to grog. They have
hitherto, been laboring under the happy
delusion that, as they had always been ready
and willing to work, they .were expected
to imbibe a miniature dipper per diem of
the invigorating ship’s grog, if only to show
that no coolness existed between the captain and
themselves, but they were mistaken; although
they have kindly been allowed to stand to lee-
ward, within smell of the liquor. Their spirits
have, in consequence, drooped for want of
spirits—their hands, after reluctantly pulling,
have at last revolted at the sight of a rope,
(even at a thin one, like the signal halyards).
They have struck, and are no more. This is
much to be deplored, but we cannot blame
them when we calmly consider that the ever
acceptable “nobbier” ashore, is doubly accept-
able at sea. May they rest in peace,—but
should occasion require, may they, like our
Irish friend Finnigan, at his own “ wake ” when
“ the smell of the liquor reached his snout,”
rise up straightway, not in their beds, but at
the sheets and braces. May they rise up, for
they are a pretty downy set of boys, or they
would not have struck at all.
* Passengers,
THE SNARES ISLANDS.
To make our paper as interesting as possible, it
is our intention to notice from time to time
the various Islands, Headlands, &c., which
lie within our course. The following, for
want of space, was omitted in our last.
The Snares are a bold and moderately high
groupe of islands, destitute of vegetation, and
covered by myriads of the pintado, or cape
pigeon. They lie 62 miles S.S.W. from the
southern island of New Zealand.
The N.E., or largest island is little more
than one mile in length, by half a mile in
breadth, rising on the north side perpendicu-
larly to a height of 470 feet. The other side
is less precipitous, and probably accessible
under very favourable circumstances. The
western portion of the groupe consists of four
islets, separated from the large island by a
channel two miles in width.
In 1790, H.M.S. Chatham ran through this
channel, passing a breaking reef of rocks,
lying in nearly a direct line between the larger
island and the Western groupe, narrowing the
channel between the reef and the former to
about li miles.
H.M.S. Pandoi'a, found in 79 fathoms of
water, and about two miles to the north and
to the S.E. of the large island, deepening sea-
ward in every direction, quantities of coral.
The S.W. island is in latitude 48° 6' 43 S.,
longitude 166° 28' 40" E.
The tides about the groupe are inconsider-
able.
Our readers will remember that we passed
to the northward of these islands on Sunday
week last, the 28th of April. This was the
last land we saw, passing out of sight of the
Bounty Islands.
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.
We have great pleasure in announcing, that
after much skill and patience, that accom-
plished sportsman, Mr. Hickson, from Lincoln-
shire, assisted by Mr. Price, succeeded last
week in hooking and landing a fine Albatross,
measuring nine feet nine inches between the
tips of the wings.
The following original lines to an old tune
9
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


are respectfully dedicated to the perpetrator
of the vegetable outrage: —
There was once a sporting man.
And he had a little gun,
And his bullets were made of lead;
He stuck a pumpkin on a pole,
Through it made a little hole.
With his bullets that were made of lead.
The P.R. has been disengaged during the
week.
A swimming match took place last week on
the main deck, but as both parties had their
eyes shut, and didn’t know which way they
were going or where they were, nobody won.
The horses on the forecastle are, we believe,
doing well, but will require care during the
cold weather.
The quiet and ancient game of “ grab ” has
been played but little during the week.
A street organ has made its appearance
amongst us, but really it is such a quiet one
that the police, we are sure, will never inter-
fere with it.
Walking matches on the main deck are now
things of frequent occurrence. Everybody is
in everybody’s way, and everybody stares
everybody who runs against him out of coun-
tenance. The coils of rope on the deck are
not at all in the way—far from it —indeed, ex-
perience has taught those in charge, that they
are better in the middle than on the bits and
pins.
It may be interesting to the sporting
public to know that the “Flying Jib ” still
keeps ahead of us, and without doubt, will
arrive in London, leaving us astern. The
gentleman under the bowsprit keeps his eye
upon it.
Our readers will observe that we are to have
an Auction Sale aboard, on Monday, at 11 A.M.,
and we trust that it may not be the only
one, but that those, who can at any time
during the voyage, muster a few saleable
articles will follow the example thus set them.
Mr. James Johnson will always act as Auc-
tioneer. Mr. J. G. Horsey has consented to be-
come Agent, so that of whatever is put up, the
owner’s name will remain a secret. The sale
on Monday will be postponed until Wednesday
if the weather proves bad, and we shall be glad
to see a few more articles added to the list.
These sales generally create some amuse-
ment aboard a ship, at sea, but are always con-
sidered binding upon both seller and purchaser,
upon payment of cash by the latter.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
MATRIMONY.
WANTED by a substantially built ex-
Austrian Nobleman a WIFE. She must he accom-
plished, beautiful, and rich. The last qualification is indis-
pensable, as, owing to needle-guns and disappointments, the
Advertiser’s Estates in Moonshire are, for the present lost.
He is now in search of them, and, requiring money for tra-
velling expenses, will consent, to the end of obtaining some,
to encumber himself by marriage. He is good looking, not
so old as he will be, and of sober habits, never drinking any-
thing stronger than Emigrants' Sherry. Enclose carte de.
visits and amount of fortune to “ Tumble-through-bunk, ”
Editor’s Box.
PHRENOLOGY.
HPHE PROFESSOR may be consulted daily
JL at his office in the second cabin between the hours of
i-past 10 and 4-past 4. Phrenological developements and
mental characteristics explained. Charges very moderate.
N.B.—Ladies’ bumps examined at half-price.
On Monday, May 13, at 11 o’clock.
MR. JAMES JOHNSON has received in-
structions from the Agent for the different owners,
Mr. John G. Horsey, to sell by public auction on the above
day at his new Mart on the main deck (weather permitting)
the following articles :
1 Washstand complete.
1 New Wallaby Bug.
1 Violin and Music.
Warm Clothing.'
Specimens of Quartz.
Terms :—Cash,
OUR LOG.
16. Saturday, May 4th. —Fair breeze and more mode-
rate sea. Stunsails set on starboard side. Lat. at
noon ; 45° 20' S. Long.: 160° 49' W. Distance
239 miles. Cloudy weather. Ship rolling very
heavily.
17. Sunday, May sth. —Commences with light wind
and cloudy weather. Lat. at noon: 45° 38' S.
Long.: 155° 39' W. Distance 220 miles. The
remainder of the day foggy with light rain. Ship
still rolling heavily.
18. Monday, May 6th. —Foggy with light fair wind.
Lat. at noon: 45° 54' S. Long.; 153° 9' W.
Distance 105 miles. Fog cleared off and sun
shone brightly for a short time, but in evening
changed to rain.
19. Tuesday, May 7th. —Commences with rain,
fine strong breeze aft., and moderate sea. Royals
and stunsails set. Lat. at noon: 46°53'5. Long.:
146° 57' W. Distance 261 miles.. Thermometer
at 55°. Clear and sunny in afternoon. Breeze
continues until near midnight and dies away.
20. Wednesday, May Bth. —Commences with fine
strong breeze on port quarter. Ship with all
sail set, running at great speed in smooth sea.
Lat. at noon: 47° 14' S. Long. : 142° 11' W.
Distance 196 miles. Concludes with lighter wind,
thick fog and rain—very cold.
21. Thursday, May 9th. —Commences with light
wind aft—proves a fine sunny day with clear
sky. Lat. at noon : 48° 18' S. Long.: 137° 20'
W. Distance 206 miles.
22. Friday, May 10th. —Commences with a steady
breeze aft., and smooth water. Lat. at noon •
48° 59' S. Long.: 132° 31' W. Distance 194
miles. Concludes with fog and light rain.
10
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


®u{ gow'tt Castty Ups.
.a. croxji^nsr^-Xj
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “ Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Black wall, 1,200 tons burthen, B. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1807.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
[Saturday, May 18th, 1867.
No. 3.]
Prayers were read in tlie saloon on Sunday
morning ; in the evening Mr. Day preached in
the second cabin. On Wednesday evening the
Rev. Mr. Farr preached in the third cabin.
BIRTH.
On Friday morning last, May 17th, in lati-
tude 55° 19' S., longitude, 91° 53' W., Mrs.
Catherine Hedley, wife of Mr. Johnson
Hedley, late of Sebastopol, Ovens District,
Victoria, of a son.
Another week has passed, bringing with it
a coutinuance of fair winds. We have indeed
been most fortunate in this respect from the
commencement of our voyage ; a few more
days without change, and we may expect
to have run clear of the Cape. Up to noon on
Wednesday the winds have been light, but
since that time we have been dashing through
a heavy, surging sea, driven on our course
before gales of wind, furious squalls, rain,
hail, and even snow —the latter certainly in
very small quantities, but something new to
many of us. We have had to endure already
several most miserable days, not only caused
by the heaving, pitching, and rolling of our
ship, but from the wet and cold. The sun and
moon have shewn occasionally from between
the receding squally clouds, but the former
gave no warmth; the latter seldom much of
her usual brightness. Added to all, with wet
and slippery" decks, we have had the cus-
tomary seas dashing over us, that to come on
deck has been simply a preparatory step to
going below again with a wet jacket. A
sharp look out is kept day and night, but
nothing in the shape of either icebergs or ves-
sels has been seen.
On Thursday the sea occasionally reminded
us of the mountainous waves we read of, our
vessel often resting for a moment in a valley
of foam, whilst ahead and astern appeared
waves far above our heads; then, at a moment
when one would appear about to entomb us, we
should rise to it’s crest and look into the
depths of a valley of water astern, and in an
instant dash onwards down the foamy side of
another ahead—an awfully grand sight, made
more impressive from the whistling of the
wind through our rigging, and the trembling
of our vessel, as she is occasionally violently
struck by a remorseless wave, which, rather
than follow the rest under us, chooses to dash
over our decks.
But we must rejoice to know that, unplea-
sant as such weather is, we are rapidly
approaching our turning point. Yesterday at
noon, our distance from Cape Horn was only
about 770 miles, and if we are still favored
with a continuance of fair winds, we shall be
in the same longitude on Tuesday next at the
latest.


Whether then we are to go east or west of
the Falkland Islands we cannot say, but all
will agree with us, that the sooner we com-
mence to decrease our latitude by running up
the American coast, the more comfortable we
may hope to be.
We were sorry to notice that during Divine
Service in the third cabin on Wednesday
evening, more than one person was employed in
some duty which might have been put off until
the service was over, or, at any rate carried on
noiselessly, so as not to interrupt those engaged
in prayer.
A lady in the third cabin has, within the
last few days, unfortunately mislaid, or other-
wise lost from her retimle upwards of £lB. It
seems that she had placed the reticule between
two beds on the seats during the alterations
to her cabin, since which time she has missed
the money.
PETITION.
A petition from the steerage passengers for
an extra lamp in their cabin, which was much
needed, presented on Monday last, was granted
by Captain Deacon.
LEAKY DECKS.
We heard of a gentleman, who was so dis-
tressed during his night’s sleep lately, that he
wept long and bitterly. Grief heavily oppressed
him, as the frequent frown, clenched fist and
teeth plainly shewed ; there he lay, a sight to
behold, turning from side to side—then lying
on his back—half-rising and rubbing his tear-
washed cheeks, and again lying down to endure
the same mental torture until he finally awoke
—the first thing to surprise him on opening his
eyes, being a drop of dirty water slipping into
one of them. It was all caused by a leaky
deck.
A WHALE.
A large sperm whale followedus on Thursday
afternoon for upwards of two hours, sometimes
approaching within a ship’s length of our ves-
sel’s stern, and then receding to return again.
It appeared to be about 70 feet in length.
CAPE HORN.
Cape Horn (properly Hoorn) is the southern-
most point or headland of a groupe called
Hermite Islands. The name of these isles was
imparted from that of Admiral Hermite, com-
mander of the Dutch Fleet, who visited this
coast in 1624. Captain Cook, who passed it in
the year 1774, says it is known at a distance by
a high round hill over it. A point to the N.W,
is not unlike this; but their situation alone will
always distinguish the one from the other.
The latitude of the Cape is 55° 58' S., and the
longitude 67° 13' W.
On the N.W. side are two peaked rocks like
sugar loaves. Some other straggling low rocks
lie west of the Cape and one south of it, but
they are all near the shore, and consequently
not seen at any great distance.
It is said by some that Cape Horn belongs
to a small island, and is so laid down in some
maps and charts, but this has never been abso-
lutely confirmed.
The summits of some of the surrounding
hills are rocky, but the sides and valleys seem
covered with a green turf, and wooded with
tufts.
Three leagues E.N.E. of Cape Horn is Cape
Wollaston (called the Mistaken Cape by Cap-
tain Cook.) This has often been mistaken for
Cape Horn. There is a cluster of rocks two
miles S.E. of it 30 or 40 feet in height.
There is nothing striking in the appearance
of Cape Horn as seen from a distance, but, in
passing near, is more remarkable, shewing high
black cliffs towards the south. It is about 500
feet above the sea.
Several different latitudes and longitudes of
the Cape are given, but the ones we have
stated are believed to be correct.
12
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


THE QUEEN’S BIRTHDAY.
Friday next is the 48th anniversary of the
birth of her Majesty, Queen Victoria. Although
ashore this day is always observed as a public
holiday, we fear her Majesty’s loyal subjects,
now nearly approaching Cape Horn, will have
to content themselves for once without par-
ticipating in any extraordinary festivities. We
may, too, in these dreary latitudes expect to
experience little else than extreme cold and wet
—perhaps rough weather—so that our friends
ashore who have little idea of the attendant
misery, will not be surprised to find us paying
no attention to this auspicious day.
COLD FEET.
The following recipe for cold feet will be
found most useful during the present dis-
tressing weather, and likewise prove a comfort
to those who, having got their own warm by
going to bed, are entertained during the night
by an occasional “ double shuffle ” on deck: —
If the weather is very wet, to prevent slipping,
bring up your bed on deck, take off your boots
and hose, and get the officer of the watch to
take the boots to the galley and fill them with
boiling water—plunge the feet into them, put
your blankets round your neck, and speedy
relief not only to yourself, but to those below
will be found. If the weather is fine, put the
bed under the pump on the forecastle, and hav-
ing wetted it sufficiently to create moisture,
proceed as before—then take it down and sleep
on it.
ACCIDENTS WILL HAPPEN AT THE
BEST OF TIMES.
This is a fact, for they will even occur dur-
ing the time of Divine Service, as the following
little incident will shew: —Being a day of rest
in every respect, a certain gentleman last
Sunday ordered a few buckets, and having
placed two or three oars along them to form a
seat, sat down, happy at having hit upon such
a scheme to carry out to the very letter the
meaning of the word “ rest,” which, according
to Walker, implies sleep, pause, quiet, peace,
to be still, to remain, support, to lean upon,
&c., &c. Service proceeded, but the god
Morpheus overcame him, and falling a victim
to that deity, he calmly slumbered. Shortly
afterwards the ship gave a rather heavy lurch
to port —the slumberer dreamt at that moment
a happy dream : After a weary journey, he had
proceeded nearly to the summit of a steep moun-
tain—all was calm and serene around him—
save the beating of his own heart, no sound
disturbed the stillness of the scene —the clear
blue sky above—the verdant grass beneath
added to its serenity—the little sparkling
rivulet trickling by his side, falling in tiny
cascades over pearl-white pebbles—all re-
minded him of Fairy-land—his heart was glad-
dened, but weary in body he could proceed no
further upwards; he stopped and repeated
after Sleek : —“ Morally I would, but physically
I can't.” Whilst resting, of a sudden a sweet
voice ascended from the vale beneath, calling
upon him to come. He turned and thought a
moment —then came to the conclusion that
down hill was easier than up. Yes, he would
go—downwards he ran —then flew as if winged
—faster and faster he went, until hitting his
head and coming to a full stop, he paused
and looked around him. He had only answered
an imaginary call, and found himself uninvited
in a lady’s cabin! He offered an apology
—it was the ship rolling not him—he never
rolled. He retired much confused —he blushed
—’tis enough—we will spare his blushes, and
drop the curtain.
THE MARKETS.
Soup and Bouilli : Demand small, smell
rather strong. — Salt Beef : No demand,
every body seeming to value their teeth.
—Flour :If good will always find a good price,
but if lumpy recommended to invalids.— Pea-
Soup : Much wanted but not obtainable, being
substituted by pea-soup water. — Suet : Good
and skinny.— Sugar : Yery fair and finds
ready consumption.— Yinegar : Sour.—Pep-
per : Hot and dusty.— Tobacco : Good but
unusually expensive, being free of duty.—
Fresh Water : (You have to get up in the
middle of the night or you will miss it for the
day).— Cheese : Yery “ cheesy.”— Crying
Children: Plentiful and strong in lungs.
— Quiet Ditto : Also plentiful and always in
the way. — Rum and Brandy : Unobtainable
13
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


but in very great demand (probably owing to
tbirst, caused by the salt provisions).— Dry
Bunks : Very scarce. — Coughs and Colds ;
Plentiful.
LIBRARY.
A library has been opened in the starboard
fore deck cabin for the use of passengers, from
which books may be obtained on Wednesdays
and Sundays, at £ past 1 P.M., upon payment
of one shilling for the voyage, the proceeds to
go to the Poplar Hospital. Mr. Husband is
librarian.
To the Heditor of the Dover Carsel Noos.
Dear Ser, — i ave put a hadvertisement in
yer paper to harnser the haustrian—pleas
halter it to Make it sound better. —Doo hall you
can to elp me get old ov im if yer no him, if
he’s sicks foot hi —if knot don’t bother. Your
youngur than me* but yer haut to no ow to
purswade im. Tell im about the cat, hand hit’s
such a beauty and haffectionate hanimal. Tell
im E needent minde behing a saint be-
kause i’m saint henuff for 2. Don’t tell im that
i’m so hold as i ham, say i’m honly forte and put
this hin yer paper for helpping. Doo.
Sbpherina Berblotherbmlovevermore.
REFLECTIONS.
We have left the sunny South behind,
And friends to us most true and kind ;
Perhaps to see no more.
We’re hastening on fresh friends to find,
Who years ago we left behind,
Upon our native shore.
May those kind friends now left behind,
Who oft will bear upon our mind,
Enjoy what’ere is good.
But I myself no more will roam,
To seek a far off distant home,
Across the briny flood.
AUCTION SALE.
This sale was beld on the main deck on
Wednesday (Monday, the advertised day being
too wet), but from one or two causes was not
so successful as expected. There were several
very good bids, but owners had placed reserve
on their property, even above the real value,
otherwise much more might have been disposed
• She being half a century, I believe her.—Ed. D. C.N.
of. The specimens of quartz were likely to sell
well, but a sharp shower of rain, and the order
for all hands on deck to “ shorten sail,” sud-
denly terminated the business and caused a
general rush for shelter.
ADVERTISEMENT.
MATRIMONY.
'T'HE EX-AUSTRIAN NOBLEMAN who
JL advertised for a WIFE may hear of something to his
advantage by calling in Cockatoo Alley (nearly opposite the
pump). The Advertiser is everything that can be desired —
rich, accomplished, and was once younger than now. Tea is
her favorite beverage. Will throw a Tom Cat into the bar-
gain (an affectionate Tom). Trusts that the Gentleman is
over six feet in height, otherwise he need not trouble him-
OUR LOG.
23. Saturday, May 11th. —Fine day with sun
shining at intervals. Ship rnnning before a fine
breeze on her course. Lat. at noon: 49° 30' S.
Long.: 126° 45' W. Distance, 229 miles. Moon-
light night. Fore royal sent on deck. Ship
rolling very much.
24. Sunday, May 12th. —Commences with cloudy
weather. Fair wind continues. Lat. at noon:
50° 03' S. Long.: 120° 59' W. Distance, 225
miles. Thermometer, 49°.5 (on deck.) Con-
cludes with misty weather and rain. Same wind
continuing.
25. Monday, May 13th. —Strong fair breeze and
light rain. Lat. at noon: 50° 42' S. Long.;
115° 53' W. Distance, 201 miles. Thermometer,
50°.5. Concludes with thick weather.
26. Tuesday, May 14th. —Light fair wind, fog and
rain. Lat. at noon: 51° 22' S. Long.: 110°
49' W. Distance, 195 miles. Thermometer:
49°.5. Concludes with freshening breeze and
rain. Stunsails taken in at midnight.
27. Wednesday, May 15th —Commences with fair
breeze on starboard quarter. At 11.30 a.m., rising
wind and sea. Top-gallant sails stowed and top-
sails reefed. Lat. at noon: 53° 05' S. Long:
104° 53' W. Distance, 243 miles. In evening
strong wind with heavy squalls and sea. Making
about 12 knots, and shipping occasionally a
drenching sea. Very cold on deck.
28. Thursday, May 16th. —Commences with hard
gale and heavy sea, with constant squalls. Ship
under reduced canvas. Lat. at noon: 54° 42'
S. Long: 98° 07' W. Distance, 258 miles.
Topsails reefed in evening. After several very
heavy squalls, more moderate, and wind heading
us. Wet and cold.
29. Friday, May 17th. —Commences with moderate
wind and sea, which soon increase again. Lat.
at noon: 55° 24' S. Long.: 91° 10' W. Dis-
tance, 237 miles. Concludes with same rough
weather and heavy sea. Ship on her course,
pitching heavily.
14
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


.{The CUufr (fasti f Ups.
.A. J’OTJUE^IN'.AILj
Issued every Saturday Morning: on board the ship “Dover Castle,” belonging' to Messrs. Green,
of Blackwall, 1,200 tons burthen, R. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 4.]
Saturday, May 25th, 1867.
Prayers were read in the saloon on Sunday speedy reduction of canvas, our ship careening
morning. In the afternoon the Sunday classes over to starboard with but little warning, and
for children met in the third cabin, and in the -in , „ „ .
creating a considerable amount of confusion
evening Divine Service was held in the second
cabin, the Rev. Mr. Bradxey officiating; also in tlie numerous berths, at the same time
in the third cabin on ‘Wednesday evening rendering walking upon deck a very difficult
by Mr. Day. proceeding. Yet, in spite of the violence
proceeding. Yet, in spite of the violence
of the breeze, which has continued ever since,
we have made but little headway, the vessel
The continuance of fair winds we had last „ , , , , ,
sailing too close to the wind to expect much.
week such apparent good reasons to hope for _ _ , . , . . , .
On Sunday morning we passed to windward
and expect, has unfortunately failed us, and . , . ~,, .. . , , „
ot a brig, and at the same time to leeward or a
nothing but calms and contrary winds have , . m
barque ; and on Tuesday morning a lull rigged
been our lot during the last few davs. When . „ n .. ..
ship running before the wind northwards.
we are to clear Cape Horn has now become a
We experience some trouble in producing
we may leave our present most disagreeable our P a P eIS darin S tlle P reaeDt weather - wit
locality far behind us. It is most vexatious * n g being a difficult task.
that we should, when within so few miles, be a S ain be g of tho thM caW “ P^engers
suddenly checked in our course and have to to kee P the paper in it’s place that all may
even go backwards as we had on Wednesday have an opportunity of reading it. We
last, and at best to make no forward progress. haTe had man y complaints from those who
We have been as far South as 69° with the cannot fllld
thermometer at 38°,
Monday last, and on the afternoon of the ' ‘
Yesterday being the Queen’s birthday,
latter day our misfortunes commenced, and eT<a7body laidinbed as late as usual, excepting
have continued up to the time of our writing. some of the sailors who rose at 4 a.m. ,to take part
At half-past ten on Tuesday morning the in some sort of proceedings in celebration of
the day. As early as | past 6 a.m., our fourth
light wind then blowing, suddenly increased officer took post at t]ie main hat chway in
to a furious gale, and necessitated a great and solemn dignity alongside the pump, and roared


lustily down the intermediate hatch, not “ God
save the Queen,” but “ Now, then, below for
water!” and, greeting each blinking passenger
who arose from night into a light nearly as
opaque —tin in hand and chattering teeth—
with the loyal query “ What’s your number ?”
proceeded to serve out to each his daily allow-
ance of Adam’s ale. What else though can we
expect such wretched mornings as these ? It is
next to impossible to laugh, for fear the face
should freeze in wrinkles before returning to its
natural shape again. No review was held for
want of soldiers ; had we had them we should
have been all right, for we have a cannon (a
real cannon) and a lot of balls much too large
to go into it, but that wouldn’t matter. The
bells (in the singular though, for there is only
one,) rang out in joyous peals during the day,
never striking more than eight at a time.
Flags floated proudly in the breeze—at least we
mean shirts, stockings, &c., for it was washing
day aboard. The herald’s welcome trumpet
resounded far and near, carrying joy in even
it’s lowest notes (it is an old cornet, and has a
severe cold like its owner). Banquets were
held in various parts —that in the third cabin
being most sumptuous. Nearly one hundred and
fifty persons sat down to dinner. The edibles,
which were numerous and served in a style
seldom attempted (viz., in tin plates and hook
pots) ranged from the delicious bouilli soup to
boiled rice and salt beef, and were heartily dis-
cussed. No toasts were drunk, having nothing
but cold water and lime juice to drink them in.
The National Anthem was dispensed with,
having no tin whistle aboard.
And thus concluded the miserable day.
THE POULTRY YARD*
We have some fine birds aboard—regular
prize cocks. They are numerous and of great
variety; thin, fat, tall, short, young, and old.
The latter are the worst. There is one classed
among them of fine proportions and in good
condition —it is of the Austrian breed and of
most extraordinary habits. All on board are
* One of the amusements pursued by passengers of an
evening was that of imitating the crowing of cocks.
aware that these birds follow the colonial cus-
tom to a certain extent by crowing late at
night, but not one amongst them sees the fun
of getting up at break of day this cold weather.
When the “ early-to-bed ” passengers retire for
the night, these useful birds may be seen on
deck and heard throughout the ship. On
Monday evening last about a dozen hovered
around the main hatchway crowing lustily,
and were answered from below by one or two
of the fraternity already at roost. The Aus-
trian bird we have referred to has scarcely been
seen since, but being fond of roosting for days
together, we can easily imagine that he is ex-
hausted from crowing so much, but will get up
again in a week or two. Oh! that we had a
dunghill for them to stand on.
ENIGMA.
What’s that which man loves more than life;
Dreads more than death, or mortal strife;
That which contented men desire,
The poor possess —the rich require,
The miser spends—the spendthrift saves,
And all men carry to their graves ?
( We shall give the answer next week.)
LINES RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED TO
MISS ,
O’er her dinner plate, in sweet repose,
A lady lately calmly slept:
Drooping, unheeded, like the withering rose
In Morpheus’ arms of sense bereft.
THE FALKLAND ISLANDS.
These islands, situated between 51° and 53°
south latitude, and 57° and 62° west longitude,
consist of two principal islands, the east and
west Falklands, with a considerable number of
others of different sizes, clustered around and
in the straits between them.
East Falkland’s greatest length is about 95
miles; breadth, about 53 miles. West Falk-
land is about 80 miles in length. The width
varies considerably, from about 40 to 25 miles.
16
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


THE C AND L E■ FI GH T. *
Al k—Teddy the Tiler,
In Spitfire Street last Friday night,
A woman screamed with all her might,
For there was going to be a jolly fight,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
Poor Scanlan—quite a harmless man—
Was reckoned up by Mrs. Fan
(Who generally is a perfect lamb
At least as like as woman can) —
The row began at the hour of ten—
First with women and then amongst men,
And might have finished —the deuce knows when,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
CHORUS.
The remaining islands, about two hundi’ed
in number, vary very considerably from 1(1
miles in length by 8 miles in breadth, to mere
islets of half-a-mile in diameter.
The sovereignty is now vested in the British
Crown, and a Lieutenant Governor appoin-
ted to them; the title has, however, been a
matter of much dispute. It has been asserted
that Americus Yespucius, then employed by
the King of Portugal, saw these islands in 1502,
but there is no clear record of their having been
discovered prior to the voyage of Juan de Solis
in 1512. On the 14th of August, 1592, John
Davis, who sailed with Cavandish on his second
voyage, but separated from him in May, 1592,
discovered the islands. Sir Richard Hawkins,
ignorant of Davis’ discovery, in 1594 named
them Hawkins’ Maiden Land, by which they
were known until Strong, in 1690, sailed through
and anchored in the channel, which he called
Falkland Sound; the name extended also to the
islands, entirely obliterated Hawkins, and
never yielded to Davis.
The French call the islands Les Malouines—
the Spaniards altering it to Malvinas.
On the 17th of March, 1764, the French es-
tablished Port Louis on the spot where the
settlement now stands. On the 23rd of January,
1765, they were taken possession of for the
British by Commodore Byroru Spain laid
claim to the islands immediately after the
French settlement, which was given up to
Spain on the Ist of April, 1767, who indem-
nified the settlers. In 1770, a Spanish armament
attacked the British Colony at Port Egmont,
and obliged it to surrender, but it was after-
wards restored. It was forsaken in 1774, but
the signals of possession were left flying.
Spain afterwards withdrew altogether from
the islands at the commencement of the present
century —then America claimed possession—
but now, except a claim by Spain, resting on a
very unstable foundation, Great Britain has
the sole right of possession.
We have given this brief account of the early
history of these islands, but, although the sub-
sequent events are numerous and varied, our
space prevents a recital of them. The year
1834 may be called the year of the foundation
of the present colony. The seat of govern-
ment is at Port Louis.
It has lately been suggested to form a con-
vict settlement hei'e.
The area of East Falkland may be roughly
estimated at 3,000 square miles, and that of
West Falkland at about 2,000 —of the whole
about 6,000 square miles.
The greatest riches of these islands are the
herds of wild cattle and horses. There are a
few wild pigs. It is a great whaling station.
Fish abound in the surrounding waters, espe-
cially in spring.
There are numerous good harbours.
The temperature is very low.
With screaming, and rowing, abuse and a scratch,
Fan and Scanlan would prove a very good match,
For a little diversion for the passenger batch,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
The cause of the row (or rather the lark)
Was the lights going out, leaving all dark,
Better than that last year in Hyde Park,
If it had’nt been for a Middy,
“ Who steals the candles,” said Mrs. Fan,
“ First to get money, then to stand ‘ sam ’
“ Whilst we in the dark have to do as we can ? ”
“ Your another, —take that! ” says Mr. Scanlan—
“ I’ll scratch your face, you nasty scum,
“ And put a stoppage on your rum! ”
• Written upon a quarrel between a woman in the inter-
mediate and the steward of that class.
17
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Which really she would have tried to have done,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
CHORUS,
With screaming, and rowing, abuse and a scratch,
Fan and Scanlan would prove a very good match,
For a little diversion for the passenger batch,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
She kept her word, and scratched his face,
Then called for the Captain to hear the case,
And would thus have added more disgrace,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
And now all hands at once turned out,
Aroused from sleep by the awful shout—
Some with their breeches, and some without
(Indecent you’ll say without a doubt) —
But what cared they in the glorious riot
Without clothing at all (or very nigh it),
And nothing would then have restored quiet,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
CHORUS.
With screaming, and rowing, abuse and a scratch,
Fan and Scanlan would prove a very good match,
For a little diversion for the passenger batch,
If it had’nt been for a Middy.
NAUTICAL SCIENCE.
W E are indebted to two ladies in the third
cabin, holding for a few minutes the following
conversation on Friday night last, for some
edifying intelligence which may be most use-
ful to master mariners and others, shewing, as
it does, more points in the compass than
those already known:—
Ist Lady (■meeting No. 2, and holding fast
to the table as the ship was very unsteady) .—Oh,
Mrs. , how are you ? Isn’t this dreadful ?
2nd Lady.—Shocking! It makes one quite
nervous.
Ist Lady. But there’s no immediate
danger ?
2nd Lady.—Let us hope not. They say we
may be weeks before 3ve get round the Cape.
Ist Lady.—lmpossible! Don’t believe’em.
But how’s she going no3v? (N.B, — “She” means
the ship).
2nd Lady.—Why, she’s thirty points off her
course.
Finale. —(A duet of wailing.)
OUR LOG.
30. Saturday, May 18th. —Commences with light
fair breeze and moderate sea. Top-gallant sails
set. Lat. at noon; 50° 16' S. Long.; 83° 53'
W. Distance, 250 miles. In evening wind dies
away. Fine moonlight night, but very cold.
31. Sunday, May 19th. —Commences with smooth
water and scarcely any wind. Ship moving
slowly. At 8 a. M., a barque in sight on the
horizon to leeward of ns, steering west, and on
windward quarter a brig, visible at a great dis-
tance and soon lost sight of. The former disap -
neared about noon. Lat. at noon: 56° 15' S.
Long.: 80° 12' W. Distance, 121 miles. Con-
cludes with same weather.
32. Monday, May 20th. —Fine morning. Ship be-
calmed. Lat. at noon: 55° 53' S. Long. : 79°
00' W. Distance, 46 miles. Ship put on port
tack at 12 o’clock. Light breeze sprung up at 3
p.m. Ship put about on the other tack at 5 p.m.
Concludes with very light wind.
33. Tuesday, May 21st. —Commences with light
weather. Ship still close hauled. At 4 past 3
A. 31., during light squall, ship taken aback, and
then run on other tack. At | past 10
a. 3i., full rigged ship passed well to windward,
steering northward. Came on to blow hard at
this time—all hands ordered on deck. Mizeu
and top-gallant sails stowed and topsails reefed.
Mainsail also reefed. Sea rising rapidly. Ship
on port tack. Lat. at noon : 56° 23' S. Long.;
78° 04' W. Distance, 44 miles. Thermometer :
42°. Steering, S.E. by E. Concludes with cold
and boisterous weather.
34. Wednesday, May 22nd. —Commences with same
weather. At 10 A.3L, wind more moderate. A
fall of snow during the morning. Sea still heavy.
Lat. at noon: 58° 35' S. Long.: 79° 07' W.
Distance, 137 miles. Wore ship at 5 P.3L, and
stood to the northward. Ship pitching very
heavily all night. Thermometer : 38°.
35. Thursday, May 23rd.— -Commences with strong
breeze and cross sea, causing the ship to pitch
heavily. Lat. at noon: 57° 39' S. Long.: 77°
45' W. Distance, 74 miles. Thermometer, 40°
Concludes with similar 3veatber.
36. Friday, May 24th. —Same wind continues with
moderate sea. Lat. at noon; 55° 43' S. Long.:
7G' J 03' W. Distance, 129 miles. At | past 5
p.3i. 3Vore ship, and again stood away to the
southward.
18
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


(The ,§or«i (Critic Ups.
.a. vTOTj^uxtax-.
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “Dover Castle,” belonging - to Messrs, Green,
of Blackwall, 1,200 tons burthen, 8.. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
[Saturday, June Ist, 1867.
No. 5.]
Prayers were read in the saloon on Sunday
morning last, and in the afternoon the usual
classes for children met in the third cabin.
Divine Sendee was held in the second cabin
in the evening, by the Rev. Mr. Farr ; and
on Wednesday evening in the third cabin, by
the Rev. Mr. Bradney.
After nine days ’ beating against adverse
winds, we have at last been favored with a
fair one. When we first deviated from oeir
course our latitude was 55 53' S., and longi-
tude 79° 00' W., since which time we have
tacked to and fro no less than fourteen times,
often in the face of strong winds and heavy
squalls, but more latterly against light ones,
and had made scarcely any progress until Wed-
nesday mominglast, when we were, by a change
of wind, again enabled to lay our course.
Our latitude was then about 57° 15' S., and
longitude about 71° 20' W., making our posi-
tion at the end of the nine days as 1° 22'
higher in latitude, and 7° 40' lower in longi-
tude, or about two hundred and seventy eight
miles further on our true course during that
period.
Early on Wednesday morning, as we have
said, we steered close hauled on our course,
and about mid-day the wind veered two or
three points further aft, but again returned to
its former quarter in the afternoon, blowing
squally throughout the night. On Thursday
we had the wind astern, and had, up to yes-
terday morning, the advantages of its continu-
ance, but then came on one of the most terrific
gales, accompanied by heavy falls of snow
and furious seas that we have yet experienced,
during which our lower fore topsail split up.
The ship lay hove-to all day and is still so,
under merely lower main topsail and main
trysail. The gale still continues. We shall
give a description of it next week.
We passed sixty miles to the southward of
Cape Horn on Wednesday, May 29th, at
midnight, within five hours of being forty-one
days out from Port Philip Heads, and abo\it
forty-two days seventeen hours from Sand-
ridge Pier.
We have seen several whales during the
week and likewise numerous vessels, but no
icebergs. Much snow has descended, more
than once covering our ship to a depth of
several inches.
The thermometer was yesterday down to
27°.55 (two and a-half degrees below freez-
ing point).
We have to inform our crowing friends that
their occasional nightly amusements on the
main deck proves very annoying to the officers
whose cabins are so close that the noise pre-
vents all sleeping, and when we remind them


Captain
.... R. K. Deacon.
1st Officer ....
2nd Officer... .
3rd Officer....
4tli Officer... .
that these gent lemon have only an hour or
two at a time to rest, we are sure all will
agree with us, that it is better to discontinue
the annoyance.
We regret to say that, owing to objections
raised by some of the second class passengers,
the usual Sunday evening services held in
their cabin will in future be discontinued.
SNOW-BALLING.
This amusement, which many of ns have
not indulged in for years, (not having even
seen a snow-fall), was pursued on board on
Thursday last, until almost every particle of
snow was used, and the game was only discon-
tinued for want of material. Both passengers
and crew joined in the sport, and everybody
who appeared as a fresh comer on deck was
either speedily driven below again, or, in self-
defence, compelled to join in the game. Early
in the morning the ship was one white mass,
reminding us of times long gone by. Yester-
day morning the vessel was covered a’couple
of feet deep, but all amusement therefrom was
entirely prevented, owing to the furious gale
blowing all day.
VESSELS SIGHTED.
Since our last issue we have seen six vessels.
On Saturday last we passed a full-rigged ship
to windward. On Wednesday a vessel was
discovered from aloft, coming up astern. On
Thursday morning about 10 a.m. we discovered
a full-rigged ship, close hauled to windward,
and another to leeward; and, in the afternoon,
observed a barque (on starboard tack) on our
port bow, but, although we hoisted our ensign,
and kept off a point or two, she went about,
made more sail, and stood away to the North
and West, we coming up to our course again.
Our vessel then hoisted her number, but the
barque had not courtesy enough to return the
compliment, until too far off to distinguish her
flags. Our Captain supposed hev to be an
American. Whilst hove-to yesterday, a vessel
was observed on the starboard quarter.
OUR SHIP’S CREW AND PASSENGERS.
Eon the information of our friends ashore we
shall attempt to give some idea of passenger
life on a voyage from Australia to England,
by recording briefly from week to week, until
completed, the usages followed during the
monotonous period occupied on such a passage.
We are aware that the subject will prove
of but little interest to our fellow passengers,
all being so well acquainted with it; but to
those who have never travelled round the
world, it will, we think, be looked upon in
quite a contrary light.
Through the kindness of our chief otficer,
Mr. Haukison, we are able to give the correct
number of passengers in each cabin.
The total number of souls now on board,
including crew and passengers (and two infants
bom on the voyage) is two hundred and
ninety-seven.
THE CREW
Consists in all, including Captain, officers, and
men, together with stewards, butcher, baker,
cooks and boys, of fifty-six persons.
The names of the officers are as follows:
5th Officer. Mr. Husband.
C Mr. Hay,
Midshipmen ....
v Mr. Giles.
Boatswain Mr. Dawson.
Chief Steward .... Mr. Dunn.
Carpenter Mr. Maxwell.
THE SALOON OR FIRST CABIN
Contains sixteen adults, nine children (over
one, and under twelve years of ago), and three
20
'XU 15 DOVER CASTLE SKWjJ,


infants funder twelve months old), and is
situated in the poop, on a level with the main
deck, occupying more than one third of the
vessel’s length. The dining saloon, running
athwart-ships of the entire width of the vessel,
and lighted by a skylight above and a window
at either end, is situated near the front part of
the poop, from which it is separated by
sleeping berths, and has a door opening on to
the main deck forward, whilst from its centre
running aft is a passage, likewise lighted by a
skylight, bounded on the sides by the sleeping
berths, and terminated by the stern cabins,
one of which is occupied by the Captain. At
this end is a ladder ascending to the poop
deck, and in the centre of the passage-way
another, encompassed by a railing leading
down to the midshipmens’ berth, store room,
stewards’ berth, &c., on the ’tween deck.
Between the last-mentioned ladder and the
dining saloon, and in the centre of the pas-
sage, is the mizen mast, around which there is
a stand of muskets, and overhead a correspond-
ing number of pistols and cutlasses.
Both the dining saloon and sleeping berths
are spacious, and in every respect commo-
dious, and the latter, like the former, well
lighted, each having a window about two feet
square; this, unlike some ships, whose saloon
passengers have only the limited light ad-
mitted through the usual sized port hole of
eight inches in diameter, is an advantage only
to be appreciated by those who have under-
taken a lengthy voyage.
It will be noticed that these arrangements
are quite different to those on board most
ships, the dining saloon generally running
fore and aft (with a table down the centre, and
the sleeping berths along the sides) and, we
think, preferable ; the sleeping accommodation
being so far removed from the dining.
The poop, as is usual, is reserved expressly
for the use of the first class passengers, and
in warm weather forms a roomy promenade,
but in the cold is little nsed, being very much
exposed to the wind.
A milch cow is kept or board for the sole
use of this cabin, and a constant supply of
fresh milk is thus provided.
The saloon is kept lighted each evening
from dusk until ten o’clock, when nothing hut
a small night light is kept burning. No
lights are permitted in the sleeping berths
after half-past ten at night.
Breakfast is laid at half-past eight each
morning, lunch at noon, dinner at half-past
three p.m., and tea at half-past six; dinner
being announced first by a bell rung half an
hour before, and another at the time the meal
is on the table —the others by one bell, when
ready.
The table is kept well supplied with fresh
meat during the voyage, there being a stock
of sheep, pigs, and poultry aboard for the use
of this class only—added to which all kinds
of preserves are provided, leaving but the
little, that is at sea unobtainable, to make the
table equal to that of a first-class hotel in a
large city. Bottled ale and porter may be
obtained when required.
The passengers in this class have the privi-
lege of buying wines and spirits if wished for,
one not allowed to the other classes at all.
There is little or no amusement on deck, if
we except fishing for sea birds, watching land,
or a vessel in sight (things of very rare occur-
rence). A whale, a water-spout, or a shark
occasionally creates a little temporary excite-
ment when discovered. Reading is generally
resorted to as a means of passing away time.
Whilst we write, however, the poop deck
is almost deserted, ladies finding but little
pleasure in facing the extreme cold weather,
and gentlemen resorting to the seclusion of
the main deck, where the high bulwarks par-
tially protect them from the chilling winter’s
wind.
(To he Continued ).
ANSWER TO ENIGMA IN OUR LAST.
NOTHING.
21
'jfc'HJS DOVER CASTLE NEWS


RIDDLES.
1. Who was Jonah’s tutor ?
2. What two Counties in Ireland would you sup-
pose to be lighter than the others ?
3. What is the difference between a bankrupt and
a feather bed ?
4. When was beef-tea first introduced into Eng-
land ?
5. Why are sailors the smallest of men ?
6. Why ought the stars to be the best astrologers ?
7. Why is a novelist the most peculiar of all ani-
mals ?
{Answers in our next.)
DOMESTIC FELICITY AT SEA.
(a fact.)
Affectionate Mamma {to her little boy who has
brought from the deck a handful of snow). —There’s a
dear boy! And now, darling, get a plate—a dirty
one will do —and fetch some for your sister!
MATERNAL ADVICE TO A DAUGHTEB*
Oh ! whisper, whisper softly, dear,
During meal times, or some may hear.
Watch well their plates; mark well to leer,
At each and all, and have no fear.
For tho’ to them this may seem queer,
You’ll never need to shed a tear,
But raise your spirits, laugh, and jeer,
Then whisper very softly, dear!
OUR LOG.
37. Saturday, May 25th. —Commences with mo-
derate breeze and sea. Wore ship at | past 3
a.m. Passed to leeward of a full rigged ship at
9 a.m. Lat. at noon: 55° 36' S. Long.: 74°
30' W. Distance, 53 miles. Ship put about at
I past 4 p.m. Concludes with same weather.
38. Sunday, May 26th. —Commences with very
light wind and smooth sea. Ship put about to the
* A lady aboard was in the habit of whispering to her
daughter during meal times.
southward at 5 past 3 a.m., and again to the
northward at 8 a.m. ; again on starboard tack at
mid-day. Lat. at noon : 55° 47' S. Long.: 74°
25' W. Distance, 11 miles. Ship put about
on port tack again at 8 p.m.
39. Monday, May 27th. —Commences with same
light weather. Ship put on starboard tack at
3.30 a.m. Caught a glimpse of what we sup-
posed to be land at 9 a.m., but it was not.
Lat. at noon: 55° 44' S. Long.: 72° 25'
W. Distance, 67 miles. A whale seen to
windward. Sea appears very green to-day as if
near land. Ship put about again at 2 p.m.
40. Tuf.sday, May 28th. —Blowing very hard af
intervals during the night, about 9 a.m. settling
down again to moderate weather. Very cold.
Lat. at noon: 57° 56' S. Long.: 72° 23' W.
Distance, 132 miles. Ship put about on star-
board tack at this time. Concludes with very
light wind.
41. Wednesday, May 29th. —Ship on her course
close hauled with very light wind. Thermometer
on deck 32°.5. Lat. at noon : 57° 5' S. Long. :
70° 18' W. Distance, 85 miles. Wind hauled
aft a point or two about 2 p.m. Starboard fore
topmast stunsail set, but had to brace sharp up
again at 3, taking in stunsail, main royal, mizen
and main top-gallant staysails and flying jib, the
wind suddenly increasing. A vessel seen astern
from aloft during day. Squally in evening with
falls of snow. Passed the meridian of Cape
Horn at midnight.
42. Thursday, May 30th. —Commences with squally
weather. Decks covered with snow. Wind
hauling aft towards 8 a.m. Passed to windward
of a full rigged ship, and to leeward of another
at 10 a.m. Lat. at noon: 56°. 17' S. Loug.; 64
00' W. Distance, 210 miles. Hoisted our num-
ber to a barque close hauled on port tack, but she
did not answer until too far oft to make her’s
out. Ship becalmed with yards squared. Fine
night.
43. Friday, May 31st. —Commences with light fail 1
wind, but at 7 a.m. commenced to blow hard
with heavy fall of snow, deeply covering decks.
Lower fore top sail split up. At 11 a.m.,
ship hove-to under lower main topsail and
main trysail only. Lat. at noon: 54° 43' S.
Long.: 61° 03' W. Distance, 138 miles. Hove-
to all day. A ship astern. Gale continues furi-
ously with very heavy sea, moderating at 9 p.m.
Soundings obtained at from 70 to 80 fathoms
on bank 160 miles south of Falkland Islands.
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


(The porcr (f attic Bcivs.
.A. J” OTJRIT
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Q-reen,
of Blackwall, 1,800 tons burthen, 11. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to Dondon, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 6.]
[Saturday, June Bth, 1867.
Prayers were read in the saloon on Sunday
morning last; in the afternoon the usual Sun-
day classes for children met; and in the
evening Divine Service was held by the Rev.
Mr. Farr, in the third cabin at 6 ; and by
the Rev. Mr. Bradney in the saloon, at 7
o’clock. On Wednesday evening a sermon
was preached in the third cabin by Mr. Day.
Since our last issue, and up to noon yester-
day we have made only the very indifferent
week’s run of eight hundred and sixty-six
miles, but, small as it is, it has placed us so
far from our position to the southward of the
Falkland Islands, whilst hovc-to at noon on
Friday week, and we are no longer subjected
to the dangers and severe weather then sur-
rounding us, but with sunshine and a warmer
temperature, are slowly approaching the
Equator.
We have made, as nearly as we can calcu-
late, seven thousand three hundred and twelve
miles from Port Philip Heads. At arriving at
this distance, we have taken, in a direct line
on our course, the run during the nine days
off the Cape, and not included the great num-
ber of miles, we then ran to the northward
and southward of it. This gives us a daily
average of nearly one hundred and fifty miles
during our passage.
Six thousand two hundred and three miles
of the vdiole distance was run between the
Heads and the meridian of the Cape; and the
remainder (one thousand one hundred and
nine miles to noon yesterday) is our distance
from that meridian.
The following information, giving an idea
of the winds generally prevailing in the
different latitudes between the parallels of
60° north and south may be interesting to our
readers.
Between the parallels 60° and 40° south,
the counter trades or north-west winds
prevail. Crossing 40° and down to 35° S.
the north-west and south-west winds con-
tend generally with equal power for the
mastery—between 35° and 30° the calm belt
of Capricorn is a region of shifting winds,
light airs, and calms, westerly being, if any,
those prevailing. Then between 30° S. and
5° N., the south-east trades prevail—hence
to 10° N, is the fluctuating equatorial calm
belt. The north-east trade winds are now
met with, and up to about 30° N., between
which parallel and 35° N., lies the calm belt
of Cancer, or horse-latitudes , where the
wind is ever changeable.
Between 35° and 50° N., north-west and
south winds contend for the mastery with
nearly equal persistency. From hence to 60°
N. are met the south-west or counter trade


winds of the North. These wind belts extend
over land and sea, around the globe.
The calm and trade wind regions or belts,
move up and down the earth annually, in lati-
tude nearly a thousand miles. In July and
August the zone of equatorial calms is found
between 7° and 12° N.; sometimes higher. In
March and April between latitude 5° and 2 J N.
In winter the calm belt of Cancer ap-
proaches the Equator,
Much rain may be expected whilst crossing
the equatorial calm belt.
NOTICE.
We are compelled, through want of space,
to postpone the continuance of “ The Ship’s
Crew and Passengers,” until next week.
Owing to the many complaints in the inter-
mediate, of passengers not being able to see
the paper, nor even ascertain who has got it,
and having already lost one, we intend here-
after, for the convenience of all parties, to file it
under the main hatchway, on Saturdays, Mon-
days, and Tuesdays, from ) past 8 A.M., until
4 P.M.
We should feel obliged if any person could
let us have a few candles, for having to com-
plete our four copies on the Friday evening,
and having used our stock, we find much in-
convenience for want of light. In a week or
two, when we have longer days, we shall not
require it. We have tried to purchase candles,
but could find no seller.
ITEMS OF NEWS.
We regret to say that our second officer,
Mr. Fawcett, has been, through indisposition,
confined to his cabin, but are happy to hear
that he is much better. Our Boatswain, Mr.
Dawson, has been suffering from a broken
chilblain on the left foot, but is again able to
appear on deck.
Much snow has fallen during the past week.
Snow-balling was carried on with much energy
on Tuesday forenoon, we hope for the last time.
In the latitude of Cape Horn (called the
“ Stormy Cape,”) the sun rises at about 8.30
a.m., and sets at 3.30 p.m.
Every day as we proceed, each is longer and
warmer than the preceding one.
The beautifnl southern cross still appears
above us, but we shall soon lose it.
Our Editor’s box will be hung against the
poop on the main deck hereafter, the bad
weither having prevented our doing so before.
We cannot undertake to return rejected M.S.S.
On Wednesday afternoon a large whale, from
50 to 60 feet in length, followed close in our
vessel’s wake, once approaching within a distance
of about 15 yards.
Yery few of the numerous birds aboard have
died during the cold weather. Those remaining
are not now likely to suffer.
We are informed that some unprincipled
person, either yesterday or on the evening pre-
vious, stole from the pickle cask a great portion
of the pork belonging to the crew, thus depriv-
ing many of them of their yesterday’s dinner.
If it be the case, we trust he may be discovered,
and receive from them his due reward.
THE GALE OF YESTERDAY WEEK.
Thursday, the day preceding this gale, was
one of unusual loveliness for these latitudes,
closing in with a fine starlight night, our vessel
lying almost motionless upon the water, her
sails flapping to and fro from the squared
yards, in a perfect calm.
Early on the following day a light breeze,
scarcely filling the sails, drove us but slowly
ahead, and continued without showing any
indications of the great and sudden change so
soon to take place.
Just before daybreak, however, (which
occurs here about six o’clock), the barometer
suddenly and rapidly prognosticated the
coming stox-m. All hands were soon employed
clewing up and stowing the different sails as
quickly as possible. At 7 the wind had fresh-
ened to half a gale, the waves also x*apidly
increasing in size, forcing our ship briskly
through the foamy waters. Then, to add to
the general change, urged downwards with
great force upon our decks by the gusts of
wind, came heavy and long continued falls of
snow and hail which, in less than an
hour lay to a considei’able depth entirely
covering Ihem; half filling the boats hang-
ing in the davits; and covering in every rope,
spar, and sail upon which it could rest, until
below and aloft little could be seen but the
rough sui’face and indistinct outlines of heaps
of snow—in fact, from truck to deck every-
thing was one white mass. The thermometer
stood at freezing point on deck, soon falling
two degrees lower.
At half-past eight canvas was reduced to fore
and main lower topsails and fore-staysail (all sail
being entirely off the mizen yards)—the wind,
increasing each moment, drove us furiously on
amidst the foam and spray, roaring through
the now exposed x’igging, with a noise suffi-
cient to almost drown the voice of our chief
officer who, speaking trumpet in hand, ran to
and fro, giving orders to the men amidst the
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


blinding spray and drifting snow, finding
now, as all did on deck, (the vessel heaving
over in the furious blasts to her lee-scuppers),
great difficulty in moving about at all; and,
but for holding firmly on to the nearest fixture
imminent danger of slipping across the deck,
and perhaps overboard, was experienced.
About a dozen of the passengers assisted on
deck throughout the morning and, in spite of
the cold and freezing ropes to be handled, the
blinding snow and dangerous slippery decks
to be traversed, remained up until noon, when
all that could be done for safety was accom-
plished. We think, even although we have to
include ourselves amongst them, we may safely
assert that their services proved invaluable,
especially when the crew were engaged aloft,
and no strength , but theirs, was available
on deck. And when we recall to mind the
almost unbearable cold we were subjected to
on the poop, and the firm hold we had to
maintain in the weather rigging for support,
even for our lives—we cannot imagine how
the men aloft, where the cold, frost, and ex-
posure to the terrific gale was tenfold, man-
aged to stow the sails, and safely descend
again upon deck as they did.
A little after ten o’clock the wind, sea,
hail, and snow united their utmost efforts, as
it seemed to overwhelm us, —onward we flew
over the mountainous waves, dashing aside
their foamy crests with terrific force, our ship
careening over, sometimes scuttles under to
port—then, added to all, a thick, impenetrable
mist enveloped us, rendering indistinct from Uie
poop the ship’s bowsprit. About this time
we felt the greatest effect of the storm and
its assistants—the view of our vessel from the
poop deck was really awfully grand and fear-
ful, and can better be imagined than described.
About 10.30 a.m. the Captain resolved to
heave the ship to, and preparations were im-
mediately made for so doing. The fore-top-
mast staysail was hauled down, and yards
braced up, awaiting a lull to bring the ship
to the wind on the starboard tack. In about
a quarter of an hour afterwards, the word was
passed to us to hold fast, or fasten ourselves,
the helm was put hard down, and our gallant
ship came to without shipping a drop of water.
Orders were now given to clew up the fore-
topsail. All hands soon succeeded in hauling
up the weather side of the sail, but, owing to
the lee-buntline having carried away, some
delay occurred in that to leeward, and the
sail, after flapping violently, shaking the
whole vessel for nearly five minutes, and before
steps could be taken for getting it in, of a
sudden, with a loud report, split from clew to
earring, and in a few moments was rent into
small strips, pieces of the stout canvas flying
away before the gale. The main trysail was then
set, and, under this and the lower main-topsail
only, our ship lay hove-to all day, drifting
helplessly to leeward, like a log upon the waves,
and although some inconvenience was felt from
the motion, one could little imagine, whilst
lying in his bunk helow, the fury of the
elements above. She lay-to beautifully, and,
except a little spray, shipped no water.
Soundings were taken in the afternoon,
which proved our position to be well to wind-
ward of the Falkland Islands, in latitude 54°
43' S., and longitude 61° 03' W.
During the afternoon a sail was observed
astern, but, although we used our glasses, wo
could not make her out distinctly, owing to
the thickness of the weather.
Towards midnight the wind somewhat
abated, and the fore-stay sail was set to keep
the ship steady.
Early the next morning sail was made,
the ship again got underway, and, in nine hours
more , ivas rolling heavily in a perfect calm.
This will alone illustrate how changeable and
dangerous are these high latitudes —how
miserable and dreary the prospects within
them!
ANSWERS TO RIDDLES IN OUR LAST,
1. The whale that brought him up.
2. Cork and Down.
3. One is hard up, and the other is soft down.
4. When Henry VIII. dissolved the Pope’s Bull.
5. Because they sleep in their watches.
6. Because they have studded (studied) the heavens
for years.
7. Because his tale (tail) comes out of his head.
NOTICE.
Our Surgeon, Mr. Webb, has requested us
to remind passengers that, except in cases of
emergency, the hours for visiting him (in his
own cabin) are 11 A.M., and 7 P.M.
A STRETCH OF IMAGINATION.
Early on Saturday morning last, a certain
gentleman, having an idea of our being on a
sand bank (probably from seeing the lead cast
several times) actually whilst lying in bed, felt
the vessel strike on the bank, and afterwards
distinctly heard the crew the chain
cables on deck to prepare for anchoring ! Could
this have been reality, with twenty-five fathoms
(150 feet) of water on the shallowest part of the
bank in question ?
25
THE HOVER CASTLE NEWS.


EPITAPH ON A SMOKER.
(COMMUNICATED.)
My weeds to ashes turned—and lo!
Out of my ashes weeds shall grow.
Then to my widow I will say:
You take to iveedt —I’ll turn to clay.
A PRICELESS PUFF.
We beg to call the attention of our readers
to the notice posted on the deck-house, rela-
ive to the formation of a pawn-office, bureau
for lost property, &c., at No. 16, Store-street.
We are much pleased to read that Mr. Charles
Christmas presides over this establishment—
a fact sufficient in itself to guarantee that same
care and attention to his “ customers ” which
he has always shown to the numerous calls,
labial or otherwise, of the passengers under his
care. We really hope that these philanthropic
intentions of our Uncle may not end in a puff of
wind.
AN ASS.
An insane correspondent sends us the following
scrip. As we ai’e rapidly approaching Bedlam we
humour him by publishing it. He has, however, left
the last of his initials out. They should have been
A. S. S.
“ Dear Mr. Editor, —Pardon me for handling your
name thus, for no offence is meant: —
“ How would you write ‘J. G. Horsey ’ in three
letters ?
J. Or.
“ Why thus, I fancy : — (o^er)
A. S.
D
In return we can tell him how to spell his; — (on)
Key.
(We do not fancy, but are sure of this.—Editor
D.C.N.)
ADVERTISEMENT.
HAIR CUTTING.
PROFESSOR NOTCHIT begs to inform the
hairy public that he has commenced business in Shin
Bone Alley. A walking specimen of his skill may be now
seen about deck.
N.B.—He could perhaps clip Hrnighter than this specimen
if the victim would bring a basin to fit his cranium.
OUR LOG.
44. Saturday, June Ist. —Commences with con-
tinuance of yesterday’s gale. Ship still hove-to
until about 2 p.m., when sail was made and ship
got underway on the starboard tack, both wind
and sea rapidly going down. New lower fore top-
sail bent in place of injured one. Lat. at noon :
54° 10' S. Long.: 60° 23' W. Distance, 41
miles. Sun shining at intervals. Thermometer
at 30°.5 on deck. Concludes with a perfect calm.
Snowing in evening. Thermometer at 28°.
45. Sunday, June 2nd. —Fine strong wind on star-
board quarter which continues all day. Ship
running to the N.E. with moderate sea at about
10 knots. Lat. at noon: 53° 7' S. Long.: 57°
21° W. Distance, 135 miles. Concludes with
heavy fall of snow.
46. Monday, June 3rd. —Commences with same
fair wind, but at 6 a.m., suddenly shifted to the
northward, compelling us to close haul on the
starboard tack and run to the westward. Snow
storm at intervals during the day. Took off top-
gallant sails and driver at 10 a.m. Wind hauled
fair again at noon, blowing lightly on port
quarter. Lat. at noon: 51° 48' S. Long.: 53°
37' W. Distance, 159 miles. Concludes with a
calm.
47. Tuesday, June 4th. —Commences with very
light wind and smooth sea. Temperature slightly
warmer. Several falls of snow and hail during
the day. Port fore stnnsails set, Lat. at noon :
51° 8' S. Long.: 51° 52' W. Distance, 77
miles. About 10 p.m., a fine strong breeze. Ship
running before it at 10 knots.
48. Wednesday, June sth. —Commences with same
fair -wind and occcasional falls of snow. Both
starboard and port fore topmast and lower stun-
sails set. Ship rolling much all day, Lat. at noon :
48° 50' S. Long.: 47° 46' W. Distance, 212
miles. Sun shining at intervals. Concludes
with same breeze rather lighter.
49. Thursday, June 6th. —Wind soon changes.
Stunsails taken in and yards braced up on the
port tack. Ship a point or two off her course
occasionally. During the morning, wind veering
constantly a few points. A whale seen spouting
to leeward. Lat. at noon: 47° 9' S. Long.:
44° 2' W. Distance, 181 miles. Blowing with
light squalls. Another largo whale following
close to our stern at 4 p.m. Ship put about at
5 p.m. on starboard tack, steering N.W.-J-N. At
11 there being no wind, yards squared.
50. Friday, June 7th. —At 2 a.m., light wind
sprung up, and yards braced sharp up on the port
tack. Ship on her course. Lat. at noon: 46°
43' S. Long.: 42° 41' W. Distance, 61 miles.
Wind heading us, and in consequence ship put
about at 5 p.m. Concludes with freshening
breeze. Top-gallant sails stowed and mizen top-
sail double reefed at 8 p.m.
26
THE DOVEII CASTLE NEWS.


SI he poitr (!'a,'i(le Ups.
.a. j-OTJ^nsr^n.
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “ Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Blackwall, 1,200 tons burthen, K. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 7, with Supplement.]
[Saturday, June 15th, 1867.
Prayers were read in the saloon on Sunday
morning last. The children’s classes met in
the afternoon in the third cabin, where, at
6 p.m., Divine Service was held by the Bev.
Mr. Bradney ; and at 7 in the saloon, the
Bev. Mr. Farr officiating. On Wednesday
evening the latter preached in the inter-
mediate.
DEATH.
On the 10th instant at sea, Wilhak
Spearet, one of the crew of this ship, killed
whilst aloft by the fall of the fore upper top-
sail yard; age unknown.
Another week, and one of misfortune in
some respects, has passed away.
On Monday we experienced another severe
gale, which, as will be our supple-
ment, was attended at it’s close by a sad
catastrophe. On Tuesday we witnessed a
funeral at sea—a solemnity happily but sel-
dom occurring. Mr. Dawson, our Boatswain,
has met with a sad affliction, one that we fear
will result most seriously.
But we are progressing very favorably on
our voyage, having run, during the week,
one thousand two hundred and fifty-nine
miles to noon yesterday, at which time we
were about one thousand eight hundred and
ninety-seven miles from the line.
"We have at last got to the northward of the
variable parallel of 35°, and when past 30°
may expect settled weather altogether.
Yesterday was a beautiful day, closing in
with a lovely sunset (the first we have seen)
and followed by a clear moonlight night, our
ship dashing along with a fine strong breeze.
The thermometer stood at 06'.
On Wednesday we passed the parallel of
of the Tristan da Cunha Islands, and, on
Thursday, at mid-day, that of Bio de la
Plata.
THE 810 DE LA PLATA.
The Bio de la Plata, one of the largest
known rivers in South America after the
Amazon, was discovered by Juan Diaz de
Solis in 1515, who navigated it as far as a small
island in latitude 34° 23' S., where, upon
landing with ten men, they were all put to
death by the aborigines.
Five years afterwards Sebastian Cabot,
having routed the Indians, and taken from
them treasures of silver which they had
brought from Peru, and supposing this metal
to abound on the banks of the river, called it
by its present name, Bio de la Plata, or Biver
of Silver, whereby it lost its name of Solis,
given by its discoverer. This river receives
in its extensive course the waters of various
other large rivers.
It is interspersed with beautiful islands, and
although navigable for large vessels, has many
shoals and rocks. The distance from the con-
flux of the Paraguay and Parana to its mouth,
by the course of the river, is about 200
leagues.
At its entrance from Cape St. Antonio on
the south to Point Negro on the north, it is
about 110 miles wide. From thence to the
junction of the Uruguay it preserves its name
being afterwards called the Parana, which
rises in the Province of Minas Geraes to the
south of the city of San Joas del Bey in some
lofty sierras in Brazil, and flows a course for
the estimated distance of more than 1,000 miles,
receiving innumerable tributaries, many of
them navigable. About 300 miles from its
mouth two falls impede its nagivation. The
country around is temperate and very fertile.
The Parana joins the Paraguay in latitude
27° 16' S., just above the town of Corrientes.
The Paraguay give its name to the State.


Preserved Meat or Soup ..
.... 3 lbs.
Salmon
1
Salt Beef or Pork
.... l| „
Ham
.... 1 „
Rice
... 1 „
Biscuits
. Unlimited
Flour
Peas
Preserved Milk
... 1 „
Refined Sugar
... * lb.
Moist Sugar
1
Tea
Coffee.....
••• i „
Butter
••• i »
Cheese
1
Raisins or Currants
... 1-|
Lime Juice
Water
Suet
... | lb.
Pickles or Vinegar
Mustard
Pepper
Salt
Preserved Potatoes
.. 1 lb.
It was first navigated by Sebastian Cabot in
1526.
The Rio de la Plata forms the maritime
division between the Republics of Uruguay and
Buenos Ayres, or the Argentine Republic.
The latitude of the city of Monte Yideo (the
cathedral) on the northern side of the en-
trance of the Rio dela Plata, is 34° 54' 37" S.,
and longitude 56° 11' 37" W. ; and of Buenos
Ayres on the south (Mandeville House) 34°
36' 18" S., and longitude 58° 22' 44" W.
THE LATE WILLIAM SPEAREY.
We are now able confidently to state, in
answer to many inquiries, that the deceased sea-
man has left a bed-ridden sister in England, the
fact of his having sent her, in her own name,
money from Melbourne, adding confirmation
to the facts already in possession of those in
command. Still, should doubt exist in the
minds of any whose names are already on the
list of contributors respecting the matter, they
will please at once request Mr. J. G. Hoesey,
in whose possession it is, to erase their names
therefrom. The whole affair has been under-
taken in a spirit of benevolence, and therefore
will admit of no argument as regards formality
of application, or order, or omission of any
names on the list. Should any feel inclined
to augment the sum already contributed, Mr.
Hoesey will be happy to receive any amount
they may hand him. Mr. Haeeison will take
charge of it when completed. ,
CAPTAIN DEACON.
AYB regret to say that since our last issue,
Captain Deacon has been confined to his berth
seriously indisposed for several days, but we
are happy to see him again on deck.
OUTWARD-BOUND SHIPS.
We may perchance meet within a few days
some outward-bound vessels, being then on
their track. If we do, and the weather be fine,
a possibility exists of being able to write back
to the Colonies.
The effects of the late William Spearey were
yesterday sold by auction on the quarterdeck.
One of the seamen (Hancock) made a good and
humourous auctioneer.
TRISTAN DA CUNHA.
The history of these Islands being very
interesting, we shall devote a supplejtnent to
the subject next week.
OUR SHIP’S CREW AND PASSENGERS.
(Continued from No. 5.)
THE SECOND CABIN
Contains twenty-eight adults, three children,
and two infants, and is situated in the after
part of the ship between decks, extending
from the fore part of the after hatchway (just
abaft the mainmast) to within about 12 feet
forward of the mizen mast, abutting at this
end, and divided therefrom by a permanent
partition, upon the store-room, midshipman’s
and steward’s berths ; whilst forward, a bulk-
head, containing a door on either side, sepa-
rates it from the third, or intermediate cabin.
At this end a ladder, ascending through the
after hatchway upon the main deck, affords
to passengers the only means of ingress and
egress, the door leading through to the inter-
mediate, and another communicating with the
store room, &c., aft, being kept fastened.
The dining table extends down the centre
of the cabin fore and aft, with the sleeping
berths along the sides. One of these, on the
starboard side aft is reserved for a hospital,
and only used in case of the sickness of any
passenger belonging to this or the interme-
diate class. The steward’s pantry is opposite
the hospital on the port side of the ship. At
this end amidships some light is admitted from
a skylight on the poop.
There are also belonging to this class four
sleeping berths in the house on deck, whose
occupants take their places at the same table
below. Except in the cases of married per-
sons there is never more than three in a berth,
each of which is lighted with a small round
port hole.
The weekly dietary scale of this class is as
follows:
One bottle of wine to each adult passenger.
28
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


These rations for each passenger are received
from the store-room by the two stewards
engaged to prepare and serve the meals, whose
duties are to wait upon the passengers, only
as far as meals are concerned, not having any-
thing to do with the keeping in order of
sleeping berths, which rests with the pas-
sengers themselves.
Breakfast is served at half-past eight each
morning; dinner at one o’clock, and tea at
five p.m.
Three lamps hung fore and aft over the
dining table, are kept lighted until 10 o’clock
each night, when all (including private lamps
in sleeping berths) are extinguished except
one, which is kept a-light all night.
Second class passengers are provided with
all necessary chinaware for meals.
The use of the poop deck is excluded from
this class, so that like the third and steerage
passengers, they have only for their use the
main and forecastle decks.
(To he continued.)
A STOW-AWAY.*
Air — Villikins and his Dinah.
’Tis of a young gentleman boasting of power,
Who found t’other day stowed away in his bower
(And merely by chance) a pudding so small
That it looked like a juvenile soft cannon ball.
Singing Too ral la 100 ral, &c.
“ Now really a Saint could hardly stand this ! ”
Cried out the enraged one with a terrible hiss.
“ These imps of the flour-bag have more than enough,
“ And yet they want pudding their stomachs to stuff!”
Singing Too ral la 100 ral, &c.
With face diabolical, and pudding in hand,
He turned to the young’uns who around him did stand:
“ Who went for to make this here horrible duffp”
Cries one: “ That won’t do, for we’re all up to snuff! ”
Singing Too ral la 100 ral, &c.
But another more brave and courageous than all,
To whom the discovery proved bitter gall,
Who had lived in the hope like the rest to partake,
Resolved to explain and apology make.
Singing Too ral la 100 ral, &c.
“ It’s only a Httle’un—a mere infant,” he cried
(And the dear little baby duff timidly eyed),
“ Don’t harm it, but pity it’s downs and it’s ups,
“ Of the big duff, believe mo, it’s one of the pups! ”
Singing Too ral la 100 ral, &c.
* A pudding found in a berth hidden behind a sea chest.
THE GALE OF MONDAY LAST.
In our last number we gave a rather lengthy
description of a previous gale. On Monday
we experienced another of equal severity, but
as a recital of this would be a repetition of
detail contained in the former, we do not in-
tend to occupy our reader’s time by writing
more than a few words on the subject. By
referring to our log of this week, contained in
another column, a correct idea of its character
may be obtained. Sufficebe it to say that it came
upon us (unlike the last) very gradually; sail
after sail was stowed during the day until
at 3 P.M., our gallant ship labored heavily
under the two lower topsails, fore-staysail,
and main-topsail only; the wind and sea
during the afternoon being quite equal in
violence to the last gale off the Falklands, but,
being in a warmer temperature, was less trying.
At 5 P.M., however, a change took place, and
with a more moderate and fairer wind, our
ship once more steered her course. It was
whilst making sail after this change, that the
deplorable and fatal accident occurred to one
of our seamen, a brief description of which will
be found in the supplement to this number.
AN ACROSTIC.
D eacon (our gallant Captain’s name)
0 ’er storms—in calms—sunshine or rain
V ivacious, watchful, courteous, ever—
E each officer and man—count one—count all,
R eflections of his care recall.
C ommanded thus our ship flies on,
A midst the waves, their crests upon
S teering for home—Old England’s shore—
T urniug to music the tempest’s roar.
L eaving dear friends lost far behind
E ngland’s Home once more to find.
EPITAPH
VOVUD on deck near THE after hatchway AT 11 P.M.
Alas! alas! he’s gone below,
We ne’er to night shall see him more,
But if report speak truthfully,
Shall hear the music of his snore.
How oft do we remember
With pleasure and with pain,
How on the deck he tumbled down
And then got up again.
29
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


His heavy boots with slippery decks
Ne’er could for long agree;
But as the ship oft tumbled down,
So tumble down would he !
His voice, both loud and musical,
Was cheering to the heart;
He never out of temper got
But stood a deal of chaff.
To-morrow mom about noon-day—
(lf fine the weather be)
His jolly, laughing, merry face,
We may hope again to see.
WoTl then his resurrection greet
With pleasure quite enough,
To send him down below again
With appetite for “ duff.”
APPOINTMENT*.
Mr. S (Steward), as Captain of the lee main-
top-gallant rudder, vice Mr. Buggins, kicked out.
Mr. S was much noticed on his arrival at his
new quarters, and introduced to the chief officer.
MR. DAWSON.
With feelings of deep regret we have to record a
sad affliction having befallen our Boatswain. On
Monday % afternoon last ho was seized with an apo-
plectic fit, and has never spoken since. He is still
in a precarious state.
ADVERTISEMENT.
HAIRDRESSER.
■jl/TR. SALTRIC, (one of our Quartermasters)
-Itand we believe an expert hand, will cut hair at a
charge of one shilling.
OUR LOG.
51. Saturday, June Bth. —Commences with light
breeze, the strong wind experienced at 8 o’clock
last evening, having almost died away before
midnight. Wind on starboard beam freshening
about mid-day. Lat. at noon: 45° 53' S. Long.:
41° 52' W. Distance, 61 miles. Thermometer 48°.
At 7 p.m. ship put on other tack. Concludes
with same wind.
• Referring to a Steward, who was brought before the
Chief Officer for being dirty, having been previously ordered
to work upon decks, owing to his laziness as Steward,
52. Sunday, June 9th. —Ship close hauled at an
early hour on port tack with strong breeze, car-
rying top-gallant sails. A little off course to the
eastward. Lat. at noon : 44° 5' S. Long : 39° 35'
W. Distance, 146 miles. Concludes with very
strong breeze. Ship still under top-gallant sails
pitching heavily all night.
53. Monday, June 10th. —Commences with very
strong breeze, increasing to half a gale. Vessel
pitching heavily. At 12.15 a.m., cross-jack and
mizen top-gallant sail stowed; at 12.45 a.m., fore
top-gallant sail taken off; at 2.40 a.m., the wind
still increasing, mizen topsail reefed, and main
top-gallant sail taken off, the lee sheet carrying
away. Shortly afterwards the inner jib split up
and was then stowed. At 9.30 a.m., mainsail
clewed up and reefed, and one reef taken in
main-topsail. At 10 a.m., main topmast staysail
hauled down; fore topsail close reefed, and
mainsail stowed; at 10.30 a.m., foresail reefed.
Ship off her course to the eastward. At 12
o’clock close reefed the main, and stowed the
mizen topsail. Blowing very hard. Ship pitching
much and drifting to leeward but scarcely mov-
ing ahead. Raining lightly all day. Lat. at
noon: 42° 05' S. Long.: 36° 00' W. Distance,
198 miles. Thermometer 56°. Gale soon blow-
ing with terrific force, lasting all the afternoon.
At 3 o’clock fore and main upper topsails
and fore sail stowed and main trysail set.
Moderating at 4 p.m. At 5.15 wind suddenly
changed, when yards nearly squared ; mizen,
and main and fore upper topsails and jib set.
Whilst hauling up the fore topsail yard, the tye
suddenly broke, the yard falling with great
violence, crushing to death one of the sea-
men, and injuring another. Our Surgeon pro-
ceeded aloft at once and pronounced the former
dead. In a quarter of an hour the upper yard
was raised and the body lowered on deck. Wind
again increases to a gale, ship straining very
much all night.
54. Tuesday, June 11th. —Commences with wind
slightly moderated. Ship laboring much in heavy
sea. Severe squall at 2 a.m., when topsail hal-
yards let go, but sails soon again set. Funeral of
the seaman killed yesterday took place at noon.
Lat. then 41° 10'S. Long.: 32° 29' W. Distance,
168 miles. Thermometer 54°. Concludes with
same fair wind and squalls.
55. Wednesday, June 12th. —Strong breeze on port
beam with heavy squalls and high sea. Lat. at
noon : 38° 17' S. Long.: 29° 27' W. Distance,
223 miles. Thermometer, 54°. Occasional
showers of rain, thunder, and lightning. Con-
cludes with same weather.
56. Thursday, June 13th.— Continuance of same
strong breeze and fine clear weather. Lat. at
noon, 34° 53' S. Long. 27° 49' W. Distance,
220 miles. Thermometer, 60°. At 5 p.m.
wind lighter. Top-gallant sails set. (Fine
moonlight nights.)
57. Friday, June 14th. —Commences with same
breeze and fine warm sunny weather. At 11.45-
a.m. ship close hauled. Lat. at noon : 31° 37' S.
Long; 24° 55' W. Distance, 243 miles. Ther-
mometer, 66°. Concludes with same wind.
30
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Supplement to Kje poper Hems
No. 7.]
[Saturday, June 15th, 1867.
SHOCKING & FATAL ACCIDENT
TO WILLIAM SPEAREY.
It is with feelings of deep sorrow, that
we have this week to record one of the
most terribly sudden and shocking deaths
that could possibly be met with. One of
our seamen, William Spearey, who, a
few moments before, in the full possession
of health and strength, was aloft on Mon-
day evening last at about half-past five
engaged in his duties there, was, without
a moment’s warning, suddenly called from
amongst us to appear before his Creator.
Truly, “In the midst of life we are in
death.”
It will be remembered that following
upon the severe gale through which we
had passed on Monday last, came a change
of wind in our favor, and all hands were
employed making sail on our vessel—some
on the main, and others on the fore-top-
sail yard, to shake out the reefs in the
sails. The latter party consisted of four
men who, having untied the reef points,
were engaged clearing the gear, whilst
those on deck hauled up the topsail
yard.
At this time, one man was in the fore-
top ; one at the topmast head; and the
deceased, and another seaman named
John Robertson, were attending to the
gear on the lower topsail yard—the latter
to leeward, and the deceased to windward
—and, when a few more pulls would have
mastheaded it, the halliards unfortunately
parted, and down came the heavy upper
yard falling with a terrible noise about fif-
teen feet. Robertson being in close
proximity to the lee rigging, swung him-
self clear enough to escape with a severe
shaking, but poor Spearey having no
such means of escape, was crushed and
mangled between the two yards, and there
jammed. Death must have been instan-
taneous.
Our Surgeon, Mr.W ebb, proceeded alof t
at once, finding life quite extinct. Mr.
Harrison, with much praiseworthy calm-
ness and decision, set all hands to work,
and in a quarter of an hour the mangled
body was lowered on deck and placed in
the fore hospital.
31


Mr. Webb found upon examination of
the body externally, a severe lacerated
wound over the right malar bone—from
the blood flowing from the mouth, he
considered some rupture of lung must
have taken place—both collar bones were
fractured —the floating ribs of both sides
were apparently torn from their union
with the spine and thrust forcibly inwards,
probably piercing the liver on the right
and the spleen on the left—a compound
fracture of the right leg, and a simple
fracture of both thighs. These external
signs being sufficient to account for death
fi’om Asthenia and Asphyxia, no post
mortem examination was made.
THE FUNEEAL.
According to notice hung on the
main deck at an early hour on Tuesday
(the day following the accident), the
obsequies of the unfortunate deceased
took place at noon of that day. The
morning proved fine, the sun shining
brightly upon the mournful scene aboard
our vessel. The severity of the late dis-
astrous gale had somewhat abated, al-
though our ship still labored much in a
tumultuous sea.
At 7 bells (half-past 11 o’clock) the
body, placed on a grating, sewn up with
heavy weights in canvas, and covered
with the Union Jack was brought on deck.
Nearly all the passengers soon appeared
also, —a few we observed in sombre
mourning.
Exactly at noon as eight bells were
struck, the crew and officers took pos-
session of the space around the body—the
latter in uniform—the men in fresh attire.
The ship’s bell sounded the death knell,
adding much to the solemnity of the
occasion.
The Carpenter then proceeded to take
out the port and the grating, bearing the
corpse, was placed partially through it,
with a slack rope on either side to allow
the whole to slip nearly to the water’s
edge.
Unfortunately Captain Deacon, who
has been confined several days to his cabin
through indisposition, was prevented from
appearing on deck. In his absence our
chief officer, Mr. Harrison, read the
funeral service, Mr. Fawcett responding.
During the short time thus occupied, the
silence of death pervaded the scene, which
was however soon concluded. At the
given words the five seamen attending the
bier launched the grating through the
port, and, with a heavy splash, the body
sank into the water, instantly disap-
pearing.
The grating and flag hauled aboard
again; the few concluding words of the
service uttered ; the assembly dispersed ;
the port replaced; and the sad scene was
ended,
32
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


®lro Bmi\ d[a.‘itle L |leniH,
.a. o'otjir/tt^a_Xj
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Blackwall, 1,200 tons burthen, H. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 8, with Supplement.]
Saturday, June 22nd, 1867.
Prayers were read in the saloon on Sunday-
morning ; the usual classes met in the after-
noon ; and in the evening the Rev. Mr.
Beadney preached at 6 r.M. in the inter-
mediate ; and Mr. Day in the saloon at 7.
The latter gentleman also preached in the
intermediate on Wednesday evening.
BIRTH.
On Thursday morning last, the 20th instant,
in latitude 12° 28' S., and longitude 21° 47' W.,
the wife of Mr. Isaac Schafer an ,late of Bris-
bane, Queensland, of a daughter.
The little Dover Castle News has been in-
deed fortunate; she has been running for
seven weeks, with flowing sheet before the
wind of public favor. Never during this
period has she experienced aught but success
—no, not a brace or sheet touched—not a sea
of discouragement shipped! But, as she has
rolled and dashed along, casting to the winds
the labor and trouble she has cost, and riding
gallantly through all, not a dissentient voice
has been heard. During the cold of Cape
Horn—the storm off the Ealklands, —the pre-
sent heat of a tropical sun—we have carefully
attended her, and, thankfully we say it, she
has up to within the last few days, made a
good and successful passage. But a little
temporary trouble has marred our pleasant
passage, a few conflicting winds have reached
us, —where we had hoped to receive approbation
for, and appreciation of our devotion to our
editorial charge; encouragement to urge on our
hopes for safe arrival at our destined port; and
wishes for our success, we have instead been
mortified by hearing of one or two cases of
mutiny aboard— only one or two —we have
been accused of partiality!—of not sufficiently
writing down sinking into oblivion the
Dover Castle , her officers and crew—and for
what ? When we see just cause—when our
provisions are bad and the allowance short —
when we receive discourtesy —in a word, when
we do not get what, as passengers we paid
for and should have, and get what we
did not pay for and should’nt—believe us,
we’ll “let fly ” —our columns shall teem with
complaints—wo shall spare nobody and nothing
—from the Captain to the ship’s figure-head
(inclusive) —all shall feel our wrath!—we
will alter our usual heading, and it shall be
“ The Dover Castle Destroyer,” or something
else equally significant! But not till then.
We have not kept so many long watches, pen
in hand, to find at the end of seven weeks our
vessel wrecked through making it the organ
to play tunes upon, we do not and cannot
agree with. Yet we are as brave as lions,
and as impartial as a Chief Justice (or at
least as he ought to be), and if occasion re-
quires it, shall do what (we must remind our
complaining friends) they seem afraid to do,
viz. : carry our grievances to head-quarters,
and not look for a poor Editor, behind whose
back we can with perfect safety to ourselves
tickle up according to fancy any person we
please, and think proper to complain of. We
should seek a Dover Castle News , and upon
finding that that journal did not agree with
our views, insert a letter with our name
at the tag end, and, if we thought proper,
would affix our seal thereto, impressed with
our ancestral arms ! What is our Editor’s
Box hung out for? (Echo answers “Biscuit,”
but that’s a falsehood.)
But, friends of our cause, fear not! We arc
on deck keeping a vigilant look-out. Our
vessel’s course shall not be affected by such
little wavulets! We shall safely conclude our
journey yet.
Officer of the watch, we’ll have a pull on
the weather braces—the wind will soon be
fair. Now she lays her course again!—Steady,
“ old gal,”—Pipe all hands to grog!


Soup or Preserved Meat ...
Salt Beef or Pork
... H „
Flour
... 3 „
Rice
1
Peas
Suet
... i lb.
Preserved Potatoes
1
Oatmeal
1
Biscuits
i lb.
Raisins or Currants
1
Sugar
... 1 „
Tea
Coffee
... 3 „
Vinegar or Pickles
i pmt.
Pepper
Mustard
1
Rq.1t-,
... 2 „
Water
Lime Juice
Since our last issue we have certainly been
most fortunate, both as regards wind and
weather.
On Monday morning our ship entered the
tropics, and has enjoyed the full benefit of the
S.E. trade winds, having lessened our distance
across the South Atlantic by no less than one
thousand five hundred and seventy-nine miles
up to noon yesterday, which will give for the
week an average of over nine knots per hour.
Our distance from the line then was only four
hundred and sixty miles, which, at the same
rate, we shall cross early on Monday morning.
We hope we may.
Three weeks ago yesterday, our ship that
now glides along over the blue surface of the
smooth tropical sea, with Royals, and top-
gallant stunsails set, was hove-to in a furious
gale to the southward of the Falkland Islands,
covered with snow.
On Wednesday for the first time (and since)
the poopdeck of our shiphasbeen protected from
the sun’s heat by an awning—the main-shrouds
too covered with canvas for the same purpose.
Everybody stops below as little as possible,
the heat being most oppressive. No longer do
we see the running and jumping about deck to
create circulation of the blood—for we are all
too glad to find shelter from the sun’s rays.
We sincerely hope, as all do aboard, that
our good luck may continue.
ITEMS.
Mr. Dawson continues in the same state as
when last we wrote. The only consolation we
have is, that he is no worse.
Another whale was seen on Tuesday.
During the last few days numerous flying
fish have been about us; and all the birds have
disappeared.
During Wednesday afternoon last, the ship’s
flags were gaily flying from our peak, in the
clear tropical atmosphere, expanded to their
full extent in the beautiful breeze then blowing.
Many conjectures existed as to why they were
exhibited, some thinking in celebration of
the victory at Waterloo (18th), and others to
mark respect to the memory of the late Prince
Consort. They were out to air.
At daybreak on Saturday last (June Isth),
our vessel crossed her exact position on the
outward passage at noon, on January 31st last,
viz.: latitude 29° 35' S., and longitude 22° 51'
W. She was then 45 days out, having left
Plymouth on the 17th December.
Mr. Horsey has handed to Captain Deacon
the list of contributors, and money subscribed
for the relief of the sister of the late William
Speabey, at the request of Mr. Harrison.
THE SHIP’S CREW AND PASSENGERS.
(Continued from owr last.)
THE THIRD CABIN, OR INTERMEDIATE,
Affords accommodation for 83 adults, 25
children, and ten infants, (including three
born on the voyage). The cabin is situated
in the widest part of the ship, between decks,
on a level with the second cabin. It extends
from just abaft the mainmast aft, (there end-
ing with the bulkhead of that cabin), nearly
to the after part of the fore hatchway, and
separated here from the open steerage by a
similar partition to that between the second
cabin and this. About 12 feet from the after
bulkhead is the main hatchway, through
which are two ladders ascending to the main-
deck. Between this hatchway and the after
end is situated a store-room, the mainmast,
and ship’s pumps, leaving at the sides narrow
passages leading to the doors opening upon
the second cabin.
The sleeping berths, which are 8 feet
square, are fitted with six bunks in each,
except those containing families, which are of
different sizes according to the number of the
family. Ports like those in the second cabin
afford light to these berths.
One berth is erected amidships forward
leaving on either side a narrow pas'sage similar
to those aft.
In the body of this cabin between the
berths there are 7 tables running athwart-
ships with seats between. A table accom-
modates 12 adults, who retain each their
place during the voyage. There are likewise
narrow tables (for the berths adjoining) on
either side of the mainmast aft.
The weekly dietary scale of this class, for
each passenger is as follows :
At the commencement of the voyage the pas-
sengers in this class (as also in the steerage)
form into messes, each composed of so many
persons—perhaps a family—sometimes two or
34
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


more —with single men, generally six in each,
numbered from Ito 22 inclusive. A repre-
sentative from a mess procures the weeks’
rations for it from the store-room every Tues-
day—one person generally taking (in weekly
turn) the stewardship of the mess he belongs
to, his duties being to prepare meals, take
them to the galley for cooking; from thence
procure them when ready, and wash up tin
ware, &c., afterwards —so that in a mess of half
a dozen, each person acts only one week in six.
Passengers in the intermediate have to pro-
vide themselves with tin-ware, consisting of
plate, hook pot, baking dish, pannican, water
can, &c., knife and fork, and bedding.
Two stewards are employed to keep the
decks and tables clean, the passengers attending
to their berths.
Fresh water is served out to the messes at
6 a.m. each day.
Breakfast is generally commenced at 8 a.m.,
dinner about noon, and tea at 4.30 p.m.
A quart of the daily allowance of water for
each person is retained by the cook, and served
out hot for breakfast and tea upon attending at
the galley—a pint each meal per adult.
Messes prepare, in whatever shape they
please, their dinners, which are either baked or
boiled in the galley,—certain days being under-
stood as for one process or the other.
Salt beef and pork are served out to the
messes on Tuesdays and Fridays thus :—On
Tuesday 1 lb. of beef, and on Friday 1£ lb. of
pork; on the following Tuesday U- lb. of beef,
and on the Friday 1 lb. of pork, thus making
up the weekly allowance of 2 \ lbs. of salt meat
for each adult.
Biscuits are kept in an open cask below,
obtainable at will.
This cabin, like all others, is lighted each
evening up to 10 p.m., with six lamps, when
all are extinguished except a night-light.
Tuesdays and Fridays are recognised as
washing days aboard when passengers have
the use of clothes lines rove in the rigging.
(To he continued).
GROWLER’S REVIEW
OF EPITAPH FOUND LAST WEEK NEAR THE AFTER HATCHWAY.
If down he’s gone, down let him go,
What’s it to you I’d like to know !
And then to reflect upon his snore —
If I was him I’d snore the more !
Hanged if it isn’t worse than sin,
More horrible than murdering,
O’er his hapless falls to write a-pun,
You Editorial son of a Gun!
(Talking of guns tho’ by the way,
With like untruth you might just say
That in Austria there is a frigate so large
That her smallest boat’s big as a barge !
Or bucket in hand down he slipped,
His head in by mischance he whipped,
These would be as like your poetaster,
As coal is unlike alabaster.)
To continue on your stupid lay :
What of his boots had you to say ?
“ Why that with wet decks they didn’t agree,
’Cause his legs were thinner than they used to be!!’ :
I can write no more—l’m sick of the thing,
But under my own protective wing
In future I’ll take him there to snoose,
Unhurt by the vile Dover Castle News.
So dread my wrath —my spiteful blood
Is hot as fire—as thick as mud—
Don’t think me, like him, a forgiving muff,
I’d stand no jokes about my “ duff! ! ”
TRINIDAD AND ST. HELENA.
We shall publish a brief account of these
islands next week. Want of space prevents
us doing so this.
TELEGRAPHIC INTELLIGENCE.
HOKITIKA, NEW ZEALAND.
Friday , June 21sf.
A new rush has taken place (on the Banks).
Much gold was discovered. Great excitement
prevails. Last night, at the Prince of Wales’
Opera House, in Revell-street “ All that Glit-
ters is not Gold,” was played to a large and en-
thusiastic audience. Mrs. Ceosby, as Mrs.
Leatherbridge, received her usual call before
the curtain after each act, amidst thunders of
deserved applause.
MELBOURNE.
Sir J. M. S n, intends spending a week
or two at Cape Horn for the benefit of his
health. His Excellency has lately suffered
much from chilblains and a very bad cold in
his head. Gruel fetches a good price in conse-
quence.
SYDNEY.
Mr. Buchanan (M.L.A.) is endeavouring to
reduce the price of ardent spirits.
The “ Flying Pieman ” has unfortunately
lost his reason. The reason of this is any-
thing but lucid.
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
On Sunday last we heard of a large Austrian
Man-of-War, mounting no less than 3,000
guns, and manned by some millions of men.
35
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS,


Tins little gunboat is steered at both ends at
once, and could easily take aboard the whole of
the British Navy.
OUR PASSENGERS’ COOK.
We understand from rumour, that a sub-
scription is to be made for our Cook, in recog-
nition of the ever obliging and attentive con-
duct he has always shewn. The Equator is the
customary place on a voyage home for pas-
sengers to make such a presentation.
LIFE ON THE OCEAN.
He that everything cannot eat
In weather rough and smooth,
Nor care how cooked, or roughly served
Should stay ashore forsooth.
Whilst he nowise particular,
Of whatever kind it be,
Can eat with good digestion,
Enjoys a life at sea.
For whether it be fresh or salt,
Half cooked, o’er done, or raw,
’Mongst icebergs—’neath the tropic’s sun—
All should be thankful for.
He too that cannot sleep on bed
Hard, tossed about, and wet, —
Bear rolling out in weather rough,
At sea is seldom met.
But he that can pass time and sleep
With feet oft higher than head,
And always with contented mind,
Sea life need never dread,
For soon you get accustomed
And happy as in town,
Whilst rolling in your bunk at sea,
As there in bed of down.
And last, not least, ill discontent,
Bad temper—useless scandal,
Can ne’er with peace and happiness
Nep’s briny trident handle.
But jollity—good feeling—both
Tho voyage with joy endows,
As onward their possessor scuds,
And the stormy billow ploughs.
Then with good appetite and plenty,
Contentment and good health,
You may oft find comfort there exceed
On shore the cares of wealth.
Thursday, June 20th.
To the Editor of the Dover Castle News.
Dear Sir, —I should like to know why some
means are not adopted for keeping our decks
cleaner ? Except where we actually walk they
are filthy—under the winch—round the masts
—everywhere. Then our noses are daily
offended by an overflow of filthy water from
the pigsty running towards the poop with the
motion of the ship.
Yours, &c.,
HEALTH.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
FOUND in a bag hung in the second cabin
for the Dover Castle News a quantity of broken biscuit.
—Owner can have it upon giving description and paying ex-
penses of advertising.
HAIRDRESSING AND SHAM-DOING.
AW. (Quartermaster) is prepared to box
• the compass by cutting the points on the heads of qny
who wish the operation performed. He will take them well
off by putting his (h) elm hard up. (This turning of the
wheel is commonly called ashore “ circular brushing.”) By
turning the wheel the other way he will bring their head to
the wind, and after washing their tops with spray made of
salt of tar (tar), will swab them down dry, haul aft (off) the
sheet in a style fit to put them before a wind 0 ! (window).
RAFFLE,
MR. SALTRIC intends disposing of by
raffle during the week a model schooner yacht, in
glass case. 30 members at 2 shillings each.
TO OUR READERS.
WE must apologise for the delay in bringing
out this week’s paper. Our Editor was yesterday
too ill to complete it.
OUR LOG.
58. Saturday, June 15th. —Commences with fine
strong breeze on port beam. Warm clear day.
At 9.30 a.m., the ship City of Quebec, running
before the wind under a great press of canvas,
crossed close to our bows, steering eastward.
Exchanged numbers with her. At noon another
sail in sight far to leeward. Lat. at noon: 28° 31'
S. Long.: 22° 02' W. Distance 239 miles. Ther-
mometer 69°. Concludes with same fine breeze.
59. Sunday, June 16th. —Commences with con-
tinuance of same breeze and fine weather. Lat.
at noon : 25° 56' S. Long.; 19° 25' W. Dis-
tance, 209 miles. Thermometer 72°. Soon after
noon a change of wind. Yards squared. At 5 p.m.,
starboard fore stunsails set. Concludes with fine
breeze, cloudy weather, and occasional showers.
60. Monday, June 17th— Same cloudy weather
and light rain. Wind hauled on the starboard
quarter, blowing from the S.E. About 7 a.m.,
entered the tropical regions. Lat. at noon: 22°
31' S. Long.; 19° 34' W. Distance, 206 miles.
Thermometer 69°. Concludes with strong breeze,
smooth sea, cloudy night, and rain.
61. Tuesday, June 18th. —Same breeze continues
blowing rather squally. Top-gallant sails stowed.
Sun shining brightly with oppressive warmth.
Lat. at noon: 18° 40' S. Long.: 20° 32' W.
Distance, 237 miles. Thermometer 73°. Con-
eludes with rising sea and strong breeze.
62. Wednesday, June 19th. — A continuance of
same fine weather. Lat. at noon: 14° 42' S.
Long.: 21° 18' W. Distance 242 miles. Ther-
mometer 76°. Concludes with occasional light
squalls and rain.
63. Thursday, June 20th.— Cloudy and raining,
clearing up about 8 a.m. Same wind continues.
Lat. at noon: 11° 1' S. Long.: 21° 56' W.
Distance, 224 miles. Thermometer 78°. Con-
cludes with lighter breeze. A fine night.
64. Friday, June 21st. —Same fine weather con-
tinues all day. Top-gallant stunsails set on
starboard side. Mizen royal sent aloft and set.
Lat. at noon: 7° 40' S. Long.: 23° 30' W.
Distance, 222 miles. Thermometer 80°. Fine
starlight night.
36
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


to t()c poocr §astt'e
No. B.]
[Saturday, June 22nd, 1867.
TRISTAN" DA CXJNHA.
These islands, situated in the South
Atlantic Ocean, are three in number, forming
a triangle, of which the largest, Tristan, is
the N".E. point. The other two were named
by the French in 1767—the westernmost,
Inaccessible Island, and the smallest, or
southernmost, Nightingale Island. The groupe
appears to have been discovered hy the Por-
tuguese in their earlier navigations, and was
further explored and described by the Dutch in
1643, and by the French in 1767.
"We passed the parallel in which they lie
(to the westward) on "Wednesday, the 12th
instant.
The N"."W. extremity near the settlement is
in latitude 37° 2' 48" S., and longitude 12°
18' 39" "W.
Inaccessible Island presents a high bluff.
The Blenden Hall, bound to Bombay from
London, was totally lost here on the 23rd of
July, 1821. Eight of the crew were drowned,
but the rest (including ladies) after six months
and three days terrible sufferings, reached the
adjoining isle, Tristan. Communication was
first had by means of a small boat, made with
surgical instruments, and the unfoi’tunate suffer-
ers afterwards fetched off by two whale boats.
The following January, a brig from Brazil took
them all to the Cape of Good Hope. Their
sole food, whilst on this island was penguins
and their eggs. This island is high, flat at
the top, and about two leagues in circuit. It
is barren, steep, and inaccessible.
Nightingale Isle is three leagues to the S.E.
of Inaccessible Island. It is small, irregular,
with a hollow in the middle, and rocky.
But the principal, and that of most interest
is the largest, Tristan. On its northern side
there is a perpendicular elevation of 1,000
feet from the sea —then commences a level or
table land, extending to the centre of the
island, and above that rises a conical moun-
tain, nearly always capped with snow. Trees
grow half way up. Above to the summit it is
bare and rugged, and frequently enveloped in
the clouds. It is about 8,326 feet high above
the sea.
In 1811 three Americans were there pre-
paring seal skins and oil for sale to vessels
that might touch. One of them (Jonathan
Lambert) by a curious and singular edict,
declared himself sovereign proprietor of these
islands. He cleared 50 acres of land, and
planted various kinds of seed, some (coffee
tree and sugar cane) furnished by the Ameri-
can Minister at Rio Janeiro. It promised to
be a valuable and important settlement. The
whole was, however, shortly abandoned and
afterwards taken possession of by the British.
The island was then again evacuated; and
lastly several families voluntarily went to it
entirely independent from control by Govern-
ment.
From the London papers of 1824, the fol-
lowing is quoted:—“ The island of Tristan da
Cunha, has now upon it, living in great hap-
piness, 22 men and 3 women. The Berwick,
Captain Jeffery, from London to Van
Dieman’s Land, sent her boat ashore on the
25th of March, 1823. The sailors were sur-
prised at finding an Englishman of the name
of Glass, formerly a corporal in the artillery,
and the rest of the above-mentioned popu-
lation. Glass gave a favorable account of the
island, which is only 9 miles in diameter.
There are on it plenty of pigs, goats, potatoes,
cabbages, &c., abundance ot fish, and excellent
water. This little colony had, at the time, 80
tons of potatoes to dispose of. The island is
very fertile, in fact, in everything desirable
to settlers, and Glass declared that if they
had but a few women more the place would be
an earthly paradise. He is Governor by
appointment of the rest, and trades in a small
schooner to the Cape of Good Hope with the
oil of the sea elephant, and the skins of the
seal, which they catch in great abundance.”
In 1829, there were seven families living
very comfortably under the administration of
Governor Glass, having for sale plenty of
bullocks, cows, sheep, hogs, goats, rabbits, and
poultry; also potatoes, cabbages, beets, par-
snips, carrots, onions, and pumpkins; together
with butter, cheese, eggs, and milk; all to
be had on moderate terms, and in any quanti-
ties. The inhabitants were most friendly and
hospitable.
The following extracts are from a commu-
nication of Captain Liddell, ship Wellington,
published in the Nautical Magazine of June,
1836: —* * * * * “I was
gratified by the opportunity of renewing my
acquaintance with the inhabitants whom I had
previously visited three times. "We arrived


off the island on the 12th of October (1835)
and were immediately boarded by old Glass,
the Governor, and his five companions, who
were overjoyed to see us again. * * *
To attract attention, whenever a ship is suffi-
ciently near to see it, they set fire to a large
heap of brushwood, constantly kept in readi-
ness for the purpose. * * * The inha-
bitants now numbered forty-one, exclusive of
Glass’s eldest son, absent in a whaler.
* * * As the poor people are en-
tirely dependent on ships for supplies of
clothes and many other necessaries, it may be
imagined with what joy an Indiaman, full of
passengers, is welcomed. * * *
My passengers, especially the ladies, were
exceedingly liberal in their presents of wearing
apparel, blankets, books, &c. I added a fine
calf, with wheat, barley, and oats for seed,
and a variety of stores. Their stock consists
of 50 head of cattle, 75 sheep, and a large
quantity of pigs and poultry * * *
The Rev. J. Applegate, of the Established
Church, took advantage of the opportunity to
baptize 29 persons, from the age of a few
months to 17 years, after an affecting address
to all the assembled inhabitants. This was
the first time they had ever seen a clergyman ;
and a baptismal register was now left with
them.”
Money was not wanted, the people wishing
barter.
The Diana and Mary put in in December,
1833. The population at this time consisted
of 6 men, 6 women, and 28 children. Mr.
Glass reported that the government had sent
them from the Cape of Good Hope a medicine
chest and bale of blankets. They said the
women were very badly off for clothes in
winter, and were much in want of some linsey-
woolsey.
The following extracts are from the notes
of Captain H. M. Denham, inH.M.S. Herald ,
(referring to November, 1852,) and give later
and most interesting intelligence of this
remote colony.
“ The little settlement of 9 families was
situated on the N.W. point of the island. v ' f
* * Around these islands this tough
seaweed ffucus giganteus) which grows up
firmly rooted in 15 fathoms of water, allays
the crests of the swell.” (The venerable
Governor Glass was on the beach to meet
them on landing.) * * * “The
population now amounts to 85 persons, all
acknowledging the Church of England Com-
munion, and under the pastoral care of the
Rev. William Taylor.”
(We learn that this reverend gentleman was
appointed by the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel at the instance of an unknown
benefactor who, sympathising with these poor
isolated people, had remitted to the Society
in 1849, £l,OOO, to provide a resident clergy-
man to fulfil the offices of teacher and minister
there for five years. Mr. Taylor proved a
devoted and most amiable pastor.)
Health and contentment prevailed in the
several cottages (still referring to November,
1852,) yet there was a very scanty supply of
furniture and utensils, but abundance of Eng-
lish farm productions, including mutton and
beef. Eor groceries and clothes they still
depended on ships, for which they were always
ready to supply stock and refreshment, as wc
have said, preferring barter to money.
(Ships may, too, obtain good water by
means of a hose from a boat to the beautiful
cascade near the settlement, receiving plenty
of willing assistance.)
William Glass was then upwards of 70
years of age, and sorrowfully afflicted with
cancer in his under lip and chin, but able
to move about. He was still called the
Governor. His family consisted of his wife,
7 sons, and 8 daughters.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS,
Mrs. Malaprop. —We cannot insert your pro-
duction, abounding, as it does, with personalties. We
have lately received many and very high compli-
ments for conducting our little Journal without
offence ; but were we to insert your letter, we should
merit much condemnation. It is, however, with
deep regret that we have to refuse Mrs. Malaprop
anything. We have been acquainted now for many
years, and this is the first request we ever
denied her. When we are blessed with the happi-
ness again to see her (which we hope may not be
long) we shall humbly beg pardon for this refusal.
Funny Giles. —Wo have received the broken
biscuit you kindly placed in our Editor’s box. We
fear it is too hard to publish. As we are aware,
though, that you are given to munching these frag-
ments nightly, from 8 to 12, wo will have another
box put up for placing in what you are unable to
eat, but we cannot keep our Editor’s box out for this
or any other purpose after 5 p.m.
Navigator. —Splicing the main brace is an impos-
sibility, but coiling the mainmast down, and reefing
the foremast, things of daily occurrence. We are
surprised at your ignorance !
Sympathy.—lt is untrue that, if a man got his
head jammed in a bucket of dirty water, he would
suffocate. The liquid would speedily flow off, and
be replaced by fresh air.
38
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


flfast bj Ups.
.a. croTJi^nsr^Xj
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “ Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Blackwall, 1,300 tons burthen, R. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BT JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 9, with Supplement.]
[Saturday, June 29th, 1867.
Prayers -were read on the poop deck on
Sunday morning last. In the evening the
llev. Mr. Bradnet preached in the same place ;
and on "Wednesday evening (in the inter-
mediate) a sermon was also preached by that
gentleman.
TO OUR SUBSCRIBERS.
As a few more weeks will conclude our
voyage, we propose to appeal to our numerous
readers in the second and third cabins and
steerage (commencing with the latter), on
Monday next for their support in printing
the Dover Castle JVews, leaving application to
our friends in the saloon for another and
early opportunity by circular.
The plan we shall adopt will be to obtain
the names only of subscribers on Monday, and
leave until the following week the actual
subscription.
We now issue our ninth number, a proof
sufficient, combined with the great success
that has throughout attended our labors to
entitle us, as we hope all will think, to the
support of every passenger aboard, in this the
final step—the summit of our success and
hopes.
We need scarcely remind our friends that
ours has been a task most arduous, for the
fact must be obvious to all who bear in mind
the many weeks of terribly rough and severe
weather we have experienced, during which
time writing was, to many, a seeming impos-
sibility. But we labored on, confident that
everybody would subscribe the trifle we re-
quire, to carry out the only object we had,
and still have, in view—the printing of (in
one work) the whole of our papers to enable
all, including ourselves, to procure a full, and
(we trust) interesting record of our voyage.
"We neither desired, nor have we derived any
pecuniary advantage for our pains. Then how
little do we ask! We seek to obtain what
every subscriber will have, and no more—our
trouble we toss to the winds!
Our paper will be issued as usual until we
arrive in the Channel, when a supplement to
the last number will be prepared, containing
our log, and all news up to the time of hauling
into Dock, as a conclusion to the whole.
We shall willingly devote our time and
attention to the matter whilst in the printer’s
hands, and carefully supply each subscriber
with his copies.
A circular will be posted on deck during
to-morrow, containing full particulars and
amount required from each subscriber, to
which we particularly call the attention
of all.


Although this week’s run has not been so
great as the last, yet we have much to rejoice
at. Since one o’clock on Monday morning
our good ship has been steadily sailing over
the North Atlantic Ocean, having then bid
good-bye to the dreary South Atlantic, by
crossing the Equator—under 66 days at sea
from Port Philip Heads. Let us then give the
Dover Castle some credit for this accomplish-
ment. She evidently felt ashamed of her
conduct off Cape Horn, and no doubt with the
intention of retrieving her lost fame “ hurried
up,” and ran from thence to the line in 25
days (over a distance of 4,417 miles) at the
average rate, during that time, of more than
7 knots per hour, —an excellent run, taking
into consideration the weather we have met
with.
On Tuesday morning last we lost th« S.E.
trade wind, having enjoyed the benefit of it
since Monday morning the 17th instant, when
we entered the tropics (lat. 23° 28' S.) Since
Tuesday we have experienced light variable
winds and calms, attended with torrents of
drenching rain.
The temperature, as we might expect in
these latitudes, has been most oppressive, and
between decks, in spite of open ports, almost
unbearable. Still avc are more comfortable
than when in the colder regions, for we have,
comparatively speaking, a smooth sea and
steady ship.
We are very close to both the West Coast
of Africa and the Cape de Yerde Islands.
Yesterday at noon (after a week’s run of 1,037
miles) we were steering towards the latter, only
distant about 367 miles; whilst the former lay
about 650 miles to the eastward of us.
We may, in a few days catch the north-east
trade winds, which will carry us away to the
westward. If, however, we should go on for
a day or two with similar breezes to those we
have had, we shall sight the Cape de Verde
Islands; but otherwise shall, as we have said,
pass out of sight to the westward.
ITEMS OF NEWS.
Mr. Dawson still remains in the same un-
conscious state.
On Thursday morning early, our vessel
being becalmed, the main yards were backed,
and a boat lowered to attempt to repair the
metal at the water’s edge, knocked away during
the late rough weather, but the swell was too
great to allow much work to be done. Whilst
the boat was pitching and rolling at the ship’s
side, Mr. Hay (midshipman), lost his balance
and fell over its side into the water, thus get-
ting a very unexpected “ bogey.”
On Tuesday and Wednesday nights (which
were very dark) torrents of rain fell upon our
decks. On the latter night especially, the
force and duration of the deluge was terrific.
This proved, however, very acceptable for fresh
water was at the time obtained in any quan-
tities, every available article throughout the
ship being filled.
Divine Service is now held on deck, the be-
tween decks being too close. At night lanterns
are brought up.
Raffles innumerable have taken place during
the week.
Hundreds of the beautiful Nautilus, or “ Por-
tuguese Men-of-War,” have sailed past us since
our last.
A large whale was seen on the starboard
bow on Thursday afternoon, and at the same
time, a great number of porpoises kept up
with our ship’s head.
We once more passed over our ship’s out-
ward course on Sunday; and Monday evening
crossed it again. She was in the former posi-
tion, outward bound, on Saturday January
19th last; and the latter on the afternoon of the
day preceding.
40
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


There is now aboard a great and increasing
demand for ale and porter, but many cannot
afford to indulge much at the present price of
eighteen-pence per bottle. We should very
much like, now that we are nearing home, to
see a reduction of, say sixpence per bottle.
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Funny Giles {as altered). —This gentleman has
called at our office, and denied in toto our statement
contained in last week’s paper, therefore we apo-
logize. He is not funny ! We thought he was !!
Mr. Bug {Norfolk Howard). —We pity your distress.
It certainly is hard to be “roused” out of comfortable
quarters, and exposed to the sun’s heat on deck.
N. Z.—We have not had time yet even to read your
lines. They arrived too late.
THE SHIP’S CREW AND PASSENGERS.
{Continued from our last.)
THE STEERAGE, OR FORE PEAK,
Contains 63 passengers (male.) It is situated
forward, between decks, on a level with the
second and third cabins, extending from the
partition of the intermediate abaft the fore-
hatchway, and is therefore of a triangular
shape.
Communication with deck is had by means
of a ladder ascending through the hatchway,
immediately forward of which stands the fore-
mast (a skylight, opening upon the forecastle
deck, lying between it and the ship’s head).
Under the hatchway, on the starboard side, a
closed berth is used as a hospital.
The sleeping bunks for passengers in this
class, are built round the sides (in two tiers),
parallel to each other, and are all open, not
being like other classes, enclosed in separate
berths.
A few ports give a limited quantity of light
to the whole.
In the centre, tables running athwartships,
similar to those in the intermediate, afford
accommodation for meals.
The dietary scale is the same as that of the
latter class. Messes are formed in like man-
ner, and, generally speaking, the regulations
of one apply to the other.
{Conclusion.)
CHEAP BREAD*
How nice it is
As the Ocean we flit
To munch “ soft tack ”
Instead of biscuit.
How kind of the Cook
All the voyage it to make
And only the trifle
Of five lob to take!
Still do we think
At nothing ’twould be
So much the cheaper
By five “ bob ” d’ye see ?
It is easily done:
Give Cooky the sack,
Growl at the bread,
And your money get back.
This is a dodge
Of ’vantage quite full,
The bread you have had,
You norv get your “ bull.’
Whilst in our berth on Monday forenoon
last, procuring a drink of lime juice to allay
our Editorial thirst, we heard a great splashing
of water without, and, looking through the
open port to ascertain the cause, were met
face to face by an enormous shark, dressed in
his Sunday clothes, who politely finned in the
following letter, stating that he was one of the
Shark Rody-Guard of His Submarine High-
* Written upon one of the passengers receiving his money
back from the Cook who had made bread for him during the
voyage.
41
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


ness, King Neptune, from whom he brought
the letter:—
Equatorial Submarine Palace ,
June 24-th, 1867.
To the Editor of the Dover Castle News.
Dear Sir, —Doubtless, much surprise has
been manifested aboard your ship at not re-
ceiving a visit from me this morning, Pray
apologise for my non-appearance.
Many—very many troubles have combined
to prevent my boarding you. The first and
greatest is, that I have had a quarrel with
Amphitrite, who has, after accusing me of stay-
ing out late at night, &c., sought her remedy
in the “ Submarine Court for Matrimonial
Causes and Divorce.” The case is still on, and
the evidence very conflicting.
Triton, taking advantage of our being in
court day after day, is on the spree, and as
drunk as a fiddler. I spared a moment to re-
monstrate with him on his imprudent conduct,
and he told me to mind my own business, and
go to , well no matter where. My father,
Saturn, will soon have him! Unhappy dad
that I am !!
However, I am much pleased with the
report the officer I despatched to inspect your
ship has just brought me. I read with pleasure
that (unusually the case) no grumblers dwell
amongst you—that all are contented aboard.
What a happy state of things to be sure!
Give my kind love to the Austrian. I recol-
lect he called me his brother when I last saw
him. I have since asked my mother Rhea
whether he is or not. She doesn’t think so,
and she ought to know something about it.
Wishing you a speedy journey to England,
I am, yours, &c..
NEPTUNE.
P.S.—Amphitrite has just scratched my
counsel’s face in open court, Triton, after
blacking a policeman’s eye, has got in the
lock-up. N.
CROSSING THE EQUATOR.
On Monday last, June 24th, at one o’clock
A.M., our ship crossed the line, in longi-
tude 24° 28' W., with squared yards, before a
light breeze, and under all the canvas she
could possibly carry with advantage. The
weather was beautifully fine, and the sea almost
as smooth as in harbour.
We were then exactly 65 days and 20 hours
out from Port Philip Heads; 25 days and 1
hour since passing the meridian of Cape Horn,
and only 7 days in the tropics.
PROGNOSTICATING TELEGRAPHIC
INTELLIGENCE.
English Channel,
Monday , July 22nd, 1867.
Ship Dover Castle, Captain Deacon, 95
days out from Melbourne, passing up channel.
East India DocTcs, July 24 th.
Ship Dover Castle hauled into the docks to-
day. All well and contented aboard.
LINES WRITTEN UPON THE BIRTH OP A
CHILD ON BOARD THE “DOVER CASTLE”
OFF CAPE HORN.
Whilst steering off the dreaded Horn
Upon the wild tempestuous sea,
A tiny infant there was born
Whose name, ’tis said, “ Cape Horn ” shall be.
Amidst the freezing snow and hail
His voyage of life begun,
To close again—how, when, or where—
On earth is known to none.
But may the time allotted him
Bo free from care and strife,
(Whilst fraught with peace and happiness,)
It’s close—Eternal Life.
OUR COOK.
Last week we referred to a proposal to award
our Cook a sum of money in recognition of his
deserving care and attention to all of us during
the voyage. We are glad to hear that a gen-
tleman intends making the collection on Mon-
42
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


day next. Rumours have reached us that some
few think the step premature, hut we must re-
mind them that we shall soon he near the end
of our voyage, and then hut little business will
he attended to.
We may add that Mr. Scott, although now
temporally acting as passengers’ cook, has for
years filled, and we hope will soon again, a higher
situation in his profession one that his
acknowledged skill and kindness fully entitle
him to occupy.
TO WHOM IT MAT CONCERN.
Whereas we have received many com-
plaints of wanted decency on the part of several
ladies during the drenching rain about mid-
night of Tuesday last. And whereas report
says that scarcely any clothing was worn, and
that one lady played her part (as she called it)
in 4 acts—the first in silk; act 2 in plain cot-
ton ; act 3 in very little of either one or the
other; and act 4 with her head stuck through
the chain cable hawse hole on deck, and her body
’tween decks. Now this witnesseth that in
consideration of female modesty, the said ladies
will transfer such “ little games to the mer-
maids, until within the privacy of their rooms
ashore.
God save the Queen!
MILITARY.
Scene: Main deck of ship Dover Castle at Sea.
Austrian ( meeting a Prussian, who has been
“ chafing ” him about the late war in Germany ) ;
—I tell you what —your countrymen did what
we could’nt do : they soon blew our brains out.
(Prussian feels proud at the compliment .)
Austrian ( continuing) .- — But yours had
none to lose!
Prussian sews him up with a needle (gun).
ENIGMA.
Of a certain place I am the name,
Lying near Sydney of noted fame.
My first is a valuable colonial stuff
Once strolling o’er the mountain rough.
My second and fourth (an ancient game
Of cards) are both the same.
My third in sound is like the cow,
A noise—or rather a horrible row—
My whole a sort of gurgling noise
As made with bubbles of soapsuds by boys.
Answer :—Woolloomooloo.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(We must really leg of our Correspondents to le
more brief, for our limited space will not
admit of long letters. — Editor D.C.N.)
Ship Dover Castle, June 2G th, 1867.
To the Editor of the Dover Castle News.
Dear Sir, —I feel convinced that you, as a
lover of justice and fair play, will allow me a
few brief lines in one of your valuable columns.
By a few maliciously disposed and evil
minded people on board, I have been stigma-
tised as a thief. Not, it is true in words, but
by actions which no sensible man could con-
strue in any other light. And why ? Forsooth
because a certain gentleman happens to be so
careless of this world’s goods as to most unac-
countably lose a pair of boots. Now, Sir, I
think both you and all readers of your much ap-
preciated journal, will at once see the absurdity
and wickedness of this accusation from the
following facts, which are indisputable: —l
have at present in my possession a pair of elastic
side boots, which may be exactly similar to the
boots which have been missing—but that, I
maintain, goes only to prove that there are
very many pairs of boots of the same size, made
by the same man, of similar material, and even
sold by the same shopkeeper ! Six gentlemen
are prepared to come forward and state that
the boots now in my possession have been so
ever since we left Melbourne, and I ask you,
43
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Mr. Editor, if it is a likely thing, if I had stolen
a pair of boots, that I would bring them on
the main deck and brush them in public ?
This, Sir, I have done, and, hoping that these
remarks will go a long way to establish my
innocence, I trust I shall no longer be annoyed
by the remarks of people who constantly say in
my hearing “ Who stole the boots ?” The
gentleman who has lost his boots I sincerely
sympathise with, but I cannot but censure his
hasty conduct in this affair.
Offering you my humble apology for en-
croaching so much on your valuable space, I
remain,
Yours obediently,
CHARLES J. DUNLOP.
No. 37, Fore Peak.
ACCIDENT.
Yesterday afternoon at a quarter to one
o’clock, a loud and sudden noise on deck, at-
tended with a tremendous shaking throughout
the whole ship, caused everybody who happened
to be below to rush up, many of them much
alarmed.
The excitement was caused by the breaking
of the main upper topsail halliards, the yard
falling (probably with a weight equal to 15
or 20 tons), on to the lower yard, a distance of
25 feet, splitting in two, and leaving the upper
sails dangling uselessly in the light breeze.
Had the heavy chain halliards have unrove
and fallen upon the crowded deck, some lives
would have been lost, but providentially no
person was injured. All hands were set to
work, and the broken yard sent down on deck
at 6 P.M,
OUR LOG.
65. Saturday, June 22nd. —Commences with same
fair wind and weather. Lat. at noon : 4° 22' S.
Long.: 24° 6' W. Distance, 202 miles. Ther-
mometer 80°. Heat very oppressive. Closes
with fine night.
66. SuNDAf, June 23rd. —Wind rather lighter. At
7 a.m., a barque passed at some distance to Ice-
Tyard, steering towards the Brazilian coast.
Wind gradually hauling aft. Lat. at noon: 1°
32' S. Long. : 24° 28' W. Distance, 192
miles. Thermometer 80°. Yards squared at 4
p.m. A brigantine steering S.W. on starboard
beam at 5 o’clock. Fine night.
67. Monday, June 24th.—Crossed the Equator at
1 o’clock a.m. Wind still aft. Weather very
warm. A schooner or brigantine passed on
horizon to starboard at noon. Lat. then :1° 00'
N. Long.: 24° 12' W. Distance, 153 miles.
Thermometer 80°. Concludes with continuance
of fine weather.
68. Tuesday, June 25th. —Cloudy and lighter wind.
Heat very oppressive. Lat. at noon : 3° 43' N.
Long.: 24° 53' W. Distance, 168 miles. Ther-
mometer 82°. At 8.30 p.m., wind hauled round
to starboard quarter and soon died away,
followed with drenching rain.
69. Wednesday, June 26th. —Ship becalmed. Yards
squared. Cloudy and very hot, rain having
ceased, and a very light breeze sprung up. Lat.
at noon: 5° 13' N. Long.: 25° 56' W. Dis-
tance, 110 miles. Thermometer 82° At 4 p.m.,
wind shifted to port quarter. At 5 ship again
becalmed. Raining heavily, with thick weather.
Suddenly discovered a vessel on the weather bow
at dusk, but it was too thick to make her out.
At 8 p.m., she passed close on our weather side
and we spoke her, but could not hear her
name distinctly. She proved to be a barque.
Concludes with heavy rain.
70. Thursday, June 27th. —Ship becalmed, but
wind sprung up on starboard quarter at 8 a.m.
A three masted schooner in company to wind-
ward. At 12 spoke the barque A. J. Pope,
bound from New Bedford to Sandwich Islands,
30 days out. Lat. at noon: 6° 27' N. Long.:
25° 28' W. Distance, 79 miles. Thermometer
82°. In afternoon saw another sail on starboard
bow, and one on port beam, just hove in sight.
Fine dark night.
71. Friday, June 28th. —Light wind on starboard
quarter. At 9 a.m., a screw steamer passed on
horizon to starboard, and also a full rigged ship.
Very hot day. Lat. at noon : 8° 38' N. Long.:
25° 51' W. Distance, 133 miles. Thermometer
85°. At 12.45 p.m., the main upper topsail yard
gave w r ay and fell, breaking in half. Ship be-
calmed, with rain. The broken topsail yard
sent on deck at 6 p.m,
44
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Supplement lo l()e power §astfc pie id 5
No. 9.]
[Saturday, June 29th, 1867.
ISLET OF TRINIDAD, AND ADJACENT
MARTIN YAS ROCKS.
The Island of Trinidad is situated in the
South Atlantic Ocean (off the east coast of
South America), the south-east point being in
latitude 20° 30' S., and longitude 29° 14' W.
We passed to the eastward on Tuesday morn-
ing week, the 18th instant.
The island is 6 miles in circumference; the
laud very unequal, and at best no more than a
cluster of rocks, with some shrubs in the val-
leys. The northernmost side is quite barren,
but to the southward all the interstices of the
rocks are filled with evergreens of several
kinds —there is also a quantity of sea-fowl,
rock-fish and many wild hogs.
Captain Halley, afterwards Dr. Halley,
Astronomer Royal, landed here on the 17th of
April, 1700, and put on it some goats and hogs
for breed, and a pair of Guinea fowl, and he
took possession of the island in His Majesty’s
name, leaving the Union Jack flying.
It was afterwards found impracticable to
form a settlement here —even roots perished
for want of water.
The island is surrounded by sharp rugged
coral rocks, and the landing is very precarious.
The surf has been seen during a S.W. gale to
break over a bluff 200 feet high. There is a pecu-
liar rock called the Monument, 850 feet high, al-
most detached from the island, with large trees
on its top, and another called the Sugarloaf.
This is 1,160 feet high—both are at the S.E. end.
When raining a cascade of above 700 feet
makes a beautiful appearance on the latter,
through which too is a remarkable arch 40 feet
in breadth, 50 feet in height, and 420 in length.
THE MARTIN VAS ROCKS
Are three in number, and close to the Isle of
Trinidad to the eastward. The centre one is
very high with tufts of grass upon its summit.
The other two are barren.
ST. HELENA.
This Island is situated in the South Atlantic
Ocean, in latitude 15° 55' 26" S., and longitude
5° 42' 30" W. We passed its parallel to the
westward on Wednesday night week, the 19th
instant.
The island was discovered by the Portuguese
on St. Helena’s Day, 1502. In 1513 it became
the voluntary abode of Fernandez Lopez, a
Portuguese nobleman, who cultivated its re-
sources. In a few years he was recalled to his
country, and imparted the advantages of St.
Helena to the East India Trade.
Thomas Cayandish, in 1588, said he found
“ Divers handsome buildings and houses, a
church tiled and whitened, very fair, a causey
made up with stones, reaching into a valley by
the sea-side.” He afterwards speaks highly of
this valley as “ the fairest spot in all the island,
exceedingly sweet and pleasant ” —of its fruits
and herbs, green and ripe figs all at once —
lemon, orange, pomegranade, and date trees,
with pleasant walks between them—of all kinds
of herbs—parsley, sorrel, basil, fennel, aniseed,
mustard seed, radishes, &c.
James Town is seated in a narrow valley
between the mountains (rocky precipices 1,000
feet high) with the batteries, the church, and the
white houses, interspersed with trees, constitu-
ting altogether a picturesque and animating
scene. Behind the water battery, and in front
of the town stands the castle, and near it a
building called the “ Times Office.”
The streets contain a number of shops stored
with European and Indian goods. The prin-
cipal inhabitants reside in the lower street.
The thermometer seldom stands higher than
80°, and in winter between 55° and 56°,
The population in 1847 was 5,298 persons.
Napoleon Bonaparte arrived here an
exile prisoner, on the 13th of October, 1815, and
on May sth, 1821 he died at Longwood, a vil-
lage 6 miles from James Town, in the 52nd year
of his age. He was buried about 4 miles from
James Town. His grave was for 19 years the
principal object of interest in this, his island


tomb. It lies in a valley, having a little fount
of water, moss grown, and beset with brake
and fern, surrounded with wild flowers, among
which the roses and geraniums bloom through-
out the year. This was Napoleon’s favourite
resort, and here his remains were deposited.
On May sth, 1840, the anniversary of his
death, the body was formerly demanded of the
British Government, and on October 15th, 1840,
t was removed and conveyed to the Hotel of
the Invalides in Paris.
THE ISLAND OF ASCENSION.
We passed the parallel of this island yester-
day week. It is situated in latitude 7° 55' 48” S.
and longitude 14° 23' 46” W.
The island is of an elliptic form —its greatest
diameter from east to west being 7f miles,
and from north to south 6 miles. Its area is
about 38 square miles, and its circumference
about 22 miles. It is of volcanic origin.
The highest peak, or Green Mountain, is eleva-
ted 2,818 feet above the sea. From its summit
about 40 extinct volcanoes may be seen. The
mountain is covered with rock roses, fern, and
moss. The temperature is delightful.
During the confinement of Napoleon on
St. Helena, the British Government formed a
Military Station here. Afterwards came the
wives and families of the soldiers. Fever at
times much thinned its little population.
The Garrison Establishment is now called
George Town, consisting of wooden houses.
Batteries have been erected, piers built, gardens
formed, and land cultivated.
Turtles abound here.
The island is much infested with rats, besides
flies, ants, mosquitoes, scorpions, centipedes,
large spiders, and crickets.
FERNANDO NORONHA.
This island is situated in latitude 3° 50' 10”
S., and longitude 32° 23' 15” W. We passed
to the eastward of it on Saturday afternoon
last (22nd June.)
It is about 7 miles in length, and 2 or
broad. It has a high rocky peak on its north
side. It has been principally the rendezvous
of whalers for procuring cattle, sheep, poultry,
wood, &c.
In 1827 there were about 200 inhabitants on
the island, under the Government of a Prussian
Officer, erecting fortifications, &c.
The island is used by the Brazilians as a
place of transportation for criminals, as well
as for the exile of political delinquents. The
beautiful scenery is enchanting. The Pyramid
of naked rock stands out above the verdant
island to a height of 800 feet. There is an in-
land lake on it. In wet seasons the island is
very swampy, but in summer dry and arid.
The trees are very small —the soil rich.
It is governed by a small party of Brazilian
soldiers, under the command of a Major who
fills the office of Governor. He has a few staff
officers and about 100 men. The island is pro-
tected by several forts.
A small village is built on the shore of Peak
Bay. A neat chapel stands on the hill over
the village. There is a hospital and a com-
modious house for the Governor.
There are extensive fields of Indian corn and
cotton, besides a plantation of cocoa nuts and
a tolerable garden, A brick and tile manu-
factory is carried on.
The employment of the people is principally
fishing. The island is supplied with provisions
from Brazil.
No boats arc allowed to *be kept on the
island, and no intercourse is held with ship-
ping without permission, and the strictest
inspection.
SHIPS SIGHTED SINCE OUR LAST
ISSUE.
We have sighted no less than 12 vessels
during the week. On Sunday morning a
barque to port, and in the afternoon a brigan-
tine. On Monday at noon, a topsail schooner
or brigantine—all apparently steering towards
Brazil. At dusk on Wednesday evening, after
the rain had ceased, and whilst becalmed, the
sudden cry of “ A ship on the weather bow,”
caused a general rush upon deck. A vessel
could be plainly discerned only about 3 miles dis-
tant but the weather being very thick, we could
not make her rig out distinctly. At eight o’clock
however, she passed close to windward of us,
and proved to be a barque. A voice was heard
from aboard her: “ What ship’s that ?” Our
Second Officer replied: “ Dover Castle!” The
barque: “ When did you lose the S.E. trades P”
Answer from us : “ Yesterday morning! What
ship’s that ?” But we could not hear the
answer. We distinctly heard her bell strike
eight. The night was very dark. On Thursday
morning two sail appeared astern, and a three-
masted schooner on the starboard side. Passed
close enough astern of the barque A. J. Pope
to read her name painted on it. Her Captain
said he was 30 days out from New Bedford,
bound to Honolulu (Sandwich Islands). Soon
afterwards two sail were seen on the starboard
bow. Yesterday morning a brig-rigged screw
steamer passed us on the starboard side, about
5 miles off, and astern of her a full rigged
ship.
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


(The Clow o’astle Ups.
.A. CTOTJIR/ISTAL
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Q-reen,
of Blackwall, 1,200 tons burthen, B. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 10.]
[Saturday, July 6th, 1867.
Peayees were read on the poop deck on
Sunday morning; the children’s classes met in
the afternoon; and in the evening Mr. Day
preached on the poop. Divine Service was
likewise held on Wednesday evening by the
Rev. Mr. Faek, in the 3rd cabin.
Another very favorable week has passed.
Up to noon yesterday, our seven day’s run
amounted to 973 miles. On Monday morning
we got the N.E. trade wind, and have since
been dashing along at fine speed with generally
a smooth sea.
Within a few hours from the time we write,
we shall have passed again out of the tropics,
when we may hope to experience a more tem-
perate and genial atmosphere.
Our distance from the Azores or Western
Islands (to the southward) yesterday, was only
about 830 miles. We are also a few degrees
to the westward of them.
We passed the parallel of the northernmost
of the Cape Yerde Islands, distant about 370
miles, early on Thursday morning last.
Although we cannot expect to carry our
present wind so far to the northward as the
Western Islands, we may still with reason hope
to reach them in about a week; and from
thence another seven or eight days may place
us between the shores of Old England and
those of France, with a fair breeze, dashing
along the smooth, green waters of the English
Channel!
It seems at times difficult to realize in our
minds after so long an absence the fact that
we are within a week or two’s sail of the well
remembered shores of our native country,—
that only little more than two thousand miles
now lies before us on our course, even if we
have to go to the westward of the Western
Islands.
With good fortune, our voyage will soon
be over our little community dispersed
through Europe—the Ocean dreariness ex-
changed for a life amongst the more stationary
multitudes ashore—and, with relations and
old friends around us, we shall be cozily discuss-
ing the events of years of separation. We may
hope for this happiness within three weeks.
We were almost fearful at the commence-
ment of this week that subscriptions towards
printing and distributing our papers, would
scarcely amount to enough to justify our com-
mencing a collection. But now we write with
very different feelings. We hear that a few
kind friends and supporters of ours intend to
take steps towards carrying to a successful end
the result of our labors. Money (in small


sums certainly) is day after day promised, and
amounts from unexpected sources are obtain-
able when necessary. In a word, wo shall
soon be able to close our list of subscribers;
collect the money, and place it in a treasurer’s
hands; carry out to the end our Editorial
duties; and put those who have kindly
supported us in possession of their copies—
the final accomplishment of all we have
worked for and desired.
THOUGHTS AT SEA.
Sailing o’er the wide blue sea,
Gracious Lord we trust in Thee—
When from dark Cimmerian caves
Angry Boreas sweeps the waves—
When the affrighted billows leap,
And there’s danger on the deep,
Nought of winds or waves we fear,
If Thou, God of love, art near.
On the whirlwind Thou dost ride,
The impetuous courser guide ;
In the never ceaseless motion
Of the ever restless Ocean.
In the wild wind’s hollow moan—
In the angry tempest’s groan —
Emblem of Thyself we see,
God of power and Majesty.
Tossed upon life’s troubled sea,
None can save us Lord but Thee ;
Onward through the roughest gale,
Piloted by Thee we sail.
Let the angry billows roar,
We shall make the heavenly shore—
If our helmsman Thou wilt be,
Safe, though rough our voyage will be.
H. DAY.
ITEMS FOR THE WEEK.
On Sunday, during a calm, one of our offi-
cers and a midshipman swam for a short time
at the ship’s side.
A “ horse-fly ” was caught aboard on Sunday,
which no doubt came from the Cape Verde
Islands —the nearest land.
Mr. Dawson is much better this week. He
has spoken several times.
On the completion of the new topsail yard on
Tuesday evening, a dozen of champagne were
drank to it’s success by those who had worked
at it.
The effects of the Steward of this ship, who
died on the passage out, were partly sold on
the quarter-deck on Tuesday afternoon, the sale
being completed yesterday. Our nautical
auctioneer, Mr. Hancock, conducted the sale
with his usual success, and things fetched good
prices.
A flying fish flew aboard yesterday morning
—the first this voyage.
We should like to see the night-lamp hung
in the intermediate properly attended to. Dur-
ing the past week it has thought proper each
night to go out about 11 P.M., leaving the whole
place in darkness until morning, and giving
rise to many complaints.
(Note. —In our last number we published
some lines headed “ Cheap Bread.” The gen-
tleman to whom this referred has stated to us
that, although part of the tenor of our song
was correct, we had not been informed rightly
as regards the payment to the Cook, who was
offered remuneration for his trouble in any
reasonable amount he might demand, but he
refused to take anything.— Ed. D.C.N.)
An idiot sends us the following riddle. It
is too bad, but we like to oblige everybody :
Why was our ship, at 6 o’clock yesterday
evening, like a stripped log in a fit ?
Answer. —Because she was rolling about with
the bark (barque) off her!
N.B.—He has since died from the effect of
composition.
48
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS,
Done up. —So you must be, when you say you
cannot digest “ salt horse.” It is fit for the most
delicate invalid.
American. —We admit that Thursday was the
4th of July, and a great day of rejoicing in America,
but we did not see any difference in the size of the
day here.
THE TALE OF THE TUB.
{New sea version founded upon fact.)
Mrs. Sgrubhard {loohing over the ship's rail
after a calm in the tropics). —Who says it’s a
calm ? Why she’s scrubbing into it fine! See
how the soapsuds run past us !!
N.B.—“ Scrubbing into it ” means in Eng-
lish going ahead, and “soapsuds” foam.— Ed.
D.C.N.
THE DOVER CASTLE FANCY BUG CLUB.
This Society, composed of a number of bene-
volent individuals, will shortly convene a
General Meeting, to take into consideration
some measures to be then adopted for amelior-
ating the present distressing condition of these
unhappy and abused beings, and to stop, if
possible, the wholesale system of sanguinary
persecution now existing, to which these harm-
less creatures are subjected. Members will
please bring their smelling bottles with them.
DOWNEY SMASHER, Hon. Sec.
A QUERYP
We heard Mr. Fawcett tell one of the
men the other day, to go forward and he would
see the Lizard.
Could Mr. F. have referred to the one in
the English Channel ?
THE RING.
GREAT BATTLE OP WORDS FOR THE SUPREME
RIGHT TO PLAY PRACTICAL JOKES ON THE
“ FENIAN ”* VERSUS THE RIGHT TO PRE-
VENT ANYTHING OP THE SORT.
This unlooked for contest took place on
the main deck, on Saturday morning last,
between the “Joking Pet,” bis mother and
father, on the one side, and the “ Sympathiser
with the Aged,” on the other.
THE HISTORY OP THE FIGHT
Is simple. The Joking Pet was on deck, half
broiled under a tropical sun, thinking how best
to keep his toes from sticking to the half melted
pitch in the seams of the deck, when the Fenian
appeared, and was deemed a fit and proper
subject for a “lark,” whereupon, having pro-
cured some broken biscuit, he opened fire on
the Emerald, but his “ little game ” was put a
stop to by the Sympathiser, who quieted him
into a state of submissive “jaw.” The Pa and
Ma of the Pet took part in the fray, and, three
to one, the fight commenced.
The excitement was great and the multi-
tudes convulsed with laughter.
Round I. —The Pet stood sarcastically
smiling, keeping his mawley nervously running
up and down the starboard main clue garnet,
up which he smilingly took an occasional lunar.
The Sympathiser let out with a terrific left
handed expression, and the Pet said “ he should
do as he liked!” Wouldn’t you ?
Round 2. —Steam up on both sides, which
quickly turned in favor of the Pet, owing to
his Ma having said “ she should only just like
to see him (the Sympathiser) touch her boy!”
and Pa said, “So should he, or any other
man!!”
Round 3.— The Pet appeared shakey on his
pins.
The Sympathiser clenched his fists, sighed,
and said nothing. No blood shed yet.
Round 4. —A lull on both sides, likely to
terminate the mill, but the Pet’s Ma suddenly
* An old Irishman aboard.
49
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


broke out again with “ Well, I’m sure ! ” which
roused the blood of the Sympathiser, and he
swamped her in an eloquent knock-down speech.
The Pet smiled at the maintop and blew his
nose.
Round 5 and Last. —Both flagged at the
call of time. The Pet said it was a fine morn -
ing, and the Sympathiser took to studying a
game of draughts. Pa propped himself up
to port,* whilst Ma looked disdainfully upon the
Sympathiser, and smiled on the Pet’s pluck.
The fight might therefore be considered as six
in favor of one, and half a dozen to the other.
It lasted 10 minutes.
EFFECT OF A CALM IN THE TROPICS.
Oh! don’t touch me, I’m so weary,
Got away and lot me be—•
Really nothing can be dreary,
Except a Tropic’s calm at sea!
The sun quite burns —the wind is hushed,
Oh ! don’t talk and bother me—
Don’t you see I’m ill and flushed —
Bah! the ship rolls horribly.
Hark the timbers how they’re creaking,
Oh! lam so very sad—•
My poor head aches as if breaking,
I shall go perspiring mad!
Sleep I cannot—l’m too hot —
Can’t e’en bear the touch of clothes—
Sit ? Oh what a wretched lot!
Walk I can no more than doze.
Aa I roll and turn to listen,
Near my bunk an awful crash,
Mugs and plates to follow basin,
All gone to eternal smash.
Sailors don’t sing when you haul,
Have some pity on poor mo,
Oh ! I feel as if I’d fall,
In this dreadful calm at sea!
* Ho walked with crutches.
THE ACCIDENT TO OUR TOPSAIL
YARD.
We are happy to say, that after sailing in a
disabled state for 5 days, a new main upper
topsail yard was made, and sent aloft on
Wednesday last.
We forgot to mention in our account of this
mishap last week that Mr. Giles (Midshipman)
met with a slight accident by being jammed
aloft whilst assisting in getting down the
broken yard, but is again on duty. Mr. Max-
well, our Carpenter, wc much regret to say,
severely cut his knee on Sunday morning,
whilst working at the new yard, and will not
probably be able to resume duty during the
rest of the voyage. He is progressing favor-
ably. In consequence of this accident, the
work of making the new yard devolved upon
several passengers, who deserve credit for their
expedition in completing the spar in three
days.
THE MARKETS.
Sails down during the commencement of
this week, in consequence of a fall in topsail
yards, but thanks to the successful inns of our
friend Cameron’s clipper “ Fleawater ”* dur-
Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, topsail yards
rose again on Wednesday, and in consequence
sails went up.
Thermometer up in consequence of a rise
in quicksilver.
Lime Juice in great demand—much has been
disposed of.
Wind.—More plentiful.
Butter. —Anything but firm.
Fleawater. — But little obtainable since
Tuesday, but up to that time, plenty of
Cameron’s brand to be had.
* A name given to the ship’s grog.
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS,


THE CAPE VERDE ISLANDS, THE
CANARIES, MADEIRA, AND THE
AZORES.
We shall give a supplement to our next
number, containing a brief account of these
islands—the last we shall have to notice.
TO OUR SUBSCRIBERS.
According to promise contained in our
notice, posted throughout the ship on Satur-
day last, we now publish our Editor’s
address:—
Mr. JOHN G. HORSEY,
Care of Messrs. HORSEY & BAKER,
No. 103, Southwaek Bkidge Road,
London.
The gentleman from whom subscribers
may obtain their copies in London when
printed is:—
Mr. AD. SANSOSI,
At KROLL’S HOTEL,
America Square, Minories,
London, (E. 0.)
At Sea, July 2nd, 1867.
Dear Sir, —With feelings of deep regret I
notice that, with regard to subscribers, you
have not been so successful in some parts of
the ship as I had hoped and anticipated
you would be, and (as none can doubt) you and
your worthy Amanuensis, truly deserve.
If everybody would consider for a single
moment, the trouble you have undergone, in so
ably carrying out the Dover Castle News, for
the last three months, they would not only
freely and liberally subscribe, but besides that,
start a testimonial in recognition of your
editorial duties. Alas! with what reluctance
the wealthy repay with their gold !! Either
they are Republicans, or, being quite the reverse,
are too fond of their Sovereigns.
I should be happy to assist in any plan for
printing your paper, but until a few more of
your readers, as well as those already subscribed,
do the like, I can only thank you for the trouble
you have taken in amusing us during the pas-
sage, and hoping that a purse of sovereigns
will be made up by the passengers for you
before we part, with sincere acknowledgements
at present in words, I remain
A Friend of the Paper.
To the Editor of the Dover Castle News.
(With many thanks to our kind subscriber
and correspondent, we can only hope that all
who have read our papers, as he has done, will,
without delay, commence in some manner to
assist us. There is scarcely a day to lose. —
Ed. D.G.N.)
NOTICE.
We have discontinued the fore-steerage copy
of our paper, there being only 10 subscribers
out of 63 persons in that class. These sub-
scribers have kindly consented to make use of
the intermediate copy during the rest of the
passage.
CHEESET.
At the next Criminal Sittings, a serious
case of stealing 6 lbs. of cheese will be tried.
From information received, the thief is sup-
posed to have devoured this quantity in such a
hurry that afterwards, for the good of diges-
tion, he swallowed a pack of cards and a
cribbage board. The detectives “know their
man.”
51
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


VESSELS SIGHTED.
We are now sailing in the track of vessels to
and from nearly all parts of Europe, Africa,
and America. Wo have sighted 14 during the
past week. Early on Saturday morning last a
large three-masted screw steamer passed us on
the starboard side. In the same direction there
were also two vessels visible. On Sunday,
whilst neai’ly becalmed, there was a full-rigged
ship, on same course as ourselves, in sight on
the starboard bow, supposed to be one of those
seen yesterday; in the middle of the day a
barque, with skysails set, on the port bow
passing us; and at 4 p.m., another sail on the
starboard beam. On Monday morning there
were three sail in sight. On Thursday evening a
sail was discovered on the port bow; and
yesterday, whilst sailing at great speed, close
hauled on a fine breeze, at 9 a.m., we passed
within a mile of a barque to leeward, close
hauled on port tack. She dipped her ensign
(English) three times to us whilst passing (ex-
pressing “good-bye.”) We hoisted our num-
ber, but she did not answer. At 1 p.m., a large
full-rigged double topsail clipper ship, under
x-oyals, passed about three miles to windward;
at 3, a vessel crossed some distance astern;
and at 6 p.m., a fine barque, under royals, passed
two miles to leeward.
OUR LOG.
72. Saturday, June 29th.— Cloudy with occasional
showers. At 5.30. a.m., a large barque rigged
screw steamer passed well away on starboard
side. There were likewise two sail in sight in
same direction, one of them all day. At 8 a.m.,
yards braced sharp up on starboard tack, our
ship making but little headway. Lat. at noon:
9° 5' N, Long.: 25° 43' W. Distance, 28 miles.
Thermometer, 82°. Raining in afternoon with
light breeze. Ship again becalmed at 5, and
yards squared.
73. Sunday, June 30th. —Fine clear morning. Ship
becalmed nearly all day. At 8 a.m., very light
breeze on starboard beam. A vessel, supposed
to be that seen yesterday, on starboard bow. Lat.
at noon: 9° 54' N. Long.: 26° 22' W. Distance,
62 miles. Thermometer, 80°. At 1 p.m., another
vessel hove in sight on the port bow. We soon
made out the former to be a full rigged ship,
with painted ports on same course as ourselves,
and the latter a barque carrying skysails, head-
ing in opposite direction. At 4 p.m., could see
another vessel on the starboard beam, apparently
heading towards ns. Fine night.
74. Monday, July Ist. —Commences with calm, but a
fine breeze from the N.E. (Trade wind) sprung np
at 6.30 a.m. A sail ahead —one on the port bow
and another astern. Raining occasionally during
the morning. Lat. at noon: 10° 53'N. Long.
26° 54' W. Distance, 67 miles. Thermometer, 81°,
Fine afternoon and night.
75. Tuesday, July 2nd. —Same fine breeze and
weather continues. Close hauled, on starboard
tack. No sail in sight. Lat. at noon : 12° 31' N.
Long.: 28° 23' W. Distance, 132 miles. Thermo-
meter, 80°. Concludes with same weather.
76. Wednesday, July 3kd. —Same fine breeze with
light squalls and fair weather. New main upper
topsail yard completed and sent aloft. Sail bent
and set. Top-gallant sail also. Lat, at noon :
14° 52' N. Long.: 30° 37' W. Distance, 192
miles. Thermometer, 80.° Blowing hard all night.
77. Thursday, July 4th. —Same strong breeze con-
tinues. Lat. at noon: 18° 22' N. Long. 32° 55'
W. Distance, 248 miles. Thermometer, 79. In
evening a sail in sight to leeward.
78. Friday, July sth. —A continuance of samo
breeze. At 9 a.m., passed about a mile to wind-
ward of an English barque, close hauled on port
tack. Lat. at noon: 22° 4' N. Long.: 34° 41'
W. Distance, 244 miles. Thermometer, 78°. At
1 p.m., a large full-rigged clipper ship passed us
on starboard side; at 3 another, vessel crossed
astern; and at 6, a barque passed to port. Fine
night,
52
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Jin* dorm; (I’a.'itU; Ups
EXTRAORDINARY.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 11.]
[Monday, July Bth, 1867.
ENGLISH NEWS
TO THE Ist OF MAY.
Fhom papers yesterday received from
aboard the ship General Wyndham , ob-
tained by her on calling at St. Helena,
30 days since, we quote what few items of
later news (than that in our possession)
we thus glean.
RUMOURS OE WAR.
Intelligence on this subject is very vague.
The only news we have is dated April 24th,
and taken from The Day (a London news-
paper). It states only that merchants are
confident Prussia will shortly be engaged in
war. And further, that the French Govern-
ment has ordered 500,000 needle-guns—the
contract to be completed by the Ist of May.
The Paris Exhibition is almost at a stand-
still, owing to the disturbed state of affairs in
France.
LONDON.
Mu. Gladstone has withdrawn all his
amendments against Diseaeli’s Reform Bill.
The following is from the London Times of
May Ist: —
The sum of £50,000 in gold was withdrawn
from the Bank to-day for the Continent. The
R.M. steamer “ Seine,” from Brazil to the
River Plate, is telegraphed at Lisbon with
£52,456.
Accounts from Cuba are very unfavorable.
The crops have suffered much from drought;
a great many planters and merchants have
failed ; and crime is very rife.
On 26th April, soon after leaving Doncaster,
the first class carriage of a train on the Great
Northern line, running from York to London,
caught fire whilst travelling at the rate of
between 30 and 40 miles an hour, the roof
being in a blaze. Afterburning 10 minutes,
the guard discovered the fire, stopped the
train, and released the passengers from their
perilous position.
Five line-of-battle ships, and five first class
frigates were sold the other day for £68,000
(says the Oloihe). Their original cost was
about £2,000,000, and £2,000,000 spent in
converting them into screws. Had they,
instead, been broken up, Her Majesty’s Trea-
sury would have realised a sum of £39,338
more than the amount received from their
sale.
34 deaths from small-pox were registered in
London last week; 42 from typhus; 19 from
scarlatina; 4 from diphtheria; 44 from whoop-
ing cough; 12 from diarrhoea; 1 from cholera;
185 from phthisis; 123 from bronchitis; and
55 from pneumonia. 2,385 births were regis-
tered.
Last evening Budroodeen Tyabjee, the first
Mahomedan barrister, was called to the English
bar,


The drama of “The Flying Scud” has
reached its 175th night at the New Holborn
Theatre.
In Wales, a boy preacher named Enoch
Probert, aged only 11 years, is, it is said, to
extinguish Mr. Spurgeon. He has a sweet
and powerful voice, which he manages well.
He preached to crowded and astonished con-
gregations on Easter Sunday, in the Baptist
Chapel, at Gladestry, Radnor. After preaching
two sermons, he spoke at length on the fol-
lowing day to the Sunday scholars.
A fearful railway accident on the Scottish
Central Section of the Caledonian Railway
took place on Monday night, but happily no
lives were lost. A cattle train, consisting of
53 wagons and 2 vans, parted on a viaduct of
great height, whilst running at a speed of 25
miles an hour. The engine and 20 of the
foremost wagons proceeded safely on, but
the latter part dashed over the bridge into the
water below. The guard, conductor, and a
cattle dealer were precipitated over (being in
the last van), but, wonderful to relate, were
rescued from the chaotic mass of wagons and
drowning cattle beneath, and escaped with
only a few bruises. All the cattle were either
crushed to death or drowned.
The affairs of the London, Chatham, and
Dover Railway Company are very precarious.
Paid-up shares of £lOO are to be bought for
from £l5 10s. to £l6 10s.
NEWMARKET 2,000 GUINEA STAKES.
Duke of Beaufort’s Vaviban by Muscovite,..Fordham 1
Captn. Macholl’s Knight of the Crescent ...Custance 2
Mr. Merry’s Marksman Edwards 3
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
Apeil 30th. —The Australian arrived at
Gravesend from Sydney to-day.
VESSELS SPOKEN WITH.
Chariot of Fame , from Liverpool for Mel-
bourne, spoken on April 26th; Colonial
Empire , from Sydney to London, February
16th; Flying Spur , from London to Sydney,
December Ist; and the Zehu, from London
to Sydney on December 10th.
IRELAND.
It is rumoured that there is likely to be
serious distress in the western part of Galway
during the summer. The Poor Law Commis-
sioners will immediately inquire into its ac-
curacy.
Apeil 30th. —Nine Fenians were to-day
brought up for high treason, and 12 more,
under a strong escort, arrived at Nenagh from
Thurles,
AMERICA.
New York, April 20 th.
The Collector of Customs at New Orleans
has seized the French steamship Darien , in
consequence of an alleged attempt to defraud
the Customs.
Russian America has been ceded to the
United States, and a Paris Correspondent
says, that the vessels composing the American
squadron in the Mediterranean, are to be
transferred as payment.
MEXICO.
Yellow fever has appeared at Vera Cruz.
54
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


(The Sorer (fasti c Ups.
_A. vJOXJ^^T^.Xj
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “ Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Blackwall, 1,200 tons burthen, R. K. Deacon, Conunander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 12, with Supplement.]
[Saturday, July 13th, 1867.
Peayees were read on the poop on Sunday-
morning last; the usual Sunday classes met in
the afternoon; and Divine Service was held by
the Rev. Mr. Faee, on the poop, in the even-
ing. On Wednesday also in the third cabin, by
Mr. Day.
We are sorry to say that our week’s run has
not been so great as we had hoped for, having
encountered nothing but light head-winds and
calms. We yesterday passed the parallel of
Madeira.
But “the longest day must have an end,”
and, although we are naturally impatient of
delay, the proverb will soon apply to our
voyage—at least we trust so. We have run
a distance of 707 miles during the last 7 days,
yet we are not 200 miles nearer England in a
direct line, being so much further westward.
A run of a little over 2,000 miles would, how-
ever, bring us within sight of its welcome cliffs.
We are enjoying longer and more pleasant
days, and have plenty of company, no less
than 21 vessels having been either spoken
with or sighted since our last. Indeed, we
have never been without one or more at a
farther or less distance from us.
We had hoped that next week we should
have been so close to the Channel as to have
issued our last number, but wo fear it will be
otherwise.
SPORTING NEWS.
Regatta. —On Tuesday last (during the
calm) a grand race took place in the North
Atlantic Ocean, between a tub that had been
thrown overboard, and Messrs Green’s v ship
Dover Castle. The two vessels kept side by
side for a long time, but the tub eventually
drew ahead, and won easily.
BOARDING THE GENERAL WYNDHAM.
One of the most exciting and interesting
incidents of our voyage took place on Sunday
last, when we fell in with the General
Wyndham. She had been gradually drawing
towards us until about 2 p.m., when, after haul-
ing up our cross-jack, the mizen yards were
backed, and our ship hove-to. At this time
the General Wyndham was steering towards
us on the weather quarter, about half-a-mile
distant. Our port quarter boat, in charge of
Mr. Harrison, and containing Mr. Speigens,
our third, and Mr, Husband, our fifth officer;
Messrs. Hay and Dames (midshipmen), and
two seamen, was then lowered, and soon
dropped astern, looking like a toy on the waste
of waters around. In five minutes, and when
only about 400 yards distant, the other ship
likewise hove aback her mizen yards, and our
boat disappeared round her bow. After a lapse
of half an hour, when the boat again appeared
returning to us, she was on oiir lee beam, and
soon got underway, our boat being once more
alongside, and hauled up to the davits. Again
underway, we soon left her astern to leeward,
at which time our passengers, who occupied


every available place on the one side of our
vessel, gave her three hearty cheers, which
were returned by the crew of the other.
The bright sunshine glittering on the
ripples of the smooth blue water around us,
added much to the really beautiful and inter-
esting spectacle we were so unexpectedly and
pleasantly made witnesses of, and the close
proximity of the ship under full sail (a sight
always interesting at sea) after our long isola-
tion from the rest of mankind, proved of that
interest to all on board which can only be
appreciated by those who have been similarly
situated, and formed a topic for conversation
throughout the rest of the day. Mr. Harrison
took aboard her several newspapers, and
returned with a number of English ones.
From him we learnt that she had no passen-
gers aboard; that she was laden with rice ;
and had called a month since at St. Helena,
where she procured the newspapers given to
to us.
She had been absent from England 13
months.
'VESSELS SIGHTED AND SPOKEH.
WITH.
On Sunday, at 7 a.m., with a bright, clear
morning and light breeze (close hauled on
starboard tack) we discovered a full rigged
ship with painted ports on our starboard bow,
steering the same course as ourselves. About
10, when 3 miles distant, she hoisted the
English Ensign, and afterwards exchanged
numbers and conversed. At this time a bri-
gantine passed between us, steering southward.
At 1 p.m., the ship was rapidly nearing us.
We had then received the following intelli-
gence by means of flags : —Her name was
General Wyndham , 651 tons burthen, Captain
Lisle, 107 days out from Rangoon (East
Indies) bound to Ealmouth for orders. She
had spoken and signalled the following ships:
— Athlete, Athletier, Triton, France Collet,
and Snaresiroo/c. She said she had newspapers,
and our Captain replied that he would send a
boat aboard in the afternoon, and bring some
Australian news. This was done. She re-
mained in sight of us during the calm of Mon-
day and part of Tuesday, when we lost her
astern. On the latter evening a full rigged
ship passed near us to windward. There were
5 vessels in sight around us on "Wednesday
morning, three of them soon disappearing. Two
were afterwards spoken. The first was the
small schooner Dagmar, which came alongside
us at noon on the weather side. When only
about two of her own lengths off, the following
conversation took place:—
Captain Deacon : “ Where are you from ?”
Ans. : Brazil.”
Question : “ How long have you been out ?”
Ans. : “64 days.”
Question: “Are you bound to London?”
Ans : “To London ; please report me when
you get home!”
Captain Deacon : “Twill.”
Schooner : What is your longitude ?”
Captain Deacon : “ I’ll chalk it up directly?”
The schooner, which had been gradually
drifting alongside, was now dangerously close
to our main chains, and Captain Deacon called
out “ Put your helm hard down !” The Cap-
tain of the schooner said it was hard down, and
she would be all right. The precaution was
exercised but just in time, however, for her
sails almost touched ours , and a collision seemed
inevitable, but, as we drew ahead, she just
cleared our weather quarter" so close that a
person might have jumped down upon her decTc.
Much excitement for a few moments prevailed
amongst the passengers, but a rush to the poop
proved to all that she was clear. The longitude
was then chalked on a board, and shewn over
the stern. Three cheers were given by our
passengers. Half an hour afterwards we sig-
nalled the barque Coquetdale , from the island
of Java bound to Ealmouth, 102 days out. We
gradually drew ahead of and passed her.
Another sail in sight behind her, and one to
windward. There were 4 sail in sight on
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Thursday morning; one of them a brig, steering-
same course as ourselves, to port, and another,
the barque Enterprise , with which vessel we
exchanged signals at 4. She was 104 days out
from Valparaiso, bound to Liverpool. Yester-
day morning, at 40 minutes past 3 (being
dark) the same barque, having gone about,
was suddenly reported ahead of us, close
aboard. Having quickly ascertained which
side she meant to pass, both helms were im-
mediately put hard down, and the jib, main
and fore sheets let go, the two vessels passing
within a ship’s length of each other. Indeed,
so close, that, according to the opinion of one of
our seamen, “ A little more, and she would
have given us jib-boom for breakfast.” Twenty
minutes afterwards wo also went about, and
spoke. Her officer repeated what we had already
learnt yesterday, adding that they had spoken
the Anglesea 6° south of the line. 7 other
sail were then in sight. At 8 o’clock signalled
the British vessel Germain on the starboard
quarter, from Valparaiso to Liverpool, 75
days at sea. At 4 p.m., two others of them
(barques) were about 3 miles to leeward, one
a Norwegian, and the other carried the flag
of Hamburg. We dipped our ensign to them.
At 10 o’clock p.m., (by moonlight) passed, she
steering the same course, what we understood
to be the Harold , from Eio Janeiro to Genoa.
She was a brig.
ITEMS OF NEWS.
Du&in3 the week, our ship has sailed through
immense quantities of sea weed. Much of it
has been hooked aboard by the passengers.
Throughout Monday last, and up to 5 P.M.
on Tuesday, our ship lay gently rolling in a
perfect calm, swimming alongside being pur-
sued on both days by crew and passengers. The
General Wyndham was in sight until the evening
of the latter day, when we left her astern.
Mr. Dawson remains still the same.
Mr. Maxwell, we are happy to say, is
getting on well.
Two Auction Sales have been held this
week; Mr. Hancock again distinguishing
himself as auctioneer.
All Thursday afternoon a little pilot fish
(about 5 inches long) kept perseveringly about
6 inches ahead of our ship’s cut water, we going
all the time at about 5 knots an hour.
PUBLIC MEETING.
On Monday evening, a general meeting was
held on the poop, to take steps for raising
money enough for the printing (and other ex-
penses attended therewith) of the Dover Castle
News. With few exceptions, all the passengers
attended.
The meeting was opened by the Eev. Mr.
Fake proposing that the Eev. Mr. Beadney
be elected Chairman, which was seconded and
carried unanimously. Mr. Beadney then ad-
dressed the meeting, and called upon Mr. Day
to read the resolutions to be put, which being
done, that gentleman proposed the first. It
was:—
“ That the newspaper written on board this
ship, entitled the Dover Castle News , during
her present voyage from Melbourne to London,
has been conducted to our satisfaction, and
this meeting is of opinion that the same
should be published.”
(A Voice). —Is it to be printed in the shape
of a book ?
Mr. Hoesey stated in reply that it was.
This resolution being carried unanimously,
the next was put, seconded, and carried. It
ran thus:—
“That in order to carry out the foregoing
resolution, it is hoped all classes of pas-
sengers, who have not yet subscribed, will
unite, according to their respective abilities,
in so desirable an object, and for this purpose
it is hereby resolved that a further subscription
be at once commenced to assist in paying the
necessary expenses attending the printing of
the said paper.”
The third resolution.—“ That this meeting,
57
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


duly estimating the arduous duties and effi-
cient labors of the Editor, Mr. J. G. Horsey,
and also of Mr. Sansosi, are of opinion that
£lO should bo tendered to them in recognition
of such services in preparing weekly the said
paper,”—and the fourth :
“ That the subscriptions, when collected,
bo at once placed in the hands of Captain
Deacon, and, after the payment of the said
£lO, the balance be kept as a distinct printing
fund; and, after the subscribers to the paper
have received from the printer the number of
copies they have respectively subscribed for,
Captain Deacon be, and is hereby empowered
by this meeting to pay with such balance the
costs and charges attending the printing
thereof,” were then put and carried, after
which, a voice enquired if the £lO was to be
paid to Mr. Horsey and Mr. Sansosi before
the printer’s bill was paid ? The Chairman
stated that such was the conclusion to be
drawn from the resolution, and the Voice
objected to it, in case there should be insuffi-
cient left to pay the printer.—The Chairman
said he could not take the objection, as the reso-
lution was carried.
Mr. Horsey however came forward and
said, that although he should, in conjunction
with Mr. Sansosi, have made up any deficiency
out of the £lO, still as such a remark had been
made, he was perfectly willing that the whole
£3O should be placed in Captain Deacon’s
hands until the printer’s bill had been de-
frayed, when he would take whatever was
left. This received a good reception from all,
and was consequently resolved upon.
The sth resolution.—“ That future sub-
scribers of £1 and upwards be entitled to 12
copies; subscribers of 10s., 9 copies; sub-
scribers of 7s. 6d., 7 copies; subscribers of
55., 5 copies; subscribers of 35,, 3 copies;
and subscribers of Is. 6d., 1 copy,” was carried
unanimously ; and the sixth :
“ That Mr. J. G. Horsey, and Mr. A.
Sansosi, be requested to superintend the print-
ing of the said paper, and make arrangements
with the printers to forward to subscribers
their respective copies; after which, all appli-
cations for extra copies, to he made to Mr. J. G.
Horsey, at his private address, as published in
the Lover Castle News, by enclosing stamps at
the rate of Is. per copy,” were carried unani-
mously.
Resolution Ho. 7 was then put, at once
seconded, and carried unanimously with
cheers. It ran thus: —“That the thanks of
this meeting be given to Captain Deacon for
his kindness in consenting to act as Treasurer,
and to the Rev. Mr. Bradney for his impar-
tiality and urbanity as Chairman.” Cap-
tain Deacon then came forward and thanked
the meeting for their kind expressions towards
him, and asked what, in the event of their
being a larger sum than sufficient for the two
purposes mentioned, he should do with the
remainder ?
It was consequently, after a few remarks,
proposed by Mr. Day, and seconded by Mr.
Horsey, that the overplus (if any) be handed
over for the benefit of the boatswain, Mr.
Dawson, which was carried unanimously with
cheers.
The Rev. Mr. Bradney thanked the meet-
ing, and the proceedings then closed.
J. JOHNSON FOR THE FIRST TIME.
We’ve waited long enough for a chance and
we’ve got him at last! Being a particular
friend of ours, and one of our most liberal
supporters, we will, though, let him off easily.
Our readers will scarcely believe that after
promising us his subscription, he tried to avoid
payment by self-destruction! On Tuesday
last, whilst several persons were bathing at the
ship’s side, he put a life belt on, and with
“ Here comes a man who can’t swim,” jumped
overboard into the fathomless deep ! We invo-
luntarily exclaimed “ There goes a subscrip-
tion !! but were happily wrong (a thing we sel-
dom are) for, after doing all he wanted, viz.:
obtaining a cool and refreshing bath, he coolly
asked to be pulled on board again, and safely
reached the deck amid the cheers and congratu-
lations of all. We cannot but admire his
courage, but he ought not to have risked our
subscription, ought he P
58
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


THE AZORES, OR WESTERN ISLANDS,
Are nine in number, and are named Santa
Maria, St. Miguel, Terceira, St. Jorge, Graciosa,
Fayal, Pico, Elores, andCorvo. Theyliebetween
the parallels of 32° and 40° N., and between
20° and 32° west longitude. The land is in
general high—the coasts steep and rocky.
These islands are said to have been discovered
by Joshua Yandenburgh of Bruges, in
Flanders, about the the middle of the fifteenth
century, who, on a voyage to Lisbon, was
driven to them by stress of weather. At
Lisbon he boasted of his discovery, on which
the Portuguese set sail and took possession of
them, calling them Aijores, or Isles of Hawks.
They were then entirely destitute of inhabi-
tants, and of every animal, excepting birds. In
1449, the great Don Henry, Prince of Por-
tugal, went in person and took possession of
them.
The capital of the Azores is Angra in
Terceira, the residence of the civil Governor;
but the residence of the Bishop is in the island
of St. Michael. The climate is delightful, the
air generally clear and serene; the soil so pro-
lific, that both European and Tropical plants
arrive at the greatest perfection. There are
traces of many extinct volcanoes.
St. Miguel, or St. Michaels, contains one
city, five principal towns, fifty-four parishes,
and in 1840, about 80,800 inhabitants.
Santa Maria, or St. Mary, has a town and
three villages, with about 4,500 inhabi-
tants.
Pico has three towns and eleven villages,
with about 22,000 inhabitants ; Fayal about
17,000 persons; St. Jorge, or St. George,
when Tofino described it, more than 11,000, in
three towns and seven villages.
Graciosa, the most beautiful and fertile of
the whole, has about 8,000 inhabitants distri-
buted in two towns and two villages. The
chief town is Santa Cruz, on the N.E. side.
Flores contains about 7,000 persons, in
two towns and four villages.
The latter island and Corvo form a separate
groupe from tlio rest, with a channel 120
miles wide between them.
Earthquakes prevail much throughout the
groupe.
THE MARKETS.
Christmas’s Circular. Seaweed fetched
an extraordinary price this week. An Austrian
merchant purchased at three shillings a bottle.
We again publish our Editor’s address—
Mr. JOHN G. HORSEY,
Care of Messrs. HORSEY & BAKER,
No. 103, Southwark Bridge Road,
London.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Nautical Amateur. —There is no danger of falling
when “runningup” a jib. When an officer says
“ Well the main-yard,” he does not refer to the state
of its health. The bite (bight) of a rope is not dan-
gerous.
CONVERSATION BETWEEN THE POULTRY
COOPS ON THE POOP.
COCK.
Oh, mistress hen, our lots are hard,
And sadly changed from times gone by,
When little chicks we used to run
All love and joy—now doomed to die.
We know not whose turn may como first,
But keep your pecker up and peck;
Oh say your love will never change
Until they ring that pretty neck!
I dreamed last night a happy dream,
I thought we were at home again—
I had my wing around your neck,
Courting you, dear, in the shady lane.
59
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


But then (as was a fact) there came
A man who caught, and made us scamper,
Changing for the bright green fields,
The precincts of a dirty hamper.
My love ! my life ! my poor, dear cochin,
How fond wo used to peck together,
Oh! let us change before we die
A lock of hair —I mean a feather.
I love you now as then my dear,
When first you came to court and woo—
But see! the butcher comes this way,
Good bye my cook-a-doodle-doo.
EPITAPH ON THE LAST PIG KILLED.
To pork he’s gone —a pig was he,
In life so dirty loved to be—
In dirt he grubbed, and dirt he ate,
On dirt he thrived at any rate;
But he couldn’t swallow the butcher’s knife,
So kickingly yielded up dear life!
OUR LOG.
79. Saturday, July 6th. —Commences with a con-
tinuance of same breeze and fine weather. Still
close hauled on starboard tack. We passed
quantities of seaweed during the day. Lat. at
noon : 25° 27' N. Long.: 36° 46' W. Distance,
233 miles. Thermometer, 78°. Breeze lighter.
Royals set. Fine night.
80. Sunday, July 7th. —Breeze much lighter with
fine clear weather, A full rigged ship on the
weather bow at 9 a.m., on same course as our-
selves. At 10.30 a.m., a brigantine passed ns to
starboard. The former proved to bo the General
Wyndham, 101 days out from Rangoon for Fal-
mouth. Lat. at noon : 27° 54' N. Long.: 38°
42' W. Distance, 180 miles. Thermometer, 79°.
At 2 p.m., both of us hove-to, and a boat was sent
aboard her to obtain papers. We soon afterwards
left her astern. A fine night, with little or no
wind,
81.— Monday, July Bth. —A perfect calm. The
General Wyndham on the starboard horizon. At
noon yards braced up to starboard. Lat. then :
28° 50' N. Long.: 39° 13' W: Distance, 63
miles. Thermometer, 82°, Calm continues.
82.— Tuesday, July 9th. —Still becalmed with the
General Wyndham rather nearer. Very warm.
Lat. at noon: 28° 53' N. Long. : 39° 10' W.
Distance, 4 miles. Thermometer, 83°. At 5
p.m., a fresh breeze sprung up. Close hauled on
starboard tack. The General Wyndham on the
lee quarter about 5 miles off 1 . At 8 p.m., passed
to leeward (at a distance of about 2 miles) of a
full rigged ship, but it got too dark to speak.
(Fine moonlight nights).
83.— Wednesday, July 10th. —Same breeze, al-
though lighter, continues throughout the day.
5 vessels in sight at daybreak, throe of them
soon disappearing. At 12, ran close to and spoke
one of them (the schooner Dagmar, 64 days, from
Brazil to London). Soon afterwards signalled the
double topsail barque Coquetdale, 102 days,
from Java for Falmouth. Another barque just
visible on horizon, to port, passing us. Lat. at
noon: 30° 13' N. Long.: 39° 39' W. Distance,
84 miles. Thermometer, 83°. Another sail to
windward. Fine night.
84.— Thursday, July 11th. —Clear warm morning
with scarcely any wind. 4 sail in sight at a dis-
tance—one of them a brig to port, steering like
ourselves, and another (a barque) to windward.
Lat. at noon: 31° 51' N. Long.: 40° 40' W.
Distance, 111 miles. Thermometer, 80°. At
4 signalled the barque Enterprise, 104 days
out, from Valparaiso for Liverpool. She went
about at 5. At 8 we went about, and stood
away to the eastward. Fine night.
85. Friday, July 12th. —Same light breeze. At
3.40 a.m., the Enterprise went about and passed
close to us, narrowly escaping a collision. At 4
we likewise went round and spoke her. 7 other
sail in sight. At 8 spoke the Germain, from
Valparaiso to Liverpool, 75 days at sea. At 11
a squall came on, followed by a dead calm. Lat.
at noon: 32° 22' N. Long.: 40° 28' W. Dis-
tance, 33 miles. Thermometer, 77°. Yards
braced to starboard at 12.30 p.m. Went about
on starboard tack at 5.30 with a fresh breeze.
Fine night.
60
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Supplement to t()e pom Castle
No. 12.]
[Saturday, July 13th, 1867.
CAPE YERDE ISLANDS.
These islands derive their name from the
nearest point of the coast of Africa, in the
North Atlantic Ocean, and were discovered, it
is said, by Antonio Noli, a Geonese, in the
service of Portugal.
The population in 1851 was estimated at
85,393 persons. Salt is the principal article
of commerce.
The groupe consists of the following islands,
besides several islets :
Ilha de Sal lies between latitude 16° 34'
and 16° 51' N, and on the meridian of 23°
West. The northern part is mountainous, and
the southern low and sandy. It derived its
name from the salt ponds upon it.
The land is very barren, scarcely any trees
or verdure being found upon it. The Peak of
Martinez on the N.E. side is 1,340 feet high
above the level of the sea.
Bona vista (properly Boavistcr), is so called
from the beautiful appearance if made to its
first discoverers, in 1450. The face of it is
variegated, partly low, partly rocky and
mountainous formerly fertile now more
barren. Salt, the principal article of trade is
readily exchanged by the inhabitants for old
clothes, biscuits, meal, and raw silk. The
island is about 3 leagues in extent. A ridge
of mountains running N.W. and S.E. divides
the island. A town is built in English Road
on the N.W. side.
Isle oe Mayo. —This island is very high,
but a great part is level. It is about 4 leagues
in length from N. to S. The soil is dry and
unproductive, and there is but one spring of
water on the island. The coast is plentifully
stocked with fish. There is likewise a town.
The inhabitants are very poor.
St. lago is very high, the peak of St
Antonio being 4,720 feet above the sea. The
town is situated on an eminence, and the
houses all colored white. It seldom rains here,
but a dry haze is very prevalent.
Eish also abound, and are principally mullet
(grey and red) rock-fish, snappers, cavalla, &c.
The Governor-General of the Cape Yerde
Islands formerly resided altogether at St.
lago, an episcopal city, and the capital of the
island, but now resides during the dry season
at Port Praya Bay. The latter town consists
of three streets only. There is also the town
of Santiago, or Ribeira Grande, 6 miles to the
westward.
Togo or Euego. —This is the highest of the
whole groupe, its volcanic peak being 9,700
feet in height. It has about 7,500 inhabitants,
whom the eruptions have sometimes forced to
quit the island. The town of Nossa Senhora
da Luz is on the western side.
Brava is very high and of a temperate
healthy climate. The Governor sometimes
resides here. It produces plenty of corn, live
stock, fruit, and salt.
St. Nicholas is high, and has two lofty
mountains, called the “Peak of Trade” in
the centre, and Monto Gordo near the west
end. There are but few inhabitants on this
island.
Raza, Branco, and Santa Lucia lie between
the islands of St. Nicholas and St. Yincent.
They are small, rocky, and mountainous.
San Yincente (or St. Yincent) is separated
by a channel 4 miles in width from Santa
Lucia. It is 11 miles from E. to W., and about
6 broad. It is mountainous and volcanic. Port
Grande in this island is the largest in the
whole groupe. St. Antonio lies N.W. of St.
Yincent. It is 22 miles in length and 11 in
breadth, and its highest peak 7,100 feet above
the sea. It has very few inhabitants.


THE CANARIES, OR CANARY ISLANDS.
This groupe of islands was supposed to be
known by the ancients under the name of
the Eortunate Islands. The original inhabi-
tants were the Guanches. In the year 1402,
it was taken possession of for John, King of
Castile.
The land is generally high and variegated
by volcanic mountains, the Pie or Peak of
Teneriffe being super-eminent. Por 8 months
in the year, the summits of all but two are
covered with snow, but in the valleys the
temperature is generally mild. The number
of inhabitants in 1857 was 134,046. The
productions are principally corn and wine.
The following are the principal islands :
The Salvages consist of four small islands,
and many clusters of rocks, lying in latitude
30° 8' N., and longitude 15° 55' W.
Lanzarote is about 3,000 feet high and
contains many extinct volcanoes. The town
is called Areeife, and is protected by several
forts. Its houses are large and its streets
capacious. The inhabitants number about
2.500, whilst the whole island contains about
17.500. Pishing is their principal occupa-
tion.
The Isle op Allegranza is the northern-
most of the groupe. It is the remains of an
extinct volcano. Puertaventura is less moun-
tainous than the rest of the islands. Although
generally very barren, there are many fertile
valleys. It has two ports of trade : Cabras on
the east and Tarajalejo on the south-east.
There are villages scattered over the island.
Its total population is about 18,000 persons.
Canaria, or Grand Canary is exceedingly
high in the centre, and full of lofty mountains,
which tower far into the clouds. The city of
Palmas is the capital. It contains 18,000
inhabitants, and has a cathedral, hospital, and
college. Fountains are erected in the princi-
pal streets. Pour or five miles inland stands
another large town. El Cumbre, the highest
peak of Canary is stated to be 6,648 feet high,
and the mountain Sancillo, near the centre
(which has a large wooden cross on its sum-
mit), 6,070 feet.
Tenerife, or Teneriffe is about 15£ leagues
from Canaria. In the centre of the island
is the famous Peak of Teyde, Prom seaward
it presents a most singular object, resembling
half consumed coke, and is triangular in form.
The volcano has not, it is stated, been active
at the summit for thousands of years, its
eruptions having been from the sides. The
depth of the crater is only now 120 feet. The
circumference at the base of the peak is about
57,105 fathoms, and is 12,176 feet high. Two
thirds of it are covered with vegetation.
Santa Cruz is the principal town, and is
situated near the N.E. extremity of the island.
Its aspect is gloomy, and the heat excessive.
The town of Crotava in the north is sur-
rounded by fields of corn, gardens, and vine-
yards, the soil being very fertile.
There are likewise the islands of Palma,
Gomera, and Perro or Hierro—the latter
being the westernmost.
THE ISLANDS OP MADEIRA AND
PORTO SANTO.
Lying to the north and east of Madeira,
is the small island of Porto Santo, the principal
town of which is Villa Balleira. The highest
peak of this island is 1,660 feet. It produces
wine, grain, vegetables, live stock, poultry,
and fish.
To the S.E. of Madeira lie the rocky islets
called Dersertas.
Madeira is a beautiful island, fertile and
verdant. It’s discovery is involved in ob-
scurity. It is of volcanic origin, and in it
may be found almost every European and Tro-
pical luxury. Its extreme length is 31 to miles;
its breadth 12 miles; and the circuit of the
coast 79 miles. The capital is Punchal, which
possesses a cathedral and many churches. The
streets are very narrow, without side walks.
There are, besides, many other towns through-
out the island. The town of Funchal is in
latitude 32° 38' N., and longitude 16° 55' "VV.
62
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


sm\\ fetti;
.A. GTOXJI^^T^L
Issued every Saturday Morning on board the ship “ Dover Castle,” belonging to Messrs. Green,
of Black-wall, 1,800 tons burthen, R. K. Deacon, Commander, on her voyage from Melbourne
(Australia) to London, commenced on Thursday the 18th of April, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 13, with Supplement.]
[Saturday, July 20th, 1867.
Peayebs were read on the poop on Sunday
morning; the children’s classes met in the
afternoon; and the Rev. Mr. Beadney preached
in the evening, and also on Wednesday in the
intermediate.
DEATH.
On Sunday evening last, the 14th instant,
Thomas Ford, passenger, a native of Ireland,
and about 50 years of age, lost overboard,
under circumstances unknown.
Land Ho ! At last this strange but wel-
come cry has assailed our ears!! Yesterday
morning, at an early hour, land’ was made out
at a great distance on the port bow, but al-
though seen by our Chief Officer, through a
good pair of glasses, nothing but clouds ap-
peared to us. Shortly afterwards, the weather
became overcast and thick, and during the
forenoon, excepting an apparent darkness on
the horizon, nothing extraordinary was to be
seen. Still the excitement continued through-
out the morning, and many anxious eyes were
strained, and glasses of all descriptions brought
to bear upon the supposed position, without
avail.
We have seen nothing but sky and water for
83 long monotonous days (the Snare Islands
being the last land sighted), and no wonder
therefore that the appearance of land should be
thus joyfully greeted. How much moro do
we long to put foot upon it!
About noon, the Island, which was Flores,
one of the northernmost of the Azores, or
Western Islands, loomed upon our bow, and
at 3 p.m. we passed 15 miles to the southward
of it. We could just discern a vessel standing
off and on (probably for stores or water), and
the white houses of a township, behind which
the lines of fencing around cultivated ground
upon the lofty hills, were dimly visible. We
can only regret that we had not clear weather
to enjoy the prospect.
Since our last issue, and up to Wednesday
morning, nothing but an annoying continuance
of light head winds and calms were encoun-
tered, but since that time a fine fair breeze
has driven us past the Azores, or Western
Islands, and we have now more reason to hope
for a speedy conclusion to our voyage.
The weather has generally been beautifully
fine. We were yesterday, at noon, only 1,290
miles from the Lizard.
If you tread on a dog’s tail, and that dog
be a vicious one, he will, ten to one, turn
round and bite; if he be a cur, most likely he
will submit to the indignity with harmless
yelling, and having freed his narrative put it
out of sight and disappear; but, if he really


be a thorough-bred, beyond an angry growl as
a hint that he does not approve of your pro-
ceeding, and you being a sensible person, take
such timely hint by removing your boot, all
will end well, and that dog will, the next
moment, faithfully, if necessary, stand by and
protect you. And of the latter you will en-
tertain a much higher opinion than of either
of the others, for where we find injuries and
suffering uncomplainingly undergone, and
goodness returned for evil—there, in the
former case, we extend our first pity, and in
the latter feel soonest that we have acted
wrongly—the consequent repentance filling
us with love, respect, and good-will for the
noble nature of its Creator —at least it should.
But although we draw a comparison from
animate things, our present intention is to
write of one inanimate, with a view, if possible,
of retrieving her lost fame, and converting
the disbeliever in her good qualities into a
truthful admirer of her creditable behaviour,
and that thing is our good ship the Dover
Castle —a real thorough-bred. We have now
been all closely acquainted with her for more
than three months, and therefore are in a posi-
tion to understand her good and bad points.
Not being in her teens yet, everyone will
agree with us that she is young. Yery well,
then let us note her conduct during our ac-
quaintanceship. When first we saw her, she
was calmly slumbering by the Sandridge
Railway Pier, resting after a long voyage, and
preparatory to commencing another. Having
awoke, and attired herself in a suit of becoming
canvas, we next find her proceeding towards
her proper element —the Ocean—where, having
arrived, she bounds onwards day after day—
night after night—with all the freshness and
vivacity of youth. We were delighted with
her —she was a beauty— that we all agreed
to —but then many of us were fresh from land
—we might have spoken incorrectly in the
fulness of our hearts at that time — now we
are weary of our voyage, and although she is
just the same identical “she” we designate
her “an old tub!” Then we admired her
body, and never remembered to have seen one
more charming—and such a beautiful slender
waist! Her head a perfect model!! Her
neck graceful—no, we didn’t exactly say that;
but we walked her poop, and thought her —
no, we didn’t though—we didn’t think any-
thing about that end either. But her legs
were good ones, and she has put her best fore-
most and passed everything she has met with.
Of her dress we can likewise speak well—
especially as regards economy, for she has only
14 yards , and that’s just about a quarter of
the quantity ladies generally wear.
She did serve us a trick once, and throw a
lot of nasty water over us, but children will be
children after all. How we loved and respected
her during the bitter cold weather, and how
many times we called her “ a first-rate sea
boat ” —and how we depended upon her when
tempest-beaten in the furious gale—pitched,
tossed, and rolled at the mercy of the elements !
How snug, and safe, and warm we felt when
we could, under her protection, turn into a
snug bunk—there, under the blankets, to
deaden the terrible noise of sea and wind, and
think of snow, hail, frost, and all as things
that were, and calmly sleep to find her labor-
ing still when waking!! Oh how fond we
were of her then, and how truly she carried
64
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


us through all our dangers. But now we
laugh at her, and she’s an “ old tub.” When
she took off her strong clothing and put on an
old patched suit, our love and respect departed,
for the cold and danger were over, and we were
to have fine weather. Didn’t we growl at her
when a yard gave way (whether at the gathers
we know not), but Me. Hakeison, with his
usual gallantry, made her a present of a new
one, and put it on for her too! It is true some of
us drank her health in champagne, but then
we are fond of that wine.
Why is she styled an “old tub?” “Oh
simply because she has met with adverse
winds, and been longer than we expected!”
Of course, we ought to have thought of that
before. “And then we are tired and out
of temper!” We forgot that too. “ And she
would’nt have passed everything if she’d not
been so light!” Light ? One breaks in upon
us at the word! The grumblers have so over-
loaded their stomachs, and eaten the ship
several feet out of water that the very result,
favorable as it is, displeases them!!
Poor victim of ingratitude, you have suffered
much from scandal. Your tail has been trod-
den on many times, but you have complained
not. You have been abused, but you have
returned long and faithful services for all in-
jury, and we pity you. Yet your enemies are
as obdurate as ever!
We have marked you well in all weather —
in stays and out of stays (and we like you
better without them) and, though not of the
most extravagant clipper build, we shall
always cheerfully give you a first-rate A 1
character if ever you want one.
We shall soon wish you good-bye, and, ex-
cept on an occasional visit, whilst you rest in
the docks, may never see you more. But we
shall not forget the good qualities of the Dover
Castle in spite of the poison constantly cram-
med into our mouths by the “Navigators.”
Never mind them—nobody believes them,
and they would’nt say it if they thought you
could turn and retaliate—not they!
We must now soon bid you farewell.
BOARDING THE DANISH BRIG
DOROTHEA ANNE.
At one o’clock on Sunday afternoon last,
we observed one of the three sail in sight, bear-
ing down to us (for some purpose), on the
weather bow, with the flag of Denmark flying
at her peak. When within speaking distance,
we could read her name on stern and side. She
was the Danish brig Dorothea Anne, 40 days
out from Rio Janeiro, bound to Falmouth for
orders. She appeared to be but little over 200
tons burden, very clean, and a smart little
sailor. After replying to her questions as to
who we were, where from, bound to, time out,
and longitude (her chronometer being out of
order), and getting her news, we asked whether
she had any information as to the present state
of Europe, but not receiving a very satisfactory
reply, our Captain determined to board her.
The mizen yards were at once thrown aback,
and a boat in charge of Mr. Fawcett, and con-
taining our fifth officer, Mr. Husband, Mr.
Giles (midshipman), and a passenger (a Dane),
as intepreter, was lowered. She soon came up
on our port quarter, hove-to to enable Mr. Faw-
cett and party to get aboard, and got underway
again, standing across our bows. To keep up
with her our vessel was likewise sailed until
the boat was seen approaching, when we once
more hove-to, got it aboard, and proceeded on
our course passing close to windward of the
friendly brig, each wishing the other good-bye,
by three times dipping their respective ensigns.
Three cheers were likewise given, and hats
waved, on parting.
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


The trip proved fruitless, for no European
news whatever was obtained, much to the dis-
appointment of all aboard; so we must still
endure our present suspense until arrival home.
We observed a large black dog on her deck, and
another tan-colored smaller one, which animals
barked lustily on the approach of our boat.
We have not seen a dog for so long that their
presence was quite refreshing.
The brig had a cargo of coffee.
MYSTERIOUS DEATH OF THOMAS
FORD.
On Sunday evening last, at 10 o’clock, it was
discovered that one of the steerage pas-
sengers, named Thomas Ford, better known
by the sobriquet of “ Pat,” was missing. A
search around the decks was at once instituted,
but not being successful, the affair was reported
to Captain Deacon, who ordered evei’y part of
the ship to be thoroughly searched. Two hours
were thus spent, but no traces of the unfortu-
nate deceased could be found, and it became
evident that the poor fellow was overboard, but
when or under what circumstances, no one
could tell.
Subsequently it appeared from the state-
ments of several persons, that a splash in the
water was heard about 8 o’clock on the port
bow, but although they looked over the side,
they could see nothing, and concluding that it
was caused by some useless article thrown into
the water, thought no more about the matter.
But at the investigation enquiring into the
affair, held the next day, one of the inter-
mediate passengers said that she saw, what
appeared to her in the darkness to be a board
or sack, pass astern after the splash.
About the supposed time of the occurrence,
the decks were thronged with passengers, and
beyond the murmur of conversation, no sound
could have prevented a cry being heard, had
there been any. The night being rendered light
by nearly a full moon would prevent a person,
with ordinary care, from accidently slipping
overboard—and the deceased was known to be
a very cautious man upon deck. The ship was
scarcely lying over at all, and was proceeding
with a smooth sea and a very light breeze, at
only a few knots an hour. All these circum-
stances create a doubt whether or not the
deceased met his death from accident, or wil-
fully destroyed himself. We fear the latter.
During the voyage, at times he has shown signs
of mental imbecility, and more than once threat-
ened to jump overboard, but no faith was placed
in these threats. Lately, although usually very
reserved, he has spoken with several persons
with reference to a draft for £287 he possessed
on a Bank in London, fearing that the paper
would wear out before he got to England, and
that he would therefore lose the money! On
other occasions he has exhibited much excite-
ment about a loss of £7OO, of which sum he
said he had been most fraudulently deprived by
a solicitor in Victoria. When told a few days
since to cheer up, for we should soon be home,
he deapondingly replied, “ I shall never live to
reach it.”
He appeared to be a labouring man, an Irish-
man by birth, and about 50 years of age. He
is supposed to have had a brother in Ireland,
and to have been about 25 years in the Colonies,
Those wishing to obtain extra copies of the
Dover Castle News must enclose stamps to—
Mr. JOHN G. HORSEY,
Care of Messrs. HORSEY & BAKER,
No. 103, Southwark Bridge Road,
London.
TELEGRAM.
London, July 18th, 1867.
“It is rumoured that the English Petticoat
Government intends adopting the same law as
that extant in other despotic countries, for the
extinction of a free press after this date.” In
consequence, the Dover Castle News has been
refused admittance in several private circles
where this kind of government exists, and the
hen-pecked have been prohibited the privilege
of subscribing, and threatened with severe
crinoline punishment if they disobey. A
merciful edict, however, allows them to read it
cheaply aboard, and the victims have embraced
this blessing with tears of gratitude.
66
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


COTTAGE BY THE SEA, #
FRONTI NULLA FIVES.
Childhood’s days it recalls to me,
Forms and scenes of long ago—
As puny on my mother’s knee,
Of sense but little—stature low.
And then of youthful care and sorrow:
Of ignorance full, and money none—
Not prone to giving, though I’d borrow,
I laugh at it —it is such fun.
Of years that as they passed before me
My tiny wits led me to roam,
But hard up wished to cross the sea
At her expense to Ma’ at home.
I wrote her such a pretty letter,
She sent some “tin” to little mo
I thought to “cut a swell” t’was bettor,
And penniless crossed the briny sea !
BIRDS OF THE OCEAN.
Wild birds of the Ocean, from your bleak rocky home,
To cheer us lone mariners again are ye come j
How oft as we sail through tempests and storms
Have we longed to behold your beautiful forms, —
Yet ye came not. Ah! no—though undaunted and free
So far from your loved island homes in the sea.
Oh! beautiful birds as in grandeur ye rise
Your plumage to bathe in the light of the skies,
Now soaring sublime on the wings of the storm;
Now breasting the billows in innocent scorn;
Now floating serene o’er the cloud curtained dome ;
Now rising in pride on the waves crested foam, —
As with pleasure I gaze on your plumage so bright,
Ye seem to my fancy fair spirits of light.
And with rapture seraphic I think on the hour
When my spirit immortal triumphant shall soar
To the land of the happy, the pure, and the blest,
In the haven of glory for ever to rest!
H. DAY.
OUR FAREWELL.
At last we have to bid a long farewell,
Our voyage and task alike are nearly done, —
That little word forms now our epitaph
And signifies our course outrun.
• Written upon a youthful braggart aboard.
When first we met t’was in the sunny South;
Together passed the cold and dreaded Horn;
Then tossed upon we ploughed the southern soas—-
The Tropic’s heat in friendship since have borne.
’Midst gales and calms —both heat and snow,
For three long months we’ve dwelt together,
O’er three great Oceans meanwhile sailed,
But parting must, that friendship sever.
Our pen reluctant forms that little word
With seeming knowledge of its sad import
It’s death thus signs, and life yields up
A victim to the word it wrought.
Say what think ye of its short spanned life
For your amusement solely spent ?
Forgive us subjects of our harmless jokes
For no offence was ever meant!
Farewell good ship—our Ocean homo,
Farewell to Captain, officers, and crew—
Farewell to passengers —friends we mean—
We now with sorrow bid you all adieu !
A FACT.
Everybody was in a good temper wdicn the
breeze sprung up in our favor on Wednesday
morning.
OUR PASSENGERS’ COOK.
Mr. Scott has desired us to express his
thanks for the liberal manner in which many
of the intermediate and steerage passengers
have subscribed towards the collection made
for him. We notice, that very many of the
latter class have not subscribed at all, a fact
which much surprises us, after the great atten-
tion he has paid to their interests. We only
hope that those who have made promises will
not, upon arrival in England, fail to redeem
them —and also, that our friends in the second
cabin, (who, we believe, have also received much
attention at his hands,) will at once make him
a substantial presprit.
67
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


NOTICE TO OUR SUBSCRIBERS.
There is a probability of our being either in
or close to the Channel on Saturday next —if
so, in either case, we shall not issue another
paper aboard, but in the shape of a supple-
ment, give a concluding account of our voyage,
ending upon our entering the docks. But, if
on the other hand, there is time, another, and
the last number will appear next week.
Any letters or copies of testimonials to be
presented, must, if intended for publication,
be sent in before 5 o’clock on Thursday evening
next, or we cannot insert them.
VESSELS SPOKEN WITH AND SIGHTED.
As we are daily surrounded with vessels,
and are likely to be so during the remainder of
the passage, we cannot aiford space for more
than a passing notice of any, except we signal
or speak to them.
On Saturday, three sail were in sight at a
great distance, and on Sunday morning a
similar number, one of which (the Danish brig,
Dorothea Anne ) we afterwards boarded as des-
cribed in another column. On Monday evening
we came up in sight of a full rigged ship on
the weather bow, which we passed early the
next morning. There were then two other
sail in sight on the port side, and three more
during the latter part of the day. On Wednes-
day, there were two vessels in sight to wind-
ward, and at 11 a.m., with a fresh breeze and
clear sky, we discovered another ahead. So
rapidly did we come up with her, that at 2
p.m., we were close alongside to leeward. She
was not of very prepossessing appearance, and
evidently one of the “slow and sure school.”
Her hull was painted green, with a flush deck
fore and aft, and apparently about 200 tons
burthen. It was the French brig, Louise, of
Cette, 60 days out from Montevideo (Rio de la
Plata) bound to Havre. Mr. Harrison spoke
her from the quarter boat in the French
language. We soon left her astern. Another
vessel in sight to leeward. No less than 8
could be seen from aloft. On Thursday evening
a sail was seen on the starboard side, and
yesterday one on the starboard bow; another
on the port quarter; and a third close in shore
off the island of Flores.
NOT BAD.
Jack Tar {engaged in painting the starboard
side of our ship at sea). —Let me see! She’ll lay
t'other side to the quay, and this to Limehouse.
There’s nobody particular living there, so it
don’t matter a rap how we do along here. Mop
away Bill!!» v & ... r
ADVERTISEMENT.
IF the person who kindly took the pea-soup
out of the galley on Tuesday last, putting dirty water
in its place, and, at the same time, also took the pork out
of somebody else’s soup to enrich it, can suggest any recipe
better suited to his taste, the owners will in future accord-
ingly alter its preparation.
OUR LOG.
86. Saturday, July 13th. —Fine clear day. Very
warm. Ship on starboard tack close hauled.
Very little wind all day. 3 sail at a distance to
port. Lat. at noon: 33° 46' N. Long.; 40° 40'
W. Distance, 85 miles. Thermometer 78°.
Fine night.
87. Sunday, July 14th.—Cloudy with light wind,
3 sail in sight. Clear with stronger breeze
towards mid-day. Still close hauled on starboard
tack. Lat. at noon : 34° 58' N. Long.: 40° 56'
W. Distance 73 miles. Thermometer 80°. At
1.30 p.m., spoke and boarded the Danish brig
Dorothea, Anne, 40 days from Rio Janeiro to Fal -
mouth for orders. Fell calm again at 10 p.m. It
was discovered at this time that one of the
steerage passengers was missing, and after a
fruitless search concluded that he had in some
manner fallen overboard.
88. Monday, July 15th.—Commences with calm,
but at 8 a.m., got a light steady breeze, our ship
steering a little free on her course. 2 sail in
sight. Lat. at noon: 36° 5' N. Long. : 40° 2' W.
Distance, 80 miles. Thermometer 83°. A full
rigged ship on same course as ourselves hove in
sight at sunset on the weather bow.
89. Tuesday, July 16th. —Commences with a calm,
and cloudy weather. 2 sail in sight to port. The
ship seen last evening and another vessel on
starboard quarter. At 8.30 a fine breeze sprung
up—another sail on the weather bow. At 10.30
another sail hove in sight ahead. Lat. at noon :
36° 54' N. Long.: 38° 50' W. Distance, 76
miles. Thermometer 78°. A change of wind at
7.30 p.m., when the yards were squared. Another
vessel hove in sight on starboard bow at 10 p.m.
A calm.
90. Wednesday, July 17th.—A perfect calm until 9
a.m., when a fine breeze sprung up from the
southward. Starboard fore stunsails set. 2 sail
in sight to windward —another hove in sight
.ahead,at 11 a.m. Lat. at noon: 37° 19' N. Long.:
37° 33' W. Distance, 66 miles. Thermometer
76°. At 2 p.m., spoke the latter vessel (the
French brig Louise of Cette, 60 days from Monte
Video, bound to Havre). Another vessel well to
leeward. Fine night.
91. Thursday, July 18th. —Same breeze continues.
Lat. at noon: 38° 11' N. Long.: 34° 28'W.
Distance, 155 miles. Thermometer 75°. A sail
to starboard in evening.
92. Friday, July 19th.—Same breeze continues.
‘Sighted the island of Flores (Western Islands) at
sunrise on the port bow, but the weather soon
got very thick. A sail on starboard bow, and
another on port quarter. Lat. at noon: 39° 1' N.
Long.; 31° 13' W. Distance, 161 miles. Ther-
mometer 74°. At 3 P.M.) passed 15 miles to the
southward of the island. Concludes with thick
wcatlier qnd rain,
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


goncfitbinfl Supplement to
•The purer (I’astlc Ups
OF SATURDAY, JULY 20TH, 1867.
EDITED BY JOHN G. HORSEY.
No. 13.]
[Tuesday, July 30th, 1867.
THE RING.
The P.R. lias been rather lively this week.
On Friday afternoon a spirited verbal con-
test between two ladies took place in the inter-
mediate before an admiring, but rather noisy
audience. The cause of the quarrel is rather
complicated, but we will attempt to give it in
plain language, by using the principal “ hits.”
We have no doubt all our readers will under-
stand it.
■ Round 1. Hypocrite! Notorious!! old
beast!!! —Oh dear no — we never say anything,
do we? —oh no! we didn’t say we were poor!
Everybody ought to subscribe to everything,
and ought to be ashamed of themselves if they
don’t! But we are too poor!! We didn’t say
we wanted a trifle subscribed for us, not we, —
did we, you old thing ?
Round 2. — A glass of porter and a bit of
cheese, so big!—do anything for a bit of cheese
so big, and a glass of porter!! A glass of
cheese and a bit of porter, so big !!! Bah !!!!
(Ends in a duet of bow-wow-wow-wows! and
indignant shaking of heads.)
Rounds 3 to 50 ( inclusive ). — We didn’t say
we waited 8 years for one man and 12 for
another, and are still a Miss! —oh dear no!!
Coincide with all —all for a bit of Bible in
hand —so big ! Hypocrite!—Hope you’re all
very much amused, ladies and gentlemen ! {The
ladies and gentlemen express themselves delighted,
and cries of “ Time.” —“ Go it little’un.” — Ha,
ha, ha ” —issue from amongst their enraptured
bosoms.) You never get in a temper!—oh, no,
never !! Why, insignificant deformity, you’re
shaking with passion now. You’re not a pas-
sionate woman ! !! There! you will have the
last word—why don’t you leave off? —’Cos I
don’t.—Why don’t you ?—Theveyon go again,—
Say it’s me!—So it was you.—T’was’nt.—T’was.
(This it will be observed is contradictory.)
(Repeat the last four lines about 30 times,
and the thing is complete).
This account may appear very dry at first,
but as you proceed there is a delightful recipro-
city of feeling shewn.
Late on Friday night a short and one-sided
battle was fought on the main deck. One of
the combatants, after working his antagonist
into a proper pugilistic state, sat quietly down,
and received without a murmur “one for
his nob.” But he (the former) said in course
of time (even if centuries elapsed), retribution
would overtake the boxer, and in the fulness of
his heart he pitied his sad position. When he
marked a man, that man was a “ gooser,” and
no mistake.
N.B.—No doubt the unfortunate creature
will fly from England (when he gets there) and
retribution, to some uninhabited island un-
known to the “ marker.”
Two other battles have been fought, one
between our butcher and a pugilistic pig, and
the other between a funny friend of ours and
an aspirant for fistic honors, but our reporters
were too drunk to attend, and we have therefore
no detailed accounts. All we hear is, that
the pig and our funny friend were vic-
torious, and congratulated each other upon
their respective successes.
A contest took place on the main deck on
Wednesday evening, between little “ I vish I
may die” and the “Grampus”—the former
came off with a black eye, and the other with
hia grog stopped. 1


VESSELS SIGNALLED AND SIGHTED.
A full account will be found in the log
nothing of particular note having occurred
during the week.
ITEMS OF NEWS.
Cue ship having been thoroughly cleaned,
repaired and painted, inside and out, her rig-
ging tarred down, and spars scraped, now
wears quite a fresh appearance, fit for docking.
Shoals of porpoises have followed us during
the week.
On Tuesday during the calm, swimming was
again carried on at the ship’s side.
The weather during the past week has gen-
erally been cold, wet, and miserable.
Betting on the ship’s daily run, and time-of
getting into dock, sighting England, taking
pilot aboard, getting a steam-tug, &c., &c., has
caused much money to change hands during
the week.
Our boatswain, Mr. Dawson, still lies con-
fined to his bunk—although able to speak a
little, he shows no other sign of improvement.
Mr, Maxwell, our Carpenter, we are happy
to say is on duty again.
On Friday afternoon last, the chain cables
were got upon deck after their long rest, and
attached to the anchors ready for use.
The appearance of the American Squadron
standing in towards Spithead, on Sunday after-
noon, gave rise to much surmise aboard.
During the last 3 nights whilst steering up
Channel, the greatest care has been necessary
to prevent collision with some of the numerous
vessels around us. Lights in every direction
have caused a constant alteration in our course.
OUE LOG.
93. Saturday, July 20th. —Clear weather with fine
breeze aft. Ship rolling heavily all night. Lat.
at noon: 40° 26' N. Long.: 28° 04' W. Dis-
tance, 168 miles. Thermometer 69°. A brigan-
tine hove in sight on the port bow. Came up
ploae to windward of him at 3.15 p.m. Proved to
be the Portuguese brigantine Maricarida Emilia ,
15 days from New York for Lisbon. Another
brigantine on port bow, which we passed at dusk-
94. Sunday, July 21st. Weather cloudy and
thick. Strong wind, with rising sea, and occa-
sional squalls. Port fore stunsails set. Royals
stowed. Lat. at noon: 42° 17' N. Long.: 23°
52' W. Distance, 221 miles. Thermometer 68°.
At 12.30 came up with and passed three miles to
leeward of a Spanish brigantine. Another sail
astern. Sighted a largo ship on the port bow,
hull down, at dusk, and another abeam. Con-
cludes with squalls and rain.
95. Monday, July 22nd. —Thick, chilly weather and
heavy squalls. Signalled the ship Liverpool (of
New York), from London for New York, at 9
a.m. A barque passing on horizon also to wind-
ward. Another sail to leeward. Lat. at noon .-
45° 12' N. Long.: 19° 52' W. Distance, 247
miles. Thermometer 64°. During the afternoon
and evening, very thick and cold weather, with
heavy rain and constant squalls. A vessel’s
light seen ahead at 10 p.m.
96. Tuesday, July 23rd. —Cloudy with but little
wind. Lat at noon: 46° 39' N. Long.: 16° 5'
W. Distance, 181 miles. Thermometer 63°,
Closes with a dead calm.
97. Wednesday, July 24th. —Commences with a
calm, but at daybreak a light head wind sprung
up. Steering to the northward on starboard
tack. Lat. at noon : 47° 31' N. Long. : 15° 15'
W. Distance, 62 miles. Thermometer 62°.
Clear and bright in the afternoon. Went about
in a fresh breeze at 6 p.m., standing to the east-
ward close on our course. Fine night.
98. Thursday, July 25th. —The same strong breeze
continues. At 4.30 a.m., overtook a large full
rigged ship, soon leaving her out of sight astern.
Cloudy with light showers. Lat. at noon ; 48°
32' N. Long.: 12° 25' W, Distance, 129 miles.
Thermometer 61°. Our distance from the
Lizard is now only 297 miles. Caught up to and
passed a brig at 2 p.m., giving her our longitude.
Our fine breeze still continues.
99. Friday, July 26th. —Wind lighter—fine clear
morning. 11 vessels in sight at daybreak. At
10 a.m., passed close to and spoke the American
ship Shatemug, 9 days out from Liverpool, bound
to Rio Janeiro. She said there was no European
news of importance. Wind light and more aft—
port fore stunsails set. Lat. at noon; 49° 25' N.
Long.: 7° 25' W. Distance, 204 miles. Ther-
mometer 62°. 92 miles from the Lizard. Chain
cables got on deck in afternoon. At 7 p.m., the
pilot boat 18 S., came alongside, and three of
our passengers left in her to land at Penzance.
She also took letters. At’B, a large screw steamer
passed close to us on same course. Several other
vessels in sight.
70
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.
71
TABULAR ACCOUNT OF
OUR
VOYAGE,
Tabular Account of our Voyage — continued.
TEMPERAI U RE, BAROMETER, &(J.
Dist.
Baro-
meter.
Dist.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
meter.
Ther.
in
Miles.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Ther.
in
Miles.
June
8
45.53S.
41.52W.
29.74
48
61
April
('From Sand-
9
44.05
39.35
30.00
51
146
18
\
30
' ridge Wharf
10
42.05
36.00
29.44
56
198
19
; -
j to Port Philip
vHeads.
("Prom Heads
11
12
13
14
41.10
38.17
34.53
31.37
32.29
29.27
27.49
24.55
29.53
29.94
30.05
30.18
54
54
60
66
168
223
220
243
20
' position at to
I
135
1259
Week’s run.
21
j -
...
j noon on 21st.
VBirth aboard.
28.31
15
22.02
30.20
69
239
22
39.06S.
148.37E.
30.40
63
49
16
25.56
19.25
30.31
72
209
23
40.15
149.26
30.39
63
79
17
22.31
19.34
30.38
69
206
24
42.33
151.59
30.36
63
181
18
18.40
20.32
30.29
73
237
25
44.47
156.20
30.40
61
232
19
14.42
21.18
30.24
76
242
26
46.16
160.33
30,38
60
201
20
11.01
21.56
30.20
78
224
Birth aboard.
21
7.40
23.30
30.18
80
222
907
Run from pier.
1579
Week’s run.
27
47.19
163.33
30.41
58
139
5" Sighted Snare
28
47.56
167.08
30.30
55
177
22
4.22
24.06
30.18
80
202
29
47.48
172.15
30.26
55
208
C Islands.
23
1.32
24.28
30.17
80
192
('Crossed the
30
47.36
174.43
30.24
55
100
24
25
LOOK
3.43
24.12
24.53
30.10
30.06
80
82
153
168
4 Equator at
Cl a.m.
May
C Day repeated
26
5.13
25.56
30.08
82
110
{!
47.11
47.00
179.28
177.56W.
30.19
30.09
55
55
196
107
) on crossing
1180th meri-
Cdion.
27
28
6.27
8.38
25.28
25.51
30.11
30.13
82
85
79
133
f Highest Thor-
( mometer.
(■Longest day’s
1037
Week’s run.
46.30
170.57
29.95
51
287
Iran.
29
9.05
25.43
30.11
82
28
3
44.59
166.25
30.07
54
210
30
9.54
26.22
30.13
80
62
1424
Week’s run.
July
10.53
30.15
1
26.54
81
67
4
45.20
160.49
30.05
55
239
2
12.31
28.23
30.18
80
132
5
45.38
155.39
29,92
56
220
3
14.52
30.37
30.17
80
192
C
45.54
153.09
29.93
57
105
4
18.22
32.55
30.24
79
248
7
46.53
146.57
29.87
56
261
5
22.04
34.41
30.33
78
244
8
47.14
142.11
30.10
53
196
9
48.18
137.20
30.28
53
206
973
Week’s run.
10
48.59
132.31
30.33
49
194
Man killed aloft.
25.27
30.38
6
36.46
78
79
233
1421
Week’s run.
7
27.54
38.42
30.34
180
8
28.50
39.13
30.33
82
62
f Shortest day’s
11
49.30
126.45
30.32
47
229
Funeral.
9
28.53
39.10
30.36
83
4
12
50.03
120.59
29.96
48
225
10
30.13
39.39
30.43
83
84
(lull.
13
50.42
115.53
29.66
61
201
11
31.51
40.40
30.45
80
111
14
51.22
110.49
29.65
50
195
12
32.22
40.28
30.39
77
33
15
53.05
104.53
28.99
50
243
16
54.42
98.07
23.72
48
258
707
Week’s run.
17
55.24
91.10
28.90
43
237
Birth aboard.
33.46
30.40
13
40 40
78
80
85
f Passenger lost
1588
( Highest
14
34.58
40.56
30.47
73
\ week’s run.
15
36.05
40.02
30.49
83
80
t overboard.
18
56.16
83.53
29.02
42
250
16
36.54
38.50
30.42
78
76
19
56.15
80.12
29.22
45
124
17
37.19
37.33
30.40
76
66
20
55.53
79.00
29.85
46
46
18
38.11
34.28
30.40
75
155
21
56.23
78.04
29.69
42
44
19
39.01
31.13
30.35
74
161
Sighted Flores.
22
58.35
79.07
30.06
40
137
23
57.39
77.45
30.21
40
74
696
Week’s run.
24
65.43
76.03
30.16
42
129
20
40.26
28.04
30.18
69
198
804
Week’s run.
21
42.17
23.52
29.94
68
221
22
45.12
19.52
29.82
64
247
25
55.36
74.30
30.01
42
53
23
46.39
16.05
29.92
63
181
26
55.47
74.25
29.93
40
11
24
47.31
15.15
29.86
62
62
27
55.44
72.25
29.74
42
67
('Passed the
25
48.32
12.25
29.86
61
129
28
29
57.58
57.05
72.23
70.18
29.80
29.60
36
35
132
85
26
49,25
7.25
29.97
62
204
j Cape Horn at
1242
Week’s run.
30
56.17
64.00
29.36
30
210
\ midnight.
—
( Entered the
< Channel at
31
54.43
61.03
29.37
27
138
/ Lowest Ther-
27
49.39
4.21
30.12
61
120
mometer.
28
50.13
I
1.56
30.24
61
100
C midnight 26 th
696
Week’s run.
29
165
30
/ "■
June
to time of
1
54.10
60.23
29.74
28
41
385
-j entering the
53.07
57.21
29.40
35
135
East India
3
51.48
53.37
29.20
34
159
CDocks.
4
51.08
51.52
28.97
38
77
Total number of nautical miles^
5
48.50
47.46
29.46
34
212
run (from noon to noon without [
15584
6
47.09
44.02
29.70
47
181
including tacks) from Sandridge f
7
46.43
42.41
29.60
48
61
Pier to East India Docks
1000
866
Week’s run.
nmo rrom wnan to docks, iua days ana zu nours.


RELIGIOUS.
Prayers have been read as usual in the
saloon. On Sunday week, the 21st instant,
the children’s classes met for the last time,
when the Rev. Mr. Bradney, and the Rev.
Mr. Farr, in affecting language, bade farewell
to their pupils. Mr. Day preached in the even-
ing of that day, and the Rev. Mr. Farr on the
following Wednesday, and also on last Sunday
evening. These gentlemen are entitled to the
thanks of all on board, for their kind and vo-
luntary services during the voyage, and we
shall ever remember with gratitude their devo-
tion to our welfare.
LAST NIGHT AT SEA;
(A bilious idea)
And this is nearly the last night I am to
sleep in this bunk ? When I came aboard, more
than three months ago, I stared with horror
upon it’s narrow limits, and wondered who
could sleep in that! Two days at sea I endured
it for want of a better retreat from public gaze.
A month, and I looked upon it as mine, and
“ turned in ” night after night as a man
naturally walks into his own house—not from
any love for the place, but because it is his and
nobody else’s. After two months, I found the
seclusion of that bunk preferable to mixing
with the noisy crowds on deck. I took a fancy
to storing pipes, tobacco, combs, brushes, look-
ing glass, pens, books, ink, paper, &c., &c., under
the mattrass, until now that I have got to part
with it, I feel the greatest friendship for my dear
old bunk. We are going up Channel, and in a
night or two I must change my snuggery
for a dreary expanse of sheeting and bedstead,
and not only not be rocked to sleep every night,
but be stared in the face until blind by a hugh
expanse of daylight in place of my little port
hole—no more splashing without either, to lull
me to sleep! Oh! why was not the ship another
hundred days at sea, I’d like to know ?
A COLONIAL SPUN-YARN.
We’re soon to have a run ashore,
Oh, how jolly!
Won’t we drink, and sing, and roar,
Oh, by golly!
Kick up our heels—surprise all London,
Rather, won’t we ?
Have a corrobhoree, and some fun then
D’ye see, don’t ye ?
Teach’em to drink nobblers —eat some gum,
What a lark!
And cook their meat by the heat of the sun
In Hvde Park!
Surprise them with colonial manners,
Ignorant creatures,
Drink healths with their own “bobs” and “tanners”
As their teachers —
Tell them of our southerly “busters”
How they blow
Of hot winds, just—well just as warm as
Down below!
Of clouds of dust and heaps of sand,
Choking thought
Of storms and deluge in our arid land
And parching drought—
Of leads and drives and rich “ deep sinking”
Down a hole
Of surface gold got whilst winking,
’Pon my soul,
Of “ spreeing ” with the “ tin ” we’ve made,
Never sober,
Of rolling home with the milking maid
Half seas over.
Of our daring adventures in the brakes
Far in the bush
’Mongst death-adders, centipedes, and snakes,
Whore we “ lush.”
Push round the bottle—make them drunk,
Smoke their pipes,
Put them in a state of “ funk,”
Talking of “ swipes,”
Who’ll say then that a Loudon codger
Strangely noted,
Is a match for a knowing colonial “ dodger ”
Who’s “ floated ” !!
OUR VOYAGE.
We write at the mouth of the English Chan-
nel, where we may consider our Ocean voyage
as ended. It has occupied the long period of
one hundred days, and, as will be seen in these
pages, has been a tedious one. Winds and
calms have retarded our progress, and we have
made a long passage. We suffered much from
the severity of the weather off Cape Horn, but
little from the heat within the tropics, having
made a quick run through them. 3 births and
two deaths have occurred, and we have the
misfortune to take our boatswain home an in-
valid. Thanks to the unremitting attention
and precautionary measures adopted by our
Surgeon, Mr. Webb, there has been little or no
sickness amongst us.
Captain Deacon and his officers have been
most kind and attentive to us duringthe voyage,
and we now enter the English Channel thank-
ful to all who have been instrumental in
bringing about so pleasant and satisfactory a
termination as ours, to a voyage half round the
Globe.
72
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


VALEDICTORY ADDRESS TO OUR
READERS.
The best of friends must part, and so must
we. On publishing this supplement to our
thirteenth number, issued on Saturday the
20th July instant, we write with feelings of
pleasure and gratitude, not unmingled with
sorrow. When we reflect that our career is
ended —that we have to yield up our position
as Editor of the little Dover Castle News —to
no longer express our humble self with the
Editorial We —to cease enjoying the society
of all, and the friendship of many of our
fellow-passengers —to sink as a public character
into oblivion—how can we experience aught
hut regret? Yet whilst the scale is thus
weighed down, a counter balance exists to
bring to a level as it were, our strangely com-
bined feelings—for on the other hand, we greet
with joy the conclusion of a long and mono-
tonous voyage—one that has not been unat-
tended with dangers exceeding those usually
met with, and which has occupied a period of
several disasters, severity of weather, and
troublesome delay.
We pause to glance through our open port
upon the white cliffs of England! There they
are across the expanse of bright green water,
beaming with loveliness under the blue canopy
of heaven —a boundary to the glittering waters
—a home to us! Fur astern lie the deep blue
waters of the dreary North Atlantic Ocean,
whose tumultuous waves we have so lately
ploughed. The spirit of our dream has changed
for we are home!
No doubt we have been anxiously expected
weeks ago, for we are much behind time.
Whilst driven to and fro, baffled by contrary
winds, or lying sluggishly rolling in calms, the
daily papers at homo have been regularly
searched for some announcement respecting us
—but, “better late than never,” We are truly
happy in the anticipation of meeting relatives
and friends, from whom we have been separated
by years of trouble, care, and affliction. Oh!
hear us, noble ship—sail swiftly on and lessen
those impatient hours of future separation!
See how proudly she skims the waves, as if
conscious of our wishes, careening to the breeze
and decked in all the beauty of bright hun-
ting, and outspread wings of snow white can-
vas—homeward hound!
Yes—’ere long we must take a last farewell
of our noble “ Castle,” her guardian Captain,
officers, and numerous fellow-passengers, per-
chance to meet no more. The reminiscences
of many —very many happy hours aboard,
cause us to look forward with some regret to
that moment —the breaking up of our Ocean
home!
Our career has been a smooth one, for we
have received almost universal kindness at
the hands of all aboard, and numberless thanks
for our pains; and in return, with feelings of
deep gratitude we close this our first literary
effort.
Doubtless when under the influence of
printer’s ink, one and all of our papers will
appear so short and insignificant, that our
readers ashore will peruse them with amaze-
ment, and wonder how so few columns could
have been recognized as a newspaper, and
have so successfully held its head above water.
To such we must say a word. There being
four classes of passengers to be supplied, the
preparation of a similar number of copies each
week has made much writing necessary. To
perform this, —working as we have had to do,
in the most terrific weather, when half the
usual time is occupied in holding the body up
to prevent being thrown with the motion of
the vessel across the deck of our office—in
steadying ink, paper, copy, and more than
once the desk we wrote on—our Editorial
hand, instead of grasping the ready pen,
sometimes clinging to the ship’s side for very
life, amidst the pitching, heaving, and rolling,
the deafening crash of waves, the howling
wind, and the dashing of seas along our decks
—our brain has had quite enough to accom-
plish, simple as results may appear. We re-
member preparing one of our numbers during
a severe gale, near Cape Horn, standing upon
THE DOYEII CASTLE NEWS.


otie leg , —the other placed on the edge of a
sleeping bunk for support, the sides of our
office being at times pitched heavily, more
than forty-five degrees out of the perpen-
dicular. On another occasion, we were by a
sudden and heavy lurch of the vessel, thrown
violently on the deck or floor, followed by pen,
ink, paper, &c., in one chaotic mass. Under
many such difficulties, a word or perhaps only
a single letter could be formed at a time, thus
occupying many hours to complete each copy.
True, we have had finer weather, but at the
best of times, writing has been a difficulty.
Having to prepare our papers too, in a fit
manner for submitting to our readers, some
time and care has been expended, where, if
writing for the press, rougher copy would have
sufficed. Confined also within the narrow
limits of a ship’s sides, where the monotony
is as unchanging as the rising and setting of
the sun, and the sameness of our lives alike
unvarying, how could we produce, single-
handed, and unassisted by contribution (except
once or twice, when we received the few lines
which bear initials), in the face of such labor,
trouble, and interruption, more than four such
copies weekly ? We assure our readers that
our genius of invention has many times been
put upon its metal to find material for filling
our columns, small as they are.
We have then spent one half our voyage
in amusing our fellow passengers (and we
trust their friends ashore), in endeavouring to
produce a correct and interesting record of our
long acquaintanceship on the broad waters of
the South Pacific, South and North Atlantic
Oceans, and we now lay down our Editorial
pen, flattering ourselves that we have not
been unsuccessful. We have throughout care-
fully avoided personalities, and hence one
reason of our success.
We could however have wished to find
amongst our fellow-passengers more able pens
than ours to assist, but, as we have said, very
few lines have been contributed.
Our persevering and assiduous amanuensis,
Mr. Adolph Sanbosi, deserves the highest
credit for liis weekly production of two copies
of the paper, but for whom we never could
have supplied four. He has worked hard with
his pen under disadvantages we did not ex-
perience, for whilst we prepared and after-
wards made two copies in a comfortable and
comparatively warm berth, he, amidst the
snow and frost of the extreme Southern
regions, perished with cold, never but once
(and then only through indisposition), failed to
finish to time his two copies, in an open berth
on deck, where the storm-blast, snow, hail,
and rain often penetrated. A strong, and we
sincerely hope lasting friendship, has through
our mutual labors (in the first place) united
us, and this we consider the greatest boon we
have acquired from editing the Dover Castle
News.
To Captain Deacon, our chief officer, Mr.
Harrison, and our second officer, Mr. Fawcett,
we are not only indebted for much valuable
information, but likewise grateful for the con-
stant and obliging kindness we have, through-
out the passage, received at their hands.
Our Surgeon, Mr. J. H. Webb, whose
friendship we boast of with pleasure, we have
much to thank for, not only as regards this
paper, and for his jovial companionship during
the voyage, but likewise for his professional
kindness and attention since we first had the
pleasure of meeting him.
We have to thank Mr, Johnson Hedley for
kindly aiding us with a supply of paper, &c.,
for our little news, but for whom, having
come aboard totally unprepared to turn Editor,
we should have had much trouble.
The kindness of the Rev. Mr. Bradney, the
Rev. Mr. Farr, Messrs. Day, Rethell,
Eisenstader, and Waltho, in assisting us to
raise a printing fund, we thankfully acknow-
ledge.
And now to our kind Captain, all his equally
kind officers, and our numerous fellow-pas-
sengers we say farewell—our task and voyage
are over.
74
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


ANOTHER FAREWELL.
(to OUR MIDSHIPMEN AND ONLY A LITTLE ONE.)
Funny Giles, we grieve to lose you,
Hay, we weep to wish good bye—
Inskip—bless your little heart—
And Dames—oh ! really we could cry !!
Yet we’ll laugh and jump for joy,
And think of Giles, Hay, Inskip, Dames,
No more “ heavy weather ” now—
No more of your “ little games! ”
• This is a tear.
FIRST COMMUNICATION WITH
ENGLAND.
At 7 o’clock on Friday evening last, when
about 45 miles outside the Channel, the pilot
boat 18 S, from Scilly, came alongside and
boarded us (but we did not require his services)
bringing new potatoes and fresh eggs, which,
we need hardly say, were soon bought up. She
put us in possession of English papers to the
15th instant. Bargains were made by three of
our passengers to land them at Penzance. At
8 o’clock the boat left with them, taking our
letter bag, and the cutter soon stood away.
The greatest excitement prevailed, and the two
men who came aboard had thousands of ques-
tions to answer within the hour. We heard of
the execution of the Emperor of Mexico—the
breaking of the Atlantic Cable—of there being
no war in Europe—and of the non-arrival of
the Omar Pasha and Wellesley* (15 days before
us at starting) &c., &c. Three cheers were
given them at parting.
THE FIRST AND ONLY VESSEL THAT
HAS BEATEN US.
At] 8 o’clock on Friday evening last, a large
screw steamer caught up to and passed us
within a distance of half-a-mile. We had
scarcely any wind, and were consequently
going very slowly. What steamer could not
beat a sailing vessel under such circumstances ?
Then we can still boast of having beaten
everything we have seen !
* We found afterwords that this was incorrect.
OUR LOG.
In the English Channel.
100. Saturday, July 27th. — Entered the Channel
soon after midnight. The Scilly lights in sight
on the weather beam. Little or no wind. At
4 a.m., a fresh breeze on the beam. Steering E£S.
A large full rigged ship astern following us.
Misty with thunder, lightning, and occasional
light showers. At 8 a.m.,
Sighted the Lizard
(our first glimpse of England), which, owing to
our distance from it, was not visible from deck,
but we saw it with our glasses (on the weather
quarter) from the main cross-trees (an elevation
of about 85 feet above the deck). Lat. at noon :
49° 39' N. Long.: 4° 21' W. Distance, 120
miles. There were then 24 vessels in sight. At
1 P.M., we were to the southward of Eddystone
Lighthouse. Passed close to the barque Jules,
of Nantes. The ship astern proved to be the
Marlborough. The General Butler (American)
passed to windward, outward bound. Our num-
ber was kept flying at the peak all the afternoon.
At 3 o’clock, the wind blew from the eastward,
we standing to the southward. Still surrounded
with vessels. At 4.30, whilst standing close
across her bows, spoke the outward bound Indian
ship Aliquis. At 5 p.m., a dead calm. A steamer’s
smoke seen to the eastward at 7, which caused
great excitement, for the most sanguine supposed
it to bo a tug sent down for us, but they were
disappointed. A light breeze sprung up at 8.30,
and before it we again steered our course.
101. Sunday, July 28th. —Light fair wind still
continues. Clear sunny morning. Steering
N.E. At 5.30 a.m,, the Island of Alderney (off
the French coast) in sight on the starboard
beam, 15 miles distant, and the groupe of Casket
Rocks (adjacent to the westward of it) with it’s
row of three lighthouses. Surrounded with ves-
sels. The topsail schooner, Ron Fiere, passed
close to leeward at 5.45. Capo La Hague (the
French mainland to the eastward of Alderney)
hove in sight at 6 o’clock. At 9 a.m., weather
hazy. Sighted Portland Bill on the weather
bow. Yards squared with stronger breeze. Port
fore stunsails set. At 11, more of the English
coast could bo seen along the horizon to port.
St, Albany Head on the port bow. The French
coast nearly out of sight on the starboard
quarter. Lat. at noon : 60° 13' N. Long.; 1°
5G' W. Distance, 100 miles.
75
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.


Sighted the Isle of Wight
noon, passing Broadstairs. At 1 p.m., close to
the North Foreland and Margate. Still blowing
hard ahead of us. At 5, a change of wind, when
lower topsails and staysails set to assist tug. At
G. 15 p.m., passed the Nore Light Ship. Between
Sheerness and Southend at 6.30.
ahead at 12.30 p.m. At 1,30 it’s white cliffs ap-
peared much plainer, the sky being overcast
behind it. We could count at this time no less
than 61 vessels, of all sizes and rig around us.
At 6.30 we were close abreast of the easternmost
point of the Isle of Wight. Came on very thick
to windward with thunder, lightning and rain.
4 American ships of war (one flying the commo-
dore’s flag) standing in towards Spithead, close
to us. Noticed suddenly that all the vessels to
windward were reducing canvas, and laboring
heavily in the approaching squall, and in a few
moments it came down upon us, driving us furi-
ously through the water. All was bustle and
confusion. Stunsails hauled in, royal halliards
let go fore and aft, staysails quickly hauled down,
&c., our ship feeling relief immediately, and
righting under clouds of shaking canvas. In
half an hour we were sailing steadily on, with
royals and stunsails again set. Several steamers
in sight. The English mainland on the weather
bow. At 9.15 Beachy Head Light hove in sight
on the weather bow. Steam tug Renown came to
In the River Thames,
Our gallant ship at last pursues her way up the
river, still in tow of the Robert Bruce. With
what pleasure do we survey the banks on either
side, and the tanned sails of the well-remembered
river barges, the dusky colliers, steamers, and
boats of all descriptions. Gradually the river
narrows, until at 9 o’clock (just dark) we see on
one side close at hand the lights of Gravesend, —
on the other those of Tilbury.
Lot go the starboard anchor at this time, squared the
yards, and hauled aboard the hawser. The
Custom House Officer took charge. In 10 minutes
our ship lie still on the smooth surface of the
river, surrounded with boats, whilst upon deck
the confusion can be more easily imagined than
described.
Our passengers (light-hearted and joyous upon en-
tering the river) resolved to “ speak ” every
ship and barge that passed, and a constant roar
of merriment was derived from the absurdity.
Imagine an old river barge, with a square pile of
hay half way up the tanned sails, being
spoken to thus : —“ Ship ahoy ! Is yer Capt’n
aboard ?—Where are you from p—Where do you
think you’re bound to? — What’s your cargo?
—Does your mother know you’re out ? —What’s
yer longitude ? —Give us a tow-line, and we’ll
give your hay-stack a drag! Coo-ee !!! ” and
so forth. Many passengers went ashore “ for a
run ” at Gravesend.
us at 9.30, but we did not want her services.
Dark fine night.
102. Monday, July 29th. —Passed Beachy Head at
1.30 a.M. At daybreak another tug came along-
side, enquiring for the True Briton, steering
between Hastings and Dungeness. At 7 a.m., the
steam tug, Robert Bruce, came alongside, and
kept company until 7.40 a.m., when she took us
in tow. (Everybody came upon deck to see her —
the greatest source of pleasure we have expe-
rienced for a long time). Towing in towards the
high, white cliffs of Dover. All hands employed
stowing sails. At 8.30, Pilot boat 3 D steering
towards us, and at 5 minutes to 9 the Pilot came
aboard. At 9.30, passing close off Dover, near
enough to distinguish persons walking in the
streets. The noble castle, fortifications, houses,
railway, streets, wharves, and beach, formed a
beautiful scene. At 10, rounded the South Fore-
land. 43 vessels standing out from the Downs
close to us. A fresh breeze blowing. At 10.45
a.m., off Deal. At 11.30, close off Ramsgate. At
Collision.
Whilst lying at anchor for the night off Gravesend,
at about 2 am., a three-masted schooner dragged
her anchor, and struck us on the port side with
great violence. Her fore topmast and yards
coming in contact with our fore yard arm, broke
oft’ at the cap, and fell over. She soon afterwards
got clear without injuring us.
THE DOCKS,
ENTERING
On ~EirenoßM' morning, (July 30th,) our ship was
taken, by the aid of two steam tugs.
i, up the river to the-
East India Docks, which, after waiting for a clear passage, she entered about mid-day, amidst crowds of
spectators. The Marlborough followed us in, and there was a third following her—the trio creating
great excitement.
From Sandridge Railway Pier, 103 days 20 hours, and from Port Philip Heads, 102 days 6 hours have’
been occupied on our voyage (to the Docks).
Our voyage is finished. We bid you all farewell !!!
70
THE DOVER CASTLE NEWS.




