

qi a
A VOYAGE TO VAN DIEMEN’S LAND PART I.
Doubtless, my dear reader, you have
before now been condemned to spend
a wet day at a solitary country inn.
Did you ever spend a wet week in one ?
Did you ever come down, either on bu-
siness or pleasure, for a week’s explo-
ration of a pleasant country, and find
yourself reduced to a seat at the win-
dow, watching the slanting rain beat-
ing on the puddly road, the turbid ed-
dies of the swollen river, and the mists
and clouds brushing along the wooded
banks of the valley, and shrouding in
a leaden pall all the higher ground
about it ? Trusting to the promised
fine weather, you have brought no
books nor any other means of in-door
employment; you are the sole guest
in the inn, which has itself no means
of internal amusement; and you are
bound to wait in listless expectation
your appointed time, on the chance of
each succeeding day being fine enough
for the purpose you have in view.
Such was my hapless condition for the
last day or two, when lo I this morning
I stumbled on an old note-book that
by some chance had concealed itself in
my portmanteau, and found it to con-
tain the record of a voyage made, now,
alas 1 nearly twelve long years ago,
into warm seas and sunny lands. The
perusal of this has brought back to my
recollection glowing scenes that have
served to brighten and dispel the gloom
that was gathering round my imagina-
tion ; and I would fain attempt, kind
reader, to impart to you, at this dull,
dead season of the year, something of
the same pleasant feeling that is now
playing upon my own fancy, and which,
perhaps, like a mental aurora, may
lighten the darkness of a wintry hour
by a few flashes and gleams of reflected
illumination.
age of exploration. The shores of
Cornwall were then streaked and spot-
ted with snow ; and we, who were fit-
ted out solely for the tropics, and had
accordingly no stoves on board, had
been blowing our fingers and stamp-
ing our feet on deck for the last
week or two, under the influence of a
keen and frosty north-east wind —we
were not sorry, therefore, to find our-
selves at last flying before it for the
more genial south. Many travellers
relate, with much real or pretended
sentiment, the feelings of regret and
reluctance with which, as they depart,
they look back at the blue shores of
their native land fading from their
sight. lam afraid it may seem very
“ matter of fact,” but I really cannot
pretend either to have experienced
anything of this feeling myself, or to
have seen any one else apparently un-
der its influence, nor did a whisper of
the kind ever meet my ears at the time.
As I had long made up my mind to go,
the only feeling I seemed to experience,
on this or other similar occasions, was
one of satisfaction that the bustle and
bother of preparation were over at last,
and the start fairly made.
There comes a time indeed when,
after long years of absence, the remem-
brance of that hour, the thought of
the blue headlands that were all then vi-
sible of our native home, rises strongly,
painfully in the mind, with a fond yearn-
ing to see them once again, and a joy-
ous anticipation of the time when they
shall hourly grow more and more visi-
ble on the horizon; and I believe that
the feelings of the one time are, by a
common self-delusion, translated to the
other, and thus confounded together in
the memory. However that may be,
we flew and joyously before the
north-east wind across the Bay of Bis-
cay, into the wide Atlantic; and on the
dawn of the following Sunday morning,
April 18th, had the island of Madeira*
It was on a Sunday afternoon, the
11th of April, 1842, that we sailed from
Falmouth, in H. M. S. Musca, Cap-
tain Darkwood, bound on a long voy-
* A friend, who was for some time in the Indian service, once related to me that two very
enthusiastic young ladies, bound for Calcutta, being in the same ship with him, were very
anxious to see something of the island of Madeira; and being told in the middle of the night
that they were passing it, one of them hastily dressed herself, and came out of her cabin
with a lighted candle in her hand , in order to tee it better..


broad on our lee-bow. We were on
the north-western side of the island,
and all we saw of it at first was a long
dark shore, shrouded in mist and cloud;
but about eight o’clock we rounded the
south-western corner of the island, and
sailed at once into a different clime.
We appeared to pass suddenly, in the
course of half an hour, from the dark,
cold, gloomy north, into the warm,
sunn}', and genial south. Our course
lay close along the southern shore of
the island. This consisted for the most
part of lofty and precipitous cliffs of
red tufaceous volcanic rock, interstra-
ti fied with large beds of black colum-
nar basalt. They were frequently
broken through by the mouths of small
valleys, issuing out of the lofty interior
of the island, the ground of which slopes
steeply towards the sea, furrowed and
indented everywhere by these deep in-
cisions. Each of the ridges ended in a
cliff, and each ravine had its little cen-
tral gully, down which leapt a silver
thread of water, forming often a suc-
cession of cascades, and sometimes
flinging at last its bright waters over
a lower cliff into the sea. In the larger
of these ravines now and then arose a
conical peak, or jutting brow, with a
dark, precipitous face frowning over
the deep, narrow valley below. All
the tops of these hills and ridges were
brown and bare; lower down they were
clothed with pines or other trees, many
of which were now leafless ; below
these again the ground was parcelled
out into small enclosures and rows of
trellis-work for the vines ; while in the
bottoms of the valleys, and in a lovely
fringe along the shore was a rich and
luxuriant vegetation of broad-leaved
bananas, and groves of laurels and
oranges and other southern trees and
plants. On the slopes, among the
vines, were sprinkled a few white houses
and cottages, with many small, round,
thatched huts; while at the mouths
of the principal valleys were small vil-
lages gleaming from among the trees,
with their modest churches and pretty-
looking bridges across the larger brooks.
After feasting our eyes for some time
on this beautiful landscape, and being
interested by the admirable sections
exposed in the cliffs, where the different
layers and masses of rock were often
cut through by narrow intersecting
dykes, we anchored at Funchal about
noon, and soon afterwards landed for
a walk about the town.
Our passage had been so rapid, and
we had brought so much of the northern
atmosphere and temperature along with
ns, that stepping ashore at Funchal was
like walking suddenly on a wintry day
into a great hot-house or conservatory,
except that, along with the warmth,
we felt none of the close, stifling at-
mosphere of those places. A rich,
warm, genial air played among the
leaves of the trees, the bright sunlight
flashed from whitened wall and window-
pane, birds sang and flowers bloomed
around us, and the glowing light and
deep, broad shadows revealed for the
first time, to my eyes at least, that
those features were not exaggerated in
Italian and other pictures of a southern
clime.
Of Funchal I shall not attempt to
give any description. The whole is-
land of Madeira is only one great
mountain, with many valleys, radiat-
ing from the centre to the sea. At
one part of the coast, where the slope
of the hills is a little more accessible
than usual, and where a rather longer
pebble beach intervenes between two
rocky headlands, lies the town of Fun-
chal ; its steep streets, and terraces of
houses, running and straggling right
up the hills from the beach, to an in-
definite altitude ; while far away above
the town are still seen white houses
and convents, among the wooded re-
cesses of the mountain’s side.
I cannot resist, however, giving a
slight sketch of our ride to the Cor-
ral, one of the lions of Madeira.
Thirteen of us, lieutenants, middies,
and all, landed one morning on the
beach, were immediately assailed by
a cloud of light horsemen, called bur-
ruqueros, and were each incontinently
mounted on the outside of a small
horse, with an attendant hanging on
by his tail. The horses were good,
spirited little things, marvellously sure-
footed, to assist which quality their
shoes are turned up at the ends, so as
to form actual spikes.
The burruqueros are light, active
fellows, each dressed in a white frock
and trowsers, with boots of untanned
leather, and a small conical cap of blue
and red cloth on the head. They car-
ried a long spiked stick, which they
used, either to urge on the horse, or to
assist themselves in springing up the
rocks, clinging to the horse’s tail by
the other hand.
We gallopped up the steep paved


streets of the town, and then over se-
veral ridgy rocks to the west, till we
stopped at about five miles, to bait at
a small “venda,” or wine shop. We
then turned up a little valley, and
crossing a bridge at its head, rode
right up the shoulder of a black pre-
cipice, along a little narrow winding
ledge. I sat on my horse for a little
time, in order to see what the animal
really could do, and found it springing
up the rocks and clutching hold of the
slippery crags, more like a kitten than
a horse, till a combination of fear and
shame—shame at thus tasking the ani-
mal’s energies, and fear at the inevit-
able consequences if they should happen
to fail, impelled me to dismount.
From the summit of this ridge, we
looked down into a magnificent gorge,
coming right out of the interior to-
wards the sea, in the depths of which,
several hundred feet below us, ran a
rapid brook, now gleaming among the
dark precipices, and now hidden by
dense foliage. Up this ravine our path
now turned—a narrow track, coasting
along the sides of the mountain, and
winding gradually deeper and deeper
into its recesses. After passing across
the bed of a torrent, where our horses
again astonished us by the way in
which they stepped from stone to
stone, and scrambled up smooth sheets
of lava, slippery with wet, we came to
a neck of land, where a bold spur
struck out from the mountain’s side,
right across the ravine, as if intending
to reach to its opposite side. From
the neck of this spur, we looked down
into a huge circular valley, the bottom
of which was 1,500 feet below us, en-
vironed by great precipices of black
lava and basalt, that led up to bare
mountains, the summits of which are
more than 5,000 feet above the sea.
Several brooks coming from these
mountains leaped down the black sides
of the precipices, and hurried their
united waters through a very narrow
gorge, intervening between the spur
on which we stood and the opposite
wall of the ravine, up which we had
come. If it were not for that gorge
the Corral would be a great circular
lake. The bottom of the valley con-
sisted of green fields and groves of
trees, among which were visible the
white walls of a small village, and a
little chapel or church.
After standing for a few minutes in
wondering admiration of this very
striking scene, our attendants became
anxious for us to proceed. “Go on—
where ? and how ?” we all exclaimed ;
whereupon one or two of them rushing
forward, disappearedovertheface of the
precipice at our feet, and the rest urged
us to follow them on horseback. “ Look
before you leap,” is an old and a safe
adage; so, dismounting, I gave my
horse to the burruquero, and peeped
over; and finding a mere winding bro-
ken ledge, partly of rocky steps, and co-
vered with loose stones, and requiring
careful walking for even a man to keep
his footing, 1 declined to trust my neck
even to the sure foot of a Madeirese
pony, where one false step might send
one flying through a thousand feet of
clear air, before again alighting on terra
jirma .
I accordingly led the way on foot,
and my example was followed by my
shipmates. In going down I often paus-
ed to look back overhead, and admire
the wonderfully picturesque sight of
our party, consisting of a dozen naval
officers, thirteen horses, and about
twenty guides, all one above another,
winding in short turns down the face
of the precipice.
Arrived at more level ground, we
again galloped forward, frequently
stopping to look at the beautiful
scenery by which we were surrounded,
where the utmost grandeur of outline
and feature, and sternness of character
in the rocks, were clothed, and conceal-
ed, and adorned by all that was lovely
and luxuriant in foliage. One huge
precipice of black rock I especially re-
member’, that was draped all over by
a thick matting of ferns and creepers,
behind which a cascade seemed to be
trickling down the cliff, and distilling
from every leaf of the plants.
Threatening clouds which we had
before seen gathering round the heights
of the mountains now began to settle
down into the valley, and shortly sa-
luted us with a pelting shower; so we
set spurs to our little steeds, and gal-
loped up to the chapel, and threw
ourselves bodily on the hospitality of
the padre, or priest of the valley. He,
good man, though a little overwhelmed
by the numbers and the noisiness of
his guests, did all he could for us—
supplied us with a table and benches,
and some awfully sour red wine, that
seemed as if made from grapes that had
been brought up in a fog. Luckily we
had brought some bread and meat, and


a flask or two of brandy with us; and
the latter article found most especial
favour, not only in the padre’s eyes,
but in his mouth also ; so that he
seemed quite ready to undertake to
keep us for a month, provided only we
kept up a proper supply of that article ;
and was most unwilling to part with us,
so long as there seemed the slightest
probability of a drop being left in the
stores of any of the party.
There was a marriage, or a festival,
or some other religious ceremony going
on in the church which we visited, and
we found aparty of peasantryin holiday
costume, who brought us a crown be-
decked with flowers, which, as a great
favour, we were expected to kiss, and
to pay for the favour by depositing a
pistareen or two in a box under-
neath.
The rain having ceased, although
the mist remained, we mounted our
horses to return, galloped across the
valley, and then up a spur of the pre-
cipice by a different and easier path
than the one we had come down by.
Here I was again charmed by the wild-
ness of the scene, and lagged behind
to enjoy the sight of my companions
winding up the heights above my head,
each one in succession dimly appearing
on some jutting crag, shrouded in
mist; while the wild cries of the bur-
ruqueros sounded along the line, till
their voices were muffled in the clouds.
As the fog whirled around us, small
openings were formed in it here and
there, giving us lovely pictures of dif-
ferent parts of the valley—all the more
lovely for the framing in which they
were set. As I stopped upon one jut-
ting crag, one of these openings just
disclosed the church and the ground
around it, with a group of the villa-
gers, headed by the padre, watching
our ascent. He took off his hat, and
made a low bow ; but I by no means
appropriated the salutation to myself,
rightly deeming that it was in truth
but a reluctant adieu to the departing
brandy-flasks.
Arrived at the comparatively level
mountain-path above, we found a cold
wind driving the mist into our faces ;
and in galloping along my horse very
shortly cast a shoe. I dismounted,
not over-pleased with the prospect of a
long and solitary walk into Funchal;
but the burruquero quickly pulled out
hammer and nails, seeming quite pre-
pared for the accident, and in a short
time overtook me with the animal re-
shod, and in a condition to enable me
to rejoin the cavalcade.
As we descended the brow of the
mountain, we came suddenly to the
base of the cloud in which we had been
enveloped, and saw it stretching out
like a ceiling a little above our heads
for about a mile, throwing its shadow
on a corresponding portion of the
ground below, while beyond, the blue
sea, with its shipping, the rocky shore,
and the white buildings of Funchal, lay
gleaming in the sun.
As we approached the town, we
marshalled our forces into regular or-
der, sent out videttes, and entered
Funchal in military array, two and
two, as much to the amusement of the
Funchalese as our own diversion at
their astonishment.
Those were happy days, ray dear
reader. We were young, healthy, and
active ; we had a comfortable home in
our good ship, always holding out a
refuge to us from danger, sickness, or
want of money on shore. We, who had
none of the responsibility of her guid-
ance, had no care to harass, no cere-
mony to distract us. We cared little
how wagged the rest of the world—
peace or war, storm or calm, were alike
indifferent to us ; and when our quar-
ter’s mess-bill was defrayed, we had no
further anxiety even about money.
Who can say as much in this perplexed
and turmoiled life ashore ?
That our ship was not only a refuge
to us, but was ready to become one to
any others, even in the most delicate
distresses, was proved by an incident
that occurred on board of her the day
we left Madeira. A certain Dr. L., an
Englishman, had become enamoured
of, and engaged to, a fair Portuguese.
The priestly authorities of the island,
however, would not hear of a marriage
between a Catholic and a heretic ; and
the English chaplain declined, from
politic reasons, to celebrate it in their
defiance. As soon, therefore, as our
anchor had loosed its hold of Portu-
guese ground, and we were fairly under
weigh, and thus fully within the ma-
rine territories of our own sovereign,
and amenable to none but English
laws, the bridal party came on board
in boats, accompanied by an English
clergyman, who happened to be stay-
ing on the island, and the ceremony
was performed in the captain’s poop-
cabin. I fear it was not a very merry


party, for old ocean did not even spare
the bride, and both she and the brides-
maids were miserably sick before they
got into the boat to go ashore again;
and even the bridegroom exhibited a
countenance which was anything but
“ glowing with happiness,” or ‘‘ ra-
diant with joy,” upon the occasion.
We can only hope that they soon re-
covered themselves when they got
ashore, and if sick, that they never
were sorry afterwards.
April 2Sth. On coming on deck
this morning, we saw the eastern end
of the island of Teneriffe on our star-
board bow ; and farther west, high up
in the air in a clear space among the
clouds, we caught sight of the famous
peak. It was still eighty miles distant,
and was scarcely to be distinguished
from a cloud, except by its steadiness
of outline, having the same light-grey
colour, and shadowy, unsubstantial
aspect, while a patch of snow on its
northern side increased the resem-
blance.
In hauling up the towing net this
morning, I got, among other things,
a specimen of a porpita, a most deli-
cately beautiful little animal. Its form
is flat and circular, little more than a
quarter of an inch in diameter, rather
rounded above, and protuberant below.
Its substance was a glassy gelatine,
like that of a medusa, but rather more
opake and fleshy. The upper surface
showed a white, semi-transparent cen-
tre, passing gradually into a rich but
delicate cornelian at the circumference.
It was divided into eight parts by ra-
diating farrows that proceeded from
a central pit, each part being partially
subdivided by another slighter furrow,
that increased towards the circumfe-
rence. Small vessels proceeded from
the centre to the circumference, ex-
hibiting a darker shade than the
rest, both in the white and the blue.
Hound the edge was a thin fringe
of the same lovely blue, but rather
darker, marked with little, straight
vesicles that ended in a black tip, with
a similar black tip between each, as if
from a vesicle beneath. The under
surface of the body was slightly coni-
cal, of a brownish white in the centre,
but blue at the circumference, as on
the upper side; and from the blue part
proceeded a great number of tentaculm,
like those of a star-fish, but not appa-
rently contractile to any great extent.
These tentaculae ended in three or four
granular knobs. One of them, under
the microscope, seemed like a blue
vessel, ending towards the base, en-
closed in a white, gelatinous cover,
which became blue towards the knobbed
extremity; it had no apparent exter-
nal orifice. Neither could Ibe certain
that the animal itself had any orifice,
either above or below, though, doubt-
less, there must have been one at least.
I took also two small janthina. The
bubbles, by means of which they floated,
adhered pretty firmly to the animal,
so that I had to take a pair of forceps
to pinch them off. When removed,
the animal fell to the bottom of the
tumbler of sea water, in which I had
placed it, and for several hours, at all
events, showed no sign of renewing its
bubble.
April 29th Anchored in the roads
of Santa Cruz. This is a clear and
pleasant-looking town of white houses,
stretching along shore from some rug-
ged and barren hills on the north, to a
small, bare, and desert-looking plain
on the south, at the back of which the
rugged hills receded for a mile or two
till they again struck out upon the
coast. On consulting the English Con-
sul he declared positively that it was
utterly impossible to ascend the peak
at that early season of the year, where-
upon we made preparations for start-
ing the next morning to attempt it. In
the meantime we strolled through and
about the town, saw Nelson’s flags, of
course, and sundry bright black eyes,
which flashed suddenly upon us through
little portholes in the windows as
we passed along the streets. These
take an unfortunate stranger at a
most unfair advantage. The windows
have glass only above, in the lower
part the panes are of wood; and one
of them, if not more, hangs upon
hinges, opening outwards, like a ship’s
port. As the stranger strides along
the paved streets, which in the day-
time are pretty solitary, at every win-
dow up goes the port and out gleam
the dark eyes full upon him as he passes,
while, if he stop to return the salute,
down goes the little door, and all is
blank.
At six o’clock on the morning of the
30th, eight of us, headed by the cap-
tain, set out on horseback to cross the
island to Orotava. We rode up paved
causeways and rocky roads, in one
part a mere track across a rough, cin-
dery surface of lava, to the old and de-


serled-looking town of Laguna. Grass
grew in its silent streets, and in the
great square, ornamented by huge
gateways, decorated with armorial
bearings carved in stone, leading to
the houses of the old nobility; and we
passed through the town without seeing
more than half-a-dozen living beings,
and one of these was a camel. Lagu-
na is 1,200 or 1,400 feet above the sea,
and stands on the edge of an undulat-
ing plain, surrounded by rocky hills.
This plain, after heavy rain, is said to
be sometimes converted into a shallow
lake, whence the name of the town.
It was now, however, well covered with
fine crops of potatoes, wheat, maize,
barley, rye, flax, and lupins. Having
crossed it, we arrived at the ridges,
which slope down on the north-western
side of the island, and these we had to
traverse obliquely on our road to Oro-
tava. From the summit of one of
these ridges we had a most magnificent
view of the peak. From the centre of
a great mass of rugged mountain rose
the majestic cone, slightly truncated
or indented at top, and crowned with
another little cone, called the Piton.
About the middle of the mountain was
a beautiful cincture of white cloud,
stretching out in level sheets, from
which occasional fragments detached
themselves, and sailed over our heads.
Except these, the whole heavens were
of the deepest and most unstained
blue, as was the ocean on our right,
towards which the ridges gradually
descended, ending in an indented coast
of black rocks, circled by a creaming
belt of snow-white foam. Two or
three dark pines stood statue-like on
the crest of one of the ridges before us,
while in the valleys were groves of date
palms, fig trees, and orange trees, and
the road was ornamented with rows of
agave, and cactus, and trellises, on
which the young vine leaves were just
bursting into life. The whole scene
was new and peculiar to me. There
was none of the rich, luscious, green
carpet, or leafy woods of our own is-
lands here at home ; on the contrary,
the ground generally had a bare and
almost barren aspect; but what a con-
trast and harmony of colour in its
brown and yellow hues, shaded by
green and black, the intense blue of
the sea and the sky, and the brilliant
white of the foam, the cloud and the
snow-capped summit of the peak ; and
what a stately majesty in the wide
sweep of indented coast and broken
mountain-side, with the noble cone
culminating over all. Nothing, how-
ever, still struck me more forcibly than
the clearness and transparency of the
air, and the depth and intensity of the
light and shade. To know what a
blue sky and a glaring sunshine really
are, it is absolutely necessary to quit
these northern latitudes and to get
some twenty degrees at least more di-
rectly under the sun.
After riding up to the picturesque
Villa Orotava, on the mountain-side,
peeping at the famous dragon-tree,
and admiring the beauties of the lovely
valley in which we found ourselves, we
rode down, and took up our quarters
at a rather indifferent posada at the
lower Porto Orotava. The Vice-Consul
here, of course, confirmed his chief in
Santa Cruz as to the utter impossibility
of our ascending the peak, but agreed
at last to send for a guide. His name
was Manuel Aguida, a fine, manly-
looking Spaniard, with quiet, courteous
manner, who threw no obstacles in our
way, nor attempted to enhance his ser-
vices on account of the season, but
simply stated what were the usual
terms,* and the amount of men, horses,
and provisions that would be requisite.
We accordingly begged him to provide
these, and to be with us early in the
morning.
May Isf—ln spite of every exer-
tion it was half-past seven before we
could get the horses packed, and make
a fair start of it. The Vice-Consul
was kind enough to add to our stores a
gallon or two of wine of a superior
description to any we could have pur-
chased, and to come and see us off;
but his last salutation was, “ I wish
you luck, but it is impossible you
should succeed.” Our cavalcade con-
sisted of thirteen horses (five of which
carried the provisions and water), and
a man to each horse, which made our
party twenty-one.
We passed between two small recent
volcanic cones, called “ Las montes
des Frayles,” the lava streams from
which were as fresh as if they had just
* These terms were, four dollars for each horse and its attendant, and four dollars for
himself as guide-in-chief.


cooled; and vve then rode through a
village called Hija, where, as it was
Sunday morning, we found all the pea-
santry in holiday costume, saluting us,
and wishing us a good journey. We
then began to ascend by a narrow and
rocky path, having on our left hand a
precipitous ravine or dry torrent chan-
nel, one of those called a “ barranco ”
by the Spaniards. In an hour and a-
half we had left the region of vines,
and come on that of the firs and ferns,
and broom and heath. We had hither-
to seen a level and dense stratum of
clouds above our heads, cutting off all
view of the mountains above a certain
definite height, and about ten o'clock
we rode up into this cloud.
For about an hour we continued
thus shrouded in mist, gradually as-
cending along a narrow winding path
among rocks covered with small trees
and bushes, when suddenly all vegeta-
tion began to disappear, and imme-
diately afterwards we emerged into
the clear upper sky with a blazing sun-
shine, and the peak towering before us
over piles of brown rocks and yellow
pumice and ashes. Streams and great
masses of black lava wound among
these hills of pumice and ashes, and we
had a little steep climbing till we ar-
rived at a place called the Canada, at
the edge of the pumice plains, where
we halted under the shade of some
rocks to lunch. We here looked down
on the surface of the clouds which en-
circled the hills below us, and stretched
away in level, solid-looking, snowy
plains into the distant horizon.
We then rode for about three miles
across the pumice plains, a gently
undulating stretch of ground which
sloped very gradually up towards the
foot of the cone that rises at their south-
west corner. The plain is bounded by
a line of craggy hills, which in places
assumed the character of a perfect wall
of rock, with a precipitous face towards
the plain and a more gentle slope out-
side. I could see in some places that
the beds composing this broken wall
inclined (or “dipped”) steeply from
the plain towards the sea. It struck
me, not that these beds had been once
horizontal, and had been subsequently
elevated into their present inclined
position, but that they were the rem-
nants of the wall of a former cone, of
immense magnitude, of which the pre-
sent pumice plains formed the centre,
and that the beds were only the layers
von. xtin.— no. ccuxi.
of ashes, pumice, and lava which had
been originally deposited in that in-
clined position on the slope of-the cone.
The pumice plains themselves were
covered with a light yellow pumice, in
pieces of the size of a walnut down to
the very finest powder, with here and
there a crag of jutting rock, a brown
or reddish lava appearing from under-
neath it. Clouds of dust rose under
our horses’ feet; no green thing was
visible in any direction but a few
bushes of a stunted kind of broom, and
the whole scene so brown and arid, with
the hot sun overhead and our long line
of horse and foot painfully toiling over
the undulations of the ground, seemed
to me the very epitome of an African
desert. As we approached the foot of
the cone, we rose slowly on to some
great buttresses of yellow pumice, that
now began to be dotted with large
blocks of black rock, a pitchstone por-
phyry passing into obsidian. These
were of rudely spheroidal shape, cin-
dery outside, but compact or crystalline
within. They were from six to ten feet
in diameter, and were generally split
across by one or two great cracks, and
lay sometimes a mere heap of broken
fragments. I thought at the time that
they were huge volcanic bombs that
had been shot from the crater during
some great eruption, and this is the
expressed opinion of Humboldt; but
Yon Bach, with more probability,
calls them great “tears’’ of lava that
had become detached from one of the
streams above, and rolled down the
sides of the cone into the plains below.
Just at this side of the cone a stream
of black lava does descend from the
summit of the cone, and ends suddenly
among the light yellow pumice and
ashes about half way down, as if it
had become cooled and consolidated
before it could quite complete its
descent.
Passing beyond this, and still slowly
climbing round the foot of the cone,
our horses apparently almost spent by
fatigue and want of water, we drew
near to another great stream of lava,
which had not only rushed down the
sides of the cone, but had spread far
and wide across that portion of the
ground below, and formed, indeed,
the termination of the pumice plains.
Just before reaching this we turned
to the right, and began at last slowly
and painfully to climb the actual cone
itself, by means of a little track that


•wound sharply up the piles of loose
cinders and ashes.
At about half-past three, we at
length arrived at our halting place,
the “Estancia de los Ingleses.” This
is merely a group of huge masses of
black rock, with a few loose stone
walls, built here and there against
them to keep off the wind. Under
the shade of one of these great rocks
was a hole, which in the summer was
said to contain a spring of water, but
which now held merely a cake of white
ice, which we immediately proceeded
to break up, in order to cool the parched
mouths of the horses, and our own.
The sun still felt hot even at this alti-
tude of 10,000 feet, but in the shade
the temperature was 45°. The air
preserved this temperature even on the
ground close to the ice, the surface of
which was yet not at all moist. I
conclude a thin stratum of dry cold
air remained undisturbed in the hollow,
just above the ice, which, even when
broken, did not become damp till it
was handled.
From the “ Estancia” we could see
the hills of the Gran Canaria, and the
southern coast of that island, the sea
line of the horizon stretching greatly
beyond it; but the upper surface of
the clouds occupied the greater space
within the scope of our vision, and to
me at least was one of the most inte-
resting sights.
At sunset we were treated to a grand
effect in watching the March of the
Shadow of the Peak. We were on
the eastern slope of the cone, and just
as the sun set behind it, the sharply-
defined shadow of the little summit-
piton was projected first on the pu-
mice hills below us, then stole rapidly
across the plains, clomb more slowly
up their encircling walls of rock, over
which it disappeared, while the swell-
ing outline of the lower cone, darken-
ing all it covered, grew rapidly up-
wards in ever-increasing dimension.
In a few minutes more we observed
the shadow of the little Piton travers-
ing the surface of the clouds below,
hastening forwards to the east, and
followed by the great pyramidal sha-
dow of the whole Mountain of the
Peak, stretching many a league over
land, and sea, and cloud, till it gradu-
ally became lost in the distant and now
darkening horizon. In the north the
clouds were very magnificent, as there,
their level plains were broken into
huge foaming billows of a snowy
whiteness.
It now suddenly became quite dark,
and the stars shone out more brilliantly
than on a frosty night at home; but
dinner being declared ready by Aguida
(who acted as maitre d'hotel), we
turned our attention to something more
substantial than the atmosphere ; and
then, getting two fires lighted—.one for
ourselves, and the other for the guides
—and having previously collected all
the old bushes of broom we could find
to keep them going, we wrapped our-
selves in our blankets, and each party
began a round of songs.
The song of the guides appeared to
be extemporaneous, as each took it up
alternately, and sang a verse, to which
all united in the same chorus, the words
of which were supposed by some of us
who had a smattering of Spanish to be
something about “ to-morrow morn-
ing.” This was often accompanied
by shouts of laughter; and, like the
man in the play, we thought “ they
must be speaking of us, for they
laughed consumedly.” It was a wild
scene the huge black rocks, from
among the crevices of which peeped
out here and there a spectral horse’s
head—the two fires, with their blanket-
clad groups of revellers the shouts,
the laughter, and the songs while
around, above, and below us was the
steep slope of the mountain-side with
its rocks and lava-torrents, its foot en-
veloped in the clouds, and its lone
head high among the stars.
About two in the morning, Aguida
roused us, and we found a bright moon
shining, by whose light we were to con-
tinue our climb; so, after swallowing
a piece of bread and a cup of coffee,
we set off. We each had a stout iron-
shod pole in our hand, which we found
very useful; and for about an hour
and a-quarter we toiled up the steep
slope of pumice; and even then, as we
looked back, seemed but little above
the fires of the Estancia, where we
could hear the voices of the “machu-
chos ” we had left behind. We here
found ourselves at the edge of a great
lava-stream, and now had to climb
over this. This was not one solid
mass, as I had expected to find a stream
of lava, but aheap of loose, disconnect-
ed, rudely - spheroidal blocks of cin-
dery lava, of all sizes, from that of a
man’s head up to six or eight feet in
diameter. These blocks often tottered


under our feet as we stept, leapt, or
crawled from one to the other, while
the prospect of a tumble down in
among their cavities seemed anything
but inviting.
After about half-an-hour of this kind
of climbing, the day began to dawn,
and the whole east rapidly assumed a
crimson and golden hue, before the
light of which “ the stars ’gan pale
their ineffectual fires.” By the aid of
this light, we soon caught a sight of
the Piton shining over the black rocks
above us, and shortly afterwards we
reached its foot. Just as we arrived
here, the sun rose, and threw a golden
glare over the surface of the clouds,
from the horizon to our very feet, pro-
ducing a glorious effulgence such as I
never saw equalled. As It rose above
the level horizon of the clouds, it ap-
peared as if it were greatly spread out
horizontally, and divided into three or
four short columns or squares of light,
occupying apparently a space equal to
three or four times the real diameter of
the sun.
Many patches of snow lay about us
here, but did not impede our progress,
while from some hollows and crevices
steam and vapour were issuing. In
one of these the thermometer showed
130° F., just at the mouth of a small
hole, although a large patch of snow
lay within arm’s-reach of it. In the
open air, and shaded from the sun, the
thermometer showed 31° F.
We now addressed ourselves to the
little summit Piton, which looked a
mere hillock, to be run up in a quar-
ter of an hour. Aguida, however,
told us it would take an hour and a
half; and it is, I believe, nearly six
hundred feet high. It was as steep as
it was possible to stand on indeed it
would not have been possible had we
not been able to dig the feet into the
loose ashes, or rest them on little pro-
jecting ledges of harder rock.
Partly fx-om the steepness of the as-
cent, partly from the exhaustion and
shortness of breath caused by the ra-
rity of the atmosphere, this last hour’s
climb was the most laborious of all, as
we could only proceed a few steps at a
time without stopping. At half-past
six, however, we were all assembled at
the summit, glorying in the magnifi-
cent prospect. The wide-spread sur-
face of a vast plain of cloud was about
six thousand feet below us, through
which rose part of the ridges and crests
of Teneriffe, and the summits of Pal-
ma, Gomera, and Canaria. Here and
there, too, we looked down through
rents and gulfs in the clouds, on
spaces of sea, or on part of the coasts
beneath. This vast stratum of cloud
seemed to have a perfectly regular,
level, and well-defined base, and had a
singularly unvarying and solid-looking
aspect. Its upper surface was gently
undulating, with rounded knobs and
hummocks here and there. I could
have fancied I was again looking down
on some vast frozen sea, with its ice-
bergs rounded and smoothed by snow.
The dark lake-like chasms in the clouds
increased the resemblance, as they
showed like spaces of open water. On
looking more attentively at them, how-
ever, we could perceive the void, ca-
vernous space beneath the clouds filled
with a dark shadow, and could detect
the ripple on the surface of the sea
below. The thickness of the stratum
of cloud did not seem to be any where
great, which made their solid and im-
movable aspect more remarkable. The
wind with us was very light from U.
by E. ; we afterwards heard they had
a strong breeze below from the N. E.
The rocks around were smoking in
several directions, both on the sides
and in the bottom of the little summit
crater, which may be a hundred yards
in diameter, and a hundred feet in
depth.
After making some meteorological
observations, and experiencing much
trouble in endeavouring to get my
Wollaston's thermometer to boil, I was
proceeding to examine the crater more
narrowly; but by this time several of
the party beginning to be sick and
faint, rushed down the side of the Pi-
ton; and Aguida became so anxious
to join them, lest they should lose
themselves, while he at the same time
would not leave me for the same rea-
son, that I was compelled, most reluc-
tantly, to descend long before 1 had
completed my observations.
In going down the lava stream, we
turned out of our way to visit a large
cavern in the lava, caused by the up-
per crust hardening over, while the
lava was still flowing below. This, in
the winter, becomes full of ice and
snow, and is the great natural ice-house
of the island, whence, during the sum-
mer, ice is being constantly carried
down to the townsof Orotava and Santa
Cruz. It took us two hours and a-half


to descend to the Estancia, where we
mounted our horses, and we reached
Orotava about two in the afternoon
of Monday. It was a “fiesta,” and
we found all the crosses festooned with
flowers; while at the entrance of the
town were arches of green boughs
wreathed with flowers, an oratory on
one side adorned with trinkets, and on
the other a mountebank’s stage in full
operation. Fireworks were exhibited
in the evening. We slept at Orotava,
and the next day rode back to Santa
Cruz, got on board our ship, and, at
six in the evening, were rolling along
before the trade-wind still farther
south.
The total cost of our expedition from
Santa Cruz and back again was six-
teen and a-half dollars a-piece, or
somewhere about £3 10s.
I should have hesitated, oh, indul-
gent reader ! in going over this old
ground with you, which, among others,
has been so well described by Mr.
Wilde, in his Travels, had I not
thought that scenes so worthy of at-
tention can hardly be described too
often, since every fresh observer sees
them in a somewhat different light,
and thus helps to place them more vi-
vidly before your imagination.
We calculated the height of the
Peak from barometrical observations,
and from trigonometrical ones, de-
pending on a base measured at sea
with a patent log, and the mean of the
whole was 12,080 feet above the sea.
May 9th At 8, a.m., we came in
sight of Mayo, one of the Cape de
Yerd islands—a bare, brown, desolate-
looking place, with a low, arid shore,
rising into conical volcanic hills in the
interior. A few cocoanut trees in
some of the little valleys, and a few
huts on one of the sandy plains, off
which a brig was lying at anchor, were
the only signs of life visible. At noon
we anchored at Porto Praya, in St.
Jago. Here, too, all seemed burned
up, brown, and desolate; but the cliffs
were loftier, and the mountains in the
interior exhibited some very curiously
jagged and serrated outlines. We
landed on a small rock at the head of
the bay, the only place where it is
possible to get ashore without being
wet through, and walked into a little
valley behind the table-land on which
the town stands. The whole country
seemed to be made of lava and dust,
with not a green thing on the dry and
brown expanse of sand, but a few aca-
cias and one grove of cocoanuts. The
town consisted of one square, sur-
rounded by low one-storied huts, and
a few lanes of ditto. It was inhabit-
ed almost entirely by negroes, who
looked sleek, well fed, and happy.
The consul was absent ; but we were
entertained at his house by a young
Englishman who was acting for him.
He gave us some tolerable wine and
water, and cheated us afterwards most
confoundedly in the matter of some
fowls and turkeys with which he under-
took to supply us, taking care to bring
them off only just as we were under
weigh.
For the next ten days we sailed lux-
uriously along before the trade wind,
till, as we approached the line, we
gradually exchanged our bright skies
and pleasant breeze, for heavy, lower-
ing clouds, and sultry calms, varied
by showers of rain, not formed of drops,
but of continuous streams of water,
poured down /upon us as if a river
had been suddenly emptied out over-
head.
I was never tired of watching the
small squadrons of physalus, or Por-
tuguese men -of - war, that we often
passed through, and the flights of the
flying-fish that we every now and then
flushed in regular covies from under
our bows. When fresh they are beau-
tiful things, with their delicate flexible
bodies, about eight inches in length,
large silver scales, great brilliant eyes,
five-eighths of an inch in diameter, and
the filmy fins or wings of transparent
tissue, five inches long, and veined by
cross lines as if jointed. They rose
from the water by a leap, and for the
first few yards seemed to labour hard,
fluttering their fins in rapid vibrations,
something like a dragon-fly, while the
tail was forcibly bent down. They
then skimmed off with a smooth and
rapid flight, like that of a swift, but
appeared to me to rise and fall occa-
sionally in gentle curves, in order to
avoid the crests of the waves. They
seemed usually to prefer starting “on
a wind,” as a sailor would say; but
gradually “fell ofi” before it, shortly
before they dropped into the water.
Their longest flight I should estimate
as about one hundred yards.
May 18 th Last night we had been
hailed by Neptune, who asked leave to
come on board, and this morning pre-
parations were made for receiving him,


and for initiating us novices into his
mysteries.
It so happened that at least one-half
of the ship’s company, including some
of the “ best men ” among it, had
never crossed the line. Accordingly
when w r e were ordered below, and
found we mustered about seventy good
men and true, we immediately deter-
mined to have some fun of our own,
and not let his Marine Majesty on deck
have things quite so much his own way
as he was used to. The senior mate
and the carpenter were among us, and
acting under their directions, we im-
mediately triced up gratings under the
fore hatchway, so as to prevent our
being attacked in the rear, barricaded
the gun-room door to protect our flank,
and removed the ladder from the main
hatchway, round which we marshalled
our forces. There was a force pump
on deck supplied with a hose, that if
well directed would have annoyed us
much ; but we cut off the supply of
water from this by turning the cock on
the lower deck.
When Neptune and his satellites, in-
cluding a band of constables, hideously
bedaubed with paint and bedizened
with oakum, had completed their pre-
parations for our reception on deck,
and, opening the main hatchway, called
the first,on the list to come on deck and
appear before him, we coolly told him
to “ come and fetch him.” Seeing our
preparations for resistance, Neptune’s
forces at first tried a rapid fire of
buckets of water, and that not succeed-
ing, endeavoured to stifle us out by
tarpaulins over the hatchways. These
were poked off with handspikes, while
every leg or foot that ventured to show
itself down the hatchway got a lash
from a rope’s end that caused it quickly
to be drawn up again.
At length a combined assault was
made, and, under cover of a deluge of
water-buckets, a dozen or two of con-
stables at once fell, one over the other,
down the hatchway, and having gained
a footing on the lower deck, attacked
us with staves, and endeavoured to
capture some of our number. A pretty
sharp fight now ensued, while those on
deck stood ready with nooses to throw
over any of us that came near, and
haul us up upon deck as if we were
bags of bread.
As I headed one of the charges on
the constables I suddenly found my r-
self embraced by a noose ; but before
my legs had well left the deck I was
seized by two or three big fellows of
our side, who, by dint of hauling on
the rope, succeeded in extricating me
before I was quite torn asunder. After
a pretty sharp tussel victory decided
in our favour, and we shortly had thir-
teen constables prisoners, whom, by
way of humane treatment, we lashed
to the tables and stanchions nearest the
galley-fire, where, considering we were
under the line, we determined they
should not have any chance of suffering
from cold, at all events. An honest
master’s-assistant was suddenly dis-
covered very busy at the force-pump,
proceeding to work so coolly that he
was taken for one of us, till some one
remarked that he belonged to our op-
ponents.
“ Hallo, old fellow, what are you
doing there ?” said some one.
“ .Rigging the force-pump,” said he ;
“the second-lieutenant ordered me to
go and do it.”
“No; you don’t say so?” was the
cry, as he was seized and carried for-
ward, to his intense astonishment, as
he vehemently pleaded the orders of
his superior officer, and found them ut-
terly disregarded. On consideration
of his being an officer, he was offered
the freedom of the lower deck, “ on
his parole but as he declared he
would “die rather than surrender,”
and seemed to look upon us all as real
mutineers, and the whole proceeding
as “ flat rebellion,” he was lashed near
the fire like the rest, and given the
hottest place as an honourable distinc-
tion for his courage and fidelity.
We were now masters of the field, or
rather the deck ; and the fight having
lasted an hour, and Neptune having
neither time enough nor men enough
to continue it much longer, his Ma-
jesty' for once condescended to a par.
ley, and offered easy terms on condi-
tion of our surrender, promising clean
soap and a smooth razor provided we
submitted to the ancient ceremonies.
Against such an appeal from so august
a dignitary, and one of whom there is
no other defeat recorded in history, we
had not the heart to contend longer.
One by one, therefore, did we submit
to be shaved, to be soused, and to be
drenched; and one by one, as we
emerged from the bath prepared for
us, did we incontinently turn to and
souse, drench, and swab our late com-
rades in opposition. The iniatory ce-


remonies being over, the usual proces-
sion took place round the quarter-deck:
Neptune in full costume, with Amphi-
trite by his side, well stuffed and padded
into charms of the most exuberant pro-
portions, nursing and caressing their
youngest son (a most mischievous
young imp of a powder-monkey), his
carriage of state (a gun carriage, be-
decked with flags) drawn by obedient
but most outrageously-dressed satel-
lites, and followed by the dripping
band of his newly-receivcd subjects,
presented us and himself before the
captain, on the poop, to whom he re-
ported his proceedings, and these being
declared satisfactory, and double allow-
ance of grog ordered for all hands,
three cheers were given, the procession
moved forward to the forecastle; and
as eight bells at noon were struck, the
boatswain’s whistle came shrill and
clear, and the usual hoarse tone of com-
mand to lf clear the decks and beat to
quarters.”
Then was seen a good instance of
the effect of discipline. For three or
four hours our good ship had been one
scene of confusion and uproar, for the
most part good-humoured, but not un-
mingled with contention, which, under
other circumstances, might have passed
as tolerably earnest, for some men had
afterwards to apply to the doctor for
hurts received in our “ ’tween-deck ”
melee. Every man, too, was dripping
with wet, and many painted and dis-
guised in all manner of disfigurements.
There was a temporary platform near
the forecastle, and a huge canvas-bath
before it, and the decks were strewed
W'ith litter of all descriptions, and
streaming everywhere with water. In
twenty minutes from the time the
boatswain’s pipe was heard, the whole
deck was clean, neat, and orderly, as
usual; every man was in clean and
dry clothes, without a trace of paint,
dirt, or water ; the guns were pointing
through the ports, the men standing,
silent and steady, at their quarters, the
officers in full uniform at their stations:
not a thing but was in its proper place,
ready for instant use ; and the ship at
once transformed from an apparent
bedlam to a still, orderly, perfect man-
of-war, ready for instant action. A
few common manoeuvres were gone
through ; a few brief, stern commands
issued by the first-lieutenant ;.the reins
of command, which one might just
previously have supposed to have been
thrown away for ever, were quietly
picked up, and adjusted to their use ;
and the “ crossing of the Line ” re-
mained merely as a subject for conver-
sation, and for laughing over its various
chances.
defects in the present system of cavalry tactics.
While of the three component arms
which form a military host, the infan-
try and artillery have arrived at great
perfection, the cavalry, it appears, has
retrograded, and is no longer so effec-
tive as it once was, and ought to be
again if properly organised. The feats
of the hussars of Ziethen and Seidlitz
in the Seven Years’War, are marvels of
history to which we can furnish no recent
parallels. The boldest charges of Mu-
rat and Anglesea are pronounced to be
mere child’s play compared to the
sweeping whirlwind with which the ir-
resistible Prussian troopers and their
squadrons bore down and scattered the
firmest battalions that ever stood up
against them in serried phalanx. Seid-
litz brought his men to this by hard
drill, and lost many through casualties.
at mere rehearsals. The king, Frederick
the Great, considered the practice ob-
jectionable; but Seidlitz observed drily,
“ If you make such a fuss about a few
broken necks, your Majesty will never
have the bold horsemen you require
for the field.” The book we are about
to notice mentions this anecdote, and
adds, that it was 0119 of the amuse-
ments of this daring cavalier to ride in
at speed between the arms of a wind-
mill while working—a feat he often
performed after he had attained to the
rank of a general officer. An empty.
Quixotic bravado, the success of which
is almost as extraordinary as the es-
cape of Sterne, who, when a child, fell
through a water-wheel in rapid motion,
at Annamoe, in the county of Wicklow,
and was taken out of the stream with-
