



A VOICE
FROM
TASMANIA,
BY
EDWARD KEMP, ESQ.
HOBART TOWN :
PRINTED BY JOHN MOORE, MACQUARIE STBBSfSr
1846.




DEDICATION.
TO CHARLES G. BURCHETT, ESQ.,
OF
The Gums, Port Phillip:
My Deae Buechett,
Jn dedicating this Poem to you, it is but neces-
sary I should say a few words in explanation
thereof —never having visited Van Diemen’s
Land, however well acquainted you may be, with
its general history, from not being so, with the
particular personages the work treats of, many
of its passages would otherwise be unintelligible
to you. It was originally intended by me, to
be merely a playful Satire, upon the present
Members of the Legislative Council, not omitting
their popular President ; but to my sincere
sorrow, perceiving the unimportant position they
occupied in the public mind, I was reluctantly
compelled to alter my design, and extend it, to
other subjects of greater local interest. With
regard to the versification, I have not attempted
the polished smoothness of Pope.
It will be a matter of surprise with many, how


I could be so mad, as to publish a work in a
Colony, where the ruling principle is money, and
where, but very few, from their numerous avoca-
tions have time to peruse, works of the most
momentous interest. To them, I say, I acknow-
ledge the justness of their remark—but when I
saw David Burns, Mr. Knox, and N. L. Kentish
intrude themselves upon their notice, I could not
help bringing myself forward, for good or for evil
report. The most of it is drawn from life—my
own feelings, have given a colouring to the scenes,
1 have attempted to describe. The “ Kit of turf”
is intended, as a general description of a race.
In my sketches of character, I have gone as near
to the originals, as the laws of society would
permit. I am not quite sure whether the
satirical vein of the poem, be not attributable to
a diet of toast and water, and the diurnal visits of
my Doctor; but whatever be its errors, and
defects, 1 leave them open to public reprehen-
sion ; whatever be its services, I devote them to
the land of my birth.
Hoping that you may receive as much pleasure
in perusing, as I did in composing it,
I remain,
Your very sincere friend,
EDWARD KEMP.


POSTCRIPT TO THE DEDICATION.
My muse’s a strange, an inconsistent thing,
Quite natural too ; doth morn, all sunshine bring ?
Is life all happiness ! and nature spring ?
At one time mystified with Bibleology,
The next enthusiastic on Dogology.
She turns all history o’er with sober face,
And laughs o’er comedy with equal grace,
To tragic scenes she seldom doth resort,
For like D. Burns such scenes are not her forte.
A politician now; she hates tautology,
And so for change, she feels thy bumps—phrenology.
She varies with the climate of her birth,
The most uncertain climate on the Earth.
She worships Franklin, in the evening star,
But frowns on Buonaparte the God of War,
Mourns o’er the Act which legalized divorce,
And cries with “ Dick, my kingdom for a horse,”
Speaks in all styles, her flights I can’t restrain,
Nor keep one metre through her lively strain ;
And if you wont indulge her wayward lyre,
Down with the cash, and throw it to the fire.
Sometimes she roams with good King Arthur’s bowman,
But most of all she pays her court to woman,
And so I hope the public will excuse me,
Nor for my casual wandering refuse me,


1 have a precedent tho’ not a new one,
The best abused but most admired Don Juan,
If they forgive, I promise in my next
To take this worthy Hero for my text,
Exposing Cant which breathes but of mortality,
In short the man without his immorality.
When first I caught her, in Apollo’s Isle,
I tried in vain to make the goddess smile,
Wild as an Arab in the desert snaffled,
She bounded, shrieked, and all my efforts baffled,
She flew like madness, seated on the wind.
And left all dull competitors behind ;
I tried the curb, till passion fired her veins,
She galloped stronger as I pulled the reins,
I tried the snaffle, coaxed her ’twould not do,
A meteor streamed as faster on she flew •
I twined my arms around her swan-like neck,
And pressed them close, as sand banks to a wreck;
Casting the fetters off, away she went,
Earth had not space, to see her spirits spent,
I tried to kiss, she turned her head aside
As to a Bridegroom turns a modest Bride,
And glanced so wildly on my troubled brain,
I felt an extacy,half joy, half pain.
I touched her lips, she loved me from that hour,
And now’s to me, what fragrance’s to the flower.
Which proves to conquer, kindness hath the power.
E. KEMP.


INTRODUCTION.
Since the foregoing was written, (in fact the work was
finished two months ago, but owing to unavoidable delays,
I was unable to get it through the press) news of Sir
Eardley Wilmot’s recall (thank God) have arrived. It
tends to prove the justness of my remarks, and so far
from deterring me from giving them to the public as
some of my friends, wish it to do, has only confirmed
me more strongly in my intention of printing. “ The
good deeds that men do often die with them; their evil
ones live long after them.” Are the by-gone tyrants, and
debauchees of antiquity, not to be mentioned in the page
of history, nor the verse of satire, because they have
ceased to persecute their fellow-creatures ? Is it cowardly
to stigmatize such men T Are the memories of Nero and
Verres to be held sacred, because one was a human
butcher, and the other an unprincipled extortioner. I
thought that injured innocence was a legitimate object
for compassion, and unexampled treachery and im-
morality, of condemnation.
Mr. S. Blackwells, Royal Oak, Cross Marsh,
October 23, 1846.




A
VOICE FROM TASMANIA.
Crime clothed in greatness, holds a wond’rous claim
On the world’s tenderness; ’tis few will dare
To call foul conduct by its proper name,
When it can prowl and prey in golden lair.—
Eliza Cook.
An honest man’s the noblest work of God.—.
Pope.
Isle of the South, destined for many a year.
To be the granary of the Southern sphere ;
Destined by situation, and by soil,
To cheer with golden crop the Sons of toil.
So formed by Nature, blessed by climate too,
Thy peaceful waters, and thy mountains blue,
To yield a race, at no far distant time,
Bold as thy hills, and temperate as thy clime.
B


Oh ! may the breath of devastating war
Ne’er visit thee—the South Seas’ loveliest shore ;
Nor make thee in the future, an Algiers,
A scene of sorrow, dew’d with blood and tears ;
Nor make thee, as the Sainted Emerald Isle,
Oppression’s home, where joy has ceased to smile.
The narrow Straits, arm of the abyss,
Should they not promise hopes of future bliss ?
Not wedlock them, in free trade’s liberal train
As Sister Members, mother’d by the main 1
Port Phillip for its pasturage and vines ;
Australia for variety of mines;
Sydney for its haven, smiling on the main;
And this for timber, pretty girls, and grain.
’Ere Freedom’s flags, a century unfurl’d
Thoul’t be to them, what Albion’s to the world.
Here, may the God of peace his stay prolong
And make his home, our fertile fields among,
Here, in the future Isle, of wild romance and song.
Who, that hath voyaged on thy Northern stream
Could deem that Eden was an idle dream.
Eyes that delighted, saw thy ripples shine,
I grieve to say, have never seen the Rhine,
But since, have sparkled to the welcome voice.
Which gave in point of beauty thee—the choice.
In length, nor breadth, not even in a dream
Couldst thou aspire to rival that fine stream.


Which wandering flows, majestical along,
Through countries hallowed by immortal song,
Through Switzerland, whose scenery is, 1 ween,
Not much unlike a wild Tasmanian scene.
The test of. centuries o’er thee yet must sweep,
And their reflections in thy waters sleep,
Which, wooded to the brink, the gnarl’d roots lave,
’Ere poesy perpetuates thy wave.
Tamar, when first I wanton’d o'er thy wave,
My thoughts were wild, my soul did vainly crave,
To quit its fleshly covering, and be
Absorbed in thy enchanting scenery ;
To blossom in the tree, —look from the mountain, —
Ripple in the river,—murmur in the fountain, —
Frown from the rock, —smile from out the flower, —
And be the Wood Nymph in her lonely bower.
There landscape painters would have lov’d to trace
The scenes of beauty fresh from Nature’s face ;
There balmy Spring blushed forth in sunny day,
And birds were carolling from every spray ;
The trees were all in blossom, and the skiffs
Spread proud their wings beneath the beetling cliffs.
On either hand the fields of plenty shine,
And all proclaims beatitude divine.
The rosy peach bloom and the wattle’s hue,
In intertwining clusters lured the view.
b 2


Ben Lomond’s snow—-sunlit—tower’d o’er the hills,
And sheep, and kine, were drinking from the rills.
The pretty village, cradled in the bay.
The old windmill, then tottering to decay,
(Many a weed this crumbling structure grew in,
Which gave an interest to the simple ruin.)
The wood-embower’d dwellings lent a charm,
Unto the poor man’s well-appointed farm;
Children were playing ’neath the blossoming trees,
Whose branches waved before the fresh sea breeze,
Clad in the healthful glow of ruddy infancy,
The fairest flowers of all that fragrancy.
In this deep contemplation of the wild
We lose sight of the past, and wish to be a child.
The picturesque—the sternly savage were,
In contrast placed so beautifully there,
That he, who heedlessly pass’d by and talk’d
Of life’s dull cares, as on the deck he walk’d,
The smallest life that ocean’s depths doth swim
Must be a God in soul compared to him.
The thoughts of home—the forest chieftain’s cave,
He who was nobly, generously brave,
Who sacrificed a few short hours of breath,
To send a traitor to the shades of death,
Recall’d me back to scenes of vanished joy,
When innocence danced o’er the sward, a boy.


Slowly the vessel worked her way along,
When some sweet voice hymn’d forth this plaintive song—
The wattles o’er the mountains glow,
Whose leaves the winter decks in snow,
And now they break the cheerless gloom
In one wide canopy of bloom.
The Bronzewing’s coo, when first the sun,
With amber color, streaks the sky,
The love that in their nest begun
Will faithful last until they die.
The Kangaroo bounds swiftly by
To seek the vales where fern-trees grow,
His large dark eyes, so meekly shy,
With more than virgin softness glow.
The spirit of creation smiles,
In this, the favorite of her Isles,
The sun above, the flowers below,
Possess the only charm for woe.
Woe that’s so settled and so deep,
My kindred deem not notice worth,
The tribes of man, at distance keep,
As though God marked me from my birth.


Oh ! question not, my source of tears,
The gloom that ill becomes my years,
Tis many a hapless maiden’s fate,
The flower of love whose fruit is hate.
The eyes which sweetly smiled on me,
Now pass me by with aspect cold ;
And buds, which gemm’d the parent tree,
Their leaves of bitterness unfold.
Companions, with whom I play’d
In childhood’s artlessness array’d,
Approach me now, with falsehood’s breath ;
Their flattery is worse than death.
An exile in my native land,
A stranger wheresoe’er I flee,
Forsook so long, by friendship’s band.
That friends and foes are one to me.
Oh ! God, Oh 1 my Father, how long,
Shall the heart of the maid bleed in song
And the love which to man is sincere,
Be the fountain of many a tear.
All my error was loving too well,
For the magic of love hath a spell,
It comes like the morn thro’ the bower,
Giving fresh life to every flower.


Is there no kind redeemer for her,
Who in life’s early morning doth err ?
Must the flower that once droops its head,
Be flung in the grave with the dead ?
But since I am destin’d by fate
To reflect on my past life with hate,
Take the soul that I now offer thee
’Ere away to the mountains I flee.
The breeze springs up and every heart is gay,
As round the vessel’s prow the waters play
In eddying wreaths, which sparkle as they plash;
No sickness up above, nor ocean’s dash
To make the landsman seek his berth below,
Nor cure his nausea in the goblet’s flow.
But standing on the deck in healthful plight,
He views the scene with unperturbed delight,
The sunny sky extends its balm within
The heart
A Sunday influence dwelleth in the breast,
As though that day were sinking in the west.
When lo ! the Town of Launceston appears,
A grove of houses sheltered by the tiers,
The anchor rumbling drops, and many a hand
Conveys you quickly to the verdant land.
But scarcely have you sprang upon the shore,
When you are destined to rejoice no more.


The main street’s axle deep, at every stride
You vent an oath, and in your Saint confide,
And up and down you go, a billowy motion,
Just like an old tub on an angry ocean.
But even this hath charms—to wish in
Sir Eardley Wilmot makes you feel quite well.
When you find an inn—here are splendid inns,
And the bright wood fire sparkling away begins
To warm you with its grateful cheerful ray,
You feel like Spring just blushing into day ;
You take your dinner, tea, or what you like,
And read the news, until the clock may strike
Ten, (sober hour) then off to bed you go
With a gay heart at peace with all below.
I’m very fond of inns—there you’re at home
And independent (if you wish to roam,
Sauntering about the fields, light a cigar,
So Johnson saith to those who restless are).
Besides you hear men gossips who command all;
True politicians these, though fond of scandal.
To serve their country these noble fellows
They leave their families to—blow the bellows.
I’m fond of horses, dogs, and balls, and plays;
And, sometimes, not averse to lacing stays.
I’m fond of ocean, when the foggy sky’s off;
And pretty girls, if they’ll but keep their eyes off.


I’m fond of Champagne, when it sparkles well.
But who can drink that tasteless stuff Moselle ?
I’m fond of brandy when the duty’s off,
Rum’s the best physic for a churchyard cough.
Beer’s not bad, to a complexion ruddy,
But then it makes your ideas very muddy.
I’m fond of these, tho’ some may deem it worldly,
I’m fonder far, than all, of Eardley Eardley.
Let those who dwell within the town’s turmoil.
Whose hearts delight not in their native soil,
Who never felt the fragrant breathing Spring
Around their steps celestial odours fling ;
Who never heard the magpie’s magic tale
Give life to death, and music to the vale;
Nor from the mountains saw the moon at niidit
O
Pour o’er the hills a flood of silver light;
Who never heard the Bronzewing’s lovelorn coo,
When Summer’s sun to twilight sighs adieu ;
Shading itself where wattles fringe a stream,
As picturesque as any Eastern dream.
Let those condemn my verse, imbibe their beer.
And deem the luxury Elysian cheer ;
Admire the maid whose languid sickly air.
Proclaims Aurora never visits her,
Whose pallid cheeks, from sitting late at night,
Require the rouge to make their aspect bright;
A VOICE FROM TASMANIA.


To whom the arts of trickery and dress
Fail to bestow one ray of loveliness.
Give me the mountain streams, the artless girl
Whose glossy ringlets, naturally curl,
Whose cheeks rich bloom, whose lips carnation hue
Exact that homage, which to woman’s due,
Who tortures not her waist, to grace her dress,
Herself the grace, which countless Loves caress;
Whose intellectual eyes, which check desire,
Far from the boorish gaze of man retire;
Reflecting wide the glories of a mind
Guilt ne’er contaminates, nor flatteries blind.
My native land, Oh ! how my spirit yearns,
And for thy future fame sincerely mourns.
A few fleet years have scarcely glided by,
Since first I viewed thee with a poet’s eye ;
But since those years have fled, Tasmania seems
No more the country of a thousand dreams.
Cold—cold reality, her shade hath spread,
And veileth joys that live but with the dead.
When shall her palmy days return again ?
And her sons’ lips, nor murmur, nor complain.
When he departs who fixed the plague spot here,
With him it spreads, with him ’twill disappear ;
He who professed to be the people’s friend,
And Judas-like betrayed them in the end.


Whose letter ’s an epitome of lies,
Known for its reckless breach of human ties.
Who spareth vice, and virtue would defame,
Completely lost to every sense of shame.
A pictured harem hangs around his bed.
Ideally smiling o’er the lecher’s head.
I recommend a winter at the lakes,
A cooling climate for imbecile rakes ;
No doubt he’d add to many a J. P’s salary
If he’d admit his lady to his gallery ;
An M. C’s seat in council we may trace,
Unto a lady’s very pretty face.
But could you not, you withered old man, see
That such in you is but buffoonery.
If you have no respect for your own mother.
Pray do respect the feelings of another.
There’s penny prints in shops your taste will please,
For your taste savours not of high degrees.
Then take them down, reform if thou would’st rule,
Grey hairs can not exonerate a fool.
Why walk about with Murray arm in arm ?
Because his convict friendship hath a charm.
A light which sheds around in penal rays
A phosphoresence of its Newgate days.
Look to the crimes you’ve passed in silence by,
Crimes which aloud for retribution cry.
A worthy patron of the Midland Show,
They blackball’d you for lying, oh ! oh! oh !


None can support you, save a certain clique
Whose daily bread depends on what they speak.
As for these tilings, who on our revenues prey
Who cares for what they think ? or what they say ?
“ Spectator,” justly prized for prose insane,
For polysyllables, and verse inane,
Paid by Sir Eardley to defend his cause,
To pervert justice, and subvert the laws;
Of virtuous birth—Probation ism’s heir—
Weil might the “ Times ” bring forth a child so fair,
Whose far-fetched words of harsh discordant sound,
Are to tlie sense as farthings to the pound.
Compassion’s anodyne, is Eardley’s due
'When he’s obliged to hire such scribes as you.
Thy sire’s a trump, where is such courage found,
lie call’d his foe out—fir’d, and shot the ground.
“ God bless you, Tom ; God damn that scoundrel, Jack ;
“ God bless you, John ; now Tom has turned his back,
“You are the King of Earth’s most princely fellows,
“ What scoundrel Tom said, do my good boy tell us.”
Murray thus lauds and damns you to save time,
(Like Kentish gilding prose with senseless rhyme)
This world’s enjoyments then he wishes you,
And clucks his blessings as he smiles adieu.
God bless you, Lathrop, here’s a health to thee,
For when God blesses you, he’ll think of me.


To do you justice here my muse desires—
You are the prince of most accomplished liars.
To prove there’s no crime here, you select samples
Of British guilt, congenial examples ;
All that the public see, in reading these, '
Is crime—is crime, at the antipodes.
Your paper is a mirror of your mind,
Thro’ which we search in vain the truth to find ;
You praise one as you open with a laugh.
Abuse concludes the worthy paragraph.
The modest Kentish, who “ don’t write for fame,”
Whose always dull—tho’ rabid—still he’s tame,
Candidly tells us that his friends “ afford
To laugh at letters which himself ador’d,”
Acquaints the public that it is “ his crime
To torture prose into unmeaning rhyme.”
How fare your twins ? does this your mind distress ?
I hope they won’t come still-born from the press,
Or otherwise you couldn’t with justice say
“Go hang yourselves—l know you will—away.”
Unfortunate in verses, as in “ Charts,”
The muse indignant from his presence starts,
And leaves the dark and uncongenial sphere,
For other regions to her soul more dear,
Where Fancy soars upon her rainbow wing,
And Nature smiles in everlasting Spring ;


Rebuking Kentish, as she speeds along,
With two short lines from Satire’s keenest song—
“ Such damning fame as Dunciads only give,
Could bid your lines beyond a morning live.”
I write for fun, that men, not Gods, may read,
My pen shall scribble, if my rhymes succeed
To pay some friends, unto a large amount,
To whom I owe a pretty long account,
And if the public pleased bestow their praise,
And round my temples, twine the proffer’d bays,
I'll thank them largely on my own behalf
And gravely bowing, homeward wend to—laugh.
I thank you Kentish—thank you from my soul,
And pledge you freely, in the sparkling bowl,
For since you’ve kindly deign’d, my lines to scan,
The public hail me, as a popular man.
My Pegasus, they tell me, is a prancer,
To which you vainly work, to send an answer,
You own “ you could not to my verse reply,”
Then why, in God’s name, such an effort try.
“You heed me not,” the lines you try to write,
To thousands demonstrate how mine excite.
Too true, dear Kentish, you’ll ne'er “ drag ” a name
Unto the glory of transcendant fame.
Explain, dear Kentish, maddest of your race,
How you can “draw” me to “ self-sought disgrace.”


The nearest high-road I perceive unto it,
Is studying you, sir, as my model poet.
“Oh ! shameless dunce.” Oh! what a pretty line
To grace the altars of the sacred Nine.
His sheet abounds with expletive attacks,
With soaring “ rumpus,” and descending “ thwacks.”
“Oh ! shameless dunce ! ” Hear him my charming fair,
And, if you can, let him your favors share.
Oh ! for the days of Juvenal and Martial,
To hold a court, the army terms court-martial,
On this usurper on the realms of rhyme,
On this intruder on the public’s time ;
Whose verse is only doggrel at the best—
Whose prose, who reads it, reads it to detest.
A brilliant writer for a magazine,
A fitter inmate for some low canteen,
Where he might spout his doggrel—laud his charts—
To men unskilled to criticise the arts.
Where Giles would say, “ why measter thou bangs all,”
And Scroggins rank thee with his plough horse Ball,
And, gradually reeling to his native sod,
Would hiccup’s a rum un—hiccup—by God.
Adieu, dear Kentish, deem me not unkind,
The more I read you the more faults I find.


Adieu, dear Kentish, hear my fond farewell,
Let no one read you, if you wish to sell.
E’en those who tolerate poor Dibdin’s strain,
Who read you once, will never read again.
But ’ere again in rhyme you fain would stammer,
I would advise you to peruse your grammar.
Poetic trifles—trifling to the end—
Prove plainly Knox is not the Muse’s friend ;
Conspicuously great in every line,
Excels in all things save the art to shine.
•“ Sweetly sings the breeze of mirth.”—Ye Gods,
He next will say the river Derwent nods.
Love a runaway,”—a bushranger you mean ;
I thought that love was charming sweet sixteen,
I see it now—’tis no poetic whim,
She certainly is “ a runaway ” from him.
“ A dream—a dream of thee—l wake to weep.”
I wish to God your “ dream ” would go to sleep.
Such stuff would make Job swear ; Knox to the shelf,
And keep your “ dreams ” and “ weeping ” to yourself,
(For when a poet now a-days would cry,
He claps an onion on his favorite eye.)
He boldly soars not on the eagle’s wing,
Kor gracefully doth sonnetise the Spring.
But blundering onward, to the last sad letter
Keeps singing songs, “ so middling, bad were better.”


Oh ! Burns, not Robert, Scotia’s noblest bard.
Whom from my earliest youth I studied hard,
Nor deem’d it study, for it was a joy,
A pleasure to me, even from a boy ;
How well, I recollect the Cotter’s night
Which I repeated with a wild delight,
And Goldsmith’s poem, which ne’er fails to please,
“ Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease.”
These I oft dwelt on, till I grew quite sad,
And all my playmates round pronounced me mad—
Then I withdrew from out the social throng,
To muse in silence o’er the poet’s song;
And gaze upon Mount Wellington, with eyes
Which searched in vain to view their own bright skies ;
And thoughtful, leant o’er Lander’s tea-tree fence,
Where various flowers regaled my raptured sense.
Lander once famed for fowls he bred to feel,
Nor flinch the beak, nor cruel piercing steeL
Oh ! David, not Israel’s King of yore.
Whose holy melodies the world adore—
Whose Psalms deep penitence, to us were given.
To lead the sinner to the gates of Heaven.
The stream of music, gushing from his heart,
Disdained the modem subterfuge of art ;
From Zion’s mount, enchanting all the air.
Whilst every note proclaimed a God was there.
But he whose muse hoists up a streaming pennant.
Who wrote the comic tragedy “ Our First Lieutenant/”
c


Oil! David, may thy muse her foolscap keep—
My voice shall not awake her peaceful sleep.
The Council Chamber next, invites my muse—
They ’re all so had, I scarce know which to choose—
From an official, to an extermed one—
From twaddling Bicheno, to “pious Dunn.”
How well the prophecy to Dunn pertains,
A councillor in all, except the brains.
True charity ne’er yet relax’d his grasp,
He soothes his victims with an usurer’s rasp.
Service divine, he’s punctual to on Sunday;
Service profane, upon the following Monday.
His Pecksniff smiles for me, may ever rest ;
His honest heart, let Walter Cheine attest.
Gently my muse. I’ll have no more of this,
Bestow your devoirs on some clever miss,
Who can return your running fire of spleen,
And ridicule you with a weapon keen.
Wilmot, impregnable to aught beside,
Winced, when Ithuriel touched his tender side ;
And Punch occasioned from his comic steeple,
A challenge to the Father of the people.
The colony don’t prosper, sir, for why ?
Because the duty on our wheat’s too high.
The colony is ruined, sir; n’import.
Sir Eardley Wilmot is our best export.
’Tis strange, in England he detested one,


Who’s now his friend; of course, I mean a “ Dunn.”
Dunn, who in my presence, sir, told his waiter
To hand Lieutenant HuguNiNE a tater.
Steady, my muse, you ’re worse, I do declare,
Than Mrs. Caudle, chirping every where.
So ho, my muse, ’tis twelve let’s go to bed,
Ere yet the cock’s crow echoes o’er your head;
Depart from this, attempt a chaster style ;
Pursue such game no more, they ’re far too vile :
But, ere you sleep, I’d have you this remember.
That young John Dunn’s a Punch and Judy member.
See you now, speaking with a churchyard face,
A youth, possessing anything but grace,
The northern Cormorant in regal land,
A trusty friend to shake a settler’s hand.
He first commits acts worthy of his groom,
And then insults us in the Council-room.
For which he’s competent, I ’ll say not why.
About as well, my girl, as you or I
To be a bishop; or, to save suspense,
A miser chuckling o’er his sordid pence.
And shall I live, and he remain unknown
No, you must first from this warm heart have flown.
Which, ever since I read of “ Robespierre,”
Has loved distractedly the flirting fair,
b 2


Will Allison, the genius of the age,
Informs the table, with a look quite sage,
That dogs, by nature, never bring forth pups ;
That ewes are females, and that rams are tups.
Discussing subjects, worthy of renown,
Where duller comprehensions would break down.
Then Orr, courageous, riseth with a frown,
Politely hinting that he’s been “ done brown,”
Opposing acts of which he never dreamt ,
And, arguing wildly, gets mankind’s contempt,
Oh! Alexander Orr, your steps retrace,
And quit the theatre of your disgrace.
But, if you’ll not for this, my presence shun,
I’ll back you any M. C. there to run,
Oh! Alexander Orr, for God’s sake Orr,
The Council quit, and break the peace no more.
Oh ! how I laugh when you address the table,
And think of iEsop and his croaking fable.
What grumbling noise is that distracts the ear ?
’Tis Driscoll begging to be noticed here.
With pleasure, Driscoll; if you ’ll only pay
Me handsomely, I’ll praise you in my lay;
And hold my tongue, about the score per cent
And many other things, Apollo’s sent
To make a most delicious dish of rhyme,
Which gourmand bards consider food sublime-


Twenty per cent—’tis calumny—how could you :
Thirty’s the rate—let’s give the devil his due.
Meantime, to see how you receive my offer,
I bow complaisantly unto your coffer.
To kind old Bicheno I next resort,
And for variety his speech report ;
Rolling his eyes his corporation shakes,
And as he nods he thus jocosely speaks ;
“ The Independent Six a noise create,
And vainly think that they can “ con-sti-pate.”
The taxes are all moonshine, you’d complain,
If in a drought a hot wind brought you rain ;
I feel them not —for my part I can’t see
How we are tax’d to an extremity.
I drink no rum—l don’t resemble Mayo
Who kill’d his comrade for a smoke of ’baccp.
I advocate no imposts—’pon my soul
Tis not a tax I want, ’tis but a toll,
(A queer distinction humourous and droll);
E’en if press’d down, the settler’s should not lie
Like dogs in ditches lazily to die.”
(Hear, hear, from Fenton—Gregson laugh’d aloud,
But O’Boyle’s—Silence—hush’d the vulgar crowd).
“A hen and chickens are the similies,
For our kind mother and her colonies :
The mother lays the egg—which then she hatches,
Forster’s its growth, and for its food she scratches,


Humph ! bur! (I’m so oppress’d with this curs’d cough,)
And when she cannot keep, she beats it off
When it can peck and scratch and run alone,
And pick up grubs,—where there existeth none ;
For fear the bird should prematurely die,
She leaves the chick without a quill to fly.”
Three cheers for Bicheno who drinks no rum,
While nonsence is to speak who ne’er is dumb.
Three cheers for him who no Tobacco smokes.
And in the Council cracks his heavy jokes.
And who is that, who seldom speaks a word,
As if he were ashamed of being heard;
I hear he’s got the alphabet by rote,
Intending soon to treat us to a “ wote.”
Who when old Bicheno spouting caught his eye,
Clapping his hands, roar’d that is the cove for I;
Who stares so stupidly—is he awake ?
He looks scarce fast enough to be a rake ;
That, sir, ’s a nob, nicknamed Indenture Ned,
Before whose genius all our Council fled.
Faintly whispering, you can’t hear him speak ;
’Tis useless list’ning to the painter Leake;
He whines on toll-gates till you feel you ’re bored,
Note.— *Vide “Advertiser,” 12th August, 1845. Mr. Bicheco’s speech
,i Council.


And daubs with black the ground-work of the board ;
On which, in dirty white, he paints each letter,
Because, forsooth, he thinks ’twill “ stick ” there better.
This is the stuff we ’re now compelled to hear ;
This is the man you’d have me what ?—revere.
Why, by the Virgin Mary, I can bring
A better councillor from out the ring.
And, if we are insulted any more
By this preposterous parody on law,
My ire will rise. Councillors, stand clear,
For I’m the owner of Ithuriel’s spear.
My grandam’s ghost, if she’d but slower speak.
Would make a better orator than Leake.
Baron von Giblets, alias Baron von,
Of all the councillors most degenerate one ;
Like Charles the last whom history says was handsome.
Within the Royal Oak you found your ransom.
Sir Eardley Wilmot—Mrs. Giblets—sir—
Enough to make my grand aunt’s tom cat purr.
Had one still vended grog and graced the bar,
Nor Candied you into a councillor.
And you still held the plough to say no worse,
Neither had been conspicuous in my verse.
Last, but not least, O’Connor is in time
To be admitted to the pantomime ;
The puppet show; the council of advice :


Where entree tickets are beyond all price ;
Where you must cringe, and bow, and fawn, and whine,
Or be insulted, and at once resign
Your seat. Sir Eardley loves a loyal tool;
Vote as he votes, or be expelled from school.
When His Excellency fain would pass an act,
Opposed to sense in each essential fact,
Remain at home, indisposition sham,
Betray the cause, whilst you your pockets cram
With pilfered treasury coins; but mind, beware,
The public don’t detect you pilfering there,
Or, if it suits, pretend your bed to keep,
Consult your interest in washing sheep.
Whilst you are teeming out the rosy drams,
Bicheno’s bellowing “ Were they Lambs or Rams ?”
No so with Gregson, in the patriot fight,
He nobly struggled for the people’s right ;
Integrity found welcome in his breast;
His bright ideas, with more than vigor drest ,•
His rapid eloquence ; Athenian’s fire ;
The crowd assembled, linger’d to admire ;
The crowd that linger’d, by the self-same rule,
Now linger there for what I —to ridicule.
How cries my friend from Cambridge—classic ground,
Who’s travell’d idly Earth’s chief empires round,
How can you judge ?—you, who have scarcely trod


Beyond the precincts of your native sod.
By the same rule, the Romans did of old,
When Curtius saved what Catalina sold.
By reading Curran, Sheridan, and Pitt ;
The first’s rich eloquence; the second’s wit;
The third’s terse style, who always bravely spoke
Against oppression’s various moulded yoke,
(Oh ! when his thoughts indignantly did blaze
How coward despots crouched before his gaze.)
By the fond mark a grateful populace gave
To him who spurned the trammels of a slave;
But most of all, by that which doth outlive
The mortal frame, which study cannot give.
Discrimination, which selects at once
The man of genius, from the learned dunce.
Ne’er yet forgotten, well remember’d Dry
Whom all admire, nor question me for why,
I raise my feeble voice, and bless the hour
Which gave you to us.
When all of me, shall with my fathers mix,
You shall survive, —the patriotic six
Are chronicled, in every good man’s mind
As honourable examples to their kind.
Bad is the man, who’d willingly offend
His country’s honour, and the poor man’s friend—
But if I may suggest a noble aim
To one esteemed, by eveiy class the same


’Twould be to roam, the Southern Islands thro’
And make in each a book portentous view,
And represent us, thro’ the giant press
Where none in vain seek patiently redress—
And scare the mists of ignorance away
Which cloud, the promise of a brighter day.
Are there not errors happening every hour
Which on our heads, perpetual evils shower?
Then go forth Dry, and not to us, alone
Thy name—thy virtues—and thy fame, be known.
Let Europe’s wide extended regions view,
A benefactor of the world, in you —
The Launcestonians, bless’d you with their voice
Then would their hearts, leap joyful at their choice—
Set that example, which in future years—
The calm historian, sacredly reveres.
Enlist your voice, against your country’s foes
And sing the story of her joys and woes,
That those who claim with thee, a kindred birth
May bless the Saviour, of their common earth ;
And generations, yet unborn, may say
His was the sun that set in glorious day.
Thanks to Maclachlan, Pitcairn let us thank,
And with our blessings, noble Ewart rank— '
Thanks to Earl Grey send—Oxford’s Bishop too
Long life to Hutt, who joined the patriot few,
No thanks to Stanley,—Oxford misconstrues,


His clever speech, if I read right the news,
Allowing that the testy Lord meant well,
He’d make this lovely Isle a frightful hell.
Hail patriot chiefs! an independent band.
Your fame has reached a native of the land,
Join heart, and hand, and advocate our cause,
We only ask, our famed forefather’s laws—
Relieve us from the transportation curse,
Whose very name’s pollution to my verse.
Send out your paupers, here they shall have bread—
Ere justice dooms them, thro’ the court to tread,
For poverty, main origin of crime.
Ordains that they should sin, and leave their clime:
Then why not send them free—retrieve expense—
’Twould be a charity, and save the pence.
I ask no fame, no plaudits for my dream,
Since knowledge flies upon the wings of steam,
Since modern steam-boats rapidly arrive
With gems of literature from every hive ;
But still I own not mine has been the power,
For fortune smiled not on my natal hour.
To profit by the works we deem divine,
Although the wish to view them still is mine;
To be in England that my feet may tread
The very ground where sleep the mighty dead;
To pace the aisles of Westminster around.
Where softly echoes the sepulchral sound


Of melancholy footsteps. I revere
These sacred scenes, unto my heart long dear ;
And ever feel, when gazing on a tomb,
A spirit-breathing influence, tempering gloom.
I’d like to speed along the foaming sea,
And every sight that England boasts to see;
To visit Co vent Garden, Drury Lane,
And see the Nymphs and Fairies they contain;
To see the actors act, where once stood Kean,
And Siddons moved of tragedy the queen ■
To be companion’d with the learned great,
And be, what I shall never he, the pet of fate.
These, tho’ my grosser being cannot share.
My immaterial ever hovers there ;
And, like the bee abroad among the bowers,
Culleth its honey from the choicest flowers.
For that, I claim my gentle reader’s patience,
For this, I bow, and offer my obeisance.
And as, like Kentish, “ I don’t write for feme,”
Nor court the glory of a deathless name ;
(I prophecy’t will live as long, nor start ye
The colonial patriarch Macarthy),
I’ll be content to please the few awhile
Who give me “ Friendship’s Offering ” a smile.
If fond companions of my early days
Perceive the moral that pervades my lays ;


If Paramatta King School boys (at taw
A more proficient class the world ne’er saw)
Chance to acknowledge any true trait here
Of him, whose “ friends departed ” claim a tear;
Of him who joyed to see Tom Bloomfield fleet
O’er fence, and ditch with Melton Mowbray seat.
If Melboumites exclaim, with unfeigned bliss,
Who would have thougnt that he would come to this ?
Our quondam crony at the Royal Inn,
Who drank so copiously of Cowell’s gin,
And spoke, when pouring down the steaming grogs.
Of nought but racing and his greyhound dogs.
An author, you be d , my eyes, we’ll next
Have parsons censuring scripture, curse their text.
If these few friends with joy my page peruse,
What feelings warm will cheer the grateful muse;
And modest girls my artless strains admire,
’Tis all her truant son could most desire.
“ Misfortune’s son—young wayward fancy’s child—
“My words are lava, and my soul’s as wild
“ As mountain torrents, dashing from the steep,
“ Rude ’tween the banks where beds of violets sleep—
“My heart’s an iEtna, and my blood’s a flame—
“ Quenchless, alas! that it should be my shame—
“ I love the landscape, where the heart grows warm,
“ To gaze on nature’s far divinest form,
“ I love the melody of woman’s voice.


“ And, from my soul, aloud to heaven rejoice-,
“ How wonderful is beauty—e’en the flower
“ That paints the earth, exhales its magic power,,
“ And turns the weary pilgrim from his road
“ To hail its fragrance as the breath of God.
“ Alas! for magie beauty—it’s the power
“ To extract a honey from the humblest flower;
“ That honey’s love, when in the human breast
“ It feeds the worst of passions and the best;
“ I’ve gazed upon its features, till my heart
“ Became of thought the only conscious part;
“ And watch’d its dovelike, love-inspiring eye,
“ Until arose the involuntary sigh—
“ To know that it would perish, and the dust
“ Be all of life, the voice, the eye, the bust,
“ That fascinated, as it moved along—
“ The painter’s model and the poet’s song.
Founder of the College, Nixon, shall I close
This thing of rhyme, upon my self-sought foes—
Self-sought, no, never, when conceit invites
The pen of censure, blame not him who writes—
Without one line of humble praise to thee.
Thou worthy teacher of divinity,
Whose every word is eloquence itself—
Whose thoughts abroad return to aught but self—
Return unto the book, inspired divine,
Where virtue kneels before her sacred shrine—


The scripture’s oracle—the pulpit’s light,
The orphan’s friend, —and auditor’s delight.
Long may you lire to preach, and bless the land,
Which most requires the pastor’s fostering hand ;
Swift be your voyage o’er the buoyant main,,
Then you may soon adorn your throne again.
Now that the embryo College’s in my verse,'
To great Kermode, ray muse is not averse ;
And Captain Neilly, whose high-water mark ;
And “ Native Youth,” and W. J. T. Clarke :
These, and many others, claim my praise;
They lend an interest to the poets’ lays ;
They live in memory, when the poet’s dust
And time has sepulchred his fombless bust,
But where is Dunn—go seek him at the bank.
And if he Jews you not, your fortune thank.
Didst ever see to mammon such a slave 1
The sleek-skinn’d, two-faced, fawning, soulless knave;
Meet subject for the surgeon’s searching knife—
The co rps that’s galvanised to mock the life.
Immaculate Lawyer —not the scriptural one.
But he who is the satellite of
A source of wealth to a Colonial Bank,
And you for many a pound have it to thank ;■
Many an honest man you’ve bled you know.
When bills dishonour’d from your office flowy


E’en when the money’s lodged to meet the bill.
The costs are tack’d on with consummate skill;
And if the victim ’gainst your arts retort,
You untold Coke and threaten him with Court;
Of all that is dishonest you’re the bane,
I feel myself compell’d to say with “ Pain,”
Your character’s in every body’s mouth,
From the cold North unto the genial South;;
Think not I’m unprepared my words to prove,
I’ve friends who ought your very name to love;
I will if once the indictment’s roll’s unfurl’d.
Expose your upright conduct to the world.
Hail! glorious sample of the human race,
Wilmot, whose acts the sense of man disgrace.
In prose, in verse, in* Punch’s history too—
All kinds of literature have honor’d you.
What cordial farewells, as your ship departs.
Will flow from all the loyal settler’s hearts.
The regiment’s order’d out—the men in tiers
Their arms present high, as your presence nears ;
The Battery point now gliters with its bright
Cannons arranged in form, from left to right.
And all in bustle; scarfs are waived on high;
The breeze blows fairly, and the waves roll high.
When lo ! the ship’s enveloped in a cloud
From our delighted eyes yourself to shroud ;
Instead of thundering far the gay salute.


The cannon’s factious, and the powder mute—
’Merging itself in mist, for evermore
To veil the pestilence from Tasman’s shore—
Illustrious man, the settlers honor thee—
And hang your effigy on every tree,-
And not content with jibbetting your name,
Write ’neath the loathsome image—Eardley’s fame.
This is the age of Dbg Acts, and of Toll Gates,
I wish, Sir Eardley, you may get the rates.
A dog dare n’t howl unto the moon a Sonnet,
For fear some constable should pounce upon it,
I hope the maniac Act may pass the dome,
For then poor Kentish may obtain a home,
’Tis well, my dears, its stuffing is a puzzle.
Or else his gallantry would tax the bustle ;
And many a heart would sigh the loss to find
Of half your poetry—a false behind.
This is the age of Road Acts—a Street Act
Our sapient Councillors should first enact ■
But doubtless this would meet with their displeasure.
And Townites would protest against the measure—
With why should saucy settlers not repair
The streets, —they use up more than half their share—
To tax our energies they have the will—
They introduced the “ differential bill.”
D


To prove the state of our rich revenue
We have an Inn, to every eighty-two
Persons—which if we grumble at ’tis sure
Says Wilmot, give it time, to work its cure
Wholly indifferent, in the mean time yet, sirs,
As to the interests of the free born settlers—
Sir Eardley vilifies us with impunity—
And tells Lord Stanley, we’re a bad community.
And then by way of downright contradiction,
Declares Probation morals not a fiction,
Tho’ we have 30,000, past conviction—
Who “ toil not neither do they spin” but eat.
No thanks to him, some of the Settlers’ wheat,
And many a pound of good Port Phillip meat.
Now as I’m in the humour, for grimace
I ought to give, the Belfast Duel place
Where Sprott and Campbell both, in glory figure
Tho’ neither pulled a gentlemanly trigger
All nature mourned ; on that disastrous day
The skies gave forth of sunshine scarce a ray —
Still was the scene, the wild birds’ notes were hush’d—
Tho’ many a brace of harmless Quail were flush’d—
The distance measur’d each one eyed his man
With all the caution, critics, poets, scan
And whisper’d low—the word was scarcely given,


One pistol snapp’d, the other peal’d to heaven
The jackass laugh’d, all sentient things besides,
And nature in convulsions split her sides
The death fraught bullet whistled thro’ the roar,
And Romeo fell, alas! to rise no more—
Tho’ fleet of foot, of Albion’s best turf-blood
A colt from out the Duke of Grafton’s stud
Australian winds with rude regardless gust
Now sweep afar, the fiery racers dust
Who now shall go, with Plenipo the pace
And test his bottom, in the lengthy race
Who stride so quickly, as he sped along
Recherche, subject for a Nimrod’s song
Whom Landseer, would have sketche’d with pencil boM
And many a copy from the portrait sold
Tho’ dead and gone—thy colours, and thy name,
And hard won stakes perpetuate thy fame
“ Arms that would shame, a Statuary’s collection—
“ Have clasped thy neck, in fond, yet proud affection
“ And girls to kiss thee, from their music ran
“ Would blush to give, that rapturous kiss to man
“ (Nor deem this masculine, ye moralists whose cold
“ Hearts, are unapproachable by aught but gold
“ Go to the Arab’s Tent, and there you’ll see
“ A living picture of what life should be
No power on Earth can make the Moslem part
*•* With her whosk Stable is his inmost heart
d 2


“ No miser’s longings, ever enter’d there
“ All Rothschild’s wealth were dross beside his mare—
“ His children’s pillow, and bis guard at night
“ His friend, when Alla leads him forth to fight
“ The only heritage, he gives his child
“ Except the wide expanse, of desert wild
“ The barren sand, whose boundary is the main
“ Where ardent Suns shed forth their beams in vain
“ And yet he smiles, when Palaced kings complain.)
Full many a groom has staked on thee his all,
And robbed his master to enrich thy stall,
Full many a jockey, heaped up Romeo’s rack
Nor envied kings, when once upon his back.
With flashing steel and whip to urge him on,
He walks the favourite, pf the Turf the Sun
Now see advancing, to the starting-post—
The brute we prize, and yet abuse the most—
“ His opening nostril —his large eye of fire
“ His thousand veins—the Lords of Sport admire
“ His glossy skin—free from the slightest stain
“ His sinewy members—and his silky mane—
“ And spirit bold, the finest thread might lead
“ Denote he sprang from pure Arabian breed—
“ The rider’s hands, in vain his spirits check
“ He spurns restraint, and stretches far his neck
“ His neck curvetting, like an anger’d snake
“He frets—he jumps—his heart is with the stake ;


The multitude throng to the ropes to see,
The judge, who sets the generous courser free
The stand is crammed to overflowing full—
Where Ladies’ lips, smile forth “ how beautiful/’
{ Vermillion lips, which show the pearls beneath
Whose owner twines the gold mimosa wreath
To crown the horse she next to flirting loves,
That is assuming that he wins her gloves.)
The rider ready with Ids eye aside.
Lists for the word that shall his fate decide,
The word has pass’d, away they bound in air
And leave Pedestrians anxious gazing there
He soon acquires his firm, yet easy seat,
And moveth not, tho’ deer move not more fleet—
Holding his horse, steady afar he goes—
Smooth as the stream, which on to ocean flows'—
With head stooped down, in creeping daiseying style—
He sneaks along, nor heeds the finish’d mile—
The whalebone singing thrd’ the Summer air—
Acquaints the race-horse, that the whip is there—
He gathers all bis strength, to win the heat
The pace improves, than lightning scarce less fleet
Now husbanding their speed, the jockeys’ ride
To give, and take, a head at every stride-*-
The leader’twere impossible to know
Whilst like a Swallow ©ter the turf they go—
The struggle comes, men rash unto the goal


As tho’ that crowd contained—one heart—one soul-r-
Here—here—they come exclaims a hunting Buck
Here—here—they come with Countess in the ruck—
Oh ! which is first ? lisps forth a ball-room star
The Grey is leading, echoes from afar
And every youth, now throws aside the weed
To view the racer at his tip-top speed—
The first flag pass’d at a tremendous pace—
“ By the Lord Harry,” ’tis a splendid race,
Two ponies to a pound, the Grey’s in first,
Adone with you—how are you Buckhurst ?
The Chesnut pushes just a nose a-head—
The Grey will win, I’ll stake my life, my head,
Harris now flogs, and Buckhurst turns his face
As Romeo wins the well-contested race.
Dismount the Steward cries; he springs elate,
Into the scales, and trembles till he’s weight,
Weight, cries the Steward, ali bis backers near
Awake the vallies with a deafening cheer.
But to return, to where I was before
Where Romeo breathed the breath of life no more,
Poor Romeo, thy master out of compliment
Erects, but not to thee, a marble monument,
Resolved posterity, shall view the spot
Where once Monomachy was graced by Sprot,
Which shall this line, to future times record,


Put by the pistols, and revive the sword ;
Their friends who stood aloof, and shook with fear,
In case the bullets, should assault their rear,
Thus after ending, as they both desired,
Bowed to the woods, and courteously retired.
Oh! for another Camelford to teach
These bloodless Duellists, the parts of speech
These Duellists, who fight to gain a name,
To be enroll’d amid the sons of fame,
Fame, I pray thee, let these men survive,
That farce and burlesque may for ever live,
Really, I scarce know which to quiz the most
The scene, or he who sent it to the post.
Ye men of honour, were your wife seduced,
And peace destroyed, or e’en your name traduced
You’d call the rou6 out, and take your chance
Of being shot, or pierced heart thro’ in France,
Supposing you’re the victim, what’s the case,
The murderer usurps your lawful place.
Ye men of honour, —estimable men
Answer me this, —where is your honour then ?
Away with honour, such as this can boast,
Its truth is more like Fiction than a Ghost.
In such a case just hear what I would do,


I’d light my pipe, and for a divorce sue,
And drag the virtuous pair the Law Courts through.
And make the cavalier pay, at nay leisure
Dearly for his, unsanctimonious pleasure. #
To him whose got thus far,-—I say proceed
And put your specs on, if you wish to read.
For you must go like Pirates thro’ the sea,
If you would fain keep company with me ;
I humbly ask the Franklin or the Lady,
Whose quite familiar with my muse already,—
To turn the leaf, and look again at truth.
Here is a fair Girl, redolent with youth,
Giddy as lovely—fickle as a child :
Her mind composed of all things strange and wild,
She dreams of love, and muses on the theme,
Until she quits the substance for the dream ;
Ideal Cupids haunt her in her sleep,
And dancing u Fragrant’s” there, their revels keep.
At last some monied man, presents his hand,
The ring is bought, the day <e£ wedding plann’d:
Mamma’s delighted, fond Papa is glad,—
(Perhaps the prospect pleaseth of Grandad);
Or Vanity his sole besetting sin,
In lifes old age has slipped unnoticed in ;
When lo ! the girl withholdeth her consent,
And fain would bow ere yet too late repent;


Indeed her mother cries with stately strut—
Get to your room, you faithless, shameless slut;
The doors are barr’d, and all the windows shut.
Her Father frowns in stern austerial mood,
And breathing wedlock breeds a family feud—
The match shall come off, I’ve inform’d my friends,
To make a fool of me, this strange fit tends ;
The girl distracted for a quiet life,
Signeth joys death-knell, —and becomes his wife ;
“ Thou fool, for one sweet transitory kiss,
“ To blast the hopes of all thy Earthly bliss ;
“ The tree of knowledge, if not her selection,
“ Sered be its leaves, and fruitless its affection.
The honey moon is scarcely, o’er, when both.
Wish they could cut the cord, that binds their troth,
At first they storm, —speak not—storm again
One vainly sighs ’tis useless to complain.
Nature will have its course, and floods of tears,
Easeth the swoln heart, but more endears
The recollection of those halcyon days,
When Hopes bright morning rose in pleasure’s rays.
The Husband now unhappy leaves his home,
Through the unhallow’d scenes of Vice to roam,
Gives dinners to his friends, and courteth strife,
In obscene songs,—the drunkenness of life ;


His friends applaud him, and his wife condemn,
He’s not unkind to her, whose kind to them,
And off they go quite drunk, for relaxation,
Into some house of carnal recreation ;
But when his Bank’s defunct, they change their song,
The fool cries “ Sponge” I always thought him wrong,
And Parasite lifting his eye-glass swears,
“Demmee,” I’ve lost by him, some thousand Bank shares;
The man of many bottles, scarce will nod,
Because his purse contains no more his God ;
Yet even here, where Virtue’s out of sight,
One priceless Star shines brightly thro’ the night ;
When man is starving, pillowless his head
The homeless girl, will give half her bread—
(One step from Virtue, is the path to hell
How few return to where they say farewell;
How few reflect, upon their wondrous birth,
They barter conscience, ere they know its worth ;
Sins gay Votaries round their Idol meet,
And quaff from Satan’s cup the poison sweet,
The mind should pause, and gaze upon the past,
And conquer passions, which cannot outlast,
The vigour of the frame—with it they die—
Long ere the soul tastes of eternity.
That sin is virtue, erring oft we dream,
Our thoughts thus wandering dwell on each extreme,


Intoxicated with the thought, we kiss.
Hypocrisy, sad antidote to bliss ;
Oh ! when the aged Sinner quits his ways.
Copy in youth, the sunset of his days ;
The beauty of the Gospel hovering there,
What sceptics death scene can with his compare ;
The heavenly tints along his placid cheek,
Of other homes beyond the wordlings speak ;
They like the Sun, ere fades his evening ray,
Are most admired, so lovely in decay ;
The meekness to the Christians’ last hour given,
Reflects the light—the glorious truths of heaven—
Which like some gentle Spirit’s moonlit bower,
Take half their beauty from the chastening hour—
Extend around, above, to all below,
Turn grief to gladness—still the voice of w’oe,
Melt on the lip,—soften in the eye
And change what seemeth death, to immortality.)
I see I’ve bored you with this long digression,
It nearly led me to a bad expression ;
Which as my muse is sober—she shant speak,
For fear the blush should rise on Beauty’s cheek.
A Christian’s death scene—what am I about?
Well may the roue laugh—the parson doubt;
You think so—well old fellow stick to vice,
Whilst I for change of virtue take a slice.


A friend inform’d me that my works immoral,
And as I did not wish to have a quarrel,
And wish’d that you should have my Poems essence,
I begg’d his impudence to leave my presence ;
Besides I wrote it not, to please the clergy,
Who think all virtue’s in the Liturgy ;
If English Papers don’t make sad mistakes,
These white neck’d gentlemen of t turn out rakes !
A place to them’s what title’s to a Councillor,
Witness Allison, and the Reverend Bachelor:
With all their faith in that absurd expression,
About the Apostolical succession.
Another told me in considering of if,
I’d get no praise and very little profit;
He’ll recollect in justice to my bays,
I’d rather have his censure than his praise.
A third said tho’ he thought it very fine,
’Twill never get you Ned a glass of wine ;
I agreed with him, the inordinate sweep,
And went to bed and laugh’d myself to sleep.
I’m a misanthrope—confound mankind,]
And wish I had been bom both deaf, and blind :
That I might neither hear, nor know, nor see,
The soul-less portion of humanity.
A fourth observed to publish would be rash,
The sentimental part which I think’s trash,
I nodded, ’tho I felt upon the whole,,


It shook the very pillars of my soul;
Tis strange, but I would rather far be neuter.
Than be with these men to enjoy my future.
The last one said to write satirically.
Would never make a millionaire of me ;
And cried vociferously ’tis not your forte.
That you may think, so I will not retort:
But if I cannot write the true sublime.
Damn it, —you’ll own IVe got the knack to rhyme ;
If “ damn it ” is immoral, then we float,
With Charon, down the Styx, in one long boat.
Parson and Swindler, Libertine, and Pope,
With Murray’s Ghost, whose crest’s a hempen rope ;
Virtue and Vice will start for one abode,
I hope they’ll keep their distance on the road;
Because Vice being vicious, and Virtue holy,—
The one quite merry, the other melancholy.
If Vice should wish to peep at Virtue’s stocking,
No doubt her grace would think it very shocking.
When on the banks of Acheron I vow,
Amongst the Ghosts to circulate a row ;
If Rowlands should be passing by that day,
We’ll have a fight to pass the time away.
When last with Nick I took my morning nip,
He bid me tell him “ bring his hunting whip.”
I’ll tip the Ferryman—bribe Rhadamanthus,
Whose fond of flowers with a Polyanthus :


The Ancients tongues took coin to pass the place,
The Moderns take that coin air e in their face,
(Sir Eardley if he does not wish to roast,
Had better roam an unembodied Ghost;)
If Charon should refuse my Ghost the Ferry,
I’ll quote old Bicheno’s speech to make him merry ;
To make grim Cerberus slumber o’er my sins,
I’ll throw him Kentish’s forthcoming Twins ;
And as Judge Mino is a friend of mine.
I’ll have a chance of breathing air divine ;
We left the man in scenes of midnight riot,.
Now to describe the consequence I try at;
That’s rhyme’s no rhyme in the penultimate letter.
But Burns hath worse, and Byron little better .
So here it is, as pleasant, and as smooth,
As Seccombe drawing a refractory tooth.
Far different with woman, she can’t stake,
Her heart on every mad and Godless rake ;
Though I must own, as I’m to truth a friend,
That few Adulterers differ in the end ;
One thro’ the course of pleasure long has run
His mind a blank—his friends his presence slum.
For he has lost his reason in the bowl,
The guiding Star, the Planet of his soul;
Lodged in a madhouse—this is the fruit of vice.
To crime a voluntary sacrifice,
And is this life, Oh! God, inspire my pen


To be the Saviour of my fellow-men ;
Nor deem this blasphemy, I mean on Earth,
Where all are vile and helpless from their birth ;
The other still drags on a loathed existence,
Through conjugating Amo, in its mistense ;
Still to her virtue true, she holdeth fast,
And worshipeth her idol, till at last,
His form appears, and then her nature loves.
Strong as a Lions, gentle as a Doves ;
Pours out her passion with resistless force.
As boundless as the fiat of its source;
Clinging Clematis-like around the form,
Which God designs ere long to feast the worm.
He soothes her passion for a little while,
Gives kiss, for kiss, and rosy smile for smile ;
When pleasure palls—satiety begins,
To gather in the harvest of its sins ;
And conscience stricken mourneth o’er with pain.
The evil tendency of every grain;
And resolutely vows to quit the fair
Till health returns, and all again is air;
For should some Phsyche fair enchant the place,.
He quits the Bible, for her pretty face ;
And base deserts her, on some specious whim,
Who staked her heart, and all but heaven on him.
Oh ! could he know the evening of thy day,
And see thee withering shade by shade away *


Methiaks his callous heart, would softer grow.
And pity not, but love his child of woe :
The fire-side serpent love, —no, —never yet,
Beneath the Sun, have two such contrasts met.
“ Thrice happy wedlock, blessed be thy name,
“ And curs’d be he, who would asperse thy fame :
Blessed be the Scriptures, for they give,
“ Of life the fount, where all who drink shall live ;
“ Blessed be riches, if their owner can,
“ Conceive the thought, that he’s no more than man—
“ And charitably give the gold away,
“ Whose fruit when ripe is everlasting day.
“ Blessed be Virtue, mankinds holiest dower,
“ Which bloom’d ’till Satan breathed upon the flower,.
“ Blessed be woman, to man’s dark destiny given,—
“To calm life’s sea, and smooth his path to Heaven ;
Who when the sorrow throat high chokes the child.
Consoles his sobbings with caresses mild :
With Loves soft lips which press his forehead fair,
And gentle hands push’d fondly thro’ his hair ;
And smiles and words, which charm away the tear,
The music of the heart, whose tone’s sincere.
(Angelic thoughts, childhood's flowers adieu,
Heavens own chosen bathed in Eden’s dew ;
Thy bloom’s been blighted by the worlds rude wind.,.
Yet left a fragrant memory behind ;)


Who when long travel has restor’d her boy,
Springs to his side with unadultrate joy,—
Gazing on him with whom her heart's hope dies,
’Till its warm fount comes showering thro’ her eyes.
“ Who when her Lovers Sails the Waters skim,
“ Breathes in her Vespers one fond prayer for him ?
“ Who when the Tempest wrecks the Mariner’s bark,
“ First brings the torch to guide him thro’ the dark •?
“ Who when old age steals on with rapid stride,
“ Deserts him not tho’ left by all beside ?
“ Who when the law, bids him for death prepare,
“Visits his Cell, and soothes his anguish there ;
“ Who when the weights of grief, his heart strings rend,
“ Is his sole Solace, and his only Friend ?
“ Who when disease and sickness shrinks his breath,
“ Sits calmly watching by the couch of death ?
‘‘ And when the mortal spark of life expires,
“ Closeth his eyes nor willingly retires ?
“ ’Tis woman, far more faithful than his breath,
“ The Guardian Seraph of both life and death.
Blessed be woman, how came man to bless
These airy beings ? none should love them less
Than him, —for they have always been his bane, —
His stumbling block, unto his heart a pain,
Since first he sprang from out the vale of life,
With features blooming with God’s beauty, rife.
E


Last night strange clouds obscured my hopes of bliss,
But vanish’d ere the sun rose in her kiss ;
A Spirit breath’d come mortal, come away,
Struggling I awoke, alas ! a thing of clay.
I love the sex, of every hue, of every clime—
Because they patronise the Poet’s rhyme.
My love is like Joh Johnson’s, who at eighty.
Selects a spouse who’s embonpoint and weighty.
Your angel forms are quite divine in verse,
In life their tempers are the most perverse ;
Love is my hobby horse on which I ride,
My Pegasus whose mistress is my bride;
With Prudery’s bit she curbs my flighty mind,
And if I bolt declares Pm too unkind ;
A she monopolist I must not stir,
But be for ever apron-string’d to her ;
Spouting aloud more flattery than sense,
A foppish amo in the present tense ;
I smile and bear it, tho’ I must admit
My muse is happiest in the amorous fit;
While moralists shall crime from virtue sever,
Woman dear woman I’m your friend for ever.
Flower of Fiction, why thy leaves unfold,
To please an age that’s pleased with nought but gold;
This business age is not the age for you,


To sentiment the world has bid adieu.
The Laurcat’s nag must be indeed a rip,
When titled ladies sigh o’er Railway scrip ;
And deem the sister, or the friend a fool,
Who crams not Steam schemes in her reticule ;
When Walter Scott’s forsaken by the bunch,
To read that comic rascal—punning Punch ;
And Cowper lies neglected on the shelf.
With books on crockery, spoons, and broken delf.
I see you sneer, and forthwith I retire,
Vainly to cope with Douglas Jerrold’s satire.
There’ s music in the deep, so Brainard sings,
No music to our souls, the Council brings ;
Shades of the dead arise, awake Oh ! Pitt,
See sense despised, conceit mistook for wit;
See pewter-plate thieves quit their father’s tap,
And courting censure puke up reams of foolscap ;
See bailiff baggers, grocers" sons beside,
Quit thefts and candles for a Council bride ;
Junius here stopp’d me in a semicolan ;
Whispering that every villian thinks himself a Solon.
Sir Eardley Wilmot mourned when Forster died,
Stared at his corpse, and as he stared he sigh’d :
These ominous words betray’d his faltering voice—
Thou Convict Chief, Probationism’s choice.


My salary’s gone. I have no friend to-morrow,
To screen another Sodom and Gomorrah.
When Murray broke the drear and dreadful scene,
With ghastly features, and unearthly mien ;
Which cunning changed, as interest brought him there,
On tiptoe blubbering, like a cubbless bear,
Whispering—God bless you —as he drew close to it,
Wilmot, my friend, I’ll find a man to do it.
Name him, by Paul and I’ll exalt his station :
It is—it is—“ God bless you —“ Flogging Mason.”
A word at parting, let us part fair friends,
To bring an action for a libel tends
To break the Public Peace, disturb the quiet
Of a peaceful Town, that never knew a riot,
Tho’ Melbourne’s senior far; if you persist,
Dear Sir, in this false step, then hear me, hist—
If libels definition’s to defame a man,
And rob lifes happiness of half its span,
I swear by all the powers in Heaven, and more
To bring an action ’gainst the Member, Orr ;
For I have heard him wrong human nature,
Libelling mankind in every feature;
You can please yourself if you draw the sword,
I’ll keep my word, so help my—“ Jimmy Lord,”


NOTES.
*( From the Portland Gazette and Belfast Advertiser,
June 30, 1846.)
W. CAMPBELL, ESQ., AND ALEX. SPROT, ESQ.
In consequence of certain conduct on the part of Mr*
Sprot, Mr. Campbell accused him of slander and falsehood.
A contemplated hostile meeting was put a stop to, by the
extreme vigilance of the authorities, in Belfast. It was then
agreed that a meeting should take place within the South
Australian Territory. Capt. Adams, as Mr. Sprot’s fiiend,
asked me where pistols could be procured, and if 1 could
bring them ; 1 told him it rested with him, as acting for the
challenging parly, to provide the weapons, but informed him
where they could be procured, and we parted on the under-
standing that he should do so. The parlies accordingly met
in the South Australian Territory on the 27th instant. Be-
fore coming to the ground, Captain Adams asked me if I
had bought pistols ; I said “ no.” He then told me he had
tried to borrow a pair, but had not succeded, and that he had
brought a pair of pocket pistols. On reaching the ground
Captain Adams produced them, and after a good deal of
trouble we succeeded in loading them, with some chance of
their going off. When I handed the pistol to Mr. Campbell
he said that with such small pistols, it was a mere farce.
When the word was given, Mr. Campbell’s pistol snapped,
and Mr. Sport’s went off. Captain Adams asked me if I
thought it necessary that the affair should proceed any
further, to which I answersed that, of course, it rested entirely
with him. “ Well,” said Captain Adams, “ I think we have
done every thing in our power—we have come a long way to
meet you.” “ Really Captain Adams,” I replied, “ you
take a most extraordinary view of the affair, it is wb who
have come to meet you.” Captain Adams then asked me
if Mr. Campbell would withdraw the expressions; 1 said
“ certainly not.” Capt. Adams then said —“ in the event
of there being any more firing, will Mr. Campbell retract?”
I told bin 1 did not think that would have any effect.


“ Then’' said Capt. Adams. “as there is no medical man, I
withdraw my friend.” We bowed and retired.
The foregoing is the substance of the conversation between
Captain Adams and myself.
Such has been the termination of an affair in which Mr.
Campbell and I have been induced to ride nearly four
hundred miles.
After the meeting had taken place, I tc ! d Captain Adams
that, as not only the affair itself but our project .d journey
into another Territory had been publicly talked of, I thought
it would be desirable to make a joint statement of the issue.
Captain Adams declined, and I told him 1 should do so
upon my own responsibility.
R. CRAUFORD.
Portland,
June 29, 1846.
I drink no rum—l don’t resemble Mayo f
Who kill’d his comrade for a smoke of ’bacco.
Vide “Adveiriser,” 12th August, 1815, Mr. Bicbeao’s speech inConnoil'
j Another man, of the name of Mayo, without the
smallest provocation, whilst following in Indian file another
man named Bailey Jones, (who had once appeared in the
respectable walks of society as an officer ot the army, the son
of a Colonel), struck an axe into his head, which shortly
caused his death, Mayo gave his reason for the act, that he
had been all his life accustomed to tobacco, and had often
given the best part of his meals for a smoke. There was no
tobacco on the settlement then, he must go without, and
would rather die; he therefore killed Jones, that he might
be sent up and hanged. He added, that he had selected
Jones, not from animosity, as he had never had any alterca-
tion with him, but because he considered him a very bad man.
FINIS.
John Moore, Printer, 11, Macquarie Street*
