

VOYAGE
SYDNEY
TO
S.A.
MICHIE


“KID GLOVE" POCKLEY.
A Seaman of the ’4o’s.
(BY “REDGUM.”)
The above was the name by which Captain
R. P. Pockley, one time Port Master of Port-
Jackson, and for many years a master mariner
engaged on the Australian coast, was known
to the fraternity while he and the “saucy”
Emma, twin souls of the southern seas, worked
together,
Mr. J, Macnamara's little brig Emma, a
well-fashioned vessel of 135 tons, was a heelar
of the forgotten forties. She could work to
windward like a molly hawk, and with half
a gale on her quarter only a porpoise could
show her the way. For years the Emma held
the record between Hobart Town and Port
Jackson, having on one conspicuous occasion
cut out the running of 630 miles in 48 hours
of super sailing. Prom that day on, the sight
of her royals among the white horses on the
sky line, caused every rival master who was
handling a brig or schooner of about her rat-
ing to do some quick thinking, and to pass
on an order for more sail, “Kid Glove” Pock-
ley and his Emma were super seabirds in those
old days.
Captain Pockley himself was a masterly sea
rover, who had bitten his first Liverpool pan-
tiles in snouty little vessels working the home
waters, and was possessed of a master’s ticket
before he had reached manhood’s years. At
the age of 19 he left London in command of
the Tobago brig, of 140 tons register, and
turned up in Sydney after having given old
j Neptune a trouncing or two with his little
i vessel all shipshape and Bristol fashion, and
he
world again.
His sobriquet had been given him by rivals
who laughed at his whims and fancies, and
only partly understood his love for the smart
little liners of which he was given
charge for better or for worse. Always
a strict disciplinarian, he schooled him-
self and his crew into doing everything
as smartly and as nicely as was pos-
sible within the limits of his ships. He
was always master as well as admirer of any
ship he sailed. His pea jackets of blue pilot
cloth with brass buttons and braid, and the
white gloves for his homings and farewells,
all helped to hold together the sea traditions
of the nation. Such moods and fancies were
all too short lived. Blistered fingers and
freckled faces came into prominence as soon,
as the sea fights began. In the later years
commanders of the Peninsular and Oriental
Co., and the Orient liners, always wore full
dress uniform on leaving port. Captain Pock-
ley and his gloves were only a few years ahead
of their time.
THE EMMA.
The Emma herself was a masterpiece of old
day craftsmanship. She was 125 tons, was
built at Kingston, Ireland, and so pleased Mr.
J. Macnamara that he bought her off the
stocks and fitted her out for the Australian
trade. During 1847 small craft of her type
were carrying much of the world’s trade. Brigs
of about 200 tons register had many a time
loaded wool cargoes at the Queen’s Wharf for
London, and in due time had delivered the
freight in good order on the other side of
the world. Nearly all of our home trade was
in the hands of small craft under 300 tons
during the forties. Registrations made dur-
ing the year 1849 showed that 95 schooners,
ranging between 30 and 200 tons; 42 cutters,
averaging 10 or 12 tons; 27 brigs, ranging be-
tween 100 and 200 tons; 11 barques, from 200
to 300 tons; and 13 steamers were owned in
Australia. Their total tonnage was 17,879
tons, the number of men and boys employed
being 2002.
Just to show to what extent these small
craft were used when there was a big sea job
to be done, let me mention the schooner Cheer-
ful, of 160 tons, under the command of Cap-
tain Williams, who took his departure from
Sydney one day during 1849, carrying 86 pas-
sengers and a lot of cargo for the Californian
gold diggings. Such a cockleshell would not.
be allowed to make a voyage around Sow and
Pigs with standing room only in these days.
The Emma was one of the few connecting
links between Sydney and Van Diemen’s Land
for quite a long time. She carried the Royal
mails, provided cabin accommodation for 12
first-class passengers, at £ 10/10/ each for the
single voyage, and 24 steerage passengers at
£5/5/ each. The cabin accommoc.ation was
the best offering. Governors, Government
officials, soldiers and sailors availed them-
selves of the care and attention that the popu-
lar Captain Pockley and his brig offered to
them.
She was a well-found ship and fit for deep-
sea travel. It was Dr. F. Antill Pockley who
told me the story of his father’s record run
from the Iron Pot to Hornby Light. That
masterly effort was made with a full-sized
gale on the starboard quarter, and countless
great bluey-grey seahorses making maddened
efforts to force the way over the windward
rail. Even the big sea birds that now and
again blew along to see what the cook and
cabin boy were up to hung around longer
than usual, admiring the way in which the
Emma was bowling along. Captain Pockley
knew by instinct when the brig was taking ail
that was good for her. When there was
trouble ahead he quickly took a hand and
helped her over the trouble. While he was
about she could settle down to her work,
“She might be saucy,” said the captain many
a time, “but she was never sour.”
Nothing pleased Captain Pockley more than
to fall in with the rival paddle-wheeler Sham-
rock. under Captain Gilmore, who was then,
developing the Launceston trade. Both he
and his ship at all times were willing to show
the proud steam-driven hybrid the way to
Hobart Town or the way home. Together
they could run rings around the Shamrock
any time the wind was favourable for both.
The Emma herself preferred to keep her
weather eye open for rivals like the Wild Irish
Girl or the Waterwitch, a brig and a schooner
in the same employ. When either appeared on
the horizon her day’s work was always more
interesting and her life more worth while.
Ships were supposed to have souls of their own
in those days. They were then part of the
great trinity of the seas, where sky, wave,
and ship were linked together, sometimes for
good and sometimes for ill. Even though they
fought like demons on occasion, each had a
great respect for the other, and could be on
friendly terms for months at a time.
Mr. Macnamara, owner of the Emma, was
a merchant trader as well as a shipowner, Cap-
tain Pockley also did a little merchandising
and frequently bought Tasmanian produce for
carriage to Sydney on his own account.
THE PARTING AT LAST.
One day the Emma learned with regret that
her beloved mentor had eyes on another vessel
and was thinking of making a change into
steam. That would be about the year 1853,
when the Hellespont, a new iron steamer, was
making a name in the Sydney-Port Phillip
trade. I prefer not to tell any more of this
story. The little brig did not know her own
mind for quite a time after the captain,
with the white kid gloves, stepped ashore
after bidding her good-bye. But she pulled
herself together to fight many a sea-battle
with the winds and the waves, and now and
again caught a glimpse of her old lover as she
made her homing while he was acting as
Port Master of Sydney Harbour.
Captain Pockley was Port Master at the
time of the Dunbar disaster, and had much
to do with his whaleboat and crew in gath-
ering the threads which were tangled together
in the appalling story.
Later in life he retired from the sea, and
did good work as one of the much respected
marine surveyors around the port. He lived
for years at North Sydney, somewhere upon
the highlands near to the Post Office corner
but soon grew tired of seeing the other chaps’
chimneys creeping close around him. Then
he shifted his family and belongings to Lane
Cove, to a large orchard block, and spent a
lot of his later years orcharding, home-mak-
ing, tree and shrub growing, and enjoying
the life that was simple and sweet, almost
within sound of the sea.
After every heavy gale the sound of the
surf is still audible at Killara in the early
morning hours, especially if the intervening
trees are carrying raindrops or dew.
“Pockley’s Lome” was one of the noted
homes on the highlands for many years. His
blackbutts were known far and wide as a
landmark on the countryside. Some of the
great trees still stand to keep tally of time
and to help recall the days when the great
men and women of yesterday walked around
and talked with them. I never saw the old
man at any time. He had passed away be-
fore 1899, the year 1 took up residence at Kil-
lara; but I did know the orchard, the trees,
the home garden, and some of the story that
was connected with the man and the woman
who pieced Lorne together. Now I keep the
saucy Emma and her kid-gloved captain
among the treasured memories that have beer
gathered from the joyous days when pretty
littls brigs and schooners hammered there way
in and out of Port Jackson.
NO MORE—
The pleasures us denied are always valued
most . . .
To one we give the heart’s deep love sin-
cere;
Then walk estranged; but clad in solitude we
find,
Sweet mem’ry makes the lost one doubly
dear.
WINIFRED MASTERS,


7't-*n w
«
m-5/ /V *
i/.<szy
QoJ\£- ■




———
Oj
*
m
/u //^
-yCy
3U-
iry^lc
7^TT^w-su-<-^i-a*. : -y t ,_


it*' fa^fyLiu-
-W
.
'JwI C)
- %


* ~<»*« - •
■* „ _ ■ • t*'
«
* »• •
«
j- *
»
♦
r ,1 ■■' . ' |


yC-tA^r
-T^OiX^wi—, (
'i 11^
I


/f&/




A VOYAGE
FROM
SYDNEY TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND BACK AGAIN;
WITH MEMS.
SOCIAL, POLITICAL, AGRICULTURAL, MORAL, AND MINING.
BY A SICK MAN CRUISING FOR COPPER.
CHAPTER I.
The long wished-for Christmas holidays had
come—the good brig Emma, Captain Pox,
commander, was in the harbour of Port Jack-
son, bound for South Australia—we were in
the City of Sydney, bound, under the strong
compulsion of our bilious nature, “ for that
bourne from which no traveller returns, un-
less we plucked up a roving resolution, and
dashed boldly out, somewhere over the sea.
But still we had our domestic relations to give
us pause. We were not that loose and lonely
weed, a bachelor, who drifts easily about, with
every movement of the tides of life; acreature,
neither cared for in this world (except as live
rubbish, to fill up holes in quadrilles), nor re-
membered when he goes to the next. We had
objections to answer, scruples to satisfy, and
apprehensions to allay, issuing out of wife, re-
presenting her own and little ones’ interests.
Upon solemn argument fully heard, we felt
bound in conscience to decide in favour of our
project, and an immediate trip to South Aus-
tralia was our decree ; the costs to abide fur-
ther directions.
Who can prepare for a journey like a wife ?
Who can be so minutely and yet comprehen-
sively provident as she ? Prom the more sub-
stantial contents of trunks, to the lighter con-
veniences of carpet bag, all is foreseen, all
provided for. Tooth-powder, Windsor soap,
eau-de-Cologne, cravats, and currant-jam, each
and every of them have their appointed places
in out baggage. All those things are cared for
that men never think of until they -want them,
and then wonder “ how the deuce they could
have been forgotten.” Our preparations were
therefore soon complete, and after the thousand
and first precaution to take care of ourselves,
(which, by-the-bye, we are not aware we often
omit to do), and not to ride wild or unbroken
hones, or row in boats that are given to upset-
ting, or do anything else prejudicial to human
life or health, we draw matters to a close by
kissing our domestic circle, and bidding our
household gods adieu, in very serious and sad-
dened mood for us, we make for the Circular
Wharf.
“Want a boat, Sir?” cries a watchful
waterman, in the usual excitement of
anticipated extortion, as he beholds us reflec-
tively marching before our barrow-load of
personalties, our small boy dutifully in atten-
dance to see us off. Of course we do want a
boat, and therefore stowing our property in the
bottom thereof, we receive from boy aforesaid
—whose employments are the “ generally
useless”—our pilot coat and telescope, and
giving him our last moral precept against a too
intense devotion to marbles during our ab-
sence, we are the next moment cutting the
smooth and placid waters of Sydney Cove, to-
wards the choice craft which is to carry us to
the south. In a few minutes we are up with
her, as she lies a little off Pinchgut, and a
small step ladder over her side enables us
without much difficulty to win her deck.
A decidedly nasty first impression of our
trip, that deck>f the fine brig Emma. Al-
though it is Sunday morning, a strongly tarred


chief mate, with shirt sleeves tacked up to the
elbows of two brown and brawny arms, re-
ceives us on a deck, slippery, sloppy, and cum-
bered with cedar logs. We are the second
arrival of the only two who are going in
the cabin, and all the steerage passengers,
about five-and-thirty, are already on board, and
distributed about the ship ; some fishing, some
smoking and indolently watching the nibbles,
whilst the women shake and scold a dreadful
number of impracticable children, when they
ate naughty; or let them run between our
legs, and rub large lumps of bread and butter
against our trousers, when they are (what
their mothers call) good. These poor people,
whom I take to be mechanics and labourers
with their families—and alack for our labour
market ! all going/ro»t Sydney—seem unani-
mously to have registered a vow in heaven
against soap. Upon the whole, I have a clear
conviction, that I am for the next nine or ten
days, as a settled thing, to be intensely un-
comfortable. I go to one end, there are chil-
dren—l walk to the other, there are children
also. In vain I look about for some little hole
into which I may creep, and be melancholy
and alone. The children have found all these
holes out, and are in them. I feel a nervous
fever creeping over me, and involuntarily look-
ing about me for relief, I cast my eyes upon
the Trafalgar, lying hard at hand, and which
is to start the same day, with some friends of
mine in her, to England. As it is now only 10
o’clock in the morning, and we cannot drop
down the harbour before turn of tide, at 2 p m,,
I determined to go and bid them adieu. I am
comforted by finding the Trafalgar in a much
greater mess than we are. I blunder my way
to an after cabin, and there I find a Chief Com-
missioner’s lady, seated upon a camp stool,
and presiding in a state of mild and apathetic
misery over a small chaos of boxes and
baskets and parcels, whilst sympathising and
valedictory friends are propping up high chests
of drawers, and assuring her that they will not
fall upon and crush her and the Chief Com-
missioner as they lie in their berths, when at
sea. Other passengers, who must have come
on board over night, are breakfasting upon
weak-smelling sloppy-looking coffee, and
wedges of bread and butter, off a dirty table
cloth, extensively embossed with small islands
of mustard; and you can scarcely help won-
dering at the imperiousness of human appetite
which makes people seriously engage upon
their food at all, in that strange and compli-
cated atmosphere of tar, and straw, and oily
hemp, and sailors, dissolving about you with
the heat of the weather ; whilst newly arrived
visitors are perpetually coming into the cuddy
in unnatural attitudes, carrying their heads be-
fore them like camels, and bonneting them-
selves against the beams of the ceiling, as they
anxiously seek out their departing friend*.
Nevertheless, breakfasts are eaten in this situ-
ation, for one’s nature changes much in a ship,
as I shall hereafter have to record.
What are we to do with ourselves till the
ships trip their anchors at turn of tide ? A
genial son of old Scotia, who is also here to
bid the Chief Commissioner and his lady adieu,
volunteers himself as a sort of amateur
innkeeper on the occasion, and in-
vites us all—intrepid man, without
having first said one word to his wife about
it, —to take pot-luck with him", at his “ de-
lightfully marine residence,” as our facetious
friend Stubbs would call it, on the North
Shore. We go of course. Apart from the
pleasure we have in the visit to our host and
hostess, it is quite a relief to some of us. I, in
especial, feel that I am reprieved from those
children, and their bread and butler, for three
or four hours at least. I therefore give the
reins to mirth, and have a few hours of happi-
ness, of which fate cannot deprive me. At
length our hour comes. We tear ourselves
from the tawny port, and some interesting dis-
cussion as to whether high-principled men are
as common in New South Wales as in England,
my surprise being great at finding that so
much can be said on both sides on such a
question,—and our moral philosophy is ad-
journed until a future day. Another friend
puts us on board with his boat; the two ves-
sels, Emma and Trafalgar , drop down the
harbour together, until twilight drops upon us,
when the wind falls, and therefore in Watson’s
Bay we must stick until morning.
And when sleeping time comes, and retiring
for the night can be put off no longer, we pro-
ceed to our berth, a very paradise of cock-
roaches, being a kind of engloomed hole in the
side of the ship, with a shelf in it, upon which
you are supposed to stretch your suffering
figure, and consider yourself in bed. Here if
you like you can amuse yourself by kicking the
ceiling of your sleeping chamber, the very
sight of which, as you lie on your back re-
flecting upon your destiny, is imaginary suffo-
cation. Nevertheless it is your bed-chamber,
and therefore, although distrustful as to what
may be the answer to your friends’ enquiries
about you the next morning, you doff your


appaiel for the experiment, and by a series of
complicated convulsions work yourself into the
wall of the ship (literally) “like a brick.”
And there, oh, cabin passenger, you are a
fixture until next morning. You probably lie
awake as I did, for the first half-
hour, calmly expecting a visit from
the natives, and can scarcely help
wondering that not a single cockroach has
made a special survey of you, to walk upon.
Even the musquitoes, whom we can hear
blowing their small trumpets immediately over
our face, give us no trouble. Our own im-
pression at the time was that they had surely
mistaken us for something else—a new export,
perhaps, or something of that kind, decidedly
not good to eat, and that therefore they never
tried us at all. So much did we appear
changed even to ourselves, that such a mistake
struck us as by no means remarkable.
Much to our surprise, we awoke the next
morning greatly refreshed. Our opinion of our
berth rises a hundred per cent. We yawn,
stretch out our arms, open our latticed doer,
and study the countenance of Captain Fox in
repose, for he sleeps like a Knight Templar,
with enviable soundness, in the opposite niche.
We next tumour attention to the subject of
getting out of bed, which, upon looking down
from our elevation, seems a more serious busi-
ness than getting in ; it was only by a kind of
violent gymnastic exercise that we reached the
floor of our cabin in a perpendicular position.
The man who can, when at sea, wash and
shave, and satisfactorily introduce himself to
his own trousers and stockings, without serious
injury to his elbows, knees, or nose, or philo-
progenitiveness, according to the direction in
which he takes his falls, is already pretty well
qualified for a clown, in the most violent and
bustling pantomime. The very notion of
dressing in such a situation seemed to me as
absurd as if I had teen requested to perform
my toilet in a trunk. Nevertheless we try it,
for it seems in sort necessary that we should
get our clothes on before we can appear in
public, on deck. After a few falls, and much
unnatural posturising, which, if performed in
any other than a strictly private situation,
would be sufficient to demonstrate any man’s
qualification for the Lunatic Asylum at Tarban
Creek, —we contrive to shave and dress in suf-
ficient time to get on deck for an hour’s walk
before breakfast.
And oh ! the balmy breath of morning in
Watson’s Bay. The glorious sun, diffuser of
light and joy to every breathing and growing
thing, is up, and like a great policeman of the
sky, appears to be ordering divers knots of
ill-looking clouds, evidently disaffected to-
wards good weather, to be off about their busi-
ness, elsewhere. Heaven is soon one clear field
of bright and beautiful blue. How wooingly
we submit our faces to the gentle puffs of the
breeze, which steals as softly over our cheeks
as the light kisses of a pretty woman.
In what luxury of laziness we recline on
the stern, and blink against the light.
What though the wind,—the little there
is of it, —be adverse, we are lying com-
fortably at anchor, and notwithstanding we
suffer under the usual impatience of travellers,
it is impossible to quarrel with such a morning.
The briny flavour of the “ caller air,” is in-
vigorating to both body and spirit. Yaucluse,
snugly nestling in woody beauty, Point Piper,
and even the great naked chilly-looking light-
house, seem to laugh in light. We find our-
selves growing a decidedly better man. We
have found the medicine so long sought for ;
this thorough idleness entirely agrees with
our complaint. We feel as if we were a sort
of musical instrument, which has been allowed
to get sadly out of tune, and which is now
being gradually screwed and scraped into har-
mony with the other music of nature’s great
orchestra. Our benevolence has never had
fair play until this moment; it has been
cruelly spoiled with the harsh conflicts of land.
Now could we lend almost any man a hun-
dred pounds,—if we had it: nay we are not
quite sure we could not kiss the very children,
as they come upon deck, if we were to try it.
We look about us for some fitting object for
our rapidly growing philanthropy, and find-
ing none worthier than ourselves, we are
driven to take the benefit of the feeling in our
own person, by going to breakfast.
Patients ! Ye whose various and compli-
cated disorders keep hooded cabs and death-
dealing Broughams, with serious looking men
of physic in them, rolling about the town by
dozens,—ye, who dare not even in fancy
crack a bottle with a friend, in the keen joy of
social “ after dinner,” but drink nothing but
“ drafts as before,” —ye who with pallid faces
and shadowy frames, pursue the phantom
health, always flying before you, until too
late you find yourself turning into the yard of
the family undertaker, and can neither turn
round nor back out; ye, who are thus got out
of this delightful world under false pretences,
and are deprived of the honour of taking your
part in any future census of colonial popula


tion; get out of your beds, I pray you, if you
are only able, get into a Teasel, and lie for three
or four days in Watson’s Bay, and then tell
me who is the better physician, Great Nature,
the nursing mother of us all, or the medical
man of the family, who attends the funeral,
and mournfully pockets the silk hatband. For
my part—and I am, or rather was, an invalid
of some standing, and know all about it,—l
felt as I descended the cabin stairs to break*
fast, that nature had it hollow; and that
moreover, she costs your estate nothing, either
for cures whilst you are in this world, or for
black cambric when you are consigned to the
next.
CHAPTER II.
I shall not disgust the refined and fastidious
reader, by a disclosure of my preternatural per-
formances at breakfast; the beef steak, pickles,
corn beef, and coffee, consumed by one in vain
endeavouring to subdue the first phrenzy of a
marine appetite. Suffice it, that the breakfast
■was a solid and resisting one; that I was
capable and carnivorous to the last; and stopped
in course of time, from shame, and not from
repletion.
Breakfast over, we again ascended to the
deck. The clearance officer, Mr. Bignall, has
arrived; and I witness, what I never saw
before, the calling over the names, and the
mustering of the passengers, according to the
police list of clearances. We are all collected
aft, in a crowd at one side of the ship, and
when John Smith’s name is called over, he
answers “ here,” like a boy at school, and
then passes over to the other side. All the
others do the same, until at length one melan-
choly looking man is left, who has not been
returned as cleared. Mr. Bignall eyeing him
with official intensity, as if he doubted whe-
ther he could be a human reality at all, not
being in the list, asks him to account for the
extraordinary circumstance. The melancholy
looking man, states that he came from Ade-
laide last trip, with goods by the Emma , and
is now returning home, and that when he went
to the Police Office, he was told that no
clearance was necessary for him. Captain
Fox corroborates this story, as to the uncleared
having come from Adelaide, and Mr. Bignall,
who had previously stiffened from the man into
the officer, now gradually subsides into ordi-
nary humanity, as he loses his suspicion of the
man being a bolter. No man could do his
business with more earnestness than Bignall,
You could see that be was making
mental affidavits of men’s features and
persons, and although I have often
heard the expression of “ looking a man
through and through,” I never saw it really
done until now. The melancholy passenger,
however, stood it like a statue, or a zoological
rarity, accustomed to be stared at by the public
at a shilling a head. This was only one of se-
veral visits we had from Mr. Bignall; for
whenever a boat came off to the vessel, he was
down upon us in a twinkling, lest any pri-
soner or other improper person should get
away from the colony. Here was the first
decided impression I had ever got, that so far
as our British liberty was concerned, this fine
colony was after all no more than one large
gaol; beautiful effect of beautiful transporta-
tion.
Notwithstanding, however, all this visiting
backwards and forwards, of the clearance
officer, the Emma was not destined to go out
for many days afterwards. An obstinate
south wind kept her in Watson’s Bay ; and
the owner of the Emma , Mr. Thomas Woolley,
having whilst she was lying there bought that
most delightful of all possible brigs, the Phan-
tom, he kindly gave me my option to go in the
latter, if I preferred her. 1 accepted the offer,
and in a few days afterwards was rattling away
to the south, with a fair and ten-knot breeze,
our Captain being the amiable Fox aforesaid,
transferred from the Emma, and our fellow-
passengers—a young lady about eighteen
years old, in very bad health—the
owner of the Phantom, and a cannie,
good-humoured, Scotch-colonial merchant,
going down to South Australia in pur-
suit of—l suppose ! must not not say what,
or I shall perhaps be breaking mercantile
secrets.
I fancy all voyages are alike, they may be
more or less blowy, wet, and rough, and there-
fore more or less trying to landsmen ; but not-
withstanding these variations, there is a strong
general likeness among them. Landsmen at
sea, where there are no ladies, or where, as in
our case, they never come out of their cabins,
lounge, and eat and drink, and sleep, and tor-
pidly decline into slovenliness, and let their
beards grow, and change their habits, if not
their natures, materially. The only real objects
of interest with them are the wind, and their
meals. No pity is felt for the sick. Selfishness
pervades every ship. We never, however, felt


any surprise at this, for we could easily ac-
count for it. How can one expect the mere
conventional forms of life to be preserved in a
situation, where you can place no manner of
dependence on your own legs; where tumbling
down stairs, seems quite as natural a mode of
getting into the cabin, as walking down them ;
—where even in bed, you are sometimes rolled
about, at the risk of catching your nose under
one of your arms—where a man talks poli-
tics to you one moment, and the next without
any sort of notice, staggers off to the side of
the ship, and begins performing as a sort of
animated cascade ; —where men at breakfast
pour cups of coffee into their friends bosoms,
and say no more about it, than if the hot mix-
ture had been made for that purpose ; —where
legs of mutton escape from their dishes as if
inspired, and caper down the middle of the
table and up again, refusing to be quiet until
they are eaten, and not always then. In such
a state of things, no man’s faculties are more
than sufficient for self-preservation ; and this
accounts in our opinion for the more than usual
philosophy, with which men at sea, almost in-
variably bear the miseries of others.
The fair breeze enabled us to make a regular
gallop of it from Sydney Heads to Twofold
Bay, overhauling and passing everything great
and small, sailing in the same direction. At
this part the wind shifted to the south, and we
had “ to make boards,” as it is called, to get
any further. The sea became “ short and
chopping and we became conscious of an
internal change, which to be understood, must
be felt. Having taken our breakfast, we some-
how or other concluded (in our stomach, rather
than in our mind) that the only possible chance
of continuing in possession of it, was to lie
full length upon our backs, on the deck amongst
a parcel of ropes, and other ship gear,
we did not examine what. Of course the
sailors were perpetually wanting something
just under our back, and begging our pardon,
for turning us over every five minutes, like a
bale of goods. We had no energy, no passions,
no sense of dignity, no personal pride. When
we endeavoured to reflect, and to consider why
we were created, it seemed as if we had nothing
in our head but flannel, or something quite as
remote from brains. If any one had taken ad-
vantage of our temporary imbecility and kicked
us, we could not have resented it at the time,
nor even have made a memorandum of the cir-
cumstance, to be avenged on a future occasion.
The crisis approached ; we crawled to the side
of the vessel, and hanging over, as limp as an
empty suit of clothes, we * *
Ah! this is cruel indeed ! What have we done
to deserve this? Wretched ass that we were,
what business had we coming to sea ? This
seemed the only proposition we could submit
to ourselves, but we were utterly unable to an-
swer it. Every thing about us was misty, and
phantasmagoric, and dreamy; we seemed to
have lost our very soul, heart, and stomach,
and nothing but waistcoat, and limbs, and vague
disgust with ourselves, and the universe, were
left behind. In the midst of this semi-trance*
however, we were nevertheless conscious of
one peculiar evil impending over us ; it was,
that the steward would certainly come soon,
and tell us that dinner was ready: and yet»
such was the spell, at the time, upon our
powers and our will, that much as we wished
it, we could not, even when we thought we
saw him near us, request him to be so good, as
not to mention it.
After every storm, however, whether
on the inside or the outside of a
man, comes a calm. Whilst sick, we were
silent and misanthropic. It was torture to us,
to be talked to; to be invited to talk ; or even
to listen to some talk. We were obliged to
make an effort and request a passenger to talk
about that soup a little further off. When we
get well, we have as much difficulty in holding
our tongue. Our spirits rise rapidly, and our
mind becomes clear, and disposed to regard
everything on the merry, and laughter yielding
side. We have become much wiser too, with
our sickness; for we understand our own
nature much more intimately than we ever
did before. We have discovered that philan-
thropy, good humour, wit, energy, patriotism,
and all the virtues included in the circle of
moral philosophy, must depend, after all. upon
the state of the stomach. It is perhaps humi-
liating to proud man to be obliged to confess
it, but it is so. There is no doubt that Julius
Caesar was a poor creature when he was sea
sick, and if an affidavit by himself to the con-
trary could be found amongst his works, I
would not believe it.
Beyond this dreadful affection, however, and
the slightly nervous feeling induced in me at
first, by the peculiar habits of the young lady
passenger, nothing occured of any moment to
disturb the even tenor of our eating, drinking,
sailing, sleeping, and whist playing. The
young lady slept in the next berth to me, with
her head, as I should think, only separated
from mine by the width of the partition board-
ing. I have said she was in very bad health ;
and to all appearance the poor thing
was in a confirmed consumption. She was


going down to Adelaide to her mother,
and from the first hour of her coming on board
she took to her cabin, and there remained. We
are ashamed to say, we had almost forgotten
that she was on board, when at about eleven
o’clock at night, after we had turned in, and
were sitting up in bed dispersing the cock-
roaches (which came out at first very strong in
the Phantom ,) with an odd number of Dowling
and Lowndes, we all at once, heard or
thought we heard a voice, very close to our
ear. A minute or two was quite sufficient to
satisfy me that this poor young girl was light-
headed, for although quite alone in her cabin,
she was holding imaginary conversations with
some doctor about her complaint, and protest-
ing strongly against her brother (who was not
on board, even if she had one) for striking her,
and then hiding himself among the sailors.
There is something awful at all times in the
wreck of the human mind exposed by the piti-
able wanderings of insanity, and the discovery
I made was quite sufficient to cause “ a stay
of proceedings ” against the roaches, and in-
deed, effectually prevented me from sleeping,
until my poor neighbour’s longer silence than
usual, satisfied me that she had at last fallen
asleep herself. As this occurred every night,
and I had never had any practice as “ a
keeper,” nor ever before attempted to sleep
with a small lunatic asylum going on just at
the very head of my bed, the reader may na-
turally conclude that for the first night or two,
it materially interfered with my natural rest.
It is extraordinary, however, as Shakespeare
says, “ how use doth breed a habit in a man,”
for by the fourth or fifth night, I could fall
asleep in the midst of a consultation between
this poor girl and her imaginary medical at-
tendant, being no more disturbed thereat than
at any other noise in the ship.
But we must get on. Behold this wonderful
little Phantom, on the fourth night of our
being out, dashing along by moonlight, at
10 knots an hour, past the Devil’s Tower,
and Curtis’s Island, in Bass’s Straits. How
solemn these huge masses of dusky looking
rock look in the moonlight, which sets off their
sharp outline. How gravely they seem to
frown down upon our gay and lively looking
brig, as like a great white bird she streams
before the breeze, the only thing disturbing
their sublime silence as they lie there in repose
all alone with the night. But I grow senti-
mental.
Three days and four nights more of this
kind of thing brings us to Holdfast Bay, about
six o clock in the morning, and this brings us
Tery near to Adelaide, and quite to the end of
chapter the second.
CHAPTER III.
Here then is the Phantom in Holdfast Bay
after an almost unprecedented short run from
Sydney Heads, of only seven days. The
sailors shake their heads profoundly, and say
“ she can do it, and that’s all about it,’’
which, seeing that she has done it, seems a
tolerably safe assertion. We have just had a
glimpse through the telescope, of what we are
told is Adelaide, which seems slightly to dis-
may my friend, the north-country merchant,
who in a faint voice exclaims. “ Eh, Sirs, but
it’s a poor like place yon !” Eor my part, with
glass and all, I can make out so little, and that
little is so indistinct and scattered, that for
aught I could say to the contrary, it might be
a town, or it might be merely a young burial
ground, only just started in business, andnnto t
yet well set up in grave stones.
It is blowing very fresh in Holdfast Bay,
named I presume from the necessity ships
are under of holding very fast indeed, to make
it a bay at all, as it is merely an open roadstead
in the Gulf of St. Yincent. The Post Office
boat is tossed about considerably in coming off
for the mail. In about an hour the pilot ar-
rives ; we run for the point at which we are to
pull up, and presently we hear the pleasant
rattle of the chain cable as the Phantom drops
anchor in smooth water. As it is yet early, we
first breakfast, then dress for shore, and then
lose no time in scrambling into the boat along-
side, which is to carry us up to the port. As the
boat is pulled away from the brig, which now
rides so gracefully at anchor, lifting as gently to
the undulating water as an albatross in a calm,
we turn to take a parting look of admiration at
the conscious-looking little clipper. Can it be
that we have slept and dreamt so securely in
this pretty and easily moved little box,
through storm, and dark nights, and twelve
hundred miles of the awful ocean, as if we
had been in our shore bed in Sydney :
Hallo! where are we driving to ? Surely we
must be running straight on the land, for no-
thing but the shore of the gulf seems lying before
us. We are told that we are going our course
for the mouth of the harbour, and that it is
there, although we cannot see it. Accordingly
in a few minutes we come upon a narrow, low


shored opening, turning off from the gulf, like an
almost invisible London alley, branching off
from a main street. As soon as you get into
this narrow turning however, the port itself
opens up before you, and for about seven or
eight miles, is as wide as the Thames below
bridge: perhaps wider, for something must be
allowed for deceit to the eye, which has been
so lately looking at nothing but sea on every
side. This singular looking inlet has been
called by some marine surveyor a natural dock,
and were it only a little deeper at the entrance
—at which part is a sandy bar—it would well
deserve the name. Ships of four or five hun-
dred tons, if not too deeply loaded, can run up
to the port, and as many as ten or twelve
large vessels, besides numerous smaller ones,
were lying there, when we stepped on shore.
Here were only the very few houses and stores,
necessary for the convenience and business of
those employed about the shipping, as the town
of Adelaide is about six miles further inland.
We thought the port rather a black and
mournful looking affair, but there had been an
extensive fire there a few days before we ar-
rived, and this might partly account for the ap-
pearance. Chaise carts, with three seats each,
one behind the other, are employed in carrying
people backwards and forwards, between the
Port and the city, at eighteen-pence a head.
The Phantom passengers were soon in one of
these machines, and going their short, but
uneasy journey, amongst bullock drays, native
blacks, and mounds of copper ore, (lying for
shipment)—to the town.
The road from the Port to the Town lies
through very swampy and useless land, and as
we were informed, was made by the South
Australian Company, at a cost of £15,000. It
is no great affair as a road, after all, for in being
driven over it, by the proprietor of our vehi-
cle, anxious to get back for another load of
eighteen-pences, we were bumped upwards
and downwards, and against each other, most
cruelly. We stopped, of course, at almost every
public-house until we were full, and then we
dashed along at a great rate for the
town. A short, thick, round, and
red faced young man, about thirty years old,
sat just before me, who smoked fiercely, (first
considerately asking if it annoyed us, and re-
ceiving for answer that it did’nt), talked in-
cessantly, and extolled South Australia as the
choicest country of the earth. “ All had a
chance there—poor and rich—beautiful cli-
mate—rich land—astonishing mines—every
thing going a bead very fast—every body in
good spirits, every body getting on.” Here
rather a mouldy looking old man, in a still
more mouldy looking cab, gingled slowly
along by a bony, ungroomed, dejected horse,
approached us, as it rattled towards the port.
“ There,” said our talking friend, “is one of out
richest men ; one of our largest Burra-Burra
holders.” A tremendous cloud of dust
here enviously shrouded the interesting
capitalist from our view. Our eyes, mouth,
nose, shirt collar, are filled with it. In
answer to our enquiry if it is always as dusty
there, our travelling companion says “ Yes,”
which for a time slightly disturbed my confi-
dence in his account of the happiness of the
people, who seem to be living in a
permanent brickfielder; and must be
the grittiest community under the sun.
Presently we pull up at a public house.
“ Will you take any thing, gentlemen,” says
our communicative friend, jumping down.
We civily declined, but he took something
himself, started a fresh cigar, and remounted.
In about another mile, we came to another
public house ; and here he gets down again.
“Will you take any thing wow, gentlemen,”
said he. We again decline, somewhat sur-
prised at the persevering civility of our friend.
We subsequently discovered that he was a
brewer, and that these different public houses
were probably customers ; and it was after-
wards illiberally suggested by some one, to whom
we told the story, and who had not an
exalted opinion of colonial ale, that it was per-
haps both prudence and policy in this brewer,
to patronise the customers he passed, by
getting other people to drink his beer, rather
than run any unnecessary risk, by swallowing
it in person.
Here we are at last with the town in sight.
In a few minutes we are rattling along Hindly-
street, until we stop at a most desolate and in-
solvent looking inn, and this we have been
told is as good a place as we can go to.
There would be no better specula-
tion for an energetic and attentive man,
who understands his business, than start-
ing a really good Inn at Adelaide. Pub-
lic houses there are enough, and to spare;
but not one clean, comfortable, respectable
hotel, in which a traveller can be as well lodged
and provided for, as in most of the Inns of
New South Wales. This was matter of uni-
versal complaint among the visitors with whom
I conversed. The only establishment which
is considered sufficiently respectable for tra


vellers of the better sort, is a boarding-house
kept by a Miss Bathgate, a lady from Sydney ;
but here the inmates all sit down to dinner at
one time, and are, of course, as at other board-
ing houses, expected to have contemporaneous
appetites ; an arrangement which is inconve-
nient to us, and repugnant to our irregular
constitution. We therefore went to a less dig-
nified hospitium, because we preferred eating
by ourselves, when we were hungry, to being
obliged to fall in with the feeding time of any
menagerie of men and women whatever, let
the members thereof be as tame and genteel as
might be.
That our love of liberty may have cost us
something in mere creature comfort is more
than likely ; but we are certain, that this was
much more than countervailed by the opportu-
nities presented to us at the inn for studying
and understanding South Australian character
and peculiarities. It was unpleasant of course
that we were obliged at all times to enter the
same house door with the common dram-
drinkers ; to pass the bar at which they gos-
sipped, and drank, and stared at the passing
stranger; that there was scarcely any furniture
in the house, and that our bedrooms were
without curtains or carpets ; that the boards of
the floors were dirty, and the once green
plaster of the rooms blotchy with damp; that I
had to sleep upon one of those open colonial
sofas without backs, and which appear to be
constructed upon the assumption that people
never fall out of bed ; that there was only one
black East Indian waiter, with always the
same very dirty apron on , and who looked as if
he had never washed himself since he had
been imported to the colony; and
who had never learned more of the
business of a waiter, than crying whenever he
was called, “Yassar,” and never coming;
true we deluded ourselves into the notion that
we had a private sitting-room, until one morn-
ing, as I and my northern friend were seated
tete-a-tete at breakfast, in marched a man in
tweeds, drew a chair up to the table, and with-
out opening his lips, began to deal with what
I considered as our loaf, our eggs, and our
coffee, in a style of impudence which would
have been perfectly staggering, had it not sud-
denly occurred to me, that we were all in a
public breakfast-room together, which hap-
pened to be the fact.
But all this, annQying as it was, for the
time, was more than compensated by the
admirable situation of the house, for any
one, who, like myself, has a passion for looking
out of window. We were in a business
street, with a row of shops opposite—jewellers,
mercers, drapers, &c.; and a day well spent in
looking out of window, will enable you to see
something of every phase of any society, in any
town. Early in the morning comes in the
slow and stolid looking German with his farm
produce in an antique looking waggon, of a
fashion that might have prevailed in the
fifteenth century. The baker, the seller of
live poultry, which he has in a great wooden
cage, covering the whole square of his cart;
the milkman, the vegetable dealer, go by, and
submit their goods to our critical inspection.
The labourers of all kinds are off to their
work ; and an hour or two afterwards,
the men of business and farmers pass back-
wards and forwards, on foot, on horseback,
and in vehicles of divers patterns, in the ear-
nest pursuit of gain. As the day wears on,
still more interesting objects prevail. The fair
ones of Adelaide come forth, and turn all to
poetry and pleasantness. Surely a lady shop-
ping is the same delightful creature, the same
conclusive evidence of civilization, in every
part of the world ; in London, in Sydney, and
in Adelaide. Look at her, with what joyous
grace she steps out of that phaeton, and into the
draper’s shop; and with what contagious ala-
crity that smirking and irresistible shopman
rubs his hands and lifts down the piece from
his well-stocked shelves behind him. We can
witness the whole transaction from the position
we occupy, and between the things in the shop
window can even detect the busy scissors run-
ning through the stuff, as he cuts off purchase
the first. We can see him plainly, saying,
“ What is the next article, madam ?” with that
easy and graceful assumption of a number of
other things being required, which assures the
lady, if she has any feeling of what is proper,
that she will be acting offensively if she does
not name a next article, whether she wants it
or not. We are intent upon her answer, when
in drops our friend to accompany us about the
town ; so leaving the lady in the hands of the
irresistible, off we go to collect the materials
of the next chapter.


CHAPTER IV.
In proceeding to an inspection of the town of
Adelaide, I soon found that I could not do bet-
ter than rely entirely upon myself. I had not
accompanied my companion further than about
half way down the street, viz., to Bentham
Neales’s corner, or to the Exchange,--for they
are both in one spot, when I lost him in a kind
of whirlwind of business, which plucked him
from my side, and left me for the rest of the
day to my own resources, A very interesting
corner is this. Take your stand here, and you
may at any time before noon, meet with or
easily ascertain, the exact whereabout of
almost any man of business in the place. Here
you may learn the latest news from the port or
the mines, and here, also, you may, almost any
morning, behold plying his business one of the
most interesting of auctioneers, burly in his
person, sound in his lungs, and compared with
whose general professional demeanour, our own
Stubbs—is a decidedly retiring, and somewhat
nervous character. Bentham Neales, the Ade-
laide Auctioneer, has always plenty of mining
shares to dispose of, and if you only buy what
he recommends, you are a made man. He
seems to have dedicated his life towards the
advancement of the fortunes, and the allevia-
tion of the poverty of his fellow-creatures. If
the Sisters of Charity were ever to take any
Brothers into their pious connexion, this great
and philanthropic man would not be
long out of it. Nevertheless, like every other
remarkable character of the same kind that has
ever lived, (the philanthropic Howard, the good
Clarkson, or the pious Wilberforce), —Bentham
Neales is certainly not properly appreciated in
his own country. People have been
heard to intimate that he sells mining shares
for his own benefit, and not merely for the en-
richment of others; and this, although he is
constantly telling those who resort to him, that
it is quite indifferent to him whether they take
the shares or not. Why is it, sighed we to
ourselves, as we stood in this excellent man’s
auction-room, and heard him pour forth his
profuse strains of “ goodwill towards men,"
that in all time our wretched race have turned
upon, and persecuted their benefactors ? What
original diabolical element is it in our vicious
nature which thus always impels us to return
evil for good ? We found we were about as
successful in answering these self-questionings
as other moral philosophers had been before
us, and therefore as we had a good deal of work
upon our hands, we contented ourselves with
determining, so far as our own practice went,
to do justice on all oceasions towards a great
character, and involuntarily sighing to our-
selves, Benevolence thy name is Bentham
Neales, we pensively walked out of the auction
room for the purpose of surveying the town.
The capital of South Australia is divided
into North and South Adelaide, by a queer
looking crack or fissure in the earth, with here
and there a wet hole in it, playfully called the
River Torrens. In summer it appears that this
River is never more than a series of water-
holes, separated by long intervals of the dry
bed of the creek or crack ; but I believe that
in winter the holes sometimes combine them-
selves into a ditch, and rush along in such
style as to secure for themselves the reputation
of a river during all the rest of the year : for
people had not done speaking of it in this cha-
racter even when I was there. There is even a
tradition in the town that one or two ingenious
persons have succeeded in drowning themselves
in the Torrens ; and to assist the imaginations
of the residents, bridges are built over it,
which however we never used, as we found it
more convenient to walk straightforward over
the nearest dry part which lay in our way. It
appeared to me that the colonists did not upon
the whole like to hear light or irreverent cri-
ticism, on this unimpressive feature of the
landscape, for they always spoke of it them-
selves with respectful gravity. A friend dined
with us one day, who had come over from
North Adelaide to our inn on the South. On
his rising in the evening to depart, we pressed
his further stayl really cannot," said he,
“ thank you, for you know I have to cross the
water before I can get home.”
Hindley-street, in Adelaide, is what George-
street is in Sydney, the chief business thorough-
fare. Indeed, it is almost the only street in
which, for any considerable distance, there are
continuous rows of buildings, and even here
they succeed each other, in every variety of
size, shape, and material, from the weather-
boarded cottage, up to ambitious attempts at
stone and stucco, fronted with plate glass, and
exhibiting here and there faint efforts at archi-
tectural adornment. In all the other streets
the buildings are every now and then in-
terrupted by considerable spaces of vacant
ground, as in the less .frequented thorough-
fares of Sydney.
There are, indeed, whole squares and streets,
with scarcely a house in them. Whilst taking


a pleasant walk, as we thought in the suburbs
we were suddenly pulled up by a finger-post,
which informed us that we were in Grote-
street, and Grote-street, as per map, is about
the centre of the town, and did not contain,
that I could see, a single brick. Building,
however, is going on very rapidly, so that the
supply of houses is fast adjusting itself to the
additional demand arising out of the great num-
ber of immigrants who are now flocking to the
colony.
There are not a great number of private
houses at Adelaide that can bear a comparison
with many of the best houses in, and in the
neighbourhood of, Sydney. But to this re-
mark the Adelaidonians would justly oppose
the commentary, “ well, but Sydney is sixty
years old, whilst our town can scarcely be
called a sixth part of that age.” Bearing
this fact in mind, Adelaide appears to me to be
the more extraordinary growth of the two ; for
there are certainly many good houses fit for a
gentleman’s family, and many more are in
course of erection. These are chiefly to be
found in North Adelaide—across the water—
the Woolloomooloo of the South Australian
capital, although they are by no means con-
fined to that polite portion of the town. The
Bank of South Australia is quite as handsome
a building as any used for a similar purpose in
Sydney; and, by the bye, is managed by a
very gentlemanly and superior man, (whom we
encountered and conversed with) Mr. Edward
Stephens, who is extremely active in ad-
vancing the interests of the colony. There is
another banking establishment in the town,
which you might, when off your guard, easily
take for a lollypop shop, or a small store,
if you were not struck respectful
by an announcement thereon painted in long
letters, a trifle smaller than the building itself,
that this little fierce-looking bit of red brick
wall is nothing less than “ the Bank of Aus-
tralasia.” The residence of his Excellency
Governor Kobe, although not yet nearly
finished according to the original design, stands
in a tolerable garden, and is a greatly superior
house to the one so lately tenanted by the
Governors of New South Wales. The Legis-
lative Council Chamber, on the other hand,
might be taken for an insolvent Methodist
chapel,—too trim, and prim, and uniformly red
in its bricks, for a barn; too mean for a
church; too demure for a theatre; and too
melancholy even for a private mad-house. As
the sessions had lately commenced, I walked to
the door, (this was about three o’clock p.m.)
and seeing it open, and no one to oppose my ad-
mission, I entered, and found myself in a most
wretched attempt at a lobby, which was
merely a thin chop, cut off from the main
building. Seeing a narrow staircase to the
right and left of this counterfeit lobby, I struck
up one side at a venture, and following it to
the top, came out upon a small gallery, in
which was seated one reporter, who stared to
see me walking in as the audience, for besides
ourselves not a soul was present in the gal-
lery. Pursuing my investigations, and looking
down into the body of the house, at rather a
sharp angle of vision, I discovered eight South
Australian Legislators,—being the whole Legis-
lative Assembly of the Province,—four on either
side of an official looking table, at one end oi
which sate one (a stout and comely looking
Englishman) whom I knew from a portrait I
had seen of him, to be Governor Kobe. The
members, Governor included, were very quiet
—quiet as conspirators,—and were engaged in
passing the clauses of some law, (apparently
adapted from the New South Wales impound-
ing Act,) for regulating the extravagancies of
stray cattle, in and about the streets of Ade-
laide. One rather lymphatic looking legislator
made a drowsy, but elaborate exposure of some
artful old eow, apparently well known about
town, who had acquired the art of lifting up
people’s gate latches with her horn, and who
seemed to require a clause or two for herself.
The members were all colloquial in their style,
at which, however, I was by no means sur-
prised, for it certainly is not easy to rise to the
oratorical, with an audience of eight, and one
reporter, who is calmly cutting lead pencils all
the time for the debate, which is not to come;
whilst the Governor, evidently thought the
whole thing as slow as I did.
Half an hour of this I stood with great perse-
verance ; at the end of which time, seeing that
the House could not go far wrong, for I
thought I saw a volume of friend Callaghan’s
Acts lying on the table, as a sort of young
colonial legislator’s vade mecutn, I creaked my
boots as little as possible, as I evacuated the
gallery, in favour of the reporter, and once
more regained the open air, and took to tire
town.


CHAPTER V.
The Supreme Court is held in a building which
was once used for the purposes of a theatre.
The Drama failed, and the ever flourishing Law
entered upon, and now occupies the premises.
The Court was not sitting at the time I was
there, but I had several opportunities of seeing
and conversing with the Judge of the province,
Mr. Justice Cooper, who is a middle-aged gen-
tleman-like man, appears to be a very well-
read lawyer, and with a mild and benignant
suavity of manner, discharges his duties so
satisfactorily as to have secured for himself,—as
general report gave it out, —the universal con-
fidence and respect of the public at large. He
is at present overworked, but a second Judge
has been sent for, and will probably soon
arrive in the colony from England.
And now what about the people of Adelaide ?
What are they like ? Why, at the first glance,
they are very like the people of Sydney. Living
in a latitude only a degree south of ourselves,
Panama hats, blouses, white jackets, and light
tweeds, are of course as common in the streets
of Adelaide as in those of our own town. For
the rest, the South Australians are cordial and
hearty in their manners ; and in their persons,
they generally run, or perhaps, more correctly
speaking, I should say they toddle, fatter than
we do.
Prom the first moment of my landing, I was
struck with this prevailing stoutness; and al-
though my companions, when I mentioned the
circumstance, said they had not observed it,
yet they were constantly’ afterwards remarking
the same fact, and recalling my attention to it.
A larger per-centage of fat, round, happy-look-
ing men, I never saw in any population; so
fat and round, that we could not sometimes re-
sist the feeling, that many of them, but for pre-
judice, and the appearance of the thing, would
suffer much less by lying down and rolling
along the streets, than they evidently do,—es-
pecially in summer time, —in attempting to
walk. The ladies, are of course as handsome,
elegant, and attractive, as our own country-
women are everywhere; and that’s all we
think it necessary to say about them, not being
disposed to run the risk of marring this delicate
part of the subject, by our coarse handling.
There are not so many showy private equi-
pages in the streets of Adelaide as there are in
Sydney, nor are there in the former town as
yet any public carriages plying for hire, except
the chaise carts before mentioned, which run
only between the port and the town. A few
of the more successful mining speculators have,
however, lately burst upon the world in highly
varnished vehicles, and, in commercial phrase,
I am inclined to think carriages are looking up,
among the good folk in general.
I had the good fortune to be there at the
time of the holding of the yearly agricultural,
and horticultural show, which was calculated
to give a stranger a much mote accurate idea
of the productiveness of the South Australian
colony, than weeks, or perhaps even months,
of a mere desultory sojourn, at any other time,
would enable him to acquire. This very in-
teresting exhibition was held in a long tent
set up in the Park Lands, about a quarter of a
mile out of the town ; and as early as eleven
and twelve o’clock in the morning, great num-
bers of respectable and well-dressed people of
all classes were on the move, as for pleasure.
After twelve o’clock most of the people seemed
to have struck for a half-holiday, and
my eyes were, every five or ten
minutes, gladdened by the sight of a
whole agricultural family circle, condensed
somehow or other into “ the cart” (evidently
in daily use on the farm), whilst not a soul,
from the driver downwards, seemed to bestow
a single thought on the horse, who (because
he did not protest audibly) had the confidence
of the company as much as if he had been a
locomotive steam-engine. These cart-loads of
happy families were so like what I had fre-
quently seen in the country parts of old En-
gland, that few of the fine things in the Pavilion
were calculated to afford a stranger half as
much pleasure, although they were well deserv-
ing of admiration, as the reader will see.
As our only business was to stare about us,
we were on the road to the show as early as
any one; and long before 1 o’clock, p h,, we
found ourselves melting (for the day was very
hot) in a large crowd of respectable-looking
people, who were awaiting the time, at which
the rail was to be removed, and the public
admitted. There were numerous constables
present to keep the peace, which no one seemed
inclined to break, for out of the assembled four
or five thousand persons who were on the
ground during the day, not a single police
office case occurred.
At one o’clock the barriers are removed, and
the taking of the shillings commences ; the
public are admitted one by one, but so slowly,
as it appears to those who are being jammed
into fainting fits behind, that one almost thinks


that every man who is paying, is perversely
getting change for a sovereign, or a pound
note. This induces the wholesome advice
from those behind, to those in front, to get
their shillings ready; which elicits the disco-
very, that there are amongst us several unhappy
small boys, who are not going into the show
at all, having only worked into the thickest
part of the company, and contributed to the
crush, from the natural taste which all boys
have for a suffocating crowd; whereupon, with-
out any ceremony, and with some indignation
in a few of the hottest, and most suffering, the
boys are summarily pushed and hustled off,
towards the outskirts of the multitude, in
order to give a little more room for those who
are left. At length with time and patience,
we all get through the barrier, and into the
pavilion, which is a spacious and handsome
canvas structure, of the style of the Crown
and Anchor, at Greenwich fair.
The first objects which temptingly solicit
our attention, are the different samples of
grapes. There were twenty-four kinds of this
fruit from Mr. George Stevenson’s garden,
black and; white Hamburgh,—grisly, black,
red, and white Frontiniac, —Damascus, Musca-
dine, &c., &c., &c., all of them very beautiful
bunches, the largest weighing 4 lbs. 5 ounces.
To Mr. Stevenson the Judges had awarded the
first prize, and to Mr. A. H. Davis, (who also
had a very fine show of grapes) the second. The
display of wine grapes in almost every variety
known in Europe, were set forth at a different
table. Mr. Anstey’s exhibition of apples,
however, (we consider ourselves excellent
judges of apples, having visited in our school-
boy days a great number of orchards) set us
longing like Eve. His hawthorden and cluster
russets were very good, no doubt; and so pro-
bably were his golden Harvey’s, and Bedford-
shire foundlings, but if those streaked ribston
pippins, and scarlet nonpareils, were not equal
to any that ever distressed the virtue of a wan-
dering school-boy, we will never trust our
judgment in this fruit again. Mr. Anstey de-
servedly obtained the first prize for fruit ge-
nerally, of which there were beautiful samples
of pine-apples, pomegranate, guava, twenty va-
rieties of apples, (one being a noble-looking
seedling grown in South Australia) four varie-
ties of pears, medlars, quinces, peaches, necta-
rines, plums, strawberries, mulberries, and
raspberries. The second prize for fruit was
obtained by Mr. George Stevenson. The other
fruits and articles were so numerous that we
can do no more than simply mention them.
There were dried figs, raisins, Jordan almonds,
magnificent bouquets of flowers, vegetable
seeds, some very fine rhubarb, cucumbers,
vegetable marrows, salads, carrots, onions (as
large as Spanish), hops, honey, butter, hams,
bacon, cheese, malt, maize, snuff, wheat,
barley, one parcel grown by a Mr. Frame, at
Mount Barker, weighing 56 lo*l6th lbs. to the
bushel, which took the first prize; the second,
Messrs. Stanford and Burley’s, weighing 55
10- 16th lbs. per bushel. Oats grown by a Mr.
Mott, of Watergate, taking the first prize,
weighed per bushel, 46 7‘l6th pounds, and the
second prize weighing 46£ pounds, grown by Mr.
Shakes, of Nairne, The specimens of wines
we had no opportunity of tasting, and therefore
we present what has been published in the
South Australian Gazette about them, from the
pen of a writer who had evidently better means
of judging than we had,
" Wine. —The competitors for this important
article, were, Mr. Armstrong, Mr. John Baker,
and Mr. Duffield. We rejoice to say, that
upon the whole, and making every allowance
for the youth of the wine, and the unavoidable
inexperience in its manufacture, the samples
produced to-day gave the highest promise of
the future excellence of the wines of South
Australia. We tasted all the samples; and
what pleased us most in doing so, was, that
not one of them resembled in the slightest
degree the wines of the Cape of Good Hope.
They were, one and all, wholly free from that
earthy and inexpressibly disagreeable fustiness
—we use the term for want of one more de-
scriptive—.which is the peculiar characteristic
of all the wines from that quarter. The wines
made by Mr. Baker, and Mr. Duffield, were
sound and pleasantly flavoured, and were quite
equal to the same description of white wines,
exhibited by Mr. Anstey. The Frontignac
produced by the last named gentleman, was a
perfect wine of its class, —and in all respects
as good, for a new wine, as could be made in
any district of France. To this wine the prize
£lO 10s, was awarded. Mr. Anstey exhibited
a red wine of last year’s vintage—sound and of
great body, though of course requiring age to
mellow it. We look upon the success of this
last wine as of much greater importance than
any other variety, and we trust Mr. Anstey
will, at the coming vintage, direct more than
usual care to its manufacture.”
By-the-by, we never meet with any criticism
of the last vintage of New South Wales, in
any colonial paper in New South Wales ; why
is this ?


The show of wheat was very fine, the grain
being as large, plump, and heavy, as any
grown in an English county. The first prize
£6 sb. was awarded to Mr. Frame, the success-
ful competitor of the previous year—the
weight per bushel was 66 12'16th lbs., and, as
the South Australian Gazette says, “ was re-
markable for its cleanness and regularity.”
The second prize, £3 Bs., was taken by
Messrs. Sandford and Burley, weight per
bushel being 66 Is*l6th lbs. The Judges con-
sidered this second sample to be the best
wheat, but it was not so clean as the first.
The articles which came more properly under
the head of manufactures, were certainly not
the least interesting part of the show. There
was a lead pump—a very good one to look at,
and as I was told, also a good one to pump,—
manufactured from coloniallead, by Mr. Cham-
berlain. For this he received a prize of five
guineas. There were also a number of articles
of brass-foundery, manufactured by Mr. Pybus,
a brass force-pump, a church bell, the tone of
which it was said, could be heard a distance of
four miles, which I do not doubt, for an atro-
cious boy who presided over this instrument
rang conviction into the ear of every passer-by,
who appeared to be particularly disgusted with
the noise. Besides this, there were house and
cattle bells, alarm bells, elegant bronze scrapers,
all of colonial metal, for which Mr. Pybus re-
joiced in a prize of five guineas. There was'
also a very beautiful little steam engine, of six-
horse power, which was made by a Mr. Wyatt,
and which drew a prize of five guineas. A
very neat and nicely finished brass counter en-
gine, manufacturers, Messrs. Little and Saint,
received a prize of two guineas. A Mr. George
Bean seemed to have concentrated his genius
upon the preparation of leather, of which there
were the following varieties;—!. Horse hides, of
Cordovan ; 2. Seal skins ; 3, Dog skins; 4.
Kangaroo skins; 5. Calf skins, boot legs,
boot-tops, sides of sole leather, boar shield,
brown harness, hogskin for saddles, brown
seal, goat skin, brown skin mats, white skin
mats, dog skin in the hair. The Judges, highly
approving of Mr. Bean’s manufacture, recom-
mended that a prize of £lO 10s. should be
awarded to him. Basket osiers, and straw
plat were also exhibited, the former of which
having been newly introduced by Mr. Duffield,
secured a prize, therefore, to that gentleman.
The above is merely an abridgement from
the South Australian Gazette, of the account of
the different fruits, commodities, and articles
exhibited, but having seen and examined the
whole of them myself, I can speak to the ac-
count being correct, and unexaggerated.
As many very sensible and prudent men,
have, within my hearing, expressed a suspicion
that the South Australians were going rather
mad about their mines, and were in a fair way
to neglect in their favour, the slower —less
fascinating, but perhaps surer means of securing
the prosperity of the community at large, I
have, at the risk of being dull, given in
detail as above, the large variety of indications
of South Australian industry and enterprise,
witnessed by myself. From them it will be
clearly seen, that howsoever sanguine our
southern neighbours are about their wealth un-
der the earth, —and that they are very sanguine
indeed, the reader will see, from the account I
shall give of them, —they by no means neglect
those other great branches of industry, which
are not less indispensable for advancing small
communities into great nations.
CHAPTER VI.
It is now many months since accounts were
first circulated about Sydney, of a certain
gallant officer, settled in South Australia, who
having discovered copper, and kept his know-
ledge to himself, purchased, at the upset price
of a pound an acre, th,e section containing the
hidden treasure, and then forthwith practically
published himself to the world, as the owner
in fee, of a princely property, netting £9OOO
a year, thus acquired with his knowingly
invested eighty pounds. This was so like the
brilliant modes of realizing competencies pre-
vailing in the Arabian [Nights Entertainments
—so similar to the style of business of the
Eastern gentleman, who acquired all his ready
cut and polished brilliants of the first water, by
throwing into the inaccessible diamond valley
those rounds of beef, which the birds brought
up again to the gentleman, with the diamonds
sticking thereto, —that it was no wonder South
Australian imaginations were touched. The
province had but lately before this copper dis-
covery, been struggling under a depression and
distress, as general and severe as that which
afflicted New South Wales in the gloomy
years of 1843 and 44. There were, perhaps,
very few South Australian settlers or traders
who were then safe and solvent—many were
seeking relief of the Insolvent Law,—and,
therefore, the first discovery that they had


actually been filing, and were still filing their
schedules, with unbounded treasures lying in
“lodes” beneath their feet, waiting only to be
dug for, was naturally an exciting one. Like
the poor and starving painter in the story, who
day-dreamed himself into forgetfulness of his
real poverty by lying in bed and contemplating
pictures of the Brazilian gold mines, suspended
on his garret walls—the South Australians, in
almost an equal degree, surrendered them-
selves to the pleasures of imagination. Solitary
and excited gentlemen, with hammers and
bags, might have been seen and heard, it is
said, disturbing the deep silence of South
Australian mountains and valleys, as, like
lunatic roadmakers, they hammered their
anxious way over the face of the country for
“ indications.” In a very short time, as might
naturally be expected, many new and unques-
tionably good bits of metalliferous land were
discovered, and then the mining mania fairly
commenced. We shall certainly not soon forget
the surprise we felt some months ago, when we
first saw a South Australian gentleman
at a dinner party in Sydney, pull out of his
pockets, and produce to the company, what, to
our uninstructed mind, seemed to be a consider-
able portion of some Macadamized road, until
the colour satisfied us that they were no vulgar
stones the gentleman was carrying about his
person, with a patience exceeding that of pa-
viors. Ignorant that we were. These
mineral lumps were his grey ore, his blue car-
bonate, his malachite. How would he have
despised us, could he have guessed our igno-
rance?
A region in which the copper indications
were among the richest, was one which now
constitutes the valuable properties of the South
Australian Mining Company (commonly called
the Burra Burra) and the Princess Royal
Mining Company. By the Australian Lands
Act,—most readers are aware—the purchaser
of a special survey of 20,000 acres, is entitled
to buy that quantity of the Government, at the
upset price of £1 an acre, without competi-
tion; and therefore these invaluable 20,000
acres—in consequence of the considerable
masses of copper ore which had been dis-
covered at the northern extremity of the land,
—were put up by the people of Adelaide as a
special survey. It appears, however,
that the town's people were “ rather
short,” to employ the usual expression,
and a great effort was required to be made.
No one, nor two, nor six, nor a dozen persons,
could, at the time, muster £20,000 to pay for
this very special survey; and the South
Australians trembled, as they thought of
the prize, now dangling almost within their
grasp, eventually falling into the hands of some
of the rich Sydney folk, who might be in-
formed of its value, and secure it. What could
not be done by one, or by a few, must be done
by many ; and therefore a grand combination
of gentle and simple, (or to use the Adelaide
terms, “of the nobs and the snobs,”) made
imperatively necessary by the urgency of the
case, was formed for the purpose of satisfying
the inexorable Government, whose only terms
were, “cash before delivery” of the deed of
conveyance. The land was put up,—the land
was bought, the deposit was paid. The residue
must be lodged in the public Treasury within
a month. There were cautious colonists to be
got over, who albeit conscious of a taste for
copper, still shrunk from becoming men of
metal, in joint stock companies, and under
joint liabilities. Some were lukewarm
about forming a company, others were
decidedly averse from it. Meantime, the
little month was running on, and was
drawing to a close, but still the £20,000
was not collected. At length the very day
arrived on which, by a certain hour, the money
was to be paid, and still excited and half
frantic men were flying about the streets of
'Adelaide with cash boxes, clearing out the
citizens for the mighty effort; and at last, it is
said, only a few minutes before the expiration
of the time within which the money was to be
paid, the whole sum was made up and lodged
in the Treasury. And thus the most valuable
copper district in the known world, was secured
to the people of the colony, within which the
property lay. Hereafter, South Australian
historians will, I suppose, rectord the mighty
achievement in terms of solemnity befitting the
occasion. Even my informant grew animated,
like a man describing a battle, as he ap-
proached the crisis of the cash boxes ; and
seemed “to fight the battle o’er again,” as he,
in imagination, triumphantly paid in a second
time that all-important £20,000, to the Trea-
sury.
The union, however, which had been
absolutely necessary at first, was
one which could not last much longer
than the pressing exigency which had
called it into existence. Elements
naturally antagonistic, could only be made to
mix by the application of extreme force, and


like oil and water which has been shaken into
temporary union, the nobs and snobs began to
draw away from each other, almost from the
time of the purchase. They soon came to a
difference of opinions and wishes, and, like
sensible men, conscious that the shortest way
was the best, they agreed to separate, and
amicably settle their disputes by equitably
dividing the property between them, by lot.
Fortune favoured the snobs (additional
proof of her blindness, no doubt, in the eyes of
the afflicted nobs) —by awarding to them the
northern end of the survey—the 10,000 acres
which now belong to the South Australian
Mining Company, and one portion of which is
the celebrated Burra Burra Mine, spoken of by
Cornish captains of mines, as one of the won-
ders of the world.
The nobs were thus left in possession of the
southern end of the property —and although
on account of the great dearness of mining
labour, it has not yet been effectively worked,
it is generally supposed by competent judges,
from the rich indications cropping out along the
whole of the survey, to be not less valuable
than the northern half. The direction of the
principal lode, as shown by the working of the
Burra Burra, has a course of north, by about
35- west. In the first year of the working of
the Burra Burra mine, so energetically did its
proprietors go to work, in tearing open the
bowels of the earth, 7200 tons of copper ore
were extracted; and as the quantity increased,
and the quality steadily improved as they got
deeper, the shares originally £5 each, rose
rapidly in price, and a few months ago touched
£ll2. They have since declined to
£6O, and by the last advices were selling,
at £72 for cash; and on credit for £lOO, and
£llO, the seller holding the scrip until the
payment of the money. Account sales have
already been received in the colony, of the
first shipments of the Burra Burra ores, which
have realised at Swansea from £lO 15s. to
£3l 3s. per ton. As these earlier shipments,
however, were nearly all surface ores, sent
home without being cleaned, classified, or pre-
pared in any way for exportation, the above
return was higher than was expected among
experienced miners. Much of the later ore,
raised, many tons of which lay on the wharf
for shipment, both when I arrived and when I
departed, besides an entire shipload, just ready
to leave* for Swansea, was about the richest
which had yet been brought down from the
xninp, Bed oxides, grey ore, blue and green
carbonates, and malachite, lay at the port in
immense heaps of many tons each, specimens
of which I brought away with me to Syd-
ney.
Nothing but the great distance of the Burra
Burra mine from Adelaide (96 miles) and the
failure of my attempts to enlist a companion,
for what, without one, is a very long, tedious,
and by reason of the flatness of the coun-
try, an uninteresting journey, prevented
me from visiting this remarkable spot,
which, upon the unanimous testimony of all
who had seen it, it is a perfect marvel in its
way. It seems, that about two miles of gal-
leries are already constructed in the excava-
tions of the mine, and that in every direction,
large numbers of operative miners, are daily
engaged therein, quarrying (to use their own
word) rather than mining away the walls
of the lodes, so extensively and abundantly are
the ores distributed in every direction. Hun-
dreds of labourers, drays, and bullocks, are em-
ployed in connexion with the works, and
already a considerable village has sprung up in
the immediate neighbourhood of the mine, be-
sides an inn, which it is said a Burra Burra
director has lately started, at his own ven-
ture, and therefore as miners are a thirsty class
of people, a magistrate, with all the et cceteras
of coercive discipline, will soon, as I was in-
formed by a gentleman lately returned from
the mine, be required to keep this new com-
munity in peace and order.
The road from the mine to the port is almost
a dead level, so that the cost of the carriage of
the ores for that distance does not exceed £4
a ton. The number of bullocks killed, how-
ever, at this distressing work is still very great,
and it is said, that if the country were gene-
rally mountainous, a common mine, by reason
of the cost of transit of the ores, would scarcely
be profitable at all. With this conclusion, my
own limited observations, made on a visit to the
Adelaide and Glen Osmond mines,—compelled
me to concur.


CHAPTER VII.
Ix was on the fifth day of our sojourn in the
good town of Adelaide, that, in company with
my fellow-traveller, the north countryman, I
proceeded to the livery-stables, to hire a gig,
for the purpose of visiting the Adelaide copper
mine, distant about thirteen miles.
We had no sooner mentioned our destination
than the proprietor shook his head, and said,
he could not let out his gigs for such a road as
we had to travel; and that what we wished to
do, could only be done with saddle horses.
Upon this, we were obliged reluctantly to over-
haul his stables, for the purpose of selecting
the special steeds, who were to be put upon
such responsible employment. Our room for
choice was of course as limited as it usually is
in colonial livery stables. As far as one might
judge by the eye, almost every animal we saw
was miserably low, unhappy, and superan-
nuated, and fast passing away into the state of
cats-meat. Yet there was not one of them
who, notwithstanding his unprepossess-
ing appearance, had not, if you
took his owner’s account of him—and
who should know him better ?—some peculiar
virtue or good quality, which distinguished
him from the vulgar mass of horseflesh in
general. Leaving it, therefore, to the proprie-
tor himself, to select for us two of the least
deathly among the inmates of his stables, the
animals are in a few minutes led forth, which,
in consideration of ten-and.sixpence to be paid
for the services of each, are to carry us to the
mine and back. One is a moderate sized, just-
passable-looking cob, the other, a monstrous
and revolting structure of skin and bone, and
acute angles, with a neck almost as long as
that of a dromedary, and so tall, that he ap-
peared to have originally outgrown his
strength, and never to have recovered it. As
almost any rider of less stature than the Irish
Giant would have required a ladder in order
comfortably to ascend this animal, —
my fellow-traveller, with characteristic northern
sagacity, lost no time in appropriating the
more moderate sized steed, having mounted
him whilst I was wonderingly regarding the
other, I was thus left for the “ big-un,” as
the tall horse was familiarly called by his
friend the groom, who from force of habit, and
perhaps to persuade me, if possible, that the
poor dejected creature had a great fund of ani-
mal spirits, which required repressing,—held
him hard, and close up to the mouth by the
bridle, as if he would have made off any where
else but back again into the stable, if he had
been allowed to follow his own impulses at all.
Disgusted as I was, I nevertheless felt that
before I could get to the mine, I must devote
myself to the study of scaling the only other
broken saddle horse that was left for me, and,
therefore, although perfectly conscious of the
gratuitous diversion I was affording to that por-
tion of the public who were looking over the
palings of the yard, I submitted myself to that
temporary deformity of the figure, which re-
sults to every man who attempts to lift his
foot as high as his face, at the same time af-
fecting to look cool and comfortable, and in no
degree like a person who is nearly breaking a
blood-vessel. I found myself at length, and
after a desperate struggle, looking down from
the saddle upon the scene below. The first
intelligible sounds I heard were from some of
the stable-yard loungers, who were hanging
about for excitement, and who were engaged in
a quiet and speculative discussion as to whether
my steed “ could do itone averring, “ he’d
been a good old os once • ” and another express-
ing his opinion “ that he had done his work.”
As I felt that this kind of thing, now that I
was upon his back, was becoming personal, I
determined to start at once, and I requested tha
loan of a whip, upon which an instrument
was presented to me, with which I believe I
might nearly have knocked the horse down
altogether, if I had been so inclined. Thus
equipped and accoutred, our cavalcade goes
forth from the livery stable keeper’s premises, the
cob ambling off with becoming and unexpected
liveliness, whilst mine followed after, with a
spectral and stalking sort of walk, as if he had
never done anything in his life before but
funerals. Still I could not bring myself to use
my bludgeon of a whip ; and, therefore, with
that natural human pride, which deters every
man of ordinary good taste from flagellating
his unlively steed before the public, I con-
tented myself with furtive digs of the heel;
promising him, in my own mind, that he
should distinctly know the difference, as soon
as I had got him out of town.
Our road, we were told, lay through
large and cultivated plains, beautifully
covered with farms, until we should
come to a gully between two mountains, a
darker coloured and a lighter coloured one,


visible in the distance, pursuing which gully,
and crossing a certain other mountain we
should come to, would bring us sooner or later,
according to the horses, to the Adelaide and
Montacute Mines. The proper road, however,
until we came to the gully, involved, accord-
ing to the directions of a waggoner we met, so
many distracting turnings off, at this or that
fence, and keepings to the right, or bearings to
the left when we came to this mill or that
house,- that I was fully convinced I should
lose myself if I attempted to follow it. I there-
fore determined to keep my eye on the distant
gully, and to ride straight across the farms
until I got to it. My companion, who averred
that he was utterly destitute of the bump of
locality, and that he should rely upon me to
bring him to the mine, seemed at first rather
disconcerted at the proposed series of trespasses
to real property; but upon my acknowledge-
ment that it was the only means I had of
assuring our arrival at the proper part of the
mountain, he became reconciled to the neces-
sary and innocent illegality. Away, then,
went the cob, whilst my animal followed in
his wake hand passibus cequis, An
occasional shower of kicks and
blows, now and then, awoke my brute from his
natural state of somnambulism, into a kind of
long, solemn, but transitory trot, which lifted
me at every step so high out of my seat, that I
believe a spectator from behind might at any
moment have seen a considerable portion of
the landscape between me and the saddle. It
was probably as much out of commisseration
for myself, as from the natural heartiness of
the people, that not one of the farmers over
whose land we rode complained of the liberty
we had taken. I made my companion dis-
mount, to remove and replace slip-pannels,
whilst I rode forward to state to the proprie-
tors how careful and conscientious we had
been in this respect, and to propitiate them
with compliments (upon the farm,) which
could always, more or less, be paid with per-
fect sincerity.
Thus proceeding, we, in about an hour and a
half, reached the pass between the hills. Here
we are, then, as it were, in an instant away
from all cultivation, from all human
habitation. The majestic and towering
mountains, stretch up far away, on either
side of us. It was as if we had, in
an instant, become re-transported to the High-
lands of Scotland. All sorts of pleasant recol-
lections come crowding upon us, and we inyo-
luntarily stopped to enjoy the scene. This our
companion takes as a sign,—not that we are
rapt and romantic, —but that we have lost the
road, for he checks his cob directly, to look
back, and ask, if we’re sure we’re right ? I
push on my beast, who stares about him as
leisurely as if I had brought him out only to ad-
mire the scenery, and from his obstinate de-
liberateness of movement, it seems as if we
should never get to the top of the mountain.
The road winds spirally about it, and when we
have got three-fourths up,—with a high cut on
the left hand, like a wall, and a very deep de-
clivity, almost a precipice, on the right,—my
horse stands still altogether, and looks at it
like a surveyor. Kicks and blows avail not.
He will have nothing further to say to the bu-
siness. Here is a pretty go, or rather no go.
I suddenly recollect that I am invited out to
dine that day, and shall perhaps be obliged to
abandon my expedition, and make the
best of my way back to Adelaide. To
all my appeals with whip and heels,
my quadruped only returns a violent shrug, or
debilitated buck, which although merely a
demonstration of impotent vice, is dreadfully
disconcerting in my present situation. My
companion, having already satisfied himself
from the confidence of my countenance, that 1
am all right as to the road, has pushed on, and
left me to carry on the war all alone with my
unsatisfactory beast; who, at each successive
shrug or jump, threatens to grind my left leg
against the wall of earth and stones on the one
side, or swerves alarmingly near the precipi-
tous declivity on the other. And as his whole
conduct from the beginning of the journey has
been excessively eccentric, to say the least of
it, I cannot but shudder as I contemplate the
possibility of his plunging himself in a moment
of mental aberration —with me on his back-
down the declivity, without giving any kind
of .notice. I therefore descend from my ex-
alted seat, and lead him by the rein, which
appears to reconcile him to the rest of the
mountain path, for he stalks after me, not
pulling back so hard as might have been ex-
pected. Thus humouring him, I at length
reached the top of the mountain, and never
have I beheld a fairer sight of the kind, than
from that spot. Behind me lay Adelaide Plains,
covered with rich and beautiful farms, for
many a fair mile. Afar off to the left glittered in
the bright light, the Gulf of St. Vincent; and
before me rose range after range of noble hills,
further than the eye could reach. How inex-


pressibly solemn, and sweet, and awful, is this
deep stillness, and solitude. The mind is
lifted up by the vastness of the surrounding
objects, above the petty cares and thoughts of
our town life, into something of a state that we
would almost call religious rapture, if we felt
that we deserved to be called religious at all.
What can human life afford better, than the
world of delights which memory yields, when
the mind wanders away into luxurious reverie,
and seems to create, and to repose upon its
creations, at one and the same time ?
Here could I have stood, and gazed for
hours. Here also could my horse have stood,
and grazed for hours, of which fact, and of the
passing time, I was at length reminded, by the
sound of his active jaws,—by far the most
active part about him, —doing full justice
to the patches of pasture, here and
there to be found upon the top of
the mountain. Having coaxed and led
him to a slight elevation, we a second time as-
cended to his saddle, whereupon, as if in better
humour, from the bait of grass he had enjoyed,
he descended the hill at a much improved pace.
About a third of the way down I overtook my
companion, who, unaware of what had de-
tained me above, and thinking that I had at
last discovered that we were in the wrong road,
was just about to return in search of me.
Perhaps he did not fancy being in so solitary a
spot by himself, for it was certainly a beautiful
scene either for a poet, or a highwayman. I,
however, was extremely comfortable, for my
heart was light, and my pockets were empty,
and—
Cantabit vacuus, coram latrone viator.
Away we go, then, once more in company,
At the bottom of the hill we come upon a dray
load of goods, a team of bullocks, and the
driver, who has knocked off the road, and
pulled up upon a patch of grass, having given
up the attempt at passing the mountain, as a
bad job. In answer to my question, as to what
are his plans, he says he is waiting for the ar-
rival of two more bullocks, for which he had
some time before sent his mate. He also
told us that we were all right for the Adelaide
mine, which was distant about two miles.
This distance we soon travel, meeting
no one else but two of the Directors
returning on horseback from an in-
spection, who, in answer to our interrogatories,
tell us, that although we are late, the Cap-
tain will show us the works. In a few minutes
we came into a very picturesque little valley,
with a fine flowing creek running along it, and
hills before us, and on either side. The nearest
mountain to the right is the Montacute Mine,
(not worked at present), and the next is the
one on which the Adelaide Mining Company
(who have bought all round the Montacute,)
are at present at work. We rode up to the cot-
tages, and selecting the best, as likely to con-
tain the Captain, we were very civilly treated,
and at our request to be allowed to see the
works, the Captain at once led the way
straight up one of the steepest parts of the
mountain, and, in a few minutes brought us to
a cut, or adit, about four or five feet wide, and
large enough for any man conveniently to enter
without stooping. This was a newly discovered
lode. The miners had followed it in a horizon-
tal direction for about five and twenty or thirty
feet into the body of the mountain, propping
up the superincumbent earth as they went.
This lode was a rich vein of copper ore, dis-
tinctly defined in its breadth, which, as far as we
saw, was pretty uniformly as above, the ore ex-
tending upwards, and downwards, indefinitely.
We walked as far into the lode as the works
had proceeded, and saw lumps of ore sticking to
what the miners call the walls of the lode, on
either side. The men were working with
picks, &c., by candle-light, and moving about
in this subterranean passage, they looked un-
pleasantly like ferrets. One of them followed
us out of the mine, and as he touched an ima-
ginary hat, informed us “ that mining was
very hard work,” which, being translated,
of course meant that he wanted something
to drink. Gratified in this particular, he re-
treated again into his hole, and rejoined his
earthy looking friends in the mountain.
There were other cuttings in this mine, but
these in appearance were only repetitions of
the one I have described. Measures were
being taken to cut upon another lode, or which
there were strong indications, and a shaft was
being sunk below the level of the creek, in
order to ascertain whether the lode penetrated
so deep. When the copper ore is found at
this depth, called by the miners “ settled
country,” they have much more assurance of
the vein being a steady and lasting one than
when the ores are found only in irregular
upheavings of the earth. In these latter situa-
tions, the ores frequently occur, merely in boils
or lumps, and are soon worked out. This had
been hitherto very much the character of the
Adelaide mine, and on that account the shares
had not been until lately much sought after by
the public. The newly discovered lodes, how


ever, had given the shares an impulse upwards
during my stay, and a great tise in price was
expected the instant that the Captain should
report a discovery of ore, at the depth of the
creek. Near the mouth of the cut we entered,
were lying about seventeen tons of ore, which
had been worked out in the fortnight pre-
ceding our visit.
It may be, that the magnificent accounts we
had heard, on all sides, of the Burra Burra Mine,
and the large quantities of ore therefrom we
had seen carted to the port, had spoiled us
altogether for any other mine. For although,
upon consideration, I cannot but think the
Adelaide Mine, as at present under the opera-
tions of the company, is a very valuable pro •
perty, both myself and my companion were
disappointed with it, (notwithstanding the
seventeen tons in a fortnight) and we re-
mounted out horses, contented to leave it
altogether in the hands of the present com-
pany.
As at this scene I shall drop the curtain
upon South Australia, and return to Sydney
in my next and last paper, let me here
answer a question, which has been frequently
put to me, viz.: would I, as soon live in
Adelaide, as in Sydney ? To this my answer is
short, and perhaps not very satisfactory. So
far as town life goes, I know only two modes
of being : a London life, and life out of Lon-
don. The pleasures of a country life must, to a
healthy minded person, be much the same
every where. But if you talk of towns, and
carry me away from London, you may set me
down wheresoever else you please, with-
out consulting me, for I have no preference
about it.
CHAPTER VIII.
The reader is probably aware that the state-
cabins of coasters (as the cupboards for the
nocturnal confinement of passengers are called,)
are divided into two sleeping shelves, on which
the occupants lie, one over the other, in layers
—like calicos in shops, or bodies in a family
vault. The lower shelf is almost level with
the floor of the cabin ; the upper is about four
feet above it; and, as one or the other must be
the more commodious of the two, he is (in my
judgment), in a limited degree, a benefactor to
his species, who enables intending voyagers to
profitably elect in this particular.
Take my advice, then, and always choose the
upper one. It is true, that getting into a bed
fixed at such a height is a somewhat violent
proceeding ; but when you acquire the knack
of poising yourself on the wash-hand-stand, be-
fore hurling yourself into bed, the task becomes
comparatively easy. With the single excep-
tion, then, of getting in and getting out, (which
latter operation is done by a somerset—soon
acquired), the upper berth is so superior to the
lower one, that I shall never for a moment hesi-
tate between the two. In the first place, the
boards of the upper berth, upon which the
bedding rests, sometimes come out, and fall
altogether—boards, bedding, and bedfellow—
down upon the sleeper below; and, if such an
accident is to happen at all, it is much better
that you should fall upon your friend, than
that he should fall upon you. Again,
whenever the man in the upper berth is too
timid to throw himself out at once, and fishes
about with his feet for a landing, whilst he
holds on with his hands, he ten to one misses
his footing altogether, and whilst you are won-
dering where the legs are going to, or what
they are about to do, they conclude by slipping
into your berth, and standing upon your face,
or stomach, before you can roll out of the way.
Besides this, the cockroaches walk much more
upon the lower man, than they do upon the
upper one, taking liberties with him as if he
were a person of less consequence, a servant, a
slave, or a mummy belonging to the other, and
stowed away under his bed as of no import-
ance.
For these, and other minor reasons, it was
that I, —now that an additional complement
of passengers compelled us into twos for each
state cabin,—at once chose the upper bedding
place ; and knowing as I did for sixteen days
and nights, what a nuisance I was to my
neighbour, I never regretted my choice.
At about sunset of the day of our depar-
ture from the wharf at Port Adelaide, we drew
away with the stream, and fell down the
harbour with the tide. Darkness comes upon
us, and the tide is out, before we get to the
narrow mouth of the harbour, and therefore
we drop our anchor, and defer crossing the bar
until the next morning. Presently, a boat
containing the new passengers, who have been
spending every moment they could spend on
shore, is seen cutting through the dark and
leaden coloured water, to the ship. There
are the Phantom’s owner, two new passengers,
a stout passenger, (a most amiable, and gentle


manlike Crown Land Commissioner, of Port
Phillip,) a tall one, the stout one’s dog ; and
trunks, and band boxes for all. We are in-
troduced, by the Captain, and bow, in the dark,
to each other, or to the boatmen, or to the
sailors, (we are not certain which), and tea
time being ready, we descend to the cabin, to
eat steaks, drink tea, and examine each other,
there. A couple more of sea captains have
come down the harbour with vs, in order to
have a parting yarn with our Captain,
and as usual, when two or three skippers
are gathered together in one place, they start
a pleasant conversation, (for those just com-
mencing a voyage) about that ship, the Thomas
or John something which went to the Mauritius
with wheat, and has never since been heard of,
which naturally leads to the mention of at
least a dozen other vessels, which at different
times have been run down, gone ashore, or
foundered in gales of wind. Conversation
dwells in particular upon the
which was our mate’s contribution to the gene-
ral entertainment, (confirmed by a professional
brother, who said he could remember it well;)
jwhich having Bgailf lw4ks, and
'there lain for weeks, until all the food was con-
sumed, the crew were at length driven to pick
out and eat the oakum from between the deck
planking, to keep themselves from starving,
until this failed, when the Captain said they
/must cast lots, and that as it was fitter for
boys to die than grown up men, the boys must
cast lots among themselves. That upon this,
one of the boys said, he thought all ought to
take their chance alike, and that the lot ought
not to be confined to the boys, for a boy’s life
was as much to him as any other person’s life
was to him, and that the Captain said, “ lets
have none of your d d impudence, but get
ready at onceand how that they did get
ready, and that the lot fell on one, and that
the ship’s butcher was called upon to kill the
boy, and refused, and leaped overboard, and
destroyed himself, and that the boy then offered
to kill himself, and did so by cutting his own
throat, and was eaten by the rest of the crew,
who were soon after picked up off the
wreck by a passing vessel, which thought the
people on the wreck could not be in want of
food, for they had provision hanging at the
stern, which the narrator said was only one of
the legs of the poor boy.” As the conversation
has taken this sanguinary turn,—not a strik-
ingly pleasant one, even when you are safe on
shore, and mu?h too exciting when you are at
sea, we withdrawal once to our dormitory,
and climb into bed, and in a few moments, not-
withstanding the horrible narratives we have
been regaled with, are fast asleep.
Befjre light the next morning the Phantom
was under weigh, over the bar, and standing
down the Gulf of St. Yincent, with a fair wind.
We begin to calculate, (as people always will
calculate, and look into the dark womb of the
future, —always darkest at sea) about the pro-
bable time of our arrival in Sydney, “ Let’s
see,’’(says one) “seven days going down to Ade-
laide,—seven days we have been in port,—and
say, seven days back. The passage home to
Sydney has been done in five, but say seven,
or to be liberal, and on the safe side, ten.
This will make the voyage (usually a six weeks
one) only twenty-four days in all, and if we
do it in seven days then only only twenty-one.
How shall we astonish the natives. What will
they think of the Phantom ?” cries one; to
which our friend the north country man (who
is still with us, and sleeps under my bed,)
cries, “ Eh, it’s grand, Sirs,” and jerks him-
self along the poop, snapping his fingers, and
chuckling as if Sydney Heads were already in
eight, instead of being, as they are, twelve
hundred miles away.
Alas ! what short sighted, childish creatures
we are. Our Captain—who by-the-bye, is as
capital a fellow as ever trod a deck—has been
trying in vain to put down this growing spirit
of prophecy among us, from, as I believe, the
good-natured desire to save us from disap-
pointment, It is strange how contemptuous,
if not absurdly incredulous most of us are, to
his not very new doctrine, “that the winds
are uncertain, and that we must expect bad
luck, mixed with good.” They are deaf. But
when the wind chops round, and before we are
half way down the Gulf, becomes dead a-head,
we see plainly, we are not to have it all our
own way.
On Eriday evening we left Adelaide, and
although we have only sixty miles to do, to
get out of the Gulf, that distance is not accom-
plished even by Sunday night. In short, for
seven or eight days after this, the wind was as
foul, as if, to use the Irish chief-mate’s words,
“ they had done it from spite.” From exultant
anticipation of an early arrival in Sydney, we
gradually become resigned to an ordinary pas-
sage, and at last grow apathetic even
under the apprehensions of a very long
one. There is nothing for it, but


to eat and drink in desperation, and play
whist, and 100, and romp with the dog, and set
him at the goat —(who sometimes butts the
dog over on his back, and makes him howl an
almost articulate ‘murder’) —and fish for bar-
racoota with no other bait than a great staring
tenpenny nail, fastened upon a lump of red
cedar, in such a manner as to make it an insult
to any fish’s understanding to lay it before his
gills, for their acceptance. And yet these most
stupid fish are thus caught by dozens ; coming
in companies about this simple contrivance,
hooking and unhooking themselves, and then
coming back again, as if enamoured of the
nail, and never seeming to be easy in their
minds, until they are hauled upon deck, and
are opened for salting.
This adverse wind, too, is not without profit
in other respects. It is certain that when we
do get on shore we shall relish it.
No one who has ever slept, or endeavoured
to sleep, whilst standing upon his head in a
gale of wind at sea, —no one who has ever lis-
tened to his neighbour knocking himself to
pieces in his cabin, and swearing frightfully
during the operation,—no one can have ever
shaved at sea, at the risk of amputating his
nose, slicing off his chin, or cutting his
throat,—no Christian heart that has ever been
touched by the sound of that frightful
tumble of some very heavy passenger down
stairs, —no one who has heard his opposite
neighbour crying out from his little hospital
of a state cabin to the steward—“ for God’s
sake to come again no one who has ever
lain, crushed, humiliated, almost spirit-
broken, upon the top of his own hat, coats,
telescope, boots, and Blair’s Sermons, all com-
bined into a little chaos of their own, whilst
the wind is howling through the rigging, and
the raging sea is roaring and leaping its wildest
within a few inches of his ear: no one can
have seen, done, and heard all these things
without acquiring an intense and passionate
appreciation, even to very weakness, of his
own particular four-poster in his own quiet
and unconvulsed bed-room, in the (as it then
appears to him at sea) lovely City of Sydney,
Thus, “ sweet are the uses of our marine
adversity.”
On our tenth day out, at about eleven o’clock
in the morning, we sight a vessel a great way
off, with royals and studding-sails set, coming
towards us. The practised eye of our captain
at once pronounces her, from her general phy-
siognomy, to be the Dorset brig, from Sydney,
bound for Adelaide. She soon nears us, and
we set to work analysing each other with tele -
scopes. As the vessels pass on their different
ways, and the captains roar questions and
answers at each other through speaking
trumpets, what a steady, concentrated, and
collective stare, all the people of each vessel
bestow on the other! We recognize a Sydney
friend on board, and we wonder if he has
tumbled out of bed much, during his passage
hitherto. Soon the vessels are a great distance
from each other on their trackless ways, and
still we find our eyes ever falling upon the
little Dorset, as doubtless the little Dorset's eyes
are upon us. So absorbing and peculiar is the
interest which one box of human beings feels
for another, when encountering far away upon
the desolate and mighty deep. They look so
completely at the mercy of the power to which
they have committed themselves ; an observa-
tion which, in all probability, the Dorset also
makes upon us.
The next object of interest is Cape Otway,
which we can see at about six o’clock in the
morning of our twelfth or thirteenth day out.
At the same time, we sight two other vessels, a
barque and a brig, both beating in the same
direction as ourselves, in the endeavour to
double the Gape. We soon get near enough to
the barque to employ upon her the flag lan-
guage invented by Captain Marry att, and we
ask her what she is, whictr is not considered so
rude a question at sea as it would be for one
stranger to walk up to another, and put the
same question on shore. Nevertheless, the
barque takes no sort of notice, but scuds away
as if she did not see us, which is the first time
I ever witnessed one vessel regularly cut an-
other at sea. Our captain is disgusted, and
says the barque’s a beast.’ I charitably sug-
gest, that perhaps she has been jolly
last night, and is not yet quite up and dressed,
and fit for conversation, and this really looks
something like the fact, for about an hour
after, and long after we have hauled down our
flags and retired back upon our own dignity,
the barque runs her ensign up, and thus re-
cognises our existence. As, however, she has
nothing to say, we suspect she is dumb, and
altogether destitute of flags to express an idea :
she is a clipper, however, for we hold together
for a couple of days, and leave her on the
second night after we have made her ac-
quaintance. She was recognised as the
Warntah, from Adelaide to Port Phillip, and


has made the quickest passage of the season,
from London to South Australia. As for the
brig, a melancholy little tub called the Union,
•we ran away from her altogether, a few hours
after we first saw her.
The next afternoon we have a most, pic-
turesque thunder storm, which has been brew-
ing all day, in a lurid leaden coloured sky,
comes clattering over our heads at sun-down,
in sublime style. Away comes the glorious
south-wester sweeping over the deep, as it
bursts in the fulness of its power out of the
masses of angry cloud behind us. The
thunder roars as if it were rolling away into
the very vaults of old ocean; the lightnings
blaze away and “ fork out” their finest
patterns, to lend sublimity to the scene. The
wind moans and howls a melancholy dirge
amongst the rigging, whilst the seas, mounting
and curling, come hissing and careering after
us, as if they were wishing they might get the
little Phantom, which, up to everything, takes
to her heels at once, and goes foaming over the
deep under double-reefed topsails, as if
exulting in the excitement of running through
the thick of it. This burst, however, soon
blows itself out, and in about an hour it
sinks into a gentle and fair breeze, with which
resuming all sail, we quietly glide into Bass’s
Straits.
In the morning all was a dead calm. Doubts
begin to be entertained by some whether we
shall ever get to Sydney with such adverse
weather. We can scarcely fish with any
spirit, nor are we moved much, even by the
sight of a large shark, which appears just un-
der the quarter of the vessel, in an attitude of
contemplation, as if meditating upon the
flavour of the Crown Land Commissioner—by
far the juiciest man among us—who. uncon-
scious that he has excited the shark’s regards,
is hanging listlessly over the side of the vessel.
But at this point, when our hopes are at the
lowest, our bad luck ends. A cats-paw comes
gently crumpling the surface of the sea. It
grows to a little breeze. Away we go again.
Another large barque is in sight. She is hove-
to, and we see her broadside on, evidently
waiting for us. She lowers a boat as we near
her. Her mate comes on board, with |his Cap-
tain’s compliments, and wishes to know how
our barometer is, for his is very low ; and he
and his vessel appear to be seized with a kind
of shivering fit, at being among the islands of
Bass’s Straits, with the prospect of thick and dirty
weather coming on. Our friend is the Euphrates,
from London, and wishes to know whether we
intend to run. Our Captain says certainly, and
invites the Euphrates to run with him, —as he
(our Captain)|is well acquainted with the part,
and expects to get quite free of the islands
before sundown. All our Captain asks in re-
turn is, that the mate of the Euphrates will,
when she gets to Sydney, report the Phantom,
as seen in Bass’s Straits, which the mate of
the Euphrates, with the utmost good faith, pro-
mises to do. Of course we are all diverted at
the mate’s delusion, in fancying that he is to
get to Sydney first, and in order to show that
we have been only quizzing, we first escort the
Euphrates fairly past the islands, and then we
take to our heels again, and run out of sight of
her before dark, and never stop until we get to
Sydney.
We made the Heads at night. The weather
was thick and rainy, and great was the excite-
ment as aloft and below, eyes were distributed
about the vessel, looking out for the friendly
light,~ that light, at the first sight of which, so
many a sea and storm wearied heart, has
leaped with an almost childish joy. First the
mate, who is aloft, sees and proclaims a light
ho !—and to the quick and nervous question of
the Captain, “ Where-away ?” answers, on the
larboard bow. Presently several others see it,
and I work my eyes so desperately hard
to see it too, and that so successfully,
that at length I see seven or eight
lights at least. This particular light, however,
proves to be a deceiver, for in a few minutes
we find, from the alteration of its bearing, that
it is plainly moving, and at last some one ex-
claims “why it’s the Shamrock,”— and sure
enough it is the Shamrock, looking, as she
passes away in the darkness and mist, like the
ghost of a steamer, rather than a steamer it-
self. Soon, however, the real revolver casts its
bright beam across our view, and slowly, and
with the faintest breath of wind, we glide to-
wards the harbour. Such was the natural ex-
citement of making land at night, that only
two passengers went to bed, and I was not one
of them. We pass between the Heads, and
astern of the Sir George Seymour, lying
(with all her contents apparently fast asleep)
near the Sow and Pigs. In another half
hour we drop our anchor, as we bear up
at the Battery Point, and our voyage is at an
end.
Can it be possible that night is at an end


too, and we have never been to bed ? Truly it
is so, as lago says,
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short
Day begins to dawn, and in this first fresh
sober light of morn, with no living thing on
the move but ourselves, the harbour looks like
some beautiful Italian picture. We have
stolen in like a phantom, and people will
go down in the morning and find the little
clipper looking as composed, as if she had been
lying off the Battery Point for a week.
And now all our thoughts are of home. We
have been absent from Sydney a month and
two days. In that time what may not have
occurred ? Some of the dear young bright eyes
we left behind us, may, whilst we were away,
have become quenched for ever. We almost
run from the Circular Wharf through the
silent and deserted streets, as these fearful
thoughts grow upon us. Nobody is yet up in
our street, and I reach my own house, but can
make nothing of the outside of it. I cannot
discover from the expression of the street door
whether mutes have been lately standing there,
or whether funerals have been lately performed
about the premises, so that I am obliged at
last to muster up courage and ring the bell.
The imaginary character of such apprehen-
sions, the levity of these papers will suffi-
ciently show. So as I have reached home at
last, of which fact some others are probably as
glad as I am, I shall at once make my bow to
my excellent and good-natured readers, as I
write my last words, Vos valete, etplaudite.
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX, LOWER GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.












COLLECTIO^^^*^
||[ Rational Library' |»


