

V A\ , V V)
A VOYAGE TO VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.—PART 11.
There is an old proverb which says,
that “ the longest way round Is the
shortest way home it is likewise the
shortest way to the Cape of Good Hope.
Any uninformed navigator who at-
tempted to make a short cut in a
straight line from the Cape de Yerde
to the southern extremity of Africa,
would almost certainly find himself
bothered with calms and bedevilled
by currents, and thus be at last drawn
into
with the exception of some sandstones,
containing recent shells that seem either
interstratified with them, or caught up
among them. In the hollows of the
rocks on the beach that are washed by
the tide, many lovely corals grew, and
beautiful little fish banded, yellow,
and black, or blue and green with red
spots were darting about the pools.
Multitudes of small conger-eels, with
snake-like bodies and fierce-looking
heads, crawled and twined through the
holes and crevices of the rocks, and
seemed as if inclined to spring at and
bite us when we approached them.
Black echini in abundance were half-
buried in the holes of the basaltic rocks,
which they seemed by some wonderful
and quite inexplicable process to have
excavated for themselves ; while in the
shallow pools I met, for the first time,
with examples of that curious tribe of
small fish that do not fear to jump from
a pool of water on to the ground, and
by means of their strong pectoral fins
hop along by springs of one or two feet
at a time, till they get within reach of
a fresh hole, or of the sea.
Before leaving the tropics, let me re-
call one lovely aspect of nature, which
is, perhaps, more common in the wider
and calmer seas of the Indian and Pa-
“ The Bight of Benin,
Where one comes out for two that go in.
The principal thing to be looked to
is the direction and force of the winds,
and not the number of miles to be tra-
versed. The experienced navigator,
therefore, sails boldly down before the
N. E. trade-wind to about W. long.,
23° on the equator, and then gets as
soon as possible into the S. E. trade,
with which he continues his course
down along the coast of South Ame-
rica, as if he were going to Cape Horn,
till he comes into S. lat. 30 1 , when
he may reckon upon meeting suddenly
with a strong breeze from the west;
and he then simply puts his ship’s
head round, and runs away before this
at right angles to his former course for
the Cape of Good Hope.
It was in following this great high-
way of shipping in the south Atlantic,
that we came in sight, early one morn-
ing, of the lonely little island of Trini-
dad. This must not be confounded
cific Oceans than in the Atlantic, but
which is often perceivable there :— just
after sunset, two or three minutes after
the red orb has descended below the
dark line of the horizon, broad, radiat-
ing bands of colour become perceptible
in the sky, shooting from the position
of the sun in all directions— they are
alternately of delicate rose colour and
the most pearly and exquisite green.
In approaching the zenith they gradu-
ally fade away, till right overhead
they are scarcely perceptible ; but, if
followed by the eye, they gradually be-
come stronger again as they descend
towards the east, in which dh'ection
they converge towards a point exactly
opposite the sun, where is produced in
the east an exact reflex of all the glow-
ing colours of the sunset in the west#
So perfect is the illusion, that often on
coming on deck just at the right mo-
ment, it would have been scarcely pos-
sible to tell which was the real sunset,
and which its reflection, without look-
with the West Indian island of that
name —it is a small, solitary spot of
earth in about lat. 20° , and some three
hundred miles from the coast of Brazil.
We hove to on the western side of it,
and a party of us landed on the rocks,
just where a tall column of rock, which
has, of course, been christened the
“Nine-pin,” rises suddenly out of the
sea.
The island itself, which is not more
than five miles in diameter, rises ab-
ruptly from the sea to a height of some
1,200 feet, quite environed by almost
inaccessible cliff’s, except on its south-
east side, where the Portuguese once
had a small settlement, long since
abandoned. There are no marks of
any recent volcanic action about it;;
but the rocks are nearly all volcanic.


ing at the compass in order to know
the east from the west. It must be
reckoned among the advantages of tro-
pical life, that every one is a daily
spectator, not only of sunset, but of
sunrise—they are the two most enjoy-
able and delicious portions of the day,
which no one would willingly lose.
Everybody there leaps from his slen-
derly-covered couch to rejoice in the
newness and vigour of the dawn, as
every one hails the cool dews and plea-
sant airs of evening refreshing his wea-
ried frame after the exhausting heat of
the day. Then the depth and black
darkness of the night—when the air,
made transparent with moisture, seems
to open to the view the uttermost
vaults of heaven, and the eye roves
from flaming star to star, growing vi-
sibly jess as they recede into the im-
mensity of space, like lamps hung along
the heavenly road to still farther sys-
tems, too remote for human eye to
reach ; while the uncovered head and
opened breast fear no evil from damp,
and cold, but woo the gentle airs and
dripping dew-drops to refresh them.
Ah! my kind indulgent reader, our
bleak skies and wintry winds may, per-
haps, be the better and the healthier
for us all, but for physical and sensu-
ous enjoyment of the beauties of earth,
and sea, and sky, there is no place like
the tropics.
What sight can be more glorious
than to lean over the dark side of the
ship when every surge of every wave
over the whole visible expanse breaks
into sparkles of light, when the ship
seems to be ploughing up great fur-
rows of light out of the water, and
leaves a long glimmering trail behind
her like an illuminated path along the
sea, with here and there, deep under
the water, dim orbs of phosphoresence
like drowned moons, proceeding from
some great excited medusa or other
sea animal; and the dolphins and por-
poises, as they shoot and dart about
the vessel, betray themselves by the
vivid gleams of greenish light that en-
velop them like a flowing veil, mak-
ing their swift course like that of a sub-
marine rocket.
Or what say you of a hot sunny day,
with not a cloud in the sky, seeing
Venus at some 20° from the sun, as
distinctly visible in the sky, about two
o’clock in the afternoon, as she is here
often of a summer night ? This 1 have
liseenmore than once within 10° of the
one in the Indian archipelago.
Let us, however, dismiss these re-
collections, and get on with our voyage
to Van Diemen’s Land. We have not
yet touched at the Cape.
I never saw any description of the
Cape that gave me any idea of it until
I had actually been at the place. Let
me, therefore, try to give you a notion
of it.
In approaching the Cape from the
west, you see a line of very bold coast,
rising directly from the water in per-
pendicular cliffs, and reaching at one
spot an altitude of 4,000 feet above
the sea. This near piece of ground
seems some thirty or thirty-five miles
long ; and some distance beyond it, on
the northern side, may be seen on a clear
day another great mountainous country
much further off, and fading away into
the blue horizon. We might mistake
the nearest mass of land for an island
standing in front of the other land, and
so it doubtless was formerly. Inside
it there are now two bays Table
Bay on the north, and False Bay on
the south, with a low sandy plain, some
fifteen miles across in every direction,
lying between them. This plain it is
which connects the first-named rocky
peninsula with the main land of Africa.
This lofty peninsula is highest near its
northern end, where it has a great ta-
bular plateau, the well known Table
Mountain, which is, I believe, about
4,200 feet above the sea. It is com-
posed of great horizontal strata of
thick-bedded white sandstone, reposing
on granite, which forms the lower half
of the mountain. These decline gently
towards the south, and the land gra-
dually declines with them, still retain-
ing the same forms of abruptly swelling
rounded slopes about the base, capped
by flat-topped eminences having ver-
tical sides, furrowed and traversed by
rugged and precipitous ravines. Fi-
nally, on approaching the Cape, the
land slopes down to an elevation not
exceeding a thousand feet, and ends in
broken rocks and hummocks of still
lower elevation, forming the actual
pape of Good Hope. Of the two bays
inside the peninsula, the northern one
is the shallowest and openest, but is
partially protected by Rottenest Island
in its centre. On the S.W. side of
this bay, close under the foot of Table
Mountain, which seems almost to hang
over it, is the very attractive city of
Cape Town, with its wide, straight
streets, and lines of white, flat-topped
houses, its public square and principal


street lined with rows of trees, and a
rapid channel of clear water coursing
down the centre of it.
I will not stop to speak of its motley
inhabitants, its Babel of tongues, its
entangled droves of bullocks all har-
nessed to one waggon, which, at the
sound of their driver’s voice, and the
crack of his whip, unwind themselves
from the form of a small assembled
herd into a regular procession of six-
teen or twenty pair, and proceed upon
their journey ; of its vines and its
fruits; its pleasant places, its pretty
faces, and its balls and parties. 1 must
leave these to the reader’s imagination,
or, perhaps, to his recollection.
The southern bay, called False Bay,
has, likewise in its north-west corner,
a little indentation, affording some shel-
ter and security ; and this is the naval
station of these seas, surrounded by a
small town called Simonstown, boast-
ing of its little dockyard, and its _ ad-
miral’s residence, where often little
men assume the airs of very big ones.
When the wind blows into either
of these open bays, it is clear it must
knock up a devil of a sea therein ; and
I do not know that I ever saw a
grander surf than that which falls upon
their wide sandy beaches, when a strong
wind urges upon them rank after rank
of huge long-rolling waves, miles in
unbroken length, and many feet in
height, each wave several hundred
yards behind the other, and some ten
or a dozen of them at once perpetually
travelling over the sandy shoals, and
breaking into long cataracts of foam,
with a roar that would deaden the noise
of a thunder-clap. It is the action of
this great surf washing up sand, now
from the north and now again from the
south, which has doubtless, in the lapse
of uncounted ages, contributed to form
the sandy plain that now spreads be-
tween the bays.
On the east shore of False Bay is a
wide-spread expanse pf very mountain-
ous and very barren and desolate-
looking country, called Hottentot
Holland. There may be some resem-
blance between a Hottentot and a
Hollander in certain portions of the
human frame, when sufficiently deve-
loped ; but what resemblance this lofty
and broken country can have to Hol-
land, it is difficult to perceive.
Barren as it looks, its broken moun-
tains, with their furrowed sides, often
appear very beautiful Irom the other
side of the bay, some twenty miles off,
especially when softened by the warm
haze of a sunny day. They end in the
perpendicular or overhanging precipice
of Cape Hanglip and Cape Agulhas,
the latter being the extreme southern
point of tli e African continent. As we
sail away to the east, and this great
headland fades from our sight, we may
be struck with the colour of the water,
which even, when out of sight of land,
and where it is more than one hundred
fathoms deep, retains the green hue
which it has in our shallow seas around
Great Britain, so different from the
dark blue of the open ocean. This
green water, doubtless, marks the
course of the great Agulhas current,
which is always sweeping round the
southern end of Africa, out of the In-
dian into the Atlantic Ocean. It is
one part of the great oceanic river,
vtotoli/jOis f&zyoc fffltvos Qjaavoto, which Winds
across the South Atlantic into the
Gulf of Mexico, and issuing thence
under the name of the Gulf Stream,
travels even to our shores and those of
Norway, bringing mild airs from the
balmy south, and giving warmth, and
verdure, and fertility to us in a higher
latitude than they are to be found, to
anything like similar amount, in any
other portion of the globe. Without
the Gulf Stream, Ireland would have
the climate of Labrador.
Far away now to the south-east, be-
fore a fresh westerly breeze, we may
career over somewhat dark and stormy
seas, across the southern part of the
great Indian Ocean, Dark and stormy
as it may be, however, there is no
ocean in which the navigator is more
constantly surrounded by animal life,
especially in the beautiful form of
birds. The speckled petrel, called the
“ cape pigeon,” surrounds the ship in
flocks, while two or three species of
albatross are almost always in sight.
Of these the most frequent, in certain
portions of the sea, is the dusky alba-
tross, a dark-brown bird; but the
widest range, as well as the greatest
size, and most beautiful presence, be-
longs to the great white albatross,
called by naturalists diomedea exulans.
These huge birds, gigantic petrels as they
may be roughly called, whose wings
sometimes measure nearly twelve feet
from tip to tip, have a soft and rounded
form, with plumage of delicate white,
with black patches on the wings. They
appear to float rather than fly; you may
watch one for an hour without seeing
a single flap or quiver of his wings.


Keeping them steadily extended like
great horizontal sails, he careers at will
around the ship —_ rising and falling in
graceful curves; now wheeling as if by a
mere act of volition, he sweeps around
the poop, within a few feet of you, and,
looking you steadily in the face with
unwinking eye as he passes, he glides
ahead apparently without an effort,
and perhaps disappears in the distance
in a minute or two, as if he had left
you at anchor.
When the vessel is going not more
than three or four knots through the
water, it is a common amusement to
fish with a small hook, baited with a
bit of pork, for the cape pigeons; and
sometimes into the flock of these
pretty birds, about the size of gulls,
that are fighting and squabbling over
the line and its bait, as it drags through
the water, down settles, after a swoop-
ing curve or two, one of these lordly
albatrosses, before whom the pigeons
give way. He gives a harsh croak as
he touches_the water, as a sort of com-
mand for their absence, and seizes hold
at once upon the bait, which, however,
being suddenly snatched from his
mouth without hooking him, his lord-
ship is _ astonished thereat and turns
about his head with a puzzled expres-
sion, as if he wondered what could
possibly have become of that tempting
little morsel. Then catching sight of
it before him, dragging along the°slope
of a wave, he squatters after it, half
flying and half walking, and taking a
good mouthful at it, he finds himself
hooked. By careful management,
avoiding breaking the line, we once or
twice succeeded in bringing one of
these noble birds upon deck, from
which we found them apparently quite
unable to fly, unless by jumping off
some elevation.
One afternoon being a perfect calm,
which had succeeded to a gale of wind,
two or three of us went out shooting
in the dingy. We were tolerably suc-
cessful ; but what interested me most
in the excursion was the appearance
of the sea, when seen from such a point
of view. It does not often happen to
a man to be afloat in a little cock-boat
in the centre of a great ocean, with
a heavy swell on. There was, of
course, no danger, as we were never
more than a quarter of a mile from
the ship, and the weather was beauti-
ful, but the swell of the sea, conse-
quent on the previous gale, was still
tremendous. Long glassy undulations,
the crests of whose eminences were
apparently a hundred yards apart,
rolled past us with a slow, steady, and
majestic march, that had something
grand and almost awe-inspiring about
it. From the broad summit of one of
these great waves our little boat seem-
ed to slide down the slope into a deep
valley, in which we were surrounded
by lofty mounds of water, that shut
out not only the horizon, but even
the mast-heads of our vessel from our
sight. Out of that depth we were as
gradually raised again by the slope of
the on-coming wave, till we looked
abroad from its summit to the distant
horizon. It seemed ridiculous to at-
tempt to row with our little paddles
against what appeared such moving
masses of water, and as if we must be
irretrievably carried away in the direc-
tion that the swell was travelling in ;
nevertheless they caused no opposition
to our progress, for, as is obvious,
there was no real motion in the water,
which merely rose and fell perpen-
dicularly, the form and outline only
of the wave moving on, just as undu-
lations pass over a field of corn, each
head rising and falling under the wind
without being carried by it onward in
its course.
It was on the sth of August, about
daylight in the morning, that we came
in sight of the lonely little island of
St. Paul, one of two submarine vol-
canic mountains that just rear their
heads above the sea within fifty miles
of each other, and about two thousand
miles from any other land, except the
desolate Kerguelen’s Land, which lies
about eight hundred miles to the south-
ward. We anchored to leeward, or
on the eastern side of the island, about
half-a-mile from it. It may be de-
scribed as a ring of land surrounding
a volcanic crater, perfect all round ex-
cept on the east, on which side the
land has been eaten away to the depth
of twenty or thirty fathoms below the
level of the sea, thus forming the an-
chorage. The land just around the
crater rises to a height of eight hundred
feet, being nearly level at that height
for the greater portion of the ring, but
descending precipitously into the crater
on one side, and sloping more gradually
down on the other, for about a mile and
a-half, ending in low, rocky cliffs. The
island is thus about three miles in
diameter, with a circular crater in the
middle of its eastern side of about half
a-mile in diameter. Into this crater


we rowed in a boat, the bar at the
entrance having not more than a foot
or two of water on it. Inside, its
depth was about thirty fathoms, with
a bottom of black mud. The broken
wall that borders the crater on the
east, was on the south side of the en-
trance worn away to the merest shell,
and forming a knife-edged ridge that
led up to the top of the island. The
rocks were all black hornblendic lava,
and at one or two points along the
beach, inside the crater, steam might
be seen to issue, arising from a stream
of hot water that trickled through the
stones. At one of these spots the
water had a temperature of 138° , but
on removing some of the stones, and
plunging the thermometer to a greater
depth, it rose to 150° . Notwithstand-
ing this, the water in the crater, both
at the surface and at the bottom, only
showed a temperature of 54° , which
was that of the sea outside, and for
two or three days before and after we
arrived at the island.
Near the entrance were the remains
of a small hut and garden, the tempo-
rary habitation of some whalers, that
occasionally remain upon the island
for a month or two to catch seals. Wild
pigs appeared numerous, being doubt-
less the progeny of some left upon the
island, and we shot one of these among
the long grass on the slope at the foot
of the precipices. In going off to our
ship we had to make a detour to avoid
coming in contact with two great
whales, that were then basking toge-
ther just off the entrance; first, their
heads, then their broad backs, and
then their tails, rising and falling with
the gentle swell, while an occasional
puff proceeded from their blow-holes.
As soon as we came to anchor in the
morning, we began to catch fish as fast
as possible, and before we sailed there
was enough caught to last the whole
ship's company for three days. This
was a great luxury, as' I need hardly
say that one of the last places to expect
fish is when you are at sea.
Just twenty days after leaving this
solitary little spot of earth we came in
sight of Van Diemen’s Land. The
south-western coast of this great island
has a singularly stern, wild, and sa-
vage aspect. Mountains, whose tops
are hoary and whitened with the per-
petual blasts of storms of westerly wind
and rain, impend over the sea, their
steep, cl i fly sides, and rugged preci-
pices, and ravines, shagged with som-
bre and dark woods, while sentinel-like
stand here and there some lofty rocky
islets, their bases, as well as those of
the main cliffs, everlastingly beaten and
worn by as furious a surge as ever
raged upon any coast. Landing here-
abouts is' impossible, and the sterile
aspect of the country almost precludes
the hope of this portion of it ever being
inhabited. Farther east it is broken
by several deep bays and inlets, one
of which is named, appropriately
enough. Storm Bay. The land is lower
hereabouts, though still sufficiently
lofty; and on the east side of Storm
Bay are great cliffs of huge columns of
greenstone, their structure being per-
ceptible for miles off. The head of
Storm Bay sends a multitude of wind-
ing bays and arms of the sea into the
land, and into one of these falls the
river Derwent. The neighbourhood
of Hobarton, and the valley of this
river, with the grand feature of Mount
Wellington rising immediately at the
back of the town, to a height of 4,200
feet, much resembling Table Moun-
tain at the Cape, has been already
sufficiently described when reviewing
Mrs. Meredith's “Tasmania.”*
Tasmania, or Yan Diemen’s Land,
is a mass of mountains, varying from
one to five thousand feet in height,
with two principal valleys—that of the
Derwent on the south, and the Tamar
on the north, the height of the dividing
range, or water-shed between them
being about 1,500 to 2,000 feet. Inos-
culating ranges, called “ tiers, ” of dark
greenstone and other igneous rocks
embrace a number of shallow valleys in
every direction, which are commonly
called plains. One vast sea of gum-
tree forest spreads over the whole
country, with its sombre and monoto-
nous wilderness of straight, ragged
stems, and scanty and shadeless fo-
liage. Here and there only have these
profitless and unsightly woods been
felled, and green fields, and settle-
ments, forming sunny openings, been
formed in them. One very excellent
road, about 120 miles in length, crosses
the island from Hobarton to Launces-
ton, with substantial stone-built hotels
at almost every stage, and a daily
coach throughout the year. Other
* See “ Dublin University Magazine,” Yol. XLI.


roads are more or less complete or in-
complete.
Some fourteen years ago a new sys-
tem with regard to the convicts was
introduced, and remained up to the
present time. In a few years it will
have passed away, and therefore, as a
record of the past, I will give a brief
description of it.
When a man was transported to
Van Diemen’s Land, he was sent to a
“ probation station,” where he had to
remain from two to five or seven years,
according to the length of his original
sentence, and his behaviour in the
colony. He then had a ticket of leave
given him, which enabled him to go
and seek for service, and hire himself
out in any capacity to any one who
would take him, within a certain dis-
trict. He was, however, obliged,
every half-year, to present himself
before the authorities, at a certain
mustering place, and be inspected.
After a certain period passed under
this surveillance, he became free within
the colony; and latterly was enabled
to pass into any of the neighbouring
colonies, under the name of an
“ Exile.”
The probation station consisted of a
party of about 200 convicts, under a
superintendent and other officers, with
or without a small guard of soldiers.
This party were located at a certain
spot, where they were to make a set-
tlement first of all, building their own
huts, houses, and offices, and enclos-
ing them, digging gardens, and culti-
vating them, and so on; and then
turning to to make roads, work in
mines, or any other public works that
might be wanted.
It was in October, 1842, that I was
invited by the Governor poor Sir
John and Lady Franklin to accom-
pany themin the Government schooner,
“ The Eliza,” on a visit of inspection
to the probation stations of Norfolk
Bay. Norfolk Bay is a land-locked
sheet of water, having a narrow wind-
ing entrance out of the N.E. arm of
Storm Bay, lying like a lake in the
centre of some woody hills, about 600
or 800 feet high, and dividing them by
its various arms into several peninsulas,
two of which are called Tasman’s and
Forrestier’s peninsulas.
In this excursion, I passed several
most pleasant days, sailing about this
marine lake, landing at many pretty
parts of its shores, and seeing much
that was interesting in several ways.
The probation stations were all nearly
alike. The two hundred convicts
were mustered in their canary-coloured
dresses, and formed three sides of a
square, of which the governor and his
suite occupied the centre of the fourth.
Books were produced and inspected;
questions asked and answered ; a few
remarks made, and the “prisoners”
dismissed.
At Cascade, one of these stations on
the south side of Norfolk Bay, we
saw some immense eucalypti; one of
these was thirty-one feet in circum-
ference at five feet from the ground,
and tapered very gradually in one
huge straight column of timber, at
least a hundred feet, before it branched.
A mile or two into the interior was a
similar tree, said to be forty-two feet
in circumference. Large areas of the
bush were covered with a dense under-
growth of epacris, growing full four
feet high, and now covered with blos-
som, looking like gigantic heather. So
dense was this scrub, that it seemed
utterly impenetrable; and Captain
Booth, the commandant of Port Ar-
thur, the great penal settlement, was
once lost in it for five days, within
three or four miles of his own house,
and utterly unable to extricate him-
self. One or two companies of sol-
diers, besides other persons, were
searching for him for three days before
he was discovered, by means of two
dogs he had with him, just before he
perished of hunger and exhaustion.
Port Arthur is a bay on the south
side of Tasman’s Peninsula, about five
miles from the southern extremity of
Norfolk Bay; and Captain Booth had
devised and constructed a wooden
tramroad from one to the other, by
which a party of us travelled across.
Previously to doing so, however, we
paid a visit to Eagle Hawk Neck, one
of the established lions of Van Die-
men’s Land. This is an isthmus of
low sand-hills, at the head of a long,
narrow inlet of Norfolk Bay, by which
it is separated from the ocean, and
Tasman’s peninsula joined to Forres-
tier’s. An open bay, called Pirates’
Bay, on the east side of Eagle Hawk
Neck, is exposed to the full swell of
the Pacific Ocean, which has piled up
the sand-hills, and thus converted what
was once an island into a peninsula.
Advantage had been taken of this
narrow neck of land to convert the
whole of Tasman’s peninsula into one
great prison, by establishing at it a


strong guard of dogs and men, to-
gether with a chain of constables’ sta-
tions, a mile apart from each other,
down the south side of the inlet.
Each of these constables’ stations has
a dog perched upon a platform that
enables him to look over the epacris
scrub, and thus give notice of any
strange sound or motion that may be
heard or seen in it.
At the neck is a chain of fourteen
posts, stretching from beach to beach,
to each of which is tied a large and
fierce dog, by a chain that allows him
almost but not quite to touch his neigh-
bour. Each post has a large lantern,
which at night throws a strong light on
the prison or south side of the line ;
and in the centre is an elevated sentry-
box, where a sentinel is always on
duty. North of the line is a guard-
house, where a sergeant’s party is
always stationed, and a hundred yards
behind that again are some wooden
barracks, where are subaltern’s quar-
ters, and those of his men. The dogs
are regularly entered on the commis-
sary’s books, and receive regular ra-
tions along with the men. Each one
in turn was loosed every day, and
taken a walk by the convict who had
charge of them, and who was the only
man that could venture to approach
most of them.
On the shores of Pirates’ Bay some
very regularly stratified rocks jut out
in ledges along the beach, and are tra-
versed by remarkably close and straight
joints at right angles to each other.
The place is well known in Yan Die-
men’s Land under the name of the
“ Tesselated Pavement.”
Returning to the Eliza, I prepared
to go across to Port Arthur, where I
was to rejoin my ship; and, with
many thanks for their kindness, took
leave of Sir John and Lady Frank-
lin. Poor Sir John I It was a final
adieu to him in this world. Who
can tell in what “ thrilling region
of thick-ribbed ice,” or in the floor of
which portion of the Arctic sea are his
bones and those of his gallant compa-
nions now whitening. If all things were
known, I believe it would be seen that
his fate was owing to the crooked policy
of the Colonial Office and the mistaken
economy of the Admiralty. On his return
home from his government he had so
many and so just grievances to redress
at the bands of the Colonial Office, that
this Arctic expedition was got up by
the government of the day mainly to
evade a troublesome investigation. His
stores of preserved meats were supplied
from that tainted source which after-
wards caused such an outcry to be
raised, and so much putrid matter to
be condemned and cast into the sea.
Every man-of-war, for some years be-
fore and after the sending of Franklin’s
expedition, found a large proportion
of their “ preserved meats,” supplied
for the use of the sick, and for boat and
other detached service, in the same
beastly condition. In the very vessel
in which I made the voyage I am now
describing to you, reader, quantities of
the preserved meats belonging to the
public stores had to be “ condemned
and cast into the sea.” The opening
of one of the bad cases on the lower
deck was the signal for all hands to
rush aloft, so deadly, and sickening,
and penetrating was the stench. At
the very same time, among the officers’
private stock, purchased from Gamble
at a fair price, we had not one single
instance of a tainted case.
If it so happened that the Erebus
and Terror pushed on into some remote
winter harbour, trusting to their stock
of preserved meats—perhaps husbanded
for the occasion and when irretriev-
ably fast In their dreary quarters, found
them to be putrid garbage, fearful,
indeed, is the responsibility resting on
some one’s head—fearful the crime rest-
ing on his heart. Brave, kindly, ho-
nest Sir John, whatever was thy fate in
this world, happy and peaceful will be
thy lot in the next.
Let us, however, take a peep at Port
Arthur. Arrived at the railway-sta-
tion (a little wooden hut), we found
the train awaiting us, consisting of
small, open trucks, with seats in each for
four people. The motive power consist-
ed of four convicts, in their canary-co-
loured clothes, to each truck ; and, as
soon as we were seated, they pushed us
forward. In a mile or two we came on
a long inclined plane, where, of course,
we got out and walked. Everything
was wood sleepers, rails, carriages,
and all, roughly put together, but an-
swering the purpose quite well enough.
Arrived at the top of the ridge which
separated the two bays, and which
might be some 300 or 400 feet in
height, we again got into our carriages,
and then our four “ canary birds,” giv-
ing a sharp impetus to the carriage,
sprang up themselves upon its sides,
and away we shot down an inclined
plane by the side of a little ravine,


turning one or two sharpish corners,
but traversing one or two flattenings
in the descent, which checked our ve-
locity a little, till we came at last flying
down into a long wooden pier project-
ing into the waters of Port Arthur.
Here we found a boat and men lying
alongside ready to take us off; and,
after a pull of about three miles, we
landed at the famous penal settlement
of Port Arthur. Here, and at the little
Norfolk Island, nine hundred or a
thousand miles away in the Pacific
Ocean, is the double-distilled and con-
centrated villany of the British Em-
pire.
At a little distance, the settlement
had a pretty and cheerful aspect, for all
that, with the white houses and flower-
gardens of the officers, the wooden-
spired church, and the great convict
barracks, that might have been taken
for manufactories or warehouses. To
this place were sent the worst crimi-
nals, and those that had been recon-
victed in the colony, to undergo a por-
tion of their sentence, and if well con-
ducted there to be afterwards removed
to a probation station, and thus gra-
dually work their way to freedom.
The discipline and privations they had
here to undergo were most irksome and
severe, and attempts at escape were
frequent. A chain of telegraph posts
spread over the whole peninsula, and
extended to Hobarton, so that an
escape was instantly notified, and all
the posts were guarded with renewed
vigilance. Parties of soldiers and con-
stables, armed with muskets, were
stationed at every post, and patrolled
at many intervals ; yet, in spite of all
precautions, in spite of the rugged,
difficult nature of the ground, and the
impenetrable character of the woods;
in spite of rocks, and sea, and danger,
and starvation, escapes did occur
from time to time, and little groups
of men got free into the body of the
colony, and by turning bushrangers,
kept it often in a state of terror and
dismay.
The system is now happily coming
to an end, and we need not stop to
minutely describe that which is already
beginning to be a thing of the past.
Let us turn from the contemplation
of the depravity of man, and take a
look at one of the most beautiful of
the objects of nature—and that is, a
group of tree ferns which had been
just hit upon when I reached Port
Arthur in the making of a new road.
In a little dell in the recesses of the
bush, under a rocky cliff, where the
dank moisture constantly hung, was a
little grove of these beautiful plants.
A thick, soft, fibrous stem, about a
foot in diameter, and ten or fifteen
feet high, was crowned and surrounded
by a drooping canopy of leaves, just
like gigantic fronds of our own common
brakes, but sweeping in an elegant
curve till in many instances they
touched the ground. From the top
of this canopy, in several plants,
young fronds were springing, forming
downy, light-green stems, partially
uncoiled, but the ends having still an
elegant volute, and looking like bishops’
croziers. A coronal of these crozier-
like stems springing from the tent-
like canopy of dark leaves below, with
the mossy-looking trunk in the centre,
formed one of the most elegant of
nature’s productions, and when group-
ed in numbers of all shapes and sizes,
as they were in this grove, the assem-
blage had a wonderful and strange, as
well as most beautiful aspect.
After partaking of the hospitality
of Captain Booth (now alas ! no more),
and enjoying his society for some days,
we left Fort Arthur, and sailed into
the dark and stormy sea that perpe-
tually beats against the embattled and
columnar cliff's that environ the shores
of Tasman’s peninsula.
Gallant Tasman! brave precursor
of the many explorers that have issued
first from your own country, and lat-
terly from ours, it is pleasant to think
that on your return from your arduous
voyage, 200 years ago, you were re-
warded with the hand, ’as you had,
doubtless, long before gained the heart
of Maria Van Diemen, whose Chris-
tian name you had fixed on the pretty
little island we passed upon the eastern
shore, and of whom it may be doubted,
whether you were not thinking most
when you politely appended her sur-
name, or that of her haughty father.
Governor of the Netherlands’ East
Indies, to the large island that seems
ultimately destined to bear your own.
Reader, should you ever visit Tas-
mania, whether known by that or by
its old name of Yan Diemen’s Land,
may you have as pleasant a voyage out,
and spend as happy a time while there,
as that of which the brief record has
now been laid before you.
