

ONE PENNY
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 24.
A WARNING
A Sermon preached in St.
Paul’s Cathedral, Mel-
bourne, August 26, 1917,
BY
Archdeacon Hindley, B.D.
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard Pty. Ltd.,
1917.


A WARNING.
A Sermon Preached in St. Paul’s Cathedral, Melbourne, on
August 26th, 1917.
By Archdeacon Hindley, B.D.
“If thou hadst known, even thou at least in this thy
day, the things that belong unto thy peace.”—St. Luke
19 : 42.
Three years ago, a conversation was overheard in a rail-
way carriage between three working men. One said, “I
am sorry for Sir Edward Grey, for he has worried hard
for peace and has failed.” Another said, lam not sorry
for the Kaiser; he will get what is coming to him.” The
third man said, “I am
sorry for God Almighty!”
The words seemed to be blasphemous, but they were
evidently not intended to be so. They implied that God
Almighty had tried to keep away the horrors and waste
of war, and had failed to do so.
The text relates to another such failure. The Divine
Son of God “Came near to His Own city and wept over
it.” He had failed to save it. War was inevitable.
“The days shall come upon thee, when thine enemies
shall cast up a bank against thee, and compass thee round,
and keep thee in on every side, and shall dash thee to


the ground and thy children within thee, and they shall
not leave in thee one stone upon another,”
Hence the tears of Jesus, bitter, unavailing tears. He
was a Saviour Who could save to the uttermost —from
war and every other evil. But he was powerless before
the blindness of an unwilling people. The Son of God
weeping over Jerusalem reveals the attitude of God
towards all war, and especially ' towards the
present war. It is not according to His will.
He wills that war shall come to an end. And when war
does come it comes in spite of God, Who wills peace on
earth to men of good will. These tears of Jesus are ex-
plained by one word, Love. For God is love. Love de-
sires to bless, to give and to possess. When these desires
are thwarted there must be sorrow in the heart of the
lover. God desired to bless the people of Jerusalem, to
give, to supply all their needs, and to possess their hearts.
Three years His Son went in and out among them—
teaching, healing, blessing. For three years He warned
them, and when at last He realised it was all no use, He
wept over them. This coming siege, loss of life and de-
struction of property were all so unnecessary. If they
would only heed. Their destruction was on their own
heads. They would not know the “things that belonged
to their peace.” They refused to know “the day of their
visitation. ”
Things that Belong to Peace.
I desire to illustrate briefly the things that belong to
peace and the day of visitation, by the events of a few
years preceding the outbreak of the war. The one thing
that belonged to the peace of the world at that time was
that the world should know its
Danger.
In the year 1905, the first warning was given. In March


that year the German Emperor landed at Tangier frorh
the Royal Yacht, proclaimed the Sultan to be an inde-
pendent sovereign, and announced his intention to safe-
guard German interests. This encouragement of Morocco
was a challenge to England and France. War was
avoided by the sacrifice of the French Foreign Secretary,
M. Delcasse. From that time the taxes for armaments in
Europe became more and more oppressive. A new govern-
ment, said to be bent on peace at any price, assumed the
reins of power in England. This government tried to
appease Germany by soft speeches, professions of friend-
ship and proposals of disarmament. Went even further
—and set an example by laying two keels of Dread-
noughts instead of three. Germany responded by laying
four keels instead of two. In 1911 the German warship
“Panther” appeared at Agadir. A new challenge to Eng-
land, France and Russia. There was much excitement in
diplomatic circles. Lloyd George made his famous Man-
sion House speech, and once more war was avoided. But
the warning was unmistakable. In 1913, England pro-
posed a Naval Holiday, that England and Germany should
stop building ships, etc. Germany, supported even by the
Socialists, turned down the proposal, and spent an addi-
tional In armaments and mightily increased
army, and the world drifted on to 1914.
Enemies at Home.
While statesmen were thus “playing their high chess
game, the pawns whereof are men,” two things in Eng-
land that belonged to her peace were significant. The
first was the introduction into the political life of Great
Britain, of strange men, who spoke English with a strange
accent —they were masters in high finance, they were con-
trollers of the metal markets of the world. They were
feted, honoured, knighted. Some became candidates for
Parliament, others nominated candidates, and some who


could scarcely speak English were returned to represent
English constituencies in the House of Commons, party
funds benefiting by the transaction. The second signi-
ficant thing was the self-imposed mission of one of the
most honoured men in the Empire. He was a Christian,
a gentleman, and a soldier. He had served his country
with success for fifty years; he had spent his life in inter-
preting the meaning of military movements and pre-
parations. His name,
Lord Roberts.
The year 1905 witnessed the beginning of his mission.
He warned, entreated, exhorted England to prepare—and
by preparation— to avoid war. He did not ask for con-
scription, only for training, so that if the evil day should
come, trained men—not raw lads —might volunteer. He
was greeted with cries of “Don’t offend Germany.” He
was treated with contempt and ridiculed, threatened even
with the loss of pension so hardly and honourably earned.
Meanwhile, the strange men with a strange accent flour-
ished exceedingly.
0, England! England!
If thou hadst known, even in this thy day the things
that belonged unto thy peace! If thou hadst known the
enemy abroad and the enemy within thy gates! There
might have been no lamentations for the loss of the world’s
best in those fateful years of 1914, 1915, 1916, 1917 I
May I illustrate my text by a short reference to events
in Australia? Before doing so, however, I desire to quote
from several issues of the “Moniteur,” published in Paris
in 1815. These quotations mark a pilgrim’s progress to
to the valley of National humiliation. Napoleon had left
Elba. The “Moniteur” announced that the “Cannibal
has left his den.” Later, “The human wolf has arrived
at the Gulf of San Juan.” Then “The tiger is at Gay.”


“ The tyrant is at Lyons.” “The usurper is within fifty
miles of Paris.” “Bonapart is approaching rapidly.”
“Napoleon will be at our gates to-morrow.” “The Em-
peror is at Fontenbleau.” And last of all, “His Imperial
Majesty the Emperor arrived at Paris yesterday, and was
welcomed by the plaudits of his loyal subjects.”
If Germany should win, which God forbid. How would
Australia show “the mettle of her pasture” in the presence
of the conqueror? It is possible that in certain quarters
similar changes in opinions and expression would take
place. The men who fight with their mouths would adapt
themselves to new conditions. But another class would
be then under no necessity to make new professions. The
old ones would do.
If the Kaiser overcame the Allied armies and Australia
were to share the humiliation of the Empire, there were
those in our midst who could readily adapt themselves
to the new form of government, and without inconsistency
would be able to present an address of welcome to the
conqueror. Such an address might take the following
form :
Address to the Kaiser.
“Your Majesty, I have the honour to present this copy
of my published speeches for the past three years. I
draw your attention to the absence of any single word of
commendation of England and her Allies, to the absence
of any word of condemnation of German atrocities, to the
frequent condemnation, expressed or implied, of my own
country. No word of mine encouraged recruiting, and,
although thousands of the best of the young men of my
own religion and race were in danger of perishing, I
steadily discouraged relief parties, and suggested excuses
for the shirker. Your majesty will learn that at various
crises in the great war there arose in Australia a spirit of


revolt against authority, and industrial strife and disaffec-
tion that threatened the foundations of the Commonwealth.
My attitude towards revolt may be gathered from my utter-
ances. I do not know whether your Majesty had any
paid agents in Australia, but I question whether any agents
could have been more effective in crippling this country
than I and some of my confederates have been. We stood to
gain whatever happened—freedom if the Allies won, and
gratitude from your Majesty on the conquest by the Central
Powers. Observe, too, your Majesty, that while I have done
more, in a few short years, to stir up racial and sectarian
strife in Australia than any man, living or dead, I have been
the first to denounce as sectarian bigotry any criticism of
my pro-German or anti-British sentiments. Your Majesty
will, therefore, perceive that not only my sentiments but
my methods are not unworthy of the great country you
rule.”
I offer this suggestion with the greatest reluctance and
the greatest regret. Any man, of any nationality or creed
who defends his country, is entitled to honour. But Aus-
tralia should mark the man who defames his country,
who fouls the flag that defends him, who lends his aid by
word or deed to an enemy that threatens the security and
freedom of the world, and this for some petty sectarian
triumph, or to gratify some racial antipathy or personal
hatred, with all the infamy he deserves.
Let Australia Beware 1
Her real enemies are not all across the seas ! The things
that belong to her peace include the recognition of foes
at home. The importation of old world animosities, the
division of the people into hostile camps, the weekly
dragging off of bandages from wounds that time is heal


mg, and the consequent establishing of conditions that may
lead to civil war.
The Only Way.
Jerusalem drifted into ruin. The world drifted into
war three years ago; the cause of this drifting was the
rejection of the only Saviour. Apart from Him there was
no salvation, and the world has been drifting apart from
Him. I invite you to think of Jesus as He appears in
the story from which the text is taken. There is, I know,
another aspect in which the gentleness of the Saviour is
apparent, but in this story He is one who cannot
tolerate wrong
in any form, by any Government, by any group of men.
Wrong fills Him with an indignation that blasts and burns.
What will He not do to put down wrong? Single-handed
He declares war. He does not shrink ‘from violence. Wit-
ness the liberated doves in the Temple; witness, too, the
usurers scrambling for money on the floor of the sacred
building. Then see Him in Holy wrath, with a whip, driving
out the men who acquiesced in wrong and practised wrong
against God and man in His own House. The only city,
the only nation that can survive in the crash of nations is
the one that refuses to drift; that refuses to acquiesce in
evil; and that stands for God and His righteousness at
any cost.
The Empire is in peril, the lives of young Australians
are in the balance. The Government is battling with
enemies abroad, and is being hampered by enemies at
home. Strife, which might be just in normal times, be-
comes a crime under these conditions. Pray for Australia,
and as you love your country support the Government
in its endeavour to maintain order.
Wholly Set-up and Printed In Australia by Harold Smith, 87d Plinderf
Lane, Melbourne,
