

■
3AJT
A White Australia Impossible.—Part 2.
The
Cause
of Colour in
Mankind.
E. W. COLE.
Ah! be kind—life hath no secret
For our happiness like this ;
Kindly hearts are seldom sad ones,
Blessing ever bringeth bliss ;
Lend a helping hand to others,
Smile though all the world should
frown,
Man is man—we all are brothers,
Black or white or red or brown.
Man is man through all gradations,
Little recks it where he stands,
How divided into nations,
Scattered over many lands ;
Man is man by form and feature,
Man by vice and virtue too,
Man in all one common nature
Speaks and binds us brothers true,
Joseph Bobbins.


The Pamphlet, “A White Australia Impossible,” in the
Federal Parliament.
In referring to this book in Parliament, Senator Harney said: —
“Before I conclude, let me make a couple of observations upon certain
arguments used in this pamphlet headed ‘A White Australia Impossible,’
and signed by Mr. E W. Cole. One of the arguments he adduces is that
a white Australia is a physical impossibility. He bears out that argument
bv printing a shaded globe. ****** His argument is that we never
can make a white Australia, because the rays of the sun, which in the past
have darkened the human race in diminishing degrees from the equator to
the poles, will continue to do likewise in the future; and that therefore
Australia, by reason of her geographical position, must, generation after
generation, be developing people of a duskier hue, and that it will be im-
possible for us to have even a continuous colour amongst our own people
on this continent. My answer to that very ingenious argument is this..
I do not deny the proposition, nor do I think it is necessary to do so; but
it is no argument against exclusion. It is a mere play upon the expression,
1 a white Australia’; because although we now object to the people who
have a certain colour, our objection is not to the colour itself, but to the
characteristics which accompany the colour. And though centuries of a
tropical sun may tan the features of our children, still if they emanate from
the same stock, it cannot alter the essentials of our race. What argument
is it, then, to speak of the change that the sun will make, and which we
cannot fully foresee in the dim and distant future? The fact that there
will be a deeper hue in the complexion of those persons who reside upon
this continent does not matter, so long as we retain the habits, manners;
and traditions, and*all those things which go to make and to endear us to
the British Empire.”—Hawsani.
In following parts of this work I intend to answer the above remarks of
the Hon Senator, and show that white men do not. will not, and cannot
work in the fertile, low-1} ing tropics in any part of the world, and that
they will not, probably, work in the tropical part of Australia.
I also intend to discuss the following subjects ;
“The Blessing and the Curse of Factory Legislation.”
“The Value and Otherwise of Woman Suffrage.”-
“ The Possibility of Australia, by Scientific Culture, Water Con-
servation,
of People.
Etc., etc.


A White Australia Impossible.
PART 2.
CAUSE OF COLOUR IN
MANKIND.
Here and there exception has been taken to my representing Jesus,
in the first section of this book,as a coloured man Our egotistical pride
would make him a white man; but general legend and literature
represent him as of the same colour as all the Bible characters, namely
of a tan or brown, as all the Syrians are and must be in such a warm
climate. Adam (which signifies red earth), and Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and the twelve patriarchs; and Saul, and David, and Solomon, and
all the kings and judges; and Moses, Samuel, Elijah, Elisha, Ezekiel,
Jeremiah, Isaiah, Nehemiah, Daniel, and all the prophets; and Sarah, Hagar,
Rebecca, Ruth. Esther, the woman of Samaria, Martha and Mary,
Mary the mother of Jesus, and the other women of the Bible —.all the
above, as well as Jesus and his Apostles, are generally represented in
pictures as of a tan or brown colour. Some Jews, many hundreds of years
ago, left Palestine and settled in Europe, and have become white; some left
and settled in the tropics and have become black; but those who have
remained in Palestine are still tan or brown, like the other Syrians.
A Syrian
A Syrian Woman.






JEWISH WOMEN OF PALESTINE.
From a Photograph by Bonfils.
GREAT IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING THE
CAUSE OF SKIN-COLOUR IN MANKIND.
As this colour prejudice is so intense, unfair, and cruel in its effects
against three-fourths of our fellow creatures, even to the withholding of
unalienable human rights, it is our duty to try and make clear to those
who have not thought on the question, what really is the cause of skin-
colour in human beings. Now, the evidence is overwhelming that it is solely
the influence of the sun which causes this colour Everywhere throughout
the world the black people inhabit the hot countries, the brown, olive, or red
people the warm countries, and the white people the cool countries; and
there is no exception to this, unless there has been comparatively' late im-


migration of a differently coloured people or peoples into those countries.
In a general way the colour of the human skin is everywhere dependent upon
the climate People in the south of France are darker than those in the
north of France; people in the south of Germany are darker than those in
the north of Germany; people in the south of Spain are darker than those
in the north of Spain ; people in the south of Italy are darker than those
in the north of Italy; people in the south of Russia are darker than those
in the north of Russia; and people in the south of Egypt, and Arabia, and
Persia, and India, and Burmah, and China, are everywhere darker than
those in the north of their respective countries. Climate everywhere
governs; and, to generalize again, the people are always black in the hot
countries, brown in the warm countries, and white in the cool countries.
This innocent cause of colour is not known to the vast majority, hence the unfair and
deplorable prejudice of white people against coloured people. In trying to assist in
the removing of this unfortunate prejudice, I shall now give concisely a variety of
evidences showing clearly the cause of the dark colours in the human skin.
In all ages of the world observant men have noticed that the colour of
the human skin has been developed, governed, and modified by the sun.
This must be so, because the matter is so apparent. Give the latitude
where a people have dwelt for thousands of years, and the traveller or
ethnologist will tell you, in almost all cases, the colour of that people.
The ancient writers refer to the cause of colour being the sun. In the
Song ot Solomon, the Daughter of Pharaoh speaking says “ I am black but
comely, Oye daughters of Jerusalem Look not upon me (or ‘ depreciate
me not’) because 1 am black, because the sun hath looked upon
me.” Galen and Aristotle held that the sun blackened the skin.
Herodotus says that it is the sun that blackens the skin. The tragic
poet Theodectes, speaking of the Ethiopians or negroes, says: “ By the near
approach of the sun-god in his course, they have their bodies covered with a dark,
sooty lustre, and their hair curled and crisped by his parching rays.”
M. De Pages, in his Travels round the World, during the years 1767-1771,
speaking of his passage over the Great Desert, says: "The Arabs, who
frequent the middle of the desert, have their hair almost frizzled, fine, and
of the same nature as that of the negroes. . . . During the short period of my
passage, my own hair became more dry and delicate; and, receiving no
nourishment for want of perspiration, showed a tendency to assume the
same frizzled appearance) Might not the frizzled appearance, the entire
failure of moisture, and the excessive heat of the climate which occasioned
it, have been the chief cause of that frizzling? My blood was become
extremely dry, and my complexion differed but little from that of a Hindoo
or an Arab.”


SUNLIGHT GOVERNS COLOUR EVERYWHERE.
It is a universal rule everywhere that black people living in a cool
country become lighter, while white people living in a hot country become
darker. "Chambers’s Information” says: "The negro and, his descendants,
when transplanted to a cold climate, become paler." 'Negroes long resident
in the cooler States of North America, become lighter in colour than those
in the hotter South and the torrid West India Islands. The Australian
aboriginal has become lighter since he has arrived in the southern or cool
parts of Australia, while he remains black in the northern parts. The
Arabs are nearly white in Algiers, but in the hotter countries of Nubia
are very dark, and further up the Nile towards the equator are black.
The Zanzibar Arabs, living as they do nearly on the equator, are also
black.
Buflon in his “Natural History," says: "In further corroboration of
the influence of climate on the human complexion, we may remark, that
there is a colony of Jews who have been settled at Cochin on the Malabar
Coast from a very remote period, of which they have lost the memory.
Though originally from Palestine, and from their customs preserving
themselves unmixed, they are now become as black as the other
Malabarians, who are scarcely a shade lighter than the negroes of Guinea,
Benin, or Angola. At Ceylon, also, the Portuguese, who settled there
only a few centuries ago. are become blacker than the natives: and the
Portuguese, who settled near the Mandingoes, about three hundred years
since, differ so little from them as to be called negroes, which they resent
as a high indignity."
Another writer says:— "There is no fact better established in the physical
history of man than that colour depends primarily upon temperature. The
inhabitant of a northern clime is always white, of an extreme southern
clime always black. The varieties of colour exist between the two extremes
The Jews who are tawny in their own country, are white in Northern
Europe, with blue eyes and red beards; while in Borneo and Sumatra,
they are almost black ”
Another writer says '.—"The Jew is approximately white in the temperate-
regions, brown in the semi-tropics, and black in the tropics. Sir Henry
Moncrieff speaking on this point says: ‘ The descendants of the very same
family, removed into different countries, not only change their family complexion
hut are found to exhibit as many colours as there ire different regions which they
inhabit. The Jews afford the most signal and indisputable example
They are scattered over the face of the whole world, and are a distinct
race from every people among whom they dwell. It is indisputably


certain, that the English Jew is white, the Portuguese is swarthy, the
American olive, the Arabian copper, the Abyssinian dark as the original
natives, and the African Jews, in general, black as the negroes.’”
A Jew of Morocco.
We read frequently that persons naturally swarthy tan more easily than
others. Through observation on the subject, I could pick out persons who
would tan or blacken readily in the tropics. Generally the dark races,
such as the Portuguese, southern Spaniards, and others of southern
Europe, tan more readily than those of more Northern parts Sir Richard
Phillips, in his “Million of Facts,” says: “Portuguese and Spaniards
living near the equator in several generations are almost as black as
negroes.”
Another authority says: "The Spaniards who have, for any consider-
able length of time, inhabited America under the torrid zone, are now
scarcely to be distinguished from the native Indians; and. did they not
intermarry with Europeans, or if they led the same barbarous lives with
the Indians around them, as little protected as they from the burning sun, it ts
more than probable, that, in much feiver generations than any change hitherto
produced has required, they would become as dark as the darkest complexion
of the country.”
THE HOTTEST COUNTRY PRODUCES THE
BLACKEST MEN.
The hot, low lands of the tropics produce the blackest people. Orr,
in his “Circle of the Sciences,” says: “As a rule, the lower the level
of a locality, the more alluvial its soil, and the moister the character of


its heat, the blacker the complexion of the inhabitants.” And again: ‘‘The
Burmese grow darker as the valley of the Irrawady becomes broader and
flatter,” and, we may add, hotter. The hottest, extensive, low-lying region
on the earth is on the west coast of Africa, and it has produced the negro,
or rather that torrid, horrid climate has modified man into the negro type.
"Chambers’s Information,” says; ‘‘The negroes occupy Western Africa
from the Senegal to the Gaboon, the Soudan in the centre, and the low
parts of the Upper Nile. The dusky or brown hue of the Arab and Aus-
tralian is more prevalent through Africa, as a whole, than the jet black of
the negro, which seems nearly coincident with river valleys and deltas lying within
the tropics.”
Another authority says: “The blackest negroes in Africa are generally
to be found in the river valleys and deltas lying within the tropics.”
Milner, in his "Gallery of Nature,” says: "The weather is so hot in some
parts of the negro country, (for instance, on the banks of the Senegal), that
it causes spirits of wine to boil." Another describes the country as being
so hot as to cause brandy to boil. Now, brandy boils at 173 degrees
Fahrenheit. I have shown elsewhere that the average life of the white
man in that country is only two years, and that no white children can
live there. Now, my theory of the origin of the negro is that some
portion of mankind, wherever they came from, got into this region, and
that the torrid climate has, in the course of ages, transformed them into
what we now find them, with a jet black skin, thick skull, thick lips, and
curly hair. Surely the heat which makes brandy boil is enough to turn the
skin of any man black, and frizzle his hair! As we have seen, the tragic
poet Theodectes, speaking of the negroes, says, “By the near approach
of the sun-god, in his course, they have their bodies covered with a dark
sooty lustre, and their hair curled and crisped by his parching rays.” One
writer in answer to the question, ‘‘Why is a negro’s skull harder and
thicker than a white man’s ?” says, " Herodotus explained it by attributing it
to the early exposure of African children to the heat of the sun; and Pro-
fessor Virchow, after his trip up the Nile, sides with the Greek historian.”
Climate has a powerful and mighty influence in the formation or modifi-
cation of all organic beings, vegetable and animal, including man. The
effect of climate on man, taken in connection with other influences, such
as locality, food, occupation, education, association, example, religion,
government, and other forces and environments, accounts for all the
variations which now exist amongst mankind, in colour and all other parts
of their entire character.
The following, in substance, was related to me some time ago by a
Hindoo gentleman. The Scotch captain of a ship lying in the Rangoon
River one day shouted out to a black man standing near, “Come and lend


a hand, Johnny, and help us get these things on board.” The answer
came, “Eh, mon, wha are ye callin’ Johnny? I’m just a Scot like yoursel’!’’
In explanation it transpired that he had been living in that hot, low, damp
climate for 30 years, and had turned completely black through the force
of the sun’s rays.
All the travellers or residents in tropical Africa, or the “ Dark
Continent ” as it is aptly called, turn brown or even black in a very short
time. The following are six well-known white travellers and residents in
Africa, who all turned very dark, or black, in a few years ; Jephson, one
of Stanley’s officers when he went to relieve Emin Pasha, speaking of
Captain Casati, an Italian, who had been ten years in equatorial
Africa, says: “He was burnt almost black from exposure
to the sun.”
Portrait of the skin-blackened
Captain Casati.
Emin Pasha, the eminent German traveller,
governor, and scientist, as he appeared after
several years’ residence in tropical Africa.
Portrait of Cardinal Lavigerie, the
famous friend of the slave, after many
years in tropical Africa.
The intrepid Sir Henry M. Stanley
as he appeared, sun-tanned, after
travelling through and through tropi-
cal Africa.


A White Australia Impossible ,
Portrait of General Gordon, who
became coloured through spending
several years in the torr'd Soudan.
Dr. Livingstone, the eminent mis-
sionary and traveller, whose skin
became very dark after living many
years in the tropical heats of Africa
King Edward’s brother-in-law, the present Duke of Argyll, writing in
the “North American Review” of the good Dr. Livingstone, the long-
sojourner in tropical Africa, incidentally refers to his sun-tanned skin in
the fallowing passage :
" Livingston-*, to be sure, did little to encourage the idea of gold. The
c isly gold visible about him was the gold of his character, and a remark-
able hat-band of the same colour he always persisted in wearing, whether
in Africa or in Europe. That gilded hat-band had probably much to do
with the conversion of the savage to Christianity, which was the purpose
for which Livingstone travelled, toiled, and died. He had probably found
it an open sesame to distinction in the minds of the natives. It was a
most awe-inspiring diadem ; and if it avails on the captain’s head or the
merchantman’s deck, why should it not help discipline and enforce awe
on the children of Ham ? When there remained little to mark Livingstone
as an Englishman, when his skin was burned dark brown, and his speech had
become almost wholly Makololo, that golden hat-band remained to
distinguish him outwardly from all others.” Dr. Livingstone tanned
so dark with the African sun that the natives sometimes did not believe
that he was a white man until he showed them his white skin under his
clothes.
SUN-TANNING WITHIN OUR OWN EXPERIENCE.
Being much interested in this subject of mankind, and, through the
accident of my situation, coming in speaking contact with an immense
variety of people, I have observed the features of many thousands, and


I ' :p
have asked many hundreds what countrymen they were, and to what coun-
tries they have been. If they look very brown or dark, I generally ask,
"What warm country have you been into?" and the answer is generally,
"I have just come from the West,’’ or from the Transvaal, or from Queens-
land, etc. A gentleman spoke to me the other day, and I could not
conclude of what race he was. He was the colour of a Malay, but had
not the features. I asked, “ What countryman are you?" He answered. “ I
was born of Irish parents in Sydney.” I said, “ You must have been into
a hot country.” He answered, “ Yes ! I have been 27 years in Northern
Queensland”; and it then transpired that he was the Rev. John Thompson,
who had been, for many years, a missionary amongst the kanakas. I
said, “You are very dark.” He replied, "Yes; and when I have worked for
any length of time with my arms exposed, they have turned quite black ”
Rev. John Thompson’s Portrait
from a Photograph.
A few days ago I met at table in South Australia, a gentleman who had
English features, but was exactly the colour of a Malay. I asked him,
" Have you been living in Northern Queensland ? ” He answered, “ No,”
and handed me his card.
G. J. KIRKLAND,
Proprietor “N.T. Times & Govt. Gazette," Port Darwin.
He affirmed in the most positive manner that it was impossible for white
men to do field-labour in the Northern Territory I was speaking to Dr.
Holtze, the present Curator of the Adelaide Botanic Gardens, and who
was for 18 years Curator of the Botanic Gardens and Tropical Farm at
Port Darwin, and he affirmed that white men cannot do field-work


in that country. I also saw the Honorable J. L. Parsons, who was for
six years Government Resident in the No-'thern Territory; he also
affirmed that white men could not do field-work in the Territory. And
he also said to me, ’’Your White Australia Impossible, has opened the eyes
of some of our legislators, and one of the greatest points you make is, that
all the descendants of the white inhabitants who settle in the Northern
Territory, will in time become coloured by the tropical climate. Un-
doubtedly they will.” But not only does the climate of tropical
Queensland darken the skin of white people; the climate of most other
parts of Australia does so, more or less.
I went to the Goulburn Valley a short time ago to observe the progress
of irrigation there, and saw the nephew of an old German friend on his
fruit farm. He was loading fruit for the market; his shirt sleeves were
tucked up, and his arms were tanned by the sun as dark as those of a
Malay. I said, “ Pull your sleeve up a little higher.” He did so, and
showed the part of the skin covered by his clothes perfectly white, and
putting his fingers upon his sunburnt arm, he jokingly remarked, " That
is ray Australian part,” and then putting them upon his white skin, said,
“ That is my German part !"
Victorians who go to Queensland, or Western Australia, or South
Africa, and live in the open air in either of those places for a time, always
become darker. Even the out-door workers at Sydney are darker than
the same class at Melbourne, through its being six or seven degrees hotter.
The carters, lorrymen, and hansom-cabmen in Sydney, are very reddish
or brown, according to their constitution, through being exposed to that
climate.
"Keep your face and arms out of the sun, or you will be covered with
freckles,” is the anxious mother’s frequent caution. Of course, freckles
are the rapid beginning of colourization through being exposed to the sun.
*T took my children down to the sea-side for a month during the summer,
and the sun burnt them as brown as berries,” is the observation of many
thousands of mothers. We know that we always get sun-burnt if we go for
an outing or a pic-nic on a hot day. We know that if we expose our faces
and arms they get browner than the rest of our bodies, which is protected
from the sun by our clothes. Pull back your sleeve and you will find
that your arm, which is protected from the sun, is paler than your hands
which are exposed ; strip back the sleeves of a thousand men who are
exposed out of doors and you will find everyone in this respect the same.
In England, France, Italy. South Africa, Australia, and even near the
Poles, smd, in fact, in all countries, the people are several degrees darker at
the end of the bright, hot summer, than they are at the end of the dark, cold
winter. This evidence anyone in any country can observe for themselves


_ - ~
■
'•l®f3® .7 MPa? -•’<•-?. f JR
RICHARD ANDREWARTHA. ARTHUR MURPHY. WILLIAM GOODWIN
Three Melbourne Youths, showing just whatt hey would look like if they worked out in the
sun in Central or Northern parts of Australia, with their faces bare and their arms bare up to
just above the elbows, and then stripped to their waists; and if they went perfectly naked for
years, in the same hot climate, they would turn brown all over. And so would any other white
persons. Even in Melbourne and Sydney, at the baths, when out-door workers strip to bathe,
anyone can see that they have white bodies but brown faces and arms, caused through exposure
to the sun.


SHADED PERSONS ALWAYS LIGHTER.
Black children are very much the same colour as white ones when they
are born, perhaps a little redder. Horne, in his " Introduction to the Holy
Scriptures”, says: ‘‘Black is not the colour of the negro when first born. It
is a remarkable fact that the negro infant comes into the world white,
only with a yellowish tinge, and that it becomes progressively darker.”
Children born of black parents in a cool country are lighter than the
parents. A black man from Mauritius informs me that half-bred
children born in a hot country are blacker than those born in a cool
country. All persons become pale-faced if they remain much indoors, or
in cellars, or in dimly-lighted factories, compared with those who go out
and work in the open, sun-lit fields and get browned; they seem in com-
plexion like another race. If a woman stays in a dark or darkened room
she becomes pale, and continues so, and then when she goes out into the
sunlight she becomes sun-burnt, brown, or freckled. One writer says:
‘‘Shut up within the walls of their seraglios, and secluded from the sun,
the Asiatic and African women are frequently as white as the Europeans;
while, in England, exposure to the sun is well-known to produce a deeper
complexion, and artificial protection from its influence is adopted to
preserve fair and unfreckled skin.” Another says: ‘‘The dark-haired
women of Syria and Barbary are indeed frequently very white; but this
is owing to the careful avoidance of exposure to the effect of climate,
which Pritchard calls, a being ‘ bleached by artificial protection from light,
or at least from the solar rays.' ” An objection is raised that the white men
in India do not always turn brown. My answer is, ‘‘because they seldom
or never go out during the blazing heat of the day; if they did they would
certainly turn brown.”
SHADED PARTS OF THE BODY.
Another evidence that the sun and its offspring light are the cause of
skin-colour is shown in different parts of the human body, as in the under
and shaded parts of animals. The shaded parts of coloured people are
always lightest; in the arm-pits, in the palms of the hands, between the
fingers, between the toes, under the soles of the feet, the blackest person
is always lighter—this any observers can see for themselves. A Melbourne
lady who reared a Queensland black boy, said to my wife, “The soles of
his feet ate as white as my hands”; and I have seen this feature myself
many times in coloured persons, and have never seen an exception. The
inside of a black man’s mouth, and, in fact, the inside of all parts of his
body, is the same colour as that of a white man, and the soles of his feet,
which are always shaded from the light, are aluavs white.


THE COLOUR PIGMENT.
A peculiar substance called "pigment” exists in the skin of every human
being, in all countries. Many scientific books describe this substance.
One writer says: "Colour resides in the lower or second layer of the
outer skin, in the shape of pigment granules, which are perfectly analogous
to the colouring matter of freckles, moles, claret-marks, etc.” Another
says: "A pigment under the epidermis makes the complexion. The
coloured person has a black pigment, the brunette a light brown pigment,
and the blonde a still lighter pigment. When there is no pigment in the
skin an albino is the result, with pinkeyes.” Another says: “The skin
varies much in colour and texture in different races, from the pale
reddish-brown of the ' white’ races, to the black tint peculiar to the negro t
The true skin is the same in all races.”
It appears that the presence of this pigment in smaller or larger quanti-
ties, is a feature of the skin of all human beings, and that external light
and heat are the principal agents which develop or bring it out. One of the
clearest, most concise, and most decisive statements which I have seen on
the subject is that of Dr. Warren, of America. He says:
“The depth of colour in the skin depends on the amount of a certain
colouring matter, called pigment, incorporated with the deeper and softer
portion of the scarf-skin. In the scarf-skin of the inhabitants of northern
latitudes there is but little of this pigment; in that of the dwellers in
Africa there is a great deal; among the inhabitants of Southern Europe
the quantity is intermediate between the two. The depth of colour in
the skin depends on the energy of its action In the tropics, where light
and heat are in excess, the skin is stimulated to great action, just as
vegetation is, and the colour is increased and intensified. This is
illustrated every year before our eyes. In summer, under the heat of
the sun and the flood of light, the pigment-forming power is increased,
and the fairest skin is browned; while the withdrawal of these forces
leaves the winter’s scarf without pigment, and blanched.”
VEGETABLE COLORING PIGMENT.
Nearly all plants have a colour-pigment near to their surfaces
corresponding ,to the colour-pigment of the human skin This
plant-pigment is called chlorophyll, and in the light develops a green
colour on the surface of plants, exactly as the human pigment develop,
the dark colours of the human skin. Writing of this plant-pigment, Sir
J. D. Hooker says: "The green colour which prevails amongst plants
depends on the presence of a peculiar matter (chlorophyll) within the
cells, especially those near the surface of the plant. This matter becomes


green only under the action of light, consequently plants grown in quite
dark places are never green, nor are those parts of them which are not
exposed to the light, except in very rare cases.”
INFLUENCE OF HEAT AND LIGHT ON THE
COLOURS OF VEGETABLES.
In the same way as the under parts of almost all animals of the land,
reptiles of the swamps, fishes of the waters, and birds of the air, are lighter
than their upper parts, so the underneath, or shaded, sides of the leaves of
nearly ail trees are paler than the sides which face the sun and light.
The parts of nearly all plants covered by the ground are paler than those
parts which grow above the ground in the sun and light.
When potatoes grow in a dark cellar, their halms are bleached ; when
green celery is earthed-up it -is protected from the sunlight- and soon
bleaches ; when a green lettuce is tied up the heart soon bleaches through
being protected from the light. An authority to hand says: ‘‘Light is
essential to the creation of colour. In flowers, as everyone familiar with
the subject knows, the most gaudy blooms and the most brilliant foliage,
if kept in the dark or overshaded, will become pale and almost white.”
Another notable feature is that almost all night-flowering plants have
snow-white blossoms. Cabbages and lettuces, and nine out of ten of
all the vegetables, fruits, plants, and trees of the earth, are lighter in their
inside, which is protected from .the light, than on their outside which
is exposed to and coloured by the light; and their outsides are always paler
when they are in any way shaded from the sunlight. Watermelons, and
pumpkins, and cucumbers, are lighter on the side on which they lie than
on the upper side which the light and sun play on; and so it is right
through the vegetable kingdom. In ninety-nine times out of a hundred,
plants are green or dark on the parts exposed to the sun, and lighter oh
the parts shaded from the sun.
THE INFLUENCE OF HEAT AND LIGHT ON THE
COLOUR OF ANIMALS,
Foxes and hares, and most other Arctic animals turn white during the
long sunless winters of Polar regions. All kinds of fish and reptiles that
swim in the water and crawl on the land, are darker on their back and lighter
under their belly. The great majority of birds are the same, and the vast
majority of four-legged animals are the same. One authority says; “The
larvae of many insects deposited in dark situations are white, and acquire
a brownish hue upon being confined under glasses that admit the influence
of the solar rays. Facts of this kind indicate the powerful operation of diverse


climates in the various colouring of the human skin, and are sufficient to show
that the different complexions of mankind are mere varieties, introduced and
rendered permanent by the continued action of local causes.”
An authority before me says: “Both the plants and animals of hot
regions display the deepest colours with which we are acquainted, while
lighter shades are characteristic of those that are situated in cold coun-
tries. Within the tropics, the birds, beasts, flowers, and even fishes have the
respective hues of their feathers, hairs, petals, and scales uniformly very deeply
tinctured: while, as we recede from the equator, the colour of the animal races
progressively becomes of a lighter cast, till, approaching the poles, white is their
common livery
ANSWER TO SOME OBJECTIONS.
It is sometimes said that the solar heat and light cannot be the cause
of the dark colour in the human skin, because in some cases we find black
or dark people in temperate countries. The caffres of South Africa,
the Australian aborigines, the maoris of New Zealand, and the esquimaux
of the Polar Regions, are given as examples of coloured peoples being in
temperate or cold countries. In answer I would say, we have traditional
or historical evidence that the southern Australian aboriginal came from
the tropical north of Australia, that the caffre tribes of South Africa came
from the tropical interior of Africa, and that the maoris of New Zealand
came from the tropical islands of the Pacific. With respect to the
esquimaux, firstly, they are acknowledged to be a branch of the North
American red Indians, but there is a misconception about them ; many
hold that they are lighter when their faces are washed than they appear
to the stranger. The truth is that they exist upon fish, and fat, and oil,
and blubber, they dwell in small huts saturated with grease and smoke,
and they anoint their bodies with dirty oil. Soap is unknown to them,
and in consequence of the cold they never feel inclined to wash themselves
in water. Nansen, in his “ Farthest North,” tells us that he and his com-
panions went almost black with tenaciously-adhering filth in that horrid
wintry climate, and through staying for months in small snow huts
amongst blubber, and blood, and oil, and smoke, and dirt; and in one place
he describes himself and companions as “ black with oil and soot.' ’ The dark
colour of the esquimaux, for the above reasons is very doubtful, and
certainly no reliable proof on the whole question.
There may be, here and there, a cause why a local race of people may be
lighter in complexion, while surrounded by darker races in the tropics: one
of these is iliat of the pigmies, or dwarfs, travelled amongst and described


by Stanley. He describes their colour as that of a common red-clay brick,
when half baked, and one man he describes as “coppery.” Now some may
say, “here is a contradiction of the assumption that all men should be black
under the line in the centre of Africa”: but to me it appears that these
people cannot he black, living as they do in a dense forest where very
little sun-light can penetrate. In describing the extent and nature of
this vast forest, Stanley says: “Imagine the whole of France and the
Iberian Peninsula closely packed with trees, varying from 20 to 180 feet
high, whose crowns of foliage interlace and prevent any view of sky and
sun”; and later 6n, after emerging from that dense forest, he says: “Three-
and-a-half hours’ march from the Ituri, we issued out of the forest, and
again the change from perpetual twilight to brilliant sunlight and a blue sky ,
was astonishing, and we all smiled to witness its effects on the nerves of
our gentle friend and companion, the first son of Erin who had ever
viewed the grass-lands of these regions. This was the 289 th day of Dr.
Parke's forest-life, and the effect of this sudden emergence out of the doleful
shades into this enlarged view from the green earth to the shining
and glowing concave of Heaven caused him t» quiver with delight.”
THE PEOPLE OF TROPICAL HIGHLANDS LIGHTER-
SKINNED THAN THOSE OF THE LOWLANDS IN THE
SAME LATITUDE.
As I have shown in the foregoing pages, as an almost universal rule
the colour of a people is decided by the latitude of the country in which
they have long dwelt; but there is another considerable exception, namely,
that the people dwelling in the highlands of the tropics are always lighter
in complexion than those living in the lowlands of the same latitude; and
if heat is the cause of colour, this should be expected, as the highlands are
cooler’than the lowlands. Lassa, the capital of Thibet, is in almost
exactly the same latitude as Cairo, the capital of Egypt, but it is much
cooler, and its inhabitants are much lighter than those of Cairo, because it
lies at an altitude of about 12,000 feet, while Cairo lies only a few feet
above the level of the sea.


Average elevation of Thibet,
15,000 ft. above the sea. Latitude 30.
Average elevation of Bhotair
15,000 ft. above the sea. Latitude 28,
A Thibetan.
Woman of Bhotan.
The above persons would both pass for Europeans.
Another instance of a light people living in the highlands, is that of the
Abyssinians: although their country is within 10 or 15 degrees of the equa-
tor, yet as it lies from 8,000 to 10,000 feet above the sea level, it is cooler,
and their complexions are lighter than those of all the races around them
that live on the lower lands. An authority to hand, says; “ The
Abyssinians are much less dark than the negro races, for though their
geographical climate is the same, their physical climate is very different,
the high table-land of the country placing them in a lower temperature.”
And this rule holds good everywhere in the tropics. Those who live on
the cool highlands are always lighter in complexion than those who live
in the hot lowlands.
The evidence that the colour of the human skin is not regulated by the
sun is very trivial and exceptional, while the evidence that it is regulated
by the sun is positively overwhelming. So generally does climate regulate
the colour that whenever we see a dark-skinned man in a cool country, we
may be pretty sure that he or his near forefathers came from a hot
country; and whenever we see a light-skinned man in a hot country, we
may be pretty sure that he or his near forefathers came from a cool
country; and the same may be said of entire tribes or peoples.


THE PRETTIEST SKIN-COLOUR.
As natural egotism makes each people think that their race is the best,
their country the best, their religion the best, their language the best, etc.,
so each people thinks that their skin-colour is the best. The white man
calls the Indian a “red-skin” savage, the Indian in his pride of colour,
half scornfully, half pityingly, calls the white man “the pale-face.”
The white man makes the devil black, while the black man makes
him white, and his own god black. The white man calls the Chinese the
" yellow agony”, whilst the Chinamen call the white or pink men the “ red
devils”. Like the fond mothers with their babies, as a rule each thinks
their own people, country, religion, language, and skin-colour the prettiest
and best. A few artistic white people in all ages have thought that of all
the colours of the human skin the bronze is the prettiest. One writer to
hand says: “The deep bronze is more naturally agreeable to the human
eye than the fair skins of Europe, since we are not displeased with it even
in the first instance, while it is well-known that to coloured people a fair
complexion gives the idea of ill-health, and of that sort of deformity which,
in our eyes, belongs to an albino.” But, to put aside all prejudices for
or against any particular skin-colour, and while different peoples may
differ about which is the prettiest and best, one thing is certain—namely,
that everywhere throughout the world, sunlight or its absence will go on
deciding the colour of every human being.
Little Dwarf Woman, Central Africa.
An Abyssinian


SIMON GABRIEL, THE BLACK MAN TURNED WHITE
Coloured Man Photographed 1890.
The Same Man Photographed 1897.
I shall now relate one of the most extraordinary events in connection
with skin colour that ever occurred in this world, and which emphatically
shows that there is no real difference between the black man and the
white man, when the colour of the skin, and consequently the colour
prejudice, is removed.
The case is that of Mr. Gabriel, already known to a good number of the
public as that of ‘ ‘ the black man turned white'’. I may state, that although
many thousands have seen him at the Book Arcade, Melbourne, the case
is so extraordinary that comparatively few believe it, but I shall here
adduce., such testimony from creditable witnesses as to convince the most
incredulous.
He was born in Mauritius, of coloured parents. At the age of about 34
he was engaged at the Adelaide Hospital, and known as the black cook,
and shortly afterwards gradually turned as white as any European. But
I will let him tell his own story, and then give the independent testimonies
as to the wonderful transformation from a black skin to a white one.
He says :
“ I am one of a family of six boys and four girls, all of a dark chocolate
colour, and children of Tamil parents, who were natives of Goa, the
Portuguese settlement on the south-west coast of India. I was born at
Port Louis, the capital of Mauritius, in the year 1855.
** In 1886 I settled in South Australia, where I lived for n years. In
1889 I was appointed as head-cook to the Adelaide Hospital, and held


positions as chef in several of the leading hotels and clubs in that city,
until in 1891 I went to Mildura. The first indication of a change in the
colour of my skin T came across in Adelaide in 1887, when a large white
spot, the size of a penny, appeared on my left temple. But five years
later the whole surface of my body commenced to change into various
colours—not in patches or spots, but the whole surface was graded from
my original chocolate-colour to copper-colour, then to dirty-brass colour,
then a dry-lemon colour, then pale and white, then yellow like a China-
man. These changes continued for about three years and a-half, and I
was nicknamed ‘the yellow man,’ ‘the white-washed man,’ ‘the magpie,
and other such names; besides, my wife was asked by those who knew us
what she was doing to me, or what was I doing to myself. It was early
in 1894 that my skin achieved the hue which you now see, and which is
the characteristic colour of the races of Western Europe."
In reply to an enquiry Mr. Gabriel states that he was married some
years ago to a young woman of German parentage, who was born at
Lyndock Valley, near Gawlor, South Australia. There are seven children
of the marriage—two boys and five girls—one of them having been born
when the father’s skin was still dark, another when it was changing colour,
and five since he has been a white man.
TESTIMONIES.
From the Adelaide “Register,” November 19th. 1895.
A Strange Occurrence. —What may be termed an extraordinary
conversion has happened to a man who for many years has resided in this
colony, and who at the present time is unfortunately confined to his bed in
the Adelaide Hospital with rheumatism. He is a native of Mauritius,
born of Goanese parents, and until four or five years ago he presented the
ordinary colour of the natives of Goa—a dependency of Portugal in India
—a dark chocolate. But a change to white skin began, at about the time
mentioned, on the left temple, and the gradual disappearance of his dark
colour was witnessed, and in its place a whiteness to be envied by many a
“ white man ” has come, evidently to stay.
Office of the Minister of Education, Adelaide, June 26th, 1896.
I know Mr. Simon F. Gabriel well. The first time I met him he was a
man of dark colour (about twenty-two years ago). I have seen him several
times since, during the stages of his metamorphosis.
[Sir] JOHN A. COCKBURN
[Note. —This was on board the s.s. “John Tennant,” of which Sir John
was surgeon and Mr. Gabriel second steward.] .


The University, Adelaide, July 2nd. 1896.
An account of the wonderful metamorphosis from black to white, which
has taken place in the person of Mr. Simon Gabriel, will be published in
the transactions of the recent Intercolonial Medical Congress, held at
Dunedin in February of the present year. Seven years ago Mr. Gabriel
was a man of almost Ethiopian hue.
A. WATSON, M.D., F.R.C.S., Professor of Anatomy.
ANOTHER MEDICAL MAN SAYS:
I also saw this case when he was an inmate of the Adelaide Hospital,
S.A., and certify the correctness of the statements made with regard to
his change of colour.
E. C. STIRLING, M.D., F.R.C.S., Lecturer on Physiology
Adelaide Hospital, July Ist, 1896.
Simon Gabriel was an in-patient of the Adelaide Hospital for four
months from September 24th, 1895. Several employed in the Hospital
recognized him as the same Simon Gabriel who was a black cook in
this Institution several years ago. With the exception of a few dark
patches, and these are rapidly fading, his skin is now quite white.
A. E. J. RUSSELL,
Medical Superintendent.
Adelaide Hospital, February sth, 1896.
I beg to certify that Simon Gabriel was employed in the Adelaide Hos-
pital during 1889. and that he was very black-skinned. Since then he has
become quite white. —H. D. HAGGARD, Secretary.
Adelaide Hospital, February 4th, 1896.
1 certify that the bearer, Mr. Simon Gabriel, who was a late cook in
this Institution a few years ago, was a coloured man. then being very black,
but since that time has undergone a remarkable change in the colour of
bis skin, which is now white.—W. CHAS. MEDLYN, Accountant, etc.
Adelaide Hospital, February sth, 1896.
I certify that the bearer, Mr. Simon Gabriel, who was a late cook in
this Institution a few years ago, was a coloured man, then being very dark,
but since that time has undergone a remarkable change in the colour of
his skin, whiah is now white. —JOHN WOOD,
Attendant Operating Theatre.


Adelaide Hospital, February sth, 1896.
To Simon Gabriel, —
I hereby certify that when you were cook at the Adelaide Hospital your
skin was quite black; now, however, you are become quite white-skinned.
A. GLASTONBURY, Attendant Out-Patients.
Other residents of Adelaide testify to his transformation from black to
white, among whom are the following
STANLEY DOBBS, R. and I. of S., Adelaide Hospital, Feb. sth, 1896.
E. T. LEANE, Cambridge Terrace, Malvern, Adelaide, July 2nd, 1896.
WM, COWARD. Adelaide, January 4th, 1897.
G. HITTMANN, Pulteney Street, Adelaide, January sth. 1897.
O. ELLINGHAUSEN, Compositor, 74 North Terrace Adelaide,
February sth, 1896.
V. A. WORDIE, 6 Moonta Street, Adelaide, S.A., February 6th, 1896.
JOS. A. DUGGAN, Inspector and Collector, Corporation Offices,
Town Hall, Glenelg, S.A., Jan. 4th, 1897.
As many people, with a natural incredulity, have doubted the story of
Mr. Gabriel (the black man turned white), I can certify that Adelaide
people are constantly interviewing him at the Book Arcade, who knew
him when a black man in Adelaide. His transformation in colour is
undoubtedly a fact, and I look upon his case as one more peculiar, but
splendid illustration of the Oneness of Man.
He is well-up in languages—French (from Mauritius), Tamil (from his
parents’ training), Hindoostanee (picked up in his travels), and English
(gleaned after 30 years’ contact with English-speaking peoples). Yet no
one who has had a conversation with him now, in English, would suppose
that he was other than a pure-bred Englishman.
He has been with me about six years, and as an employee, he is above
the average in intelligence, carefulness, and industry, and so much is he
in appearance, language, and manner, like a white man, that I determined
to take a concensus of opinion as to what race he belonged to. In
a comparatively short time I requested 200 visitors to guess of what race he
was. The gentlemen asked came from a dozen different countries, namely,
Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, West Australia,
Tasmania, New Zealand, England, Scotland, France, Germany, America,
India, etc., of these 65 guessed that he was an Englishman, 39 a German,
27 a Frenchman, 16 a Scotchman, 14 an Italian, 8 a Jew, 6 a Dutchman,
6 an Irishman, and 17 other nationalities were guessed; but none
guessed that he was a coloured man. This case demon-
strates that when the sun-caused colour is removed,
and the man is educated, the coloured man is not
generally distinguishable from the white man.


The following are the names, addresses, and guesses of the
200 gentlemen who responded to my invitation to judge or
guess to the best of their
ability
as to his nationality
Mr. Gabriel was seen by four Frenchmen: one
took him to be a German, the second to be a
Russian, the third to be a Greek, and the
fourth to be a Spaniard.—E.W.C.
Englishman.—A. Stepley, Pt. Pirie, S.A.
Englishman —W. E. Smith, Nicholson St.,
Carlton.
Englishman.—E. S. Duckett, 14 Grant St.
North Fitzroy.
Algerian.—B. Cohen, Lit. Collins-st., Melb
American. —D. Meenam, Dimboola.
American. —Albert Drew, Sandgate, Q’land
American-—C. W. Hartshorn, Elsternwick.
American. —H. Speight, Wingadee Station,
N.S.W.
Englishman —H. N. Wilkinson, Middle Pk.
Englishman.—A. W. Crichton, Auckland.
Englishman.—Guy W. Court, Adelaide.
Englishman.—Trooper H. Fitzgibbon,
Merino P. 0., Victoria.
Armenian.—A. J. Davis, Ormonde Vale,
Foster.
Englishman.—N. Rogers, Horsham.
Englishman.—J. Street, Somerville Road,
Yarraville.
Australian. —J. M. English, Essendon.
Austrian. —The noted Louis de Rougemont,
Melbourne.
Belgian.—J. Henry, Westbourne Street,
Petersham, Sydney.
Englishman—James Fulton, Brisbane St.,
Launceston, Tasmania.
Englishman.—Mrs. M. J. Clarke, Adelaide.
Englishman.—J. Edwards, Forbes, N.S.W.
Englishman . —Sir Matthew Harris, Sydney.
Englishman.—Arthur Porme, Kalgoorlie.
Englishman.—Rev. W. O'Brien, Sydney.
Englishman.—Sergt.J. E. Cope, 3rd Q.M.1.,
Charters Towers.
Britisher. —Henry Wilson, 121 Gore Street,
Fitzroy, Victoria.
Canadian.—F. J. Pinn, Wahunyah.
Colonial. —A. C. Greenwood, Surrey Hills.
Dutchman.—W. J. Irwin, Geelong.
Dutch. —R- Wadill, Post Office, Charters
Towers, Queensland.
Englishman—M. B. Ferguson, Music Pub-
lisher, 54 Queen Street, Glasgow.
Dutch. —Mr. I. G. Sohnieder, Broadway
Street, Brisbane.
Englishman.—Thos. Britnall, Perth, W.A.
Englishman.—]. Thompson, Sunbury.
Englishman.—Major Reay, Melb. Herald.
Englishman.—L. Stevens, Spring Hill.
Kyneton.
Englishman.—Mrs. L. E. Graham, Shep-
parton.
Englishman.—Rev. P. O’Dwyer, Brisbane.
Englishman.—Sergt. Gray, 3rd Q.M.I.,QTd.
Englishman.—W. P. Higgins, Brighton, Vic.
Englishman.—Jas. Tingey, Adelaide, S.A.
Englishman.—Geo. Steward, Under Sec-
retary for Tasmania.
Englishman.—H. Hoystead, Wangaratta, V.
Englishman.—R. Simpson, Senr. Const., 39
Davis Street, North Carlton.
Englishman.—John Harcran, Burrereo P.O.
Englishman. —H. Burden, Prahrau.
Englishman.—Taliesi* Morgan, Ballarat.
Englishman.—F. M. Paton, Welaregang,
Upper Murray, N.S.W.
Englishman.—l. Carson, Yannathan, Vic.
Englishman.—Rev. Dr. Kelly, St. Brigid’s,
Nicholson Street, North Fitzroy
Englishman.—W.W. Dopson, Brisbane, Q.
Englishman.—Joseph H. Grice, Wynnum,
Brisbane.
Englishman.—Wm. Francisco, Wonwondah
East.
Englishman.—Mark. Tibbits, Kalgoorlie.
Englishman.—Geo. W, Bloomfield, Herbert
Street, Spring Hill, Brisbane, Queensland.
We have had the pleasure of interviewing Mr.
Gabriel, at Cole’s Book Arcade, Melbourne. He
asked the question re our opinion of his nation-
ality., Without exception the party took him to
bean Englishman. Without doubt an unique
case.—John R. Rodgers, Sydney.
Englishman—A. J. Dunstan, Cardigan St.,
arlton.
Englishman. —H.Palmer.Taringa, Brisb’ne.
From appearance and conversation, would take
him for an Englishman .—J. Jackson, Cumber-
land, England.
From Mr. Gabriel’s appearance and conversa-
tion I would certainly take him for an
Englishman—J. Wills, Hamilton.


I guessed Mr. Gabriel to be an Englishman.
—Alexander R. Cant. Newcastle, N.s.W.
English. —Mr. Cooper, East Melbourne.
English. —A. Barker, 3rd Q.M.1., B Squadron.
English.- Captain S. H. Stuart, of Phil-
adelphia, Pa.
English.— T. Macßain, Point Lonsdale.
English! —W. Soden,3rdQ.M.L, A Squadron.
English. —Mani Ram Hamildar, 4th Kashmir
Rifles.
English. —W. Withell, Heyfield, N. Gippsl’d.
Half-bred English and Italian.— P. N.
Shaw, Tasmania.
La ncashire, England.— John Lavars,
Ballarat.
From London.— Wm. Foy, W.A.
Londoner.— R.G. Parker, 2 Cameron St., Bk.
Londoner. —S. E. Saunders.) “Ormuz ’
Londoner. —A. Harding. ) Passengers.
Londoner. —J. A. Ogle, George St., Sydney.
Middlesex, England.— T. H. Lavars,
Ballarat.
North E iglishman. —T.Cormick, S.Yarra.
I have taken you to be a North of England
M an. —Henry Spence, N.S.W.
Yorkshireman or Irishman of English
descent.—John Robertson, Moonee Ponds, Vic.
Yorkshireman, educated in London.—
Edgar J. Moore, 28 Domain Street, South Yarra.
Frenchman. —R. W.Fisk, Neerim, Gippsl’d.
Frenchman.— J. Firth, Nicholson St.. B’k.
Frenchman. —M. Jarick, Forbes, N.S.W.
French man, —J. S. Charton, 360 Collins St.
Frenchman. —G. E. Caslette, Collins St.
Frenchman.— P. O’Toole, Merton Street,
Albert Park.
Frenchman. —T. McGuinness, Beechworth.
Frenchman.— H. J. Horn, Liverpool.
Frenchman. —T. Kennedy, Gippsland.
Frenchman. —W. H. Broomfield, Wyong,
N.S.W.
Frenchman. —W. Drew, Sandgate, Q’land.
Frenchman. —E. D. Campbell, Brunswick.
Frenchman. —David Brogden, Ballarat,Vic.
I take Mr. Gabriel to be a Frenchman, —
Jas. Weston, 1.0. F.
. Frenchman, but by speech an Englishman.
—Geo.Lance, Art Gallery, Warrnambool.
Frenchman. —H. Northfield, Horsham, Vic.
From appearance I would take y«i for a
Frenchman. —C. E. Hubbard, Liverpool, Eng.
I should take Mr. Gabriel to be a French-
man. —J. J. Meagher, Sydney.
French.— H. Wadham, Adelaide, S.A.
French. —E. Ringasami, Subadar, Q.M.O.
S. and M.
French. —N. S. Isaacs, 3rd Q.M.1., Brisbane-
French. —D. MacKenzie, Mooroopna.
French. —L. S. Stuart, Coomera, Queensl’d.
French, —M. O'Brien, K.M.R.
French. —John D. Russell, Longford, Tas.
Of French extraction. —W. A. Stace, Java.
French Canadian. —W. L. Lambe, Lakes
Creek, Queensland.
German. —William Thompson, Cressy, Tas.
German. —William Blake Dorman, Rundle
Street, Adelaide, S.A.
German. —J. D. Lee, P. 0., Melbourne.’
German. —J. M. Young, Kalgoorlie, W.A. *
German. —H. J. Wickes, Greymouth, N.Z.
German. —Thos. E. Ekberg, Ballarat.
German. —J. B. McAdam, Neerim.
German. —Sobadar Shiwa Modak, tst.
Bombay Grenadiers.
German extraction and brought up in Ire-
land.—Geo. Brennan, Rainford Street, Sydney.
German. —C. E. Lewis, East Melbourne.
German. — H. Taylor, Melbourne Herald.
German.— J. Wyatt, 10 Priory Avenue,
London, N.
German. —J. A. Webber, Sandgate, Brisbane.
German. —-J. W. Hunt, J.P., Melbourne.
German. —Cyril H. Stubbs, Adelaide.
German.— F. Milsom, Launceston,Tasmania.
German.— W. Jenkins, B.S.A.P.
German. —R- Webster, Pakenham, Gippsl'd.
German. — H. Alger, Blackburn.
German. —W. G. Pickford, Buahgor.
German. —William Coombe, Moonta, S.A.
German, —S. Ricks, Mary St., Unley, S.A.
I took Mr. Gabriel to be a German .—Fred.
Mann, New Gisborne.
German. —H. Angwin, Spencer Street.
German. —A. Lennen, 22 Andrew St., N’cote.
German. —Fred. Brathwaite, Melbourne.
German. —Mrs. Hunt, Granville, N.S.W.
German. —G. Lawlor, n Dickens Street,
Moonee Ponds.
Germ an . —Wm. Thompson, Pitt St., Sydney.
German. —H. B. Evans. Maryborough, Vic.
I guessed Mr. Gabriel to be a German. —
Arthur C. Zietsch.
German or Austrian.— L. W. Lee, Victoria,
signed for three persons.
German-English.— Josed Sonster, 33 Vic-
toria Street, Auckland, New Zealand.
North Germany. -Carl Pohlmann, Toy-
nesod, Queensland.
North German.— A. R. Fremtin, Maxrick-
ville, N.S.W.
South German.— D. Wilkie, Melbourne.
Hollander. — W. Bowman, N.S.W.Mounted
Infantry, South Africa.


Hollander. —R. H. Hamilton, 58 Cowie St.,
South Melbourne.
Hollander. —W. A. McAdain, Toora.
Indian Born. —Gundiepshing, Captain,
Punjaub 4th Kashmir Rifles.
I?ish.— E. McCornb, “Ormuz” Passenger.
'lrish. —J. Brown, Fremantle, W.A.
Irishman. —J. R. McLaurin, Yarra Yarra,
Germanton, N.S.W.
Irishman.— B. J. Farrelly, 3rd Q.M.1.,
B Squadron.
* Irishman. —J. F. Shuter, Drumwood, Jindera,
Albury, N.S.W.
Ireland. —Brennen, K.M.R.
Italian. —William Robinson, Corryong.
Italian . —Michael Jackman, Horsham.
Italian —E. G. Carter, 3rd Q.M.1., Q’land.
Italian. —A. Deneher, Malvern.
Italian, —R. Curtis, Gippsland.
Italian. —Mr. Mackey. Adelaide.
Italian. —L. A. Watchorn, Hobart.
Itali an. —O. E. Barrett, 27 Howe Crescent,
South Melbourne.
Italian.— H. Bjorksten, Narbethong P.O.
Italian, —A. S. Arnott, 69 Bourke Street.
Italian. —McKinnen, West Australia.
Italian. —Dr. John Buchanan, 337 Brixton Rd.,
London, England.
Of Italian Descent.— J. Marriner, Christ-
church, New Zealand. Late manager of the
Religious Tract Society Depot, London.
I guessed Mr. Gabriel to be an Italian or
Spaniard. —Cecil Le Bull, Newcastle, N.S.W.
dew. —W. Jones, Ballarat.
dew.— J. H. Davis, Cambria, Caulfield.
dew. —John A. Findlay, Tasmania.
Mrs. E. J. Moore took you to be a dew with
a colour of dark blood.—2B Domain St., S. Yarra.
dew. —J. T. Woods, Ballarat.
dew. —Councillor T. J. Gardner, Mansfield,
dewish Extraction. —Wm. T. Wiltshire,
Moonta Mines, South Australia.
Irish dew.— James Freeman, Fingal, Tas.
Norwegian. —H. C. Akerman, Sydney.
Octoroon — G. H. Lee, 72 Nicholson St., Fitz.
Polish. —Wm. John Matthews, Glenelg, S.A.
Pole- —Wm. Kibble, 28 Park Road, St. Kilda.
Russian Morgan, Perth, W.A.
Portuguese Descent. —Mr Berry Cass,
Perth, W.A.
Portuguese. —A. E. Maddison, Corryong.
Russian. —H. Vernon, Adelaide.
Russian. —A. Somerville, Adelaide.
Of Russian Descent.— Mr. |ohn, Arundel
Street, Fremantle. W.A.
Scotchman. —Dr. J. V. Eccles, Collins St.
Scotchman. —Alex. Munro, N.S.W.
Scotchman. —W. Parry, Beaconslield, Tas.
Scotchman. —M. Wiseman, Auckland, N.Z,
ScotChman .—Mr. C. Troedel, Flinders lane.
Scotchman.— J. Sharpe, S.A.
Scotchman. —J. Bell, London.
Scotchman . —J.Goodrope, Kalgoorlie,W.A.
Scotchman. —W. Bauer, Forbes, N.S.W.
Scotchman. —J. E. Crun, Balmoral, Vic.
Scotchman .—Gerald FitzGerald, Mullagh,
Harrow.
I guessed Mr. Gabriel to be a Scotchman, a
real Glasgow type.—Rev. J. P. Cardlan.
Scotch. —C. B. Williamson, 20 Brighton Rd.,
St. Kilda.
Scotch. —E. Davis, Charters Towers, Q’land.
Scotch. —Mrs. E. Smuts, Cape Colony.
Scotch. —E. S. Joel, 346 Punt Rd., S. Yarra.
Slav —Geo. McArthur, Maldon.
Spaniard.— Arthur Day, 10 Milner Street,
Islington, London, N.
Spaniard. —Wm. G. Holden, Stanhope St,
Malvern.
Swed e. —Rev. P. J. Flanagan, Maitl’d, N.S.W.
Swiss. —B. Lyons, manufacturer, Fitzroy.
Swiss. —Alex. Hunter, Adelaide,
Switzerland.— Albert Edward Harris,
Mount Lystron Road, Charters Towers.
Tasmanian —Mr. J. B. Crathern, 123 Lang-
ridge Street, Abbotsford.
Welshman— Harry Thomas Stone, North
Road, East Brighton.
Welshman— J. Kirkpatrick, Mornington.
At first glance I also thought Mr. Gabriel was a
Welshman. —S. M. Davies, Precentor, Welsh
Church, Melbourne.
Welsh. — R. Thomas, dunes.
By first sight of Mr. Gabriel I took him to be
Welsh.— R. Rowlands, barque “Snowdon” bt
Liverpool, •


p- —— ~ '—~~— 7—r; ;j
I -••••••' ■ • ■•'•■* .*•* * . 4 ' ■ ,v •••
1
1 \ -
■ iSh . ,1 -2 ■-
W 1 '"*" m i go
I &p»|p ~
I ~“" -ri S
I *** , c £
| ■ <• -Sjft- 1 ' 1 -■
Btttffr * o ~
EpS *p ****'"' . -;.7lX ~;. | ▼** ■>» s 13
"*” ‘ "rt
# H * > < o


CONCLUDING REMARKS.
A few months ago a Tamil, Mr. Shadrach James Peersahib, teacher of
the Aboriginal public school, Cummeragunja, in Riverina, near Echuca,
called at the Book Arcade and chanced to speak to Mr. Gabriel, when to
his intense surprise he learned that this white man was his black cousin. It
was such a meeting as has probably taken place but a very few times in
the long history of the human race. A chance meeting of dear friends
under such peculiar circumstances in a foreign land was uncommonly
surprising and affecting, and for a few moments the two men were over-
come with emotion, shook hands, but could not speak Being informed
of this shortly afterwards, and having known Mr. Shadrach James
Peersahib for some years, I wrote to him for corroboration, and received
the following reply:—
Cummeragunja Public School,
E. W. Cole, Esq., February 14th, 1898.
Dear Sir, —I have known Mr. Simon Gabriel for many
years. We are both of Indian parentage and natives of Mauritius.
Before coming out to the Colonies he and I were connected with the
Postal Departmeni of Mauritius and occupied the same house for some
years, and Mr. Simon Gabriel was then a black man like me.
Yours truly,
THOMAS S. JAMES.
I must mention that Mr. Peersahib, instead of signing his full Indian
name, has adopted the name of “Thos. S. James” in his English home,
and also that in the following letter he addresses Mr. Gabriel as “brother,’*
as well as "cousin,” in accordance with an Indian custom. Mr. Gabriel
incidentally showed me the letter, and I asked his and Mr. Peersahib’s
permission to publish it. My reason for doing so was to show it as a
testimony, and also as a simple, but telling, production of a black man’s
mind. The letter reads as follows:
Cummeragunja Public School,
21st January, 1898.
Dear Brother,
I was much pleased to get your letter to-day, and to find your dear
ones and yourself were all well. I intended writing earlier than this, acquainting you
with my safe arrival home and the surprises I gave all my folks here; but my time has
been fully taken up through the absence of my assistant, who has been appointed to
another school near Sydney.
I reached Echuca at 2 p.m. the next day after bidding you and the dear ones adieu.
My wife and family were at the railway station, and the moment the baby saw me in the
carriage she shouted out: ‘‘Oh, my papa! my papa!” and the next moment she was in my
arms with hers around my neck. We drove home immediately after making a few


purchases, and reached it about 7 p.m. After a wash and a hurried tea I gathered my
little flock around me, and having thanked the Lord for my safe return, I pulled out the
large envelope containing photos, of my dear ones in Melbourne, or rather at Brunswick
What a surprise! The topic till late at night was only Uncle Gabriel and his miraculous
transformation. The news of this event and the unmistakable proofs in my possession
spread like wildfire throughout the village, and in a few moments my house was filled
with men, women, and children, all desirous to get a glimpse at the photos., and to get an
explanation of it from my own lips. “Wonderful!” Marvellous! were the exclamations
that fell from many lips. With eyes riveted on me, with ears and mouth wide open, they
listened as I recounted our career in Mauritius, our long separation, and then our meeting
under such strange circumstances, but none the less happy.
My wife and children are immensely delighted. They had often heard of and from
Uncle Manuel, but to realize now they had Uncle Gabriel so near was a surprise indeed
It is so thoughtful of you to inquire after Miriam who was unwell. lam thankful to say
she is now quite well. Both my wife and I are deeply thankful to you for your kind
invitation to Miriam and my wife. I would gladly take advantage of it, but for the fact
that Miriam assists me in the school, and I can ill spare her just now. I know well that
Miriam would be delighted to go and see her uncle, and aunt, and cousins: she would
prefer that to teaching here. As regards news from Mauritius, lam now sending to my
Uncle Manuel, and this gives me a splendid opportunity of giving them aiso a surprise,
as well as eliciting all you want concerning Brother Emil, etc.
Trusting you are all well, with Christian love to Mrs. Gabriel, Miss Bruggemann, and
yourself, and kisses for the children, in which my wife unites.—l remain
Your faithful and affectionate cousin, THOS. S. JAMES.
1 have long held that there is no real difference in the races of mankind
but what circumstances and environments have produced: that if all men
were fed and clothed alike, educated alike, and dealt with alike in every
respect, there would be very little difference between them mentally,
morally, and physically. That man is one is an eternal truth, and it
is nowhere better shown than by the products of the mind.
“The mind’s the standard of the man” of all countries and colours, and
universal education will ere long demonstrate this through its literature.
The above letter was not written to order: it is an ordinary product of the
black man’s mind, and it is exactly like the products of a white man’s
mind. He is an educated Indian; but an educated Negro, or an educated
Chinaman, would write one just as sensible and as human.
I have letters in my possession from educated Chinese, and Hindoos,
and Negroes, representatives of the three great coloured races of mankind,
comprising more than half the population of the world. These letters,
promiscuously written, are in thoughts, in words, in inscription, just such as
would have been written by other educated persons, and no one can tel
by looking at them whether they were written by white or coloured
people, except by their foreign names.
I have had Chinese, Indians, and Negroes in my employment, born and
educated in English countries, and they are just as good mentally, morally,


and physically, as the average of my employees, and I am sure this would
hold good with all mankind, if all had equal opportunities.
The case of this black man of the Hindoo race turned white, illustrates
the fact that, when the coloured pigment is removed from coloured persons
they look just like white ones. Black men may not all turn white; but travel
and friendly intercourse are gradually convincing multitudes that colour
makes no difference, and that humane, practical, sensible education is
making all men equal, and rapidly dem mstrating that all belong to the one
great family.
SIMON GABRIEL.
Photographed in 1890.
SAME MAN,
Photographed in 1897.


m
-;0
These two photographs were taken in March, 1903, for the purpose of
showing that Gabriel’s original colour is gradually coming back again.
If the reader will take a microscope and look he will see the colour
on the ear, some spots on the cheek, and one spot over the left breast.
He says that he would like to turn coloured again to be in sympathy
with his coloured relatives and friends, while he would like to remain
a white man 'to avoid tba white people’s prejudice against colour. I
care not whether he remains white or becomes coloured again ; but
this precious fact for the cause of humanity remains —that his case
right through emphatically supports and corroborates another fact,
that there is absolutely no difference between the man with the white
skin and the man with the coloured skin ; and also that if this now white
man, possessing all the characteristics of white men in general —men-
tally, morally, socially, and physically —had not told us we should
never have known, from the keenest observation' and examination, that
he had ever been a black man. 1


HOBBY PUBLICATIONS.
It is intended to publish a series of papers entitled,
“Hobby Land," demonstrating the great blessing of hobbies
to the world, as shown in the lives of the most famous lovers
and helpers of mankind, in which will be given a short sketch
of the lives of the principal English-speaking persons, who,
by following their natural inclinations with zeal and delight,
or in other words, following their hobbies, have become
famous as:—
Astronomers Founders Novelists
Architects Geologists Naturalists
Actors Historians Poets
Antiquarians Inventors Painters
Botanists Journalists Publishers
Biographers Lawyers Princes
Chemists Linguists Presidents
Divines Missionaries Philanthropists
Doctors Moral Philosophers Soldiers
Essayists Musicians Sailors
Engineers Mathematicians Statesmen
Electricians Metaphysicians Sculptors
Emancipationists Millionaires Travellers.
In demonstrating the prevalence of the Poetical Hobby,
the lives, and examples of the work, of about 60 of the prin-
cipal poets will be given. Undoubtedly the greatest hobby
of civilized mankind is the Reading Hobby, and an essay on
that is nearly ready and will be published shortly.
One book is now ready, entitled the "Happifying Gardening
Hobby," containing zoo pieces and poems in praise of gar-
dening and flowers, most of them eloquently and forcibly
written by the good and great, including philosophers,
divines, princes, judges, statesmen, writers, scientists, philan-
thropists. and other eminent personages who have seen and
felt the great value of the gardening hobby to mankind,
physically, morally, and socially. It also contains other
matter, and about 70 pictures of beautiful cottage-gardens,
flowers, fruits, and vegetables, and vegetable and garden
curiosities. It is an interesting and instructive little book of
180 pages, price t/5 Every lover of gardens
and should get it.


PUBLICATIONS
. . EDITED AND PARTLY WRITTEN
E. W. Cole.
Funny Picture Book. (The best child's book in the world).
Price 1/6. 250,000 sold.
Fun Doctor. (The best fun book in the world). 2 series,
2/6 each. 100,000 sold.
Funniest Book But One. 6d. 80,000 sold.
Fun Doctress. Containing4oo very funnypictures.
1/6. 20,000 sold.
Thousandßest Poems, x/ 6; cloth 2/6. 70,000501 d.
Thousand Best Songs. 1/6; cloth 2/6. 40,000501 d.
Thousand Best Comic Songs. 1/6; cloth 2/6.
20,000 sold.
Cole’s Music of the Bells, i/-. 100,000 sold.
Intellect Sharpener. 1/6. 35,000 sold.
Pleasant Learning Land ; or Kindergarten series.
20 kinds, 3d, each. 140,000 sold.
Kindness Land. 12 numbers, 3d. each.
Child Land: A Book of interesting Poems and
Pictures. 1/-, 14,000 sold.
Child's Guide to Health. 6d.
Advice of ten Doctors. 2/-. 9,000 sold.
Advice of ioo Doctors on 'Light Lacing. 1/6.
100 Short Essays on Convenient Holidays. 6d.
The Coming Fashions; or, Rational Dress. 150
pictures. 6d.
Religious Sects and Sacred Scriptures of all
Nations. 6d.
Federation of the World Essay. 6d. 100,000
sold and distributed.
50 Prize Essays on the Federation of the
World. Selected out of 650 contributed. 2/-.
Book of Frauds in Trade. 1/6.
Greater Melbourne, our Inland Sea, and the
Federal Capital, i/-.
