

A WIND
FROM THE
WILDERNESS
BY
MARY GAUNT
AUTHOR OF
"THE UNCOUNTED COST" ETC.


A WIND FROM
THE WILDERNESS


BOOKS BY MARY GAUNT
DAVE’S SWEETHEART
THE UNCOUNTED COST
THE MUMMY MOVES
EVERY MAN’S DESIRE
ALONE IN WEST AFRICA
A WOMAN IN CHINA
A BROKEN JOURNEY
THE ENDS OF THE EARTH


A WIND FROM
THE WILDERNESS
BY
MARY GAUNT
AUTHOR OF
“ THE UNCOUNTED COST,” ETC.
LONDON
T. WERNER LAURIE, LTD.
30 NEW BRIDGE STREET, BLACKFRIARS, E.C. 4


AUTHOR’S NOTE
I have to thank my friend Mrs. Lang for her
severe criticism and her helpful suggestions.
She has jnade ruthless use of the blue pencil, and
her dictum that certain chapters were bad has
stimulated me to fresh efforts. I gratefully
acknowledge her help.
MARY GAUNT.
Mary Haven,
New Eltham.


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
I ROSALIE’S STORY —A KANSU CLINIC - 7
II MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —HIS UNPROFIT-
ABLE REFLECTIONS - - - - l 8
111 ROSALIE’S STORY —NOON PRAYER - - 23
IV ROSALIE’S STORY —ENTER CHUNG 38
V ROSALIE’S STORY—THE FLIGHT TO THE HILLS 47
VI ROSALIE’S STORY —THE BREAKING UP OF
THE MISSION ----- 56
VII MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —THE LOSING OF
MACTAVISH - - _ - 65
VIII SILAS CHAPMAN’S STORY —ORGANIZING A
TOUR ------ 71
IX ROSALIE’S STORY —THE SETTING OUT ON
THE GREAT ADVENTURE - ' - - 82
X MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —THE GODDESS OF
MERCY. ------ 89
XI ROSALIE’S STORY —THE UNEXPLAINED
TERROR ----- 95
XII MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —THE CASTING OF
LOTS ______ xo6
XIII ROSALIE’S STORY —THE MAN WHO WAS LEFT 113
XIV MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —THE PASSING OF
MRS. WRIGHT - - - - - 119
XV A FEW REFLECTIONS FROM STELLA CHAPMAN
—TWO WOMEN AND A MAN - - - 126
XVI ROSALIE’S STORY —CHUNG GIVES IT BEST 130
XVII ROSALIE’S STORY —THE GATHERING OF THE
LAMAS ______ 136
XVIII A FEW MORE REFLECTIONS FROM STELLA —
A BUTTERFLY IN THE DESERT - - 141
XIX ROSALIE’S STORY —A FRIEND INDEED - 146


CHAPTER PAGE
XX MARTIN CONANT’S REFLECTIONS —AN
ARCTIC WILDERNESS - - - “153
XXI ROSALIE’S STORY —OVERWHELMED - - 158
XXII ROSALIE’S STORY —ANOTHER DOCTOR - 168
XXIII ROSALIE’S STORY —THE SORROW OF THE
WORLD ------ 173
XXIV MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —LONG DRAWN
OUT ______ jyg
XXV STELLA CHAPMAN’S STORY —THE LAST OF
KOKO NOR _____ jB2
XXVI ROSALIE’S STORY —THE EURASIAN - - 186
XXVII ROSALIE’S STORY —THE POWER OF LING - IQ2
XXVIII MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —UN MARIAGE DE
CONVENANCE - 198
XXIX ROSALIE’S STORY —VANISHED - - - 204
XXX ROSALIE’S STORY —THE TEMPLE OF EVER-
LASTING PEACE - - - - 211
XXXI MARTIN CONANT’S STORY —PAI LANG - - 222
XXXII STELLA’S STORY —HER JUSTIFICATION - 228
XXXIII ROSALIE’S STORY —RAGGED ENDS - - 238


A Wind from the Wilderness
CHAPTER I
Rosalie’s Story
A KANSU CLINIC
" Seek Love in the pity of others’ woes.
In the gentle relief of another’s care,
In the darkness of night and the winter’s snows,
With the naked and outcast —seek Love there.”
“ Dear sir, i get the sower i by from yu for gods sake how
the hell you twis week My man he cuss like devil to me
how can sew wen weel he no twis. He holler like one clok
becos sower he bruk. purty soon i send him back becos no
can sew. i going to send peking for sewer quite proper.
“ goodby your truly Hop Sing,
p.s.—sin i rite yu the weel he twis rite,
p.s.s.—sin i rite you Pai Lang have burn dam sewer, wat
the hell i going to do."
I felt it was unfortunate for Hop Sing. We had just
negotiated the sale of the Mission’s old sewing-machine to
my friend Hop Sing because the mission had a new one, and
an American mission is nothing if not practical. He wanted
it to set up a tailor in Shou Yang, a little town thirty miles
away, for Hop Sing is a man of wealth and enterprise.
He has travelled too, which is extraordinary for a Kansu
man, and has been in San Francisco, and that explains
why he prefers to write to me instead of to the minister.
The minister, the Rev. Septimus Wright, would naturally
expect a Chinaman to write to him in Chinese, and oh tell
it not in Gath, but I don’t believe my friend Hop Sing
knows the Chinese characters any better than I do. Anyhow
like a true Chinaman he saves his face.


But talk about a woman’s letter having all the news in
the postscript ! Pai Lang in Kansu ! What nonsense !
The last time we heard of White Wolf he was in Hunan over
1,500 miles away. The ways of Chinamen are beyond me.
Always will be I expect. That letter came in the middle of
my morning clinic —the last clinic —■
The fact of the matter is I want to put things down
exactly as they happen and I find it mighty difficult. If
you come to think of it it is always difficult to know exactly
where a story does begin. I might begin in the middle of
my morning clinic, but again I expect I might quite as
reasonably go back to my great-grandparents. So many
things want explaining. However — Before Hop Sing’s
letter was Martin Conant. But I’ll never be able to explain
Martin Conant. He’s beyond me. What’s wrong with him ?
Something I suppose.
He appears to have been at Oxford, to have taken a good
degree, to have spent a year at Heidelberg to learn German,
to have been in the Artillery, and yet here he is at seven and
twenty a member of a little American Mission, not an
Episcopal Mission by any means, a little one-horse mission
run by a narrow little sect calling themselves The Brethren
whose religion is the very worst thing about them. It is—l
can’t help saying it'—the very devil. How on earth did
such a conception of God ever originate in any kindly mind,
for these people are tender-hearted, they are overflowing
with love and pity, yet they believe in a God Who having
created four hundred million people has condemned them
to eternal pain—think of it, eternal, save for the sixty or
seventy odd years they live upon this earth.
I know no Chinaman is ever converted. Oh yes, they are
baptised and profess the faith. If I were as poor as a
church mouse struggling to keep a wife and family on six
dollars a year, and the average peasant in Kansu doesn’t
make six dollars a year, and someone offered me a nice easy
billet as a Bible reader or a laundry man or something of
that sort, why I’d believe in any God you chose to offer.
It would only be sound business. And the Chinaman is a
decent fellow too. Having taken up the Christian religion
he acts up to it. But why, oh why are the missionaries, at
least my particular brand of missionary, not only total
abstainers but non-smokers as well ? Think of the hard life
the Chinese lead with so few pleasures, and this new God


objects to smoking—makes a crime of it. Hang it all!
why the lives of all the women and many of the men are a
martyrdom already.
And this man, this strapping broad-shouldered fellow, the
beau ideal of a soldier, has come out to be a missionary !
And he does not believe, I know he does not. He has
looked at me in a deprecating sort of way more than once
when we have gone down on our knees and I’ve been
prayed over. I don’t like being prayed over. It is such
shocking bad form. It makes me wince. Martin Conant
gets prayed over too in his turn, and the Lord knows what
he thinks about it. He takes it coolly enough. He’s
always rather silent, not the silence that has nothing to say
but the silence that is taking in everything. He’s dark,
with keen grey eyes set rather deeply in his head, and when
he listens to you he listens in such fashion that you end by
believing you are brilliant. Again and again I’ve been
taken in and had to pull myself together and remember
that he has yet to explain himself. I, who know something
of the world, cannot receive him at his own valuation as the
missionaries do. Mrs. Wright says he “is not far from the
Lord,” but then Mrs. Wright is optimistic, she says that of
me, and, goodness gracious me, no one in all this world, not
even the Chinese women she preaches to, could be farther
away, I hope, from her Lord than I am.
Then again I see my presence wants explaining in a
mission station. I am Rosalie Grahame, M.D., of Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, and I came to the little
mission in Yang Cheng because Aunt Matty’s nurse
belonged to the Brethren —she’s Mrs. Wright’s sister, and
she w y as always talking about the needs of the unfortunate
Chinese women. They wanted medical attention, she said,
and I thought it would be a good way to get some invaluable
practice in surgery and also a chance to indulge that
insatiable craving for adventurous travel which a small
patrimony rather restricts.
At least —here I’m telling the truth —the real reason I
came was because Randolph Lawson jilted me, chucked
me over calmly after our wedding day had been fixed, and
everybody knew and pitied me. It was awful. I’d have
gone on any forlorn hope to get away, and I suppose my
friends all thought the little one-horse mission at Yang
Cheng something in the nature of a very forlorn hope indeed


and pitied me all the more, but then I wasn’t there to see
their pity, so that was one score for me. The awful thing
is—l lie awake at night and think of it, and I should die of
shame if anyone knew—this is the second time I have been
jilted. I thought I loved Willie Miller, I thought there was
no one in the world like him, and I didn’t mind a bit he was a
duffer and never opened a book if he could help himself,
and so we were secretly engaged. I’m afraid I was a little
ass. I had led such a dull life in Aunt Matty’s maiden
household that when Willie came whispering all sorts of
pretty things I swallowed them, and when he had got me to
say there was no one in the world like him, he calmly cooled
off, and for very shame I let him go. No one knew, at least
I don’t think that anyone knew, Virginia Clayton was
suspiciously kind—but no, she couldn’t have known.
Randolph Lawson was her cousin. I met him first at her
house, and I kept him at a distance for four years. All
that time he courted me more or less, and it was lovely
to find someone who read the same books as I did, who
loved to discuss them as I did, who had the same religion—
or perhaps I should say the same no religion—l felt how
gorgeous it would be to go through life with so many
interests in common. Virginia always said he was a little
worm, but he was interesting, and —there —what’s the
good of writing about it ? My life is finished at twenty-six.
At that age I ought to be able to hope for a man’s love, to
have children to nestle in my arms, but how can I ? No
woman could possibly love three times, no decent woman.
It’s rather awdul to have done it twice, but three times,
Igo hot all over when I think of such a thing ! And any
how, no one is going to fool me again. I shall treat all
men as they deserve to be treated. One sees something
of the way the average man treats the average w'oman here
in China. Here the poorest peasant woman, whose, life
goodness knows is hard enough, has to undergo excruciating
torture for at least four or five years, is always crippled,
maimed and in pain, because —unless she so suffers no man
will marry her.
Well, anyhow, thank God I’m spared that; I’m whole
in body and mind, and I’ve got to make the best of things.
Still, it is strange. Even old Aunt Matty, forty-one, and
the dourest old maid ever anyone saw, actually found a
man to love her, and it’s because of that, because Phyllis


appeared upon the scene, and had to have a nurse, that I
am here in a Kansu clinic.
I’ll never forget that morning. MacTavish was restless.
MacTavish is my little black and white Japanese pug,
the dearest, prettiest little man. I couldn’t give him a
Japanese name, so I called him by a Scottish one, as, though
he is pretty nearly perfect, he lacks one thing, he has
no sense of humour. Many dogs have a sense of humour,
you know, but MacTavish is not one of them. He thinks
too much of himself.
He loves me as no one in the world loves me, or ever
has loved me. Perhaps my mother loved me, but she died
when I was three months old, and I know my father cared
precious little about me. I don’t remember seeing him
half a dozen times, but thank goodness he left me SI,OOO
a year, which is something to be grateful for. If your
wants are not very great you can get along quite nicely
on SI,OOO a year, and, of course, presently I shall
make a good deal more.
Well, MacTavish was restless, and kept coming off his
black satin cushion in the corner, and I had to be very stern
with him, and threaten him with the direst penalties if he
didn’t stay where he was put. The sun was streaming
through the southern windows in all the blaze of glory
that characterizes a North China winter. Outside it was
bitter biting cold, with the thermometer away down below
zero, but here inside the large room where I always saw
the out-patients there was a soft warmth more in keeping
with the brilliant sunshine, for labour, thank goodness—
no, not thank goodness, I think it’s bad —is cheap enough,
and so it would have been a sin not to have such a comfort
as central heating.
China ever since I arrived here has always presented
itself to me as one huge sore aggravated by disease in all
its most disgusting forms. The women and children
waiting for me to attend to them were sitting all along
one side of the room and the sunshine showed up all their
dingy misery. Young girls hiding their eyes from the
light, suffering all the tortures of ingrowing eyelashes ;
here in Yang Cheng they were so numerous I operated
every Thursday; old women gasping with asthma;
puling babies holding to life bytheveriest thread; and sores,
sores, sores, everywhere, such sores as I never saw in the


West even among the poorest. They all wore quilted
cotton garments, mostly old and dirty and torn ; all the
women who were not quite young were old, for life ages a
Chinese woman quickly, and forty-five might easily pass
for seventy in more favoured lands. Poor things ! Poor,
poor things ! And I could do so little for them ! All the
conditions of life were against them, and yet they all tried
to smile cheerfully. I believe most of them did it without
an effort, for by nature they are cheerful, contented souls;
and here was warmth, and I expect they hoped healing.
I hoped so, too.
MacTavish, on sufferance in the corner, because I hated
to leave the little chap alone, lifted up his pug nose and
sniffed delicately. I was examining a woman whose mouth
was closed by a huge sore, and who perforce lived by
suction, and I quite agreed with MacTavish, and I told‘him
so. It was a relief to talk to him ; besides, he was the only
person there who understood English.
“ It is a tall smell, only it’s my belief you rather like it ! ”
MacTavish intimated that he found life dull, and there-
fore it had its points, and I patted the old woman’s shoulder
in case she should think I was talking about her ; besides,
it’s awful to have a mouth closed by a sore. Like the rest
of them, the poor old thing had on an evil-smelling coat of
quilted blue cotton, faded to dirt colour. Dirty wadding
protruded here and there in patches ; the top buttons were
gone, and the coat open at the throat showed the unwashed
neck, wrinkled and disgusting. Ah ! it was horrible!
But I saw such sights all day long. The old lady, poor
old thing, in her anxiety, put out a claw-like hand armed
with long and dirty talons, and laid it on my hand, and I
caught a whiff of her foul breath, but there was desperate
pleading in the little rheumy eyes —a pleading that would
have gone straight to the most flinty heart. My Chinese
is very colloquial at best, and sometimes I fear it is rather
sketchy. I don’t want to read their literature. I only
want to make myself understood. I patted her shoulder,
and said, “Poor old lady ! ” I'm sure she liked to be a
Lao T’ai T’ai; “I will make you a new mouth.” But
to make quite sure I called up the trim little nurse beside
me. “ Tell her I will heal her sore, and she will have a
new mouth, but she must come into the hospital for
treatment.”


There were three nurses, all with black hair neatly drawn
back from their clean, rosy faces. I never think a woman
looks really graceful without petticoats, but their dress was
Chinese at its best, clean, bright, blue cotton smocks and
trousers drawn tidily in at the ankle, with black satin
bands, showing their neat little feet in white cotton stock-
ings and black shoes. I don’t suppose for one moment
this collection of cripples leaning against the wall thought
their feet were neat, for almost without exception those
women, the poorest of the poor, had their feet bound in
accordance with Chinese custom, and many of those feet
were not more than four inches long. No wonder the room
was crowded with broken bodies.
Kwang Su with an enamel ironware basin of warm water
and a lump of wadding in her shapely little hand mopped
softly the old woman’s face, and taking her cue from me
talked soothingly, but in a superior manner, which I hope
isn’t a copy of mine, of the delights that awaited her in the
hospital, till the old woman turned and tottered back to her
seat against the wall, nodding her bald head emphatically
as if she were not unpleased at the prospect.
MacTavish called my attention to her but I could not
agree with him. He mentioned that I ought to e pleased
she was so happy, but I could only say, “I’m thankful,
MacTavish, I’m not a Chinawoman. They all seem to go
bald sooner or later. It’s probably a sanitary measure on
the part of the Almighty, though they don’t take proper
advantage of it. Still,” and I had to beckon forward
another nurse to wash my hands, “ I shouldn’t like to look
forward to losing my hair.” MacTavish is a very sympa-
thetic listener. He understands lots of things that I could
never dream of saying to the Chinese nurses or even to the
missionaries. He certainly has been a godsend to me. He
has taught me to be pitiful to all helpless things, even ugly
old Chinese women. I know I was awfully hard before I
had MacTavish.
But you’ve got to work while you talk in a Chinese clinic,
and I sent the nurses bustling to look for the worst cases of
bad feet. Bad feet in a clinic visited by Chinese women are
the standing dish, and are always to be counted on. When I
could spare time I made it my business to watch the
nurses unwind the bandages of those presented, for I found
that having abjured bound feet themselves they were apt to


be a little harsh and rough with the unfortunates who
suffered the pains and penalties that were the result of the
binding. I have seen many feet, but one that came in this
morning was as horrible any, and that is saying a great
deal. It was loathsome, disgusting. The woman, a strong
young woman of five and twenty, already beginning to go
bald, had her eyes screwed up in an endeavour to suppress all
signs of pain, the dirty bandages, yards of them, lay on the
floor, and the nurse held up for my inspection a maimed
stump with the big toe protruding, the other toes were
bent backwards on the sole, the heel was pressed forward to
meet them, and the distance between the end of the big
toe and the outside edge of the heel was barely four inches,
for the sole had been pressed upwards against the instep, the
bones had been crushed, the arch of the foot had been
broken, and all underneath was a festering sore that smelt
abominably and was one mass of pus and dirt. I didn’t
wonder that the patient screwed up her eyes and held her
breath. I put my fingers on the thin white marble leg just
below the knee. It did not pit as ordinary flesh would have
done; it was, as it looked, hard as stone. Of course I was
accustomed to the sight, every day feet like that came to the
clinic; but the pity of it ! the pity of it ! Is it any wonder
the Chinese seem to have paused on their path in the march
of nations when they condemn their women to agony like
this? Again and again I have seen it. The other foot was
just as bad, and yet that woman had crawled to the hospital,
and, did I allow it, would make shift to crawl back again.
“ Why do they do it, Kwang Su ? Why do they do it ? ”
I asked the nurse, though it was foolishness, and I had asked
her many times before.
“ Before born,” she said, “ the men desire not a wife
whose feet are unbound. The tiny feet walk into the
heart.”
“ Damn ! Damn ! Damn ! ” I don’t care if it is vulgar
and unwomanly to swear. When I hear things like that I
don’t want to be womanly, I don’t care if no man ever looks
at me again. Men it seems were put into the world to make
women suffer for their pleasure. Well, they’ve never made
me suffer physically anyhow ! But what’s the good of
thinking about all the wrongs in the world when you can’t
right them, can’t help in the very smallest degree. All that
is best—Oh damn !


I’m afraid I did not realise I was talking loudly and
impressively. I felt exactly that way.
“My dear ! ’’said a voice softly remonstrant beside me,
and I looked round to see that MacTavish had again for-
saken his corner and was standing on his hind legs to greet
Mrs. Wright, the minister’s wife.
I pointed to the crippled foot. “ Isn’t it enough to make
anybody say 4 damn.’ As if there wasn’t enough un-
preventable misery in the world without people doing
terrible things like that just to please some men, some
unknown man if jmu please, who will only treat her as a
slave. It makes me wild. Oh, wild is a poor tame mild
word to express what I feel.”
“ Your pretty brown eyes,” said Mrs. Wright, “ are just
flashing fire.”
Well, I’m human and I like my eyes to be admired, but
for once I wasn’t feeling that way, so I could only tell the
nurses to unwind the other foot and bring the kerosene tins.
What a godsend are kerosene tins ! I never valued them at
their full worth till I worked in a Chinese hospital. We
filled the tins with hot water and soaked the poor feet well.
Of course nothing could be done till they were clean. Poor
things ! Poor things ! To know that this case and many
thousands like it are past all human help !
“ My dear,” said the minister’s wife, “ your eyes look
quite soft and they’re full of tears.”
“You said they were flashing just now,” I reminded her,
turning away. Who could help tears before so much
patient misery ?
“ That was when you were swearing,” she went on in her
gentle level voice—no wonder her sister made a good nurse.
“ You should not swear. Your own soul —”
“Oh never mind my soul. I want to kill when I look at
man’s handiwork in this hospital. As if there wasn’t
enough for these poor women to bear without adding such
a cross as this. And I can do nothing —nothing.”
“ Come to noon-day prayer,” she suggested, still fondling
MacTavish and speaking with a gentle detached air.
“ And what possible good will that do these women ? ”
“ Who knows the power of prayer ? ” she said gently.
“ You know I don’t believe as you do.” I hate to sail
under false colours; also, as I suppose is only natural, I
hate to stand aside and not do as others do. It’s so uncom


fortable but as I invariably after protest went to midday
prayer I was always afraid they might think they had really
converted me. And yet I had tried to make it clear from
the very beginning to these people at Yang Cheng that I was
not of them and never would be. I gave them my services
because I wanted to improve my knowledge of surgery, I
was not amongst them from any religious motive, or from
any motive of kindness. Of course I would do a kindness, I
hope, if it came in my way, but really it was not kindness
that moved me. I was always determined about that, more
determined than ever since Martin Conant, unexplained,
has come amongst us.
He does not belong to the farmer and small tradesman
class from which the rest of the missionaries are drawn.
Not that he ever says anything, but anyone who knows any-
thing at all can hear Oxford in his leisurely speech, every
action bespeaks not only a cultivated mind but the fact that
he is drawn from the ruling class in England, a class that has
never had necessity to make shift in any way. He has
always had comfort and plenty, but he hardly seems to
recognise that he is as far apart from the other members
of the mission as are the wide prairies of the middle West
from a little orchard farm in Kent. And, indeed, in a way
his kindliness does bridge the distance.
I don’t know why my mind went wandering to Martin
Conant while I was watching those miserable feet being
washed.
Mrs. Wright had MacTavish in her arms and he was
bestowing an appreciative lick upon her chin. I like him
to like her, but not too much. But I was not afraid of
being cut out. He came scrambling gladly into my arms
when I turned round.
“ Come, my dear,” she went on in her gentle voice,
“ come to prayers. You desire quite as much as anyone
that all should be well in this compound. Is there any
harm in saying so ? ”
Put that way, of course, I knew there wasn’t, and I
patted her withered cheek gently.
“ I’ll come, then. Almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian. Was it Felix or Festus said that ? You see
I had a Biblical education once.”
“ You are better than you think yourself,” she mur-
mured. She always persisted in treating me as if I were


an angel from heaven, and when I fell away from grace,
and even indulged in strong language, anybody who
lived in the same compound with Sister Luella would
sooner or later indulge in strong language—mine was mild
to what it might have been' —she always found excuses
for me. Of course, I went to noonday prayers. I’d have
done anything I could for her. So when I had given my
last orders to the nurses couched in very colloquial Chinese
we turned to the door.


CHAPTER II
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY
HIS UNPROFITABLE REFLECTIONS
“ My thoughts hold mortal strife :
I do detest my life.”
Nothing is ever gained by haste. Of course, on occasion
a decision must be made quickly, but in that case past
experience comes to one’s aid, and nine times out of ten
all goes well.
That is what I have thought since I can remember
giving such things thought at all. And I began rather
young. I remember the Gov’nor asking me if I would
like to go into the Navy because Tom was going into the
Artillery, and he would like to have a son in both services.
I must have reached the mature age of eleven, and I wanted
to go to sea, but I took a week to think about it, and to
his disgust I said “ No.” That was mother’s fault. How
she, the daughter of one New England missionary and the
sister of another, came to marry an English soldier, heaven
only knows. It is only a little less extraordinary than the
fact that she made that soldier a devoted wife. And yet
she hated war in all its forms, and always, with her tender
goodness, her pleasant, kindly, laughing ways, she taught
that everything may be dealt with without force. She
was sure of it. An unkind word was never heard in our
household ; I had almost said an unkind thought was never
conceived. Such is the influence of a good woman. She
wanted me to be a missionary, to follow in the footsteps
of her brother, my uncle Irwin. In her eyes and in mine,
too, he was martyr and hero. I was never tired of hearing
the story of his death in a Chinese rising ; he showed the
people his pistol and that he could use it, and then tossed
it amongst them and let them bind him and lead him away,
and on his way to death they met a man badly bleeding


from a wound in his thigh, and he prevailed on his captors
to allow him to bind it up.
I wanted to go into the Navy, but sailors must fight
when occasion arises—my father said angrily that is
what they were for, to guard England—and that settled it.
I would not be a sailor. Those days will stand out clear
in my mind all my life. Never before had I seen the peace
of our household disturbed, but that day my father was
furious and my mother sad. And the storm did not blow
over. Not till she died, I think, when the Gov’nor was
heartbroken. It took him months to recover, and after-
wards all that my mother had wished was law to him.
I believe he would even have made a missionary of Tom,
But Tom was not willing, and reminded him that it had
always been arranged he should go into the Army, and
mother had acquiesced. She had. But she had said it
was because she thought the time was come when there
would be no more wars, and discipline was good. The
Gov’nor agreed I should be a missionary and intended I
should take Orders. I intended to, too, until I was about
to take my Arts degree. Then I couldn’t. There must
be dozens of men who start with the intention of being
ordained, who before they have taken their degree see a
hundred reasons why they should not.
When I broke it to the Gov’nor that I did not intend
to enter the Church I expected him to be angry, and he
surpassed my expectations. So I stayed for a little with
Cherry, my only sister.
Cherry has married a soldier, a veritable fire-eater, but
such a good fellow that almost before I knew where I was
I had taken the opportunity my Oxford training gave me,
and was a soldier, too. It was the line of least resistance ;
a man must have a career, and all my people were pleased.
For a little this carried me on, and I honestly tried to
find interest and purpose in the life.
But I wasn’t content. My companions and I had nothing
in common. I thought them empty-headed, and they
thought me an arrogant young prig. Perhaps I was.
Howell, Cherry’s husband, would have felt the same
probably if it hadn’t been for his wife. Cherry is as sweet
and lovable as her mother was before her. I discussed
the matter at length with her and she agreed with me —
never could force and violence mend the misery of the


world, but she added she liked a fight because —there she
stopped. She could not tell why she liked it ; any more
than I could tell what I wanted for a career. I was at a
loss when it came into my head that I would go and in-
vestigate the missionary life for myself. I thought I
wanted to right the wrongs of the world. Young fool!
What I wanted was to feel myself of some importance.
I made up my mind that I would go out to China and
join one of the little American missions to which my uncle
had belonged. All my family objected, even Cherry,
who said it was pure waste, while the Gov’nor and Tom were
furious. War threatened, but I could not believe England
and Germany would fight; if they did, I preferred to be out
of it.
I was wrong, but it took time to make me realise it, and
with a heavy heart I defied them, went across to America
and gradually made my way to Yang Cheng, This occupied
a year, and all the time I have been awfully worried. With
my convictions, ought Ito have joined up ! I ask myself
the question every night. X wake in the morning asking
the same question. I had answered it by coming away, and
I am by no means satisfied with the answer. It has
brought me no peace.
After I had been at Yang Cheng three months I asked
myself what the missionaries are doing. This faith that
they preach —well, I can no more accept it than I could
accept the doctrines of the Church of England. On the
contrary, there is a dignity about the Church of England
that this faith lacks. Not that .they are not good and
earnest and self-sacrificing. Every one of these people at
Yang Cheng, not excepting Henry Maitland, who is aggres-
sively smug, are of the very best. It is the faith they
preach that disillusioned me. They are so much better
than their faith. Dr. Rosalie Grahame is as self-sacrificing,
and she says she has no faith at all, she only came to
improve her knowledge of medicine. That makes me smile.
Exactly as Sister Luella spends herself for the souls of the
people to whom she ministers, so does Rosalie Grahame spend
herself for their broken bodies. She has a little stand-off
air that is wondrously fetching. She is tall and slender,
with her head gracefully set on her shoulders, she has
pretty wavy brown hair and brown eyes that always seem
to be saying, “ Find out a way to make me nice to you.


It will be good for both of us.” Her complexion is of a
clear pallor and her cheeks look whiter than they really are
in contrast with her vivid red lips.
But perhaps her greatest charm is her radiant smile.
It lights up her whole face. When I found what a wealth of
love she expends on her little dog I knew she must be very
lonely. I told her so and she only laughed at me mockingly.
“ I am not lonely,” she said, “ only I’ve learned the value
of other affections.”
I said something, I forget what, and she turned on me
sharply as if she felt it her duty to tell me.
“ I was engaged once,” and she said it without the ghost
of a smile as if it were a matter of the most desperate
importance.
“ And you chucked him,” I said. “Poor beggar ! ”
She did not smile.
“I beg your pardon. He chucked me!”
“By Jove ! No ! I don’t believe it! ”
She went crimson all over. , Even her white neck showing
at the “ V ” of her sailor collar was red.
“ It is true,” she said defiantly, and then why she went on
I don't know. “What is more, I have been engaged twice.
And each time it was the man who —who —oh, why am I
such a fool as to tell you this ? ” and she made off towards
the door. For a wonder we happened to be alone in the
Wrights’ sitting-room and I managed to stop her,
“No, don’t run away, don’t, don’t. Let’s investigate
this. Really, Dr. Grahame, really Miss Rosalie, I’m not
humbugging. I would have sworn a man would have been
your devoted slave for ever and a day once he had kissed—”
She looked at me furiously.
“I hate—’’she began, and then she thought better of it,
flung herself out of the room and banged the door behind her,
and I saw her walking across the compound to the hospital
with MacTavish in her arms, and she evidently got some
comfort out of kissing the top of his lucky little head.
. But that’s an amazing story. Twice engaged and each
time the man failed her. And she is one of the most
attractive women I have ever met —bar none. And yet
I’m not in the least in love with her. I’m not the sort of
man who falls in love easily. I'm critical and I’m therefore
a good judge.
No sooner had she gone out than in came the funny


Chinese postman in his funny livery of blue and white,
very faded blue and very dirty white, and all, including the
peaked cap, about three sizes too large for him. His
wildest dreams could never have given him any hope of
filling it, I wonder who designed the Chinese postal
uniform. It is such a travesty of things European. He
brought me a letter from the Gov’nor, and that letter —
stung. I felt I must go home. I was mad to go home.
And these good kind people engaged in noonday prayer !


CHAPTER III
ROSALIE'S STORY
NOON PRAYER
“ Wherever you are
Work for your soul’s sake,
That all the clay of you, all of the dross of you
May yield to the fire of you.”
One thing never ceases to astonish me, and that is the
amazing tolerance of these Chinese we are for ever striving
to convert to our own petty little cramped ways. Can you
imagine the mayor of a town in New England, for instance,
presenting to a foreign and alien faith a large piece of
ground for their occupation, with leave to preach the faith
which he himself looked upon with mild contempt ? I
must confess I can’t, and yet that is exactly what the elders
of the little city of Yang Cheng had done to the American
mission which wished to establish itself in their midst.
A dozen years before I came upon the scene they had
presented to Mr. Wright, for whom they had a great respect,
a goodly piece of ground, and the missionaries have erected
half a dozen houses, a boys’ school, a girls’ school, a hospital
and a church. The compound has been nicely planted with
trees, and on this winter’s day the sunshine turned it into
fairyland. Through the night there had been heavy snow,
but with the dawn had come a fall in the temperature, and
now at noontide overhead was a cloudless blue sky, the
crisp dry air crackled with frost, and the avenue of water
chestnuts, which ran the whole length of the compound
from one side of the encircling wall of grey brick to the other,
sparkled in a dress of white and silver. Nowhere in the
world I should think is winter more glorious than in Northern
China. The brilliant sun streaming through the leafless
branches caught the frost blossoms, and every little twig
was laden with diamonds that reflected light from a


thousand facets. On the pure white ground the interlaced
branches cast intricate shadows only'a little blurred by the
faint mist that hung like a halo round each tree. It was
entrancing beyond words. Even MacTavish came under
the spell and he raced along ahead of us two muffled women,
and every now and then flung himself joyfully into the
heaped dry snow that the careful gardener had swept up
along the borders of the bricked pathways, and however un-
satisfactory I found the world, I couldn’t help taking
pleasure in his pleasure. However sorry I am' for other
people’s troubles I cannot help enjoying myself when the
means for enjoyment comes along. I haven’t decided
whether it’s callousness or a merciful provision of providence.
It’s the same with my own troubles. Twice you’d think I'd
been crushed to the ground, and yet whenever it got the
chance there was something in me popping up and forgetting
all about the slights and enjoying itself thoroughly. It does
sound hard. There are those poor women suffering the
agonies of the damned, millions of them, though I can only
think of the few hundreds who have come my way, and yet
here I was, as usual, forgetting all about them and enjoying
the lovely day. Well, I’d done the best I could for them and
I suppose the lovely day was meant to be enjoyed.
I can’t understand —Oh hang ! Those wretched women !
And even the good looks that they set such store by don’t
last long. They’re most of them bald, and the poor un-
fortunates try and disguise it with a black muslin patch
fitted into the horn into which the scanty hairs are gathered,
or worse still, by painting the bald surface with some
sticky shiny black substance, for all the world like black
enamel.
“ And yet they like abundant hair, though they do
pluck the bride’s forehead,” I found myself saying aloud,
for I wanted to talk to Mrs. Wright, and she never by any
chance originated a conversation.
“ Opening the face,” said the minister, joining us;
“ there you’ve gotten the reason for the baldness, if that’s
what’s worritin’ you. The rest of the hair kinder gets
discouraged and gives it up as a bad job.”
The other members of the mission trooped into prayers.
There was Miss Lodham, a sensible middle-aged woman,
Sister Luella Lawson, who had had charge of the hospital
before I came on the scene ; there was that promising


evangelist, the widow of Luella’s brother, and her little
daughter Sadie. Henry Maitland, the men’s evangelist
and the teacher in the boys’ school, was away the other
side of the city, and I was thankful. Henry Maitland I
never can stand. There is something unctuous about him
that displeases me. Sister Luella and Sister Ednah are
a bit trying. They are both so perturbed about the souls
of the heathen around, that the needs, the very crying
needs of this life are in great danger of being entirely
overlooked. Sister Luella is a trained nurse and a very
good trained nurse when her extraordinary religion does
not clash with her duties, which unluckily it very often
does. How can she expect a wretched woman suffering
not only the pain of bound feet but the pain of all the
other physicaHlls it brings in its train, to be happy, because
Sister Luella tells her God loves her, loves her so much that,
according to Sister Luella, if she does not love Him in return
He will condemn her to everlasting punishment. Oh !
it’s a sweet faith ! So rational and reasonable ! When
Sister Luella is a nurse, pure and simple, I love her for her
efficiency; but when she is on the religious tack —oh, Lord!
How can Martin Conant associate himself with these
people ? How can he ? And he has been here quite a
long time. I should have thought the first week would
have disillusioned him.
To-day the minute I entered the sitting-room I saw that
something was the matter with him. He isn’t generally
occupied with himself. That isn’t his trouble. He is
given to thinking about others, about me sometimes,
though it is in a detached impersonal way. In passing
I put it on record I believe I like men not to be so im-
personal.
He was disturbed. As we three entered the room he
came forward holding a letter in his hand, and it was evident
was deeply moved.
Mr. Wright ! I must go back ! At once ! To-night !
Where can I get pack-mules ? ”
“ Pack-mules,” repeated the minister, who has not always
boen a minister, but found religion late in life, after a career
which seems to have embraced many walks in life, from
captain of a Yankee sealing schooner in the Behring Sea
to an omnibus driver in Piccadilly ; “ what the howling
hyenas are you spouting about ? ” Only occasionally


when he remembers his high office does he seek words that
he considers suitable to his position.
“ I must go —go,” repeated Mr. Conant. “ Good God !
I’ve been here too long.”
Of course he has. If it were my country that was fight-
ing, right or wrong, and Britain is certainly right, do you
think I would have come away and buried myself in a
Chinese mission station ? No, indeed ! He has taken a
long while to discover where his duty lies. Listening to
his troubled words we gathered that he has had a letter
from Colonel Conant, his father, and the letter was written
in sorrow and shame.
“ I must go,” he said, and to my great surprise he
brought his hand down upon the table and swore aloud.
I looked at him. Oh, yes, I know I swear myself, but I
don’t belong to the missionary trade; a missionary, especially
one like Martin Conant, hasn’t a right to swear.
“ Oh, choke off the hot air,” said the minister serenely.
" What’s the hurry ? ”
“ I must go to the war. I want to join up ! ”
“You sorter passed up that chance I guess,” said Mr.
Wright, still unmoved, “ when you come up here,”
We were all looking at him, and I’m afraid I was laughing
a little.
“ You are a man of peace,” Sister Luella reminded him
solemnly, and I began to feel more sympathetic ; “ what
have you to do with wars and rumours of wars ? You
have laid hold of the skirt of ”
Mr. Conant interrupted her. He knew what was coming,
and he didn’t like it.
“ I tell you I must go,” he said doggedly, and he addressed
the minister, because I was sure he felt that if he looked
at Sister Luella he would never be able to resist taking
her by the shoulders and shaking her. I’ve felt the same
way myself towards Henry Maitland. “ I —must —go —
to-night.” And he emphasized every w T ord.
“ Bless you, don’t worry,’’ said the gentleman addressed,
calmly ; “if it’s a scrimmage you’re hankering after,
you’ll get it here if you hang on long enough. I’ve come
through two risin’s and three robber bands, an’ the revolu-
tion, an’ thinkin’ on ’em sorter comforts me when I’m
threatened with the Willies. Eh, Momma, don’t it strike
you that way ? ”


Mrs. Wright’s little boy had died ten years ago, but she
was still Momma to her husband. It used to irritate me
at first. Afterwards when MacTavish had come into my
possession, and I had learned to love him, I saw the pathos
of it. That’s the value of a little dog. Her answer was
a foregone conclusion, because she always smiled gently
and kindly under all circumstances, and never committed
herself to words if they could be done without. She
smiled now.
“ But I tell you,” went on Mr. Conant desperately, and
he was gnawing his black moustache, and his level eyebrows
met across his forehead, “ it’s a matter of patriotism.
Every Englishman in the Empire has joined up, and I’m
a shirker. I’ll be branded a coward and a skulker.”
“ He was despised and rejected,” began Sister Luella,
and I could see Martin Conant prepared to abjure the
Founder of the Faith as presented to him by one of His
most ardent servants.
“ Let’s have midday prayers and talk it over afterwards,”
said Miss Lodham, with her sound common sense, and down
she went on her knees.
“ Gee whiz ! I guess we’d better,” said the minister.
“ I’m apt to lay myself open to be jolted on to a side track.
We’ll make it a matter of prayer. Sister Luella will open,”
and he, too, went down upon his knees,
I wanted to laugh. It was unkind I know, but I really
did. Fancy having your martial ardour quenched in that
way ! I couldn’t imagine any mind less attuned to midday
prayer than that young man’s at that moment. I ex-
pected to see him march out of the room and bang the
door. But not a bit of it. By the time I was kneeling,
there he was beside me, and we were both opposite the
long French door looking out over the compound beautiful
m its winter dress. I was wondering if he dreaded being
prayed over as much as I do. It always seemed to me
he must because such a procedure was so foreign to his
entire upbringing.
Sister Luella began instructing the Almighty in the needs
of the Tsai family, Tsai Ling, aged fifteen, had renounced
her heathen name and been baptized Rosalie because I had
fnade her eyelashes grow outwards in the way they were
intended to and not inwards into her poor eyes, and now
it appeared according to Luella she was troubled about the


soul of her great-grandmother, Tsai Ling the elder, who
is blind, and of course lame.
“ Lord, Thou knowest the blindness of Thy humble
servant/’ went on Luella earnestly. “ Thou knowest the
hold the heathen superstition—”
I admit the meeting of all workers for noontide prayer is
a beautiful idea, but in most communities it must interfere
dreadfully with the work on hand. It interfered badly with
mine many a time. It was interfering now. Mr. Conant
was fidgeting restlessly, and Sister Luella was dictating to
the Almighty and had no intention of finishing till she had
called the Deity’s attention to the fact that she had done
all that she could, and it was now up to Him to take a hand,
I watched Martin Conant a little maliciously.
MacTavish whimpered, and I put out a restraining hand.
He whimpered again, and as I drew him towards me I caught
Mr. Conant’s sombre eyes. But MacTavish wasn’t easily
quenched. He fluffed up his pretty little ears, tore himself
away, put a little questioning white paw on the glass of the
French window and ran back to me eagerly. The little
dog was right.
Something unusual was happening at the main gate of
the compound. The gatekeeper came into view, an old man
in horn spectacles, and a long blue gown; then there was the
jangling of mule bells, and through the archway came a
gaily caparisoned white mule with bells round his neck
and a big red tassel hanging down between his ears. He
was in the shafts of a litter, and the arch of its wagon-like
tilt just fitted under the archway of the gate. No one in the
room moved save MacTavish, who made a wild dash round,
and then with pretty black and white head held very high
looked ostentatiously out of the window again with an air
that said that he at least was on the alert and doing his
duty. He took a good look as if to be sure that he was
justified in his action, his front paws were wide apart and
his little tip-tilted black nose was very emphatic. He was
justified. And though like all Japanese pugs he is a silent
dog as a rule, he rounded his little mouth and gave one full
deep bark like a prolonged “ 0—o —o —oh ! ”
In came the whole litter, a big brown mule in the shafts
behind, a Mongolian pony followed, and on it was a man who
was manifestly a European from the crown of his grey
wolfskin cap to his riding breeches and spurred heels. Five


pack-mules followed him, a small donkey and five Chinese
attendants, and the whole company moved slowly along
the brick pathway that ran under the fairy-like avenue,
and as each animal wore a collar of bells, the jingling rang
clear and loud on the frosty air.
And Luella prayed on oblivious and her voice rang in
impassioned appeal. MacTavish turned to the company
and gave another long-drawn protest,and MissLodham rose
to her feet.
“ Look here,” she said, “ if you people can pay attention
to the spiritual needs of the Tsai family, I can’t. Fve
always thought myself it was soap and water they needed
most. Why ! Good Heavens ! Foreigners ! ”
MacTavish felt himself backed up and went round the
company, some kneeling, some standing, with wild yelps
expressive of the joy a Japanese pug always feels in the
prospect of some change from the ordinary routine. Luella
stopped dead and dropped her face in her hands, her sister-
in-law looked at her thoughtfully, and then curiosity got the
better of all other feelings and they both rose to their feet
and joined the rest of us. We stood a second looking out of
the window. Then I opened the door, much to MacTavish’s
relief, and all seizing wraps as we went, for the thermometer
was far below zero, we swarmed out to meet the strangers.
The litter came to a full stop as if the white mule had made
up his mind he would go no further, and a woman’s head
muffled to the eyes w r as thrust out. The foreigner —all
white men in China are foreigners, irrespective of their
nationality—came forward. He was big and bearded, with a
fur cap like a Russian’s drawn low on his forehead and a long
coat of grey wolf-skin reached almost to his feet. He held
out his hand in a knitted woollen glove.
“ Good morning,” said he, “ this is the American mission
at ' Yang Cheng ? ”
“ Sure,” said the minister coming forward with simple
courtesy, “an’ I’m boss.” He always speaks hastily but
occasionally tries to improve his language as he goes along,
“ I mean,” he said, “ I’m the Rev. Septimus Wright in
charge. You are welcome. Come right in.”
“ Hold on a minute,” said tire newcomer, who looked a
hard man, hard as nails, “ you mayn’t ante up when you
realise who I am. I’ve been running the B.A.T, at Hein
Chou. Pai Lang, White Wolf, you know, came down on


the place and we’ve had the devil of a time getting
away.”
Now the Mission speak of smoking as if it were one of the
seven deadly sins. As I have said, their unfortunate
converts have to refrain from it and the British American
Tobacco Company is their mortal enemy. Mr. Wright is
not a tolerant man but he spoke simpty and graciously.
“ You bet your life,” said he, “ well help you if we can.
But Chinese robbers are the cussedest—l mean,” he added
hastily, “ I don’t know that there is accommodation in the
compound for your muleteers, but there’s a very good inn
just across the graveyard outside there, and for your
personal servants and your wife—is it ? ”
“ Thanks be,” said the newcomer, “ Mrs. Chapman.
I’m Silas Chapman at your service” ; and just for a moment
he removed his cap showing a thick thatch of iron grey hair.
He stepped up to the litter and lifted out a little bundle of
furs. A pair of arms went round his neck and he stood for a
moment with the woman in his arms.
“ Inside,” said Miss Lodham, " no good to get her feet
cold,” and he strode in through the open window and put
her down in the nearest arm-chair.
The rest of us came crowding in after them, Mr. Conant
last as if he could not tear his mind from his own affairs.
He shut the door with a snap. We stood round that chair
wondering, and the little figure lying back in it pushed the
furs from her head, flung them open in front, showing a
dress of white flowered voile, really a very unsuitable
costume for travelling, held out a pair of little hands, such a
pretty little pair of daintily kept hands, and burst into tears.
“Oh ! Oh,” she sobbed, “ the relief ! the relief ! Three 1
days and I thought it would never end ! Oh it was hard !
I’m sorry, I’m sorry. Forgive me. I know it’s silly but I
just can’t help it.”
She is very pretty. I have not seen anything so dainty
since I came to the mission, and really she is a joy to look
at. Even if she is only for ornament, what does it matter ?
I’ve come to the conclusion that too much of the utilitarian
is almost, not quite, but almost as bad as too much of the
ornamental. The four women who made up the mission
are good and dear, you couldn’t find better women any-
where, and Miss Lodham must have been very pretty when
she was young, but not one of them gives the least attention


to their personal appearance. I declare I am the only
woman in the compound who tries to do her hair becomingly.
They think it useless vanity, and when I looked at those
women with their hair dragged straight back from their
foreheads, and their shoulders enveloped in crocheted
woollen shawls, pink and blue and grey and scarlet, bending
over the dainty little person in unsuitable voile, I really felt
that one way of worshipping the Almighty is by making the
best of the looks He has given. A white voile was unsuitable
for the occasion, but taken altogether Mrs. Chapman made
the sweetest picture of femininity, and my heart went out to
her. I understand what old women mean by saying a
sight is good for sore eyes.
She is pink and white, with golden hair, with big blue
eyes, dewy red lips and pearly white teeth, and there is a
little quiver in her voice that goes straight to my heart.
I daresay she is rather helpless, but, after all, in these
modern times we are a bit overdoing the capable woman.
I for one am glad occasionally to meet a woman one doesn’t
expect to do anything except look pretty. Martin Conant,
in spite of his preoccupation, was attracted, too. He came
a little closer, and as he bent over the girl I could not
help thinking what a splendid couple they made. I looked
so long that that jealous little person, MacTavish, who
seems to spend all his time watching his mistress, became
aggrieved, and I had to take him up and fondle and soothe
him. Strangely enough, the newcomer’s husband, the very
type of man I should have thought would have been held
hy such frail and delicate beauty, paid little attention to
her. He is a dour, silent man, and once he had got her
inside he seemed well content to leave her to others. Just
like a man, wasn’t it ?
Miss Lodham looked at her and turned to the man.
Miss Lodham loves beauty, but she always feels she must
not waste time pandering to her own fancies. You can’t
but respect Miss Lodham, even though she does feel it her
bounden duty to rule out of this life, in her enthusiasm for
the life to come,much that goes to make theworlddelightful.
Again and again she has made me furious because I feel
is so silly, and then she does something so kind and
helpful I can’t help loving her. After all, she is much
harder on herself than on anyone else. She does try and
make life good for those girls. And I wonder if anyone


ever tried to make life pleasant for a Chinese girl in Yang
Cheng before.
“ Had any trouble ? ” she asked Mr. Chapman, who was
shedding his furs.
“Pai Lang,” he said tersely, and took off a cardigan
jacket.
“Sufferin’ scarecrows,” said the minister, “Pai Lang
ain’t in these parts.”
“ Made us get a hustle on us last night,” said Mr. Chapman
as calmly as if he were not dropping a bomb in our midst.
“ Cornin’ this way ? ” asked the minister.
“ Eventually I should say so,” said the newcomer, as if
there was no more to be said.
“ Well, I dunno if rescuin’ missions is your strong suit,”
said the minister, “ but you might let us know where the
soldiers are.”
“ Given it up and gone East,” was the cool answer.
Then I remembered my friend Hop Sing’s letter, the
letter I had paid so little attention to.
“ He’s got so far as Shou Yang,” I said. “ Hop Sing
told me so, and I didn’t believe him,” and as Mrs. Chapman
lay back with closed eyes I took her round little wrist in
my hand and laid my finger on her pulse.
She looked up with such a wistful appeal in her pretty
blue eyes. I didn’t wonder that Martin Conant —detached
Martin Conant —seemed for the moment to have forgotten
his own particular trouble, but I was surprised that her
husband was so casual. It must have been terribly trying
fleeing in the depths of a Northern China winter before a
Chinese robber. But MacTavish being put down on his
own little legs again, promptly became frantically jealous
and tried to take part in the proceedings by putting a
gentle questioning paw on her skirts, and since that pro-
duced no result, he gathered some folds in his mouth and
stood looking up defiantly.
The new young woman screamed, a delicate scream that
somehow escaped being vulgar—l have always thought
screaming so horrid—and kicked at the poor little chap
with a neatly shod foot. MacTavish, who was always a
welcome addition to any company on the mission compound,
dropped the dress and barked at her in utter astonishment.
“ Oh ! ” she cried, springing from her chair and making
a little run towards Martin Conant, “ it’ll bite me ! I
know it’ll bite me! "


There was a time before I had my little dog when I
didn’t like dogs myself, and I thought women who fussed
over them were fools, so I had to forgive her. It was
rather silly, of course, but her husband needn’t have been
so rough.
“Don’t be an ass, Stella,” was his contribution to her
soothing.
“ Stella.” I have always thought of Stella as dark and
rather regal, not a cuddlesome little thing, but I’ll have
to readjust my ideas. Anyhow, it’s a pretty name.
“Oh, MacTavish !” I said. “ Bad dog ! How can you
be so naughty ? No, indeed, he won’t bite you. He’s
really a good little dog. Come here, MacTavish, and make
friends,” and I picked him up and carried him towards
her. Mr. Conant was putting her back in her chair again.
Her clinging hands let go of him reluctantly, and she
looked anxiously at me and the little black and white dog.
He was smiling amiably, for he is always at peace with
the world when he is in my arms. I held him out to make
friends. I didn’t think anyone could resist MacTavish,
but she shrank back.
“ It’s no good,” she said apologetically. “ I just can’t
help it. A dog gives me the shivers.”
“ Don’t be an ass, Stella,” said her husband again.
“ I can’t help it,” she repeated. “ I’m so afraid of
hydrophobia in this country, and my nerves are all on edge
after the awful time we’ve had,” and she looked so attrac-
tively ashamed of herself that I had to forgive her slighting
m y treasure dog and trust to time to straighten things
out.
“ Stella,” said her husband, “ you let up on that yellow
cur streak.”
It sounded coarse, and I don’t wonder that she wilted
before him. He made me feel uncomfortable.
“It's all right,” I said, “we’ll soon show her that
MacTavish is a good little dog. Did you have a very bad
time ? ”
. He answered quickly, as if he wanted to get his story
m first.
No,” he said curtly, “ normal.”
£ We did,” asseverated his wife ; “ everything frozen
oard, air cutting you like a knife if you lifted your face from
,your furs ; inns with rooms like freezing chambers, and full
c


of cold smoke from the k’ang fire —do you know how
abominable cold smoke can be ? the k’ang too hot to sit
on, and the filth ”
Indeed I did know. I have been present at the undressing
of many Chinese women, and I have often seen the Lawsons
when they come back from an evangelistic tour among the
people, and they slip out of their clothes hastily and comb
their long hair carefully with a fine tooth comb. And
they are sustained by the thought of their holy mission.
It was hard for this girl to be subjected to such trials
without the uplifting that comes to the Lawsons.
“Don’t think about it any more,” I advised. “What
you want is rest.”
“ Ought to have freighted you back to ’Frisco,” growled
her husband unsympathetically.
Poor little thing, no wonder she looks wistful. Wasn’t
it just like a man ? Tired of her already, I suppose.
“ I told you Kansu was no place for a woman in winter,
or in summer either for that matter,” he went on. That is
what she gets for loving her husband and sticking to him.
He looked round the little company as if defying the women
he saw before him to challenge his statement. We none
of us did. I didn’t think it was worth while and not one
of the rest of them probably did consider the climate of
China suitable for either man or woman. They'all, with
the exception of Martin Conant, belonged to the class which
sees no beauty in a climate different from that in which it has
been born and bred. The climate is nothing to them.
They have come to China for a certain purpose—a purpose
that they set before all else, and every discomfort or even
every luxury is of no account weighed in the balance beside
that purpose. I who don’t believe in any missions save
medical ones give these people all honour.
Mr. Conant seemed to have almost forgotten his own
troubles in looking at the newcomer. It was natural
enough. And the young woman knows she is attractive,
she means to be attractive,
“ Stella,” said Mr. Chapman, “ between the blankets is
your place.”
“ Oh no,” she begged, “ when I do come in contact with
some of my own kind and can exchange an idea it’s too bad
to send me to bed even if I am foolish and do cry more than I
ought.”


“ Nevertheless,” I said, “ for exhausted nerves there is
nothing like rest.”
“ It seems to me,” said Mr. Conant, “ that we’re taking
the matter of Pai Lang very calmly. I must get back to
England and I’d like to know—”
“ You bet your boots you ain’t goin’ to vamoose if that
interestin’ product *Pai Lang’s shakin’ a leg,” said the
minister with conviction.
“ Pooh ! ” said Miss Lodham hugging her grey shawl a
little closer, “ if we got unduly agitated over every rumour
of unrest in China we might just as well make up our minds
to quit right away.”
“ Pai Lang and his braves are darned solid fact,” said Mr.
Chapman. Mr. Conant interrupted him.
“ Surely the missionaries,”' he began, and then to my
dismay I caught his eye and he stopped short just as if I
had said, “ Do you call yourself a missionary ? ” —which is
exactly what I thought —only I wouldn’t for the world have
said it to him at that moment, and the other man went on
calmly. He was determined we should face it
“ Tobacco selling has its little difficulties,” said he.
“ Not all confined to the missionary trade, but you get a
pretty clear conception of your surroundings, and on the
whole you hold the balance fair. White Wolf has stirred up
the Society of the Elder Brethren and that means Anti-
Foreign and Anti-Christian feeling in the country, and. that
means—”
“ The President,” began the minister, “ banks on
Christianity—”
The other looked at him.
“In Peking,” said he. “ Pai Lang’s top dog here.”
“We missionaries when we come out,” said the
minister simply, “go nap on it. We aren’t supposed to go
duckin’ an’ dodgin’ an’ side steppin’ to save our miserable
skins.”
“ It’s a bit rough on you,” said the trader, “ Got a
telegraph ? ”
“At Lan Chou. Six days away.”
“ About as useful as if it were in London. Thank you.
Let’s think of something else.”
I couldn’t help watching the new young woman. She
said nothing, but one couldn’t help feeling she was still
m the middle of the picture. Every action seemed to


proclaim, “ Think of me. Do something for me. I am
worth thinking about.” That is the effect she has on me
and I think on Mr. Conant too. You have to take her into
consideration. She is such a helpless little thing to face all
the horrors of a Chinese rebellion, and for me it does not
take away her charm that she is quite aware of it. There
is no doubt you get tired of women who are content to
efface themselves eternally and put first some impersonal
Lord whom you don’t in the least realise. There is just the
faintest touch of selfishness, a pleasant selfishness, about
Stella Chapman which is quite refreshing. I should have
thought that to every man she would have been irresistible,
and yet her husband was looking at her with something
like distaste. Before she was married Aunt Matty declared
all men tired of a woman who belonged to them, and here
was a case in point, for she is sweet and attractive and you’d
have thought that at this time in especial he would have
been tender. It is very evident he does not value the thing
he has won.
The minister took his wife’s hand and patted it.
“ I thought the Lord was playing it mighty low down on
us,” he said, “ when he took our little Jimmy, but it’s a
dead cert He alius romps in a winner.”
I did want to smile. I had to remind myself that
Septimus Wright does a good and helpful work among the
Chinese, but I couldn’t help looking at Mr. Conant. I’m
quite sure he at least must have been feeling there is a good
deal to be said for the dignified reserve of the Episcopal
Church. They say every man has the God he deserves, so I
suppose every man serves the Church that appeals to him
most. This Church always makes me squirm.
“ Nevertheless,” said Miss Lodham, with her sound
common sense, “I see no reason for not having dinner.
I’ve been twice as near to robber bands at least ten times in
the last fifteen years, and the bands never eventuated.”
“ This band,” said Mr. Chapman, and he spoke as if
stating a fact, “is going to eventuate. The elders at
Hsin Chou have fled West and everybody's taking a hand
at looting—”
“ I know,” said the minister, “ reg’ler festive splurge.”
Mr. Chapman nodded. “ Too hot for me. At Ba
Chuang my wife saw two dead men, I sa,w ten and we got
out.”


“ Lightning conductor tour,” suggested the minister,
and again he nodded.
“ All the more reason,” said Miss Lodham, “ that we
should have dinner. Fve run away before now and re-
gretted the dinner I might have had.”
Stella Chapman wrung her hands.
“ How can you ? How can you ? Who could possibly
eat ? ”
“ Oh for God’s sake, Stella,” said her husband roughly,
“ Shut up.”
Brutal of him.
“ You must eat, you know,” I said, “ we can’t afford to
spoil that pretty complexion. It’s a rarity in China. See,
here’s MacTavish asking you to cheer up. We’re not going
to let anything harm you if we can help it.”
“ You come to your room, my dear, and wash,” said Mrs.
Wright kindly.
“ I’m frightened,” she said shrinking up against me.
“I’m frightened. You don’t know what it’s like on those
roads.”
“ Now, my girl,” said her husband. “ you ought to be
content. You’ve shaken up the mission.”
She looked at him, rose up and put two trembling hands
on my shoulders. I’m not very fond of being touched but
I put my arm round her.
“ She wants a little care,” I said very distinctly, looking
her husband straight in the face He is rather good-
looking, and strange to say the eyes he turned on me were
certainly kind.
“ Don’t let her impose on you,” he said in quite a friendly
fashion. “ You see I’m up to these little stunts. Now
then, Stella, get it off your chest. What is it you want ? ”


CHAPTER IV
ROSALIE'S STORY.
ENTER CHUNG.
“ Who hath known the pain, the old pain of earth.
Or all the travail of the sea.
The many ways and waves, the birth
Fruitless, the labour nothing worth ?
Who hath known, who knoweth, O gods ? not we.”
Stella Chapman dropped her head on to my shoulder,
and, though I do detest public embraces, I couldn’t repulse
her. She had just come off a long journey in a litter,
but she was so soft and warm and she smelt of violets, and
she came to me so confidingly, as if she knew I would help
her, that I wondered still more what made her husband so
harsh with her. I suppose Aunt Matty was right, though
she recanted quite angrily after she had married the pro-
fessor ; men do get tired of the most adorable woman.
Well, it will be no hardship to stand alone.
“ I want Chung,” said Mrs. Chapman in a whisper,
still with her head on my shoulder. Phyllis always asked
for candy that way-
" Have you any objection ? ” said Mr. Chapman'looking
round. “Chung can always find all the things my wife
has lost.”
She lifted up her head then. Her hair on my shoulder
was like spun silk.
“ I haven’t anything to lose,” she protested with a pout.
He said nothing, only looked at her scornfully.
“ But where is Chung ? ” I asked. He was much more
civil to me. I couldn’t help liking him when he turned to
me, and yet on principle I hate a man who can’t be civil
to his wife.
“ Sent him into the city,” he said, and then, as if re-
luctant as he was to open his mouth, he felt that some


explanation was due, he added, “ He might find out how
the land lies.”
“ If Chung’s even an ordinary sort of a cuss,” said the
minister, “he could run round a little one-horse place
like this in two shakes of a donkey’s tail, an’ if he ain’t
likin’ what he’s piped off I guess he’s now makin’ prepara-
tions ”
As he spoke, the door that led into the kitchen opened
and Chung himself stepped into the room. He had divested
himself of his outdoor wraps —in fact, he was very much
indoor, for his head was freshly shaven, his pigtail was
newly oiled, a neat little fringe stood up on end like a
minute halo just where the hair and the newly shaved part
met, and in front of his long, clean blue gown—a tribute
to the warm house —was stuck a little fan of yellow paper.
He took it out as he entered, and with his head on one
side delicately fluttered it. The mission servants are dull,
stolid peasants. This man looked as if he had stepped out
of comic opera.
“ Chung,” said his mistress, raising her head, “ wanchee
shoe.”
“ By em by,” said Chung serenely, “ in bottom side
litter,” and by way of showing how truly amiably inclined
he was, he stooped and picked one of MacTavish’s white
hairs from the front of my dress.
I couldn’t help smiling.
“ Never mind the dog’s hairs,” I said.
“ Fezzers,” he said emphatically and picked off another.
“ I think not,” I said. He was so extremely solemn
about it. “My little dog’s hairs.”
“ Fezzers,” he said again, with a little flicker of his fan.
“ Missee have hairs, dogs and cats has fezzers.”
“ Oh, never mind whether they have hairs or feathers,”
said his mistress impatiently, “ wanchee shoe, wanchee
brush, wanchee clean dress.”
“ Bottom side mule litter,” murmured Chung indiffer-
ently. “ What the hell you stop here for ? Pai Lang
loot eastern suburb.”
“ No,” said the minister, and “ No ” said Mr. Chapman,
while the rest of us looked at one another.
“ Mr. Maitland friend of yours ? ” asked Chung casually.
“ Sure,” said the minister, “ but how does Henry Mait-
land butt in ? ”


“ Oh, he no butt in,” said Chung, throwing back his head
and swinging his long pigtail from one shoulder to the
other while he fanned himself delicately. “He dead.”
Clearly a foreigner more or less was nothing to him.
Awful things come to one, I find, so quietly, so unex-
pectedly. This man spoke exactly, and with quite as little
emotion as if he had announced that he had broken a plate,
and for the moment I hardly realised what had happened.
Something inside me kept repeating “ Henry Maitland is
dead. Henry Maitland is dead, and you always thought
him unctuous and horrid.”
“ He can’t know anything about it,” said Mr. Conant,
and you can’t think what a relief it was to hear him. “ He’s
only just come.”
Mr. Chapman lifted his hand quietly and I felt as if my
heart had stopped beating. He thought Chung was right
then.
“You bet,” said that gentleman answering for himself,
and he fluttered his fan at the company. “He dead.
Got no head.”
And we said nothing. Involuntarily we drew closer
together, and then Stella Chapman who had stood forward
for a moment turned round and clutched me again. A
man had died. I could not have shown any emotion to
save my life, but I think it was a relief that she did. I
wonder if my medical, training has made me a little callous.
Under no circumstances can I fancy myself making a fuss,
and yet I was glad she was paying this tribute to a man
she had never seen. There was danger, too.
Her husband turned on her almost savagely.
“ You keep that low bred yellow-livered cur streak in
check,” he said.
She shrank against me and I could only hold her closer
and look at him. Would he be angry with her if danger
threatened ? I hated him for being angry, and yet it
gave me confidence. Poor little MacTavish was jealous
because someone had taken his place, and he began scraping
my dress with his little white paw in order to draw my
attention to the fact that I was forgetting him. It was
foolish for two strong young women to stand clinging
together, so I put Stella Chapman gently down into the
easy chair and picked him up.
“ There, there, dear,” I was saying, exactly as if she had


been little Phyllis. “ We’ll take care of you. I must take
up my poor little MacTavish. I shouldn’t like him to
think his mistress neglected him now.”
It was the simple truth.
“ How can you ? A dog ! ” and she spoke quite re-
proachfully.
Well, I suppose she did not understand. There was a
time when I would have laughed at the idea of anyone
finding comfort in a little dog .or considering the dog had
any feelings at all. But were we really facing death ?
I had never thought it would be like this.
“ I’ve heard bluffs like that before,” said the minister,
putting his hand on Chung’s shoulder, “ Are you sure
Henry’s got the call ? ”
“ He dead —bet your life —dead as skinned cat —got no
head —shaved off one clean cut,” and he returned the
minister’s familiarity by making a ghastly motion with his
hands under his chin. It was graphic, horrible.
Something cold seemed applied to my back ; my hands
were like ice, and I was glad to hold my little dog close.
The minister was holding his wife’s hand. Sister Ednah
was clasping her child in her arms, but Mr. Chapman made
no motion to come near his wife, and she, evidently desper-
ately in need of some strong arm to lean upon, clutched
piteously at my skirts. I managed to free one arm and
put it round her shoulders. I’d rather have kept it round
MacTavish, but I was sorry for her.
“ Don’t be frightened,” I said. But it seemed there was
a good deal of which to be frightened.
“ Oh, buck up, Stella,” said her husband, and there was
a contemptuous ring in his voice. “If this young lady
can be so plucky ”
Me ! Plucky ! Well, I was glad it struck him that way.
“ If poor Henry Maitland is gone,” began Miss Lodham,
and I remembered she was the one amongst us who had
refused to believe in danger.
“Damn sure thing,” asserted Chung with conviction.
“ The fifty school girls are ”
“Damn good invite,” again remarked the same gentle-
man, not with meaning, but just as if he were stating a
fact that must be plain to all of us.
Poor Miss Lodham ! She had done so much for that
school! All her waking hours were filled with thoughts


of it. Now she just stared at him and then dropped to a
seat with her arms straight down beside her and her hands
hanging palms upwards. It was a simple confession of
failure. Mr. Conant stepped across and laid a hand on her
shoulder. He looked as if he were about to speak, but he
did not. They were all taking it so quietly. And we were
over a thousand miles from Peking, and there was no help
nearer.
“What can we do?” asked Sister Luella. “Lord!
what can we do ? ”
Tragedy was walking in our midst, and yet I kept saying
to myself, “So far have I come, and what next ? What
next ? ”
Mrs. Wright answered me.
“We can pray to the good God,” she said simply.
I managed to shake off the curious numbness that had
settled upon me and said, “ I think we’d better pray while
we work then. If Pai Lang is in the eastern suburb
there isn’t much time. We’d better make for the hills.
In a farmhouse or a cave ”
“ I lift up mine eyes to the hills,” said the minister,
“ whence cometh my help.” I think the quotation com-
forted him.
“ In December,” said Mr. Chapman, and the two words
meant a great deal. Perhaps he felt it himself, for he
added hastily, “ I haven’t got a better offer. Pai Lang
holds a full house as far as I’m concerned.”
“ What about ponies ? ” asked Martin Conant, with his
hand still on Miss Lodham’s shoulder, and he shot an
encouraging look at me.
“ Nary a one between here and Mongolia,” said the
minister. “ It’s shanks’ mare for us, you bet.”
“ But,” protested Mrs. Chapman, and there was shrinking
in her tones, “ I simply can’t walk.”
He flicked his fingers just as if it were all one to him, and
Miss Lodham sat up, her hands on the table, and spoke
deliberately.
“ There are twenty girls at least here I can’t send to
their people even if I can arrange for the safety of the
others. We can’t take twenty girls into the hills.”
If you only knew Chinese schoolgirls ! A more irre-
sponsible crowd it would be impossible to imagine. The
maddest, naughtiest schoolgirl in America is staid and


solemn and reliable beside the best of them. Even under
the circumstances I couldn’t help smiling. There is no
sense in a Chinese schoolgirl, at least, not in far west
Kansu. Nobody else said anything, so I did.
“We certainly can’t,” I said.
“ Then, of course,” said the schoolmistress, “ I shall
stay. I can’t very well leave these girls.”
“ But how on earth can your staying help them ? ”
asked Mr Conant.
Our only salvation seemed to lie in getting away.
“ I undertook their care,” said Miss Lodham, and she
spoke quite simply, and something of peace came into her
troubled face. “ No, I can’t go. I guess I’ve gotten
my place.”
Martin Conant looked round as if questioning each
person in turn.
“ Sally,” said the minister, “ I take it we ain’t doin’ a
get away leavin’ Chrissie Lodham to hustle for herself.”
His wife smiled and clasped his arm. “ God is good,”
she said, and it seemed to be answer enough for him and
Miss Lodham; though making every allowance I don’t see
how it applied.
“ Oh, you go,” she urged, “ you go. But you see I
must stay.”
“ No. I guess we’ll stop. We can’t have the congrega-
tion chantin’ ‘ O ye of little faith ’ ! ”
“ Out of the depths ! Oh Lord ! Out of the depths! ”
cried Luella Lawson. “ Shall we put from our lips the cup
He has set us to drink ? ”
Sister Ednah paused a moment. I remembered, as we
do remember things, as if two things w r ere going on at once
in my mind, that once she had said to me, that whenever
she looked at little Sadie she said to herself, “ How could
the martyrs rejoice ! ” I suppose she was saying it now
and thinking how wicked she was.
“My little girl! My Sadie ! ” she cried pitifully, and
her poor plain face was all white and strained. And then
she made up her mind, “ Amen ! Amen ! ” she said
soberly. “ And Lang Hsu needs me,” she added practically.
That was the worst of it. Lang Hsu needed me a great
deal more. Sister Ednah was thinking about her soul.
I don’t know if she had a soul; it really, when you knew
Lang Hsu, seemed improbable, but her poor broken body


certainly needed the attention I could give it. She would
suffer agony if she were not attended to every few hours,
but it made me shiver all over to think of staying. Martin
Conant looked at me and then his eyes wandered to Stella
Chapman, who was leaning forward moaning a little.
Of my own free will I had come to look after the women
in the hospital. I had promised Lang Hsu and another
woman if they would let me operate, I would look after
them and care for them, and if I deserted them when they
needed me most — Those two would certainly die if I
left them now. I hadn’t ever promised to risk my life —
but if those two women died in agony because I —and then
I heard my own voice just pitched a little high saying ;
“ Since you’re all so faithful, I’ll stay, too. I haven’t
your religion, but Lang Hsu and that other woman must
be attended to or they’ll die, and I shouldn’t like to have
their deaths on my conscience. It might be worse than
dying myself.”
They all looked at me so gravely that I went on perhaps
a little flippantly, “ Without troubling at all about the
Lord, we’ll stick to our job, won’t we, MacTavish,” and
MacTavish turned his pretty little head and looked round
the company and then back at his missis as if saying that
whatever she chose to do had his heartiest approval.
Suddenly Mrs. Wright left her husband and crossing to
me kissed me. It took me by surprise, for Mrs. Wright
is undemonstrative.
“ A wind from the wilderness,” she said. “My dear,
you are only blind. The Lord is walking close beside you.
If you only lean you will feel His sheltering arm.”
Goodness knows never did I need sheltering more.
“ It’s a simple matter of decency,” I said, a little uncom-
fortably. “If you can look after your jobs I can surely
look after mine.”
“ By gum ! ” said Chung, with a flourish of his fan.
“ Get your guns,” said Mr. Chapman tersely.
“There isn’t even a popgun,” said Martin Conant.
“ If Pai Lang blows in here,” said the minister, “ I guess
we’ll be directed how to deal with him ” —I rather thought
it was he who would deal with us —“ but ours is a peace
stunt, an’ it’s just as well. If we had guns I’d be some
worried keepin’ my claws off ’em.”
“ Then,” said Mr. Chapman thoughtfully, “it’s scoot.
And no litter.”


“ Crikey, Jim ! ” said Chung, with feeling, “ Missie
go for die for sure. He mighty beastly cold in hills.”
I heard a sob and saw Stella Chapman looking up at me
with pitiful eyes.
“ Why can’t we keep the litter ? ” she asked as a child
might have done.
The litter was there in the snow, its tilt a little rakishly
on one side.
“Because,” said her husband quite coolly, “those
muleteers only undertook to bring us to Ba Chuang, and
it was only at the point of the pistol I made them come on
here. Now they’re being absorbed inconspicuously into
the population. I don’t know that I blame them.”
“Oh, but you’ll come with us,” she said, and I don’t
know whether she was appealing to Mr. Conant or me.
She was certainly not thinking of Silas Chapman.
“ Dear,” I said, “ I can’t possibly come with you. You
must see I can’t leave these women.”
“ I don’t see why not,” she said with wide open innocent
eyes. “ They’re only Chinese and they’re among their own
people. Oh, you must come. And you’ll come,” and she
turned beseechingly to Mr. Conant, “ then we’ll be all
right.”
He looked at her and then at me and then round at the
others as if he were debating where his duty lay. Only a
quarter of an hour ago —it seemed years and years, ages —
he had been keen to set out for England.
“ If the others are staying my place is here ; but I can
help you a little on your way.”
“ By gum ! ” said Chung, again fluttering his fan, and
it was as if he were weighing us up, and was a little sur-
prised. I wonder what he had thought we would do.
I looked at the woman sitting all crouched up in the chair
in which I had put her. So did her husband.
“ Scoot, Stella,” said he. “ Scoot’s the word. You’ll
have to do it on your own little flat feet.”
She looked forlorn enough, but she rose obediently.
She made me feel capable. A little of the benumbing fear
slipped from me. You haven’t time to be afraid when
you’re busy.
“ Come along,” I said as cheerfully as I could, “ and I’ll
help you. MacTavish and I’ll go across to the dispensary
and put up a few trifles that may be useful,” and I helped
her to her feet.


She came reluctantly. Evidently she didn’t like trusting
herself to a woman.
“ I can’t walk,” she complained. “ I feel as if weights
were hanging on my feet. Chung ! Chung ! ”
Chung pranced forward, head on one side, fluttering his
fan.
“No good, Missie, no good for my ! My makee die in
hills,” and having expressed his opinion thus tersely on
the hopelessness of the situation, like a true Chinaman, he
went backwards, only he danced where an ordinary servant
would have walked till he reached the door. It was
opened from behind by unseen hands, and with his head
still on one side insinuatingly and his little yellow fan still
fluttering, he was swallowed up, and the door softly closed
behind him.
Mrs. Chapman looked on in dismay.
“ And I’ve always heard Chinese servants are so faith-
ful,” she said, and there was real surprise in her tones.
“ My girl,” said her husband, “ Chung’s had experience
of you with a litter, and he funks it without. I can hardly
blame him. Now, young lady,” he turned to me, “if you
can help us ” and his voice was pleasant and kindly.
Why on earth couldn’t he speak to his wife as he spoke to
me ?


CHAPTER V
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE FLIGHT TO THE HILLS
“ Far are those tranquil hills
Dyed with fair evening’s rose.
On urgent secret errand bent
A traveller goes.”
Mr. Conant and I helped a couple of the mission servants
to carry the Chapmans’ things to the hills, but, of course,
we could not take a quarter of what they had on the mules.
Mrs. Chapman prepared for the road was sweet. Her
hood of white Mongolian cat-skin suited her pretty blue
eyes and her rosebud mouth with the gleam of pearly
teeth. She evidently thought more of Mr. Conant’s power
to help her than of mine. Her attitude towards the rest
of us was that of a child to its guardians. She spoke as
if because of our greater strength the same danger did not
threaten us, as if she only needed pity.
“ I’ve been telling Silas,” said she with a little watery
smile, “ I won’t be any more trouble than I can possibly
help, but I’m not accustomed to walking on rough roads
like this.”
The roads are certainly terrible. We came through the
western suburb of the town, and the little street was mud-
trampled and trodden and churned by the passing of men
and beasts bearing burdens, and when it had become
thoroughly impassable it had frozen hard. It was weary
walking even for me in a pair of stout leather boots which
reached to the bottom of my utilitarian skirts half-way to
my knee. Mrs. Chapman’s skirts were fairly short, but
she had on thin silk stockings and high-heeled shoes with
paste buckles, very dainty and pretty, but extremely
unsuitable for the work in hand.
“ This arduous life is not at all suited to your style, is


it ? ” said Mr. Conant, and his voice, to my surprise, was
unsympathetic.
Her husband did not take the faintest notice of her, so
we each gave her an arm and trudged her along through
the frost-bound streets with the houses on either hand
hermetically sealed and apparently empty.
But those houses were not empty. I knew they were
full of people withdrawing themselves from contact with
the foreigner and all his ways. I have spent close on two
years in the country, and it is not likely this sinister develop-
ment would be lost upon us. Ordinarily they would all
run out to lay their ailments before me and see if they
could not get a little cheap advice. True it only cost them
one cash at the hospital, and not that if they took the trouble
to prove they had not got it, but still in Kansu a cash is
a cash, and if they thought they could get advice for nothing
on the spot they had always tried for it. Therefore this
drawing away was suspicious, and I had to set my teeth
and try to act up to the advice I was so free with for the
benefit of Stella Chapman. MacTavish trotted along
cheerfully ahead as if the whole expedition had been got
up for his benefit, and Stella stumbled along between us
until she gave a sharp cry, and if we hadn’t held her would
have fallen. Her husband went stolidly on, but to be sure
his hands were full.
Luckily it was a contingency I had foreseen, and I
dropped the bundle I was carrying, and putting my hand
on her shoulder managed to seat her on the snowy step of
a shut-up house, a high stone step with two little carved
lions standing up on each side of it. She looked as if she
were going to resent my masterfulness, and I must admit,
though I was sorry for her, I wanted to shake her, for time
was precious. I drew from my pocket my trump card, a
stout pair of woollen stockings and a pair of quilted slippers,
such as are worn by the Chinese women who have unbound
their feet.
But my trump card, I regret to say, was not appreciated,
though how she would have got on without it heaven only
knows.
Even at that moment she made a wry face.
“ Stella, don’t be a damned ass,” said her husband
harshly, and I melted before his wrath. “ Take off those
silly shoes/'


An abominable way to address a wife, even though it
was senseless waste of time discussing different sorts of
shoes in the midst of those silent, sinister watching houses.
And Mr. Conant was actually smiling as if he held the key
to this man’s conduct. I could have smacked all three
with joy,
“ I know you’re kind,” said she plaintively, as I hastily
pulled on the stout stockings, “ very kind. I know it’s
silly to have such aggravating flesh, but that wool, even
through the silk ”
“ March ! ” said Mr. Conant. It was his only contribu-
tion towards the situation. I scrambled to my feet and
picked up her bundle, and she, too, got up and slipped a
coaxing hand under my arm.
“ You’re not cross, are you ? ” she said.
I know I don’t make allowances enough. A woman
once told me, and she was fond of me, too, that I was hard,
that I would be kind enough in a real trouble, but had no
sympathy for fancies. I don’t believe I have. It does
seem so stupid to make trouble.
We who had eyes to see saw enough to worry us on that
road.
On either side were now stalls with merchandise upon
them, the mean little stalls of a poor little suburb of a small
town, but such as they were they were the sole possessions
of the people. Every stall w r e passed was mysteriously
empty, though in the distance we had seen the owner and
his men busy about it. And they were canny, those small
Eastern shopkeepers. They did not leave the stalls bare,
they just left a little of the poorest of the stock spread out
as advantageously as possible. A bundle of the thinnest
cotton of a rich dark blue shade artistically draped a
stall given over to the sale of cottons, as if the owner were
making the very best of his wares, thirty cents’ worth of
coarsest household crockery was displayed ostentatiously
on another stall; the butcher had the well-picked back-
bone of a mule hung from the rafters, and the leg of a very
lean dog on his boards; but the money-changer had the
best of it, for where thirteen hundred cash go to the Mexican
dollar, quite a big show can be made with the coin of the
country in neat little piles, though the aggregate does not
reach half a dollar in value.
But for once there was no desire on the part of perhaps
D


the poorest population in the world to earn a little money.
No one came near us. Mr. Conant commented on it.
“ I thought we’d certainly get someone to help with the
loads here,” he said, as a rickety door closed in the back of
a money-changer’s stall, leaving at least a dollar’s worth
of cash entirely at our mercy.
“ Bad,” said Mr. Chapman beneath his breath, and he
thought I did not hear.
“ What can we —” began Mr. Conant, but the other man
threw up his head and said “ Damn ! ” as if the matter
were beyond discussion.
When we had passed through the western suburb I
looked back. The walls of the town stood up grey and
square against the eastern skyline. At the north and south
the neatly rounded corners were topped by little turrets
with roofs with curled-up eaves, and in the very centre
stood the many-roofed gatehouse and the westering sun
caught a glint of gorgeous gold and red in it. The ground
fell away from where we stood and then rose again towards
the city, so that all that was graceful and picturesque and
beautiful showed up in the afternoon light, while the mean
little suburb lay half-hidden in the hollow between, but
even it and all the fields round were covered by the glittering
white snow. All the shabbiness of the miserable hovels
by which we had passed were mercifully veiled in this
soft and tender mantle. Not that we had any time for
looking back; ahead of us were the hills, and here, just
where the pathway passed by the last humble dwelling-
place, the couple of mission servants who had been carrying
some of the Chapmans’ things had laid down their burdens.
They turned to me as the one who would understand
them best, and they said very humbly, but with a note of
determination in their voices, that their work needed them
at the mission station and they could not go on. MacTavish
sat down in the snow and contemplated them and gave an
emphatic little whimper as if to accent the matter.
“ But they must go on,” urged Stella Chapman. “We
have no one to carry our things. They must go on.”
Her husband looked at her contemptuously. I believe
jeering at her relieved the tension for him, and when I
felt like being angry with her, for she was foolish, I had pnly
to listen to him and my wrath vanished.
“ Scoot’s the order of the day, my dear,” he said, with


a scornful little laugh, as he watched the stubborn backs
of the two servants trudging stolidly back on their tracks
empty-handed !
“ But if we can’t get anyone to carry our things,” she
said ; “if we can’t, Silas.”
He merely threw back his head. I could have hit him,
and I would if he had been my husband, but she merely
mourned,
“ Silas, we can’t carry them, we can’t. I can hardly
walk myself. Oh, Silas, if I wasn’t so weak. I can't
help it, can I ? ” and her wistful voice quivered off into a
sob.
We were close now to the range of steep and rugged hills
that lay to the north-west of the town. And they were
steep, so steep that in many places, in spite of the heavy
fall of snow of the night before, much of their slope was
bare earth and rock. In that direction there was not a house
in sight. There were no trees, no farms, nothing but the
forbidding inhospitable hills, all rocks and snow and ice.
The thermometer was below zero, the sun was drawing to
the west, and when night fell the cold would be gripping.
It seemed madness to go on. I turned to Mr. Chapman.
“You had better come back with us.”
“ My girl,” he said simply, and when he spoke so I liked
him, “ you can tell what I think of your chances when I
tell you I’m going on. If anybody’s going to change it
had better be you.”
We had thrashed that out before, and I had made up
my mind. So I laughed. Not because I saw any mirth
in the situation, for his words made the cold hand grip
at my heart again, but because, I suspect, that, at bottom,
our emotions were the same, and what made Stella Chapman
cry forced me in desperation to laugh. She did not see
it at all in the same light.
She stopped crying and looked at me reproachfully.
“ How can you ! How can you ! ”
“ I hate to hustle you,” I heard myself saying, “ but
I’m so afraid of them shutting the gates before I can get
back.”
“ Then we’ll keep you,” she said, stretching out her
hands.
“ Stella ! ” her husband cut her short sharply.
But I could stop to listen no longer. I snatched up the


biggest bundle I could manage, and with MacTavish
trotting gaily along ahead I ran into the hills. Before I
had found the little turning Mr. Chapman was beside me.
“ It’s good of you to help us,” he said. “ Don’t think
I’m ungrateful.” And it seemed impossible to connect
him with the man who spoke so harshly to his wife.
“This way,” I said. “Come along. But where’s your
wife ? How will she ”
“ My dear young lady,” he interrupted, “ if she doesn’t
get over that young man to carry her, she’ll worry it out
on her own.”
It was harshly spoken, but before we had done I found
he could be kind enough. We turned round a cliff and
came into a little hollow of the hills, snow-clad and open
to the sky. But it was going to be a fine night, and on
all sides the rocks rose round and kept off the wind.
' I quickly set about arranging the rugs we had brought
to make a warm couch, and MacTavish setting himself to
help me, I trod on his poor little paw, and Mr. Chapman,
the man who, it seemed, could never speak kindly to his
wife, picked him up and petted him.
“ He isn’t hurt,” he said, “ only his feelings got a knock.”
Then we heard the others coming, and we leaned over, and
there below was Mr. Conant staggering along under a
heavy burden with Mrs. Chapman clinging to him.
Without waiting to turn the corner and come up the
long way he dropped his bundle, picked up the lady in his
arms and handed her up to her husband, who with little
ceremony dragged her over the top of the cliff. The
bundle followed, and Mr. Conant came scrambling up after
just as Stella settled herself down on the couch I had made
and began quietly crying. She had shed quite a lot of
tears since we had made her acquaintance.
But I could not do anything more for her.
“ You’ll have to try and look upon it as a picnic,” I said,
but the suggestion fell flat.
She turned on me reproachful eyes swimming in tears,
and then looked at Mr. Conant.
“ I am so sorry I’ve been such a trouble,” she said.
We discussed the matter as we two and MacTavish sped
back to the city gates.
“ That little woman’s going to make things hard for
herself,” said he. “If she would only exercise a little
common sense.”


“ With Pai Lang at your heels,” I said, “ there doesn’t
seem much chance of exercising any sense at all.”
He laughed. “ It's just as bad for you, and you’re
taking it coolly enough.”
I wasn’t taking it coolly inside, but I liked him for thinking
of me.
“ You see, I haven’t a husband reminding me every
two minutes I’m a silly ass.”
And again he laughed a little queerly.
“ It’s wonderful the difference in women,” he said.
“ Yes. I know that Luella Lawson and her sister are
just as much to be pitied, poor dears.”
“They certainly don’t appeal to the aesthetic side,”
said he whimsically.
“ If only they weren’t on such intimate terms with the
Lord ! ”
“ It’s a matter for thankfulness to me,” he said, “ to
think they find comfort and consolation —•”
“ Where you do not look for it yourself.” I don’t know
what on earth made me say that. I suppose because I
felt the need of comfort and consolation. I picked up
MacTavish because I do not like him to walk where there
is danger of his being bitten by wonks, and always when
I felt lonely his little warm body pressing against me gave
me comfort.
Martin Conant did not answer. He paused a moment
and the last rays of the setting sun fell full on the western
gate towards which we were making, and it was a glory of
crimson and gold.
“Do you know,” he
I have given true thought to religion. I accepted my mother’s
teaching, which was very sweet and lovable, but I have
never gone beyond the thoughts of a boy of fourteen.”
“ And yet you came out here ? ”
“Of course,” he smiled, “ don’t you think it is exactly
what a boy of fourteen would do ? ”
“ But you were not fourteen.”
“ About as unstable.”
“ When did you grow up ? ” I asked wonderingly.
“ When I came here.”
“Oh come ! ” I couldn’t help laughing.
“If you only think, you’ll see I’m right,” he said. “ Don’t
you see that human nature is steadily advancing, each


generation wants something better, wider, broader than
the one that went before it. My mother had advanced
beyond the hard Calvinism in which she was brought up
and had evolved for herself a very tender faith, a God in
Heaven Who loves all the earth, and there —” he paused and
went on, “ she was right. There must be some Power for
good behind all. And when I came here—”
“ Now don’t tell me,” I had to say it and yet I am very
fond of the missionaries among whom I have lived so long,
“ that the people here have converted you.”
“ But,” he said, “ that is exactly what they have done.
And yet their faith’s the worst part of them. As they
preach it, it is rigid and hard and cruel, and they in the
kindness of their hearts are trying to impose it upon a kindly
honest people who want, not religion, but someone to take
them in hand and give them a chance of living more com-
fortably in this world.”
“ Indeed they do, poor things, “ I could agree with him
there most heartily, “ if you only saw the sights I see.”
“ I know,” he said. “ The suffering is the part I can’t
explain away in that Power over all.”
“ And yet, a world without pain—if we always had fair
weather —” but I stopped because I had reached the
crucial point where we all stop.
“Perhaps,” he said, “it is well we should not see too
clearly. But,” we were close below the frowning gates now
and could see in the dusty entrance the two upright white
stones that marked the width of the axle that could pass
along the narrow streets of the city, “ do you understand
we are up against things now ? ”
I could only hug MacTavish a little closer.
“ I can’t believe it,”
“ You know the people better than I do —that man
behind there in the hills didn’t seem to think—” He
stopped,
“ He thought there was a mighty poor chance in the
hills,” I said, “ and yet he wanted us to stay. Why didn’t
you stay ? You’re not a missionary.”
“ And you’re not a missionary.”
We were walking through the streets of the town now
and there was no one visible. The houses were silent,
sinister, watching as they had been in the suburb. Only in
the distance could we see any sign of life.


“It’s like walking in the shadow of death,” I said.
“ They’ll be glad enough to see you at the hospital,” he
comforted.
When we reached the mission compound the minister
met us at the gate. It was evident he was troubled.
“They’ve made a clean bolt of it,” said he. “There’s
not a solitary galoot left in the hospital.”
I stood still. It is disconcerting, to say the least of it, to
have your self-sacrifice tossed back in your face.
“ Lang Hsu,” I faltered, for I knew that Lang Hsu would
be in agony if she were not attended to every few hours,
and it was the thought of the woman’s suffering that had
made me stay.
“ They’ve cut and run,” said the minister as if he sought
but could not find some way to break the matter to me more
gently, “ didn’t the cook tell you ? I sent him to say you
had better stay with those people—it wasn’t worth while
coming back.”
“ We’ve not seen him,” said Martin Conant looking
round as if perchance we might have overlooked such a
trifle as the tall cook. “ Missed us, I expect. Suppose we
all go back.”
“Too late,” said the Rev. Septimus, “already they’re
shutting the city gates. We’ll have to wait and see what
the day brings forth.”


CHAPTER VI
OSALIE'S STORY.
THE BREAKING UP OF THE MISSION
“ All the bright lights of heaven
Thou hast made dark over us ;
One night has been as seven,
That its skirt might cover us ;
Thou hast sent on our strong men a sword.
On our remnant a rod ;
We know that Thou are the Lord,
O Lord our God."
It is always difficult to wait. Henry Maitland did not
return and it seemed he must be dead. The servants had
all fled, and the Prefect, who was friendly, sent an old-
fashioned soldier in a quilted blue cotton coat that made his
arms stand out stiffly like an automaton's to tell us on no
account to leave the compound. There was nothing to do
but wait. Luella Lawson cooked us a meal and we all
gathered together in the minister's house and tried to eat
it, but it was only a pretence. Little Sadie Lawson sang her
grace.
“ Every day, every day,” the sweet little voice sang
happily, “ we bless Thee, we bless Thee, we praise Thee, we
praise Thee, for ever and for ever.”
She was very sure God was going to take care of her, but
whether the others were quite as happy in their faith I do
not know. Except for Sadie Luella's nice biscuit was
wasted. The evening dragged on, and at last at the minister’s
suggestion we went to bed. They managed some sort of
shake-down for Mr. Conant and the Lawsons, but Miss
Lodham went back to be among her girls, and I went to my
own room.
We always slept outside even in the winter. I’m a great
believer in fresh air, and luckily the minister backed me up.
There was no roof to my little porch and I lay and looked


up at the bright stars—the stars in Northern China in winter
are like newly washed silver—and tired though I was I could
not go to sleep. I tossed and turned. Ordinarily I let
MacTavish sleep by himself in the warm bedroom because
my little camp-bed was narrow, but I couldn’t part with him
to-night. I was afraid lest if anything happened I
wouldn’t be able to get to him in time.
As the dawn came I dozed, and I was awakened by Mr.
Conant standing over me.
“ They are coming,” he said, “ The others are in the
dining-room.”
“ Singing hymns,” I said, and it made me feel cross,
“ I wish they wouldn’t. I’ll be with you in a minute.”
And I had not reached them before the mob were batter-
ing at the gates.
The minister snatched up a stool and whirled it round his
head,
“Gee!” he said, “ Chrissie ! Come, Momma!” and
as if it had been a signal, we all ran towards the courtyard,
where Miss Lodham was among her girls, MacTavish in a
state of wild delight as if the whole thing had been arranged
for his amusement, but Mrs. Wright stopped.
“Poppa,” she said, “I’d as lief stop at home. You
bring Chrissie ! ” and she and the Lawsons turned back,
but MacTavish was ahead and I ran on with Mr. Conant
and the minister. We reached the gate of the little court-
yard just as a wild burst of raucous yells broke over the wall.
“ Sha ! Sha ! Kill! Kill! ” came the voice of the
mob, a Chinese mob, decadent, ruthless, merciless, and
above the sounds of the mob came the shrill sweet sound
of children singing.
In the night I had pictured this coming of the mob, and
I had thpught how terribly afraid I would be. Instead,
I was thinking bitterly that if it had not been for those
women—poor wretches, how they must have suffered—we
should have been safe in the hills. I hated the Chinese.
How could they sing hymns !
“Well, Chrissie is a cucumber!” said the minister
admiringly, and even as he spoke the gate gave, and the
assaulters came tumbling into the compound. In the clear
bright daylight we saw them, a ragged filthy mob, the dregs
and sediment of the population. There were about fifty
of them in quilted blue cotton, with little round caps on


their heads, and they all wore pigtails—unkempt, untidy,
deplorable pigtails. I couldn’t help thinking of Mrs.
Chapman’s late servant, Chung, and his neat well-oiled
queue. Why should one think of such things at such a
moment ? They were armed with long knives and choppers
and the hoes they used for tilling the fields, and they spread
out a blot on the immaculate snow of the compound.
Filthy they were ! Filthy ! To have death come in such
a form !
“Pai Lang’s braves,” said Martin Conant, and he put
his hand on my arm. He will never know how his kind
touch helped me !
“No,” said the minister, “the riff-raff of the city on
the bust, and they mean cold straight business. God help
us ! ”
And then the mob saw us and swept down upon us.
We gave before it, of course—mortal man could do no less —
and the next few minutes I pieced out afterwards. After
all I was not as afraid as I thought I should be. It is the
waiting for things to happen that is hard.* Mr. Conant
pushed me behind him. The minister whirled the stool
threateningly above his head, then, true to his stern faith
of non-resistance, dropped it. Mr. Conant swore an angry
oath, and in a flash I had that stool and thrust it into his
hands.
“Goodgirl,” he said, getting in front of me again, and he
parried a blow with a knife and hit his assailant across the
face. I saw the blood start and the man fall back. The
minister was under a pile of struggling men, and I could see
Miss Lodham leaning up against a wall with half a dozen
terrified schoolgirls clinging round her, and all about them
were the mob, shouting, yelling, tearing down the wood-
work, feeding a fire already begun with tables, desks, papers,
books, while others darted into rooms and came out bearing
piles of bedding, for the girls had straw mattresses on their
k’angs. It was only afterwards I realised I had been so
intensely interested I actually forgot to be afraid.
They were a leaderless mob, and tore from one thing
to another with no settled plan, but they w r ere bent on
destruction.
“Now,” said Mr. Conant, and his voice sounded quite
cheerful and triumphant, “ the gate’s clear. Hang on to
me like a good girl and we’ll make for it.”


But I had seen Miss Lodham. She and the girls were
between the brick wall and the flames, and the school-
mistress’s face was all bloody, and her grey fair hair,
usually so neat, was all tumbled about her shoulders.
“ They’re going to burn her,” I cried, and I actually
dropped MacTavish and catching up the leg of a broken
chair made a dash for her.
But Mr. Conant was ahead of me, and he brought down
his weapon upon the head of a filthy brute from a butcher’s
shop who was flinging a great armful of straw upon the fire.
The minister got his head free and sat up for a moment,
and I saw his poor white strained face, and then to my
surprise he made a remark in Chinese, and though I could
not catch it in the din it was evidently funny, it made his
assailants laugh, and they took him by the arms and ran
him out of the courtyard. Another man came at us with
frothing lips and clutching hands, and my guardian went
for him, using the heavy stool as a flail, and swept right
and left with strong, capable hands. I remembered then
that he had rowed on the Thames and won renown at
footer at Oxford. I managed to keep my place beside him,
and I felt gladly I was doing my share dealing shrewd
blows with the leg of the chair. Afraid ! I was too desper-
ately excited ! I forgot to think! I just lived for the
moment ! Even when the point of a knife struck my arm
and the blood spouted I looked at it in surprise. It never
hurt me ! I was only troubled because I could not reach
Miss Lodham, and because MacTavish at my feet was
yelping and crying, for the burning straw stung his poor
little paws.
“ Can’t we help Miss Lodham ?” I said. “ She’s trying
to help the girls who’ve had their feet unbound. They
can’t walk.”
“My dear,” he said—it sounded so natural somehow —
“ we can’t help ourselves,” and he raised his stool for another
blow, when, to the surprise of both of us, the man he
threatened looked up at him and distinctly winked.
Mr. Conant stopped, stool in mid-air.
He was a very ragged man, but his cap had fallen off
and his neat pigtail was tidily wound round his head.
“ Why the hell you no go down ? ” he said in English,
and suiting the action to the word he dropped on his knees
and grabbed Mr. Conant’s leg. The snow was frozen hard


and slippery as a schoolboy’s slide, and to my dismay he
came down with a shock that for the moment knocked his
senses out of him. Miss Lodham was being carried out,
her hands and feet tied together like a pig slung from a pole.
The man who had pulled my companion down looked up
at me with a grin.
“ Oppugnation dam foolishness,” he said, and before I
could resist he had me on my knees beside Mr. Conant.
I bent forward to rescue MacTavish, who was whining and
licking his sore paws, but the Chinaman w 7 as between us,
and before I could reach him to my great surprise he was
gathered up and thrust into my arms. It was one of the
moments of my life. God knows what I was bracing myself
to bear, and here I was hugging MacTavish. Mr. Conant
stirred dizzily, and I bent over him and pushed him down
again. It seemed best not to attract attention.
“ Lie still,” I cried, “ lie still. He gave me back
MacTavish. I believe this man’s a friend.”
“ Sure thing,” croaked our assailant, “ you treat me
rite.”
But Mr. Conant was still dazed. Evidently he didn’t
know what was happening. I felt we had found a friend,
a strange friend truly.
The mob was all around us still; but apparently they
were intent on gathering up the schoolgirls. Perhaps
they would have no time for us unless their attention was
directly called to us. This man had abused me vilely—
in Chinese —but he had saved the little whimpering dog.
He tossed his head, and, his pigtail coming down, he swung
it from one shoulder to the other.
“ Why, it’s Chung ! ” I said, and I was so surprised I
spoke in a whisper.
“ Lie still,” he said, “ mus’ lie still. No be long now.”
Indeed the wretched courtyard was clearing. I saw the
last man carrying out of it one of the girls whose feet had
been unbound only the day before. Evidently she was his
share of the booty. She made no resistance, and I couldn’t
help noticing it even at that moment had an air of virtuous
self-consciousness that would have done credit to an early
Victorian bride. I suppose if you have never spoken to any
man in your life but the old school coolie, one-eyed, bent and
lame, any stalwart individual w r ould be much the same to
you.


And then I saw with a great rush of thankfulness Mr.
Conant was coming round.
“ Be quiet,” I said, bending over him, “ be quiet,” and it
was all I could do to keep from bursting out crying. But he
wasn’t sensible enough to understand.
All the little rooms round the courtyard were gutted,
everything that was movable had been thrown outside and
broken up or burnt, smoke from smouldering fires came out
of the doorways, and in some places the carved artistic
woodwork of the windows was still burning, all the paper
was long ago torn up or burnt and pieces of women’s
clothing mingled with broken crockery, books and kitchen
utensils were distributed over the place. There had not
been much to loot, but everything had been smashed or
rendered useless by the blind fury of the reckless mob.
But because it had been a leaderless mob it had no method,
had had no intention apparently beyond blind destruction,
and having destroyed the spate had passed on, leaving behind
in the dismantled courtyard only us two and our captor,
Mr. Conant was rubbing his eyes and sat up bewildered.
“ What ? Where ?” he asked.
Sitting back on his heels Chung passed his hand over his
shaven head as if to feel if the neat little fringe of coarse
black hair, his halo, was still in place. Then he relaxed after
his desperate exertions. Even though he had an evil-
looking knife slung at his waist he did not look the fierce
bandit. He picked up a cap that was lying on the ground—
his, I suppose—and tossed it on the point of his knife to
MacTavish’s openly expressed delight, and he remarked
amiably,
“ Mus’ get hills.”
And then, Mr. Conant’s senses came back with a rush.
He swept out his arms, and poor Chung was lying prostrate,
and he was standing over him,
“ It’s Chung !” I cried. “ It’s Chung ! ” and he stepped
back and looked at me in bewilderment.
“ Miss Lodham ! I must go—’ ’he made a half step across
the yard—but I was at his side—and Chung took the oppor-
tunity to scramble to his feet.
“ Don’t, don’t,” I said. “ They may be safer working it
out by themselves.
“ But I must fight,” he said, and I felt myself laughing
and crying at once, his conversion was so sincere and he was
so unconscious of it, “ we’ve got to help them.”


“Oh, we can’t,” I said desperately. “You can’t do
anything. They’re too many.”
“ But ? What ? Where ? I don’t understand.”
“ Neither do I, We’ll have to get Chung to help us.”
Chung, having picked himself up, was feeling himself
over carefully. Apparently he was satisfied with the
investigation, and he bore no malice, for he remarked again,
“ Mus’ get hills ! ”
Get to the hills ! Out of this courtyard ! I could have
laughed, and this was the man who only yesterday had
carefully explained how forlorn a refuge he thought the
hills !
“ Can pay monies ?” he asked us shrewdly. Mr, Conant
still seemed uncertain whether he ought not to rush to Miss
Lodham’s rescue, and then he saw the blood on my wrist,
and taking out his handkerchief began to bind it up, and
while he was doing it I tried to bring my two years’ know-
ledge of the Chinese to bear upon the situation. But Mr.
Conant was struck with Chung as a rescuer.
“ I knew,” said he, “ and God forgive me, I forgot that
there are brave and kindly men in all countries and among
all faiths.”
He seemed so satisfied with his own penetration that I
could not help laughing.
“ I do hate,” I said, “ to shatter such a beautiful theory
if you are applying it to Mr. Chung.”
“ Velly good,” said the gentleman, airily swinging his
pigtail and rocking himself backwards and forwards.
I didn’t want to take away from any virtue that might be
his, and truly he had come to our help cleverly enough, but
it was only common sense to recognise the fact that his
trade was that of a foreigner’s servant. He had got adrift
in the west here, and the only comfortable livelihood for a
man of his class was to be found with foreigners. His
salvation lay in sticking to us. Why he had given up the
Chapmans, who had plenty of money, I could not imagine.
I tried to make this plain to Mr. Conant, who stared at me,
and Chung nodded his head amiably as if I had hit the nail
exactly on the head,
“Mus’ pay some monies,” he repeated with emphasis,
and then there broke on the air once more the sound of a
missionary hymn. There was no mistaking it, it was a very
favourite hymn and I had heard it on all sorts of occasions,


but never, I think, on one less appropriate than this. Really
those dear good people have no sense of humour. Early in
the morning, late at night that overworked hymn rang out,
and now after all the racket and storm and stress it burst
on the air and Sadie Lawson’s sweet little childish treble
rang clear above the other voices, above the shouting of the
mob, and the distant hum of sound that came from the
seething city beyond the compound walls.
“ All good gifts around us are sent from heaven above,
Then praise the Lord, then praise the Lord, for all His love.
Saved ! Could they possibly be saved ? We scrambled
to our feet and still clutching MacTavish I ran alongside
Mr. Conant to the gates of the school courtyard. Most of
them had gone to feed the fire in the centre, only a splintered
post or two remained, but before we had reached the
opening Chung was before us pushing us back. He evidently
understood more clearly than we did the ways of the mission
people. He knew they would rejoice long before they had
any material victory that outside eyes could discover.
“ White Wolf’s men give you a hell of a time,” he re-
marked explanatorily.
But leaning over his shoulder and sheltering as much as
I could behind the little wall I saw that the mob had
reached the minister’s house and taken the women hiding
there. The two Lawsons were walking one on each side of
Mrs. Wright, surrounded by at least twenty or thirty people,
a filthy ragged crowd, odoriferous and disgusting, who were
yelling and shouting abusive epithets, but on the face of the
captives was a rapt look as if they had forgotten their
surroundings and were absorbed in the song of praise.
Even the mother who had feared so for her little child —and
I knew how she had feared —was calm, and that little child
was being carried by a stalwart Chinaman nearly six feet
high, unclean and ragged, but his face was not unkindly.
The little girl had one arm round his neck, while with a little
red gloved hand she beat the time of her paean of praise
upon his grimy cheek.
Well I’m .” Mr. Conant used an expression that,
however unobjectionable it may have been at Oxford, was
K°, more suitable to a would-be missionary than the mob’s
behaviour came up to my expectations of what an out-of-
hand Chinese mob would do. Then MacTavish, unfor-


Innately for himself, put his little black and white head
up to see what was going on, and not quite approving, said
so in a loud voice and so called attention to his presence.
He is very good-looking, and on his round forehead is
the “V ” shaped mark that makes him valuable. Once
or twice he had been stolen from the compound, and brought
back after rewards varying in value from 1,000 to 10,000
cash had been offered by his distracted mistress. I was
never anxious to call attention to his perfections, and I
quenched his ardour by suddenly popping his head under
my arm and withdrawing into the courtyard.
Too late. The triumphant singing passed on, but a man
stepped out from the following mob and came running
to the courtyard to investigate.
Then there was a torrent of Chinese both from Chung and
the newcomer, and I turned shivering with my face to the
wall and hid my little dog in my arms.
“ What’s the matter ? ” asked Mr. Conant, for his Chinese
was not equal to the babble that was pouring out round him.
The man wanted MacTavish. He said it was only fair.
Evidently we were to be ransomed, and he seemed to think
I might be worth 30 dollars, while MacTavish was certainly
worth 15,000 cash, and he knew of a purchaser, a Lao
T’ai T’ai, the other side of the city. Oh, my little treasure
dog ! I tried to explain to Mr. Conant.
“ Our lives are surely cheap,” he began. I think he was
going to say at the cost of a dog, but he stopped, and I
suppose he saw that I loved MacTavish. I do. I just
felt as if I could not give him up. Too well I know how the
Chinese treat dogs. I have had some bad moments in my
life. And that was one of them.


CHAPTER VII
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY
THE LOSING OF MACTAVISH.
" From all thy lovers that love thee
I, God, will sunder thee ;
I will make darkness above thee,
And thick darkness under thee.
Before me goeth a light,
Behind me a sword,
Shall a remnant find grace in my sight ?
I am the Lord.”
Of all the plucky women —if ever I’m in a tight place again
I hope I have a woman like Rosalie Grahame by my side.
I wonder if there is another like her. But no, Providence
doesn’t make two women of her sort. The way she aided
and abetted in the fight in the courtyard.
It was beastly luck just when we were beginning to think
we were out of the wood that wretched little dog should
have called attention to himself. I was beginning to think
that Dr. Grahame was her old self again. There was a
very mocking little devil in those bright eyes of hers when
she pointed out to me that Chung’s salvation lay in identify-
ing himself with us, and then it went out with a flash and
there was shrinking and dread when that coolie reached
across and demanded her dog.
“ Oh my little dog ! ” she said, “ I can’t part with him !
To a Chinese ! My little dog ! He’ll be miserable ! ” and
she held him passionately against her.
Chung, the polite Chung, bent over and snatched him
from her. He held him up by the neck and the little chap
whined piteously.
. If is a matter for argument,” said Chung sententiously,
ln Chinese. “ The division is fair. The gown to me, the
cap and shoes to thee,” and he handed the little dog to the
claimant.
E


“Oh!” cried the girl, “Oh, my little dog!” and
MacTavish heard the loved voice and promptly bit the hands
that held him, and being promptly dropped raced over
to the mistress he knew would defend him. She gathered
him in her arms, but Chung turned on her reproachfully.
“ You don’t treat me rite,” he said, and stretched out
a hand to recapture him. But MacTavish evidently under-
stood the situation, and showed his sharp little teeth. He
did not like the Chinese at any time.
“ Lend me your knife,” Rosalie Grahame turned to Chung.
“He shan’t suffer. I’ll kill him.”
Her face was strained. '
“I’ll do it,” I said, “if it’s necessary. But the little
dog is valuable. They’ll treat him well. Besides,” and it
was a consideration, “we can’t afford to offend these
people.”
“ You needn’t tell me,” she snapped, holding him fast.
“ I know how Chinese treat dogs, fondled and over-fed one
day, starved for a week, kicked out to die when they are
ill and old. My little dog ! I’d rather he was dead. I’d
rather die myself.”
“We have no choice, I’m afraid,” I said reluctantly,
and then I had a bright idea.
“ Tell him,” I said to Chung, “ Missie will give 30,000
cash for him by and by.”
She looked at me, and, upon my word, sparkling, mocking
brown eyes can express gratitude far better than blue ones.
“ Not thilty dollar one time,” warned Chung, “ take it
tief her again.” There’s a good deal of nous about our
Chung.
“Tell him not to sell to the Lao T’ai T’ai,” I said. “Tell
him to keep him and when the country’s quiet he shall have
thirty dollars if the dog’s well and fat.’*
“ He couldn’t afford to keep a dog,” muttered Dr.
Grahame. “They are so poor. MacTavish is a rich
man’s dog.”
But Chung tossed his head knowingly.
“ Sell her to Lao T’ai T’ai,” was his solution of the diffi-
culty. “ Alice same, Missee shall have. Can tief her.
Missie give thilty dollar,” he asked insinuatingly.
Poor girl. She clasped more closely the little quivering
creature that nestled against her and watched as if he
knew his fate was in the balance. I saw “ More, more,”


trembling on her white lips. And her lips were so red
usually. But my thrifty New England ancestry got the
better of me.
“ Thirty dollars,” I said definitely. “ Missie no can give
more. Can get plenty like him ten dollar. By and bye she
remember.” And she looked at me as if there could not
possibly be another dog like MacTavish. But there was
nothing to be gained by putting an absurd price upon him.
Thirty dollars is a lot to these people. And the argument
had weight with Chung. He gauged Missie’s love for the
little dog at about thirty dollars. But more—l really
don’t believe Chung thought that anyone woald give more
for a dog.
“ All litee, ” he said, and stretched out his hand for the
dog.
The little thing looked up in his mistress’s face, as if
asking if she would really give him up, and she put her
face down against his cold little nose and rubbed his ears
against her cheek. He hates and fears the Chinese.
“My little dog ! My little dog ! ” and she turned holding
him loosely so that the man might take him if he wanted to.
He made a snatch, and the little chap growled, so she put
him into his arms and said in Chinese, with a little quiver
in her pretty voice,
“ Kindness should be practised and he will reward with
great love.”
But the dog whimpered and struggled at the sound of her
voice, and the man cuffed him as he turned away, and she
covered her face, but I knew she was biting her lips to keep
back the tears.
“ I don’t think you need worry,” I exhorted her. “ They
will keep him safe for the promise of thirty dollars.”
“ Sure thing,” said Chung, snapping his fingers. “ Tief
her by em by,” and he squatted down on his heels again and
spread his hands out soothingly over the snow.
“ Missie,” he said solemnly, “ wantchee go for hills ? ”
He looked up at her a little knowingly, and yet with the
proper amount of respect she might expect from a Chinese
servant, “ want boy, wantchee velly good boy ? ”
The tears were still on her cheeks. She shot a glance at
me.
China is a strange place. Tragedy is always mixed up
with what may be called comic relief. Many a time has the


missionary found the men who have avowedly come to kill
him end by playing dolls with his children, and yet the
sentence of death is not annulled. It may be carried out
later on. Somewhat to my surprise, Dr. Grahame played
up to the man on the ground.
“You no go Missie Chapman ? ” she asked.
Chung puffed out his cheeks and let his breath come out
in a slow and thoughtful whistle.
“ Missie Chapman,” he said spreading out his hands and
patting the spow again, “ not wantchee velly good boy,”
and he looked up under his eyelids with a comical air of
taking her into his confidence. There were certain things
he seemed to say were understood between intimates and
need not be put into words. lamby no means given to
rushing things, but this leisurely way of going on was a little
too much for me. We had only just escaped death, and here
we were discussing whether Dr. Grahame wanted a servant.
At any moment the mob might come back.
“ We ought to be making preparations for getting away,”
I said.
“We are,” said Dr. Grahame, coolly and she was evidently
herself again. Unselfish too, though I did not realise at
first what she was driving at.
“ No monies got,” said she with a little air as if that
disposed of the matter ; but her tone said there was still
room for a suggestion.
“Plenty monies got .at T’ai Yuan Fu ? ” asked Chung
insinuatingly.
“Poor woman,” announced Dr. Grahame, and I could
not help wondering how she could play so calmly with her
chances of life. “ My brother,” and she indicated me much
to my surprise, and I found I was not quite pleased with the
relationship, “ poor man. Missionaries no have got much
monies ! ”
I couldn’t make out why she was bargaining like this.
We were neither of us rich, but we were rolling in wealth as
wealth goes in Kansu. A hundred Mexican dollars or so
could make no difference to us. I would have said so, but
with a quick look she silenced me.
“ Got little monies,” insinuated Chung, “ velly good boy
tweny dollar a mont’.”
She fell back against the wall. The rejection was com-
plete. Chung picked up the snow in little bits with his bare
hands, and she sighed just a little but with ostentation.


“ Sleventeen dollar,” said Chung still insinuatingly, but
the girl put her hand before her face, and through her fingers
I saw a pair of eyes that sternly bade me restrain myself and
have patience. Her attitude still indicated despair, and
Chung came down.
“ Flifteen dollar.”
There was an air of finality about him this time.
Dr. Grahame took her hand from her face.
“ Missionary very poor,” she reiterated.
“ Flifteen dollar,” asseverated Chung stonily and yet with
perfect courtesy. He might still be taken as a servant for
his manners were all that could be wished.
Then she turned to me and her eyes implored me to
follow her lead. v
“ Missionaries are so poor,” she said with emphasis,
“ can we manage fifteen dollars a month ? It is just as
important, you know,” and this I recognised was for
Chung's benefit, “ for Chung to have a good place as for us to
have a good servant. If we are dead we can’t help Chung.”
“ Flifteen dollar,” repeated Chung with stolid respect.
“ Mrs. Wright get cook—good cook, eight dollar,” and
then I tumbled to it. If it was a question of ransom she did
not want the missionaries to have to pay too heavily. If
the people got the idea they had plenty of money they might
even put them to torture to get it. A brave woman and a
thoughtful woman is Rosalie Grahame. I should have let
them in.
“We have an uncle not a missionary,” I said, entering
into the game with zest. I didn’t believe Chung would
come down any more. “We could pay when we reach
Peking. Yes, sure when we reach Peking.”
“ Sure thing,” said Chung, relaxing with an air of relief.
I doubt, if of late his lines had lain in pleasant places.
I looked at Dr. Grahame and read acquiescence in her
face.
“ Sure thing,” I said taking upon myself the relationship
to which I objected, “ Chung Missie boy, fifteen dollar a
month. Pay at Peking.”
Chung danced his hands about cheerily and tossed his
head till his pigtail fell first on one shoulder and then on the
other, and then he accepted the situation, and like a good
servant began enumerating our needs upon his taper
fingers.


“ Mus’ get do,” said he, “ Mus’ get chow,” and we two
looked at one another. There were tears in the brave
brown eyes.
“ My tink more better go minister,” said Chung.
He surprised me, and Dr. Grahame gave a little cry that
told me what she thought.
“ The minister dead,” I said.
“My tink not,” said Chung gently reproving me.
“ Makee laugh.” And then he went on to state his reasons
for his belief. Even a Chinese mob, merciless and reckless,
has trading instincts, and once the first fury of the attack
was passed, Chung was of opinion that the minister, if he had
been spared by his captors, would be traded to well-wishers
for value received. About the women he was not so sure.
He was distinctly sceptical about the value of Mrs. Wright
and the two Lawsons. Miss Lodham, being a teacher,
might have a chance, but the others were only so many
mouths to feed. Henry Maitland had been killed, but
Henry Maitland from what he had heard could not “ makee
laugh.”
I looked at Dr. Grahame. There was nothing to be done
but to drift with the tide.
“We shall be all right, I think,” she said. “ But, oh, my
poor little dog ! ” and the pinched look came into her face
again. “He will think I’ve given him to the Chinese ! ”
I put my hand on her shoulder.
“ Cheer up ! I believe he’ll be all right too ! ”


CHAPTER VIII
SILAS CHAPMAN'S STORY
ORGANIZING A TOUR.
“ I have seen the desire of mine eyes.
The beginning of love.
The season of kisses and sighs
And the end thereof.”
These young people think I am a dour unfeeling sort of
chap, but after all a man can’t be for ever explaining him-
self. The young fellow is honest, tho’ God only knows why
he is a missionary. The girl is a good one, one of your
thoroughbreds, and I admit I got a jolt when she looked as
if she were shocked at the way I treated my wife. The
fact of the matter is, Stella is one of those that, once you
see through, your affection for them dissolves away like
sugar in a glass of water. Not even a kindly feeling is left
behind. Perhaps it’s the way I’m built; can’t sort of
make allowances. And now her beauty gets me in the neck,
and her little ways—damn it all. On the whole it’s lucky
I’m a silent man.
Here we were stuck down in this hollow, and any ordinary
woman would have known that the wisest thing to do was
to slip away quietly and quickly. But do you think I
could stir Stella? Passive resistance was her lay. She
stopped me by the simple method of lying quite still. I
have always got her what she wants because it saves
trouble in the end, and I suppose she reckoned if she held
on long enough I’d evolve mules out of nothingness. I
couldn’t —so I curled up in the rugs and watched her
brush her hair. She led me by that beautiful hair once,
and, faith, she deliberately threw me away. She thinks
more of a strand of that yellow hair than of my whole


body. Now she was brushing it and groaning because it’s
a hefty job to brush long thick hair in a heavy fur coat,
and she only did it because she firmly believed if she neg-
lected it in this dry air she’d soon be as bald as a newly
laid egg.
“ It’s enough to kill me,” she said, and she looked up
into the bright blue sky and down into the white snow-
covered hollow. I kept an eye upon her, because I am
never quite sure what foolishness she’ll be up to next.
She is cunning ; she hadn’t started on it till she was con-
vinced it was too late for us to take the road. I was
reconciled to stopping, because it was a pretty forlorn hope
anyway. I might just as well stay and if any of the
missionaries got through they would join us. Stella kept
speculating as to what had become of them, so I told her
they were probably dead. Then she told me I was a brute,
and I forgot my promise to myself to stand her provoking
way and cursed her for a fool, and that gave her something
to think about, and took her thoughts off the situation.
I followed it up by telling her I thought I’d leave her there,
and she was by no means sure I wasn’t capable of carrying
out my threat, so she sat down and cried quietly, and it
gave me a chance to steal up to a little vantage point and
look over the road occasionally. I could see it winding
among the graves and fields down through the ramshackle
suburb and up again to the walls of the city, but on the
road came nothing and no one save some lads with small
donkeys evidently seeking fuel. Early in the morning
those little beasts go out into the hills, and towards evening
back they come, bundles of fagots hiding everything but
four staggering legs. Other wants the town apparently
had none, and the farming folk round must have heard
how things were and were lying low. Beyond those
bundles of fuel not a living thing stirred on that rough
frozen road. It was bitter cold, and the day stretched out ;
there were hundreds of square miles of that day and seem-
ingly never an end to them, but at last the shadows
lengthened.
“ Oh, the sun is setting,” sobbed Stella, as if she saw her
last friend disappearing. “As long as the sun was up I
could bear it.”
He was. He pays no attention to the desires of pretty
women, but shines or ceases to shine on the pretty and


plain with an eqnitableness which she certainly had not
often found imitated in mere man. The cold took an edge
on it when he went.
I tucked Stella up, and maybe I was a bit grim. It
was the only way to stop her grousing. So she lay still
and sobbed silently. I was glad that young doctor was not
there to hear her; but, anyhow, she did lie still, and I
crept up every now and then and listened over the road.
If any of these sky pilots had got away I thought in all
probability they would come along about now. And I
wouldn’t put it past some of them to get away. You
never know where you are with the Chinese.
At last, somewhere about nine o’clock there was a distinct
sound of some one clambering up the hillside.
And then that little fool let go.
“Oh!" she shrieked, “they’re coming to kill me!”
Never anybody but herself.
I couldn’t have that. Suppose it wasn’t the sky pilots.
I got my hand over her mouth. But I thought I heard
shod feet.
“ That you, Conant ? ’’
“ Yes,” came the answer, and Stella let out a squeal fit
to rouse the city, but she only got one in. I strangled the
other at birth, only there was a choked gurgle that gave
me away, and as I let her go she ran forward and flung
herself into the pretty young doctor’s arms, doing the wel-
coming trick to perfection. I guessed I knew what that
girl was thinking of me.
“ Oh, my dear, my dear. I’m thankful to see you again.
I couldn’t sleep for thinking of you all night long,” and the
doctor was kissed again and again. The little liar. She’d
snuggled down and slept the night through, all the better
because of the exercise she’d had. Much she’d trouble
about anybody else so long as she was comfortable. I
wonder if that young doctor reckons she’s got a genuine
pal or if she guesses just how much she’s expected to carry.
Of course, the young man will get the glad eye. Only
these two and a Chinaman behind ’em. The doctor was
sensible. I thought she would be.
Stella was half laughing and half crying, and behaving
altogether abominably.
“ Sit down,” said the other young woman. She spoke


kindly, but if I know anything about it, that won’t last,
“ It won’t do to get too excited.”
“My missus,” I told her, “ wants a firm hand. “ And —
hallo, Chung ! ”
I never thought Chung would have come back. I
thought Stella had settled him. There was no moon, but
the stars in a winter night in Northern China count. Their
light reflected from the white snow showed up the new-
comers, and there was Mr. Chung trying to make himself
small behind the young doctor. I was mighty pleased to
see him again.
“ Loved us so much you couldn’t keep away ? ” I asked,
but the pleasure was evidently not reciprocal.
“ Ga Taifu wantchee velly good boy,” he said, and wheel-
ing round with his thumb over his shoulder he pointed at
Dr. Grahame, and that was the way he intimated that he
no longer served the Chapman family.
Well, I don’t know that I blamed Chung. Dr. Grahame
tried to explain, but what did it matter ? We were throw-
ing in our lots together, and if my missus don’t get all she
wants I don’t know her, that’s all. Chung’ll earn double
wages and I guess he won’t complain.
I’d got enough whiskey to give ’em a tot apiece. I guess
it was the first Dr. Grahame had ever had, and it was a
mighty long day since young Conant had had any either.
The whiskey loosened their tongues and they couldn’t get
over the fact that they were both alive, and apparently the
only man who had really suffered was the man whose death
had set us all on the go.
Chinese have their own little ways, easy enough to under-
stand ’em once you’ve got the right end of the stick.
“ This morning a raging mob was apparently thirsting
for our blood,” said young Conant. “The hospital had
walked itself away in terror, the school was distributed
among the mob. I thought I was fighting for our lives, and
finally I was captured by this peaceable-looking person who
was your servant Chung,” and he seemed quite cut up
about it.
“ Allee same,” said Chung ,who was stage-managing
this bit of business, “ put up plenty good fight.”
“ But how did you get away ? How did you get away ? ”
asked Stella at her very best. The charming interested
friend stop turned on now.


Well it was an anti-climax, of course. They just walked
away, went along to some people who were themselves
hiding from White Wolf, spent the day in the solid, can’t-
cut-it-with-a-knife atmosphere of a Chinese house, and
when night came walked out over a gap in the wall where
the rain had got in last summer and the bricks had fallen
out.
“ It was not comfortable but it was quite easy,” said Dr.
Grahame, and she gave a sad little laugh. Evidently she
wanted cheering up.
“ Don’t you worry,” I told her. “ There are difficulties
ahead still.”
Of course Stella shrieked—l knew she would —but Dr.
Grahame was thinking about the others.
“They’re not dead,” she said, “except for Henry
Maitland they’re all right, and Chung seems to think they
can be bought.”
“ Sure thing,” said that gentleman. The Chinese are a
commercial people, thank goodness, and there’s no doubt
they’re not tumbling over each other quite so eager to
murder the foreigner as they were in 1900. They got a
lesson then. And well, of course, the B.A.T.’s been at work
a good few years now. Missionaries —don’t tell me. The
Chinaman’s looking out for a business proposition and the
B.A.T. sinks in on that lay. He soon sees there’s a lot of
good and never a scrap of harm in the foreigner, and once
you get that well rammed in, the victory’s there all along
the lines. The Chinaman understands a bargain. But it
wasn’t any good telling these sky pilots that. I just
mentioned to Conant that there might even be a chance of
his taking up the missionary business again, but he smiled
gently and wasn’t taking any.
“ I’ve done with it,” he said. “ I see the good, of course,
but I can’t help feeling there’s a lot of power wasted.”
Power wasted ! That’s the conclusion he’d come to !
I wonder what he is concluding to do with that power now
he’s got it in hand.
But evidently he struck a chord in the doctor’s mind.
“ If I hadn’t gone back to help those women,” she
mourned, and she spoke half to herself, “ I should have
brought my little MacTavish here safely.”
Then Chung took a hand.
“ Wantcheesmall dog,” said he, swaying himself backward


and forward on his haunches, and even in that dim light I
reckoned he was avoiding my missus’s eagle eye. After all,
a small dog was neither here nor there—what we really
wanted was some loose cash. Loose cash is always handy,
but the situation was crying out for it now. Of course none
of us foreigners could go into the city. It would be too
disturbed, but all the more on that account I reckoned if
one of the bankers or merchants could be got hold of
they’d be glad enough to lend hard cash to the B.A.T.
Return it with good interest, say 7% in six months —I began
to buck up and I laid the case before the others, and that
young doctor —give me a sensible woman with a trained
mind—she tumbled to it at once.
“ Hop Sing,” said she, and began explaining to Chung
where the particular thief she knew by that name hung out.
“ Can do,” said that gentleman swinging his pigtail
around from front to back and back again, “ can do,” and
then she got up and stood over him. Give me a practical
woman any day of the week.
“Now, Chung,” said she, “you bring Hop Sing chop-
chop.”
Well, to make a long story short, not only was Hop Sing
brought in a couple of hours, but before morning the
minister and his wife, a frail,tired, sick-looking woman, w r ere
safe in the little hollow in the hills.
There was another woman with them —a long-waisted,
giraffe-necked young person the others called Luella
Lawson.
“I,” she said, “am a messenger from Miss Lodham.
She is one of the Lord’s anointed.”
The young doctor took her up quick.
“ I hope,” said she, “ she’s not going to take up her
position on the staff at once.”
In the dim light Sister Luella peered at her and she
repented. She is that sort. She wouldn’t be funny if it
hurt anyone’s feelings.
“ I mean, I hope she isn’t going to die,” she said. “ Shall
I come back and look after her ? ”
“ No,” said the other, evidently that wasn’t her trouble.
She’d get it off her chest in time, I knew, if they gave her
rope enough. “ Her legs and arms are strained, but she
says herself she’s all right, and the Tsai family are lovely to
her, just lovely. She sent me to say she can’t travel, she


couldn’t walk as far as here, and she takes it as a sign that
the Lord has need of her.”
When the Lord wants me to stop along in one particular
place I do trust he won’t need to sling me on a pole like a
Chinese pig to bring the fact home to me. Giraffe-neck
didn’t see anything to snigger at. “ The way will be made
clear for her,” said she. “ Ednah and I and Sadie will stay
with her.”
“ I alius knew Chrissie had an eighteen-carat heart on
her,” said the minister with fervour. “ I’d stop myself—”
“ The Society of the Elder Brethren,” said his wife
quickly—and evidently she was one of your silent ones, for
the others all looked at her surprised to hear her speak—”
“ have made a proclamation against the foreigner. It’s
pasted up in the streets —”
“It is,” said the minister. “ You’re about right, Ma.
It’s a dippy move on their part. ‘No foreign man to be in
the city.’ Don’t say anything about the women. I guess
they think they don’t count.”
“P’raps I .ought to stay,” mused Mrs. Wright, stealing a
trembling hand out to her husband’s coat sleeve.
“ Septimus—”
It always fetches me when I see husband and wife on
those sort of terms. I always hoped —but there—Stella
isn’t the sort. I ought to have known that when I married
her.
“ You’re right where you are, Ma,” said her husband
cheerily. “ I’m almighty obligated to you, gentlemen.
I understand from my friend, Hop Sing, you Mr. Chapman,
and you Martin Conant, advanced money to buy me out.”
Of course we had. I’d have pledged the B.A.T. to that,
only young Conant waltzed in and said he’d do his share,
and then came the doctor clamouring to help. After all it
must be a bit humiliating to work at the missionary job for
twelve long years and finally be bought out, wife and all,
for 50,000 cash ! Twenty-five dollars ! Poor old chap !
I think he rather felt going so cheap.
“I guess,” said he, “it got you some worried trying
to get the dollars. The mission’s bust up.”
“ The credit of the 8.A.T.,” I said, “ still appears to be
excellent,” and he wilted, poor chap.
“ Gee ! ” said he, picking up a bit. “ The wicked shall
flourish like a green bay tree,” and I hadn’t the heart to


point out to him it was lucky for him we were flourishing,
if by the wicked he meant the B.A.T. “ What’s to become
of a floater like me,” he went bn, “ if the mission’s bust
up ? ”
“ I reckon,” I said, “ you’d better come along with us.
We’re collecting the touring party now. There’s me and
my wife, the original members, and Dr. Grahame and Mr.
Conant here, new recruits, and you and your missus and
Miss—er —Miss ’ ’
Giraffe-neck looked up gravely. She was in Chinese
dress, with many furs and swathings round her head.
“You can count me out,” she said. “I’m going back.
The Lord’s work is still to do in the city.”
“ Now, Luelly,” said the minister, “ I guess after a trying
day you didn’t come cavortin’ out here in the night to tell
us that.”
“ Thank the Lord,” said Luelly, “ I can go back to the
Tsai cousin’s house in the northern suburb.”
“ G’wan,” said the minister, “ an’ I reckon you didn’t
come along to spring that on us either.”
“ Miss Lodham,” hesitated Luella, and she put her hand
to her face,” I told her we ought to trust in the Lord,” said
she, “ and,” she added with conviction, “ I guess I’ve got
to go back and tell her so again.”
“ I guess, Luelly,” said the minister, “ Chrissy was put-
ting it that if there was a little currency about loose, her
price ’ud come in mighty handy for oiling the wheels. I
reckon a real slap-up school marm with a buddin’ doctor
an’a full-blown evangelist ingoin’ order chucked in, ought
to make a stagger at it on 20 dollars. Geptlemen—” he
looked up wistfully at the monied men who could borrow
money—“ I haven’t a red cent, but our mission’s mighty
generous. I know once I get a chance to put it to our
folks at home I could raise 20 dollars for them, and it’s
mighty hard to live entirely on charity in a Chinese family.
Not that they ain’t generous, but the Christians among
us ”
“ But, of course, we’ll give them enough,” said the
young doctor.
“ Hold hard a moment,” I said. “ I don’t want to
check your generous impulses, but let’s get a working basis
to go upon. Our friend, Hop Sing, seems to think all ways
to the east and Peking are cut off, so we must go west or


north, and as we can only raise 1,000 Mexican dollars
I’m afraid it won’t take us very far. Now in justice to
the rest of us I really don’t see we dare leave those ladies
more than 100 dollars.”
“If they can borrow more tell them I will pay,” cried
that impulsive young woman eagerly, “ and if they would
make enquiries about MacTavish ”
“The Lord will bless you,” burst out Sister Luella
fervently. And I saw young Conant and the doctor look
at one another. They weren’t full-blown missionaries, and
there was a sort of bond between ’em anyway, though I
don’t believe they knew it themselves. And now each of
them put a friendly hand on Sister Luelly’s shoulder to
show their good will, aye, and I guess their admiration, too,
for you bet she would have gone back and faced a Chinese
winter without a penny.
The minister wiped his eyes.
“It seems some as if I was quittin’ my post,” said he.
“Go on,” said I, “ your post’s quitted you. You buck
up. It isn’t free soup and salvation we’ll find in the wilder-
ness. Where’s Chung ? He ought to be getting a move
on him about breakfast.”
It was broad daylight now, but no Chung was to be seen.
He had vanished after escorting Hop Sing to the hollow.
“ Stay a minute,” said the doctor feverishly, her arm
through Luelly’s, “ I know Chung knows where MacTavish
is.” She evidently sets great store by the little dog. Well,
the ways of women are beyond me. And she is a good
plucked one, too. “If you could get the little chap, or
be kind to him sometimes ” but her voice trailed away.
It was a broken reed she was leaning on. Luelly is not the
sort to waste her time over little dogs when there are Chinese
souls to be roped in, I reckon —no, no. I could see the
doctor knew it was no go. She got another idea then.
She is fond of that lucky little beast.
“ I wonder,” she said, “if I went back. There doesn’t
seem to be any danger for a woman.”
I don’t know but what she would have gone, but Stella
interrupted. She had an eye to her breakfast.
“ There’s Chung,” said she. And Chung came into the
hollow, a bland smile on his imperturbable face.
He held something hidden under his quilted cotton coat,
and presently there was a small eruption and a blamed


whirlwind was let loose amongst us. My missus gave a
shriek—trust her to make a fuss, and a very ratty-looking
little blue dog with a long thin ropy tail tore round and round
and flung himself upon the doctor with yelps of joy,
“ Mad dog ! Mad dog ! ” shrieked Stella. Her oppor-
tunity had arrived. It wasn't going to be the glad eye
this time. She was going to give a nice young man a chance
to protect a beautiful lady, and she flew behind Conant
and seized both his arms. But the doctor gave a cry, a
cry that had more gratitude in it than all Sister Luella's
“ praise the Lords ! " and dropped down on the snow.
“ MacTavish ! MacTavish ! My little dog ! My little,
little dog ! ” and her voice broke as she caught the joyous
little cuss in her army.
Chung rocked himself on his heels, flinging his pigtail
from one shoulder to me other, and snorted like a porker
mighty pleased with himself.
“ Velly good boy,” said he. “ Missie say velly good
boy ! ” '
“ Very good boy,” declared the doctor, and the tears
were on her cheeks.
“ But,” said the minister, “ that animal ain’t MacTavish.
That’s a foreign variety that ain’t listed frequent, cos there
ain’t no demand.”
“ It’s MacTavish ! MacTavish ! ” said his mistress.
“ They’ve shaved him,” and she gathered him under her
fur coat.
“ Tief her from Lao T’ai T’ai,” declared Chung, with
smug self-satisfaction. “ Cut off fezzers an’put her in dye
pot so no can tell.”
“And they put him in a blue pot,” said the doctor
half-laughing. And she pressed her own face to the funny
little face poking out from among her furs.
And then, of course, my missus took a hand. It didn’t
strike her the way it did the rest of us. It wouldn’t.
She thought the doctor was a fool, and very nearly said so.
“ But it’s so ugly now,” said she. “ You’re never
going to bring an ugly little beast like that along with us.”
“ But he’s my MacTavish,” said the doctor, and she was
so overjoyed she forgot to think the other was rude. “ He’ll
be pretty again presently. And even if he isn’t, he’s my
own little dog. I can stand anything now. I know I can
walk through Tibet.”


“ And I wouldn’t put it past us. We may have to do
that yet,” I said.
She smiled and her eyes looked straight into mine.
Well, of one thing I can take my oath, if that journey is in
any way manageable,Rosalie Grahame,M.D.,is the woman
to go through with it.


CHAPTER IX
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE SETTING OUT ON THE GREAT ADVENTURE
" Call now if there be any that will answer thee ; and
to which of the saints will thou turn ? ”
It is wonderful how things settle themselves.
“ The Lord’s guiding hand,” said the minister.
Perhaps after all we do mean the same, the minister and
I, when he talks about the “dear Lord,” and I of the
“Power that is behind all,” only mine’s the more dignified
way of putting it. I couldn’t talk out loud like they did at
Yang Cheng, but I prayed all the time “ Oh God, give me
back MacTavish, or if you can’t give him back make it
easy for the poor little man.”
And I’ve got him and I’m grateful. But exuberant
parade of gratitude is in some way unseemly, God, if there
is a God, will understand. I remember a kind old Catholic
priest talking to me about God once, and I said I didn't
like to think of God always with His eye upon me.
“ My dear girl,” said he, “ God is a gentleman ! ”
Now that hits it. These people are dear and good, but
their God is not a gentleman.
How I slept once MacTavish was brought back to me.
I felt as if nothing would keep my eyes open, and as for
being afraid, there didn’t seem anything to be afraid'of.
Whatever the city was doing, White Wolf or the Society of
the Elder Brethren, or whoever was arranging the little
row that upset us, was well satisfied with what had been
accomplished and was not looking round for stray foreigners.
As for my friend, Hop Sing, he was only too thankful to
lend money on good security, the sewing machine, it
appeared, was gone beyond repair, and his idea was to get as
much money as possible out of the way till the country had
settled down again. We were a godsend to Hop Sing.


The question of supplies simplified itself. He was glad
enough to sell us a couple of mules —all he had—he’d have
sold us forty if he’d had them —a large bag of puffed rice,
tea, sugar, flour, and enough fur coats and padded cotton
quilts to keep out the bitter cold, and then he suggested we
should borrow again the money we’d paid for them.
That suggestion comforted me. He evidently thought
we’d come through, and I have a great opinion of my friend
Hop Sing’s wisdom. Of course he said it was taking risks,
but he was taking risks anyway with Pai Lang on the war
path. The poor minister’s feelings were terribly hurt by
finding he actually put more faith in the B.A.T. than in the
friends of the missionaries. Hop Sing explained that he
had often tried the B.A.T. and found them trustworthy,
faithfully carrying out the agreements of their servants,
whereas he was not quite sure of the unknown God in whom
the minister put his trust. And the more he explained that
he meant no disrespect, only that he did not know, the more
the unlucky man felt that he had failed in his mission.
All the next day when I could keep my eyes open, we
discussed the question of which way we should go. It was
a most important question, and at any other time I think I
should have been awfully dismayed at finding we were cut
off from Lan Chou, which is the capital of Kansu, and the
town which lies on the high road to Peking. As it was I
had had so much excitement, we had come through so much,
that our future route seemed of minor importance. Yang
Cheng is almost on the borders of Tibet, a compact little
city in a valley west of Sining and not very far from the
grass country. The country here was a series of hills and
valleys stretching down from the great plateau, the begin-
ning of the great mountain system that stretches right across
the heart of Asia. That is the big way of talking about it.
What we saw was a series of hills and dales, and roughly
if we went west we got into the grass country and the hills
of Tibet where there were robber tribes who might be worse
than Pai Lang, while to go east led us into the valley of the
Hoang Ho, But Lan Chou, the great city of that valley,
was held by Pai Lang.
The thing was then to get to the river east of Lan Chou
and then drift down it through Mongolia till it entered
China again as the boundary between Shansi and Shensi.
There were missionary stations in Northern Shansi where


we should be quite safe could we reach them. The thing
was to strike the river beyond Pai Lang, To do that we
must take a journey of at least a couple of hundred miles.
They were discussing the matter when I went to sleep
in the early morning, the long day wore away, and when I
wakened from the most delightful sleep I have ever had in
my life with MacTavish nestling close beside me they were
still at it.
“ We’ll be guided, we’ll be guided,” said the minister.
“ I’ve always found,” said Mr. Chapman coolly, “ that
making up one’s mind assists the guiding considerably.
There’s nothing for it that I see but that tramp, and with
these helpless women—” he stopped and looked at me
thoughtfully.
“ Now what have I done,” I said, “ to be called helpless ? ”
“ I’ve eyes,” said he quite kindly, and indeed he was
right. I believe I could get along as well almost as one of
the men, for I always hold that the average woman, young
and strong, can endure hardship quite as well, or even
better than the average man, but neither Mrs. Wright nor
his wife were normal. Stella Chapman would have been
all right if she could have got over her early Victorian
training. Unluckily I believe she thought helplessness
added to her charm. As for poor Mrs. Wright that was a
different matter. She is old, I daresay she may be forty-
seven or forty-eight, she was always frail and sick, and now
she is terribly shaken. She looked up with a faint smile.
“ I reckon I’ll be helped,” said she. “ Many a time I’ve
wickedly wearied an’ lost faith, but the help has always
come.”
“ It’s the Mongols I'm thinking about,” said the minister.
“ Good-natured,” said Mr. Chapman—he never wasted
words —“ and awful cowards.”
“ Mebbe,” said the minister, “ but when the Mongol’s
top dog I hear he goes nap as a bouncer. He’s the chestiest,
cockiest rooster—”
“ We’ve sampled the Chinaman,” said Mr. Chapman—
“ we’re between the devil and the deep sea.”
And that settled it.
It was two hours after sunset that the great adventure
began. We scrambled down from our hiding place into the
road that led up the valley a little north. Hop Sing had
been as good as his word, and two mules in charge of a


muleteer and all the things we had ordered came up as we
slipped down. The muleteer was frightened, a Chinaman
hates travelling by night, and Chung took him in hand with
soothing words and presently the loads were rearranged
so that on one was a pile of bedding and a place where one
person might ride. It was very clear only one could ride,
and it was equally clear that one must be Mrs, Wright.
“ You put her up, Mr. Conant,”! said, for the minister
was only a little man. Then in the darkness, for we only
had the light of the stars, I heard a sob beside me, and I
found that Stella Chapman was crying. What on earth
was she crying about ? I couldn’t imagine. Everything
was going so smoothly.
“ Why, my dear ! ” I said, rather sharply I’m afraid.
“ What’s the matter ? ” I was tingling all over with the
excitement of the thing, exhilarated, but it evidently
didn’t take her that way. It was bitter cold, and the air
was crackling with frost, but luckily there was no wind.
If we’d ordered the night it couldn’t have been better.
“I’m trying to be brave,” came her quivering voice.
“ Oh, I’m trying to be brave.”
Possibly she was afraid of her husband,
“ I’m sure you are,” I said. “ But I don’t think there’s
anything to be afraid of yet.”
“You see, I can’t walk,” she sobbed, “and it will be
so lonely to be left alone. It will be a long time before
one can die.”
“ But my goodness ! ” I said, “ who’s talking about
leaving you? We’re going very slowly, just as slowly as
you like. Cheer up ! ”
Then she explained.
“ Oh, I know you’re kind, but I’m not expecting you
to stay for me. Of course I shouldn’t think of such a
thing.”
“ For God’s sake don’t be a fool, Stella ! ” said her hus-
band roughly.
Thank goodness I haven’t a husband.
She took it much more nicely than I should have done.
“ I’m not complaining, Silas,” she said. “It isn’t my
fault if I’m weak and helpless. It’s only just saying
good-bye is a little hard,” and she drooped her head.
I think Stella is inclined to overdo the pathetic note. I
felt rather inclined to try what a good shaking would do.


“ Don’t be silly,” I said. “ Come along. You never
know what you can do till you try. Mr. Conant and your
husband will give you a hand.” And I couldn’t help
feeling it would add considerably to our difficulties if at
every awkward corner Mrs. Chapman was going to be
on the verge of collapse.
She might have read my thoughts.
“ I don’t want to be a burden to anybody,” she said.
We were all silent for a minute. Then Mrs. Wright
spoke.
“ My dear,” she said, “ I never could abide a mule.
I’m thinking if I can ketch holt of Septimus’ arm I can
manage right well, an’ it ain’t fair for me an’ Septimus to
butt in an’ take the mule.”
But that was more than I could agree to.
“ Can’t we get another mule ? ” I asked Mr. Chapman.
“Nbt the tail of a donkey,” he said angrily, “and we
can’t stand barneying here. Buck up, Stella, you little
fool! ”
It certainly didn’t encourage her.
“ I know I can’t walk,” she asserted patiently. “ Leave
me some bedding and I’ll go back to the hollow.”
And then to my dismay Mrs. Wright settled it. She
slipped her hand under her husband’s arm and turned
down the rough road. I knew he was smiling fondly by
the sound of his voice.
“ Sallie and me,” said he, “reckon we’re cornin’ out
strong in the toddlin’ line. We ain’t purfessionals, but
we sorter reckon we can hold our own end up. We’d be
kind of annoyed if we couldn’t make good,” and without
another word the pair set out and vanished in the gloom
of the overhanging hills. Mr. Conant picked up Stella
Chapman and lifted her on to the pack saddle.
“ I’d rather stay behind,” she sobbed. “ I hate to take
the mule.”
“ I wish you’d try to walk,” I couldn’t help saying.
“ Mrs. Wright is ill. I’m not sure she isn’t very ill.”
“ I will stay behind,” she protested, but she made no
movement to get down, and Mr. Chapman began stuffing
quilted “ comforts ” round her to keep out the cold.
I could have cried, but it seemed likely Stella Chapman
would provide the company with plenty of tears.
“ Don’t you worry,” said Mr. Conant. “ You see things


will settle down as we go on. Besides, we’re sure to raise
another mule.”
The first night was certainly trying. We crawled on
slowly, our pace made by Mrs. Wright, and it .was lucky
indeed it was mostly down hill. When the minister and
his wife sat down we all halted and rested by the wayside
for a couple of hours. Mrs. Chapman still rode. She
seemed to take it as a matter - of course. Not that she
was very comfortable. She was perched up on the bedding
with her feet hanging down each side of the animal’s neck.
She had nothing to hold on to except the bedding, no
means of guiding the mule, and whenever he stumbled,
which he did very often, for the road was rough and full of
holes, she shrieked. Her husband walked alongside to see
that she did not fall, I presume, and whenever she shrieked
he cursed her openly for a fool. I picked up MacTavish
because now he was all one dark colour in the gloom I
could not see him, and Mr. Conant protested.
“ You’ve enough to carry without the extra weight,”
for we each carried some of our possessions hung round us,
and it was so cold the heavy clothing we were obliged to
wear was in itself a load.
“ I suppose it does seem silly to you,” I said, “ but it’s
such a comfort to feel him in my arms.”
“ No, it doesn’t seem silly,” he said. “I sometimes
wonder,” he went on, “if I haven’t missed something.
I don’t believe I have ever felt as badly about anything as
you did about MacTavish the other day.”
I wondered. It was very pleasant having Mr. Conant
talk to me like a good comrade. I said :
“ You spoil things when you love too much.”
Dimly in the darkness I saw him looking at me curiously.
“ Have you loved too much ? ” he asked.
I remembered that I had been engaged twice—twice —
but now I came to think of it, I don’t believe I had loved
at all. I certainly never loved either of those men as I
love MacTavish.
“ No, I certainly haven’t loved too much,” I said, and
I found I wasn't even bitter any more.
“ And I ” began Mr. Conant.
Stella Chapman’s voice interrupted him.
“ I can’t stand it any longer, I’m just aching all over.”
“ After all, you’re better off than Mrs. Wright,” I said.


“ It can’t be far to the next village,” said Mr. Conant,
“ but perhaps we’d better halt till daylight.”
It was rather a miserable little company that crouched
against the steep cliff side waiting for the dawn, Stella
Chapman nestled against me. She was half afraid lest I
should be cross with her for taking the mule.
“ I know it was mean of me,” she said, “ but I wasn’t
brave enough to stop behind. If you’re going to hate me
I shall wish I had. You’re my only comfort.”
I soothed her, and with the bedding we made a place
where she and Mrs. Wright could lie down on the ground,
and the rest of us sat down round them. Luckily the
nights are not long even in December south of 38°, and by
half-past six the stars began to pale and the jagged tops
of the purple mountains to the east were outlined against
a rosy sky. It was lovely, and it was still more lovely
when beneath the rose came a band of gold that stretched
from mountain top to mountain top, and then long streamers
of gold, rays from the sun god himself, streamed upwards
to the zenith.
“ If we only had some tea,” sighed Stella.
We all looked at Chung, who squatting on his haunches,
with his eyes fixed on the sunrise, was slowly tipping himself
first on to his toes and then back to his heels again.
“ No can,” he said without the ghost of a smile, “ Missie
no have sat on,” and he went to the mule load and produced
a bottle which he held out to Mr. Conant.
“ Have floze,” said he.
“No wonder I was wretched,” said Stella indignantly.
“ Where is this village ? ”
“The village isn’t far,” said Mr. Conant. “ The minister
has been there and he says they were lovely to him.”
You’d have thought he didn’t know the minister when he
drew comfort from that statement. However the village
proved to be only three miles off and if the people weren’t
exactly what I should call “ lovely,” at least they were not
unfriendly. It was only a small mountain village with
hills on either side, and the people were interested to see so
many foreigners together, and they clustered round and
escorted us to the only inn in the place.


CHAPTER X
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY
THE GODDESS OF MERCY
“ Look thy last on all things lovely
Every hour : let no night
Seal thy sense in deathly slumber
Till to delight
Thou have paid thy utmost blessing,
Since that all things thou wouldst praise
Beauty took from those who loved them
In other days.”
Since Chapman and I were the only fighting members of the
party we were relieved to find that Chinese village not
particularly anti-foreign. The men who were feeding the
mules and donkeys in the inn yard left their job to come and
stare as the cobble-stones rang to our shod feet. We had to
walk warily for where there was any liquid it was solid
sheets of mighty slippery ice.
“ Luckily,” remarked Dr. Grahame, and I saw what she
meant, it was sewage pure and simple.
The stalls for the mules open in front were ranged round
one side of the yard, and opposite the entrance was the
inn proper, a building of stones and mud, and when the door
was opened and three or four ragged dirty men muffled to
the eyes from the cold of the early morning tumbled out
they brought with them such a reek of human occupancy
that even Rosalie Grahame stood back.
“We can’t,” wailed Stella genuinely disgusted, “we
can’t.”
“We certainly can’t,” said Dr. Grahame, and then
looked round to see what offered. “ We’ll have to make the
best of a mule stall,” she said. “ Luckily we’re all used
to the open. It won’t be bad. We can make the stalls
quite comfortable with plenty of straw.”


“We can’t live in a mule stall,” Stella protested. “ I
want to wash —I want —” she looked across at me.
“ I tell you, Stella, you’ll have to lump it,” said her
husband harshly. “ There’s no washing for us this side of
the Hoang Ho,” and he seemed to find satisfaction in the
thought.
The minister spoke to the landlord, a friendly gentleman
in a fur cap with a dirty smile face, who hawked and
expectorated, and finally agreed for forty cash —roughly
something under a penny —to put kaoliang straw in two
of the stalls, and for eighty cash more to supply us with
enough warm water to do a little elementary washing. In
such circumstances as ours it was somewhat difficult to
preserve what we are accustomed to consider the decencies
of life, and I could not help being struck with the different
way in which the two girls took the situation. The young
doctor accepted it as the most natural thing in the world.
There would have been no awkwardness but for Stella
Chapman. Her false modesty many a time brought a hot
blush to the other girl’s cheek.
“ I feel sometimes,” she told me one day, “ as if I could
strangle the people who brought up Stella Chapman.”
I don’t know that any upbringing would have improved
Stella Chapman. She is rotten at the core. And yet she
manages to be alluring.
Mrs. Wright accepted a bed of kaoliang straw in a mule
stall as if it had been a room in a palace, and sank back in
her rugs with a sigh of deep thankfulness.
“ Now you must lie there,” I heard Dr. Grahame say,
“ and I’ll bring you some tea. Chung has gone to see if he
can’t buy a couple of chickens for breakfast.”
“ My dear, you’re lovely to me,” said the weary woman,
looking up with a world of gratitude in her faded eyes.
“ It’s real good to be here and I’m so tired I can’t keep my
eyes open.”
“ She’s lucky to be able to sleep,” commented Stella
enviously. “I’m aching in every bone.”
The village was the poorest of the poor. They all came
to stare, and the wretched women with their bound feet and
many ailments moved the young doctor to compassion.
“ I could help some of them,” she said. “ I’ve a few
medical comforts here —” and she looked at the minister.
“ It’s takin’ on too big a contract,” he said, shaking his


head. “If you didn’t cure ’em slick they’d blame the
bally lot of us an’ we’d have to face the music.” And then
he seemed to think he might have been unfaithful to his
trust for he added, “ Ma an’ I are right willin’, of course, if
you feel like reskin’ it—”
But Stella Chapman interrupted him emphatically.
She disliked the Chinese and is not likely to heed anyone
else’s suffering.
“No,” she said, “no. Don't let’s risk anything. Let
us get away from these horrible, horrible people. We
have enough to bear as it is. There, don’t look as if you
thought I was a brute, Rosalie darling, but I can’t feel
they’re human. I feel as if they were beasts, disgusting
beasts.”
Dr. Grahame hugged her dog.
“ Treasure dog,” she said, “ we mustn’t do it, and here’s
my skill going to waste. I abhor waste.”
“ It would be waste if we were all killed now,” said
Stella, and that was truth enough.
It was amusing to see the way Dr. Grahame put her foot
down next morning. She was determined that Mrs. Wright
should not walk a step. Stella looked at her and then at
me and accepted the situation with a gay little laugh.
“ You’ll all have to help me,” she said, and before we
were out of the village I found her soft little hand thrust
through my reluctant arm and her pretty little face looking
up into mine while Rosalie was wholly occupied with Mrs.
Wright.
In the clear bright sparkling cold of the early morning
we went on our way. The ground was frozen hard, the
hills all round were covered with snow, and the cold was
bitter, but the sun was turning the little icicles that hung
from the eaves of the houses into scintillating diamonds.
The sky above us was a matchless blue. It was a delight-
ful morning and half the village accompanied us on our
way to the east gate.
Outside was a shrine of the goddess of mercy. It stands
at most city gates in China. And when I think how
deadly poor the people are, how ready they always are to
help each other, I think that on the whole, however shabby
those little shrines may appear, the great goddess is not
neglected.
This was a very poor little shrine and the image was old


and dusty, and in the pot of sand that stood on her altar
were no incense sticks. A priest, or at any rate a servitor
of the sanctuary, stood bowing to us as we passeci and he
held out a handful of those sticks. The minister waved
them aside with a get-thee-behind-me-Satan motion, and
the old man looked pleadingly at the rest of us. Stella
shrank up to me.
“ Oh,” she said, “ isn’t he horrid ? ”
But Rosalie Grahame saw him in another light. She
gave him a mou, ten go to a Mexican dollar, but it was
worth more than a hundred cash, and I believe the old man
had only hoped she might be good for a cash. Anyhow,
he bowed himself to the ground and made loud exclama-
tions of thanks and joy.
“ Missie pay too much,” said Chung reproachfully, but
she didn’t mind Chung. The minister was another matter.
He was ahead walking beside the mule on which his wife
was riding, and he turned round and saw her with the
incense sticks in her hand just about to put them in the
jar before the goddess. To me it seemed a pretty little
act of recognition of kindness received.
“Rosalie Grahame ! ” thundered the minister, and the
distress in his tones sent the colour flying to forehead and
chin, and the smile she had turned on the old servitor died
away, “ you shall not deny the dear Lord ! You shall not
peril your soul in idolatrous practices ! ”
She looked from the one man to the other, pleasure on
one face, pain on the other. Evidently she made up her
mind.
“ The town has been good to us,” she said, with a note
of decision in her voice.
Chapman was looking on with a smile, and his wife
was clinging to my arm.
“ What are they all bothering about ? ” said she.
“ I don’t want to deny my colour,” said Dr. Grahame,
“ but the village has been good to us. Why shouldn’t I
make an offering to their goddess of mercy. I like the
idea,” and she got a match from Chung, who was enjoying
himself, and lighting the sticks placed them with all
reverence in the jar of sand on the altar before the goddess.
“ Got plenties monies,” said Chung preening himself.
“You are denying Christ,” said the minister with
quivering lips.


“ No,” said Dr. Grahame, “ no. As far as this is con-
cerned, Christ and the goddess of mercy are one. I am
offering thanks for the kindness of the village in the only
way they will understand.”
He turned away to overtake his wife. There was a
crushed look about him.
“ Anyhow,” said Dr. Grahame, “ the people are pleased.
And it does seem so impossible to please everybody.
You’re not shocked.”
“ It’s bending the knee in the house of Rimmon,” said
Stella, and it was the first and only time she hinted that
she ever read anything.
“ Ever since I came to China,” I said truly enough,
“ I’ve had a longing to burn incense to the goddess of
mercy.”
“ And you are going to be a missionary.”
“ I don’t understand what we’re making such a fuss
about,” said Stella. “ What on earth is the good of
bothering about their silly old idols ? ”
That was the way she put a stopper on our quest after
higher things.
She is pretty in a Dresden china way, but I could no more
talk to her about the faiths or the needs of the world than
I could have shaken that clinging little trusting hand from
my arm.
“ You needn’t laugh at me,” Rosalie said as we resumed
our march, “ but ever since I have known the Chinese I
have felt that the goddess of mercy is the goddess they
worship in spirit and truth.”
“ The goddess of mercy ! ” Stella’s voice rose to a little
shriek, and she shrank closer to me, “ and they were going
to kill us ! ”
“Oh, that was by the way,” said Dr. Grahame. “No
nation is always consistent.”
“ She is silly,” said Stella confidentially to me, and
Chapman was grim.
“So now you see, Dr. Grahame,” said he, “ you’ve
offended all round, for I reckon he,” and he nodded at the
man who was walking ahead with bent back, walking
sorrowfully as one could see, “ won’t forgive you.”
“ He will,” said Dr. Grahame, “ he’s a good sort, and I
know he will. Unfortunately I know also he’ll make it a


matter of prayer, of public prayer, and when that happens
I always squirm. Don’t I, MacTavish ? ”
But before many days had passed over our heads the
bitter irony of that offering was brought forcibly home to
us.


CHAPTER XI
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE UNEXPLAINED TERROR
" I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof
dark ; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon
shall not give her light.
All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over
thee, and set darkness upon thy land.”
The day we reached the temple of the Eleven Hot Springs
I was congratulating myself that we were getting along
wonderfully, when Mr. Conant suddenly dropped Stella
Chapman’s arm and calmly joined the minister as if there
were no one in the world he more desired to speak with.
Stella sat down in the snow, and said she could not walk
a step further. Mr. Chapman was sarcastic, and said she
might stay behind, and Mr, Conant looked round on the
landscape as if it really were no business of his. Superior
cat!
I was in despair when Chung came to the rescue and
pointed out a wretched little hovel tucked away on the
hillside in a place that would be an orchard probably
when the summer came.
It was dirty, small, and hardly fit for a dog. Indeed,
I shouldn’t like to leave MacTavish in such a hole, but
Chung had the audacity to suggest that Stella should go
and stay there till we should reach some mission station
in Shansi and could send back for her ! Mr. Chapman
said he thought he could manage to carry her that far, and
then she scrambled to her feet and said we were wicked
and cruel and she’d try again.
She got along fairly well, but Mr. Conant declined to
have any dealings with her. Her most pleading looks were
lost upon him.
Hitherto we had had still glorious weather, and now


suddenly puffs of wind came to us across the snowy fields
that stretched away on either side. They were the merest
little sighs, but they were icy, and as they cut my cheek
I turned anxiously to Mr. Chapman, who was the most
weather-wise.
He looked up at the sky. It was intensely blue, but he
pointed to the north-west where a heavy, dense black
cloud hung low on the horizon.
“ That little caboose,” he said, and stopped as if that
reference to the hut we had left behind us should be
sufficient.
Clearly if there was a storm coming we could not stay
out in it, but to retrace our steps to such a forlorn place
of refuge— Another icy puff of wind was like sharp
needles in my face, and I saw the black cloud spreading
upwards, spreading quickly. All the hills were covered
with snow; there was a clump of trees stretching bare
arms to the sky to the right, and farther on ahead was a
darker clump of what might be pines apparently climbing
up a cleft in the hillside. The bare trees to the right were
a graveyard that offered no shelter, but those on ahead—
Mr. Conant pointed.
“They look like pines,” he said. The minister shook
his head over them, for a clump of trees in China, when it
isn’t a graveyard, and a graveyard isn’t likely to climb up
a hillside, generally means a temple. The Temple of
Eleven Hot Springs, Chung said was hereabout.
“ More better go,” said he, also looking at the threatening
sky, and then he added, “Can vash.”
Hot springs and a wash ! It did sound tempting, and
we could reach it before sundown. I gladly turned out
of our path and went straight for it. I was so pleased
I even forgave Stella, and we both of us revelled in the
thoughts of a nice warm bath. We felt ourselves well
beyond Pai Lang by now, and the priests in all the temples
that I had ever seen were unw r ashed but civil.
A paved way that led up to the temple gates was bordered
on either side by tall and densely growing dark pines.
They met overhead forming a series of arches, but the sun
was low and streamed in between each pair, flooding a
patch of pavement with sunshine. The branches sprang
from the very roots, so that looking up the avenue it was
quite regular, a broad band of dark shadow, cut by a


narrow band of brilliant sunshine as far as the eye could
reach. We could not see the gates, they were more than
a mile away. We were looking up hill, and the pathway
fell again when we reached the,crown. It was rather a
fine vista, the avenue of pines, the brilliant sunshine, and
the snow sparkling on either side. The way itself had
evidently been swept.
But as we stepped under the first pair of trees there came
a burst of icy wind that tossed their branches wildly, and
at one swoop the light and colour went out of the landscape
as though a heavy curtain had been drawn across the sun.
It was eerie. I was suddenly afraid. Those archways
we had to pass under seemed menacing. Our furs were like
so much tissue paper in that cutting wind. Still it reminded
me how urgent it was that Mrs. Wright at least should be
sheltered.
We reached the top of the little rise, and as we looked
ahead I stopped with a gasp. Around us the night had
come suddenly, but ahead at the end of the gloomy avenue
was one long gleam of sunlight that fell upon four colossal
figures making them stand out with startling distinctness.
At first I thought they were alive, but presently I saw
my error. They were more than twice life-size, figures of
warriors of bronze, and their arms held threateningly
above their heads grasped weapons, a sword, a spear, an
axe and a club. So life-like was their poise that I should
not have been surprised had that spear come hurtling
towards us.
“ Search me ! ” said the minister in surprised tones.
It was a relief.
“ Reg’lar rough on rats carnival,” he went on, “ blamed
if I didn’t think they pirates was the slap up real thing !
Goshety Gosh ! Idols ! Dear Lord ! Idols ! ”
I don’t think they were exactly idols. I suppose they
were some manifestation of power. They certainly were
uncanny, and I think if it hadn’t been for the storm coming
up and the desolate country all round I would have sug-
gested going back along that avenue and pushing on for
the next village, giving up all thoughts of a plentiful supply
of hot water, since it was only to be attained by crossing
that sinister threshold. We drew close together in silence
as we approached them. There was no gate. The light
from above fell directly on the figures and showed us they
G


were raised on a platform as high as the wall on either
side in the place where the gate should be. A steep ramp
of carved stone, on which were entwined chiselled serpents,
led up to the figures, the only means of entrance, and it
was worn a little by the passing of many feet. Clearly it
stood out in that solitary ray of brilliant light, which showed
us, too, behind the tossing branches of other pine trees,
the curved corners of many tiled roofs, red and green and
burnished gold. The sound of the bells that hung from
every eave came to our ears with a harsh clang, quite unlike
the silver sound of most temple bells.
Then suddenly the wind died, and as if it had been a signal,
the single ray of light went, too, and the ramp and the
guardian figures were only dark masses against the pines
amid a stillness.
But by the time we had climbed that steep ramp the
storm was upon us again. The pine branches bending
before each furious blast were moaning and creaking in
time to the wailing of the wind, and looking back, the long
avenue up which we had come was blotted out in a white
whirl of flakes dancing madly in the darkness to the sound
of the clanging bells.
Down the other side of the ramp we were sheltered from
the gusts of wind, but we could hear it raging in the pine
branches overhead. A ruddy light streaming through the
carved lattice of a paper window fell on a patch of snow, and
every now and then a branch of pine swung into the light
and every needle stood out distinctly.
It was rather a large courtyard, like all temple enclosures,
with several buildings in it, and towards the largest we made
our way, the muleteer making a sort of yodel that opened
a door for us and showed us an interior bare and desolate,
but lighted up by a brazier of live coals. There were about
twenty monks with shaven heads and long red robes
crouching round it, and as the door opened twenty pairs
of cold and indifferent eyes met ours. We stepped across
the threshold and again there came a hush in the storm,
and we stood there in utter stillness held motionless our-
selves by some indefinable menace.
And then there rang on the air a piercing shriek.
Such a shriek, as long as I live it will ring in my ears.
In it there was something more than terror, but not a
muscle of those impassive faces moved, Martin Conant


made a step forward, but Mr. Chapman laid a detaining
hand on his shoulder.
“Steady,” he said, “these blighters hold the trump
cards.”
“That was a woman,” said the minister in Chinese.
And with one accord the men answered :
“ There is no woman here.”
From all sides were collecting red-robed monks, impassive,
inscrutable, the firelight gleaming on their hairless heads.
There must have been a couple of hundred of them. Then
one who appeared to be in authority asked calmly, as if
there had been nothing to disquiet us :
“ The Before Born need lodging.”
But Mr. Conant turned to the other men.
“ We must do something,” he said emphatically.
“ Are we ghost bearin’,” said the minister, “or have we
got a shingle loose by any chance in our upper storeys ? ”
“ If a couple of hundred people on their own ground
declare there is nothing,” said Mr. Chapman, “ what can
we do ? ”
And we had to leave it at that in spite of all Mr. Conant's
urging.
“ The sooner we vamoose the better,” said the minister.
But the fierce raging of the storm overhead told us
plainer than words that move before morning we could
not. There was nothing else for it ; we had to follow the
monk who led the way into a little paved courtyard with a
couple of rooms in it. Even under the circumstances these
rooms looked havens of rest to us accustomed to the dis-
comfort of Chinese inns. They were stone floored, but that
'allowed of a brazier of glowing coals. There were carved
black wood tables with high Chinese chairs, cupboards
bound in brass and k’angs into the fireplaces, of which a
monk put a little firing to warm them. The rooms were
swept and cleaner far than anything we had seen since we
left the mission station.
“Oh ! ” sighed Stella, “if I weren’t afraid ! ” and for
once she voiced my feelings exactly.
Chung beamed. Strange sounds didn’t worry him.
He came in fairly purring to explain that there was a hot
spring quite close in the next courtyard. It fell into a pool
that had, been carefully enclosed, so as to ensure privacy
and “ Missie can have barf.”


One needs to have been tramping through the disgusting
winter dust of Chinese roads for days on end to appreciate
the delight we found in that announcement.
I went with Stella, and Mr. Conant said,
“ I'll stand outside till you’ve done,” and we were
certainly glad to have him near. That awful shriek, the
sudden silence and the impassive monks made us almost
afraid to move.
It was warm in the little chamber where the hot spring
bubbled up.
There was an iron bar in the stone wall and from it
Chung hung a round Chinese lantern on which black
dragons had been painted so that their curious shadows
greatly enlarged fell on the walls. It was a very dim light,
dimmer still by reason of those dragons, but it served to
show us the square chamber with dark shadows in the far
corners where the light did not reach and where the steam
seemed to linger. The spring burst out of a rock in the
corner farthest away from the door and flowed into a great
circular basin cut with much labour in the living rock. It
must have been boiling where it came out, judging by the
steam, but at the side nearest the door where it ran out
with a curious gurgling sound that we heard even above the
raging of the storm, it was just pleasantly warm.
“ Now don’t be afraid,” said Mr. Conant as he shut the
door, “ I’ll be here.”
“I am afraid,” said Stella as she shed her furs. So was I.
But here was a luxury we had not had for many a long day
and might not have again—till—well perhaps till we reached
Peking.
“There’s nothing to be afraid of here,” I said, but
Stella pointed with trembling finger to the threatening
darkness of the far corner.
“ I don’t like that heap,” she said.
“Only rags,” I said, “ let’s get in quickly.”
The water was about three feet deep, warm, soft, luxurious.
There came to us the pleasant feeling of cleansing. I even
dipped MacTavish, and as I put him on the stone bank that
ran all round he danced about with joy. He hated being
washed, but was wild with excitement when it was all over.
He felt so good.
For a moment as we dried ourselves Stella and I felt a
little better.


“ I’ll go in again, I think,” she said, “ who knows when
we’ll get another chance.”
“ But Mr. Conant’s waiting in the cold,” I reminded her.
“ Oh he’ll —Oh look at your dog ! ”
He’d run round the basin when I’d put him down, and as
he came back into the light of the lantern I saw that his
little head was all wet with some dark sticky substance.
I caught him and it came off on my hands —a sinister
dark stain.
“ Blood ! ” shrieked Stella, grabbing her clothes.
His head and front paws were covered with it, and I was
horrified and dipped him in the water again. Then as I let
him go he ran back and I saw him worrying into what I had
thought a heap of rags. In a moment I was after him and
snatching him up found him all wet and sticky and stained
again. Once more I dipped him in the water, and as I held
him there with one hand I touched gingerly the heap among
which he had nosed—and—by the dim light of the lantern
I saw —and for a moment my heart stood still with horror.
I heard Stella’s voice asking, “ What is it ? ” But no
words would come to answer her for I remembered the
shriek and here was a woman’s underclothing, a foreign
woman’s underclothing, not stained with blood but simply
soaked in it. The poor plain muslin garments trimmed
with simple frilling such as Mrs. Wright and Sister Luella
wore. I felt sick with horror, my legs shook under me,
I would have fallen into the basin, but I huddled
on the rest of my clothes and wrapping MacTavish in my
towels made for the door with Stella still crying,
“ What is it ? Oh what is it ? I thought it was blood ! ”
“ It is blood ! ”, I heard myself saying.
And the awful part is we cannot explain it.
We told Mr. Conant, and when he had brought us back to
our room, he and Mr. Chapman went together to the spring,
but except for a dark smear on the rock where I had seen
the heap they found nothing.
We looked at one another in fear and dismay. It
deepened the mystery. The bloodstained clothes had
evidently been taken away in that brief space of time. The
men might have doubted my word, but Stella was emphatic.
“You think we’re foolish women. But it’s true, I tell
you, it’s true ! Why MacTavish was all covered with blood !
Do jmu think we could have imagined that ! ”


Unseen eyes must have been upon us. We could do
nothing. We all huddled together and kept the brazier
going, and the men decided that they would take it in turns
to watch. And at first the only person who slept was
MacTavish. About midnight Stella went to sleep and I
heard the others tossing and turning, I listened to the wailing
of the storm and the clanging of the bells, and I watched
the glowing brazier till at last I too fell asleep.
The next day we wakened to a still quiet world, the sun
shone brightly and the faintest breath of air occasionally
moved a bell that gave out a soft tinkle ; the snow was
piled up in the courtyard, and in the pine branches soft dry
powdery snow slipped down occasionally with a sighing
sound.
Chung served out breakfast and the muleteer turned up
as if nothing in the world had happened.
I think Mr. Conant voiced our feelings when he said it
seemed as if we could not go away leaving that awful
shriek and the bloodstained clothes unexplained, but Mr.
Chapman shook his head and said we were no knight-
errants and had to think of our own skins.
“We’re not out of the wood yet,” said he. “ I’m no
coward, but I tell you I’d a deal rather postpone enquiries
till we can do it safely in Peking. The monks are none too
friendly and they outnumber us —well I reckon there ’re
two hundred if there’s one.”
“ Goshety gosh ! ” said the minister —“ the heathen
ain’t on the advertisin’ lay, but I reckon if they wanted to
collect us—still,” he added hastily, as if we might accuse
him of selfishness, “ if you feel like roustin’ round on the
enquirin' lay I guess Momma an’ me’s willin’.”
No the enquiring lay was foolishness. Even Mr. Conant
saw that, and we went away out of that sinister courtyard
across the ramp between the menacing bronze figures
along the avenue of pines where the sun was barring the
pavement again. It was clean swept the whole mile length
of it, though once we left the courtyard we saw nobody,
and this exhibition of quiet power terrified us. As we
stepped off the pavement out of the shadow of the pines
into the dust of the so-called road, Chung put the situation
in a nutshell,
“ My tink monk velly clever mans.”
They were. And we were caught in this country. Every


day we were deeper in the toils. If we could only have
wiped out that awful visit to the temple.
We saw plenty of people as we marched along the hard
frozen road, often sunk a little below the surrounding
country, peasants gathering manure, small-footed, gaily
dressed women mounted on donkeys, long caravans of
camels and mules, and through these people we got news
occasionally of Pai Lang. He was ravaging the country to
the south, and most of the caravans were hesitating whether
they dared go through Shensi.
On the evening of the sixth day out we crossed a frozen
river by a prettily arched bridge. On the other side was
a small village, like all other villages, a long street of mud-
coloured houses packed close together. By the time we
were settled in the usual mule stalls, it was evident Mrs.
Wright was very ill indeed. Of course, she didn’t complain.
She always smiles sweetly, poor dear, and is quite sure
everything is for the best. She lay on her bedding now,
and the waning light showed her poor white face thin and
transparent. Her eyes were shut with very weariness,
but they were not quite closed, and there were pathetic
lines reaching down from her nose to her mouth.
Next day she was no better, and I told the others she
could not be moved. Whether we liked it or not we were
bound to stay here.
Stella looked up from her breakfast of millet porridge
and devilled chicken, and said calmly :
“ What are we going to do, then ? We can’t all be sacri-
ficed for one person.”
. No one said anything, and she seemed rather surprised.
“ No matter how weary I am,” she went on, “ I struggle
on, and now you want to stay in this awful hole. The only
thing that makes things bearable is the thought that we are
getting on.”
I was afraid she would tell Mrs. Wright, and make her
feel she was keeping us back, and then I had an idea.
“ It’s a good place for Mr. Chapman and Mr. Conant to
look round for another mule. Then you know you could
ride.”
Chung serving breakfast was listening with interest.
Of course, he isn’t exactly happy. He is a true Chinaman,
and life in these rough places on the roads is not to his
taste. It is too strenuous. He has mentioned it several


times, but no one took any notice, for no one had anything
better to offer. Now he was in complete agreement with
his late mistress. He wanted to get on, and he thought
Mrs. Wright ought to be left behind.
“ How far Shansi ? ” he asked with interest.
“ Two months,” I said at a venture.
Chung sat down in the ground and rocked himself back-
wards and forwards, the very picture of despair, and Mac-
Tavish much agitated ran round and round him letting
out short, sharp barks. He still looked rather shaven,
though his hair was beginning to grow, and he was assuming
a piebald appearance.
“ Stepped out of a nightmare,” said Mr. Wright, who
didn’t realise how very ill his wife was.
But MacTavish’s scorn was the last straw and Chung
wept tears.
“Go for die,” he mourned. “No lice got for far.”
“ Can buy,” said Mr. Conant tersely.
“No can buy,” asseverated Chung solemnly, and he
lifted up his face to the sunshine and the tears trickled
down his yellow cheeks.
“ There,” said Stella, “ even Chung’s afraid. We must
go on.”
“Pai Lang have Lan Chou Fu,” sobbed Chung, and he
rose up and went away into the middle of the courtyard.
The air was crackling with frost. The rough courtyard
of the inn was iron-bound, and round the edges of a hide
bucket that stood by the well the water hung in icicles.
The landlord of the inn inspecting it as if he had never seen
such a thing before was captured by the mournful Chung,
and presently was dragged by that worthy over to us.
He wore an evil-smelling goatskin coat, with the hair
inside, and his brown and wrinkled face, grimed with many
years of dirt, peeped out from a fringe of fur that lined
his cap.
“ Can do one piecey mule,” said Chung, solemnly, and
with the air of a man who had retrieved the company from
disaster.
But on investigation the matter wasn’t so simple.
What the landlord meant, he declared, was that twenty
li away was a big Mongolian encampment where they would
sell plenty of horses and mules.
“ But are we all going to walk seven miles out into the


desert to interview a Mongolian encampment,” asked
Stella.
“No, no,” said Mr. Conant, “I should think your
husband and I might take the mules with the innkeeper for
an interpreter.”
“ It’s a pretty batty proposition,” said the minister,
“ interviewing the gentle Mongol.”
“ I can’t let you go,” wailed Stella, clutching at her
husband’s arm.
He shook her off roughly, and she turned her wet eyes
on Martin Conant, who smiled at her as if a bad-tempered
husband were all in the day’s work.
Chung looked round on everybody benevolently, and
beckoned up the muleteer and the two mules. He was
going to hasten things if he could. But he had a word of
warning.
“ Mongols,” said he, “ velly bad mans. If master go
die ”


CHAPTER XII
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY
THE CASTING OF LOTS
“He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he
that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.”
You make up your mind quickly on an expedition like ours.
A chance of extra mules was not to be lightly thrown away.
We finished our breakfast without further discussion, and
then both the women came to see us off. Chung attended
them and gave another word of warning.
“ The tiger,” said he in solemn Chinese, “ even when he
plays has claws.”
He could never divest himself of the idea that he was
running the show. Heaven knows we’d have done mighty
poorly without him. I wouldn’t for the world be little
Chung.
Chapman drew his automatic pistol. It was the only
weapon we had amongst us.
“ Mine,” said he, “ are sharper,” and Chung, who had
a wholesome dread of firearms, fled, his pigtail streaming
behind him. He forgot he was there to protect his mistress.
We bade the two women farewell, and passed through
some mounds of brickwork that had once been a gateway
and tower in the Great Wall, and Chapman, silent man as
he was, gave his opinion of things as we rode along.
“ The minister’s wife,” he said, “ is going to get her
crown of glory.”
“ A rest,” I said, “ may do wonders.”
He shook his head.
“ Our uncommonly capable young doctor thinks she’s
going to pass in her checks.”
He was right, I knew.
The desert stretched away before us brown and desolate,
flecked here and there with patches of white snow. Over-


head was the deep blue sky, without a sign of a cloud, but
the brilliant sunshine was bitter cold. I have felt cold
many a time, but the remembrance of the cold of the Mon-
golian plateau that day remains with me as the worst I
have ever felt. In the distance were rugged hills, their
jagged tops outlined against the sky. Presently I saw a
couple of black specks against a white snow bank. They
were lost against the brown earth, but they came on, and at
last, shading my eyes, I saw they were mounted men.
Mongols probably. Chapman was shortsighted, and they
were close upon us before he could see them, mounted men
in long belted gowns, high boots and little peaked fur caps,
from beneath which strands of greasy matted black hair
fell down over their turned-up collars.
As they rode up the innkeeper became frantic with
excitement, and too vehement in his remarks for me to
understand him.
“We’ve been handed out the wrong crowd,” Chapman
explained. “ They’re not from our man’s encampment,
but belong to a great robber chief who’s best let alone.”
The men were riding a couple of clever-looking, unkempt,
piebald ponies, and it was very evident that with our
baggage mules we stood precious little chance if they wanted
to be nasty.
Chapman stooped down and grabbed the reluctant
innkeeper by his pigtail, for that gentleman was giving
unmistakable signs that he considered discretion the better
part of valour.
“We can’t do without our interpreter,” he said.
The desert men hesitated, came forward, hesitated, and
then came forward again till they were within hailing
distance.
“ Tell them,” said he to the trembling innkeeper, “ that
we have more rifles than gold,” and I saw the slit eyes of the
men upon his pistol.
“Ask them,” went on Chapman, “if they have ponies
for sale ? ”
When the answer was translated into Chinese I understood
that they had ponies for sale at their yurts, many ponies, and
the yurts were only three li, about a mile, away.
“Recollect,” said Chapman, “the proverb about the
tiger from the Eastern Hills, and the tiger from the Western
Hills.”


There is a good deal in it.
“ Meaning,” I said, “ that you think there’s not much
difference between these and the gentlemen we shall meet
at Wang’s ? ”
“ Meaning also that if they don’t like our little game
they could quite easily collect us before we reach Wang’s.”
Pleasant reflection truly.
“ Then we haven’t much choice. If anything happens to
us —those helpless women.”
Chapman turned and looked me straight in the face.
“ That young doctor,” said he, “ is dead earnest and
awful clever at planning out things, and the minister’s a
pretty good man of business when the Lord doesn’t interfere.
His missus is going to peg out, and mine’s a dead weight,
but on the whole I don’t know that we’re so necessary to the
plan of existence as you seem to think,” and he took a turn
with the unfortunate innkeeper’s pigtail round his hand.
“ Look out,” he cried, “ the muleteer’s going to bolt.”
I hadn’t paid any attention to that odoriferous individual
because I thought he would stick by his mules, but as
Chapman spoke he sped back on the back track as hard as
his legs could carry him. He scented danger evidently
as he left his sole means of livelihood behind him.
“ Encouraging,” said Chapman, and he waved to the
newcomers to lead and we would follow.
They said something to the innkeeper, and presently
Chapman was telling me that the greatest chief of all the
chiefs was at the yurts we were approaching.
“ Our friend,” he added on his own, “ does not seem to be
getting any real comfort out of the fact.”
I was a little amused at the shivering terrified Chinaman.
We hadn’t anything worth taking, and it should be worth
the while of these people to open up trade with the
foreigner.
“The risk’s worth the ponies anyhow,” I said, “and I
don’t see why we shouldn’t win out.”
I felt pretty sure all would go well. But I wished—and
with that fervent wish I abjured my uncle Irwin and all his
works —we were more heavily armed.
We were close to the felt tents now and the people were
crowding outside them to look at the strangers. The men
were dressed like the two horsemen who had brought us and
the women wore unbelted gowns and high head-dresses


ornamented with turquoises and rubies, and the little dark-
faced children were mere bundles of fur and dirty rags.
There must have been at least forty men, and they all had
matchlocks slung across their shoulders. Every man in the
desert carries a weapon, and they were not arms of accuracy.
However it appeared weapons were not to count, for
Chapman stood forward and flung down his pistol.
“ It isn’t the thing in polite Mongol society,” said he,
“ to enter tents armed,” and he flung out his empty hands
and motioned me to do likewise.
Out from a black felt tent stepped the very great chief.
There was nothing to distinguish him from his people.
His face was burnt nearly black from the reflection of the
sun on the snow, his dark cat-skin robe was dirty and torn,
but he was evidently the very great chief. His followers
gave him all deference, and their deference to him seemed
to do us honour.
I felt a good half-way to our goal.
“ Now for the ponies,” I said. “Do you think that
innkeeper can interpret properly ? ”
“ He wants,” said Chapman a little grimly, “ to scratch
his entry. He’s scared out of his seven senses.”
But he interpreted nevertheless.
“ He asks,” came the question in his broad Kansu
dialect, “ if the Master is a very great chief.”
“ Shall we get better ponies ? ” I asked, “ if we are big
chiefs, or shall we pay less if we are humble folks ? ”
“ An Asiatic,” said Chapman, “ thinks small beans of a
little man. We’re very great chiefs. It’s lucky we left
the outfit behind. Tell him lam a very great chief.”
“ And the other master ? ”
“Ringing you in,” said Chapman. “The other master
is a very great chief too. We’re sinking your connection
with the missionary trade,” he added. “ Missionaries, I
reckon, won’t carry weight up here.”
“ But which is the greatest chief ? ”
“ Now,” said Chapman, “ that is a poser. I’m willing to
share my throne, and anyhow I'm the weightier man.” He
squared his shoulders. “ Tell him lam the mightiest chief.”
“ And they don’t seem quite happy in their minds, even
now,” he added.
Though learning a little German seems to have used up
all my power in foreign tongues I understood the answer
that was translated into Chinese.


“ The great chief is glad to meet a great foreign chief.
He has long wanted one in his power.”
There was no mistaking it ! That is exactly what the
trembling innkeeper said.
“ The devil! ” said Chapman turning swiftly round and
looking at me, “ the minister would say we’ve gotten a
wart hog in the greased pig class ! ”
The Mongols didn’t waste time. Before I had realised
that the danger that I had thought negligible was more than
threatening, a couple of men had laid their hands on my
shoulders. I went for them with my fists—l would have
killed the crowd if I could without compunction. But
hands like iron grasped my arms, the smell of unwashed
humanity and unclean clothes was in my nostrils, and I
might have been a baby for all the strength I had. And
Chapman with strange oaths was fighting just as helplessly.
Presently we were standing bound side by side, and it
seemed as if the story had moved on with a jerk. Our
terrified Chinaman was standing between a couple of
Mongols, but he was not bound. I looked up at the blue
sky. I had never before realised how fresh, how invigorat-
ing was the air.
“ What is the Chief going to do to us now ? ” I asked.
“ It appears his job is to show his people how big a chief
he is,” Chapman answered.
“ But how ! Why we rode straight into his camp ! ”
I felt very angry.
“ By killing a great foreign chief,” said Chapman grimly.
“ Now keep a straight face on you, man. One of us is
going to die, and the other —”
“ The other—” I repeated stupidly. How bright the
sunlight was ! The air was like champagne ! The snow —
His clear cool voice cut across my thoughts like a whip
lash.
“ The other goes to tell the foreign peoples and the
Chinese how great a chief is the blighter who dares this
thing.”
And then we looked at one another. One of us was to die !
I looked round and every man was unslinging his match-
lock in silence. There was on all the faces turned towards
us an eager expectant look. And on the clear air rang the
joyous laugh of a little child. One of us was to die !
“ Which ? ” I asked mechanically.


“ That’s the beauty of it,” said Chapman. “ They can’t
decide which of us is the greatest chief.”
“ The innkeeper ? ”
“ Oh, the gentleman’s only too willing to oblige. He
went nap on you.”
So I was to die in the sunshine. It was a queer feeling.
“ But he straightened things out,” went on the cold
even voice, “ by giving me a look in.”
“ I suppose they will kill us both,” I heard myself say.
“That idea was mooted, I gather,” said Chapman
calmly, “ but its drawback is it leaves no one to tell the
tale.”
“ Then in God’s name,” I said, “ what are they going to
do ? ”
“ Shoot one of us, and give the other a piebald pony
because it isn’t becoming a great chief should bestraddle a
mule. Oh Lord, if they could only see our outfit ! ”
“If they only could ! To think it is all a mistake ! ”
It is no easy thing to face death, sudden, unexpected,
unnecessary. To wish that I might live was to wish him
dead, and I felt the sweat cold on my forehead and salt on
my lips. And he proceeded to explain that there would be
two rifles and one would be loaded and the other empty,
but the men behind those rifles would not know which was
which.
“ Will they give us time to write a note, to send a
message ? ”
“ The transaction is spot cash,” said Chapman, and I saw
a couple of rifles being handed to the two men who had
brought us, while the rest of the people moved away from
us. Then he spoke again.
“If you come through give a hand to my wife. She’s
pretty helpless, poor little cuss.”
I was obsessed with the thought that time was short, that
I had much to think of, many messages to send, and I would
never get them said.
“ So long, old chap,” said Chapman’s voice, softened as
I had never heard it before.
We stood there alone, hands and feet bound, and opposite
us, quite close, hardly a rifle’s length away, stood the two
nomads we had met so hopefully half an hour ago. They
were putting their rifles to their shoulders —
“ That’s right, smile,” said Chapman, “ mustn’t let the
beggars think we funk it.”


God knows I had no idea I was smiling. I remembered
how the minister had calmed an angry Chinese mob by
making them laugh, but these men were not going to be
done out of their prey so lightly.
What a long time they took to arrange things ! And yet
I kept thinking if I only had a little more time, a little
more time. Chapman was looking grimly ahead down the
barrels of two rifles.
There was a quick sharp crack. I shut my eyes in-
voluntarily and opened them again.
And the world was exactly the same ! There were the
jagged hills in the distance cutting into the clear blue
sky. There were the patches of snow on the brown earth.
There were the clustering, interested, eager people in front
of us. I heard the sound of their voices as in a dream. I
drew a deep long breath of the invigorating air. I was
alive ! I was alive ! For a moment I thought of nothing
else. And Chapman stood beside me.
“ Old man,” I said, and I felt as if I spoke with difficulty.
iEons had passed since last I spoke to him. He turned and
swayed towards me.
“ Tell them I died game,” he said. “ And my accounts
are fairly correct,” and the blood gushed from his mouth
as he fell forward on his face.
And a man ran forward with a knife and cut my bonds.


CHAPTER XIII
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE ONE WHO WAS LEFT
" Something there is
(With my lips soothing thee, adding I whisper,
I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and
indirection),
Something there is more immortal even than the stars.”
There is a certain sort of woman— l have always envied
them—from whose flesh and hair and clothes there ahvays
seems to emanate a sort of subtle fragrance, and even here
after all our rough journeying, Stella had that charm.
Now as she walked along leaning heavily on my arm after
we had seen the men off, she sighed once or twice and then
looked up at me,
“ Oh Rosalie, you don’t think me awfully wicked, do
you ? ”
“ You ?” I said. I don’t know that I exactly thought
her a saint, but I was very sure she did not consider herself
a sinner. “Why?”
She hesitated, and then said in a half whisper,
“ About Martin Conant, of course. Indeed it isn’t my
fault.”
“ Martin Conant ? ” I tried to speak naturally, but her
words came like a little sharp sting.
“ Don’t you see ? ” she said. “ I thought you would —
I mean a woman can’t help it if a man falls in love with her,
can she ? ” and she lifted her caressing eyes to mine.
I don’t know what I should have answered, but just at
that moment the minister called me to his wife and I had
to give her all my attention. Indeed she was very ill and I
thought she was gone. But all the while I was attending
to her I was thinking about what Stella Chapman had
told me. Martin Conant was in love with her. Of course
H


it was more than likely. She was just the sort with whom
a man would fall in love. Of course a man oughtn’t to
fall in love with a married woman, and oughtn’t to tell her
so if he does, but they do, and why should I suppose Martin
Conant was any better than the majority ? I had just been
thinking myself how attractive she was —Mr. Conant would
feel it more deeply. I was sure of that.
Yes, probably Martin Conant did love her. A man
would never notice that she was selfish, unless he swung
over to the other side like her husband. But Martin
Conant —my comrade and friend, Martin Conant ! Till this
minute I believe I had only thought of him as a good
comrade —why should I mind if he was in love with Stella
Chapman ? I’ve been half in love with her myself. He
could be a good comrade still —and I want nothing else—
still —still—daipn—damn—damn—
The minister was with his wife, Stella Chapman was
curled up in the other mule stall asleep, and MacTavish was
sitting beside me, every now and again stroking my dress
with his little white paw. It was his way of saying
“ You’re forgetting your little dog.”
Suddenly he leaped on my lap, and looking up I saw
Chung with the tears streaming down his face. It didn’t
take much to move Chung to tears so I wasn’t much
alarmed.
“ Missie,” he said solemnly, “ all go for die.”
“Nonsense, Chung,” I thought a little opposition would
cheer him, “ I have no intention of dying just yet.”
“ Missie,” his hands were playing nervously with the
bit of dark blue cord at the end of his long pigtail, “ one
piecey man have come back.”
Then I was on my feet in a moment.
“ Who ? The innkeeper ? ” I was frightened now.
Why should the innkeeper come back alone ?
“One piecey muleteer,” sobbed Chung. “ Missie go for
Lan Chou. Mongols velly bad mans ! ” and his voice rose
to a shriek.
“ Hush ! ” I said, “hush ! ” It was no good rousing
Stella till it was absolutely necessary. She could not help
in any way. I should like to have had the minister’s
advice, but Mrs. Wright was very ill. I couldn’t very well
take him away from her.
So MacTavish and I went out through the courtyard into


the street, where I. saw the muleteer crying and wringing
his hands, and as far as I could make out, declaring that the
Mongols had stolen his mules, and I must pay. What had
happened to the men on the mules apparently he didn’t
know and didn’t care. I was sick with fright, and I was
helpless. It didn’t even seem funny to me that these two
men grown to man’s estate should stand in front of me
with the tears running down their yellow cheeks, one
reiterating in Chinese that his mules were stolen, and the
other sobbing in broken English, “ Missie mus’ hide.
Missie mus’ go for Lan Chou ! ”
While we stood there another Chinaman came running in.
If the muleteer was excited there are no words in the
English language to express this man’s terror. His eyes
were starting out of his head, his pigtail was flying out
behind him, and his breath was coming in gasps. He had
evidently run for his life. I did not recognise him for the
moment, but Chung and the muleteer did. It was the
innkeeper who had gone out with Mr. Conant and Mr.
Chapman to act as interpreter. Apparently he didn’t see
the others as he rushed along in his headlong flight, but
they caught him and there was a very babel of tongues.
Of course I knew the language, I knew it quite well,
but a sort of sick feeling came over me, there was a darkness
before my eyes, and what they were saying reached my
ears as meaningless sound. MacTavish stood on his hind
legs against me and signified that he was afraid for a wonk
was coming after him, and I picked him up mechanically.
It seemed as if I were saying to myself, “ Martin Conant !
Martin Conant! Martin ! ” Then Chung broke in in
English,
“ Mongol velly bad mans ! Have makee master die ! ”
I understood his Pigeon English. Oh, it was plain
enough. I could see everything clearly, the rutty frozen
road that led away to the village gate, the walls on either
side, the archway that led into the inn yard ; overhead the
sky was blue and the sun shone brightly, while in the air was
a sting. I wanted to ask him which master, but my voice
wouldn’t come. I wasn’t in the least afraid. I never
thought about the rest of us or what might happen in the
future. I could only think of Mr. Conant’s kind grey eyes
under his heavy brows looking back at me—at us —as he
rode out of the village gates and on through the wall. I


was afraid to put into words my fears, lest the very naming
of them should make them true. MacTavish stretched up
his little face as if asking me what was the matter, and then
another man came running—but this man was not afraid—
and he caught hold of Chung. In a moment—the relief of
that moment—Chung’s face straightened out, his air of self-
importance descended upon him, and it seemed to me as if a
load had been lifted from my heart. They were wrong,
these messengers of disaster, or Chung would never have
looked like that. He pranced forward in his old cheerful,
important manner. The tears were not dry upon his
cheeks, but he had forgotten all about them.
“ Master wantchee minister,” said he as airily as if he
had not been explaining to me two minutes before that
“ Master makee die,” and he turned to go into the inn yard
—for like all Chinamen he did not think much of a woman
when a man was in question.
But I spoke to him so sharply that he remembered that
he was my boy originally, and a Chinaman always keeps
to his bargain.
“ Minister no can come,” I explained. “ Mrs. Wright
plenty sick.”
Chung knew that as well as I did. He put his head on
one side ingratiatingly, “ Master say, fetch minister.”
“ Missie will go,” I said. “Chung come with Missie,”
and I thrust MacTavish into his arms. Both MacTavish
and Chung objected, but I knew it would keep Chung close
behind me.
It was only a step or two to the gate, and but a little
way beyond was the gap in the Wall through which the
two had gone so gaily so short a time before. There were
some people there, a handful of Chinese in quilted blue
coats and furs, two mules and a skewbald pony, and —my
heart stood still and then went on again beating furiously—
there was Martin Conant. I heard Chung making little
purring sounds of satisfaction as if he had arranged it all,
and I slowed down for a moment to collect my wits. I
could not meet them with a heart beating like mad, and
then Mr. Conant turned his face towards me and I could
hardly help crying out. The light and life seemed to have
been ruled out of it. It was white, and his eyes were
sunken in his head. I thought of all the tales of torture I
had heard, and ran forward pushing aside the Chinese who
were clustering round.


“ Martin Conant ! What is the matter ?”
It seemed as if his lips could hardly form the words.
“ I wanted the minister/' he said, “ but nobody can do
any good.”
“ The minister can’t come. I never even told him.
He has his own job, poor man. And if you’re ill I’m worth
much more than the minister.”
I saw it was no good mincing matters. He was ill and
wanted looking after.
For a moment his face lighted up.
“ You’re a doctor, of course, perhaps—” and he drew
aside and I saw on the mule its load. The dead body of
Silas Chapman.
Perhaps—no, there was no perhaps about it. Silas
Chapman was dead. It took me but a few moments to
ascertain that, and then I turned to the man who was
looking at me with miserable eyes.
For the first time since I had known him, Martin Conant
seemed incapable of thought or action. Evidently he had
had a shock. There was nothing else for it. I must take
the conduct of affairs into my own hands. The muleteer,
with glad surprised cries, was rejoicing over the return of
his animals, and I called to him to lay the body down there,
and taking MacTavish from Chung set him to watch it while
I led Mr. Conant back to the inn. In the little temple of the
goddess of mercy I made him rest for a moment, and by
buying a few incense sticks paid for a seat on a stone, and
got him a little tea.
The people went away. Possibly they thought the
muleteer and the innkeeper would be more communicative.
Mr. Conant sat there with his head in his hands. I brought
him the tea.
“ Drink it,” I said. He lifted up his face as if he did not
understand.
“ Drink this tea,” I said, “ rest a little, and then well
go back to the others.”
“ I feel as if I can never face them again,” he said.
“ Why was he taken and I left ? ”
P He was so obviously wretched that I ventured to put my
hand on his shoulder and gently touch his cheek. Perhaps
a little human sympathy might help him.
“Tell me all about it,” I said. He dropped his head
down till it rested against my skirts and I took off his hat


and smoothed his hair. MacTavish was frantic with
jealousy, but for once I was not thinking of MacTavish.
And then in disjointed words he told me all about it.
MacTavish sat on a stone a little way off looking at us with a
disdainful air, “You’ve forgotten your little dog. Well he
doesn’t care,” and once Martin Conant had found words
the story flowed.
I had been so desperately anxious when the muleteer
and the innkeeper had been talking that I thought I had not
understood them, but now as Martin Conant told his story
I knew I had heard it all before in Chinese, except what he
and Mr. Chapman had said to one another.
The telling of the story brought him a measure of calmness,
and he raised his face and looked at me with sad eyes.
“ What could I have done ? ” he said.
“You could not have done anything,” I said. “ You
seem to have forgotten that it is the merest chance that it
is you who are sitting here and telling me the story and not
Mr. Chapman. Come back to the inn now and rest.”
The incense sticks were burnt out now, only their sensuous
fragrance lingered on the sharp cold air. The goddess of
mercy looked at us with unseeing eyes. We rose up to go.
Mr. Conant thrust his arm through mine as if he were afraid
to be alone, and MacTavish trotted over and asked to be
picked up.
“ I’m your own little dog,” he said in the soft murmurs
of a Japanese pug, “ and when you think about it you’ll
remember you’ve treated me very badly.”
“ And how am I to tell his wife ? ” asked Martin Conant.
“ How in God’s name am I to tell his wife ? ”
Then I remembered disagreeably what Stella had told
me this morning.


CHAPTER XIV
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY
THE PASSING OF MRS. WRIGHT
“ Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the
floods drown it. Though a man should give all the
substance of his house for love, yet it would utterly be
contemned.”
I could never afterwards remember how I got back to the
little village where I had left the others. But the Mongols
hindered me in no way. Rather did they help. They
supplied me with a skewbald pony for my own riding, they
strapped the body of the dead man upon one of the mules,
and they escorted us half-way back to the gap in the Great
Wall whence they had come. Thence with good-tempered
laughing gestures they turned back, and I went on with my
burden.
And this is where Rosalie Grahame comes in.
I hardly knew what I was doing or saying, but she took
charge of everything in the most natural and capable
manner in the world. God bless her for the very best of
women. Lucky the man with whom she elects to throw in
her lot. She engineered me into the temple of the goddess
of mercy, got me some tea —it was nectar that tea —and made
me tell the whole story. Why the telling should have
soothed me I don’t know, but it did ; perhaps the kind and
sympathetic touch of that gentle hand did more.
Presently she said,
“Now you’ll leave everything to me. I’ll get another
stall cleared out for you and I’m going to give you a draught
that’ll make you sleep.”
“ But I have to tell—”
“ No, you will leave that to the minister and me,”
So coward that I am, I left it to her, and when I awaken-
ed again the worst was over.


I think the telling of Stella was a bad job. She shrieked
and wailed and cursed me till even Mrs. Wright, a frail
ghost, sat up and tried to comfort her. But she wouldn’t be
comforted. Rosalie Grahame arranged with the muleteer
that the dead body of poor Chapman should be guarded
from wonks and wolves and should not be brought into the
village, but should be buried there in the open.,
“ I know he’d like it better,” said she. “ I should.
It is sweet and fresh by the Wall,”
When I waked from a very refreshing sleep Stella was
still wailing. She added greatly to my shame somehow.
Of course I know his death was no fault of mine, but if I
had never looked into her eyes I should have felt less
guilty.
I had to see her. That was inevitable. She burst out
crying afresh. Perhaps that too was natural.
“ I promised your husband,” I said, “ that if I were the
one to come through I'd take care of you.”
“Tea have got,” said Chung’s correct voice. I believe
Rosalie Grahame had arranged the interview so that it
should be immediately interrupted ; Chung, when he wasn’t
in fear of his life, was quite sure that nothing should inter-
fere with our sacred meals.
“ As if I could look at afternoon tea and poor dear
Silas not in his grave,” sobbed Stella. She was meretricious
to the core. I wondered that I had ever been attracted
by her.
“ But you must have some,” said the other woman’s
pretty voice. Have I said that Rosalie Grahame, in
addition to a radiant smile, has a very pretty voice ? It is
like the chiming of silver bells. “It will do you good.”
“ I can’t face it,” wailed Stella, “ I can’t face it,” and
there was an air about her as if there was some particular
virtue in not being able to face it.
Mrs. Wright did not come to tea. Neither did her
husband, and afterwards Dr. Grahame said, “ I’ll try and
persuade Mr. Wright to have some now. I’ll stay with his
wife.”
“ What’s the matter with her ? ” I asked.
With a little catch in her breath she answered,
“ She’s dying.”
Stella cried out, “ Rosalie ! Rosalie ! ” but Dr. Grahame
never looked at her. She turned towards the mule stall and


we followed. Mrs. Wright was lying back in the rugs and
blankets, and her husband sat beside her holding tenderly
her poor thin hand.
“ There is no one to hold my hand now,” sobbed Stella,
oblivious of the fact that since we had known her she and her
husband had quarrelled steadily and openly. I couldn’t
very well laugh but I did wonder what the other young
woman who had a keen sense of humour was thinking.
Stella had the hardihood to address the minister.
“ We’re afraid of the Mongols,” she said, and dropped on
her knees in the straw.
He looked up quickly.
“ The Mongols ain’t got any grouch against us,” said he
simply, “ an’ Sallie’s real right down wore out. Ain’t you.
Momma ? ” and he looked at her tenderly.
She put out a thin hand and laid it on his wrist. It was
little more than a skeleton with skin like paper drawn
tightly over it. Her husband covered it with loving
fingers.
“ You didn’t ought to take off your mitts, Sallie,” said he,
and his voice was a caress. Dr. Grahame picked up the
little dog for ever at her feet and hid her face in his soft
coat.
“ Doc,” said the minister with painful flippancy, “ I
guess Momma’s finding the victuals in this food parlour
a bit tryin’.” There was an earnestness in his voice which
emphasized the words.
“ She cannot take much beyond chicken broth,” said the
doctor, and it was evident she was keeping her voice steady
with an effort, “ and when it comes to travelling on it—”
her voice trailed away and she looked across at me appeal-
ingly.
But how could I tell him ? .
He was losing all that went to make life worth living.
And he must see it for himself presently.
“This little bubble tour that we’re takin’,” he began
hesitatingly as if he would blind himself to the truth as
long as he could, “ is a bit rough on the amatoor, an’ it’s
sort of rammed in on me that what Sallie wants is rest, jest
plain rest ! ”
“ Oh, but we can’t stay here,” wailed Stella. “We must
start to-morrow. I can’t bear it,” and the minister looked
at me and then back at the doctor with an anxious question
in his eyes.


The passionate prayer there went straight to her heart.
She forgot her professional manner, and with her face
hidden against her little dog, who looked on with great
contentment, she answered only with a sob.
He understood then.
He said nothing, but his wife spoke.
“ Tell him Rosalie, dear. I’m goin’ home.”
“No,” he cried, “no,” and his voice rang sharp with
pain. It was as if a sword had struck him. “ Lord !
Lord ! The world is empty without her ! ”
The young doctor stood just outside the mule stall in the
cold sunshine. Her hood had dropped off and the light
caught the bright gleams in her waving hair. The mocking
little scornful look that gave piquancy to her face had gone,
and in its place was an infinite tenderness. She was seeking
words of comfort and Stella’s crying evidently worried her.
“ You would like her to rest,” she said. “ She is keeping
up for you.”
He bent over then and took the slender little body in
his arms. Dr. Grahame indicated Stella still kneeling on
the straw with the tears on her cheeks.
“ Take her away,” she said, and there was nothing for it
—I must put my arms round her and lift her out on to the
rough cobble stones of the yard.
“ Sallie, Sallie,” said the minister, and in the clear air,
though he spoke low, we could hear every word, “ I’ve been
hard on ye, Sallie.”
There came no answer, but the frail hand stole softly to
his face. There was no need of words. Not one of us but
knew that her husband had been the desire of her heart,
the light of her eyes, and if she had loved so had he. The
world would be empty for him when she was gone.
Even Stella Chapman stilled her lamentations before the
minister’s silent sorrow. She was dying here among the
desolate mountains in a mule stall in a miserable little
Chinese inn, but her head was pillowed on her husband’s
breast, and I reckon she cared for little else. She had
craved rest—l expect none of us guessed how she had craved
for rest —and she was resting at last. Every movement for
the last six days had been an effort, and now there was no
need to move any more.
Dr. Grahame moved a little away and I followed her with
Stella clinging to my arm. She was sobbing loudly, but I


did not feel that I could do anything. The air was cutting
and we went into the next mule stall, and to us came Chung.
“ Wantchee supper,” said he. It w r as his business to
provide for the wants of the party, whether we lived
or died was no concern of his. He had ascertained from me
that the death of Silas Chapman would make no difference
to his remuneration, so he had gone about his business and
had collected dried dung —argols they called them —and on
his little fire in the open between three stones he had heated
soup, and since we did not come to the little low k’ang table
he had laid out, he came towards us bearing three basins on
a large plate.
And sometimes the everyday duties are a relief. Rosalie
Grahame looked as if she could not stand the tension much
longer. I felt pretty bad myself, and I really think Stella
Chapman needed consideration less than any of us. But
I was bound to consider her, if only because I had once
looked at her with eyes of desire, and Rosalie Grahame
would certainly waste herself upon her. The only person
who ignored her, and he did it with the utmost courtesy,
was her late servant, Chung.
“ I can't drink,” she cried, “ I can’t drink ! How can
you offer me soup, Mr. Conant ? ” I wasn’t doing anything
of the sort. “Poor Silas is dead and Mrs. Wright is dying—
how can we be so unfeeling as to have soup ? ”
Dr. Grahame was hugging MacTavish as usual. But her
common sense was refreshing.
“ Fuel is scarce,” she said, “ and food is scarce, and we
all need something. Take it, Stella, take it. Oh don’t
you see we must make the best of things.”
I backed her to the best of my ability.
“ I’ll look after Mrs. Chapman,” I said, “ you see if you
can help Mrs. Wright.”
But no one could help Mrs. Wright. She was done with
this world, and as the next cold bright winter’s day drew
to a close she gently dropped asleep on her husband’s breast,
and so slight had been her hold upon life that Dr. Grahame,
who was watching, could hardly say when she ceased to
breathe.
And the man who held her in his arms looked down upon
her as if he could not let her go. I did not see it, but Rosalie
Grahame told me afterwards with tears in her eyes.
“ She is gone,” said the young doctor gently.


He had held his precious burden as if he feared by a
movement to disturb her, and now he clutched her to him
passionately.
“ Sallie ! Sallie !” he cried, “ you wouldn’t leave me to
face it alone. You wouldn’t go back on me.”
But he knew. Those hands had never before been un-
responsive when he caressed, those lips had always smiled
at a word from him, those eyes must be closed for ever when
they failed to look love and trust into his own. And he
cried on his God and laid her down and flung himself down
beside her and put his face on her breast, and Rosalie
Grahame came for me, and again together we looked upon
death.
The sky was flushed red with a rosy sunset and we were
all bathed in the glorious light. The King of Terrors had
come very gently to the worn-out woman, he had taken the
man suddenly in the pride of his manhood, but to the
woman he had come with a gentle smile as a comforter.
On her face was an infinite peace. The tired lines were
smoothing out fast.
And that had a message for the lonely man beside her.
“ Sallie ! Sallie !” he moaned, “ I was hard on ye.”
“ She would be the first to tell you,” said Rosalie
Grahame, “ that the very look on your face or the touch of
your hand was enough to make her happy.” And she
added, “ You two have made me lonely to look at you.”
I wonder if it was true. Anyhow God her.
“ Oh Lord ! ” cried the minister, getting to his knees,
“ I thank Thee.”
And the splendour in the western sky deepened. Mac-
Tavish came trotting along and put up his little white paws
against his mistress, and as she stooped to gather him up her
clear-cut face with the little scornful upper lip was bathed in
the glowing light. All the sky was radiant with crimson
and gold. It made a glory in that poor little inn yard.
The girl drew a long breath as she looked round, and though
I had felt the faith of my mother slipping from me since
I had been at the mission station, I could not but feel that
here indeed we were in a holy place. The mysteries of
Life and Death are beyond me, but the Power that set
that glorious sunset in the sky is mighty.
Dr. Grahame must have felt the same.
“ It is a glory,” she breathed.


I stooped and touched the minister on the shoulder.
“ Look up, look up at the sky ! ”
And Septimus Wright raised his face.
“ Behold,” he said, “ the Lord is in His heaven and He
heareth the cry of the afflicted,” and as he dropped his face
in his hands again I think we both realised that for him the
worst had passed. He remembered once more the God
Who doeth all things well. He was no longer quite alone
in an empty world.
And then came Chung the materialist. He lived in the
present. Such supper as he could get together —and it was
not a bad supper considering all things, curried chicken
and rice and scones steamed, biscuits these Americans
called them, instead of baked —this supper was ready and
he mentioned the fact. Mrs. Wright was dead. ' She had
never meant anything to him. Mr. Chapman was gone.
Weighed in the balance as a good master he did not counter-
act his wife as a bad mistress, and as his wages were sure
he dismissed the subject from his mind. I and Rosalie
Grahame were apparently in his estimation the important
members of the party, not forgetting MacTavish, for was
he not worth 50 dollars ?
“ Supper, leady,” he said in his matter of fact sing-song.
“ Alice lice finish.”
And the glory in the sky faded. The sun was gone and
the night came down bitter, cold, grey and pitiless. Only
where the tiny fire of argols burned was there any warmth,
and that was like a fiery eye that threatened.


CHAPTER XV
A FEW REFLECTIONS FROM STELLA CHAPMAN.
TWO WOMEN AND A MAN
“One’s self I sing, a simple, separate Person.”
I really have been most unfortunate. In the very begin-
ning it was unfortunate. Of course I loved poor dear
Silas, but still I could have wished him different sometimes,
and it really was cruel of him to bring me to China. How
on earth could a young girl—l was only twenty-five when
I married, and that is young for nowadays—-who had
only lived in hotels in and Matlock Bath and
Hunstanton know what it would be like in the interior
of China ? Of course, I wanted to go because I loved Silas,
and I thought rich merchants in China had pearls and furs
and rich silks and satins and plenty of servants ; but he
did know what it was like, and I’m quite sure he oughtn’t
to have taken me. It was cruel. Fancy being set down
in the heart of China in a horrid cold Chinese house with
Chinese servants, who made me shudder and absolutely
no one to entertain ! There wasn’t even anyone to speak
to. What on earth was the good of all my pretty clothes ?
And there was no place to go, nothing to do from morning
to night. I cried, and Silas was sarcastic —I’m sure one
hundred per cent, of women so situated would have cried.
But then, men are cruel. Mother was hard on me, but I
could get away from mother, and there were other people;
and here there was nobody but Silas. You can’t manage
a man properly when there’s nobody to play off against him.
That was what the good Pai Lang did for me. It was awful
running away and living anyhow and going in fear of your
life, but it did bring along Martin Conant. And Martin
Conant is good-looking, and at first I thought he was going
to be quite an acquisition. He was always queer, though.
Sometimes when we were together, and he was helping


me along, he used to bend over me quite nicely, just as if
he thought I was a dear little thing and would be awfully
good to kiss, and then all of a sudden he would drop me
and go off as if he were vexed or something. Of course,
I should have got along better without another woman.
There is no doubt a pretty woman alone is often at a
disadvantage. She wants another. Dr. Grahame would
answer, only she is too pretty. At least, prettiness would
not matter, but there is an air of distinction about her
which I certainly shouldn’t have chosen for the woman
I want as a foil. She is able to do all sorts of things, and
yet she never looks foolish or common. Of course, the
missionaries are common, but she isn’t. She is slim and
graceful, more graceful than ! am, and so it is aggravating
to see her doing fifteen miles a day declaring she likes it !
Likes it ! What nonsense ! Of course, a doctor’s training
must wear off some of the charm of a woman. It’s bound
to. Rosalie has a great deal to thank her personal appear-
ance for. If I had her looks what couldn’t I do. It makes
me horribly envious sometimes. A woman is a fool if
she doesn’t know how to make the best of herself, and I
flatter myself I do know my own faults. Of course, I’m
not the type to go in for athletic exercises. I want a
beautiful drawing-room to set me off, and if I go out I want
a car and plenty of rich furs. Then I’m delightful. A man
told me once that in my furs I was a delicate, just-opened,
fragrant rose with the dew on it, and I think he was right,
but when one is the rose type one has to be careful not
to be overblown. Mother kept me on thorns fearing I
should be like her ; besides, one doesn’t want people who
are admiring one to see what one’s mother has developed
into. That really made me thankful to go right away to
China.
But it was a mistake. I see now it was a great mistake.
And now poor dear Silas is dead. Of course, I’m most
awfully grieved, but if we can only get away I’ll be able
to start again.
Rosalie Grahame pretends to be so careful about me, but
she can be horrid on occasion. The day I took a little of
her hazeline cream and powder, the stuff she had in her
medical case—she was just horrid. She said I had plenty
of stuffs that she had put up for me herself, and, of course,
I had, but this dry cold makes your face and hands so sore


you can use any amount of cream on them, and I thought
I’d like to try hers. She puts that powder of hers on any
dirty old woman’s sores, and she grudges me a little for
my nice sweet clean arms and neck. She said quite
angrily that it was stealing—stealing to take that !
And she never would have known if it hadn’t been for
that interfering Chung. I thought she was safe out of the
way, and he actually went and told her I wanted her !
It is all very well to have a foil, but you don’t want your
foil to be always on hand. She was getting to think she
was welcome always, so I dropped her a hint that Martin
Conant admires me.
She’s silly in many ways though she is so clever. Look
at the fuss she makes over that ridiculous little dog. I’m
very fond of dogs in their proper place, and a Japanese pug
is quite the correct sort of dog to keep. It looks very
well in a car, but you want someone to see it is properly
cared for and the idea of taking a little dog dyed blue and
shaven and hideous along is too ridiculous. It’s an absolute
danger in a country like this, where every second dog has
hydrophobia. But men are silly over a pretty woman.
Both Silas and Martin Conant seemed to think Rosalie’s
devotion to her dog rather charming. On the whole
though I’m glad she is silly, for while she is looking after
MacTavish she can’t be talking to Martin Conant. And
though I honestly believe he thinks I’m the more attractive,
he likes talking to her best. He’s rather dull to talk to and
I shouldn’t mind Rosalie taking him off my hands only that
when they get interested in some dull old subject, the
religion of the Chinese or something, they generally end
by forgetting all about me. Oh, this is a miserable life
for a woman. I’d give anything to get out of it, and our
position seems to get worse and worse.
Always the muleteers tell us, “ There is unrest, there is
unrest.” We can’t go north, we can’t go south, we’ve tried
to go east, so we seem to be gradually edging west I ride
a pony nearly all day, and drop off half-dead, and there’s no-
where to sleep but a mule stall, with a cupful of warm
water to wash in. Oh, it’s awful ! And I’m cheerful !
I do think I deserve a medal —but nobody says one word
of praise. If you come to think of it, it is sad, a pretty
young widow going along bravely after day bearing
up and smiling under all hardships and never uttering one


word of complaint. It is pathetic. But nobody says
anything.
Well, anyhow, I’m glad I dropped that word of warning
about Martin Conant to Rosalie Grahame. I hope the
death of poor dear Silas won’t have put it out of her head.
I don’t think it has. He always walks at my pony’s head.
I’m afraid by myself, and I’m sure he likes doing that for
me, and she never comes near him.
So that’s all right.
If only I could think we were getting out of this.
Anyhow, when one’s husband is killed in this sort of way,
I don’t think one need wait so long as a year before marrying
again. Or if one did wait for a year there is nothing to stop
one being engaged.
Silas and Martin Conant went away together —and —I
wonder— of course it would suit him so well that Silas
should be out of the way. At least, oh no, of course not.
There were the muleteer and the innkeeper —of course
Martin Conant has money. But, oh no, of course not.
It was just one of those accidents. Poor dear Silas !
I


CHAPTER XVI
ROSALIE'S STORY.
CHUNG GIVES IT BEST
" The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds
in the south pass through ; so it cometh from the desert,
from a terrible land.”
Mrs. Wright is dead and Silas Chapman is dead, and they
are buried there under the Great Wall with the stones and
rubble heaped over them because the ground is too hard to
dig a grave.
Mr. Wright takes things hardly. The light and life
seemed to have gone out of his twinkling little eyes, but
when Stella cried and said she could eat no supper he
lifted up his hands and said,
“ Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
bless His Holy Name ! ”
I could see that Stella thought this bad form. It was in
a way, but the minister is so earnest.
“ Who redeemeth thy life from destruction,” he went on,
“ Who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender
mercies. Who satisfies thy mouth with good things, so
that thy youth is renewed like the eagle’s.”
“ Don’t, Mr. Wright,” said Stella. She could see nothing
in our plight to be thankful for, and even I felt he was
straining things a little.
“ In my sorrow,” he said simply, “ it’s borne in on me
that I'm forgetting the dear Lord’s many mercies. If Igo
on with you I’m turnin’ my back on Him. He got me here
among the heathen, an’ now He’s taken Sallie to himself
I reckon it’s a sign I’m to be about His business.”
“ But surely,” began Mr. Conant, “ those last days in
Yang Cheng —”


“I’m turnin’ my back on Him with my face set east.
Yang Cheng is my place,” and he turned valiantly to the
setting sun.
“ There is an edict,” began Martin Conant, but the other
threw out his hands as if sweeping away all such vain
imaginings.
“ The Good Tidings ’ud never have been carried to the
heathen,” said he, “if the disciples had been galoots as
considered their skins first.”
Then Chung took a hand. But there was nothing
spiritual about him. He had been enquiring, as was the
duty of a good servant, as to provisions to be got in the next
village along the route towards the river, and the informa-
tion he had acquired was by no means comforting. He
came now with a solemn little prance swinging his pigtail
from one shoulder to the other as if he were in deep
thought.
“No lice got,” he said lugubriously, shutting his eyes,
and there were tears in his voice. “No chuckie got. No
can buy,” and he opened them again to see the effect of this
announcement. Chung was always a joy. He was worth
his wages for the cheering effect he had upon me and. Martin
Conant alone.
“ Oh nonsense, Chung,” I said, “ can do next village.”
“ No can do next village,” and Chung drew a long breath
and shut up his eyes again very tight. “No can do this
side libber,” and his voice trailed away in a mournful
wail.
“ I suppose Chung knows what he’s talking about,” said
Martin Conant to the minister who was too much occupied
with his duties and his manifold blessings to consider such
trifling matters as provisions for the next fortnight.
“You bet,” said Chung opening his eyes and beginning
to take an interest in things around again, and MacTavish
gave a little encouraging whimper.
Well, we discussed the situation from all points of view
and the result was we had to turn back. There was
nothing else for it. We decided that Mr. Conant, Stella
Chapman and I should try and reach the China Inland
Mission at Urumchi in Sinkiang, tw'O months away at least,
but it was better than trusting to the tender mercies of the
Mongols on the Hoang Ho. There was a missionary station
at Sining, but that was rather far west, and we could


hardly hope to get more than advice from the missionaries
there. As for the minister he was going back to Yang
Cheng.
And a week later the dear old man left us. It was a
very forlorn little figure that, with bowed head, turned into
a track that led south, and went bravely about his Father’s
business.
It was after that we found ourselves at Dresar, that is the
business part of the great monastery of Kama Miao. We
stayed outside the town in a little inn on the ridge that
divides the temples and houses of the lamas from the town.
Things were very bad. We did not dare tell Stella how
seething with unrest the country was. The muleteer was
shivering and crying and saying that he would be killed,
and Chung was going about with a face as long as a wet
week.
It was a beautiful view up the hillside. Up and up and
up climbed the temples, and their roofs were red and green,
and the gold roof of the greatest of them flashed in the
winter sunlight. There was snow on the ground, and
against the white background the red robes of the lamas
stood out splashes of gay colour. The place was humming
like a hive of bees. There were great open-air staircases
leading up from one building to another, and up and down
them passed the red-robed figures, there was the blare of
trumpets and the hum of prayer wheels, and woven through
all like a silver strand came the sweet chiming of the bells
that hung, hundreds and thousands of them, from the eaves
of the temples.
It was most fascinating, and at any other time I could
have stood and drunk it all in with joy. It seemed to me as
if it had been spread there waiting all these hundred years
for me to see. That I suppose is what Stella calls my
colossal conceit. It seems to irritate her when I speak like
this. Nothing fashioned by Chinese hands pleases her.
She said she couldn’t admire the embroidery till she was
safe in a London hotel. How I shall dream of this scene
when I am at home !
Chung was still in a state of desperate depression when he
brought us our supper that night. He had a little k’ang
table he had borrowed, as usual, from the people of the inn,
and he set it down in the middle of the mule stall, where
Stella and I proposed to spend the night. Its coat of


grease was hidden under a blue tablecloth of the cotton
of the country. We bought a clean one occasionally for
a few cash. It was a little luxury we did allow our-
selves.
Chung sighed heavily as he set down our scanty supply
of cups and plates, and just as the sunlight gave way to the
mournful grey light of the winter night he tumbled a few
scones on to a plate and set down beside them an unusual
luxury, a lump of yellow butter.
“No chuckie can get,” said he,
“ Oh, butter ! ” said Mr. Conant, “ never mind, we’ve
got butter ! ”
“No piggie can get,” went on the mournful monologue.
Considering the disgusting pigs we had seen in the villages
I cannot think that was any deprivation.
“ No baa lamb, no sheeps,” went on the dreary voice, and
when a cheerful Chinaman feels bad he descends into the
very depth of woe, “no nannygoat, no wonk.” At that we
laughed. We were not going to grieve over the absence of
scavenger dog !
“To-mollow flour be all finish,” proclaimed Chung
sepulchrally.
“ I see there’s nothing for it,” said I, “ but to send Chung
to Sining to see what the missionaries would advise.”
So close were we to Sining now he could be back by next
morning, and I thought that would settle Mr. Chung.
“I’m afraid,” said Mr. Conant, “that is impossible.
He couldn’t get into a walled city with the robbers all
about.”
That little stretch of country between Kama Miao and
Sining was extremely unsafe and we certainly never dreamt
of daring it, but Chung straightened himself up, swung his
pigtail joyfully from shoulder to shoulder, snapped his
fingers and pranced forward cheerfully.
“ Can do,” said he gaily, “ can do. Mus’ go chop-chop.
So can get back to-mollow chop-chop. Missie,” his
voice became very wheedling, “ can pay small small
monies ? ”
“ Get us another cook,” suggested Mr. Conant, remember-
ing that in the Treaty ports a servant never goes till he has
found someone to take his place.
But Chung shrivelled before the suggestion.
“ Here am strange place,” said he mournfully, “ no can.


But,” cheering up, “ come back chop-chop. Missie giving
chit ? ”
“We can’t let him go,’’.wailed Stella. But Mr. Conant
and I decided he must go. Our only hope was that the
missionaries might have some suggestions to make.
Chung was cheerful again. He brought all his pots and
pans and all our slender stores to the mule stall—“ so Missie
can mind.” He also called my attention to the fact that he
had made all the remaining flour into scones enough to last
us all the next day, and he suggested that the muleteer could
make the fire of argols for us, for that is an art in itself,
and he also suggested he could warm the puffed rice and
make the tea. Remembering the muleteer’s unwashen
hands I rather thought that if he lighted the fire I’d perform
the other little offices myself, and then Chung came a little
closer and spoke in a confidential whisper.
“ Put on Tibet coat, can take Missie to Sining.”|
It was a great idea.
“ Why, we’ll take the whole outfit, Chung,” I said.
“ All lite,” said Chung cheerfully. “No can take Missie
Chapman. He stop Kama Miao at inn,” and he let off a
whole series of winks, confidential but perfectly respectful
winks.
I looked across to where Stella was talking to Martin
Conant. The sharp cold and frost had roughened her
cheeks a little in spite of all the grease she was for ever
rubbing into them, but her face looked wonderfully dainty
and delicate peering out of her white cat-skin hood. Her
teeth were, perhaps, a little too pointed, occasionally it
made her face look cruel, and yet it was an essentially
feminine face, and as she looked up at Mr. Conant it was very
enticing. lam afraid Ido not like Stella as much as I did,
probably it is jealousy on my part if I were to be quite frank.
But her beauty evidently had no weight with Chung. He
was determined to leave her behind.
“ But, Chung,” I said, “ we can’t leave Missie.”
“ Missie Chapman no can hide in Tibet coat,” said he
with a little note of scorn in his voice. “ Can take Missie.
Missie can do,” and I’ve no doubt he would have seen me
safe into the mission compound.
“No can leave Missie,” I said. “Chung come back
chop-chop.”
“ Chop-chop,” said he with conviction. The next


morning he left us. And that night the muleteer took his
mules to have the harness mended, so he said. And that
was the last we saw of him. We were reduced to the skew-
bald pony On which the Mongols had sent Mr. Conant
back.


CHAPTER XVII
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE GATHERING OF THE LAMAS
“ Within it opens into a world,
And a little lovely, moony night.”
On the night of the day on which Chung had departed the
moment Stella was asleep, MacTavish and I stole out of the
stall we shared with her, and went out into the courtyard
that sloped so much to the west that I could see over the
wall. The moon was at the full, and the light fell on the
great pile of buildings that climbing up the hillside made up
the great sanctuary of Kama Miao. The buildings were
oblong —square —piles of massive masonry indeterminate
in shape—broken here and there by chortens. Clear cut
they were against the night sky, and in the brilliant moon-
light, more brilliant by reason of the snow, we could see the
staircases and the lamas moving upon them. The faintest
breath of air, sharp, and clean, and cold, brought to our
ears the rumbling of the prayer wheels, thousands of them,
the silvery sound of the temple bells, and the cadence of
rich young voices chanting psalm and prayer. On the roofs
of some of the buildings they had lighted little fires of
juniper boughs which gave out an exquisite aromatic
scent. Such a glorious night I
Out of another stall came Martin Conant, and we stood
side by side looking at the moonlight on the snow-clad hills
that were so still and silent, at the temple that was teeming
with life, listening to the chanting and the soft murmur of
the bells. Everything unsightly or unclean was hidden
away, and the monastery stood out in wondrous beauty.
Oh, it was good to be there with Martin Conant. I stood
there drinking it all in, content —more, glad, happy, thinking
neither of the past nor the future, and then Stella’s com-
plaining voice brought me up sharply.


“ What on earth are yon two doing out there on this
bitter cold night ? ” she asked.
“ I’d forgotten. It is cold, isn’t it ? ” said Mr. Conant.
“Dogo to bed. I don’t think we’ve anything to fear just
yet.”
But next day we changed our minds. There was a
tremendous tumult in the monastery and the lamas were
collecting. Everywhere we could see their red robes
pouring out. They mounted and came riding over the
ridge past the little inn, and on their heads were turbans of
raw silk dyed red, and the winter sunlight was flashing on
guns and spears and swords. They had banners fluttering
yellow and red, and I felt for the moment as if I had stepped
back hundreds of years and was looking at the Asia that had
faced the Crusaders. They were a company of at least
2,000 strong, and the air was full of the sound of their horns
and of their voices shouting.
“ Sha sa ! Sha sa ! ” they yelled in a sort of chorus, now
high, now low, and the hills caught it and echoed it, and
re-echoed it. It was the war cry of the lamas, “ Eat meat !
Eat meat ! ” was the literal translation, and it marked the
dire necessity that made them throw off their usual habits.
The faint breeze that flaunted their banners bore on its
breath as a minor accompaniment to this warlike array
the silver sound of the temple bells, that told of the peace of
winter and of the eternal hills. For a moment it would
dominate, and then above it would sound the clash of arms,
the blare of the long trumpets and the shouts of the fighting
men.
It was wonderful! Something to be remembered !
There was just that sense of danger that made me clutch
MacTavish and hide him beneath my furs, but also that gave
so much zest that I forgot to be afraid.
“ I gather from the innkeeper,” said Mr. Conant, “ they
are going to fight White Wolf.”
In the clear blue sky to the east we could see clouds of
smoke arising, villages burning. I raised my hand and
pointed, and Martin Conant nodded silently. Stella caught
his hand and stood up close to him sobbing. She was
terrified. All around us the villagers were crying and
wailing—poor things caught between the upper and the
nether millstone. Each one was turning a prayer wheel.
Last night the Buddhist faith had showed itself to me in all


its beauty, this morning the click of the prayer wheel seemed
a childish thing. It reminded me of a baby's rattle, and
against the danger that threatened was about as much use
as a baby’s rattle.
“ Chung has failed us again,” moaned Stella, still clutch-
ing Mr. Conant’s hand. I always was something of a
Radical and Stella deepened that feeling. Why should
Chung be faithful to her ? What had she ever done to
demand sacrifice from him ? I turned away for a moment
to try and re-arrange my temper.
A very dilapidated coolie, dressed in a quilted cotton
jacket with the dirty wadding sticking out through the
breaks in the stuff, high Tibet boots, a wisp of dirty rag
hiding one eye, and an exceedingly unkempt pigtail, managed
to attract my attention. He had a dirty scrap of paper in
his hand, and he whined a request that the Lao T’ai T’ai
would give him something for the letter he had brought.
It always takes my breath away to be addressed as the
Lao T’ai T’ai—after all I’m not old yet—but there was
something about the man that was familiar.
There was only half his nose and one eye to be seep,
while his chin was sunk in the collar of his jacket, but I
don’t forget faces easily, and there was something about this
man —and then I knew, and my heart stood still. It was
Chung !
For a moment I was on the point of addressing him by
name, and calling Martin Conant.
But Chung was probably stretching a point to come even
so far, and I held out my hand for the letter and offered him
some cash. He pleaded for wu chen, that is half a Mexican
dollar. For a moment I hesitated.
“ Is it worth it ? ” I asked in Chinese.
“ The Lao T’ai T’ai,” he said earnestly, “ buys safety
with half a dollar, and this poor worm has come sixty li
through fire and death from Chung Li, the faithful servant,
to bear the good tidings. Is it not worth the half dollar ? ”
Whether it was or not he got it, and with a wink and a
toss of his head that was truly Chung, he was gone before I
could ask him another question.
Martin Conant came up and Stella followed.
“ Who’s your friend ? ” he began.
“ Chung,” I said, and Stella stared.
“ But why on earth ? ” said Mr. Conant.


“ I’m afraid he does not think much of our chances.”
I unfolded the letter, which was written with a blunt pencil
on rice paper, and so was punctuated with holes.
“ Honoured Missie,” it began, and each letter was a
printed capital of a different size, and the whole had
evidently cost much labour, “ Yor servant Chung Sick no
can do rod it be far to much wat Hell can do in hil by blu
se—” so far it ran smoothly, though I failed to make sense of
it, but here was a word that had been altered and crossed
out and re-written, and finally emerged as “mulican,” and
the letter went on, “ allee same missie why the hel 5m no
go? ” and it ended triumphantly, “your Lovin Chung.”
As a specimen it was perhaps cheap at half a dollar, but
I utterly failed to make head or tail of it till Mr. Conant
took it and read it aloud, and then we saw it was to be
treated phonetically.
Evidently he wished us to understand he was sick and
could not travel—“ rod ” was certainly “ road.”
“ His racy remarks are plain enough,” said Mr. Conant,
“ but. what they apply to I fail to see.”
“Oh I hate —hate—hate the Chinese,” moaned Stella,
but as hatred of the Chinese was about all she ever did
contribute towards helping out difficult situations, we
neither of us paid any attention.
The yelling and shouting outside was dying away in the
distance, but the sound of the turning prayer wheels still
mingled with the sweet chiming of the bells. Clearly we
ought to be out of this before the lamas returned. Whether
they were victorious or not they might be a danger to us.
“ In hill by blue sea,” read on Mr. Conant in puzzled
tones, but it sounded all right to us who were listening.
“ Of course,” I said, “ In the hills by the Blue Sea—the
Chinese call Koko Nor the Blue Sea. We’re only three or
four days from it, you know.”
“ You’re a wonder, Dr. Rosalie Grahame,” said Martin
Conant. “ You think he’s advising us to go to Koko Nor.
Well, I always wanted to see it, but not under these circum-
stances. No wonder he felt it called for forcible language.
Now comes a poser. ‘ Mulican allee same Missee.’ ”
“ Another American woman doctor,” said Stella, with
just that peculiar intonation with which she always spoke
of a woman doctor. Sometimes it irritated me. Now I
didn’t care !


“ Good gracious ! Stella ! You’re right ! ” What did it
matter if she did despise us. “An American doctor there !
Mr. Conant ! ”
“ You’re presuming we can put faith in your loving
Chung,” said he with a whimsical smile. “ You can’t
think how I hate to damp your ardour, but I feel bound to
remind you that according to you the gentleman, while
recommending us to go, has .left an excellent service and
high wages rather than risk it.himself. Also I have heard
that Koko Nor—” and then he stopped.
“Go on,” I said. “ There’s nothing gained by not
facing the worst.”
“ Well, I have heard that Koko Nor, besides being nearly
10,000 feet above sea level, is th — over two hundred miles
round.”
He had meant to say three, but thought better of it.
“We are the unluckiest people,” sighed Stella. But
neither Mr. Conant nor I looked very cast down. We had
been wandering so long without any definite object that to
hear we had a chance of reaching somebody of our own
colour, who presumably knew the country, was distinctly
comforting.
There was no question about it. We had to find that
American doctor.
And there and then we loaded up the horse and paid the
innkeeper—his bill was 100 cash, not quite 5 cents—and
we made ready to start.
Stella stood still and protested she couldn’t possibly walk.
And then I remembered Mr. Chapman, and how hardly
I had judged him. Martin Conant, at the horse’s head,
looked at me hopelessly.
“ Then,” I said, “ we’ll have to make arrangements to
leave you with the innkeeper. He looks rather as if he were
going to run away himself, still —” and I picked up Mac-
Tavish and marched ahead.
“ Cheer up,” said Mr. Conant, “it’s lovely weather for
walking,” and a forlorn little company we set out on surely
the forlornest quest since the historic days when someone
went hunting for a needle in a bundle of hay.


CHAPTER XVIII
A FEW REFLECTIONS FROM STELLA
A BUTTERFLY IN THE DESERT
“ Sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds.
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.”
It was awful, simply awful, and of all the selfish women
give me the woman who thinks she is just the kindest thing
in the world. Rosalie Grahame is for ever holding herself
up to Martin Conant as the kindest, most thoughtful, most
self-sacrificing woman that ever was made. Not that she
says so in so many words. Trust her for that. Of course
she does do things that look as if they were kind, but that
is only because he is looking on, and if he’s only eyes, only a
man’s always blind, he’d see she spoils it all by being so
selfish over that little brute of a dog. I hate him. Of
course I can’t say so. People are so unreasonable. They’d
think me a beast.
We walked and walked and walked after we left Kama
Miao. Goodness knows it had been bad enough in China,
but here things got worse and worse. Always we were
tramping up and down those wearisome roads, up one hill
and down another, and the other two each carried a bag
and a stick, and made quite a joke of collecting their horrid
fuel. It was all very well for a man, but I wonder Mr.
Conant didn’t see it was disgusting for a woman. It
showed such a lack of refinement. Of course a man will
laugh over that sort of thing when he gets the chance, but
I do think he might have remembered occasionally how
miserable it all made me.
We met a certain amount of people and a certain amount
of camels and mules and donkeys and horses—one always
does meet them in China. Every Chinaman is horrid and
these Tibetans in skin coats, with pointed hats lined with
lambskin, matchlocks on their shoulders, spears in their


hands, and knives in their girdles, were terrible people
to come across. That is at first. We got accustomed to
them very soon. Their brown faces were grimed with dirt,
and their wild hair stood out allround their heads, unkempt
and disordered, and once when they came too close I
screamed. I really couldn’t help it, it was most natural.
Everybody hasn’t got nerves of steel like Rosalie—she took
me by the shoulders and shook me hard and said I was
risking all their lives. As if I was.
It was hard too because I saw such lots of things I should
have simply loved to possess. They had lovely furs, some
of them, and I got Mr. Conant to buy one or two because
the cold was bitter, and they were ever so useful, and then
Rosalie Grahame must needs put her oar in and say we had
enough for an Arctic winter, and we should need the money
for something else before we were done, and we shouldn’t
be able to trade the furs. Ido hate a woman who pretends
to be practical just when she sees another woman wants a
thing badly.
And then the ornaments the women had ! Beautiful
turquoises and coral, brooches and hairpins and necklaces,
and even rings, and not one single one would that woman
allow us to buy. I could easily have managed Mr. Conant.
But she declared we hadn’t a cent to spare. Such a pity
too when we could have bought them at a tenth what they
would have cost in England, and I am sure we could have
managed all right.
But no, my lady was on the high horse, and we mustn’t
buy anything but tea, horrid brick tea, all stalks, and
barley meal, vile stuff they called tsamba, and butter which
was often filthy with hairs sticking in it and marks of the
dirty fingers that had scooped it out of some filthy skin.
I saw it once or twice, though Rosalie had generally scraped
it clean before she set it before us, but the thought of it
made me sick, only, of course, one had to eat something.
We were right out beyond the villages, and it was snow
everywhere, unless some of the hillsides were too steep for
the snow to lie, and there weren’t any more houses. We
were actually sleeping now at night out in the open !
Think of it ! With the thermometer away down below
zero, and nothing but the sky above us ! And all around
was a dreary waste of hills and dales covered with deep
snow. It wasn’t so hard for the others. Martin Conant


is a man, and a man can always bear things more easily than
a woman, though he generally makes more fuss if his little
finger aches—it takes a woman to suffer in silence. And
Rosalie Grahame is just like a man. She can’t feel the
things as I do. I did suffer a lot in silence, and then I
found I might suffer, they went on as if I liked it. Liked
it ! And all the fire we had to keep us warm at night was
the remains of the argols put into little copper Chinese hand-
warmers, and when there was only enough for one they
gave it to me, and such a fuss as they made about it you’d
have thought they were offering me the luxuries of the
Ritz or the Savoy at least. It really is hard when you’ve
always got to be eternally thanking people for wretched
little favours that in any other place you’d much rather not
have. Fancy anyone having to be grateful for a horrid
little smelly hand-warmer, and fancy having to say “ I
know you’re so kind.” Ido really think I had the hardest
part, and yet the other two w r ere going on all day long as
if they were saving me.
I could have managed Martin Conant all right. It was
having a woman doctor, young and good-looking too, made
it extra hard. Oh, why couldn’t she have gone on with
the minister to Miss Lodham, or Sister Ednah, or whoever
they were. It would have made all the difference to me.
It was the hardest luck she should have elected to come in
where she wasn’t wanted. If I could only have had Martin
Conant alone.
We marched for four days into the hills, and got to the
shores of Koko Nor, and then I thought we were really
going to have a minor stroke of luck and lose MacTavish,
We were camping against a great rock and I was doing my
best to keep warm —we really hadn’t any too many furs—
while Martin Conant attended to the horse and Rosalie
Grahame was warming the last —the very last—of our
puffed rice in the frying pan over a fire of argols. There
were some tents sprawled out over the snow a couple of
miles away, and Rosalie had bought butter and tsamba
from them, filthy stuff—if anybody thinks I didn’t suffer I'd
like them to have to live on tea and tsamba, and that butter
with the thermometer away down below zero. It was just
getting dark, really rather picturesque, with Rosalie, tall and
slim and graceful, bending over the red fire. If only I
could have been whisked away to a comfortable hotel in


London—-it was the sort of thing I could admire on the
stage, but to be taking part in it—o—o—oh !
Then I saw a great white Tibetan dog come creeping up.
If I’d thought he was going to attack Rosalie I should have
cried out, but I knew he wouldn’t dare touch her, and
before you could say anything he had made a snap at
MacTavish, who was sitting down beside his mistress
waiting for his share of the rice.
It was done in a flash, and I thought for a moment,
with quite a throb of thankfulness, that the little brute
was gone for good and all. But as the big dog shook him
like a little rat he gave a despairing yelp and Rosalie turning
shrieked aloud. And then actually, because she had no
other weapon handy she seized the frying pan, sent the rice,
the very last puffed rice we had, flying, and hit the dog over
the head. He dropped MacTavish who made for his
mistress’s feet, and Mr. Conant came running up. He had
the revolver in his hand, but Rosalie said,
“ Don’t shoot, for goodness’ sake don’t shoot. He
belongs to those tents over there, and we can’t afford to put
them against us.” Then she ran at the dog again with the
frying pan—he was a handsome-looking dog—and he slunk
away with his tail between his legs.
She turned back and picked up MacTavish, and he cried
and licked her fingers, and she let him.
“ I’m afraid he’s badly hurt,” she said, and you’d have
thought it was a child she was speaking about as she knelt
down by the fire to inspect him. I felt I had better call her
attention to the waste. Where were we to get more rice ?
“ It’s our very last rice,” I said mournfully, looking at it
scattered on the ground.
“Pick it up,” said she, still giving all her attention to the
dog. He moaned a little. “ The ground is hard.”
Of course she never thought about anything but her own
affairs, but Mr. Conant picked it up for me.
“ Is he hurt ? ” he asked.
“ I’m afraid so,” said Rosalie, and actually her voice was
nearly breaking.
Mr. Conant bent over the little brute and patted his head.
The silly idiots making such a ridiculous fuss !
“Poor old chap !” he said. “ Cheer up, Missus. Why
the skin is not even broken. I’ve seen dogs recover in the
most wonderful manner.”


“ He’s had a bad squeeze,” she said. “ A day or two will
show whether he will pull through.”
And she went to bed that night hugging him in her arms.
But I don‘t think he’ll pull through, and that will be one
burden less, for really the fuss Rosalie makes over that
arrogant little wretch irritates me.


CHAPTER XIX
ROSALIE'S STORY.
A FRIEND INDEED
*
“ I knew it was Love, and I felt it was glory.”
How I would have wondered once at the idea of being filled
with anxiety about a dog when it might well be we had
enough to worry about on our own account. We lived
from day to day—still, thank God, we did live—and every
day brought us nearer the spring and the warm weather.
The surroundings were Arctic. We’d been four days
marching into the hills, and the road had reached its
highest point. We sheltered under a rock, and looking
back the country stretched away a mass of softly rounded
hills covered with snow. The jutting rock hid the view to
the north, and looking round we saw a wonderful sight, a
great sea of ice, the lake of dreams, the Blue Lake, Koko
Nor. Truly had it been so named, for frozen into its mid-
winter stillness when the sun was on it it looked blue, a
great sheet of bluish, semi-transparent ice, stretching away
to the far horizon, with the blue and cloudless sky above it.
It was really wonderful, wonderful, all the vast expanse
of blue and white glistening and glittering in the sunshine,
an Arctic world, like the world to which the Snow Queen
took little Kay in Hans Andersen’s story. But when the
sun went the glory was gone. The stars came out like
gleaming points of silver, and the moon was a sickle of
silver newly washed, but the frozen lake looked grey and
threatening, and the hills were eerie and weird. The
biting cold only emphasized the desolation, and the little
fire of argols was hardly sufficient to boil our tea.
I felt down-hearted enough as I sat in the rugs beside
Stella, with MacTavish in my lap. I would have left him
there as he seemed fairly easy when he was lying still, only


I didn’t trust Stella. I was afraid she might torment the
little sick dog when my eye was not on her. So I just sat
where I was and nursed him and let Mr. Conant get the
supper as best he could.
When Stella was asleep he and I discussed the situation,
and he was optimistic. We must meet the American
doctor sooner or later. Everyday we came across encamp-
ments of cloth tents spread out like huge spiders on the
snowy ground, and indeed, if it hadn’t been for them and the
provisions they sold us we should certainly have perished ;
but they weren’t exactly friendly. Fodder was getting
scarce and terribly dear as our means went, and I had been
wondering whether we had not better try and trade off the
horse at some of the encampments, only goodness knows
how we’d have carried our things without him.
And MacTavish was sick. He lay in my lap and licked
my hand gratefully every now and then with his little hot
tongue. All night I lay with him in my arms, and the
slightest movement made him moan. We were all huddled
up close together for warmth—there was nothing else for it—
and it’s extraordinary how quietly one slips into things
when the necessity really arises. Stella was in the middle,
and once turning over and throwing out her arm she
jostled the poor little dog badly, and I could have hit her,
I felt so furious. I wasn’t nearly so close to hating her then
though as I was next morning. It v/as manifest the poor
little chap was very ill indeed.
We had to eat our food cold in the morning, and parched
barley and butter mixed with tea is about the limit, but
lighting a fire was such a business we never could do it
except at night, and as we were having our breakfast
Stella looked at the little dog lying covered with my gay
Italian silk rug.
“Poor little thing,” she said, “ I do hate to leave it.”
Actually she would have left him sick and suffering to
perish there of cold and hunger !
“ Who’s going to leave him ? ” I asked, and I wonder
if my voice expressed all I felt.
“ Are you going to ask Mr. Conant to put him out of his
misery ? ” she asked sweetly. How could I ever have
thought she was charming ? “ Perhaps that would be best.”
“I don’t know what you mean,” I said, and gave Mac-
Tavish a little reassuring pat. I felt as if he might under


stand what she was saying, and it seemed so dreadful when
he was so ill.
“ Well, what are you going to do with a sick dog ? ”
“ I’m going to carry him, of course.” He knew we were
talking about him and raised his pretty little butterfly
ears and watched me anxiously as I gathered together my
particular load. It seemed to me that the poor little
thing who had always been so gay realised that he was in-
capable now of walking, and was wondering what would be
his fate. It gave me a sharp pain to think he might not be
sure I would protect him.
“ Darling little ducksey dog,” I whispered in his ear,
“I’m going to carry you.”
“ You can’t burden yourself with a dog,” said Stella all
at once very considerate for my comfort, “ You know he’s
overgrown for a Japanese. He must weigh at least ten
pounds.”
Then I turned on her. “I’d rather stay behind myself,”
I said, “ than leave my dog. So there ! ”
Then Mr. Conant came to the rescue.
“ And I can help you,” he said cheerily. “We can’t
afford to lose our jolly little friend. Why he’s better.
That’s right, old chap ! Lift up that funny little nose of
yours. He’ll be trotting along as well as ever presently.”
And he looked at me and smiled, and I knew I loved him.
That evening as we craw-led slowly along looking for some
place where we could camp for the night, two Tibetans came
galloping up to us. Their matchlocks were slung on their
backs, but they carried their spears threateningly. I
spoke to them in Chinese, but they shook their head.
They knew no Chinese. Evidently they were out for
robbery for one of them made a grab at the gay rug I had
wrapped round MacTavish. It was the only thing out of
the common we had about us. The little dog whimpered
as his rug was tugged at, and Mr. Conant promptly stepped
forward and threatened with his pistol. The man let go and
they both laughed, and urging their horses rode on down the
mountain track we were following.
“Oh, you ought to have let him have it,” cried Stella,
“ we’ve got to keep on the right side of these dreadful men.
Why one had his face painted red and yellow.”
But I said, “ No, I think you were right. It would never
do to let them think we were afraid of them.” And as I
spoke I knew I was desperately afraid.


And then how it happened I don’t know, I slipped on the
stony slippery path, and trying not to jar the little dog I
slipped still more, and presently I was sitting down in the
middle of the path with MacTavish in my lap and the
agonizing knowledge slowly crystallising in my brain that
even if my life were at stake —and very likely it was—l
could not crawl from that spot.
Mr. Conant bent over me.
“ You’re not hurt ? ” And looking up into his troubled
face I would have given worlds to say it was nothing. But
I couldn’t. I could only put down my hands and grasp
my ankle and say with difficulty,
“ I don’t think any bones are broken.”
“ That’s good. Just rest a bit. Hold the noble Per-
simmon a minute, Mrs. Chapman.”
But Stella drew back.
“ Oh, you’re frightened. He’s much more frightened of
you, I assure you. He’ll stand, I think. Here, let me,”
and he got me with my back to a big rock and then kneeling
on the ground began unlacing my boot.
I tried to keep my voice from shaking, and I said, “ It's
a bad job. I’m afraid it’s sprained.”
“ We must rest for the night,” he said, and he actually
managed to speak cheerfully. “ Anyhow I think it's just
as well to let these men get ahead of us. Well find a little
camping place in the hills here. I’ll look round. Cheer up.
You’re not afraid to hold Persimmon, are you ? ”
If Persimmon had been anything but the mildest of
beasts I should have had to let him go, but it made me feel
I was of some use still when I held him, and before he went
Mr. Conant had arranged MacTavish comfortably in my
lap. Bless him. Stella cried, of course. She always did
cry in an emergency. I wondered dully what on earth she
was crying about. It wasn’t her ankle that had given out,
but I didn’t try and comfort her. I felt I had bottomed.
My nerves were all on edge. I wanted to get up and
shriek. I felt desperate.
But it is curious how little things affect one. MacTavish
gave a little whimper, and I forgot my woes for the minute.
I patted his little head and Stella wailed aloud.
“ You’re only thinking about your little dog ! ” she
sobbed, “ and I know we’re going to die here in these awful,
awful hills.”


It was too much. In spite of everything I laughed.
“ Well, for goodness’ sake die if you want to,” I said,
“ but I’m not going to die just at present, neither is Mac-
Tavish.”
Just for the moment my own words cheered me, and
back came Martin Conant saying he had found a little
hollow in the hills where there was a fireplace made of
stones, plenty of fuel round and quite a comfortable little
cave to sleep in. It might have been the Biltmore, at least,
and he made a joke of getting me there, and setting me to
blow up the fire, for it is a business to make a fire of argols.
But when we lay down my courage oozed out. All
night I looked out at the hard bright stars and the moon,
which was past the full, but still bright, and cold—oh so
cold. And my ankle throbbed and I held my little dog
close, and I think I was the most miserable woman in all the
wide world. Oh, I was miserable ! And the night was
long and yet it was not long enough for I knew there was
only one thing I could do. It was all very well to scorn
Stella for a coward, but I had no right to keep the other two
back. It was my bounden duty to persuade them to go
on and look for the American doctor. They could come
back for me —if I was alive —but, of course, I mustn’t say
that. I could not allow them to stay here and wait till I
got well.
And then there was MacTavish, my little MacTavish,
who was so sick. I thought about him till I had to bite my
lips to keep from bursting out sobbing. He snuggled up
closer to me, as if he knew all about it, and licked my hand
softly and that made it all the harder. The night seemed
so long, as if it would never end, and yet I was afraid of the
end. Oh, that awful night ! I can never again have such
an awful night.
And then came the soft pink of the dawn stealing slowly
over the white snow, and the sun himself, bright and cold.
The thermometer must have been far below zero, but the
light was brilliant, and when the other two waked, and Mr.
Conant went away to look after Persimmon I summoned all
my courage and tried the scheme on Stella.
She was extremely cheerful about it and my heart sank.
I wonder if I had really thought she would say “ No,” or
offer to stay with me while Mr. Conant went on to look for the
American doctor.


“We can make you a nice little fire and pile plenty of
fuel up round so you can get it quite easily,” she said as if
it were the jolliest plan in the world, “ and we’ll come back,
of course, the minute we find the doctor, and take you
and MacTavish,”
“ But I want you to take MacTavish,” I said. “ He’s
sure to be all right in a day or two if you let him ride on
Persimmon for a little.”
“ Oh, I think he’s better with you,” said Stella airily.
“ Won’t MacTavish be better with Rosalie, Mr. Conant ? "
she asked as he came back.
“ What’s that you’re saying ? ” said he.
I looked at him. Somehow the words would not come.
But Stella spoke up more cheerfully than she had done for a
long time.
“ Rosalie says she’d rather stay here and we can send
back for her when we find the American doctor,” she said.
I hadn’t put it that way, and it sounded as if I really wished
to stay behind. “ She says we’re to take MacTavish, but I
am sure he’d be better with her. A sick dog can’t ride a
horse, you know, can he ? and he doesn’t like me.”
Mr. Conant looked from her to me and back again.
Then to my utter surprise he dropped down on his knees
beside me and put one arm round my shoulder.
“My dear girl,” he said, “my dear girl.” He said
nothing more for a minute, but with his other hand began
patting my cheek, “Do you think we’d part you and
MacTavish, and do you think we could leave you behind?
Why we’d never be able to get up a fire, and would perish
with cold,” and he laughed a little and patted my cheek
again.
I couldn’t say anything. It seemed as if some terrible
burden had been lifted. I looked at him for a minute, and
his eyes were full of pity, the pity that is tenderness and
kindness and sympathy.
“ Why, we could never leave you,” he said.
“We can take you on the horse and leave you at the next
Tibetan encampment we come to,” said Stella, and her
voice sounded shrill and as if she were disappointed.
I remembered once we had threatened to leave her in a
Chinese and I was ashamed. Oh it would be awful to be
left. Mr. Conant drew me a little closer to him. I tried to
say something, but no words would come, only strangled
foolish sobs.


“ We’re going to stick together,” he said, and the kind
hand went on stroking my cheek. “ I know what we’ll do.
Mrs. Chapman is dead sick of walking. We’ll carry you on
Persimmon to a little sunnier spot and make a sort of
permanent camp there, and you women can stay at home
and you can blow up the fire and I can go ranging out every
day—”
Then Stella’s voice cut in sharply and angrily.
“ Don’t pet her. It’s the very worst thing for hysterics.”
I made an effort to stop then.
“ If you only knew what it is like to find you so kind
when —when all night—”
“ You were making up your mind to send us away with
the treasure dog,” said he with a little laugh, “ you ought
to have known me better than that. Now there’s such a
lot of fuel here we’re going to have hot tea for breakfast, to
say nothing of porridge, and there’s still a spark in the fire
if you think you can blow the bellows,” and he stooped down
and undid the rug in which I had wrapped MacTavish. It
gave me a queer pang to think how my heart had ached as I
had wound the rug round him. The little chap raised his
ears and stretched out his little white paws.
“ Why, he’s better,” said Mr. Conant, gently lifting him
to his feet. “ There’s a bit of good luck for us. He’s
distinctly better.”


CHAPTER XX
MARTIN CONANT'S REFLECTIONS
AN ARCTIC WILDERNESS
“ Sleep were no sweeter than her face to me.
Sleep of cold sea bloom under the cold sea.”
“ She played at half a love with half a lover.”
I’ve a pretty strong imagination, but I certainly never
anticipated being adrift in a howling Arctic wilderness
alone with two good-looking young women. I sometimes
felt as we marched along as if I were between the embodi-
ments of good and evil, the attractive good and the
attractive evil.
Rosalie Grahame is a good woman, there is no doubt about
that. She has high ideals and tries to live* up to them.
She is hot-tempered, but that adds a spice to life, and she
is very good-looking. When first I came to the mission
station I was mightily attracted by her, but she kept me at
a distance. On this journey the aloofness has slipped
away imperceptibly, and I see what a thorough good
comrade she is, sound all through. If it weren’t for Stella
Chapman—
That woman is a little devil, an attractive little devil,
pretty, and soft, and clinging —as selfish as they make them.
Without uttering a single word she says twenty times a day,
“ Let’s enjoy ourselves. We’re both young. Nobody
would know and we could have such a good time. We
shall never get such a chance again.”
She would hold up her hands in horror if she knew that
was the crude way in which I put her appeal to me, but,
nevertheless, boiled down to the essentials, that is exactly
what she is saying the livelong day.
She is certainlyaC {active, but not half so good-looking as


Rosalie Grahame. Rosalie is worth a dozen of her —a
dozen —a hundred—a thousand !
Hang it all! The idea of analysing like this when the
Lord knows whether we shall be alive this day week. I’m
hanged if I know how we’re going to get out of this. And
poor Rosalie has twisted her ankle —nothing in a civilized
land, but here pretty near fatal. Poor girl! The brave
lips quivered a little as she suggested we should take
MacTavish. I very nearly broke down, and if I hadn’t put
my arm round her and hugged her, upon my word I believe
I should have howled or throttled Stella. The little devil
would have left her here, would have got rid of her and her
dog and cared not a cuss whether they died or not. She
would have been pathetically sorry about poor dear
Rosalie and her little dog, and that would have been the end
of it. And Rosalie—l have never seen anything like the
relief in those brown eyes of hers as she looked at me' —the
gladness-—and then they were drowned in tears. She ought
to have known that any man with a glimmering of imagina-
tion would have realised that to leave her here would be
abandoning her to her death. She knew it. Hang it all,
why couldn’t she give me a little credit for common
decency? Things don’t look very promising, but anyhow
we’re going to face it together, unless Stella likes to make a
little excursion on her own, and I don’t think that’s likely.
She can go if she wants to.
After we’d had breakfast—such a breakfast—only it was
warm for once, I got Rosalie onto the old nag—she couldn’t
put her foot to the ground—put the little dog in her arms,
and then leaving our gear, led the horse while we went to
look for a camping ground with a little more sun about it,
and a wider outlook where we might rest for two or three
days. Resting is a beautiful word, and we might just as
well call it that as anything else.
We didn’t go far. We couldn’t afford to be parted from
our belongings. I found a good camping ground on a
hillside that was sheltered, and from which we could see
over quite a goodly range of country. Koko Nor was to the
north of us, and on a rock in it we could see the curved
roofs of a monastery, and about tw'elve miles away, but still
plainly to be seen against the snow, a little to the right of the
monastery and the lake, were some spots of black. An
encampment, of course. Plenty of folk in the wilderness


evidently. The question was to whom should we apply for
aid ? Help we’d got to have from somebody soon. We had
good reason for distrusting monks, and those in Tibet are
often truculent, and the encampments—oh, well, I thought
Td give my mind to considering it later on, or perhaps
discuss the matter with Rosalie when she was rested.
I dumped the women down in the sun and went back
quickly for our gear. Rosalie, with her little dog in her
lap, sat down contentedly enough with her back to the
hillside. Stella looked as if she were considering coming
back with me, but I nipped that desire in the bud by setting
off at a pace that would have taxed all her powers. I
didn’t want Stella at this juncture.
For one thing the weather was threatening. It looked
as if a storm were coming up. We had only been able to
travel at such a low temperature because the air was still
—if it began to blow I knew it behoved us to be snugly
tucked up till it was all over.
I got back in about an hour and a half. Then I piled up
stones roughly against one side of the hill, and over it I
stretched a piece of American Army canvas, that hitherto
we had used as a ground sheet, fastened it down with heavy
stones and filled up all the chinks with snow. I brought
it, Stella pretended to, and Rosalie though she had to stay in
one spot, worked like a nigger, so that we had really a sub-
stantial resting place before the first puffs of wind began to
blow. I collected fuel and put it ready to our hands just
outside, and inside the shelter we piled up our furs and
thanked God we had so many.
“ And you didn’t want me to buy them,” said Stella
reproachfully to Rosalie.
The young doctor was as gay as a child building a doll’s
house.
“ I’m glad now,” she said. “ I’m thankful. Oh, we
shall be all right. Oh, supposing I had been alone,” and her
eyes wandered over the lake where the heavy clouds were
gathering, and her hand stole down to pat MacTavish
nestling among the furs.
“ You ought to know,” I said, perhaps a little roughly,
“ you never would have been alone.”
She turned round with one of her old imperious looks,
and then there came into her eyes a softness and she bent
over the little dog.


“ We know, MacTavish,” she said, “ we know and we
won’t ever forget.”
I had not realised it before but hers isn’t mere prettiness.
It is something better than that. I had always thought she
was nearly beautiful, and there and then I took away the
qualifying phrase.
However, the Lord knows this wasn’t a time to think
of women’s beauty. I built a fire of argols, thrust the
bellows into her hands and bade her keep it going while the
horse and I ranged the country round for more. I got a
goodly pile before nightfall, and I saw some tents not three
miles away, and made up my mind that presently we would
appeal to them. It would be better to go to an encampment
than to the monastery, and better to go to one three miles
away than ten. Suppose these people could put us in touch
with the American doctor.
Rosalie and I talked about it that night as I ate the
porridge of parched barley she had ready for me, and so
hungry was lit tasted quite good. Stella cried because the
wind was beginning to blow, driving little wreaths of snow
before it, and I wondered where I should have been if
there had been no Rosalie to prepare that supper. One
thing is quite certain, Stella would not have done it.
Rosalie was amazing She was cheerful and happy, and
even pitiful with Stella, who was crying like a fretful child.
“ Don’t cry, dear,” she said, “ don’t cry. Only think
how nice and warm we shall be to-night, however much it
storms. And oh, just look at MacTavish ! He’s getting
well! ” For MacTavish had crawled out of his gay rug,
and staggering along on shaking legs, was inspecting our
abode and giving it his gracious approval.
“I’m so unhappy,” wailed Stella, “I’m so unhappy,”
and she wrapped herself in the best of the furs and came
creeping along to crouch down beside Rosalie, “I’m so
uncomfortable,” and she fidgeted about as if she could not
get herself settled in the confined space. Rosalie laid down
the bellows and tried to help her.
“ There, that’s better,” she said. “No ? Oh ! There’s
a lump here.”
“It’s nothing,” said Stella hastily, and her tone changed.
“ Nothing ! Why, of course you’re uncomfortable, sitting
on awkward corners like that. Let me —Why ? Stella ! ”
and she drew out a little parcel and looked at it curiously.


Stella too looked at it half shamefacedly, half defiantly. I
couldn’t see what it was, but the dull fire of the argols
caught and sparkled on something bright.
“ Stella ! ” cried Rosalie again, half laughing.
“Well, why shouldn’t I? ” she said. “ Those buckles
alone cost two guineas in Bond Street, and the shoes are not
worn.”
“ But to bring them along ! I thought we’d left those
shoes outside Yang Cheng ! ”
“ As if I could,” said Stella, with so much feeling in her
tones that we both laughed outright and she joined us.
It cleared the air somehow and put us all on a better
footing.
“ Still I’m worried about poor old Persimmon,” said
Rosalie looking up and wiping the tears of laughter from her
eyes. The wind came shrieking down and tore at the little
shelter, and went wailing away into the hills. Good Lord,
how it did blow ! It bore on its icy breath snow like little
lumps of sharp ice, and soon the air was so full of whirling
flakes it was impossible to see a yard ahead. We had got
our shelter just in time, no human being could have survived
such a storm in the open. The wild wind made the fire of
argols glow redly. Of course we had to abandon the horse to
his fate, but I had found him shelter, tied him with a long
line, given him a good feed of parched barley, and I could
only hope he would justify the name we had given him and
pull through.
There was nothing to do but attend to the fire and sleep.
The storm roared and wailed overhead, the air was full of
the whirling flakes, and that little shelter, and the red eye
of the argol fire made our world.
“ It’s the coldest fire,” said Rosalie, as every now and
again she rose and blew it up with the Tibetan bellows.
“I was just thinking,” I said, “that it made all the
difference. Why, this place is quite cosy.”
“ I’m glad you like it,” said Stella sarcastically.


CHAPTER XXI
ROSALIE'S STORY.
OVERWHELMED
“ He hath laid my vine waste and barked my figtree ;
he hath made it clean-bare and cast it away ; the branches
thereof are made white.”
“ Well,” said Martin Conant, as we snuggled down to-
gether, “ you may look upon yourself as a public benefactor
after all,” and in the dull glow of the argols I was blowing up
I saw that tender little smile not only on his lips but in his
deep grey eyes. Who could help loving Martin Conant ?
We were up rather high under the lee of a cliff. He had
piled up stones on one side and built in our ground sheet
carefully, so as to form a shelter. Naturally it was very
small and very crowded, and just in the opening we had
made a fire of argols that the storm served to keep alight.
We were sheltered from the wild blizzard that raged
outside, luckily. Just above the fire and below the curtain
overhead, we could see the snow driven before the wind in
one great slanting white sheet of dancing particles, and
stepping outside for a moment you needed to keep your
wits about you, for but one turn would have blotted out the
fire, the shelter, every vestige of the camp, and you would
have been lost and frozen to death in a white wilderness.
We went out no more than we could help, and we abandoned
the poor old horse to take his chance. We had to.
Stella lying there in the furs we huddled round us com-
plained bitterly of the cramped quarters, but I—l was
happy. Who would have thought I could have been
happy in a little make-shift shelter on a hillside on the
Tibetan Marches ?
And yet I was. I had feared so terribly the night before.
No wonder the howling storm sang in my ears as a paean of
thankfulness, and Stella’s moans but emphasized the


comforts that were ours. And MacTavish was getting
well. He staggered out of his wrappings more than once
and held up his pretty little head, and asked us with what
Stella called his arrogant air what on earth we were doing
in such a place. And I laughed and hugged him, I was so
ridiculously happy. And yet the shrieking and the howling
of the storm drowned all other notes.
Never have I seen such a storm, but it wore itself away in
thirty hours, and before the sun set on the second day, the
sky was a cloudless, wind-swept blue that looked down on a
white world. Even the lake was gone, and where there had
been a vast expanse of blue ice was now one stretch of snow,
of undulating snow worked into hills and valleys, like
shifting sand, by the fierce wind. I could not have believed
it was a lake. It was lucky we had come upon it a couple of
days earlier, or else we should have gone marching on right
into the heart of it, never realising we were on the lake
itself.
It took us nearly till sunset to clear things round about
us, and to feed Persimmon, who had survived. Goodness
knows we had not much left, and Martin Conant and I
looked at each other when we saw how scanty was our store
of tsamba and curds and tea. Still we managed something
for the poor beast, and we knew there were tents not far
away. Mr. Conant had seen them when he was collecting
material for our shelter, and we had discussed the propriety
of appealing to them for help. But Tibetans are not
inviting. We put off communication with them as long
as we could.
“ But I've got to look them up to-morrow,” said Mr.
Conant. “ Can we hold out till to-morrow ?” he asked,
when I had given him a feed for Persimmon. Persimmon
had the same as we did nowadays.
Till the day after, I told him. MacTavish was solemnly
trying all his little legs out in the sunshine, and he looked
so much better that I was confirmed in my faith that all was
well. I watched the gorgeous sunset over the hills of
unknown Tibet, and that night I slept a dreamless sleep
without a care, and when the fresh clear, cold, sunny,
morning dawned I awoke refreshed, better, very sure that
this was the best of all worlds.
We had our minute breakfast, and then just a little tiny
feeling of discomfort began to creep into my heart. I didn’t


like Mr. Conant going to those unknown Tibetans. I
suggested he should ride, but he pooh-poohed the idea.
Evidently he did not think the horse was up to it. I
looked across to where, before the storm, perhaps ten or
twelve miles away, had been the black tents of another
encampment.
“ Go there,” I said, reluctant to let him go out of our
sight, “ and we can watch you all the way.”
He laughed.
“Why, my dear girl, I shouldn’t be back to-night.
Wouldn’t you rather I came back in a couple of hours than
watch me flounder through the snow for six ? ”
“ Well, take the pistol.”
But he wouldn‘t do that. “ 1 guess I’m safe with this
stout stick,” he said, “ and I like to think you women have
something to protect yourselves with in case of necessity.
But I’m sure you’ll be all right, and I won’t be long.” He
stood up, walked a little way, turned round and looked at
us.
“ Don’t worry. I’ll be back soon,” and he snapped his
fingers at MacTavish, waved his hand to us, turned the
corner into a fold of the hills and—vanished.
We set to work and tidied up. You can understand
there are difficulties for a woman in the life we were leading.
But Mr. Conant was very thoughtful, and, as we all wore
furs, rich furs, we did not look so unkempt as we otherwise
might have done. Stella and I always kept our hair well
brushed. We both of us had plenty, and did not mind
letting it down and combing it vigorously, and now that we
were certain Mr. Conant could not come back for three hours
at the very least we cleaned out our cooking pot, filled it
with snow, and got enough warm water to have a thorough
good wash, which refreshed us considerably.
When that was done we sat down in the sun in the snow
and talked. Not that we had anything to say. Of course
there was lots to occupy our minds, but nothing that
demanded immediate attention. Stella was cross and
discontented, aggrieved with me, though what I could have
done to injure her I’m sure I don’t know. I felt how
thankful I would be when Mr. Conant came back. He
always made light of difficulties, and created an atmosphere
of cheerfulness. Stella evidently missed him too. After
two hours had passed and the sun was creeping up to the
zenith she became quite tearful.


“He ought to be here now. It’s cruel of him to leave us
alone so long.”
I could only repeat, “He hasn’t been long. It would
take him at least an hour to get there and an hour to get
back.”
He would come as soon as he could, but oh how I longed
to see him turning that corner.
Three hours passed and I too grew restless.
He would never spend an hour in the camp of the dirty
Tibetans.
“He’s cruel, cruel,” wailed Stella. “He’s left us
because we’re helpless and we keep him back.”
I could hardly believe my ears. At last I understood
stern hard Silas Chapman. Was this the sort of woman he
had to live with, one who the moment a friend was out of
sight imagined all manner of evil about him ?
I made an effort to speak reasonably.
“ How can you be so wicked, Stella ? Has he ever been
anything but good and considerate to us ? ”
“Oh ! ” said Stella, “ that’s just it. You can’t expect a
man to go on being good and self-sacrificing for ever.
He’s bound to get tired of it, and your accident was just
the last straw.”
She took away my breath. It was such cold callous
reasoning.
“ He might get tired,” I said, “but he wouldn’t go away
and leave us to die.”
“No one would ever know,” Stella’s voice trailed away
miserably, “ our bones will lie here for the hawks and
vultures.”
I was right down angry then.
“ How can you think so badly of a man who has been so
good to you ?” I said. But she kept on.
“ He went away with Silas, a big strong man, and came
back with Silas dead. How do we know the story he told
was true ? ”
It was horrible. I found it disgusting to be near her. X
wanted to snatch up MacTavish and walk away into the
snow. And then I remembered that Stella always said the
first thing that occurred to her. She was no more re-
sponsible for her words than a silly child who had lived
among low-class minds.
“You must remember,” I said sharply, “your husband
T,


was a great loss to us all, and to Mr. Conant in particular.
It doubled his responsibilities.”
“ He was my husband,” said Stella wiping her eyes, and
even in that moment she spoke with that bridling air of
satisfaction that a certain type of woman always uses when
she thinks her charms have been irresistible.
It was the very last straw. I don’t know whether I
looked as disgusted as I felt, but I held my tongue, and
suddenly she was down on her knees with her arms round
my waist.
“ Don't be cross with me. Of course I never meant that
exactly. Only you see men do like me—and think me
pretty, and—”
I shook her off. Hateful little beast ! I could find no
other word to describe her. And yet here we were, two
utterly helpless women, alone on a Tibetan hillside, and it
would be folly to quarrel. I walked away a little and after
waiting another half-hour MacTavish and I began limping
towards the corner where Mr. Conant had turned into the
hills.
Stella came after us weeping and crying that I was cruel
and she was a most unfortunate woman, and that now
we were as good as dead. At last we got to the turning in
the hillside. My heart beat as we turned that corner.
There was quite an extensive view of snow-clad hill and dale,
but there was no sign of a tent, not a sign of human habita-
tion ! We were alone in a desolate white world. Mr.
Conant had said he could see quite plainly tents from here
and the men and women outside them.
“ I told you so. I told you so,” said Stella. “ There
are no tents there. There never were any tents there.
He’s left us.”
What was the good of defending him from the atrocious
accusation ? What did it matter what a bad woman
thought ? We were alone, close to starvation, and Mr.
Conant might be injured or dying among those snow-clad
desolate hills. Unless the tent dwellers had held him
prisoner or killed him nothing would have kept him from
us. My knees were trembling so I had to sit down in the
snow and MacTavish scrambled on my lap and licked my
chin to show his sympathy.
If Martin Conant were dead it seemed to me the world
would be absolutely empty, and I might just as well sit


there and die too. But supposing he* were injured and
helpless—that thought wrung me, for I was so helpless
myself. Stella wrung her hands and sobbed, and then
subsided on the snow beside me, but I had done with trying
to comfort Stella.
I believe I should have just sat there till I died if it hadn't
been for MacTavish’s little warm tongue licking my face.
It reminded me the little dog had a right to his life anyhow.
I struggled to my feet and remembered that the poor horse
was tethered, and I determined I’d let him loose and give
him a chance for his life.
“ Where are you going ? ” asked Stella. But I said
nothing.
When we got back to the little shack the western sun
was low in the heavens, but we could see quite a long way
round and the light on the snow was blinding. It hurt my
eyes, and as I was turning away something black caught
them. There were the tents on the hillside to which I had
wanted Mr. Conant to go because we would have been able
to see all the way he went. And then like a flash it came
to me, if we could get there perhaps the people might help
us.
It was such a forlorn hope ! But we had nothing else,
I limped into the shelter and got hold of the tsamba bag.
There wasn’t much, but we would have to share with poor
old Persimmon.
“Are you going to get supper?” asked Stella in a
conciliatory tone.
“ I’m going to give the horse something,” I said, “ and
MacTavish and I are going to wait here till to-morrow
morning, and if Mr. Conant is not back by then I’m going
to try and get across to those tents over there. Perhaps
they can help us to find him.”
It was awful that night. I had never before faced
danger alone, for Stella did not count. Here in the dark
stillness I heard a thousand terrible threatening sounds
that could not be explained. I lay awake and thought of
Martin Conant, and prayed he might not be suffering. I
thought how easily we might be overcome did anyone come
to the camp in the night. We were two women alone, and
very, very helpless, and even those black tents I intended
to make for might not hold out a helping hand. Even if
you believe there isn’t anything worth living for you still


feel a shudder at the thought of being at the mercy of a
horrible filthy man clad in dirty furs and dirtier rags,
and crawling with vermin.
Stella cried and said she should not close an eye, and then
I heard her regular heavy breathing. I thought I might
consider us safe as long as MacTavish slept, but when he sat
up and listened intently I listened too, and the night was full
of crunchings and snappings and long-drawn sighs. The
little dog growled angrily, and I felt cold down my spine.
He snuggled back again and I felt faint with relief. I lay
and watched the stars, keen and bright, through the opening
under the ground sheet, the planets were like glorious
jewels, and I must have dozed and slipped a little so that my
waking eyes looked up at the ground sheet and I started up
wide awake in horror, thinking the doorway was filled up.
But the dawn came at last and everything was as we had
left it the night before, not a living creature had been near
us.
It was a business getting off for I could only just hobble,
and those tents were certainly ten, possibly twelve, miles
away. We had to load our things on Persimmon, and it
took me all I knew to do it.
“ We can take turns in riding him,” said Stella sweetly,
“ though I don’t know how you’re going to get up now
Mr. Conant has deserted us.”
I looked at her.
“ I’m not at all sure Persimmon can carry our goods, and
he certainly can’t carry you or me,” I said.
I gave him the last of the tsamba mixed with tea, poor
beast, and he ate it gratefully. He had got over his
prejudice against white people and used to nuzzle his poor
old nose into my hand for something to eat. Luckily most
of our baggage consisted of furs, and I made a little nest
among them for MacTavish, and he sat there looking out,
bless him, as if it were his proper place and he was sure
everything was going all right.
That was an awful journey. My foot was so bad,
swollen and hot and black to the knee, and painful, when I
put it to the ground, that I could only hop along, guiding
Persimmon by clinging to the ropes. Every few yards I
had to sit down and rest. One thing it didn’t give me time
to think, every effort was given to crawling along. Mostly
the snow was frozen into a hard stony surface so that there


was no sinking, but occasionally—for what reason I don’t
know—it would be soft, and then both the horse and I
would find ourselves plunging hopelessly in a drift that
scared me lest we should be overwhelmed and never get
out again. It was a cruel struggle. We had started soon
after sunrise, but by midday the tents seemed no nearer,
just little black spots on the surrounding whiteness I ached
in every limb, and my ankle throbbed so that I think that at
another time I should have sat down and wept with the
pain-—now I was beyond all tears. It was like a ghastly
nightmare. I felt that darkness might fall on us, and find
us still struggling along on this great snowfield, and I had
no doubt about what the end would be if it did. We ate all
the curds I had left, and let the horse lick up the remains,
and I wondered if we had eaten our last meal. Stella didn’t
say much. I think she was too tired even to complain, only
when I lifted MacTavish down and gave the little chap some
of my share of the curds she said,
“ I can’t think how you can bother yourself about the
dog now. Just as if we hadn’t enough on our minds. And
you know the dogs at the encampment’ll probably finish
him.” And she looked across the waste of snow.
She didn’t intend her speech to comfort me. But it
did. It evidently hadn’t occurted to her as it had to me
that we might never reach that encampment, that it was
little bigger than it was five hours ago.
“ We’ve got to get on as quickly as we can,” I said.
“ It will never do to be caught by the darkness.”
“ I really think we have got on wonderfully,” said she
with an air as if she thought I might have praised her.
And again I drew courage from her words. The sun got
lower and lower, and I could have screamed if I had had any
breath left to waste on such an effort as I saw that still the
tents were a great distance away. But we could see plainly
that they were tents. Stella sat down and said that she
could go no further, and for a moment I was tempted. It
would have been such a relief to take the furs off the horse
and roll myself up and rest there in the snow, but I knew
what that would mean, and if Martin Conant wanted help,
who would help him. I felt as if I daren’t stop. I could
hardly turn my head.
“ If —I —can —” and I heard my own words coming very
slowly, and with gasps in between —“ I’ll —send —those —
people at —the—tents back —for you.”


It sounded very forlorn, and hopeless, and presently she
was stumbling along clutching my arm and gasping and
crying that she was done. I couldn’t help her. If she had
fallen I could have done nothing. The sun went slowly
down flooding the scene with a light more brilliant than
ever, and dropping behind the hills left the world cold and
grey, and with his going came the gripping cold fiercer than
ever—to breathe the air was like drawing down swords into
your lungs.
I thought it was the finish. We could see the tents now,
four large tents, we could even see people moving outside
them, and I wondered they didn’t see us. Perhaps they did
and were not interested. With the fading of the light they
seemed to vanish. How could we go on if we had no point
towards which to steer? I tried to say something to Stella
but I didn’t seem to have any voice. In my heart I kept
crying, “ Martin Conant ! Martin Conant ! ” and I
stumbled and fell on my face for about the twentieth time.
And then I heard Stella sobbing, “ They’ve lighted a fire ! ”
At that I struggled up again and saw the fire, a glowing
fire of argols, a point of red light in the gleaming snow.
How on earth we got over those remaining miles—there
were two at least —I shall never know.
Stella might have gone on, but she explained afterwards
she was afraid to face the Tibetans alone. If they had been
unfriendly I don’t know what we should have done. I was
not even equal to taking thought for MacTavish beyond
being thankful he was secure in his cosy little nest, for the
dogs came rushing out. In a dim, confused way I was glad
of the barking dogs. They proclaimed our arrival. Stella
clung to me and shrieked,
“ They'll kill us ! They’ll tear us to pieces ! ”
Out of one tent came a man and beat them off, and the
curtain of the biggest tent was thrust aside and there
stood a woman in Tibetan costume, with a little round cap
on her head, but the hair that fell in long braids beneath
it showed up pale yellow in the light of a lamp, the dull
firelight gleamed on a pair of glasses, and the eyes behind
those glasses-were blue. This was no Asiatic !
Surely it was the American doctor we had been hunting
for the last week ! Was it a week ? It was more like a
thousand years.
She was a little woman with a pale set face, and she stood
and blinked at us behind her glasses.


She said something at first in a tongue I did not under-
stand, then in Chinese she asked, “ Who are you ? ” and
then she repeated it in English, and there was surprise in
her voice as she stepped forward and laid her hand on my
arm.
I found words then—
“ Thank God,” I said, “ Oh, thank God ! ”


CHAPTER XXII
ROSALIE'S STORY.
ANOTHER DOCTOR
“ ‘ Secrets,’ sighs the nightwind,
‘ Vacancy is all I find ;
Every keyhole I have made
Wail a summons, faint and sad.
No voice answers me,
Only vacancy.’ ”
I was so utterly done I saw nothing as the little doctor
drew me into the tent. Vaguely I was glad because I knew
we had reached the goal we had set before us ever since we
had left Kama Miao, and that thought filled me with such
satisfaction and thankfulness that in my utterly worn out
state I could think of nothing else. It was done, and I
staggered across the warm and cosy tent and sank on a pile
of furs. I forgot the horse, I forgot Stella, I even forgot
MacTavish till I felt him snuggling up against me—someone
had brought him in, I was in a sort of torpor and I only felt
dimly my boots being taken off and my swollen ankle
being bathed.
“ My ! ” said a high nasal voice, “ you’ve been havin’ a
dandy time ! ”
Then so great was the relief I dropped asleep, and when
I wakened I lay for a moment looking out at my surround-
ings, not knowing where I was. It was a fairly big tent,
dimly lighted by a small lamp on a folding table. I had
looked so long on the vast whiteness outside the dark
Tibetan cloth walls and carpet were a relief to the eyes.
Beside the divan of furs, a bed, a table and a couple of boxes,
the only other furniture the tent contained was a folding
chair in which was sitting our hostess reading a book. She
was a little woman with a pointed nose and sharp features.
She had rather an aggressive face, and no teeth, and her


mouth falling in gave her a quaint look of primness. Her
only beauty was her hair, and that she had done her best to
disguise, for the Tibetan cap hid her head, and all I could
see were two thick plaits like yellow ropes lying on her
shoulders. She was the only thing in the tent that did not
look restful. I thought thankfully how cosy it all was—
and then I remembered, and threw out my arms with such
suddenness that Stella, who was beside me, stirred.
“ Martin Conant! ” I said.
Our hostess laid down her book—l think she was picking
out texts in the Bible—and looked at me.
“Now ain’t that real nice,” said she. “You’d better
have some supper.”
But I was gathering together my scattered faculties, and
I murmured foolishly, “ He’s lost.”
“ Lost, is he ? ” said she. “ Well, I guess you’re a bit
rocky as to your own whereabouts.” She spoke as if she
had no curiosity, and as if it didn’t very much matter. I
struggled up into a sitting posture then, though Stella pro-
tested.
“We must save him,” I said. “If we crawl after him we
must save him.”
“You ain’t up to ten yards,” she said in the most matter
of fact way, looking at me as if she didn’t see me, “ Who
is Martin Conant anyway ? Your husband ? ”
“He isn’t my husband. He—” and I tried to explain
what had happened. To my dismay she didn’t appear to
be listening, and Stella cut in,
“ He’s all right. He just didn’t want to be bothered
with two women. If he’d known we were so near here, I
expect —” she went on with a hateful smile I saw clearly
enough in the dim lamplight.
“ When did you say you —um —um —like a roarin'
lion—” she held a piece of paper between her lips and
fluttered violently the leaves of the book she held, “ no,
that ain’t exactly to the point —Sodom and Gomorrah —
um, that’s the ticket —their sins—you was sayin’—”
“He went out yesterday morning ”■—l tried to be patient
and explicit”—we expected him back in a couple of hours,
three at the most, and—”
“ Only yesterday morning ! Lawks ! ” She fluttered
over the leaves again. Her Bible was accustomed to it,
the leaves were quite limp “ —jubilee shall that fiftieth year


be unto you—um —the grapes undressed —seems to me sort
of wasteful, but who am I to judge ? ”
“ But you see I must find him,” I said, “ I’m bound to.”
“What’s the trouble?” said she. Stella was asleep
again. “ He’s stopped along o’ the Tibetans. There ain’t
no sayin’ what a man’ll do. I’m trying to get my lesson
fixed up for to-morrow, and I tell you it comes hard, for the
Tibetans ain’t an agricultural people, flocks is all right,
but when it comes to grapes—”
“ He wouldn’t stop with the Tibetans,” I said desperately,
“ unless they made him.”
“ Wal, supposin’ they did. He’ll get back all right.
Thirty-six hours —where’d I be if I started worryin' in
thirty-six hours ! Why I ain’t seen Lemuel Petersen a
fortnight come Saturday, an’ —now I’ve got it. It ought
to be something simple —set me down in the midst of the
valley which was full of bones.”
I grew frantic.
“ I’m afraid he’s hurt.”
“ Wal, supposin’he is. Not likely though.” I felt cheered
“ —an’ lo they were very dry. Anyhow you can’t go
rampin' an’ ragin’ round the country this weather.”
Sh e took a pencil and began rapidly scribbling, murmuring
just above her breath, -and it was evident that I and my
troubles had gone quite out of her head.
I rose up then,and with MacTavish at my heels staggered
across to the table.
“ Look here,” I said, “I've got to do something—if I go
out doing it on my own.”
She came back to my affairs with an effort,
“ A nice missionary you’d make,” she said, “ not a mite
of trust in the Lord ! ”
“ But I’m not a missionary,” I said angrily. “ I’m a
physician and I’ve got to find Martin Conant.”
Her thoughts had gone wandering again.
“ Sure,” said she, “ you’re very welcome to anything I
can give you even if you’re not a missionary. The mission
always enjoins on us hospitality. I guess I’ll give you a
sleeping draught. Look at your sister.”
It was maddening. “Oh do pay attention for a moment ”
I begged. “I’ll give your mission fifty dollars if you find
Martin Conant alive. Tell me someone I can go to.”
“ But you can’t tell what a man’ll do,” she declared, only


half interested even at the prospect of money for the mission.
“ Lemuel always says—says —”
“ Where is Lemuel ? ”
She was deep in her book again.
“ I tell you it’s some work preparin’ this lesson. It’s
gotten to be translated—Oh, Lemuel —well if he’s back any
time these three months I’m content. The longer he’s
away the more souls he’ll rope in. ’
“ I don’t want to rope in souls. I don’t care for anything
if only you’ll tell me how I can set about looking for
Martin Conant.”
“ Hush ! ” she said. “ Hush ! It’s a privilege for these
benighted people, and if you—”
“ Would they do M t. Conant any harm ? ”
“Well the Tangut robbers are some bad,” she said
dubiously. “If they got frightened they might—but we
don’t come out into the desert to go awearying after
what might happen.”
“ This time I know something has happened. Is there
anybody who has any influence with these people ? ”
She was deep in her Bible again, much taken up with
Ezekiel’s bones, but seeing I was so desperately in earnest
she tore her mind away for a moment.
“ There’s Mr. Ling,” she said. “The word of the Lord ”
—she was writing busily, “ Mr. Ling’s gone up to the
monastery—um—m—m—thine hand —I don’t like to have
any dealings with the monastery —um —um —m —m —
Judah —tabernacle—or with him, though I hear his mother
was one of the Lord’s chosen —and —”
“ How can I get hold of Mr. Ling ? ” I put my hand
on her shoulder.
“ Abbas—it isn’t his real name, but it’s the nearest I
can get my tongue to it —Abbas shall go up the first thing
to-morrow morning.”
To-morrow morning ! And already it seemed ages since
Mr. Conant had gone round that hillside. I looked at this
woman, and she looked at me, and apparently we came to
different conclusions.
. “ You’re petered out,” she said, not unkindly. “ You’re
going to have some supper and a draught and then you’ll
be able to see your blessings more plainly. Look here,
I’ll call Abbas.”
Abbas was called, and apparently instructed, and went


out again. Then she gave me a supper of bread and butter
and curds and dried apricots and tea, the nicest supper I had
had since Chung left us, and though she didn’t take any
interest in MacTavish —she’d have liked me better if I
been a Tibetan —she didn’t object when I gave him some
bread and milk with a lump of butter in it.
Then still in her masterful way she insisted on my having
a sleeping draught. I suppose her calm manner of taking
things did have a soothing effect upon me. Surely she
could never have been so casual if a man’s life were at stake
even if she had never seen him. Anyhow I had set in
motion the beginnings of something to help Martin Conant.
I must have been very tired when such a very small
beginning comforted me. I suppose it was the feeling that
I could do no more. I dropped on to the divan again, and
with MacTavish snuggling up against me fell into a sound
sleep.
How long I slept Ido not know. I only wakened when
someone pulled aside the curtain over the door, letting in
the icy outside air and the brilliant daylight, and then I
started up wondering where I was. There was Stella
standing full in the light saying querulously,
“ How much longer are you going to sleep ? ”


CHAPTER XXIII
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE SORROW OF THE WORLD
" The burden of dead faces. Out of sight
And out of love, beyond the reach of hands,
Changed in the changing of the dark and light,
They walk and weep about the barren lands
Where no seed iB nor any garner stands,
Where in short breaths the doubtful days respire,
And Time’s turned glass lets through the sighing sands.”
I had slept heavily and long, and it was late. Almost
before I was awake the thought that I must make up for
lost time and help Martin Conant was uppermost in my
mind.
Dr. Caroline Petersen was serenely going about her
business. As I came out of her tent I saw the tail of her
gown whisking into the one next it. She came out sternly
propelling before her a dark, flat faced Tibetan woman with
turquoise and coral weighing down her greasy black hair
behind. Dr. Petersen was earnestly impressing something
upon her unwilling ears, and the woman was listening in
sullen silence. To what I did not gather, and did not care.
My mind was set upon one end.
“ Oh, pardon me,” I said, “ but last night you were good
enough to say you would send a messenger to the
monastery.”
She looked at me through her spectacles abstractedly.
“The monastery,” she repeated vaguely. “Well,
p’raps it is better than having three husbands ! And one a
trial sometimes ! Five months I have wrestled with this
woman, and now she tells me without turning a hair she’s
got three husbands ! ”
“You remember,” I went on patiently, “ it was most
important. Martin Conant —hurt perhaps—”
I had to be spasmodic for I wanted to get it all in and


impress it upon her. But it was like trying to stop a hole
with quicksilver. She had one idea—the Tibetans.
Nothing else mattered.
Still she was hospitable.
“ Didn’t Anna give you some breakfast ? Here, Anna !
Anna ! ” something unintelligible, and Dr. Petersen was
gone into another tent and Anna had placed before me
tsamba, and tea, and cream. Delicious, if my mind had
been at ease.
Dr. Petersen came back again carrying a fat and dirty
child in her arms, with the mother hovering over him
anxiously.
I tried her again.
“If you sent to that monastery,”T began.
“ Oh, do be quiet,” said Stella, “ Mr. Conant will be all
right.”
“I’m determined that this child at least shall have a fair
start,” said Dr. Petersen, and she flicked a look at me for a
moment as if she expected sympathy. “ Brought up in
darkness and the shadow of death, to say nothing of no
proper ewer or wash bowl —um —um —right away down to
his little shirt and pants.”
“Oh, but I must go to that monastery,” I cried desper-
ately. “ I must see your Mr. Ling.”
“He isn’t my Mr. Ling, thanks be,” said she. “ I don’t
hold with these m arriages. Still, of course, the Scriptures ’' —
“ Did Abbas go to the monastery ? ”
Stella was smiling.
“ Abbas,” repeated Dr. Petersen, “ of course if I told him
—Why, what’s this ? ”
What on earth it was I don’t know. I didn’t want to
know. An idea had suddenly struck me. There was the
monastery, its red and gold curved roofs peeping out of the
snow. In the clear air it looked quite close, surely not
three miles away !
I pointed to it.
“ I'm going there,” I said to Stella. Dr. Petersen was off
again. It was no good expecting help from her.
“ Don’t be a fool,” said Stella.
But there was nothing else to be done and there and then
MacTavish and I started off. It was a good omen to see
him dancing about in the bright sunshine, happy and
almost well.


It was hard going over the snow, and it took me a long
while because my ankle was still painful and weak.
At last I drew near enough to see the open-air staircases
built up on archways, and the gateway, a great square arch,
opening on to a courtyard filled with snow. The heavy
iron-studded gates were wide open, but there was not a sign
of a living being, only on the stillness, growing, growing, as I
came nearer, was a sound monotonous, and yet strangely
weirdly tuneful, like a great volume of voices rising and
falling—in long cadences. I listened, and suddenly there
was a great blare of trumpets that cut the air, harsh,
resonant. It came again and died down, and as I stood
in the gateway in dead silence I could hear the snow slip,
slipping softly from where it had lodged on the roofs, and
the sound of MacTavish’s little restless feet as he pattered
over the white ground.
There were pine trees in the courtyard, and a little snow
still lingered in their branches, gleaming white against the
dark pine-needles, there was snow on the pavement, and
piled up against great China jars, in which were tall plants
bound into neat pyramids with straw, snow-covered now.
Facing the gateway with the sun streaming right upon it
was a seated statue of the Buddha, and on his shoulders
and in his lap, in the turned-over leaves of the bronze
lotus flower in which he sat, and as a crown on his head, was
the soft white snow, while in a long line on either side of him
were a row of prayer wheels, but they were still and silent,
and in that courtyard was no living human being. Only
on the air was a low murmur.
I picked up MacTavish and stood still in the gateway and
looked at the face of the Buddha. It was so calm, so far
away, far above all the wear and tear of this earth. It
spoke of a high order of civilization. The men who took
pride and pleasure in looking upon it could not be rough
and rude savages. They might be cold and impassive like
the far-away dreaming face or like the deserted hills around.
My nerves steadied. The scent of incense stole upon the air
and the murmur of unseen voices rose and rose till it was
loud and ringing, and again there was the red blare of the
trumpets.
It was awe-inspiring this appeal to the Father of all. I
felt small, impotent, yet burning in me was feap for the maa
I loved.


I was desperate. I made a step forward, only to be
again arrested, for standing in the shadow by one of the
prayer wheels, having apparently come up softly from
behind them, was a tall Chinaman bundled up in the
richest furs. My heart gave a bound : here was someone
who could understand me. But it sank again for this man
was evil-looking. He had the white puffy fat look of a man
who leads a sedentary indoor life, who lives on rich greasy
foods such as a Chinaman loves. But it was not that that
repelled me. It was something sinister and evil in his face,
something secret. I felt he had been watching me long
before I had seen him.
He stepped forward and spoke to me in English, quite
good English, but pronounced with a careful precision that
he could have learned in no English or American school. He
spoke pompously, and he took my breath away by his first
words.
“ A pearl! A lotus flower ! ”
To add to the weirdness of the situation out blared those
trumpets again, accompanied by another sound, deeper,
louder, a sound made by the blowing of conch shells.
For a moment I stood speechless, and then like a flash
it came to me in dismay—l had found the man I was seeking.
This was Mr. Ling. And he was my only hope !
“ Are you Mr. Ling ? ” I asked in a half whisper.
Our voices were pitched in quite a different key from the
chanting, and I could hear, and he heard quite plainly.
The big Chinaman put up a hand, clothed in a sealskin
glove with a knitted red mitten over it, and made as if he
would raise his cap, but it was tied under his chin, so he
touched it and fell back into the Chinese fashion of shaking
his own hands.
“ This unworthy person is Mr. Ling, madam, Arthur
Ling, Ling Cheong, at your service.”
He stepped forward and pointed to the gateway, and
slowly I fell back towards it.
“ I want help,” I found myself saying, “ I must have
help for an Englishman.”
Still he pointed to the gateway and I went back.
“ They pray for the illustrious souls of the mighty
dead,” he said in his fat solemn voice, “the souls of the
million dead."'
Back,, back I went, beyond the snow-laden" pine trees,


by the great china vases that stood at either side of the
gate, outside into the snow where the sunshine seemed more
brilliant in the wide space under the great empty sky,
“ The souls of the dead,” I repeated.
“ A thousand times ten thousand,” he said, sweeping his
hand round, “ and the abbot and the monks pray for their
souls.”
“ Where ? ”
“ Over in barbarian Europe, where they fight,” and I
stood dumb before him. These people I had disdained
were praying for the souls of the men dying in the great
European war, men unknowm to them, bound to them only
by the ties of a common humanity. Overhead the sun
blazed in the cloudless heavens, the glare from the white
snow almost blinded me, and from the monastery rose and
fell the deep chanting of hundreds of voices—praying—
—and the scent of the incense enwrapped me. Here, in
Tibet, they were praying for the souls of the dead and
dying in Europe. And as the trumpets blared again I
could only bow my head and add my silent, w r ordless
inarticulate prayer to the volume of sound that was going
up to the Almighty. Here, on this frozen lake, in the heart
of Asia I realized the world tragedy.
I came back to my trouble with a start. The evil-
looking Chinaman was pointing towards Dr. Petersen’s
tents, little black blotches in a world of whiteness.
“ If this insignificant one may suggest the lotus flower
has been afflicted with the loss of her most precious
guardian.”
I wished he would use a little simpler language, but
when I tried to explain he waved my words aside as if they
were of no account.
“ It would indeed be a difficult and hazardous conjecture
to make,” he said, stretching out his hands and patting the
air patronizingly, “ but the Heaven-sent messenger this
morning brought news of the unprepossessing circumstances
and the glad tidings of the arrival of two pearls and a
donkey.”
Poor old Persimmon !
“ An intelligent and discriminating individual,” he went
on, “ will perceive the utmost need for much reward in
cash,” and he looked at me shrewdly out of his slit eyes.
But however absurd his language he was my only hope.
M


And there and then I made the best arrangements I could.
He said in very flowery language that he could find out what
had become of Mr. Conant because he had many dealings
with the Tibetans, and they trusted him. It was more than
I did. but I promised to pay double what he asked if he
brought Martin Conant back alive.
Then there was nothing for me to do but to go back
across the snow the way I had come.


CHAPTER XXIV
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY
LONG DRAWN OUT
" When I looked for good then evil came upon me ;
and when I waited for light, there came darkness
I went mourning without the sun I am a
brother to dragons and a companion to owls. My harp
also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of
them that weep.”
The finishing touch was always being put to my missionary
career. Not that the Tibetans don’t want some sort of
reforming. But that I or twenty thousand men like me
could ever influence them in the smallest degree I very much
doubt. The visit to those tents swept away the last
remnant of my faith in my own powers.
There were only two tents and I felt I ought to be able to
manage their occupants. I put a bold face upon it for
these people despise the humble and meek, and I advanced
swinging the big stick I carried as a protection against the
innumerable dogs that hang round these camps.
But they came on baying and growling menacingly, and
their vociferous remarks fetched out three unsavoury-looking
ruffians clad in sheepskin. Their appearance was not
inviting, but they made no effort to use the old-fashioned
matchlocks which were slung across their shoulders. The
dogs came at me with open mouths and slavering jaws, and
I laid about me with my heavy stick, I called out in
Chinese too, but I don’t think they understood. My actions
probably spoke for themselves. The dogs, four fierce
beasts, kept out of range, and the men advanced with broad
smiles on their dirty countenances. So far so well I thought,
especially as the tallest produced a whip and proceeded to
lay about him with a will. I made a step forward, and then
—there was a blank. I never saw the man who shot me,
never even heard the sound of the shot. It came upon me


suddenly as if for a brief space I had been annihilated, and
when I came back to this world again, dazed and sick, and
feeling curiously angry and indignant I found myself lying
on the snow surrounded by three men backed by four
growling dogs.
For the moment I thought I was not hurt, then I felt that
half my face was blown away, and a sickening pain in my
side made me, in spite of myself, sink back upon the snow.
The men standing over me were apparently quarrelling, and
the dogs crept a little closer to inspect me. I wondered if I
were going to die. It was pretty disgusting going out like
that with my life all in ragged ends, and I thought with a
pang of those women I had left on the hillside. One of the
men bent over me, weights were holding down my arms,
there was no power in my hands. I was looking up into a
flat-faced Mongolian countenance burnt nearly black by the
sun on the snow, and before I had a chance to try my
halting Chinese again the pig eyes and matted black locks
were swaying up and down, mixing themselves up with the
blue skies and the white hillsides, and again I forgot my
troubles in the depths of unconsciousness.
I must have been insensible for some time, for when I
came to I found I had been flung across a horse that was
stumbling along. The glare of the sun on the snow hurt my
eyes, hurt my head, the pain in my face and in my side was
excruciating, but the thought of the women I could not help
hurt me most. We went on and on. Sometimes I was
unconscious, but mostly I was acutely, painfully clear-
headed, piecing together the consequences of my action, and
the probable fate of those women.
After what seemed hours I was lifted inside a stuffy tent
that smelt to high heaven, and some clumsy person was
going through my clothes. Evidently I was an object of
great interest, for about half a dozen other people, men,
women, and children were punctuating the performance
with shrill cries that might be admiration or astonishment.
I could not make myself understood. They laughed and
mocked at my efforts, and I lay there on the filthy vermin-
infested ground through interminable nights, and long, long
hopeless days, haunted like an intolerable nightmare by the
thought of those helpless women. Sometimes I wondered
why I did not seize one of those long knives that were raised
at me threateningly, when occasionally I made.shift to crawl


outside, or one of the matchlocks, and put an end to
it all,
A thousand times in those dreary tortured days and nights
I longed for death to put an end to my thoughts, to ease the
maddening throbbing of my face, which extended now to
my whole body. I felt I was fetid and horrible, and always
I craved for something to drink.
Sometimes my hosts gave me a sort of barley water, but
often I gathered lumps of snow outside and crammed it in
my mouth to take away the burning fever, and the pain that
was in my whole body.
After ages and seons of suffering I came back to find a
Chinaman, a clean-looking fat Chinaman, looking down at
me, and I summoned with an effort my Chinese to ask him
to help me.
But I thought I was still in a dream, when he bent over
me and said in English—
“ O, most illustrious, this mean one has followed in your
footsteps to beg permission to relieve you in your necessitous
and ill-starred situation, and we together, armed with a just
cause, shall quit the abode of—”
I don’t remember any more. The torment of the night-
mare descended upon me again, and I seemed to be going,
going, going, always in intolerable pain, feeling I must
rescue those women, till suddenly I felt cool clean water on
my face, and opening my eyes I saw bending over me,
Rosalie Grahame —Rosalie Grahame in the flesh, and well,
Rosalie Grahame, who had perished a thousand times in my
thoughts on the hillside.
I pushed her hands down with my own, and she smiled.
“ It’s all right. You’re safe at last.”
I strove to understand, to regain my full senses, and then
I heard another voice, a voice I also knew well, a little
petulant, a little querulous.
“ My goodness gracious me,” it said, “ well, I’m glad you
think he’s all right. He’s horrible. If he dies it will be
just —”
But the voice stopped suddenly, and I tried to think to
whom it belonged. And then I went away into peaceful
forgetfulness.


CHAPTER XXV
STELLA CHAPMAN'S STORY
THE LAST OF KOKO NOR
" If women could be fair
But when I see how frail these are,
I muse that men forget themselves so far.”
Beastly, there’s no other word for it. How on earth I ever
endured to tell the tale I don’t know. My sufferings—but
nobody ever seems to think of my sufferings. Rosalie
is for ever prating about the clear air and the healthfulness
of the bitter cold, and the wonderful effect it has in healing
her patient. Thinks Tibet’ll be a health resort some day !
Ugh ! All because of Martin Conant. She mends his
broken face and damaged lungs—thinks of nothing but
him. And he thinks of nothing but the fact that he is in
love with her, and isn’t fit to have her now. He doesn’t
like her seeing his helplessness, and his—well that wound on
his face —festering and horrible—ugh—
So he turns to me, no thought as to whether I should like
to play second fiddle. Pleasantly exciting for me, isn’t it ?
They are a silly couple.
I don’t mention Dr. Petersen or her husband because they
simply aren’t worth mentioning. People who are foolish
enough to condemn themselves to life among the Tibetans
had better be allowed to enjoy themselves in their own way.
Far be it from me to interfere.
But everything is so dull that a boredom beyond words
is added to other miseries.
The man who really counts in the situation is the
Eurasian, Ling Cheong. And whenever —I mean, of course,
when one’s desperate, desperate measures are not only to be
excused but are an absolute necessity. Where would the
rest of them be, I should like to know, if I hadn’t had my


head screwed on the right way ? You’ve got to look a
little ahead.
First Ling said he thought he could get us a servant —my
suggestion—he knew a Chinese who had been left behind
by some missionaries fleeing from Pai Lang, and the next
time he came up he brought us of all people in the world,
Chung—Chung, prancing along as usual, tossing his pigtail
from one shoulder to the other, beaming in his hateful self-
sufficient manner, but still Chung, an excellent servant.
Left behind indeed ! I should have thought the boot was
on the other foot. However, there he was, and I was
exceedingly glad to see him, though of course I didn’t say
so. It never does to admit you are dependent for comfort
upon a Chinese servant. Martin Conant did. I think he
found it pretty humiliating to be helpless in the hands of
those two women doctors. You couldn’t count Dr.
Petersen’s husband. He was never with us for more than
two days together. No wonder Martin Conant was glad
to have a servant of his own again.
He isn’t my servant. He always makes that clear.
I can’t think why. I suppose because he thinks I have not
as much money as the others. Chinese are so mercenary.
It is a cruel situation for a pretty young woman. I want
so little. Given the proper surroundings, I can make a
wonderful show on almost nothing at all. But, of course, I
must have something to go upon. Naturally my thoughts
turned to Ling, and I had the forethought to cultivate him.
Luckily he is easily flattered. Men who think a woman
an inferior being always are. You can’t move a man like
Martin Conant, who persists in putting woman with a
capital “ W ” on a pedestal, but give me a man who thinks
a woman was made for his particular pleasure when I want
to get something out of him. I hadn’t seen Ling three
times before he had brought me as a present the sweetest
set of pale blue silk garments, Chinese, of course, but of the
richest silk of the most delicate shade, and simply divinely
embroidered. It was ages since I'd seen anything so pretty,
and I could quite sincerely be sweet to Ling even though
Rosalie has a way of looking down her nose when she finds
me talking to him. But I wonder where she and her lover
would be if I didn’t arrange things—tell me that ?
I put it to him wasn’t it possible to get down to China ?
It seems it is quite possible. White Wolf is still on the


prowl, but Ling said he thought he could probably hire
some of his braves to guard us—it was only a question of
money.
What I want, what we all want for that matter is to get
away, and I soon saw I must stick at nothing if I am to
succeed. And Rosalie was determined Mr. Conant should
not be moved too soon.
It was the end of February before Chung joined us.
And at the end of April we still lingered in that hateful hole.
I had it all settled up in my own mind and was just debating
how I should spring things on the rest of them when Chung
took the matter in hand. He doesn’t like Tibet any more
than I do. Of course he is horribly selfish, but sometimes
selfishness is useful.
One day we were all sitting out in the sunshine, Rosalie
nursing that beast for which she had been ready to risk
all our lives, and Mr. Conant shading his scarred face with
his hand. He will never be handsome any more, but
Rosalie has done wonders, I will say that for her. That
disgusting festering sore that made me sick when I caught a
glimpse of it once, is now reduced to a deep red scar, ugly
to look at but perfectly clean and with nothing nasty about
it. I suppose he thinks it worse than it really is, because he
often covers it with his hand.
Well, we were all sitting there in the sunshine, our party I
mean—you never knew where the Petersens were—and I was
thinking how boring it all was. Rosalie and Martin Conant
were talking some drivelling bosh about the lovely view
instead of considering how we were to get away. If they’d
even gone in for courting I could have forgiven them, but to
moon their time away talking about the skies and the lake
and the flowers—Goodness ! It was lucky for them they
had me along with them !
“ Spring,” said Martin Conant, touching the flowers,
she had brought him almost as if he loved them. He
always was a bit of a fool, “ and I can hardly crawl from my
bed to my chair.”
Then she comforted him. That’s the sort of drivel they
called conversation. I was thankful to see Ling arriving,
if it was only to put a stop to this aggravating twaddle, and
while Ling was giving himself up to prolonged greetings,
Chung appeared on the scene.
Chung always went straight to the point.


“ Missie go China,” said he, “ my go China, small dog go
China ? ”
Mr. Ling nodded solemnly. He wore European clothes,
his hands were tucked in the narrow sleeves of his Norfolk
jacket Chinese-fashion, and I saw he missed his petticoats.
“ Go to China ! ” said Mr. Conant as if the thought came
as an immense surprise to him. How r truly foolish some
men are !
Then Mr. Ling spoke in his picturesque, Oriental way.
“ If it is the wish of this illustriously endowed gathering,”
said he, “ to move towards the Flowery Kingdom, this mean
worm can conscientiously assure them of his far-reaching
protection.”
Mr. Conant rose up as if someone had hit him.
“If we could get to China I could get to Europe. And
the war ? What about the war ? ”
But nobody took any notice of him. Apparently Mr.
Ling didn’t know anything about the war, besides the great
thing was to get away from Koko Nor. I felt mad with joy
at the thought that there might be a hope, and Rosalie
hugged the wretched little beast on her knee.
“ Oh MacTavish ! ” she said, “ MacTavish ! ”
Chung gave a little satisfied prance.
“ My can makee nice,” said he, “ in Chinatown.”
So we settled it there and then. Ling didn’t say any-
thing about the guard of robbers, and, of course, I held my
tongue. It is well not to be too wise, and in three days we
were saying good-bye to Dr. Petersen.


CHAPTER XXVI
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE EURASIAN
“ A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds
and of thick darkness as the morning spread upon the
mountains A fire devoureth before them ;
and behind them a flame bumeth, the land is as the garden
of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness.”
Dr. Petersen’s husband, the Lemuel she mentioned
occasionally, turned out to be a nice gentle kindly man with
haunted eyes. He was not a missionary, but a physician,
and a clever one. He helped me a great deal with Martin
Conant’s face at first, but he never stayed long at the tents.
He said he was interested in the people, and he used to go
wandering off, and only appeared at irregular intervals.
I am sure he helped wherever he was, but I doubt very much
whether he was engaged in roping in souls as his wife fondly
imagined. It was Ling who came more into our lives.
We could never have got Martin Conant away from those
tents if it had not been for his help, and yet —he fills me
with dread. I like no half-castes, but Ling Cheong is a
loathsome beast. I might have liked his father, who was
probably a fat and pursy Chinaman, and pitied his mother,
who belonged to one of those curious little one-horse American
sects who often feel it their bounden duty to seal their
sacrifice by marrying one of the people they have come to
convert. And the result was Ling, the very personification
of evil, some cruel, secret, unmentionable evil of the East.
He too was fat and pursy and middle-aged, and when first
we met him, or perhaps I should say he met us, he was
dressed as a Chinaman, which was at least suitable. Then
one day he appeared in European clothes, a Norfolk jacket,
out of which he was bursting, his chest had slipped con-
siderably, and the little skirts of the jacket stood out


horizontally in front; below, instead of his dignified skirts,
he wore a pair of very tight and very short black evening
trousers; round his neck, instead of a collar, was a woman’s
knitted scarf, but on his feet were still the comfortable
Chinese shoes and white socks, and on his head the little
round black satin cap with a red button on top that so
many Chinamen wear. An oiled paper umbrella completed
his turn-out, and instead of looking a figure of fun he
contrived to look sinister. And he is powerful. He is
rich, that is evident, and he is willing to lend us money till
we can get back to Peking, so we can do nothing but suffer
him.
We were wild to get away, and yet we might have been in a
worse place. Above us stretched the beautiful blue sky
with an infinity of depth in it, sometimes cloudless, and
sometimes with great clouds piled up on which the sun shone,
turning them into snowy mountains with blue crevasses
and hollows that caught and held the golden sunshine.
And the frost gone, the lake below was indeed a great sea,
the Blue Lake, a wonderful blue lake stretching away to a
shore that was beyond the farthest horizon. On it, crowned
with the broken roofs of temples were three white islands
sparkling and bright, like the clouds that floated overhead.
On them we knew were shut away for the summer the
Buddhist monks who dwelt in the monasteries there, and
whose stern faith did not allow of even a small boat that
would connect them with each other and with the mainland.
Dr. Petersen used to weep over those monks, but if I had
done so it would have been for a different reason. They
had what they wanted, of that I was sure, but they stood to
me for the mystery of the East. They seemed to hold in
their hands the threads of the skein that held us entangled
in its meshes. I feared the monks. It was for myself I could
have wept.
And now the grass was springing in every sheltered
corner, and in all the little nooks of the hills around the May
flowers were coming out shyly. MacTavish and I had
gathered sweetly scented violets growing on a bank where
a little stream went brawling over the stones as if it were
rejoicing to be free of the ice and hastening to join the great
lake.
But the flowers and the lake and the wide view were my
only solace. We seemed to be caught in a coil and must


drift with the stream under the guidance of this half-caste
who fills me with a fear I cannot throw off, and yet that
must be disguised under an outward semblance of friendli-
ness. Stella does not seem to feel it. She displays for this
Chinaman, got up in a travesty of European clothes, all the
seductive ways that she had once used towards Martin
Conant, and he looks at her, it seemed to me, as a snake
might look at a playful rabbit that presently he intends to
swallow whole. And the worst of it is I daren’t even hint
at my fear to Martin Conant. He is still so frail that I
desire above all things to keep his mind from worry.
Li Hsien, the little Chinese town, where Ling has a house,
was three days’ march away, and on that march down I
realized that my instinctive fear of Ling had reason in it.
They had three litters, Stella, Ling, and Mr. Conant, to his
disgust, but I chose to ride poor old Persimmon and carry
MacTavish, even though by so doing I lowered myself in
the estimation of Ling and his following. He had a
wonderful large following, a ragged array of men, some on
foot, some on donkeys and mules, and all armed after a
fashion, looking very much like the filthy mob that had
attacked and wrecked the mission station. They made me
shudder, and Chung when he passed me the first evening
after we left the Tibetan highland looked at me for a minute
with a wink, and remarked sotto voce,
“ Lobbers ! Missie mus’ stayin’ close to litters.”
Adrift in the heart of China with a band of Chinese
robbers ! Ling had gone bg.ck into Chinese dress, rich
Chinese dress, and it was very evident that he was a power
and we were entirely at his mercy. It seemed to me there
was significance in his fat sleek smile as he looked at us that
evening out of the corners of his long slit eyes.
The next day we came to the country that had been
ravaged by Pai Lang’s braves ; we passed several farm-
houses, poor little mud cabins along the wayside, whose
thatch roofs had been burned. In the doorway of one a
tiny child lay dressed in a little soiled green coat and pink
drawers, evidently the precious son of some family, ahd
when I dismounted and turned him over I saw that he was
dead and the wonks had gnawed his face ! The poor
little helpless thing ! And as I turned away I saw Mr. Ling
looking at me, and smiling secretly.
And next day it was worse. We passed many burnt


farm-houses, and the wonks were busy with the dead who
lay among the ruins, and as we went on we came upon the
trail of the brigands in all its desolation and horror. We
passed no less than three walled towns, the walls of which
were an empty mockery, for inside the houses had been
burnt and sacked, only here and there had one escaped, and
thin and gaunt shadows stole out, but directly they caught
sight of us they scuttled away in abject terror. I longed
to feed them, but I could only help through Ling, and he
merely smiled as if these people were so many ants to be
crushed without a thought. It was horrible. Stella sank
back in her litter and covered her face, I looked round for
Mr. Conant, but I could only see his litter stopped far
behind. I guessed what had happened, he was helping
some unfortunates there. It encouraged me and I got a
handful of small coins from Chung and flung them out to
the starving wretches. And then an awful thing happened.
A miserable woman with bound feet gathered up about
twenty cash in her clawlike hands and began hobbling
towards a tumbledown hovel. One of our ragged following
went after her, and though I called out in my best Chinese
that the money was for the woman, he paid no attention, but
caught her by the shoulders. She held on to the money and
shrieked and screamed, and the brute drew his knife, and
before I could stop him he had cut off her hand and she had
dropped forward on the ground, the brass cash, about a
cent’s worth, all dabbed with blood, scattering around her.
I stood too horrified for words, and then came Ling’s voice,
calm, smooth, odiously courteous.
He had been ahead as the most important person in the
party, but he had come back.
“ The condition of affairs is indeed offensively unbearable
for the illustrious pearl,” said he.
“If that brute’s your servant,” I cried, “he deserves
hanging.” I would have jumped from old Persimmon, but
Chung pressed MacTavish back against me.
“ Missie go chop-chop,” he said, and his desperate
earnestness made me hesitate just a moment. But it was
fatal. Ling made some little careless motion, and before
my very eyes the ruffian stuck the woman in the throat.
She looked at me with reproachful dying eyes.
“ Chop-chop,” cried Chung. And still I hesitated. I
saw another woman’s face starved and worn peering round
the ruins.


“ Mr. Ling ! Call that brute off! We must help them ! ”
He stretched out his hands.
“ If the pearl will condescend to bestow the light of her
presence upon the immeasurably inferior —”
I interrupted again.
“ We must help,” I said in a shaking voice.
He moved his hands backwards and forwards smoothing
the air. It gave me a feeling of absolute helplessness. I
looked round. Mr. Conant’s litter was still far in the
distance—besides what could he do ? We were entirely
in this man’s power. Chung struck Persimmon on the
flank, and I made no further protest and rode on, though
that woman’s dying eyes haunted me.
Now that the spring was upon us, with its warmth at
midday, the smell of death and decay that hung over these
towns poisoned every mouthful we ate and made me turn
from even a drink with disgust and horror.
Mr. Conant’s indignant protests —and there was much to
protest at during the next day or two —were met with the
same inscrutable smile, the same impassive demeanour.
There was no doubt this man on whom we were dependent
countenanced these frightful things. To say we were
thankful when on the fourth day we arrived at a farm-house
outside Li Hsien is to put it mildly. Ling ushered us into
the courtyard, and standing there with his hands in his
sleeves, bowing solemnly, said,
“ If the exalted ones will condescend to direct their
venerable footsteps into this uninviting and degraded hovel,
this mean worm will have his senses gladdened by their
distinguished confidence and they will overwhelm him with
gratified confusion.”
Ling’s extraordinary inflated language ought to have
made us laugh. It didn’t. It was sinister. Doubly it
made me fear him. To be absolutely in the power of such
a man !
“ This humble person’s slaves,” he went on, “ will outdo
themselves day and night in assuring the illustrious ones
they may close their distinguished and virtuous eyes in
peace. Doubtless the exalted ones do not need riches, but
nothing could confer more pleasure upon this humble
person than an opportunity of offering his despised and
sordid wealth upon this gratifying occasion.”
I looked at Ling. Both Martin Conant and I fully


understood that his despised and sordid wealth would only
be at our service just so long as he was convinced that we
could pay a proper percentage. Indeed we would have
used it on no other terms. We would not have been under
an obligation to him if we could have helped ourselves.
He stood there smiling that secret smile that I had
learned to dread, and he looked at me Chinese-fashion under
his eyelids. With a cold shudder of foreboding I entered
our new resting place.


CHAPTER XXVII
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE POWER OF LING
“ We may buy the poor for silver and the needy for a
pair of shoes ; yea and sell the refuse of the wheat."
A farm in China does not bring before the eyes the rural
surroundings of one in Europe or America. The farm in
which Ling installed us was not unlike an inn, the rooms, all
of one storey, opened into a fairly large courtyard where
the sun penetrated every corner. There was rather a high
wall round, and I could well believe it had been built for
defence. In the centre of the courtyard were three large
peach trees covered with pink blossom. Outside the walls
were lines of fruit trees, peaches, plums and apricots, lovely
in their pink and white spring dress, and the land around
waking from its long winter sleep was carpeted with green,
the blades of wheat just bursting through the ground.
It it hadn’t been for Mr. Ling I could have been almost
happy. Martin Conant was so much better, wanted so
little of my attention, that I was able to establish a sort of
little clinic for the women and children in a corner of the
farmyard, and hither came from all the country round, and
even from the town itself, three miles away, the halt and the
maimed and the sick for advice and treatment. Some-
times boys would come creeping in with bad eyes and
terrible sores, and even the men, and how could I send
them away ? My medicines were reduced to a rudimentary
basis. My principal drug was clean boiled water.
Still it was good to think I was helping ever so little, and
it took my thoughts off Ling and our very uncertain future.
Ling did not come to see us very often. He professed
himself perfectly willing to lend us money until we could
get away, and as Martin Conant and I were quite rich
according to Chinese notions, we agreed to keep Stella


between us. She thanked us both prettily, but I’m sure
she thinks it is the least we can do. It is.
It seems to me that whoever reads my story will complain
it is too full of ghastly horrors. But China after a rising
is full of horrors. Human life is of no account, and cruelty
—well, perhaps you could not expect a nation that inflicts
a long drawn out torture upon its women to consider any-
one’s sufferings. It flings out blind unwanted puppy dogs
to die of starvation, heedlessly torments domestic animals
and criminals, and those it fears when caught are tortured
without mercy.
One day Ling came to me smiling his secret smile. It
made me shiver, but I could only smile back at him defiantly.
It always made me remember that as a last resource I could
die. But he was perfectly courteous after his own fashion.
“ In the matter of detail,” said he, “ it may be objected
that this penurious one is inefficiently incapable of expressing
himself mellifluously. But the representation of the
marvellous cures of the healing pearl—”
“ Oh, what do you want ?” I asked. It always tired me
to try and find the meaning in his long-winded lucubrations.
“ A devout and unassuming person,” he said, “ has heard
of the heaven-sent cures, and she, seeing greater endurances
have not been neglected, might be worthy of the favourable
consideration of the healing pearl.”
“ If you mean there’s a sick woman wants to see me,” I
said, “ why, of course, I’ll do what I can for her,” and I
picked up MacTavish so as to occupy my hands and have an
excuse for not looking at him. I have no words to say how
I dislike to look at Ling, or to feel his eyes upon me.
“ Alas,” he said, “ this ill-destined one dwells at a farm
ten li away, and though without delay she would set herself
to the arduous' and laborious task of crawling to the feet
of the pearl among miracle workers —”
“ If she’s too ill to come to me, of course I’ll go to
her,” I said.
He smoothed the air softly with his hands outstretched
after his usual fashion.
“ Since the miracle-working pearl consents,” said he,
“ this unworthy person will make arrangements to amiably
conduct her to the abode of the necessitous one.”
Well, that was fairly to the point. The only thing I
wanted to make sure of was that he would not take me
N


himself. At first I feared that was his intention, but
finally I gathered that the sick woman should be told I
was coming next morning, and that he would send a man to
guide me to the farm.
Then came Martin Conant. “Is it safe, do you think ? ”
Again Ling stretched out his hands and smoothed the air.
“ The glorious miracle-worker,” said he, “ is in the care
of this wormlike person. If the honourable healer wrapped
up in the inception and manner of operation of this versatile
scheme will deign to accept the unalterable assurance—”
“Oh ! ” said Stella fervently, “we trust you entirely,
Mr. Ling.”
She said it. I could not have done so, but thank goodness
it cut short the interview.
It is beginning to be hot in the daytime now, but the
mornings are gorgeous. The sun rose on a clean new world-
The trees are in full leaf, and outside the farmhouse, far
as the eye can see, right up to the grey crenellated wall of
the little town extends a sea of green waving corn fields,
broken here and there by the lines of fruit trees heavy with
their promise for the autumn. Overhead is the clear deep
blue sky, with here and there great clouds like heaped snow
mountains. The intense dryness of the Chinese winter
has gone, and in the air is a soft languorous feeling, the
scent of the tuberoses I have placed in pots outside our
windows is heavy in the air, and from every blade of grass,
from every ear of corn hung a crystal dew-drop sparkling
like a diamond in the early morning sunshine. A gorgeous
morning ! We had the courtyard to ourselves, and the
dainty green hoopoes with their crested heads, all in their
bridal array, danced to each other among the grass growing
up between the cobble stones. A sweet and lovely morning !
I did not feel there could be much wrong in the world on
such a morning.
We always breakfast early, though Stella never fails to
protest, but now she sat in her wrapper and drew in long
breaths of the scented air.
“ I have a good mind to come with you,” said she, “ it
might be good for me.”
She has a secret fear of growing fat. Very probably she
will, for she is a lazy little toad.
“ Yes, do,” I said. Mr. Conant wanted to come too but
someonfe had to remain at the clinic, and he had been a


great help there latterly with the men and boys, and I left
MacTavish in his care.
Chung informed us that a guide had come. He was a
ragged and forlorn individual, whose face brightened when I
promised him a mou if he returned us safely to the compound,
and having had our breakfast we set out. Martin Conant
insisted upon our taking Chung, though what good Chung
was likely to be in case of danger I failed to see.
“ Anyhow,” I said, as we started, Chung very lugubrious
for he didn’t like walking, “ he can be trusted to bring you
prompt news of our decease.”
But Martin Conant shook his head. “ Don’t joke,” he
said. And he was right. Life in China is dead serious.
However it was a most enjoyable walk in the freshness
of the early morning, and if Stella grumbled at the roughness
of the road it was only to be expected. Our destination
was one of the better sort of farm-houses, but the living-
room was filthily dirty, and in the next room, which had
had no fresh air since the summer before, an old woman lay
huddled in furs coughing her life out in the last stages of
phthisis. The case was hopeless. She might last a week,
she would quite likely die before the sun went down. I
should like to have torn down the paper windows and let in
the fresh air in the interests of others, or have made a
beginning with a pail of warm water and a cake of soap, but
this was a very important old lady, and I had to walk
warily. I made my adieux with the grave formality which
the better class Chinese expect, and went outside again to
draw deep breaths of the fresh air.
Stella was standing in the courtyard in the sunshine,
and our guide was sitting on the ground in front of her, while
Chung was leaning against the wall.
“ O —o —oh ! ” said Stella, “ I thought you were never
coming.”
“ I haven’t been long.”
“ But listen to that.”
There was a strange sound like a long-drawn moan in the
air, and then laughter, coarse, brutal laughter. I remem-
bered I had been conscious of it when we arrived, but my
mind had hardly taken it in, I was too full of my unseen
patient. It was a curiously disquieting sound.
“ Let’s go back quickly,” said Stella.
“ Chop-chop,” said Chung with a whisk of his pigtail and


a prance. “ Missie not knowing, bes’ not knowing,” he
asseverated earnestly. Chung always endeavoured to live
up to his duties. But once my attention had been called
to that sound it had to be investigated, though Chung, I have
no doubt, is right, and there are many things in China best
unsifted. The laughter and chatter almost drowned the
moaning. It came from behind a large building the other
side of the farm. I made for the entrance to the courtyard
with Stella clinging to my arm and Chung and our guide close
behind.
But when outside, instead of turning to the right, I went
in the direction of the sound under some lime trees in full
flower, and a chorus of wails in diffefent keys came from my
three companions.
“ You can go back, Stella,” I said, but she clung to my arm
a heavy weight.
I paid no attention to the other remonstrances and went
on round the farm-yard wall, dragging her with me. The
others followed. There was a graveyard, the air was heavy
with the delicious scent of lime blossoms, and on all the
little pointed mounds the fresh green grass was growing.
A young man with a bird in a cage sat there peacefully con-
templating the little singer. He looked up at us with lazy
indifferent eyes. Beyond the- bare ground was dabbled
with some whitish substance, and there was a crowd of
dirty, unkempt people all looking one way. For a moment
they did not see us, then someone pointed us out and they
turned curious eyes upon us. And those eyes were not
indifferent. They were stormy, cruel —I flinched before
them. There was a silence as they turned towards us, and
the moaning rose again on the air. A pitiful hopeless
moaning.
I had to see what it was. I might be able to help.
“ Stay there,” I said to Stella, and before I could think
I had made a step forward into that horrible crowd. They
parted before me, and then I saw —I saw that at which they
had all been looking—jeering. It was all that was left of
a man, buried naked to his middle in a lime pit, the earth
stamped down well round him. His nose had been cut
off and the hollows where his eyes had been were filled with
white lime. His mouth was open and from it came the
piteous heart-broken moan that kept ringing in our ears and
exciting the merriment of the cruel Chinese labourers.


The utter horror of it turned me to stone. It was a
relief to feel Stella’s clutching hands on my shoulders, and
hear shriek after shriek rending the air. As I stood still,
stupefied, the crowd again parted, dwindled away, and I saw
Ling standing serenely looking at the awful sight.
“ Help him ! ” I cried, “ for God’s sake ! ”
And he looked at me and smiled.
“ It is much to be regretted,” said he, “ that the sight
of this narrow-minded and incompetent insect should
offend the eyes of the God-given pearl,” and he calmly
walked up to the unfortunate and drew a pistol. He looked
at me, salaamed, put his pistol against the man’s temple
and shot, and the man fell forward. The Eurasian bent
over him and turned to me again.
“ It is with a hopeless sense of illness of ease,” said he,
“ that this unworthy one definitely understands that the
eyes of the heaven-sent pearls have been affronted with this
degraded and unpresentable object.”
And then I remembered that he had sent me here for
his own purposes. Suddenly something else caught my
eye and I felt myself suffocating. The hair on that head
that lay there on the ground all dabbled in blood was brown
and curly'—no eastern man has curly hair. The earth
began to go up and down, and far away I heard Chung’s
voice,
“ Missie coming back chop-chop.”
“The misguided one,” went on Ling’s urbane voice,
“ may thank the miracle-working pearl for a symmetrical
and luxurious death. He placed insuperable obstacles in
the way of munificent guiding by this poor worm. He was
leagued with evil forces, and the illustrious and energetic
workers of the district are ever suspicious of those who
doubt the spirit of fheir ancestors. Will the gracious
pearls be pleased to make use of the litter of this unworthy
person ? ”
Stella, still shaking with sobs, accepted eagerly, but I
could only stammer dully that I was going back with
Chung.
Of how I did get back I haven’t the slightest recollection.


CHAPTER XXVIII
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY.
UN MARIAGE DE CONVENANCE
" I had no hope but of some evil thing. ...
She walked between the blossom and the grass.
I knew the beauty of her, what she was,
The beauty of her body and her sin.”
Stella announced it to us at breakfast. Breakfast at
seven o’clock on a June morning in the shade of the peach
trees, when the sunshine was golden and just warm enough
to perfume the air with the scent of the tuberoses and the
single peonies, was a delightful meal, and Stella in a delicate
blue Chinese wrapper was very pretty. Rosalie wore a
grey silk Chinese coat and skirt, which she said was suitable
to her profession. She looked very well in it, but this
morning she was pale from the shock of yesterday. We had
thought of nothing else since.
Ling had professed entire ignorance of the man to whom
he had put an end in contemptuous pity. He had declared
his intention of informing the prefect, and there the matter
ended. But Chung had informed us he was a Scandinavian
wandering preacher, who moved by religious fervour had
thought to convert the Chinese and had wandered up
country. He had succeeded in stirring the people, already
harried by robber bands, to frenzy, and Rosalie had seen
the result. There was no doubt Ling could have protected
him if he had liked, for Ling is all-powerful. How powerful
Stella showed us.
“ I am going to marry Mr. Ling,” she said in a small
voice, crumbling her scone beside her plate.


“ Stella ! ” cried Rosalie in disgusted horror, and I
heard myself saying in much the same tones,
“ Mrs. Chapman ! ”
“ I know poor Silas hasn’t been dead a year,” she said,
and Rosalie interrupted her angrily.
“ A man like that! A Chinaman! A brute! A
devil! ”
“ It’s the only way to get back to England,” said Stella
virtuously. “Do you think I want to stay here for the
remainder of my natural life ? You can’t get away,” and
she looked at me in a way that was intended to make me
feel humble and meek.
I had nothing to offer. That was certain.
“ Can’t you see that we shall all be killed just like that
man yesterday unless we make sure of Ling ? He’s our only
hope,” went on Mrs. Chapman, “ and I can’t stand it any
longer. I’m desperate. Ling has promised to take me to
America, and I’m going to marry him. Besides it’s all very
well for you people, you’ve got money. I haven’t. Ling
is rich,” and her voice changed. Now that she had got the
unpleasant announcement over she was prepared to show us
the bright side.
For a moment there was silence, and then Rosalie’s voice
in its coldest, most cutting tones remarked,
“ His wealth won’t do you any good.”
Then indeed a smile of pleasure lighted up the other
woman’s face, and her blue eyes danced. She put her hand
inside her wrapper.
“ There you are wrong,” said she. She drew out a long
string of pearls and flung them on the breakfast table,
“They’re worth a king’s ransom. Whatever happens I
shall be rich. He gave them to me yesterday as soon as I
said I’d marry him. They’re my very own.”
“ I should feel they were soaked in that poor missionary’s
blood,” said Rosalie severely.
“ You’re unkind, you’re always cruel to me,” sobbed the
other, pushing away her chair and making for her own room,
but she did not neglect to take the string of pearls with her.
MacTavish gave a little bark and raced round and round at
full speed as if he were rejoiced at the prospect of getting rid
of someone he had always distrusted, and Rosalie looked
at me.
“ She can’t possibly do such an awful thing, ” but that


was only an expression of her own feelings. We both knew
that Stella had every intention of doing it. She had been
thoroughly scared. It seemed to her the only way out, and
the money was an extra inducement.
Before we had finished drinking our last cup of tea came
two men with a couple of donkeys bearing presents for the
expectant bride, consisting principally of rich silks and
magnificent embroideries enclosed in perfumed boxes,
carved and inlaid with mother of pearl and ivory. The
Eurasian in eastern fashion was doing honour to the woman
he desired. She was being bought and not cheaply,
“ But he has wives already—l know he has,” said
Rosalie in disgust, “ and she knows it.”
But evidently she did not think that Chinese wives
counted.
Rosalie stamped her foot, “ It’s too horrible and
disgusting for words,” said she. “ I’d rather —I’d rather—”
But no amount of discussion could alter the fact that
Stella intended to marry this man.
In due course Chung was announcing Ling Cheong. I
received him graciously, for we were certainly in his power,
and sat him down in a high chair under the shade of the
peach trees, and motioned to Chung to place a stool for his
feet. He sat there solemnly. His dark blue silk skirts
hung down in straight folds, showing the tips of his round-
toed, thick-soled Chinese shoes, his long sleeves close
together hid his folded hands, and his pawky face, solemn
under his little round Chinese cap, had in it all the mystery,
all the secret, undiscovered sin of the East. From the
little round red button in the middle of his cap to the black
satin bands that held in his white stockinged ankles, and
the thick paper soles of his shoes, he exhaled that intangible
something which separates by so great a gulf the East from
the West.
He had come to ask for Stella Chapman in marriage, or
rather to announce his intention of taking her. Since the
lady was willing, anxious, how could we interfere ?
I said emphatically that Mrs. Chapman’s future must be
safeguarded, and he spread out his hands and smoothed
the air and said,
“ The occasion is one which undoubtedly calls for gravity
in an exaggerated degree,” I cannot describe his smugness,
but this humble person is an unworthy member of an


enlightened people who outdo themselves in endeavouring
to keep the exceptional cares of huddled life from the gazelle-
like shoulders of the lotus flowers who trust them. The
sorrows of existence shall be but as the finest grains of
Foo Choo sand to the rocks of the mountains to the dove-
like one.”
He meant to say that the Chinese care for their women.
They do ! As we care for our cattle or our dogs ! Some
pet and spoil them ! Some neglect them, some just keep
on the right side of public opinion. But for the woman as
for the dog there is no redress.
In my missionary career I had learned something of the
way in which the Chinese care for their women ! Mr.
Wright used to say that Chinese family life was enough to
bring on nervous prostration in a brazen statue. But what
was the good of talking ? Stella knows as well as Ido what
she is letting herself in for.
I wanted to throttle him, but that would have been
madness. We can only let things take their course.
Evidently the compound had been aware of what was
coming, for presently I saw Chung peering out of his kitchen
with a distinct question written on his expressive counten-
ance, I made a sign and a small table covered with a blue
cotton cloth was brought and a little feast was spread.
There was tea, the very best that Li Hsien could produce,
there were cakes made with sugar and lard, and sesame
seeds and almonds, and there was ginger and dried fruits
of all sorts. It was a very solemn feast, Chung in his
best gown, with his head newly shaven, his pigtail down his
back waiting upon us. And every now and then in the
intervals of serving us he found time to take out the little
yellow fan tucked in the front of his silk coat and flutter
it delicately, his hand well held above his head.
Rosalie took nothing. She told me afterwards that
Ling seemed to her like a great loathsome spider slowly
spinning his toils around us.
Only when the feast was drawing towards its end did
Ling speak the words which clinched the bargain. Of
course we had known they were coming.
“ On the auspicious and well-chosen day at the new moon
at the rising of the sun this humble person will swiftly and
eagerly despatch his broken and inefficient litter for the
moonfaced and accomplished lotus flower who stoops to


bestow upon him the light of her amiable countenance. In
his unworthy abode he will await her joyful coming with ill-
restrained impatience.”
This self-depreciation is merely a manner of speech—we
have heard it so often that we simply listen in order to sift
the verbiage and understand what the beggar is driving at.
Anyhow he proposed to take Stella away. If she had
wished, we would have risked everything to save her, but
she had made up her mind, and nothing would move
her.
At the appointed time in the cool of the early morning
there arrived a gaily decorated litter covered with red and
gold, borne by two handsome brown mules, half hidden
with red and gold trappings, with bells slung at every corner
and followed by other litters. What was in them I don’t
know, possibly they were only for show like the bodyguard
of men on horseback. These were a queer collection, for
the Chinaman of the rich loose country does not exactly
shine as a horseman, and they were a scratch lot, some only
coolies in their ordinary blue coat and trousers, with scraps
of red about them, mounted on a scratch mob of horses,
mules and donkeys, also decorated with red tassels and red
streamers, for bridal good luck I suppose.
We tried one more protest.
“Oh Stella ! for God’s sake think what you’re doing ! ”
pleaded Rosalie.
“ Don’t go,” I said.
She was dressed in red satin, and she looked picturesque
enough. I suppose her appearance gave her confidence.
“ You sillies,” she said, “ don’t you see it’s the only thing
to be done ? When I get you out of this horrid hole you’ll
thank me.”
“ I want nothing from Ling that I can’t pay for in gold,”
Rosalie said emphatically.
“ Silly,” said Stella again, “ don’t you know there are a
great many things can’t be bought with gold. Wait till
I help you, dears,” and she kissed us both quite fervently,
and then she, who had consistently wept and wailed and
been an obstruction ever since we had started on our travels,
entered the litter smiling and gave herself over to that
ragged crew, apparently without a qualm. The attendants
drew the curtains, she put a white hand through and waved


it in farewell, MacTavish barked, they put the litter on the
mules, and it went swaying out of the courtyard.
Rosalie drew a long sigh and put her hands before her
face.
“Oh ! ” she said, “Oh ! if you had seen that man in the
lime pit! And she has gone to that —”


CHAPTER XXIX
ROSALIE'S STORY.
VANISHED!
“ All his gold garment had
Pale stains of dust and rust/’
I thought that when Stella had gone with her querulous
discontent and uncomfortable insinuations, peace and com-
parative happiness would reign in our little compound, but
I found as a matter of fact that I couldn’t shake off Stella
so easily. Morning, noon and night I found myself worrying
over her fate. It was obvious that Martin Conant felt the
same uneasiness, although he did his best to keep it from me.
We seemed to live in a fever of painful expectation, and I
grew so nervous at last that any sudden sound made me
jump.
And yet the days passed away without anything to confirm
our forebodings.
June passed and July came in hot and stormy. My work
grew. I was desperately busy. Providence must have
been considering the suffering people of Li Hsien for this
anxiety about Stella took from me all desire to get away.
Talking it over with Martin Conant we did not see how we
could leave her. We both felt that we were waiting on from
day to day, hoping, fearing, we knew not what. Our release
depended upon Stella, and Stella —
Occasionally she came to see us. She was very self-
conscious and mysterious at first, but every time I saw her
I thought with a sinking heart her confidence lessened.
And I waited anxiously for what, I did not know. She
always wore the pearls and appeared to derive satisfaction
from looking at them, and calculating what they would
bring her when she found herself in a position to discard
Ling. Then she did not come. We waited. Still there
was no word of her, and at last it seemed so long since we


had seen her that I persuaded Mr. Conant to go and find
out why she did not come.
He came back escorted by Ho Ting, Ling’s business
manager, who said the country was unsafe, and implored
us to stay in the compound. Mr. Conant himself was
surprised and uneasy. He had been refused admission.
As far as he could make out the attendants had informed
him that it was not seemly a man should be admitted to the
women’s quarters ! Ling was to all intents and purposes
a Chinaman. This was bad enough, but it was followed by a
piteous little note from Stella herself, imploring me to go
and see her. There was nothing for it. I could not pay any
attention to Ho Ting’s warnings. I felt I had to go. I had
vowed to Stella I would never enter Ling’s house, but I was
too uneasy to think of that now.
Ten minutes after I had received that note I had taken
Chung and set off.
It was a hateful house. A house full of stealthy steps,
strange whisperings and subdued murmurs. It was stuffy
and close with the heat of a Kansu July day, and the mingled
scents of eastern perfume, of sandalwood, of oily cooking
and of dirt were strong. I left Chung in the outer court-
yard, was shown into an empty room, and was kept waiting
a long time until Mr. Ling, to my dismay, shaking hands with
himself and smiling his secret smile, conducted me through
one dark room to another across little courtyards, and down
little narrow passages, till at last we reached a room where,
reclining on a k’ang, Chinese fashion, with a cushion behind
her shoulders, and another for her arm to rest upon, lay
Stella. She was dressed in the thinnest of blue silk, but
her pretty hair was limp and dank and all the colour had
gone from her face, which was strained and anxious. The
long string of pearls was round her neck, and she was
playing with them languidly.
Her face lighted up when I came in as I had never before
seen it light up at sight of me, and by that I gauged the
depth of her misery. She rose up and flung herself on me,
and I caught a whisper, “ He won’t go away, and I can’t talk
to you,” and then she leaned back again on her cushions
and pointed to others arranged on the other side of the
k’ang for me.
But I couldn’t lean against stuffy cushions on such a day.
The room looked into a little courtyard where was a Chinese


garden, a bridge of stone, a pool of water and some trees
in pots, all on a miniature scale, and Stella had had the
sense to tear the paper from the fretwood window so that
all the air that could get into that confined little courtyard
came into the confined little room. I leaned up against the
window, and a woman with small feet, a woman who had to
work too, evidently a slave of the household, brought in a
high Chinese chair and placed it down beside the k’ang.
On it Ling took his seat and sat there with true Chinese
gravity and I searched my mind for something comforting
to say to Stella. And I could find nothing. Only with an
effort I talked to Ling, discussing the conditions of the
country, and he warned me with a meaning in his suave
tones that made me shiver, that this expedition must not
be repeated. It was dangerous for me to leave the com-
pound without an escort. Pai Lang, according to him, was
ravaging the country to the south and east, and to the
north the Mohammedans were threatening to rise. He
smiled, and I felt as he dilated on the unrest that he was
gloating over the fact that he had us in his power. He
terrified me more than I can say, and I had to keep repeating
to myself that we must be safe, Martin Conant and I owed
him a considerable sum of money, and it was to his interest
to keep us safe. And yet when I looked at his hands spread
out on his knees, with their disgusting long nails, I knew
that we were in the heart of China and almost anything
might happen.
Stella said nothing, only shivered occasionally as if she
were ill. But she was not exactly ill, though there was
something strange about her which intensified my fear.
Tea and cakes were brought in and Mr. Ling served me
with ceremony. It was a great honour considering I was
a woman. I ate and drank and tried my hardest to help
Stella.
“ Stella had better consult me,” I said, “ as a doctor.”
And Ling smiled secretly as if he could go one better than
that.
“ O adorable and discreet pearl of ravishing loveliness,”
he asked, “ no rapacious and evilly inspired distemper has
seized upon you,” and he bent forward anxiously.
I don’t know whether he always used this flowery form of
speech in the bosom of his family, but its effect upon Stella
was distinctly disquieting. I saw that she was far more
afraid than ever I had been.


“Oh no,” she said hastily, “ no. If I can go to the farm
some day soon—to-morrow—”
“ A convenient, expedient and commodious day shall be
diligently sought,” he said, smoothing down his knees and
casting down his eyes, and quick as thought Stella lifted her
eyes to mine and shook her head. Ling had made her take
things quietly.
After that I dare do nothing. I could only declare
definitely that we would expect her at the farm early
to-morrow, and then take my leave, still escorted —closely
watched, I might have said—by Ling.
Chung was not forthcoming, and Ling smiled.
“The humble followers of this low-minded person,” he
said, “ dispense degraded hospitality to the exalted one’s
elegant slave.”
If he meant me by the exalted one he was about as much
out as when he described Chung as an elegant slave.
That gentleman merely smiled when I rated him for
keeping me waiting, and truth to tell I paid little attention
to him, for Stella’s pale face haunted me. Why had she
sent for me ? Whatever the reason, she had not dared tell
me, and I had very little hope of her coming to the farm.
Martin Conant and I talked the thing over in all its aspects,
and we were still talking it over when next day Mr. Ling
came hurriedly to the compound, and bursting in on us
without being announced, demanded Stella.
We stared at him dumbfounded.
He was furiously angry. He seemed to have lost all
control of himself, and he shouted at us in a curious mixture
of Chinese and English that had lost some of its pomposity
and did not even pretend to be polite. He said he knew she
was here because last night we had sent one of our servants
for her.
The news came like a thunderclap and I plucked up
courage to defy him.
“ What nonsense ! We have only Chung ! And we
certainly didn’t send Chung for her.”
“ Misfortune comes to all men and to most women,” he
stormed, “ and when the fled fair one was alone her shadow
filled her with a complicated emotion.”
If he meant she was afraid of her own shadow he was
; ight. But where was she ?
Chung was engaged at a small stove in the open air.


He was busily preparing bread for our tiffin. His neatly
plaited pigtail hung down his back, and his working clothes
were of spotless blue cotton. He never even looked in our
direction.
“ Evil dragons and thunderbolts! ” mouthed Ling.
“ that insatiable person came ! ” and he pointed a hand,
long nailed and disgusting at Chung.
And I was very sure Chung at any rate would not have
crossed the road for Stella.
I beckoned Chung over and he came reluctantly.
“ Missie mus’ be quick,” he announced to all whom it
might concern, “ else bread spoil,” and he gave his pigtail
an energetic flick, and taking out the fan he always wore
tucked in the front of his coat, looked us all over without
meeting our eyes.
Mr. Ling burst out at him in a torrent of Chinese, and
Chung fluttered his fan deferentially.
“ Not understanding this fashion talk,” said he. “ Master
mus' speak slow.”
Master didn’t speak slow. He completely forgot that he
aimed at a high standard of civilization and he threatened
Chung with all the penalties of an outraged Chinese master.
I was afraid, but Martin Conant tapped him on the shoulder.
“ Really, Mr. Ling,” he said, “ you mustn’t threaten the
man. I saw him in his quarters last night, rolled up,
sound asleep.”
“ Beyond a doubt you called the contemptible slave,”
said Mr. Ling angrily.
“ I did not,” said Martin Conant. “He was sleeping
soundly so I did without him. But I saw him rolled up on
the k’ang.”
“The illustrious one,” said Ling, struggling for this
politeness, “ will pardon this person for suggesting he was
mistaken.”
Mr. Conant shrugged his shoulders. “ I don’t think so.
Besides Chung always refused to serve Mrs. Chapman.”
Ling considered the matter a little more calmly. Mr.
Conant’s attitude had its effect. Still he repeated once
more,
“ The exalted ones have hidden the fair flower.”
“Look for yourself,” said Mr. Conant. “Chung take
Master round the compound.”
“ Blead spoil,” said Chung succinctly.


“ Chung ! ” And at the angry voice Chung flew to do his
bidding.
It was a most thorough search that Chung conducted
while we two looked at one another uncertain whether to
rejoice at her escape or to fear for the consequences. Heaven
knows we could hardly have hidden a mouse, let alone a
young woman like Stella, and when they came back to us
Ling apparently was on the best of terms with his conductor.
“ My tink,” said that wily gentleman, “ Missie have gone
back to minister.”
“ Oh no,” I said involuntarily, “ how could she get so
far ? ”
“One piecey caravan with straw hat have gone,” sug-
gested Chung, and then added briskly, “ can do ? Can go
bread ? Else spoil.”
Certainly there was a very appetizing odour of newly
baked bread, perhaps getting a little over-done, and Chung,
having received permission, skipped away hurriedly.
But there was a certain complacency in that skip that
strangely enough cheered me. I was in the mood to catch
at straws. Whatever had happened between Mr. Ling
and our servant, Chung considered he had had the best of it.
He was the only serene person in the compound.
Ling seemed unable to make up his mind that his search
was vain. He kept on insisting that Stella must be here.
It was nonsense to think she would go away with a caravan
—his caravan.
“ Something dreadful has happened to her,” I said, and I
looked at Ling. What had I not seen him do ? What had
not been done under his orders ?
Only if he had hurt her why should he even trouble to
mention her to us. WTiy this pretence of looking for her ?
It gave me a little hope.
“ Nothing has happened to the misguided one,” he said.
He spoke more simply than usual, but he was in deadly
earnest. “ Undoubtedly she has run away, and when they
of this person’s household run away—” He did not
finish the sentence. He did not even trouble to indulge in
the long Chinese farewells. Only as he flung himself into hjs
litter he looked back and tossed us a word of warning.
“ If the exalted ones go beyond the sheltering farm,” he
said, and he looked round as if he could have killed some-
body, “ the rapacious braves of Pai Lang are like starving
0


wolves in the snow, and the contemptible cash this person
has expended will be expended in vain.”
Looking out we saw the litter going at full speed towards
the city with the muleteer running panting along behind it
in an endeavour to keep up.


CHAPTER XXX
ROSALIE'S STORY.
THE TEMPLE OF EVERLASTING PEACE
“ We whom the world loved well,
Laying silver and gold on us.
The kingdom of death and of hell
Riseth us to take hold on us ;
Our gold is turned to a token.
Our staff to a rod.”
So it had happened, that indefinable something we seemed
to have been waiting for ever since Stella had gone to
Ling’s. At Ling’s departure we looked at each other
hopelessly, for what could we do ? Stella might need help,
need it terribly. But how were we even to begin to look
for her. The seclusion of a Chinese household faced us
at every turn. Chung told us Ling was searching secretly
up and down the town and making preparations to go to
Yang Cheng, and at last in spite of his sinister injunction
I decided to go to his house.
Mr. Conant insisted on accompanying me. First we
went to Ling’s business establishment, for if trouble were
brewing it would be well to have as much money as we
could. His manager was sitting before an open stall on
which were ranged little piles of brass coins of inferior value
for the use of the poorer people. Ho Ting was a suave
fat Chinaman of the old school, with a pigtail, and a chest
that had slipped even more than Ling’s, and he told us that
Mr. Ling was making preparations for a journey to the
west. We asked for a couple of hundred dollars. He
protested, but by offering a little higher interest we got it.
He seemed extremely anxious we should go back to the
farm. Indeed he wanted to escort us back, but though he
hummed and hawed, we insisted on going to Ling’s, and I
left him still protesting with Martin Conant in the outer


courtyard, while I went to the women’s quarters and asked
for Ling T’ai T’ai.
My arrival created a sensation, and an old woman came
forward. She looked at me with a sly secret smile, and when
I asked for Ling T’ai T’ai showed me into the room where I
had seen Stella, and there on the k’ang, leaning against the
cushions by the open window sat a middle-aged Chinese
woman elaborately dressed in a pale blue coat, much
embroidered, and pink trousers. Her feet were of, the
tiniest, her face was worn, but it was impassive under its
paint and powder, and her thin hair was drawn back under
an embroidered satin band fastened on her head with gold
pins. There were two other women, both elaborately
dressed and both with tiny feet, seated on the k’ang, and
each of them held in her arms a child, while two more
played beside them. I could not doubt I was looking at
Mr. Ling’s harem. And Mr. Ling’s harem was secretly
hostile and secretly triumphant. They received me with
perfect courtesy—that is Chinese courtesy.
Yes, this was Kuei T’ai T’ai, the wife of Ling Cheong.
These were her children, and she had, she counted on her
fingers, fouteen more. I tore my thoughts from Stella’s
plight to remember that the children of the secondary
wives and concubines are always counted the children of the
first wife. I praised them, said how beautiful they were,
for however desperate one’s anxiety, you may not hurry a
Chinese interview. Kuei T’ai T’ai said the house was
contemptible, and the children were ugly and sickly, and
her sisters were hardly worth my notice, but I had honoured
them all by coming here. She trusted that I had beautiful
children.
I disclaimed the children, as hastily as politeness would
allow. No, I was not married. And then in spite of my
own pre-occupation I saw that a little wonder did creep into
her voice, a wonder she instantly suppressed, but her calm
superiority had been broken for a moment by that emotion,
and I got a chance to ask about Stella.
In a moment she was herself again. Yes. It was true
there had been a foreign woman here for a short time.
What would you ? You cannot interfere with men’s
fancies. But she was only a passing fancy. She had gone
to rejoin her own people and —Kuei T’ai T’ai spoke with the
calm nonchalance of a woman who thoroughly understands


her rights, and is going to allow no outsider to interfere
with them. I was shaken with a fear that grew and grew
as, with elaborate courtesy, the slightly arrogant courtesy
with which we are accustomed to treat the half-civilized,
she swept all mention of Stella away, and ostentatiously
set herself to do the honours of her house. The other
women were inclined, I realised dimly, at the back of my
mind, to show a little natural curiosity concerning my
unmarried state, but she checked it with an air of serene
condescension that was perfect in its way, and beckoned
the innumerable servants who were peeping in to bring me
cakes and tea. Her whole attitude went to show she had
got her right position back again, and the incident was
closed. If I had been afraid when I entered the house, my
anxiety was doubled when at last I cut short the intermin-
able Chinese farewells, and got back to the outer courtyard
and Martin Conant and a very agitated Ho Ting again.
And at the city gates Ho Ting dismissed us with another
warning to stay within the bounds of the farm compound,
and as we went back I noticed an undue number of armed
men, ragged armed men such as had escorted us down from
the Great Lake, and more than once they looked at us and
laughed.
There was evidently trouble brewing. It was no time for
foreigners, unarmed foreigners, to be wandering about the
country.
“ I think,” said Martin Conant, “ you ought to go back to
your clinic, and I’ll see what can be done about Stella.”
And then the growing terror clutched at my heart. We
two were the last left of the little company that had set
out from the mission station at Yang Cheng. Two we had
seen die, the minister might be all right, but Stella —
The moment we were in the safety of the farm and Mac-
Tavish was going mad with delight at seeing me again, for
I had left him behind, I put both my hands on Martin
Conant’s shoulders and said,
“ I can’t be left. I daren’t be left. We must look for
Stella together. Promise, promise you won’t leave me.
Promise, promise.”
He looked at me a moment. Then he put up his hands
and took mine in his.
“My dear,” he said, “ we’ll stick together. You’re
thinking about all the dangers we’ve come through.


Remember we have came through them,” and he sat me
gently down in a seat and called to Chung to bring tiffin.
But if there were danger for us we hardly heeded it in
our anxiety as to what had become of Stella. Had Ling
T’ai T’ai —I had no doubt she was Ling T’ai T’ai—taken
measures to get rid of her ? Such things might be I knew
in a Chinese household. Had Ling himself killed her in a
moment of anger ? In that house anything might have
happened. What were we to do ? How were we to begin
to search ? We took Chung into our confidence, and he was
all for waiting.
“ Master—Missie —waiting one piecey farm and Missie
all ri’—Missie surely all ri’,” and he fanned himself em-
phatically, while Martin Conant marched impatiently up
and down, and asked, “ How do you know ? How can you
know ? ” But Chung only smiled mysteriously.
The evening came, and we had heard nothing, and the next
day in desperation we went again to Ho Ting, but all we
got out of him was outspread hands and Chinese politeness
and a reminder that we had been requested to stay in our
compound.
He made us feel that danger threatened, for six armed men
escorted us back, and made a little encampment outside
the gates.
We were now virtually prisoners in our little compound.
It was awful to think of what Stella might be suffering, and
we were helpless. There was only one hopeful sign. The
people still came to my clinic, though they came creeping.
I dressed gunshot wounds and frightful sword cuts, and they
said there was war in the land, that the Elder Brethren and
the foreign lord were fighting. Did they regard White
Wolf as a foreign lord, we wondered ?
The day passed, and the next day was only made bearable
by hard work, for the ca ses at the clinic were exceptionally
heavy. Every ailment for miles round had been brought
apparently for treatment, and when I made enquiries as
to this unwonted rush, a ragged baldheaded, toothless, old
lady with a chronic sore obliterating one eye, calmly
informed me that they heard we should soon be killed, and
so she had come while there was yet time, otherwise it
would have been more convenient to wait till after the
harvest.
I told Martin Conant as we sat at supper in the pleasant


warmth under the peach trees where the fragrant fruit was
rapidly ripening. Overhead the clear blue sky peeped
through the green leaves, and all the farm-yard was bathed
in the golden light of the sun sinking towards the west. We
had made a few improvements since we had come—there
was no dirt and no litter. Roses and peonies and oleanders,
pink and white, and golden marigolds, were in pots outside
our rooms, a cricket was shrilling loudly in a small straw
cage outside the kitchen wall, and another answered him
from outside. The air was heavy with the scent of the last
of the peonies, but I was too anxious to enjoy anything
or do justice to the excellent supper Chung had set before
us, MacTavish had his and retired to the kitchen to nose
round for tit-bits. I had forgotten all about him, and
Martin Conant who had gone to the gate came back smiling,
“ One good sign,” said he, “ our guard has gone.”
I jumped up. “ Are you sure ? ”
“I am quite sure. They are making for the city.”
He was interrupted by MacTavish, who came tearing
across the compound lugging along something half wrapped
up in paper. Chung was in pursuit, but MacTavish was
pretty sure of my sympathy for his peccadilloes and made
straight for me.
“ Bad dog,” I said stooping over him and taking from him
a pigeon wrapped up in a piece of paper.
“ Small dog,” said Chung outraged and angry, “ tief ’em
one piecey pigeon for cully, small dog—”
I was going to hand over to him the messy parcel when I
was startled by seeing on it English handwriting. I held
it back and Chung rudely made a snatch. Martin Conant
standing by caught him by the collar, shook him, and
swung him backwards, and he stood there looking rueful and
apologetic.
“ Missie, Missie,” he begged abjectly.
“ What is it ? ” I had unwrapped the dead bird and saw
that the paper was covered with writing that was thick
and blotted as if it had been done with a Chinese brush,
“ Missie, Missie,” pleaded Chung, “ no good now, no good
now.”
“ Get back to your kitchen,” said Mr. Conant, but Chung
picked up the bird I had let fall, and crouched there on the
ground sobbing. I paid no attention to him.
“ What is it ? ” asked Martin Conant, and MacTavish


began scratching at my dress begging for forgiveness, but
for once I had no time for MacTavish. For it was part of a
letter.
“ Chit coming too late,” wailed Chung.
As I looked at the dirty smeary piece of Chinese paper
in the corner I saw a signature, “ Stella.”
Stella ! Stella ! A letter from Stella and Chung had
hidden it. I felt as if the world were going up and down
with me. Martin Conant took it gently from my hands and
pushing me into a chair spread it out on the table.
The top was gone. Either Chung or MacTavish had
disposed of it, and all we could read of the first line was
“ Englishman ” and “ emple of ” . . . “ lasting peace.”
Then it went on quite easily to be read in spite of the blots
that writing with a brush made plentiful. “Please, please,
by all .you hold sacred, don’t tell him about me. I have
written him a letter saying there are foreigners here. I
told him I was staying with Ling’s sister. I will meet you
on the road, but don’t tell him because—” and the rest,
but for the signature, was illegible. But the signature was
undoubtedly Stella’s. And Chung had had this precious
letter, which would have relieved all our anxieties, and
seemed to open out undreamed of hopes, and had used it
to wrap up our dinner. But for MacTavish we might never
have seen it. I was dumb before such a heinous crime, but
Martin Conant swooped down and dragged the culprit to
his feet demanding where he got the letter.
Chung sobbed woe-begonely, the tears trickled down his
fat cheeks, and he smeared them away, like a child, with his
sleeve.
“ Where did you get that letter ? ” reiterated Martin
Conant.
Chung went limp. His head and arms and pigtail hung
loose and wobbled as if he were a rag doll. And Mr.
Conant shook him again.
“ Chit coming late too much,” he sighed.
Mr. Conant let him go, and he fell all of a heap exactly as if
he had been stuffed with sawdust. MacTavish stood off
and barked at him, and he opened an eye and fixed it on me
piteously.
“ Have been one piecey velly good boy,” he mourned.
“Chung,” I said severely, “where did you get Missie’s
letter ? ”


“ Late too much,” he murmured again.
I tried once more.
“ Where is Missie ? ”
A little stiffening came into Chung’s back. He raised his
head.
“ Missie have gone Peking.”
“ Nonsense, Chung ! ”
“ Missie have,” he reiterated. “ Maybe tufeis catch him,”
he added thoughtfully.
“ The foreign master at —” began Martin Conant.
Chung finished the sentence for him. “ The foreign
master at Temple of Everlasting Peace,” said he. “ Missie
say wantchee go. But no can,” he added sorrowfully, and
there was conviction in his tones.
I was mad with excitement. A foreigner at the Temple
of Everlasting Peace ! And Stella had seen him ! He had
helped her to escape ! I distractedly put two and two
together, and my hopes, because I had been in the depths of
despair, soared wildly. A foreigner in Li Hsien ! But
suppose he had gone while we had been waiting here wasting
time !
Martin Conant dragged the limp Chung to his feet again.
“ Is there a foreigner in Li Hsien ? ”
“Pai Lang have got her one time,” Chung said, as if
Mr. Conant had jerked it out of him.
“Is it any good paying attention to a boy who uses
important correspondence to wrap up the dinner ? ” asked
Martin Conant. He spoke as if half our troubles were over.
Indeed I felt they were. But the sun was sinking fast. In
a little over half an hour the city gates would be closed and
we would have to wait till next morning to find out whether
this thing were true or not. The thought of waiting was
intolerable.
“ Let us go to the Temple of Everlasting Peace,” I said
catching up MacTavish.
Chung shrieked and yelled as only a Chinaman can.
“ No, no, Missie, no, Missie. Missie staying farm, Master
staying farm. Pai Lang —”
We looked in each other’s faces and read the same
decision. We would go at once and seek out this English-
man. Of course we could not get back to-night, the gates
would be shut presently, but there would be no hardship
anyhow in spending the night in the temple.


I hastily gathered together a few necessaries, and Chung
followed me sobbing, “ Missie, Missie, Pai Lang have catch
foleign Master. Missie ! Missie ! ” but I paid no attention
to him.
“ Come on, come on,” said Martin Conant gaily, “ never
mind Chung. It’ll do him good to think we've left him.
I suppose the beggar wanted to prolong the job. I think
we shall do it. Here, I’ll carry MacTavish. If he’s going
to find anything interesting among the graves he’ll delay us. ”
We raced across the ground that lay between us and the
city gates, laughingly speculating as to the meaning of
Chung’s conduct.
When we were close up to the gate and saw it was not yet
shut I paused a moment.
“Chung’s conduct was queer,” I said. “What did he
say about Pai Lang ? ”
“ We’ve been threatened with Pai Lang for the last six
months,” said Martin Conant. “ After all if there isn’t an
Englishman in the temple we can spend the night there.
The people have been talking about a foreign lord ! ”
The great door, heavily studded with iron, moved out-
wards a little, hesitated, and a face peered round it. The
sun was set and the guardians of the city were taking a last
look round before shutting the gates for the night. It was
intolerable to think of having to wait ten hours.
Martin Conant took my arm and we ran forward. The
guardian of the gate grinned at me in friendly fashion, I
recognised him. His little son, his only son, had been sick,
and I had set him on his feet again. He put out a grimy
hand and patted MacTavish.
“ A good omen,” I said as the gates clanged ominously
behind us and we were in the darkening city for the night.
“The Temple of Everlasting Peace!” Martin cried,
“ where is the Temple of Everlasting Peace ? ”
A grubby hand pointed the way, and I asked,
“ Is there a foreign lord there ? ”
“ O mighty healer ! ” said the man, “ there is a great
lord there. But,” he hesitated, “if the healer desires,
the gate shall be opened again.”
“ No, no, no,” and we ran along the dirty narrow street
leading to the temple that stood enclosed behind red walls
in a great open space on rising ground in the heart of the
city.


My companion caught my arm with one hand, while the
other held MacTavish. It was darker inside the walls than
it had been outside in the open, and here and there a light
showed dimly through paper, but there are few windows in
a Chinese street. My heart was, beating to suffocation.
Were we at the end of all our troubles ? Stella evidently
thought we would be when we reached the Englishman.
Why had she not waited ? But what was the use of foolish
speculation ? Presently our questions would be answered.
Darker it grew, and darker, and narrower the streets.
Then I saw at the end of one of them the silvery white
light of the moon nearly at the full and just topping the city
wall. Only in the narrow streets because of the walls her
rays could not fall. But where the street widened, a broad
irregular dusty place opposite a high wall with a heavy door
in it lay flooded in the white light.
“Now for it,” said Martin Conant, and his voice had a
cheery ring in it.
I was glad he seemed so certain for I did not like the look
of the dozen or so of men who were lounging about the open
space. They reminded me too much of the men who had
guarded us as we came down from the Great Lake. Only
half of the temple door was open, and an unkempt sort of
soldier lay sprawling across. The man sprang up as I asked
for the foreign lord in Chinese.
He looked us up and down, grunted, called another man,
and presently we were thrust rather rudely into the inner
courtyard.
“ Well have to speak to the foreign lord,” began Mr.
Conant, “ about the manners of— Oh ! ” he broke off,
“ the Temple of Everlasting Peace ! ”
He softly thmst MacTavish into my arms and the
faintest breath of wind perfumed with the scent of incense
shook the bells on the eaves till they gave forth the ghost of a
chime.
The moon was coming up. Outlined against the clear
sky were the curved irregular tiled roofs of the temple, and
from the gnarled and spreading branches of dark-foliaged
cypress trees hung great round Chinese lanterns in colourless
oiled paper, shining: silvery white, like the moon herself.
The courtyard was all soft white light and deep dark
shadow, and there was nothing to mark where moonlight
ended and lantern light began. There were china jars.


white and rich royal blue with oleander bushes in them, and
long pathways wound among the trees, pathways paved
with small pebbles worked in patterns such as the Chinese
love.
We stood and drank it all in, and for a moment my
anxieties, my hopes, my fears even, were stilled. The
Temple of Everlasting Peace ! And then like a crashing
discord broke on the air the shrieking falsetto of a Chinese
singing girl, and the twanging of her lute. The spell was
broken, and we looked at each other and laughed.
“ He’s got a queer taste in music that foreign lord,” said
Martin Conant.
4 ‘ Come,” said the man who had brought us in impatiently,
almost rudely, motioning us towards one of the pathways
where the light fell dappled through the foliage overhead.
It was only half a dozen steps, and there came a turn in
the pathw r ay, there were more lanterns, and the light, still
soft and cool but bright as day, fell on the front of the
temple raised a little above the ground. There was a high
tiled roof, supported by dark red pillars, up which twined
golden dragons, and behind was the interior, a dimly seen
vista of scarlet and gold, mysterious and wonderful. But
the figures in the foreground of the picture riveted our
attention, a singing girl in gay silk coat with painted
impassive face, and reclining among cushions, a large
k’ang table between them, two Chinese in silken robes, and
my heart sank like lead, for one of them, portly, suave,
sinister, was unmistakably Ling Cheong !
Martin Conant drew my arm through his, and then I was
conscious that the ragged armed bodyguard I had seen
outside had clustered behind us, cutting off our escape.
“O illustrious ones,” said Ling rising and shaking
hands with himself, “ how fortunate indeed is this long
hoped for and much procrastinated meeting. This humble
person has been fortunate enough to extend his beneficent
protection over the mighty ones, waiting for a convenient
season when it would be possible to commemorate this
honourable meeting with music and other forms of delight,”
and he spread out his hands softly patting the air and yet
indicating the man who lay opposite among the cushions, his
heavy eyelids opening and closing lazily.
“ We came to meet the foreign lord,” said Martin Conant
sternly.


Ling salaamed first to the other Chinaman, and then to us.
“This,” said he, “is a matter which has been pressing upon
this person’s mind for some time, and this unworthy one is
immeasurably and unaccountably relieved of compelling
anxiety by the gracious presence of the exalted ones.
There is now no possibility of ingenious misunderstandings
unexpectedly arising. The exalted ones will undoubtedly
be enraptured to exchange the protection of this unworthy
and humble person for the all-embracing care and much-
to-be-desired tenderness of the illustrious and beneficent
Pai Lang ! ” And again with his hand he made a motion
towards the man on the other side of the table.
Pai Lang ! Pai Lang ! After all our wanderings, all
our struggles we were at the mercy of the great Chinese
robber at last.


CHAPTER XXXI
MARTIN CONANT'S STORY
PAI LANG
“ Yet shalt Thou bind them up that were broken,
O Lord our God.”
Good Lord! Pai Lang! Pai Lang! After all! I
laughed, though God knows it was no laughing matter, and
I saw Rosalie looking at me wonderingly. If it hadn’t been
for her I should have emptied the barrels of my automatic
pistol and ridded the world of a pair of blackguards, run for
it and taken my chance. I’d have felt my account was
square anyhow.
But I was bound to consider Rosalie. Ling Cheong
seemed to have much satisfaction in pointing out to us the
great robber chief.
He was a tall man not yet thirty years of age, clad in the
silken robes of a high-class well-to-do Chinaman, but even
as he lay there indolently there was about him a suggestion
of force, which is foreign to the average Chinese. Instead
of wearing a queue his head was covered with a short
growth of hair that stood on end. It looked as if someone
had gone over it with a blunt razor, and only succeeded in
getting off two hairs in every three. For a moment I was
puzzled, then he opened his lips and I understood. He
addressed me in German.
“ Swine of an Englishman ! ” he said.
I put a hand on Rosalie’s shoulder and felt with the other
for my pistol. I said nothing. “ Keep your last cartridge
for yourself,” is an injunction one always remembers in
China. Well, I must keep two, for the girl beside me
depended on me and I must not fail her.


“ Barbarian ! ” said the man on the cushions struggling
up and gesticulating with vile oaths and truly German
precision—he there and then told me what he would do to me
and the woman beside me. He had perfect command of the
German language, and though he and I were the only two
who understood what he said—luckily—he seemed to take a
fierce joy in going into details—in enlarging on the subject.
I fixed my eyes on his distorted* angry face, and the passion
in it had the effect of making me calm. The ragged body-
guard were close; their numbers gave me a certain con-
fidence because there could be no question what I must do.
I owed it to the good comrade who had stood by me at
every turn, to the woman I loved. Every ghastly detail the
fiend before me was pouring out in guttural German but
stiffened my resolution. The man mouthed on, desecrating
the perfect summer night, but the faint temple bells, the
whispering breeze in the cypress branches had another
message for me too. With that automatic pistol in my
hand I was not helpless. We had been adventurers for the
last six months—now we would start on another adventure,
the greatest of all—together. He should not have his
victims.
She stood there, leaning close against me, clasping her
little dog, afraid certainly, but still, I think, vaguely
comforted because the man was speaking in a European
tongue.
“ Why you are smiling ! ” she said.
I had not known I was smiling, but after all why
not ?
“We will do him,” I said. “ Don’t be afraid.” And she
too smiled.
I think it angered those two men looking on, playing with
us as a cat plays with a mouse.
“Damned English swine!” cried the Chinaman, “I
will make you afraid ! ” and he changed to Chinese and
Rosalie started, looked at me and understood. Her face
hardly changed, but I felt her hand pressing my arm.
“There are many subjects for elegant conversation,”
said Ling suavely, “ and doubtless the illustrious ones will
understand what will be a just and enlightened conclusion
of this affair.”
I looked at him, soft and pawky—him I could deal with
qs he deserved. No, nothing that I could do would give him


his deserts. But, at least, never again should he oppress the
wretched. Not if I could help it.
It was strange how quiet I felt now that all uncertainty
was over, now that there was really no choice. It was such
a simple thing that I was going to do. I did not explain, did
not ask her pardon. I felt so sure that Rosalie would
understand. I had the pistol hidden in the wide sleeve
of the Chinese coat I wore, and I moved it so that she might
see it and smiled, and she smiled back at me, God bless her.
If I think about that moment now, the sweat is cold on my
forehead and salt on my lips, but then—thank God, it only
scented natural to be glad I had the means of outwitting
those blackguards.
Oh, the Temple of Everlasting Peace had a message for
me after all. The bells rang softly and the scented breeze
caressed our faces.
And as if in answer to my thought, the German Chinaman
rose to his feet in his anger, casting off his indolence, and
flinging out his hands he came towards us mouthing his
words and shouting in Chinese, but what he said I could
only guess by the pressure of Rosalie’s fingers. Her face
hardly changed, only grew whiter in the moonlight. I
thrust her a little behind me. When he was dead would be
time enough—
And then a strange thing happened. As he came on I
raised my pistol, but before I fired—l wanted to make quite
sure—a cloud seemed to fall over his face and all expression
died out of it. He hesitated a moment. I had him
covered. Then his eyes closed, the long slit almond eyes
of a Chinaman, and he staggered backwards and fell among
his cushions again with his eyes half open, a look of serene
content upon his face, and he settled himself there as if he
needed rest and were about to take it.
For a moment, a second, I stood surprised and dumb-
founded, then as Ling bent over him I saw my advantage.
“ Mr. Ling,” I said, “ you move off those people of yours
or you’re a dead man. Quick ! I give you two minutes !
Look sharp now ! ”
He straightened himself up and looked as if he were
about to defy me, and found himself looking right down the
barrel of an automatic pistol. The surprise and dismay on
Ling Cheong’s expressive countenance were good to see.
“ This unworthy person —” he began.


“ Quick ! Your orders ! One minute gone ! ” I knew
now we could die. It was quite simple, so simple I could
dare almost anything. I had six cartridges. I would have
used one on him without a tremor.
I heard a clatter behind me and I guessed the men
behind were thinking about using the old blunderbusses
they carried, but the bright white light also showed me
fear in Ling’s self-satisfied face, and he was chattering and
shrieking, and gesticulating in a manner that was really
unbecoming in a gentleman of his ample proportions.
I still held him covered.
‘You move at your peril,” I warned him, and I asked
Rosalie, “ Are they going ? ”
“ Yes,” she said, “ yes.” And then she took a hand.
“ Stand out of the moonlight. You can keep him covered
just as well.”
T must admit I was beginning to wonder what the dickens
the next move was to be. I rather thought I’d better
truss up the famous robber and make Ling carry him. Of
course there were disadvantages —I was beginning to feel a
bit light-headed at the unexpected turn of events, and Ling
Cheong was recovering his equanimity to a certain ex-
tent.
“ The just and insatiable Pai Lang,” he began, “ being
moderately overcome by the devouring fumes of the
beneficent poppy it remains for this unworthy person to
recount to the distinguished gathering a matter which
merits the favourable consideration —”
“ You be—”
There was a sound outside, a sound of rushing fe6t.
Ling turned to listen, and I reminded him that my pistol
held something for him.
“ There’s a knocking at the gate,” said Rosalie’s voice
with the first shade of anxiety in it I had heard since we
had come into the moonlit garden. Ling Cheong was
listening too, the ragged following had vanished at his
bidding, among the shaded scented aisles, only Pai Lang
was peacefully resting in a semi-conscious dream, and the
singing girl sat staring ahead with the fixed simper on her
vacant face. She had been engaged for the evening and her
time was not up yet.
I kept Ling where he was. He at least was safe, and if
the worst came to the worst, I could kill him, and —
P


I thought I heard a word I understood. In the medley
of sounds it seemed to me —could Ibe dreaming ? —a calm
voice said, “ Break down the gate ! ” and spoke in clear
precise English !
The tumult was growing. Someone was battering
against the gate furiously.
“ Do you hear ? ” I said to Ling at a venture, “ the
foreign lord comes to our help.”
“ Thfere will be no necessity then,” stammered Ling, who
was, I could see mortally afraid the pistol would go off,
“ for this unassuming person to undertake any further acts
of benevolence, but the exalted ones remembering acts
which merit pleasing and satisfactory consideration—”
The gate gave and there came along the pathway where
the lanterns and the moonlight made it light as day twenty
Chinamen, well-set-up drilled men, and leading them was a
tall man in a Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers, Englishman
written all over him. He carried a pistol in one hand, a
cane in the other, and the moonlight fell full upon his bare
head and his neat torpedo beard.
I heard Rosalie give a sob, Ling stood like a statue
because he dared not move, the singing girl still sat impassive
and the great robber lay wrapped in his opium dream. But
for these three we had the moonlit garden and the deep
shadows and the cypress trees all to ourselves. The
Englishman came towards us.
“ My look see foleign lord,” said a self-satisfied voice
we knew, and Chung appeared beside the newcomer, who
marched straight up to us.
“ All here ” said he.
“ Good Lord ! ”1 said, “ you’re just in time.”
The Englishman looked at the man among the cushions.
“Pai Lang,” I said.
“We can’t shoot an insensible man,” said he—•“ besides
the Chinese must settle their own little difficulties. And
this gentleman ? ”
Ling Cheong, with an anxious eye on me, made an
elaborate obeisance.
“ He ought to be shot,” said I, “ but I owe him a lot of
money.”
“ Then that settles it,” said the newcomer, and I lowered
my pistol, and Ling Cheong making deep obeisances backed
himself into the gloom of the temple behind.


“ You will pardon haste, madam,” said our deliverer
turning to Rosalie, “ but discretion is the better part of
valour. If you will allow me to suggest—”
But Rosalie was sobbing passionately, and I could only
put my arm round her, and surrounded by the little band,
lead her out of the Temple of Everlasting Peace.


CHAPTER XXXII
STELLA'S STORY
HER JUSTIFICATION
" Blossom of broom will never make bread,
Red rose leaves will never make wine.”
It is no good supposing the others will ever understand.
Rosalie Grahame has her own views of right and wrong, and
when you live in accordance with them you may bask in the
sunshine of her approval, but if you deviate one little step
from the line of conduct she has laid down you may as well
walk in outer darkness. Your slip will not be forgiven you.
As for talking to her about worldly wisdom —these young
American professional women are just silly. I shall say
nothing, but at the back of my mind is always the knowledge
that at the cost of great discomfort and suffering to myself
I saved their lives.
For, oh, the life in Ling’s house ! The long, long days
when there was nothing to do, absolutely nothing, nothing to
look forward to, nothing to hope for, nothing to amuse one,
not even a book to read, not even a bath to be had ! When
I got up in the morning a slave brought me a basin with a
little warm water in the bottom of it, and that was a great
concession, for I verily believe the rest of the household all
gave themselves a smear from the one basin with the same
dingy rag.
There were heaps of women about, Mr. Ling’s three
sisters, and all the various slave-women Chinese ladies have
to attend upon them. The sisters had bound feet and only
spoke Chinese, which just shows how completely Ling’s
mother had gone over to her husband’s people, and most of
the others had bound feet too, but not quite so bad. They,
the sisters, and the slaves too, for that matter, had children,
though I never saw their husbands. I suppose it would


have been bad taste, though I don’t know why. One
Chinese more or less couldn’t have made any difference to
me, man or woman. I hated them all equally except Mr.
Ling, and him, once I realised how wickedly he had deceived
me, I hated and feared more than all the rest put together.
I couldn’t talk to the women- —I didn’t want to—and there
was not a creature I could exchange a word with. I was
expected to sit on the k’ang where I slept the livelong day,
unless I went and lay in the garden. A blind story-teller
came and amused the women and sometimes sang songs in a
high queer falsetto, and naturally that didn’t amuse me.
All my meals were served on a tray on the k’ang table.
I was supposed to eat them lying down, and all the food was
in little basins to be eaten with chop sticks or a china spoon.
It wasn’t bad—Chinese, the rich ones do live well —but
I soon grew to hate it, and every day seemed to stretch
itself out into a year. After a week I felt I had lived there
for a hundred dreary monotonous years. No one can
possibly guess what an awful time I had. And yet if it
hadn’t been for me and my self-sacrifice the others would —
well, I suppose they would have been dead.
I shall always maintain that the only thing to do is to
forget all about those awful days at Li Hsien, to forget all
about China altogether if possible.
.Well, after all the sacrifice I made it would be the worst
possible taste for anyone to talk about China to me.
After I found out how deceived I’d been I felt I would
have done much better to stay at that horrid farm. As a
rule I am cheerful and make the best of things. Now I
felt that all the good had gone out of life. It did not seem as
if I were ever to have a chance to get away.
Then a curious thing happened.
Ling's eldest sister and the old doorkeeper came tottering
in one day, and making signs to me to be quiet,they led me
along a narrow passage-—it was a rabbit warren of a place—
till at last we came to a little dark dirty room. Just as I
was going to protest, I heard, oh, I heard two people talk-
ing, and they spoke English !
How it was I didn’t shriek out I don’t know. One was
Ling, but the other had a soft pleasant cultivated English-
man’s voice ! Except for Martin Conant I hadn’t heard an
Englishman speak—for—oh it seemed like years! The
women crept up softly and looked through a crack in the


wall, and beckoned to me to do the same. Naturally I did.
And there, seated at a high Chinese table on which was tea
and fruit, was my —Mr. Ling and a tall, good-looking middle-
aged man, very thin, with long thin fingers and a neatly
cut grey beard. His hair was grey too. But what I
noticed about him was that he sat there as if he were master
of the situation. Ling Cheong was bowing down before
him and treating him as if he were somebody of great
importance. He looked as if he w r ere. What would I not
have given to rush to him and throw myself upon his
protection. I leaned up against that dirty with my
heart beating, and it took all my strength to prevent my
calling out to him. He looked so certain of himself, so safe-
I think I should have risked everything, but I heard him say
quite distinctly,
“ Well, I’m at the Temple of Everlasting Peace, and I
shall be there for a few days, so if you do hear anything
you might let me know.”
At the Temple of Everlasting Peace ! It seemed to me
that if he were stopping in this little city I might get away
and throw myself on his protection quietly. It would be
so much better than making a scene.
“ This person,” said Ling Cheong, in his very best manner,
“ has acquaintance with the pleasing fact that the much
enquired for Heaven-sent ones have taken their departure
from this excessively evil and ill-regulated district. This
unworthy one has been the beneficent means of supplying
the exalted ones with a plentiful supply of despicable and
contemptible cash.”
“ Well, if you did—” said the pleasant voice, evidently
trying to cut short his periods. But you couldn’t do that
with Ling.
“ They were insatiably and intensely desiring to journey
forth,” went on Ling, “ they skedaddled with unpresentable
efforts in order to realise their anticipations.”
“Did they indeed?” said the quiet voice. “Then I
presume—”
“This unworthy person,” insisted Ling, in the most
respectful and engaging manner, “ventures to suggest to the
great Lord, that he should follow the valuable suggestion of
the lowly Ho Ting and shake off the dust of this most un-
worthy city from the soles of his venerable feet.”
“ And why ? ” asked the other coolly.


“ The valorous Pai Lang,” came the answer, “ is about
to visit this city, and it is his pleasing and inalienable
custom to torment with firebrands and—”
The Englishman smiled slowly.
“ I don‘t think I have much to fear. My men are
drilled soldiers by now, and when it comes to tackling a
robber band—”
Ling waved his hands in that way he has which has got
on my nerves.
“This person is overwhelmed with confusion,” said he,
“ in unworthily reminding the great Lord that it is an
unfortunate coincidence that while passing along the roads
at this season many inconsiderate and unthinking bowmen
are apt—”
“ The road due east along which I came and along which
I shall go back presently,” interrupted the Englishman, “ is
likely to be safe enough. A child might go that way for a
week,” and he spoke with confidence. “You see they know
I am coming.”
“ The words of the great Lord gladden the heart of this
individual,” said Ling with his oily smile, “ and raise from it
an unbearable load. The heaven-sent ones unfortunately
travel in mean garments, and unattended, but by one
elegant slave. After listening to the dignified narrative of
the mighty Lord this person will anxiously await news of the
polite meeting with the lonely ones fleeing from avaricious
persons along the—but,” he broke off, “ I cannot conceal
from myself I am becoming intolerably tiresome with my
commonplace talk.”
The Englishman only muttered something in reply, and I
stepped softly away, evidently to the great disappointment
of the women who had brought me. But it would not have
been wise—no, I knew it would not have been wise to rush
in then. The thing would be to get into communication
privately with this Englishman. It made me hot and cold
all over just to look at him. Oh if only I could get to him —
could get away from this awful place !
But, of course, there were many things to be considered.
If I let Martin Conant and Rosalie know, they would give
this man their version of how I came to be where I was.
There is no saying what Rosalie was capable of blurting
out. I could not bear—no, as I looked at that nice hand-
some clean-cut face I felt I must have a fair start with him.


It would be too cruel if he should get things wrong. Oh
it was a difficult situation.
I got the women to bring me pen and paper—Chinese
pen and paper—and they nodded and smiled, but still I
couldn’t make up my mind what to write or whom to write
to, and I was simply sick with the anxiety of it when
Rosalie came to see me. I debated whether I’d tell her, but
Ling was there, and even if I could have managed it I
couldn’t trust Rosalie. She has no gumption. She is one
of your frank open young women, who prides herself on
speaking straight out. She thinks she has nothing to
conceal unless it is the fact that she is desperately in love
with Martin Conant. Still when she was gone I flung
myself back on the cushions in despair.
And just as I was in the depths of misery, in through the
door again came Mr. Ling’s eldest sister, and the old woman
doorkeeper hustling in, of all people in the world, Chung I
That old sister thought a great deal of herself, and yet here
she was behaving like a common coolie. I always disliked
Chung, but still he was a straw. Evidently he had been
brought in while Ling was going through those silly Chinese
farewells at the gate. So that whatever I had to say must
be said at once.
And it made me mad to think that Rosalie might meet
that nice Englishman before I could arrange things,
“ Mus’ makee haste,” said Chung. “My run ’way
Missie ni’ time ? ”
I nodded, though of course I didn’t want to run away
with Chung. But the thing was to get away.
“ Have got monies,” he said, and I was nearly frantic.
Of course I hadn’t any money. My heart sank down when
suddenly Ling’s eldest sister bent over me rudely and held
up the string of pearls I wore round my neck. They repre-
sented money. I saw Chung’s eyes glisten, and I wondered
if I was safe to trust him. I really am a brave woman.
“ Can do one, two three pearls,” I said. After all I would
have given him the half if it got me away.
“ Can do,” said Chung. “ Missie go ni’ chop-chop.”
I nodded again and in, a moment the sister was pouring
out a rapid flood of Chinese, evidently arranging with
Chung, and before I had time to say anything more he was
gone.
My feelings may be imagined.


Well, the night came before I had made up my mind what
to do. By the light of a horrid smelly kerosene lamp came
those two women again, and made me strip and change
into the ragged dirty coat and trousers of a coolie woman.
Awful! I could have screamed but for one thing that gave
me a gleam of hope. They thrust the string of pearls into
my hand. They wanted to get rid of me and this was a sort
of bribe. They twisted up my hair tight round my head and
tied a strip of blue cotton rag over everything, and then
Ling’s sister with some words which I felt sure were an
insult, handed me over to the old doorkeeper, and she took
me along by a winding passage to the courtyard before the
main gate of the house. And there was Ling standing in the
doorway talking to the handsome Englishman. I caught
the words “ heaven-sent ones,” and guessed they were talk-
ing about us. Badly I should like to have listened, and I
could have done so quite easily for neither of them would
have paid the least attention to two women-slaves, but the
old woman pushed me roughly outside, and the gatekeeper
slammed the gate in my face.
It was horrible, but Chung was there, and I felt the pearls,
and my courage returned. lam a brave woman. There
and then in that filthy narrow dark street I made up my
mind what I would do. Of course I didn’t know whether
I could trust Chung, but I’d got to. First I must get some
decent clothes. It was madness to think of meeting the
Englishman in filthy rags, and then I would make Chung
get me a cart and I would go along the road and let the
Englishman overtake me. I would write a letter to
Rosalie telling her about him, but I w T ould tell Chung not
to give it to her for a day at least, because it would be so
much better they should not know anything about me when
Ling went there to look for me. Of course he would go
there for me, and —why, goodness me —they might think I
ought to go back !
Anyhow, there, in that horrid dirty, smelly street, all in
the darkness, I managed to tell Chung what I wanted. I
told him I was going along the road to Peking and the
Englishman who was with Ling would overtake me, but I
didn’t want to see him till I had decent clothes. He was
going to meet me. I said that because I was afraid Chung
might intend to murde-r me for my pearls. Chung was to
get me a cart, and the clothes, and I would give him a letter


to Missie Grahame, but he was not to give it to her till
the day after to-morrow. Then they could join the English-
man as he was starting. I gave him five pearls there and
then, and I must say, much as I hate them, Chinese servants
are clever. He understood at once.
“Missie come my,” said he, “start to-morrow chop-
chop.”
And then we walked miles. He took me up the wall by a
steep ramp by the gate, and we walked along one side until
we came to a break where the water had pushed out the
bricks. Don’t ask me how I got down it, but I did. I slipped
and slipped, but I held my tongue when I hurt myself for
Chung declared the guards would kill me if they discovered
us, and at last we arrived at the rotten little suburb opposite
the farm. Of course I only found this out next morning,
and Rosalie and Martin Conant must have got their break-
fast late, for Chung was busy getting me a cart, an old woman
to sit in front and some clothes. They were only coolie
clothes, but they were new and I hoped it was only for a few
days. It was a wonderful plan for a woman.
Of course I never should have dared it if I hadn’t heard
the Englishman say the road was safe. Safe—it was about
all it was. Anyone who knows China can imagine my
awful sufferings during the next two days. Chung took me
to a horrid little hole of a house built against the wall. I
wrote my letter and changed my clothes there, and then I
went off in the cart. Awful! There’s no other word for it.
Pretty early that day we were overtaken by a company of
men, and my carter without saying anything to me went
along with them. I didn’t dare look out, I just sat in that
cart, most utterly miserable, wishing I’d gone straight to
the Englishman, wishing I’d waited for an answer from
Rosalie, wishing all manner of things. I wasn’t even sure I
was on the road to Peking, and for all I knew these men all
round us might be robbers.
Oh, I put in a cruel time, a terrible time, and then on the
third day, to my utter surprise, peering through a crack
in the tilt of my vile Peking cart, I saw the Englishman
riding along !
Well, it only took a minute. I was outside that cart
weaving and calling to him. I was awfully ashamed of my
dress, of course, but I think my hair flowing all over my
shoulders in a great cascade of gold made up for it. I told


him afterwards I’d just been brushing my hair when I
caught sight of him, and of course I couldn’t wait. I drew
half over my shoulder and began plaiting it as we talked.
He was surprised. I didn’t want him to ask questions,
so I asked them.
“ But where is Rosalie Grahame ? And Martin Conant ?
Oh, where are they ? They were so anxious to get away.”
“ My dear lady,” said Sir Charles Marston—of course he
told me who he was afterwards—“ who are you talking
about? The lost missionaries ? Ling Cheong assured me
they were on the road ahead.”
“ He’s a bad man,” I said. “He wants to keep them and
get more money out of them. He never said you were in
Li Hsien. Only I went to see his sister ” —I thought I’d
better put it that way —“ and I saw you—and—and —I
didn’t dare speak to you because his sister was so frightened,
and I promised—l promised —and I wrote to Rosalie and
told her you were there. Didn’t they come to you ? ”
“No,” he said, “ I heard about them, but when I en-
quired of Ling he assured me they’d gone away a week ago.”
“ It wasn’t true,” I said, and then I told him how thank-
ful I was to meet him, and how White Wolf had broken up
the mission, and the Mongols had killed my husband, and
Martin Conant had been nearly killed by the Tibetans, and
all that we had suffered, and how I couldn’t come to him and
couldn’t go to the farm-house because I was so terrified of
Ling, who wanted to marry me, and I couldn’t bear he
should even know where I was, and I know it was all dread-
fully confused, but that didn’t really matter. A woman
who hasn’t been in touch with the outside world for such an
eternity may be excused if she is a little confused, and really
Sir Charles didn’t seem to mind. Oh he was nice and
deferential and charming. I suggested he should send back
some of his men for Martin and Rosalie, but he shook his
head and said he’d have to go with his whole force because
he had heard White Wolf was coming down on the town.
I cried then—l just cried hopelessly. Anyone will admit
I’d had enough to bear, and the thought of going back was
too much for me. Sir Charles was really tender. I suppose
I did look forlorn and helpless, and after all beautiful golden
hair helpless and in trouble is much more interesting than
the woman he probably expected to meet, your average
missionary, with her drab locks dragged back in a tight
little knot behind.


Of course I had to go along with them. I couldn’t be
left, and Sir Charles was awfully good to me because I was
so tired and so frightened, and he promised faithfully he
would take care not to let Ling know I was with him, or that
he had ever seen me. It was the best I could do, and my
sufferings can be imagined as we went back. Sir Charles
told me not to be afraid. He said he had come to China to
get coolies to work behind the lines in the great war in
Europe, and as the coolies were going by sea and he could
go across Russia, he had thought it might be useful to see
into the state of the country, and as he had to have a
certain number of servants he had drilled them like soldiers.
“ It’s quite simple,” said he, and he spoke quite tenderly,
“ I’d like to see the robber band that would stand up to my
fellows.”
Of course it wasn’t the robber bands I was exactly afraid
of, but I let it go at that.
Well, I could only hope it would be all right if I didn’t
show my face, and we arrived at the farm exactly four days
after that old woman had pushed me out of Ling’s house.
I stayed in my litter, of course, and presently back came
Sir Charles in a great state of mind with Chung.
“ They went into the city,” he said, “ just before the
gates closed.”
“ Chung pay master missie’s chit ? ” I asked.
I didn’t like it, of course, there’s no good saying I did, but
I had to put a bold face upon it.
Luckily, oh luckily things were all right. I never can be
thankful enough. And it just shows one ought to do the
right thing, and everything will be well in the end.
Chung fiddled and twisted and pranced from one leg to
the other, and tossed his pigtail about, and finally out it
came.
“No hab pay piecey chit. Pai Lang in Temple an’ six
piecey soldier at gate. So no hab pay.”
My heart sank. Unless I directed Rosalie and Martin
what to say there was no knowing what they might blurt
out. Still, of course, if Pai Lang had got hold of them, they
might be dead. I looked at Sir Charles.
“ Oh, they’ve never got my note,” I said. “Why didn't
I go myself ? ”
Chung smiled blandly.
“Small'dog catch chit,” said he. “ Missie catch chit,
master missie go look see temple one time.”


Sir Charles looked at me puzzled. He didn’t know any-
thing about that little beast MacTavish, and I laughed—l
was so relieved. They had the letter then, and probably
they wouldn’t say anything.
“ Gone to the Temple of Everlasting Peace ! ” cried Sir
Charles, “ and Pai Lang in the city ! ”
“ Chung knows a way in,” I said.
They owe their lives to me. They’ll never realise it,
but they do.
And I waited there alone for hours. Sir Charles says I'm
the bravest woman he knows.


CHAPTER XXXIII
ROSALIE'S STORY
RAGGED ENDS
“ Oh, roses for the flush of youth,
And laurel for the perfect prime.
But pluck an ivy branch for me,
Grown old before my time.
Oh, violets for the grave of youth.
And bay for those dead in their prime ;
Give me the withered leaves I chose
Before in the old time.”
It seemed as if the story that began in the clinic with Hop
Sing’s letter would end when Sir Charles Marston came to
our rescue so opportunely.
We left Pai Lang lying like a log in front of the temple,
with the singing girl staring at him vacantly; Sir Charles
said he could not kill an unconscious man no matter how
much he had deserved it, and he had not the time to mix
himself up in the country’s private dissensions. At least
that’s what I understood afterwards. At first I was too
shaken to do anything but follow blindly. With twenty
drilled men there was no difficulty in making the guards
open the gate, and we went on for ten miles before we had
rest and refreshment. I remember Martin Conant saying
something about Stella, and Sir Charles answering with his
grave precision,
“ Ah, the brave little missionary who sent me here !
She is quite safe and awaits you with impatience. We owe
your lives to her.”
We did. We owed our lives to Stella, and when we met
she flung herself into my arms and kissed and cried over me,
and begged me to get us out of China as quickly as I could
and forget it all.
But I am never likely to forget the Temple of Everlasting


Peace, and Martin Conant standing between me and a fate
too awful to contemplate.
But if it hadn’t been for Sir Charles Marston we might
have been in Kansu yet, if we escaped at all, and I am
extremely grateful to him quite apart from the gratitude
Stella thinks I ought to extend to her. When I was a little
girl we always thought of an Englishman as rather a solemn
prig, a man who expressed no emotion, and calmly went his
own way as if the rest of the world did not matter. I used
to hate that Britisher, but my typical Englishman material-
ized was kindness itself. It might seem ridiculous to
apologise for the absence of wine at our first supper to-
gether, when I at least was still quivering in every nerve,
for the use of tinned milk with the coffee. I would have
accepted rice and hot water and been thankful. Every-
thing tasted like ambrosia, or was it sawdust ?
But his attitude did more to restore us to the normal than
any amount of excited sympathy could possibly have done.
You’d have thought that picking up a pretty lady wandering
around China and rescuing two people from imminent
death was part of the day’s work, and nothing to make a
fuss about.
He told us about the war, and why he had come to China.
He mentioned that he was a widower and that his only
son had been killed at Mons, and took it for granted that
Martin Conant would join up directly he reached England.
Mr. Conant said something about making good, and Sir
Charles looked at me and smiled in his quiet superior way
and said,
“You will make good. I have no doubt of that,” and
Martin Conant flushed a little, and I knew I liked my typical
Englishman immensely.
It took us a month to reach Peking. We had an escort
of twenty well drilled men, and a gang of servants that kept
up Sir Charles’ dignity as a very great lord in the eyes of the
Chinese. There really couldn’t have been better propaganda
for the Allied cause in China, if Pai Lang’s ragged hordes,
and I suppose they did, represented the Germans.
I really think the only thing that troubled me were the
relations of Stella and Sir Charles Marston. And Martin
Conant shared my discomfort. Of course if Sir Charles
were going to marry her, and, long before we reached Peking
it looked as if he were, I would be thankful, but I doubted


very much whether he would if he knew about Ling. And
he ought to be told. But who was to tell him ? I sug-
gested to Martin Conant that he should, and he asked if I
couldn’t persuade Stella to tell him herself. It would come
so much better from her. It would, of course. I put it to
her one evening, and to my immense surprise she said she
had. She had told him soon after she had met him, and
they had agreed never to mention the subject again.
I was surprised and said so, and Stella began to cry. I
tried to soothe her, for I saw Sir Charles coming to call us to
dinner. We had dinner in the evening now, and all sorts
of luxuries that we had not been accustomed to for many a
long day. We were sitting in the courtyard of a little
temple, and Stella wiped away her tears and smiled up at
Sir Charles, then to my dismay broke down again, as if she
were trying to stop and couldn’t. Sir Charles looked very
uncomfortable but very pitiful.
“ My dear lady, my dear child,” he began.
“ Rosalie won’t understand I can’t bear that awful time at
Li Hsien to be mentioned,” she sobbed, “she will drag it up.
I told her I had told you about that horrible man Ling—and
that I was so ashamed —so disgusted—” more passionate
sobbing—“ and that you had promised never—never,”
and she went on crying again hopelessly, “ but she will —
she will —insist—”
Sir Charles looked at me and I felt a culprit. If he knew,
of course he would rather —
“ We needn’t go back to it,” insisted Stella, looking up at
him with streaming eyes, and she did look pretty. I
remembered the days when she had won me.
“ Certainly not,” he said, looking at her and then at me.
“ We’llnever mention Li Hsien or Ling again, Dr. Grahame.
We must all do our best to make this poor little woman
forget she has ever been in China. Poor brave little woman !
Come to dinner,” and he made me feel an unfeeling brute.
And so we went east to Peking, and in the train at the
Chien Men bade farewell to Chung.
Chung, like Stella, was quite sure he had been instru-
mental in saving our lives. He took occasion to point out
to me that he had led Sir Charles and the soldiers across
the gap in the wall, and now that we were safe there seemed
no point in reminding him, or Stella either for that matter,
of tibe days qf anxiety their secret machinations had caused
us.


He came to see us off, carrying my new handbag and
MacTavish, much to the latter’s disgust. But Chung was
so anxious to make himself useful that I sacrificed my little
dog’s feelings for this occasion only.
“ My lich man,” proclaimed Chung prancing along and
tapping his chest with the unwilling MacTavish, then
insinuatingly, as he placed him on my knee,
“ Missie getting mallied ? ”
“ I have never thought of it, Chung,” I said untruly.
Having placed my bag and cushion in their proper place
Chung produced a fan and was himself again. He bent
forward, shielding MacTavish from the eyes of the officials
on the platform and spoke in a whisper. He wished to have
a hand in guiding me to the last.
“ My tink,” said he, “ more better put small dog in blasket
so no pay monies.”
“ But I have paid, Chung,” I said, and he stood back,
fanning himself wildly and reproachfully at the thought of
such extravagance.
It was a last proof of devotion, and as the train steamed
away from under the piled masonry of the great Tartar
Wall my last view of Chung was of that immaculate servant
running along the platform, his pigtail flying behind, fanning
himself vigorously and crying,
“ Missee coming back he wantchee velly good boy ! ”
“ Thank goodness,” said Stella as the platform vanished,
but I shall always remember that I owe a great deal to our
Chinese servant.
And then we went all across Asia and Europe, and Stella
completed the conquest of Sir Charles—no, that is wrong.
I believe she was right, the conquest was complete when she
stepped from her cart with her golden hair over her
shoulders, and flung herself on his protection, but at least
the two of them were absorbed in one another, and Martin
Conant and I —well we were happy too.
And after awhile Stella and Martin Conant and I, and
of course MacTavish, found ourselves at Archangel on
board a collier, the “ Elizabeth Victoria ” —her captain
explained she was called after two great queens- —bound for
Cardiff in Wales. It was the only way I could take Mac-
Tavish, as dogs from Russia w r ere not allowed to enter,
Sweden.
Stella had offered at once to come with me.
a


“Don’t you fret, Rosalie,” she said. “I’ll keep you
company and you can land that beast you’re so fond of
without going to Sweden at all.”
And Martin Conant, after discussing the matter with Sir
Charles, had decided to come too. Sir Charles regretted,
he said in his courtly manner, not being able to come himself,
it went to his heart to break up such a pleasant little party,
but he had stretched his time to the utmost, he was abso-
lutely obliged to return within the week.
And Stella did not mind leaving him.
“ My dear,” she said confidentially to me, “ you needn’t
thank me because it really will look much better if he meets
me. Of course I sh'all miss him ’ ’ —she was most becomingly
sentimental—“ but think how delightful it will be when he
meets me on the wharf. MacTavish, you’re a very ungrate-
ful little dog. We’re doing it for you, and you don’t like
me the least little bit in the world.”
She amazed me with her confidence and her happiness.
“ A wind from the wilderness ” had blown over Stella, but
it might have been a softly scented breeze. Those long
anxious weeks, those dreary months, seemed to have been
blotted out of her life altogether. I might have thought
she had forgotten them, but that she always cleverly
changed the subject when Martin Conant and I mentioned
them.
Once when we were on the collier Martin said something
about the farm at Li Hsien, and Stella at once became
violently interested in a queer metal thing that hung in a
rack in the saloon.
“ Dinna touch yon,” came the skipper’s voice, “ yon’s a
grenade and gin ye get they pin oot it’ll blow ye to kingdom
come.”
O —o —oh ! ” Stella sat down in horror, but she was
quite pleased to forget about Li Hsien, “but what have you
got it for ? ”
Officers and crew both treated Stella as if she were a dainty
denizen of another world, and she, with Sir Charles in the
background, was sweetly gracious to them. Oh, life went on
oiled wheels those days, those days that I look bkck upon
with tender remembrance !
“ Air ! little leddy ! ” said he with a laugh, “ my nevvey
gie’d it me —brought it back fra France, an’ telled me if A
cud pit they wee bailie in a German boat there’d be a
pretty muckin’ up.”


“ Oh, but surely,” began Stella.
“ Deed yes, little leddy, A’m hopin’ there’ll be no need to
theenk on such. Dod A’m no sure—”
Martin Conant went up and inspected the little metal
thing, and the skipper showed him how it was used, but
when I asked him if he could really use it against a sub-
marine he laughed and said no, he thought a depth charge
would be more useful, but he had kept the grenade because
his nephew, of whom he appeared to think a great deal as a
sound fighting man, had given it to him.
“An' A’m thinkin’,” said he, “ the young beggar had no
right to the disposin’ of it. Anyhow he thocht o’ me and
there it is.”
They were kindly men those merchant sailors, and the
first days on board were very pleasant, a pause before
Martin Conant and I should be obliged to take up the
world’s work again.
In a measure Stella must have felt the same. The
v/eather was strangely calm.
“ Eerie,” said she with a little shrug of her shoulders,
“ after all the turmoil, to come into this.”
“Restful,” I said, but I think her word described it
best.
It was eerie. We were off the west coast of Norway,
steaming south. The sea was curiously calm, so calm
it was like a mirror. Here and there were streaks across it
like the marks on watered silk, grey watered silk, for every-
thing was grey, still and grey, overhead a wide sky stretching
far to an horizon where sea and sky met without a ripple,
and not a thing in sight save the disc of the sun, strangely
broadened and pale, like some great uncanny moon that
we could look at with case. I suppose there must have been
a mist in front of it, but it did not seem so. It made the
strangest picture I have ever seen, .the vast still grey sea
broken here and there by those streaks which were not waves
but simply marks upon its still flat surface, marks that
showed us how vast was the space in which we found our-
selves. A great wide silent empty world, with a ladder of
silvery rays stretching across it from the little black collier
to the faded sun that hung in the heaven above.
We were the only blot on the still grey seascape, and
Martin Conant and I hanging over the side hushed our
voices as we spoke. Martin Conant and I were always
together these times. I felt he was very near to me.


“ Do you remember,” said he, “ the scent of the juniper
fires at Kama Miao ? ”
Did I not remember it ? We had stood side by side on
the glorious winter night and looked at the temple across
the moonlit snow.
He looked away over the sea.
“When we smelt the juniper wood,” he said, “I was
beginning to think you might like me.”
“I do like you,” I said. And I felt as if a faint breath
were touching my happiness.
“ Oh, my dear,” he said, and gladness came to me again,
“do you think I don’t understand. It has been growing
upon me ever since Sir Charles showed me what a terrible
thing this war has grown into. You always thought I was
wrong until out of the kindness of your heart you forgave
my shortcomings in remembering I tried to do my best for
you.”
“Oh but —” I began, and he silenced me by turning and
laying his hand on mine.
“ If I’d been worth it,” he began.
But privacy is very difficult in a little ship, and at that
moment the captain came up. I wanted to tell Martin how
much I thought he was worth, how a friendship and com-
radeship between man and woman when something more is
added is the mightiest thing in the world, and I think my
eyes must have told him something for his face lighted up
and the mark on his cheek that I had tended so carefully
burned redly. But I did not mind the skipper’s inter-
rupting us for I think sometimes when a woman is prepared
to surrender everything she is a little afraid and is glad of
any excuse to put off the desired moment. I can’t say why
this should be, only I know my heart was singing, and I was
glad, and yet I could turn to the old man and greet him with
a smile. My amiability was not well received.
“ It’s all very well,” said he, “ for you passengers. I
suppose you’re admirin’ yon.”
“ Well,” I said, and I wondered there was not something
written upon my face, “ even if it’s bad it’s well it has one
good quality, for it is beautiful.”
“ Eh, “ ye that ’re tucked in
saft an’ warrm in your bunk ilka nicht. The next thing ’ll
be fog and whaur’ll we be then ? ”
Martin looked at me, and looked away again at the wide
Still grey sea,


“ I suppose we shall be here, only going slowly, “ I said,
and all the while I was thinking of the man beside me.
“ ‘ Going slow,’ says she,” went on the skipper, “ crawlin’
more like, an’ no bunk for me inside o’ a week maybe, an’
if I soun’ the horn it’ll fetch up a damn U-boat hand over
fist, and if I dinna some beastly old hooker ’ll come buttin’
into us, an’ how’ll you like this pretty grey sea for a per-
manent abiding place, my pretty lassie ?•—tell me that noo,”
“ I’m rather in love with life,” I said, and I was glad
because it sounded like a message to Martin. The old man
looked at me under his bushy grey eyebrows, and he looked
sternly and pityingly.
“Ah ye that now ? ” said he, and his voice rang kindly.
“ It’s a fair temptin’ o’ Providence to say so. Well we’re
safer in thick weather an’ gin the fog rises—”
“ If the fog rises,” said Martin, turning round, and his face
looked happy and hopeful and confident—my dear ! my
dear ! “ you set that old fog horn of yours going, and if a
German does turn up, send me on board to interview him,
I speak the lingo, you know, and with that hand grenade
of yours, and my automatic pistol—”
“An’ what’ll become of ye ? ” asked the skipper dourly.
“ I’ll swim off to you,” he answered lightly, “ the sea’s
calm enough,” and the skipper shrugged his shoulders and
went back to the bridge.
“He thinks you’re fooling,” I said, “ and this is too serious
a matter for jesting.”
“ But you don’t think I’m jesting, my dear, my dear,” he
said, turning round and suddenly taking both my hands in
his. “ You understand that if I could redeem myself—
make up for—for—”
“ Oh, but I couldn’t bear it,” I said, and when we turned
and looked at the sea he pressed both my hands against his
breast. My love, my sweetheart, in all the years to come,
can I ever forget the joy of that hour we stood together
looking over the ship’s side saying all the things we had left
unsaid in these months we had been together, and when we
said nothing aloud we understood each other just as well,
standing silent watching the grey fog close down upon us.
It was like veils of soft grey chiffon, oh something finer,
more impalpable than chiffon, and moment by moment the
veils fell till the sun faded to a point of light, and even that
died out and the width of sea grew smaller and smaller, and


the movements on board ship seemed to grow muffled, the
voice of the skipper calling orders and the responses of his
officers and men were muted, and a hush and silence hung
over all, broken only, now and again, by the dragging of
the rudder chains on deck. Most often only the clanking
of those chains broke the stillness. The ship went slower
and slower, feeling her way in the dense obscurity. Then
the fore part vanished, swallowed np in the fog, the little
house over the hatchway vanished—we could not even see
the sea below the rail over which we leaned, we two were
alone on the little ship on which I had thought there was
no privacy, and he took me in his arms and there was no need
of words between us, my comrade and my friend was my
lover, and surely in this world woman can have no greater
joy. Surely on those Tibetan Marches we had forged a bond
that would hold all our lives —our lives in this world and in
the world beyond.
Stewards and cooks, as I have said before, go on just the
same whatever happens, and presently the tea bell rang,
muffled but most certainly the tea bell. It was not exactly
dark, it would not have been dark anyhow this summer
weather, but the fog made a cold and clammy obscurity,
and Martin said with a little lilt in his voice,
“ Are we to go down to tea ? ”
“ I suppose the world will go on just the same,” I said,
and somehow the world seemed to have changed so for me I
wondered if anything could ever be the same again. It
never has, no, it never has.
“ Things must go on, my darling,” he said. “ You
remember I must join up.”
“Oh Martin! Martin!” But I knew he must. I
should not have loved him if he had not wanted to. How
can such things be ? And yet they are, and I can write
about them—and bear them.
“ And remember,” he said, “ perhaps you will have the
hardest part ! ”
But I did not feel that and I said so.
“ You must remember healing is my job, and whatever
is your job is never quite so hard as it seems to other
people.”
“ You must remember that too, sweetheart, “ he said in
his old whimsical way, “ when I am a Tomm y in the
trenches.”


And then the tea bell rang again more insistently than
ever, and we went below into the little saloon, and there sat
Stella and the second mate. The second mate was a huge
Shetlander, and he adored her, and she held the teapot in
her hand and looked over at ns archly and meaningly, and
strangely, oh strangely I didn’t even resent her looks.
All the world was bliss at that moment. I loved that little
stuffy saloon with a lamp burning dimly and the fog
making its way between the tightly closed doors and ports.
A rack hung across the table, with glasses stuck in it, and
the light gleamed upon them and upon the skipper’s little
hand grenade.
“ You two,” said Stella, “ are driving the steward
frantic. Everybody’s temper’s spoiled by the fog. Now
don’t tell me you’ve forgotten MacTavish ! ”
I had ! I actually had ! We had shut the door and
MacTavish, unaccustomed to such conduct on the part of
his mistress, was scratching furiously at the panels and tell-
ing me in unmistakable tones what he thought of me.
“Oh MacTavish,” I cried hastily.
But Stella waited for no more. She set down that tea-
pot and flung herself into my arms.
“Oh you silly dears ! You’ve done it at last,” she said,
and promptly kissed us both.
* ♦ ♦ *
We crawled through that fog, and it lasted forty-eight
hours, forty-eight blissful hours, when Martin and I said to
each other all the things we had left unsaid ever since we had
met at the mission station. Always I shall remember those
days of the fog when the skipper paced up and down the
bridge in the obscurity, with his temper on hair springs,
when the damp clung to my hair in drops and made my new
serge frock a limp rag. But I was happy, oh I was happy,
it seemed to me nothing could go wrong in such a beautiful
world. The thought of Martin beside me set my heart
beating, and all the terrible days in China were well worth
while because they had led to this.
Oh life was well worth living. We even laughed at the
skipper’s fears, and we laughed at MacTavish, who has no
sense of humour and cannot see a joke against himself, till
he scratched wildly at my skirts with his little white paws
and demanded to be taken in my arms and assured of my
unaltered affection.


Then there were the moments on deck in the obscurity
of the fog —oh it was a glorious happy time ! I felt young,
young, I remembered it afterwards, I was young. lam for
that matter, I suppose, nobody seems to think seven and
twenty very old, but I think that was the first time in my
life I felt thoroughly irresponsible and care-free. I just
lived for the moment and so did Martin. We would not
look forward —not yet, there was no need for perhaps a week,
and for the past it was good to go over it again together.
We even talked about my two engagements, and we laughed
over them, and I wondered I had been miserable or minded
in the least the defection of those two shadows. How
happy I was ! How happy !
“ Eh, ma lassie,” said the skipper looking over the screens
at us as we sheltered abaft the bridge outside his cabin,
“You ask him, MacTavish,” I said, “why we shouldn’t
be happy ? ”
He stamped up and down the bridge, up and down, and
every time he came to our side he leaned over and shook his
head, but he was a kindly old man, and I think was sympa-
thethic. I liked to see his crumpled old face peering at
us through the fog.
The fog had lasted forty-seven hours before anything
out of the common happened. It was weird on deck; and
merry party as we were in the cabin the laugh died on our
lips when we stood there leaning out into the dense obscurity.
The silence could almost be felt. I could hear the clank,
clank of the rudder chains, the tramp stamp of the skipper’s
never ending march, and then strangely harsh and grating
a laugh rang out.
. “ It was someone on board,” I said hardly above my
breath. But I knew it was no one on board.
And now indeed was the world’s war being brought
home to us. We did not know where that laugh came from.
We ran the risk of being run down as we crept slowly
through the fog, but we heard no engines, the U-boat could
hear the steamer coming through his microphone, and
he was lying on the surface with his engines stopped.
So said the mate, and the skipper swore bitterly.
Stella came creeping up to me and clung to me, and I,
holding MacTavish close, was thankful to feel Martin’s hand
on my shoulder.
“Oh, surely, surely,” moaned Stella in sudden terror.


“ nothing could happen now ! Oh, my God ! it would be
too cruel ! ”
Yes, too cruel ! But Fate is like that.
But no hail went up from our ship in answer. The laugh
in which there was no mirth was like an ill-omened portent
dashing across our happiness. I wanted the spell broken by
some commonplace happenings. But nothing happened.
There was the clammy moist obscurity, that hung on our
hair and eyelashes in drops, and made MacTavish rub his
funny little nose against my shoulder, and strain our ears
as we would we could hear nothing more. Then we two sat
ourselves down behind the house and forgot everything
in our own concerns till perhaps an hour later, when I
raised my eyes and looking up saw the fog hanging, torn and
dishevelled in rags, and a spot of sparkling blue where the
sun was touching the sea.
“ Why, the fog is going ! ”
There was just the very faintest breeze, and presently we
saw again in more places than one the sunlight on the sea,
and the sea was no longer still and grey and calm—oh, but I
shall always remember with tenderness that still grey sea—
it was deep dark blue, and where the sunlight caught it it
danced and sparkled, and the sun himself showing through
the rags of fog was no longer the faded old sickly pale
yellow orb we had bade farewell to the day before yesterday,
but he had renewed his strength, he was young and strong
in a new-born world. That shifting of the fog was glorious,
the sunbeams, the golden sunbeams, were tearing it to
ribbons, and we wondered what we should see when it was
gone. I had loved the fog, but it was good to see it go.
We kept drawing into our lungs great draughts of fresh
pure air, and we looked at one another in the sunlight as
if we were beginning a new life together.
There was a hail from the look-out man,
“ Something broad on the starboard bow, sir.”
“ Aye, aye,” came the response from the officer of the
watch.
“ About four points.”
We came out then and joined the others on the deck, and
there directly in the sun’s rays right in the middle of one of
the pathways of sparkling blue water that ran directly
up to that new young gay sun that seemed to symbolize my
life, was something—something long and grey, going very


slowly along, leaving a very slight oily wake slightly parallel
with us, and a murmur of dismay ran through the ship’s
company.
You who read must remember that I write as a woman.
I know nothing of sea terms or sea ways, I can only tell the
story as I think it happened, and God knows it seems as if
every moment were written on my eyeballs, graven on my
brain, and I could never forget.
With his glasses the skipper could, of course, see much
better than we could, and he looked at his mate.
“ Eh, Mist.er,” he said, “ they set the crew of the Pretty
Prissy adrift in the North Sea in a leaky boat.”
Then the fog closed down and everything was blotted
out, and a great sigh went up from the company. I heard
the engine room telegraph bells and we were speeding away
through the fog.
“ If they dommed fog’ll only hold,” said the skipper.
If it would hold—if it would only hold. Could we lose
oHirselves in this thick darkness ? No, it was going, and the
ne'xt minute we were looking down a long lane where the
sun light was pouring. Behind us was the long grey—
Tihere came a whirr and a crash, the timbers of the bridge
were splintered, the railing smashed, and a man sank down
on the deck in a pool of red that spread and spread. I went
to him, but he was past all human aid, and when I looked
round again the bridge was deserted and the skipper was
bending over the skylight talking down into the engine-
room. He looked round and spoke to the mate.
“ We maun stop, Mister, we maun stop,” he said, and I
saw the misery in his old eyes. “ They can blaw us oot o’
the water.”
The breeze freshened behind us and the fog rolled up
before it like a blind or a curtain drawn by a string. Before
us —around us —was a waste of blue water sparkling in the
golden sunshine, and quite plainly to be seen was the long
slate-coloured thing with a periscope—clear it was in the
brilliant sunshine —the pirate of modern times, the mean
marauder from w r hom no mercy could be expected.
“Run him down,” cried Martin.
But the skipper shook, his head,
“ He’d sweep oor decks before we reached him. Puir
Tamson’s gone.”
So w T e were to be adrift on the sparkling sea. You know


how in moments of danger all your body seems to creep
together and cold water trickles down your spine while you
try to keep a calm face and speak as if it were all in the day’s
work. It seemed so hard, so hard just when we were
reaching safety. Stella shrieked, and I could hardly find
it in my heart to stop her. I could have shrieked too if I
had felt it would be any good.
And the submarine came quite near.
“Ram her,” Martin kept urging, “ram her.”
“ Dom you for a fule,” said the skipper and there came a
voice from the U-boat, a guttural voice hailing us. He
hailed us in German, and of course the captain did not
understand. Neither did I for that matter. Martin turned
to the skipper.
“ He says you’re to lower a boat and go on board him.”
We were all clustered round the engine room skylights,
and the skipper threw up his hands in despair. Martin
seized the situation.
“ You don’t know any German,” said he, “ let me go.”
The old man looked at him doubtfully.
“ Look here, make as much fuss as you can,” said Martin,
“ let ’em see you getting ready to abandon ship. Make out
you’re in a blue funk.”
“ A am thot,” said the skipper.
“ What’s the good of going on board when you can’t
speak the tongue,” went on Martin. “ Here—” he jammed
on the skipper’s cap. It was the only sign of uniform he
ever wore, “ I’ll go as the skipper.”
He raced down below and was back again in a moment, I
saw the pistol he was hiding, wdiile the skipper was giving
orders to lower a boat. The U-boat had passed quite
close on our beam, and I could see the green weed on her as
she rolled slightly floating out on the water, and drawn back
again close against her sides.
“ She’s a bonny target,” said the skipper mournfully,
shaking his head, “ an A’d like weel to avenge puir Tamson.”
“ Then—”
“ Mon, ye’re a born fule.”
There came a shout from the U-boat, We could see
the men on the little deck at the-gun.
Martin turned and shouted something in German. As he
leaned over the side the sunlight gleamed on the gold lace
on the skipper’s cap. There were two men in the boat and
some of the crew were at the falls- clearing it away.


“ If I make confusion will you ram ? ” asked Martin
preparing to get into the boat.
“ An what’ll become o’ ye ? ” asked the skipper.
“ I can swim,” said Martin emphatically. “ Mind, I’m a
good swimmer.” It was the second time I had heard him
suggest this to the skipper, and I could see it made an
impression on the old man.
Then there was a moment’s hesitation, and an impatient
voice from the U-boat.
Martin waved his hand, turned to the skipper again and
took my hand. Oh, my dear ! my dear ! It was com-
forting to feel his strong firm grip. We had come through
so much. We had been in a worse place in the Temple of
Everlasting Peace. After all I felt it might be all right, and
I looked up at him and smiled.
“My brave girl! ”he said. He turned to the skipper.
What he said I don’t know. My mind didn’t seem able
to think properly, but afterwards the skipper said he was
exhorting him not to take to the boats till he was absolutely
obliged, but to make believe they .were getting ready so as
to keep the U-boat quiet. The last words I heard were,
‘When you see your chance, ram him.” Then he drew me
towards him before them all and kissed me.
“ My love, my dearest, my own,” he whispered, “ God
bless you.”
He let me go, sprang to a rope, swung himself over, and
was in the little boat alongside the couple of men who were
at the oars. It was so quickly done, and it seemed to me it
would only be for a short while. Presently he would be
back again and we would be adrift on this blue sea, and my
mind seemed to be full of many things, but chiefly I think
was the feeling of loss, I wanted him beside me again, I
longed to feel his strong arm round me and I was seized with
a sudden terror of loneliness. All the golden sunshine, all
the pure fresh air had lost its charm, all the wide sea was
empty, I could think of nothing but him and the dangers
he might be facing. All the rest of the ship’s company,
all the danger and suffering that might be coming for them,
were nothing to me if only my man were safe.
I held MacTavish close in my arms as I leant over the side,
and as his little warm tongue found my cheek, Martin looked
up at me and sent a message of tenderness with his eyes, but
his tongue said, “ I’ve got the grenade. Now remember,
rain him ! ”


The skipper cursed, and then he nodded, “Ou aye, if
ye do yon, I’ll do my pairt. But ye ken that gun’s trainit
on oor deck.”
Then he called orders thick and fast. Stella was shrieking,
and only afterwards I realised it, it suited the skipper she
should shriek, every time the mate passed the ship’s bell he
gave it a tug, and it went tolling out over the sea weirdly,
the crew were clattering about the deck rushing madly from
one boat to another letting go the falls, and the skipper and
mate were shouting all sorts of orders. Apparently panic
reigned supreme.
It seemed to me at first they must have gone mad till the
skipper turned to me and spoke quietly enough,
“ Lay ye doon on deck, lassie, an’ watch oot through the
freeing port, ye’ll see better. An’ see here, ye'll call to me
directly the water shows we’re using they propeller.”
So there was method in it after all, and for a little a
curious cold calm possessed me. I lay down flat on the
deck and I felt MacTavish snuggle down close beside me
as if this were some new sort of game it behoved him to look
into. I put my hand on him and I saw that the skipper was
quietly enough giving orders to the engineroom through the
skylight. I looked through the square port that carried
off the water from the deck and I saw the skipper was right.
I could see the U-boat much better from there. At
first it seemed to me she was moving slowly ahead of us and
then I saw that it was the “ Elizabeth Victoria ” that was
turning with just a hardly perceptible stroke of her propeller
at a time, and her head was gradually swinging towards the
submarine.
“ Canna ye screech, lassie,” said the captain looking
approvingly at Stella, who was making the air ring, and I was
so surprised that inadvertently I squeezed MacTavish too
hard and he gave vent to his feelings in an agonized and
indignant yelp.
I could see the boat alongside the submarine now.
Martin was on board and the boat was lying off. They
were so close we could see everything, and I could hear the
skipper keeping up a running commentary,
“ God ! God ! It’s a mad scheme. The de’il’s in it !
The lad’s talkin’ to yon limmer.”
“ I can see the white water,” I said and my own voice,
sounded so strange.


“ Ay,” nodded the old man, “ a guid lassie, a wee bit
slower, Mac. Odds ! Keep her so ! It's reet, it’s reet!
A’m fearin’ —”
Clang went the bell again, and a boat swung madly out
and swung inboard again, while the mate swore aloud and
every man of the crew seemed to be yelling something
different. Stella gave another shriek, and I saw Martin
climbing up to the top of the conning tower. He was
talking to the German officer, and then I saw him raise his
arm and fling something down into the submarine. The
next moment we heard the faint sound of an explosion,
the German officer half fell out of the conning tower,
apparently killed, and quick as thought Martin had jumped
behind the conning tower and had started bring round it at
the 4-in gun’s crew on the after-deck of the U-boat.
“ He’s dune it ! God ! mon ! he’s dune it ! ” yelled the
skipper, and it seemed as if everyone else on board the
Elizabeth Victoria was yelling the same.
“ Full ahead, Mac, full ahead and hard-a-port,” yelled the
skipper, scrambling for the bridge, and I too rose and ran to
the bridge, for it seemed that from there I could see best.
My eyes were glued to the man behind the conning tower,
who was shooting at the gun’s crew, keeping thejn off their
gun.'
“ Ane mon dune,” cried the mate exulting. “ The
de’il but he’s a nailer ! They daurna get at they gun !
Anither ! Losh ! The auld mon’ll ram her after all ! ”
It seemed to me the U-boat was going ahead, but
presently I saw it was the ship coming round. The Ü-
boat lay like a log on the water with the German officer’s
body half hanging out of the conning tower. Why didn’t
Martin jump now ? My heart stood still.
“ Losh I ” cried the mate again. “ Her worrks is
derangit ! Come you aft, leddy. The auld man’s —”
Crash ! Smash ! The Elizabeth Victoria had hit the
submarine amidships and gone right over her. There w r as a
tremendous swirl as the U-boat turned over, and then an
explosion which shook the ship from stem to stern. I
heard the skipper,
“ Her depth chairges is gone off.”
It was all over in a second. One moment my eyes had
seen the man behind the conning tower in the unaccustomed
uniform cap with the little puffs of smoke from the auto


matic pistol. I saw him give a quick glance our way, put
up his hands for a long dive, and then the ships touched, and
when the explosion came all seemed to go dark before my
eyes. I had dropped on my knees, clasping MacTavish
close, and the yelling and shouting of all the ship’s crew was
in my ears, triumphant shouting, and when I looked again
there was the calm sea, and first a bubbling and .then huge
patches of black oil on the blue sea, spreading-spreading—
Again there was a wild burst of triumph from the men
round me. A babel of voices shouting about the reward
and the Navy men. The skipper had his hands on my
shoulders,
“ See yon, my lassie, see yon. Ah, it’s guid evidence for
the Admiralty. The Navy men’ll want to know.”
“ Hurroo ! yon’s evidence enough ! ” yelled the mate.
The little boat was going slowly over the place, and I shut
my eyes and—oh, if passionate longing is a prayer, surely my
prayer should have counted. I looked again and I saw two
men being hauled aboard and my mouth was dry and there
was a singing in my ears. The captain’s hand was on my
shoulder. I felt it trembling like a leaf. The triumphant
gladness had died out of his face. There were tears in his
eyes and a sob in his voice, but I managed to ask quietly
enough.
“ Mr. Conant ? They’ve got him ? They couldn't have
saved the Germans and—”
It was only such a few minutes since his arm had been
round me 7 since I had felt his lips on my face. I wanted
him, my lover, my husband, all the world was empty
without him.
“ A rare capable mon,” went on the skipper’s voice
monotonously. What was he saying ? Such a good shot —
so steady —he had given his life for the ship’s company.
If only there had not been such a drumming in my ears
that I might have heard what the skipper was saying.
And at last, far, far away muffled and muted like their
voices had been in the fog, I heard him.
“ Till the sea shall gie up her deid.”
And MacTavish’s little hot tongue licked my cheek and
the last veils of the fog drifted away, and before us was the
wide empty sea. Like my life, empty.


November 11th, 1918. Peace at last!
I know now that Mrs. Wright had got hold of the truth
though she may not have expressed it in a way that appealed
to me. There is something far, far higher than the merely
material, and when my lover yielded up his life for his
country he achieved it. It is not always given to us to
understand and realise in the first great shock. But
nothing in this life is ever attained without effort, and I am
sure that the best in the life to come is bought at a mighty
price. I went down into the depths of despair because I
was so desperately lonely without him. Then I worked
because I must. I w r ent to France and saw ? brave men
suffer and die, and I know that hundreds of thousands of
women are crying in their grief even as I did : “ Why ?
Why? To what end ? ”
The Wind from the Wilderness has blown through the
world. A devastating wind, but a healing wind too. It
has purged away all that is false and untrue. It has left
many of us mourning—for a time —I know it is only for a
time.
We two loved each other deeply, and love like ours is not
lightly snapped asunder. It was sealed by the great
sacrifice he made, and it is my constant hope and prayer
that I may so order my life here that we tw r o may go hand
in hand joyfully in the life that is to come.
THE END.
PRINTED BY BURLEIGH LTD., A'i XHa BURLEIGH BRISTOL,, ENGLAND


