

A WORLD of PEACE
ITS ADVANTAGES and
HOW TO WIN THEM
By GEORGE A. TAYLOR
(With Portrait Sketches by the Writer)
THIRD EDITION




A WORLD of PEACE


AT THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS.
Third Assembly, Geneva 1922.
President Don Agustin Edwards (on the left), and
Secretary Sir Eric Drummond (on the right).


A WORLD of PEACE
ITS ADVANTAGES AND HOW
TO WIN THEM
A stud p of Nationalities at the
Third Assembly) of the League
of Nations, at Geneva, I 922
By
GEORGE AUGUSTINE TAYLOR
(With Portrait Sketches by the Writer)
Published hv BUILDING LIMITED
20 Loftus St., Sydney,
Australia


TTo Life SKCale


PUBLISHER’S NOTE TO THIRD EDITION
A copy of this book was forwarded some'months
ago to all possible delegates to the 1923 Congress
of the League, a number of whom replied to the
author sending best wishes, so that when the mat-
ter was jrought before the League on September 18
the subject was well received. The League has
now announced that it desires that all Governments
realise the necessity for encouraging scientific re-
search by rewarding those achieving distinction in
it. and it is about to circularise the world to that
effect.
One proposal was that each Government should
establish a fund from which scientists should be
rewarded for the work, of adding to human know-
ledge and progress.
One proposal suggested was that if a scientist
discovered a new force in nature, such as a new
gas. which subsequently means a mechanical inven-
tion. and put to profitable commercial use by others,
he should receive his share of the royalties arising
from the patent rights of the invention.
It was mentioned that what was wanted in Aus-
tralia and elsewhere was the awakening of the
National conscience to the realisation that scientific
progress was nationally essential.
At the recent Pan-Pacific Science Conference held
in Sydney, Mr. Taylor, who was a delegate, brought
the subject forward in a special paper on “The En-
couragement of Invention and its bearing upon
the Peace of the World,” in which it was proposed:
“That the Pan-Pacific Science Congress of 1923,
desires that the League of Nations give best atten-
tion to the encouragement of invention for human
peace and progress.” This was carried in the par-
ticular section and transferred to the National Re-
search Council.
It is, therefore, of special interest that the League
of Nations has approved of the proposal and has
taken action on this matter.




CONTENTS
Chapter. Page.
1. The World’s Appeal for Peace .. 11
11. The League of Nations 17
111. The League and its Critics .. .. 22
IV. Curtailing Destructive Inventiveness 28
V. The Reduction of Armaments ... 35
\l. Mutual Guarantee of Safety . . . . 51
VII. Trading in Arms 58
VIII. The Command of the Air 61
IX. Disarm!—What Italy Thought .. 66
X. Disarm! —What France Thought .. 71
XL Disarm!—What Australia Thought 77
XII. Disarm!—What Norway Thought .. 82
NHL Disarm!—What the League Thought 85
XIV. The British Empire and the League 91
XV'. The League’s Work and a Special
Message 99
XVI. The Ideal of the League 104
XVII. The New Appeal for Human Progress 111




CHAPTER I
THE WORLD’S APPEAL FOR PEACE
“Peace and Goodwill” is a great maxim, and
leaders of men are trying to make it universal
through the League of Nations.
It is a grand appeal, and to study its world pos-
sibilities I visited the League Assembly at Geneva
in September. 1922. To best prepare myself for
that study I travelled through Great Britain, France,
Belgium, Holland, Germany and Italy, and so made
personal investigations of the conditions resulting
from the Great War.
1 found Great Britain still struggling to over-
come the financial strain, the consequence of her
heavy war cost, which included the expenditure
on her own fighting forces, the heavy loans to
France and Italy, and the repayment of her loan
to America. The factories of England had not got
into their before-war stride; whilst the ship-yards,
particularly those of Glasgow, stood bare of
vessels like great skeletons of past glory.
Heavy income taxation was being levied, but
industry generally was beginning to sit up and take
notice of the necessity to get busy.
France was in a state of financial uncertainty.
She complained that she was reaching the level of her
patience regarding the slackness of Germany’s pay-
ment of reparation, and was issuing diagrams show-




ing her serious financial situation; an action that
preceded the later occupation of the Ruhr; } r et her
factories were beginning to become active.
Germany seemed to be ignoring the occupation
of the Rhine district by the French, American and
British troops; Cologne, the headquarters of the
latter, being in a state of business activity that
hardly differed from its pre-war condition.
Though the mark was falling in value. Germany
was strenuously pushing ahead with developmental
work. I noted that buildings were rising
in almost every city, Berlin being particularly
active in that respect, also having under way an
underground railway. An exhibition at Leipzig
was most successful from a display point of view,
though the difference between German and foreign
exchanges was making! export trade sbmewhat
uncertain. Munich was about to complete her
great museum, and had other developmental work-
in hand; whilst practically every factory-chimney
on my line of travel proved that the factory was in
active operation. Economy was everywhere manifest.
Everybody appeared to be housed, large houses
being subdivided amongst families; artisans were
seemingly satisfied with wages and conditions, with
little talk of short hours; in fact, Germany was
trying to reach the high road to prosperity.
Italy was showing slow recovery from war de-
pression. yet things were brightening up generally
with that nation ; whilst Switzerland was in a bad
way financially owing to the loss of income from
foreign visitors, her great increase of imports over
exports, and the large number, of unemployed.


So on to Geneva I journeyed with a mind well
schooled in the conditions of the leading nations of
Europe, and ready to judge from an unbiased point
of view what possibilities the League of Nations has
in helping human progress and in shaping the des-
tiny of the world.
THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE BRITISH ARMY
At Cologne, September, 1922.


There was one aspect of human progress in which
I was particularly interested, and that was the de-
velopment of the inventive spirit; for one can well
understand that with every encouragement for the
best improvement of humanity, the inventive spirit
would be diverted from devising mighty weapons
of war and human destruction, to the invention of
ways and means for human uplift and general
happiness; in fact there could be no better inspira-
tion than “scientific research for human progress.”
Some have said that it requires war-stress to
stimulate the inventive spirit. That is incorrect.
The inventor of the worth-while, keen in the de-
velopment of his idea, does not need the call of war
to inspire him. Having a scheme worth-while, his
financial encouragement is essential; and when one
considers the enormous waste of money, time and
labor in the building and maintaining of colossal
armies and navies, surely some of this expenditure
could not be put to a better use than encouraging
the inventor of the worth-while.
With such encouragement, the world would move
ahead even faster than during the past quarter of
a century, that saw such a remarkable development
in human initiative as the motor, the submarine,
the aeroplane and the wireless telephone; in fact,
the veritable conquest of the land, sea, and air.
It was, therefore, with intense interest that I
reached Geneva on the occasion of the Third As-
sembly of the League of Nations; and I say with
all sincerity the experience was one I shall ever
remember.


SOME NEW BUILDINGS IN BERLIN,
September, 1922.


CHAPTER II.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
The year 1920 saw the birth of the League.
It was a remarkable change in the spirit of human-
ity when forty-nine nations could so come together
to study one another, to build friendships and con-
sider ways and means for settling international mis-
understandings in a better way than by the former
method of human slaughter. The “brotherhood of
man” had hitherto been a fancy phrase, for just
prior to the birth of the League of Nations.
60,509.531 humans had been engaged in bitter battle,
in which 7,917.470 fighters were killed, 34,047,304
were wounded, and 9,185.523 civilians were mas-
sacred at a total cost of £35,779,533,747!
Can one wonder, after studying these astounding
figures, that a war-weary world held out its hands
for help? So a League for Peace was born, and the
League of Nations commenced a course that should,
with wise guidance, lead humanity to the light of
reason and common-sense settlement of mutual mis-
understandings.
It was on November 15. 1920, that the Nations of
the World thus met in friendly mood. It was the
most remarkable meeting in the history of humanity
For the first time, men of almost every color, re-
ligion and language, sat in one great assembly to
jomt4v consider the great problem, “how to end
'human conflict and unite in one common creed —-
the uplift of humanity.” There were many virtues


In the cessation of human conflict besides the saving
of life ami preventing the insane waste of time,
work and wealth.
SOME NEW BUILDINGS IN BERLIN,
September, 1922.


Take one matter alone, the “Reduction of Arma-
ments.”
Germany in the pre-war days, employed at least
1.000. of her people directly and indirectly in
connection with her war organisation, which meant
an average payment to each of value equal to £3
per week, a weekly expense of £3,000,000. Those
1.000. persons transferred to industrial enter-
prise. and each earning an average payment of
value ecpial to £3 per week means £3,000,000 being
spent in weekly wages, so that without calculating
any profit on the work which would without doubt
be worth while, there is actually a saving of
£3.000,000 per week, or an annual saving of at least
£150.000.000 per year! If such a saving be possible
for one nation, what will be the astounding fig-
ures for all the nations of the world, after a small
deduction is made for an international police under
the control of the League of Nations.
The question would arise as to what control the
League would carry, and what efficiency would
that control represent? In dealing with such
problems, many side issues would intrude that
would make the work of the League a task of con-
siderable care. The League, therefore, had much
to do. Its path seemed choked with the weeds of
human mis-understanding that had grown inter-
twined during the centuries of human existence.
Rules and regulations for the conduct of meetings
had to be arranged, as well as the selection of
particular languages to be known as official; whilst
the procedure generally, had to be considered,


Various propositions, wise and otherwise,
would have to be decided that had long been
discussed in the separate tribunals of mankind, such
as the pooling of all the raw materials of the world
for the benefit of all nations. These were brought
forward to be discussed at the first Assembly of
the League of Nations, which closed after a five
weeks’ session, with the following interesting sum-
ming up by the Canadian representative, N. W.
Powell: —
“The first assembly of the League of Nations has
satisfied its friends and disappointed its enemies.
Its most significant feature is the fact that for five
weeks, representatives from forty-one different Na-
tions have found it possible to co-operate on a great
variety of matters and international concerns, and
that as the Assembly progressed, it has developed
in an increasing measure a corporate consciousness,
a sense of power and authority, and the conviction
that it serves a great purpose. That guarantees its
future. Its greatest achievement was a permanent
court of international justice. This was in itself
a great step, substituting reason for the sword as
a means for settling international disputes. The
League has become more truly a world organisa-
tion by the admission of former enemy and neutral
States. The League will live because humanity
needs it.”
So the first meeting of the Assembly of the
League of Nations saw the establishment of a
mighty tribunal for settling human disputes with-
out loss of life, loss of time and loss of money.
The second meeting of the League in 1921, still


LORD ROBERT CECIL (South Africa).
further knitted the great nations together, and saw
the discussion of matters affecting human welfare
generally. The League considered that humanity
had enemies other than disputing nations, enemies
that killed with the certainty of shot and shell r so
campaigns were arranged against typhus and other
diseases; steps were taken to combat the traffic in
women and opium, the powers and possibilities of
the League were confirmed, and the way cleared
generally for the third session ; which, with a com-
mon understanding that had been arrived at be-
tween the nations, tended to be one of considerable
importance, and proving the absolute necessitv for
the 1 .eague to help the best improvement and pro-
gress of humanity.


CHAPTER III.
THE LEAGUE AND ITS CRITICS
The title “League of Nations,” seemed but a
pretty phrase till one visited the Assembly of tne
representatives of fifty-two nations at Geneva, and
saw the earnest yet sane and sensible way in which
great national questions were discussed. Problems
that would formerly be made excuses for inter-
national strife, were calmly and carefully consid-
ered. It was a new and simple method of settling
disputes that even surprised many members of the
League; Professor Gilbert Murray, representing
South Africa, stating that the spirit of the League
exercised a sort of spell over the national repre-
sentatives.
“Is it not a really remarkable sight,” he said,
“that we have seen in the hall —the Maharajah of
Nawanagar (India) standing up and criticising
other parts of the British Empire without the least
resentment being felt, nor the least wish to evade
the issue? Is it not something without parallel in
the history of the world hitherto, that the delegate
from Haiti, with no sort of diplomatic or military
power behind him, can stand up here with perfect
courtesy and perfect ease, to complain of certain
actions which he considered the Great British Em-
pire had taken towards the people of his race? I hat
such can be done in the face of the world with no
resentment felt and no attempt on the part of the
great power so criticised to evade such criticism
or complain of the language used, is remarkable.
That it has been done, surely shows that we have


Professor GILBERT MURRAY, M.A., LL.D.
(South Africa.)
reached a new stage in the development of inter-
national relations; and the mere fact that it is post
sible, proves that the League of Nations is a reality
and has already begun to exercise its power over
the world.”
That well expressed the importance of the League
in these days of human uncertainty and mistrust,
and as I sat in that great hall and looked into the
faces of the many types of individuals with different
languages and varied religions, I could not but feel


that the world had here its most remarkable as-
sembly—an assembly that stood for Universal Peace
—an assembly that recognised that human thought
was for other objects than the solving of problems
f'jr human destruction, and that this world of ours
could be made a Heaven on earth if quarrelsome
misunderstandings could be explained and dis-
missed. For, after all, there should be but one war
and that against stagnation in body and soul; in
the winning of wisdom that would make human
existence a forward march to a higher, better, and
healthier earth-life.
Up to the present time this ideal had met ob-
stacles, many of which had been made by those
who desired to see their ideal realised, but who
gave up hope when they saw the immense pile of
difficulties that they themselves had created ; and
as many who desire to see the ideal realised may
still be anxious in the face of such artificial diffi-
culties, it would be interesting to mention some.
For instance, many fancy that the world-citizen-
ship. which is the ideal of those who favor the
League of Nations, is impossible; yet it really is
capable of earliest realisation provided a person
looks at other nations with an understanding that
such nations have special habits and ways peculiar
to themselves, just as certain parts of his or her
own nation, differ in character from others.
This requirement of fellow-feeling is even called
for in the friendly consideration of one’s own na-
tionality.
Taking America, for instance, I have heard one


THE EARL OF BALFOUR, K.G, O.M.
(Great Britain.)
section in Chicago speak with scorn of another
section in the same city; whilst in New York City
some of the populace in the fine homes’ area front-
ing the Hudson River, look on the East-side resi-
dents with a deeper sense of disapproval than they
would give the people of what they would consider
an “enemy nation.”
Admit that such an attitude be wrong, as it un-
doubtedly is, then away is swept a block that many
put in the way of that World-citizenship that the
League of Nations is out to develop, and which it
can only develop to its best by keeping human
thought pinged on to methods of increasing human
comfort, in devising methods of winning the
simplest and best means of production and com


munication that will mean the best development
of social perfection.
It is fine ideal, though it still has the barbed
entanglements of the world’s wild history to handi-
cap progress, yet the Third Assembly of the League
of Nations saw the goal and bravely battled to it.
Another favorable argument of the critic who
fails to see the full importance of the League of
Nations in keeping the world free from war. is his
saying that “the programme of the League for a
durable world-peace is built upon an unstable foun-
dation, as no victorious coalition in the history of
the world has resisted speedy disintegration ; hence
the League of Nations cannot last, as it is consid-
ered a false hypothesis that the nations who link
up have a common interest in seeing that the con-
ditions of the League are carried out, and are will-
ing to make the sacrifices necessary to make the
League the great success desired in the achievement
of Universal Peace.”
Such a critic fails to note that there is no icason
to give up hope for the nations of the world having
common sense, and working together for common
good. Mistakes of the past need not be repeated.
It may be. however, that such critics consider
that nations in victorious coalition, not having to
develop their inventiveness from a destructive point
of view, will rust out as many have done in the
past. That lesson has, however, been well learnt,
and the future ought to see the former war-invent-
ing nations turning their inventive skill to the de-
vising of peace-machinery in the saving of labor
and the increasing of human comfort.


THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS— Geneva, September, 1922.


CHAPTER IV.
CURTAILING .DESTRUCTIVE
INVENTIVENESS
The curtailment of the development of inven-
tiveness from the destructive point of view was
the main topic of discussion in the Third Assembly
of the League of Nations. It covered the great
problem of the League, the Reduction of Arma-
ments; and with that problem of Reduction of
Armaments, arose the question of efficient protec-
tion for the unarmed nations, by the development
of an International Police Force to be at the service
of the League; hence before the problem of disarma-
ment could be solved, the substitute of a force for
keeping law and order had to be decided. Article
10 of the Covenant hints at such a force, as it reads:
“The members of the League undertake to resoect and
preserve as against external aggression, the territorial
integrity and existing political independence of all mem-
bers of the League. In case of any such aggression, or
in case of any threat or danger of such aggression the
Council shall advise upon the means by which this obliga-
tion shall be fulfilled.”
Lord Robert Cecil (representing South Africa)
evidently with such a League Police Force in view,
suggested to the Assembly that in order to enforce
the League’s decisions, all nations should agree to
place their air forces at the disposal of the League.
Canada, however, fancied that under Article 10
above mentioned, the League as representing
the Governments in its membership has power to


HON. PETER CHARLES LARKIN P.C.
(Canada).
declare war; hence it objected, as it considered that
no Government should be a party to making a
country go to war without the assent of the Par-
liament representing the people of that country;
whilst the United States considered that “Article
10” was one of the reasons why it stood outside
the League.
I recently placed this aspect of the matter before
Sir Mark Sheldon, an Australian representative at
the League Assembly, and formerly Australian
Commissioner at Washington, and he gave me the
following statement which is of particular interest,
as it also refers to the attitude of the United States
with regard to “Article 10.”
“There is no question that the League of Nations
is the only solution to-day of the world’s peace


problem. It no doubt has its deficiencies, but as
there is no other body that could better operate
towards the much-desired goal of world’s peace, we
must make the best of what we have. It is not
fair to consider, because peace is not immediately
arranged upon the earth, that the League has not
been doing its duty. The League, like every other
great movement that will live, has to grow. It,
more than any other concern, if hastily developed,
would as rapidly deteriorate, for the League is
being built with that most subtle of materials —
National Destinies. That in no less than two
years the League had at its third Congress fifty-two
nationalities, is a proof that it is destined to be
a factor in helping to eliminate that old-time bar-
barous method of settling disputes by war. It is.
however, not fair to the League to expect it to
perform miracles, for human ways are the most
difficult to change, particularly when we know the
ways of war are as old as human existence; still,
from a careful study of after-war negotiations, I
am satisfied that mankind is on a possible track to
universal peace.
“It is interesting to look back at the after-war
happenings in connection with the League. After
the Versailles Conference, too much was expected
from it. In fact, the world expected it to act as
an “Aladdin’s Lamp” in instantly changing human
temperaments and natural conditions; hence the
League found its plea not as welcome as it should
have been. The world, however, quickly began to
understand the League’s desires, with the result


HON. WILLIAM STEVENS FIELDING, LL.D., D.C.L.
(Canada).
that to-day there is a re-action, and a better under-
standing is developing as regards the League’s
duties and possibilities.
“1 here is, however, one nation that would be
particularly welcome, and which I trust will see its
way in some manner to link up with the other
nations. F refer to the United States. It stands
outside at present because of Article 10. which
deals with combined military action, but which is
somewhat indefinite. Yet that should be no reason
for having the United States a stranger. Already
that great nation is considering some way of meet-
■ng the situation (without actually agreeing to


Article 10) either by some Association or World’s
Court. Senator Borah, a week or two hack, voiced
what seems to he the American sentiment on the
matter. Tic favored an International Court of Jus-
tice, which after all is exactly what the League of
Nations stands for. Evidently, with Article 10 in
mind, he considered that an International Court
would not require force to make its decisions bind-
ing. hut only world-opinion would be necessary.
He. however, appeared to forget that every Court
of Justice, even the Supreme Court of the United
States, which he mentioned as a proof of his ‘peace-
without-police’ policy, must have force to make its
decisions imperative.
“I particularly mention Senator Rorah, for he is
reported to have said that the League’s Court of
Arbitration was subject to the manipulative prac-
tices of European politicians. That is hardly fair,
as there has been no possibility for such manipula-
tion ; nor should there be any if the League con-
tinues in its straightforward way to solve Inter-
national problems; and any possibility of political
manipulation that the United States may have in
mind, would be a further argument for the United
States to link up and make such a manipulation
absolutely impossible.
“The fact of the matter is, the peace problem has
already been utilised by politicians in the United
States, and the Republican Party was so committed
by its antipathy to the League of Nations, that
individual politicians and statesmen who are quite
in favor of coming to some agreement cannot, owing
to their ‘peace actions,’ subscribe to the League of


HON. ERNEST LAPOINTE, B.A., LL.D., K.C.
(Canada).
Nations as such. In fact it is simply a question of
name. They could no doubt subscribe to another
concern with the same objects as the League, pro-
sided it were called an International Court of
justice, or some other title.
“With regard to clause 10. which deals with
military action. France has been placing great
reliance on that, having suffered in the past by the
failure of treaties to avert war. Canada, however,
is in favor of the elimination of Article 10, or
having it better defined.
“Personally speaking, I consider Article 10 could
be more clearly defined ; and if France could get
some kind of a guarantee from the Powers, that she
would be protected in case of aggression, then I
have no doubt that she would relent from her present
plea that Article 10 should be strictly kept. There


is no question that she is determined on her atti-
tude in this respect, for throughout the discussions
of the Disarmament Committee, on which I was
the Australian Representative, every few hours for
three weeks the French Representative would voice
the adherence of France to the above principle.”
Sir Mark Sheldon thus clearly defined the great
outlook for good work by the League if it be given
reasonable opportunity to act; whilst the possibil-
ities of Article 10 should be calmly faced and
where not of common good could be eliminated
and common-sense ways substituted.
There is no question, however, that the League
must have some international authority; and if
such authority cannot be exercised with force until
the matter, as Canada suggested, has been brought
before each Parliament in each of the Nations in
the League, of which there were fifty-two already
represented, then much damage could be done by
a war-maddened nation before any protective action
could be instituted in time.
It is, therefore, a question of considerable inter-
est. and is to be fully discussed in the next Assembly
of the Nations of the League to be held in 1923.
The fact that these points are being raised and
thoroughly considered and calmly discussed, proves
that the Nations interested are each desirous that
the foundations of the League shall be well and
truly laid.


CHAPTER V.
THE REDUCTION OF ARMAMENTS
We can now better study the greatest feature
of the Assembly, the consideration of the report
on the Reduction of Armaments, which with
“mutual guarantees between nations,” is the great
keystone to Universal Peace.
At the first Conference of the League in 1920,
a Temporary Mixed Commission was appointed to
prepare reports and proposals for the Second As-
sembly in 1921. That Conference added seven
members to the Commission for the Third Assembly
of the League in 1922. The Committee of that
Assembly held nine meetings at which the various
proposals for the Reduction of Armaments were
discussed and a special report was drawn up for
submission to the League, and if approved was to be
placed before the various National Governments for
criticisms and suggestions, such replies to be in
hand prior to the next Assembly of the League
(1923).
The report covered the following recommenda-
tions :
(1) Regarding the Limitation of National Expenditure
on Armaments, it recommended that European
States existing before the war in 1914, and which
are not engaged in military operations which justify
their armaments, reduce the total of their military,
naval and air expenditure to the figures for 1913.
(2) Regarding Statistical Enquiry in connection with
armament expenditure, it was proposed that the
enquiry be limited to (a) Peace-time armaments
and (b) Expenditure in armaments.


(3) Regarding Surplus Stock of Munitions, it was
recommended that no step could be taken regarding
surplus stocks of arms and munitions except by
means of control of international traffic in arms.
(4) Regarding the private manufacture of armaments,
it was urged that an international agreement for
the control of the manufacture of arms by private
companies be considered at a special conference of
members of the League, which will also consider
(5) A plan for the control of international trade in arms.
(6) Regarding chemical warfare, it was urged that
members of the League and other nations adhere to
tiie Treaty of Washington (Feb. 6, 1922), prohibit-
ing the use of poison gas and submarines in war
and other similar matters.
(7) Regarding the Reduction of Naval Armaments it
was recommended that an international conference
be summoned, and all States consider the matter of
limiting Naval armaments, as was agreed to at
Washington by the British Empire, the United
States, France, Italy, and Japan.
As to the reduction of land and air armaments, the
Commission is to prepare a definite scheme for
general reduction, to be submitted to the next
Assembly in 1923,
It was recommended that a draft Treaty of Mutual
Guarantee be prepared, so that if any country in
the League be attacked, that guarantee would be
a defensive agreement that would bring all other
countries to provide immediate and effective assist-
ance for the country attacked. .The report con-
cluded that as moral disarmament -was an essential
preliminary condition of material disarmament, an
atmosphere of mutual confidence and security
should be achieved by the reorganisation of ex-
changes and ending the uncertainty prevailing
regarding the' means for restoring devastated
regions and settling the problems of reparations
and inter-Allied debts.


SIR JOSEPH COOK, P.C., G.C.M.G.
(Australia.)
Lord Robert Cecil, in presenting the report to the
Assembly, made an excellent explanation of its
problems and possibilities. 1 give it rather fully,
as it is an essential feature of the World’s Peace.
He particularly emphasised the point that the Lea-
gue of Nations had the special duty assigned to it
to formulate schemes for reducing armaments,
which schemes were to be submitted for final de-
cision to the various governments represented in
the League.
in the First Assembly the subject was consid-
ered, but owing to the turmoil that then existed
in the world, it was not possible to take any very


striking step. The most that was done was to em-
phasise, by reference to many international pro-
nouncements, the importance of disarmament, to
make an earnest appeal for the ratification of the
Arms Traffic Convention of St. Germaine, and to
appoint a new body—a Temporary Mixed Commis-
sion as it was called, mixed because it was to con-
sist partly of civilian experts and partly of military
experts —to consider and report to the following
Assembly what could be done.
At the Second Assembly some little progress was
made. Statistics were ordered to be collected to
enable a scheme of reduction afterwards to be
formulated.
With great emphasis, the League's resolutions
were repeated about the importance of putting
a stop to, or at any rate of controlling, the
traffic in arms, and, amongst other things, the
Temporary Mixed Commission was directed to
bring up a definite scheme of disarmament for the
consideration of this Assembly. A considerable
advance had been made for the year 1922. the vari-
ous Commissions had been engaged, partly in pre-
paratory work, work which was necessary for an
ultimate scheme of reduction of armaments, and
partly in making definite proposals which would
result in a reduction of armaments if they were
adopted by the Governments.
“On the preparatory side,” said Lord Robert
Cecil, “we have to report to you that a very con-
siderable quantity of statistics has been prepared,
which really do enable anyone who studies them
to form a good bird’s eye view of the armaments


VISCOUNT CHELMSFORD, G.C.S.I., G.C.M.G.
(India).
problem. In close relation to these statistics has
been a still more important collection of facts, and
that is a collection of the statements of the vari-
ous Governments as to their requirements for arma-
ments.
“You will remember that, by the first paragraph
of Article 8, the reduction of national armaments
is to be ‘the lowest point consistent with national
safety.’ Therefore, in any enquiry, the first thing
which you have to ascertain, is what are the arma-
ments required for the national safety of each State.
The first element in that enquiry is naturally Avhat
the Government of each State thinks to be neces-
sary for the safety of its own country. We have


received a very large number of replies. They are
not complete yet. and we recommend strongly that
they should be completed. But even now the facts
collected are large and important. Some of the
countries —it would be invidious to mention names
—have given a very thorough picture of what they
conceive to be their necessities, setting out not only
the number of men. and so on, that are required,
but the broad reasons for which they arc required.
Other States have not gone quite so much into
detail; 1 wish they all had, but they have given
us very important information. The result is a
formidable total. Hundreds of millions of pounds
are stated to be necessary. Millions of men are
required to be withdrawn from peaceful and re-
munerative Vocations in order to be ready to light
the battles of their country. Apart from all other
considerations, as has been often and continually
pointed out by the economic advisers of the League,
the strain on the finances of the world by this stale
of things is enormous.
“ I here is another fact which comes very clearly
out of these statistics. W e asked the Governments
of the countries to make a distinction between what
they required for external purposes, for resisting
external aggression, and what they required for
internal purposes, for maintaining order, and so
on. in their countries. The result is very striking
and remarkable. The amount required for the
maintenance ol internal order, on the statements
of the Governments themselves, I would almost say
is negligible. It is quite a small fraction of the
total forces required. Broadly speaking, without


His Excellency GIUSEPPE MOTTA
(Switzerland.)
any exception, the forces, these millions of men
costing hundreds of millions of pounds, are required
only for the purpose of resisting aggression. What
does that mean? It means that we are paying
this vast sum every year for no remunerative pur-
pose whatever, for no purpose that does any good
to a single soul. It is the price of international
suspicion, and nothing else. 1 emphasise that, be-
cause that note has to be struck again and again
in any enquiry in this subject. International sus-
picion, the fear of each State of its neighbor, the
terror that it is going to be attacked by those who


are nominally living peacefully with it. and round
it—that is the great obstacle to disarmament, the
great factor in armaments, which the League, if
it is going to deal with this question, must dis-
pose of.
“We ask the Assembly in this connection to
urge the Members of the League to complete as
soon as possible the information which they have
been good enough to give us so far; and in close
connection with that, we ask the Council to consider
once again (it has once considered it before),
whether the time has not arrived at which it can
take some steps to carry out the last paragraph
of Article 8, which says “The Members,of the Lea-
gue undertake to interchange full and frank in-
formation as to the scale of their armaments, their
military, naval and air programme, and the condi-
tion of such of their industries as are adaptable to
war-like purposes.” The statements that have been
made by the Governments are a first step in that
direction, but we hope that the Council may see
some means of putting that interchange on a per-
manent and business footing.
“I must mention one other subject in connecti6n
with the preparatory work of the League of Na-
tions that has been done. If you are to reduce
land armaments to a certain degree —and I talk
for the moment only of land armaments, because
it does not apply to naval armaments nor possibly
to air armaments —it seems almost essential that
you should have some unit by which they are mea-
sured. You must be able to show that such-and-


His Excellency M. HJALMAR BRANTING
(Sweden.)
such a country has such-and-such a strength, and
other countries round it have such-and-such a
strength. If you are to induce them to enter upon
a common scheme of reduction, you must be able
to measure the requirements or the suggestions you
are going to make by some unit, and a great deal
of the energy of the Temporary Mixed Commis-
sion during the last year was devoted to discover-
ing some satisfactory unit of measurement for land
armament. I believe it to be a very important
measure if it can be achieved, and indeed it does
not seem very easy to see how you can formulate
a scheme for reduction unless you have such a


unit. But the difficulties in arriving at a unit are
very considerable. I suppose that in olden times
the strength of an army roughly consisted of the
number of men that you could put into the line.
I am informed—l do not pretend to be an expert
on the matter — that that would be a very unsatis-
factory unit by which to measure modern armies,
and that the mechanical part of modern aggressive
equipment is so important that it may well be that
it greatly exceeds in importance the number of the
ii dividuals who compose your army. That evi-
dently, among other things—and there are many
otner complications—adds greatly to the difficulty
of arriving at the unit. We have not yet succeeded.
We are still investigating the matter. Personally,
I believe that such a unit can be arrived at if we
are content to have one which will be of broad
practical value, and if we do not attempt too great
and too meticulous a scientific accuracy. I believe
that it must be found in a combination of the ex-
penditure authorised and provided for the armies,
together with the number of the personnel em-
ployed. Opinions differ as to which’ of those two
factors will be the more important; but out of a
combination of those two, the unit must ultimately
be discovered. On that part of the subject we only
ask the Assembly to give to the Temporary Mixed
Commission the authorisation to pursue its enquir-
ies, and we make an earnest appeal to the govern-
ments of the members of the League, to give all
the assistance they can to the Temporary Mixed
Commission in its arduous investigaton.


Dr.LAUST MOLTESEN
(Denmark.)
“I now come to the actual work directly designed
to produce a reduction of armaments. It is evident
that there are three main divisions of that subject
-Mhe armaments of the sea, the armaments of the
land, and the armaments of the air. Of the three,
the problems presented by sea armaments are un-
doubtedly the easiest. A navy consists for the
most part of great ships which are obvious to all
the world, which cannot be concealed, which have
to be at sea if they are to be kept in effective order;
and to a very large extent, as I understand the naval
opinion of the day. the strength of a navy depends
upon the number and power of what are called its
capital ships, its main fighting vessels. These ships,
these great monsters, are not only quite incapable


of being concealed, but they cannot be brought into
existence without a considerable expenditure of
time. If, therefore, you can limit the number of
such vessels, still more if you can limit the number
of the other vessels, you arrive instantly at a
method of reducton of naval armaments which it is
relatively easy to put into effect, and relatively
difficult to evade.
“It is rather interesting to note that when you
get beyond these ships, when you get to the smaller
vessels and particularly the submarines, which are
not so obvious or so easily controlled, you have
the most difficulty in arriving at a common agree-
ment for the reduction of naval armaments.
“Now, as far as other efforts are concerned, we
have, of course, the enormous assistance of what
was done at Washington. You will find in the
Report of the Third Committee, an acknowledge-
ment of the that we all owe tb the work which
was done there. It was the most important step
towards disarmament that has ever been taken.
It was admirably accomplished. Though it seems
ungracious to make any criticism, the only critic-
ism that can be made is that it may be. perhaps,
that the want of permanent machinery to watch
over and complete that work may render its ac-
complishment not in all respects as great as its
promise. Still, an enormous step forward was taken
at Washington, and the main purpose of our pro-
posal is to extend the work done there to other
countries which were not represented at the Con-
ferem e.


Professor LOUIS DE BROUCKERE
(Belgium.)
You will find in our resolutions, the actual pro-
posals we make in this respect, and, as this is one
of the most important parts of the Report, I pro-
pose to read the resolution.
“The first one is;—
(a) That an International Conference should he sum-
moned by the Council as soon as possible, .to which
all States, whether members of the League or not.
should be invited, with a view to considering the
extension of the principles of the Washington
Treaty for the limitation of naval armaments to all
non-signatory States, it being understood that any
special cases, including that of the New States, shall
be given due consideration at the Conference.””
“The second one is:—
(b) That the Report of the Temporary Mixed Com-
misison .together witii the Report and the Draft
Convention prepared by the Permanent Advisory
Commission, as well as the text of the Washington
I reaty, should be forwarded immediately to the
various Governments for consideration,”


“What we actually did, was this. Three draft
Naval Conventions designed to carry out those
principles, were presented to us, one by the English
representative, one by the French, and one by the
Italian. They were referred to the Naval Section
of the Permanent Advisory Commission, the Com-
mission under Article 9of the Covenant. 1 hat Sec-
tion reported favorably on them in the main, and
drafted a Convention of their own, largely on the
lines of the Conventions submitted to them. 1 hat
was in turn submitted to the Council and to the
Temporary Mixed Commission, and forms part of
our recommendation. We recommend that this
Conference should be called, that the draft Conven-
tion should be submitted to it as a basis for discus-
sion and that to the Conference all States, whether
Members of the League or not, should be sum-
moned.
“You will observe that we took the Washington
basis. The Washington basis —I speak very gener-
ally and roughly —was that status quo of- naval
armaments, together with a provision for a ten
years’ naval holiday from building. We took that
basis because it had been accepted by the most
powerful of the Naval Powers, and because it pro-
vided a definite basis, something definite on which
we could proceed; It is quite evident, however,
that it cannot be applied in a cast-iron fashion.
Modifications will have to be made in particular
cases. There are States, I am glad to say. which
have naval armaments so small that for the pur-
poses of national security they may rightly claim


an increased armament rather than a decreased
armament. There is also the case of the new States,
who have, some of them, no naval armaments at
all. All these cases will have to he considered by
the Conference, and no doubt whatever allowances
ought to be made will be made by that body.
“The Conference is to be summoned, according
to our proposal, by the Council of the League. 1
want, in passing, to note this. I sometimes read
suggestions that international conferences are, as
it were, an alternative to League procedure. That
shows how difficult it is to get men and women
throughout the world to realise the facts of any
particular problem. Anyone who has studied the
procedure of the League knows that it works very
largely through the summoning of special confer-
ences to deal with special technical subjects. We
have had a Financial Conference, a Transit Con-
ference. an Epidemic Conference, and many others,
and it is right that it should be so. This Assembly
is in itself a great world conference, but it is a
great world conference consisting for the most part
of men who are skilled in statecraft, statesmen and
diplomats, and it is quite evident that it does not
contain the necessary technical knowledge to deal
with the technical problems which any international
organisation must necessarily have to deal with.
It is. therefore, a regular part of our procedure to
summon such conferences as are here recom-
mended, and there is no difficultv and no obstacle
to those conferences including nations which are
not yet Members of the League.
“I now come to the land question, and that is


undoubtedly a much more difficult one, even . t\ a
that of the sea, because you have the difficulty as
to units which I have already pointed out. and you
have this additional difficulty that by land attack
sudden incursions can be made from one country
into another, and it is not enough to provide, as we
do in Article 16, for the eventual punishment of
the aggressor, of the sudden and unprovoked ag-
gressor. because it may be that during that aggres-
sion damage of so serious a character may be
inflicted as to greatly injure the attacked country
whatever may be done at a later time. Danger of
sudden incursions is really the reason why countries
insist on maintaining these large peace forces which
I have already alluded to, and which are the sub-
ject of reduction if reduction can be established.
That is an essential difference between the land
and the sea, and unless you deal with this differ-
ence, you cannot hope to proceed to a real reduc-
tion of land forces.
“Therefore, the Committee has arrived at the
conclusion, and presents for your assent, this pro-
position, that if you are to persuade the great bulk
of nations, and particularly European nations, to
make a serious reduction of their armed forces, you
must provide for them some alternative seemity.
The principle is this, that if you are to have an
effective, a fully effective reduction of armed forces,
it must be general. That is obvious, 'i ou cannot
have a partial reduction, because it would leave
the countries which reduced their forces, at the
mercy of those who did not reduce theii forces.
It must be general.”


CHAPTER VI.
THE MUTUAL GUARANTEE OF SAFETY
The Reduction of Armaments to be effective
must be on a co-operative basis.
There must be some security for a nation that
disarms, for disarmament has its dangers, which
can be overcome by a Mutual Guarantee between
Nations with an adequate International Police
Force to put it into operation. It is the present
average district police-force system applied to
Nations,
Lord Robert Cecil, whom I have extensively
quoted on the matter of Reduction of Armaments,
dealt with this matter of National Securitv, and
said:—
“You cannot expect many of the countries to
reduce unless you give them some alternate sec-
urity, and it is suggested that alternative security
is to be found in what is called a Treaty of Mutual
Guarantee, that is a treaty which will give effec-
tive, real, well thought-out assistance to any coun-
try that is suddenly attacked. Rut that guarantee,
if it is to be effecfive for disarmament, must be
dependent on disarmament being carried out. And
what I would say to this Assembly, is that though
1 believe that on those lines, and those lines only
as far as I can see. a scheme of disarmament is
to be found, there are certain dangers which must
he guarded against and guarded against carefully.
You must not allow the Treaty of Mutual Guar


antee, which is designed for disarmament, to change
its nature and become merely one of the old type
of defensive alliances. It will be absolutely fatal
to the cause of disarmament itself, if you once see
re-established in Europe and the world, the old
system of groups of nations, allied amongst them-
selves, no doubt, but allied against other nations
which will also form groups —if you once get that
system of rival groups of nations in Europe, all
hope of disarmament is gone, all hope of progiess
is destroyed, and we are once again in the terrible
condition in which we found ourselves at ihe eve
of the Great War.
“Therefore, in our proposal we lay emphasis on
two safeguards. The first is that this alliance, this
new guarantee, must be open to all nations without
exception. We hope, some of us more sanguinely
than others, that once you get that guarantee set
up, and once you get it before the peoples of the
world, the nations will hasten to join it. It will be
the great hope for the peoples of the world, the
only hope they have of getting rid of this burden
of armaments and this menace of war. But what-
ever few or more nations can be induced to join
it at the outset, it must be open to all nations
that is an essential feature in the scheme.
“The second feature is this, that Guarantee and
Reduction of Armaments must go hand in hand.
I do not mean to say that you will not, in some
cases, be able to obtain Reduction of Armaments
without a guarantee; so much the better where
that can be done. There are cases which we were


His Excellency M. EMILIO DE PALACIOS
(Spain).
told of in the Committee of the Scandinavian coun-
tries which desire to reserve liberty of action, on
the theory that they may be able to carry out very
extensive reductions of their armaments without


any guarantee. It is evident that geographical
position may enable certain groups of countries to
do that, and in that connection perhaps, 1 may be
allowed to mention, as it is mentioned in the Re-
port, the Congress of the South American States,
which is to be held at Santiago next March. It may
be that they can arrive at some system of whole-
sale reduction of armaments, not dependent upon
guarantee. But speaking generally, you will not
be able to get a general reduction of armaments
without some alternative security such as a guar-
antee. Therefore, you cannot hope for your general
reduction, without guarantee. But it is equally
true that you cannot ask for a guarantee without
reduction; for some nations to undertake such a
guarantee as this, would be a very heavy respon-
sibility. There may be some nations who will hesi-
tate to undertake it. I hope that they will get over
their hesitation. I want to see this a universal
movement in which all nations will take a part,
because in the last analysis, it is to the interest'of
all nations that there should be general disarma-
ment and consequently general peace. But it wil’
be a heavy demand to make upon some nations.
It will be exposed to very simple, facile, popular
misrepresentation, and the only thing which you
could say to nations of that kind, is this: ‘You
have got to pay some price for general disarma-
ment ; if you want peace you must have disarma-
ment, and if you want disarmament, you must be
ready to pay a price in order to obtain it. You
can get nothing for nothing in this world, and if


DR. FRIDTJOF NANSEN
(Norway).
you desire disarmament, you must be prepared to
give a guarantee.’
“Of course, the broad principle of a guarantee
is merely a cut at the roots of that internaliona!
suspicion of which I have spoken, and unless you
'■an destroy that, no effective advance can be made
towards disarmament, and though 1 believe that
the general guarantee is an essential feature in any
attack on that international suspicion, an essential
feature in the process which has been eloquently
called from this tribute, moral disarmament, I do
not believe that it is the only step which must be
taken, if you are to achieve that result.
“In the Third Committee, we have been much


impressed, as has every other person who has given
any attention to the subject, with the terrible condi-
tion of unrest and disquiet prevailing in the world,
and particularly in Europe, as a consequence of the
economic difficulties which unhappily exist Ihe
collapse of the exchanges, the prevalence of un-
employment, the hindrance to international trade,
are symptoms of a profound unrest and disquiet
which must re-act upon the political and military
situation, and contribute to the maintenance of that
international suspicion which is the very root of
all evil in this matter, and we have ventured to
press upon this Assembly, and if we may do so,
upon the world, the vital importance of coping with
this economic difficulty. We have not concealed
from ourselves that one of the main causes of it is.
the question of inter-governmental indebtedness,
the question of reparations and allied debts of
which so much is heard, and to solve which, so
many attempts have been made. We venture to
urge on those immediately interested, the import-
ance of a solution to these questions.
“We venture to appeal to all the nations to lend
their moral support, and. if necessary, other support
also, to their solution, and though it is not our
business to point out the steps which should be
taken, I venture to say that this question can only
be solved if it is approached in an international
spirit, if creditor and debtor, victor and vanquished,
are alike ready to make sacrifices. It is only in a
spirit of that kind that a solution of this question
will be reached.
“Those are the steps towards moral disarmament
which we urge this Assembly to endorse. But we


Another sketch of Dr. Fridtjof Nansen, of Norway, when
earnestly pleading for help for the Refugees at Smyrna.
(See also page 55.)
do not ask you to wait there until that has been
carried out before anything is done; on the con-
trary, the two causes must proceed, pari passu—
moral disarmament and material disarmament must
go together. You will be able to achieve material
disarmament, the more you get moral disarmament;
the more you get material disarmament, the more
you will achieve moral disarmament.”
There is no question about this common-sense
pleading for some definite security to be guaranteed
to nations that propose to disarm, for Reduction of
Armaments and a guarantee of national safetv must
go together.
Let us learn a lesson from ourselves. We find a
police force giving individual peace to a community,
so an International Police Force could give national
neace to a world.


CHAPTER VII.
TRADING IN ARMS
Following his excellent speech on the “Reduction
of Armaments” and the steps to take to achieve
it, Lord Robert Cecil considered that although Re-
duction of Armaments may not be an immediate
step, much as one would like to see it as such, there
were some things related thereto that could be
immediately done, and one was the control of I rade
in Arms; as he well put it:—
“There is the question of the private manufacture
of arms and the arms traffic to which 1 have re-
ferred,” stated Lord Robert Cecil. “We urge upon
you this. We had under our consideration a draft
scheme for the control of the private manufacture
of armaments, and we urge that that should be
considered by the Temporary Mixed Committee,
and that a definite scheme should be elaborated
upon it. As for the arms traffic, that is indeed a
melancholy story. I do not believe it is possible
to exaggerate —at any rate it is very difficult to
exaggerate —the importance of that question. I
believe that if, three years ago, we had had a pro-
per control of the traffic in arms, very many of
the disturbances and hostilities, much of the fight-
ing that has since taken place, would never have
occurred. It is really a melancholy picture that
one gets of certain aspects of human nature, when
you consider what is actually going on in this mat-
ter. The other day 1 read this statement in a news


paper—l do not vouch for its truth, but it is at
any rate an illustration of what might easily hap-
pen, even if it has not already occurred: —
‘‘According to trustworthy information received from
quarters that arc informed of Bolshevik activities
in various countries, it appears that agents of the
Moscow authorities are buying considerable quanti-
ties of arms. A very large order for armoured
cars, lorries, motor cars, and it appears also for
machine guns, is understood to have been placed
with” a particular works which is there named.
“What a melancholy thing that we, the countries
in the West, should actually be engaged in arming
a Government, one of whose main tenets is, that
it is the enemy of all the existing Governments of
the world. Yet that can go on at present, and
does go on as everyone knows. It is called “Busi-
ness Enterprise” I believe; I should be inclined
to give it a rather harsher name. From the very
outset of the League, this question has been taken
up. At Paris in 1919, a Convention was framed
to deal with this question. It was accepted by
those who were there, subject, of course, to .rati-
fication. Since then, at every meeting of the As-
sembly, strong resolutions have been passed urging
its acceptance by all the nations of the world, and
after three years’ continuous effort we have arrived
at this position, that practically all the important
nations of the world have accepted it and have
agreed to ratify it and to promote the necessary
legislation to make it effective in their countries,
on one condition —that it is universally accepted.
The one exception was the United States of
America, and we hoped to receive their assent to


this Convention. It is not for us to criticise them,
but we received on the 29th July last a definite
statement that the Government of the United States
was not in a position to ratify this Convention, and
I am afraid, therefore, that effort to control the
traffic in arms must now be definitely ruled out as
a possibility.
“There is one favorable aspect of the matter
which I must not forget. In the note which has
been sent us, is contained the statement that I. he
Government of the United States is in cordial sym-
pathy with efforts to restrict traffic in arms and
munitions of war . . .’ and that ‘lt is desirous
to co-operate for the purpose of suitably controlling
the traffic.’ That is a very important declaration,
and we venture to hope that we may be informed
of the conditions on which the United States will
join in this effort. Our resolution is to this effect:
“That it is highly desirable that the Government
of the United States should express the objections
which it has to formulate against the provisions
of the Convention of St. Germaine, and any pro-
posals which it may care to make as to the way
in which these objections can be overcome.’ Then
we go on to ask that the Temporary Mixed Com-
mission should be instructed to continue its labors
in framing a plan for controlling the traffic in
arms and preparing a suitable Convention as soon
as it can. I do earnestly hope that this object
may be achieved, because 1 am satisfied that of
the minor steps that can he taken, none would
he more valuable than an effective Convention for
the control of the traffic in arms.”


CHAPTER VIII.
THE COMMAND OF THE AIR
“The final division of the subject of armaments,”
continued Lord Robert Cecil, “was the question
of control of the air forces of the world. No doubt
the control of the traffic in arms will do something
for that purpose, but not much. No doubt the air
problem is the most difficult of all the three, and
the question of attack from the air will be one of
the subtlest problems in the future. The develop-
ments of air attacks are the most obscure that
we have to deal with. Immense progress is con-
stantly being made in the art of aviation and air
attack, and owing to the relatively small size of the
units concerned, it is very difficult to devise any
system of efifective control, and the difficulty is
greatly complicated by the fact, I am told, that
commercial airships and aeroplanes can be used
for military purposes with very slight, if any, altera-
tion. It is true we may be able to do something,
and one of the things we have been able to do is
to investigate by means of budgetary control, and
by control of the number of persons trained and
capable of manning the air fleets of the world. Per-
haps, also (this is another interesting line of en-
quiry which we must pursue), something may be
done by making air forces the special weapons
which the League will have a right to call upon in
order to carry out its duties under the Covenant,
and more particularly which the guarantor powers
will have a right to call upon in execution of the


provisions of the Treaty of Guarantees. Gut I full}
admit that that part of our problem is the most
difficult, and 1 am quite certain it is the most urgent.
“There is no doubt that since the war enormous
advances have been made in this department of
military knowledge. Ihe machines, so lam in-
formed, are in all respects better, the engines aie
more trustworthy, the lifting power is greater, the
size and the effectiveness of the bombs have been
enormously increased. 1 was told the other da}
that it would not be an exaggeration to say that
bombs possess at least ten times the power they
had at the close of the war, and in addition you
have the awful and appalling possibility of poison
gas and germ warfare. I know Conventions were
made at W ashington by which we recommended all
the nations of the world to prohibit the use of
poison gas. and still more the dissemination of
germs, but 1 confess I feel that to be a very slendet
protection against these terrible possibilities when
you reflect on what actually happened in the late
war. If you are going to deal fairly and honestly
with the matter, you have got to face at any rate
the possibility (I am afraid I should put it higher)
that in a world-struggle, a struggle for life and
death between the nations of the world, it will be
impossible to limit the use of any weapon which
may be effective, or which may be thought to be
effective, in order to produce victory. What does
this mean? I am told at the present moment,
leaving out the question of poison gas altogether,
that the means of attack are so terriffic that the


His Excellency Professor SZYMOUR ASKENAZY
(Poland.)
greatest cities of the world might in a short time
be rendered uninhabitable, and that the only way
of replying to such an attack would be by a counter-
attack on the cities of the aggressive nation. What
an awful picture of the result of human progress!
What an awful possibility to contemplate, that
unless the opinions we entertain here are realised,
the only way of settling our disputes is by levelling
to the ground the cities of the world and destroying
the fruits of years and generations of human effort.
And, remember, that this is leaving out all the
possible developments of poison gas, the horrible
possibilities, which are by no means remote, of
an extension of that particularly terrible form of
Warfare.


“T do not know of any means by which, if war
continues, these things can be limited, and your
Committee has only made one suggestion on the
point. It thinks the peoples of the world ought
to be informed of what is the actual case; they
ought to know what they are facing in another
war, and the Committee asks you to consent to
the appointment of a small Committee whose duty
will not be to pry into unknown secrets, but merely
to bring together in an authoritative form the
known facts so that the people of the world may
know the abyss to which the world is being hurried
at the present moment. We ask that the I empor-
ary Mixed Commission may be re-appointed to
continue its labors, and we hope it may receive in
the carrying out of those labors, the full assistance
and support of all the Governments represented in
this room, for the duties they have to perform are
great and important, and their difficulties are enor-
mous. It is no subordinate issue we are laying
before you to-day. We are convinced, and I be-
lieve that you are convinced, that so long as offen-
sive armaments exist, sooner or later they will
be used. My study of the subject, and, I believe
everyone’s study, leads to this inevitable conclus-
ion—that if, once again, we have to face a world-
war. civilisation itself will be destroyed. It is no
exaggeration, but it is literally true that the nations
of the world must disarm or perish. The choice
is before them. Let them choose life or death. We
cannot compel them to choose; but we do think
that the peoples of the world should be given a
fair opportunity of choosing. We ask that you
should help us, or that we should help you rather,


DR. EDMUND PRIVAT
(Legal Adviser, Persia).
to lay before the peoples of the world an alterna-
tive, a way of safety, a definite practical scheme
of disarmament. Then let them choose. If they
really are anxious to have peace, let them take the
way to peace, and, if not, let them take the way to
destruction, and their blood be upon their own
heads.”
What clearer picture of the horrors of a future
war has been shown than this straight-made study
by Lord Robert Cecil? Without any exaggeration
he calmly pictured what the next world war would
mean, with the use of poison gas, the strengthening
of bombs, the dissemination of germs and the other
horrors of conflict; truly it would mean the destruc-
tion of civilisation. Yet every chance of those
terrors can be easily prevented by the simple use
of common-sense to-day. Let us get busy.


CHAPTER IX.
DISARM!—WHAT ITALY THOUGHT
The Italian view of Reduction of Armaments,
given by M. Scialoja was most interesting. He
said that disarmament has hitherto been the held
of Utopians and dreamers, and the rest of the world
has been inclined to be. sceptical and incredulous.
The reports of the Temporary Mixed Commission
and of the Third Committee now show that for the
first time the question has been really grappled with
in all its intricacy and with due regard to the
exigencies of the political, economic and social sit-
uations. The explanation of the success which
has been achieved, lies in an influence outside and
above the organs of the League of Nations able
as those organs have shown themselves to be. It
is not only by the efiforts of individuals and Com-
mittees that we have been able to go so far, but
by the general and increasing pressure of public
opinion. It was only after the war that the world
realised all that it had suffered, and all the econ-
omic loss it had endured and all the efiforts which
would be necessary for reconstruction, but now
public conscience is becoming more aroused it
furnishes a strong impulsion towards the establish-
ment of a peace on a durable basis, that is towards
a Reduction of Armaments.
“ I will leave out the minor considerations and
confine myself to the main issues involved by the
decisions of the Temporary Mixed Commission and


AN INTERESTED PERSONAGE
(At the Assembly, Geneva).
the Third Committee. The chief decisions are two
in number. First, there is a series of proposals
by Lord Robert Cecil with regard to the basis of
disarmament. These proposals may, perhaps, be
criticised as being too general in their nature, too
indefinite and dealing too much with preliminaries
•and not as being concrete proposals for immediate
action. That may be true, but Lord Robert Cecil
was wise in abstaining from working out co-effic-
ients for the reduction of armaments or attempting
to fix the number of battalions, guns or air-craft,
which any State might maintain. Such a labor
would be largely thrown away at this period or


perhaps at any period. Experience has shown
that all artless calculations of this kind which fail
to take account of the other fundamental circum-
stances of the situation, so far from advancing,
actually retard a solution of the problem. Lord
Robert Cecil’s proposals have raised the real ques-
tion which lies at the root of the whole problem
of disarmament. He has laid down the principle
that no reduction of armaments is possible unless
and until such reduction has its counterpart in a
moral guarantee, which must be in proportion to
the reduction which a State is asked to effect. While
affirming this principle, Lord Robert Cecil has,
moreover, endeavored to find a place for it \\ ithin
the scope and in harmony with the principles of
the League of Nations; that is to say he has laid
down that a pact of guarantee must be general in
its character. But as it is obvious that such a pact
cannot be universal, from the outset it is emphas-
ised in the report that the pact is to be open and
accessible to all nations —that it is not to be exclus-
ive, but that there is to be no ban against any
nation, and that the pact is to be aimed at no-
body. but in favor of. and on behalf of, all nations.
I think it is a cause for deep gratification that it
has been possible to achieve such an advance be-
tween January and September, that is to say, be-
tween the meetings at Cannes and at Geneva.
“Disarmament is only possible if the causes of
fear and suspicions are eliminated, and there are
intimate relations which exist between disarma-
ment and the economic situation of the whole


Another Sketch of the Earl of Balfour, when offering
£50,000 for the Smyrna refugees, if other Governments
would provide a similar amount. (See also page 25.)
world, and of Europe in particular. This economic
situation is so grave that it dominates every other
consideration. All political questions are really only
so many aspects of this all-embracing economic pro-
blem ; in fact disarmament is the external expres-
sion of an equilibrium in social and political condi-
tions. How is this equilibrium to be established?
Italy has. perhaps, suffered more than any of the
other great powers from the economic results of the
late war. It is therefore natural that she has always


recognised tire close relationship which exists be-
tween the economic and political questions w i e
have agitated the world since the war. . • • 1
French delegation’s proposals, taken as a m o ,
are cordially supported by the Italian delegation,
indeed, it would be a pity to miss such an oppor-
tunity for establishing the basic relationship which
exists between political and economic
But the proposals of Lord Robert Cecil and M. de
Touvenel are not limited to the affirmation of prin-
ciples. Their moral value is increased and multi-
plied by the fact that they are worked out within
the League of Nations, that is to say within an
organisation which is universal in its nature ano
where questions can be dispassionately and objec-
tively regarded. It is the League of Nations spirit
which gives the chief value and the chief chance of
success to these proposals, and I think the moral
signification is even \ aster.
“The report urges the necessity of moral disarma-
ment as-the preliminary to material disarmament.
It would be a misfortune if this idea of moral dis-
armament were not appreciated .and if it found no
echo outside the League of Nations. 1 here arc
difficulties in the path which have not yet >ten
overcome; our future course simply bristles ">‘h
difficulties. But the right ideal, which is our gu.
in „ s tar, will assuredly lead us to our goal, .1 we
follow it steadfastly and faithfully.


CHAPTER X.
DISARM!—WHAT FRANCE THOUGHT
The French view of the subject was well placed
by M. cle Jouvenel, who said that the work of the
Italian representative greatly facilitated the task
of the Members of the I hird Committee who were
all united in their efforts to enable effect to be
given to the proposal of Lord Robert Cecil for
which they asked for the approbation of the whole
Assembly.
»‘Of course we expect,” he said, a certain
amount of criticism in regard to these pro-
posals. There are always people who are pre-
pared to deride ideals and who fail to see that the
very worst of illusions is to believe that things
will always go on unchanged and that while there
are changes in the economic, the financial and the
agricultural spheres the relations between man and
men, the relations of humanity, are to be the only
sphere in which no improvement is possible. For-
tunately Lord Robert Cecil has got idealism of the
right kind, and I thank him for it. Politicians, as
we all know, are subjected to attack. It is written
in an old manuscript which is preserved in one of
our museums, that if you have dealing with the
crowd you will be defiled. I think that the most
senseless accusation, which could be advanced
against these proposals is that they are Utopian.
Every.step in progress was at one stage or anothei
of the world’s history called Utopian. The point
is to be able to work up from the ideal to its prac-
tical realisation. Lord Robert Cecil has rightl)


endeavored to satisfy that condition in his proposal
for a treaty of mutual guarantee. In the old days
men relied on their arms as their only protection ;
men were their own police and their own courts of
justice. They took many years before they could
see the unwisdom of regarding their own security
as the measure of the danger which they repre-
sented to others. However, the world saw wisdom
at last. Justice and police were gradually developed
and finally, a long time afterwards, we had the
system of insurance societies which guarantee
people against losses from conflagrations or against
impoverishment or unemployment.
“The nations of the world have had to tread the
same path as individuals, and it has become neces-
sary to give the nations the same security as is
obtained by private persons. You have begun by
creating the Permanent Court of International Jus-
tice. which can indeed define justice but which at
present is not able to enforce it because its juris-
diction is not compulsory and because international
law has not yet established any sanctions. Lord
Robert Cecil by his mutual guarantee pact, has
taken the first step towards organising sanctions.
In doing so he has met what has long been the
aspiration of the French nation. The discussions
in the Third Committee in regard to this mutual
guarantee pact showed that there were three con-
ceptions of such a compact. The first is that of
Lord Robert Cecil, who would like to begin with
a general agreement binding all nations and giving
all nations a guarantee of security. The second con-
ception is that disarmament must be general.”


AN INTERESTED PERSONAGE
(At the Assembly, Geneva).
“The guarantee cannot be universal, because there
are states which are willing to keep the peace
themselves, hut will not pledge themselves to
compel others to do so.
“The third conception is that of the Latin nations,
which was upheld by Poland. by Italy, by Rou-
mania, and by many other States, and which has
consistently been defended by the French delega-
tion. That conception is based on the recollection
of the invasion of Belgium in 1914, and on the re-
collection of the more recent invasion of Poland,
and it recalls the fact that there arc still two
great powers in Europe who may become a danger
to the peace of the world. One of those is a nation
more mysterious and more secluded that any other


State has been since history began, while the othei
under certain circumstances may be m a position
to equip the first nation I have referred to. hrom
this we see the need of having direct private guar-
antees without waiting for a general guarantee. It
is necessary that the Great Powers should agree
together and that they should agree to protect the
small States, and thus allow some of those nations
which are in the more exposed situations m Europe
to reduce their armaments while ensuring that t ie\
shall no longer be in danger of becoming a prey
to their predatory or adventurous neighbors.
“The Temporary Mixed Commission and the Per-
manent Advisory Commission will examine all these
conceptions of a Pact of Guarantee, but m what-
ever form that pact may finally emerge, you may
be sure it will in no way resemble the old alliances.
Such pacts will be open to all nations which are
peaceably disposed and who furnish evidence that
they are peaceably disposed.
“It is not enough, however, to form an insurance
a guarantee, against war. We need to go further,
we must form a regular and a complete insurance
society of all nations. The victory of civilisation
is not vet complete. A great orator said at the
time of the French Revolution, that happiness was
a new idea in Europe. Gentlemen. I belong to a
people who are convinced that all the bloodshed
and all the sacrifices they have undergone will be
thrown away, unless they can abolish the ideas
which underlie the famous words of Bismarck, that
might is the only right, the phrase of Bethmann-


AN INTERESTED PERSONAGE
(At the Assembly, Geneva).
Hollwag about a scrap of paper and all the fallacies
which are involved in Nietsche’s philosophy. We
feel that those doctrines must be obliterated and
must disappear for all time. What is the idea that
we have got to abolish —the most important idea
which must be abolished? It is that armed invasion
represents the last word in politics.
“It is necessary for us not only to get rid of the
fear of future invasion, but to efface the traces of
the last invasions. The French delegation, there-
fore, has made certain proposals to reduce the total
expenditure on armaments to the 1913 level, reckon-
ing that level by the method adopted by the d em-
porary Mixed Commission for computing such ex


penditure. Secondly, they propose to combine the
two problems of Reparations and Inter-Allied
Debts, so that, while on the one hand the nations
are relieved from the burden of armaments, the)
arc relieved, at the same time, from fears with
regard to their economic future.
“I think, therefore, that the Committee has
achieved its task well, and the French Delegation
is glad to associate itself with the proposals that
you have before you. The French nation nourishes
a deep belief- that it is, by its nature and by its
history, destined to bear the ideals of civilisation
to all parts of the world, and to create in the most
remote regions the atmosphere which is necessaty
for civilisation, progress and development. Fiantc
hated war. yet France cannot., on the other hand,
forget the war; .she is the guardian of the graves
of too many nations, and this gives her a duty which
*he owes to humanity and which she cannot forget.
In the early days of the late war the French nation
was, so to speak, the covering troops of civilisa-
tion against a barbarian invasion, and success was
only achieved because the cause they stood for
was one of right and justice. That success hung
long in the balance, until at last we heard the cry
from across the Atlantic. “Lafayette, we are com-
ing.” We feel ourselves now the guardians of the
Treaties. It is a heavy burden. If by this mutual
Pact of Guarantee you bring us some relief and say.
“France, we are here to share your burdens,” then,
indeed. I think we shall have some security for
peace and tranquility.”


CHAPTER XI.
DISARM!—WHAT AUSTRALIA THOUGHT
Sir Joseph Cook, representing Australia, gave a
clear enunciation of the view of the newest of
nations on this important question of the Reduc-
tion of Armaments. “It is.” he said, “the very crux
of the work of the League of Nations, and if the
League of Nations fails to deal with this question
of disarmament, it will have failed in the main
reason and purpose of its existence. I therefore,
would only say to those who arc engaged in this
enterprise, “Co forward with renewed energy and
determination”; and though the outlook is not very
clear at the moment, and though the possibilities
of progress are very meagre, we should rather ad-
dress ourselves to it with a greater zeal and greater
determination to succeed.
“I listened yesterday to the speech of the Italian
delegate and the speech of the French delegate.
May I say quite frankly that I felt some little
disappointment at those speeches. There was right
throughout the Italian delegate’s speech constant
reference to the economic question. I would like
to say that in my judgment this disarmament ques-
tion is the supreme economic question of the mo-
ment. This much I think is clear —that those
nations which have least armament to carry and to
provide for. will be the better equipped for the
economic struggle of the future. If we of the old
countries are going along carrying this burden of
armaments upon our shoulders, and at the same


time releasing from that burden some of our erst-
while enemies, we are placing a tremendous econ-
omic handicap upon their side in the economic
struggle of the future.
“Take, for instance, the case of Germany. We
have disarmed her and therefore ■she has no longei
to carry this burden. I went into a feu hguies the
other day about this matter. I find that before the
war Germany carried the same armamental burdens
as the British Empire. She is not carrying that
armament to-day, while we are still continuing to
carry ours. That is a tremendous economic advan-
tage that she has as she addresses herself to the
task of the future. Remember, also, that in pre-war
days Germany always had an average of about a
million men under arms under the conscript system.
The economic equivalent of those million men en-
gaged in peaceful enterprises is another tremendous
handicap in her favor. Altogether, if the two items
are taken together, it will be found that in dis-
arming Germany, in allowing her therefore to press
all her men into economic service, you have placed
a tremendous economic advantage to her account
in all the trading enterprises of the future. Once
these things are settled, once this question of re-
parations has been settled, you will find, if lam
not mistaken, that Germany will take full advan-
tage of this handicap which we have given her in
disarming her and placing this tremendous econ-
omic advantage on her side. Unless we make some
corresponding proposal for disarmament and for
the relief of our own burdens we shall, it appears


AN INTERESTED PERSONAGE
(At the Assembly, Geneva).
to me, be terribly handicapped in the economic com-
petition of the future. That, I think, is a fact
which was not sufficiently taken into account in
dealing with this question of disarmament. If our
economic competitors are to go free of all tTs
burden while we stagger along under our present
burdens, that country which is free is the more
likely to succeed as compared with the country
which is heavily burdened.
“I thought it well to stress that point since so
much was being said about the economic condition
of the world. Therefore, it is that, having re-
lieved some of the countries of Europe from this
pressing burden of armaments, there is all the
greater obligation upon us to address ourselves
urgently to this task in the hope that we, too,


may relieve ourselves of some of the armarnental
burdens that we are carrying to-day.
“The French delegate eloquently referred to the
side of this question relating to the small states.
He' urged, if I remember rightly, that the large
states should guarantee the small states. May I
suggest that the large states, too, want some relief
from those pressing burdens. Some of the large
states to-day are the most heavily burdened of all.
We speak of the large states going to the relief
of the small states; but I suggest that the large
states should begin to relieve themselves of this
terrible handicap that they carry in comparison
with some of their more immediate neighbors.
What we want is some general scheme of disarma-
ment. May I suggest that we might try and
experiment while we are making all these enquiries.
You heard yesterday from the representative of the
British Empire, in the person of Mr. Fisher, that
Hreat Britain had taken some risks in this direc-
tion; she had led the way boldly. May I <;av here
that the young cubs over the seas have followed
her in this respect right loyally. I am here to tell
you to-day that in Australia’s budget this year,
which is just under the consideration of our As-
sembly, we have reduced our Defence Vote by
over 25 per cent, of the total. We are taking some
risks ourselves. Will nobody take a little? Trv
this experiment. I venture to say that if it is tried
a little further in Europe the results will be a’to-
gether good.
“I sometimes think that we are rather too fearful


in attempting to do anything, having our eye
always upon our neighbor who always is a member
of this League, and always, therefore, is pledged
to the principles of peace. Let us try just a little
to put our principles to the test. You have the
evidence that Great Britain has done it. I give
you the evidence that Australia has done it in a
very radical and thorough fashion. I commend
this example to some of the smaller States of
Europe in the hope that they may follow it,
“\\ e have the tragic fact to-day three or four years
after the war, that we are still spending over 20 per
cent, of our entire revenues in the preparations to
destroy each other. If only that 20 per cent, could
he reduced to, say, 10 per cent., what a tremend-
ous difference it would make throughout Europe
in the economic and commercial, as well as the
social sphere.
“It is time to see whether we cannot make some
serious attempt to clear up this old cockpit of
Europe, which has been the scene of such fratricidal
struggles for so many centuries past. We can only
secure this by continuing, with all the force at
our command, to fight down the warring spirit,
keeping always in mind the fact that the continuance
of our present armamental burdens means slow
hut sure and certain suicide.”
In that clear-cut summing up of the present ab-
surd European situation, Sir Joseph Cook aptly
stated the common-sense view of its dangers.


CHAPTER XII.
DISARM!—THE NORWEGIAN VIEW
Dr. Christian Lange (Norway), after congratulat-
ing Lord Robert Cecil on the report, said:—
“The Australian Delegate spoke very eloquently
of the need of devoting more energy and vigor to
this question of the reduction of armaments. Cer-
tainly the time calls for it. An experienced states-
man told me a short time ago that there are very
many states which will shortly find themselves
faced with the alternative of either discontinuing
the payment of the interest on their debts or of
reducing their armaments. 1 think that shows the
necessity of arriving at a solution.
“I. would like to emphasise the point of view of
some of the smaller nations in regard to disarma-
ment. Why, I ask you, does the Covenant insist
on a reduction of armaments as a condition of
peace? It is because it is desired that no state
should be so strong that it may be tempted by
reason of its strength to violate the Covenant. 1 hat.
I think, is the basis of the Covenant and of the
whole League of Nations.
“I do not ■ wish to speak of regional agreements
or of naval disarmaments. Those matters are fully
dealt with in the report. But I wish to refer to
what is really the essential problem of all European
difficulties, and that is the question which the Tem-
porary Mixed Commission is going to try to solve
by the method of Mutual Guarantee Treaties. I
am glad to say that the Norwegian Delegation is


DR. CHRISTIAN LANGE
(Norway).
able to vote in favor of such a proposal, for it is
expressly stated in the report that the final decision
in this matter will rest with the Governments. I
am sure that we all recognise the need of exploring
this method, and we realise that there are many
States w r hich cannot contemplate a reduction of
armaments unless they are given a suitable guar-
ai tee for their security. But I feel at the same
time that there are many dangerous aspects of this
policy, and all wait with interest and with some
anxiety to see the conclusions of the Temporary
Mixed Commission on this subject.
Finally, as it is stated in the report, it is essen-
tial that we should achieve some improvement in


the international atmosphere. In this connection
I am very glad that we are going to study the
economic and financial problems which are absorb-
ing the attention of the whole world at this mo-
ment.- But there is another aspect of this inter-
national atmosphere, the psychological aspect,
which we must pay some attention to. One of the
legacies of this war has been an increase in the
sentiment of nationalism. That was perhaps neces-
sary, and it was even inevitable during the war;
but the conception of the State as a completely
independent and absolutely sovereign unit, even
from a moral point of view, is one which is preg-
nant with grave dangers for international progress.
It is entirely a unilateral conception, and it is a
false conception. In all the nations at the present
moment there are many cross-currents of sentiment,
and it must be our task to encourage all the cur-
rents which make for good, which make for peace.
The only possible outcome of conflicting nationalist
sentiments is war in the long run. And it is only
by completing and expanding the idea of inter-
nationalism. that we can solve the problem. We
must remember that by our very title we are the
League of Nations. If you want co-operation, if
you want to save the world from future catas-
trophies. you must all unite and co-operate in mak-
ing the League of Nations universal.”
That fine review by one of the European Nations
that stood neutral during the Great War crisis, is
of particular value; proving how universal is the
desire for the best development of the spirit of
national co-operation that is behind the League.


CHAPTER XIII.
DISARM!—WHAT THE LEAGUE THOUGHT
The problem of Reduction of Armaments and
its substitute won many interesting opinions; Dr.
Francisco Urrutia (Colombia), pointing out that
twenty-one nations of North and South America
were shortly meeting at Santiago for the purpose
of limiting armaments and recognising international
law in its relation to that matter.
lie was followed by M. Emilio de Palacios
(Spain), who, having in mind the forthcoming As-
sembly of South American Nations at Santiago,
stated that in view of the fact that the League of
Nations was not yet universal, the League would
welcome all attempts by nations to band them-
selves together and to discuss any movement lead-
ing to Peace.
M. Manuel Rivas-Vicuna (Chili) replied that he
felt that nations would do better in the Assembly
of the League to work for harmony between all
nations, yet he felt convinced that at the next As-
sembly in 1923 the American States would be able
to inform the League that they had concluded
an agreement with regard to disarmament and
thereby had laid down the foundations of durable
peace in that Continent, and at the same time
learn that the people of the rest of the world, under
the guidance of the League of Nations, had been
able to conclude compacts for a reduction of arma-
ments and for treaties of mutual guarantee, and
thus had ensured the peace of the world.


M. Herluf Zahlc (Denmark), whilst not agreeing
with the point of view that disarmament should
be postponed pending the solution of several ques-
tions which had arisen from the war, hoped that
the Temporary Mixed Commission would continue
its examinations of the Reduction of Armaments
without connection with the systems of guarantees.
Lord Robert Cecil replied that there was a num-
ber of definite practical proposals by the
various speakers, and two fundamental ideas. One
was that the great obstacle to reduction of arma-
ments was international suspicion.
“We are not going to wait,” he said, “until all
international suspicion has been abolished before
we proceed with disarmament; but still no one can
doubt that it is international suspicion that stands
in the way of that great reform.
“The second is that for many nations some guar-
antee must be provided if armaments are to be
reduced. It must be a general guarantee condi-
tional on reduction of armaments open to all and
directed against no one, or rather, against everyone.
That is the central conception. Rightly and justly
has the gospel of force been condemned which is
associated with the names of Bismarck, Nietsche,
Treitsche and others. But let us be frank The
adherents of that policy are to be found not in one
nation only, but in many. There are some even
in England. It may be that there are some also
in France. 1 believe most profoundly that wher-
ever they are found they are a small minority
of the population. When I was on my way to this


His Excellency HERLUF ZAHLE
(Denmark).
Assembly, 1 had a most interesting conversation
with a very intelligent employee of one of the
French railways, and in the course of that con-
versation, he asked me what was thought about
France in England —did the English people believe
that French policy was a militarist policy. My know-
ledge of the language, or rather my ignorance
of the language, occasioned a little delay in my
reply, and he went on to say, “Well, there may be
some militarists in France, but, believe me, the
great mass of the French people”—“le peuple
francais/ as he put it —‘are sincere lovers of peace.'
1 believe that is profoundly true. I believe it of


France, and 1 believe it not less of other countries
of England, of Italy, and even of Germany and
Russia.
Everywhere the peoples of the world desire
peace; everywhere they desire to be delivered from
the bondage of fear. That is not a task which is
wholly within the compass of this League. To be
caitied to its real conclusion we must relv on the
great agencies of religion and morality, and we
must hope that those who are the leaders of those
causes, will show a great and increasing energy
in pressing forward this crusade. But we can do
something; we can let the people speak. We can
give a chance to humanity, and it is because 1
sincerely and honestly believe that this report marks
a step in that direction, that I venture to commend
it with all confidence to the acceptance of the
Assembly.”
The President of the League (M. Agustin Ed-
wards) then said: —
"In a few moments we are going to vote a set
of resolutions which. I hope, will bring us nearer
to the accomplishment of the great and noble pur-
poses for which this League was founded, inter-
national harmony and general peace.
“The terrible events which have been witnessed
in our time by all the countries of the world, show
that all those countries are intimately linked to-
gether. and that none can hope to avoid the con-
sequences of a conflict of interests, no matter where
it may break out. If it happens that a certain


INTERESTED PERSONAGES
At the Assembly, Geneva.
number of States or groups of States think fit to
conclude on certain points, particular agreements
in order to take the necessary measures demanded
by international engagements or on behalf of their
own security, it is unavoidable, it is necessary, that
all nations, great and small, should feel interested
in the matter, and should co-operate in agreements,
the effect of which is felt by the whole world.”
The report was then adopted with great applause.
Amongst other business dealt with was the highly
important scheme for the salvaging of Austria,
under which that nation will carry out a pro-
gramme of financial reform that will lift hci from
her present bog of depression.


INTERESTED PERSONAGES
At the Assembly, Geneva.
The subject of slavery was brought forward by
Dr. Nansen (Norway), and upon whose recom-
mendation it was decided that the matter be in-
serted in the programme for the Fourth Assembly
ol the League (1923), and all particulars regarding
same be obtained in the meantime. The repatria-
tion of prisoners, reviewing the situation in the
“Near East,” the position of Georgia and Armenia,
and other matters consequent on the turbulent
conditions left as a result of the Great War were
also discussed, as well as the question of the
“Rights of Minorities,” an important factor of par-
ticular interest to Australia.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE LEAGUE
As mentioned in the preceding chapter the ques-
tion of the Rights of Minorities has a special inter-
est to Australia. It is claimed that communities
of a foreign race in another nation should have
certain rights and liberties.
Professor Gilbert Murray (South Africa) , laid
down a principle that the best method of maintain-
ing good relations between the various nations
in the League and the minorities under each sov-
ereignty was by benevolent and informal commun-
ications on the part of the League of Nations; and
where injustice may be deemed to exist in a min-
ority of one nation living in the area controlled
by another, then the nation of the minority may
have recourse to the League’s Court of Interna-
tional Justice, It was suggested that impartial
agents could obtain reports if the complaining min-
orities were carrying out the duties they owed to
the Governments of the Nations concerned, for
though the minorities had the right to protection,
it was also incumbent upon them to co-operate as
loyal fellow citizens with the Nations in which
they lived.
It was pointed out that the League had a lofty
aim in the establishment of the peace of the world,
and history showed that the oppression of minor-
ities resulted in conflict and bloodshed.
In the discussion on the question of minorities
that was referred to by Professor Gilbert Murray,
the Maharaja Jam Saheb of Nawanagar (India),


The MAHARAJA JAM SAHEB OF NAWANAGAR
(India.)
made a very clever and striking speech in which
he expressed his hearty approval of the principle
of the rights of minorities, as Professor Gilbert
Murray, whom the Maharaja considered to be “a
wide-minded politician, a great name in literature,
and a very great practical idealist,” “very wisely
and very rightly pointed out, when he said that
the question of minorities was not merely a human-
itarian question, but that it was also a political
question.”
The Maharaja also quoted Professor Gilbert
Murray as saying:—•
“We must spread general contentment with the


Another Sketch of Professor Gilbert Murray, when
speaking on the Rights of Minorities.
(See also page 22.)
new distribution of Europe, or the new distribution
of Europe will not endure.”
The Maharaja then mentioned that there were
minority questions outside Europe; South Africa
for instance (here he looked at Professor Gilbei c
Murray who represented South Africa.) ‘ Indians,
said the Maharaja, “have insistent and irritating
minority question in Africa.”
“These matters are, therefore, not merely causes
of discontent locally in South Africa; they are
causes of' discontent all over India in a population
approaching one-fifth of the human race. But more
than this, if the present distinguished delegates of
South Africa can induce their Government to settle


these questions happily (I know of course, there
<u e difficulties, as there always are) , not only would
one house be set in order, but three houses would
be set in order. We of the British Empire are a
big family. The British mother has taken to her
bosom the grizzly bear, the kangaroo, the lion or
ostrich, the tiger or kiwi, and with a family of
that description quarrels are bound to happen, but
there is one virtue in the British Empire, that is
when we are attacked by a common foe, we are one
really happy family, and the elements I have
alluded to all unite together in the defence of the
Empire. South Africa would be more contented
and more united; the Government of the British
Empire would be relieved of a troublesome political
reference, and India would be deeply grateful, and
would feel that an old wound had at last been healed.
These minority questions have sometimes wide
ramifications, as we all know so well, but at any
rate I do feel that it is right, that it i s fair, here in
this Assembly, to remind the South African Dele-
gates, who are such sincere and such shining pro-
tagonists of the League of Nations, that other
virtues besides charity, may well begin at home.
■‘A\ e. in this Assembly, believe that one God
made all men to walk erect on one earth; and we
believe in one truth and one justice, universal for
all men, and it is to this atmosphere, and to this
faith I make my appeal. But outside this Assembly
there have often been tAvo justices, one for the
West, and one for the East. It is for the League
of Nations to engraft its own conception, the far


AN INTERESTED PERSONAGE
At the Assembly, Geneva.
(See also page 67.)
higher, the far better conception, upon the universal
practice of mankind.”
There is a great lesson for Australia in this dis-
cussion of the Rights of Minorities; and that is,
to he careful to prevent minorities developing, that
may not be to the best interests of the Nation.
Australia has already adopted a rule in this res-
pect. and the winning of the world’s peace by the
League of Nations should aid to that rule being
kept, without the necessity of an almost overwhelm


ing expense in developing local armaments for the
purpose.
1 hat is but one reason why Australia should be
linked with the League of Nations; and there are
many others apart from the necessity for Universal
linking to win Universal action.
In the chat with Sir Alark Sheldon referred to on
page 29, he made some interesting remarks re-
garding the necessity for giving every assistance
to strengthen the League. “Australia,” he said,
“should give cordial support to the League of Na-
tions, for not only does it honor us by giving us a
standing as one of the world’s Nations, but it also
gives us opportunity to plead for protection against
undesirable immigrants.
“This question of immigration, which came be-
fore another committee on which I acted, brought
proposals to send out thousands of Russians and
other refugees to Australia, a proposal that found
favor with all the European Nations, but when
the position was explained in Committee and the
Australian view point emphatically declared, the
delegates began to understand our attitude on the
whole question of immigration. If Australia had
not been represented then, there would he the
aspect of an country apparently awaiting
settlement, and no doubt judgment would have
been given without Australia having been in a
position to state its views.
“Whilst we are administering the mandated ter-
ritories such as Nauru and New Guinea, it is es-
sential that we should exercise all our rights under
the League of Nations, and be represented at its


SIR MARK SHELDON
(Australia.)
meeting's by Australians, and whilst the League is
being developed in the excellent way that it is. I
have no doubt whatever that it is going to be a fine
factor in the world’s peace, and Australia will
have its just claims upheld, that it will have every
opportunity to develop itself as the great Nation
that we all ardently desire to sec it become.”
'l'he clear-given view bv Sir Mark Sheldon of
the excellent way the League of Nations is de-
veloping. was given after the Fiench occupation of
the Ruhr, an action on the part of France that some
critics considered revealed a weakness on the
part of the League. It has, however, been dis-
tinctly explained that such action on the part of
France was in accordance with the pledge given by
Lloyd George in 1921 to the German Ambassador
that the alternative for failure to fulfil the terms
of the Treaty was the military occupation of the


AN INTERESTED PERSONAGE
One of the Interpreters at the Assembly, Geneva
Ruhr, which occupation was denied France by the
United States at the conclusion of the Great War.
Germany had failed to fulfil terms of Treaty, so
France proceeded with the occupation. The Lea-
gue of Nations could not intervene. It had not
yet got those powers. Let those who complain,
link up with the League and so give it the power
it undoubtedly should have.
Those who sincerely study the League and its
efforts for international peace have nought but
praise. Justice Rich (an Australian delegate) said
“I went in rather a sceptical mood. 1 returned
convinced that the League was an instrument for
securing good will and international peace,”


CHAPTER XV.
THE WORK OF THE LEAGUE AND A
SPECIAL MESSAGE
There is no question as to the great value of the
work of the League, particularly that transacted
at its Third Assembly.
Sir Joseph Cook. High Commissioner for Aus-
tralia, in reviewing its action, said that apart from
very useful work regarding preparation of reports,
three questions suggested themselves as. perhaps,
the most important; the question of disarmament,
the trouble in Asia Minor, and Austria. Taking
the last first, one may say quite safely that Austria
will now be given a chancfe of getting back to more
normal conditions, and a very serious attempt will
be made to restore her dislocated finance and her
shattered economic condition. The resources of
the large Powers are to be placed behind her, on
the one hand, in the shape of loans, and guarantees
are to be required on the other. If Austria can
be put with her feet upon the solid ground once
more, that in itself will be an achievement worth a
great deal of the time and effort involved in holding
the Third Assembly.
“As to disarmament,” continued Sir Joseph.
“Europe is a veritable cockpit, and many of the
nations are still looking over the fence and doAvn
the guns of their neighbors. Tt was both a privi-
lege and a.pride to be able to tell the League that
we had taken a great step forward in Australia, and
to commend the example to the consideration of
European nations. The question is to be studied


still further during the year, with a view to finding
some method of solid guarantees which will form
the basis and be the means of a beginning in a
task which must be somewhat slow in accomplish-
ment, because of its tremendous and far-reaching
importance in shaping the future destinies of the
world.
“The excellent work accomplished by the Third
Assembly of the League of Nations, gave that
great organisation a firmer standing and more in-
fluential voice than it has hitherto possessed. The
League,” concluded Sir Joseph Cook, “has proven
that it has become a permanent factor of highest
importance in the progress of the world towards
wiser and better conditions than the world has ever
seen.”
Before closing reference to this Third Assembly,
a word of praise must be given to the work of its
able President, Senor Don Agustin Edwards.
He was born in Santiago, Chili, June, 1878; and
is the author of many books of Travel Notes.
He founded nine newspapers, as well as two Chilean
Insurance Companies, and the Edwards Bank of
Valparaiso and Santiago. He was Minister for
Foreign Affairs in 1903, settling the basis of the
Treaty of Peace and Amity in 1904 between Chili
and Bolivia, After a brilliant political career in
South America, he was. in 1910, appointed Minister
to Great Britain. In 1921 he was designated Presi-
dent of the Chilean Delegation to the League
of Nations, of which he was elected President of
the Third Assembly in 1922.


At the conclusion of the work of the Assembly
he made a very striking speech.
After reviewing the important work of the As-
sembly and referring to particular members, and the
Senor DON AGUSTIN EDWARDS,
President, Third Assembly, League of Nations,
Geneva, 1922.


great parts they played in the success of the Lea-
gue, he concluded by saying:—
“Gentlemen, we have reached the third milestone
in the journey of our institution. We have nothing
with which to reproach ourselves, much to be proud
of, and still more to expect. Let us have faith in
the destinies of the League, because all that is
great, all that seeks the good of mankind and tends
towards perfection, is imperishable. In another
moment we shall have left this hall, and the charge
with which you have honored me by electing me
as your President, will have come to an end. I
cannot depart without assuring you that to the
gratitude which I feel for the trust you reposed in
me, is now added a strong sense of obligation for
your indulgence. I cease now to be your Presi-
dent, but all my life 1 wish to be your friend ’’
He received the cordial thanks of the Assembly
for his good work.
During the period of the Assembly I had some
interesting moments with the President, whose sin-
cere efforts to spread the maxim of Peace and
Goodwill were most manifest. He was particularly
interested in Australia and favored me with the
following interesting message: —
“To the Prime Minister of Australia (Right Hon.
Mr. W. M. Hughes).
“As President of the Third Assembly of the Repre-
sentatives of the Nations of the World, I feel a deep
sense of honor and am proud to be so associated with
the forty-nine Nations present—Nations that, though
differing in languages, ways, and methods, yet all have


the one grand ideal of Universal Peace—an ideal we are
all intent on realising at the earliest opportunity.
“Though some may consider the achievement of that
ideal will take time, yet one must remember that the
world cannot be expected to step from a state of turmoil
to that of world peace as with the wave of a magician's
wand: still we have progressed greatly towards our ideal,
and from the sincerity of the great representatives at this
Assembly 1 cannot but feel that the achievement of our
grand ideal is not far away.
"Speaking personally, as representing Chili. I look
across the Pacific Ocean at our brother-continent, Aus-
tralia, and send it good wishes. As a continent that has
never known a war upon its soil. Australia holds a record
that a lover of World Peace must recognise with plea-
sure—a record I trust that shall long endure; especially as
like my Nation, it fronts an Ocean with the appropriate
name of ‘ Pacific.’
“I therefore, with every pleasure, send it good wishes,
and trust that the able administration that has developed
it to its present prosperity shall continue and make Aus-
tralia ever a grand link in the great chain of Nations that
clasps hands of brotherhood around the World.
“ I am. yours truly,
[?]
President of the Third Assembly of the League
of Nations, Geneva, 28th Sept, 1922.”


CHAPTER XVI.
THE IDEAL OF THE LEAGUE AND HOW IT
CAN BE ACHIEVED
I lie ideal of the League of Nations is the early
consummation of Universal Peace. and a great
factor in achieving that ideal is “public opinion”;
public opinion that people have in their hearts,
that they feel is fair and progressive, and that is
behind every progressive move-in public affairs.
The understanding of National Development on
sane and sincere ground should, therefore, be
widely diffused amongst the people, for they are
the actual governors of a nation, the future peace
of the world depending upon people being made
wise to its great and grand possibilities. It is only
through such wisdom shall we ultimately win for
the world that peace that the League of Nations
is out to secure.
How then, can public opinion be guided into
sane channels regarding peace and its possibilities,
and who can best help in that much to be desired
direction ?
• here are tw r o parties to whom this should par-
ticularly appeal; those who fought in the Great
W ar and those who helped at home and abroad.
The men who fought best know what war really
means. They know that, beneath the glories of
victory, there were agonies of defeat and the bitter-
ness of enmity. They best feel that after all the
terrible turmoil of war and its woes, there ought
to be saner ways of making up misunderstandings


between fellowmen, and that it is hardly fair to
the coming new generation that war should be
painted as a great and glorious adventure. That
new generation is rapidly rising; each year sees its
flood of new young people coming to the light of
sense. They read of the glories of war, but not
of its horrors.
Why not look upon war in its proper tone as a
grave punishment? Tear from it its so-called glory.
Reveal its hideousness to the members of the
voungcr generation. Let them understand that
behind the beat of the drum and the blow of the
bugle there is a tragic ghastly figure.
History quickly forgets the dull side of the pic-
ture in all the wars of old. Of the Battle of \\ atcr-
-100 we only know “the glory of Wellington’s vic-
tory.” Our art collections show but the daring
defences of the infantry and the glistening wonder
movements of the dashing cavalry of the victors;
so that one yearns to grip and wave a sword and
cheer; but how few see beneath that glory-glow
the sorrow and the torture of the souls that suffer,
that for the six years following that victory millions
of people were starving through the disorganisa-
tion of industry and trade. How few are aware
of the thousands of families that tramped the streets
and lanes of England seeking bread or the oppor-
tunity to work for it; of the awful despair, the
crushing taxation and the staggering prices of food
products.
Even four years after the Great War, I found
the greater part of Europe in a state of business


uncertainty with nations staggering under crushing
national debts with financial exchanges almost
hopelessly upset.
I hrough all this darkness and uncertainty, the
League of Nations stood as the chief light of civil-
isation. If it succeeds, then civilisation is safe. If
it fails; no, there shall be no failing, for behind it
stands those who can best guide humanity to adopt
common-sense ideals of civilised government; men
and women who were keenly interested in the
(neat War and saw more than sufficient of it to
compel their very souls to advocate Peace and Pro-
giess with prosperity to humanity.
W ai has many advocates who grip every pos-.
sible opportunity as an “I told you so” example
Since the sitting of the Third Assembly of the
League of Nations, the French have occupied the
Ruhr district. The action calls to mind the state-
ment of General Foch in 1919, that he would not
trust the momentary characteristics of Germans
who would ever be a menace to France, as he
considered that they could not change natural char-
acteristics in four years.
Admitting such characteristics to be wrong, why
not have the League of Nations strong enough
to hold in check any Nation that has such wrong
tendencies. Just as you may not be able to change
the personal character of a wicked individual in four
years, yet by efficient police control and proper
discipline, that character can be kept in order and
gradually changed; so it can be the same with a
Nation.


The question of the world’s colored races has
also been brought forward as a block to the ideal
of the League of Nations, but it will not develop
into the serious problem that some seek to build
it. The plain fact must be faced, that the civilisa-
tion of the white races has reached a higher level
than the colored, the greatest inventions of the past
century emanating from the brains of the white
nations; yet in the coming age of rapid scientific
achievement, simplicity of construction will render
knowledge easier to attain, with a gradually better
enlightenment of colored and white races; and as
this spirit of fraternity develops, there will be less
appreciation of those agitators who endeavor to
widen the breach between the races. Such in-
dividuals should give keen attention to the wisdom
of the Maharaja Jam Saheb of Nawanagar as enun-
ciated at the Assembly of the League of Nations
and referred to in Chapter XIV. of these notes, in
which he quotes the British Empire that is so varied
in its nationalities, races and creeds, yet when at-
tacked by a common foe “one really happv
family.” The British Empire with its Universal
Peace policy in itself is an ideal ready for world
adoption.
The League of Nations in checking war ambi-
tions will transfer much human invention from
destructive to productive channels.
In Australia to-day we find one of the gieatest
military leaders of the War, General Sir John
Monash, directing an army of scientific experts in
a battle against nature to win 43,960 kilowatts of


IN THE WORTH-WHILE WAR OF SCIENTIFIC DEVELOPMENT.
General Sir John Monash, G.C.M.G., K.C.B., V.D., who is directing the great Victorian
Electrical Development project, is the figure on the right In the centre is Professor R. W.
Chapman of the University of Adelaide, on the left being Mr. W. J. Newbigin, the two latter
being Past Presidents of the Institution of Engineers. Australia.
G e nera l Monash, signing of the Armistice, said to his Divisional Commanders,
We have been engaged in the work of destruction for five year's; the time has come for us
to turn our attention to reconstruction, to building up rather than tearing down’ —and such a
spirit as shown by that great personality is the spirit of the New Age of Scientific Development.


power upon which national enterprise £2,006.000
shall be spent!
That such spirit of “Peace and Progress with
Prosperity to Humanity” is general throughout
the hearts of the men who fought in the Great
War, is aptly proven by this message that General
Ousley, Commander of the American Legion gave
to Australia recently;
“It is to be hoped that we shall soon reach the
dawn of lasting peace —for which the hearts of the
world have been crying so long, and let us earn-
estly pray that the men of Australia and America
shall be found side by side in peace as they have
so recently fought in war.”
This appeal for peace, by the men who offered
their lives to secure it, will be re-echoed around
the world, and confidence in the League of Nations
will make that Universal Peace more quickly
materialise.
The work of the Third Assembly of the League
of Nations was a great step towards the advance-
ment of civilised law and order, and the standard-
isation of moral values; and it gave every clear
proof that it is bound to play an important part
in the development of humanity towards that frat-
ernal understanding and co-operation in scientific
achievement that will make universal good-will
well worth the time spent in securing it.
There is need for this side-by-side fraternal spirit
in the world’s battle for good-will, for good-will
is a vital factor not only in peace between nations,
but between individuals, —a vital factor that should


be better recognised for the best interests of human
progress.
The best of men will ever desire to excel, and no
better way cam the man of ambition exercise his
inventive spirit than in solving problems to simplify
la )or that at present necessitates considerable
energy; and, in this respect, the League of Nations,
by giving man wider opportunity for the exercise
of his inventive skill, is ushering in a civilisation
that will turn the former tide of destruction to one
of construction; that will use as its standard Scien -
tific Research, and as its creed “the uplift of human-
ity by the easing of conditions of living.”
This truly is an age of development in the ways
of men. for ten years ago the realisation of Uni-
versal Peace seemed ages off.
It is the same with Scientific Research.
It seems hardly a century since the steam engine
began to ease men’s efforts and quicken travel on
the rails, ft does not seem a few decades back
since the motor vehicle came and eased our trans-
port by road.
\\ hen one to-day marvels at the wonders of wire-
less telephony with its wafting half around the earth
of waves of music, and considers that it is less than
half a century since Maxwell gave the first theory
that electro-magnetic waves were waves travelling
through the ether, and Hertz but thirty-six years
ago produced and timed the waves and so gave
birth to the remarkable achievements in wireless,
one cannot but realise that we are indeed in
an age of scientific possibilities. Yet one feels
that this past era of scientific wonder is but a pre-
liminary to an era of scientific achievement that
will outshine the glories of the past.


CHAPTER XVII.
THE NEW APPEAL FOR HUMAN PROGRESS
The world to-day is calling for the best encour-
agement of science, and Universal Peace will give
best opportunity.
Humanity is not as happy as it should be, a- 1 ? the
adaptations of modern science have not been as
wide as they deserve. Inventors are solving many
problems, but a better recognition and faster ap-
plication of each discovery is desired.
The British public has been somewhat negligent
in its recognition of the inventor of the worth-
while. the latter being usually looked upon as in-
terrupting the general inactivity into which many
people are apt to fall. It may seem absurd in these
days to recollect that as far back as the year 1340
Thomas Rlacket of Bristol was fined by the local
civic authorities for “having caused various mach-
ines. for weaving and making woollen cloths, to be
set up in his house and in the houses of some of
his friends, and for having hired weavers and other
workmen to carry on the new industry”; and
though the fine was remitted and Rlacket made a
bailiff of Bristol two years after, that spirit of
negligence had not passed out. as one notes that
over five centuries later the first self-propelled
vehicle had to be preceded by a man with a bell
and red flag!
We may smile at such procedure to-day, but we
cannot truly say we are free from that negligent
spirit,


THE REVOLVING CYLINDER ENGINE.
Invented by Hargrave, in Australia, in 1899.
I ake the British Empire with its wide area of
scientific development. In as far away as its furthest
link, Australia, the neglect of its inventive sons
has long been manifest.
The solving of the problem of human flight was *
achieved and exhibited in Australia as far back as
1884 by Lawrence Hargrave, whose models nineteen
years later seemed to inspire the Wright Brothers
in America, who appeared to have enlarged the Har-
grave model, fitted it with engines and propellors,
and it rose into the air. The Bleriot monoplane that
crossed the British C hannel later was an enlarge


merit of a model monoplane made by Hargrave, with
similar double-cylinder engine and flown many
years before, whilst the first revolving cylinder
engine for aerial use was made in Australia by
Hargrave in 1899. though full credit for it was
given to Gnome of France many years later.
1 noted a somewhat similar state of affairs during
my recent European tour, when interesting demon-
strations were being given for the first time in Ger-
A MOTORLESS AEROPLANE
being utilised by the writer for a number of distance flights
at Sydney, Australia, November, 1909.
(Vide the ‘‘Sydney Morning Herald,” November 7 1909.)


many, I'ranee and (ireat Britain of utilising motor-
less aeroplanes for distance flight instead of simply
using them for gliding from a height; yet similar
results were achieved by the writer with an iden-
tical construction in Australia thirteen years before.
Ihe first wireless messages between moving
trains were exchanged in Australia in 1910 (vide
A drawing of Sir Frederick Darley, sent in by wireless,
by Reginald Wilkinson, in Australia, in 1910.


Melbourne “Herald.” November 19, 1910), the
credit being claimed by America some years later.
The first transmission of drawings by wireless
was also claimed by the United States in 1921, yet
it was achieved by an Australian (Wilkinson) and
exhibited at lectures the writer gave in Australia
in 1910.
How the drawing of Sir Frederick Barley, as shown on
page 114. was received by wireless in 1910.


J mention these incidents not to discredit in any
degree the great honor due to the Wright Brothers,
I dei iot, Gnome and other great demonstrators of
scientific \\ ondei s, who may not have been aware
of previous successes; but to emphasise the point
that if the world had been without war-making
intentions, and so had less distrust between
nations, thcie would have been more freedom
of exchange of inventive ideas between people
and more rapid progress; for. if Gnome were aware
that a similar idea to his revolving cylinder engine
had been devised fifteen years before, he could
ha\ e had that much time saved and so have placed
his clever brain to making the device still more
useful.
I here is also the general apathy towards the
inventor to be considered.
Even when the credit has been given to Austral-
ians for great inventions, such recognition has, in
the main, been paltry. An Australian, William Farrer,
bred wheat, and a seed he evolved called “Federa-
tion seed” gave the farmers of Victoria in one year
alone an extra .£250.000. In the twenty years
that followed, Farrer’s wheat saved farmers many
millions of pounds by its rust-resistance and other
virtues, yet all he received was a salary of £350
per year. An Australian, Dr. W. A, Har-
greaves, solved the “weevil” problem, and though
his discovery has been calculated to have saved
o\ ei £1.500,000, the inventor received no recogni-
tion.
To-day. we find the ignoring of the world’s inven


tors and their work still existing; in fact, the world
is not sufficiently alert in generally applying science
to its highest objective—lndustrial Utility. The
British Empire has achieved much in invention dur-
ing the past, with utilising steam-power, the
railway engine, illuminating gas, the aeroplane,
the Crookes tube and many other accessories to
science, yet the placing of inventions has not. kept
in step, inventors- having s.till to hght against un-
necessary apathy.
This apathy regarding invention is general
throughout the world. It should be cast off and
every encouragement given inventors, for upon in-
vention depends national development and human
comfort. Encouragement can best be given by the
first establishment throughout the British Empire
of local Boards to Encourage Invention and to pro-
perly place inventions worth-while, with a Central
Board acting in Great Britain.
To win widest attention to the inventors of the
worth-while, and so to remove that apathy long
held regarding Scientific Research, a Board to en-
courage invention was inaugurated by the writer
in Australia in May, 1922, when the movement
was approved by representatives of the Australian
Institution of Engineers, the University of Sydney,
the Technical College, the Aero Club, the Chambers
of Commerce and Manufacture, and the United
Service Institution. It Avas desired to see the re-
markable incentive given to im r ention during
the period of the Great War, continued and applied
to peace and’ national progress, and so the new
moA'ement Avas encouraged.
The necessity Avas manifest that for the
Avidest spread of such a Avorthy movement.


a central authority should be established at
the heart of the British Empire, having as its
policy “Scientific Research and its best develop-
ment.” The writer, therefore, during his recent
European visit met that great institution of scien-
tists, the British Science Guild, which, on his sug-
gestion generously widened its sphere to cover
his proposal to help inventions of the British
Empire and their application to industry; and
so at the centre of the Empire, the British
Science Guild stands, with branches being-
formed around the world, all with a great policy of
encouraging the application of science to technical
crafts and scientific progress generally.
This movement for encouraging the inventor of
the worth-while is helping that new age of peace-
ful development that is behind the spirit of the
League of Nations, and should not be confined to
the British Empire. It should be international.
Inventions to-day are burdened with National
Patent Laws that are varied and wearisome. There
should be a common understanding regarding world
patents, for an invention worth-while should not
be curtailed by national boundaries. \\ orld apprec-
iation should be given the inventor who devises
what will bring more comfort and happiness to
humanity.
The League of Nations thus has a new sphere
of usefulness, and could with every advantage make
“Encouragement of Inventions for Human Pro-
gress,” a feature of its fifth Assembly in 1924.
I write these notes prior to the Congress of the
League of Nations in 1923. so that the importance
of encouraging Human Thought for Human Pro-
gress should win the great consideration it deserves.


APPENDIX TO SECOND EDITION
Since the first appearance of this book the Lea-
gue of Nations has had many strains, yet it stands
to-day (July, 1923) with a still stronger appeal for
universal appreciation as a necessary factor against
the growth of armaments and their wild use in
human conflict. Prior to the formation of the Lea-
gue, each of the world’s nations had a sort of fear
that another might at one time or another fall upon
it and endeavor to overwhelm it by superior mili-
tary strength.
To reduce armaments, therefore, it is necessary to
remove from the minds of Governments and peoples
any sense of fear, and replace it with certain sec-
urity as in the Treaty of Mutual Guarantee Under
that Treaty, which was laid before the Temporary
Mixed Commission of the League, all nations, both
members and non members of the League, would
disarm and enter into a common mutual obliga-
tion that all would support any one attacked. Such
a Treaty would mean the abolition of aggres-
sive war; and the abolition of the right of war by
a universal Treaty of Mutual Guarantee would in
itself do more than could be done in any other way
to develop the methods of pacific settlement which
the League has at its command.
Such was exactly the historical development of
law in England, when the first step taken was to
abolish the right of individual citizens to take the
law into their own hands, so national justice came


into being; and b}' similarly preventing a nation
from taking the law into its own hands, the first
step in International Justice will be taken.
According to Lord Robert Cecil, if the Treaty
of Mutual Guarantee is to achieve its end. it must
create the mutual confidence between nations which
will bring about disarmament, and also organise
the security for each nation that must follow.
Two problems must be solved; one is, which party
to any dispute has be£n the aggressor; and the other,
to ensure the earliest support by the guarantor
nations for the defence of the nation attacked. With
this command over War such a Treaty of Mutual
Guarantee would be a great step forward for Uni
versal Peace and clear the way for the universal
encouragement of inventions that make for human
progress and comfort.
That proposal was the desire of the Versailles
Treaty of the League of Nations that was framed and
signed at the conclusion of the Great War ; the first
part of the treaty covering arrangements whereby the
allied and associated powers undertook to promote
international co-operation and to achieve peace and
security amongst nations by accepting the obliga-
tion not to resort to war, to have open, just and
honorable undertakings between nations, and firmly
establish international law amongst Governments r
any future war or threat to be the concern of the
whole League, and provision to be made for a per-
manent court of International Justice which should
deal with any member of the League which resorts
to war in spite of its agreement, such action to be


considered an act of War against the League, all
members agreeing to cut off trade, financial and
all friendly relations with it at once.
It will, therefore, be apparent that the League
of Nations holds the key for Universal Peace and
already has done great work to that end. It has
stopped a war between Sweden and Finland, estab-
lished an International Court of Justice, mediated
between Lithuania and Poland, re-established Aus-
tria, registered and published 69 international treaties,
established international offices of labor and health,
and is fighting typhus in Eastern Europe, deciding
questions relating to Upper Silesia and arranging
for peace between Turkey and Greece.
It is, therefore, doing good work, and with the
proposed encouragement of inventions for human
progress, it will be taking a great step forward
that cannot but help with greater speed that period
of tranquillity, when human progress and comfort
will have best consideration.
Everything, therefore, calls for action to be taken
at the coming Congress of 1923 in the passing of a
motion that: “The Encouragement of Invention for
Human Progress,” be made a feature of the fifth
Assembly of the League of Nations in 1924, at
which Assembly the writer trusts to be present.
George A. Taylor,
Australia, July, 1923.


What the Press said of the First Edition of this Book:
From “ Sydney Morning Herald."
Mr. George A. Taylor travelled extensively on the Con-
tinent of Europe last year, and was in Geneva on the
occasion of the Third Assembly of the League of Nations
in September. “A World of Peace” contains his impre-
sions of the proceedings of the League, as well as pen
portraits of a number of the delegates. Mr. Taylor, who
devotes a good deal of space to the debates on disarma-
ment, has a profound faith in the future of the League.
He scouts the suggestion that it is merely an academic
body, with little effective influence on events, and his con-
tribution is a welcome addition to the growing volume of
testimony on the subject.
From “ Sydney Daily Telegraph.”
The versatile Mr. George Taylor, of Sydney, offers a
small booklet, attractively printed, a study of nationalities,
at the third assembly of the League of Nations, at Geneva,
1922. Mr. Taylor was at Geneva in September of that
year, prior to which he travelled through Great Britain
and various Continental countries, making personal inves-
tigations of conditions resulting from the Great War. He
discusses, briefly, the position of these countries as he
found them, and sets down many interesting observations
and reflections, gathered in the atmosphere of the truly
remarkable meetings at Geneva. The value of the book
is strengthened by numerous portrait sketches by the
author, of whose cleverness with the pencil Australians
have long been aware.
From “ Sydney Daily Mail.”
That energetic wielder of the pen and pencil, Mr.
George A. Taylor, of Sydney, has produced a little
volume entitled “A World of Peace,” being a study of
Nationalities at the Third Assembly of the League of
Nations, at Geneva, 1922. His remarks have the interest
which necessarily attaches to an interested observer’s
impressions of prominent personages and big politics.
The book is illustrated by photographs and portrait
sketches by the author.
