

m. Wonderful tllawarra waterfall. fr J
I'lfflr.] ' XL.J
Y0 r * * ♦ A beaUiY £P@t. * * *
m
fif
Ip) fil*
if
M
IHJm
will
r
li
Of hidden beauties have I chanced to espy On Friday forenoon the real excursion to DOWer of , np ~i-„r or writel . to exnrpss
Among the mountains, never one like this. ;> . , m U r> t ,uwer or speaker or writer li express. f JJI —.L I I
m, ~ ... i -rwf . . the waterfall was entered upon. The Rev. There before their wondering and admiring Nk.Sj^^
These lines, by the poet Wordsworth, W I. Oakes (Wesleyan clergyman at g. ze was the wateHall they had aoae to jf'S,! ,
fulyexpresa the admtrat.on of the water- Jamberoo) having heard of the intended behold—two >,f them, for the first time. Of I >1 }
fail here al tided to by the writer of tb s outing made a request to join the party, be the sight before them it might faithfully be
nonce, and, if he mistakes not very much, having a scientific eye for the earth beneath, said, i H the language of the poet— A SI A
many other persons will be similarly nn- as well as a spiritual one for the heivens f |f j
pressed on viewing the same enchanting above. His request was cheerfully granted, SPpHP
scene - and a right pleasant and edifying com- Uplifted high among the mountains. (iL feHh
On the occasion of Mr. Archibald Camp- panioni he proved himself—his knowledge There was the waterfall, and long drought !. r 3 HJ
bell’s visit to Jamberoo a few weeks ago in “ geology giving the other excursionists ag there had been, there was a strong
connection with the Parliamentary election, t 8 ®o van tige of several object lessons volume of water flowing over it like silver (r i® fni'l
Mr. William Graham, one of his staunchest rom him on footprints of the Creator S n r ay into a beautiful, large, and deep
political supporters in that locality, ex- appearing in the many rooks, stones, and p oo i 0 £ raog t pellucid clearness at the foot JS If
traded a promise from him to visit an u ,, der3 P a9 | e d in coarse ° the asc ®“ t 0 f the rocky framework of (h§ goen? ( it frl)® (pi
almost unknown waterfall situated near the i < l ’ e Mlt i aa “ urrai 0“ was evident that for centuries the falling ' liiTkjo p
head of the Minnamurra River, in the c fe h ? , f °?L°L - h ? 0I ! water had been cutting away the rock J
mountain range. And so confidently did Mr- Michael Ivelly fell into line with the weß tward, inch by inch, the interesting - I E i’l
Mr. Graham look forward to the result of Lhdeime S ‘wrh l Un« h d +h° m h ' 3 ?” result being that, addition to a fall of MlpiJ
the election as a foregone conclusion that resl Jenoe, which nestles by the raoun am f u p y 15Q f eet over w hi c h the water leant Sill
he stipulated, with Mr? Campbell’s consent, "nl!Sf° f aK the cou« of thestream below PM
that the proposed excursion should be made j£ Bnt ,^ d ' a" I . lun ,? red mor ? lay narrowly between two perpendicular
before the meeting of the new Parliament. “ et “rising” ground w £ lu of roc £ of even greater Light- r LSUL
In accordance with this anticipation and j” iam Badans was interviewed and fiICEjipTJ
arrangement Mr. Campbell proceeded to enlisted Into the ranks of the pilgrims en A deep chasm where quivering sunbeams play. Ijpipi W
Jamberoo on Thursday last week, the after- to do homage at the shrine of the The natural grandeur of the scene was Jkr-jjUk
noon of which day was spent most inter- looked-for waterfall. This gentleman one never to be forgotten by any who | MI (jj
estingly in inspecting operations of a very r ? s ?,. es . 011 borderland of Jamberoo might be privileged to witness it. And h l5Hi
important character that are being carried civilization, his immediate neighbors on yet, though situated within four miles of dkwdk
out by two local gentlemen of an enter- f . e * ev^ e <*. territory westward of him the town of Jamberoo—certainly not more j[]l ~i H!
prising and scientific turn of mind. Nor bein o wallabies and paddamelous. He is than five miles—very few persons in the |P
did the hours of evening hang heavily on ? ne ,, several strong-hearted, sterling locality have ever seen this charming picture ‘dh
hand. Thanks to the cordial hospitality of brothers who have made their marks on the mounted in very Nature’s frame. And, as
Mrs. Graham and her intelligent daughter, mountain side there in the way of clearing a matter of course, it is a thing wholly nn- j j t__J j >
not speaking of the robust cheerfulness of and farming. He lives with his family in known to all excepting the few and far ff-Jh ffijlff 'j
the head of the house and the friendly faces a cottage by the wood,’ 7 the appearance between who have casually beheld it. mJH) ( J
of his patriarchal number of sons, more or surr o ua dings of which indicate health- Even among natives of Jamberoo who have M |t—j 1
less Parliamentary hours were almost * u mess, homeliness, and happiness. And a reached the autumn of life not half-a-dozsn j(i] if- J
reached before the house was reluctantly ma J estlc primeval wood is that it is supposed have seen this hidden skSn
adjourned for bed. Mr. G. W. Gordon, which overshadows Mr. Badan’s farm on the treasure, which, if known far and wide, Jk'“H
who had acted most efficiently as secretary mountain side. A good sample of Illawarra would attract hundreds of tourists every mliSj i ]
to Mr. Campbell’s committees at Jamberoo bum rich in luxuriance, variety, attitude, year. It may now be taken for granted, /
in connection with both elections, was one S enera l appearance; however, that the day is not far distant
of the evening party, and among other sub- A f ... when this waterfall of marvellous beauty 111 Mn I 1!
jects the late successful contest with the Blythe Autumn^pufplT crown, SalG ’ will occupy a prominent position among [jEv
“ Strong Man ” was discussed at consider- And Winter’s icy mail. * the “ Beauty Spots of New South Wales” in
able length. In the course of this very en* Messrs. Cook and Sons’ Tourist Guide Book. ; ’j {
fcettaining review of the recent campaign, Mr. Badans being quite “at home” in The waterfall having no name, the ex- , L’.SJL
u became evident that Jamberoo now has the bush thereabouts, he at once undertook ourai oni 3 t 3 resolved, in solemn conclave, to ff) Hlfjfe
a much higher opimon of Wollongong the post of guide to the scene of attraction, invite the Minister for Lands (Hon. J. H. IfSjlifJ
UhnpWk U ombl -!’ / nd ''f T, eI C u d he . P .l rf ° r u m , the duty< Carruthers) to visit the spot and christen it. Jig
Albion Park than ever it had before. After travelling through the bush about a * ' jVpdlT-.i
Shellharbor, too, was looked upon as having mile and clambering under the direction Some bUier gtepg were eonsidertjd wijh
“ acted splendid,” as once was said of of its pilot a view to having due publicity given to the iL^nliv
“Tom” of political renown. Tongarra, extensive and wonderful natural beauties iHIiSHI
Avondale and Marshall Mount were like- Where rocks were rudely heaped and rent, of the waterfall and for the purpose of
wise complimented, and even the 0 msoia- s y as f lrit tmbiilent. rendering access to it much easier than Iblsl if
tioa Stakes of half-a-doz-n won by the ~ ~ , . , . . under present circumstances. ffilLSril
, S.M. at Dunmore was not begrudged. JH ‘ o “ ,st3 .«ached the object m view, ... F .
j and viewed it with delight surpassing the JLLAWAXSA MEitcvjir, lOtt isaa. r — —
|js|[i]
;{p|l|
ip
111
Yaffil
J,iiP
iff
i
