

A WRECK OF THIRTY
YEARS AGO,
“High o’er the ship black billows cast their shade
Then break and fall in terrible cascade.”
FALCONER.




A WRECK OF THIRTY
YEARS AGO.
TO
OLIVIA, ERIC, WAY, ARTHUR and GRAHA/A,
for whom these recollections of days
that are long dead have been jotted
down by their affectionate Father.




A WRECK OF THIRTY YEARS
AGO.
Commanded by Captain Foache, a veteran of
heroic soul and distinguished appearance, the steam-
ship Meikong, belonging to the Messageries Mari-
timos Company of France, left Shanghai on her last
voyage on the 20th of May, 1877. Saigon, Singapore
and Point de Calle were each visited for a few hours,
as the vessel hurried at the rate of 350 miles a day
towards Marseilles.
Nothing can be more delightful than an Eastern
voyage in youth, health and radiant weather, and
life on board the Meikong was the perfection of
luxury. Nights of unbroken rest followed enchant-
ing days. At six o’clock a smart Chinese servant
announces to His Laziness that the bath is ready.
How tempting the clear water looks as it splashes
against the white marble! How the salt wave
strengthens every limb, and thrills the sleep-suffused
body with boundless energy ! Then in airy costume
our typical traveller strolls into the saloon, where the
first breakfast, consisting of tea, coffee, chocolate,
cognac, with various substantial viands, steams in-
vitingly on the table. Here assemble other male
passengers, similarly attired and equally hungry.


Parisian wit effervesces on every side, —-words of many
colours and torrents of contagious laughter come
pouring forth. By-and-by our friend, when he has
replenished his physical and exhausted his mental
energy, seeks the well-scoured deck, where until
eight o’clock no ladies are visible. With bare feet
in sandals, and limbs clad in curious native garments
from Annam, Japan, or Tonquin, the lords of creation
enjoy without restraint the brightness and freshness
of the tropical morning. If in this voluptuous
freedom any one forgets the flight of Time, a
steward suggests that the hour of Adonis has
arrived, and the laggard descends to his little white
and gold cabin, with "which he has already begun
to associate the sentiment of home. The weather is
calm, the port wide open, and when dressing he
can put his hand out and touch the blue waves that
flash foaming past!
The sea in these regions is full of life. Every now
and then a so-called flying fish, which is really sup-
ported on the wind for a time by its outstretched
and evenly balanced fins, springs from the wave, and
sometimes —luckless fate ! falls heavily on deck.
Sharks and other marine monsters shoot to the sur-
face and gambol fearlessly within a stone’s throw of
the ship. Then suddenly they dive into the darkness
of the infinite deeps, as if weary of the splendour of
the sun.
At half past nine o’clock a bell announces the


second dejeuner. To it the ladies come trooping in
brilliant crowds. There is always a good table on
these steamers when the chief steward attends to his
work, and the captain is a student of Brillat-Savarin.
The heat in the cabin, in defiance of Fahrenheit,
is scarcely felt, for punkahs, fastened to the ceiling
and pulled by Chinamen, constantly circulate the
air. At this meal it is more than ever clear that
man is a social animal. To ladies and gentlemen in
the glow of physical health, after the comparative
silence of night, conversation seems as necessary as
food. On largo ocean steamers, peopled for the
most part by the educated, the wealthy, and the
travelled, one hears a great deal of excellent talk.
When other subjects have been exhausted, a man
is sure eventually to speak of himself, and a
philosopher can observe at leisure the revelation of
many a remote personality. At luncheon I gene-
rally sat beside Mr. Arathoon, of Madras, an elderly
man extremely proud of his family. His eldest
daughter he regarded as a miracle of beauty, and
judging by her photograph, which he frequently
displayed, not without reason. He was one day
talking of his business experience. Among other
financial institutions, he referred to the Commercial
Bank of India and the East. “I lost,” he said,
“ much money by that failure, and very nearly a
great deal more. On one occasion I called at the
Head Office in Moorgate Street, and said to the


cashier, whom I knew, that I thought of largely
increasing my holding in the bank’s shares. He
replied, ‘Don’t do it immediately, Mr, Arathoon,
put it off' for a day or two ’ I followed his advice.
Next day the bank failed!” Strangely enough, I
was able to identify the friendly cashier as a brother
of my own! To return to the other passengers.
There was a red-haired, choleric Irishman from
Assam, also a sun-dried husband and wife who had lived
an alarming number of years at Cochin, and suffered
in temper accordingly, a young coffee planter from
Ceylon, and a British officer whom I met originally at
lunch at the house of a friend in Gfalle. Ho was
recovering from a serious illness, and our host
confided him specially to my care. No doubt,
partly in consequence of that wise precaution, he
grew much stronger, but after our return to England
I somehow lost sight of him. The other day the
death was announced of a general of the same name.
I wonder whether this was my old friend. Other
shadows pass before me—an English Government
official from Penang, almost too perfect for contact
with poor humanity—a graceful young lady who
veered about the ship like a perfumed flame; her
husband (remaining, perhaps a little indiscreetly, at
home) was a musician at Shanghai, which may have
accounted for the harmony of his wife’s manners.
Then there was a merchant from Burmah and
another from China—both somewhat inflated by
6


rapid success : the latter, like Fadladeen in Lalla
Kookh, posed as a judge of everything, from the
flavour of a curry to the deepest questions of
science. Most of the passengers were socially
inclined, hut there was one French lady from
Singapore whose “ soul was like a star, and dwelt
apart.” Still young—not more than thirty—with
black hair, dark eyes, and regular features, she was
singularly handsome. A sympathetic smile flitted
across her face, if anyone spoke to her; hut for the
most part her expression indicated complete indif-
ference. “ The rose within herself her sweetness
closed ” —a white rose, for her cheeks were pale
and thin. Wrinkles had already begun to invade
the marble of her forehead, and “ the rounded iris
of a night of tears ” might often be noticed by the
most careless observer. At meals she sat beside
the captain, who was extremely attentive. He had
brought her out to Singapore a few years previously
with a companion supposed to be her husband.
This gentleman had been induced to settle in the
East by a relative who promised him a rapid fortune.
Death, however, arrived before the fortune, and now
the Meikong was bearing the survivor home, The
other, young and brilliant—alas! how often may
such a tale be told—was lying in the cemetery at
Singapore ; every turn of the screw reminded the
mourner that she was being carried further and
further from the tomb of her beloved. For hours


she sat on deck alone, sad and silent, gazing on the
horizon “as one who deep in heaven some airy
pageant sees.”
These were a few of the passengers.
Let us return to our traveller. If ho is blessed
with a good appetite, he can indulge in lunch at one
o’clock : this meal is really a third breakfast, almost
as complete as the second. Then backgammon,
cards, dominoes, quoits, music, or a siesta under the
shadow of a great tent erected on deck. Or he may
read —for the ship has an excellent library —or
watch the gliding shores, if the steamer happens
to be passing within easy distance of land. At six
o’clock it is again time to dress. At the dijev/mr
a robe de chambre for the ladies, a linen coat for the
men, are allowable, but at dinner the captain insists
on conventional costume. Our fourth repast finished,
the evening commences. The sun sinks without
twilight, as suddenly as it rose. For a brief space
the canopy of heaven is fretted with golden fire. A
great cloud of purple, divided by chasms of delicate
green, spreads over the sky. Then comes a superb
flush of violet growing paler and paler as it fades
away. Night is even more beautiful than day.
Stars are shining; the sea is bright with phos-
phoiescent gleams.
On a memorable evening wo spent in Galle harbour
the oars of every speeding boat seemed to dip silver
as they swept along. The passengers are again on
8


deck. They stroll about, converse, sing or play.
One black-bearded Italian, a master of the violin,
controls like a hypnotist the emotions of all within
reach of his music, now soft as the first sigh of love
n ,
then fierce with the red frenzy of battle I Sometimes
a little play is acted in this marvellous theatre.
The backgrounds are sea and sky ; the moonlit foam
in the wake of the ship stretches to the horizon like
a carpet of silver cloth. Light breezes scatter the
applause of the indulgent audience. Then follows a
quite superfluous supper —our fifth meal. By twos
and throes the passengers retire—some to their hot
cabins; others remain on dock and settle down for
the night on long wicker chairs. One can sleep
soundly in the open air in these latitudes, refreshed
by the night wind, lulled to rest by the long un-
dulating waves, and cherishing the delightful thought
that every day brings us nearer home.
The evening of the 17 th of June was even more
lively than usual on board the Meikong. It was the
birthday of an eccentric and wealthy merchant, who
had given orders for the dishes at dinner to be
decorated with flowers reserved specially for the
occasion. Another passenger, who during the day
had won a handsome sweepstakes on the ship’s run,
offered champagne without limit to all at table. The
hum of talk grew louder ; stern faces relaxed ; men
and women habitually silent began to address their
neighbours ; a prosaic banker fluttered into epigram..
9


Towards the end of the repast one or two Frenohmen ]
brimming over with wine and eloquence, delivered
speeches that recalled the glamour of the East.
Some of the passengers, on the other hand, were
turning in thought towards their English home —to
green trees and sweet-scented hedgerows —to
swallows poising in their arrowy flight—to “ kingcups
bursting with the morning dew.” Whatever may
have been witnessed by the inward eye, each in-
dividual life seemed outwardly to reach its culmination
in this luxurious scene. Beauty, artfully emphasised
or tastefully suggested, passionate music, costly wine
and generous fare —all contributed to exceptional
elation. When, however, the passengers left the
glittering table and went on deck, they noticed that
the moon, which for several nights had been shining
brilliantly, was now obscured, and that the sea, as if
impatient of so much merriment, had donned a
sinister expression. Rapid changes of weather, as
•one of the officers remarked, are frequent in the
neighbourhood of Guardafui. Still, the tide of happy
life eauld not be checked by a cloudy sky or a
blustering wind, and on dock dance and song, light
laughter and pleasant chatter continued until cloven
o’clock struck, and the lights were extinguished.
Many a genial, and possibly many a sentimental
good night, had been uttered during these last few
minutes.
Among the younger passengers the intention was


generally expressed of rising early on the following
morning to observe the coast, and if possible catch a
glimpse with opera glasses of the terrible Somalis,
who were said to inhabit these barren shores.
I had been scarcely half an hour asleep when I was
wakened by the steamer striking first a bank of sand
and then a reef of rock, shuddering, as it stopped,
from stem to stern. There was no one else in my
cabin. I pulled on a white jacket and trousers, and
hastened on deck. The vessel was lying on its side
helpless, like some great wounded animal. The
darkness had grown deeper. A whisper ran round
that - the ship had struck an unknown rock, and was
sinking fast.
On one side every billow that came rolling along
leapt into the air in a fountain of foam, and swept
across the deck. A portly stewardess, emerging from
the cabin staircase, lifted her arms and shrieked,
“ Nous sommes pordus ! ” A Chinaman, his pigtail
wagging in the wind, tore his shirt into strips, and
rolled up his money to fasten it round his waist. A
Spanish priest rushed up and down screaming at the
pitch of his voice, like a wounded hare. Two nuns,
of whom the priest was supposed to be protector,
prayed in silence on their knees, casting occasionally
a surprised glance at their companion’s unconven-
tional behaviour. Captain Foache was holding on
with both hands to the bulwark on the weather side.
Not far off staggered a solicitor from Calcutta, with his


wife and child. “Well, captain,” asked the solicitor,
“ what do you make of this 1 ” The captain did not
hazard a reply—his sad thoughts were buried in his
own bosom. The solicitor’s wife, lifting up her
daughter, exclaimed melodramatically, “ Oh, let me
perish, but save my child ! ” Even at that terrible
moment I remember smiling at this absolutely un-
necessary self-abnegation, which sounded like the
distorted echo of some heroic story. Most of the
passengers were now seated or moving up and down
on the slanting deck. Every wave carried off part
of the ship’s fittings; and even now, at the
distance of 30 years, I seem to hear one exceptionally
heavy mass of water falling on the skylights,
shattering the glass, and plunging with a
terrific splash into the saloon. With the coffee
planter from Ceylon I got hold of a circular life-belt,
to which we decided to cling should the ship break
up, as was momentarily expected.
Although I believed my last hour had come, I was
not conscious of physical fear, and, to my surprise, I
heard my voice speaking in its usual tone. I felt
that the sensation of being swept into oblivion in the
womb of some stupendous wave would pass quickly
and without pain. No doubt, in such cases, the
presence of others prevents the exhibition of strong
feeling, when it does exist. After some time, as the
waves began to break dangerously over the deck,
the captain ordered all the passengers into the saloon.


where he made a short, reassuring speech. As I was
listening to his crisp sentences, my eye fell on a pic-
ture hanging aslant on the cabin wall. It represented
a rural scene in France—children dancing in the open
air on a summer afternoon. The contrast between
that vision of peace and my actual surroundings
struck me with keen insistence. A book had been
left face downwards on a chair : it proved to be a
collection of the romances of Crebillon and Marivaux.
A few steps away an English prayer-book was lying
on the ground. In times of excitement the mind is
vividly impressed by trifling details. How different
the scene in the cabin from that of a few short hours
before ! Where are the sparkling smiles, the jewelled
dresses, the honeyed words? Can these haggard and
dishevelled women be the beauties of last night’s
banquet ? One or two of the English passengers, well-
meaning but foolish, played and sang at the piano
popular ditties of the day, in the hope of inspiring
the women with confidence. I wish the vocalists
could have observed the expression of a lady who
sat frowning at their absurdities and pressing her
throe young children to her heart. It was then, so
far as I can remember, that I saw the Singapore
lady for the last time —she was seated apart from the
others, and looked as unmoved by all the alarm and
commotion as a marble statue. Her gaze seemed
fixed on something far off—something beyond.
After the brave captain had made his little
13


speech, he returned to the deck and occupied
himself along with Lieutenant Ahbal and Lieutenant
Bouis in establishing communication with the shore.
Three boats were capsized and two sailors drowned
before the hawser could be securely fastened.
About three o’clock in the morning the lights are
noticed of a ship passing far out to sea. Without
losing a minute, Captain Foache orders a small
cannon to be fired and Bengal lights to be burned.
Several anxious moments elapse—then a brilliant
light appears. There is the boom of an answering
cannon. The ship stops. Captain Foache despatches
Lieutenant Bouis to communicate with the unknown
vessel. It is difficult to recall in their order with
perfect precision the events that occurred during
these bewildering hours. As Dr. Johnson says, in a
tremendous sentence, “ Atany particular features and
discriminations are confused and conglobated into
one gross and general idea.” At any rate, this I
can confidently assert —that never did dawn appear
more entrancingly beautiful than when it began to
dissipate the clouds of that melancholy night, and to
steal with rosy radiance round the outline of the
rocky coast. All the boats were hors de combat
with the exception of the little whale boat. In it
the disembarkation was effected. Before my turn
came to get on board, I went down to my cabin.
Water was washing over the floor. My hoots were
soaking, and I was unable to get them on. When I


returned on deck, a Monsieur Piquet, whom I had
known in Yokohama, exclaimed, when he saw my
bare feet. “You must not think of going onshore
without boots. The rocks look very sharp 1 ” He
brought me a pair of his own boots of Gargantuan
size. In them my feet kept their place with diffi-
culty, but to Monsieur Piquet’s foresight I owe thirty
years of life. A little thing often determines fate.
According to Pascal, if Cleopatra’s nose had been an
inch shorter, Mark Antony would have remained
master of the world. If I had been unable to got
my feet into Monsieur Piquet’s boots, my children
would never have existed ! At intervals along the
hawser ropes were fastened, by means of which
the little boat was guided over the enormous waves.
Although the passage was short it seemed full of
danger. Those league-long breakers of the south-
west monsoon were rolling in huge hills of water,
and dashing on the rocks in cataracts of foam.
Close to land our boat capsized. I was dragged
from the waves by a sailor, and placed on the rocks,
which proved as sharp as my friend had predicted.
Their jagged points pierced the solos of my—or
rather I should say Monsieur Piquet’s—boots. If my
feet had been bare, they would have been cut to
pieces !
When I landed there were already on the heach
crowds of Somalis, who during the night had seen
our signals and come trooping from the interior.


They looked on the Meikong as their jjersonal
property, for wrecks are common on that dangerous
coast, and a great source of wealth to the natives.
The shore was covered with the remains of many a
gallant ship. As I climbed the rocks my jacket was
torn to tatters, and my trousers, like Don Juan’s on
a very different occasion, ceased to be of any practical
service. My costume was something like that of a
Japanese coolie who wears two handkerchiefs—one
round his head and the other not ! Attired in a
pliable French life-belt, I was surmounted by a sun-
hat so large that it might almost be described as a
tent. No doubt I presented a fantastic appearance ;
but as all the other passengers looked more or less
ridiculous —except the Government official, who might
have feen starting for a stroll down Bond Street —I
did not feel so unfashionable as might be expected.
While the disembarkation was proceeding, more
Somalis came swarming down to the shore. They
grew bolder and bolder, until at last, if one of them
took a fancy to any article of clothing that belonged
to a passenger, he did not hesitate to possess himself
of it; and if the unfortunate owner resisted, the
Somali made a sign that he would terminate his
existence. Of the French sailors fully fifteen had
worked through the night with unfailing skill and
courage. All honour to these noble Frenchmen, whose
ancestors fought against us at Waterloo ! It was they
who saved our lives. The 18th of June—-the day on


which the events I am now describing occurred—was
the 62nd anniversary of the great battle. Some of the
other French sailors, however, when they found them-
selves on terra firma drank all the claret and cognac
landed for the passengers. Those reckless potations
inflamed their Southern blood, and they began to
admire the beauty of the younger ladies in possibly
a flattering, but at the same time a decidedly discon-
certing manner. It required a strong guard of
passengers to keep them in order. The scene was
indeed curious, and after the disturbance had been
quelled I withdrew to some distance for quiet
observation, while Monsieur Barrabant, the postal
officer seated near me, put the finishing touches to a
sketch he had dashed off with accurate ease, His
work was afterwards reproduced in an illustrated
French paper, of which I possess a copy. On the left
of the picture the Glenartney, the vessel that had
answered our signals, is seen waiting patiently in the
far distance. Across the centre lies the ill-fated Mei*
kong, swept incessantly by unsparing waves. On the
right, perpendicular rocks frown fiercely, as if they
resented any inti usion on their desert domain. Three
shattered boats are depicted in the foreground.
Another boat is being capsized as it approaches the
shore. Eight or ten sailors haul it on to the beach.
Others are rescuing passengers flung into the sea.
Groups of the saved mingle, with Somalis, who
brandish their spears in a menacing manner. Friends


are embracing, believing they had been parted for ever.
One gentleman is bending over two ladies seated on
the sand. He points to the wreck with animated
gesture, possibly congratulating the ladies on their
escape. A poor woman not far off, left to herself, is
evidently in tears —whether in consequence oi the
general calamity, or because she has no one to pay her
attention, may be left to the fancy of the spectator.
Some of the Somalis are swimming off to the ship —
they make their way with little effort through the
boiling waves. Indeed, we soon saw' them careering
up and down the deck, sticking their spears into
portmanteaux, and tossing our belongings overboard.
As we wore thus waiting and wondering what
would be the next development, the Glenartney
steamed away. Surely this is the last straw ! 'What
can be more bitter than the desertion of a friend ?
We were not aware that Lieutenant Bonis had
requested the Glenartney to proceed to the other
side of the Cape, where the sea was comparatively
calm. At last —when we were full of apprehension
as to what Fate had in store for us—to our delight
and surprise we observed two Europeans making
their way towards us across the desert. They turn
out to he the mate and a sailor of the Glenartney,
who had been despatched by Captain Gulland.
After the position had been discussed, it was decided
that the young men among the passengers should at
once start with the mate. I was preparing for the


Journey by refastening my life-belt and adjusting
my wide-spreading hat, when Mr. Arathoon came
up in great agitation, and begged to be allowed to
accompany the first party. He had a bag of
diamonds fastened round his neck, which he feared
the Somalis mi«ht at any moment discover. With
some reluctance I agreed to his joining us. The
sun was now pouring down its meridian rays, the
soft sand of the desert had become almost too hot
to touch, and I though Mr. Arathoon would stand
a better chance if he waited till the cool of the
evening, when Captain Foache proposed that the
women and children should be brought over on
camels he hoped to hire from the Somalis. Mr.
Arathoon, however, insisted on going with us, and
we began our march —another passenger and I
supporting him on either sale. Before us, in a
straggling line, the rest of our detachment followed
the mate. Nothing was to be seen but rocks, sand,
distant mountains, and the stormy ocean. Hill after
hill was surmounted with difficulty. Sometimes we
completely lost sight of those in front, and had to
make for the point on the horizon at which they
disappeared. At last we arrived at a patch of grass
where two Somali girls were filling leather bottles at
a brackish spring. A skin stretched on four sticks
formed a primitive tent. With a sigh of relief we
sank down under its shade. I swallowed a mouthful
of the nauseous liquid, and begged Mr. Arathoon not


to take any. The rich man in the parable would
have scorned a drop ! Mr. Arathoon drank two
bottles—enough in itself to kill the most robust. We
were beginning to think of resuming our march
when two other passengers, who had started later,
arrived at the tent, and, seeing that my companion
and I were utterly exhausted, offered to taka our
place with Mr. Arathoon. This was an immense
relief, and after a terrible trudge over interminable
sand slopes we made our way with throbbing heads
and faltering steps up one more than usually lofty hill.
On reaching the summit we discovered to our extreme
joy that we were now at the end of our journey.
We stood on a cliff looking down on smooth sands,
and a sea almost as smooth. There is the Glenartney
—our ark of refuge—lying quietly at anchor. Boats
are passing to and fro. We hurried down to the
beach, and found the Captain’s gig, which had been
thoughtfully provisioned. Deliciously the sweet,
fresh water streamed over our cracking lips and down
our dusty throats. Only those who have braved the
sharpness of death, and surmounted danger and
difficulty, can realise the physical delight of the first
feeling of safety. The Glenartney was on its way
from Hankow to London, racing home with new
season’s tea. Even the sleeping cabins were crammed
with heavy chests —but to us, weary wanderers,
the vessel appeared a floating palace. Our humourist
was heard, as he stepped on board, to thank Heaven


that he had at last arrived at “ lone Glenartney’s
grateful shade.” It is supposed he was giving
utterance to some imperfect reminiscence of Sir
Walter Scott. From a young sailor I borrowed a shirt
and other indispensable garments, andparadedthedeck
with the self-appreciation of a Beau Brummel. Even
now I peruse “ Sartor liesartus ” with additional
zest!
Having thus conducted myself to security, along with
the survivors of the first detachment, let me turn for
a moment to the fate of the other passengers. First
with regard to Mr. Arathoon. After my friend and
I had set out, the two passengers who remained
assisted the unfortunate old man as we had done, but
it was soon evident that his strength was failing. He
asked them to try and carry him, which they were
unable to do. He then endeavoured to drag himself
along on his hands and knees. Suddenly he became
faint; his companions opened his shirt to give him
air ; he drew a long breath and expired. The bag of
jewels round his neck was removed, and eventually
leturned to his family. It was impossible to bury
him. Ho was left whore he lay. Soon after our
departure, Captain Gulland, who was becoming
anxious, made his appearance at the main body. In
crossing the desert he encountered two lions, but they
did not molest him. By the time he arrived the
Somalis had become so threatening that, after a brief


consultation between the two commanders, it was
decided that the whole party should start at once.
But scarcely had the column begun to move -when
the Somalis raised a shout, and, brandishing their
lances and shields, came alarmingly close to the
Europeans.
One of the passengers drew a revolver and pointed
it at the savages. Captain Foache ran up, seized the
weapon, and in a loud voice declared that he would
blow out the brains of any sailor or passenger who
without orders made the slightest hostile demonstra-
tion. The column continued to advance slowly,
followed by the blacks, who were every minute
becoming more and more dangerous. Some of the
Somali women, clothed in red petticoats—embarras-
singly short from a civilised point of view—their
naked breasts partly hidden by barbaric ornaments,
seemed to be reproaching their lords for allowing the
living prey to escape. The men, at last goaded to
fury, were on the brink of some violent action, when
from the other side of the Cape came the repeated
report of a cannon. The crew of the Glenartney,
afraid lest Captain Gulland should have lost his way,
had fired in order to indicate the ship’s position.
Again and again echo repeated this thunder of
cannon. The Somalis imagined that a man-of-war
was in the neighbourhood, hurrying to the assistance
of the Meikong ; they stopped and consulted. At


length, concluding that there was no time to lose if
they wished to pillage the ship, they began to retreat,
and the column was saved. With fresh energy the
main body continued their journey.
Many of the passengers had lost their hats, and
protected their heads with clothes and sheets and
folding life-belts. Others without boots dragged
themselves along on the hot sand, cutting their feet
on sharp stones, and on large nails with which the
shore was covered—probably the cargo of some ill-
fated ship. One of the ladies who crossed the desert
on foot without shoes or stockings had the skin burnt
off up to her knees by sun and sand. She died a few
weeks after on her arrival in Paris. The whole party
looked like a line of wounded soldiers escaping from
a field of battle. Some of the women and all the
children were carried by sailors and by the negroes
belonging to the ship, who had remained faith-
ful. Captain Foache, Captain Gulland, Lieutenant
Bouis, Second-Lieutenant Abbal, the Chief Steward
Monsieur Henry, the Postal Agent Monsieur Barra-
bant, moved incessantly up and down the column,
encouraging the helpless and supporting the weak.
Monsieur Henry, who had worked all night like
a hero, fell a victim to his devotion. He dropped
down dead from sunstroke, and. like Mr. Ara-
thoon, had to be left without even a shroud
of sand. Arrived at the beach I have already
23


described, the column was threatened by another
danger. The Somalis of the coast to the north of
Cape Guardafui had not been aware of the wreck of
the Meikong, but hearing the sound of guns, they
trooped down to the shore, where they saw the
Glenartney lying at anchor. They pray to
their gods to deliver into their hands this noble
vessel, floating quietly on a tranquil sea. Their
hopes are checked by the arrival of the column.
They arrest its progress ; but on board the
Glenartney the sharp eyes of the English sailors
observe what is taking place. Boats filled with
armed crews advance towards the shore, in good
order and with determined aspect. The Somalis
are alarmed, and, as they hesitate, the column forces
its way through the yielding ranks Some of the
sailors hurry the passengers into boats, the rest
face the natives. When a boat is filled, it hastens
to the ship and returns promptly for another load.
At last there is no one left on shore but the crew of
the Meikong, and the French and English captains.
The Somalis do their utmost to prevent their em-
barkation, but now that the passengers are safe, the
much tried sailors do not hesitate to strike. The
Somalis, awed by their dauntless attitude, gradually
retire. The last boat to leave the shore contains
Captain Foache and bis officers. When every one
was on board the Glenartney, and the sick and


■wounded had been attended to, the roll was called.
To the best of my recollection it was ascertained that
four were absent—two sailors, who had been drowned
by the upsetting of a boat, and Mr. Arathoon and
Monsieur Henry, who had died of fatigue and sun-
stroke. According to some accounts the lady from
Singapore was also missing. It was rumoured after-
wards that she had been swept from the wreck in
the early morning. At half-past ten o’clock the same
night the Glenartney resumed her course to Aden,
where she arrived on the 20th of June,
During a short stay in Paris in 1890 I happened
to take up a novel called “ Chere Adoree,” by
Adolphe Belot. It narrates the story of the silent
lady from Singapore, to whom I have referred. The
book begins with a vivid and substantially accurate
description of the wreck of the Meikong. The reader
is then transported to a villa near Royat-les-Bains,
where every year, from the end of June to the
beginning of October, resided a charming couple—a
cood old doctor and his faithful sister. The latter,
O
although passionately fond of children, had repeatedly
sacrificed her prospects of happy wife-and-mother-
hood, in order to remain her brother’s companion.
They had made the acquaintance at Royat of a lady
of refined manners, but in delicate health and without
friends. Her name was Madame Fernande Yiliers.
She admitted to the doctor that travelling to Royat
and procuring expensive medical treatment had


exhausted her resources. The doctor promised on
his return to Paris to find her a situation, which he
did in the family of a Monsieur de Latonr, a man of
position who resided at Auteui!. This gentleman,
having divorced his first wife, had married an amiable
young lady, who loved, as if they had been her own,
her husband's children—Jeanne, thirteen years of age,
and Paul, eleven. These children had hitherto been
taught by an old scholar, Monsieur Belin, who lived
with the family, but it was now decided that they
should have a governess, and Madame Yiliers became
a member of the household. Monsieur Belin had
known Monsieur de Latour's first wife, and he was
struck by the remarkable likeness of Madame Yiliers
to that unfortunate lady. The first Madame de
Latour’s story was this : In a moment of folly, but
without committing any criminal act, she compromised
herself with a man of great personal attraction, who
was devotedly fond of her. Her husband challenged
this admirer, and in a duel wounded him severely.
Incensed by what appeared to her to be gross
injustice, pitying the man who had suffered for her
sake, and who had no wife or children of his own,
she was guilty of the grave indiscretion of nursing
him during his long illness. The world, no doubt
quite properly, showed its displeasure, and said in
effect, “ You see, we were right. She has always been
his mistress.” That was not the case, but when her


husband had taken, her children from her and cast
her adrift, not knowing to whom to turn, she did
accompany her friend to Singapore. How could she
leave him 1 His wound, which was regarded as
cured, had broken out afresh, and his remorse for the
evils he had brought on his companion robbed him of
repose. On arriving at Singapore he was seized with
a fever that never left him. Madame de Latour
was believed by the kindly-disposed to be his wife,
by the evil-thinking to be his mistress. She was
neither. She was his nurse. After all these
weeks of close companionship she might have been
a guardian of the sacred fire in the temple of
Vesta ! At last he died, and she left for France in
the Meikoug.
On the night of the wreck, so runs the story, she was
washed off the deck by a gigantic wave, which, instead
of drowning her or dashing her against the rocks,
cast her, fainting and unconscious, on a hank of sand
that thrust its ample shoulders between two rocky
cliff's. Roused by the hot rays of the morning snn,
the poor woman recovers consciousness and looks
around. The Meikong, deserted by all but the Somalis,
is being beaten to pieces by the relentless sea. She
raises herself, shouts, tries to attract attention, but
in vain. Through a hole in the rock she can see the
other passengers on the shore surrounded by natives-
She makes a last effort to climb the rock, but falls


back exhausted and bleeding. At length she
sees the column start, and grow smaller and
smaller until it disappears over a hill of sand.
Then comes oblivion. When consciousness returns,
she finds herself lying in a tent in a Somali encamp-
ment. She is recovering from a long illness. The
natives have saved her life in hopes of obtaining a
ransom. She lives with the women, who learn to
love and respect her. Ultimately, after several years
of a life strange beyond description, she escapes by
the help of an Arab seaman, who lands her at
Bombay. There is, in all probability, frequent com-
munication between that city and Somaliland, for, of
the watches of the passengers lost in the Meikong,
one or two, several years afterwards, were recovered
by their owners through having been exposed for
sale at the market-place in Bombay. Madame de
Latour, or, as she now called herself, Madame
Yiliers, had been three months in France when she
met the good doctor who found her a situation in her
old home. She could not resist the temptation of
taking care of her children, to whom she had been
passionately attached. Her sufferings had greatly
altered her appearance, and she disguised herself as
cunningly as possible ; but eventually, by intense
devotion to the children, she betrayed her identity
A similar incident occurs in the popular novel of
“East Lynne,” in which the divorced Lady Isabel
28


Carlyle returns to her husband’s house as Madame
Vine. Madame de Latour’s little daughter cannot
live without her own mother, and, after many painful
scenes, it is arranged that Madame Viliers shall
reside by herself in Paris, and see her children at
stated times. Poor lady ! The life that opened
serenely came to an end, like so many of those
we see around us, in the grey gloom of regretful
age.
Whether the history of Madame de Latour is real
or imaginary, I have now no means of ascertaining.
The novel may throughout have been founded on
fact, embellished by the quick sympathy of Latin
genius, or the disaster to the Meikong may have sug-
gested the parallel of a social wreck brought about,
not by deliberate wickedness, but by lack of circum-
spection and self-control. Many a ship that has left
port in sunshine, with blue waves rippling round
the prow and soft breezes filling the sails, has been
caught on the wide sea unavrares and destroyed by
overwhelming storms. Many a life begun amid the
sweetest surroundings has lost its compass, and ended
in crime, and madness and despair. But is this the
end ? A thousand times, No ! Are we not, the
worst as well as the best, in the hands of omniscient
and omnipotent Love 1 Are we not all His children 1
How can I better express my belief than in these


words of a generally clumsy, occasionally sublime
but always great-minded poet:
“ It’s wiser being good than bad ;
It's safer being meek than fierce ;
It’s fitter being sane than mad.
My own hope is a Sun will pierce
The thickest cloud earth ever stretched ;
That, after Last returns the First,
Though a wide circuit round be fetched ;
That what began best can’t end worst,
Nor what God blessed once prove accursed.”
G. W. T.
18 ih June, 1907.
Woian AM) Sons, Ltd., Printers, Letter Lane, Lond)n, E.C. 4.
