

a UJoung Solbiev
of the dross
i
\
l
%


■
■
.


' ¥
WILLIAM ALGIE STEWART SMITH,
Born 22nd May, 1905 ;
Died 17th August, 1924.


JJ
-WJF'ERGUSON
||F LIBRARY" jjjj


foreword
It was suggested to us (his parents)
that a brief resume of our late son Wil-
liam's life should be published in pamphlet
form, as it may please God to use such
an account as an inspiration to many lives
—especially the young—showing how God
can use a life which is fully surrendered
and consecrated to Him. This pamphlet,
therefore, is sent forth in the hope that
God's blessing may rest upon it.
A memorial reference to our late son
was made by the Rev. C. J. Tinsley at the
Stanmore Baptist Church on the 31st
August) 1924-. Such reference was prac-
tically a brief resume of his life, as it sets
out the main features. It is herewith pub-
lished, and these following remarks may
be regarded as a foreword to that refer-
ence. In that reference some remarks con-
cerning our late son by the Rev. J, Comp-


lin are quoted, also his testimony for
Christ in his office life. As Mr. Complin's
remarks are so eloquent and inspiring, we
think we are only doing justice to our
late son's memory to herewith publish
them in full, and the testimony given by
Mr. Jacob concerning his office life speaks
for itself. Also herewith is an eloquent
testimony by Chaplain the Rev. H. M.
Riley, concerning our late son's camp life
at Liverpool. Mr. Riley also, in a letter to
us» says: "Many will remember your son
with a deep sense of his unswerving faith
in Christ."
It is not seemly for us (his parents) to
praise our late son's godly life, but we
would like to say that although stricken
by a severe, painful and trying illness, his
mind even then, as indeed at all times, was
ever on the things of Christ, and even up
to the last few weeks of his life by the
aid of a Greek lexicon he was trying to
perfect himself in the knowledge of the
Scriptures.
Reference was made by Mr. Tinsley in
his memorial address to our late son's


Bible. This was suitably inscribed and
givvm to him by us at Christmas. 1915>
when lie was then ten years of age. Two
texts were written on the fly leaf: I Tim-
othy 1:15, and II Timothy 3: 14 to 16.
We selected these last verses because we
knew how true it was—even at that age
—of him "that from a child he had known
the holy scriptures." It might be said he
sought Biblical knowledge from the dawn
of his childish intelligence. "Blessed are
they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness: for they shall be filled." St.
Matthew 5-6.
Our late son's main activities for Christ
were confined to two years, or even less.
'1 hey seem to have commenced with his
baptism, which took place on the 28th May,
1922, at the Stanmore Baptist Church, and
he was received into fellowship on the 4th
June, 1922. On his membership card was
printed the following text: "Call upon Me,
and I will answer thee" and shew thee
great and mighty things, which thou know-
est not," ( Jeremiah 33:3) and on the back
of this card our late son wrote "My
Motto": "For to me to live is Christ. To


die is gain." (Signed) W. A. Smith;
Witness, Jesus Christ." His selection of
that text, a strange choice for one so
young, and his life so inspired a young
lady Christian worker that she composed
the following eloquent lines:
A PRAYER FOR CHRISTIANS
Suggested by the text our late beloved
brother, Will Smith, chose, and so faith-
fully put in practice during his short but
successful labour of love for the Master
he loved so well.
O loving Father when I think
Of Jesus' wondrous love to me
I hate my sin and long to live
In perfect fellowship with Thee
Beneath the Cross at Jesus' feet
I lose sin's guilty stain
And here for me to live is Christ
In Him to die is gain.
0 take this willing heart of mine
And work within Thy purpose sweet
0 take myself, my life, my all
A sacrifice throu' Him complete
And may His words he on my lips
His praise my lips refrain
And now for me to live is Christ
For me, to die is gain.


So always to be found in Him
I yield myself to Thee,
0 Father, till 110 more 'tis I
But Christ who lives in me
to breathe His life when here below
Then to Himself, above, attain
While now for me to live is Christ
tor me to die is gain."
aui . , Amy Giles.
24th August, 1924.
We believe to some our late son's zeal
tor Christ was regarded as fanaticism, but
o 1 at Blble Ile wrote: "' M y commission,"
St. Matthew 28:18 to 20 verses, and if he
had a prophetic instinct that he was work-
ing on an "abbreviated time table" the
words of his Master would appeal to him
with a force and power not understood
by less zealous followers of Christ "I
must work the works of Him that sent
me, while it is day: the night cometh,
when no man can work" (St. John 9:4).
Moreover, having a sense of humour which
even to the last a long distressing and
painful illness could not quench we (his
parents) never had any anxiety regarding
his mental condition. Concerning his zeal


and Scriptural knowledge, it was remarked
by one clergyman: "He was so sane with
it." One need not have any misgivings
about any follower of Christ whose zeal
may seem to border on the fanatical if
such follower is blessed with a gift of
humour.
Reference was also made by Mr. Titisley
regarding our late son's aptness in illus-
tration, and the following extract 'from
a letter of Mr. William Wade, one closely
associated with him in Christian work,
may be quoted: "It was a picture on Sun-
day morning, after he moved to Bronte'
to see Will standing on the beaches testi-
fying to the crowds, his red golden hair
glistening in the sun, following the Mas-
ter's steps, who often preached by the sea.
He was good at illustrations and seized
the opportunity to teach a lesson on ob-
jects close handy. One Sunday at Coogee,
when the shark scare was about Will
pointed to the shark tower and gave a
fine lesson of warning. He said: "If the
man rang the bell and some did not take
heed and the shark got them, the re-
sponsibility lay on their own shoulders."


He then drew the lesson of the Gospel
bell ringing- the warning, and if the people
did not heed, then the consequences rested
on them. He used to address the children
and get them to sing. Children he delight-
ed in, and in anything that uplifted the
name of Christ to the glory of God. O that
the Lord would raise up more like him."
We would like to say that early in life
our late son embraced eagerly and lovingly
the truth of believers' baptism, and the
Lord's Second Coming, which truth and
glorious hope he —young as he was —loved
and preached in his open air addresses so
earnestly and faithfully, striving for the
prize—and we are sure he won it —evi-
dently only given to believers whose godly
life is in conformity with their heart (not
head) belief in the near Coming of the
Lord (see I Corinthians 9:24 to 27, and
compare II Timothy 4:6 to 8. Titus 2:12
and 13). St. Paul ran, strove, fought and
preached concerning this prize and by the
grace of God his life was such that he
was not a castaway from it.
W r e feel sure our late son, now in glory,
does not regret one moment of his life


that he spent in the service of Christ, and
proud as we are of his Christian life and
character here, we will in the life to come
be prouder still* when by the grace of God
we shall see him 011 the "Day of Reckon-
ing" cast his trophies at his Master's feet.
For the many expressions of sympathy
in our loss, in speech and writing, that we
received we are truly grateful, and helped
by such prayerful sympathy. We are es-
pecially thankful for the grave-side ad-
dress delivered by the Rev. C. J. Tinsley.
That inspiring, eloquent address must
surely live long in the memory of those
privileged to hear it. A tribute to its power
was given by a fellow employee of Will's
when he said: "There was not a dry eye
present."
We feel honoured that God gave us such
a son. In the freshness and purity of his
youth God called him to higher service.
The Lord hath need of him. By conse-
crating his life to God he —by God's grace
being made perfect by and through the
merits and sufferings of Christ —in a short
time —fulfilled a long time. He has be-


queathecl to us and we believe to those who
knew and loved him a precious and frag-
rant memory that time can never efface.
"The memory of the just is blessed."
(Proverbs 10:7.)


Brief flDemoir of TOill Smiths
(REV. C. J. TINSLEY.)
Stanmore Baptist Church.
31st August, 1924.
It is exactly seven years since I con-
ducted the memorial service for W. Yar-
row, our late beloved Secretary. The text
I took then is the one I propose to take
this evening. A few personal words first:
Will was one of the choicest of our
young men, destined to a great future as
a Missionary or as a Preacher in one of
cur home Churches. I married his parents
and have seen him grow up in the school
and the Church—one of the many who
have gone forth to serve God and of whom
I am justly proud. In that day, like the
apostle Paul, they will be my crown and
joy of rejoicing.
He was a boy who grew up in the sun-
shine of God's love, and never deviated


from the shining path. There was hardly
a time when he did not know the Saviour.
He could not tell perhaps when the Sun
rose, but he lived in the blaze of its
warmth and light. Fortunately, he had
good parents who sought to train him in
the right way, and in his grand-
father, a godly man, he had a. noble
forbear. He had been headmaster
of Petersham School, then Cowra,
being sent from there to Wollongong
School, where he died. He seems to have
transmitted some of his qualities to Will.
There is a testimony regarding him by an
authority on school work, written of him
at the age of 19.
I have been a close observer of him
and of his system of teaching, and I must
say, though I have visited Government
and private schools, I have never seen any-
one except in model schools possessing so
good and so successful a method of im-
parting instruction. He possesses a verv
happy facility of commanding attention."
His grandson followed in his steps.
Will passed through the Sunday School
as a scholar, and then in turn became a
helper in the Primary Department, then
13"


a teacher in the Junior Department, and on
Miss Cropper's departure became the
pianist of that Department. He was
a most capable and reliable teacher,
always at his post. He was the first and
only male scholar up till then to pass all
the" Sunday School examinations* and gain
the gold medal, an honour which his
younger brother Colin has since secured.
He also passed through the ranks of the
C. E. Movement, being a Junior En-
deavourer, then one of the Intermediates,
finally entering the ranks of the Y.P.S.C.E.
going back to the Junior Society as one
of the helpers. When the Men's Morning
Meeting started he joined up, and came
when he was free, and his address on the
morning when four young men took the
meeting will be remembered by all the
men. One of them, commenting at the
meeting, described him as a young Spur-
o-eon.
vU 11.
But it was in the open air that he shone
conspicuously. His youthfulness* his earn-
estness. his red hair, his gift of speech,
his aptness in illustration, his familiarity
with the Scriptures, all combined to arrest


attention. He early joined up with the
meeting in the Stanmore Park, going there
after the school. One man with his
wife, who are now Christians, used
regularly to go to the Park to
hear "Fairy," as they called him and more
than one worker received inspiration as
they listened to him. The meeting held on
Parramatta Road on Friday night found
in him a regular and tireless worker. It
was inevitable that his gifts should draw
him into other spheres of service.
The Bathurst Street Church hold a regu-
lar meeting on Saturday at which he was
a frequent speaker, and the testimony
given by Rev. J. Complin is so choice and
faithful that it is worthy to be quoted
"Last year Will Smith came to our open
air meeting at the corner of Bathurst St.
and George St., and rendered such excel-
lent service that our annual report inclu-
ded in its brief summary of the year's
work, a highly appreciative and grateful
reference to our friend Willie Smith, the
boy preacher."
At one of our open air services a gentle-
man, after listening intently to Willie, asked


my daughter who the young man was ?
She was able to speak with knowledge, as
Willie had been in her Sunday School class
when she was a teacher at Stanmore. The
gentleman said
"I am in the Education Department of
the State. I have a great many young
men under my care during the yean but
I have never heard one who could better
express his thoughts than the young man
who has just been speaking."
It was wonderful to hear the stream
of pointed truth he poured out upon the
people. He was so young (only 19, I am
told, when he was promoted to glory),
in fact quite boyish in appearance, that
people gathered quickly to hear what this
youngster had to say; but when once there
he held them to the end. He was sound
on all the great fundamental doctrines and
based all his assertions on the words of
Holy Scripture. He had, too, an intense
conviction of the truth of what he said.
I expected to hear of him entering the
ministry, but evidently the Master had
need of him in the Palace of God."
Another open air service was held in Sus-


sex Sti eet during' the dinner hour, and when-
ever he could manage it he attended that
meeting, gripping the rough labourers
with his messages. One day when lie was
speaking to the "Wharfies" a lady came
up quite excitedly and wanted to know who
lie was, with such courage at his age,
speaking to such a crowd. She praised
God for him. Another brother, Mr. Id.
A. Weekley, with whom he was closely
associated in Christian work for a time,
sends along the following stirring words:
Y\ ill s favourite chorus, or at least one
of his favourite choruses, was:—
W hen tlie battle's over I shall wear a crown
In the New Jerusalem. 5 "
How hearth}/ he used to sing- that chorus
on our tiips to and from the various homes
visited. On reflection it seems wonderful
ihe labour Will used to cram into each
week. Will and another used to spend
two afternoons after work witnessing for
the Lord afl the various hotels and also
sometimes on Saturday afternoons. Many
rough times were experienced on these


occasions, but 1 know God blessed the wit-
nessing', and who can tell what shall be
revealed in that day when everything shall
be made manifest . J The bread thus cast
upon the waters shall return. Latterly he
spent his lunch hours either with Brother
Hill's gospel party in front of St. An-
drew's " Cathedral, or else with another
worker witnessing to the wharf labourers
at the wharves in Sussex Street.
During the last summer months, until
the weather drove the people off the
beaches, 'Will was always one of a party
that visited the various beaches with gospel
signs each Sunday morning, and witnessed
for the Lord to the surfers and picknickers
of the beaches These are the places where
you beard the lion in his den —the wharves,
the beaches on Sunday mornings and
around hotels, and I know that Will
stopped at nothing so long as he was wit-
nessing' for Jesus. It was unusual, seeing
he was so young. Y isiting the different
homes and hospitals was another avenue
of service in which Will delighted. Then
again the majority of the nights of the
week he either spent in open air work


round Camperdown or Redfern. I think
of Will as I have repeatedly seen him—
standing witnessing or holding on in
prayer while another one witnessed—with
his gospel text hanging around his neck
as there was no other place as a rule to
hang it. One text greatly used was: "How
shall we escape if we neglect so great sal-
vation."
I know Will was fully stretched out in
the race after the prize—the only prize
worth striving for—that to be found in
Jesus —and I am sure he won it.
Surely a unique testimony of a unique
life. His whole life was absolutely yielded
to His Lord for service. His favourite
texts were: "To me to live is Christ and
to die is gain," and "woe is me if I preach
not the Gospel of Christ."
His holidays were largely given to Chris-
tian work, and his spare hours were con-
secrated in the same way. His pocke'
money invariably went in tracts. As Mr.
Complin wrote of him—
"Will bought up every opportunity. He


might have known that he was working on
a much abbreviated time-table for his zeal
vvas quenchless and his activities for Christ
continuous."
Another one wrote: —
"I do not know a more devoted young
man following in the steps of the Master
than Will was "
Christian work was his hobby? his recrea-
tion, his rest cure. It might be said of
him "The zeal of the Lord's House hath
eaten me up." The influence of his life
was evidenced by those who attended his
funeral from the headquarters where he
worked. The delegation that came was
a rare testimony to the character and in-
fluence of so young a man. It was there
he showed his colours and revealed fine
courage, his life commanding the respect
and the confidence of his senior employer
and fellow employees.
His Bible was his constant companion,
and was read, marked, and inwardly di-
gested. A quiet perusal of that book of
his is in itself an inspiration and an edu-
cation. Redemption was his favourite
theme, and the old couplet was constantly


on his lips :
I'm a poor sinner and nothing at all,
But Jesus Christ is my all in all."
When he lay sorely spent on one occa-
sion he suddenly gathered himself together
and sang out: —
REDEMPI lON, that is the word—it
should be written across the sky."
But with it there was no gloom or sour
asceticism, but a bright, cheerful, win-
some personality radiating sunshine and
attracting everyone to him. He enjoyed
a fellowship with the Saviour quite beyond
his years. He was a ripened, matured
Christian at 19 years of age.
In his sickness there was wondrous pa-
tience and submission to the Will of God.
He realised as well as sang—
Lnderneath are the everlasting arms."
In his Bible the following passage was
underscored—
I know, O Lord, that Thy judgments
are right, and that thou in faithfulness hast
afflicted me." (Psalm 119 :75.)
The pain and the discomfort never affec-
ted his faith or disturbed the serenity of
his disposition. He perfectly acquiesced


in the Will of God for him, accepting the
bitter with the sweet. He had no feai o
death, and when his mother on one occa-
sion spoke of the seriousness of theopera-
tion, that at one time was anticipated, he
smiled and said: "O. mother, I am not
afraid to die." . ,
At the last he sank rapidly, and with
beautiful smile that seemed to be a recog-
nition of his Lord he fell asleep, and the
trumpeters sounded as he went m.
The following piece of poetry was writ-
ten by a friend and I would close this brief
memoir with it: —
To the loving memory of our beloved
brother Will Smith.
AT REST.
Come unto me all ye that labour and
are heavy laden and I will give you rest
Come learn of me and ye shall find re.
unto your souls. (Matt. 11—8.)
At rest! earth's storms and calms forever past.
And present with thy Lord.
At rest! within thy Father's Home at last
Where thou hast treasure stored.
At rest! no pain and sickness there,


No blast of worry, and, no shade of care,
My brother, with the ransomed ones to share.
Thy Saviour's glory in that land so fair,
How sweet thy rest.
At lest! and soon the heart's that loved thee dear
Shall cross the river too.
At rest! when Christ shall in the clouds appear.
Unto His promise true.
At rest around the Father's Throne,
0 what a gath'ring, all the Saviour's own,
My brother, none shall be afraid, alone,
No more earth's griefs and sorrows shall be known.
How sweet that rest.
Amy Giles.
"For to me to live is Christ, to die is
Gain." (Phil. 1:21.)


Extract from■ the "Australian Baptist," 26th
August, 1924- —
THE LATE WILLIE SMITH.
THE BOY PREACHER.
The church at Bathurst Street, Sydney,
heard with sincere grief on Wednesday
night of the early call "home" of our young
friend, Willie Smith- and at once offered
earnest prayer for the bereaved who mourn
their loss. Last year he often came to our
open-air meetings at the corner of George
and Bathurst Streets, and rendered such
excellent service that our annual report in-
cluded in its brief summary of the year's
work a highly-appreciative and grateful
reference to "our friend Willie Smith, the
hoy preacher."
At one of our open-air services a gentle-
man, after listening intently to Willie,
asked my daughter who the young man
was? She was able to speak with know-
ledge, as Willie was in her Sunday School


class when she was a teacher at Stanmore
Sunday School. The gentleman said: "I
am in the Education Department of the
State, and I have a great many young men
under my care during the year, but I have
never heard one who could better express
his thoughts than that young man who has
just been speaking."
It was wonderful to hear the stream of
pointed truth he poured out upon the peo-
ple. He was so young (only 19> I am told,
when he was promoted to be with his divine
Lord in the glory), in fact, cpiite boyish in
appearance, that people quickly gathered to
hear what such a youngster had to say,
but when once there, he held them until
the end. He was sound on all the great
fundamental doctrines, and based all his
assertions on the words of Holy Scripture.
He had, too, an intense conviction of the
truth of what he said.
I expected to hear of him entering the
ministry, but evidently the Master had need
of him in the palace of God. When one
thinks of the many—to us—untimely
deaths, one can but regard these early ter-
minations to service in the light of promo-


lions. They are the souls; response to the
Master's call, "Come up higher. Happily,
Willie Smith bought up every opportunity.
He might have known that he was working
on a much abbreviated time-table, for his
zeal was quenchless, and his activities ioi
Christ continuous. We have lost an ardent
soldier of the Cross, whose prayer and
practice might be well expressed in ie
passionate words of another .
"Oh, let me kiss Thy bleeding feet,
And bathe, and wash them with my tears;
The story of Thy love repeat
In every sinner's drooping ears;
That all may hear the quickening sound,
Since, 1, e'en I, have mercy found."
The church at Bathurst Street, and
particularly our leader, Mi. S. A. - u
drews with the band of consecrated
workers helping, wish to convey their deep
and sincere sympathy to those who are
bereaved through this so early termina-
tion to a young, noble and self-sacrificing
life. . ,
Who will step into the vacant place at
the open-air services? Young men who


are willing to confess Christ in the public
street, and recommend him to others, are
urgently needed to help at the three week-
ly open-air services conducted in connec-
tion with the church at Bathurst Street.
Young men who know how to pray are
asked to communicate with the writer and
"to do it now." The spiritual thermom-
eter of Sydney is rising, let us be ready for
our opportunity and responsive to our res-
ponsibility.
JOHN COMPLIN.


WITNESSING IN CAMP.
The Church Hut at Liverpool was full
of trainees. Platform was crowded by en-
thusiastic singers. When the Padre en-
tered he soon had them all singing the
popular airs. There is no doubt that the
lads do like to sing.
At last the pianist had to leave and the
Padre asked for a volunteer who could
play hymns as well. A bright shock-
haired lad stood up and soon the crowd
was joining in the singing once more. Pre-
sently the grand old hymns were being-
sung in place of the popular airs. So it
continued each night. That lad's faith was
seen in his absolute unselfishness. He gave
up everything that he might lead those
trainees in the hymns he so much loved.
It was after the majority of the lads had
gone over to their huts when he and his
companion were anxious that the Padre


should have his civ of tea that we had
those talks which revealed how deep that
faith was.
id is face used to just glow with joy as
he spoke of his desire to later on preach
the gospel, and tell all that God had done
for his soul.
His love for Christ was rich and full.
His hope shone through all that he did.
dowards the end of the camp I felt that
he must have a message for his comrades.
The Hut was packed. All had had a cup
of tea and biscuits. I turned to him and
asked him to speak. It was a great test,
and demanded the utmost courage. But his
words came with tenfold power, because
the others had seen him in the huts and
knew that he was striving to live what he
preached.
Tt was a definite testimony to the saving
pace of Jesus Christ. He pointed out that
he did not wish them to think that he had
the 1 ight to teach them, but he felt he
would like to speak for his Master who had
done so much for him.
Sincerity was the keynote of his address


and many spoke of the effect Ins fnilli
and testimony had upon them.
He has been much on my heart ever
since. Our friendship was renewed one
Sunday evening" when he attended the ser-
vice at Waverley and introduced me to his
mother. How proud he was of her!
We little thought that he was already
chosen to ascend higher. Even then we
were speaking to an angel unawares. "He
walked with God and was not, for God
took him." We" cannot understand His
plan. We would have thought that such a
promising young life would be essential
for work in the Master's Kingdom, but he
was needed in the great Beyond.
Many have helped us in our work in
the Hut at Liverpool, hut none excelled the
late William Smith in fervour and earnest-
ness.
It was a privilege to meet him and his
memory will be ever treasured in the
hearts and minds of those who had the
joy of his fellowship in camp.
Chaplain, Rev. H. M. Riley,
Wollongong (late of Waverley).


LETTER FROM Mr. A. E. JACOB.
(Metropolitan Board of Water Supply and
Sewerage.)
Your late son, William, was appointed
Junior Clerk in the House Drainage
Branch, M.B.W.S. and S. (which Branch
I am in charge of) on 2nd August, 192 L
and retained his position there till over-
taken by what proved to be his last illness.
He earned general approbation by his up-
right and earnest conduct and attention to
duty, and personally, while admiring his
1 esolution to shortly pursue a career for
which he felt himself fitted, I always looked
forward with regretful anticipation to the
time when lie would retire from the ser-
vice of the Board to take up that calling.
T was myself on leave recovering from
illness when he took ill, and it was a shock
to me to learn on returning that his illness
had assumed a hopeless form, and though
prepared for the outcome everyone with
whom he had been associated in his duties
shared in deep sorrow when the end came.


Please accept my deepest sympathy with
you and your family in your loss of a son
whose character and conduct appeared to
mark him as one destined to exert a bene-
ficial influence on mankind.
Yours sincerely,
A. F. JACOB-
Assistant Engineer House Drainage,
Metropolitan Board of W .8. and 8.
February 12, 1925.
ADDENDUM.
The following lines by our late son, were found,
written in pencil in a note book, after bis death.
We have reason to believe they were written m
the closing days of his life and we regard them
as his final appeal to the unsaved:
"Dear Friend,
Have you ever thought that you are a traveller
from time to eternitv and that one day your days
on this earth will end, and you will have to face
a just God?"
This little message is just humbly put nuclei
your door with an earnest prayer that you may
think about your soul's eternal welfare and pre-
pare to meet'your God by accepting the way He
provided for your salvation in the wonderful Sac-
rifice of the Lamb of God on Calvary's Tree where
Christ suffered.
The just, for the unjust.
The sinless for us the sinners.
A.C.W. PRINT. P76 CLARENPE STREET, SYDNEY


-
■
'
I
I
F
■
1
,
*


'
!
1
'
I
I
