





Miss Turner.
"Deep were my anguish, thus Compell'd,
To wed with one I ne'er beheld."


ABDUCTION;
UNE NOUVELLE MANIERE D'ATTRAPPSR UNE FEMME.
OR
A Hold Stroke for a Wife,
EXEMPLIFIED IN Mr. WAKEFIELD'S “NEW ART OF LOVE."
TOGETHER WITH HIS POETIC DECLARATION TO ELLEN, NEVER BEFORE
PUBLISHED; AND THE PROCEEDINGS CONNECTED WITH THE
ABDUCTION OF HIS WIFE AND NO WIFE, MISS TURNER.
I saw her in an airy figure as I contemplated the sky.
Lovely is the mist, said I, that assumes the form of my unknown.
Wakefield's Ossian.
“No human laws e’er damp’d our soft desire;
We lov'd, we felt, we fed the tender fire.
Fancy recalls the hours of rapture past.
Too great, too happy, too sublime to last;
Oh! had oblivion wrapt my guilty flame.
No crime had tarnish’d my unsullied name.
Too late I view the horror of my crime.
And torture closes on the heel of time.
My plaintive eyes to Heaven I raise in vain,
My prayers but prove as fruitless as my pain."
The Modern Abelard.
London:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY
E. DUNCOMBE, 165, FLEET STREET.


Entered at Stationers Hall.
Kemshead, Printer, Portsmouth Place, Kenninglon Lane.


AVANT-PPROPOS.
“ Knavery is bad in all shapes; but it is made worse by hypocrisy; Vice is never
so disgusting as when it puts on the garb of Virtue , and every body then applauds
it's Punishment.”
Stockdale's Memoirs of the living and the dead.
The Work now offered to the public, is far from claiming’ the
literary merit of a far-famed and celebrated heroine, which ap-
pears to have been dictated by the Graces in the Forum of the
gay aud gallant Lothario, her lack-linen Publisher. But
those renowned reminescences of that exquisite lady, and the
moral lessons of her aide de camp, the Colonnade Count, or
rather the biographical sketches of their dupes, are admitted, on
all hands, to be more entertaining than useful. That work also
fads in many of its descriptions, for want of a richness of co-
louring, a fault the gentle reader will not have to complain of
in Monsieur Wakefield’s interesting and facetious new art of
love.
It is thought, and seriously too, that the present subject is
worthy of minute investigation ; and so far from appearing fri-
volous, it will be found on the contrary, generally useful and of
national benefit. By the wise lessons it inculcates, young men
will learn the secret of pleasing a bonne amie, and of triumphing
over the virtue of a modern belle ; and the husband that of
preserving his wife from the dangers of seduction, so congenial
to the British soil; for it is an admitted and settled point by all
philosophers of the present day, that every man in the nation is
or will be either a Fool, Rogue, or Cuckold : and who can
be angry at such a declaration, when even crowned heads give
the example ! !!
H


One may easily imagine that such a subject as the present,
could furnish materials for several thick volumes in folio, but
let it suffice in this place, to give the precepts only in a sum-
mary manner : it being a well known fact, that lovers in general
have very little time to lose, as is evident from the perusal of the
narrative of the hero of this tale.
The man, (according to Mr. Wakefield’s “ new art o f love,”
which in point of expression exceeds by far the writings of the
amorous Ovid, the tender Tibullus, and the elegant Petrarch,)
who is constant, is certain to please; and patience, he says,
will conquer all difficulties both in love and war: we ought, he
adds, to disunite all those who attempt to blacken us with our
mistress, or throw r any obstacle in our way of success. It is
necessary too to persuade her that you love her and only her, and
that she is the first that ever inspired you with a tender senti-
ment. Do not be abashed by her disdain or caprice at the
commencement, it will be sufficient if she w ill permit you to see
her, and to speak w ith her from time to time, and love will do
the rest. If you can prevail on her to accept a letter or some
verses, which any of the Grub-street people will write for you for
half a crown, if you possess no talent for those things yourself;
or if she will give you a kiss, you may indulge in the hope of
success; nothing will be. w anting afterwards to crown your
bliss but opportunity.
“ Oh love ! how perfect is thy mystic art.
Strengthening the weak, and trampling on the strong,
How self-deceitful is the sagest part
Of mortals whom thy lure hath led along ;
The precipice she stood on was immense.
So was lier creed in her own innocence.”
The Author.


Wakefield’s New Art of Love.
“ Right or wrong, onward still he goes;
And ne'er looks forward, further than his nose."
It has been long- acknowledged by the poets of ancient and
modern times, and by none with more force and energy than
the immortal bard we have just quoted, that love is the predo-
minant or ruling passion of the fair sex, and perhaps the only
one that actually has a seat in their hearts. Nay this penchant
implanted in the nature of woman, may be easily observed
strongly marked in her countenance. Although we admit there
are many women of different temperaments with equal passions,
yet we have observed that all women possess a portion more or
less of the ruling qualities of their nature, such as sensibility,
finesse, presence d'esprit, levity, artifice, considerable address,
coquetry, vanity, and capriciousness. They are subtle, crafty,
sharp, cunning, sly, giddy, and of volatile dispositions, always
inclined to do mischief, and seldom any good ; they are how-
ever weak, timid, and irresolute : a man, nevertheless, to be
on an equality with this sex, should be bold, audacious, and
venturesome.
The lover who would wish to succeed with his mistress,
should study with care the gout of her heart. It is also im-
portant to know the dangers to which her virtue is exposed, I
repeat women are giddy, it is necessary then to oppose every
obstacle to their inconstancy. A woman who has most warmly-
loved, often changes the most rapidly, because the stronger
the passions the shorter their duration. It is a difficult task for
a delicate and tender girl, with a heart full of fire and love, to
be constant, such a butterfly is every thing by starts, but no-
thing long, novelty alone can satisfy her. According to our
new “ art of love,” after having dissipated all the fears of your
fair one not a moment should be lost, delays are always dan-
gerous ; hay should be made during sun shine. The lover-
ought to make a fine picture of the happiness that will ulti-
mately attend two tender hearts when united in bonds never to
be broken; the picture will be sedueingif the lover will express
the pleasure he will have in seeing and speaking with his
mistress. He must strongly impress upon her mind their kisses,
their transports, their several teles a tetes as the greatest
of all possible enjoyments to mortals here below.
Such are the conclusions we have drawn from the perusal of
Mr. W’s romance, or as it is elegantly styled by the learned,
consistent, and eloquent John Bull, “ The Document of Mr,
Wakefield, worthy of being preserved in our Columns,”
Be this as it may, it is quite clear by Mr. W’s “ Document,
a 2


that the art to entrap a female is not so difficult as that of in-
ducing’ her to remain with her lover after having’ been caught ;
and it is Mr. W. himself who tells the bed-chamber tale after
his modest trip to Calais.
It may be said, and perhaps not without reason, that it is a
difficult task for a platonic lover such as Mr. Wakefield, to con-
strain and guard in for days and flights a young married lively
and beautiful girl, entirely alone within the walls of her bed-
room, it being said that inconstancy is the natural law by which
all women are governed. Their extreme sensibility renders
them accessible to the lightest impressions ; the unique plea-
sure of their hearts is to be loved : they are occupied by this
noble passion during the whole period of their lives, and by
their extraordinary desire to please, often fall into the net they
spread for others. But still it is too often the case that the lover
is the sufferer ; so says Mr. Wakefield in the following verses,
which in the first instance gained him the prize, and which we
give verbatim.
The son of sweet Venus ! a mischievous boy,
Would have all the whole world be a wooing,
He delights and will revel in extatic joy,
To accomplish a youth’s * undoing.
Beware of this boy, he is sly, and will wound
With his arrow so sharp and so true,
And when least expected, is there to be found,
And will pierce a young heart through and through.
The wound he inflicts gives a heavenly pain,
So say those who the smart have endured,
And rather than never be wounded again,
Would consent that it ne’er should be cured.
Ah the rogue! I first saw him in Ellen’s bright eye.
With his bow and his sure fatal dart;
I vow’d 1 would shun him, and instantly fly
From the danger that threatened my heart.
Yet he look’d so bewitching when coyly withdrawing,
His glance from mine eye which met his,
Just like a gay kitten, when playfully pawing,
Then sideling seems quite at its ease.
Oh thou rebel I cried, retain thy sweet station.
In the bright eye of fair Ellen still.
In me thou can’st not cause the least perturbation.
Thine arrows can do me no ill.
But alack, I no sooner had ended my speech,
Then twang went the siring of his bow ;
I fled, and would fain have got out of his reach.
When 1 fell from the force of the blow.
* It is said Mr Wakefield is 40 years of ag-e, and Miss Turner not lb ! !


Yes, the arrow it pierc’d to my very heart’s core.
And as prostrate I lay on the ground.
The rogue flew to my side, first laugh’d and then swore.
That soon he would heal up the wound.
I fear though the arrow is still in my heart.
This fraudful physician would rather
Draw another and pierce me, than extract his dart.
And return it again to its quiver.
Then Ellen, sweet girl! I beseech, I implore
That thou ask the young god to relent;
His pow’rs confest, and I never will more
Rebel, indeed I sincerely repent.
Exert then thy pow’r, and try to persuade,
A Psyche to him you must prove.
If he’ll let you prescribe for the wound he has made.
Wilt thou heal up that wound with thy love ?
If thou wilt, Oh my Ellen I vow to return.
The love thou prescrib’st ten-fold ;
Thy whole self I will love, and my heart it shall burn
With a fervor that cannot grow cold,
Possest of thy heart!—Oh joy without measure.
United it should be with mine;
Thy love my delight; thy will my whole pleasure;
Thus we’d glide down the stream of old time.
Such a declaration certainly speaks the impassionate lover,
and what female could withstand the pleasure it points out
And indeed we cannot be surprised at Miss Turner’s yielding* to
such a picture of happiness, so warmly drawn ; for he seems to
have hit as far as words could go, the taste and passions of a
lovely young girl just commencing her teens, and as he describes
her, of “ a gay and lively disposition;” but, after all, when he had
succeeded in the heavenly possession, what did he do? He left
her, closeted and alone in her chamber, a widow mourning her
folly, and that widow* a widow bewitched.
But as it w ere to give the dernier coup depinceau to his weak-
ness, and after the wonderful display he has shown of his know-
ledge of the “ Modern Art of Love,” and his meaneringof his
prize through so many counties, with his complete possession of
her mind and inclinations in the manner he so feelingly de-
scribes, nay, after landing her at length on the shores of France,
the modern Bairn of pleasure, that he should have kept her so
longandso uselessly on the tenter-hooks of expectation, w ithout
even a hope of those enjoyments with which he had tilled her
deluded imagination.
4lh \ Manes of Abelard f What a jury of boarding-school
misses of the third lustre would say if empanneiled to try
the cause, we shall leave to the imagination of our readers;


we shall only say, that for ourselves, though almost half a
century has rolled since we first made our entree into this best
of worlds, that had we been placed in a similar situation, we
should have “ thrown off at least thirty years looking in her eye.”
11 y a des g’ens, eependant, si remplis d’eux memes, que
lorsqu'ils sont amoureux, iis trouvent moyen d’etre occupes de
leurs passion, sans I’etre de la personne qu’i's aipient.
By what fatality could our Modern Joseph have been induced
to land at Calais, the sink of the Continent, if not with a view
of proceeding further ; and to continue tho enjoyment of those
pleasures the presence of his fair companion in flight must have
inspired him.
A lover should be a hero ; even in the celebrated expeditions
of Don Q uixotte against the windmills there was a motive; but
we confess honestly we see none in the extraordinary and inex-
plicable migration of our author of the “ new art of love.” Fer-
tile completion of the picture however, we refer our gay, melan-
choly, credulous, all-wise, ever-thinking, and those who never
think at all, to the following extract of a statement of facts, con-
cocted and endited by E. G. Wakefield, Esq. the modern
Adonis, and first published by Messrs. Bull, in the Bull, at the
Hole-in-the-Wall, Bull-Alley, Fleet Street.
“In the end of February I went to Macclesfield, for the pur-
pose of paying a long-promised visit to my friend the Reverend
Dr. Davis. At that time I had heard Mr Turner’s name
mentioned, but merely in conversation about Cheshire people ;
and I had no more knowledge or thought of his daughter,
or any of her family, than I have of people in the Moon.
I will now state how T I came to think of her, and to do what
I have done.
A thought a wish, a determination just then entered my head.
It was, that I would marry Miss Turner before the Chester
Assizes, and get up such an escort for her father, (the new Shc-
as must have driven the most bilious ofhis detractors mad,
Flere was a task! To marry within three days a person of
whom I knew so little, and whose knowledge of me must have
been equally limited, and, (for this made the difficulties almost
insurmountable), to become pleased with her, and make her
pleased with me, before even proposing- marriage to her!
Ihe apparent impossibility of the thing urged me on ; and I
pursued ns execution with reckless activity, I formed and rejec-
ted plan after plan, till, at last, I decided on that which induced
the schoo.-mistress to give me the opportunity I desired, of
conversing with Miss Turner.
No one can imagine the pains I took to know my future wife,
and, fmding her, as I did, all that is delightful, how I strove to
interest her, and to make her pleased with me. That I sue


ceeded there can be no doubt: for when, having made up my
mind to propose marriage to her, I asked her whether she knew
where she was going % She said, “ No, but I suppose you do ?
and Ido not wish to be told, 1 rather enjoy the uncertainty.”
I informed her that she was going into Yorkshire, and that she
would probably meet her father at Huddersfield. “ Very well,”
she replied; and she then reverted to the conversation which
had been broken oft* by my question. This occurred after wo
had left Manchester about three hours.
As we proceeded, we still talked incessantly, and often al-
luded to the strangeness of our situation. I gradually assumed
towards her a manner, which I cannot readily describe. It was
not studied. It was perfectly natural. I behaved to her as I
would to a. beloved sister, whom I had joined, after separation
from childhood, and whom my whole soul was bent upon
pleasing—with careful reserve, and yet with the most affec-
tionate frankness—with intimacy without familiarity, and with
the greatest, the most marked and thoughtful kindness, but
with no more tenderness than any man of feeling would display
toa helpless woman, accidentally placed under his sole protection.
She was, I suppose, pleased by this manner of treating- her.
By what means I cannot tell further; but that she was pleased I
had soon ample proof.
On reaching Huddersfield, my supposition of her regret at the
thought of our separation was confirmed by her hig-h spirits
whilst we were at an inn there —after I had told her that we had
no chance of seeing her father till the next day. We staid an
hour, I believe at the inn, where we eat, drank, talked, laughed,
and almost played, as if we had been on a party of pleasure.
It was then dark. She expected to travel alone with me all
night; and she knew not to what place she was going, nor with
what object so strange a journey had been undertaken. But
she did continue the journey, not merely without a sig-n of hesi-
tation, but with every mark of delight at our incessant conver-
sation, and the hurry and excitement of the whole adventure.
The Devil reminded me that, besides the means of persuasion
furnished by our already established intimacy, I had a very
powerful argument to use. She had passed one xchole night
with me ! and I could have urged that, for her own sake, she
w ould do well to become my wife without delay. True it was,
that I had treated her with the utmost delicacy ; and her consci-
ence would have been clear, though she had not married me.
But, then, there was an ill-natured world, which knowing how
much I had done, would never give me credit for any degree of
forbearance, and w ould laugh at. any saving declaration of mine
as the mere result of fear or repentance. The argument was,
indeed, at least to a gentlewoman, tremendously powerful; but


I felt an invincible repugnance to useing it. A romantic fit (for
which no stranger will give me either blame or credit) came
upon me; and under its influence, I dreaded to appear a brute
in the eyes of this sweet girl, who was already so well inclined
to like me, and w hom bad I used that ungenerous argument, I
should have married by a means, which promised to insure for
me her dislike, instead of the tender love that I then felt certain
of inspiring her with.
At last the device struck me, which I ultimately used with
success ; and I declared that that pretext was employed, not as
the surest and easiest means of persuading her, but as the only
one which w ould enable me to marry her without, in the very act
of marriage, risking the loss of her good opinion. .
She entered at once, and I may say eagerly, into what she
thought a scheme for securing her father’s fortune. There was
no holding back, no hesitation. “Yes” she said, “ with plea-
sure, for papa’s sake.” She evidently exulted at the idea of
being useful to her parents, and expressed so beautifully her
admirable feelings towards them, that I was very near elaspin°*
her in my arms and betraying all.
As soon as she had expressed not only her consent but her wish
to marry me, I swore to myself' and to her, to render her the hap-
piest of w omen, and to makeherasa devoted husband, more than
ample reparation. This tenderness from me, and the caresses to
which it gave rise, soon restored us to our w onted cheerfulness.
When near Gretna, I found that she w as well acquainted with
the marriage service, having as she told me, “ often read it, little
thinking then that she should it so soon.’ The die beino-
now irrevocably cast, we proceeded to Dover without a
delay, and from thence to Cplais from whence,! addressed aletter
to Mr. Turner, in which I eagerly sought to remove from his
daughter to myself, all the blame that might attach to our mar-
riage, and repeated even in stronger terms, my previous decla-
ration, under the same impulse that had induced me to make it
to his brothers.
Mr. Turner answered my letter by obtaining a warrant
against mo for a capital felony, and ultimately forced my wife
from me. I then hastened to England, anxious to surrender
myself into the hands of justice.” —The following
Public Examination before the Magistrates at Macclesfield,
was the result.
Mr. Turner introduced his daughter, who exhibited an ex-
traordinory degree of firmness.
Mr. Tatton.- —We have here an office copy of Miss Turner’s
deposition on a former occasion: do you (addressing the prisoner)


wish to have it read, as in the instance of the last witness ? Pri-
soner.—Certainly.
Miss Turner’s examination, as taken on the Isfot April was
now read, with the mere alteration of the date to the 23d instant.
It was descriptive of the fraud used in obtaining her from Miss
Daulby’s school—of the deception practised by the prisoner on
the road, as to the embarrased state of her fathe’is affairs—of
their journey to Carlisle and Gretna ; their fictitious marriage
at the latter place—their going to London, and onwards to
Calais, —to the appearance of her uncle and Mr. Grimsditch,
and her recovery by them from the prisoner.
Miss Turner was asked had she any additions to make to her
depositions ? She said she wished to mention one remark of Mr.
Wakefield, respecting the letter which he said he had received
from Mr. Grimsditch.
Mr. Tatton. —What is that? Mr. Grimsditch.—Will you
allow me first to ask her a question which arises upon the last
paragraph of her examination ?
Mr, Tatton. —Certainly. Mr. Grimsditch.—Was it against
your will and inclination that you married Mr. Wakefield?
Miss T urner.—Yes, it was against my inclination ; but I told
him, ff it was the only thing that would save my papa, I would
consent.
Mr. Tatton. —Throughout the whole of the transaction you
went against your inclination? Miss Turner.—Yes, I went
against my w ill and inclination, but it w r as from a desire to save
my father. I consented to marry him (Wakefield) to save him ;
it was solely to serve my father, and to save him from ruin.
He (Wakefield) said it was the only way, and I believed from
his representations that it w as so.
Mr. Tatton. —The paper which you signed at Gretna-green
you believed was to save your father from ruin, and that
was the sole reason why you consented? Miss Turner.—Cer-
tainly it was. I understood it was a certificate which would
save my father. Prisoner.—That was not the answer which
was given.
Mr. Tatton. —What sort of certificate was it? Was it a cer-
tificate that you consented to be married in consequence of the
distress of your father? Miss Turner.-—lt was, but I did not
write it so. I understood it to be a certificate of my consent.
The paper did not state that it was to save my father ; the paper
was to certify to all concerned that we were married. Mr.
Hopes, solicitor.—lt was to certify that the marriage had taken
place ; merely a certificate of marriage.
Mr, Tatton. —That was all ? Miss Turner.— it was.
Mr, Tatton.—You said something about a letter. Miss


Turner.-—Yes, Mr. Wakefield remarked that the letter which
he had received from Mr. Grimsditch, he thought was not in
Mr. Grimsditch’s usual w riting’; and that he must have been
very much agitated at tire time he wrote it. Mr. Grimsditch.—-
Did you see your uncles, Mr. Robert Turner, and Mr. Critchley,
enter the harbour of Calais?—l did. Was Mr. E. Wakefield
with you at the time?—He was, and I remarked to him I thought
I saw one of my uncles, but I was not sure.
Mr. Tatton. —Did you then express a wish to go to them?—
No, I did not, for I expected soon to go them as a matter of
course. We then went to the inn, and Mr. Wakefield took me
into Madame Quillacq’s room, and told me 1 must wait there,
as he wished to speak to my uncles. Did you see which w r ay he
went ? Yes, he remained in the court walking with Mr. Percy,
How did you know it was Mr. Percy ?—because Mr. Wake-
field had before pointed him out to me. Mr. Wakefield then
came to me again and said my uncles w ere gone to another hotel,
and he w ould go and call upon them; but I thought he did not
go for them, for I saw r him again talking to Mr. Percy. Soon
afterwards the master of the hotel (Quillacq) told me that he (Mr.
Wakefield) had gone upstairs with the gentlemen ; I supposed
he meant my uncles. Mr. Wakefield, after some time, came to
me again, and said he would take me to my uncles, and as we
were g’oing up stairs, he said they would tell me something
which I little expected to hear. I was then show n into a room
w here my uncles w ere, and Mr. Wakefield then left me. He
expressed no unwillingness whatever to leave me w ith my uncles;
I saw Mr. Wakefield afterwards. Mr. Grimsditch.—-That closes
Miss Turner’s evidence.
Mr. Tatton. —Have you any questions to ask the witness ?
Pi •isoner.— No none whatever.
Miss Turner now rose, as did the whole Court, and was con-
ducted out of the room by her father. The prisoner was one of
the first on his legs, and made a slight inclination of his head.
For the first time he seemed affected during the examination of
Miss Turner.
Mr. Critchley, of Macclesfield, deposed, that on his interview
with Miss Turner at Calias she exclaimed “Oh! he “Wakefield”
is a brute, he has decieved me, and I never called any one a
brute before, but that nevertheless he had behaved to her like a
gentleman, yet, that she was determined never to go near
him again. He was fully commited on the capital charge of
F elony.


