

TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
NEW ZEALAND INSTITUTE
18 9 5
[.Extract from ]




[TRANSACTIONS OF THE NEW ZEALAND INSTITUTE,
VOL. XXVIII.]
Art. XV. —Abel Tasman and his Journal.
By Dr. T. M. Hocken, F.L.S
[Read before the Otago Institute, 10th September, 1895.]
Plate I.
In fulfilment of a promise made during the last session of
this Institute, I have now the pleasure of laying before
you a translation, made by myself and my wife, from the
original Dutch of that portion of Tasman’s Journal relating
to the discovery of New Zealand. It is the first time
that this has been fully translated/" I shall also give
an account of the Journal generally, of the circumstances
under which it was written, and of Tasman himself. During
the latter part of the sixteenth and the earlier part of
the seventeenth century the Dutch were pre-eminently the
rulers of the sea. They had superseded the Spanish and the
Portuguese, who so long had been in the van of maritime
discovery and adventure. Their ships were better built, found,
and commanded than had ever been the case before. Their
* Translated from “ Journaal van de Reis naar het oubekende
Zuidland, in den Jare 1642, door Abel Jansz. Tasman, met de Scliepen
Heemskerck en de Zeehaen. Medegedeeld en met eenige Aanteekenmgen
voorzien, door Jacob Swart,” &c., &c. “ Met eene Kaart. Te Amster-
dam, bij de Wed. G. Hulst van Keuleu, 1860.” Tasman’s Journal was
lost for oyer two hundred years. When it was found Swart published it
in its entirety, as above, in 1860. A copy of this I possess, and from it
my translation has been made.


navigation, laws, and rules were lor the time of quite an ad-
vanced kind ; and, with that quiet perseverance and sturdy
courage which, under the name of Dutch phlegm, have always
been characteristic of the nation, their merchants had secured
and held the trade of the world. England’s day was then but
in high dawn; and, though now she is, and for long has been,
the mistress of the seas, at that time she held but a second if
not a third place. Early in the seventeenth century Holland
penetrated into the Indian Archipelago, and amidst its.num-
berless fertile islands developed amazingly the wealth of her
trade. In 1610 she founded the capital of Batavia on the
Island of Java, and, though surrounded by hostile native
princes or chiefs, she maintained her position and security in
this centre. The affairs of this Dutch East India Company
were managed by a Governor-General and Council, who, by
persistent courage and enterprise, maintained in those parts
of the world that renown which their countrymen had won
elsewhere. At no period in its history was the company so
prosperous and flourishing as between the years 1630 and
1680. That half-century closed, it became involved in the
quarrels and politics of the native Javanese States, and then
commenced its commercial ruin. In 1636 Antony van Diemen
was appointed Governor-General, retaining office for nearly
ten years; and no Governor equalled him in energy and
sagacity. It was during his rule that Tasman’s voyage, of
which we are now to speak, was undertaken.
Tasman was born in 1602 or 1603, at Hoorn, in the north
of Holland, a town on the borders of the Zuyder Zee, where
so many bold sailors were bred, and where, it has been stated,
descendants of his family still remain. But, indeed, we know
little of Tasman’s personal history beyond that contained in
his Journal. In this he has truly bequeathed us his monu-
ment, though underneath it lies little more than a shadow.
An old engraving of him is to be seen in the Christchurch
Museum ; and it would seem that some personal description is
given by M. Dozy in “Bijdragen de Taal Land en Yolkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indie ” (“ Contributions to the Language,
Country, and People of Dutch India ”), sth series, vol. ii., p.
308 ; but of this I know nothing. He died at Batavia in 1659.
By direction of Van Diemen he was despatched in 1639,


and soon after his arrival in the settlement, under the com-
mand of Captain Matthys Kwast, who was instructed to
proceed through the Western Pacific to the Philippines, and
there to make search for the fabled Gold and Silver Islands.
These are now known as the Bonin Islands, east of Japan.
This was most probably Tasman’s first voyage under the aus-
pices of the company; at its close he sailed in the Indian
seas until 1642, and then commenced his great voyage of dis-
covery.
Here it will be interesting to contrast the mode of present-
day sailing with that whereby those who went down to
the sea in ships in Tasman’s time made their truly perilous
voyages. Now navigation has been reduced to a fine arc, as
well as to a precise science—so fine and so precise that it may
be generally affirmed that disaster at sea is the result of care-
lessness, often of gross carelessness. Those floating palaces
which now cross the waste of waters in every direction are timed
to reach their destination with the punctuality and almost the
speed of a railway-train. A few days, or weeks at most, of
safe and pleasant travel now represent the weary months of
discomfort, dangers real and imaginary, and the scourges of
scurvy and dysentery which were too often the lot of those
who led the way. All this was first rendered possible by the
invention of those instruments, the sextant and chronometer,
which now daily tell the sailor his exact position on the track-
less ocean. Add to these his accurate chart and nautical
tables, and what evil can befall him, unless through great
neglect or rare misfortune? When undertaking early voyages
of discovery it was usual that two, three, or more vessels
should form the fleet. This was a precaution in all ways
wise, contributing as it did to mutual courage, safety, and
companionship. The commanders and officers formed a com-
mittee, or council as they termed it, and whenever any diffi-
culty or dilemma arose the members of this council were
summoned by signal aboard the principal vessel of the expe-
dition, and there decided what course was best to follow.
These occasions seem to have been frequent, as we can well
fancy. The vessels, with their high poop, high forecastle, and
round bows must have looked picturesque enough. They were
greatly foreshortened, too, for it was considered that a vessel
whose length much exceeded its breadth was absolutely
unsafe and not unlikely to capsize. Four or five knots an
hour was good average sailing; much more frequently the
distance traversed in a day did not exceed fifty or sixty miles.
The tonnage of those early vessels varied much : some mea-
sured 300 or even 400 tons; but the perils of many a long
voyage were encountered in little vessels of no more than
40, 60, or 120 tons burthen. The dietary scale in Tasman’s


time was something as follows: To each man —one good
cheese for the whole voyage; three pounds of biscuit, a
quartern of vinegar, and half a pound of butter per week ; on
Sunday, three-quarters of a pound of meat; on Monday and
Wednesday, 6oz. of salted cod ; on Tuesday and Saturday,
a quarter of a pound of stock-fish ; on Thursday and Friday,
three-quarters of a pound of bacon with grey peas; and
at ail times as much oatmeal as could be eaten. Those were
not the days of coffee, tea, or teetotalism, but of strong
rum and arrack, which were regularly distributed; and who-
ever was so lucky as first to descry land from the mast-
head had his ration doubled. The instruments and methods
used for determining the position at sea —the latitude and
longitude—were of the most primitive and, one might say,
ineffective kind. Cartography was in its infancy, and the few
charts that were placed in the sailor’s hands were projected
on principles so regardless of the proportions of the sphere as
to be absolutely misleading and dangerous. The simple de-
vice of the log for measuring the rate of sailing through the
water was introduced but twenty years prior to Tasman’s
time. Before that it was usual to estimate the amount by
guess. The sun’s altitude,, and the relative position of the
heavenly bodies, which are now calculated with such accu-
racy by means of the sextant, and which, with the chrono-
meter, give the true position, were then ascertained by very
crude instruments —the astrolabe, and, later, the cross-staff;
specimens of which I exhibit. The astrolabe was made of a
circular piece of metal, 7iu. in diameter, divided into quad-
rants, one of which was divided into degrees, and suspended
freely, as one might suspend a watch by its ring. A broad
pointer or index, l£in. wide, traversed the face of the instru-
ment, and was divided through the exact middle of its length
by a line termed “ the line of confidence.” Close to each
extremity of the index, and perpendicular to it, a small plate
was fixed, with two small holes, one larger than the other, but
both being exactly over the line of confidence. These were
sights, and when the object viewed was seen in exact line
through them—the sun or moon, or a star—the angle was
read off. The cross-staff, which was probably used by Tasman,
was a squared rod of wood, 3ft. in length, upon which were
denoted angles or degrees, and having a sight at the eye-end.
Upon this, by means of a slot, slid at right angles a second
rod of wood, about 2ft. in length, having a sight at each
terminal, and through these sights the object was viewed, the
object-rod, if we may so call it, being adjusted upon the other,
which was pointed plane to the horizon, and the angle read
off. In this rough way was the sun’s altitude taken, and
probably a rough attempt was often made to take what


sailors call a lunar distance. An improvement was made on
this cross-staff by adding one or two shorter transoms for read-
ing smaller angles. On some of those odd frontispieces which
embellish ancient atlases or geographies may be seen a sweet
little cherub holding aloft an emblem of the cross apparently,
but really this cross-staff. A hundred years after the in-
troduction of the cross-staff came Dr. Hadley’s quadrant
(about 1731), which has developed into the perfect sextant of
to-day. But with his tables of declinations, which were even
then calculated, and this simple instrument, Tasman and his
brethren succeeded in taking their latitudes with remarkable
accuracy, as is evident by inspecting the coast-line of his
Staten Land, which I have placed side by side with that of
our New Zealand. But how he succeeded with his longitudes
is quite a different matter. As we well know, longitudes can
only be calculated perfectly by knowing the difference of time
at two meridians, and this must be gained by the aid of accu-
rate timekeepers. In Tasman’s day, the very few clocks and
watches in existence were but of little use in keeping the
time. The problem of longitudes at sea was always con-
sidered of the utmost importance amongst maritime nations.
Even at the beginning of this century it was thought that
it would never be solved, owing to the difficulty or impos-
sibility of ever constructing watches that would keep per-
fect time. As indicating this sentiment, the so-called Board
of Longitude advertised, at the beginning of last century, in
Queen Anne’s reign, that they would give rewards of £IO,OOO,
£20,000, and £30,000 respectively to him who should discover
a means of taking longitudes at sea to within sixty, forty, and
thirty geographical miles. Precision within these limits was
not thought of or expected. This liberal offer stimulated in-
vention, and Dr. John Harrison, an ingenious mechanician,
who for years devoted himself to making improvements in
clocks and watches, succeeded in 1764 in gaining the prize of
£20,000 with a watch —or chronometer, as we should now call
it—which was twice carried on a voyage to the West Indies.
The time kept was admirable, and insured an accuracy of
longitude to within ten or twelve miles. One of Harrison’s
watches, which, by-the-by, cost from £BO to £IOO apiece,
was carried by Captain Cook on his first great voyage of
discovery. Messrs. Wales and Bayly, who accompanied
Cook’s second expedition, state, in their astronomical obser-
vations of the voyage, published in 1777, that the longitude
could then be computed to within the fifth or sixth of a
degree—that is, to ten or twelve geographical miles. The
earliest account I can discover of the use of timekeepers at
sea is in 1663, when two watches were used together on the
same vessel. The result was not satisfactory, as may be


learned from the manuscript in the Sloane collection of the
British Museum. It is but within the last few years, com-
paratively speaking, that chronometers have been in universal
use.
The last antiquated marine instrument to which I shall
refer as used in Tasman's time is the sand-glass. These
were constructed of different sizes, so as to measure periods
of four hours, one hour, and half an hour The survival
of them at sea is to be seen in the 28-second log-glass,
used when the log is taken; and on the kitchen mantelpiece,
for boiling eggs. Hour-glasses were, used in the last century
in churches, placed on the pulpit-ledge in view of the con-
gregation, where they regulated the length of the sermon.
Much improvement has been effected in this direction during
the last few years, the regulation length of sermons now being
about twenty minutes. The time at sea was roughly kept by
the half-hour glass, which was always in sight of the steers-
man. When the last grains of sand had run out he reversed
the glass, striking a bell at the same time as a mark of the
time. This was repeated until the glass had been turned
eight times, and the bell struck eight times. Thus four
hours had elapsed, the watch was completed, and the new
watch took charge of the ship. And so Tasman, in denot-
ing time, speaks of so many glasses in such-and-such a
watch ; thus, three glasses in the morning watch would be
three half-hours past 4 a.m. —that is, 5.30. These sand-
glasses were made with the greatest care and accuracy.
The upper and lower sections were separated by a thin
metallic plate, perforated with a fine pin-hole, through which
the sand ran. The sand was carefully selected and dried—
iron-sand, I think, being preferred, as being a rounder, more
regular grain, and therefore affording the least friction. When
the running of this sand through the pin-hole had been ad-
justed and timed the whole was hermetically closed by lash-
ing, and was further protected by a wooden framework. Now,
it is quite possible, and not unlikely, that, conjointly with dead-
reckoning, Tasman took his longitude by the help of a four-
hour glass of this description, set agoing at noon when about
to leave port. Of course, there would be some error, due to the
expansion or contraction of the glass, or to failure in turning
at the exact moment when the last grains of sand had disap-
peared. Still, with all faults, this was the only method of
securing any reasonable approach to a fixed meridional time.
If Tasman did not adopt it, then his only other way of esti-
mating his daily longitude was by means of dead-reckoning—
that is, by reckoning the number of miles sailed over an east
or west course in twenty-four hours. This rough method has
been used by sailors for centuries, and is used at the present


time whenever a clouded sky interferes with a due observation
of the sun. It is untrustworthy at the best, from causes
which are very evident. A vessel may make much lee or lost
way from some ocean current, which insensibly drifts her out
of her course; and there are other sources of error. Hence we
shall not be surprised to find that, whilst Tasman’s latitudes
are very correct, his longitudes are often considerably at fault,
even so much as three or four degrees. As will be observed
in this map of New Zealand, upon which I have projected his
daily course, he is wrong on the average about 3° W. —that is,
about 170 miles from the coast. This vast discrepancy will
exhibit very clearly the imperfection of nautical methods two
hundred and fifty years ago, and that Queen Anne’s Board
of Longitude might well be content with any means where-
by the position at sea might be known within thirty or
forty miles of the true one.
Before the discovery of America—the so-called New
World the westernmost point of the then known world
was the Island of Ferro, one of the Canaries, and it was
therefore selected by old geographers as the prime meridian
from which all other meridians were calculated. Afterwards,
and son ew lat before Tasman’s time, the Peak of Teneriffe,
also in the Canaries, was selected, probably' because of its
conspicuous height. It is from this meridian, then, that
Tasman gives his longitudes. In the present day all nations
agree as a matter of great convenience to calculate from
Greenwich, with the exception of the French, who, whilst
notating their parallels from Paris, nevertheless add the Green-
wich equivalent. Whilst Tasman gives, in both his chart and
Journal, his positions as deduced from the Peak of Teneriffe,
they must really be computed from the Island of Mauritius,
which, as we shall presently see, was his final point of de-
parture after leaving Batavia. So that, to reduce his longi-
tudes to those of Greenwich, we must subtract, say, 21° 2 r
from them —made up of, say, 16£° for Teneriffe and error
for Mauritius. We then have remaining what may be called
“personal errors,” caused by inability to calculate his posi-
tion exactly, and which, as has been seen, often amount
to three or four degrees. Another explanation should here
be made. The distances sailed are in Dutch miles, fifteen
of which are equal to one degree. A Dutch mile is equal
to about four English, so that if Tasman gives as his day’s
work twenty miles we should reckon that he had sailed
eighty. In making this translation I have preferred to
give Tasman’s own unaltered details; those who desire to
make the corrections can do so from the data I have given.
In a paper read before this Institute last year I gave some
account of Tasman’s Journal, and showed that it had never


been edited and published in its entirety until so recently as
the year 1860, when Heer Jacob Swart, of Amsterdam, gave it
to the world in the original old Dutch, which not only differs
greatly from modern Dutch but is apparently a dialect. From
this edition this translation has been made, and I think it may
be truly said that it is the first full translation hitherto made.
It was with great pleasure I learnt a few weeks ago that the
firm of Heinrich Muller, of Amsterdam, is now preparing to
publish a limited number of copies of the full text in English.
This will be as valuable as interesting. Then, as good things
sometimes come together, I saw recently a few sheets of what
apparently is to be the future New Zealand Reader for use in
our primary schools. These sheets contained some parts of
Tasman’s Journal, evidently translated from the Swart edition.
The portion relating to New Zealand ended, unfortunately,
with the massacre in Murderers’ Bay. Ido not know who the
translator is, but his work has been done in the most com-
petent and accomplished way, and it is to be hoped that he
will complete it. The translation is sometimes not quite
literal, and that in parts which would not be obscured by a
literal rendering. Nor do 1 understand the principle adopted
in giving the longitudes: these are not Tasman’s, even with
the data for corrections above given, nor are they the true
longitudes. The distances run are given in English miles.
So, then, all the previous renderings of Tasman’s Journal
prior to that of Jacob Swart in 1860 have been incorrect
in various particulars, the chief one being that of excessive
abridgment. As regards the bibliography of these, I cannot
do better than refer to my paper in the “ Transactions of the
New Zealand Institute ” for 1894, pages 619, 62Q.
In his edition Jacob Swart prefixes to the Journal a pub-
lication of all the documents relating to it. These are of
considerable value and interest, and were discovered in the old
foliants and letter-books of the company, presumably at the
same time that the long-lost Journal was found and forwarded
from Batavia to Amsterdam. They consist—first, of a letter
from Governor Van Diemen and his Council to the Council of
Seventeen at Amsterdam, apprising them of Tasman’s departure
on his important expedition ; second, of a Letter of Instruc-
tions to Tasman and his chief officers ; and, third, of other
letters and papers giving an account of previous discoveries and
directions, which it was no doubt thought important that Tas-
man should have with him. The Instructions are far too
lengthy to lay before you here, but they testify most favourably
to the wisdom and foresight of Governor Van Diemen and his
Council in all matters relating to the geographical knowledge
of the time, in fitting out the ships, in suggesting suitable
measures in case of accident or failure, and generally in their


fullness of sagacious advice and command. Even to-day they
would well serve as models to copy. The vessels of the expedi-
tion were two—the ship or yacht Heemskerck, and a smaller
vessel, the flyboat Zeehaen, the former having a crew of
sixty, the latter of fifty men. They were victualled for twelve
months.
Towards the better understanding of the Journal, I would
here explain that Tasman begins and ends his day at mid-
night—that is, it is the same as our civil day. He reckons
his course and the distance run from noon to noon, at which
time he took his latitude and longitude. His watches were
—the day or morning watch, from 4 to 8 ; the forenoon or
noon watch, from Bto 12 noon; the afternoon watch, from
12 to 4 ; the flatfoot, or, as we call them, the dog watches,
from 4 to 6 and 6to 8; the first watch, Bto 12 midnight;
and the second or hound watch, 12 midnight to 4 in the
morning. It is curious that of all Teutonic-speaking sailors
the English alone use the term “ dog-watch ’ as signifying
the hours between 4 and 8 p.m. Other Teutons use the
equivalent hund-, hunde-, or honde-ioacht, as signifying the
second watch—that between midnight and 4 a.m. ; and to
express their dog-watches, between 4 and 8 p.m., they use
plait fuss, plattfoden, or platvoet, meaning “ flatfoot.” The neo-
Latin or Italic speaking sailors had no such words as “ dog-
watch ” or “flat-foot,” but spoke of the second watch, or of
the watch from 4 to 6 or 6 to 8 in the evening. I do not
know the underlying meaning of these words, but can fancy
they contain the idea of the most restful part of a ship’s day,
when a dog would be sufficient guard, and when any work on
deck would be done without running—all heel and toe, as the
pedestrians have it—a flat foot.
The vessels sailed from Batavia on the 14th August, 1642,
with instructions to make in the first instance for the island
Mauritius, where they were to take in fresh provisions and
otherwise refit. At this time Mauritius belonged to the Dutch,
and was a convenient recruiting-place for their vessels as they
sailed to and fro between Holland and the Batavian settle-
ment. Tasman commences thus : “Journal or description by
me, Abel Jansz. Tasman, of a voyage made from the City
of Batavia, in the East Indies, for making discoveries
of the unknown South Land, in the year 1642, the 14th
August. May God Almighty be pleased to give hereto His
blessing. Amen.” Mauritius, a distance of about 3,000
miles, was reached, after a splendid run for those days, on
the sth September. This would give an average of about
120 miles a day sailed. Here a month’s stay was made,
during which the vessels were thoroughly refitted, and pigs,
goats, wild-fowl, firewnod, and fresh water were brought on


board. Thus fortified at all points, they left Mauritius on
the Bth October, “ for which,” says Tasman, “ the Lord be
praised and thanked.” The course was now south and south-
east. On the 27th a considerable quantity of weed was seen,
which indicated proximity to land. A council was held,
and it was determined to keep a man constantly at the
topmast-head on the look-out, and whoever first discovered
land, rocks, or shoals should be rewarded with three reals and
an extra pot of arrack or rum. Nothing further, however,
was seen for nearly a month, and until the 24th November,
when Tasman made his first discovery, that of Van Die-
men’s Land, so called by him after his patron the Batavian
Governor. The distance thus run from Mauritius was nearly
6,000 miles, the average daily run being about 140 miles. He
named many of the bays and headlands —names retained
to this day," such as Frederick Henry and Storm Bay,
Maria Island, &c. He explored here until the 4th Decem-
ber, and saw at a distance some of the inhabitants, smoke
rising in the woods, steps cut into the trees with flint axes,
whereby the natives climbed up them to search for birds’
nests; specimens of gum, and so on. Before leaving Van
Diemen’s Land, on the sth December, a fort was erected in
Frederick Henry Bay, with a flag flying on it. The vessels
were again at sea on the sth December. A council was
called, when it was agreed that the course held should still
be one due east, and that it should be kept for twenty-six
degrees of further longitude; if no further land was fallen
in with, a northerly course should be shaped for home. Flight
days later, on the 13th December, Staten Land, or New
Zealand, was discovered. As the distance run from Van
Diemen’s Land was about 1,000 miles, it is evident that the
average sailing-rate of 125 miles a day had been still main-
tained.
It will save interruption in Tasman’s narrative, and
render it more intelligible, if at this point I preface a few
further words of explanation. The land—“ the great high
land,” as Tasman calls it—he would first see between Hoki-
tika and Okarito ; and it is not too fanciful to say that that
great mountain which two hundred and fifty years later was
called by his name was one of the first sights he saw on
the wild west coast. Somewhat further north he describes
that low point known to us as Captain Cook’s Cape Foul-
wind, with its outlying steep rocks or cliffs, the Steeples.
Westport is not far from this point. “ North of this,” as
Tasman says, “the land makes a great bight”: this is the
Karamea Bight. Then came the “ furthermost point, which
stood out so boldly that we had no doubt it was the extreme
point.’ This is now Captain Cook’s Cape Farewell, with


the long spit of sand running from it, upon which is a
lighthouse. Next in order is that bay of tragic interest
called by Tasman “ Murderers’,” but now known as Golden
Bay, in which is the Township of Collingwood. The scene
of tragedy lies close to Parapara, where at this moment a
new and far different interest has arisen in the fact that
a great and peaceful trade is expected to spring up in
connection with the masses of haematite which lie around
the shore. Thankfully escaping from this dreadful spot, Tas-
man tacked about in what he called “ Zeehaen’s Bay,” but
which in truth was the north-west portion of Cook Strait.
As we shall presently see, Tasman himself suspected that
there was a passage through. Proceeding north, Cape Egmont
was seen, and was named Cabo Pieter Boreels, after one of
the Dutch East Indian Council. No reference is made to the
mountain. The high mountain seen on the 2ith in lat. 38°,
and taken at first for an island, would probably be Mount
Kanoi, bounded as it is to the north by Whaingaroa Harbour,
and south by Kawhia and Aotea Harbours. The Three Kings
Islands were Tasman’s point of departure from New Zealand.
This name was given from the fact that the vessels anchored
there on the sth January, the eve of the Epiphany. You may
remember the incidents connected with this rsligious festival
which commemorated the meeting of the three Magi or Wise
Men of the Bast with the infant Christ. Their names were
Kaspar, Melchior, and Balthasar. The fable says that their
bones were removed to the cathedral at Cologne, where they
still rest, and where, as in Tasman’s time, they are still vene-
rated by all faithful observers of old Christian legends. I may
here remark that in all probability the interesting process of
name-giving did not take place until after Tasman s return
to Batavia.' The best description of the Three Kings known
to me is that given by Mr. Cheeseman, the curator of the
Auckland Museum, in the volumes for 1887 and 1890 of
the New Zealand Transactions. Mr. Cheeseman made many
additions to our natural-history knowledge of these islands,
and he also recognised that part of the Great King upon
which Tasman’s crew attempted to land when searching for
water and vegetables. It is much to be regretted that Swart
does not reproduce Tasman’s sketches. In a provoking way
he says that these are to be found in “ Valentijn.” Yalen-
tijn’s abridged copy of the Journal was published in 1726, and
to this rare work the reader is referred. It is to be hoped that
this omission will be rectified in Muller’s forthcoming edition.
Tasman’s intercourse with the natives was but of a few hours’
duration ; yet it was sufficiently long to enable him to give a
good personal description. It is, therefore, curious to find
that he makes no reference to the adornment of the tattoo.


Does this indicate its non-existence two hundred and fifty
years ago? It is advisable to repeat here that r lasman s
miles-, which are Dutch, must be multiplied by four to reduce
them to English measurement. Other explanatory comments
will be found in the previous half of this paper.
The Journal.
December 12tb [1642] —Good weather, and the wind
south-south-west and south-west, with a sharp breeze. At
noon found the latitude 42° 38', and longitude 185° 17'.
Course held east, and sailed thirty-eight miles. The swell of
the sea continued from the south-west, so that here no great
land is to be expected to the south. Var. 7° north-easterly.
13th. —Found latitude 42° 10', longitude 188° 28'. Course
held east by north, and sailed thirty-six miles. The wind
south-south-west, with a topsails’ breeze. Towards noon
w’e saw a great, high, bold land, and had it south-east
from us about fifteen miles ; we gave our course south-east,
straight for it. About noon we tired a shot and hung out
the white flag, whereupon the officers of the Zeehaen came
aboard us, when it was resolved, all agreeing, to make for
the said land as soon as possible, as the resolutions of this
date further show. In the evening we thought it advisable
to order our steersmen, as long as it remained calm, to hold
the south-east course, but with increase of the breeze should
go due east, so as to keep from going ashore, and to prevent
any accident as far as possible. In our judgment, we should
not attempt to land on this side, because of the great open
sea which here with great rough billows and surf comes
rolling in, unless there were some sheltered bays on this
side. In the first watch, four glasses having run out
[lO a.m.], we stood our course due east. Var., 7° 30' north-
easterly.
14th.—At noon found our latitude 42° 10', and longitude
189° 3'; course,held east, and sailed twelve miles. We were
about two miles from the land. It was a very high, double
land, but from the thick clouds we could not see the tops
of the mountains. We shaped our course northerly, and
so close that we could see the surf breaking on shore. In
the afternoon, about two miles from shore, we sounded in
55 fathoms, sticky, sandy ground. It was calm. Towards
evening we saw a low point, about three miles from us north-
east by north. We drifted quietly towards it. In the middle
of the afternoon we sounded in 25 fathoms, sticky, sandy
ground We sailed along quietly the whole night, the current
setting in from the west-north-west. We neared the land
till within 28 fathoms, good anchor-ground; it still being


calm, and not to go nearer the laud we anchored in the
dog-watch [4 to 8 a.m.] with a stream-anchor, and waited
for the land-wind.
15th. —In the morning, a light land-breeze. We weighed
anchor, and did our best to get off the land a little to sea.
Course north-west by north. We then had the northerly low
point of the day before north-north-east and north-east
by north from us. This land consists of high, double moun-
tains, not lower than Formoza Island. At noon found latitude
41° 40' and longitude 189° 49'. Course held north-north-
east, and sailed eight miles. The point of the previous day
lay south-east from us. Two and a half miles from this
point stretches north a large reef. Here, above water, on
this reef some high, steep cliffs, like steeples or sails. Past
this point, moreover, a mile to west, there was no bot-
tom. From here also we saw the high land stretch north-
north-east from us. We set our course due north, with fine,
dry weather and slack water. From this aforesaid low point,
with the cliffs, to the north-east the land makes a great
bight, and stretches first due east and then again due
northerly. This aforenamed point lies under the southern
latitude of 41° 50'. The wind west. Here it was easy to
see that in this country to the water it seemed a barren
land. Besides, we saw no men nor any smoke in the least,
and we also saw that they could have no boats there, as we
could see no signs of them. In the evening, var. 8° north-
easterly.
16th. —Six glasses before the day [2.30 a.m.] we sounded at
60 fathoms, good anchor-ground. At that time the northerly
point in sight lay north-east by east from us three miles, and
the nearest land from us lay south-east a mile and a half.
We drifted in the calm, with good weather and still water. At
noon got latitude 40° 58', and longitude 189° 54' ; course held
north-north-east, and sailed eleven miles. Drifted through
the calm all afternoon. In the evening, at sunset, var. 9° 23'
north-easterly. Got the wind south-west, with increasing
breeze. We took the bearing of the furthermost point from
us we could see, which was east by north from us. It
stood out so boldly that we had no doubt it was the extreme
point. We called our council, with the second mates, where-
upon we resolved to go north-east and east-north-east to the
end of the first watch [8 to 12 p.m.], and then, weather and
wind not changing, to sail near the wind, as is further to be
seen by the resolution of this date. At night, at the sixth glass
[ll p.m. (?)], the weather became calm, so that we remained
by the east-north-east course, although in the fifth glass of
the dog-watch [second watch, 2.30 a.m.] the point of the
previous evening lay south-east of us. From the sharpness


of the wind we could sail no higher than east-north-east a
trifle east. In the first watch [B-12 p.m.] we had one, and
in the dog-watch [second watch, 12-4 a.m.] another, sounding
in 60 fathoms : fine grey sand. In the second glass of the
morning watch [4-8 a.m., say 5 o’clock] we got a breeze
from the south-east, and we then tacked again for the
shore.
17th.—In the morning at sunrise we were about a mile
from the land. We saw in different places smoke rising
where fire had been made by the inhabitants. The wind,
south from the land, went round to the eastward. At noon
we worked out the latitude 40° 32', longitude 190° 47'. We
held a course north-east by east, and sailed twelve miles. In
the afternoon, wind west, course east by south along a low
sand-hill shore, with fine, dry weather. Soundings, 30
fathoms, black sand ; so that by night w T e might easily sound
along the ground to this shore. So we ran towards this sand-
point up to 17 fathoms, where, because of the calm, we
anchored at sundown. We then had the northernmost of the
dry sand point west by north from us, also high land stretch-
ing east by south, and the point of the reef south-east from us.
Within this narrow point of sand we saw a large, open bay,
quite four to three miles wide. East of this narrow sand-
point there is a sand-bank which stretches quite a mile east-
south-east, 6ft., 7ft., and Bft. to 9ft. deep. In the evening,
9° north-easterly [variation].
18th.—In the morning weighed anchor, with calm weather.
At noon, latitude worked out 40° 49', longitude 191° 41'.
Course held east-south-east, and sailed eleven miles. In the
morning, before weighing anchor, we had resolved with the
officers of the Zeehaen that we should endeavour to land
and find a convenient harbour, and when near shore should
send the shallop in advance, as is further amplified in the
resolution of this date. In the afternoon our shipmaster, Ide
Tiercxsz, and pilot-major, Francoys Jacobsz, with the shallop,
besides the Zeehaen’s boat with the supercargo Gilsemans
and one of their second mates, went on before to seek for an
anchorage and watering-place. At sunset, it being calm, we
anchored in 15 fathoms, good holding-ground. In the evening,
about an hour after sundown, we saw several lights on the
land, and four boats along the shore, of which two came to-
wards us, and the other two —our own—returned on board.
They reported that they had found not less than 13 fathoms
water, and that they had been about half a mile from the
shore at the setting of the sun (which sank behind the high
land). About one glass after they had returned on board
the people in the two prows began to call to us, and that with
a coarse, rough voice, but we could not understand in the


least what they said. However, we called to them again in
answer, whereupon they cried again several times, but came
no nearer than a stoneshot. They also repeatedly blew on
an instrument which was like a Moorish trumpet. We let
one of our sailors (the one who could play on the trumpet)
play some pieces in answer. Those on the Zeehaen made
their second mate do the same. (He had formerly been a
trumpeter on shore, and had been made at Mauritius a
second mate by the Council of the Port and Shipping). After
this had been repeated on both sides several times, and as the
evening shade was falling more and more, those in the boats
finally cleared and went away. We ordered our people (for
security, and to be well on guard) to keep entire quarterly
watch (as is usual at sea), and that the munitions of war,
such as muskets, pikes, and cutlasses, should be got ready.
We let off some pieces on the top deck and reloaded, so that
all accidents might be forestalled and we might defend our-
selves in case these people might attempt anything. Var., 9°
north-easterly.
19th. —This morning early a boat of these people, having
thirteen men, came about a cast away from our ship. They
called out several times, which we could not understand, the
speech having no resemblance to the vocabulary given to us by
their Highnesses the Governor-General and Council of India.
But this is not to be wondered at, as it was the language of the
Salomon Island. These people were (so far as we could see) of
ordinary height, but coarse of voice and strong, their colour
between brown and yellow. They had black hair, fast bound
right up on the crown of their heads, in manner and fashion of
the Japanese on their heads, but with a long, thick tuft of
hair in which was stuck a large, thick white feather. Their
boats were two long narrow prows fastened together, over
which were placed some boards or other seats, so that those
above can see through the water under the canoes; their
paddles were a full fathom long, and sharp at the end. With
these boats they could obtain great speed. Their clothing (so
it appeared) was some of mats, others of cotton, whilst most
were naked to the waist. We pointed out to them many
times that they should come on board, showing white linen
and some knives from those given us in our cargo. But in-
stead of coming nearer they returned at last to shore. Mean-
while the officers of the Zeehaen came on board us (by
order of the previous evening), and a council was held, when
it was resolved to go as near shore as we could, as there was
good anchorage, and these people (as it seemed) sought our
friendship. Soon after taking this resolution we saw another
seven boats come from the shore, whereof one (high in front,
and pointed), manned with seventeen men, pulled behind the


Zeehaen, and a second (wherein were thirteen stout men)
came up not half a cast from our ship, who called to
each other several times. We showed them (as before)
white linen, &c., yet they remained still. The master
of the Zeehaen sent his quartermaster with his boat
and six sailors back to the ship, to direct the mate,
in case these people should come alongside, not to allow too
many on board, but to be prudent, and well on his guard.
Just as the Zeehaen’s boat put off, the natives in the near-
est prow to us called out and signalled with their paddies
to those who were behind the Zeehaen, but what their
meaning was we could not understand. Just as the Zee-
haen’s boat pushed off again, that one lying between the two
ships began to pull furiously towards it, and when about
half-way from us struck the Zeehaen’s boat furiously with
their stems, making it lurch greatly at the same time; where-
upon the foremost man in this villainous prow thrust the
quartermaster, Cornelis Joppen, several times fiercely in the
neck with a long, blunt pike, so that he fell overboard. Where-
upon the others of them attacked the boat’s crew with short,
thick pieces of wood (which we at first took to be blunt parangs)
[a kind of chopping-knife used by the Malays for cutting
wood, &c.] and with their paddles, and overcame the boat, in
which fray three of the Zeehaen’s people were killed and a
fourth mortally wounded through hard blows. The quarter-
master and two sailors swam towards our ship, and we sent
our shallop to them and picked them up alive. After this
outrageous and detestable affair the murderers let the boat
drift. They had one of the dead dragged into their prow, and
another drowned. We, and those on the Zeehaen, seeing
this, shot briskly with muskets and cannon, but, however,
probably did not hit any, as both returned to shore out of
shot. We fired many shots from our fore-upper-deck and
bow guns near and amongst their boats, but did not strike.
Our master, Ide Tercxsen Holman, rowed with our shallop,
well manned and armed, to bring back the Zeehaen’s
boat (which, luckily, these cursed men had let drift), and
presently returned on board with it, finding in it one of the
dead and one mortally wounded. We weighed anchor and
got under sail, as we judged we could not establish any friend-
ship with this people, nor could get water or refreshments.
Our anchors weighed, and being under sail, we saw twenty-
two prows, alongshore, whereof eleven, swarming with men,
came off to us. We kept quiet until some of the first were within
shot, when with our pieces we fired one or two shots from the
gunners’ room, but without effect. The Zeehaen fired too,
and hit, in the largest prow, one who stood with a white flag
in his hand, so that he fell down. We also heard the grape-


shot strike in and against the prow, but what further happened
is unknown to us, as after getting this shot they returned
speedily to land, two of them setting up sails fashioned like
tinganghs [a Malay boat: our “ dingy ”is derived from this].
They remained quiet alongshore without visiting us again.
About noon the master, Gerrit Jansz, and Sr. Gilsemans again
came on board us. We sent also for their chief mate, when
we called the council, and resolved as follows: That the de-
testable deed of these natives that morning on four of the
Zeehaen’s men should teach us to hold the inhabitants of
this land as enemies; that we shall therefore keep easterly
along the shore, following the coast-line, to see if we can find a
convenient spot to obtain water and refreshments, as is further
mentioned in the resolutions. Ac this place of murderers (to
which, moreover, we have given the name of Murderers’ Bay)
we lay anchored in south latitude 40° 50', longitude 191° 30'.
We steered our course from here east-north-east. At noon
reckoned latitude 40° 57', longitude 191° 41'. Held a southerly
course, and sailed two miles. In the afternoon the wind was
from west-north-west. We then steered, on the advice of
our steersmen, and our approbation, north-east by north. At
night we went on, as the weather was fine; but about an
hour after midnight we had soundings 'in 25 to 26
fathoms; hard, sandy ground. Soon after the wind was
north-west. Had soundings in 15 fathoms. We imme-
diately steered our course west, in the contrary direction from
that by which we had entered, awaiting the day. Yar., 9° 30'
north-easterly. This is the second land sailed about and dis-
covered by us. We have given it the name of Statenlandt, in
honour of their High Mightinesses the States-General. Thus
it is possible that this land is part of the great Statelandt, but
it is uncertain. This same land seems to be a very fine coun-
try, and we trust that it is part of the great coast of the un-
known Zuytlandt (South Land). We have given this course
the name of Abel Tasman course, because he is the first to
navigate it.
[ln this place, in Tasman’s Journal, are found the drawings
of the plates which Yalentijn has given us on pp. 49, &c.,
under No. 6F, No. SE, No. 5Eb, and No. 7G. The plate
No. 6F is not so complete as that of the manuscript journal.
The reader, of course, knows that the name of Staten-land
has since been changed to that of New Zealand, and it con-
sists of two large islands, which are separated by a strait or
passage now named Cook Strait. It was in the opening to the
westerly entrance of this strait that Tasman lay anchored
with his two ships when the New-Zealanders, without the
slightest warning, fell upon his shallops, wherefore in the
account he named that part Murderers’ Bay. That portion
2


of the sea found between the islands of Van Diemen’s Land
and New Zealand was named by him Tasman’s Track, a
name which remains to this day, and serves to remind us
all of that brave man who was the first to sail round New
Holland, and to accomplish the voyage between New Holland
and New Zealand.—Jacob Swart.]
20th.—This morning we saw land lying all around us, so
that we have sailed perhaps thirty miles into a bay. We had
at first thought that the land where we anchored was an
island, not doubting that we should find a passage into the
great South Sea. But to our great disappointment it proved
otherwise. The wind being westerly, we endeavoured to get
back through the same passage by which we had before sailed
in. At noon found ourselves in south latitude 40° 51', and
longitude 192° 55'. We held our course east-half-north and
sailed fourteen miles. In the afternoon it was calm ; the sea
ran strong into the bay, so that we could not advance, but
drifted back with the tide. At noon we turned northwards
and saw a round, high island* about eight miles from us west
by north, which we had sailed by the previous day. This
little island lies about six miles east of the place where we
were anchored. In the same latitude in this bay, into which
we had sailed so far by mistake, the land seemed everywhere
fine and good : on the sea-coast low, barren land ; moderately
high inland. Sailing along the coast there is anchorage from
60 to 50 fathoms to 15 fathoms, becoming dry about a mile
and a half to two miles from the shore. At 3in the afternoon
got light breezes from the south-east, but, as the sea ran very
rough, we made but little or no progress. In the night we
drifted along calmly; in the second watch [l2-4 a.m.] the
wind was west, going round to the northwards.
21st.—At night in the dog-watch [l2-4] had a westerly
wind with a strong breeze. Steered to the north, in the hope
that the land, which the day before was north-west from us,
should there fall away to the north, but it extended to the
north-west. After the cook had dished we tacked and turned
again from the land. It began to blow stronger, so we ran
south-west over towards the south shore. At noon found lati-
tude 40° 31' and longitude 192° 55'. Held a northerly course,
and sailed five miles. It was foggy, so that we could see no
land. Late in the afternoon again saw the south coast, and had
the island, which the day before was about six miles west from
us, about four miles south-west by south. We sailed towards
it, bringing it to bear north-north-west from us, and anchored
by some cliffs in 33 fathoms, sandy ground, mixed with shells.
Here it is full of islands and rocks. We struck our sail-yards,
• Stephen Island.


for a storm threatened from the north-west and west-north-
west.
22nd.—Wind north-west by north, and blowing so hard
that there was no appearance of going on under sail, and it
was difficult enough for the anchor to hold. We made our
ship snug. We here lay in south latitude 40° 50' and longi-
tude 192° 37'. Course held south-west by south, and sailed
six miles. At night we got the wind so hard from the north-
west that we struck the topmasts and let go another anchor.
The Zeehaen did the same.
23rd.—Still dark, foggy, drizzling weather, the wind north-
west to west-north-w r est, and that with such a storm that to
our great regret we could not advance.
24th.—Still hard, unsteady weather ; the wind still north-
west, and stormy. In the morning had a calm interval.
Hoisted a white flag and got the officers of the Zeehaen on
board us, and it was proposed that, as the flood came from
the south-east, there might probably be a passage through,
and whether it would not be best, wind and weather per-
mitting, to search for this, and to see if we could not get fresh
water there : as may further be seen by the resolutions drawn
up thereupon.
25th.—In the morning we reset our topmast and yards,
but it still looked so gloomy that we dare not lift anchor.
Towards the evening it became calmer, so that a portion of
our cable was shortened.
26th.—In the morning, two hours before day, we got the
wind east-north-east, a light breeze. We weighed anchor,
got under sail, and steered towards the north, intending to
sail northward by this land. With the day it began to rain,
and the wind went round to the south-east, and then south
to south-west with a stiff breeze. Had soundings in 60
fathoms. We set our course by the wind to the west. At
noon, latitude 40° 13', longitude 192° 7'. Held a north-north-
west course, and sailed ten miles. Yar., 8° 40'. At night
lay-to with easy sail.
27th.—In the morning made sail at daybreak, and steered
north ; the wind south-west, with a strong breeze. At noon
found latitude 38° 38', and longitude 190° 15'. Course held
north-west, and sailed twenty-six miles. Set our course at
noon north-east. At night lay-to, with little sail. Yar.,
8° 20'.
28th.—In the morning made sail at daybreak; set our
course to the east, so as to get sight of the land which we
had previously seen in 40°; it stretched still further to the
north, and then to the east. At noon we saw, east by north
from us, a high mountain. We took it at first to be an island,
but afterwards saw it was part of the mainland. We were


about five miles from shore. We threw the lead in 50 fathoms,
fine sand mixed with clay. This high mountain [Mount
Karioi ?] lies in south latitude 38°. This coast stretches, so
far as I could see, south and north. It became calm, with a
light air from north-north-east; we tacked to the north-west.
At noon anchored, latitude 38° 2' and longitude 192° 23'.
Course held north-east by east, and sailed sixteen miles. To-
wards evening the wind came north-east and north-east by
east, and began to blow harder and harder, so that at the end
of the first watch [B-12 p.m.] we had to take in our topsails.
Var., 8° 30'.
29th.—In the morning, at daybreak, we took off our
bonnet-sails [small sails beneath the foresail], so that we
had to take in our foretopsails. At noon we computed
the latitude to be 37° 17' and longitude 191°, and we ran
over to the westward. Course held north-west, and sailed
sixteen miles.
30th.—In the morning the weather was something more
moderate. We set our topsails, rigged our bonnet-sails. Had
the Zeehaen to lee of us. Wind west-north-west, with a top-
sails breeze. At nocn found the latitude 37° and longitude
191° 55'. Course held north-east, and sailed seven miles.
Towards evening again saw the land north-east and north-
north-east from us. We therefore ran north and north-east.
Yar., 8° 10' north-easterly. [Tasman here gives two sketches
of the Staten-land (New Zealand) —first, as it appeared in
38° 30' south latitude, and second, in 36° south latitude.—
Jacob Swart.]
31st. —At noon we tacked about to the north, and the wind
west-north-west, a slack breeze. Noon, found latitude 36° 45',
and longitude 191° 46'. Course held north-west, and sailed
seven miles. In the evening we were about three miles from
the shore. Four glasses of the first watch [lO p.m.], again
tacked to the north. In the night sounded in 80 fathoms.
This coast here stretches south-east and north-west. The
land is in some places high, and in others sandhills. Yar., B°.
January Ist [1643]. —In the morning drifted in the calm
along this coast, which here stretches north-west and south-
east. It is an even coast, without shoals or sandbanks. At
noon had latitude 36° 12', and longitude 191° 7'. Course held
north-west, and sailed ten miles. About noon the wind came
south-south-east and south-east. We steered our course west-
north-west to be further off shore, and here a heavy surf was
running. Var., 8° 30' north-easterly.
2nd.—Calm weather. In the middle of the a
breeze came from the east. We steered north-north-west at
the end of the first watch [l2 p.m.], course north-west, so as
not to come too near shore, and to avoid any accident, as in


the evening we had the land north-north-west from us. .At
noon, latitude 35° 55', and longitude 190° 47'. Course held
north-west to west, and sailed seven miles. Var., 9°.
3rd. —In the morning saw the land about six miles from us
east by north, and were astonished to find ourselves so far
from shore. At noon found latitude 35° 20', longitude 190°
17'. Course held north-west to north, and sailed eleven
miles. At noon got the wind south-south-east, and steered
our course east-north-east, so as to run again towards the
shore. In the evening we had the land north and east-south-
east from us.
4th.—ln the morning we were near a cape, and had an
island north-west by north from us, whereupon we hoisted
the white flag for the officers of the Zeehaen to come
aboard us, and resolved with each other to stand for the said
island and see if we could not get there fresh water, vege-
tables, &c. At noon found latitude 34° 35', longitude 191° 9'.
Course held north-east, and sailed fifteen miles; the wind
south-east. Towards noon we sailed calmly. We found our-
selves here in a very strong current, setting us to the west.
There was also a heavy sea drawing from the north-east,
which gave us not a little hope that there might be a passage
here. We had this point east-north-east from us lying in
south latitude 34° 30'. The land here fell away to the east.
In the evening the pilot-major, with the secretary of the
Zeehaen, went close by the island, and could not observe
that what we wanted was to be had there. Agreed with
the officers of the Zeehaen that if we got a good wind in the
night it would be best to go on. Var., 8° 40' north-easterly,
[Here is found in the manuscript the chart and representa-
tion of No. 8H and No. 9J, but without the ships, which
Valentijn added here to give a little adornment. Jacob
Swart.]
sth.—This morning still drifted in the calm, but about
9 o’clock had a light breeze from the south-east. We agreed
with our friends of the Zeehaen to steer for the island.
About noon we sent our shallop with the pilot-major, and
the Zeehaen’s boat with Gilsemans, the supercargo, to inspect
the island, and see if water was to be had there. In the
evening they returned on board and reported that they had
gone close to land, being always on the watch that none of
the natives should fall upon them, and had entered a small,
safe bay, where fine fresh water was found, which fell from
steep hills in great abundance; but, from the surf on the
shore, it was dangerous and troublesome to water there; so
they rowed further round the island, seeking if they could
find any other convenient place. On this land in various
places, and on the highest hills, were about thirty to thirty-five


persons, men of tall stature, so far as they could see, with
staves or clubs, who called to them in gruff, loud voices which
they could not understand. In walking they took great steps
and strides. In rowing round they saw a few more people on
the hills, whereupon they resolved (as may well be believed)
to be well on their guard, and to hold their boats and small
weapons in readiness. On this island they reckoned there
would not be more people than had shown themselves, for on
rowing round our people saw no dwellings, nor cultivated land
except that near the fresh water. Here, on both sides of the
waterfall, there were everywhere square enclosures after the
manner of our country, green and pleasant. But what kind
of vegetables they could not tell from the distance. It
was quite possible their dwelling-places were round here on
account of the fresh water. In this aforesaid bay there were
two prows lying, hauled upon shore—one navigable, the other
broken. They saw no other boats anywhere. Our people then
returned. We immediately endeavoured to get under the
land, and about evening anchored a short pedereroe [a piece for
firing stones and gravel] shot from shore in good ground. We
at once made preparations for taking in water next day. The
island lies in south latitude 34° 25', and longitude 190° 40'.
6th. —At early morning we sent both boats—to wit, ours
and the Zeehaen’s—to the watering-place with casks to get
water. Each one mounted with tw r o pedereroes, six mus-
keteers. The rowers had pikes and side - weapons. With
one shallop were Pilot-major Francoys Jacobsz, and the
master, Gerrit Jansz. As they rowed towards the land they
saw, standing in different places on the heights, big men, each
with a long stick like a pike, who seemed to be watching us,
and, as our people passed by, called loudly to them. But when
they had got about half-way to the watering-place, between a
safe point and another great high crag or little islet, the cur-
rent ran so strongly against the wind that the boats could
scarcely stem it; whereupon the pilot-major and Gerrit Jansz,
master of the Zeehaen, with the other officers, held counsel,
resolving not to imperil the boats and men, as they had a long
voyage before them, and the ships could not afford their loss;
and so they returned on board, the more so as a heavy surf
was rolling on the land near where the watering-place was,
and, the breeze beginning to increase, they would have found it
difficult to reach land. We signalled from our ship by hoist-
the flag and firing a cannon that they should come back; but
they were then near us, and seen to approach. The pilot-
major, with our boats, came on board, reporting that, from the
wind and the innumerable hard rocks all around, without any
sandy ground, it was too dangerous, and they would be sub-
ject to the peril of being attacked by the natives, and of having


the water-casks injured and broken to pieces. We immedi-
ately ordered the officers of the Zeehaen and the second
mates to come aboard us, when we summoned the council,
and resolved to lift the anchors, and with an easterly course to
run to latitude 22°. Following the foregoing resolution, that
we should keep due north to south latitude 17°, and then
should steer a due-west course, and run straight in right on
the Coques [Cocos] and Hoorense [Horne] Islands, and there
obtain water and refreshments ; or, if we should earlier come
upon any other island, that we should endeavour to do the
same there: as is specified in the resolution of this date, lately
referred to. Near noon we got under sail, having the island
at noon about three miles from us due south. In the evening,
at sunset, it was six to seven miles south-south-west from us,
the rocks and the island lying south-west and north-east from
each other. At night, pretty calm, wind east-south-east.
Held our course by the wind north-north-east, the sea run-
ning from the north-east.
Such, then, is the entire and literal translation of that part
of Tasman’s Journal which relates to his discovery of New
Zealand. Time forbids that I should give more than the
briefest account of his continued voyage, which is full of
interest. Steering north-east, he discovered in succession
Pylstaart, now Tropic-bird Island, where are found those
birds (Phaethon rubricauda), which occasionally make for the
very north of New Zealand, and whose tail-feathers are so
highly prized by the Maoris as an ornament for the hair;
then three islands of the Tongan Group—Tongatabu, Ana-
moka, and Eoa—which he called Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and
Middelburg. The stay in this group was lengthy and grate-
ful, and made some amends for the inhospitable reception in
New Zealand. Here fruit, water, and provisions were pro-
cured in abundance from the friendly natives. On the 6th
of February Prince Willem’s Islands—the Fijis—were dis-
covered. The general course then maintained was west-
north-west. Several islands were passed, and the coast of
New Guinea reached on the 14th April. For more than a
month he sailed along the northern coast, and gives an ex-
ceedingly interesting description of the country and natives.
Well-recognised points and islands were then fallen in with,
and on the 15th June, 1643, the vessels dropped anchor at
Batavia, after an absence of two years save two months.
“ God be praised and thanked for a safe voyage. Amen ! ” is
Tasman’s last entry. His Journal is written in a plain,
quaint, intelligible style, and abundantly shows that the
writer was a bold and accomplished seaman as well as a
fortunate discoverer.


6ujcio
Fio^yoB<^
In 1644 he was again despatched to examine the north
coast of New Holland, and to explore what is known to-day
as Torres Straits. The papers connected with this important
exploration have never, so far, been discovered. But the pains-
taking research made of late years into various departments
of long-forgotten history may yet succeed in giving us another
and Tasman’s last Journal. Proud of the discoveries of their
countrymen, which were enriched so specially by those of
Tasman, the Dutch sought to perpetuate them in imperishable
marble. In 1648 they erected at Amsterdam their magnifi-
cent Stadhuis or Town Hall. Part of the embellishments
consisted of a map of the world, projected as a planisphere
and deeply cut into the stone floor. Each of the hemispheres
was 22ft. in diameter, and they contained all that had been
discovered of New Holland, Van Diemen’s Land, and New
Zealand. But the traffic of thousands of feet finally effaced
this curious map, and when, in 1773, Sir Joseph Banks visited
Amsterdam no trace of it remained, nor had the oldest inhabit-
ant any personal knowledge of it. Fortunately, M. Thevenot
copied the most material portion, and this appears in his
"Divers Voyages Curieuses,” Paris, 1663. It is also found
in an old British Museum map, and in outline in Janssen’s
"Atlas,” 1650. The labour of preparing this account of
Tasman and his work is amply rewarded in laying it before
an audience which on so many previous occasions has granted
me a patient hearing. If it should reach the hands of those
whose business it is to traverse our west coast, I hope they
may be interested in comparing the details of their own log
with those of an old seaman of two hundred and fifty years
ago.
[Since this paper was written I have corresponded with
Messrs. Frederik Muller and Co., of Amsterdam, who are
preparing for publication the edition de luxe of Tasman’s
Journal above referred to. They say, "The papers of the
Dutch East India Company are now in the Hague State
archives. A journal of the 1644 voyage was never found,
only the binding wherein it had been bound once was found
by the old Mr. Frederik Muller in the State archives some
twenty-five or thirty years ago.”—T. M. H.]


Ufomsirdttita Iftati |bnfaiifc Yoi. xxyiil pi. i.






