

/ fJuM h ftt**.l< *X ip.




jjf Capital :
* ' K
A LECTURE,
DELIVERED IN THE
SCHOOL OE ARTS, SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
On Thursday, May 26, 1864,
FREDERICK LEE.
“ The quality of mercy is not strained ;
It droppeth, as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath : it is twice bless'd ;
It blesseth him that gives, and him that takes :
'Tie mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes
Tbe throned monarch better than his crown ;
Bis sceptre shews the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty,
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings—
But mercy is above this sceptred sway;
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
It is an attribute to God bimself;
And earthly power doth then shew likest God's
When mercy seasons justice.’’
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
HANSON AND BENNETT, PRINTERS, 104, PITT STREET.




ABOLITION OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In placing before you my views upon the desir-
ability of the Abolition of Capital Punishment, I am per-
fectly aware that lam treating upon a subject which has
already been discussed by abler pens than mine ; nor do I
pretend to be the originator of the views to which I am
about giving expression, as ideas similar to mine have
been promulgated by different minds, who have suggested
ideas very similar; and to avoid any charge of plagiarism,
to which I should have to plead guilty, 1 confess myself
indebted to many philanthropic and talented writers on
the subject. With some degree of diffidence I approach
the question, not alone from the vast importance involved,
but from the knowledge that, in advocating the views I
entertain, I am constrained to be in opposition to the
prejudices of many worthy members of society, who, with-
out, perhaps, having given the subject that careful consider-
ation, and that philosophical research which this import-
ant question so strictly demands, have arrived at a conclu-
sion without having examined the premises. Possibly
the simple interrogation, “ What, not execute for
murder ?” has settled the question; others, perhaps, have
based their conclusion in favour of capital punishment
because they conceive that the death punishment is
enjoined as a Divine command : (Genesis chap ix, verse vi.)


“ Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be
shed and did I interpret that passage as a Divine
command, I should not be so presumptuous as to place my
feeble opinion in opposition to such an ineffable authority.
Although in practice, the constant remission of the
capital sentence is inconsistent with a command , which if
really a command of the great Architect of the Universe
we should be bound to carry out regardless of con-
sequences. In the original Hebrew, the verse referred to
IQT DIM Diwj DT
Now the word (yeshophek) signifies “ shall be
shed,” or “ will \T-r • be shed,” and I do no violence
to the grammatical construction in reading the verse re-
ferred to, “ Whoso sheddeth man’s blood by man will his
blood be shed.” Now, my humble opinion is (and I am not
singular in that opinion), that that verse does not enjoin
a command, viz.: It is not mandatory but permissive. The
murderer is declared an outlaw, any one may destroy the
homicide, but it is not commanded for any one to do so.
Now, I think my proposition may be fairly illustrated by
the first fratricide Cain, doubtless a homicide of a most
heinous and unnatural nature. In this case we have the
voice of the Almighty, (Genesis chap, iv., verse xv.) pro-
claiming what seems to me very significant, not alone
vengeance against any one who should slay the fratricide,
but the Almighty in addition “ set a mark upon Cain, lest
any finding him should kill him.” The punishment we
know by Cain’s exclamation, i( My punishment is
greater than 1 can bear,” was deservedly a very severe
one, but not death. Now 1 do think from this first homicide
that this is a fair and reasonable deduction, that the death
punishment is not a Divine command, otherwise, instead
of an inferior punishment having been inflicted on the
first murderer, the Almighty would surely have exacted
the extreme penalty.
At the early period of the sacred volume, we must
not fail to remember that mankind were almost in a state


of nature ; “ An eye for an eye,” ei a tooth for a tooth,”
might at that period have been almost a stern necessity ;
every man had a right to defend, by force of arms, his
person and his possessions—to repel, or even prevent
violence, and take a reasonable measure of satisfaction
and retaliation. An exemplification of this may be found
in the act of Moses slaying the Egyptian, and for which
act no censure appears to have been incurred; but a strong
proof of the barbarism of the ages is apparent in the 19th
chapter of Deuteronomy, in which the necessity of shielding
the inno ient is manifest, cities of refuge being appointed
for the protection of him who accidentally slays another,
from the of blood,” viz., the nearest relative of
the slain, a proof beyond contradiction that retaliation was
then an acknowledged principle, which, however necessary
it might be in a barbarous age, when might prevailed over
right, could not be tolerated in the nineteenth century,
nor be upheld by any benevolent or civilised individual.
But even at a later era the small value at which life
was estimated may be found in the annals of the Anglo-
Saxons, as also in the heroic times of Greece, where the
guilt of murder was expiated by a pecuniary fine; at Rome
and Athens by exile. But more astounding still, so late as
the sixteenth century, we find in Germany traces of pecu-
niary composition being granted for murder. Indeed the
right of sanctuary even now prevails insome foreign countries,
if the homicide only reach the goal his life is safe. Assum-
ingthen thatthe death punishment is not a Divine cdmmand
but merely a permission, or a prediction, of the probable
fate of a murderer, whose life would in all probability be
sacrificed by the relative to the manes of the victim, it
will now be not unbecoming to inquire by what right, by
what authority, an erring mortal in meting out death
and life as though he were a Deity, dare deprive a fellow
creature of that immortal spark which he. alas ! can quench
but not create. “ But once put out the light,
I know not where is that promethean heat that
can the light relume ” By what right we transgress
the commandment, “ Thou shalt not kill” and, further, by


what right we transgress the angelic and beautiful pre-
cept “to return good for evil/’ and “not to revenge an
injury.” We seem to have mistaken the great end of all
penal law, which is not vengeance, but the prevention of
crime; and that pain deliberately inflicted without
benefit to the sufferer is simply vengeance.
Passing now from the scriptural legality, permit me
to enter upon the social expediency, and before so doing
we will take a dispassionate view of an execution. A
great crime has been committed, and by the execution of
the criminal do we not in effect revenge the crime, and
exact retribution for the act by committing another
murder ?—and not content with wreaking vengeance upon
the culprit whilst living, we add to the sentence (that
being the law in the mother country,) “ that the body be
buried within the precincts of the gaol,” we thus carry the
punishment beyond) the grave by dishonoring the sense-
less clay. All religious men disavow revenge, and as it
is condemned by the moral law of nature, it naturally
follows that as a principle in our treatment of criminals
it must be deemed reprehensible.
In considering this important subject—a subject more
momentous than any topic, be it political or social of the
day—by far the most momentous question that can be
debated, because it involves the soul, the future
state of a fallen erring mortal, and our right
to cut a soul off in a state of sin, and deprive
a criminal of the possibility of reformation, we
will inquire what ought to be the object of punish-
ment in general, and how crimes are to be prevented. I
submit to you, that the object of all punishment should
be—Firstly ; To deter others from committing a similar
crime Secondly :By a punishment to the criminal him-
self, to teach him the injury he has done, both to society
and himself, by a departure from the path of rectitude,
and disobedience of the laws. Thirdly : To reform the
criminal, and endeavour that he should become a good
and useful member of society; and this, I think, the most


important of all. I quite agree with the sentiment of the
late Archbishop Whately, who has said in beautiful and
emphatic language, “ If one criminal out of one hundred
be reformed, that it is worth the effort.” I believe this
idea of reformation to be a truly Divine idea, and one
which should pervade all punishments. This admitted,
viz., that reformation should be the main object, then
death punishment on that ground cannot possibly be
upheld. Quintilian, an eminent Latin writer, says, “If the
criminal can be amended, as oftentimes he can, it is
much better for a commonwealth that a good citizen be
made, than that he be taken away while he is evil.”
The reformation of a culprit by hanging him is truly
a novel mode of effecting the object, and as a punishment
to the wretched culprit, as contra-distinguished to a per-
petual imprisonment, has proved a miserable failure. And
as some proof that my views are not chimerical, I have
the high authority of the Prison Discipline Society of
London, who, in their eighth report, declare “ that
an effectual substitute may be found for the penalty of
death, in a well-regulated system of penitentiary discipline —
a system which shall inspire dread, not by the intensity of
punishment, but by unremitting occupation, seclusion, and
restraint. The enforcement of hard labour, strict silence,
and a judicious plan of solitary confinement, will be found
the most powerful of all moral instruments for the correc-
tion of the guilty, and when to these are added the
application of religious instruction, the utmost means are
exercised which society can employ for the punishment
and reformation of human character.”
In speaking of the execution of a criminal, how
common it is for all of us to remark u he richly deserved
it;” but if the deserts of the criminal be the test, if we are
to administer punishment according to the deserts of the
culprit, there are cases of such atrocity that torture would
not be adequate punishment for the offence.
“ Use every man after his desert and
“ fVho shall ’scape whipping.'’


But really as a punishment, the death punishment
falls with less severity upon the culprit than upon the
unfortunate innocent surviving relatives, upon whom a
lasting disgrace is entailed ; at whom the finger of scorn
is too often pointed, and whose feelings must be harrowed
by the revolting recital.
Hanging, as a punishment to the culprit himself,
has proved an eminent failure. What is physical death—
once and over, to the living death of the heart—that
death which does not kill ? And as a proof of my
position, I quote the case of Manns, the escort robber,
by no means an isolated case. Previous to ascending the
scaffold, Manns bade adieu to his fellow-associate and
partner in crime, Bow. Bow having shaken hands with
Manns, _ and expressed his. sorrow for his fate, Manns
replied in the mos£ cool manner, yet without any bravado,
“D° n °t feel sorry for me ; I never was more happy; I
would not change places with youviz., he preferred
death to the eternal imprisonment which Bow had to
undergo. This case is one only of the many instances of
culprits who are executed, and who meet their fate with
the most supreme indifference.
In support of my idea of the benefit accruing to
society in attempts to reform a criminal, I must bring to
your notice the case of Bow, to whom I have just referred,
one of the escort robbers, who was condemned to death,
but who was reprieved. This case illustrates the
impolicy of hanging a man, on the ground
(of one out of a many) that it precludes all
possibility of reformation. This criminal, in whose
preservation from the gallows I rejoice to say I was
an humble instrument, has been immured for life, very
deservedly, in Darlinghurst Prison, where I have had
opportunities of seeing him, and of tendering him good
advice; and both from my own observation, and the
history of his .conduct given me by the officials, I find
that he has earned the character of being one of the best
behaved prisoners, seems penitent, and sets a good example


to his fellow convicts; that on his admission he could
neither read nor write, both of which he now does, and
that remarkably well, and the probabilities are that should
he ever obtain a remission of his sentence, that—having
already seen the enormity of his crime— he will become an
useful member of society. Now had this criminal been
executed, could these happy results have ensued ?
In entering upon an inquiry as to how we may hope
to repress crime, that must depend principally on the
means of obviating or counteracting the causes in which
it originates. The cause of any crime is the desire of
some actual or imaginary good. A man is induced to
steal by the desire of property; to do injury to the
person of another by resentment. In ordinary cases the
desires which cause criminal acts to be perpetrated
are identical with those that lead to other and
necessary forms of human activity; and as
they are essential to man’s existence, the question
naturally arises as to what preventives can be
devised to prevent their leading to criminal acts
while leaving them free within legitimate bounds. Now,
the mode at present in vogue is in fact retaliation, or
more properly speaking, vengeance. Such a mode is quite
consistent with the prevailing theory, which denies that
criminals are human beings, actuated by precisely the same
impulses as the non-criminal class, and consider them
simply evil animals to be imprisoned, frightened, or
hanged into an endurable attitude towards the reputable
classes.
I, on the contrary, believe much more may be gained
by kindness, and appeals to conscience, than by any other
means.
The committee of the House of Commons, in their
report on prison discipline in 1850, express their opinion,
‘ ‘ That the majority of convicted prisoners are open to the
same good motives and good impulses which influence
other human beings, and recommend a system of
encouragement to good conduct, and endeavours to inspire


feelings of self-respect, self-reliance, and hopefulness for
the future.”
And as it appears that crime has gone on increasing
in amount in proportion as punishment has been
abundantly administered, we may safely draw this con-
clusion—that thus far punishment as at present
administered has proved an eminent failure ; indeed the
more severe the punishments the less likely are they to
be inflicted ; so that really if any thing be gained
by increase of severity it is lost by increase of impunity.
The famous Dr. Franklin, referring to Montesquieu,
who was himself a judge, and one of the greatest
of European jurists, so far from thinking that
severe and excessive punishments prevent
crime, asserts, “ That the atrocity of the laws
prevents their execution; when the penalty is without
bounds, men are frequently obliged to prefer impunity to
it.” And we find that in countries remarkable for
lenient penal laws, crime is as effectually prevented as in
others where they are very severe. Mr. Sampson, in his
excellent work, informs us “ That in Tuscany, where no
capital punishment was inflicted, there were but four
murders in twenty-five years ; while in Rome, where the
death penalty existed, there were twelve times that
number, viz., forty-eight murders in a single year.” He
also says, “ About five years back, in the State of
Michigan, capital punishment was abolished ; since that
time there has not been a single conviction for murder. In
1860, a bill for the abolition of capital punishment passed
a third reading in the New York Legislature, by a
majority of more than two to one.
The Diet of Saxe-Weimar, the most enlightened State
in the German Confederation, in 1862, also carried the
abolition, by a majority of nineteen votes to ten : and the
French Republic, in 1848, also adopted the same law.
I also find that in Belgium, where the propriety of
capital punishment is a much contested point, and the
royal clemency is exercised, in all excepting the most


aggravated cases, that crime is not particularly prolific ;
and so much is mercy extended in that country, that
during a period of ten years, out of 311 criminals con-
demned to death, only twenty-three were executed.
That eminent man Mr. Bright, in his place in the
House of Commons last February, during a debate upon
the Townley case, is reported to have said.” “In no
country where capital punishment has been abolished has
there been an increase of crime; on the contrary, crimes have
on the whole diminished, and the public have gained
immensely; and I believe now, that the abolition of
capital punishment in this country would not be accom-
panied by an increase of murder, but would tend to make life
more sacred, and put an end to the most demoralising and
frightful spectacle which it is possible to exhibit to
civilised man.”
To prove to you how inoperative severe laws become,
in France Richelieu rigidly enforced the capital punish-
ment for duelling, although the punishment was
administered most relentlessly, duels never were so
numerous nor so desperate.
The chief causes of crime may be attributed to, first
and foremost, drunkenness, and other kinds of profligacy.
Who that ever was a votary at the shrine of Bacchus
was ever enabled to preserve himself from being enslaved
by his auxiliary ? The opinion of Mr. Justice Wise, as
expressed on the trial of Wilcox, for arson, at the April
Criminal Court, is “ that all cases of violence in this colony
are brought about by drunkenness;” and that opinion I
cordially endorse. Secondly, ignorance, idleness, and bad
training. Thirdly, poverty. Fourthly, by the creation of
laws, which to the uneducated, are apparently not based
on justice, such as the game laws, an infraction of which
is considered by the public a venial offence, but when
infringed collisions take place and a murder may be the
result.
To show you the deficiency in industry, as also the
ignorance of the criminal class, it appears that out of 6648


prisoners committed in one year in England, only 667, or
ten per cent, had any knowledge of a trade ; and I find by
the criminal tables for England and Wales for 1842, only
ten per cent, of the criminals were able to read and write
well; of the remaining ninety per cent, nearly one half
could not read and write; and the remainder could read and
write hut very imperfectly. To what conclusion does this
point ? Why, in my humble opinion, to the reformation of
the criminal both within and without the prison walls; most
assuredly not by hanging him, but by imparting moral and
religious education, by training him to habits of industry
and self-reliance, by exciting nobler tastes, by cultivating
the germs of moral and spiritual beauty which lie dor-
mant in every man, by the practical inculcation of the
value and dignity of work, by creating a love for social
and refined amusements, such as music, or a love of
flowers, all of which tend to ennoble and elevate the mind
towards the celestial sphere, and repress the animal
passions, and by teaching him a trade, so that he will have
the power of gaining an honest livelihood. In fine, by
earnest endeavours to prevent crime, in preference to the
present mode of punishing it when perpetrated. In the words
of that great legal luminary, fcir William Blackstone,
“ preventive justice, is upon every principle of reason, of
humanity, and of sound policy, preferable in all respects
to punishing justice.”
The same great authority refers in language most
favorable to abolition, to the fact of the death punish-
ment being abolished by Catherine, second Empress of all
the Russias; and that under the Empress Elizabeth it
never was inflicted, and with the most happy results.
The true benefactors of their race, are those who seek
to spread religious enlightenment and education through
the world, for by those blessings only will the gallows be
robbed of its prey.
I will now endeavor to discover under what
circumstances criminal homicides, which are punishable
by death, are perpetated. I find that nine-tenths of them


are committed whilst under the baneful influence of
alcoholic drinks; and when not so stimulated, then the
impetus is given from a predisposition by the perusal of
details of murder, or suicide, the reading of novels penned
expressly to pander to a vitiated taste, such as “ J ack
Sheppard,” in which the villain is held up to the public
as a hero, whilst his hair-breadth escapes, and romantic
adventures, create an emulation in that class, from whom
our prisons are populated ; —men generally of little or no
education, inferior understanding, and of ill-developed
minds. Mayhew in his able work, says, “at a meeting
of 150 vagrants in London, numbers avowed they had
been induced to resort to an abandoned course
of life, from reading the lives of notorious
thieves and highwaymen.” And I cannot find
language sufficiently strong to condemn, and I
earnestly beg of you all not to encourage by your presence
pieces which are frequently produced at the theatres, such
as “ The Bushrangers in the Weddin Mountains,” u The
Roadside Murder,” and plays of that villainous class; their
ultimate effect is to represent pleasure in an unnatural
alliance with vice, and to relax those sacred obligations
by which life ought to be regulated. Such entertainments
tend to enlist the sympathies of the audience with
the criminal, such plays have a most pernicious
tendency, and are a suggestion to crime. Upon the
same principle, the being present at an execution has
upon a morbid mind a most unhappy effect, by directing
special attention to the particular crime for which the
culprit has suffered the penalty. In many cases the
homicide is committed in consequence of a morbid craving
for blood, an overwhelming impulse to take life, frequently
combined with a suicidal tendency ; probably an inflam-
matory action upon the brain, an irresistible influence,
which impels the criminal to commit the crime, totally
regardless of the consequences. Now, in dealing with
the minds of men who generally commit crime, we must
not measure them by our own standard. An eminent doctor


to one of the London prisons says, “ Generally speaking,
the convicts are of inferior understanding; as a body I
consider them to be badly developed people; there are
exceptions.”
I fear that our legislators have quite lost sight of
the degrees of intellectual capacity—laws have been enacted
by men possessed of the highest degree of moral and
intellectual capacity who do not reflect that all men are not
constituted alike, and who erroneously imagine that a
punishment which would deter themselves from committing
a crime, and who really require no deterring influence
whatsoever , would have the same effect upon all
other individuals. Those men who habitually commit
crime do not enjoy controlling powers in an ade-
quate degree to enable them successfully to resist the
temptation presented by their passions, and by the
influence of external circumstances; indeed certain
intuitive principles appertain to each individual, which in
many cases give a bias or premature development to
certain faculties.
Now the impulse to commit a crime necessarily leads
me to the question as to the “ moral sanity” of the
criminal. The gravity of this point has not escaped my
attention, nor has it ceased to cause me great anxiety;
because it touches on the question of moral responsibility;
but the gravity of the subject must not deter me from
eliciting the truth, and as we consider lunatics irrespon-
sible, I am only asking an extension of the principle;
but happily, even if the criminal be deemed irresponsible,
the result will be, not that he escapes punishment, but
that instead of having death inflicted on him he would
be subject to perpetual imprisonment; and in advocating
the lesser punishment, no amount of subsequent good
conduct should be sufficient to warrant the liberation of a
prisoner who has been guilty of murder; the sacred
rights of society demand his perpetual incarceration.
I make use of the term “ moral insanity” because
Beck, in his work on Medical Jurisprudence, says, “At


that stage physicians have not been able to detect in the
persons affected, any delusion or hallucination ; the power
of self-government is lost, or greatly impaired.”
The immortal Spurzheim speaks “ of the existence of
some of the natural propensities in such violence, that it
is impossible not to yield to them.”
Dr. Elliotson suggests “ the idea of such irresistible
violence as leads to crimnal acts.”
Esquirol says, “ There are madmen in whom it is
difficult to discover any trace of hallucination-.” We are
told that the results of this species of madness “ displays
itself in an irresistible propensity to commit murder,”
(homicidal mania.)
Lord Hale makes the remark, “ That all crime seems
to be the result of partial madness,” and I see no reason
to doubt the justness of his lordship’s conclusions.
Dr. Forbes Winslowe, a great modern authority, in
speaking of criminals who have committed crimes of
great atrocity , says, “ May not all these monstrous depar-
tures from ordinary and healthy modes of thought,
impulse, and action, constitute evidence not only of
depravity and vice in their ordinary signification, but of
undetected, unperceived, unrecognised, mental disease, in
all probability arising from cerebral irritation or physical
ill-health.
I must observe we cannot fail being impressed with
the striking resemblance between crime and insanity; in
many cases a murder committed by a madman, or by a
man reputed sane, the difference is inappreciable. In the
words of Beck “ what can be more alike than the anger of
the sane, and insane, what a similitude between the
maniac and the habitually passionate, between the melan-
cholic, and him who habitually broods over his malignant
and revengeful conceptions.”
Without doubt passion often overpowers the reason,
and a great crime whilst under the influence of passion is
committed. Philosophically considered, the effects of
violent passion is a species of temporary insanity, but the


sacred rights of civil society demand that they should be
treated as crimes, and should we not sufficiently uphold
those rights, by the punishment of perpetual imprison*
ment? Does the strangling of the criminal tend to
uphold those rights in any greater degree ?
Dr. Crawford in speaking of a criminal (one out of
many cases) whose whole life had been devoted to crime,
and who had suffered every punishment short of death and
all without effect, as a last resource, this criminal was
sent to a lunatic asjlum. Dr. Crawford adds, “he was
not insane, in the usual acceptation of the term but that
he considered him most properly treated when he was
handed over to a lunatic asylum because although his
brain was not diseased the extreme deficiency in the moral
organs, rendered him morally blind, just as the want of
eyes would render a man incapable of seeing,
A s I have fljefore observed, lunatics being held irres-
ponsible, suppose the principle were extended a little
farther, the effect would be, the chance of being considered
insane, being universally regarded with horror, and the
idea of a mad-house, conveying a something terrible to the
imagination of all men. If it were felt that a breach of
the laws might be deemed a proof of insanity, the tempta-
tion would at once be withdrawn from that large class of
criminals who commit crime for the sake of acquiring
notoriety or vague admiration of the public, and who
frequently select public characters for their attacks, in
order to gain notoriety, such criminals, if treated as
lunatics, would indeed have little to boast of, and the
stimulus to their criminal acts would at once be with-
drawn.
In considering the death punishment, it will be useful
to inquire if the criminal (prior to the perpetration of the
crime punishable with death) reflects upon the punishment
to which he is making himself amenable. Difficult as the
solution of this problem necessarily is, I believe the
true reply would be, that in the majority of cases the
culprit does not reflect at all; if this be so, then the


deterrent power necessarily is a failure. And my reason
for arriving at the conclusion is this, that if a burglary, ,
or other crime not punishable by death be about being
perpetrated, every possible disguise, every scheme, fre-
quently very ingenious ones, are brought to bear on the
plot; an ingenuity worthy of a better cause, so as to
escape detection ; and in these cases, personal liberty is
only at stake.
But what do we find when a homicide is committed ?
Why, with few exceptions, the perpetrator has laid wo
plot at all; he has in no way provided for his not being
detected. The recklessness of the murderer is the peculiar
characteristic of the crime—generally after having com-
mitted the crime, he either commits, or attempts to commit,
suicide, or delivers himself up to justice.
The reply of Townley, the murderer of Miss Goodwin,
to the question of the Lunacy Commissioners, is peculiarly
interesting ; the criminal said, “ That without forethought
of any kind, I killed Miss Goodwin, under the influence of
sudden impulse.” Be further said, and this bears on the
deterrent power, “ I expected to be hanged because I
killed her, and am not such a fool as not to know that
the law hangs for murder.” The advocates of capital
punishment insist that the dread of death is the strongest
feeling existing in the human breast ; if so, that might be a
good reason for continuing the punishment; but I think
that the common absence of disguise in committing a
murder points to the opposite conclusion. Indeed if we admit
the fact that the homicidal is most frequently accompanied
by the suicidal tendency, what becomes of the fear of death
if the person who commits the murder desires to destroy
himself, and the death punishment in such cases instead
of being of any efficacy, only gratifies the morbid desire
of the culprit.
In Great Britain, for five years ending in 1835
inclusive, there were thirty-one murders recorded; of
these ten surrendered themselves to justice, expressing a
perfect readiness, and in some cases eager desire, to meet
their fate. In three cases the murder was followed by


the immediate suicide of the culprit. In two cases, the
culprit attempted suicide previous to the perpetration of
his crime; and in five, their general conduct shewed the
absence of any wish to avoid their fate ; making a total
of twenty-one cases out of thirty-one, in which a desire
for self-destruction was more or less clearly manifested.
A few more recent cases, perpetrated in the mother
country in the years 1862 and 1863, may be w T orthy of
notice, as shewing the inefficacy of the death punish-
ment.
Catherine Wilson, (a modern Borgia), who was exe-
cuted for the poisoning of Mrs. Soames. This culprit
maintained a stern reserve to the last, and died with a
lie on her lips, asserting her innocence, although there
could be no doubt of her guilt.
Gilbert, the murderer of Miss Hall, was quite in-
different to his Vate, and at his execution appeared to
take no notice of the proceedings.
A woman named Cole murdered her child, and then
committed suicide ; the only motive which could be
assigned was, that she had expressed a fear “ that the
child should come to want.”
Joseph Mockford poisoned his two*children, and then
committed suicide.
Mrs. Yyse poisoned her two children, and then at-
tempted to commit suicide. This case is known as the
Ludgate-hill Tragedy.
Taylor and his wife (the Manchester Tragedy),
assassinated Mr. Mellor in the most open manner, also
poisoned his three children; after the commission of these
crimes, the culprits made no attempt to escape, nor any
denial of the deed.
Robert Burton, a youth only eighteen years of age,
murdered an inoffensive boy, and then gave himself up to
justice, averring “ that he wished to be hanged.” On his
trial he pleaded guilly, but at the suggestion of the
presiding judge, Wightman, withdrew his plea. The
prisoner again repeated his wish to be hanged. After
sentence of death was passed upon him, he coolly thanked


the judge ; and since his conviction has shewn no repen-
tance, but expresses the same desire to be hanged.
A man named Gair attacked a woman in her sleep,
nearly severed her head from her body, and then com-
mitted suicide.
Brooks, who was executed for the murder of a
policeman, at Acton, although he confessed to having been
implicated in the murder, but that his hand did not fire
the fatal shot, refused to name his accomplice.
George Voss, a youth only nineteen years of age, was
executed for the murder of a woman named Docherty.
He acknowledged his guilt, but appeared quite indifferent
to his fate, eating a hearty breakfast, and smoking a pipe
within an hour of his execution.
Alexander Milne murdered James Patterson, avowed
the act, and gave himself up to justice.
Hunt, who poisoned his wife and two children in a
cab, after the deed, committed suicide.
William Wright, the account of whose execution
arrived by the January mail, murdered his paramour,
Maria Green. Both the murderer and his victim were
under the influence of drink. After having committed
the deed the culprit, who, up to the commission of'the
crime, bore the character of being a quiet, inoffensive
man, remained alongside the body, making no attempt to
escape ; on being apprehended he said, “ take me away,
it is all right, I did it.” On his trial he pleaded guilty.
Extraordinary exertions were made by the inhabitants of
London that his life should be spared, but
without avail. And I will take this oppor-
tunity of remarking, that as in this case
where many thousands of respectable people, comprising
amongst them medical men, magistrates, barristers, and
members of Parliament, expressed their decided opinion
against i he death punishment, that, generally speaking,
their united opinions commonly tend towards the right
direction,
I do not go the length of believing in “ Vox Populi
Vox Dei,” or “the voice of the people being the voice of


God ; ” but the calm deliberate expression of a particular
opinion of a large mass of reputable individuals may
generally be depended upon. And lam happy to record
that other countries are moving in the good cause. In
Portugal the ministry have proposed the abolition of
capital punishment, and to their honor, have made it a
ministerial measure.
Townley, the murderer of Miss Goodwin, (known as
the WigwellGrange murder,) after having cut his victim’s
throat, assisted her home, and made no attempt to escape;
his conduct evinced the idea that he had performed a
meritorious act. The Rev. C.R. Gordon, who ministered to
him in the condemned cell, says that Townley expresses
a delight that his life is to be taken ; he justifies murder
without giving a reason; and in his calm moments, when
asked how he came to commit the murder, he replies,
“ All was dark before my eyes ; I don’t know anything
about it.” He received sentence of death without emotion,
but did not suffer the extreme penalty, his sentence having
been commuted to penal servitude for life.
Of these fourteen murderers jive added to their
crime by committing suicide after perpetrating the deed.
Eight either surrendered themselves to justice, or
evinced by their conduct and not attempting to escape, an
entire indifference to their kite, one of whom confessed to
having committed the deed expressly that he might be
hanged; and one, after condemnation, although confessing
his guilt, refused to further the ends of justice by
naming his accomplice ; and it is worthy of remark that
nit one of these murders was committed for the usual
cause of crime, viz., for the sake of lucre.
Now, it will be evident that the death punishment
was contemplated prior to the commission of the
homicides, and in effect the confession and surrender of the
culprits was in fact an indirect suicide.
Dr. James Johnson remarks, “ there are cases on
record where the mono manic lacks courage to commit
suicide, or cannot make up his mind as to the means of
accomplishing it, under which circumstances he has com-


mitted a capital crime, with the view of being capitally
punished.”
The case of Burton, (which I have just narrated) who
murdered the boy for the avowed object of being hanged
is a case exactly in point.
But in proof that the dread of death is not so power-
ful as is generally supposed, what do we find in the
lowest and uneducated class, —the class who commit nearly
all the crime—and this prompts me to ask all your influence
in favour of educating and not hanging, why we find
an extraordinary recklessness where their own lives are
concerned, astounding risks are incurred for an almost
nominal advantage, or to save trouble.
To uphold the death punishment on the ground that
the fear of death deters the criminal from committing the
crime, we ought to be able to shew that the preservation
of life is a feeling that predominates in the classes who
are most prone to crime, but I submit to you that the
reverse is the case. To induce the lower classes to use
precautions for the preservation of their lives is most
difficult.
The miner, in the coal mine, refuses or neglects the
use of the safety lamp, although he knows the probable
fatal results of his neglect. In 1862 no less than 1163
lives were sacrificed in Great Britain in collieries by
accidents; a portion of this lamentable waste of human
life was attributable in many cases to the want of due
precaution taken by the miners. The grinder of steel
goods at the Sheffield manufactories refuses, more often
than neglects, to use the chimney by which the minute
particles of steel, so fatal to human life, become innocuous.
In fact, the lower we descend in the scale of civilisation
and virtue, the more feebly does the value of life operate
upon mankind.
The lower grade do not habitually restrain their
passions, which—owing to the non-cultivation of the
higher sentiments, unduly preponderate —and immediate
gratification, without reference to the consequences, is the
result.


With the educated and benevolent man the reverse
is the case; men with minds of a high standard dread
death if occasioned by a disobedience of laws, human or
divine; but on the other hand, when not so occasioned,
are prepared to meet it with firmness and resignation.
The fear of death, as I have shown, having been proved
insufficient, is it not probable that were the criminal to
know that he would not be put to death, but that a terrible
and hopeless imprisonment for life would be the conse-
quence of his shedding blood, everything tending to
gratify his suicidal desire being removed thereby, if might
be that the dread of the punishment being not evanescent,
as the death punishment is, would have the effect of
causing him to curb his animal passions, and to stop just
at the point of gratification.
In advocating that the murderer should be subjected
to a perpetual imprisonment, a portion of which should
be solitary, I consider that no subsequent repentance or
reformation, should warrant the prisoner in being released ;
because he who has once shed blood should never again
have the opportunity of committing a similar crime.
Nor should he be allowed on any account to have the
chance of perpetuating the homicidal mania which most
murderers possess by transmitting it to posterity.
The French law partially adopts the imprisonment I
am now advocating, viz., in cases of murder, giving a
power, or rather a discretion to the jury to return a
verdict of “ guilty of murder with extenuating circum-
stances,” and of which they frequently avail themselves.
When that rider is attached to the verdict, the death
penalty is never enforced; and I am not aware that any
thing bad has resulted from this law; nor that murders
are more numerous, or of greater atrocity, in France than
in England.
One case out of a many, will suffice as an example,
that the sanguinary Draconian code is not followed in
France, as it is in Great Britain or under British law.
On December 27, 1863, a farmer named Blachon,
aged 63, was tried at the court of Assizes of the Loire,


for an attempt to murder M. Desfarges, Juge de Paix at
St. Rambert. Blachon’s enmity was excited against
the judge, owing to an adverse decision having
been pronounced by the judge against him. The
prisoner laid in wait, and shot the judge in the back
as he was returning from church. The wound did
not prove mortal. The prisoner was found guilty, and
sentenced to ten year’s imprisonment. Now the only
distinguishing feature between this case and that of
Manns, the escort robber, who was executed, is this that
Blachon’s was a case of much greater atrocity; Manns’
complicity was only proved by his being present during
the attack on the escort; whether murder was intended at
all, or whether the firing was for the purpose of intimida-
tion only, is a matter of doubt; indeed between the two
crimes an attempted assassination and a highway robbery,
the distinguishing characteristics are too marked to require
comment. Yet on one side of the channel death
is the penalty, and on the other side, imprisonment.
That an incarceration for life without hope of release
would not be a more severe punishment to the criminal
than hanging, I think no one would be so hardy as to deny.
Why, in such an imprisonment there is a gibbet for
every hour : no hope, reminding me of the Hell of Dante,
over whose dread portals that sublirnest of geniuses in-
scribes in his immortal poem, “ Here Hope never enters.”
No escape, a terrible doom which comprehends the for
ever, to wake day after day a hopeless captive; and to
prove that perpetual imprisonment is a severer punish-
ment than death, we need only examine what a criminal
has to undergo in prison—deprived of liberty, obliged to
submit to strict discipline, debarred from the indulgence
in spirituous liquors, compelled to labor, and
at the close of each day’s work locked
up like a wild beast in his den for twelve weary
hours in a dark cell, a prey to his gloomy thoughts,
not permitted to indulge in obscene language, cut off from
all his vicious associates, and all his most deeply
cherished gratifications disallowed. Now all this to a


man who has run riot in every vice, who has lived by
fraud and violence, whose associates have been the most
degraded of both sexes, and who has spent his nights in
debauchery—to such a man is one of the severest punish-
ments conceivable, as great a punishment as it would be
to a respectable member of society—for instance a clergy-
man —to be doomed to associate with thieves and
drunkards, to be compelled to listen to blasphemy,
obscene language, and every emanation of a brutal mind
without any power of complaint or remonstrance. The
pain felt in this instance would not exceed that felt upon
being on a sudden forced to abandon the gratification of
vices long cherished, and the indulgence of every selfish
feeling ; yet in the latter case, the pain inflicted
would be the reverse of revenge ; it would tend to reform,
to regenerate the culprit.
I feel the impossibility of justifying the death
punishment on the ground that it cuts off all hope of a
true and lengthened repentance, and excludes all
reformation of the criminal, and in this sentiment that
highly distinguished scholar, Gilbert Wakefield, who is a
consistent advocate for the Abolition of Capital Punish-
ment concurs. The repentance between the sentence
and execution is too often a barren void. The criminal
can scarcely realise his position; a mental paralysis; the
thought always present of standing on the brink of the
great gulf, an undying worm gnawing without cessation
at the heart and brain, or perhaps with reckless hardihood
standing at bay, as a savage at the stake, or the converse
displaying the extreme of abject cowardice; the phantom
of the gibbet haunts the miserable wretch day and night,
to the exclusion of better thoughts.
No more fearful state of mind can be conceived than
that which is displayed by some culprits at the last
moment; a savage indifference, alternated with remorse
and despair; or sullen apathy of the soul, hard as adamant.
An equally strong reason against the death punishment
is this: that by statistics of crime, we find that the
homicidal and suicidal mania go hand in hand together,


from which I derive this, that in some cases (as in
Burton’s murder of the hoy,) the punishment of death
has been the cause of murders having been committed by
criminals, who, possessing the suicidal tendency, have
committed murders in order that they might meet death
at the hands of the common hangman. These men,
although they possess a strong desire to commit suicide,
do not possess the animal courage sufficient to commit it
on their own persons.
The following cases are on record :
Hadfield, who shot at George 111., gave as a reason,
“ he wished to die.”
Joseph Henri, who attempted to kill Louis Phillip,
upon being sentenced to hard labour for life, said, “ That
is not what I expected ; I implore to be put to death as
a favour and an act of grace.”
Tscheck, who in 1844 attacked the king of Prussia,
evinced the same disposition.
The recent case of Burton, who committed the murder
for the express purpose of being hanged.
In addition to these cases, the repeated attempts
upon the life of Queen Victoria must be familiar to you
all. One of these ruffians who attacked the Queen de-
clared “ he was tired of his life;” but the most remarkable
feature in these attacks upon the Queen, and which
proves my proposition to demonstration is this, that it
was thought advisable to repeal the law, it being then a
capital offence, and make an assault upon the Queen
punishable by imprisonment and whipping. The effect
of this alteration in the law was very significant, the
crime entirely ceased, the criminals’ desire for death
was no longer gratified
I now propound this question : —Can executions be
upheld on the ground of being an example ? To which I
reply emphatically that they have upon the spectators a
most pernicious effect, and in this opinion Lord Brougham,
Lord Campbell, and other law lords concur. The
terrible scenes enacted at the foot of the gallows have
been graphically described by Dickens; the spectacle


awakens more pity for the sufferer than respect for the
law. It is notorious th >t at the foot of the gallows the
pickpocket pursues his nefarious occupation, obscene
language is heard on all sides, and an assemblage of all
the most depraved characters of both sexes are congre-
gated, whose eyes are eagerly fixed upon a miserable
wretch with a rope round his neck, devouring his every
look and gesture, and brutally commenting upon them;
eager as a Roman in a gladiatorial amphitheatre for the
fatal denouement. Nor is it uncommon in London for
the sum of three guineas to be given for a good seat to
view the spectacle, and organised and placarded pleasure
trains run on the railways to bring people from the
surrounding districts to witness the execution.
It is on record that at the execution of Bishop and
Williams, who for an almost new species of
murder, styled from its author “ Burking,” that when
the drop fell the mob gave several tremendous cheers, a
sad commentary upon the efficacy of the punishment as an
example.
A similar scene occurred on the 12th January last,
upon the execution in London of Samuel Wright, who
murdered his paramour. The moment he was seen by
the crowd there were loud cries of “ shame,” “ bravo,”
God bless you my lad,” “ judicial murder,” accompanied
with great yelling and hooting, and whilst the fatal pre-
parations were being made at least a dozen preachers were
exhorting the mob, hymns were sung, but alas ! to little
purpose, the sacred tunes being drowned by the discordant
refrain of many comic ditties; at times there were tipsy
shoutings and brawlings, and some three hours before the
execution the brutal occupants of the benches, tables, and
floors of the public houses locked in drunken slumber,
were turned into the street, so as to make room for more
profitable customers. Again the preachers shouted, the
mob sang and laughed, and, most terrible to relate on such
a sad occasion, there was no lack of rough practical
joking, and when some drunken ruffians began kissing all
the women near them, shrieks and roars of merriment


arose. And to crown the brutality, ragged garments, caps,
hats and occasionally old boots were thrown at the heads
of the preachers.
And at the execution of the five pirates at Newgate
last February, if it be possible, scenes of greater depravity
were displayed; and organised bands of robbers assaulted
and plundered every person whose appearance indicated
the possession of portable property.
Such scenes as these to take place upon such tragical
and mournful occasions, is abhorrent to every well con-
stituted mind, and speaks volumes as to the inefficacy of
an execution as an example, and the baneful effects on
the spectators of such revolting exhibitions.
But any thing that tends to bring crime prominently
before the public is a suggestion to crime ; it tends to
bring into play the initiative faculty so inherent in the
breasts of all, but more especially in those whose animal
passions are not properly regulated. Happy would it be
for the rising generation if it were possible that the
details of all atrocious crimes and suicides were never
published by the press.
Now, what effect had this execution of Bishop and
Williams as an example or as a preventative ? v* hy, the
worst imaginable. The result was, that this peculiar
mode of murder for the purpose of obtaining subjects for
dissection (until then almost unknown, so novel as to be
characterised by a distinguishing name, viz., “ Burking,”
because so common) the publication of the crime was in
fact a suggestion to the criminal; the fatal propensity of
imitation was excited so many murders of a similar
character occured that the Legislature had to introduce
an act, styled the “ Anatomy Act,” to legalise the giving
dead bodies to the surgeons. Indeed, any crime to which
the public attention is particularly directed, has a terrible
fascination for morbid minds, and a pernicious effect by
administering to the passion for diseased excitement.
The imitative character of criminals to which I have
just adverted is illustrated in a most ghastly manner by
the horrible fashion of committing suicide in public.


Three cases out of many will suffice, two of the suicides
being committed on consecutive days.
On June sth, 186'!, a gentleman dressed in black,
deliberately kneeled down in Fenchurch-street in the
middle of the day, placed his head on the roadway in
front of a loaded waggon, which, passing over his head,
caused instant death.
On the following day, June 6th, in the Barnet-road, in
broad daylight, a respectable-looking man, as an omnibus
was approaching, and before any one could interfere,
deliberately removed his neckerchief and cut his throat
in sight of the passengers.
On January 2nd, 1864, on the London and Hamp-
stead Junction Railway, Robert Young, of Kentish
Town, deliberately placed his head on the rails in front of
an advancing train, which passed over him ; he was taken
up frightfully mangled, and died the same evening.
Similar imitation was displayed in attempted suicides
from the Monument in London, —a person having pre-
cipitated himself from the top of the Monument. The
attempts by other parties to destroy themselves in the
same manner became so frequent as to compel the
authorities to close the structure to the public. The
remarks of Hill upon this subject, are very pertinent.
“It is notorious as a general rule that any act to
which the public attention is powerfully attracted,
whether it be a murder, a suicide, or other deed of an
exciting kind, is likely to be followed by similar acts.
In truth, there are always many people whose reason has
so slender a control over their feelings, that no sooner is
an idea connected with their strong predispositions forcibly
presented to their mind, than the feeling becomes un-
conquerable, and it takes its course regardless of con-
sequences.”
But an excellent commentary upon the example
which the witnessing an execution produces is this : that
to uphold it on that ground—if it really be so good an
example as is pretended—it would be the duty of all good


men to attend an execution, accompanied with their
dearest relatives.
What would be thought of him who took his wife or
child to witness the revolting spectacle ? I need not answer
the question. Why, again is the hangman viewed as a
reptile, whose touch would contaminate ? hy is he an
outcast of society, shunned on all sides, even by the
lowest and most wretched. Whereas to uphold the prin-
ciple, his office ought to be deemed most honorable, he
being the minister only of a worthy action.
But, I think, a conclusive answer to my question—
Can executions be upheid on the ground of being an
example—may be found in the Act of the I egislature of
this colony, passed in 1853, causing all executions to be
private, abrogating public executions, and I find that
the same law prevails now in Prussia, Saxony, Wur-
temburg, and the United States; a tacit admission that
executions in public are injurious to the public morals,
and a failure as an example. To my mind the doing the
legal strangling in secret seems terribly repulsive and
un-English. Is the punishment more efficacious because
secret? The secrecy certainly does away altogether with the
example of which is so much vaunted, as thousands of
people who do not peruse the details in a newspaper do
not even know what punishment the culprit has received,
or rather are ignorant if punishment at all has followed the
crime.
That executions are barbarous and cruel, and in some
cases cause actual torture to the culprit, is another
reason for their condemnation. The harrowing details of
the protracted death of Manns, the escort robber, must be
fresh in your memory, how he was, after being half
strangled, carried again up to the fatal tree, his sufferings
having been prolonged for more than a quarter of an hour;
and this is by no means an isolated case, for a similar
scene occurred at Chester a few months since, upon the
execution of Alice Heritt, for matricide ; on the bolt being
drawn the drop would not hill, a second attempt was made
but with the same result, all this time the doomed woman


exclaiming “ make haste,” and each time the bolt was
withdrawn she gave an agonizing shriek ; the third time
the drop was loosened, but horrible to relate her sufferings
were prolonged and aggravated by the incomplete adjust-
ment of the rope.
In perusing such details as these, we might almost
imagine we were listening to the romantic tales by Cooper,
of barbarities committed by North American Indians
instead of atrocities perpetrated under the sanction of law,
by a civilised nation in the nineteenth century.
Another very strong reason why the death punish-
ment should be a thing of the past, presents itself very
forcibly to my mind, and must be equally strong upon the
minds of all of you, and that is the possibility of an
innocent man being executed —such cases are on record —
and may with the best intentioned juries again occur, and
with your permission I will read you three letters which I
have received from that venerable and benevolent
clergyman, the Rev. Arch Priest'i herry, on this point.
Balmain, 13<h April 1864.
Dear Sir,
I have been this morning favored by the receipt of your letter of the 11th
instant, requesting information'Cgarding persons who having: been formerly tried,
found guilty by a verdict of a jury and sentenced to death by a judge of the
Supreme Court were afterwards either pardoned, or had their sentence mitigated in
consequence of the a ridental discovery of evidence that the parties were perfectly
innocent, or that the charges werenot sufficiently proved ; and in reply beg to say, that
several cases of the above description have come under my observation in this colony
during the last forty-four years, bnt as I have not time at present to refer to documents
I can only briefly allude to some of them without giving names or dates, which,
however, may be ascertained by a reference to the records of the Supreme Court or
to the columns of the Government Gazette , under the government of his Excellency
Governor Macquarie. 1 believe in 1820. I applied to the principal police
magistrate, D'Arcy Wentworth, Esq., in behalf of three men (Protestants) who were
in the Sydney gaol under sentence of death and who, as 1 then believed, as I do now,
were perfectly guiltless of the charge brought against them This gentleman told
me in reply, that the Governor would not hear the case if brought before him In a
sh rt time, not many weeks, this magistrate told me that the real perpetrators of the
robbery for which the three innocent men were executed, were discovered, and that as
they could not be tried were quietly sent to Port Macquarie, then a penal settlement.
Shortly after I discovered that another man, also a Protestant, who had been
sentenced to death, was innocent and that be was to be banged on the morning of
that discovery. I went immediately to Government House to see the Govern 1 r, who
being unwe 1 refused to see me. I then applied to the Colonial Secretary, Major
Gonlburn, who said he should see him, and having seen him obtained pardon for the
poor young man, whilst nroceeding to the scaffold with the rope about his neck. The
mail of our local post office is about to be closed
Faithfully y'urs,
Frederick Lee, Esq. , <J. J. THERRf, A, P.
269, George Street, Sydney.


„ „ Balmain, 22nd April, 1864.
Mt Dear Sir 1
In c. mphance with the request conveyed to me in your letter of the 20'h
instant and with the hope of assisting you in your ex' eedingly praiseworthy effort#
to have the putishiDfnt of death abolished, I shall furnish you with a few cases
which may contribute, when well managed by you, at least to your partial success.
At (he old gaol in George-street I had to attend the execution of a Oath lie piisoner,
whom I believed to be innocent of the crime for which he was tried and found gniliy,
1 could not obtain his pardon, the law was to take its course. After an interval of
(30) thirty years, this identical man came from a distance of 200 miles with a letter
from the Rev. Father Magennis. now of Appin, then of Yass. stating that the
bearer had declared to him than he could not die in peace till he should have an
opportunity of personal y thanking me for having saved his life. When the drop of
the scaffold fell the rope was broken, and the moment he reached the ground, and
whilst lung on it he instantaneously said with a loud voice in my presence that he
wa« an innocent man. The Sheriff, at my request, delayed the execution till he end I
should have made a communication to tbe Governor on the subject, who was
providentially at home at the time. The results were a respite, investigation, a
mitigation of sentence, and pardon. I must now attend to other duties.
„ J. J. THERRY.
Frederick Lee Esq.,
269 George Street Sydney.
, Balmain, 17th May, 1864.
My Dear Fir,
Having when looking for other papers, met with the enclosed, which is alluded
to In the last letter I had the honor to address to yon, and knowing that yon take
very groat interest in the matter with which it is connected,! beg leave to send it you.
Most sincerely yonrs
JOHN JOSEPH THERRY.
Frederick Lee, E-q.
Yass, 17th April, 1856.
Vert Rev and Dear Father Therrt,
This is to certify that the bearer of this note is Willism Cartayne, who had
been attend< dby you at the scaffold in Sydney many years pa t. The rope however,
having broken, and year charitable interference with the then Gover or of the Colony
incline him to have the pleasure of seeing you before he leaves this world.
Believe me, my dear Father Therry,
Aff, ctionately ypnrs
R MAGENNIS.
Vert Rev J. Therry.
In all other punishments if a great wrong be com-
mitted it may be amended, but if a sad mistake be made
nothing can compensate for tbe disgraceful death, and the
anguish and torture of the dearest relatives. The terrible
remorse of the jury who pronounced the fatal word
“ guilty,’’and some consideration is due to the prosecutor,
upon whose testimony—possibly most honest, perhaps
mistaken identity—an innocent man has suffered. Can
you conceive the indescribable remorse and regret can
you picture to yourselves the suffering a greater torture,
that by his mistake a fellow creature has earned an


ignominious death ? Should a doubt only arise afier the
sentence is executed, the revulsion must be terrible.
The efficacy of the punishment of death may be
tested by a recent case in this colony : I allude to Manns
the escort robber, whose life I used every possible exertion
to have spared without avail, although backed with a
petition for mercy signed by 16,000 persons, which I,
as one of the deputation, presented to the Governor ; the
answer, the stereotyped reply, “an example must be
made,” as if there were no other punisnment but death
capable of producing an example. And what was the
effect of the so-called example ? The best test is, did it
repress the crime ? IS 1 o, it had a contrary effect, for by a
pailiamentary paper I find that in the space of two
short months after that, no less than thirty-three
highway robberies of a similar character were
perpetrated. Again, a reason in favour of abolish-
ing the death punishment consists in this, that all
testimony capable of being used for the punishment, and
consequent prevention of crime dies with the criminal by
the infliction of death. It incites the principle of “ honor
amongst thieves,” a criminal who is about being hanged,
will die as it is termed in slang, but terrible language,
u game;” whatever confession he may make, he generally
will not inculpate his partners in crime. In fact, for a
culprit after sentence of death to confess anything wffiich
shall in the criminal’s language bring his associates into
trouble, ‘‘is a very rare case.” Now let us suppose the
culprit instead of being hanged being in seclusion in
prison for life ; after the lapse of a short period the moral
and religious feelings being cultivated, and the baser
passions being suppressed, the nobler sentiments will
assert their supremacy. In the solitude of a prison the
mind becomes pre-disposed to receive moral impressions,
as with the muscles so with the human mind —without
action there can be no vigour. The heart once opened
softens by use, gradually and unconsciously —the inter-
change of thought with the chaplain, ordinarily possessing
an upright and ingenious mind, has sown the good seed.


The culprit, for the first time, looks into himself, takes a
retrospective and fearful review of his past guilty career,
remorse and repentance succeed. He, tor the first time,
sees his crime as a crime, and as a small proof
of his sincerity furthers the ends of justice by giving such
information as would be most beneficial to society. And
is my proposition so monstrous that a murderer should
receive the severest punishment short of death ? If it be
so, i am proud in saying that I err in illustrious company,
for Lord Brougham, that unwearied advocate of progress,
who is a strong supporter of the Abolition of Capital
Punishment, has said, “ it is doubtless a great evil for a
man fo be murdered, but that in reason is no argument
for inflicting death upon the murderer ” Another great
objection to the capital punishment is, that it causes the
administration of the law to be uncertain, and the more
certainty in the punishment, the less temptation to commit
the crime. And in proof of my assertion, a larger propor-
tion of murderers escape punishment than any other class
of criminals. English statistics prove this fact. From
1846 to 1863 inclusive, of 586 persons committed for
murder, only 134 were convicted, and of those only 73
wore executed. But during the same period, 4792 persons
were committed for housebreaking, of these 3962 were
convicted, and only 828 acquitted. When it was a capital
offence to steal any amount to the value of five shillings,
the capital sentence was constantly evaded by juries com-
mitting a pious fraud, and finding the property (although
worth a hundred times as much) of less value than was
required by the statute, notwithstanding this evasion the
cruel sentence was too often carried into execution. In
1785 no less than 97 persons were executed for this offence,
and to the disgrace of the age be it related, twenty
human beings suffered at one time under this bloody
statute, for this paltry offence against property.
The same desire to evade the capital penalty occurs
constantly in our criminal trials in this colony. I
remember a recent case:—An aged man, named Scott,
who was tried at the Sydney Criminal Court, and who


ha<i hitherto borne an excellent character, was
indicted for firing a pistol at a man, and wounding him in
a drunken brawl. The crime was committed under great
provocation There were two counts, one a capital count,
and the other not capital. Now had the first count only
subjected the prisoner to, say not exceeding fourteen years,
transportation, instead of death, and the second count as it
did to three years imprisonment, the jury would have found
the prisoner guilty on the first count, instead of on the
second; and the probability (I may say certainty)
is, that had there been no escape from a capital
conviction, the jury would have acquitted the prisoner.
But a case which occurred on the 7th April last at the
Criminal Court at Maitland, is a demonstrable proof of the
aversion juries evince to the capital punishment.
John Sievers was indicted for wounding, with intent
to murder, John Vf U ck. There were two counts in the
indictment, the first capital, the second not capital. The
jury asked the presiding Judge, Wise, “If they found the
prisoner guilty on the first count, (viz., the capital count)
with a strong recommendation to mercy, would his Honor
exert his influence to see the recommendation carried
out?” To which his Honor replied, “whatever might be
fhe result of their verdict it was their duty to return a
verdict according to their conscience.” Upon receiving
this ambiguous reply, the foreman immediately, without
any further consideration, performed his duty by return-
ing a verdict of guilty on the second count, and the
prisoner was sentenced to fifteen years hard labor on the
roads. The supporters of the death penalty will charge
this jury with a sympathy for crime, but the proof that
no such sympathy existed is apparent by the verdict
being “ Guilty.” Sympathy would have resulted in an
•acquittal. The dictum of the judges that juries have
nothing to do with the sentence, but are bound to return
a verdict regardless of consequences, is in theory true,
but in practice generally disregarded by all intelligent
jurymen; they in fact do consider the effect of their
verdict, and all the laws and all the judges in the universe


would not prevent it. The opinion of Sir Samuel Romilly
is worthy of notice: “ That the extreme severity of
penal laws was not in practice effectual lor the prevention
of crime ; but on the contrary by increasing the difficulty
of convicting offenders, affords them impunity, and in
most cases renders their punishment extremely uncertain ”
Sir T. F. Buxton and Sir James Macintosh (who
with Sir Samuel Romilly used every exertion in Parlia-
ment to diminish the number of death punishments) also
concurred in that opinion.
It is no less remarkable than true, that the abolition
of the death punishment for minor crimes has always
resulted in the diminution of those crimes ; and this seems
to me to be an irresistible argument in favor of the
abolition of the capital punishment for murder. The
remarks of Mr. Justice Blackstone are very pertinent:
after having lamented the existence of 160 crimes punish-
able with death, that learned judge adds, “so dreadful a
list instead of diminishing, increases the number of
offenders.”
If the extreme penalty be insufficient to deter men
from committing crimes to which they are impelled by
comparatively slight motives, how can it be expected to
prove efficacious in deterring a criminal from committing
a homicide to which crime over-whelming impulses prompt
him ? In minor cases the milder punishment has been
found to be more efficacious; —why should it not prove as
efficacious in the major ? The abdition of this revolting
punishment would make the punishment of the criminal
more certain and lessen crime :—criminals would not then
be able to reckon, as they now do, on the unwillingness
of witnesses to give evidence, and on juries to convict for
a capital offence, which would consign the culprit to the
gallows. Juries would find a verdict of guilty in cases
v here they now frequently acquit; they would be relieved
from the grave responsibility which at present rests upon
their verdict should any unhappy mistake be made. All
the eclat and romance of crime, so reproductive of similar
results—tie desire to know every movement of the


criminal in the condemned cell—the sympathy for the
criminal, the crime being forgotten in the magnitude of
the punishment—and all the false sentiments so appre-
ciated by the mob and the criminal’s associates in crime,
would fall to the ground, and the criminal would appear
in his true colors, divested of all false sympathy, he
would be seen in his naked deformity.
One argument I have heard advanced in favor of
capital punishment is, “ that the expense of keeping the
culprit in prison during his natural life would be an
improper burden on the public.” That such a miserable
argument should be advanced, touching the life of an
erring fellow creature, makes me blush for humanity. Let
me beseech those parties who advance such opinions to
reflect and remember that they themselves are not
infallible. It mhy be well here to adduce an incident,
mentioned in Dr. Johnson’s life of Boerhaave, one of the
most illustrious of European physicians, When (says
Dr. Johnson) Boerhaave heard of a criminal condemned
to die, he used to think who can tell whether this man is
not better than I; or if am better, it is not to be ascribed
to myself, but to the goodness of God.”
Can any of us sincerely say, that under certain cir-
cumstances were we placed in a particular position, and
under a particular temptation, that we should be proof
against the commission of crime—that we possess no pas-
sions, no heedless impulse which might lead to sorrow,
shame, and despair ! How many cases have there not been
of men of frivolous character, devoid of ambition, or of
any great stimulus to evil—men whose minds are, * may
say without impropriety, in a state of equilibrium for
good or evil, who from want of thought or facility off
temper, from an inability to pronounce that simple mono-
syllable “ No!” —the rubicon once passed have been
gradually led from one step to another, until they have
been imperceptibly plunged into the veriest depth of
human depravity.
“ The first step passed, compels us on to more;
And guilt proves fate, which was but choice 1 before,"


In my humble opinion, and I think you will agree with
me, "that no pecuniary consideration should weigh one
grain against the important interests at stake—the
reformation of an immortal soul. But the pecuniary
argument, if there be any strength in it, will apply with
equal force to a criminal convicted for any offence not
capital; for instance, a forger, who receives a sentence
of seven years imprisonment; and to make the supporters
of this argument consistent they ought to be prepared to
execute every criminal who is found guilty of committing
a crime—the gallows would be the grand and cheap
Panacea.
Another point has been urged against the A holitioa
of Capital Punishment, and which at -first sight I
candidly confess appeared to me to have some force ,* it is
this, that in the perpetration of a highway robbery, with
the knowledge that the punishment would be imprison-
ment whether the criminal did or did not murder his
victim, that in order to- destroy testimony he would
commit the murder, but the difference of the term of
imprisonment—in one case for a specified term, with the
hope of being released even before the expiration of the
sentence dependant upon good behaviour, and in the
other case perpetual imprisonment, without the possibility
of a hope of being released—would, I think, do away with
this objection.
That many criminals have been executed who ought
properly to have been consigned to a lunatic asylum is
another reason, and a very strong one, in favor of the
abolition of the death punishment. To hang a man who
is not responsible for his conduct is as ridiculous as it is
cruel. The vagaries of courts of law on this subject are
worthy of notice; the motive seems to be the point upon
which the belief in the sanity or the insanity rests ; if
no motive can be traced, the prisoner stands a chance of
being considered insane, and escaping the death
punishment.
Some years since the lamented Dr* Cut hill, of this
city, was assassinated by a monomaniac, and on the


criminal’s trial the jury were told by the judge the
following fallacy—not less a fallacy because it is strictly
correct in law—“ A Ithough the mind of the prisoner were
diseased, if he knew the nature of the act he had com-
mitted he would be criminally responsible for the act;”
and a similar charge was made to the jury by the learned
Judge Baron Martin, on the recent trial in England of
Townley for the murder of Miss Goodwin, and in both
cases the juries pronounced a verdict of guilty, and
sentence of death followed.
But this theory, “ as to the knowledge of the nature
of the act,” is opposed to all medical science. The majority
of madmen do perfectly will know the nature of their
acts. One of the evidences of lunacy is, not that the mad-
man does not know the nature or consequence of his acts,
but that he does which sane men would not do. The
sane man not alone can appreciate the cause and effect,
but in addition has the power of restraining himself.
When the madman puts a pistol to his head, does he not
well know the effect of pulling the trigger —the poisonous
draught to his mouth—the razor to his throat, that
they will destroy life whatever course he
pursues for the purpose of self-destruction, is
it not with a distinct view of adapting the means
to the end ? Cases are reported in medical works
of patients so well knowing the nature of their acts, that
they deliberately ask, prior to the paroxysm, as a favor
to be restrained; others who have an irresistible desire to
commit suicide (a very common form of madness) have
also consulted their medical adviser, and begged him to
take steps to prevent their consummating the crime;
others again have an uncontrollable desire to kill some of
their dearest relatives, but are so conscious of their loss
of the power of self-restraint that they call upon their
relatives to fly.
Dr. Chown, upon the trial of Oxford for an attack
upon Queen Victoria, gave the following evidence:
“I have patients often come to consult me who are
impelled to commit suicide without any motive for so


doing; they tell me they are happy and comfortable in
other respects, but that they have a strong desire to
commit suicide.” Does not this show that it is quite
consistent for a person to be insane, and yet to have a
perfect knowledge of what he is about, and a clear
perception of the effect of his acts ?
To sum up in accordance with all the great medical
authorities on the subject—insanity more frequently
shews itself in the absence of self-command than in a
want of the apprehension of consequences. That, indeed,
it is not at all inconsistent with madness for the madman
to possess a full knowledge of right and wrong, a perfect
perception of the relations of sequences, but with this
fatal accompaniment, a total inability to abstain from
doing that which is wicked, fatal, or absurd. Indeed,
with the present nicelegal distinction, upholding the
responsibility of the criminal although insane, if he know
the nature of his acts, a man may be held to be sane
according to law who in fact, is really mad. And to
prove to you that this is no crude opinion of my own, I
need only refer you to the report of the Lunacy Commis-
sioners, who by the direction of Sir George Grey,
examined into the state .of mind of Townley, the mur-
derer of Miss Goodwin, whilst that criminal was under
sentence of death in the condemned cell. Those Com-
missioners report—“ We do not consider this criminal to
be of sound mind; at the same time, according to the law
of the land, he was responsible for his actions ” Now,
to punish an irresponsible man with death is simply
cruel; the most humane course would be, to place him in
an asylum, beyond the possibility of committing any
further crime against society; any other course is truly
impolitic and unjust, fcir William Ellis, no mean
authority, says, “ We frequently pass erroneous judg-
ments, sometimes wrongly acquitting, sometimes
sentencing a culprit to death for the commission of a crime
of which, had we known the precise state of his brain,
we should have declared him guiltless by reason of
insanity.” And another eminent physician, on the same


subject, says, “It has brought to the scatfold many
deplorable victims who merited compassion rather than
punishment.” I would wish to press on your attention,
that ignorance and crime go hand in hand; indeed, on
reference to history, the direst sufferings of the human
race have been marked by that period when mankind were
in the state of the most benighted ignorance, and that the
diffusion of knowledge tends more than all the penal
laws man can devise towards the suppression of crime.
The statistical returns of commitments for England
and Wales for 1861 show the total commitments to
amount to 129,338, of whom only 6669 could read and
write well, and only 309 of those had received a superior
education; so that 77 per cent., or more than three-fourths
were uneducated; but these results, lamentable as they
are, afford hope fpr the future. As in 1842, the same
tables (which I have already quoted,) show that 90 per
cent, were uneducated ; sothat between 1842 and 1861
education has slowly advanced; no doubt attributable to
the greater attention paid by the Government to the
dissemination of knowledge, by establishing schools and
by the publication of cheap literature, but there is still
enormous room for improvement.
The degree of instruction of persons apprehended by
the Sydney police in the year 1863, was as follows :
Out of 2481 males, 109 only, or about 4f per cent.; and
, out of 2413 females, 47 only, or about 2 per cent., could
read and write ; 1956 males, or about 80 per cent., 1698
females, or about 661 per cent, could read only, and many
of these imperfectly ; 416 males, or nearly 17 per cent.,
768 females, or nearly 32 per cent., could neither read nor
write shewing how sadly deficient the educational element
prevails amongst the criminal class.
On the 6th April of this present year the following
was the state of Darlinghurst Gaol—there were 440
prisoners confined in that establishment, of whom upon
their reception 14, or about 3J per cent, only had received
a superior education, 252, or about 9 per cent., could read
only, and 134, or nearly one-third, could neither read nor
write.


X am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Sheriff Uhr
for the above valuable statistic, and I think it only due
to that gentleman to state, and to his honor be it recorded,
that he was the first sheriff in this colony who disallowed
prisoners as schoolmasters in prisons, substituting free
men in their place, thereby upholding the true principle,
the necessity of inculcating moral sentiments, combined
with education, into the breasts of the criminals; and a
fair share of praise is due to the worthy governor of the
gaol, Mr. Reid, by whose co-operation the prisoners are
kept in such a good state of discipline, so few punish-
ments are administered for breaches of the regulations,
that this prison will bear a favorable comparison with
the best conducted prisons in the mother country.
I will trespass upon your patience with one more
statistic. In the year 1834 the first grant for public
education was made by the House of Commons, the
beneficial effects were remarkable, as can be seen by
the following statistics of the United Kingdom:—
In 1834, the year of the first grant for education,
480 persons were sentenced to death; in 1838, 116
persons only were sentenced to death; in 1834, 894
persons were sentenced to transportation for life; in
1838, 266 persons only were sentenced to transportation
for life; in 1834, 2400 persons were sentenced to trans-
portation for seven years; in 1838, 1900 persons only
were sentenced to a similar punishment. Taking into
consideration that the population steadily increased
during these five years, the decrease is enormous, and
shows to demonstration the great benefits produced by
education, and further proves that ignorance fosters
crime. Can any of you doubt this proposition, after
perceiving the amazingly small number of criminals in
England and Wales who have received a superior
education—3o9 out 0f129,000 individuals? I would,how-
ever, beg to observe that after all these statistics of the
degree of instruction are very fallacious as bearing upon
the prevention of crime, because the simply being able
to read and write-—unless the instruction has been


accompanied with a moral training—has a doubtful ten-
dency, or may even in some cases be productive of bad
results. The power of reading without such training
may, for instance, create a taste for perusing immoral
works, or works of the Jack Sheppard or Eugene Sue
style; and many other evils might arise, unless the
education be combined with the inculcation of moral self
restraint and self-denial.
In the few remarks I have had the honor of
addressing to you this evening, I have as much as
possible scrupulously abstained from appealing to your
passions. The principles I advocate all tend to cultivate
the attributes of mercy; and as I conscientiously believe
my views to be correct, I must not be swayed by any
prejudice, by disingenuous taunts of having a sympathy
with crime, nor mis-directed public opinion, nor be pre-
vented nor ashamed) of pleading the cause of mercy and
compassion, and protesting against the taking
retribution and vengeance. Nor can I be
surprised at being charged with a sympathy
for crime, —which I take this opportunity most
emphatically to disclaim, amelioration of punishment,
and reformation of the criminal, being my avowed prin-
ciples—when I find that mistaken notions of the existence
of such sympathy is credited by the highest judicial
dignitary in this colony, his Honor the Chief Justice, in
his charge to the jury at the last April Sydney Criminal
Court, on the trial of Hill and Jones for an attempt
to murder one Hussey, is reported to have said—“ He
deprecated in very strong terms the disgraceful sympathy
manifested by some members of the community for parties
who were guilty of such outrages. He was happy how-
ever to think, that there was no such sympathy in the
jury box; he had never seen anything of the kind, and
he was desirous that that fact should be generally known,
because he was under the impression that many who were
guilty of such crimes as these were inclined to speculate
upon some supposed chance of having a favorable jury. ’
N ow, with the most profound respect for what emanates


from the learned Judge, nothing can be more illogical
than such statements. His Honor first charges some
members of the community with this sympathy, which if
it really existed, I should be the last to palliate; hut in
the same breath his Honor says, “that there was no
such sympathy in the jury box, and that he had never
lound it amongst jurymen.” Now, as we are told every
day in courts of justice, under the plea of “not guilty’’
that the prisoner puts himself upon the country, which
country the jury represent, I do not see how a more
fair representation of the respectable portion of the com-
munity can be obtained, than that which the jury box
exhibits. The conclusion fairly deduceable from his
Honor’s charge is this, that the sympathy he refers to is
not at all participated in by the reputable portion of the
community, but that which we all know to be
natural to exist, and ever will exist, between
the criminal and his brother associate in crime.
But lam happy to be able to admit that there is an
increasing disinclination on the part of juries to convict
capitally for offences against property. In this sentiment
oir William Jones, one of the most distinguished and
accomplished of the sons of men, who died in 1794 in
where he held the office of judge, concurs, who
says, “ 1 he punishment of death inflicted on crimes against
property goes beyond the law of nature.”
The advocates of the death penalty really appear to
regard compassion as unjust, the gallows as a sort of
homoeopathic remedy for murder, on the principle that like
cures like, and that where there is any exercise of
humanity, as a miscarriage of justice, indeed with them
clemency is weakness, and retribution the sum-mum bonum.
May the blessing of Heaven be showered upon those who
seek to spread religious enlightenment and education,
combined with the inculcation of temperate habits,
amongst the ignorant and vicious; such a moral educa-
tion will, under the blessing of Providence, thin the
prison wards and rob the gallows of its victims.
Should you perceive truth in any of the views which


I have so feebly expressed—views which it would require
a Cicero or a Brougham to clothe in appropriate language,
I respectfully and earnestly entreat you to diffuse them -as
much as lies in your power, because it is only by the
exertions of the many that prejudices can be overcome
and truth prevail.




