





BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.






PROCEEDINGS. AM. PHILOS. SOC.
VOL. XXXVI, No. 155, PLATE IV.
Australian Rock Carvings.


nat 0
% 17 AUG. 192/ C
v> .
AUSTRALIAN ROCK CARVINGS
62561
(Plate IY.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read May 7, 1897.)
At a meeting of the Royal Society of New South Wales, held on
the Ist of August, 1894, I read a paper on “ The AboriginalJßock
Carvings and Paintings ” in that colony, for which I was awarded
the Society’s medal. 1 I also contributed papers on the same subject
to the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain, 2 the Royal Society
1 Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxviii, 329, 330.
2 Jour. Anthrop. Inst., London, xxv, 145, 163.
kEPRINTEB FROM VOL. XXXVI, NO. 155, PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC.


of Victoria, 1 the Royal Geographical Society of Australia 2 and other
learned bodies. Since then I have continued my researches, and
have succeeded in discovering several other groups of native carv-
ings ©©fc-hkherte-.-re-corded; a description -of which I have thought
are worthy of being recorded.
In the papers above referred to I have described the way in which
these carvings were executed by the native artists, their geographic
range, etc., so that it will not be necessary in the following pages
to again refer to these parts of the subject. The accompanying
plate shows much the largest and most varied as well as the most
valuable collection of rock carvings hitherto published. All the
figures are drawn to scale from careful measurements and sketches
taken by myself, and the position of each on the Government maps
is also stated in the descriptions, so that they can readily be found
by persons desirous of visiting them. As all the carvings are sit-
mated within New South Wales, it will not be necessary to add the
lame of the colony in the description of each figure.
Plate IV. Rock Carvings.
Fig. x. This huge, roughly drawn figure of a man is carved on a
fable of Hawkesbury sandstone, almost level with the surface of the
ground, on the old road from Peat’s Ferry to Sydney, and is about
half a mile northerly from Vize Trigonometrical Station, Parish of
Cowan. The old dray track, now little used, passes over this figure,
which has caused some of the lines to become rather indistinct.
From the feet to the top of the head measures ten feet eight
inches. 3 Both eyes are shown and a diagonal line across the face.
There is a line across the body at the waist, across each arm near
the shoulder, across the left thigh, and the left ankle. An un-
finished line rises from the left thigh, outside of the figure. The
right hand and part of the left shoulder have been obliterated by
the traffic along the road referred to.
Figs. 2,3, 4 and 5. This group of carvings appears on a fiat
’kproc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vii (N. S.), 143, 156.
2 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.),x, 46-70; ibid, xi, 86-105.
3 For other gigantic carvings of men, the reader is referred to the following
plates in various papers written by me on this subject: Figs. I and 6, PI. 16,
Jour. Anthrop Inst., London, xxv, 145-163; Fig. 5, PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust., Queensland, xi, 86-105 > Fig. 7, PL 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria,
mi (N. S.), 143-156.


sandstone rock, about a quarter of a mile in a northwesterly direc-
tion from Taber Trigonometrical Station, Parish of Broken Bay.
There are a man and a woman in the attitude of aboriginal
dancers; the man is about four feet six inches high from his feet to
his hands. The head contains eyes and mouth, but no nose, and
there is a belt around the waist consisting of one incised line. On
the upper side of the belt, and projecting from it, are two incised
lines extending upwards about five inches. Lines are also cut across
the arms above the shoulder, with short lines similar to those pro-
jecting from the belt extending a few inches along the centre of each
arm. The hands have four fingers and the feet four toes each. The
penis is shown in this figure by a single incised line, 1 instead of in
the way usually found in native carvings.
On the right of the man is a female figure, much smaller, without
eyes or mouth. The mammae are depicted in the manner usually
employed by the Australian aborigines in their paintings or carvings
of women. 2
Another carving, Fig. 4 in this group, represents a male figure,
which is interesting on account of the lines rising from the head,
which may represent hair, or may perhaps be intended for feathers
or other ornaments stuck in the hair. The hands have four fingers
only, and the feet have been carried away by the weathering of the
rock.
On the same rock is another of those grotesque forms, Fig. 5,
which are hard to definitely identify, and may be intended either
for some kind of lizard or for a human being.
Fig. 6. The large sandstone rock containing this carving is dis-
tant from Taber Trigonometrical Station about fifteen chains in a
westerly direction, Parish of Broken Bay. It is on the top of the
range dividing Smith Creek from Coal and Candle Creek.
This shield is four feet five inches long by two feet broad, and has a
longitudinal and a transverse subdivision. In the upper right-hand
quarter are four jagged holes cut in the rock, and five similar holes
in the lower right-hand quarter. The upper left-hand quarter of the
shield contains five similar holes and the lower left-hand quarter six,
1 Compare with Fig. 4, PI. 2, of my paper on “Australian Rock Pictures,” con-
tributed to the Anthropological Society of Washington, and published in The
American Anthropologist, viii, pp. 268-278.
2 For an interesting carving of a woman dancing, see Fig. 3, PI. 2, American
Anthropologist, Vol. viii, pp. 268-278.


or twenty holes altogether. These holes are not in any symmetrical
design, but appear scattered irregularly over the surface of the shield,
and have probably been intended for ornamentation. The ethno-
logical collection of the Australian Museum in Sydney contains a
hielaman, or shield, from Queensland which has a longitudinal line
and two median horizontal lines, and is ornamented with a ground-
work of red dots. On the other hand, these marks may be intended
to represent the indentations made by spears.
Near this shield is a hollow, or “pot-hole,” in which water col-
lects in wet weather. Around the margin of this small pool of
water are a large number of grooves or hollows worn by the abo-
rigines in sharpening their stone tomahawks. For illustrations and
descriptions of similar grinding places, see my paper on “ Some
Stone Implements Used by the Aborigines of New South Wales,”
Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxvii, pp. 301-305, Plate 43, Fig. 3.
Figs. 7-13. These carvings are all on the same flat rock, situated
within Portion No. 1140, of forty acres, in the Parish of Manly
Cove. The first three are apparently intended for eels, varying in
length from four feet three inches to six feet one inch. Figs, nto
13 are all of the same kind of fish, but of different sizes. lam un-
able to say definitely what fish is intended to be represented, but it
has been suggested perhaps that they are grupers. The length of
the smallest is two feet four inches, and that of the largest four
feet two inches.
Fig. 14. This drawing, which is on the same rock as Fig. 26,
represents a man about five feet eight inches high, with a boomerang
lying near him. The left hand has four fingers and the right five.
The distance from the right toe to the centre of the boomerang is
one foot two inches, the length of the latter being two feet four
inches. The end of one of the weapons shown in Fig. 60 almost
touches the right foot.
Fig. 15. This well-executed figure of a buck kangaroo is carved
on a large flat rock of Hawkesbury sandstone, near the southern
boundary of Portion No. 717 in the Parish of Manly Cove. The
drawing appears to have been intended to represent the animal bent
down in the attitude of grazing. The eye, one of the ears and the
mouth are shown, the latter being open, which is unusual.
Figs. 16 and 17. These carvings are found on the perpendicular
face of a large standstone rock about five yards from the left shore
of Cowan Creek, about seven or eight chains above its confluence


with Cockle Creek, in the Parish of Gordon. Fig. 16 repre-
sents a fish five feet nine inches long and about two feet nine
inches across the body at the widest part. This fish has
two eyes and three small dots about two feet three inches from
the point of the nose, which are perhaps intended to represent
gills. The tail is divided by two curved lines extending from the
back to the belly. Within the outline of the larger fish there is a
small one about eighteen inches long by eight and a half inches
across the body. There are six representations of boomerangs, the
most I have yet observed in so small a space, three of them being
within the outline of the large fish, two partly within and one out-
side of the said outline. 1
Ten feet five inches farther to the right from the nose of the large
fish, on the vertical face of the same rock, are two small animals,
Fig. 17, which are probably intended to represent kangaroo rats,
judging by their size and general aspect.' 2 They are each about one
foot four inches in length, and are fairly well executed.
The side of the rock on which the figures are cut faces north-
easterly, or towards Cowan Creek. These carvings are somewhat
uncommon on account of being executed on the face of a vertical
rock, such drawings being generally found on horizontal surfaces;
they are, however, sometimes met with on rocks occupying different
slopes between the two positions mentioned.
Fig. 18. This curious drawing is on thesame flat rock as Fig. 26,
and is probably intended to represent a fish, real or imaginary. 3 It
is five feet three inches in length.
Fig. 19. This figure of" a wallaby is on the eastern continuation
of the same rock as Fig. 26, but is on the Government road separating
Portions Nos. 1139 and 1140 before referred to. The length of the
wallaby from the tip of the nose to the end of the tail is four feet
five inches; it is in the attitude of jumping, and the eye is shown.
1 Three feet seven inches to the left of the tail of the larger fish is the carving
of an iguana six feet long which is shown as Fig. 11, PI. 3, of my paper on “ The
Aboriginal Rock Pictures of Australia,” Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queens-
land, Vol. x, pp. 46-70.
2 Kangaroo-rats are represented in Figs. I3and 14, PI. 99,illustrating mypaper
on this subject in the Report of the Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Vol. vi, pp. 624—637.
3 For other examples of nondescript or monstrous creatures clrawn by the
aborigines the reader is referred to Fig. 6, PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc . Aust.,
Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105 > Fig. IO > PI. 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, -VoL
vii (N. S.), pp. 143-156.


Fig. 20. This figure, which is three feet eleven inches high
and on the same rock as Fig. 26, is probably intended to represent
a boy: The correct number of fingers is shown on each hand.
Fig. 21. This remarkable carving is on a large, flat rock of
Hawkesbury sandstone on the western side of the road from Pymble
to Pittwater, within Portion No. 23 of 320 acres in the Parish of
Narrabeen.
The drawing represents a man with a weapon in his left hand,
which is raised over his head. It is not clear whether the weapon
is a nullanulla or a tomahawk, resembling one as much as the other.
This carving is one of unusual interest, as it shows what appears to
have been intended for a breast on the left side, as if the native
artist had at first intended to draw a figure of a woman and had
afterwards changed his mind. Or it may have been drawn to repre-
sent a dilly bag carried by a string over the right shoulder, with the
bag hanging under the left arm. Again, it may have been intended
to show some deformity which existed in the man it was designed
to represent; or perhaps the intention was to delineate some real or
legendary personage having the characteristics of both sexes.
The head contains eyes, but no other features; the feet are drawn
in the usual way, but the hands are not shown. From head to foot
the man stands five feet eight inches high. The rock on which this
figure is carved slopes gently towards the southwest, and the bear-
ing of the figure from feet to head is N. 50° E.
Fig. 22. This figure of a man five feet eight inches high is on the
same rock as Fig. 26. The eyes and mouth are shown, and the
hands have each only four fingers.
Fig. 23. This figure of a woman, one foot seven inches high, is
drawn on the same rock as the last described. The hands and feet are
omitted, but the paps are shown as in other carvings of females de-
lineated on this plate. This figure is interesting on account of the
comparative smallness of its size.
Fig. 24. This figure of a man six feet high is on the same flat
rock as Fig. 15. The fingers are shown on the right hand, but not
on the left. On the left side of the head and coming partly within
it is a shield one foot nine inches long and five inches wide, with a
bar across it near the middle. The penis of this figure is drawn in
an unusual style, showing the foreskin.
Fig. 25. This human figure is three feet three inches high, and
although the sex is not shown I am inclined to think it is intended


to represent a young girl. I have arrived at this opinion by
comparing it with Fig. 23 on the same rock and with Fig. 36 in a
different locality. It may also be compared with Fig. 11 Plate
9, of my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in
N. S. Wales,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Victoria , vii, N. S., pp. 143-156.
Fig. 26. This carving is delineated on a flat rock of Hawkesbury
sandstone sloping northerly, within Portion No. 1139 of twenty-four
and one-half acres in the Parish of Manly Cove. This drawing is
apparently intended to represent the wombat, an Australian animal
with a very short tail and heavy body. Like many other native
drawings, the animal is shown much larger than the natural size.
From the point of the nose to the end of the tail it measures nine
feet eight inches, and across the body at the widest part it is four
feet. The plate shows the figure exactly as it appears upon the
rock, the usual careful measurements having been taken. Within
the outline of this carving is what appears to be a snake three feet
six inches long. 1
Fig. 27. This carving, which probably represents a shark, 2 is on
the same rock as Fig. 26, and is eleven feet long. There are two
dorsal and one ventral fin and a fairly good tail. The nose of this
fish is very pointed, a peculiarity I have observed in other native
drawings. Near the mouth is a boomerang one foot eight inches
long, on the concave side of which is a small oval figure. Farther
on towards the tail of the fish are two other oval figures of larger
size, but I am at present unable to suggest what they are intended
to represent —they might conceivably be meant for eggs.
Fig. 28. This figure is on the same rock as Fig. 61, and repre-
sents a man four feet four inches high. Contiguous to his right
hand are two oval figures about a foot long and nine inches across,
which may have been intended to represent shields, or possibly the
eggs of a bird. A similar object is shown in Fig. 61.
Fig. 29. This group of carvings is situated on the horizontal sur-
face of several large tabular masses of Hawkesbury sandstone, all in
1 This carving is shown as Fig. 14, PL 3, in my paper on “The Aboriginal
Rock Pictures of Australia,” in Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Qld. Bch., Vol. x,
pp. 46-70.
2 An immense fish carved on a rock by the aborigines is shown in Fig. 15, PI.
in my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in N. S. Wales,”
published in Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria , Vol. vii (N. S.), pp. 143-156.


close proximity to each other on the western side of the cleared
road leading from Pymble along the dividing range between Cowan
and Cockle Creeks, about half a mile southerly from “ Bobbin” Trig-
onometrical Station, in the Parish of Gordon. 1
The largest emu 2 is six feet three inches from the beak to the end
of the tail, and is five feet high, in the attitude of looking for food
or at something on the ground ; and although the neck is rather too
short, it is a very fair picture of an emu. Only one leg is delineated,
and the foot is shown in continuation of the leg.
The other emu, which is much smaller, measures three feet two
inches from the beak to the tail, and stands three feet five inches
high. In this drawing the eye has been added, and one leg with
its foot is delineated in the same way as that of the large emu.
Between the last two birds is a small one, fifteen inches from tail
to head, and fourteen inches from pinion to pinion. Were it not
for the presence of wings and the shortness of the neck and legs we
might suppose this to be intended for a young emu to complete the
picture. As it is, .however, it appears to represent some bird upon
the wing.
Fig. 30. This carving is also on the continuation of the same
flat rock which contains Fig. 29. The figure measures two feet four
inches in extreme length, one foot two inches across the fore feet
and one foot four inches across the hind feet. The head is four
inches long and the tail nine inches. This drawing appears to be
intended for a flying squirrel, as it resembles that animal more
x ßesides Figs. 29 to 37, inclusive, shown in this plate and now described, there
are on the same cluster of rocks some other carvings which are described by me
elsewhere, the positions of which are as follows: About five paces from the snout
of Fig. 31 is a group representing a man and woman in the attitude of dancing.
Near them is a native “ dilly bag ” and several human footmarks cut into the
rock. For a description of this group of carvings see my paper on “Aboriginal
Rock Paintings and Carvings in N. S. Wales,” published in Proc. Roy. Soc. Vic-
toria, Vol. vii (N. S.), pp. 143-156, PI. 9, Fig. 8.
About twenty-five or thirty paces in a southwesterly direction from the last-
mentioned carvings is another group representing two men and two emus. For
a drawing of this group, see Fig. 3, Pi. 2, in my paper on the “Rock Pictures of
the Australian Aborigines,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society of Australasia, Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.
2 A group of six emus are represented in Fig. i, PI. 2, in my paper on “Aus-
tralian Rock Pictures,” published in The American Anthropologist , viii,
268-278.


closely than any other I can compare it with. It may, however, be
intended to represent some bird.
Fig. 31. This figure is delineated on the same flat rock of Hawkes-
bury sandstone as Fig. 29. It measures four feet five inches from
the point of the nose to the tip of the tail; the head contains an
eye, and there is also a dot on the ear, apparently to indicate the
hollow part of it. I submit that this is intended to represent an
opossum, 1 because the portion of the body is more horizontal
than in figures of kangaroos and kangaroo-rats, in which the fore
part of the body is always more or less elevated. The position of
the tail, pointing slightly upwards, also strengthens the supposition
that it is an opossum.
Fig. 32. This carving is on a flat rock of Hawkesbury sandstone,
not far from the last-described carving, and appears to be intended
to delineate a bird on the wing, 2 but it is difficult to suggest what
bird is the likeliest to be indicated, and in trying to arrive at a definite
conclusion the forked tail should not be lost sight of. From the extrem-
ity of one wing to that of the other measures three feet, and the total
length from the head to the end of the tail is one foot eleven inches.
It is well known that the natives had animals and birds as totems;
among these may be mentioned the eagle hawk, the crow, the white
cockatoo, the emu, the kangaroo and so on.
Fig. 33. This peculiar carving is executed on the same group of
flat rocks as the preceding, and delineates the lower part of the
body of a man, from the waist downwards, the knees being bent
outwards, with the feet also in the same direction. From the out-
side of one knee to the outside of the other measures three feet eight
inches. The figure may have been intended to indicate that the
man was sitting on the rock, the rest of the body being upright
and not shown ; or perhaps it was intended to convey the idea that
the rest of the man’s body had gone into the rock, leaving this part
protruding. I have seen similar figures carved upon rocks, but
they are uncommon, 3
1 For another carving of an opossum see Fig. 7, PI. 3, Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc.
Aust., Queensland, p. 67.
2 For carvings of birds on the wing the reader is referred to Fig. 2, PL 99, il-
lustrating my paper on “ Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Aborigines of New
South Wales,” published in the Report of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, Vol. vi, pp. 624-637.
3 For a similar carving see Fig. io, PI. 2, attached to my paper on “Rock Pic-
tures of the Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland,
Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.


Fig- 34- This small figure is also on the same line of rocks as
Fig. 31. It is one foot seven inches high, and the same distance
from hand to hand. The head is rather bird-shaped, and has an
eye ; there are incised curved lines reaching from the arms to the
head on each side, the meaning of which I am unable to suggest.
This figure is most likely intended to denote a “piccaninny” or
young aborigine, because there was room on the rock to draw a much
larger figure if it had been desired. We frequently, I might say
mostly, find figures of men drawn in caves which are not larger thstn
this, but in such cases the small-sized figures are chosen on account
of want of room on the cave walls. 1
Fig. 35. This carving is on a continuation of the same flat rock as
Fig. 31 and is another of those objects found in aboriginal draw-
ings the precise identity of which it is difficult to arrive at. It is
probably intended for the echidna 2 or porcupine, but I would, how-
ever, throw out the suggestion that it may be intended to represent
a dilly bag. Some color is lent to this view from the lines drawn
across it; the dot, which may represent the eye, is, however, against
the latter theory.
Fig. 36. This carving is delineated on the continuation of the
same flat rocks as the preceding, and represents a female two feet
seven inches high and about the same distance across from hand to
hand. 3 The arms are very long for the size of the body, and there
are four fingers on each hand, but the feet are not shown. In the
centre of the head is a small hole or dot, and there are two similar
holes on the chest, but whether they were put there by the native
artist or are merely water-worn indentations in the rock is uncer-
tain. Above the figure there is a bird-like object which at the
nearest points is two and a half inches from the head. This may
be intended as an ornament to the head, or it may be where some
other figure has been commenced and abandoned. The breasts are
drawn in the usual way adopted by native artists, and there is a
short incised line apparently intended to represent the pubes.
1 A few feet from this figure is a carving of an iguana seven feet two inches
long, shown as Fig. 9, PI. 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. vii (N. S.), p. 153.
2 For similar carvings see Figs. 11 to 17, PI. 2, American Anthropologist,
viii, 276.
3 For a colossal carving of a woman nearly twelve feet tall, the reader is re-
ferred to Fig. 2, PI. 16, of my paper on “The Rock Paintings and Carvings of the
Australian Aborigines,” your. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxv, pp. 145-163.


Fig- 37. This carving is also on the same flat rocks as Fig. 31. It is
evidently intended to represent a male, probably a youth. It has
the same bird-like head as Fig. 34, a form not uncommon in
native carvings. The legs are short, but the termination of them
is well defined, showing that they were originally drawn as they
now appear. Near the extremity of one of the legs is a small un-
finished drawing eight inches long by two inches wide.
Fig. 38. This large fish, apparently intended for a shark, is de-
lineated on the same rock as Fig. 15 ; it is fourteen feet four inches
long and three feet nine inches across the widest part of the body,
not including the fins. It has a pointed nose like Fig. 27 and other-
wise closely resembles that fish. 1
Fig. 40. This interesting carving is delineated on the same rock
on which Fig. 26 appears and represents a fish two feet nine inches
long and one foot across the body at the widest part. It has a
dorsal and a ventral fin and a small, well-formed tail. An incised
line, similar to that marking the outline of the fish, extends from
its mouth for about five feet six inches along the rock. 2 This is
evidently intended as the picture of a fish caught on a line. 3
Fig. 41 consists of a circular figure with a winding lind extend-
ing from it to another figure one foot six inches long and six inches
wide. Within the former is one of those oval objects referred to in
Fig. 27. Both this and the preceding carving, Fig. 40, are on the
same flat rock as Fig. 26.
Figs. 39, 42 and 43. Fig. 43 lam unable to offer any explanation
of at present. Fig. 39 are no doubt intended either for human hands
or the paws of some animal.'* The upper one has three fingers, the
lower one four, each having a thumb in addition. Fig. 42 is, in
my opinion, a human hand with part of the arm attached, and not
1 The reader is referred to my paper on “ The Rock Paintings and Carvings of
the Australian Aborigines,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxv, pp. 145-163, PI. 16,
Fig. 7, for a carving of a very large shark, 33 feet 10 inches in length.
2 For a similar carving of a fish caught on a line see Fig. 13, PI. 2, illustrating
my paper on “The Rock Pictures of the Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust., Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.
3 Collins says he saw the natives of New South Wales fishing with a hook and
line. The line was made of the bark of a small tree, and the hooks of the pearl
oyster shell, which they rubbed on a stone until it assumed the shape desired.—
Account of the English Colony in N. S. Wales, 1798, Vol. i, pp. 556-557.
4 For a similar hand see Fig. I (g), PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust ., Queens-
land, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.


a foot, as might be supposed at first sight. Compare with repre-
sentations of feet in Fig. 61.
Figs. 44 to 47. On the same rock as Fig. 26 are representations
of fish of different sizes, ranging in length from two feet two inches
to six feet. Six inches from the mouth of Fig. 45 are two lines
crossing each other, one being ten inches long, the other five.
Fig. 48. This figure of a man five feet nine inches high appears
on the same rock as Fig. 61 and is close to it. The eyes, mouth,
and the proper number of fingers are delineated, as well as a belt
round the waist. A small oval figure, similar to those seen in Fig.
27, appears close to the belt on the right-hand side.
Fig. 49. This appears to me to be part of a shield, which was
left when half finished. It is two feet five inches long and ten
inches wide. It is on the same rock as Fig. 47 and is close to it.
Fig. 5°- This interesting drawing of a fish four feet six inches
long appears on the same flat rock as Fig. 15. There are two dots
for the eyes, on the same side of the head, a peculiarity of native
drawing frequently seen in representations of fish.
Fig. 51 is on the same rock as the preceding, and is a very good
drawing of a fish four feet five inches long,
Fig. 52 represents a shield three feet six inches long and one
foot eight inches wide, and is on the same rock as the last two
figures. Attention is drawn to the unusual point at the end.
Fig. 53. This figure represents a shield four feet three inches in
length and one foot nine inches in breadth, with a longitudinal and
a transverse subdivision. This carving is on the same series of flat
rocks as Figs. 7 to 13 and is not far from them.
Fig. 54. This drawing, which is on the same rock as Fig. 26,
may have been intended to represent a fish, or perhaps the skin of
tome animal.
Fig- 55 011 the same rock as Fig. 26, and represents a human
figure five feet one inch high, the sex of which is uncertain. Five
fingers are shown on each hand.
Figs. 56 and 57. Fig. 56, which is eighteen inches long, is appar-
ently intended to represent the native tomahawk, with handle
attached. Fig. 57, which is one foot nine inches long, may be
either a nulla nulla or a tomahawk. These figures are carved on a
mass of Hawkesburg sandstone more than an acre in extent, about
five chains from the eastern side of the old road from Peat’s Ferry
to Sydney, and about a mile northerly from the rock containing
Fig. 1.


Fig. 58. This large fish is carved on the same mass of sandstone
as Fig. 1, but several yards farther south, and close to the old dray
track. It measures twenty feet five inches from the snout to the
farthest end of the tail, and thirteen feet from point to point of
the fins. Across the larger of the fins, which appears to be the
dorsal, is an incised line, such as is frequently met with on the
bodies of different animals drawn by the aborigines. The two eyes
are shown on the same side of the head, a mode of representing
the eyes often observed in native pictures. The greatest width of
the body, independently of the fins, is eight feet. 1
Fig. 59. This representation of an eel is three feet four inches
long, and five inches across the widest part of the body; from
point to point of the fins measures seven inches. There are four
bands or lines across the body. It is carved on the same flat rock
as Figs. 56 and 57. For other carvings of eels, see Figs. 7, 8 and
9 of this plate.
Fig. 60. It is difficult to arrive at a definite conclusion as to
what these figures are intended to represent. One is ten feet long,
the other twelve, and they each have an average width of three
inches. They occupy a position on the rock very close to Fig. 14,
the end of them almost touching the right foot of the latter. Per-
haps they represent spears or yamsticks; or were possibly intended
for large snakes.
Fig. 61. This interesting carving is on a flat rock of Hawkes-
bury sandstone with Portion No. 796 of 9 ac. 2 r. 3 p., Parish of
Manly Cove. It represents a man six feet high, with a belt round
the waist and bands round the arms near the shoulder, similar to
those seen in Fig. 1. Within the outline of the body is a very
good representation of a human foot, twelve inches long, four
inches across the toes, and three inches across the heel. 2 About
three feet behind the heel of the last-mentioned figure is another
human foot, not so perfect as the first, twelve inches long and hav-
ing only four toes. Eleven inches farther away in the same direc-
1 For a monstrous carving of a shark, nearly thirty-nine feet long, see my paper
on “ The Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Aborigines of N. S. Wales,” pub-
lished in Rep. Australas. Assoc. Adv. Sci., vi, pp. 624-637, PL 99, Fig. 30.
2 Human footmarks carved on rocks are represented in Fig. 8, PL 9, illustrat-
ing my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in New South
Wales,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria, Vol. vii
(N. S.), pp. 143-156.


tion is an oval object, but what it is intended to represent I am at
present unable to offer an explanation. The two last-described
figures are shown in their relative positions to each other, but are
not so in reference to the man. They are shown above the head of
the latter on the plate to fill out a vacant space, but a careful
reading of this description will indicate their true position.






DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. I
(With Map, Plate XIII.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
{Read November 18, 1898.)\
In an article on the “Initiation Ceremonies of Certain Tribes of
Australian Aborigines,” published in the Proceedings of this
Society, Vol. xxxvii, No. 157, pp. 54-73, I established the bound-
aries of the different organizations spread over the whole of New
South Wales. In the present article it is intended to show the
limits of the aboriginal nations inhabiting that portion of Queens-
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXVII, NO. 158.


328 MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. [Nov. 18,
land lying between the northern boundary of New South Wales
and the nineteenth parallel of south latitude.
Each of these nations is composed of certain communities or
aggregates of tribes who adopt identical section or class divisions,
the particulars of which are explained under each head in the fol-
lowing pages, and the boundaries of the nations are accurately
defined on the accompanying map. Each nation has been named
after one or two of the tribes whose section or class divisions were
first reported in it, and they are numbered on the map to corre-
spond with the numbers given in the letter-press.
On the map referred to there is also represented the dividing
line, AB, between the area in which circumcision is practiced, and
that in which such rite is not in force. From B, this line con-
tinues in the same northerly direction till it meets the shore of the
Gulf of Carpentaria. The continuation of this line southerly from
the point A passes through the northwest corner of New South
Wales, and its position is fixed on the map of that colony accom-
panying my paper read before this Society March rB, 1898.
No. i. The Dippil Nation.
The country occupied by this nation, No. i on the map, extends
from the Upper Clarence in New South Wales to Port Curtis in
Queensland. On the east it is bounded by the sea-coast, and on
the south, west and north by the distinguishing line marked upon
the map, and includes the Brisbane, Mary, Burnett, Dawson, Upper
Condamine and other rivers; together with Moreton, Stradbroke,
Fraser and other islands on the adjacent coast. The following are
a few of the principal and best known tribes who were formerly
spread over this tract of country: Dippil, Turrubul, Paiamba,
Kitabool, Kaiabara, Kooranga, Goonine, Murrungama.
The people are divided into two primary groups, called Deeajee
and Karpeun ; the former is again divided into two sections, called
Bunda and Derwine, and the latter into two, called Banjoora 1 and
Barrang. The following synopsis shows which sections may inter-
marry, and to what section the children belong:
1 In the Wide Bay district, Balcoin is used instead of Banjoora, with the fem-
inine equivalent Balcoingan.


Offspring.
Sons. | Daughters.
Derwine ; Derwinegan
Bunda j Bundagan
Banjoora Banjooran
Barrang Barrangan
Descent is always reckoned on the female side, the children
taking the group and totem name of their mother. They do not,
however, belong to her section, but take the name of the other sec-
tion in their mother’s group, as exemplified in the above table.
The pair of sections, Barrang and Banjoora, forming the group
Karpeun, invariably marry the Bunda and Derwine pair, of the
group Deeajee, but the rules of intermarriage of the individual sec-
tions constituting the groups is different in different parts of the
tribal territory. For example, in some districts, instead of the
rules of marriage following the order laid down in the foregoing-
table, a Barrang, male, marries a Derwine, female, and vice versa ;
a Banjoora, male, marries a Bunda, female, and vice versa. The
descent of the children is not, however, affected by this variation
—the offspring of a Derwinegan being always Bunda, no matter
whether she marries a Banjoora or a Barrang husband. This law
applies, mutatis mutandis , to the offspring of the women belonging
to the other three sections.
Although marriages are generally regulated by the rules set out in
the above table, and in the last paragraph, yet there are what I have
called family or sectional regulations, under which a man may, in
certain cases only, marry a woman belonging to his own section,
but of a different totem to that to which he himself belongs. For
instance, a Barrang Opossum might be allowed to marry a Bar-
rangan Porcupine. Marriage between persons of the same totem is
strictly prohibited. 1
The totems belonging to each of the primary groups are common
I “The Katnilaroi Class System of Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust, (Q.), x, 23-24.


to the two sections of which it is composed. Thus, the totems
attached to Karpeun are common to the sections Barrang and Ban-
joora, and the Deeajee totems are common to the Bunda and Der-
wine sections. I have found that certain totems which belong to
Karpeun in a given district are reported to be attached to Deeajee
in a different part of the tribal territory. It may be stated that I
have observed similar local disagreements among the totems of
other organizations. 1
In the tribes inhabiting the country on the heads of the Clarence
and Condamine rivers, the following are some of the totems
attached to the group Karpeun : kangaroo-rat, parrot, turtle, carpet
snake, eaglehawk, codfish, sea, brown kangaroo, crow, opossum,
scrub turkey and porcupine. Among the totems of the Deeajee
group in the same district may be enumerated the plain turkey, red
kangaroo, bat, common magpie, wallaroo, black snake, native cat,
emu, iguana and platypus.
Mr. A. W. Howitt reports that in the Turrubul tribe, one of
those included in this Nation, “descent is counted through the
male.” 2 In another place he makes the same assertion in regard to
the Kaiabara, also belonging to this Nation. 3 There is, however,
no question that he is in error in both instances, and has evidently
been misinformed. I have drawn attention to the matter now,
because on a former occasion I was misled by Mr. Howitt’s conclu-
sions respecting the line of descent of the Kaiabara tribe. 4 I have
since, however, from personal inquiry, reported that descent is
through the mother. 6
I have before given the Rev. William Ridley the credit of being
the first to report the Turrubul and Dippil tribes from Moreton Bay
to Wide Bay, whence Mr. E. Palmer traced a similar organization to
Port Curtis. 6 lam the first to publish the existence of identical
divisions on the sources of the Clarence and Dumaresq rivers ;
down the Condamine, and across the country to the Dawson,
including that river and its tributaries, as shown upon the map.
x Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxi, 170.
2 7 'vans. Roy. Soc. Victoria (1889), i, 102.
XJourn. Anthrop. Inst., xviii, 50.
*Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Atist. (Q.), x, 29.
5 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 81-82.
*Loc. cit., p. 81.


The names of the groups Deeajee and Karpeun, and the equiva-
lence of the four sections to those of the Kamilaroi tribes, have
also been first reported by me.
No. 2. The Kogai-Yuipera Nation.
The name is adopted from the Kogai of the Maranoa and
Yuipera of Mackay, the two tribes whose divisions were first made
known in this area. The immense extent of country covered by
the tribes and communities constituting this nation can be under-
stood better by a reference to the map than by any description of
it. In a former paper, to which the reader is referred, 1 I detailed
the original work done by the Rev. William Ridley, Mr. R. B.
Smyth, Mr. E. M. Curr, and Mr. E. Palmer, among different tribes
of this organization.
I have traced the same section names among the tribes of the
Warrego, Paroo, Bulloo, Barcoo, Thomson, Diamantina, and other
rivers, thus covering all the country in which the section or class
names had not been particularized by previous writers. The fol-
lowing are a few out of a large number of tribes included in my
inquiries : The Gnoree tribe of the Middle Warrego, the Murgoan
of the Bulloo, the Moothaburra and Birria of the Thomson, the
Koonkerri of the Barcoo, the Kurrawulla of the Diamantina, the
Banthamurra of the Wilson, etc.
In all the tribes of this Nation the people are divided into four
sections, called Woongo, Koobaroo, Bunburri and Koorgilla, or
else mere variations of these names. The people appertaining to
the Woongo and Koobaroo sections together form a group called
Wootaroo, and the Bunburri and Koorgilla sections constitute the
group Yungaroo. In my previous article already referred to, 2 1 gave
a tabular arrangement of the groups and sections of the Yuipera
tribe at Mackay, as reported by Mr. R. B. Smyth, in 1878, but as
the names are slightly different in the interior, it will be better to
supply a new table, as follows :
1 your ft. Roy. Soc. N S. Wales, xxxii, 78—80.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 79.


Section.
Offspring.
Group.
Husband.
Wife.
Sons.
Daughters.
Wootaroo Woon S° Bunburrian
Koobaroo Koorgillan
Koorgilla
Bunburri
Koorgillan
Bunburrian
Yungaroo Bunburri Woongoan
or Mallera Koorgilla Koobarooan
Koobaroo
Woongo
Koobarooan
Woongoan
Mr. E. M. Curr reported that the name Mallera was used on the
Belyando and other rivers instead of Yungaroo, and I have found
the same name on the Warrego, Thomson and elsewhere.
As every man and woman in the community bears the name of
an animal, or some other natural object, it follows that there will
be an aggregate of diverse totems known by the collective title of
Wootaroo, and a corresponding variety of totems will be distributed
under the distinguishing name of Yungaroo or Mallera. The
•tribes of this organization are so widespread that I shall not at
present occupy the space to enumerate the lengthy lists of totem
names collected by me in the various districts, but will reserve this
task for a future occasion.
Although the section names are practically the same over the
vast territory shown as No. 2 on the map, yet the dialects and cus-
toms of the people are more or less diverse in different parts of it.
Throughout a wide zone of the western end of this nation, all the
males are circumcised, and other rites are performed, which have
been described by me elsewhere. The line from Atoß on the
map separates those tribes who practice circumcision from those
who do not. Such a boundary would necessarily be varied slightly
at different times by conquest, or by the intermarriage of neighbor-
ing tribes on either side.
The southwest and west boundaries of Queensland, separating
that colony from South Australia, being arbitrary geodetic lines,
cannot be expected to coincide with the boundaries of the aborig-
inal nations. For the sake of simplicity, however, the Queensland
boundary has, for the present, been adopted as the southwest limit
of the Kogai-Yuipera people. I am preparing a map dealing with


1898.1 MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. 383
some South Australian tribes, on which the actual boundary between
them and the Queensland communities will be shown in its proper
place. The northern boundary of the Barkunjee nation, No. son
the map hereto annexed, will also be more particularly defined in
my forthcoming article.
No. 3. The Kooinmerburra Nation.
This nation comprises several small tribes, inhabiting the coastal
district from Port Curtis via Keppel Bay, Port Bowen, Cape Town-
shend and Shoalwater Bay to Broad Sound, together with Long
Island, Curtis Island and some smaller ones off the coast. On the
south they were bounded by the Dippil, and on the west and north
by the Kogai-Yuipera nations, as represented by a distinguishing
line upon the map, PI. XIII. The community is divided into two
intermarrying groups, having the same names as their western
neighbors,' but with subdivisions bearing a different nomenclature.
The primary group Wootaroo is divided into two sections, called
Moonal and Karilburra, and the Yungaroo group into two, called
Kooealla and Koorpal.
The names of the groups and sections, showing how they inter-
marry, and the names of the respective divisions to which the chil-
dren belong, will be readily understood by referring to the follow-
ing table :
Yungaroo
Kooealla Moonalan
Koorpal Karilburran
Karilburra
Moonal
Karilburran
Moonalan
Moonal and Karilburra are equivalent to Murri-Kubbi, and
Kooealla and Koorpal to Kumbo-Ippai, of the Kamilaroi and
Wiradjuri communities in New South Wales
In this community descent is always reckoned on the female side,


the same as in the two adjoining nations, the children of both sexes
taking the totem name of their mother. The undermentioned are
a few of the totems common to Moonal and Karilburra: curlew,
wallaby, rain, russet hawk, bat, yellow-bellied snake. The Koo-
ealla and Koorpal sections have the following totems amongst
others: crow, boomerang, jackass, eaglehawk, salt water perch.
The intermarriage of certain totems belonging to the same sec-
tion, referred to in my explanation of the marriage laws of the
Dippil nation, also prevails in the Kooinmerburra community.
For example, a Moonal might, under certain restrictions, marry a
MoOnalan of a totem different to his own.
For the particulars of the social structure of the Kooinmerburra,
and their geographic range, I am much indebted to Mr. William
H. Flowers, one of my most valued correspondents, who took a
deal of trouble in replying to my inquiries. In 1894, in an article
treating of another tribe, 1 I incidentally referred to the Kooinmer-
burra divisions reported by Mr. Flowers. The divisions of this
tribe have also been briefly mentioned by Mr. A. W. Howitt. 2 The
full details given in the present article, and the map defining the
boundaries of the tract of country occupied by all the tribes of
this organization, have never been published until now.
Explanation of Plate XIII.
No. 1. The Dippil nation, at its southern end, extends a little
way within the New South Wales frontier—the whole of the
remainder being situated in Queensland. Moreton and Stradbroke
islands appertain to this organization.
No. 2. The Kogai-Yuipera nation adjoins the northern boundary
of the Barkunjee and Kamilaroi nations of New South Wales, which
encroach some distance within Queensland territory. All the
tribes occupying the country to the west of the line AB practice
the rite of circumcision, but to the east of that line the custom is
not in force.
No. 3. The Kooinmerburra nation inhabits a comparatively
small territory fronting the sea-coast for some distance north and
south of the Fitzroy river.
No. 4 is the northern extremity of the country of the Kamilaroi
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), x, 27.
'‘■Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xiii, 341.




nation, which crosses the boundary between the colonies of Queens-
land and New South Wales.
No. 5 represents a portion of the Barkunjee territory, which also
overlaps the Queensland frontier.
For particulars of the country occupied by the Kamilaroi and
Barkunjee nations, and the eastern limit of the custom of circum-
cision in New South Wales, the reader is referred to my paper on
the “Initiation Ceremonies of Australian Tribes,” published in
the Proceedings of this Society, Vol. xxxvii, pp. 54-73, PI. V.


Reprinted from
Vol. XIII., “ Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science."
[lssued 22nd May, 1912.]
Section F
NOTES ON SOME PUBLISHED STATEMENTS
WITH REGARD TO THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
W. E. Smith. Limited, Bridge Street, Sydney.


, NA-Hq
5 17 AUG. 192'/ C


62563
~/cAt
7.— NOTES ON SOME PUBLISHED STATEMENTS WITH REGARD
TO THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
[Plate XLII.]
At the meeting of this Association held at Brisbane in 1895 the late
Mr. T. Worsnop read a paper in which he described, inter alia,
certain aboriginal paintings in South Australia and Queensland,
which appeared to me to call for further inquiry. 2 In 1905 I wrote
M Rep. A.A.A.S., Brisbane, vol. 6, pp. 141-2-4, plates 12 and 19.


to Mr. T. A. Bradshaw, the officer in charge of the telegraph station
at Alice Springs, sending him a copy of Mr. Worsnop’s report and
a reproduction of his plate xii., asking Mr. Bradshaw to send me a
photograph of the paintings at Ooraminna rock-hole. He ac-
knowledged my letter, and after a long interval he got a chance
to comply with my request. In August, 1907, he wrote to me from
Alice Springs as follows :
“ I availed myself of an opportunity occurring last week to visit the
Ooraminna (or Uraminna) range and waterhole, 30 miles southerly from
here, taking my camera with me. I had to exercise great patience to secure
a photograph of the drawings you refer to, as they are on the sloping roof
of the cave. I had to watch until the sun shone between two boulders on to
the floor of the cave, and then take the picture with reflected light. I forward
you a copy of the result, hoping it will be of interest ; anyhow it will dispose
of Mr. Worsnop’s elaborately uniform and fanciful design. (Plate 12).
“ The cave is situated at the north-west end of the waterhole, and is
about 15 feet long, going back about 10 feet into the rock. The height of
the roof from the floor at the outside or front would be about 7 feet, rapidly
decreasing downwards, until at the back, some 10 or 12 feet distant, the
roof and floor join together. The roof, like the rest of the cave, consists of
desert sandstone, and has not been painted white, as stated by Mr. Worsnop,
but is in its natural state. The greater part of the roof or ceiling is covered
with sketches, of which my photograph represents about a fourth, and is a
fair sample. (See fip 3). They are drawn in white, yellow, and red ochre,
and there is no trace of a regular design of any kind. There are a few similar
markings on some sheltered rocks outside the cave, but no human hands or
feet, either inside or outside, unless they are so faint as to be unrecognisable
as such.”
I also asked Mr. Bradshaw to try and obtain a photograph of
the “ sculptured rocks ” described by Mr. Worsnop at the junction
of Sullivan’s Creek with the Finke River (p. 144 and Plate 19). He
replies :
“ I have not seen them, and am not likely to be in that neighbourhood
to inspect them. lam of opinion, however, that Mr. Worsnop’s Plate 19 is
too regular to be reliable, and would advise inspection by some capable
person.”
At p. 142, Vol. 6, Mr. Worsnop further states :
" At Buckland’s tableland, in Central Queensland, on the banks of
Xardoo Creek, is a high cliff, and on its face is a magnificently executed
picture, representing a lake of fire, out of which are stretched dusky brown
arms in hundreds . . . The hands are elevated as in the agonies of
death, as though a host were engulfed in a seething lake of fire . . .
Every joint can be seen, and each looks alive . . . The whole picture is
about 70 feet across . . . The groundwork of this grand picture is
painted in pigments of red, white, blue and yellow, giving the general effect
of a mass of sulphurous fire.”
I sent a copy of the above to a resident of the district indi-
cated, and asked him to make inquiries. He reported that Nardoo
Creek is about 60 miles southerly from Springsure, in the county
of Denison, Queensland. On the smooth natural face of an over-
hanging rock, sheltered from the rain, a large number of hands
are stencilled in the way commonly adopted by the natives, as well
as a few other devices. He says there is nothing remarkable about
the work, and that to call it a “ magnificent picture,” or that it
represents “ a seething lake of fire,” is a ludicrous misdescription.


While I am endeavouring to correct some inaccuracies which
have appeared in our own Proceedings in the description of rock
pictures it may be well to also invite attention to erroneous
accounts of other doings of the aborigines published elsewhere.
It has truly been said that “no man has been more misrepresented
than the Australian blackfellow.”
The following is a detailed and very early account of hunting
a kangaroo in Western Australia, according to Captain (afterwards
Sir George) Grey :
" The mode of tracking a kangaroo until it is wearied out is the one
which beyond all others excites the admiration of the natives ; this calls
out every qualification prized by savages : skill in tracking, endurance of
hunger and thirst, unwearied bodily exertion, and lasting perseverance. To
perform this feat a native starts on the tracks of a kangaroo, which he
follows until he sights it, when it flies timidly before him ; again he pursues
the track, and again the ainmal bounds from him ; and this is repeated until
nightfall, when the native lights his fire and sleeps upon the track. With
the first light of day the hunt is resumed, and towards the close of the second
day, or in the course of the third, the kangaroo falls a victim to its pursuer.
None but a skilful huntsman, in the pride of youth and strength, can perform
this feat, and one who has frequently practised it always enjoys great renown
amongst his fellows.” 1
G. S. Lang, in describing the native fishing weir at Brewarrina,
says :
“ The great weir for catching fish on the upper Darling at Brewarrina is,
both for conception and execution, one of the most extraordinary works
recorded of any savage tribe. ... It forms an immense labyrinth of
stone walls about three to four feet high. . . . The lower parts of the
walls are so solidly and skilfully built with large heavy stones, which must
have been brought from a considerable distance and with great combined
labour, that they have stood every flood from time immemorial.” 2
If the reader refers to my article on the aboriginal fisheries at
Brewarrina 3 it will be seen that the walls of the fishing pens were
formed of boulders of various sizes washed out of the bar of desert
sandstone which crosses the bed of the Darling River immediately
above them, and were consequently lying on the spot ready for
the native builders, instead of having been “ brought a consider-
able distance with great combined labour.”
The ludicrous and impossible method of hunting a kangaroo
given by Sir George Grey would merely amuse a man accustomed
to Australian bush life, but the account has been accepted and
handed on by an English author, N. W. Thomas, in his “ Natives
of Australia,” pp. 103-104. G. S. Lang’s fabulous conclusion
respecting the building of the fishing weir at Brewarrina has also
been incorporated in the same work at p. 94.
1 “ Journs. Two Expeds. Discov. in N-West and W. Australia in 1837 to 1839 ” (London, 1841)
vol. 2, pp. 273-274.
2"The Aborigines of Australia ” (Melbourne, 1865), pp. 19-20.
3 Journ. Roy. Soc., N.S.W., XXXVII., 147-9.


Another marvellous account of the above fishing weir is given
by Mrs. K. L. Parker in her book on “ The Euahlayi Tribe.” At
pages 102 and 109 she says :
“ The greatest of local landmarks is at Brewarrina. It is said to have
been made by Byamee, the god and culture hero of this tribe, and his giant
sons—the stone fisheries made in the bed of the Barwon [Darling].”
In 1884 the late Dr. A. W. Howitt reported that in the Kaia-
bara tribe, Queensland, descent was in the male line. 1 In 1889 he
repeated that statement. 2 For the third time he repeated it, in
1904. 3 He arrived at this erroneous conclusion owing to a corre-
spondent having written him that the phratry Kubatine comprised
the sub-classes Balkoin and Bunda, and that the phratry Dilebi
was made up of the sub-classes Barang and Derwain. As I have
made several personal journeys among the remnants of the Kaia-
bara and neighbouring tribes during the past 15 years I am able
to report their law of descent with certainty. A table will be
useful for illustration :
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Offspring.
Kubatine
Balkoin
Derwain
Bunda
or
Kappaian
Barang
Bunda
Derwain
Dilebi (
Bunda
Barang
Balkoin
. or <
Diawai i
Derwain
Balkoin
Barang
This table shows that the phratry Kubatine (my Kappaian) is
composed of Balkoin and Barang, instead of Balkoin and Bunda.
It also shows that Dilebi (my Diawai) consists of Bunda and
Derwain, instead of Barang and Derwain, as stated by Mr. Howitt.
If we take Balkoin, the first name in the “ husband ” column
of the table, his normal wife is Derwain, or it is quite lawful for
him to espouse a Bunda woman. If he marries Derwain his child
is Bunda ; but if he weds Bunda his child is Derwain. The
phratry, and the sub-class (or section), and the totem, of the man
Balkoin’s children would depend altogether upon their mother,
quite irrespective of their father.
Dr. Howitt’s statement that descent is counted through the
father in the tribe referred to has been accepted and repeated by
such able anthropologists as N. W. Thomas, 4 J. G. Fraser, 5 and
Andrew Lang. 6 On the other hand, Rev. J. Mathew 7 and myself,
who have both been among the blacks in question, have reported
that descent is reckoned through the mother in all cases.
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., 13, p. 336.
2 Op. cit., 18, p.
3 “ Native Tribes of S.E. Australia,” pp. 116 and 229.
4 “ Kinship and Marriage,” p. 43.
5 “ Totemism,” vol. I, p. 447.
6 Man, 1910, No. 80.
7 “ Eaglehawk and Crow,” p. 100.


C. Lumholz says :—“ On Herbert River, Queensland, expe-
ditions are sometimes undertaken for the special purpose of securing
talgora, that is, human flesh. The very thought of talgora makes
a man’s eyes sparkle.” 1
G. F. Angas states that the aborigines of the Tatiara district
of Western Victoria used to travel to Lake Alexandrina to catch
black children for the purpose of devouring them. 2
It is well known that the Australian blacks have cannibalistic
practices ; but that they go specially and deliberately hunting for
human flesh as an article of diet among their neighbours is alto-
gether improbable. No such custom has been reported to me by
any of the old blackfellows among whom I have made inquiries in
the different States of the Commonwealth.
EXPLANATION OF PLATE XLII.
Aboriginal Painting, Finke River
1 “ Among Cannibals,” p. 27.
2 “ Savage Life in Australia and N. Zealand,” vol. 1., p. 123.








Reprinted from
Vo/. XIII., “Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science.”
[lssued 22nd May, 1912.]
Section F
SOME MOURNING CUSTOMS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S,
W. E. Smith Limited, Bridge Street, Sydney.


NAT^
| 11 AUG. 192'/ V
A, &
%>« ,


frSrr'62
6.—SOME MOURNING CUSTOMS OF THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
[plate XLL]
I have before described the so-called “ widows’ caps,” as well as
the elongated oval tablets of kopai which were placed upon native
graves along the Darling River and its hinterland. 1 Other mourning
emblems found at aboriginal burying places in that district were
made of the same material as the “ caps,” and resembled them in
general outline, but were larger and heavier. The largest example
of this kind of article which has yet come under my notice is one
in my own private collection, illustrated in the accompanying
photographs. Unfortunately, the smaller end was broken off
before it was discovered, leaving the specimen open at both ex-
tremities, with a funnel-shaped cavity reaching right through it.
The thickness of the shell is irregular, being greatest near the base
and middle of the shaft, where it is in places about two inches,
thinning out to intermediate thickness down to less than half an
inch at other portions. The length outside of the wall or shell
of the cylinder in its present damaged and weather-worn state is
13£ inches.
1 Queensland Geographical Journ., vol. 24, pp. 63-69.


At the base, which is only slightly damaged, the longest
diameter of the orifice of the funnel is 8| inches, and the shortest
6 inches. The corresponding internal diameters of the opening
at the smaller end are 5J and 4f inches respectively. The outside
measurement of the circumference at the base is 28f inches, and
a similar outside measurement at the smaller end is 23 inches.
The original circumference has evidently been a good deal reduced
by the wasting away of the outer surface by the weather and wind-
blown sand during many years of exposure.
This specimen was discovered on Tongo station, about three
miles eastward from the homestead. It was partially buried in
loose sand, near the margin of Tongo Lake, the outfall of which
flows into Paroo River. Tongo is in the county of Fitzgerald, in
the north-western portion of New South Wales, and is about 80
miles north-north-east from the town of Wilcannia.
Plate XLI, fig. 1 is a photograph of the article standing upon its
larger end, and exhibiting the other extremity in its broken condi-
tion. There is a thin, irregularly-shaped patch on the outside of the
cylinder, consisting of the same material as the rest of the article,
but slightly lighter in colour. This patch was evidently put on
after the main trunk had been completed, because along portions
of the margin it has peeled off, owing to the difficulty of making
the new wet mixture properly adhere to the previously dried
surface. It was put on either to secure a uniformly rounded con-
tour, or to remedy some defect in the original structure, or partly
for both of these reasons. On examining the inner side of the wall
opposite to the middle of the patch there is a small flaw, which
probably extended through to the outside, where it was perhaps
larger, and required mending.
/ Plate XLI, fig. 2 shows the larger end, with a view right through
the hollow interior to the other extremity. Near the distal end of the
funnel there is a discoloured streak in the wall or shell, which is
shown in the photograph. Such a mark could have arisen from a
stoppage of the work for additional material, which was not quite
of the same shade along the joining line. This photograph also
contains a side view of the patch on the outside, showing places
where flakes have peeled off its edges, as stated in describing
Fig. 1.
On the inner side of the entrance of the funnel there are about
a dozen lines, from one to two inches long, resembling the impres-
sions of stalks of cane-grass or rushes. They are not arranged
symmetrically like what a net would have been, but appear to be
the marks made by the outside of a bundle of rushes or grass placed
inside the funnel for the purpose of keeping the plaster in position
while wet. This opinion is supported by the fact that only the
ends of some of the stalks have left their impression. They became
fast in the plaster, where they remained until they rotted away„
No impressions of a net are visible upon any part of the inner wall..


In the making or “ building ” of the subject of the illustrations,
a considerable quantity of sand has been mixed with the gypsum,
which has given it a sandy colour, both inside and outside, as well
as along the broken part at the upper end. When the specimen
was found it was lying in the position shown in Fig. 3, with all
the lower part embedded in the sandy bank of Lake Tongo, and had
apparently lain in that position for a long time. The upper half,
from a right back to the other end, was freely exposed to the
weather for many years, and is consequently considerably dimin-
ished in thickness by disintegration. It is much the thinnest part
of the shell, being in places less than half an inch thick. The
lower half of the article, as seen in the photograph, is the thickest
portion of the shell, from the front to the rear.
I have stated above that the outside height of the specimen,
in its present damaged state, is inches. We can safely assume
that before the breakage the height was at least 2-| inches more,
which would make the total original height about 16 inches. The
depth of the internal hollow space from the front inwards, if
restored, would be about 14 inches or more. The present weight
of the article is just a little over 15 pounds. At a moderate
estimate, the portion broken off would weigh about three pounds,
making the weight of the complete article about 18 pounds. Then
we must take into consideration that the whole outside surface
has suffered by disintegration during many years’ exposure to the
weather. The same would apply to the inside surface of the
cavity, though in a lesser degree. The original weight has also
been diminished by the drying of the material in the sun for such
a long period. The reduction in the weight due to the two com-
bined causes mentioned is difficult to estimate, but judging by
the worn and contracted appearance of many parts of the surface
I think that at least two pounds could be allowed for it. This
would bring the total weight of the article when it first left the
maker up to about 20 pounds.
As regards the purpose of articles such as that now illustrated,
it is hard to obtain full particulars, because they are not used by
the remnants of the tribes at present living on the Darling River.
It is not at all likely that they have been worn on the head, like
the widows’ caps described by me in 1908, because the opening in
some of them is too small to fit any adult skull, whilst others are
much too large and heavy. The great depth of the cup-shaped
cavity—l 4 inches in the present specimen—would be quite needless
as a receptacle for the head ; and there are no impressions of a net
on the inner wall similar to those found on widows’ caps. An old
blackfellow, whom the white people called “ Marra Jimmy,” a
head-man of the Ngunnhalgu tribe, who resided most of his later
years at Marra station, on the Darling, and who died about ten
years ago, said the articles with the deep cavities were not worn
on the head, but were laid upon the graves of old men and women
of tribal importance, in the same way that the kopai tablets were
deposited.


Mr. J. E. Suttor writes me as follows :
“ In 1880, while mustering cattle on the back part of Curranyalpa run,
I came across two old black men and a woman camped at a waterhole.
They had shifted out from the Darling River to hunt opossums for the skins.
The old woman was lying in the camp very sick. A few days later the two
black fellows passed my camp, which was about five miles from their own,
•and told me the old woman had died. Going that way a couple of days
afterwards I found the woman’s grave on a pine ridge close by the camp I
had previously seen, and upon it were lying two hollowed kopai articles
somewhat resembling widows’ caps. At the place where the camp fire had
been was a piece of bark, with the remains of kopai plaster upon it, together
with some lumps of kopai, burnt and ready to break up, if more had been
required. The woman’s husband and the other man, who was probably a
relative, had each left a token of their sorrow upon the grave before they
went away.”
Although a widow’s head-dress consisted of a cap similar in
shape to those depicted at pages 67 and 68 of volume 24 of the
Queensland Geog. Journ., they were also worn by a woman for an
adult son or daughter, or for a favourite brother or sister. Their
use was not restricted to the women only. Old “ Marra Jimmy,”
already quoted, said that men sometimes wore such a cap in
mourning for their mothers, mothers’ sisters, their own elder
sisters, their wives and other blood relations of mature years.
Generally speaking, however, the men used the kind of articles
described in the present paper, which were never worn on the head,
but were deposited at the grave.
The facts just narrated would account for the comparatively
large numbers of so-called “ caps ” which have been found at
individual graves. Mr. T. Worsnop mentions four found on a
grave, one of which weighed 14 pounds, but he does not state
whether any of them had marks of the meshes of a net on the inner
surface. 1 A friend writes me that he has seen five caps similarly
used, but cannot remember details. A station owner on the
Darling River informed me that many years ago there was an
aboriginal grave not far from his homestead which had from half-
a-dozen to a dozen articles lying upon it, which then appeared to
him to be “ caps.” They were not all of one size, but comprised
some very large ones, others medium size, whilst others were small.
In the cases just mentioned it is likely that some were widows’
caps, some had possibly been worn by men, whilst others had been
manufactured as tributes of mourning. The latter kind could be
placed upon the grave as soon as the body was buried, whereas a
“ cap ” could not be deposited till the wearer’s term of mourning
had expired.
The widow’s cap illustrated in the Queensland Geog. Journ.,
already quoted, is made from kopai, with only a small mixture of
sand or ashes, because kopai is abundant over a large portion of the
Darling Valley. But on some of the tributaries of the Darling,
such as the Macquarie, Mara, Bogan, etc., where gypsum is found
only in small quantities, the mourning caps were made out of a
1 “ Aborigines of Australia“( Adelaide, 1897), p. gs.


brown-coloured tenacious mud, obtained from the bottoms of
waterholes and streams, with little or no admixture of gypsum.
Yellow or reddish clay, sometimes seen cropping out on the slopes
of ridges, or on the banks of watercourses, was utilised for the same
purpose. The shape of the cap was the same, no matter what the
material consisted of. Clay caps, when removed from the head,
and exposed to the weather on a grave, soon became disintegrated
and fell to pieces ; hence none of the caps of this material have
been preserved by the white people. White is the favourite colour
for mourning among the Australian aborigines, but when it cannot
be obtained other colours must be substituted for it.
It is well known that human skulls were used as water-vessels
by the aborigines in several parts of Australia. Mr. E. J. Eyre
saw some drinking cups of this sort, and gives an illustration of one. 1
The tribes referred to by Mr. Eyre adjoined the Darling River
people on the west. When surveying on the Darling and Paroo
Rivers in 1884-5 I met an old blackfellow who had a skull among
his paraphernalia, which he used for drinking purposes on cere-
monial occasions. Old “ Marra Jimmy,” already mentioned, told
me that, in addition to their use as mourning emblems, the kopai
articles were imitation skulls which the spirits of the dead were
supposed to use for their water supply in that arid district.
EXPLANATION OF PLATE XLI.
Figs. 1,2, 3, Widows Caps.
Addendum. —For the purpose of enabling the reader to compare the
photographs in Figs. 1 and 2 with the “ caps ” known to have been worn by-
widows, I have supplied a block (Fig. 2) illustrating the inside of a widow’s
cap, made of kopai, showing the marks of the meshes of the net which was
on the woman’s head. This is a reduction from the larger plate given in the
Queensland Geog. Jour, above quoted, and is now repeated in order to
bring the whole subject under the reader’s eye in one article.
fourns E\peds. Cent. dust.’’ (London, 1845), vol. 2,pp. 310,316, and 511, plate iv., fig. 20










