

(. Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales, Vol. xli.)
ABORIGINAL NAVIGATION AND OTHER NOTES.
By R. H. Mathews, l.s.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S. Wales, December 4, 1907.']




ABORIGINAL NAVIGATION AND OTHER NOTES.
By R. H. Mathews, l.s.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S. Wales, December 4, 1907.']
In this paper I have briefly touched upon the aboriginal
methods of navigation, for the purpose of showing that
practically the same kind of canoes and rafts is used
throughout Australia, which is suggestive of the unity and
common origin of the native race.
Canoes made from a single sheet of bark, generally
stripped from a bent tree, were used by the natives of every
part of Australia, with the exception of a portion of the
coast of Western Australia from Eucla to Albany and
onward about as far as Gladstone. One of my friends who
has been acquainted with the country between Perth and
Israelite Bay since 1844, states that he never knew or
heard of either canoes or rafts being used by the natives
between the points mentioned. Canoes were never seen
among the natives of Tasmania, but rafts took their place.
The rafts were made of two or more logs of buoyant wood
lashed together with bark ropes or thongs ,of skin.
Rafts were also in use on the north-west coast of Western
Australia, all the way from the mouth of the Gascoyne
River along the seaboard to Cambridge Gulf, and on as far
as Port Darwin. The rafts used in Tasmania were prac-
tically of the same construction as those made at Port
Darwin and other parts of Australia. Canoes made of one
sheet of bark were seen by Capt. P. P. King at Port
Essington I—apparently 1 —apparently just such a canoe as one might see
* ‘Narrative of a Survey of the intertropical Western Coast of Australia’
(London 1827) Vol. i, p. 90.


on the Murray River in New South Wales or on the Gripps-
land lakes in Victoria. From Port Essington, which is one
of the most northern points of the Australian continent, to
the southern coast of Tasmania, comprises about thirty-
three degrees of latitude. These facts show the wide
geographic distribution and uniformity of our native navi-
gation, whether by canoes or rafts.
With the exception of Tasmania and the portion of the
coast of Western Australia above referred to, canoes were
used in the same regions as the rafts. When a suitable
sheet of bark was not obtainable for making a canoe, a
raft was constructed in its stead. I have seen both canoes
and rafts afloat at one time on the same large lagoon in
New South Wales.
Capt. Watkin Tench says the natives of Sydney Harbour
and Botany Bay paddled their canoes “several miles in the
open sea.” 1 Lieut. 0. Jeffreys says the Tasmanian natives
could “cross an arm of the sea or a lake in their rafts,
which were made to skim along the surface of the water
by means of paddles, with amazing rapidity and safety.” 2
Although the canoe is more serviceable for many purposes
than the raft, yet the latter possesses the advantage that it
is not so subject to damage by accident, or exposure to the
sun. Bumping against a sharp rock or other obstruction
may cause an injury to one of the logs or bundles of which
it is made, without interfering seriously with the buoyancy
of the rest of the raft. Such a mishap to a canoe might
damage it beyond repair, or even cause it to sink. Perhaps
this is the reason why rafts are so universally used.
It lias been said by some writers that because the
aborigines of Tasmania had no canoes, they must have
reached that country before it was cut off from the main
1 ‘Narrative of the Expedition to Botany Bay/ (London, 1789), p. 84.
1 ‘Van Dieman’s Land/ (London, 1820) pp. 127-128.


land of Australia by Bass’ Strait. lam of opinion, how-
ever, that it is quite possible that the Tasmanians crossed
over in their rafts from island to island, long after the
continuous land connection had been broken through by the
sea. For a long period subsequent to the first severance
of Tasmania from Victoria, there probably was a chain of
islands extending from Wilson’s Promontory via Kent’s
Group, Flinders and other islands to Cape Portland. There
were no doubt other islands at moderate intervals, reaching
across from Cape Otway via King island to Cape Grim,
and at other places as well. All such islands, with the
exception of those at present in existence, have disappeared
either by subsidence or by the wearing action of the sea.
The hypothesis just stated appears to me more reason-
able than the old theory that the Tasmanians travelled on
dry land all the way from Victoria to their Anal home,
because it brings us down to a much later geological epoch
and agrees better with the time usually assigned to the
advent of man. Moreover, from my investigations among
the natives of South-east Victoria, as well as among those
of the Great Australian Bight, I am disposed to think that
there is not much difference between them and the defunct
inhabitants of Tasmania, pointing to the conclusion that
they have not been separated by a very gr6at interval of
time.
In certain northern portions of Australia, abutting on
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria, the natives employed
two or three or more pieces of bark in building a canoe,
and it is noteworthy that such crafts are more elaborate
in their manufacture than those in use in the southern
parts of the continent, a fact which might suggest foreign
influence, such as that of the Malays or Papuans at some
comparatively recent period. Rafts and logs were like-


wise used on some of the rivers flowing into the Gulf of
Carpentaria.
The “catamaran” and the “dug-out” canoe, now used
by the aborigines of Cape York Peninsula, Port Darwin,
and other northern parts of the continent, will not be
included in this article, because I do not consider them of
purely Australian origin, but believe them to be intro-
ductions from Torres Straits.
I would like to offer a few remarks on certain statements
made by two of the early writers on the New South Wales
aborigines. Dr. George Bennett, when travelling from
Cullen Bullen to Dabee in the Rylstone district saw some
kurrajong trees, upon which he makes the following com-
ment: —“The wood of the kurrajong tree is used by the
aborigines for boats and canoes.” 1 Some years ago I was
all through that district discharging my duties as a sur-
veyor, and being aware of Dr. Bennett’s statement, I made
inquiry from old blaclcfellows if ever they had made canoes
out of wood, but they had never heard of such a thing. I
also asked white settlers of long standing in that part, and
their replies were to the same effect. lam of opinion that
Dr. Bennett was told by white people that the natives
sometimes used dry logs of kurrajong and other light and
buoyant woods as rafts, and that he did not differentiate
between these and the actual canoe.
Mr. G. P. Angas says:—“Their canoes were very rude.
To the southward and on the Murray River they are mere
pieces of bark tied together at the ends and kept open by
means of small bows of wood. Towards the north tliey
have canoes of a more substantial character, formed of the
trunks of trees, twelve or fourteen feet long; they are
hollowed out by lire and afterwards trimmed into shape
1 ‘ Wanderings in New South Wales/ (London 1834) x., 115.


with the mogo or stone hatchet.” 1 In 1860 I was working
amongst stock on the Clarence and Nymboida, two impor-
tant rivers in northern New South Wales, when the blacks
were numerous and I saw them almost every day. I
frequently crossed streams in bark canoes, but never heard
of one cut out of a log of wood by the blacks. In several
parts of New South Wales, however, I have seen canoes
made by white men for crossing over rivers at sheep and
cattle stations. A large, hollow tree was selected and cut
down. The rotten interior was burnt out, and then cleaned
more thoroughly with an axe. The ends were then blocked
up with thin wooden slabs, securely nailed in position and
afterwards caulked with rags or wool.
From the vagueness of the statements of both Dr.
Bennett and Mr. Angas, I feel confident that they never
saw log canoes (or “dug-outs”) in use by the natives, but
that they were misled by the careless reports of white men.
It is of course possible that some of the aborigines occas-
ionally copied the white man’s method of constructing a
canoe, after they had been supplied with iron tomahawks
and axes, but I never heard of such a case.
1 * Waugh’s Australian Almanac for 1858 ’ (Sydney) p. 56.






