

ft ■ -f J
ABORIGINAL CLAIMS
*'< v. •
’v
'
L
*
•i.
V.
i'. '
| ;
DISCUSSED,
IN A LETTER TO A COLONIST IN
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
y ."Sv ’ V
ii
I
/
LONDON:
-??*>- |i PRINTED BY EDWARD BREWS’! F.R, #
HAND COURT, DOWOAXE HILL, ||
1838.


4*^
( 1


p&r.u*: w f
* ** " • ' • ' * -■ • ■
v*sr% %z -ii* /
mr iiiru-i ., sun ** *&*&% *. v>4 .
Slid Xibsainic possess in. of im immense imC IcS’juv
iz~marj 9 by lastly isd >.xxrh-a oxer r, ibno ns
| er pKttuas cl -die gssai &r.% d‘ sissn in itls of
j elbow-room, are at liberty to go among then for tbe pnr-
of building villages and towns, and becoming ** tillers
of the ground, 15 and “keepers of sheep.’ 1 * The"inspired
volume, on which I am disposed to rely as a guide and an
authority in these matters, no where countenances such an
idea.
s Some persons, who have hesitated as to the right of ci-
fct:3fe tTl 1 1 n A/*! •*'■* n r-vm r. 4- a! ? _ 1 • . • .
aboriginal claims
discussed.
ON THE NATURAL RIGHTS OF THE ABORIGINES
OF A COUNTRY.
My dear Friend,
Wrf ST? PaP ° r 3
occurred to me in reference to that v frora t,me t0 timc
ant question, the nromr f. .. 7 graVe and import-
Australia, in those quarters w],ere °* the '?. bori S ines of
tlements has not been sIT7 ° f Penal Sct ‘
may chance to be deserving ofL my su go cstl ’ons
they may contrihum if r g . . ° ns . lderatlon: all events,
endless perplexities into which™] 10 ’- t0 - tIleclifflcnlties and
sued, and without a high feeliim of m^ 0 ?’ pur-
must inevitably throw the ani • { ?. oral responsibility,
to sav an thin uof tin- dlw /L- m habitants of a country,
-rsjtosc. 4~. ... , ‘ *** '**<'■<*& m- . ■. -■ .
Some persons, who have hesitated as to the right of ci-
vilized nations to colonize and appropriate territory previ-
ously occupied in the manner I have described, have en-
* Gen. iv. 2.


dcavourcd to satisfy the scruples which they could not but
entertain, by suggesting some one preliminary act, in the
way of bargain or purchase (to be dignified perhaps with
the title of “ treaty”), by which a trilling consideration is
given in the outset, as an equivalent for the territory co-
veted. For such transactions I have an utter contempt.
The inheritance is sold for “ a mess of pottage.” The con-
tracting parties are so unequal, the reciprocity is so clearly
all on one side, that such bargains really leave the difficulty
exactly where they found it. The agreement, if the case
could be brought within the jurisdiction of tribunals similar
to our courts of Equity, would be instantly set aside, as ab-
solutely fraudulent. The pretended compensation, in the
view of an intelligent by-stander, is a mockery. The be-
nefit, if such at all, is only temporary : the injury inflicted
is permanent.
Now r , if I were appealed to as an arbitrator in such a
case, I should insist upon a bond fide equivalent, nor
should I confine my award to this: I should feel that those
oppressed parties were entitled to more than strictly an
equivalent. The consequence of a civilized people coming
among them, is that their condition can no longer remain
stationary. It must either advance or retrograde :■ but the
natives have no choice in the matter. The intrusion im-
poses upon them the acquiring of new' habits, and the fol-
lowing of new pursuits. They are placed in a situation of
extreme difficulty and embarrassment, out of which they
have no chance of extrication, unless the colonists, and
the Government which claims the new right of sovereignty,
will assist. Suppose me, at present, to be pleading but
for one of the Australian tribes, a race who are the lords
of a tract of country equal in extent to one of the king-
doms of our Saxon Heptarchy. Admit they are a very
small tribe, “ few in number,” as were the Israelites, when
they first wandered about in Canaan. Still, however in-
considerable they may appear in a numerical point of view,
it should be borne in mind, that they have their recognized
boundaries. You cannot drive them hack, or compel them
to retire from their hunting grounds, without, in all probabi-
lity, sooner or later, involving them in feuds wdth other tribes
similarly situated; I mean, as to having understood and
acknowledged boundaries. You must, if you mean what
is equitable by the particular tribe with wffiose range you
arc interfering, recognize their right “ to dwell in the land,”


and, with reasonable efforts on their part, “ to be feel, 5 ’
In proportion as you shut them out from their hunting
grounds, and the banks of their lakes and rivers, from which
they now derive at best but a scanty and precarious sub-
sistencc, you limit their supplies. They should not have
to seek a remedy hy making free with the territory of other
tribes , or he driven , hy want , to commit depredations on the
settlers ; aggressions which'will often issue in the effusion
of blood. Within their own original limits they should
have sustentation. This, I hold to be incontrovertible.
Otherwise, a war of extermination begins, as certainly as
effect follows cause. Nor is this all. The sword which is
unsheathed is a two-edged one: it cuts both ways.
PATRIARCHAL RIGHTS A SYSTEM OF POLICE—OF REGIS-
TRATION PERMANENT RESERVATIONS OF LAND FOR
NATIVE USE ADVANCE OF TOOLS AND IMPLEMENTS, AND
TEMPORARY RATIONS HOURS OF LABOUR, ETC.
This principle admitted, namely that the Aborigines
should be cherished within the limits of that territory
over which they have hitherto had uninterrupted range;
it is obvious that they must be assisted during the period
of transition to the habits of a more civilized state of society.
The native tribe with whom the colonists most exten-
sively interfere, should be the first selected for the purpose
of experiment. And here, allow me to suggest that respect
should be paid to Patriarchal rights. Remembering that,
insignificant as they may appear to us, “the powers that
be” are ordained of God, our appeals should first he made
to them. We should sedulously endeavour to get their
car. The chief or chieftains of a particular tribe should
be invited to friendly conference: repeated interviews, and
some kind acts, might be necessary to explain tolerably
your views to these children of nature, and to gain their
confidence. The European understands how to make
the earth (in a subordinate sense) “yield her increase,” and
the waters theirs also: how to accumulate herds and
docks, and provide clothing as well as food, for himself and
Ids offspring: how to build for shelter, comfort, and pro-
tection. But in no respect is his superiority more apparent
than in his ability and inclination to make provision for the
future , by laying up stores of surplus-produce for the
seasons of inclemency and scarcity. Now, in all these arts
we should offer to initiate the aborigines; and, as a prN


Mary step, we should declare our willingness to set apart
ample portions of land for native use, and such portions
should not be liable to alienation. The forfeiture of in~
dividual rights might occur ; but the tribe at large, or par-
ticular members of it, should still enjoy the property.
Eligible spots, with access to lakes and rivers, should be
assigned. It should be our aim to accompany this attempt
to locate and settle the natives (for this you will already
perceive I contemplate) by endeavouring to introduce
among them a system of police like that established among
our Saxon forefathers. Our own early history will suggest
many valuable hints. The chief should be held responsible
for the tribe, and be required to exercise a certain degree
of control. The tribe should be divided into sections,
having different though neighbouring locations, a village to
each section, and a headman, with a degree of trust reposed
in him, and responsible accordingly. These latter officers
the male adults might choose among themselves ; but no-
tifying such choice to the British authorities.
There should be a registration of the tribe—of men, wo-
men, and children—with such particulars as might assist in
proving identity. The register should be examined at
stated intervals, and increase or decrease accounted for.
The tendency of such an arrangement, would be to make
human life looked upon ,aa.more precious.
But it will not be enough to make permanent reservations
of land for the natives. While it should be explained
to them that it is indispensable that they co-operate cor-
dially, that their muscles and sinews must be vigorously
set to work, you (the strangers) on your parts should en-
gage to direct, counsel, and assist. Tools and implements
for their first operations should be provided, and rations
of food supplied to those natives actively employed, so far
as such latter assistance may be requisite in consequence
of the partial suspension of their hunting and fishing pur-
suits. It should be suggested to the tribe to work by
relays; leaving always a party for their old pursuits, in
whose success the labouring party should participate. The
hours of occupation should at first be very moderate. The
object should be to get them rather to vigorous exertion for
the time, than to long-continued effort: four, six, or at the
utmost eight hours should suffice, leaving to themselves to
propose any extension of toil, if they got interested in the
undertaking, and wished to complete a particular building,


or a certain extent of digging, ploughing, &c, All should
have their turn at hunting; it will long he their favourite
pursuit.
If, after every pains had been taken to convince the par-
ticular tribe to which your preference was due that it was
the interest of its members to close with your friendly offers,
they should still stand out, it would then he time to make
overtures to some other tribe. But of your intention to take
this step the first tribe should have due notice. I proceed
with my remarks, however, on the supposition that your
proposals are at once entertained.
COTTAGES, PLOUGHING, GARDENING, SOWING, PLANTING,
INCLOSURES, LAND AND WATER COMMUNICATION.
The site of a location having been determined, and the
necessary implements for building put into the hands of the
natives, the hatchet and the saw may quickly he set to work.
The neighbouring woods will furnish abundance of suit-
able timber, and comfortable cottages and homesteads,
thatched and covered in (such as many a new colonist
would be thankful to have about him), may easily be
erected. The clearing of the ground might be going on at
the same time by a distinct party of natives.
The next object should be to set to two or
three plqiighs and yokes of oxen/each plough
guided at first by an English ploughman and fils hoy ; hut
some natives should be invited to attend, to observe the
process, and to he occasionally entrusted with the handle.
They should be the pupils, the learners. Mimics as they
are, they would very soon “ know all about it.” They
should see to the harrowing and the sowing in the same
manner; occasionally, little by little, lending a hand.
After the sowing of the essential crops, having a reference
to the sustenance of man and also to the feeding of cattle,
gardens and orchards should he laid out, and the spade
and pickaxe put in requisition. An example having
been set, and the natives invited to imitate (taking for in-
stance row for row, that emulation might he excited), re-
wards might ultimately be distributed. Separate portions
of land, seeds, and plants, might also he entrusted to each;
the superintendent endeavouring to sec or ascertain that a
proper use had been made of the whole.
Having got in the garden as well as the field-crops,
attention should next he directed to the inclosures—^em-


kmkrftents, hedges arid palings, etc. At these various occu-
pations it might, at first, he expedient to let all take their
turn, and have an opportunity of showing their respective
talents: ultimately, however* the whole business of the
tribe would probably settle down into a division of labour.
The interval between the seed-time and the in-gathering
would give opportunity for erecting barns and storehouses.
As a consequence of their industry barter will arise, and
means should be taken to facilitate the transit of their pro-
duce, and the discreet disposal of it. They will, at first,
require to be watched as children. After a time, as the
native farms began to assume a permanent character, the
leading men in the tribe might be furnished with a few
sheep, cattle, goats and pigs, as the commencement of flocks
and herds.
Many of these suggestions are so perfectly common-
place, that some apology may be necessary for laying stress
upon them here.
LAWS RESPECTING LIFE AND PROPERTY RESTRAINTS ON
THE NATIVE TRIBES IN GENERAL ON PARTICULAR TRIBES
TERMS OF INTERCOURSE WITH THE SETTLERS IN-
QUESTS IN ALL CASES OF VIOLENT DEATH POLICE.
To assist in establishing this new order of things, I am
anxious that a few simple rules should be clearly laid down,
and communicated to the native tribes in general, which
might operate as some check upon their lawless habits, and
influence their conduct in their intercourse both with us,
and also with their brethren whom we are attempting to
civilize. In the case of the latter, their connection with the
colonists being closer, many regulations will he requisite,
which it would he premature and useless, for the present,
to attempt to inculcate extensively. But certain laws re-
lating to life and property should at once he promulgated
to all the native tribes with whom we come in contact.
They should hiow what we expect from them , and what
they have to expect from us, A more favourable opportu-
nity cannot be seized lor making this communication, than
when we are selecting one or more particular tribes with
the intention of conferring upon them real and permanent
benefits, about which there can he no misunderstanding :
no pretence for suspecting the strangers of having sinister
objects in view. Let the natives be given to understand
that it must ultimately depend upon themselves, whether


the colonists shall confer or not on each tribe in succession
similar advantages ; that there is a sincere desire to sur-
round them with plenty, and with numerous comforts to
which they have hitherto been strangers. Explain to
them that we come to drive no hard bargains with them;
but that, on the contrary, it will be our aim to abundantly
compensate them for our occupation of the country ; that
we wish to live along with them as brethren; that it
shall be their own fault alone, if they do not largely parti-
cipate in the blessings we enjoy; that we are desirous to
communicate to them liberally. Let it be urged that it will
contribute greatly to facilitate our friendly designs towards
them, if they will attend to certain rules which we propose
for their observance. These rules should have relation to
life and to private property, not only in those cases in
which the colonists themselves may be liable to be sufferers,
but also, as I have before intimated, the members of the
particular tribe or tribes which we determine to take under
our more immediate protection. Unless due warning is
given, there will be a pressing inwards upon the latter, and
a constant interference with their operations, which will
render all attempts to serve them abortive. You should
make a strong effort, at the very outset, to make the sur-
rounding tribes feel more reluctant to shed innocent blood,
and to violate the rights of private property. An explicit
declaration of your views would prevent much mischief, and
pave the way for the progress of civilization. It would
also be desirable to declare the terms upon which any of the
aborigines will be allowed to visit the British settlements, or
the native farms; and you should further require the sur-
render to the British authorities of all outlawed persons, run-
away convicts, &c. No such characters should be harboured
among them. In all lam here contemplating, your native
police would be able to render the most essential service.
A friendly intercourse should be at once commenced; 'and
small parties of the native tribes occasionally invited to
our settlements under safe-conduct.
The second description of laws should be adapted to the
wants of the tribe or tribes taken under our more immedi-
ate protection. It should comprise such rules as the necessi-
ties arising out of their new situation appear to call for, and
not be needlessly burdensome. For their own sakes , they
should be required to adopt some light but decent attire*
easily attained and suited to the climate. The costume ol
a 5


Oriental nations, will readily suggest what would be becom-
ing. After a reasonable interval, this regulation should
be made imperative. It should be strictly obligatory, as
the condition upon which alone the natives should be aD
lowed to approach European habitations, and still more to
enter them. Their warlike weapons also, considering how
completely they are the children of nature, and liable to be
actuated by sudden impulse, should be laid aside on such
occasions: at the same time an injury or assault inflicted
upon an unarmed native, should be taken cognizance of
as a grave offence, and his feelings duly considered ; he
should be held to be fully entitled to the protection of Bri-
tish law. To the adoption of such regulations as these, I
am inclined to attach considerable importance. A wild
man, armed, is more or less an object of fearnecessa-
rily so : but if he approaches the European in the state of
nature, he becomes an object of disgust. His life will he
valued accordingly . He will be liable to be treated with no
more consideration than the beasts that perish. Such a
state of things should not be suffered to exist in justice to
him, to say nothing of the colonists. If allowed to con-
tinue, his tribe, as the weaker party, must decrease. Blood
will be spilt. One native will drop after another. The
necessity of attention to these every-day matters is urgent.
Effectual means should be taken, and that without delay,
for raising the condition of the savage in every possible way.
Depend upon it he will not be the.only party benefited.
The colonists will sleep sounder in their beds, and tra-
verse the country with far less cause for apprehension. I
would also suggest that the natives should be required to
withdraw from the English towns, villages, and homesteads,
at sun set , Such a regulation would prevent much disorder,
and the acquiring of many pernicious habits.
A little reflection will suggest many other useful rules
applicable to their new situation. The only additional one
to which I will now advert, respects the possession and use
of ardent spirits. This should be checked as much as
possible. We have carefully to guard against adding
European vices to the stock which the native already has,
thus making him far worse than he was in his original state.
There is another measure which I think it very desirable
to adopt: an institution of the nature of a Coroner’s
Inquest. Whenever a violent death occurs in those parts
of a British settlement to which we have access, and w r hcre


our power is not merely nominal, a persevering effort should
be made to trace the offence to the perpetrator. In the
case of natives, &c. falling, whether by the hands of
natives, or of settlers, a rigid investigation should in every
instance take place, in the presence of an interpreter and
some of the tribe: one or more British magistrates should
preside, assisted by intelligent jurymen. This tribunal
should have the power to order the arrest of the party ac-
cused, and to send him to trial in the criminal court of the
colony.
I cannot leave these topics, closely connected as they
are with the maintenance of good order, without expressing
a hope that the civil as well as the military force of the
colony will be kept up on an efficient scale. I have been
much struck with the remarks of Sir James Stirling in the
following passage, and especially with the justice of the dis-
tinction which he draws at the close of it. At the risk of
giving offence in some quarters, I cannot help saying that
the Governor appears to me to be right, and that the policy
which he deprecates, would be a very short-sighted one
indeed.
“ I assert, with confidence,” says Sir James, in a letter
to Lord Glenelg', dated Oct. 15, 1837, “that, unless an
“ efficient establishment of this description* he maintained
“ for the purpose of protecting, controlling, managing, and
i( gradually civilizing, the aboriginal race of this country,
“ there will be a fearful struggle between the invaders and
“ the invaded, which will not cease until the extermination
“ of the latter be accomplished, to the discredit of the
“ British name. To avert these evils was the leading mo-
“ tive in the establishment of the police corps; and in
“ 1832, the colonists pledged themselves and their pro-
“ perty in support of so necessary a measure. Why they
“ should consider it unnecessary in 1835 and 7 is not for
“me to inquire; hut I must be permitted to say that their
“ notion of employing the military in such an avocation,
“ displays an utter want of attention to the distinction bc-
i( tween civil and military duties and qualifications. 51
* A police corps.


URGENT NECESSITY FOR MISSIONARY CO-OPERATION
DUTIES OF A MISSIONARY*
Now to carry out these views (very imperfectly sketch-
ed, I am aware), much will depend upon the agents em-
ployed to direct and superintend. Considering how im-
portant it is to get at the main springs of human action m
such an undertaking; that the social reformation which we
are desirous of effecting, would be incomplete without a
moral reformation; that the parties with whom we have to
deal are in the lowest state of degradation, ignorance, and
barbarism; that the light of nature and conscience is almost
extinct an energetic and devoted missionary is the man
of all others, who should be selected to take the lead in
such an undertaking, in humble dependence upon a supe-
rior power. Every thing should be done under his super-
intendence, aided by suitable persons qualified to teach
agricultural and handicraft arts. By means of an interpreter,
the task of religious instruction should at once begin. The
missionary should intimate his reliance upon the Great Spirit,
and implore his blessing. Night and morning he should
publicly renew his simple and solemn appeal, and follow it
up by a declaration of the love and goodness of the allwise,
allseeing, and allpowerful being, the Creator of the heavens
and the earth. The labours of the day should thus begin
and end, and kindness, patience, forbearance, and decision,
should at all times characterise his conduct. Every day
the natives, at some convenient hour, might be collected for
a few minutes, to learn the names of things in English, and
be very rapidly taught, old and young, upon what is called
the Hamiltonian System. A few pictures at first, and an
interpreter, would afford all the assistance needful. For all
ordinary purposes, the missionary and his pupils would soon
acquire the language of each other. Their vocabulary would
become larger every day, and they would learn with scarcely
any laborious effort. The possibility of adapting that mode
of teaching to such uses struck me some years ago, when
I attended a lecture delivered by the late Mr. Hamilton.
The classical scholar is apt to depreciate the value of the
system, or perhaps to overlook the purposes to which it is
chiefly adapted. A critical knowledge of a language no
doubt was never acquired by means of it, and it may not
he well calculated for that end: but in such a case.as that
which I have in view, I am confident it may be turned,


to good account. I have said the names of things may be
connected with the exhibition of pictures. The idea might
be carried further. The letters of the alphabet, and words—
what are they but pictures? These, especially the nouns,
might be taught in the same way. This discipline, at first,
should not extend beyond a very few minutes, say fifteen
or twenty. By means of it, many weighty sentences, such
as the beatitudes.in Our Lord’s Sermon on the Mount, and
the Ten Commandments, might be fixed in the memory. In
the very earliest stage of the settlement, this mode of in-
struction might be adopted. The establishment of regular
schools supposes a more advanced state of things.
A missionary with the zeal and benevolence, and the
practical good sense, of an Oberlin, might be the means, un-
der God s blessing, of accomplishing an astonishing change
in these tribes. Superintending, counselling, and even join-
ing them in their laborious pursuits (for such a character
I contemplate), and, with ail this, coming among them as
a “ legate from the skies;” proclaiming, at proper times
and seasons, moral and religious truths of the loftiest and
most thrilling kind; by degrees opening to them the sacred
volume with all its inestimable treasures of wisdom, its
examples, its precepts, its promises, and its threatenings ;
expatiating upon the love of God in giving his only Son
to suffer ignominy and death for sinners, even for their
forlorn race, that he might purchase for them an everlasting
redemption ; such a man, sympathising with them in their
joys and sorrows, and exhibiting the affection of the ten-
derest father to their offspring, may be expected to obtain
an influence over them, which an inferior teacher never
could acquire. lam sanguine enough to hope that before
many moons have waxed and waned, the grateful hymn
and the contrite prayer, may be heard ascending from na-
tive voices in the wilds of Australia, worshipping in an
edifice consecrated to the service of Jehovah, the one true
God : that the day is not far distant when, in the beautiful
language of prophecy, even there, “ The wilderness and
the solitary place shall be glad for them, and the desert,
shall rejoice and blossom as the rose,”


youfcli thus educated, and that of another who lias been kept
poring over slates and books six hours a-day, but with'
his energies dormant three-fourths of the time, and which
will be most fit to maintain himself in comfort, and to
promote the prosperity of the colony, when he grows up?
Whether the experiment be tried upon a European or upon
an Australian, can there be a doubt entertained, as to which
system will do the most to make the individual an indus-
trious and intelligent member of society ? which plan will
be most likely to enable him to add to the common stock?
In the department in which female children may be edu-
cated, the change from the old system to the new, would
not be quite so striking as in the case of boys ; for girls’
schools are generally less exclusively devoted to book-
learning. But even out of these establishments, a great deal
more good might be got, I am inclined to think, than is gene-
rally elicited, by a judicious varying of the learners’ pursuits,
so as to fit them more for after-life. In every art that can
tend to make the poor man’s cottage comfortable, it is de-
sirable that girls should be initiated; especially in those
connected with clothing, with the preparation of food, and
with cleanliness. The milking of cows, the management
of a dairy, the making of bread, the superintendence of
poultry, pigs, bees, &c., might all be learnt and be made
to interest them.
It might not be easy to find all the requisite knowledge
in any one teacher, for all I contemplate; but there are
ways of meeting the difficulty. Qualified persons might
be engaged to come at stated times to give the instruction
and assistance to which the resident teacher might not be
competent, just as in a higher grade of schools a drawing
or a dancing-master pays his periodical visits. A sufficient
knowledge of the art and mystery of for in-
stance, the boys would soon attain, applicable to building,
fencing and inclosing, if they had but a fit person to direct
and overlook them. By similar aid, much might be done
in horticulture and in farming pursuits, so as to make the
labour remunerative.
The more I reflect upon the little that is at present done
in the schools intended for the humbler classes of society,
with a view of rendering persons eligible for respectable sta-
tions in the world, the more lam astonished. Where, in
this country, can the parent of moderate means, who con-
templates taking his family to a new colony, in which


NATIVE AND COLONIAL SCHOOLS—PRINCIPLES UPON
WHICH THEY SHOULD BE CONDUCTED.
Again, allow me to suggest that in the formation of na-
tive and colonial schools, it should be matter for serious
consideration, whether there is not a fundamental error in
all our general, schools (for to our grammar schools I do
not wish to he understood as now referring). Take espe-
cially those provided for the lower, and, as they are
commonly called, the laborious classes. Assuming that
it is desirable to give children who have passed the period
of infancy, six hours daily training and discipline, the
question, I think, has never been sufficiently canvassed, as
to how that time could be most beneficially 'employed,
with a view of qualifying them for the ordinary pursuits
of life, including those which might be placed within their
reach, if pains were taken to give a little preparatory know-
ledge of the useful arts, and a degree of manual dexterity.
In none of our schools, as far as I am aware, is the time
by any means so usefully employed as it might be, lam
inclined to think that the plans upon which all these insti-
tutions proceed are wrong; that far too much time is set apart
for mere book-learning, I would suggest that half-an-hour
of every working day should be devoted to the study of
the sacred Scriptures. Add to this, two hours and a half
a-day for book-learning, writing, and arithmetic. There
will then remain three hours a-day. Why not, in the case
of boys, at any rate, let these hours be devoted to out-door
employment, and to handicraft pursuits ? Can they keep up
their attention to books during such lengthened periods as
those in which they are ordinarily confined ? Will the ex-
ercise and developement of their faculties he rendered as
complete as it might be, by adhering to the old system ?'
My experience of children convinces me that the result
will be far otherwise. Many of the most powerful intel-
lects among them will hardly be set to work at all. Why
not, then, at once combine more active and stirring pur-
suits? Why not begin to initiate them in agricultural em-
ployments, horticulture, the feeding and management of
cattle, the use of the plough and the spade, and of a few
carpenter’s tools, such as boys soon delight to handle.
Of brickmaking, thatching, rude building, fencing, they
might easily get a good notion. There can be little or no
mystery in any of these pursuits. Take the case of a


they may have, fora time, to do every thing for themselves—
where can he place his children for three or four years, so
that at the end of any such a period they shall be able to
help themselves materially, when they go abroad, and not
really have every thing to learn ? For instance, much as
agriculture and horticulture are esteemed in this country,
there is no institution, public or private, in which an edu-
cation is afforded which prepares for such pursuits. Why
is there not ? It would puzzle any one to answer the ques-
tion. Even in a highly civilized country, like Great Britain,
such institutions would be productive of immense advan-
tage : but in a new colony, such as that in which your
lot, my friend, is cast, where land is easily attainable, they
would work miracles. Instead of your ploughmen being
looked upon as dull, heavy, stupid, animals, mere clod-
poles, you would have a race of intelligent agriculturists,
tolerably acquainted with several of the useful arts, and ca-
pable, with a very little assistance, of turning the desert
into a paradise. There is in your colony at this time,
just such a person as your schools should aim to produce,
and you are well aware how much that single individual
has done, though he had no book-learning with which to
begin. True, he has made himself what he is, capable of
putting his hand to almost any thing; but many might be
taught to go and do likewise, if a proper bias were but
given, while they are young.
Such institutions, whether at home or abroad, ever keep-
ing in view the moral and religious training of the learners,
would, in their results, delight and astonish. Do not, I
say again, let your schools be confined to book-learning I
It is valuable in its proper place; but, after all, it will do
little towards rightly forming a moral and a social being.
We dignify it with the name of education , and we deceit
ourselves , It often leaves the learner, as to all the higher
requisites of an intelligent and responsible creature, just
where it found him. Let your system of discipline take a
wider range; let it form industrious habits, both of the
mind and the body, ever keeping utility in view; and
you will not regret having left the beaten path in these
matters.


A GENERAL CODE OF LAWS REQUIRED, APPLICABLE TO ALL
OUR NEW SETTLEMENTS.
I deeply regret that the Legislature of Great Britain has
not fixed certain preliminaries, applicable to all our at-
tempts at colonization in remote countries, so that the na-
tives might be sure of having justice done them, and that
our coming among them might be a blessing, as it ought to
be, instead of a curse. There should he a code of laws
provided for all these new communities, and their just
claims should be recognized, and fully met in the outset.
It would render the task of governing them far more easy,
and in the end, economical. The colonial office and the
national exchequer would alike participate in the benefit.
That the policy hitherto pursued in our Australian colo-
nies and in Van Diemen's Land, has not done justice to the
native population, but directly the reverse, is a matter of
public notoriety. In Van Diemen’s Land, the aborigines
have had their numbers so diminished, that I do not be-
lieve a tithe of them remain. Whole tribes, I believe,
have become extinct. This is a frightful result of coloniza-
tion, and so great a scandal to the Christian name, that the
greatest efforts ought to be made to prevent similar occur-
rences. It is lamentable that, as a nation, we are not more
alive to the claims of the aborigines. Surely, ray friend,
it cannot be right that such matters as these should be left
to all the waywardness and uncertainty of the voluntary
principle. It cannot be equitable for a great nation to leave
unsettled in. our colonies, momentous questions, on which
are dependent the welfare of the native population, their
future sustentation, the rank they are to take in the new
order of things, and even their very existence. But what-
ever indifference may be shown to these poor natives here
at home, still the colonists should exert themselves, and do
what in them lies to meet the occasion. Contribute among
yourselves implements of husbandry, seeds, plants, trees,
building materials, carpenters’ tools, rations for temporary
sustenance, and labour. And as to land at least, surely the
colonial authorities have some discretionary powers, the
just exercise of which, in such cases, would be counte-
nanced and confirmed at home: I cannot question it for
a moment Those settlers who have not money, implements,
or rations to give, can at least give a helping hand.
Let a vigorous effort bo made, that these poor natives,


the original inhabitants of the country, may have a share
in the inheritance, and not be left to all the risks attendant
upon their precarious and wandering mode of life, and to
the increased privations with which they arc threatened; or
be compelled, as their only alternative, to become (( hewers
of wood and drawers of water.” \
Sept . 16, 1838.
POSTSCRIPT.
The manuscript of the above letter had been dispatched
to the printer, when Major Mitchell’s new and elaborate
publication, entitled “ Three Expeditions into the Interior
of Eastern Australia,” very unexpectedly fell in my way.
The work consists of two octavo volumes, comprising about
700 or 800 pages of letter-press, and is illustrated by a
number of well executed engravings. It is with no
common pleasure that I avail myself of the opportunity
thus occurring, to extract a passage which appears to me to
go far to establish the reasonableness and practicability
of many of the suggestions which I have ventured, not
without much distrust of myself, to throw out for your
friendly consideration. One observation only I will make,
suggested by this extract, acknowledging at the same time
that the point had escaped me altogether: I allude to the
treatment of native prisoners. The result of the experi-
ment made in Sydney Harbour, I hope will not be lightly
passed over. No similar opportunity of benefiting the abo-
rigines should be neglected, but, on the contrary, the ut-
most should be made of it, and all unnecessary hardships
and severity of treatment avoided.
Major Mitchell writes as follows :
“ In the descriptions of Dampier and other navigators
“ who have touched on any part of these shores, we recog-
“ nize the same natives, with all their characteristics, and
“ are led to conclude that they are derived from the same
“ stock ; as the judicious compiler of the first History of
<{ New Holland considered it most probable, from this and
H other circumstances, * that the number is small, and that


“ the interior parts of the country arc uninhabited,’* 1
“ may observe that I have had no reason to entertain a
“ contrary opinion from what I saw of the interior country
“ beyond the Darling. The native population is very thinly
“ spread over the region I have explored, amounting to
“ nearly a seventh part of Australia. I cannot estimate
“ the number at more than six thousand; but, on the con-
■* trary, I believe it to be considerably less. They may in-
“ crease rapidly if wild cattle become numerous ; and, as
“ an instance, I may refer to the number and good appear-
“ ance of the Cudjallagong tribes, near Macquarie Range,
“ where they occasionally fall in with a herd of wild cattle.
“ The kangaroo disappears from cattle-runs, and is also
“ killed by stockmen merely for the sake of its skin ; but
“ no mercy is shown to the natives who may help them-
“ selves to a bullock or a sheep. Such a state of things
“ must infallibly lead to the extirpation of the aboriginal
“ natives, as in Van Diemen’s Land, unless timely mea-
“ sures are taken for their civilization and protection. I
“ have heard some affecting allusions made by natives to
“ the white men’s killing the kangaroo. At present, al-
“ most every stockman has several strong kangaroo dogs ;
“ and it would be only an act of justice towards the abori-
“ gines, to prohibit the white men by law from killing
“ these creatures, which are as essential to the natives as
“ cattle to the Europeans. The prohibition would be at
“ least a proof of the disposition of the strangers to act as
“ humanely towards the natives as they possibly could. If
“ wild cattle, on the contrary, become numerous, the na-
“ tives might increase also in number, and if not civilized
“ and instructed now, might become formidable and impla-
“ cable enemies then, as no absolute right to kill even wild
“ cattle, would be conceded to them. The evils likely to
“ result from such circumstances, were apparent both in
“ the commencement and termination of my first journey ;
“ but although the desert character of the interior ren-
“ ders such a state of things less likely to happen on a
“ larger scale, the unfortunate race whom we have found
“ on the shores of Australia, are not the less entitled to our
“ protection.
“ Some adequate provision for their civilization and
“ maintenance is due on our parts, to this race of men,
“ were it only in return for the means of existence of which
* History of New Holland, pp. 51 and 232.


t( we depriving them. The had example of the class of
“ persons sent to Australia* should be counteracted by
“ some serious efforts to civilize and instruct these aborigi-
<f nal inhabitants. That they are capable of civilization
“ and instruction, has been proved recently, in the case of
“ a number who were sentenced for some offence to be
“ confined with the chain-gang on Gaol Island, in Sydney
“ harbour. By the exertions of Mr, Ferguson, who is, I
“ believe, a missionary gentleman, these men were taught
“in five months to read tolerably well; and also to ex-
“ plain in English, the meaning of the Lord’s Prayer and
** Ten Commandments. During that time they had been
“ initiated in the craft of stone-cutting and building, so as
“to completely erect a small house. They grew fat and
“ muscular, and appeared really stronger, when well-fed,
“ than the white convicts.
u The natives can also be very good shepherds when any
“ of them are induced, by proper encouragement and pro-
“ tection, to take charge of a flock. One of the lads who
“ travelled with me, named * Tommy Caine-first,’ had pre-
“ viously tended sheep for a year, and had given great sa-
“ tisfaction.
“ My experiment with the little native, Ballandella, will
“ be useful, I trust, in developing hereafter the mental ener-
“ gies of the Australian aborigines, for, by the last ac-
“ counts from Sydney, I am informed that she reads as
“ as well as any white cliild of the same age.”— Mitchell’s
Expeditions into Eastern Australia, vol. hi. pp.
341 — 343.
A Report of the House of Lords on the present state of
the Islands of New Zealand, has lately appeared. The
Christian missionary there, has to contend with a state of
things which might appal the stoutest heart; an extent
of depravity which Western Australia in no part of it pre-
sents ; and yet he finds that most gratifying success attends
his labours. The Rev. John Beecham, one of the Secretaries
of the Wesleyan Missionary Society, gives the following
testimony
“ The New Zealanders are a noble race of men ; they
“ have a body much stronger than that of Englishmen in
M general, and a mind in no way inferior, did they only
♦ The allusion of course, confined to thp penal settlements,
rnmmzmmxmmz z. I r*:


“ enjoy equal privileges; but, alas! they have been trained
“ up from generation to generation, in error, superstition,
“ and misery.... Of the one true and living God they
“ have not the most distant idea, but of imaginary deities
“they have numbers: birds, reptiles, and fishes are in-
“ eluded in the number. Their principal deities are their
“ departed relatives, of whom they have the most supersti-
“ tious dread. To these they always pray before they go
“ to war, and entreat them to impart their anger to them,
“ to enable them to fight and conquer their enemies.
“ Those that fall in war are roasted and eaten by the vic-
“ torious party.. .. They that have eaten human flesh are
“ considered as deities while they are alive; and by the
“ name of Atua (God) they are often addressed; and even
“ the body itself, when the spirit is fled, is called Atua;
“ so that, according to their views, they are themselves
“ deified, body and soul, dead and alive .... Their moral
“ character is such as might naturally be expected from a
“ mind so dark and polluted. I may venture to affirm
“ that there is no crime of which they are capable, of which
“ they are not guilty. Reason is completely dethroned,
“ and the reins of government given up to the passions al-
“ together, and by these they are carried to the greatest
“ extremes.” p. 212.
The case of the celebrated native chief Shungee, who
once visited England, is a complete exemplification of this.
I extract the following passage from another part of Mr.
Beecham’s evidence, in which he speaks of the conduct of
that warrior on his return to New' Zealand. “ Soon after
“ Shungee had arrived, he was informed that in his absence
“ one of his relations had been slain by some of his friends
“at Mercury Bay and the River Thames. This report
“ was too true. Shungee immediately declared war against
“ the people, although they w T ere relations. The chief who
“ belonged to Mercury Bay, and with whom Shunghee
“ had sailed from New South Wales to New Zealand, ear-
“ nestly desired reconciliation, but in vain. Nothing but
“ war could satisfy Shunghee; he collected 3,000 fighting
“ men, and commenced his march. The battle w r as dread-
“ ful, and many fell on both sides; but Shunghee proved
“ victorious, and returned to the Bay of Islands in great
“ triumph. After my arrival in New Zealand, I learned
“ that Shunghee and his party slew 1,000 men, 300 of
“ whom they roasted and ate before they left the field of


<f battle.* Shungee killed the chief above-mentioned, after
u which he cut off his head, and poured the blood into his
“ hands, and drank it. This account I had from Shungee
“ and Whycatoa, who related it with the greatest satisfac-
** tion,” p, 207. , |
Now, take by way of contrast, the following picture
drawn by the same hand. lam anxious to present it to
you, because it is that result which I have dimly had in
my mind’s eye, while I have been writing. Here is the
realization of my most sanguine views, It is from the
same volume of evidence, and Mr. Beecham is still under
examination.
“ I was speaking on the influence of Missions in pro-
“ moting the temporal interests of the natives ; and as a
“ single fact often conveys a clearer idea than lengthened
“ general remarks, with your Lordships’ permission, I will
“ read one with which I am furnished in a letter from a
“ medical gentleman, respecting one of our Christian na-
“ fives his name is David, which appears to be a
“ favorite name among the Christian natives In this
“ case we see the once savage New Zealander devoting
“ himself to the peaceful pursuits of civilized life ; daily
“ worshipping the true God in the midst of his family,
“ consisting of twenty persons, and entertaining his Eng-
“ lish guests in the true spirit of patriarchal hospitality.
“ * On the 25th of February, 18»37,’ Mr. Shaw says
“ * The captain and myself started from the Hokianga to
“ * visit the Bay of Islands, and, at dusk, after a fatiguing
“ * but highly interesting day’s march, we arrived at a
“. 1 native village, where an intelligent and most hospitable
“ ‘ native of the name of David resided. We met with a
“ * hearty welcome from David and his friends; and, on
“ * entering his house, preparations were immediately
“ * made for our comfort. Before we had time to seat
“ * ourselves around the fire upon the floor, a girl brought
“ ‘ in trusses of clean wheaten straw for our beds ; others
“ * were busied in preparing our supper, which consisted of
“ * milk, bread, and potatoes —all, the produce of this man’s
“ * farm. After supper, what was my astonishment when I
“ * saw David bring out two books, and after selecting a
“ * portion in one, which was a translation of part of the
“ * New Testament, he read it aloud with a clear and im-
* It is elsewhere explained that it is usual for these cannibals to eat
the legs and arms of their victims.


“ 4 hesitating voice ! This finished, he read from the other
“ * book some prayers, which were' responded to by the
44 4 whole native company, above twenty persons. After
44 * this, a very handsome young man, apparently David’s
“ 4 son, prayed aloud extempore, all the people devoutly
44 4 kneeling. The same ceremony, with as much devo-
-44 4 tion, was performed at daylight in the morning, before
“ { we proceeded on our journey.
44 4 This native, through the kind assistance and instruc-
-44 4 tion of the missionaries, may now be called wealthy.
“ ‘ He possesses a good house, strongly built of Ranpoo,
44 4 which for natives is comfortable and commodious, con-
-44 4 sisting of two rooms, the inner one being a sleeping apart-
-44 4 ment; the outer one is of considerable size.... This
44 4 farm consists of several acres of land, well cultivated, pro-
-44 4 ducing luxuriant crops of wheat, potatoes, and coomeras.
44 4 He makes use of a plough; and his wheat field would bear
44 4 comparison, both as to tillage and richness of the crop,
44 4 with some of our English fields. The wheat is ground
44 4 at the missionaries’ mill, the flour being made into ex-
-44 4 cellent bread, or eaten boiled with milk. He has five
u 4 or six cows, which are the increase of one given him
44 4 some time ago by the missionaries, so that he has an
44 4 abundant supply of milk and butter ; the latter he sells
44 4 to people at the Bay of Islands, and elsewhere for money.
44 4 .... On going away he would receive no payment; we
44 4 of course made him a present of tobacco. He expressed
44 4 a great wish that should we return by the same route,
44 4 we would stop at his house. He understands and can
4 4 4 speak English.
44 4 The natives generally are very quick at acquiring
44 4 knowledge of all kinds, and are particularly fond of
44 4 reading, writing, and drawing.’ p. 287.
44 Mr. Shaw then adds his testimony to the great change
44 effected among the natives by promoting their honesty,
44 which is one of the bonds of civilized society.”
It is hardly possible to read the above particulars of
David, without being forcibly reminded of St. Luke’s
account of the man who had been 44 possessed of devils
long time but who, after they w r ere departed, was found
44 sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right
mind.”
Edward Brewster, Printer, Hand Court, Dowgntc Hill.
\
.Tt »■*,«»>»' V
' V* - i ( Ik I i
