

iuAuMu 1




ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA,
QUEENSLAND.
ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES
ON THE
Aboriginal Tribes of Western Australia.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Outridge Print, Brisbane
Associe. etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.


tlk cjounl 4cnj|fii|i[|i|ial Socieio nf
QUEENSLAND
fHIS Society has been established in Brisbane for the last nineteen years. The
Society was instituted with the view of promoting the interests of Geographical
science, of encouraging exploration in Australasia, and of furthering the study of
Physical and Commercial Geography.
While these objects cannot fail to commend themselves to the scientific and com-
mercial classes of the community, and to many persons engaged in extending pastoral
and mining enterprise into distant parts of the Continent, of which comparatively
little is known, the great educational advantages to be derived from the establishment
of this Society will be no less apparent to all intelligent colonists.
Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary Member, subject to election.
Subscription, £1 Is. per annum, due on the Ist July in each year
Life Membership, £lO 10s.
The usual Entrance Fee will not be charged during the session
1904-1905.
Members’ Privileges.
To receive the Society’s Diploma.
The right to be present at, and to introduce two friends to, all meetings of the
Society.
The privileges of admission to the meetings of the Royal Geographical Society,
London, and of the use, for the purpose of reference, of the Map Room and Library.
To be allowed to purchase copies of all the publications of the Royal Geographical
•Society, London, on special terms.
Membership of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society when in North Britain
without payment of additional fee, and the privilege of purchasing The Scottish Geo-
graphical Magazine on special terms.
Entree to the Evening Meetings, Library, &c., of the Sydney, Melbourne, and
Adelaide Centres of the Society.
To have access to the Library and other public rooms of the Society.
To receive a copy of the Society’s official publications.
Diplomas' of Fellowship.
Section IV, Clause 3, Constitution and, Rules :
The Council may confer the Diploma of Fellowship upon such eminent persons
as have rendered valuable services to geographical science ; on persons of distinguished
scientific attainments ; on those who have promoted the objects of the Society ; and
on Honorary and Honorary Corresponding Members of the Society, without the pay-
ment of diploma fees.. On Ordinary Members, on payment of a nominal diploma fee,
subject to the following conditions, namely:— (a) Upon written application: Those
who have compounded for life membership and are deemed worthy of the distinction
by the Council, (b) Upon written application: Those who are not in arrears with
their annual subscriptions, and are. upon the recommendation of the Council, approved
by the Society at an ordinary monthly meeting. Of the honorary class the number
of Fellows shall not exceed ten. Each Diploma, after being approved by the Council,
shall be signed by the President and by the Hon. Secretary of the Society. Members
who receive the diplomas shall have the privilege of designating themselves “Fellows”
of the Society, and may use the initials F.R.G.S.A.Q. after their names as long as
they continue to be members of the Society.
Ladies or gentlemen who wish to become Members of this Society may do so by
handing in or posting their names to the Hon. Secretary, at the Rooms, Brisbane, or
to any Member of the Society who will arrange for their nomination.


ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES
ON THE
27079
Aboriginal Tribes of Western Australia.




ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE ABORIGINAL
TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Associe. etranger Soa. a Anthrop. de Paris.
Synopsis.— Prefatory; Origin of Australian Aborigines; Rock
Piet ares; Organisation; Initiation Ceremonies; Extraction of
Teeth; Superstitions, etc.; Description of Plates; Language;
Vocabularies.
During several years past I have been endeavouring to obtain
reliable details of the rock-pictures and some other customs of the
aboriginals of Western Australia. My mode of procedure lias been
to write to' the owners and managers of stations in different parts
of that. State, to members of the Police Force, and also to others
who might be recommended by any of these. Many of the persons
who were thus communicated, with made no l response, but an indi-
vidual observer here and there took an interest in my work, and
did his beet to help me.
I supplied to my correspondents categorical lists of the particu-
lars required, and when I received a reply showing that the writer
was a capable man, I again wrote to him for further details, or
respecting new matters suggested by his letter. From the reliable
character of my correspondents, and my own general knowledge of
the subject under discussion, I feel sure that the information sup-
plied in this article can be relied upon.
ORIGIN OF THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
The probable origin of the Australian aborigines, and the
development of some of their customs, are dealt with in my article!
on “ Les Indigenes d’Australie,” contributed to' the twelfth session
of the International Congress of Prehistoric Anthropology and
Archaeology, held at Paris in 1900, and therefore it has not been
thought necessary to say anything on that subject in the present
paper.
ROCK PICTURES.
The rock-pictures of Western Australia, like those of New South
Wales, must be divided under two heads—Carvings and Paintings.
In the former the drawings are cut into the surface of the rock
* Bead before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland.
f Congres Internat. d’Anthrop. et d’Archeol. prbhist., Compte Rendus 12me
Session, pp, 488-495. Also see my article in L’Anthropologie, vol. xiii., pp. 238-240.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Yol. XIX.


either in outline or in low relief, whilst in the latter the pictures are
painted in pipe-clay, red-ochre, or charcoal on the walls or roofs of
caves or sheltered places, protected from the weather by overhanging
ledges of rock.
Rock Carvings. —The mode of executing these, carvings is as
follows: —The outline of some object., say a. kangaroo, was first,
sketched or designed on a. smooth or even-faced rock, selected on
account of its suitability for the purpose. Then the operator got a
piece of hard stone., broken or chipped to a. point, or edge, with, which
he chopped and battered at. the surface, of his design until all the
space inside, the outline, had been beaten away to a fairly uniform
depth, say from a sixteenth of an inch to a qua.rt.er of an inch. The
new surface exposed in this way forms a striking contrast to. the
surrounding weathered exterior of the rock. This fresh surface
retains a distinctive, colour for a. long period, and shows the figures
very clearly, giving them, at a distance, the appearance of standing
out. in relief.
The hammering and beating process is generally continued all
over the surface of the design, but in some instances a. band or groove
is first formed along the outline of the figure, by chopping a.nd
hammering the rock surface in the way above described. The. artist
could then either batter 'a.way the internal surface, or leave the
drawing in outline only.
It will be observed that, the above method of indenting the
design upon the rock differs somewhat, from that employed in New
South Wales, which I have described elsewhere.* In the counties of
Cumberland, Hunter, and other places on the coast of New South
Wales, where rock-carvings abound, the rocks consist, of
sandstone, in which lines and grooves could be cut with comparative
ease. In many parts of Western Australia, however, on the Upper
Murchison, Gascoyne, Ashburton, Fortescue, Yule, and other rivers,
for example, the rocks are mostly granite and basalt., to make marks
on which would be very difficult.. Repeated blows, as above described,
would be 1 the only way to execute the work with such rude tools as
those used by the aboriginal artists.
About two miles south-westerly from Mount Stewart. Station,
on the Ashburton River, there are some hills, abounding in denuded
masses of granite projecting many feet above the ground. Under
overhanging ledges of these rocks, and in disintegrated hollows in
their sides, the natives have apparently taken shelter from the sun
and rain. On the walls of the rock-shelters, as well as on neigh-
bouring rocks exposed to the weather, there are figures of men,
iguanas, and other animals, all executed by beating away the surface
The Aboiiginal Hock Pictures of Australia.” Proc. Roy. Geo. Soc. Aus-
tralasia, Queensland. Vol. x., pp. 54-56.


of the rock within their outline. There is no proportion between the
relative sizes of the objects depicted; for example, there' are drawings
of men from one foot six inches to three feet, while iguanas on the
same rock are as large as the men. Pictured rocks of this kind are
usually near rock-holes, or other places containing water, which form
convenient camping localities for the natives. Similar drawings to
those described, incised in the rocks in the same manner, are found in
several places throughout the Ashburton district.
On Hillside Station, between the Shaw and De Grey rivers, are
some large granite rocks, close to the homestead, on which are drawn
several pictures by cutting or beating away the surface of the rock.
One of these represents a man about seven feet high.
Rock carvings are very numerous on the Yule and Shaw rivers,
and, as one of my informants puts it, “ they are in a variety of vulgar
attitudes.” They are incised on basaltic and granitic rocks by batter-
ing constantly within the margin of the object outlined until a slight
depression is worn in the rock. Such drawings retain their fresh
appearance for a very long time.
Similar carvings to the foregoing are reported by my correspon-
dents as existing on Fortesoue, Lyndon, Gascoyne, and Murchison
rivers.
By far the most interesting and numerous display of aboriginal
rock carvings in Western Australia, are found on Depuch Island, situ-
ated opposite Balia Balia, a small town formed, during recent years,
on the mainland. The island is about four miles distant from the
shore, and about six miles from Balia Balia township. The shores of
in that locality consist of low banks of mud and siand,
studded with mangroves. At low water spring-tides these sandbanks
are sufficiently dry in some places, to admit of the natives walking
out to the island, which is called, in their language, Wommalunna.
The island is a little over three miles long, and upwards of two
miles wide. The highest part is at the western end, where it attains
an elevation of between 500 and 600 feet. On the eastern end of
Wommalunna is a fresh water spring, or natural tank, close to which
are the native drawings described in this article. In rainy weather,
water also collects in hollows in the rocks at different places. The
natives used to cross over to the island, and remain there as long as
the water lasted.
The island is one huge mass of igneous rooks, standing on end in
thin layers, piled so loosely, block upon block, that in climbing o>ver
them, one expects the touch of his feet to start some monolith thun-
dering down into an adjacent gully. Even the hardy spinnifex cannot
grow excepting in the gullies, where a few stunted white gum-trees
and scrubs are also to be found. This scanty vegetation, however,
sustains numbers of rock wallabies.


It will give the readier some idea of the great number of these
rock pictures if I quote Mr. H. A. Hall’s answer to miy request to try
and count them : “ It would take hours to discover and count approxi-
mately all the drawings in the one gully I examined, still I think it is
safe to say there are about a hundred. But there are many gullies
on the island, and I am led to believe there' are drawings; more or
less, in most of them. In fact, a week or ten days could easily be
spent in making up records of the aboriginal work.” Mr. Wm. Byron,
in one of his letters says, “ After some difficulty I am, able to send
you about forty copies of the rock carvings on Depuch Island, of
which there are hundreds.”
In May and June, 1840, Captain Wickham,, in the surveying ship
Beagle, was in the vicinity of Depuch Island!, the position of which
he gives as Lat. 20° 38' S., and, Long. 117° 44' El. Both he and
Captain Stokes subsequently described the aboriginal drawings dis-
covered there.* Captain Wickham speaks of “the vast number of
specimens of art, - ’ and Captain Stokes says, “ the number of specimens
is immense,” showing that both these officers were impressed with the
great, profusion of the drawings. Captain Stokes adds: “ There is
not in them to, be observed, the slightest' trace of indecency.” Hie either
did not see the pictures found by my correspondents, or he mistook
them for saurians—a mistake which anyone unacquainted with aborigi-
nal drawings would be likely to' make, especially in regard to some
of them, where the penis is so much elongated as to resemble a tail;
and in others where the length of the body is out of proportion to the
rest of the figure. In fig. 6, however, of his plate of drawings, Cap-
tain Stokes shows a man with the genital appendage.
All the native pictures on Depuch Island (Wommalunna), are
executed in the manner described in earlier pages of this article—that
is, they are incised on the rock by repeated blows with a sharp' instru-
ment.
Rock Paintings. —The rock paintings of Western Australia are
produced mainly by drawing the required object on the smooth sur-
face of the rock in the required colour. In some cases the objects
are shown in outline only; in other instances the space within the
outline is painted with a wash of the same' tint; whilst not infre-
quently this space is shaded by lines or dots drawn either all in the
same colour, or in two' or more different tints. The drawings which
appear in red are no doubt done with red oxide of iron, found as a
clay, and known as red ochre'. The white colour would be either pipe-
clay or fine ashes from the' camp fire; whilst the black drawings are
done with charcoal or soot.
* Capt. Wickham, “ Notes on Depuch Island,” Journ. Roy. Geog. Soc. (London,
1842), vol. xii., pp. 78-83.
Captain Stokes, “ Discoveries in Australia” (London, 1846), vol. ii., pp. 168-172.


Native paintings consist largely of representations of the human
hand. In .some instances the extended hand was placed firmly on
tihie surface of a rock sheltered from the weather, and the required
colour blown or squirted over it out of the mouth. In other cases the
palm of the hand of the artist was either rubbed over with a liquid,
or was dipped into it, and while wet was closely pressed against a
smooth surface on the cave wall. Upon removing the hand, the col-
oured impression of it was left clearly defined on the rock. Occasion-
ally the surface of the rock was coloured previous to making the paint-
ings upon it, for the purpose of greater artistic effect.
On the Ord River, Hall’s Creek, Margaret River, and Sturt
Creek, Mr. J. Wilson informs me there are numerous paintings on
the rocks, representing kangaroos, snake®, iguanas, human feet, etc.
Mr. J. C. Rose states that paintings of human figures, crocodiles,
reptiles, and other animals, as well as native weapons, are common
on the Fitzroy, Fraser, and Lenard rivers. I learn also from Mr. E.
Smith, Mr. J. Hancock, and others, that aboriginal paintings on the
rooks are' plentiful on the Upper Murchison, Ashburton, Fortescue,
and other rivers, being usually found near water. They consist of
men, hands, weapons, snakes, and other devices.
The most famous of Western Australia’s paintings, and at the
same time amongst those possessing the greatest interest, are those-
discovered by CJapt. Grey, afterwards Sir George Grey, on the Glenelg
River, in March, 1838, which were described and illustrated in a
work written by him in 1841.* Nothing definite was again heard of
similar paintings in that district till 1891, when Mr. Joseph Brad-
shaw drew attention to the subject in a paper read before the Geo-
graphical Society in Melboume.f
But the matter was not lost sight of by the Government of
Western Australia, and when, in 1901, an expedition was sent out,
under the command of Mr. F. S. Brockman,, to explore the north-
west district of Kimberly, the party was supplied with photographic
appliances to secure copies of any cave paintings met with in any
part of the journey. At different places photographs were taken,
showing some very important aboriginal drawings found on the walls
of rocks protected from the weather by overhanging masses of sand-
stone. The photographs thus obtained have recently been published
by the Government of Western Australia'! in official form.
* Two Expeds. N-W. and W. Australia (London, 1841), vol. i., pp. 201-218, with'
six plates.
f Proc. Roy, Geog. Soc. Aust., Victoria Rch., vol. ix., p. 100, with one Plate. See
also Journ, Anthrop Inst., London, vol. xxiii., Plates 5 and C.
| Report on Exploration of North-west Kimberley (Perth, 1902), pp. 4,6, 7, 12,
18. Plates 4,5, 6, 10, 12, 13, 15-20, 23-26.


Several of the paintings discovered by Mr. F. S. Brockman
and his party are similar in character to those reported by Capt.
Grey, and in order to give this matter further publicity, I have
thought it desirable to copy one of the recent photographs into this
article, because the Journal of this Society will go into many channels
which will not be reached by the report' of Mr. Brockman’s
discoveries'.
The figure I have chosen for reproduction is numbered Plate 17
in Mr. Brockman's report. This painting is one of several discovered
in caves on Bach stem Creek, a tributary of the Oalder River, which
empties into Collier Bay. This figure is all painted in red colour,
with the exception of the eye-balls and the pendant-like object on the
chest, which are in black, the whole of the rock-surface having been
previously coloured white. The outlines of the face were measured,
and found to be eighteen inches long and twelve inches broad. The
entire painting is about five feet high.
The face is bounded by a double line, which extends downwards
to form the shoulders, and is continued across the breast. The
countenance consists of very large eyes and nose, but no> mouth, unless
the lower portion of the nose be intended for that feature. Around
the sides and top of the head is a sort' of halo, with lines radiating
through it from the head outwards. Just beyond the halo is a broad
band with a number of spots at tolerably regular intervals along the
mi ddle of it; and the ends of this band, which appear to be tassel led,
almost touch the shoulders. There are two short arms, with bands
around them, and five fingers on each hand. In the centre of the
chest is a black object, the vertical dimension of which is about
double the horizontal. The entire painting terminates at about the
waist or abdomen, and there is nothing by which the sex can be
determined. The vertical lines drawn on the body from the thorax
downwards are not in my opinion intended to' represent clothing, but
are only for ornamentation. Towards the right of the picture are
some rude outlines, onei of which resembles a human foot with four
toes, painted in red colour.
Somewhat similar paintings were' found by Mr. Brockman s party
m different places in the Kimberly district, but space precludes
more than this brief mention of them. Plate 16 of Mr. Brockman’s
report represents a number of hands stencilled on a cave wall, similar
to those reported by me to the Anthropological Society at Paris in
1898.*
* “ Gravures et Peintures sur Rochers par les Aborigines d’Australie,” Bull. Soc.
d’Anthrop. de Paris, t. ix, 4me Serie, pp. 425-432.


ORGANISATION.
Western Australia is the largest of all the Australian States,
and its native inhabitants have several systems of social organisation,
which I will briefly refer to, for the purpose of giving their geographic
distribution.
The most primitive of these organisations is the Tuar system
which exists among the tribes on the west coast about Dongarra
northerly to Onslow. In this system, the elders of the tribe allot
the progeny of certain women to be the wives of certain men, but
the relationship existing between the parties to the marriage must
not be nearer than that of second cousins. As the Tuar is the
same in principle as the Nanarri system of New South Wales,
described by me in a previous paper in 1900,* it will not be necessary
to go into' details here.
Proceeding southerly from Dougarra to Perth and Albany, and
thence to Eucla, extending inland to Norseman and Lake Barlee,
we find the people of each tribe divided into' two intermarrying
phratries, called Wurtungmat and Munnitchmat, with rules of mar-
riage and dfescent in accordance with the following table:
Table 1.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Munnitchmat Wurtungmat Munnitchmat
B Wurtungmat Munnitchmat Wurtungmat
Mr. Thos. Muir, J.P., of Deeside Station, Western Australia,
supplied this information in response to a letter which I wrote him.
On my writing again, requesting him to further check the descent of
the offspring, his reply was “ this table is exactly right.”
The families composing the two primary divisions mentioned
bear the totem names of different animals, plants, or inanimate
objects. Among the totems of tih© Munnitchmat phratry may be
mentioned the following : —White cockatoo, kangaroo, fire, common
black and white magpie, dog, pelican, carpet-snake, kangaroo-rat,
blow-fly, porcupine, parakeet, and pigeon.
The undermentioned totemic names may be enumerated as
embracing some of the people of the Wurtungmat phratry:—Crow,
bandicoot, emu, mopoke, ringtail opossum, chuiok (bird), black duck,,
black cockatoo, iguana, spear, lizard, turkey, and wallaby.
My enquiries respecting the line of descent' of the totems has
not yet been satisfactory, but I am following up the investigation.
Another form of organisation consists in the bi-section of each
phratry, thus making four intermarrying divisions, called Bulcharri,
Kurrimurra., Burronga, and Banaka, or dialectical variations of these


names. This system is in operation over more than half the geogra-
phic area of Western Australia, together with a wide zone through
the centre of South Australia, reaching as far as the Georgina River,
on the frontier of Queensland.
In all the northern part of Western Australia, situated north-
easterly of a line drawn approximately from Collier Bay to Lake
Macdonald, and continuing eastward into the Northern Territory,
each phratry is subdivided into four sections, thus making eight
divisions of the community. The names of these divisions are given
in Table 16, infra.
In order to explain this subject, it will be necessary to introduce
tables to exhibit the intermarriage of the different divisions, and
the sections to which the resulting offspring belong.
On the Murchison, Greenough, Sanford, Roderick, Wooramel,
Gascoyne, and Lyons rivers, the several native tribes are divided a,s
in the following table:
Phratry. Father.
] Buldyerri
(Kaimarra
B (Burung
(Bugarlu
Table 2.
Mother.
Burung
Bugarlu
Biildyerri
Kaimarra
Offspring.
Bugarlu
Burung
Kaimarra
Buldyerri
These sectional names, with some modifications, are found among
the natives at Weld Spring, Bonython Cheek, Lake Throssall, Elder
Creek, Glen Gumming, and extend eastward into South Australia,
where a similar organisation exists among the Andikarina and
Arrinda tribes.
The tribes on the Ashburton, Fortescue, Oak over, and Throssell
rivers have similar section names, with the exception that Banaka
takes the place of Bugarlu, as under:
Table 3.
Phratry. Father.
(Bulcharri
(Kurrimurri
Mother.
Offspring.
Banaka
Burronga
Burronga
Banaka
j, | Burronga
| Banaka
Bulcliarri
Kurrimurri
Kurrimurri
Bulcharri
These sections reach easterly into the Northern Territory of
South Australia.
In the Roeburne district,, and on the Yule, Maitland, Shaw, and
De Grey rivers, the natives have practically the same four names for
the divisions, but the sections constituting the phratries are different,
as shown in the following table:


Table 4.
Phratry. Father.
\ Paldyarri
| Burungo
Mother.
Offspring.
Banaka
Kaiamara
Kaiamara
Banaka
j, (Kaiamara
, (Banaka
Paldyarri
Burungo
Burungo
Paldyarri
On the Lower Fitzroy and Lennard rivers, Jurgurra Creek, and
thence along the coast to Broome and Condon, are a number of
tribes possessing the l following four section names, which differ but
slightly from those in the other tables:
Table 5.
Phratry. Father.
| Parradyerri
(Parungo
Mother.
Offspring.
Panaka
Kaiamba
Kaiamba
Panaka
(Kaiamba
(Panaka
Parradyerri
Parungo
Parungo
Parradyerri
It will be observed in Tables 4 and 5, that Paldyarri and
Burungo constitute Phratry A, whereas in Tables 2 and 3, that
phratry consists of Buldyerri and Kaimara. This matter will be:
again referred to: farther on.
Among a number of tribes occupying the country drained by
the Ord, Denham, Fitzroy, and Margaret rivers, and on Sturt Cheek,
the people are classified into eight sections, which intermarry in
conformity with fixed laws. A name is given to each of the sections,
by means of which the members of the different divisions are readily
distinguished; and identification is further facilitated by a mascu-
line and feminine form of each of these eight, names. Table 16.
The division into eight sections is also in operation over the
greater portion of the Northern Territory, and extends into the
north-west corner of Queensland. 1 From information supplied by
Mr. J. Cahill, manager of Wave Hill Station, on Victoria River, I
reported the names of the eight sections obtaining on that river and
its affluents with the laws of intermarriage and descent. 2
Mr. W. Holze, of Daly Waters, in 1900 gave me full details of
the intermarriages of the eight sections of the Ohingalee tribe, and
likewise of the tribe at Elsey Creek. I contributed the former to the
Anthropological Society at Washington, 3 and the latter I reported to
1 See my paper on “ Native Tribes of Queensland,” American Anthropologist,
vol. i. New Series, pp. 595-597.
2 “Divisions of Tribes in the Northern Territory,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales,.
xxxiii., p. 112. Queensland Geog. Journal, xvi., p. 72.
3 American Anthropologist, ii., N.S., pp. 494-497.


the Royal Society of New South Wales the same year. 1 I also
communicated the divisions of the Elsey Creek tribe to the Society
of Anthropology at Paris: 2
Mr. Hiolze sent me, a comprehensive vocabulary of the Chingalee
language,, and also a valuable table of totems, showing their inter-
marriage and descent, both of which I contributed to the Royal
Geographical Society at Brisbane in 1901. 1 13 lam likewise indebted
to Mr. Holze for much reliable and important information respecting
native customs in the Northern Territory.
The eight sections of the M‘Arthur and Calvert rivers tribes
were collected for me by Mr. M. Costello, and communicated to the
American Philosophical Society at Philadelphia in 1899 A
The Inchalachee and Warkya, (or Waggaia) tribes have eight
divisions, which were tabulated under my direction by Mr. A. H.
Glissan, Rockland Station, and reported by me in 1899. 5
In the foregoing brief review of the social organisation of the
native' tribes of Western Australia, it has been shown that in some
districts the primitive system of the Tuar isi employed to regulate
intermarriages. In other localities the community consists of two
phratries, as A and B, without any further subdivision. (Table 1).
Over the greater part, of Western Australia, there is a partition of
each phratry into two sections, making four' divisions of the tribe.
(Tables 2,3, 4,5). Among the inhabitants of other districts there
are four subdivisions of each phratry, giving a total of eight sections.
(Table 16).
These different types of organisation have originated so far back
in the past that the present natives cannot give any account of their
raison d'etre, and therefore I shall venture to- state a theory by
means of which the' origin of the different systems could be, accounted
for. My object in adopting this course is to invite discussion on this
highly important subject among ethnologists in various parts of the
world reached by the Journal of this Society.
4 “ Marriage and Descent among the Australian Aborigines.” Journ. Roy. Soc
N.S. Wales, xxxiv., pp. 130-131.
5 ‘‘ Organisation Sociale des Tribus Aborigenes,” de I’Australia, Bulletins Soc.
d’Anthrop. de Paris, t. ii., serie 5, pp. 415-419.
6 “ Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of the Northern Territory,”
Queensland Geogrraphical Journal, xvi., pp. 85-89.
7 “ Divisions of North Australian Tribes,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxviii
P- 77.
8 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, xxxiii., p. 111. See also my article on “ Les
Indigenes d’Australie,” Congres Internat. d’Anthrop, et d’Arch6ol. prehist., Compte
Rendu, 12me Sess., p. 492.


Following a line of reasoning I have before adopted, 1 in dealing
with Australian organisations, we will assume that in the remote past
there were two tribes called Bulcharri and Banaka,, who, either by
conquest or as a matter of public policy, amalgamated, and that, the
Bulcharri men married the Banaka women, and vice versa. This
would give us the organisation shown in the following table, the
offspring taking the mother’s name:
Table 6.
Phratry. Father.
Mother.
Offspring.
Banaka
Bulcharri
Bulcharri
Banaka
B Banaka
Bulcharri
Let us also say that Kaimarra and Burungo united in the same
manner, and intermarried one with another, as follows:—■
Table 7.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Kaimarra Burungo Burungo
B Burungo Kaimarra Kaimarra
It will be observed that the organisation in each of the Tables
6 and 7 is precisely the same in principle as that existing at the
present day among the Parnkalla 2 tribe, the Yowerawarraka tribe 3
the Barkunjee tribe 4 , and several others. Likewise, the children
belonged to the same phratry as their mothers, as in the tribes quoted.
We will now assume that the confederacy represented in Table 6
conquered that in Table 7, or that these two peoples considered it
politic to amalgamate for purposes of mutual advantage. Such an
alliance could have been accomplished by the interchange of sisters
between the members of the opposite confederacies in this way:
Bulcharri could have taken the sister of Burungo, and have given
his own sister - in exchange • Kaiamarra and Banaka could have
exchanged sisters in a similar way; but there was no alteration made
in the names of a man’s offspring in any instance. The united con-
federacy would then be illustrated by Table 3, ante, which represents
the organisation as we find it to-day among the tribes on the Ash-
burton and other rivers.
On the Murchison River and elsewhere, the section name
Bugarlu, as stated in an earlier page, takes the place of Ban aka,
1 “ The Origin, etc., of the Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc.
Philadelphia, vol. xxxix., pp. 556-578, with map of Australia. Also see my paper in
“ L’Anthropologie ” (Paris, 1902), vol. xiii., pp. 233-240.
2 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, vol. xxxix., p. 82,
3 Op. cit., p. 83.
4 -Journ. Roy. Soe. N.S. Wales, vol. xxxii., p. 242.


which could be explained by supposing a. tribe named Bugarlu,,
instead of Banaka, to have amalgamated with Bulcharri in past times.
Further, if we take, the four names in Table© 4 and 5, we dis-
cover that the phratries comprise different sections to those shown in,
Tables 2 and 3, as already mentioned in an earlier page. It may
be postulated that the people in Table 4, for example, consisted in-
ancient times of the confederacies illustrated in Tables 6 and 7, and,
that at a later period they became amalgamated. The consolidation
of the four sections, however, was effected by the coalition of different
pairs of sections. Bulcharri married the sister of Kaiamarra, and
Kaiamarra. took the sister of Bulcharri as his spouse; Burungo and
Banaka exchanged sisters with each other in the same manner, thus
constituting the organisation existing at present on the De Grey
River and elsewhere. (Tables 4 and 5).
Instead of exchanging sisters, as above suggested, the coalescence-
of tribes could be accomplished by the exchange of wives. This
arrangement, would be only temporary, or it might endure for that
generation. But in the rising generation, the men of Phratry A
would obtain their wives from among the sisters of the men of
Phratry B, and conversely, precisely the same as we find marriages
arranged at the present day.
We also discover, in examining Tables 3 and 4, that although the
phratries in each table are not composed of the same sections, yet
the offspring have the same fathers in both tables. For example,
in Table 3, Buloharrie marries Burronga., and his children are
Banaka; but if we take Table 4, it is seen that. Bulcharri marries
Kaiamurra., and his children still retain the name of Banaka.. This,,
is, of course; likewise true of the other three sections.
This may, perhaps, bear the construction that at the time of
the amalgamation of these four sections, it. was considered best- to
bestow on a man's offspring the same section name which they bore
before the consolidation, or, in other words, not to let the mother
influence the line of descent, as had been the custom under the
ancient organisation represented in Tables 6 and 7.
Referring back to Phratry A 3, it will be observed that
Burronga is the regularly appointed wife of Bulcharri, and his child-
ren are Banaka.. In certain cases, however, where there, is no blood
relationship, it is sometimes permissible for Bulcharri to marry a
Banaka woman belonging to a distant tribe, but in such case the-
children are called Burronga. This alternative privilege may be a
survival of the archaic law, when Bulcharri married Banaka., as in
Table 6, and the descent of the progeny was regulated by the mother.
Kaiamarra can, under like circumstances, take a Burronga woman as
his alternative wife, and his children are Banaka. The same rule-
a-pplies to the men in both sections of Phratry B.


The fact of different, pairs of sections being employed to. consti-
tute the phratries exhibited in Tables 3 and 4, and the consequent
variation in the intermarriage of the four sections, together with the
persistency of the names of a man’s children in both tables, may
help to strengthen the hypothesis of the consolidation of a number
of small clans into pairs, as in Tables 6 and 7, or into quartettes,
as in Tables 2,3, 4, and 5.
If we travel easterly from the tribes we have been describing,
and proceed into the Northern Territory, we find not only the same
organisation, but section names are met with, some of which are
almost identical with those in Tables 3 and 4. For example 1 , at
Chai'lotte Waters and Alice Springs, in the Northern Territory, the
people are segregated into four sections, which intermarry as in the
following synopsis:
Table 8.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
. (Bultara Koomara Panungka
(Parulla Panungka Kumara
t> (Kumara Bultara Parulla
: T) -V Vk . - D nu.illn Dll 1 vl n
(Panungka Parulla Bultara
The sections Bultara, Kumara, and Panunga very closely
resemble the corresponding names in Table 4, but Parulla appears in
lieu of Burungo. This intrusive name', if it be not a dialectic varia-
tion of Burungo, may be accounted for in the same way as Bugarlu,
referred to in an earlier page.
Continuing still farther to the eastward till we reach the
boundary between the Northern Territory and Queensland, we
encounter tribes having four sections, as under :
Phratry.
Father.
Table 9.
Mother.
Offspring.
A
I Belthara
Gubilla
Deringara
(Kumara
Deringara
Gubilla
B
(Gubilla
«*sg#elthara
Kumara
(Deringara
Kumara
Belthara
The two names in Phratry A of this table are substantially the
same as Bulcharri and Kaianiurra in that phratry of Table 3, but
the two remaining names, Gubilla and Deringara, take the place of
Burronga and Banaka.
It now remains to apply our theory to the explanation of the
origin of the present system of dividing a tribe into' eight sections,
the names of which are given in Table 16, infra. In order bo simplify
the illustrations, the masculine form only of each section name will
be used.


Let. us assume that in time® of yore, the Changura. and Chabalyi
clans became consolidated, by conquest, or otherwise: A Changura
man espoused a Chabalyi woman, and vice versa , the offspring taking
the name of the mother in both oases, as under:
Table 10.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Changura Chabalyi Chabalyi
B Chabalyi Changura Changura
A similar incorporation took place between the Chauan and
Chauarding tribes:
Table 11.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Chauan Chauarding Chauarding
B Chauarding Chauan Chauan
Afterwards these two confederacies amalgamated by an inter-
change of sisters, as exemplified in the attached table, but leaving
the section name of the offspring the same as before :
Phratry. Father.
j Changura
(Chauarding
-p> (Chauan
(Chabalyi
Table 12.
Mother.
Chauan
Chabalyi
Changura
Chauarding
Offspring.
Chabalyi
Chauan
Chauardmg
Changura
In those days, Changura had, perhaps, the privilege of taking
Chabalyi' as an alternative wife, being similar to the law now existing
among the tribes on the Ashburton River and other parts of Western
Australia, possessing a. quadruple organisation, already referred to.
Chabalyi was Changura’s former wife in Table 10.
In illustrating the remaining four sections, we will postulate that
in former days the Chungala and Chambin tribes sought incorpora-
tion, and intermarried one with the other, as follows:
Table 13.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
B Chungala Chambin Chambin
A Chambin Chungala Ch ungala
We will also suppose that Chuaru and Chagara were similarly
coalesced :
Table 14.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
B Chuaru Chagara Chagara
A Chagara Chuaru Clmaru


Subsequently these two confederacies became amalgamated in the
same manner as those represented in Table 12, the section name of
each man’s children remaining unchanged:
Table 15.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
p, f Chungala Chuaru Chambin
* - (Chagara Chambin Chuaru
Chambin Chuaru
j Chuaru Chungala Chagara
\ Chambin Chagara Chungala
From eight separate clans or tribes we have now illustrated the
development of two communities, one represented by Table 12 and
the other by Table 15, each of which has four intermarrying divisions
in its social organisation. At a later period these* two communities
became* consolidated into their present, form, and the hypothetical
course followed in arriving at this result* will now be investigated :
A man of the Changura section in Table 12 espoused the sister
of Chungala in Table 15; Chauan took the sister of Chuaru;
Chagara. in Table 15 annexed the sister of Chabalyi; and Chambin
took the sister of Chauarding. Again, a. Chungala man took the
sister of Changura; Chauaru espoused the sister of Chauan; Chauard-
ing took the sister of Chambin; and Chabalyi annexed the sister of
Chagara.. The intermarrying sections of the new organisation, with
the names of their sons and daughters, are as under:
Table IC.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Son. Daughter.
(Changura Nungala Chabalyi Nauadyerri
I Chauan Nuaru . Ctiauarding Nabungarti
A
Chagara Nauadyerri Chuaru Nuaru
1 Chambin Nabungarti Chungala Nungala
/Chungala Nangili
| Chuaru Nauana
-
Chauarding Nambin
.Chabalyi Nagara
Chambin
Chagara
Nambin
Nagara
Chauan Nauana
Changura Nangili
The rules of marriage in the above* table are those mostly
followed; thus, Changura marries Nungala, which I have elsewhere
called the “ direct ” or “ tabular ” law. C'hangura can, in certain
circumstances, marry Nuaru, which. I have denominated the “ alter-
native ” law. It may be explained that Nuaru is Changura’s father’s
sister’s daughter, but the relationship must be collateral and not of
the full blood. Moreover, Changura may occasionally espouse the
sister of Chauan, who was the ancient wife of the Changura section
(Table 12’), which is probably commemorative of the intermarrying


code of that period. This may be called the “ rare ” or “ ancient ”
law. In earlier pages of this article reference has been made to the
privilege of marrying the “ ancient ” wife in the quadruple organisa-
tion. Attention is again drawn to the matter, because if it be a
survival of the; old law, it may add strength to the theory of the
consolidation of small tribes into confederacies in the past-.
Again, in examining Table 16, it will be seen that Chauan’s
‘‘ tabular ” wife is Nuaru, his “ alternative ” spouse, Nungala, and
his “ ancient ” wife, Nangili. It therefore appears that Changura
and Chauan may exercise their choice over the same- two sections
of women; and they can also make matrimonial exchanges of their
sisters with each other. In other words, Changura and Chauan can
mutually exchange- either their wives or their sisters. These two men
were brothersi-in-law under the ancient regime (Table 12), and they
are indirectly so still. These remarks apply to Chagara and Cham-
bin, and also to- the pairs of sections in Phratry B of Table 16.
In Phratry A of Table 16 it is seen that Nungala is the mother of
Nauadyerri, Nauadyerri of Nuaru, Nuaru of Nabungarti, and Nabun-
garti of Nungala, and this series is repeated in the same 'order for
ever. A similar result is obtained by taking successive generations
of the women in Phratry B.
Again, taking Phratry A of Table 16, we observe that Changura
is the uncle (mother’s brother) of Chambin; Chambin is related in
the same manner to Chauan; Chauan is the uncle of Chagara ; and
Chagara is the brother of the mother of Changura.—the latter being
the name with which we commenced. This succession of the uncles
and nephews is repeated in the same order from generation to genera-
tion. This applies also to the men of Phratry B.
If we wish to place together all the. women in each phratry to
show their order of descent, and if we also desire; to demonstrate th®
lineal succession of the uncles and nephews, then Table 16 is a con-
venient arrangement of the; sections. But if our object be to- illus-
trate the- descent of the offspring through the men, then the following
classification is preferable :
Table 17
Moiety. Father. Mother. Son. Daughter.
/ Changura Nungaia Chabalyi Nauadyerri
j Chabalyi Nagara Changura Nangili
A
Chauan Nuaru Chauarding Napungarti
.Chauarding Nambin Chauan Nauana
/ Chagara
Chuaru
Chambin
(Chungala
Naudyerri Chauaru Nuaru
Nauana Chagara Nagara
Napungarti Chuugala Nungala
Nangili Cham bin Nam bin


The reader of this table sees that the men of each pair of sec-
tions in Moiety A reproduce themselves in alternate generations; that
the men in each pair of sections in Moiety B do likewise; and that
the children belong to- the same moiety as their fathers. Again, the
men of Moiety A are the same- as those in Table 12, whilst the men
of Moiety B coincide with the names in Table 15. It is, moreover,
observed that the “ direct,” the “ alternative,” and the “ rare ” wives
all belong to the same moiety in each instance.
Full details of the intermarriage and descent of the sections, with
particulars of the totems among a. number of neighbouring tribes in
the Northern Territory, were supplied in an article I contributed to
the Geographical Society of Queensland in 1901, to which the reader
is referred.
INITIATION CEREMONIES.
In a strip of country commencing at Cape Arid, and thence along
the coast to Albany. Fremantle, and Sharks Bay, to Onslow, extend-
ing inland all the way for about a hundred miles or more, it is found
that the natives neither circumcise nor subincise. But- throughout
the whole of the remainder of Western Australia both these rites
are practised. As I have elsewhere 1 given tolerably full descriptions
of the ceremonies connected with the performance of these mutila-
tions, in the adjoining State of South Australia, they will be passed
over at present.
EXTRACTION OF TEETH.
Along the West Australian coast from Roebourne or Condon
southerly, via Onslow, Carnarvon, Geraldton, and Fremantle, to
Albany, and thence easterly to Eucla, on the South Australian
boundary, the custom of taking out a front tooth is not practised.
From Derby up along the Fitzroy River and its tributaries to Hall’s
Creek, thence down the Ord River to Wyndham, and thence round
along the coast, via Beagle Bay, to- Condon, two- front teeth are
extracted in some tribes, and in others one tooth. In the central
districts of Western Australia the extraction of teeth is also in force.
SUPERSTITIONS, ETC 1 .
The natives of Western Australia, like their confreres in other
parts of the continent, have many superstitions. They believe in a
number of malevolent spirits, who are always prowling about, more
especially at night. They are present in deep water holes, in whirl-
winds, in thunder, in certain scrubby and rocky places, in storms,
and elsewhere. They are supposed to have the form of men and
animals, and possess purely human traits. There is nothing sacred
in their character, although they are said to exercise supernatural
1 “Phallic Rites and Initiation Ceremonies of the South Australian Aborigines,”
Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxix., pp. 622-638.


powers. Instead of endeavouring to propitiate these mysterious
creatures, the men treat them as they would any human foe, and
try to scare them away by open acts of defiance, or to counteract
their wicked designs by magic.
Respecting the origin of these mystic spirits, the natives do' not
trouble themselves to formulate any definite idea. Some arei sup>-
posed to have had an existence coeval with that of the blacks them-
selves, whilst others are feared because they are the shades of
departed enemies. There is no* conception of a good or friendly spirit
any farther than that some' of the ancestors of the' tribe will try to
favour them by driving food-producing animals into their country.
Their ceremonies refer largely to the supply of food. Each
wizard or shaman has his own special occult functions. Some profess
to have the power of giving success in the chase, others in fishing,
others in making rain to supply them with water in the rock-holes,
and so on. On such occasions they repair to a. secluded rock, called
tarlo, which is used only at these ceremonies, and the practitioner
rubs or beats the rock with a stone held in the hand, muttering
incantations the while.
The natives of Sturt Creek and thei Fitzroy and Ord rivers
believe that a supernatural monster in serpent form made all the
rivers, as he travelled inland from the sea, which is his home. In
some districts this creature is known as Ra.nbul, and in others as
Won naira.
The natives around Weld Spring have a legend that, in the
desert country beyond the Parker Ranges there are enormous snakes,
called Wonnangura, living in the vicinity of rock-holes and other
places where there is water. If a- blackfellow wishes to go to a rock-
hole or spring to- get a drink, it is necessary that one or more of his
friends should keep' watch, or else these venomous monsters would
bite him, or perhaps devour him. Whirlwinds are also said to prevail
in that country, which would carry a blackfellow off, and deposit
him in some rocky mountain or dense scrub far away in an enemy’s
country. A whirlwind is supposed to be the tail of a maleficent
monster in serpent form.
The boundaries of the hunting grounds of the different tribes
are defined by patches of scrub, hills, sandy tracts, or any remark-
able natural features. If these are trespassed upon by adjoining
tribes, the intruders are driven back by armed force.
A man’s weapons, utensils and ornaments belong solely to him-
self, and at his death are buried with him. Each woman also has
her own personal property, which is either interred with her or left
at her camp. In the Kimberly district the usual mode of burial is
to place the body, wrapped in paper-bark, on a. platform of sticks in
the branches of a tree. Sometimes in rocky country, the body is
laid on a shelf of rock, above which there is a projecting ledge.


Among the Lyndon and Minilya river tribes there is a belief
that a creature of malignant power, called Yamaji, comes into the
camp at night, and carries a man away into the mountains, where
he changes his language, and brings him back to the camp. Next
morning no one can understand the man who has been treated in this
way. Sometimes iti is a woman who is taken away by Yamaji.
Perhaps this superstition has developed to account, for a, man or
woman losing his or her reason after exposure to thirst, sunstroke,
or other hardship.
Some of the natives believe they can delay the setting of the sun
by lighting a fire on a high rock, or by fastening a burning stick in
the fork of a tree. Having done this they travel as fast as they can
towards their camp, apparently believing that they will get there
before the darkness sets in.
Mr. H. T. Knight, station manager, Lyndon River, writes to me
that one day during a thunderstorm he saw a black woman take her
little girl and dip her in a, pool, for the purpose of inducing the rain
to cease, because it, was not wanted just then. In an interview with
Mr. G. Buchanan, Flora, Valley Station, near Hall’s Creek, in the
Kimberly district, he told me a similar story. A black woman was
stopping in the stable, and during a storm she held her child under
the drip from the eaves, to stop the rain, in order that she could get
away home to her camp.
In my “ Ethnological Notes on, the Aboriginal Tribes of the
Northern Territory,’ 1 I have described their customs in hunting,
fishing, and other methods of obtaining food; their camps, vessels,
and weapons; some of their superstitions, sorcery, barter, modes of
burial, wife stealing, etc. All the particulars given in the work
referred to> are applicable to the aborigines of the Kimberly district
of Western Australia. They are in effect the same race as the
natives of the part of the Northern Territory with which I dealt in
my former treatise, which can therefore be read in connection with
the present article.
In conjunction with the present paper, I would also ask the
reader to peruse ray treatise on “ The Origin, Organisation, and
Ceremonies of the Australian Aborigines,’’ 2 which is accompanied by
a, map of Australia,, showing the geo,graphic distribution of the tribes
under each type of social organisation, and exhibiting also the boun-
daries between those tribes who practise circumcision and subincision,
and those tribes among whom neither of these genital rites are in
force.
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, xvi, pp. 76 85.
2 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., U.S.A., xxxix., pp. 556-578.


DESCRIPTION OF PLATES.
Plate I. —Rock Carvings.
In this plate I have illustrated nine carvings upon rocks on
Depuch Island, called by the aborigines Wommalunna, all of which
have been drawn to scale, by myself.
Figs. 3,4, 6,8, and 9 have been drawn from photographs fur-
nished by Mr. W. A. Hall, already referred to in this paper. Figs.
1,2, and 5 I prepared from careful sketches and measurements taken
by Mr. Hall under my direction.
Fig. 7 was copied by myself, as stated in the text, infra.
In Figs. 1,3, 4,6, 7,8, and 9, the whole surface within the
margin of the object depicted has been chopped or beaten away, this
being indicated by solid colour on the plate. Fig. sis in outline only,
and Fig. 2 partially so.
Fig. I.—A man three feet seven inches high. It is executed
on the perpendicular face of a rock about, forty feet up the side of a
steep gorge. Mr. W. A. Hall says in his letter to me of September
16th, 1901, “We tried very hard to photograph this figure, but there
was too much angle from either side, and only the smallest, of ledges
in front, The original artist, must- have suffered some, little incon-
venience to execute his drawing.”
Fig. 2 represents a- human foot, with eight toes. It is one foot
five inches in length, and seven inches wide. The figure is in outline,
with the exception of the toes, where the rock surface has been
beaten away.
Fig. 3 shows three birds, cut upon a monolith lying on the side
of a hill, and forming an inclination of about' forty-five degrees to
the horizon. The birds are shown on the plate in their correct, rela-
tive position, to each other, and the line around them represents the
margin of the rock on which they are carved. Mr. W. A. Hall says
in his letter above mentioned: “ The block of stone containing the
three birds weighs between two and three hundredweight. I started
two of my crew carrying it to the dingey, but the track was so. rough,
and the tide receding so fast, we had to leave it, but I intend
securing it at. some convenient time later on.”
Fig. 4 is probably an emu or native companion in the attitude
of feeding, and measures two feet three inches from the bill to the
tail. *
Fig. 5. —This carving is in outline only, the incised lines being
about half an inch wide and a quarter of an inch deep in the centre.
It is probably an unfinished drawing.
Fig. 6.—This is intended for either a wallaby or kangaroo, and
is one foot seven inches in length.


PLATE I
d RH Mathews deli


Fig. 7 represents a. man one foot nine and a-half inches; in
height, carved on a slab of stone two feet five inches high, by an
extreme width of one foot ten inches.
Mr. W. A. Hall brought, this rock, which weighs about two
hundredweight, with him from Depuch Island to. Cossack. On my
expressing a wish to see it, he packed it- carefully in bags and shipped
it to Sydney, whence I had it brought to Parramatta by a drayman.
I then copied Fig. 7, which is the only drawing upon this monolith.
Fig. B.—lt is impossible to say what the native artist wished to
portray in this drawing, which is on the perpendicular face of a slab
of rock.
Fig 9 is shown in its correct, relative position, and represents a
man or woman seven and a half inches in length.
It may be stated here that I supplied my correspondents with
accurate copies of the carvings published by Ca.pt. Wickham and
Capt. Stokes respectively, already referred to, and asked them to
endeavour to identify some or all of such drawings. I regret to say
that very little success was met with. Fig. 6 of my plate, however,
is probably identical with Fig. 11 of Capt. Stokes’ plate, or Fig. 67
of Capt. Wickham's plate.
Plate ll.— Rock Paintings.
The drawings shown on this plate have already been described
in the text of this article, from details supplied by Mr. F. S. Brock-
man, in a personal letter, at my request.
LANGUAGE.
Two short vocabularies are added, for comparison with those
compiled by other authors in different parts of Western Australia.
The first one contains 155 words noted down by myself from the
mouth of a native of the Roebonrne district, named “ Baibung.” He
belonged to the section Ban aka, and totem kangaroo. (See Table 4).
The second vocabulary of 125 words is prepared from information
supplied to me by Mr. A. E. Clifton, manager of the Yeeda. Station,
near Derby, and represents the language spoken on the Dower Fitzroy
River. In a paper contributed to the: Royal Society of New South
Wales in 1901, I furnished a vocabulary showing 120 words of the
Kishu language, collected under my direction by Mr. W. J. Wilson,
police officer at Hall's Creek, in the Kimberly district. 1
As far as my information at present extends in regard to the
languages of Western Australia, I am led to. the following conclu-
sions respecting their grammatical structure:—There are the sin-
gular, dual, and plural numbers. Nouns and adjectives are declined
by postfixes. Pronouns and other parts of speech subject to inflection
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, xxxv., pp. 220 222.


have an inclusive anfl exclusive form of the first person in the dual
and plural. The verbs are inflected somewhat similarly to those in
the languages of the Darling River tribes in New South Wales.
The study of the aboriginal languages of Western Australia has
been very much neglected. The following is a summary of the
principal pioneers in this direction:
In 1842, Mr. Charles Symmons, Protector of the Aborigines, with
the assistance of F. F. Armstrong, the Native Interpreter, published
PLATE 11.
Rock Paintings.
a short article entitled “ Grammatical Introduction to the Study of
the Aboriginal Language of Western Australia.' - ’ It appeared in C.
Macfaull s " Western Australian Almanac for 1842, with Appendix,”
pp. 1-28. This work, which is elementary and incomplete, deals with
the language spoken by the Australian aborigines on the banks of
the Swan River, and in the country adjacent.”


Mr. Symmons is the only author, so far as I am aware, who has
attempted to' define the grammatical constitution of the Western
Australian tongues. But. a few of the vocabularies which, have
appeared at different, times are deserving of mention :
Captain Grey, afterwards Sir George Grev, prepared a vocabu-
lary of the language spoken “ from King George’s Sound to more than
one hundred miles beyond Perth." The title of this work is “ Vocabu-
lary of the Dialects of South-western Australia.” (Perth, 1839.)
The Rev. J. Brady printed a. “ Descriptive Vocabulary of the
Native Language of Western Australia,” (Rome, 1845.) He explains
that “ the words contained in this vocabulary are used in the vicinity
of Perth and adjacent districts." He also states, “ Nothing is said
here about- the grammar of the language, because it is not- sufficiently
known."
In 1866, Mr. E. M. Curr published vocabularies of several tribes
on the western and southern coasts of Western Australia. “ The
Australian Race," vol. i, pp. 292-406.
A short vocabulary of native words in use among the Gualluma
tribe, located between the Yule and Fortescue rivers, was collected
by Mr. E. Clement in 1899, and published in the Journal of the
Anthropological Institute (London), vol. ii, n.s., pp. 192-196.
CONCLUSION.
It is hoped that the information supplied in the foregoing pages
may be found useful to ethnologists, geographers and linguists in
dealing with the customs, boundaries, and classification of Australian
tribes.
The attention of the reader is also invited to the following papers
contributed by me during past, years to other learned societies on
the subject of the aborigines of Western Australia,
“ Divisions of Some West Australian Tribes/’ American Anthro-
pologist (Washington, 1900), vol. ii., n.s., pp. 185-187.
Woorbya Organisation of the Australian Aborigines," Ibid., pp
494-501.
“ Some Aboriginal Tribes of Western Australia," Journal Royal
Society, New Sbuth Wales (Sydney, 1901), vol. xxxv., pp. 217-222.
“ Native Thibes .of Western Australia," Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc.
(Philadelphia, 1900), vol. xxxix., pp. 123-125.
“ Western Australian Divisions," Joum. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales
(Sydney, 1898), vol. xxxii., pp. 84-86.
The Oiigin, Organisation, and Ceremonies of the Australian
Aborigines, Prcc. Amer. Philos. Soc. (Philadelphia, 1900), vol.
xxxix., pp. 556-578, with map- of Australia., on which is* shown the
distribution of the tribes of Western Australia.


VOCABULARY—ROEBOURNE DISTRICT.
Family Terms, Etc.
A man, Ngaiada. or Mulba.
Husband, Ngurra.
Old woman, Munga.
Young woman, Kuri.
Wife, Mirrawai.
Father, Mamana.
Boy, Kobbodya.
Sister, Konnarung.
Elder brother, Gurannha.
Woman, Dhurramba.
Child, neuter, Munggula.
Natural Objects.
Sun, Yunda.
Moon, Willara.
Stars, Binderi.
Pleiades, Kuriguri.
Wind, Thura.
Whirlwind, Wunna.ngurra,
Thunder, Yindarra.
Lightning, Wulliwuddi.
Clouds, Kandera.
Rain, Yungo.
Water, Baba.
Fire, Kulia.
Camp, Nyirrang.
Bough hut, Maia.
Stone, Munda.
Sand, Yundaga.
Egg, Dyimbu.
Charcoal, Dyinda.
An enemy, Dyuna..
Evil spirit., Warungga.
Any tree, Barku.
Firewood, Thamara.
Flesh, food, Mundu.
Yams, Mudumuri.
Parts op the Body.
Head, Thuru.
Beard, Nganga.
Hair, Kulkara.
Neck, Ngulye.
Eye, T’hulai.
Nose, Mula.
Teeth, Era.
Tonguei, Yaluru.
Ear, Gulgai.
Arm, Thilli.
Elbow, Wungulla.
Hand, Murra.
Navel, Nilu.
Stomach, Ngalu.
Ribs, Thambi.
Heart, Kurrunggulla.
Breasts, female, Bebi.
Backbone, Muru.
Thigh or leg, Wulugali.
Foot, Dyinna.
Penis, Wandi.
Scrotum, Karru.
Vulva, Minni.
Bone, Kudyi.
Skin, Kunnu.
Blood, Mudda.
Excrement, Guna.
Urine, Kumbo.
Animals.
Dog, Yugurra.
Eiack dnck, Kundarri.
Corolla, Bilyago.
Wild dog, Wundya.
Kangaroo, Mungurru.
Padamelon, Burtkarri
Fish, collectively, ta-wu-ru.
Snakes, collectively, Wallu.
White cockatoo, Metameta. Common lizard, Babangurra.


Animals Continual.
Claw of dog, etc., Birrigal.
Claw of bird, Mungulla,
Common ants, Waruma.
Butterfly, Kunullawulli.
Feathers, Wullaguru.
Flies, Wurri.
Mosquito, Kumin.
Louse, Kulo.
Centipede, Minnawanggo.
Weapons, Etc.
Shield, Yarra,
Hair belt, Barawuru.
Stone knife, Kundi.
Vekbs.
Catch, Dagalgo.
Shout, Erainaga.
Smell, Bandilgo.
Bring, Kuinima,
Roast, Thamera.
Walk, Yannambe.
Run, slowly, Winbai.
Run, fast, Murianbai
Strike, Gurramunbi.
Sit, Bandiamba.
Cbune, Kugai.
Bite, Mindhalgo.
Piercei, KuddhalgO'.
Cry, weep, Nguddyinba..
Sleep, Gununba.
Eat, Ngunnamba.
Drink, Bundyalga.
Jump, Mungangurri.
Arise, Karri.
Fight, Kuiramanba,
Dance, Banigo.
Lie, Ngari.
Cut. open, Diagalma.
Go away, Bungarra,
Throw, Ngaialgo.
Look, Wialgo.
Kill, Nyiddigalma.
Fly, as a bird, Kungurra.
Adjectives.
Quick, Wulli.
Slow, T'huragu.
Strong, NunggOi.
Sick, Wirago.
Wicked, Wulkya
Distant, Kuddyaguda
Stinking, Buka,
One, Igawuda.
Two, Kudhara.
Several, Murru.
Tall, Mandibanga.
Short, Thumbaga,
Black, Waru.
Red, Murrara.
Old, Windo*.
Dead, Guru.
Hot. Kumbai.
Cold, Nyugga.
Tired, Kundigo.
Little, Ivulugulu.
Large, Kutthaguda.
Miscellaneous.
I, nguddha. Mine,
nguddhagu. Thou, nyinda. Thine,
nym-
dagu. Tie, nyia. We two, thou and I, ngalli. Those two, numbalu.
Yes, kugu. No, mita,. Here, nunnxx There, nyinna. I go,
nguddha yannamba. We two go, ugalli yannamballi. We all go,
nyeaiu yannambulu. How far, nga-ni muna.
Since the occupation of the country by European stock, the
following names have been invented:—Cattle, billamanba. Horses,
yau-a-da. Sheep, kukundyai.


VOCABULARY—LOWER FITZROY RIVER.
Family Terms, Etc.
Man, Wamba,
Woman, Dyandu.
Wife, Wangu.
Old man, Wadal.
Father, Ibilla.
Mother, Kuya.
Elder brother, Bubbala.
Elder sister, Warnu.
Younger brother, Murridyudda. Younger sister, Nemmera.
Husband, Yargu. Little girl, Kanyarri.
Youth, uncircumcised, Dyuggada.Maid, Warrindyula.
Youth, oiicumcised, Balalli. Child, either sex, bubba.
Man, incised, Wongalong
Parts of the Body.
Head, Nalma.
Hair, Labindyenna.
Eye, Nemilgera.
Ear, Nillabubba.
Nose, Wanaginna.
Smell, Ibbandyun.
Mouth, Nillira,
Teeth, Cherink.
Chin, Terngu
Cheek, Maila-maila.
Foi'ehead, Cherribil.
Beard, Ngulgu.
Breasts, female, Numibla.
Finger, Wirril.
Natural Objects.
Sun, Walga.
Moon, Kerrading.
Stars, Lam.
Cloud, Warragarra.
Sky, Buddarra.
Rain, Whella.
Rainbow, Miding.
Light, Chanera.
Darkness, Yingadi.
Morning, Neimbi.
Day, Dyumbel.
Night, Baian.
Heat, Barra.
Cold, Amini.
Firei, Dyungu.
Water, W hell a.
Milk, Numiria.
Evil spirit, Bullingun.
Shadow, Nimmeradya.
Windi, Won gal.
Mist., D'yaboera.
Smoke., Dui.
Thunder, Chiaama.
Lightning, Pinmuk.
Country, Burra.
Stone, Woningara.
Canoe, Kulbia.
East., Bauna.
West, Kula.
North, Yo-wan.
South, Yanbun.
Subincision, Worral.
Watercourse, Nimmila
Grass, Worra.
Tree or wood, Barlou
Bark, Kuding.
Campi, Oh albi.
Hut, Maiarra.
Hole, Dabbu.
Lump, Durrug.
Patib, Kurdi.
Footmark, Neinbel.


Animals.
Native-dog, Kurrida.
Kangaroo-, Baldyering.
Fish generally, Bi.
Opossum, L-angura.
Emu, Yulgi.
Iguana, Banne.
Eagle-hawk, Kalbedyug.
Crow, Wungina.
Black duck, Warrabaluin
Plain-turkey, IVI-o-ngaiera.
Pelican, Maiada.
Laughing jackass, Dyarradyurra.
Native companion, Kargura.
White cockatoo, Ngulagu.
Black cockatoo, Darreal.
Fly, Dumbara.
Mosquito, Nilagul.
Snake-, Churra.
Weapons.
Wood spear, Minigwal.
Reed spear, Dyennil.
Shield, Karribina.
Boomerang, Chibba.
Club, Marballing.
Adjectives
Alive, Marbu.
Dead, Kud.
Large, Wida.
Small, Wuba.
Long, Idan.
Short., Wongoela.
'Good, Marbu.
Bad, Melu-marbu.
Hungry, Marrinyang.
Thirsty, Barra.
Red, Bui.
"White, Dup.
Black, Rauga.
Full, Mera.
Empty, Marrinyang.
Quick, Bulla-bulla.
Slow, Bunga.
Blind, Mulgun.
Deaf, Bubbadarra.
Strong, Cherril.
Weak, Wogala.
Heavy, Du an.
Light., Ngorla.
Afraid, Waddyi.
Sweet., Yarrawin.
Right, Mummeragun.
Wrong, C'huda.
Straight, Charar
Crooked, Chulga.
Correction.
In Vo-1. xvi. of this- Journal, in my “ Ethnological Notes on the
Aboriginal Tribes of the- Northern Territory,” p. 70, fourth line from
the bottom, after the word “ Nambijana,” add “or Chappta and
Nemira, or C'hangary and Nhermana.” These words were inadver-
tently omitted.


THE THOMSON FOUNDATION GOLD MEDAL
i l|c *ll oy a I smgtja|i(|ital Society of Australasia,
QUEENSLAND.
(Established in honour of J. P. Thomson, LL.D., Hon.F.R.S.G.S., etc.,
Plunder. See payes 132-135 of Journal, To/. XVI.)
CONDITIONS.
This Medal shall be awarded annually, or at such other times as the
Council may approve, to the author of the best original contribution to
Geographical Literature, provided it be of sufficient merit, approved and
accepted by the Society (the subject of such contribution to be named by
the Council). Special awards of the Medal may also be made from time
to time to such persons as have gratuitously rendered eminent services to
the Society.
The Council may award a silver or a bronze impression of the Medal
to the Author of a contribution deemed to further the interests of the
Society and add to the value of Geographical Literature.
The Council shall name from time to time the subject of such con-
tribution for which the Medal is to be awarded, preferential consideration
being given to the Geography of Australasia.
All contributions for which the Medal may be awarded must be
written in the English language, and will become the property of the
Society absolutely.
It shall not be competent for any Officer of the Society or Member
•of the Council for the time being to compete for the Medal.
The administration of the Medal shall be entirely in the hands of
the Council of the Society, who will make such additional rules and
regulations for awarding the Medal as from time to time may seem
necessary.


ifjounl Ibengnijiliiral Sopetg of Australasia.
QUEENSLAND.
Conditions of Competition for The Thomson Foundation
Gold Medal.
The Thomson Foundation Gold Medal of this Society will be
awarded to the Author of the Best Original Paper (provided it be of
sufficient merit) on each of the following subjects:
To be sent in not later than Ist July, 1905.
1. —The Geographical Distribution of Australian Minerals.
To be sent in not later than Ist July. 1906.
2. —The Agricultural Industry of Australia.
The competition is open to Members and Non-members of the
Society alike, whether residing in Australasia or elsewhere, but not to-
any Officer of the Society or Member of the. Council for the time
being. No' award of the Medal will be made for a mere compilation,
no matter how meritorious.
All competitive communications for the Medal should be written on
one side of the paper only, with marginal space on the left hand side
thereof, and limited to, say, about 32 pages of the “ Queensland Geo-
graphical Journal/’ Royal Bvo. Instead of the writer’s name each paper
must be identified by a motto. A sealed envelope with such motto
written outside, and the writer’s name ; d address inside, should ac-
company each paper.
The successful papers will be printed and published in the Journal
of the Society, fifty reprint copies of each being supplied to the author,
free.
All communications, with illustrations for which the Medal may be
awarded, must be written in the English language, and will become the
property of the Society absolutely.
Papers may be illustrated by such maps, diagrams and pictures as
are considered by the authors thereof to be necessary and useful.
Additional subjects for future papers will be announced from time
to time.
All communications should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary of
the Society, Brisbane
Hugh M. Nelson, President
J. P. Thomson, Hon. Secretary^




■


NATIVE TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Bead March 16, 1900.)
Western Australia contains an estimated area of 978,299 square
miles, or, inclusive of the contiguous islands, about 1,057,250
square miles, being about eight times the size of Great Britain. It
is the largest of all the colonies of Australia, containing more than
a third of the entire area of that continent. In the southwest
coastal districts there is much land suitable for farming operations,
and farther north there are extensive grassy downs, capable of de-
pasturing immense numbers of sheep and cattle. Considerable
areas are gold-producing, chief among which may be mentioned
Coolgardie, Cue, Marble Bar and Kimberley—comparable in ex-
tent to some prominent European kingdoms. By far the greater
portion of the colony, however, consists of vast arid tracts of sand
and scrub, which is practically a desert.
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXIX, NO. 161.


In the present preliminary paper it is intended to give a brief
outline of the social organization, rites and customs of the native
tribes sparsely distributed over the whole of that portion of west-
ern Australia lying to the north of the twenty-eighth parallel of
south latitude. Compared to the size of the territory occupied the
number of the aboriginal inhabitants is insignificant.
On the Murchison, Greenough, Sanford, Roderick, Wooramel,
Gascoyne and Lyons rivers the several native tribes are each divided
into four sections, called Buljerry, Kiemarra, Boorong and Boogar-
loo. The intermarriage of these divisions, and the sections to
which the resulting offspring belong, will be readily understood
when arranged in tabular form, as under:
Husband.
Offspring .
Buljerry
Kiemarra
Boorong
Boogarloo
Boorong
Boogarloo
Buljerry
Kiemarra
Boogarloo
Boorong
Kiemarra
Buljerry
These sectional names, with some modifications, are found among
the natives at Weld Spring, Bonython Creek, Lake Throssell, Elder
Creek, Glen Cumming, and extend eastward into South Australia,
where a similar organization exists among the Andikarina and
Arrinda tribes, particularized by me in previous publications.
If we travel northward from the Murchison, Gascoyne and other
streams above mentioned, we discover that the tribes occupying the
Ashburton, Fortescue, Yule, Shaw, De Grey and Oakover rivers
are likewise divided into four sections, the names of which are
Butcharrie, Kurrimurra, Burronga and Banaka, being simply varia-
tions of the nomenclature tabulated in this paper, Banaka taking
the place of Boogarloo. These sections reach easterly into the
northern territory of South Australia.
Proceeding still farther to the northward from the Oakover to
the Fitzroy river, the four sections are known as Baljarra, Boorungo,
Kimbera and Bannicka, the men of one section marrying the
women of another in a certain fixed rotation. In all the tribes
referred to in this paper there are aggregates of totems attached to
each section or pair of sections, and descent of the children is
counted through the mothers.


In the northeastern corner of western Australia, comprising the
region watered by the Ord River and its tributaries, Sturt Creek,
Margaret river and the Upper Fitzroy, are a number of native
tribes, particulars of whose divisions and the limits of their territory
are described in papers which I have communicated to different
learned societies.
In all the country dealt with in the present article, with the ex-
ception of a strip along the western coast from about Geraldton to
Onslow, all the youths are circumcised. Some time after their
recovery they must submit to a further mutilation, consisting of
splitting open the urethral canal from a point a little way from the
scrotum almost to the glans, but leaving the latter intact, the inci-
sion being about two inches in length. In some tribes the glans is
also split, the cut being carried right into the urinary orifice. After
a man recovers from the effects of splitting the penis he is allotted
a boy who has not yet been operated upon. This youth is a brother
of the woman whom the man is entitled to claim as his wife. The
boy is used for purposes of masturbation and sodomy, and con-
stantly accompanies the man.
The natives who inhabit the barren desert country are much in-
ferior to the coast tribes, both in personal appearance and in their
weapons and utensils. Their mode of camping at night during the
cold months of the winter is as follows: They scoop out a circular
depression in the sand, about eighteen inches deep, the diameter
varying with the number of individuals who are to use it. In this
depression they light a fire, and gradually replace the sand they
have scooped out until it is all sufficiently heated. At bedtime
each person scrapes a trench in the warm sand and lies down with-
out any clothing, letting the loose sand fall in around his body,
except the face. A man, with his wives and children, would per-
haps occupy one of these sleeping places, several young men
another, some unmarried or old women another, and so on. It
not unfrequently happens that pebbles are mixed with the sand,
and these retain the heat for a longer time. Although not suffi-
ciently hot to burn the skin of the sleepers, yet on lying against a
person’s body for a long time they raise blisters, which sometimes
become sores, especially on the tender skin of children. No fire is
kept alight during the night, but on emerging from their lairs in
the morning fires are lit to cook any animal food they may have on
hand.






f ,., v., ■" * ' ‘ i■ »»V ..,7 ’. « t, * * * * • ’ 1 * * * * • . 4 '* 4 . , \ i * f j J
• * * * *,',' 4 / 1 • <*« 1 . ;;;; /; • • •.
i • i :<• • . . •! ,-*•••■. .44 •» •'< * t ■ ’ • . ,,.•••• *' ■' * V,// 4 **!' .*■ ' ./»'■’ * * ' / V. , , w','”-
7,V '/-».’*'<<• ' M4 <"». "*•
' J “ l * > .4 • » «. “ #.j '• •!,, .•"* •'<*«. »*, . • "*• ’•» , ... .»# . * "
V'tV/’V/; 7 >/;:•V/..WW#" • ; 7;;77.7 'V;/ 4 '** 7«/*' 4 7V7 »-•:;.**.• y';
.V.V/'.V.V '-///:'*•* '*'** '*'■ •**'/' 77'/ '***' t ,\\[ •
.51! ‘V .77* *;; • ,’//;
..V,. '*V> i..'//' *’«’• ■ •////. •** /, ,/*'«• 7,7/ • 7,
//' : */* ..'/*•, *‘7V '
" V; ■
'* .7.7 y v JJ ‘%7<.77’,.'7l Z 1 ' ' ■ V »V#VV\W V * * r *7/4! V ,'.’.7 7 **V/.7V. 4 ‘, ‘ i4 - ■'.***' .77 «*•**•/ -V. "7*.«##7" 44
.. f * *7,7 ■ * * • •< ,7'*
7S : '7/:7':7.-7 : ’7 ; ':7777.
*7V; ••• ,4 * //V
••;.■.••• "i . ”.v. •
,777 ■ 4 ■
■••.■.'. i*.V- ■••■ .**■ *..V/': • ,V ( - . ., •
' v. *777 7,!*‘ •' * ■ ;//
■■■ ••• ... ..... .V.',."* - ;;J*.. .... .‘.V .... —
'-."‘.v..'.V.7 ;;,**• ■
•V;, 77v. • ; 7V‘ - ,/ 7.v*
• .v.v.v - ••• ... ,'/■
".*. '77’ 7 4 ;,7*. '* "'
;V. ;*V |
vV; -v.*•;:;>• V/:i v -*v'v•
-V".v.,-. ...v :r ::; -....•
•• ... .. .... ...
*•7 777 - V,.v//77 ;;;;
. ‘ .4. ' ‘ - T ‘ ‘ * \ . . ‘ • '*»/*!* •'** * ‘ «<* • , ... * 44, * " * / «'/•.. . , , . . , , • ♦ ' ‘ * , ..
/ . • HI/'*' '•'«».
77* , ,77 '*' ';• *7.7*7 ".77
-..4#, 4., *'. '* “ 4
'*««*. , ••• .,. *'•» .... •- .*,«'* • ... ,.. ... • ... • •**“
, - 4 ... • #. • ‘ • ,,, 4,1, < ,. . * *» * • ' . ■ " ... ■' • • * * •
;; [''JV. • • ?*•*'./,7 //
,v 4 .•'* *.« • ., "4*#.. .v.v* ‘.,7"../, 44..: ;;
77* .*;,* ’ r ' * 4 * , ,7 »
/-» 4 .:».;•••■*•« If ,*/ • 1...
: ; .:7‘-.v # ■ •••-
V ',/// 4,44 **;.,7;;;*» v .;
'* * ;' 4 * ,(1 '•***'*•* >** \\'** ■ * * *. * ‘ »V - mV. .*««.' ,!*.*■ ,V.V, * # ‘ 'ft 77/ ’ * * . *7. ••
•■V. •«*/ '** 7 4 4
/'•"
• :: *'W
4,,, *' ■ 1 1. . 4-** • #<l *., >*04 .Vii. .44*1! . •»<i • .4, .... * f ,.
7i‘^,7; '*'*«7V''’.7.' "'*• " 4 44 .'4V •<-. ,',.7,“ "• ••• ,1 ’ ,f ” 7',
.7*;,* '*»• /,/“*» 7*//. 77, 77*.
•;; 7/; #V /7,V.V>7.*7!;,•*«■ 7;/7;7 4 ;7*:.77!* .7//• V77• ’.7/ -7.' 7 77. t :*;. 7';.'!
77.’''77v’ ; /' ; 7;;' # , '77 , ‘v
/«.:.,/.••• "‘.V , '• j i
7 7.777 .77*:; /;, 7‘ /,, 7,
■» " ‘ * * •’ 4 • « • * 1 • 4 « '/« •♦ .’<** .44,'*‘ ‘ * . t f 44. .44. 77 -444, , * 4 4 f 1 . • . ' 7 ‘ . [' , ■ 1
-.4 ... ,, «•#.*.. i.,'*** .4. •.» .... . *•.. .. . • ...
> .... ..../• 7,: .,7 .• .,Z ,, •»/. ...Vi. .... • 7 * *
7 .777. ;v '*7:7'/,7
* .
*7V; 'V*''77V,,;;'7 ;;
,;*///' /i
.• 4 ’” V 4 -'",V,::;/7*i4 777 7V :
'
V *.7 •<"-. 77 .*717'77 **7’ 'V.V/.44 •• ••
•7.7”7 /V*, ; "»• *77/7 '
V • ,7 ■
v ''-V' 4'“.//. % 7*.- .4,'*‘*- .f.,'. *'‘• 77,7.7.74, "‘ ’.7,; 77 f ‘.7 .*77.7‘ ,7/ ,77. f .7.7-77
- . ■ , .
/ ;;'::;V: - v;; 7 :7! • : . v / : :
■
7 - ;;«‘7.'.''7-.‘7.
* 1.*'/ % k»• ,* .•«/. .41 1 ,i 7. 4 ’ 777 " *z-7'* 4 ,,7 / * ■ .*.7 * *''»//' * 7. * V 1 ’ ‘ * * • ...
. 7" " "
’’77 '•V.V'/'-'-X*-''■['.//’' 77;-7..V.' *' ■ - 1 .*///’ • • 7.7‘7V'"«-7, *7., ,77 ! \
‘ •'■'7* *..7777 7,7* •*.** •* <7* '’7.7/ 4*7 4 -’.7, '''' *77,, 7,7 //*.V'.7 - /;«•. -.,7' //' •" ..V.'; - /'•
• •*• *' 7V;.";;. "" "77
7" ’1
•
v**7v-77-V*:AV//-»7.V.v**;';’-V. ;*7/. •** ,.7V.77V .7.7.7«V.7;V ### 7'- 7*7 * 4< ; 7/ 77' ,7/ , 7*
■
* ‘ I
"-7,7* ••*7* r"■ 7; -7. *7,.7‘;!.•* ‘7 " 7;/" • /‘.7: " ’*‘ /.I
::>!;; ; 7;77v/77'' ’ 77
■ 7‘*. . ■ * ,*'• **•,/"»• — ... *»• •*» .... ...
■
,V. ■
;
■
7.7 *' 7* .,/ '*!,.. "7 "*
•
./ . •,;« .i4 / '. . ' ‘ t •,•. • .. * •
.7;;'.'.7 . 7 7*7,/7;7/,V; V.’V .7/• '•••V;-**■ *7.7/; '•*•■ *** 7/7.'; *7, ' ' 7. ;;*•** ../'. /’•** 77
.7*7• 7.' ..777 ///; ,77 777.
, is
7 '*;•'*.7.4* V • ’ •••* 7; 7"” 7; ; 77/' * 7 ‘• • 7: ;.•/ 4 ‘;7 '*77* .v • * - 7,- • 7;.’77 7, ■ '* 7*
7‘77'V' ** 77
: V v. v :;7v 'V v/! 7 *'*-
7 : :7’:.; ■v.":;7/r'-; Vv
•
7.v. -7/7 77;■*//.7v7 • •/,'• 7*7*^*■ 7* • 77* 7 v* V;777';777!7 • - 7' *7*.. .'7'..7' - • 7;.V‘// ; '7*T*.'./.'/“ * 7.7.77’ * * V*7;
:7r’vA7’;7V;77v5;'::7^^
: 4 7/'" 77' *;-V
i
, •
.',777.7V.'.7*. 7/ V,77’ -'7'. "• 77.7;;* “7’:' 7; ' 77 • ;7*’"7: *777.--7.7 ,• 7‘. 7*' .:7-.;7 .77/ .7 77 ; 7
7. 7*7 *; v V .77 " 77 7* V V;
.
• T .'.7 /'.7;J; # -7 ;;’ ’777 •*,‘7;'7.. 7. 7. • 7-V' --’‘.77777 •- ” 7777./V/. .77*;
.’ 7*7* ''’.;7
' 1
'• -7;**-*'77;■;*-.;;;; : 7777•■777777 r.-'**7;:.77V 777.'7 77 '77/. -7.77/• '"7 ■;*•/'/;. ••♦*• 7. •**. '777777.'
44*.' * 7* ;;; ;; 7/
V ■ : v
■*77"*■ 7* 7* ‘ 1 ‘’ 77' 7 '7‘ .77 ''7 w/7'' -• ..7,,
.•*
.. - _
/ •• •,;*.'77 \*
i-V:’• 7-7f/;-**777:i : -7V;7j'.7 7V;;;fr;V7- -^.V'V"V /• *!vV;^‘‘777;]/"7 : ;'7,7 : ‘ . 77-
7 /’.77* v - ’ /.v ’ .VV" . 7 7 ..
' ■ f; '7
7;;"' ‘'7/V.77!
■ ;V. f
■■ .*;;; '” ;; :::. ■ ; *,v'7, *.v . ■. v,
77V7.7V 7V7v;:V ; ' V •'
7 - • 777 '.77
7 7 f - • 7* ,* * "• * •'•* * • ; 4 * * •*; . v ; - -i .,*■ •*•7/; .'.7;,; ,.77.-7. *7*
7*..,**,'•’ *..,V* '''
;r.' 4 '«7...7',;,//. 7; * 7 »7. 11 *77.77 • •' .7 7 7s ' .7 ' .7.77:77* ..77/.v.“ .-7 .7,
'
■. ';7
•; - . ; ■ ; /.- . * •
■
’7 • ,• • • .. ’ ; .. /77V- 7 ;;;
‘‘*7 • * • *• • *• ...
./ "7
7; 7 *7777777*./ ■ 7'.77/7/‘v!' 777';;;; • .. * 7' .7. *'• 4 /////:;;• 77 .. 7:;7 4 ;-. ;;; 777 7,
/•-•
*777 i
7 . ' / 7777 r.' : 7 . '.777*.’7'/• • ; • V 77V, ;; 7* ; .,7.7'777 777. 77; /.. 77. 77
• .*'• ’ 77*,, .,;;*■ j
7
•'* ’ • - / ; 7* ' ' ’ * 7 77 ' • • • V 7*'* ’ ' • *-7,77* “4 * •• ... 77’;". 7'
;; ’.,;
• 7,7.77' 4 *. ,•**•’*/ ••**” •*•• .7; .*77'...' 7* *7 '-7*7.
7* V; ’77 */,*.. *
7 ,///'.
’ • . . 7 •’ 7 : -7 77. . •*;
;;; ; -*** . -.V.. 7777 .77 ////.7
;■ I
-7’..'. '7' 7*77 77." ' ; -.77 *7' .. /7*77;7.V7 ? / 4 -V//7.7 ;.'7.^77 j*»'*.**//.'/. '.77' '!,*
; 7.777* /VV;;'‘ */; •
. -7,;
' . . ' .. 77 '/.* *”*7777* 'v; * 4 "*'7 • . . ; ■ ' . • '
. 4 . , ,V
• . . ; .. .7 *7- **• 77* **7 *777 '...'* .; 7*77 .
:/// ,7' '.'.7 7 ;/; 77 .’4,, .,77
-
