

ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.


VC' M3ZSS /
ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
Extract from a Letter, dated Perth, Swan River, Western Australia,
July 17, 1836,
You ask. Is there a probability that the Missionary can obtain access
to the Aborigines ? We answer. Yes. They are a very quick and intelli-
gent race of people; and they are become so domesticated about Free-
mantle, Perth, and Guildford, as to fetch most of the fire-wood from the
woods for the use of the white people, and some of the farmers employ
them to go out with their sheep and cattle ; so that we think there is a
very good opening to preach the gospel to them. There is a native
establishment about half a mile from Perth, where there are generally
some of the natives. At this establishment is a young man employed
by Government as an interpreter, who has acquired a general knowledge
of their language. We think no heathens more worthy the compassion
of Britons; for we believe it is the universal opinion of all who have seen
them, that it is impossible to find men and women sunk lower in the scale
of human society. With regard to their manners and customs, they are
little better than the beasts that perish. They neither wear clothes, build
houses, nor cultivate the ground, but depend entirely upon their dexterity
in fishing and hunting for their food; nor do they ever provide for the
morrow. Polygamy is tolerated amongst them. They have not the most
distant idea of any supreme Being ; and before the arrival of the white
people, it is a matter of doubt whether they had any idea of existence after
death in any state whatever. And when we look around, and think how
many thousands of these poor dark benighted creatures are wandering
about in the woods, ignorant of God, and of the Saviour who died for
them, deprived of the blessings of civilization, and every domestic comfort,
truly we may say, “ The harvest is great, but the labourers are few.” And
we sincerely pray that the Lord of the harvest may send forth from your
Society more labourers into his vineyard.


Copy of a Letler from the Rev. Joseph Orton, dated Hobart Toton,
Van Diemen’s Land, August, 1836.
I have steadily borne in mind the instructions given and repeatedly
urged by the Committee, directing me to obtain all possible information
as to the practicability of establishing a Mission to the Aboriginal natives
of New South Wales ; but until lately formidable difficulties have com-
bined themselves against the undertaking.
Some time ago, I received intimation that a favourable opening pre-
sented itself in the vicinity of Port Philip, a settlement on the south coast
of New South Wales, recently formed by adventurers from the colony
of Van Diemen’s Land. From the character of the information received,
and the nature of my instructions from the Committee on the subject, I
felt it to be my duty to proceed to the place with as little delay as possible;
in order to obtain information that would enable me to form a judgment
as to the eligibility of the situation, and the propriety of establishing a
Mission to the Aboriginal natives of that vicinity.
Having therefore arranged my circuit-affairs, and committed them to the
charge of my worthy colleague, and having resigned my family and person
specially to the protection of the great Head of the church, on the 30th
March I proceeded on my mission,
As the facilities of communication with Port Philip are principally con-
fined to the north side of Van Diemen’s Land, I had occasion to cross the
country to George Town near Launceston.
At George Town, I was detained a few days by adverse winds. This
place is now almost desolate. It was originally intended to be the prin-
cipal seaport on the north side of Van Diemen’s Land, but after strenuous
efforts to establish it as such, the local advantages for agricultural pursuits
prevailed in favour of Launceston, which has now become a place of great
importance. While sojourning here, I received very kind attentions from
the port-officer, Lieutenant Friend, of the Royal Navy, and from Mr. Neil;
who, together, afforded me every facility for dispensing the word of God
among the much neglected inhabitants of this township.
The wind becoming favourable, and the vessel being ready for sailing,
I embarked for my destination. The vessel was crowded in the hold with
live-stock of various descriptions, and the cabin with passengers who were
proceeding to Port Philip as speculators or observers of the country, to


■whom priority of application had given precedence, so that I was com-
pelled to select my berth on the deck of the vessel, in company with some
cattle for which room could not be found below. Our passage over Bass
Straits, a distance of about two hundred miles, was tedious and exceed-
ingly boisterous. From the inclemency of the weather, the precarious
situation of the vessel driven about by the fury of the gales in a most
dangerous navigation, and the extremely noisome effluvia arising from
the living, dying, and dead cattle with which the vessel was crowded (the
latter of which could not be thrown overboard during the storm), I do
not remember in all my travels to have suffered more personal incon-
venience than I did during this ten days’ passage. The principal Euro-
pean settlement of Port Philip is situated at the head of a very consider-
able inlet of the sea. The country for many miles in every direction
presents a very beautiful appearance. It is thinly studded with trees and
gently undulated; and, to one accustomed to view the rugged scenery of
Van Diemen’s Land, the aspect becomes picturesque and imposing.
One of the first individuals to whom I was introduced after my landing
was a person named William Buckley; and as I shall have occasion to
refer to him in the course of my remarks, I shall briefly sketch his rather
singular history.
Buckley, previous to his leaving England, was a private in the army.
For some misdemeanour he was sentenced to transportation, 1 believe, for
seven years. The vessel by which he was sent out touched at Port
Philip, it being intended, if circumstances were favourable, to form a
penal settlement there. Those in command, judging the situation to be
unfavourable, relinquished their design; and proceeding in search of a
more favourable place, ultimately landed and formed a penal settlement
at Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land. During the temporary dis-
embarkation of the prisoners, Buckley with some others absconded from
the party, and, after a fruitless search, the fugitives were left in the country.
From the information given by Buckley it appears, that he and his asso-
ciates wandered together in the bush a short time and then parted ; and
Buckley from that period has had no intelligence of his former companions.
This man, who has been singularly preserved, when first discovered by
the natives, was most kindly treated by them. They appeared to sym-
pathize with him, and endeavoured to alleviate the misery of his forlorn
condition by providing him with food, and skins for clothing, and showing
him every possible attention. Having wandered with them a considerable
time, he abandoned all hope of getting away from the country. He allied
himself to a tribe by marriage according to their custom, and assimilated
himself to their habits and mode of living, in which state he continued
about thirty-two years, until discovered by the recent settlers. He ap-
b 3


pears to have entirely forgotten the use of his native language, and when
addressed by those who discovered him, he could only mimick the words
used by them, which he could articulate very distinctly, but without being
able to attach any meaning to them. He however rapidly became again
familiar with his mother-tongue, and can now converse fluently. He is a
remarkably tall man, being six feet six inches high. He is a man of
thought and shrewdness, a proof of which he has exhibited in the policy
he has adopted towards the natives, particularly in carefully avoiding to
mix in any of their party feuds, by which means he has remained on terms
of friendship with all. Had it been otherwise, he would most probably have
fallen a victim to the revenge of party.
He appears not to have risen to any eminence among them, so as to
command any considerable influence, which may be attributed to his
unassuming, inert disposition, and his want of capacity to lead or govern.
Considering that he has been associating with the most degraded
heathens for thirty-two years, his manners are good, equal to those of most
of the peasantry in England. I found him very willing to listen to reli-
gious instruction, and sometimes hoped that he was under the influence
of good impressions. He informed me that, during the whole period of
his heathen sojourning, he never forgot to acknowledge a Supreme
Being, upon whom he daily depended. And yet, strange to say, I cannot
learn that he used the least effort to improve the natives, but descended
and conformed to all their barbarous habits, without endeavouring to
raise them in any degree; for which I can only account from his incom-
petency to convey instruction (for he is totally uneducated), his indolence
of disposition, and the policy he deemed it prudent to adopt. His ex-
cuses are, that it would have been useless, and might have endangered his
personal safety.
In the event of our establishing a Mission there, he might, by pro-
per attention, be rendered useful in aiding the operations of the Mission-
aries ; but there is ground of apprehension, lest he should be unduly in-
fluenced before that can take place. He has withdrawn v himself from
his heathen associations, and at the present lives with, and is employed
by, Europeans on the settlement, principally in the character of a nego-
tiator between them and the natives.
The Aboriginal population of Australia is generally thin and scattered,
but in the vicinity of Port Philip it maybe considered comparatively large.
It is very difficult to ascertain the amount with any degree of precision,
but, from the most correct information that I could obtain, it may be
computed at about one thousand, within sixty miles in each direction
from the settlement, and in the same proportion entirely along the coast.
They associate in tribes, and are in the constant habit of wandering.


having no houses of any description, nor fixed place of abode; although
in their wanderings they generally confine themselves to certain limits,
beyond which they seldom stray. The only means of screening them-
selves from the inclemency of the weather is by erecting a sort of “ break-
wind ’’ of boughs of trees, under the lee of which they squat, or lie down,
and sleep for the night; and they usually seek fresh quarters for the
ensuing night, wherever they may happen to be in the course of their
excursions. The whole tribe seldom wander together, but separate into
families consisting of from ten to twenty persons, who scatter themselves
for the purpose of more conveniently obtaining food. The men hunt and
fish for their subsistence. The kangaroo and opossum are the principal
objects of their hunting pursuits, which they practise in a singular and
artful manner. They usually cover themselves completely with green
boughs of trees, so as to resemble a bush; they then move gently along
so as to be unperceived by the unsuspecting object of their prey, until
they are within its reach by their spears, which they use with great
dexterity and throw to a considerable distance with amazing force and
precision. Having struck the animal, they throw off their disguise, and
secure their game.
The women, during the hunting excursions of the men, are generally
employed in gathering succulent roots, which are their only substitute for
bread, and form a principal ingredient of their food. Their persons are
by no means comely, but I am of opinion that they are in this respect
superior to the natives in the neighbourhood of Sydney. The men are
rather stately in their appearance, and many of them have fine open coun-
tenances ; but the women are greatly inferior in outward form, and ap-
pear to be a comparatively degraded race. They are in all respects sub-
servient to the men ; they perform all the menial offices ; and, when they
travel, or wander about, they follow the men at a considerable distance,
and carry the food, utensils, and hunting implements, on their backs.
Their clothing principally consists of a garment of kangaroo or opossum
skins, sewed together with the fibrous parts of the animal, which they
throw over their shoulders, and which reaches down to the knees. Their
hair is jet black, coarse and long ; usually decorated with kangaroo teeth,
claws of animals, bones of fish, pieces of earthenware, and buttons ob-
tained from Europeans, or any thing of the kind. Many of them have
their faces whimsically painted, and have fish-bones or other small bones
pierced through the ears, or the dividing cartilage of the nose, which are
worn as ornamental appendages.
It is an appalling fact, which is too well substantiated, that these
barbarous creatures, not satisfied with the practice of infanticide, are
cannibals, and that of the grossest and most shocking description. Their


wandering habits render it inconvenient to carry about their young infants;
and it is not unfrequently the case that when a second child is born
before the former is able to walk, one or the other is destroyed and eaten
by them. My own observation on the disparity of years between children
of the same parents, collaterally at least, supports the fact. If any of their
relations for whom they profess to have great regard, die by an acci-
dental occurrence, or are slain in battle, the bodies are eaten; but when
they die of disease they do not eat them, but cover the body with leaves,
or bury it, or place it securely in a tree. The latter mode is intended as
a mark of respect to distinguished characters.
The information obtained by me on this most disgusting feature of
their character was derived from such a source, and at the instance of such
pointed and repeated inquiries, as leave me no room to encourage the
shadow of a doubt, of which to give them the advantage. The Euro-
pean named Buckley, of whom I have spoken, who has wandered with
them for thirty-two years, and who has become thoroughly acquainted
with their customs, and had in most respects descended to their habits,
although evidently unwilling to disclose such deeds of darkness, yet in
several conversations most distinctly asserted the awful fact; and he is
not the only source of my information.
Upon my arrival at Port Philip, messengers were despatched to invite
the natives to the settlement, which afforded me an opportunity of seeing
and associating with considerable numbers. During my stay, I spent a
portion of almost every evening with them in the bush surrounding the
settlement, where they had encamped ; which gave me favourable oppor-
tunities for observation and communication, in which I was occasionally
assisted by Buckley, who acted as my interpreter. Their language
appears to be exceedingly meagre ; one word, accompanied with a variety
of intonations and gestures, is used to express various meanings.
Their general disposition does not appear to be ferocious. In this
respect they have comparatively little of the savage in their character.
They appear to be remarkably docile. I always found them anxious to
obtain information on all points which were suggested to their minds ;
and they were equally disposed to communicate. And, though my stay
with them was unavoidably short, yet, before my departure, by the imper-
fect use of words which I had acquired, assisted by signs, I could commu-
nicate with them tolerably well. I made them clearly understand the
object of my visit, and they frequently expressed themselves in terms of
grateful approbation.
They discover indications of intelligence, which, however, assumes
rather the character of shrewdness or cunning. It will be readily con-
ceived that a people Ahus deeply degraded are sitting in darkness and in


the shadow of death. As to religion, the mind seems to be a rttde chaos,
destitute of the power of conception, presenting an awfully distressing
vacancy of thought, and a seeming want of capacity to dwell upon and
comprehend the simplest truths. After the minutest observations and
strictest enquiry, I could not discover that they possess the most indistinct
notion of a Supreme Being; nor have I been able to ascertain the slightest
vestige of religious worship, or of superstitious observance. They have,
however, an idea of a future state, for they decidedly hold the doctrine
of transmigration; and, since Europeans have settled amongst them, they
seem to have imbibed the ludicrous notion, that the white people are
their ancestors returned to them, and that after they die they will “jump
up white man.”
One of the most interesting scenes which I witnessed, was while perform-
ing divine service with the Europeans at the settlement; on which occa-
sion a considerable number of natives assembled together, and surrounded
the shed under which the service was performed. Some apprehension
was excited that our devotions would be interrupted by their noise and
restlessness, for they are usually exceedingly loquacious, and in their
social intercourse maintain a constant jabber and confusion; but contrary
to our expectation the reverse was the case : and though the nature of our
engagement could not be comprehended by them, they were, apparently,
remarkably attentive and quiet all the time ; —during singing, especially,
they appeared to be struck with silent admiration. I viewed their sable
countenances with feelings of no ordinary character. I was reminded
of past scenes in the West Indies: but with this appalling drawback,
that these poor creatures were totally ignorant of, and not yet able to
receive, the important truths which I was endeavouring to explain. The
mingled feelings of commiseration and compassionate desire for their
welfare, which were wrought in my breast, are not to be described. My
soul truly went out after their salvation. I felt as though I could have
sacrificed every temporal comfort for their spiritual advantage. I longed
ardently to be able co communicate my feelings to them, and to explain
the blessed truths of God’s word; but was left to the mere anticipation
of a happier period, when these poo? creatures, who are degraded in some
respects far below the brute creation, will be exalted to the level of
Christians, and when they, or their immediate successors, will participate
in the blessings of the glorious gospel. I could not allow so favourable
an opportunity to pass by, without an affectionate appeal to the intel-
ligent part of my audience in behalf of those, whose country they had
come to possess. I presumed to point out some of the obligations un-
der which they were placed, endeavouring to impress upon their minds
that they were bound in justice and humanity, and by the Christianity


they professed, to promote by all the means in their power both the tem-
poral and spiritual welfare of their fellow-men, with whom, in the order of
Providence, they had thus become connected. This I have no doubt will
be the case on the part of some respectable persons who have settled
there; but there is reason to fear that a contrary line of conduct may
be pursued by others.
Upon the eve of my departure, I collected together all the natives who
were on the spot, and through the medium of Buckley, who acted as my
interpreter, I addressed this interesting audience, particularly explaining
the object of my visit, and stating the probability of Missionaries settling
among them to instruct them and their children; with which they ap-
peared very much pleased, and especially so with regard to their children,
expressing their willingness to commit them to our care for tuition.
After distributing a few trifling presents, I bade them farewell, amidst
expressions of warm attachment, and anxious enquiry as to the period of
my return. The best mode of reciprocating my feelings of attachment
may be, to state my conviction, that a door is open to an interesting field
of Missionary operation among the degraded natives of New Holland,
and to recommend the establishment of a Mission on those shores.
I was favoured by having a much quicker and more pleasant passage
back ; and after an absence of little more than six weeks, in the order of
a kind Providence, I was permitted to rejoin my family and flock, having
the gratification to find all well.
From the information I have acquired, my judgment is, that a Mission
should be established among the Aboriginal natives of that part of the
country without delay. It would be emphatically a Mission to the heathen,
and one that would not fail to interest every friend of Missionary opera-
tions. Such are my views of its importance, and the confidence I have in
the Committee’s approbation, that, if I had a suitable man or men, I should
not hesitate to send them. I am of opinion that much depends upon the
adoption of prompt measures in entering this interesting field.
I am quite aware that such a Mission will be attended with peculiar
difficulties, arising from the awfully degraded condition of the people,
which is enough to discourage every effort, except those made in obedi-
ence to the Divine mandate, “ Go ye into all the world, and preach
the gospel to every creature,’’ —in humble dependence upon Divine
influence, —and in the fullest confidence of the truth of God’s word,
which so positively and encouragingly declares, that “ in the wilderness
shall waters break out, and streams in the desert,” “ and the parched
ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water;” yea,
“ the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose,” ‘‘for the earth shall


be filled with the knowledge of the glory of God, as the waters cover the
sea,” “ for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.”
It would be extremely difficult, now to lay down a plan for conducting
a Mission so peculiar in its character, particularly, in respect to the vagrant
habits of the natives. I conceive that in the commencement nothing more
could be done, than to point out a few general principles ; the specific
course of operation being left to circumstances. At present it occurs to
me that it would be desirable to obtain from Government (for all the land
there is at present considered as belonging to the Crown), for the purposes
of the Mission, a sufficient quantity of land ; —that three, or at least two
Missionaries, should be sent over with instructions to form a homestead
or establishment in the best situation, as a sort of rendezvous for the
Mission, particularly for such natives as might be induced to settle or so-
journ in the immediate vicinity ; —that at least one of the Missionaries
should always be at this establishment, for the purpose of instructing the
natives, particularly the children, and attending to such other duties con-
nected with the station as might be necessary;—and that one, or more,
of the Missionaries should occasionally wander about with the natives,
which would afford favourable opportunities for obtaining information as
to their language, habits, and manners, for imparting instruction during
their journeyings, for gaining their confidence, and inducing them, ulti-
mately, to settle near to the Mission Station. It would, of course, be the
object of the Missionaries to encourage habits of industry, by inducing
them to cultivate portions of the land granted for the general use of the
Aborigines connected.with the Mission.
It would be the most prudent that the agricultural department, at least
for a time, should be under the supervision of some pious and competent
person, appointed by the Missionary, who might also act in the capacity of
school-master or Assistant-Missionary. Such an appointment would un-
doubtedly be one of great utility, and would relieve the Missionary from
engagements which might appear too secular in their character, and which
most certainly it is desirable to avoid as much as possible ; and it would
leave the Missionary more at leisure to pursue the chief object of his
Mission. The agricultural pursuits connected with the Mission, are only
suggested as being merely preliminary, and consequently temporary, in
their character. The produce arising therefrom, would help to relieve
the Mission from an expense which, it is presumed, must in the first
instance be incurred, in providing the natives partially with food ; and
this plan would also eventually lead to their becoming independent settlers
on allotted portions of land.
The expense of the Mission it would be extremely difficult to calculate


with any precision ; much would on the scale upon which it might
be conducted. It might, probably, be about 6001. per annum, besides all
expenses incurred in establishing the Mission. As there is a great interest
felt by several respectable persons in this colony in behalf of the pro-
posed enterprise, a considerable amount might be raised for the specific
object; and I am sanguine in my expectations that the Colonial Govern-
ment would not only grant a sufficient portion of land, but render some
pecuniary assistance also.
In conclusion, I repeat that this Mission demands the Committee’s
immediate attention, and presents no ordinary claims to the liberality of
the Christian public. I shall soon expect favourable returns from the
Committee in answer to my communications on this subject.
It would seem that the intellectual as well as moral debasement
of the Aborigines of Australia is so great, that long-continued
intercourse with them, if not some degree of religious and mental
culture, is necessary, before any definite information can be obtained
from them, relative to the superstitious notions which they may
cherish. The Missionaries of the Church Society have at length
discovered that the Aborigines in Wellington Valley are not wholly
strangers to superstitious fear. It is now found that they believe in
a Being, whom they represent as “ sitting down a long way off, over
the great waters,” and who “made every thing and every body first
time.” Of this Being, however, they appear afraid to discourse at
length, and say they “ don’t like to talk about him; he will be
very angry.”
Thoms, Printer, 12, Warwick Square, London,
