

; /"Vi * i
*4jnO:CA. i '_/, -y... •<,/,
1876.] The Aborigines of South Australia.
111
THE ABORIGINES OE SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The subjoined documents relate to
an article we published in January-
last respecting the condition of the
Aborigines of South Australia. As
we have no desire other than that
accurate information should prevail
on the subject, we consider it only
right to publish in full what has
been officially forwarded to us :
“ Office of Commissioner of Public
Works,
“ Adelaide, March 24, 1876.
“ Sir, —I am directed by the Honour-
able J. P. Boucaut, the Premier of
South Australia, to forward you a copy
of a report which he has obtained from
the Sub-Protector of Aborigines in con-
sequence of an article which he read in
your magazine of the month of Janu-
ary last.
“I also forward you a map of the
colony (attached to a book of Mr.
Boucaut’s speeches), on which the
various aboriginal reserves are marked
in pink, and the various depots dotted
in blue.
“ I am instructed to hope that you
will be able to find space in your
magazine for some slight editorial note
or memorandum qualifying your very
unsatisfactory account of our aborigines
and our efforts on their behalf, which
scarcely does justice to our people or
their governments, and which, appear-
ing in the columns of so influential a
publication, is calculated to injure our
character for justice to the native popu-
lation.
I am directed to forward with said
map two or three other books, as per
margin,'* giving information concerning
this colony,
“ And remain
“ Your obedient Servant,
“John Mann,
“ Secretary.
“P.S.—A separate plan, showing
aboriginal reserves and depots has
been prepared in the Survey Office,
and is forwarded herewith in lieu of
that annexed to Premier’s speeches.”
“ Extract from Article on ‘ Aborigines
of South Australia ’ (vide Dublin
University Magazine for January ,
1876).
“ ‘ The efforts of civilization and mis-
sionary enterprise amongst these luck-
less aborigines have, as usual, been
almost abortive. What little success
has been met with among the Adelaide
and Encounter Bay tribes is due al-
most entirely to the Roman Catholics;
but the results have been altogether
most discouraging, and the number of
converts veiy, very few.
“ 4 Some years since excellent schools
were opened in Adelaide for the chil-
dren of the aborigines; these are now
unfortunately closed. Nor were the
results of the instruction given satis-
* “Handbook,” “ Boothby’s Almanack,” “Schomburgk’s Papers,” “ Chamber of Manu-
facturers’ Papers, ” “ Statistical Sketch,” “Ward’s Southern District.”


factory; such of the children who did
not return to their old life having
proved by no means creditable mem-
bers of society.’
“ Memo.
“My attention has been drawn to
the above extract from article on
* Aborigines of South Australia’ (vide
Dublin University Magazine for
January, 1876, page 89) containing
statements calculated to convey a very
erroneous and imperfect impression
with respect to the results of the steps
taken by the Government and private
persons in South Australia to amelio-
rate the condition of its aborigines.
“ With a view to give a more correct
idea as to the nature and extent of the
official and private attempts made for
the protection and support of the
aborigines of this province, I beg to
submit the following statement :
“ Roman Catholus.
So far as can be ascertained from
the records of this office, and inquiries
I have made, I believe I am correct in
stating that the Roman Catholics have
never at any time organized any efforts,
either privately or aided by Govern-
ment, on behalf of the aborigines of this
province.
“ German Missionaries .
u The earliest attempts in this direc-
tion were made about 1838, by the
Moravian and Lutheran missionaries,
Messrs. Meyers, Teiklemann, Schur-
mann and Kloze, who had mission
stations and schools at Encounter Bay,
Adelaide, and Port Lincoln, towards the
support of which the Government con-
tributed pecuniary assistance, as well
as rations and blankets.
u 1839 Dr. Moorhouse was ap-
pointed Protector of Aborigines, under
authority of the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, and in 1841 a native
school was established in Adelaide
under the auspices of Governor Grey,
and in charge of Mr. and Mrs. Ross,
who received from the Government a
yearly stipend of .£BO, together with a
house and rations. In 1843 another
Government school was opened at
Walkerville, under the superintendence
of Mr. Smith, formerly a draftsman in
the Colonial Land Office; and at one
period there were 107 native children
under instruction in these institutions,
and making satisfactory progress in
acquiring the rudiments of education,
as also the habits and tastes of civilized
life.
“ Xhese schools appear to have been
continued to about 1850, when the diffi-
culty experienced in keeping the chil-
dren, owing to the evil influences and
prejudices of their parents and the
wandering tribes who frequented Ade-
laide, gave rise to the idea of founding
an institution in an isolated position,
to which the children could be removed
after their preparatory training in these
schools. This idea was practically
carried out by Archdeacon Hale (now
Bishop of Brisbane), and a mission
station formed at Poonindie, near Port
Lincoln, 220 miles from Adelaide, on a
reserve of 16,000 acres of land dedicated
by the Government.
“ Appropriation of Money hy Govern-
ment.
“ When South Australia became a
Crown colony in 1841, one-tenth of the
proceeds of the sales of all waste lands
was set aside for the benefit of the
aborigines. This was found, as the
sales of land increased, to be more
than sufficient, and thereafter any defi-
nite portion ceased to be set aside, but
whatever amount their necessities
required was drawn from the territorial


1876.]
The Aborigines of South Australia .
revenue ; and this state of things existed
until the control of that revenue was
ceded to the colonists under the new
constitution, and from that time sums
have appeared annually upon the esti-
mates. The total amount expended
for aborigines from 1840 to 1874-5 was
£91,430 16s. 3d. The sum voted by
parliament for current year for abo-
rigines department was £4,694, appro -
printed as follows :
u Two sub-protectors’sala-
ries and allowances . . £444
Provisions, blankets, cloth-
ing, implements, medical
attendance, travelling
allowances, defending
prisoners, transport of
stores, and sundries . . £3,750
Grant in aid of Aborigines
Friends’ Association . £5OO
“ Mission Stations and Schools now
existing.
“ Poonindie.
“ Established in 1850, at Port Lin-
coln, by Archdeacon Hale, on a reserve
set apart by Government, containing
about 16,000 acres. There are now 78
natives resident at this institution, which
is under the superintendence of the
Rev. R. W. Holden, of the Church of
England. The school is attended by
26 children. During the past year
250 acres were cropped, and produced
2,400 bushels of wheat and 60 tons of
hay; 900 sheep were depastured, yield-
ing 115 bales of wool; the stock also
includes 150 cattle and 30 horses. All
the natives except two earn their own
living and perform all the work on the
station, receiving regular wages, the
same as paid to European workmen.
The people are reported to be cleanly
and well behaved, and appear very
happy and comfortable.
“ This institution is vested in three
trustees—the Lord Bishop of Ade-
laide (Church of England) and Messrs.
S. Davenport and G-. W. Hawkes, S.M.
Up to 1860 the Government contributed
annual grants in aid of this establish-
ment amounting to a total sum of
.£7,225; from that time it has been
entirely self-supporting.
“ Point McLeay
“ This native station was formed in
1857 by the ‘ Aborigines Friends’ As-
sociation,’ and is situated on the Lower
Murray, on a Government reserve con-
taining 730 acres, but which is about to
be increased by an additional block of
three square miles along the Coorong
Lake. The Rev. George Taplin, of the
Congregational Church, is the super-
intendent. The natives of this district
number over 500, of whom 154 are on
the station. The school is attended by
40 children, who are making satis-
factory progress and present a very
neat and orderly appearance.
“ The health of this community has
been good, no epidemics of any serious
nature having visited them for several
years. During the first year several
natives were taught rough masonry
and carpentering, and made a road
across a lagoon for the speedy transit
of produce. Many of the natives have
been employed by European settlers
in clearing land, raising stone, and
shearing; and it is gratifying to note
that some of them have been placed in
positions where none but trustworthy
men would be employed.
“ This institution has not yet become
self-supporting, owing to the limited
area on which its operations have been
conducted; it receives assistance from
private subscriptions, and an annual
grant in aid of £SOO from Government.
In 1875 a special vote by parliament
of £7OO was received to defray liabilities


of previous years caused by failure of
crops from red rust.
“ Point Pierce.
“ This institution was founded in
1866, on the West Coast of York’s
Peninsula, by a private society in con-
nection with the Congregational Church,
on a Government reserve of eight square
miles, subsequently increased by an
additional block of land of 20 square
miles for pastoral purposes. The aver-
age number of natives on the station
is 45, who are regularly and usefully
employed in shearing, fencing, and
other farm work; 32 acres are under
cultivation, and the stock includes
2,800 sheep. The general health and
conduct of the natives is said to be
good, the married couples living in
cottages keep them in good order, and
seem to appreciate the additional com-
fort to their previous wretched wurley
life. The able-bodied receive wrnges
for their work on the station, and spend
their earnings usefully at the Mission
Store in rations and clothing, which
are supplied at cost price. The scho-
lars at the school make fair progress,
and the girls attend to washing, cook-
ing, baking, mending, and always make
their owm clothes.
“This station is partly supported by
private subscriptions, the Government
contributing rations and blankets for
the relief of the old, sick, and infirm
aborigines.
“ Kopperamanna, Far North.
“ A mission station and school were
formed in this locality about ten years
ago by the Moravian missionaries, who
afterwards, owing to a severe drought,
were obliged to give up their labours,
but subsequently the Lutheran mission-
aries resumed possession of the station,
and obtained from the Government a
reserve of 400 square miles, on which
they have succeeded in obtaining a
good supply of water by sinking wells.
105 natives are on this station, and the
school contains 27 children. The con -
duct and health of this community is
stated to be satisfactory.
“ Pinkie River.
“ A reserve of 900 square miles on the
boundary line of the northern territory
■was set apart by the Government in
1875 for the purposes of the Lutheran
missionaries, who are forming a station
there with a view to carry on pastoral
pursuits for the benefit of the natives
in that locality, who are reported to be
peaceable and well disposed towards
Europeans. Some time must neces-
sarily elapse before operations are fairly
commenced, and there are results to
report.
“ Depots.
“ There are now 54 depots established
throughout the province for the dis-
tribution of blankets, rations, medi-
cines, and medical comforts for the
relief of the old, sick, and infirm
aborigines. 21 of these depots are in
charge of pastoral lessees, 22 at police
stations, 6 at mission stations, and 5 in
other private hands.
u E. L. Hamilton,
“ Sub-Protector.
“ Aborigines Office, Adelaide, SA.
“ 17th March, 1876.”
