













97A 7 Q
£(O ( 0
DIVISIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS. L.S.
(Read April 15, 1898.)
In 1891, my attention was drawn by an article contributed to the
Royal Society of South Australia, 1 by the Rev. L. Schultze, to the
existence of eight classes or divisions among the native tribes in-
habiting the Finke river in South Australia. On making further
inquiries, I found that this eight-class system, with different modi-
fications, extends northerly from the Finke river almost to Port
Darwin and the Gulf of Carpentaria. It also prevails in a westerly
direction, from the boundary of Queensland to that of West Aus-
tralia, and may therefore be said to be in force over the greater
part of the Northern Territory—a name given to the northern por-
tion of South Australia.
Owing to the great apathy regarding native customs shown by the
white population sparsely distributed over this immense tract of
country, I have experienced much difficulty in obtaining particu-
lars respecting these classes. Among my correspondents I was,
however, fortunate enough to find Mr. S. N. Innes, the owner of a
station in the Northern Territory. He had read a paper on the
class systems of other tribes contributed by me in 1894 to the
Geographical Society at Brisbane, 2 which had awakened his interest
in the subject, and when I wrote to him he willingly offered to
collect particulars of the divisions among the natives in his district.
The tribes reported upon by Mr. Innes are divided into eight
classes or sections—the names of the women being slightly different
from those of the men in each section. Four of these sections
form a group, which may be called A, and the other four sections
become group B. This .division will be readily understood by
means of a table.
It will be seen by the accompanying table that the women of group
A are the mothers of the men of group B, who marry the women be-
longing to the latter group. The women of group B are likewise the
mothers of the men who marry the women of group A. In other
words, the sons of the women of one group marry the daughters of
the women of the other group. Or, what amounts to the same thing,
1 Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, xiv, 210-246.
2 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland, x, 18-34.
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXVIT, NO. 157.


MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [April 15 r
the men of group
eration in group
A marry
the sisters of the men of their own gen-
in group
B, and
vice versa.
Group.
Husband.
Choolum
Jamerum
Cheenum
Yacomary
Daughters.
Children.
Wife.
Ningulum
Palyareenya
Nooralum
Bungareenya
Chooralum
Bungarin
Chingulum.
Chingulum
Bungarin
Chooralum
Palyarin
Noolum Yacomary
Yacomareenya Cheenum
Neenum Jamerum
Palyareenya
Nooralum
Bungareenya
Ningulum
Neomarum Choolum
Yaeomareenya
Neenum
Neomarum
Noolum
On examining the table further it will be observed that the
daughters of the women of group A belong to the same group as.
their mothers, but to a different section or class of it. For example,.
Ningulum has a daughter Palyareenya; Palyareenya produces
Nooralum; Nooralum produces Bungareenya ; Bungareenya is the
mother of Ningulum, and this series is continually repeated. The
women of the A group pass through each of the four classes in as
many generations—the same class name reappearing in the fifth
epoch. If our example had been taken from the B group, an
analogous result would have been obtained.
When on the Culgoa river some years ago I collected some in-
formation respecting a large tribe speaking the Moorawarrie lan-
guage, who occupy the country from about Goodooga on the
Bokara river to Barringun on the Warrego, extending southerly
about fifty miles and northerly into the Queensland frontier about
the same distance. They are divided into four sections, having the
same names for the men and women as those of the Kamilaroi tribe,,
with rules of marriage and descent as exemplified in the following,
table:
Husband. Wife. Sons and Daughters..
IpP a L Kubbitha, Murri and Matha,
Kumbo, Matha, Kubbi and Kubbitha,.
-^- u khi» Ippatha, Kumbo and Butha,
urr *’ Butha. Ippai and Ippatha.


The whole community is divided into two groups—the members
of the Ippai and Kumbo sections forming the one, and the Kubbi
and Murri people constituting the other. The families composing
these groups bear the names of different animals, plants, or inani-
mate objects, which are called totems , a word copied by us from the
North American Indians. Among the totems of the people consti-
tuting the Ippai and Kumbo sections may be mentioned the follow-
ing:
Wirroo (parrot), Bilbee, Mulga Snake,
Emu, Gray Kangaroo, Red Kangaroo,
Native Dog, Jewfish, Bronze-wing Pigeon,
Codfish, Swan, Plain Turkey,
Bream, Native Companion, Common Ants,
Gray Frog, Jew Lizard, Wood Duck,
Common Fly, Galah, Native Cat,
Galah, Native Cat,
Spider, Kangaroo Rat, Top-knot Pigeon,
Plover, Grasshopper, Muscle,
Curlew, Cocklarina, Bush Mouse,
Water Hen, Copi (Mogand’erra), Blue Bonnet (parrot),
Sun, Hail, Clouds,
Rain, Rainbow, Lightning,
North Wind, West Wind, Thunder,
Birribil, Numumbeera, Cuttibundi,
Doomul, Mulga, Carbeeii,
Gidyer, River Gum, Bloodwood*
Myall, Belar, Leopard Tree,
Kurrajong, Quandong, Grooee,
Supple Jack, Whitewood, Greenw
Whitewood, Greenwattle,
Tea Tree, Plop Bulsh, Wild Orange Tree,
Lime Tree, Yams, Lignum,
Nardoo (Bah), Blue Grass, Mitchell Grass.
Pig-weed, Sensitive Plant,
The under-mentioned totemic names may be enumerated as
belonging to some of the people comprising the Kubbi and Murri
sections :
Ground Iguana, Padamelon, Opossum,
Carpet Snake, Brown Snake, Black Duck,
Eagle Hawk, White Cockatoo, Pelican,
Fish Hawk, Dove, Bower Bird,
Tree Iguana, Porcupine, Black Snake,
Crow, Death Adder, Native Bee,
Scrub Turkey, Silvery Fish, Flying Squirrel,-
Common Magpie, Black Magpie, Green Frog,


154 MATHEWS—DIVISIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [April 15.
Cross Frog, Shingle-back, Jackass,
Mopoke, Turtle, Wasp,
Centipede, White Crane, Blue Crane,
Ibis, Crimson-wing Parrot, Shag,
Diver, Wood Adder, Scorpion,
Butterfly, Bull-dog Ant, Moon,
South Wind, East Wind, Quartz Stone,
Midjeree, Brigalow, Coolaba,
Ironbark, Pine, Sandalwood,
Apple Tree, Box, Mungal,
Cherry Tree, Wirribil, Barley Grass.
Nepon Tree,
East of the Moorawarrie is a large tribe speaking the Uollaroi
■dialect; they have the same sectional divisions as the former, and
with some variations their totems closely agree. In both tribes
descent is reckoned through the mother. In gathering the particu-
lars respecting the Moorawarrie tribe, now for the first time pub-
lished, I desire to thank Mr. J. E. Miller, of Goodooga, for his will-
ing assistance.










DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read May 5, 1899.)
The division of a tribe into intermarrying sections or classes,
although one of the most interesting of the institutions recognized
among the Australian aborigines, has not hitherto received the
attention which its importance deserves. In a former number of
the Proceedings of this Society 1 I tabulated the names of eight
sections, with the rules of marriage and descent in force over a
large extent of country in the Northern Territory. Since then I
have reported 2 a similar eight-section system, but with different sec-
tional names, in the northwest corner of Queensland, extending
southerly from the Gulf of Carpentaria for a distance of about
three hundred miles, including the Wentworth, Nicholson, Greg-
ory and Upper Georgina rivers.
In an article contributed to the Royal Society of New South
Wales in June, 1898, I described the eight sections of the Arrinda
tribe on the Finke, Todd and other rivers, 3 but, while that paper
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxvii, 151-154.
2 yourn. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 251, 252.
3 Ibid., xxxii, 72.
KUPRIN TED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC. VOL. XXXVIII. NO. 159.


was in the press, a correspondent furnished me with additional
information which shows the line of descent in a manner that is
more readily understood than by the table appended to the article
in question. I propose, therefore, to supply a new table, showing
how the divisions intermarry, with the sections to which the off-
spring belong, as follows :
( i. Panungka
Parulla
Pungata
Group A,...
1 2. Mbutjana
Pungata
Ngala.
3. Knurraia
Ngala
Bultara
4. Koomara
Bultara
Parulla
TABLE I.
Husband Wife Offspring
1. Panungka Parulla Pungata
f 5. Parulla Panungka Koomara
Group B 1 6. Bultara Koomara Knurraia
7. Ngala Knurraia Mbutjana
8. Pungata Mbutjana Panungkr
Mbutjana Panungka
It will be observed by the foregoing table that the sons of the
women of one group marry the daughters of the women of the
other; and, also, that each group has perpetual succession through
its females. For example, take the women of Group A in the
table, we find that Parulla is the mother of Pungata; Pungata of
Ngala; Ngala of Bultara, and Bultara is the mother of Parulla,
and this order of succession is continually repeated. 1 Among the
women of Group B the line of descent conforms to the same rules.
I have traced some of the section names of this organization,
namely, Bultara, Koomara, etc., across the country from the Upper
Finke river northeasterly to the Georgina river, a distance of more
than four hundred miles.
My correspondent also made some further investigations respecting
the order of succession in four of the sections of the Warramonga
tribe at lennant s Creek, with the result that it becomes necessary
to prepare an amended table of one of the groups. As it might
cause confusion to show only one group, I have included both in
the subjoined table:
1 1 he names of the eight sections of the Upper Finke river tribes were first
reported by the Rev. L. Schulze in 1891 (Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, xiv,
223, 224). Their arrangement into two intermarrying groups was the result of
my investigations ( Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 72).
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 73.


TABLE 11.
Husband Wife Offspring
1. Aponunga Tungulli Apungata
2. Ampaiona Apungata Opalla
Group A \ TT „ .
j 3. Ungary Opalla Kabajee
4. Akamarra Kabajee Tungulli
f 5. Tungulli Aponunga Akamarra
6. Kabajee Akamarra Ungary
7. Opalla Ungary Arnpajona
B. Apungata Arnpajona Aponunga
Group B j 61 Kaba J ee Akamarra Ungary
7. Opalla Ungary Ampajona
In Group A of the above table, the rotation of the section names
is different from that given in my former table, which, necessarily,
alters the order of descent among the women and children. Group
B is the same as that previously given. If my correspondent is
now correct, it can be shown by this table that a brother’s son’s
children intermarry with a sister’s son’s children, instead of
the son of a brother marrying the daughter of a sister, and
vice versa, as stated in my former paper. 1 In examining the two
tables, I and 11, it is seen that the names of several sections in the
Arrinda tribe are almost identical with some of the section names
of the Warramonga.
On the McArthur, Kangaroo and Calvert rivers, in the Northern
Territory, reaching thence along the shore of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria beyond the Queensland boundary, and extending inland
about one hundred miles, are several native tribes, among which
may be mentioned the Yuckamurri, Yanular, Leanawa, Yookala and
Kurrawar. The following synopsis shows the section to which a
man belongs—the section into which he can marry—and the desig-
nation of the offspring :
TABLE 111.
Husband
Wife Offspring
Jungalagoo Bullaranjee
Bullaranjee Jooralagoo
Jooralagoo Bungaranjee
Bungaranjee Jungalagoo
f 1. Joolanjegoo
2. Jameragoo
3. Jinagoo
4. Yukamurra
f 5. Jungalagoo
J 6. Bungaranjee
j 7. Jooralagoo
f 8. Bullaranjee
Group A.
Joolanjegoo Yukamurri
Y ukamurra Jinagoo
Jinagoo Jameragoo
Jameragoo Joolanjegoo
Group B.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , xxxii, 74.


Some native tribes on the Victoria liver, in the Northern Terri-
tory of South Australia, are segregated into two intermarrying
groups, with the following subdivisions :
Husband
Wife
Offspring
f
i. Jamada
Jungalla
Dhalyerree
Group A
|
2. Jameram
Dhalyerree
Joolam
• 1
1
3- J anna
Joolam
Dhungarree
l
4. Jummiunya
Dhungarree
Jungalla
r
5. Jungalla
Jamada
Jummiunya
Group B
J
6. Dhungarree
Jummiunya
Janna
' ]
7. Joolam
Janna
Jameram
i
8. Dhalyerree
Jameram
Jamada
If we
compare
Tables I, II, III and IV with
the table of
sections
repc
Drted
by me in a former article to this Society, 1
TABLE IV,
If we compare Tables I, 11, 111 and IV with the table of eight
sections reported by me in a former article to this Society, 1 it will
be observed that the four tables are constructed on the same system,
and all contain the same order of succession. In other words, all
the tribes dealt with have substantially the same organization,
although there are dialectic variations, more or less, in the names
of the sections. In the Tables I, II and 111, I have omitted the
feminine form of the name of each section, which, it is thought,
will enable the reader more readily to follow the rules of marriage
and descent. The divisional system, or social organization,
reported in this article, extends from the Upper Finke river to the
embouchure of the McArthur, in the Gulf of Carpentaria, a distance
of about six hundred and fifty miles. lam informed by some of
my correspondents that the same system, but with different divi-
sional names, reaches westwardly from the Gulf of Carpentaria to
the Daly and Victoria rivers, and onwards into West Australia.
The southern portion of the Arrinda and adjoining tribes occupy
the Middle Finke and Charlotte waters, reaching as far south as the
Macumba river. Among them there are only four sections em-
ployed to regulate the intersexual relations, as shown in the follow-
ing table. These sections comprise four of those enumerated in
Table I:
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxvii, 152.


TABLE V.
Husband Wife Offspring
Group A J l. Panungka Parulla Bultara
l 2. Koomara Bultara Parulla
Bultara Parulla
Group R / 3. Parulla Panungka Koomara
l 4. Bultara Koomara Panungkr
Koomara Panungka
It will be seen that the community is segregated into two inter-
marrying groups, and that the children take the name of the com-
plementary section in the division to which their mother belongs.
11l the southern portion of South Australia there are a number of
tribes who possess the two primary groups only, like A and B in the
foregoing tables, without any subdivisions into sections. As an
example of this system, it may be mentioned that in some districts
these two divisions, or groups, are called Matturri and Karraroo ; x
in others they are Krokee and Kumite; in other parts they are
called Kookoojiba and Koocheebinga, and, again in others, they
are known as Koolpirry and Thinewah. In each case the men
belonging to one primary division marry the women of the other,
and the children take the name of their mother’s division. As I
am now engaged in the preparation of a comprehensive article
dealing with this type of organization, I shall not enter farther
upon it at present.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 69.








ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES
ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES
NEW SOUTH WALES ANI) VICTORIA
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
ASSOCIE ETRANGER DE LA SOCIETE D’ANTHROPOLOGIE DE PARIS;
CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY,
WASHINGTON, U.S.A., ETC.
Author of :
“Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of the Northern Territory.'' “ The
Native Tribes of Victoria: their Languages and Customs.” “The Aboriginal
Rock Pictures of Australia.” “The Origin, Organisation and Ceremonies
of the Australian Aboriginesetc., etc.
All rights reserved
P. W. WHITE, GENERAL PRINTER, 344 KENT STREET.




ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES
ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES
NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIA
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
ASSOCIE ETRANGER DE LA * SOCIETE. d’aNTHROPOLOGIE DE PARIS ;
CORRESrPONDING MEMBER OF THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY,
WASHINGTON, U.S.A., ETC.
Author or :
“Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of the Northern Territory“ The
Native Tribes of Victoria: their Languages and Customs.” “The Aboriginal
Rock Pictures of Australia .” ‘'The Origin, Organisation and Ceremonies
of the Australian Aborigines,” etc., etc.
All rights reserved
Sgbiug:
F; W. WHITE, GENERAL PRINTER, 344 KENT street.


■


PREFACE
This work comprises an article written by me under the same
title, dated sth October, 1904, which has just been published in
the Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales for 1904,
Volume xxxviii., pages 203 - 381. This fact will no doubt be
considered a sufficient guarantee that it is up to the standard
required in scientific investigations. By the generous courtesy of
that Society I have been permitted to reprint the article in book
form, for the purpose of still further disseminating its contents
among those who take an interest in the aboriginal inhabitants of
this country.
Everyone who has given the subject any consideration must
have observed with astonishment how little has been done by the
Governments of New South Wales and Victoria, to secure an
at then tic record of the aboriginal tribes of these States. Most
of the scanty knowledge we possess has been gathered by private
individuals during brief intervals of leisure whilst following
other avocations. But we must confess, with regret, that no
systematic scientific study of the aborigines at the Government
expense has ever been attempted.
It is well known that the natives of New South Wales and
Victoria are dying out before the European occupation of their
hunting: grounds. The remnants of different tribes have been
mustered on reserves at various places, where the aged people
and some of the children are maintained at the cost of the State.
Those who are able to work can get employment among the white
people on the stations and farms.
The old native men and women, who alone are able to furnish
full and reliable information regarding the sociology, languages,
ceremonies and general customs, will in a few years time have been
carried away by death. It is of the highest importance, therefore,
that an attempt should be made to preserve some record of the


race while we still have the opportunity. With this object in
view, I have endeavoured to touch upon the leading features con-
nected with the daily life of the aborigines of New South Wales
and Victoria.
Having to keep the work within such reasonable limits as would
ensure its acceptance for publication by the Royal Society, has
necessitated considerable abridgement under each branch of the
subject, but it is hoped that this is an improvement rather than a
drawback. Moreover, the Royal Society restricted me to original
matter only, which had never been published anywhere before. In
consequence of this limitation I have been unable to incorporate
in this book any portion of my previous writings. This difficulty
has, however, been surmounted by enumerating all my former
works in the “ Bibliography.”
Owing to the great decrease in the numbers of the black
population, many of their customs have fallen into disuse and
are not now practiced, but in my descriptions of them through-
out this work it has been found more convenient and explicit to
speak of them in the present tense.
At various times during recent years I have recorded and
published the grammars of fifty Australian languages and dialects,
with more or less fullness, together with a large number of vocabu-
laries. Two additional elementary grammars, with corresponding
vocabularies, are included in the present work. It is hoped that
some of the eminent linguists of Europe and America will be able to
utilize my investigations for comparison with the achievements of
other labourers among different primitive peoples all over the world.
Those portions of my book, dealing with “Sociology” at pages
5-15 and 84- 103 will completely revolutionise all the old school
notions respecting the organisation of Australian tribes which
have been published up to this date. It will be evident that the
old women’s yarns about “marriage by elopement,” “ marriage by
capture,” and “ group marriage,” are practically impossible as
fundamental matrimonial laws in aboriginal society.


The comprehensive description of the “Pirrimbir,” or aboriginal
mode of avenging a homicide, and also the chapter on the “Mum-
birbirri ” ceremony of scarring the human body, are both entirely
new to the literature bearing upon the aborigines of New South
Wales and Victoria.
In describing the knowledge possessed by the natives regarding
the heavenly bodies, I have been able to show that in naming the
stars and stellar groups along the path of the moon, in the neigh-
bourhood of the ecliptic, they have in effect evolved a zodiac,
peopled with men and animals, connected with which are some
extremely interesting mythological stories.
Several ceremonies of initiation, both of men and women, are
described in detail, obtained by myself from the natives, and are
now published for the first time. My aboriginal informants
received me as one of the initiated men of their own people,
because they were aware that I knew all the secrets of the initiation
ceremonies of the Wirraidyuri and Kamilaroi tribes.
The chapter on “ Mythology ” contains a number of strange
superstitions and legendary tales current among the natives of
New South Wales and Victoria, which is, I think, the most repre-
sentative collation which has yet been published, giving the reader
a peep into Aboriginal Wonderland.
Although there are no maps attached to the present treatise, I
beg to refer the reader to the comprehensive maps of Australia
printed in some of the articles enumerated in the “ Bibliography.”
For example, in the treatise mentioned in No. 37 there is a map
of the whole of Australia, accurately showing the boundaries of
the different organisations, as well as the boundary lines separating
those tribes who practice phallic mutilations from those who do
not. The article No. 10 in the “ Bibliography” contains a map
of Victoria, illustrating the different social organisations in that
State. In No. 42 there is a map of New South Wales in which
are marked the territorial limits of each type of initiation cere-
monies. Under other numbers there are maps of parts of South
Australia, Queensland and the Northern Territory.


In the Appendix will be found a few important items of
aboriginal custom and folklore, which it has been thought well to
keep by themselves. They are of a purely scientific character and
are not suitable for perusal by the general reader.
It will perhaps be well to mention that, in previous contribu-
tions to various Societies, I have comprehensively dealt with
aboriginal rock-pictures, languages, the bora and several other
initiation ceremonies, bullroarers, message-sticks, and native
customs generally. The sociology of many of the tribes of Queens-
land, the Northern Territory and Western Australia, have also
received their full share of attention from me in other publications.
In the table of “ Bibliography ” the titles of the various treatises
referred to have been enumerated, all of which bear the “ hall-
mark ” of publication by the leading anthropological institutions
of America and Europe. By means of these institutions, my
works have been distributed into the libraries of most of the
learned Societies throughout the world.
I have on hand a considerable number of separate copies of each
of the treatises enumerated in the “Bibliography.” Sets contain-
ing all or most of the articles mentioned, bound together as a
volume, are for sale at a moderate price by the author.
Only those who are acquainted with the difficulties attendant
upon the collection of information from uncultivated races, possess-
ing no literature of any kind, can understand the labour and time
and patience which have been expended in gathering the materials
for the preparation of this book. And last, but perhaps not least,
may be mentioned the long and laborious journeyings by rail, by
coach and otherwise over New South Wales and Victoria, during
many years, which have cost the author large sums of money.
Parramatta, New South Wales,
23rd March , 1905.


CONTENTS
Introduction...
System of Spelling
Sociology of the Mgeumba Tribes
Sociology of the Kamilaroi Tribes
Sociology of the Thurrawal Tribes
Childbirth
The Ngeumba Language
Ngeumba Vocabulary
Language of the Thangatti Tribe
Thangatti Vocabulary
Pirrimbir or Avenging Expedition
Explanation of Illustration
The Search for Food
Food Regulations, Totems, etc.
Mumbirbirri or Scarring the Body
Some Burial and Mourning Customs
Sorcery or Magic
Aboriginal Astronomy—the Zodiac
Sociology of the Tribes of Western Victoria
Sociology of the Tribes of Eastern Victoria
Language of Mothers-in-law
The Wonggoa or Wongupka Ceremony
The Tyibbauga Ceremony
The Dolgarrity Ceremony
Notes on the Initiation of Girls
Aboriginal Mythology and Folklore ...
Baiame ...
Dhurramulan
Miscellaneous Superstitions
Dyillagamberra the Rainmaker
How the Wongaibon obtained Fire
How Water was obtained by the Kamilaroi People
The Dhiel and her Water-trough...
Yandhangga
The Moon and its Halo
Two Young Men and the Moon
The Yaroma
W allanthagang
The Wawi and the Song-makers...
Page


Achievements of the Brambambults
1. The Ngindyal...
2. Ngaut-ngaut ...
3. Wirnbullain ...
4. Dyuni-dyunity
5. Gartuk
Appendix
Bite of Subincision
Additional Folklore
The Bat, his Wives and the Native Cat
Origin of Tulliwaka Ana-branch
CORRIGENDA
Page 3, line 4, strike out the words “ at end of this article.”
~ 8, in 'table 11., the word waugue is erroneously printed wangue.
„ 10, all the words from lines 16 to 31 inclusive, must be struck out,
owing to slight clerical errors in transcribing from the original
draft manuscript.
„ 23, line 8 from bottom, for dhinua, read dhinna.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
In the following bibliography are given the titles of ninety
five different articles written by me on the ethnology of
the Australian aborigines, during the past ten years. The
original articles enumerated were contributed to some of
the leading Societies in Europe, America and Australia,
who open their Journals to anthropological subjects. The
names of the different Societies are given in the list, with
the volumes and pages where my papers appear. In giving
the customs of the Australian aborigines the widest publi-
cation, my aim throughout has been to induce a student
here and there to embark upon this interesting work.
American Anthropologist, issued by the Anthropological
Society at Washington, U.S.A.: —
1. The Bunan Ceremony of New South Wales, Vol. ix., pp. 327
- 344, plate vi.
2. Australian Class Systems, Vol. ix., pp. 411 —416.
3. Australian Class Systems, Vol. x., pp. 345 347.
4. Initiation Ceremonies of the Wiradjuri Tribes, Vol. m., N.S.,
pp. 337 - 341, with plate.
5. Message Sticks used by the Australian Aborigines, VoL x.,
pp. 288 297, with plate.
6. Australian Rock Pictures, Vol. viil, pp. 268 - 278, with plates.
7. Australian Ground and Tree Drawings, Vol. ix., pp. 33 49,
with plate.
8. The Toara Ceremony of the Dippil Tribes, Queensland, Vol.
ii., N.S., pp. 139-144.
9. Native Tribes of Queensland, Vol. i., N.S., pp. 595 - 597.
10. The Victorian Aborigines : their initiation Ceremonies and
Divisional Systems, Yol. xi., pp. 325—313, with map of Victoria.
11. Native Languages of Victoria, Vol. v., N.S., pp. 380 et seq.


12. Wombya Organisation, Northern Territory, Vol. ii., N.S., pp.
494 501, with map.
IS. Divisions of Some Western Australian Tribes, Vol. n., N.S.,
pp. 185 - 187.
Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales: —
14. Burbung, etc., of the Murrumbidgee Tribes, Vol. xxxi., pp.
11l -153.
15. Group Divisions and Initiation Ceremonies of the Barkunjee
Tribes, Vol. xxxii., pp. 240 —250, with map.
16. Aboriginal Bora held at Gundabloui in 1894, Vol. xxviii.,
pp. 98- 129, with plates.
17. Additional Remarks on the Bora, Vol. xxx., pp. 211 - 213.
18. Rock Paintings by the Aborigines in Caves etc., Vol. xxvil.,
pp. 353 - 358, with plate and map.
19. The Thurrawal Language, Vol. xxxv., pp. 127 150.
20. Organisation, Language and Initiation Ceremonies of the
Aborigines of the South-east Coast of New South Wales,
Vol. xxxiv., pp. 262 281.
21. Marriage and Descent among the Australian Aborigines, Vol.
xxxiv., pp. 120 - 130.
22. Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,Vol.xxxi.,pp. 154-156.
23. Australian Divisional Systems, Vol. xxxn., pp. 66 - 87.
24. Stone Implements used by the Aborigines of New South Wales
Vol. xxviii., pp. 301 - 305, with plate.
25. Dharruk Language and Vocabulary, Vol. xxxv., pp. 155 - 160.
26. Aboriginal Fisheries at Brewarrina, Vol. xxxvn., pp. 146
156, with plates.
27. Rock Holes used by the Aborigines for Boiling Water, Vol.
xxxv., pp. 213 216, with illustration.
28. The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria, Vol. xxxvi ,pp. 70-106.
29. Notes on Some Dialects of Victoria, Vol. xxxvn., pp. 243-253.
30. Languages of Some Native Tribes of Queensland, etc., Vol.
xxxvi, pp. 135 190.
31. Divisions of Some North Queensland Tribes, Vol. xxxn., pp
250-255. <


32. Some Tribes of Cape York Peninsula, Queensland, Vol. xxxiv.,
pp. 131-135.
33. Divisions of Aboriginal Tribes, Queensland, Vol. xxxm., pp.
108 - 111.
24. Language of the Bungandity Tribe, South Australia, Vol.
xxxvii., pp. 59-74.
35. Divisions of Tribes in the Northern Territory, Vol. xxxm.,
pp. 111-114.
36. Some Aboriginal Tribes of Western Australia. Vol. xxxv., pp.
217 - 222.
Proceedings of tlie American Philosophical Society,
Philadelphia: —
37. Origin, Organisation and Ceremonies of the Australian
Aborigines, Vol. xxxix., pp. 556 - 578, with map of Australia.
38. Rock Carvings and Paintings of the Australian Aborigines,
Vol. xxxv., pp. 466-478, with plate.
39. Australian Rock Carvings, Vol. xxxvi., pp. 195 - 208 with
plate.
40. Aboriginal Rock Pictures in Queensland, Vol. xl., pp. 57-58.
41. Phallic Rites and Initiation Ceremonies of the South Aus-
tralian Aborigines, Vol. xxxix., pp. 622 - 638.
42. Initiation Ceremonies of Australian Tribes, Vol. xxxvn., pp.
54 - 68, with map of New South Wales.
43. The Gundungurra Language, Vol. XL., pp. 140 - 148.
44. Languages of New England Tribes, Vol. xlii., pp. 249 263.
45. Divisions of South Australian Aborigines, Vol. xxxix , pp.
78- 93 with map.
46. Divisions of Australian Tribes, Vol. xxxvi., pp. 151 154.
47. Divisions of North Australian Tribes, Vol. xxxviii., pp. 75-79.
48. The Nguttan Initiation Ceremony, Vol. xxxvn., pp. 69 —73.
49. Divisions of Queensland Aborigines, Vol. xxxvn., pp. 327
336 with map.
50. Native Tribes of Victoria : their Languages and Customs,
Vol. xliil, pp. 54-70.


51. Some Aboriginal Languages of Queensland, etc., Vol. xlii.,
pp. 179 - 188.
52. Native Tribes of Western Australia, Vol. xxxix., pp. 123-125.
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, London :
53. The Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes, Vol. xxv., pp. 295 -
318, with plates and maps.
54. The Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes, Vol. xxvi.,pp. 272-285.
55. The Keeparra Ceremony of Initiation, Vol. xxvi., pp. 320 -
337, with plate.
56. The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes, Vol. xxiv., pp. 411 - 417,
with plate.
57. The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes, Vol. xxv., pp. 318 - 339.
58. Languages of the Kamilaroi and other Aboriginal Tribes, with
Vocabularies, Vol. xxxm., pp. 259 - 283.
59. The Dhalgai Ceremony, Vol. xxvi., pp. 338-340.
60. Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Australian Aborigines,
Vol. xxvi, pp. 145 - 163, with plates.
61. Bullroarers used by the Australian Aborigines, Vol. xxvii.,
pp. 52 - 60, with plate.
62. Stone Cooking Holes used by the Australian Aborigines, Vol.
xxv , pp. 255 - 259, with plate.
63. Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Australian Aborigines,
Vol. xxvii , pp. 532 - 541, with plate.
64. Wirraidyuri and Other Languages of New South Wales, with
Vocabularies, Vol. xxxiv., July - December, 1904.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Brisbane: —
65. The Kamilaroi Class System of the Australian Aborigines,
Vol. x., pp. 18 - 34, with map.
66. The Thoorga and Yookumbill Languages, Vol. xvil, pp. 49-73.
67. Aboriginal Rock Pictures of Australia, Vol. x,, pp. 46 -70,
with plates.
68. Rock Pictures of the Australian Aborigines, Vol. XL, pp. 86
105, with plates.


69. Rock Carvings of the Australian Aborigines, Vol. xiv., pp.
9-11 with plate.
70. The Walloonggurra Ceremony, Vol. xv., pp. 67 -74.
71. The'Murrawin Ceremony, Vol. xvi., pp. 35 41.
72. Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of the Northern
Territory, Vol. xvi., pp. 69 - 90.
73. Murawarri and Other Australian Languages, Vol. xviii., pp.
52-68.
74. Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of Western
Australia, Vol. xix., pp. 45 - 72, with plates.
Bulletins de la Societe d’ Anthropologie de Paris :
75. Gravures et Peintures sur Rochers par les Aborigines d’Aus-
tralie, Tome ix., Serie iv., pp. 425 - 432, with plates.
76. Organisation Sociale des Tribus Aborigines de 1’ Australie,
Tome ii., Serie v., pp 415 - 419.
77. Le Langage Wailwan, Tome iv., Serie v., pp. 69 81.
78. Langage des Kurnu, etc., Tome v., Serie v., pp. 132 - 138.
Mitteilungen der Antliropologisclien Gesellschaft, Vienna:
79. Das Kumbainggeri, eine Eingeborenensprache von New South
Wales, Bd. xxxm., (1903), pp. 321 -328.
80. Die Sprache des Tyeddyuwurru-Stammes der Eingebornen
von Victoria, Bd. xxxiv., (1904), pp. 71-76.
81. Die Multyerra-Initiationszeremonie, Bd. xxxiv., (1904), pp.
77 - 83.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Queensland: —
82. Rock Carving of the Australian Aborigines, Vol. xn., pp.
97-98, with plate.
83. Aboriginal Customs in North Queensland, Vol. xm.,pp. 33-37.
84. The Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes, Vol. xvi., pp. 35-38.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria: —
85. Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes, Vol. x., N.S., pp. 137 173.
86. Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings, Vol. vil., N.S., pp.
143 - 156, with plates.


87. Wandarral of Clarence and Richmond Rivers Tribes, Vol. x.,
N.S., pp. 29-42.
88. Burbung of the Darkifiung Tribe, Yol. x , N.S., pp. 1-12.
89. Burbung of the New England Tribes, Yol. IX., N.S., pp. 120-136.
Journal of Transactions of the Victoria Institute, London:
90. Pictorial Art among the Australian Aborigines, Yol. xxxm.,
pp. 291-310, with plates.
Reports of the Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science: —
91. Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Aborigines of New South
Wales, with plates, Yol. vi., pp. 624- 637.
Report of the International Congress on Prehistoric Anthro-
pology and Archaeology, held at Paris in 1900 :
92. Les Indigenes d’ Australie, Compte Rendu xii., pp. 488 495.
This paper is also printed in “L’Anthropologie,” Yol. xm.,
pp. 233 - 240.
Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, Berlin: —
93. Language, Organisation and Initiation Ceremonies of the
Kogai Tribes of Queensland, Band xxxvi., (1904), pp. 28 - 38.
94. Language of the Wuddyawurru Tribe, Victoria, Band xxxvi.,
(1904), pp. 729- 734.
American Antiquarian, Chicago, U.S.A.: —
95. Thoorga and other Australian Languages, Yol. xxiv., pp.
101-106.


ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES
THE ABORIGINAL TRIBES
NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIA
Introduction.
In the following pages it is intended to supply a succinct
account of the social organisation, languages and general
customs of our aborigines. Throughout a comparatively
long life I have had special opportunities of studying the
habits of these people. I was born in the Australian bush
and black children were among my earliest playmates. In
my youth I was engaged in station pursuits in the back
blocks of New Sonth Wales and in the new country of
Queensland, when the blacks were in their pristine con-
dition. In later years I was employed by the Government
as a surveyor on the Barwon, Namoi, Castlereagli, and
other distant inland rivers, where I was continually in
contact with the sable sons and daughters of the soil.
Fortunately, also, I always liad a keen proclivity for
collecting all the information available in regard to their
numerous highly interesting customs. It so happened, too,
that I possessed some little capability for investigating the
grammatical structure of their language, being able to cope
with the difficulty of correctly hearing and correctly writing
down the native words. Owing to my familiarity with the
ways of blackfellows, I always received the complete con-
fidence of the chief men, and thus gained admission to their
secret meetings. Moreover, my training as a draftsman


enabled me to copy every description of aboriginal draw-
ings with great facility, for some of which I was awarded
the medal of this Society in 1894, ten years ago. And the
knowledge of astronomy which my profession demanded,
made it easy for me to identify with precision all the differ-
ent stars and stellar groups which figure so prominently in
the aboriginal folklore.
I have made the foregoing brief mention of my oppor-
tunities of acquiring some knowledge of aboriginal customs,
because the reader will readily understand that investiga-
tions of this character require many years of patient work
among the different tribes. It is essential that these
inquiries should be conducted by a person well acquainted
with the daily life of the people, and that his observation
should extend over a considerable period. I have adopted
none of the opinions nor followed any of the methods of
other Australian authors, but have struck out on my own
lines, recording all the new and interesting facts within
my reach. Possibly further researches may modify some
of my conclusions, but this is the inevitable lot of all
scientific pioneers.
I write not in the expectation of exhausting the subject
of the languages, ceremonies, and customs of the Australian
aborigines, but in the fervent hope of exciting the interest
and encouraging the investigation of younger students;
and trust that some foundations have been laid by me for
others to build upon, or to correct if necessary.
Attention is called to the fact that all the particulars
contained in every branch of the subject dealt with in this
treatise, have been collected by myself in the native camps,
without the assistance or suggestions of any man, and
therefore, I only am responsible for any defects which may
be discovered in studying the following pages. The present
work is only one of a series of similar treatises on various


ceremonies and customs of the Australian aborigines,
which I have published in the journals of some of the lead-
ing learned societies of Europe and America, as well as in
this country. See “ Bibliography ” at the end of this article.
The system of orthoepy adopted is that recommended by
the Royal Geographical Society, London, but a few ad-
ditional rules of spelling have been introduced by me, to
meet the requirements of the Australian pronunciation.
Eighteen letters of the English alphabet are sounded,
comprising thirteen consonants, namely : b, cl, g, h, k, l, m,
11, p, r, t, w, y, and five vowels: a, e, i, o, u.
As far as possible* vowels are unmarked, but in some
instances, to prevent ambiguity, the long sound of a, e, I, 5
and u are given as here represented. Where the short
sound of these vowels was otherwise doubtful, they are
marked thus : a, e, 6 and u.
It is frequently difficult to distinguish between the short
sound of a and that of u. A thick sound of iis occasionally
met with, which closely resembles the short sound of u or a.
B has an intermediate pronunciation between its proper
sonant sound and the surd sound of p. The two letters are
practically interchangeable.
G is hard in all cases, and often has the sound of k, with
which it is generally interchangeable.
W always commences a syllable or word, and has its
ordinary English sound. The sound of wh in our word
“what” has no equivalent in the native tongue.
Ncj at the beginning of a word or syllable lias a peculiar
nasal sound as in tlie English word “ singer.” If we alter
the syllabification of this word and write it “si-nger,” then
tlie ncj of “-nger” will represent the aboriginal sound. Or
if we take the expression “hang up” and change it into
“ha-ngup,” and then pronounce it so that the two syllables


melt into each other, the ng of “-ngup” will also be the
sound required. At the end of a syallable, ng has the sound
of ng in king.
The sound of the Spanish n frequently occurs. At the
beginning of a word or syllable it is given as ny, but when
terminating a word the Spanish letter n is used.
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “that,” with a slight
sound of d preceding it. Nh has likewise nearly the sound
of th in “that,” with a perceptible initial sound of the n.
Tli is frequently used at the commencement of a word
instead of dh , and in such cases an initial t sound is substi-
tuted for that of the d. Dh and th are generally inter-
changeable. At the beginning of a word our English sound
of d and t seldom occurs; it is generally pronounced dh or
th, in the way just explained.
A final h is guttural, resembling ch in the German word
“joch.”
Y at the commencement of a word or syllable preserves
its habitual sound.
R in general has a whirring sound, at other times it is
rolled, and occasionally the English value is assigned to it.
Tis interchangeable with cl, p with b, and g with k, in
most of the words in which these letters are used.
Ty or cly at the commencement of a syllable or word has
nearly the sound of the English j or Spanish ch, thus -tyci
in the word min-tya, closely resembles c ha or ja.
Some native words terminate with ty , as ‘kur-gaty,’ one
of the frogs. The last syllable of this word can be pro-
nounced exactly by assuming e to be added to y, making
it -gat-ye. Then commence articulating the word, includ-
ing the y, but stopping short without sounding the added e.
An accurate pronunciation can also be readily obtained by


substituting c h for the y, making it gatch, but omitting
the final hissing sound when pronouncing it.
Where double l occurs, it often closely resembles dl ; thus
‘kullu,’ a lizard, could be spelt ‘kudlu.’ The same thing
happens with double n; thus, the word ‘kunnai,’ a yam"
stick, could almost be pronounced ‘kudnai.’ M and b are
often interchangeable in the same way.
In several native words, an indistinct sound of r seems
to come before some consonants. Thus, it is difficult to
distinguish between thurl-tha and tliul-tha; between kur-
nu and ku-nu; between bur-al and burd-al. In modifying
the terminations of words for inflection or declension, r is
often changed into l.
When there are double consonants, the second one must
begin the following syllable.
Sociology of the Ngeumba Tribe.
In treating of the Ngeumba language in subsequent pages
the boundaries of this nation will be defined. I shall here
supply an abridged account of their social organisation,
which has never before been published.
The community is divided into two primary phratries,
called Ngurrawun and Mumbun, with their feminine
equivalents Ngurrawunga and Mumbunga. The Ngurrawun
phratry is again divided into two sections called Ippai and
Kumbo, and the Mumbun phratry into two, called Kubbi
and Murri. In each of these sections the names of the
women are slightly different from those of the men, as will
appear from the following tabular synopsis, which also
shows what sections can intermarry, and to what section
the resulting offspring belongs :
Table No. I.
Phratry Father Mother Son Daughter
, T ( Ippai Kubbitha Murri Matha
i gurrawun j£ um j3 o Matha Kubbi Kubbitha


Phratry
Father Mother
Daughter
Mfimhnn i Kubbi Ippatha Kumbo Butha
( Murri Butha Ippai Ippatha
It will be observed that the children inherit the name of
the other moiety of their mother’s phratry. Thus, if a
Ngurrawun man, of the section Ippai, marry a Mumbun
woman of the section Kubbitha, the offspring will be Mum-
bun the same as their mother, but they will not bear the
name of her section, but will take the name of the other
section in the Mumbun phratry—-the sons being called
Murri, and the daughters Matha. Again, the children
inherit their mother’s totem ; for example, if the mother be
a pelican, her sons and daughters will be pelicans also.
Like the people themselves, everything in the universe,
animate and inanimate, belongs to one or other of the two
phratries, Ngurrawun and Mumbun. And every individual
in the community, male and female alike, claims some
animal or plant or other object, as his dhingga or totem.
The totems of the Ngurrawun phratry are common to the
two sections, Ippai and Kumbo, of which it is composed ;
and the Mumbun totems are common to the sections Kubbi
and Murri.
Among the dhingga or totems of the Ngurrawun phratry
may be mentioned the following: —emu with dark head,
kangaroo, bandicoot, bilbai, pelican, opossum, swan, plain
turkey, mosquito, musk duck, porcupine, bat, dog, kurrea,
bulldog-ant, yellow-belly fish.
The undermentioned totemic names, or dhinggn , may be
enumerated as some of those belonging to the Mumbun
phratry : —emu with grey head, house-fly, tree iguana,
ground iguana, eaglehawk, scrub-turkey, shingleback, large
fish-hawk, wanggal or small night-jar, black duck, pada-
mellin, crow, carpet snake, codfish, bream.


Beside the pliratries, sections and totemic groups above
illustrated, the whole community is further divided into
what may, for convenience of reference, be called ‘castes.’
These castes regulate the camping or resting places of the
people under the shades of large trees in the vicinity of
water or elsewhere. The shadow thrown by the butt and
lower portion of a tree is called ‘ nhurrai ’; that cast by
the middle portion of the tree is ‘wau-gue’; whilst the
shade of the top of the tree, or outer margin of the shadow,
is ‘ winggu.’
Again, the men, women and children, whose prescribed
sitting places are in the butt and the middle shades of the
tree are called ‘ guai'mundlian,’ or sluggish blood, whilst
those who sit in the top or outside shade are designated
‘guaigulir,’ or active blood. This further bisection of the
community into Guaimundhun and Guaigulir, which may
be referred to as ‘ blood ’ divisions, has happened so long
ago that the natives have no explanation regarding it. The
Guaigulir people —those who occupy the ‘ winggu ’ or outer
margin of the shade —are supposed to keep a strict watch
for any game which may appear in sight, the approach of
friends or enemies, or anything which may require vigilance
in a native camp.
Eacli pliratry, and consequently every section and every
totemic group, contains men, women and children belong-
ing to the Guaimundhun and Guaigulir bloods, with their
respective shades. We have just seen that the Guaimun-
dhun people are subdivided into nhurrai and waugue, the
butt and the middle shades, whilst the Guaigulir folk are
intact in the winggu or distal shade. The additional regu-
lations which are brought into the laws of intermarriage
by the ‘blood’ and the ‘shade’ divisions are as follow: —
A Guaimiinclhun man of the butt shade marries a Guai-
gulir woman. He can also marry certain of the Guaimun-
N—Oct. 5, 1904.


dhun women in the middle shade. And a Guaimundhun
man of the middle shade marries a Guaigulir woman, and
certain of the Guaimundhuns of the butt shade. A Guai-
gulir man (who is always a winggu), can marry a Guai-
mundhun woman of the middle shade, and certain of the
women of the butt shade. No man or woman can marry
into his or her own personal shade ; for example, a nhurrai
cannot marry a nhurrai, nor a winggu a winggu.
We shall now deal with the descent of the progeny. It
will of course be borne in mind that the phratries, sections
and totems are the principal elements in the laws of mar-
riage and descent, and that the castes of ‘blood’ and ‘shade’
are ramifications or extensions of them. The following
table will exhibit the intermarriage and descent of the
castes: —
Table No. II
Blood. Father Mother Offspring
Nhurrai Winggu Winggu
_ . „ Nhurrai Waugue Waugue
Guaimundhun < _ T
Waugue Winggu Winggu
Wangue Nhurrai Nliurrai
Guaigulir \ Win S« u Wangue Waugue
' Winggu Nhurrai Nhurrai
It will be observed that a Guaimundhun mother produces
Guaimundhun children, who moreover take their mother’s
shade, whether nhurrai or waugue. A Guaigulir mother
produces Guaigulir children, belonging to the winggu shade.
Going back to Table No. I. at an earlier page, we see
that Ippai marries Kubbitha, who is his tabular or ‘ regular’
spouse; but he has the right, in certain cases, of taking a
Matlia maiden instead, which may be distinguished as an
irregular or ‘ alternative ’ marriage. He can also, subject
to prescribed restrictions, have an Ippatha allotted to him
as his wife, and such a marriage may be designated ‘rare.’


Before a union can take place under the ‘ regular ’ law, or
under the ‘alternative’ regulations, or under those which
I have called ‘rare,’ the genealogy of the contracting parties
is subjected to the test which I shall now endeavour to
illustrate.
In examining Table No. I. it is found that the children
of a brother and those of a sister belong to different phratries
sections and totems. Let us assume that Ippai A 1 bandi-
coot, marries Kubbitha iguana ; then his sons and daughters
will be Mumbun and Mumbunga —Murris and Mathas —
iguanas. His sister, Ippatlia 81, will marry, say, Kubbi,
padamellin, and her children will be Ngurrawun and Ngurra-
wunga —Kumbos and Buthas —bandicoots. As the children
take their mother’s totem, the padamellin of her husband
is not inherited by Ippatha’s children.
Diagram of Genealogies.
Tnnnl A 1
-Ippatlia B1
-Butlia B
-Ippatha I)
IppaiD
Murri A-
Ippai E-
Ippatlia E
Brother and Sister
-Matlia A
-Kubbi 0
Kubbitha 0
-
Let us call the Murris and Mathas of the last example A,
and the Kumbos and Butlias B. According to Table No. 1,
Murri marries Butlia, but a Murri A cannot marry a
Butha B. She is mia to him, and he is mia to her. By
continuing the genealogy for another generation, Murri’s
sister, Matha A, iguana, marries some other Kumbo and
has a son, Kubbi C. Butha B, bandicoot, marries another
Murri, and has a daughter, Ippatlia D. Then Kubbi 0 can
marry Ippatlia D, and by an interchange of sisters, Ippai D
can marry Kubbitha 0. He is mumma to her and she to
him. They are what we call second cousins, being a
brother’s daughter’s child and a sister’s daughter’s child.
If we had taken a brother’s son’s child and a sister’s son’s


child, the result would have been the same. Such a mar-
riage is ‘regular’ or ‘direct,’ as in Table No. 1., and could
not be disturbed by the totemic regulations, because the
parties could not possibly belong to the same totem.
Instead of tracing the descent through Ippai’s daughter,
Matha A, as above, let us suppose that Ippai’s son, Murri A,
has married some strange Butlia and produced a son, Ippai
E, then such a son could marry Ippatha D of the last para-
graph. This would be a brother’s son’s child marrying a
sister’s daughter’s child ; or a brother’s daughter’s child
marrying a sister’s son’s child. This constitutes the ‘rare’
marriage spoken of in a previous page. In this case it
would be possible, in certain circumstances, for the totems
of the parties to be the same, and therefore the union
would not be sanctioned.
Ippai’s grandson, Ippai E, has still another source of
getting a wife. Ippai’s maternal uncle, Kumbo, has a
daughter Kubbitha, who marries, and produces Matha F,
(not shown on diagram). Then Ippai E can marry Matha F.
The brother of Matha F could in like manner marry the
sister of Ippai E. That is, a man’s grandchild marries his
uncle’s grandchild. This is what I have called the ‘alter-
native ’ marriage ; and like the first, it is free from totemic
interference.
A wife for Kubbi 0 could also be found by following the
descent of his mother’s mother’s relatives, or his mother’s
father’s relatives, or his father’s mother’s relatives, in an
analogous manner. Again, Kubbi 0 could marry a Matha
of the proper lineage. In other words, a man of any given
division can marry into one or other of the three remaining
sections, and also into his own.
lii tlie above examples I have traced the genealogy
through the grandfather, Ippai Al, down to Kubbi 0, and


have shown the marriages of his offspring with that of liis
sister Ippatlia 81. But if we go over to the other side of
the diagram, and run Ippai D back to his grandmother,
Ippatha 81, it becomes evident that Ippai D marries his
mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s daughter, Kubbitlia
G, for the ‘ direct ’ alliance; and he mates with his mother’s
mother’s brother’s son’s daughter, Ippatha E, for the ‘ rare’
marriage. The proper husband for any given woman is
ascertained in the same manner, and need not be further
exemplified.
In studying the foregoing rules and the diagram, it will
be manifest that any individual’s pedigree, when followed
back to the grand parents, is subject to several variations.
We can either trace a man back, (1) to his father’s father;
(2) to his father’s mother ; (3) to his mother’s father ; or,
(4) to his mother’s mother. From that point the descent
is followed out as in the examples given above. It is for
the elders of the tribe to settle what particular genealogy
will be adopted when choosing a husband or wife for any
given person. Previous family marriages and a number of
other matters are considered in arranging this point.
Although polygamy is practised, a man is not allowed a
wife from each of the four lines of descent. If more than
one wife is allotted, they must belong to the same lineage
as the first, if available.
The rules of intermarriage and descent illustrated in the
preceding six paragraphs, were briefly outlined by me in
1900, when treating the Ivamilaroi laws, in which I showed
that a man marries the daughter of his father’s father’s
sister’s son. 1
It has not been thought necessary to encumber the fore-
going examples with the ‘blood’ and the ‘shade’ distinc-
1 “Marriage and Descent among the Australian Aborigines/’ Journ.
Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Yol. xxxiv., page 126.


tions, which are peristent in them all, and must be taken
into account in arranging a marriage. There are also
regulations depending upon the totems of the affianced
parties, and upon whether they are the elder or younger
members of the family. The uncles of the parties are, in
all cases, among the principal personages in conducting the
betrothals.
Sometimes a man or woman belonging to a distant tribe,
where the phratries and sections have different names, will
come and settle among the Ngeumba people. In such a
case a conjugal mate would be found by means of the
totemic, blood, and shade records of the stranger.
Sociology of the Kamilaroi Tribe.
The Kamilaroi territory may be approximately described
as extending from Jerry’s Plains on the Hunter River as
far as Walgett and Mungindi on the Barwon, taking in the
greater part of the basins of the Namoi and Gwydir rivers.
They are divided into four sections which have the same
names as those of the Ngeumba, but the names of the
phratries are Kuppathin and Dhilbai, with their feminine
equivalents Kuppathingun and Dhilbaigun, as shown in the
following table. Kuppathin is equal to the Ngeumba
Ngurrawun and Dhilbai equals Mumbun.
Phratry Father Mother Son Daughter
tt .nniFn J !pP ai Kubbitha Murri Matha
jvuppainin ( Kumbo Matha Kllbbi Kubbitha
TYhiihni i Ku kbi Ippatha Kumbo Butha
ct ( Murri Butha Ippai Ippatha
All that has been said in preceding pages of this article
respecting the Ngeumba subdivisions into ‘ shade ’ and
‘blood’ castes, totems, ‘alternative’ and ‘rare’ marriages,
apply to the Kamilaroi, and will not be repeated.
Rev. Wm. Ridley, b.a., was the first to report the names
of the four sections of the Kamilaroi, with tfieir rules of


intermarriage and the descent of the progeny. Mr. Geo.
Bridgman, Superintendent of Aboriginal Stations at Mackay
in Queensland reported to Mr. R. B. Smyth, as follows: —
“All blacks are divided into two classes, irrespective of
tribe or locality. These are Youngaroo and Wootaroo. The
Youngaroo are subdivided into Gurgila and Bunbia, and
Wootaroo into Coobaroo and Woongoo. . . . Children
belong to the mother’s primary division, but to the other
subdivision. . . The blacks divide everything into these
classes —alligators, kangaroos, sun, moon, the constellations,
trees, and plants. . . . An intelligent native who has
been living with the Kamilaroi people, says the Kamilaroi
system is the same as that here in Mackay.” 1
Since the time of Mr. Ridley and Mr. Bridgman down to
the present day, nothing important has been added to our
knowledge of the Kamilaroi organisation. Neither of the
gentlemen mentioned, nor any writers who have copied
them, have attempted to supply the minute details of its
structure, which are now published by me for the first time.
In short the ‘ blood ’ and ‘ shade ’ subdivisions have never
been even mentioned by any writer until now. The
feminine forms of the phratry names are also new.
Tlie initiation ceremonies of the Kamilaroi had been, if
possible, even still more neglected until my description of
the Bora appeared. 2 Little or nothing was known of the
speech of this tribe until the publication of my grammar
and vocabulary last year. 3 Until described in the present
treatise, nothing at all has ever been written in regard to
the ceremonies connected with scarring the bodies of the
1 “Aborigines of Victoria,” by R. B. Smyth, (Melbourne 1878), Vol. i.,
p. 91.
2 “The Bora or Initiation Ceremonies of the Kamilaroi Tribes,” Proc.
Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. ix., (N.S.) pp. 13V-173.
3 “ Languages of the Kamilaroi, etc.,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol. xxxin.
pp. 259 - 283. See also my “ Kawambarai Language,” a dialect of the
Kamilaroi, Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi., pp. 145 - 147.


men and women. A secret language in use among the
initiated men of the Kamilaroi tribe was reported by me,
with vocabulary in 1902. 1
Sociology of the Thurrawal and kindred Tribes.
In an article contributed to this Society in 1900, 2 and in
other publications, I have described the social organisation,
with the laws of intermarriage and descent, among all the
native tribes inhabiting the south-east coast of New South
Wales from the Hawkesbury River to Cape Howe. The
same organisation extends onward among the tribes
throughout the eastern half of Victoria.
In later pages of the present work I am supplying addit-
ional information on the social structure of other commu-
nities, under the separate heads of ‘ Sociology of the tribes
of Western Victoria,’ and ‘Sociology of the tribes of Eastern
Victoria,’ to which the reader is referred.
Among many of the tribes in the Northern Territory of
South Australia, in the north-west corner of Queensland,
and in the northern portion of Western Australia, there
are eight intermarrying divisions. Although the tribes
in the respective regions mentioned do not fall within the
scope of the present treatise, yet I desire to state, in pass-
ing, that there is no great difference between their organi-
zation and that of the Ngeumba, Kamilaroi, or Thurrawal,
as well as that of the tribes of Western and Eastern
Victoria. In all of them the selection of a wife or husband
is determined through the grand parents of the parties to
the matrimonial alliance. In some tribes the totem is
perpetuated through the men, whilst in others it descends
through the women.
1 Journ. Eoy. Soc. N.S.Wales, Yol. xxxvi., pp. 159 - 160.
* Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Yol. xxxiv., pp. 263, 264.


Early in the year 1898, 1 I reported the eight sections of
the Wom-by'-a tribe, in the Northern Territory, with their
laws of marriage and succession. Again, in 1900, in deal-
ing with the same eight sections, I stated that “ a man
marries the daughter of his father’s father’s sister’s son, or
the daughter of his mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter.” 2
The direct, alternative and rare laws of marriage prevalent
in tne Wombya and kindred tribes, were shown to follow
the same rules as in the Kamilaroi and Parnkalla com-
munities. On that occasion (1900), I also stated : “owing
to the different methods of subdividing the tribes, the
details of the rules regulating intermarriage and descent,
are somewhat varied in each system, but the fundamental
principles are the same in them all.” 3
Childbirth.
While obtaining the particulars given under this heading,
I was assisted by the wife of a station manager in the
north-western districts of New South Wales. This lady
had been a trained nurse and had witnessed several cases
of accouchement among the black women on the station
where she resided.
When a woman approaches the period of labour, she is
taken charge of by one or two old female relatives, but
not by her own mother, and is conducted to the locality
which has been assigned as the place where that particular
woman must give birth to her offspring. Certain spots are
fixed by the elders for women to repair to in such cases,
and when the expected event draws near, the woman’s
tribe proceeds to the neighbourhood of that place and
1 “ Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Phila-
delphia, Yol. xxxvii., pp. 151 - 154.
a “ Marriage and Descent among the Australian Aborigines,” Journ.
Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Yol. xxxiv., p. 126. See also my “ Ethnological
Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of the Northern Territory,” Queensland
Geographical Journal, (1901) Yol. xvi., pp, 69-90.
3 Op. cit., p. 121.


camps there. When the time arrives, the woman who has
charge of the patient presses her hands along the back from
above downwards, and continues this treatment until the
child is born. The umbilical cord is cut quite six inches
away from the infant’s belly, the severance being effected
with a sharp flint or other suitable stone. It is then bound
tightly round and round with string made from human hair
or the fur of animals. The umbilicus, being about six
inches in length as above stated, is doubled back into a
circular loop, the cut end being then tied to the point of
origin at the navel. This loop of the umbilicus is laid flat
on the child’s belly, extending upwards towards the chest.
A string, made of animal fur, is then passed through the
loop, and is carried up around the nape of the child’s neck
and back again, when it is knotted, thus forming a sort of
sling or suspender for the umbilicus, to keep it in position.
The excised portion of the umbilical cord which protrudes
from the mother is now placed in the mouth of the infant,
into which the nurse squeezes as much blood along the
tube of the cord, as the child can swallow without being
sick. An infant is never fed from the breast for about
three days after its birth —the dose of blood which it drinks
in the way described sufficing for that period. The natives
say that if a baby swallow plenty of blood from the umbilical
cord it will not require so much food in later times. To
get away the afterbirth, the patient sits on her heels, with
her knees bent and her hands behind her back, the fingers
touching the ground. The old women present then stroke
the belly and back, commencing above the abdomen and
stroking downwards. The patient assists these manoeuvres
by moving her body and straining. As soon as the after-
birth is discharged, it is burnt in a fire or buried in the
ground. The attendant places the newly born infant in
warm sand or ashes to get it dry and clean, this treatment
serving the purpose of a bath. The child is subsequently


carefully greased all over with animal fat, but has no cloth-
ing of any kind. The mother is generally able to get about
in a day or two, when the infant is placed in a kind of
basket or girdle made of paper-bark, and is carried on its
mother’s hip. Certain foods are forbidden to women dur-
ing portions of their pregnancy and lactation.
Infanticide is common, and if twins be born, one of them
is almost invariably killed. The children of young unmar-
ried girls are usually killed a few months after they are
born, by the old women tilling their mouths and nostrils
with sand. They are opened along the belly and the
intestines removed, and the leaves of a kind of Acacia are
put inside the body, after which they are cooked like any
other animal, and are eaten by the old men. A man can-
not go near the spot where a child has been born. This
prohibition is called guruan.
The Ngeumba Language.
The Ngeumba speaking people formerly occupied the
country from Brewarrina on the Darling River southerly
up the Bogan almost to Nyngan. They stretched thence
westerly beyond Cobar and Byrock, including the upper
portions of Mulga Creek and surrounding country.
The Wailwan tribe occupies the country to the north-
east of the Ngeumba, whilst the Wongaibon people adjoin
them on the south. The languages of both the tribes
referred to have already been published by me. 1
Nouns.
Nouns are subject to inflection for number, gender and case.
Number. —There are three numbers, the singular, dual
and plural. Womboin, a kangaroo; womboinbula, a couple
of kangaroos ; womboingirba, several kangaroos.
1 “ Le Langage Wailwan,” Bull. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris, tome iv., 5
Serie, pp. 69 - 81. “The Wongaibon Language,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S.
Wales, Vol. xxxvi., pp. 147 - 154.


Gender. —For the human family this is expressed by
different words, as, maie, a man; winnar, a woman. For
animals the gender is indicated by using a word signifying
‘male’ and ‘female,’ as, mundaiwa, a male; guninger, a
female. These words follow the name of the animal
spoken of, and are declined like other adjectives.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative,
genitive, instrumental, accusative, dative, and ablative.
There are two forms of the nominative. When the action
is described by an intransitive verb, as, winnar yuwunna,
the woman lies (on the ground), the noun is without flexion.
But when a transitive verb is used, the noun takes a
causative suffix, as, murrawandu wirmedhi, a kangaroo
scratched me.
Genitive —Murrawanggu dhun, a kangaroo’s tail. Maingu
bulga, a man’s boomerang.
Every object or article over which ownership can be
exercised is subject to inflection for person and number, as:
bulgadhi, my boomerang; bulganu, thy boomerang ; bulga-
lugu, his boomerang, and so on through the dual and plural,
which also contain ‘ inclusive ’ and ‘ exclusive ’ forms in
the first person.
If a couple or several articles be claimed, an infix is
inserted between the root of the noun and the possessive
affix, as : bulgambuladhi, my two boomerangs; bulgagir-
badlii, my several boomerangs.
Instrumental —When an instrument is the remote object
of. a transitive verb, it takes the same affix as the second
nominative which I have called the causative.
Ablative—Ngurandidlii, from my camp.
The dative is the same as the first nominative.


Adjectives.
Adjectives follow the nouns which they qualify, and are
subject to similar declensions for number and case, examples
of which are not considered necessary.
Comparison is made by positive assertions, as: bamir
nginna—bumba ngunnala, this is long —that is short.
When an adjective is used as a predicate, it can, by
adding the necessary suffixes, be converted into a verb,
and it then follows all the forms of conjugation of that
part of speech. Yuttadhu, I am good; yuttagedhu, or
more euphoniously, yuttadhuge, I was good. Yuttalagadhu,
I shall be good, and so on.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have number, person and case, and contain two
forms in the first person of the dual and plural, one of
which includes the person addressed, and the other excludes
him. I was the first author to report, in any of the
Australian States, these important grammatical forms.
The following is a list of the nominative, possessive and
objective pronouns in the singular:
Ist Person I, ngadhu My, ngaddhi Me, dhi
2nd ~ Thou, ngindu Mine, nginyu Thee, nu
3rd ~ He, ngillu His, ngigulu Him, lugu
There are also variations of the objective case of pro-
nouns, meaning ‘towards me,’ ‘away from me,’ ‘with me,’
and so on.
Interrogatives —Ngandi, who? Nganngundawa, whom
for? Nganguanni, whom belonging to? Widdyuwandu
ngulagai, what is the matter with thee ? Minya, what ?
Minyanggo, what for? Minyunguri, what from? Min-
yunggalmai, how many ?
Demonstratives —Nginua,this. Nginnilla, there. Ngunna,
that. Ngunnala, that, (farther). Ngunnaingulu, that,


(farther still). Ngunnigal, that (yonder). Ngunnigal
mannha, that far away. Nginnage, that, (is the thing I
meant). Nginnillana, this is the very one. Nginyalanga,
that (is the one which was acted upon). Ngillu, this (did
it). Ngullu, that (did it). Ngunnalabu, that (may be it).
Most of these demonstratives can be declined for dual and
plural.
Verbs.
Verbs have number, person, tense and mood. There are
inclusive and exclusive forms in the first person of the dual
and plural. A contraction of the pronoun is added to the
root of the verb to show number and person. The follow-
ing is a short conjugation of the principal parts of the
aboriginal verb, Bumulli, to strike or beat:
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
( Ist Person I beat, Bumurradhu
Singular 2nd ~ Thou beatest, Bumurrandu
13rd ~ He beats, Bumurralu
f Ist Per incl ‘’ beat, Bumurrali
p ua l J '( We excl., beat, Bumurralina
] 2nd ~ You beat, Bumurrandubla
13rd ~ They beat, Bumurralainbula
f st p er {We inch, beat, Bumurrane
Plural l 1 We excl., beat, Bumurraninna
I 2nd ~ You beat, Bumurrandugal
l3sd ~ They beat, Bumurrawullugal
11l the past and future tenses of verbs there are variable
terminations to indicate that the act described was done
in the immediate, recent, or remote past; or that the act
will be performed in the proximate, or more or less distant
future; that there was, or shall be, a repetition or con-
tinuance of the action, and other modifications of the verbal
suffixes. These terminations remain the same for all the
persons of the singular, dual and plural, so that it will be


sufficient to give an example in the first person of the
singular number, in the past and future tenses:
in the past and future tenses:
Past Tense.
f I beat, indefinite,
| I beat this morning,
< I beat last night,
I beat all day,
_ I beat again,
Bumaidyu
Bumulngurriyedhu
Bumulngubbinyedliu
Bumulbenadhu
Bumulallidyadhu
Singular
Ist Per.
Future Tense.
' I shall beat, indefinite, Bumulagadhu
I shall beat in the morning, Bumulngurriagadhu
I shall beat all day, Bumulbenagadhu
I I shall beat in the evening, Bumulngaiagadhu
II shall beat in the night, Bumulngubbiagadhu
Singular
Ist Per.
Imperative.
Beat, Buma. Beat not, Kurria buma.
Conditional.
Perhaps I shall beat, Yama bumulagadhu.
Reflexive Mood.
lam beating myself, Bumadyillingedhu
I beat myself all day, Bumadyillibenadhu
I shall beat myself, Bumadyilliagadhu
Reciprocal Mood.
This modification of the verb is applied to those cases
where two or many persons reciprocally beat each other,
and is consequently limited to the dual and plural:
Dual We, excl., are beating each other, Bumullinnalina
Plural We, excl., are beating each other, Bumullinnaninna
Adverbs.
Following are a few of tlie more commonly used adverbs
which are generally placed after the verb: Yes, ngaua.
No, wongai. Now, dhallun. Yesterday, kumbirrabutthe.
To-morrow, kumbirrabutthalagu. To-day, dhallun. Pre-
sently (future), dhallumbuttlialagu. Just now (past),
dhullumbutthe. Some time ago, gumbirranabutthe. Long
ago, murradhal.


Some adverbs admit of inflexion for number, person and
tense, as: Where am I, wundhalawadhu. Where art thou,
wundhalawandu. Where is he, wundhalaguana. Where
are we, dual inclusive, wundhalawali. Where are you,
dual, wundhalawandubla. Where are you, plural, wun-
dhalawandugal.
When, wittyubara. Where, wundhala. How, widdyuwa.
Perhaps, ngakillaga. Ido not think so, wongaia. Certainly
or certain, kurrimunkan. How (was it done), widdyumin-
dumi.
Prepositions.
In front, murrubil. Behind, kukkirbil. Inside, kuru-
gunna. Round at the back (of something), ngunnungurra.
Between, bauwungga. At the side (of anything), ngunna-
langurra. Around (a tree, rock, etc.), ngunniguliai. Round
there, ngunnibingura. Up there, ngunnianya. Down there,
ngunnidyar. Outside, wagiga. Around (a person, as a
belt), guranggadha. This side, nginnangur. The other
side, ngunnaingur. Through, guruga. Over or across,
burabiddya. On the top, wampana. Underneath, ngunni-
dyingura. Up the river or stream, wambagirri. Down the
river, dhunggagulli.
Some prepositions can be inflected for number and person,
as : kukkiridhi, behind me ; kukkirrinu, behind thee ; kuk-
kirrilu, behind him; and so on through the remaining
numbers and persons.
Numerals.
One, mukku. Two, bulagar.
Ngeumba Vocabulary.
The vocabulary herewith contains about 460 words of the
Ngeumba language, collected by myself in the camps of the
aborigines. The words of a similar kind are grouped under
separate headings, as, Family Terms, the Human Body,


and so forth. It is hoped that this classification will be
more convenient for reference than if arranged in alphabetic
sequence. In all grammars and vocabularies minor inac-
curacies are of course inevitable —they will creep in despite
the greatest care.
Family Terms.
A man, maii
Husband, mamambon
Old man, bukaianggai
Very old man, kukun
Clever man, wirringin
Boy, butthudhul
Boy just walking, warm
Uninitiated youth, iramuru
Youth after ) . u ~
~ , >mm baddy urai
tooth out, j J
Initiate, wallui
Elder brother, murrumbai
Second brother, bauuma
Younger brother, kakirgilli
Elder sister, thathi
Younger sister, gidyurai
A woman, winnar
Old woman, kukaianggai
Woman during menses, miirpi
W if e, buttong
Small girl, bulkaligu
Young woman, marrianda
First menses, goanbon
Maid at puberty, wirringga
Father, papa
Father’s mother, dhurbaga
Mother, gunni
Mother’s mother, muki
A small child, warrudhul
All the people, men, ) . ,
j u-ij t mamgirba
women, and children ) °
All the initiates, wallugirba
All uninitiated, irramurrungirba
All the little girls, bulkalligiilka
The Human Body.
Head, bulla Knee-cap, pundai-kiwai
Top of head, kumbuda Knee, pundai
Forehead, ngulu Shin, biyu
Shin, biyu
Hair of head, bullandhur Foot, dhinna
Beard, yerrai Ankle, burrunggal
Eye, mil Heel, wurta
Nose, murudha Sinews, kaia
Back of neck, wuru Heart, gi
Throat, nuki Liver, guralu
Windpipe, nugal-nugal Blood, go-ai
Ear, wuttha Fat, gutthal
O—Oct. 5, 1904.


Cheeks, thuggal
Bone, ngimbi
Mouth, ngurndal
Foreskin, ngulumbilla
Lips, willi
Penis, mundai
Teeth, wirra
Gians penis, muru-un or nyirin
Testicles, burru
Tongue, thullai
Breast, female, 'ngammu
Navel, gindyer
Pubic hair, o-i
Sexual desire, giridyai
Afterbirth, ngalgir
Copulation, dhani [murra
Belly, purpibirti Masturbation, kuppa-kuppa-
Back, mukkulla Sodomy, ngindyi-dhani
Forearm, pi Noise made in copulating, mint
N oise made in copulating, mintya
Elbow, ngunnugu Semen, butthe or bai
Armpit, gilkin Emission, kalkinyi
Shoulder, kunna Vagina, munai
Shoulder-blade, pikkilgirra Labia major, willir
Hand, murra Clitoris, wukk
murra Clitoris, wukkur
Finger-nail, yulu Nymphse, ninti
Loins, gumbul Anus, ngi
Hip, milla Excrement, guna
Thigh, dhurrakur Urine,
Buttocks, murta V enereal,
mundai-bukkin
Inanimate Nature,
Sun, thunni Night, ngau-ap-a
Moon, giwir Morning, ngauo-guramba
Stars, girala Evening, ngauo-ngauapa
Orion’s belt, thurkallunggalka A splinter, dhurinyi
Pleiades, mullumullurga Hill, dhirrama
Sky, gunnunggulla Sand-hill, gumbogun
Light clouds, thurai Grass, , gurun
Storm clouds, gunda Leaves of trees, gira
Rain, yuru Bird’s nest, mutthe
Rainbow, yulubirki Egg, kuppugo
Dew, dhimbur Honey, warrungunna
Fog, pupilla A tell-tale, wurrimurra
Frost, dhukkur Grubinboxtree, butthu-gurm
dhukkur Grubinboxtree, butthu-gurnidya


Hail,
wirranggurra Grub in gum tree, bityulla
Water, kulli
Grub in ground, birka
Bloom on trees, gurawin
Earth, ground, dhukkun
Ground sun-heated, marawurra Pathway, dhinnakkal
Mud, windya
Stone, kurrul
Sand, gurrawir
Light, ngullun
Darkness, ngauo
Heat, wiwi
Cold, gunundai
Camp, ngura
Bark hut, kukur-ngunnu
West wind, gulyi-yeto
East wind, guru-annha
Whirlwind, burumuga'
Dust storm, miar
Mirage, kullu-kulli
Hole, munilla
Pipe-clay, rnunnha
Red ochre, kuppur
Oorroboree, dhfinkurrumunna
Fire, wi
Smoke, putthu
Flesh food, bunna
Vegetable food, kakullu
Thirst, bungkunnu
Day, dhirranba
Animals — Mammals.
Shadow, gual
Tail of animal, thun
Charcoal, guri
Ashes, num
nummur
Live coal, gurnun
Firestick, wirunggunni
Trumpeting of I •
r ° > muppammgga
emus, '
Top-knot feathers, ) Pikkun
o£ any bird >
Dog, mirri
Opossum, guragi
Kangaroo-rat, bulpu
Native cat, bubbilla
Bandicoot, guru
Small kangaroo-rat, gunnhur
Water-rat, pikkun
Bat, butthaiballa
Porcupine, thikkarpilla
Kangaroo, grey, wamboin
Kangaroo, red, murrawe
Summer, tharrialpa
Winter, tukkar
Echo, yulpur
Emu feathers, gurungunna
Feathers generally, bubil
Fur of opossum etc., mu-a
Spines of porcupine, thikkar
Scales of fish, wallugar
Skin of animal, yulai or bauar
Skin shed by snake, | .
/ , Igmggai
iguana, lizard etc. >
Shell of turtle or mussel, bukkai
Edge of water, bukki


Birds collectively, thibbi
Laughing jackass, kukuburra
Curlew, guribun
Crow, wakan
Mallee-hen, yunggai
Bustard, giimbal
Native companion, buralga
Pelican, birraia
Swan, dhundhu
Wood-duck, gunaru
Quail, buludhur
Eaglehawk, mul'-le-an
Emu, nguri
Young emu, ung-ga
Black and white ) , _ ,
y karuawar
magpie, '
Black magpie, wi-u
Black duck, burangun
Mopoke, thurku
Dove, kopatha
Death adder, burnu
Shingle-back lizard, kullu
Ground iguana, thuli
Tree iguana, gugar
Sleepy lizard, goarri
Carpet snake, yeppa
Locust, wirai
Blow-fly, nukui
Louse, kuppul
Nit of louse, dhinnil
House fly, burimul
Sugar ant, bippainbilla
Birds.
Reptiles.
Top-knot parrot, ko-ri-e
Nankeen, thiirkun
Musk duck, wukkarbutta
White crane, bullun
White-necked crane, murku
Grey crane, barra
Small night jar, dhi-ell
Swift, pil-luru
Peewee, gulititi
Fish-hawk, pipiddya
Galah parrot, gilla
Bowerbird, ngurambula
Brown snake, bullabului
Black snake, ngundaba
Tiger snake, wurrala
Jew lizard, kanni
Whip snake, dhuru
Turtle, wurrumba
Invertebrates.
Centipede, gilga
Jumper ant, bungai
Maggot, thurrabut
Grasshopper, murru
Spider, murramurraga
Mosquito, gam'ugin
Bronze-wing pigeon, yammar
Rosella parrot, dhenkutthenku
Brown hawk, burrawar
Larger kingfisher, birrimbirru
Smaller kingfisher, dhutul
Plover, bildadhirradhirra
Weejuggler, bunyan


Common ant, wunggai Scorpion, ganigandhera
Butterfly, bullabulla Greenhead ant, buddyar
Bulldog ant, buru-ingga Mussel, bukkady
bukkadyerra
Trees and Plants.
Any tree, gugur
Bark of any tree, munggar
Squeaking tree, muppuran
Wild willow, wilgar
Myall, buri
W attle, billibar
Pine tree, kurrabar
Oak, billar
Red gum tree, gungun
Grey box, girral
Sandalwood, kuttawu
Weapons,
Stone tomahawk, wukkar
Handle of ditto, birra
Stone chisel, kainda
Wooden vessel, gulkur
Jagged spear, mura
Yamstick, kunnai
Reed spear, thirril
Spear-lever, wammur
Spear shield, miirka
Waddy shield, muttha-muttha
Fighting club, bundi
Hunting club, kuttyura
Boomerang, returning, bulka
Fighting boomerang, wukkara
Old man’s bag, bun'-ko
Woman’s bag, kulai
Large bag, bukitta
Gum of sandalwood, thukkabella
Whitewood, balkan
Beefwood, mumbo
Leopard wood, ngarkarri
Kurrajong, yumma
Hop bush, gidya
Gidyea, karri wan
Wild orange, mukil
Quandong tree, kwanda
Currant bush, warriar
Tar bush, thurramurra
Utensils , etc.
White brow-band, kambai
Red brow-band, ngulunggira
W aist-belt, gular
Nose-peg, murudhagi-ur
Girl’s apron, kumil
Whet-stone, kiwai
Stone knife, irrangin
Lower millstone, yauai
Upper millstone, murra
Skin cloak, burta
Bone needle, ki-ur
Sinews for sewing with, kaia
Net for catching emus, mukir
Propstick for net, bidyilli
String of nets, mau-irr
Lower string of net, kuruguru
Vessel for drinking with, kuttyul
Adjectives .
Alive,
Dead,
moan
ballune
Strong,
Afraid,
wallan
giandunna


Large, buppir Right,
Small, butthu Wrong,
Long or high, bamir Straight,
Short or low, bumba Crooked,
Good, yettama Tired,
Bad, wurrai Deep,
Wide, pikkaba Shallow,
Narrow, ngambur Blunt,
Jealous, guringtatai Sharp,
Dry, bun-kai Fat,
Wet, muttha Lean,
Lame, kutthiburra Hot,
Thirsty, bunkunna Cold,
Red, girrabarai Angry,
White, bunggaba Sleepy,
Black, bullui Glad,
Mad or crazy* bullawarrai Greedy,
Full, wirrambu Sick,
Empty, bintyi Stinking,
Half-full, some, gulangai Pregnant,
Quick, burra-burrai Sweet,
Slow, yarur Hard,
Blind, muki Soft,
Deaf, wuttha-muku
Verbs.
Die, ballune Stare at,
Eat, dhai Cut off,
Drink; ngurruni Hang up,
Snatch or grab, thunmanyi Put into,
Sleep, rauka Pull out
rauka Pull out of,
Stand, warrana Pull down,
Sit, winya Shut,
Touch, ngukkunma Open,
Hold, rnirna Cough,
Twist, warwainma Sneeze,
yetta
wumma
bintul
mrra-nirrai
yellamunnha
ngurambul
gunnai
muku
wirrandul
muruanda
ngimbi-ngimbi
wi-wi
gunundai
kulkai
rauka
kaia
kai-ili-dyai
giranggira
buka
ngurkambon
nguttha-ngutthai
wall an
thalpai
raukamirra
kukka
wambainma
guruga
thuranma
wirrima
nunpani
kunkaima
karra
thikkartuna


Spill, kalkinya
Pinch, nimma
Pull, wuru-unma
Carry, wamba
Grow, yurunnha
Startle, dhullagurra
Lie (animate thing, as a man),
yuwunna
Lie (inanimate thing, as a
boomerang), gurinya
Crawl, as a child, karanna
Put down, gurimanni
Pick up, mamanni
mamanni
Lift (if heavy), girramanni
Shake, as a tree, dhillama
Talk, ngeara
ngeara
Shout, gulaga or gulagunni
To call anyone, ngealugu
Walk, yananna
Run, bippuna
Bring, gaka
Take, ngullupi
Make, mulla
Break, gumma
Strike or beat, bumulli
Wound, mundhi
mundhunmai
Arise, barraka
Fall down, thuwatta
See, ngaga
Look, ngani
Hear, winnungga
Give, nguka
Sing, wukkaima
W eep, yungunna
Cook, wirrunggurri
Cough up anything, as from the
throat or lungs, yandyarra-murra
Shiver as with cold, bulpurrinya
Pierce, with a weapon, dhura
Hurt, girrimpathi'
girrimpathi'
Bend, nirraibunma
Make a hole, bun gaga
Sound or test, thurabia
Drawn, nunkann
nunkanni
Split, # wirpadhia
Chop, bindhea
Send, nginnakaka
Shine, dhallarbirra
Suck as a child, ngammuna
Suck a wound, wuruandirra
Suck through a reed j thurtirra
or the like J
Swim, yawinya
Bathe, gurungunna
Search for, gurrandirra
Spit, dhumbia
Spit or hiss towards!
an enemy orgame V wi-ung-kurra
as a spell j
Smell, buttha
Throw forcibly, gurarba
Pitch or heave, wannaga
Roast, wirrungg
wirrungga
Whistle, wilpadha
Pretend, warrimirra
Kiss, putharbattlia
Y omit, kapi
Dance, wakuttha
Corroboree, dhunkurrumurra
Dive, ngupungginya


Steal,
murnumulli
Sting,
dhuni
Request,
ngukatti
Hunt onground
[, munnabiddya
Blow with breath, bumbea
Hunt in trees,
wulkagirri
Climb,
wulkagirri
Go,
ngullubi
Conceal,
nunbimulli
Come,
dhaiana
Jump,
baragirri
Burn,
biinga
Laugh,
gindadha
Bite,
kuttha
Scratch,
birma
Fly, as a bird,
burrana
Tear with claw,
Forget,
kappia
nunbanna
To trim timber by j , ,,
J > bukkibiddha
chipping )
Language of the Thangatti Tribe.
The remnants of the aboriginal tribes who speak the
Than'-gat-ti language are located chiefly in the valley of
the Macleay River, on the north-east coast of New South
Wales. This language is a highly interesting one, both on
account of its euphonic and flowing intonation, and also
because it possesses strong affinities to the speech of the
great tribes of the Wirraidyuri and Kamilaroi, who occupy
extensive regions in Central New South Wales. The social
organisation of these people, and their ceremonies of initi-
ation, have been described by me elsewhere. 1
Adjoining the Thangatti on the north is the Kumbainggeri
tribe, a grammar and vocabulary of whose language was
contributed by me to the Anthropological Society at Vienna. 2
Nouns.
Nouns have number, gender and case.
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual and plural
numbers, as in the following example:—Womboin, a
kangaroo; wamboinbutobu, a couple of kangaroos ; wom-
boindyillong, several kangaroos.
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. xvi., pp. 35 - 41. Proc. Amer.
Philos. Soc., Yol. xxxvii., pp. 54-73, with map of N. S. Wales.
2 “ Das Kumbainggeri, eine Emgeborenensprachs von N. S. Wales,”
Mitteil. d. Anthrop. Gesellsch. in Wien, Bd. xxxm., (1903), p. 321 - 328.


Gender. —In the human family sex is denoted by differ-
ent words, as, guri, a man ; gulban, a woman ; guraman,
a boy; thukalbang or muna, a girl ; dhulle, a child of
either sex. Among animals, gender is distinguished by
words meaning “male” and “female,” placed after the
name of the creature, as, wille yimbukai, a male opossum;
wille nyukabang, a female opossum.
The principal cases are the nominative, causative, instru-
mental, genitive, accusative, dative and ablative.
Nominative. —This case merely names the subject, and
is without flexion, as, mirri, a dog; burragan, a boomerang;
yarre, a native bear. It is also used with an intransitive
verb, as, guri nyinne, a man sits.
Causative. —When a transitive verb is used the noun takes
a suffix, as, guri-nga burragan guru, a man a boomerang
threw. Mirri-nga wille-nga baiin, a dog an opossum bit.
Gulban-nga dhulle-nga bunyun, a woman a child beat (or hit).
Instrumental. —This case is the same as the causative,
as, gulban-nga mirri bunyun gunni-nga, a woman beat a
dog with a yamstick.
Genitive. —Guri-gudhun burragan, a man’s boomerang.
Gulban-gudhun gunni, a woman’s yamstick.
Accusative. —Frequently there is an inflexion like the
causative, as, Guri-nga yarre-nga bunyun, a man a bear hit.
It is generally the same as the nominative when followed
by the instrumental case, as illustrated above.
The dative and ablative cases also have distinguishing
postfixes, as, nguragu yung, to the camp go.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify, and
are similarly declined for number and case. They are com-
pared by making two positive statements, as, this is good
—that is bad.


Pronouns.
There are two forms of first person of the dual and plural
one in which the person or persons addressed are included
with the speaker, and another in which they are exclusive
of the speaker.
The following is a list of the pronouns in the nominative
case: —
f Ist Person I, Ngaia
Singular { 2nd ~ Thou, Nginda
13rd ~ He, Nong
Dual ISt Person { « walgU
Plural Ist Person £|^“ g algu
The genitive and accusative forms of the pronouns, in
the singular number only, are exhibited in the following
table: — -
Ist Person Mine, Dhalga Me, Ngiinya
2nd ~ Thine, Nginnumbo Thee, Nginna
3rd ~ His, Nonningbo Him, Nonninyang
The dual and plural are omitted, for the purpose of
saving space.
Interrogative pronouns.—Who, ngannung. Whose, ngan-
numbo. What, miang. What for, miangrai. How many,
minnlian.
Demonstrative pronouns.—This or here, dying. That or
there, ngandha. Those two, ngandambural. Those, plural,
ngandadyillong. The demonstratives are numerous and of
various forms, frequently taking the place of pronouns of
the third person, a circumstance which explains the great
diversity of the third personal pronouns in all the numbers.
Verbs.
There is a difference in the termination of the verb for
each tense. Any required person and number in each tense


can be shown by using the necessary pronoun from the
foregoing table.
An example of the conjugation of the singular number of
a verb will be sufficient: —
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
f Ist Person I sit, Ngaia nyinne
Singular <! 2nd ~ Thou sittest, Nginda nyinne
13rd ~ He sits, Nong nyinne
and so on through all the persons of the dual and plural.
Past Tense.
Singular Ist Person I sat, Ngaia nyinnimbin.
Future tense.
Singular Ist Person I will sit, Ngaia nyinniling
The imperative, conditional, reflexive, and reciprocal
forms of the verb will be omitted for want of space. The
adverbs, prepositions and interjections are also passed over
for the same reason.
The numerals are, Wadhu, one ; Buta-buta, two.
Including the Ngeumba and Thangatti grammars con-
tained in this treatise, I have now illustrated, wholly or in
part, the grammatical structure of fifty Australian dialects
and languages. This vast amount of work has been ren-
dered possible by the kindness of several learned Societies
in Australia, Europe, and America, who promptly published
the manuscript dealing with all these languages. It may
be added that I still have in my note-books the grammars
and vocabularies of several other native tongues, awaiting
an opportunity for publication.
Thangatti Vocabulary.
About 200 of the words in most common use in the
Thangatti language, are comprised in this vocabulary. I
have thought that placing groups of words of the same
character together under distinctive headings will prove


more acceptable for reference than the common method of
arranging the vocabulary alphabetically. Every word,
both in the grammar and the vocabulary, has been carefully
written down by me from the mouths of the aboriginal
speakers, whilst visiting them in their own camps.
The Family.
Man,
guri
Woman,
gulban
Youth,
murranggil
Girl, muna or thukalbang
Novitiate
murrawin
Mother,
nanggo
Small boy,
guraman
Child of either sex, dhulle
Father,
beanggo
Elder sister,
meanngun
Elder brother,
binghai
Younger sister,
weran
Younger brother, kumbiri
The Human Body.
Head, bo
Forehead, ngutu
Hair of head, murra
Beard, yerran
yerran
Eye-lash, dhilmirra
Eye, mi
Eye-brow, yindirri
Nose, ngummi
ngummurra
Throat, gugurra
Ear, binnagun
Mouth, gunnung
Lips, witting
Hand, yamma
Teeth, dhirra
Shoulder, mirka
Thigh, dhurra
Knee, gutung
Calf of leg, gunde
Foot, dhinna
Blood, gunggurra
Fat, bibban
Bone, dhirral
Penis, bunmai
Testicles, burru
Semen, buttumbun
Vulva, binnhun
Breast (female) ngubbung
Navel, wiri-wiri
Belly, bindyil
Tongue, dhuttufi
Copulation, yingmuddinge
Urine, gittuddhai
Anus, miri
Back, munu
Excrement, gunang
Venerea], wullan
Arm,
dhalburra


Sun,
Heat of sun,
Moon,
Stars,
Thunder,
Lightning,
Rain,
Rainbow,
Dog,
Frost,
Snow,
Ground,
Stone,
Sand,
Grass,
Light of day,
Darkness,
Heat,
Cold,
Moonlight,
Shadow,
Kangaroo,
Wallaroo,
Wombat,
Native bear.
Opossum,
Inanimate Nature.
dhunnui Camp, ngura
gittafl Bark hut, ngure
wupu Smoke, dhung
murungai Fire, wakai
mikki Water, ngaru
gurrea Food (flesh) buggara
dhulaweng Food (vegetable) wigai
munggul Day, burrafi
Day, burrafi
murragan Night, ngunmurra
burri Evening, bimmai
dhurru Hill, bukul
bune Flat rock, wullai
Flat rock, wullara
gurral Leaves of trees, wurui
burrafi Bird’s nest, gunde
ngunmurra Egg, gulgang
guyung Honey, gubbung
gurring Path, yurbn
dhallai Shadow of tree, muttong
muttong Tail of animal, dun
Mammals.
wamboifl
yindibai
ngulifi
Flying fox, bullawirri
Porcupine, nguggufi
Bandicoot, gumbung
Native cat, dulufi
Rock wallaby, burre
yarn
wille
Ringtail opossum, bukurri Flying squirrel, bunggo
Padamelon, munni Dog, mirri
mirn
Birds.
Emu, nguruin Peewee,
Laughing-jackass, gurruga Plover,
Lyre-bird, murran Swan,
gulirti
guyung Bough hut, wurrui-gurrilu
yigan Morning, ngundagango
butthurrafi
ngubbudhar


Wild turkey,
Scrub turkey,
Fishes.
Mullet,
Catfish,
gauang
willang
burro
Large eel,
Reptiles.
Carpet snake,
dhunggifl
Invertebrates.
Locust,
Blow-fly,
Maggot,
Louse,
Weapons.
Tomahawk
Koolamtn,
Yamstick,
Spear,
Spear-lever,
Adjectives.
Large,
Small,
wutubang
butyikunnung
gurarbang
Tall or long,
Low or short,
Good,
gulminbang
murrung
Bad,
nunnai
Quick,
Strong,
gunnung
ngullufi
Jealous,
ningin
Verbs.
Die,
Eat,
buttinne
Look,
Hear,
Give,
dhummone
wurrane
Stand,
ngumbullung White cockatoo, garebun
ngurwifi Eaglehawk. millamba
Eaglehawk. millambai
Silver eel, gurrigung
Crab, burainbaft
Perch, gubirra
Brown snake, bukkulla
goarra Hits of lice, dim min
burungun Mosquito, large, yira
diwin Mosquito, small, wur
Mosquito, small, wura
munyo Bee, yilberi
bubbung Spear-shield gunmer
gitti Waddy-shield, bungungga
gunni Club, murre
gummai Boomerang, ' burgan
wommera Fighting-hook, gupin
Hungry, giddhal
Afraid, murrar
Tired, watta
Angry, gutui
Sleepy, burungging
Greedy, yittifi
Stinking, buka
Pregnant, bindyaldyurai
ngurrene
nguya,


Sit,
nginninne
Sing,
baiarelo
Talk,
goi-ite
Weep,
wuteling
Walk,
munnene
Steal,
wudunggumeling
Pitch,
gute
Request,
ngimbutte
Throw,
bimbea
Climb,
wandati
Whistle,
wenbutti
Conceal,
dhurundeling
Pretend,
gurambin
Jump,
bullaia
Break,
gulbumina
Laugh,
gindene
Run,
gromatti
Suck,
ngumbene
Bring,
ngeta
Swim,
wirrungati
Take,
manda
Spit,
gute
Destroy,
gungulla
Smell,
bu-ye
Strike,
bungga
Vomit,
routine
Arise,
beni
Dance,
bete
Fall down,
dokkane
Dive,
dhurakutte
Scratch,
ginninmatti
Sting,
dhungin
Cough,
gunyumputti
Put,
yunda
Sneeze,
ginyilputti
Pirrimbir, or Avenging
Expedition.
Among the aborigines of the south-eastern districts of
New "South Wales, Pirrimbir is the name of a party
organised for the purpose of revenge. As this custom has
never been described, a short account of the manner of its
execution is now given, prepared from details gathered by
myself in the camps of the remnants of the native tribes.
When a man is killed by open violence by any of the
people of a hostile tribe, the relatives and fellow-tribesmen
of the deceased hold a council at tlie bambiHi, at which all
the old headmen and warriors assemble, painted with pipe-
clay on the forehead, breast and shoulders. Two of the
eldest men then sing one of their tribal dirges, the words
and music of which are as shown in “ Chant No. 1 ”
hereunder: —


Chant JCJI
j j jj -J-fec4 I 1 <sj~=^=p=
JiJtv Ttint-urn,- biL ltimrumrbjju duir-Tv tux-
fej j j Ji.n-j./Tj. y\ j\[ i
- ah, - - ga,
Chant 2j
n l«| y | 1 1 -r || ..
Yojv- cl-wcl l)er-vi-(pju ~nruxr lah . .. .
Chant JY?. 3
ijfCj.j oj ij jJi -> J ;
Kun-umrbvu hun?iunrbu ngo-dyit-ant-bcu ur-ar-ivn-bas
.Jb J JL o) I d . r II m
TujuT-cjamrba. - uuu dclJ
When this song has been droned for some time, the war-
riors get small portions of hair which have been cu,t from
the head of the deceased. Each man takes one of the
fragments of hair and plaits opossum fur around it, making
a small parcel about the thickness of a pencil, and a few
inches in length, called ‘ murur,’ and puts it away in a littfe
bag, called ‘guraga,’ which he uses for storing similar
charms.
At the same time the women are also mustered in the
camp, which is within sight of the bambilli , and sit down
in a convenient place, singing a ‘ nyunggoan ’ or weeping
song, of which “ Chant No. 2 ” above is an example.
After the above ceremonial lias been gone through, the
people patiently wait for a suitable opportunity to organize
a party to punish the individual who has caused the death


of their friend. Many months may pass over, or a year,
or even a longer period, but the matter is not forgotten.
When the time at length arrives, a party of warriors,
accompanied by some old men, go away into the enemies’
country. The chief features of the procedure in despatch-
ing such a hazardous expedition may be summarised as
follows: —
The band of men who are to perform this important duty
are selected from among the most active and fearless of
the relatives and friends of the man whose death they are
deputed to avenge. Some of them belong to the same
totem as the deceased, and the totems of others are those
with whom he could have intermarried. They are mustered
on one side of the camp, accompanied by the men who are
to lead them, and are decorated with red ochre and grease.
The best spears and other weapons are chosen and well
greased with human fat. They assume a crouching attitude
by bending their bodies at the haunches and knees, and
form into single fde. Bach man produces one of the
‘ mururs ’ already described, and holding it up in his hand,
mutters yah l yah! They now march away in their bent
position, in single file, till they get out of sight of the camp
where the women are. They then straighten their bodies
and walk on, every man joining in the song shown on
the music-block as “Chant No. 3,” which is repeated for
a short time. While singing, they gesticulate with their
weapons as if assaulting an enemy.
Shortly after the departure of the warriors, the women
pack up their belongings, singing a prescribed song as they
do so, and remove the camp to another locality, whither
they are conducted by the men who remain at home. At
this place which may be distinguished as the “ women’s
camp,” all the occupants keep quiet, in order that the
sorcerers or spies of the enemy may not suspect that a
revenge party has been sent out.
P—Oct. 5, 1904.


In the meantime the chosen band already described has
marched on till near sundown. They generally select a
depression between ridges, or a dry watercourse, as their
camping place for the night. Their fires are lit in small
excavations made by digging the ground with the end of a
nulla-nulla or other weapon to a depth of some inches,
and the earth thus removed is used to raise a bank around
the margin, as additional protection for the fire. Short
pieces of firewood are used, to fit in the holes, and when
finally leaving the place the fires are covered over. These
precautions are taken in order that any straggling blacks
belonging to the enemy may not observe the fires at a
distance.
Next morning a tree is selected in or adjacent to the
camp and is marked in the following manner: As many
men as there is room for squat on the ground close around
the butt of the tree, facing it, and mark the portion of the
bole within their reach, with their tomahawks. An equal
number of men mount, in a sitting posture, upon the
shoulders of the first, and mark the tree in the same way.
A third tier of men now sit upon the shoulders of the second
lot, and make their marks. By this time the bole of the
tree is marked up to about the height of a man. All the
markers now withdraw and a fresh detachment of men
stand around the tree and mark as high as they can reach.
The same number of men get astride the shoulders of the
first cordon and likewise mark the tree. Another tier of
men sit on the shoulders of the second tier and do the same.
The two tiers of seated men now jump down to the ground,
but the men who are standing around the base of the tree
remain in position. A fresh lot of men now mount with
their feet on the shoulders of the last mentioned, and
standing up, mark the bole as high as they can reach. The
tree is now marked about ten or twelve feet from the
ground, or even higher than that.


The whole ceremony is enacted for the purpose of making
the people of the hostile tribe powerless to screen the
predestined victim. This is why as many men as possible
join in marking the tree, muttering incantations during
the continuance of the proceedings. Some of the old
sorcerers rub the marks with a quartz crystal or bullroarer
to render the operation all the more efficacious and irresist-
ible. Other men jump around, putting their beard into
their mouth and biting it savagely.
At the conclusion of the tree-marking ceremony, pre-
parations are made for the resumption of the journey. Four
men are sent on ahead of the main contingent to reconnoitre,
and if all is well, to select the site of the night’s camp.
Having decided upon the best spot, two of them start back
to meet and inform their comrades, who in the meantime
are coming on. The other two travel forward several miles
from the selected camp, to examine the country and see
that no strangers are located anywhere in the vicinity.
Having satisfied themselves upon this point, they return
to the camping place and rejoin the party. On the follow-
ing morning, another tree is marked, and the scouts are
again sent ahead. The proceedings are substantially the
same for every day, unless delayed by rainy weather.
In this way the armed warriors journey on by easy stages
into the enemies’ territory, and endeavour to discover what
part of their hunting grounds they are then occupying.
When this information has been obtained by cautious track-
ing, listening and watching, a temporary bambilli is made
in an unfrequented place, where there is sufficient timber
to hide them from view, and here the avengers remain very
quietly. This bambilli is as close to their enemies’ camp
as they consider prudent —the distance being less in hilly
or scrubby country than in places which are open and level,
or are badly watered. Two or more strong, active men,


who are also supposed to be clever sorcerers, are then sent
forward as spies to report upon the precise place wdiere
the tribe they are in quest of is located. They hold up the
‘murur’ in‘their hand as they travel stealthily along,
because it is supposed to possess the magic power of guid-
ing them to the quarter of the camp occupied by the slayer.
While the spies are away on their dangerous task, the
other men who remain at the secret bambilli clear a small,
circular patch of ground, by scraping away the leaves,
small pieces of sticks, grass, loose stones, or the like, which
may be lying on the surface. For this purpose they gener-
ally select a place where there is a tree growing in the
centre, and clear the ground for several yards around it.
A tree with soft bark is preferred, such as a gum, grey
box or peppermint. With their stone tomahawks, or with
the sharp ends of their clubs, the men in the way already
described chop into the bark of the tree some rude marks,
such as lines and zig-zag devices, resembling the marks on
trees at ‘ Bunan ’ grounds or burying places, but not so
elaborate. [See illustration and descriptive letter-press.]
Somewhere within the clearing a hole or hollow place is
made in the ground, into which the men discharge the pro-
ducts of the emunctories, throw remains of food, or other
refuse. These precautions are taken lest a spirit or con-
jurer belonging to the enemy should become possessed of
any of their refuse, excreta, or the like, and thereby frus-
trate their designs. The men who are in charge of this
bambilli go out hunting to renovate their supply of food,
but they make as little noise as possible —their operations
being chiefly confined to fruits, reptiles, and game caught
with nets.
When the spies have ascertained the position of the pre-
destinated person in the hostile camp, and his surroundings,
they start back to their fellows without delay. On their


way thither they gather green grass and leafy twigs which
they fasten under their brow-bands and in their hair, to
show that they have been successful. When approaching
the secret camping place they mutter mu-u-u! and their
comrades answer them in the same way. On arriving in
sight they commence singing the following song: —
Wurrigangaia ngurabun bunnungga
Wurrigangaia gungoara muggu.
On reaching the camp, the men there spread out and form
a semicircle into which the messengers walk. Each man
composing the semicircle lias a spear in his hand, which he
holds in a nearly vertical position. An old man now asks
the spies if the enemies’ camp has been found, and on
receiving an affirmative reply, all the men bring down the
points of their spears upon the ground, with the exclama-
tion wirrh ! wirrh! This is illustrative of the manner in
which they mean to punish the offender. The old man
further enquires as regards the approximate number of
people in that camp, and when the answer is given the
spears are again brought down to the accompaniment of
wirrh ! wirrh ! as before. Queries are next made as to
the quarter of the camp their special enemy occupies—is
it easily got at —who camps near him, whereabouts is the
chief man camped, and so on, each reply being received
with the same exclamation and gestures.
If the actual slayer is not in the camp visited by the
spies, they endeavour to locate the sleeping place of one
of his brothers, or his father, or other near relative who
may be available, and such person is selected as tlie victim.
The spies then remove the twigs and grass out of their
hair and put them into the hole in the ground already
referred to. They also discharge into this hole as much
excrementitious matter as they wish to be relieved of,
covering it up with the earth which had been scooped out.


All the men around then turn their backs to the hole and
commence scratching backwards with their hands and feet
like fowls. They scrape all the loose rubbish off the surface
of the ground and continue backing towards the centre till
a small heap is raised over the excavation. Next, all the
men lie down with their heads toward this heap —as many
as possible having their heads resting upon it —and pretend
to sleep. This feigned repose is believed to have the same
exhilarating effect upon them as that produced by a cor-
roboree in ordinary circumstances. After a while, an old
man breaks the silence and enquires sorrowfully, “ Where
are all my grandchildren ?” This is an exaggerated way
of referring to the death they are about to avenge. It is
also symbolical of the sorrow of the doomed man’s friends,
when his death shall have been reported to them. All the
sleepers answer, “ i-i-i-wah /” in a very mournful tone.
All hands now get up, and jump around the tree and the
heap of rubbish, holding their noses between the thumb and
fingers, muttering ‘munyunga irrimbulbul.’ Each man
then goes away a few paces and provides himself with a
couple of sticks about three feet long, one in each hand, to
make believe he is very sick and unable to walk without
such support. These men turn their faces toward the
enemies’ camp and at every step they bring their walking
sticks to the ground, exclaiming ‘ nyeh! yukkal yukka!
These proceedings are supposed to work a spell upon the
adversary and render him powerless to defend himself.
The members of the party then lie down and rest till near
daylight next morning, when they all start quietly away
to fulfil their mission, being conducted by the men who
acted as spies. These two men have their heads ornamented
with grass and boughs as before, with a murur placed on
top, projecting over the forehead. A vine is bent through
the brow band and hair to keep the appendages firmly in


their place. This decoration is believed to appal the enemy
and make it impossible for him to escape. All the men
have their faces painted with pipeclay, so that they can
readily recognize each other during the encounter. They
also have leafy twigs fastened in front of their bodies and
faces, to prevent the enemy from observing them in the
darkness. On reaching the confines of the camp they halt
till daylight.
They have timed the approach of the dawn so well that
they have not long to wait. The first bird which hails the
morning is the signal for the assailants to surround the
hostile camp, some men branching off in single file round
one side and some going round in the opposite direction,
until they meet on the other side of the camp. While
marching round, they tramp heavily on the ground with
their feet. Let us assume that a magpie begins to sing.
All the men at once commence to imitate the call as they
start away. This will startle other large birds, whose
calls are also imitated. Little birds will chirp, dogs will
bark, and they are likewise mocked. This and the heavy
trampling of the men, gives the enemies the impression
that a numerous host is surrounding them, as they cannot
in their excitement distinguish between the calls of the
animals and those of the men. The assailants also shout
out the names of some of the principal stars which may
appear in the orient at the time. The planet Venus, if
then a morning star, is mentioned.
The ringleader or headman of the Pirrimbir party now
calls ont to the headman of the people in the camp, and
asks for the surrender of the man they wish to punish. He
uses the secret name only, so that the women and children
will not know who is doomed. The headman addressed
then also invokes some of the eastern stars, to wait a little,
while he shouts out the secret or Kuringal name of the


man who has been asked for, 1 and tells him to be ready to
defend himself.
The doomed man then catches his best shield and stands
out to parry the spears which are thrown at him by the
kinsmen of the deceased. All the spears intended for this
purpose have been charmed and anointed with human fat,
to render their course unerring and increase their power.
The spears must all be thrown from one direction, namely,
the front of the victim. Perhaps the man wards off a con-
siderable number of the missiles with little or no injury,
until one spear, which is therefore believed to have been
more specially greased than the rest, catches him in a
vital part, and he falls to the ground. Two or three of the
assailants then rush upon him and despatch him, and the
members of the surrounding cordon thereupon shout,
wirrh! wirrh!
The avengers quickly gather round the dead man and
with their stone knives flake off portions of skin and flesh
from the middle of the back down to the buttocks, from
the chest, and from the backs of the legs. This skinning
is not done all in one piece, but may be in flakes about the
size of a man’s hand. His kidney fat is also taken out.
As soon as the pieces of flesh are secured and placed in
their guraga bags, the invaders leave the camp hurriedly
and make their way back to their secret bambilli of the
previous night, where they roast and eat some of the flesh
of the murdered man. They now sing and jump around
the marked tree in a defiant manner, throwing their clubs
at it to exorcise its power, while they mutter “uml uml ”
This is believed to have the effect of preventing their
enemies from following them.
1 In 1896 I reported that every man has a secret name which is known
only to himself and the initiated men of the tribe. Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,
Yol. xxv., p. 310.


A start is then made upon the return journey, and they
all travel as speedily as possible, hunting as they go. They
return along the same route as they travelled out by, and
use the same camping places. They again dance and sing
around the marked trees for the purpose of exorcising all
the magic and potency which had been injected into them
when they were first marked. This restores them to their
position as mere ordinary trees of the forest, and makes
them of no service to the enemy. It also destroys the
spell of any adverse sorcerer.
On reaching within about a mile of the place where the
women and others were directed to make a new camp,
mentioned in an earlier page, the returning warriors con-
tinue muttering mu-u-uh l until they reach the vicinity of
the camping ground. Every man has bunches of leafy
twigs or green grass fastened in his brow-band, the same
as the spies already described, and the actual slayers are
in the lead. When the old men hear this sound they go
and meet the avengers and conduct them to the bambilli.
On the following morning the result of the expedition is
related very fully, and the portions of the victim’s body
which they have brought with them are produced.
Some green bushes are laid on a smouldering Are to make
a smoke, and the dead man’s skin, with the flesh attached,
is placed on top, and smoke-dried. Red ochre powder is
sprinkled over, or rubbed upon the skin to assist in drying
and preserving it. Each head-man takes a piece of the
preserved flesh and puts it into his guraga bag, which he
carries slung over his shoulder. These bags are never
brought into the camp where the women and children
reside, but are hung up on some convenient tree or sapling
at the bambilli on the confines of the camp, where none
but the initiated are allowed to consort.
At certain times the old head-men and warriors warm
the pieces of fleshy skin to make the fatty matter soft,


and rub it on their own bodies. Small portions of it are
occasionally eaten, to make the participants fearless and
vengeful. The men also rub the greasy skin on the noses,
eyes, and feet of their dogs, to make them good hunters
and unusually expert in discovering game. Spears,
boomerangs and clubs are similarly rubbed to increase the
force and accuracy of their flight when thrown at game,
or when used for punitive purposes.
It should be mentioned that when an early morning
attack, such as that particularised in the foregoing pages,
is made upon an individual, none of his fellow tribesmen
interfere, because they are probably all acquainted with
the facts of his having shed the blood of some man in
another neighbouring camp, and retributive justice must
take its course. When they hear the shouting of the
pirrimbir party, they sit up at their camp fires, or per-
haps spring to their feet, and take particular notice of
the man who strikes the fatal blow, because they know
that, sooner or later his blood, or that of a tribal brother,
will also be required by the relatives of his present victim.
Explanation of Illustrations.
The tree shewn in the illustrations was marked by a Pirrimbir
expedition in the Thoorga territory many years ago. It was first
pointed out to me by two old aborigines in 1899, who at the same
time gave me all the details and the songs of the Pirrimbir,
recorded in the foregoing pages.
It is a tall, green tree of the grey box species, measuring some
ten feet in girth at about a foot from the ground. It stands on
hard, stony ground, and probably the annual growth has been
slow, which accounts for the good preservation of the marks.
The tree is situated in the parish of Noorooma, county of
Dampier, and is about 300 or 400 yards westerly from the south-
west corner of Portion No. 381 of 40 acres in the said parish.


Photographs of a tree marked by Pirrimbir Warriors.


Fig. 1 shews the northern side of the tree, whilst Fig. 2 shews
the south-western side, because on these aspects of the tree the
marking appears more clearly than on the remaining sides. The
same kind of marking is continued all round the bole, and extends
up the tree to a height of about 14 feet.
In Fig. 2 the camera was placed nearer the tree than in Fig. 1,
to give a larger picture on account of being the shady side of the
tree. This is the first illustration of a Pirrimbir tree which has
ever been published. Such a tree has never been even mentioned
by any previous author.
The Search for Food.
The ordinary, everyday methods of searching for the
different kinds of game, fish, plant food, etc., practised by
Australian tribes have so often been described by several
writers, that they will be passed over in this paper. But
the following contrivances respecting the procuring of
food have been gathered by me among the aborigines in
various places in New South Wales and Victoria. In
describing the contrivances employed in hunting, the
State in which they were observed will be mentioned in
each instance. It will be noticed that the exogamous
divisions of the people, and their peculiar superstitions,
are scattered through these customs. A few examples
collected from the natives of the south-east coast and
other parts of New South Wales will be given first,
followed by some interesting items from the aborigines
of Victoria.
When the natives observe a whale, ‘murirra,’near the
the coast, pursued by “killers,” mananna, one of the old
men goes and lights fires at some little distance apart
along the shore, to attract the attention of the “killers.”
He then walks along from one fire to another, pretending
to be lame and helpless, leaning upon a stick in each
hand. This is supposed to excite the compassion of the


“ killers ” and induce them to chase the whale towards
that part of the shore in order to give the poor old man
some food. He occasionally calls out in a loud voice,
ga-ai! ga-ai! ga-ai! Dyundya waggarangga yerrimaran-
liurdyen, meaning “ Heigh-ho! That fish upon the shore
throw ye to me!
If the whale becomes helpless from the attack of the
“ killers ” and is washed up on the shore by the waves,
some other men, who have been hidden behind scrub or
rocks, make their appearance and run down and attack
the animal with their weapons. A messenger is also
despatched to all their friends and fellow-tribesmen in the
neighbourhood, inviting them to come and participate in
the feast.
The natives cut through the blubber and eat the animal’s
flesh. After the intestines have been removed, any
persons suffering from rheumatism or similar pains, go
and sit within the whale’s body and anoint themselves
with the fat, believing that they get relief by doing so.
It may be added that the “killers” eat only the tongue
and lips of the whale.
Catching pens or flsh-traps, ngullaungang , are made
across narrow, shallow inlets on the sea coast or along
the course of rivers. These are made by tying together
bundles of tea-tree, and laying them close together like a
wall across a creek or narrow shallow arm of the sea.
These walls or barricades are slightly above the surface
of the water. A gap or gateway is left in mid stream
so that the fish can pass through, and when a sufficient
number are enclosed, the gateway is blocked up by other
bundles of tea-tree, which have been prepared beforehand
for this purpose. If the pool is large, one or more smaller
portions of it are partitioned off in a similar manner,
into which the fish are driven by splashing the water,
and are thereby more easily caught by their pursuers.


Just within the gateway leading into the outer barri-
cade, one of the old men ties a little bag containing a
portion of the skin of a dead man. This is supposed to
cause the fish to flock into the enclosure in larger num-
bers than could be obtained otherwise without this
magical help.
If fishing is done by hook and line, these instruments
are often rubbed with a dead man’s skin or fat to make
them more effective. Mullet fat thrown in little pieces
on the waves in a lake or estuary, is supposed to make
the water smoother, while the people are engaged in
fishing.
When the men are fishing in canoes, or standing upon
rocks in the water, they break into small pieces crayfish,
sea-eggs, congewoi, or shell fish, and cast the fragments
on the water for the purpose of collecting schnapper.
As soon as they appear and commence eating the bait,
they are empaled with a spear made for the purpose.
Groper fish are caught in the same way.
Early in the morning, while the dew is on the trees,
the men and women take each a koolamin, ‘ bung'gulli,’
and go among the small honey-suckle trees,‘babir,’when
they are out in blossom. A native puts his koolamin
under one' of the bunches of bloom and shakes the twig,
which deposits the honey from flowers into the koolamin.
The dew dilutes the honey exuding from the blossoms,
and causes it to come away when they are shaken. Each
bunch of bloom is shaken in succession, and when a
sufficient quantity of honey has been collected, water is
added to form a pleasant beverage, which can be drunk
at any time during the day.
When a man went out hunting he took with him a
charmed wommera or spear-lever, the hook of which con-
sisted of a bone from a dead man’s arm, ground to a point.


The fat of the corpse was mixed with the gum used in
lashing the hook to the shaft of the weapon. When the
hunter espied an emu, kangaroo, turkey or similar game,
he held up the wommera in sight of the animal, which
would thereby be spell-bound and unable to run away
until the man got near enough to throw his spear with
fatal effect.
When a clever man is out hunting and comes across
the tracks of, say, a kangaroo, he follows them along and
talks to the footprints all the time for the purpose of
injecting magic into the animal which made them. He
mentions in succession all the parts of the foot, and then
names the different parts of the leg right up to the animal’s
back. As soon as he reaches the backbone, the creature
becomes quite stupid and is an easy prey when overtaken
by the blackfellow. Before cooking such an animal, the
man and his companions dance round the body for the
purpose of exorcising the magic which it has absorbed
from his incantations.
Dhuran is the Wirraidyuri name for what we call “wind-
clouds.” When such clouds are seen in the sky in the
early morning, the men whistle for the purpose of causing
the wind to arise and then start out into the bush.
Kangaroos, emus and simliar game generally keep their
heads facing the wind, making it more easy for a hunter to
approach them in the rear. Besides, the wind prevents
them from hearing small noises, as the crackling of sticks
under a man’s feet, or catching the scent of the hunters.
A man carries a mat of boughs fastened together, reach-
ing from his nose down nearly to the ankles, and comes
up a little closer every time the animal lowers its head
to feed. When he gets within killing distance of a bird
he launches his spear. Whenever possible, the natives
always hunt any animal against the wind. Again, a


blackfellow generally goes up a creek or river when spear-
ing fish, because the water which is made muddy by wading
into it is washed down the stream into the rear, and does
not disturb the fish higher up. Besides, it is easier to
see the animals in the clear, undisturbed water.
During my rambles among the aborigines of western and
northern Victoria, I gathered some hunting customs, a few
of which are as under : —The wild turkey of the plains is
timid and watchful. The following is one of the devices
employed by the natives in catching them : The hunter
provides himself with a little bird and ties its legs together.
He lays it on the ground in an open space which he knows
is frequented by turkeys. A plant or shelter of bushes is
made a little way off, behind which the man hides. A
string reaches from him to the bird, which continues to
flutter its wings. A turkey feeding on the open ground
adjacent sees the bird, and being tempted by curiosity,
comes up to it. The hunter with one hand gradually hauls
in the string with the bird attached, and the turkey follows
till it comes within reach of a noose fastened to the ex-
tremity of a small tough wooden rod which the hunter
holds in his other hand. The turkey is so intent upon
watching the fluttering little bird that it does not perceive
the proximity of the end of the rod. The blackfellow
dexterously passes the noose over the turkey’s head till it
reaches the upper or small part of the neck. The hunter
then twists the tod round and round in his hands with great
rapidity. This twists and tightens the noose and chokes
the bird without making much noise or disturbance, and it
is dragged quietly into the bough screen. Perhaps another
turkey, following its companion at a little distance may be
snared in the same way.
If the turkey, which belongs generally to the Guro-gity
phratry, be too shy or wary to approach the “call-bird,”


then that individual is supposed to be a Kappaty turkey.
If a dog pursue a “forester,” which is usually Kappaty,
and fail to bring him to bay, that animal is said to be
Gurogity.
A hunter takes some fat, or skin, or piece of bone, of a
dead man, and puts it into a little bag. He then goes to
some place in the bush frequented by kangaroos, emus,
turkeys or other game, such as a favourite feeding ground
or watering place or sand hill. Here he selects a tree
belonging to the proper phratry, and hangs his little bag on
one of the spreading branches. When an animal gets
within “shooting distance,” as it were, of this magical
artillery, it becomes stupid and wanders about heedlessly
until the hunter gets an opportunity of spearing it.
Another custom was, as soon as some emus or kangaroos
appeared in sight, the men commenced chewing human hair
and spitting towards the animals, accompanied by magical
incantations. This was expected to work a charm upon
the game and cause them to remain quiet and sluggish, so
that a man could steal upon them, holding a bough in front
of him, until he got within killing distance. Wurrity is
the native name for fat, hair, or other portion of a human
body, used to work spells, or conjure with.
In following along the tracks of an emu, kangaroo, wild
dog, or such like game, if the hunter at intervals drop hot
coals in the footmarks of the animal, this will have the
effect of making it hot and tired, or induce it to come round
again towards its pursuer.
In other instances the sweat and hair taken from under
the arms, as well as the hair of the head, were used to rub
on hunting weapons to increase their precision in killing
game. These charms were also employed to enable a man
to climb trees dexterously, or to carry out any project
Q—Oct. 5, 190).


successfully. A girdle made from the hair of a warrior,
alive or deceased, confers great powers upon the wearer.
Food Regulations, Totems, etc.
Dyim'ber is a term applied to the laws regulating the
dividing of all food caught by the people. Food which is
strictly forbidden to a man or woman is called mugu. These
are the terms used in the Thurrawal and Thoorga tribes of
New South Wales. A few examples only will be given.
Tiie rules of dyimber will be first described: —A boy
must not eat anything which he catches himself, neither
can his sister eat it, but his father can, and in certain cases,
his mother too. Two brothers must exchange anything
they catch, with some boy who is not their brother. Young
children of both sexes can eat anything which is given to
them by their parents or relatives, because the rules of
mugu do not apply to them. The forelegs of animals are
given to little boys to make their arms strong.
A young woman may not eat anything which she catches
herself, or which is caught by a boy, but she can eat what
an initiated man catches. A young man cannot eat any-
thing which a woman kills with a stick or club, but he may
eat what she catches on a line, provided it be not mugu to
him.
When a man kills a mammal, say an opossum, he splits
it lengthwise with a stone knife into two equal parts, the
cut extending down the middle of the back. He then keeps
for himself the half containing the right fore and hind legs,
and gives the left half to a friend. Birds and reptiles are
divided in the same way as an opossum.
If a man catches a fish he lays it down on its left side,
-and about midway between the nose and the tail he makes
a transverse incision from the back to the belly, penetrating
halfway through the body. Then he splits off the upper


portion, between the transverse cut and the tail, which he
keeps for himself, and gives the remainder to a friend. In
other words, the person who catches the fish gives away
about three-quarters of it to his fellows, and they divide
with him in a similar manner.
Mugu or Forbidden Food. —When a youth is first
admitted to the status of a tribesman, either by means of
the Bunan 1 or by the Kuttya ceremonies, he is forbidden to
eat the male of the native bear, kangaroo, opossum, or
short-nosed bandicoot. Neither can he eat the emu, por-
cupine, pelican, or ducks. Schnapper, groper and eels are
also forbidden, but he may eat any other kind of fish but
those mentioned. The flesh of any animal which burrows
in the ground, or which has long teeth, is likewise inter-
dicted. He can, however, eat the long-nosed bandicoot,
swans, honey, yams and other edible roots. There are
other animals and plants beside those mentioned in the
above lists.
Again, during the time a youth is out in the bush with
the old men, going through the initiation ceremonies, he
must only eat certain kinds of food, and his mother and
father are restricted to the same diet as he. And when a
novice is released from any taboo regarding food, in the
manner described farther on, his mother is freed at the
same time. Generally, however, the laws of taboo do not
apply to a woman —she is not thought of sufficient impor-
tance, but eats everything which is given her.
Any food which falls to the ground under any circum-
stances, must not be picked up again by an adult person,
but young children may lift it and eat it. Eating the gum
of the grass-tree and certain others is interdicted, because
these gums are used in fastening handles upon stone
1 “ Bunan Ceremony,” American Anthropologist, Vol. ix., pp. 327 -344,
with plate; Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxiv., pp. 276-281


hatchets and chisels, or for any other purpose where gum
would be serviceable.
When a woman is enceinte she cannot eat fish which
come in “schools.” If she did so, it would cause them to
turn away to another place. This ban applies to little girls
and uninitiated boys, and lasts for some weeks after
“ schools ” commence to arrive. The bones of fish during
this period must not be given to dogs, but must be burned,
otherwise “ schools ”of fish would go elsewhere. A preg-
nant woman is allowed to eat rock-cod, flatliead and leather-
jacket, but not schnapper, groper, or bream.
If a woman who is enceinte were to eat forbidden fish at
such a time, the spirit of the unborn babe would go out of
its mother’s body and frighten the fish away. If a male
infant, it would have a fishing spear —if a female a yamstick
—and stand on the water at the entrance to a fishing pen,
or in front of a net, and turn the fish back. The fish are
more afraid of a male infant, on account of its carrying a
spear, than of a female. Although these spirit children
are invisible to human eyes, the old men know they are
present by the movements of the fish, and at once suspect
some woman of having broken the food rules.
When a man visits the people of another tribe, one of
them takes him a mouthful of cooked flesh on the end of a
small stick, like a skewer, and reaches it out to the stranger
who bites it off the stick with his mouth. As soon as this
ceremonial is over the stranger can enter into conversation
with his hosts, but not before. After a while, the hosts
take a vessel, in which there is water and mix a little earth
into it, and give the visitor a drink. From that forth lie
can eat the food and drink the water in their territory. If
he were to do these things without the ceremony described,
he would become ill and sores would break out over his
body. The first night of a stranger’s arrival, his enter-


tainers make a bed for him by placing small sticks on the
ground and covering them thickly with leaves. On all
subsequent occasions he must make his own sleeping place.
A mother-in-law receives food from her son-in-law while
sitting down. She does not reach out for it, but he sends
some one to place it in her lap. He must not approach
his mother-in-law himself, and if any conversation takes
place, their backs must be turned towards each other. In
such case she would clap her hands, indicating that she
wished to speak to him. See also “ Language of Mothers-
in-law,” infra.
When a man is out hunting, he will not kill his totemic
animal, no matter what opportunity he may have of doing
so ; and if his totem be an edible plant, it is likewise left
uninjured by him. It is believed that thus allowing the
animal to escape, or leaving the plant unplucked, will
augment the supply and increase the fruitfulness of such
game or vegetable.
It is apparent, therefore, that a specific animal or plant
is left unharmed by each individual in the tribe, whether
male or female. Supposing, for example, that ten men go
out into the bush in quest of food. Every man of the party
will take care that he does not injure his own totem during
the day’s rambles. If we assume that each hunter has a
different totem, then each man will allow a certain object
to go free; or in other words, ten different animals or
plants will not be molested. But in such an expedition
there would generally be groups of men belonging to the
same totem. For example, there might be three kangaroo
men, two iguana men, one porcupine man, and four yam
men. Then, three of the party would not harm a kangaroo
under any circumstances, two would allow iguanas to
escape, one would not interfere with a porcupine, and four
would not gather yams. Let us suppose that a mob of


kangaroos is encountered, then our hunting party, instead
of numbering ten men, really consists of only seven. If
iguanas are met with, the hunters comprise but eight men.
And if they come to a fertile patch of ground, only six
yam-diggers are available.
It is manifest that this arrangement conduces to preserve
the supply of food by diminishing the number of those in
quest of it. It should perhaps be stated that in some
instances a man can eat his totem if killed and given by
another person, but as the chief difficulty consists in the
capture and gathering of the food, the tendency is still
towards its preservation.
I have also observed that animals and plants which are
prolific or numerous are the totems of a greater number of
men than those which are more or less scarce. For example
wallaby, duck and yam men are more numerous than por-
cupine and pelican men. Again, game and other things
which are scarce are tabooed to the young people, who
must hunt among the animals which are plentiful, in order
to give the old folk a chance.
Mumbirbirri or Scarring the Body.
Raising cicatrices by means of cutting into the flesh on
the shoulders, arms, and chest is a custom of wide pre-
valence among the Australian aborigines. The position
and extent of the scarring is regulated by the custom of
the tribe to which the novice belongs. When visiting the
natives on the Upper Lachlan, I obtained the following
particulars of the practice in that part of the country. My
informants were old men who had been operated on in their
youth, who showed me their scars, and had a very vivid
recollection of the formalities connected with the ordeal.
These people speak the Wirraidyuri language, a grammar
and vocabulary of which I contributed to the Anthropo-


logical Institute of Great Britain. 1 Their ceremonies of
initiation were described by me in a communication to the
Royal Geographical Society at Brisbane in 1896. 2 I also
dealt with a portion of their social organisation in two
articles to the Anthropological Society at Washington in
1897. 3
As no account of the import of scarring the body and the
ceremonial connected with it has ever been published, I
shall give a brief description of some of its main features.
At the Burbung, or ceremonies of initiation already referred
to, certain restrictions regarding the eating of animals and
other articles of diet are imposed upon tlie novice, such
prohibited food being called wcmal. As the youth grows
older, he is liberated from these taboos one by one, his
release from each object following a prescribed routine,
and being accompanied by a ceremony. It is unnecessary
to add that no man can be scarred who has not passed
through the Burbung ceremonies.
In the tribe with which I am dealing, the first wanal
from which a youth is liberated is the fat male opossum.
Hitherto he has only been allowed to eat lean and tough
animals of that species. He is taken into the bush by his
mother’s brothers, the brothers of his potential wives, and
his father’s people, and a number of leading tribesmen are
also present. A fire is kindled and the subject is carefully
painted and rubbed over with opossum fat. The animal
itself is cooked and some of the flesh is given to the youth
by his uncle, which he eats while the old chiefs sing the
song prescribed for the fat opossum ; and the other men
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., July - December, 1904.
2 “The Initiation Ceremonies of the Aborigines of the Upper Lachlan,
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. xi., pp, 167-169.
3 American Anthropologist, Vol. ix., pp. 411-416, and Yol. x., pp.
345 - 347. See also my “ Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Journ.
Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxi., pp. 154-176.


dance around, shouting out the names of waterholes, shady
trees, etc., in the novice’s country.
On the first cold night after these proceedings, the novice
is kept in the camp without food and is not allowed to sleep.
He is not permitted to speak above a whisper and remains
in the same place. Early next morning, while it is still
very cold, he is taken charge of by the men and is seated
on bushes laid upon the ground. His future brother-in-law,
or his maternal uncle, or a tribal representative of one of
these men, comes behind him, and with a piece of sharp
flint makes several vertical cuts about two and a half inches
long on the back of his left shoulder —on the central portion
between the point of the shoulder and the spine. The blood
flowing from the incisions is rubbed into them by the
operator, after which ground charcoal, mixed with grease,
is applied. Being sleepy, cold and weary, his body appears
to be numb and almost insensible to pain.
Before commencing the cutting, the boy’s maternal uncle
or his father licks or sucks the top of his skull. It is said
that some years back, the lad’s skull was bitten by the old
man. 1 One of the sorcerers present rubs a bullroarer across
the youth’s shoulder or perhaps a large quartz crystal is used
instead ; these manoeuvres being supposed to increase the
graduate’s fortitude and alleviate the pain or bleeding.
If there be more boys than one to be dealt with, the same
ritual is gone through, but a fresh scarifier is appointed for
each one. These men profess to undertake their duty with
hesitancy, and therefore some mock persuasion has to be
enacted before they start work. They are usually chosen
from among men who have come from some of the neigh-
bouring tribes. Probably the unwillingness of these oper-
ators is due to their fear of any fatal results following the
1 “ Burbung of the Darkinung Tribes,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol.
x., N.S. (1897) p. 8.


scarring, because their own lives would be demanded by the
relatives of the deceased. See “ Pirrimbir,” supra.
While the scarring is in progress the men standing around
make a great noise by beating their shields with other
weapons. The novitiate is then taken away by some initi-
ated men who act as his guardians and provide him with
food. These men are generally the brothers of his future
wife and his own elder brothers. Firesticks are occasionally
held close to the wounds to make them open and protrude
as much as possible during the process of healing, in order to
leave raised scars. Every afternoon, just before sundown,
he is freshly painted, and a mixture of grease and ashes
or ground charcoal applied to the cuts on his shoulder.
In the course of a few months, when the wounds are
healed, the graduate is painted again and his body anointed
with the fat of the doe opossum, which up till this time has
been wanal to him. Some cooked flesh of the animal is
then given him and while he eats it the old men chant a
different song to that used on the first occasion, the dance
being also varied. As soon a& convenient after this cere-
mony, the subject is kept awake throughout a cold night,
as before, and in the morning he is again placed sitting on
boughs spread upon the ground, while a man cuts vertical
lines on the right shoulder, similar to those appearing on
the left, and the wounds are treated in the same manner.
There is now a band of vertical marks reaching across
the back from shoulder, which shows that the bearer has
creditably kept the law relating to opossums and that the
headmen have thought lit to release him from that particular
waned. If a youth were sly and deceitful, and surreptiti-
ously eat something which was wanal to him, and the
elders became aware of it, they would punish him by refus-
ing to release him from his forbidden food, fora much longer
time than would otherwise be considered necessary.


Shortly after the last marking has healed, the headmen
despatch a messenger to the mother and friends of the
novice, and another messenger to his future wife’s people,
stating that the graduate will be taken to a certain place
at such a state of the moon. If it is any time between
the new and full moon, the messenger stands before his
audience and holds up his boomerang horizon tally or nearly
so, with the convex edge towards the west. The time
between the full and new moon is indicated by holding the
convex edge of the weapon towards the east. As both these
positions of the moon occupy a fortnight, lesser periods
would be explained verbally by the messenger.
The youth’s mother, as well as his betrothed, have been
expecting this message, and repair as early as circumstances
will permit to the appointed meeting place and erect their
camp. A U-shaped enclosure is built of boughs, tlie open
end being farthest from the women’s quarters. On the
last morning preceding the arrival of the bush contingent
with the novice, another messenger is sent forward to
report that the party will arrive in the afternoon. The
graduate’s buddunggan or future wife, and his mother,
accompanied by some old women, repair to the bough
enclosure and kindle a fire, and make everything ready.
About an hour before sundown, the bush mob make their
appearance in single file. The novice and his custodians
are near the front, and lie is conducted into the bough yard
where his mother and buddunggan are standing together.
The latter approaches him and taps him on the breast with
a dhullabulga or portion of a man’s apron, after which green
boughs are thrown upon the fire and he passes through the
smoke. The women then retire, and the youth is taken to
the quarters of the single men where one or two old fellows
will chant for the occasion. The women also sing at their
own camp.


During the early part of the following day, the men take
the novice again to the bough yard, where the women meet
them. There are present the graduate’s mother and father,
some of his sisters, brothers, maternal uncles and aunts.
His bundunggan or promised wife, accompanied by similar
relatives, is also there. Some leaves have been strewn
thickly over the surface of the ground in front of the bud-
dunggan, on which are laid the following articles of a man’s
dress, which she has brought there for presentation to the
graduate:
1. A tvullunggaiir , or wide brow-band, painted red. 2.
A garnbun, or narrow brow-band, painted white. 3. A
willa-willa , consisting of a few of the top-knot feathers of
the white cockatoo. 'The feathers are fastened with string
or gum on a small piece of stick, and are intended for
inserting under the brow-band as an ornament. 4. A
dhullabulga, made of the skin of the kangaroo-rat, cut into
narrow strands about a foot long. These strands are bound
together at one end, and are worn attached to the front
part of the waist-girdle, so as to hang down over the pubes.
5. A kurbubundhan, or girdle for the waist, made of woven
opossum fur. 6. A pair of buggurbundlian , or strings to be
tied around each of the upper arms, woven from opossum
fur. 7. A gudyugang or necklace, made of pieces of reed
cut into short lengths of say, half an inch, and an opossum
fur string passed through the hollow of each one. 8. A
baigur , another neck ornament, made of pieces of skin cut
from around the genital appendages of a male kangaroo,
and fastened on a string of opossum fur.
Tlie buddunggan walks up to the graduate and passes the
gudyugang necklace over his head. Next she decorates
him with the baigur in the same way. These are the only
articles with which she invests him —the remainder of the
turnout being put on the youth by his guardian. In return


for these gifts the sister of the graduate presents the bud-
dunggan with a complete set of a woman’s regalia. The
youth now goes back with the single men to their camp,
and the women stroll away to theirs. In the evening a
corroboree is held in celebration of the youth’s release from
the opossum wanal.
Some months after the above ceremony, or it may be the
best part of a year, or longer than that, if the graduate is
young, he is again taken charge of by the elders of the
tribe, and another animal is added to those which he can
hunt and eat. As the procedure connected with each
ceremony is somewhat similar, I shall very briefly describe
the position of the scars, or mumbir , on the different parts
of the body.
The next waned on the list is the girwei or iguana. For
the full-grown male animal, the graduate is cut, vertically,
on the left shoulder, a little below his first marks for the
opossum. After a while his right shoulder is similarly
branded for the female or young iguana, and when he has
recovered from its effects, he is marched to the women’s
camp, as on the first occasion, and is shown to his relatives.
He has now a second tier of mumbir , or marks extending
across the back, and is received with the usual congratu-
lations. The songs and dances connected with the iguana,
both in the bush and at the women’s camp, are different to
the opossum ceremony. No bough-vard is erected on this
occasion, nor are any presents given by the buddunggan.
After a considerable time the young man is allowed to
eat the full-grown male emu, ngurun , being painted and
greased as on other occasions, but the old men continue
singing special chants throughout the night. There is a
superstition that the emu never sleeps at night, because if
it did all the aborigines would die. Therefore, in discharg-
ing a man from this wanal , everybody in the camp keeps


awake all night. In the morning the graduate is marked
by vertical cuts on the left shoulder just under the previous
scarring. There is a further interval of time, and the man
is released from the tabu regarding the female and half-
grown emus, when a similar ceremony is held, after which
he is marked by vertical incisions on the right shoulder
immediately below the iguana mumbir.
The graduate now has three rows of scars, extending
from shoulder to shoulder, which completes all the mumbir
which will be cut upon his back. At some convenient time
after this he is marched to a place near the women’s camp,
where he is met and welcomed by his male and female
relations as before.
Next in order comes the graduate’s liberty to eat the
maugang , a large grub found by chopping into the boles of
trees, for which he is marked on the left arm with vertical
cuts. For the burragang , a large grub in the roots of trees,
he is similarly incised on the right upper arm.
After another interval he is relieved from his wanal
respecting the dhugganan , a small grub obtained in the boles
of trees and is marked on the left arm below the first
mumbir. The gurthan , a small grub found in the roots of
trees comes next, for which he is cut on the right upper
arm, below the burragang scars. In each of the four last
cases, one of the grubs is rubbed around the graduate’s
mouth by an old man before it is eaten, and each has its
own peculiar chant.
The chest is the seat of the next mumbir. With cere-
monies similar to those already described, the yiibba or
full-grown male carpet snake is added to the man’s dietary
scale, and he is marked by vertical cuts on the left breast,
commencing at the collar bone, high enough to leave room
for another row of marks between it and the nipple later
on. When these wounds have healed the novitiate is


branded on the right breast in a corresponding position,
which enables him to eat the female and half-grown carpet
snakes.
After a while the man is released from the prohibition
regarding the flesh of the male wcindciiela or porcupine,
which is made known to whom it may concern by vertical
incisions on the left breast, between the carpet snake
mumbir and the nipple. For the female or half-grown
ivandaiela , he is similarly marked on the right breast.
Another interval elapses and the graduate is permitted
to eat the male of the gudamang or turtle, which is denoted
by a transverse or horizontal scar Across the breast between
the nipples ; and for the female turtle another horizontal
scar is made below the former, in the intermammary region.
When the graduate is admitted into the rank of eating
the carpet snake and the porcupine, the old men chant all
night, and the people keep awake, the same as at the emu
ceremony already detailed. At all these gatherings there
is a good deal of sexual license allowed, such as men lend-
ing their wives to visitors, similar to what I have elsewhere
referred to at the Burbling ceremonies. During these
assemblages, too, the people often barter weapons and
other articles —and sometimes the teeth which were ex-
tracted at the initiatory rites are returned —particulars of
which have been reported by me in other publications.
Want of space compels me to omit many matters connected
with the Mumbirbirri ceremonies, which may be included in
a future communication.
Some Burial and Mourning Customs.
The rites connected with death and burial vary some-
what among different tribes, and it would be highly inter-
esting if all the ceremonial connected with this subject
could be collected over the whole of Australia. The
following is an example of the procedure in ordinary cases


among the Thoorga tribe on the south-east coast of New
South Wales, whose language I have already reported. 1 The
initiatory rites of these people were described by me in
1896, 2 and their sociology in 1960. 3
If a man dies a natural death, as of old age, accident or
the like, his body is placed full length between pieces of
bark, and the whole is then bound round with string outside
the bark. During the afternoon a few wizards, muyulus ,
gather up all the men and women and take them to a very
tall tree, or at any rate the tallest tree within sight of the
camp. Some of the old men are left sitting close to the
corpse.
The women sit on the ground near the base of the tree,
with their rugs folded in front of them, and keep quiet, as
if listening for something. Two of the muyulus now climb
the tree, one following the other, either by cutting steps
or by means of vines. The front man ascends the tree as
far as it is possible to go, and the other keeps about 6 or 8
feet lower. The topmost man, looking in the direction of
the native country of the deceased, calls out in a loud,
clear voice, kagalgal nunnup l The lower man repeats the
call in quick succession. Simultaneously with the men’s
call, each woman brings her open hand down upon her
folded rug, with a thudding sound. The same rug may be
used by several women.
The lower man, who may be distinguished as B, then
descends about 5 or 6 feet, and the top man, whom we will
call A, comes down to the place just vacated by B, and
both men repeat the call as before, and the old women
again clap their hands on their rugs. B and A each
1 *'The Thoorga Language,” Queensland Geographical Journal, Yol.
xvi., pp. 49 - 73.
2 American Anthropologist, Yol. ix., pp. 327- 344, pi. vi.
3 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Yol. xxxiv., pp. 262 - 264.


descend another stage of 5 or 6 feet, and shout again, and
the women repeat the clapping. This is continued stage
by stage until B reaches the ground and A is a few feet up
the trunk of the tree, when the Anal call is given by both
men, accompanied by the beating of the rugs by the women.
It is supposed that at a man’s death, his inside or spirit,
called bulubulaty , goes away back to its native place and
visits all the haunts and camps occupied by the man during
life. Perhaps the man has left some of his weapons at his
old camping places, or has hidden away his bullroarer or
other secret belongings somewhere in the bush. His bulu-
bulaty is supposed to go and see if these belongings are
alright. The ceremony of calling from the tree-top is for
the purpose of bringing the bulubulaty back to the body
before burial.
While the two men are calling out from the tree, the
other old fellows who were left sitting near the corpse are
attentively listening, and they generally report that they
have heard a rustling sound within the bark covering of
the corpse, as if the bulubulaty had returned to the body.
Moreover, the men who climb the tree frequently aver
that they have heard the bulubulaty in the distance answer-
ing their calls. If the deceased had been strangled in his
sleep by the sorcery of an unseen enemy, the answering
voice would be very hoarse and feeble ; but if no injury had
been done to him, the voice of the returning spirit would
be clear and distinct. If the man has met his death by foul
play on the part of any of the people present, it is supposed
that the old men at the butt of the tree will see the bulu-
bulaty touching the guilty party as it flies past him.
The spirit and body of the deceased being now reunited,
a grave is dug in some soft ground, such as loamy soil or
sand, and the body, with its covering of bark, is placed
lying full length on its back, with the head pointing towards


the native country of the deceased’s mother. Or if he died
within the territory of his mother’s tribe, then his head
would be laid to the west, so that when his bulubulaty sits
up in his place of sepulture his face will be towards the
rising sun, to enable him to get warm. The native country
of one’s mother is called “ i-dhung'-u-ru.”
The men who ascend the tree, and the other mourners,
are painted with millin , pipeclay, and gubur, red ochre, on
the limbs, bodies and faces. Some of the maternal uncles
of the deceased are present at his burial ceremonies, and
take a prominent part.
When a woman’s husband dies or is killed, her hair is
overspread with the white down of birds and pipeclay.
Kangaroos’ teeth and porcupines’ claws are bound in her
tresses, and on top of the head is fastened a barran which
hangs down between her shoulders. Her face is painted
with small daubs of white and red, and she wears a brow-
band painted with pipe-clay. Strings made of the skin of
the ring-tail opossum, to which are attached small pieces
of bone, are tied around her arms. She wears a waist-belt
made of opossum fur. The chest and limbs are painted
with streaks of white mixed with red. A man’s mother,
sisters, mother-in-law, and daughters also mourn for him.
Tlie widow lias a bag in which she puts any food which
may be given to her by her husband’s relatives or her own.
She does not go out hunting, but remains in the camp with
any other widows who may be there, who look after her
wants. Pood from her bag can be eaten only by herself
and her family. The brothers and sisters of the deceased
can also partake of the contents of the bag. All remnants
of the widow’s food must be burnt or covered in the ground,
and no dogs, excepting those of the deceased, must be
allowed to eat any of the bones or refuse.
R—Oct. 5, 1904.


No person except the brothers of deceased are allowed
to use his weapons and other belongings, which are called
dhundhal. If the brothers of the dead man take his spears
or other weapons and kill any game therewith, no one
excepting the widow and relatives of the deceased, can
participate in the feast. If more game or other food has
been obtained than the relatives can eat, they cannot give
away the surplus to other people of the tribe who are not
relatives, but must burn or bury it.
The widow does not converse with any one, but every
morning and evening she raises a lamentation, and chants
certain customary dirges. This is continued for many
months, at the termination of which one of the younger
brothers of the deceased may claim her.
When a man of the Ngeumba tribe is buried, a grave is
dug in which the body is placed in a sitting posture, lean-
ing backwards with its head towards sunrise. A doctor,
or clever man, goes into the grave and places the body in
position. The face of the corpse is bent forward till the
chin touches the chest. This bowing down of the head is
done to prevent the friends of the deceased from dreaming
about him. Yerrudhami means a dream. When every-
thing is ready, the men on the top throw down earth and
short pieces of sticks, with which the doctor packs the
corpse in position. Afterwards, the men return to their
camp and are smoked at a fire with green boughs layed
upon it.
Sorcery or Magic.
Upon the decease of a tribesman, the old men, muyulus,
generally, if not always, ascribe his death to the machina-
tions of some enemy, either in their own tribe or among
their neighbours. The following is one of the methods
adopted by the Tharumba tribe to discover the person who
has secretly caused a man’s death : —His body is taken by


the women, who rub it all over with a mixture of burnt
bark and grease. The bark used is that of the apple-tree, 1
which is burnt to a fine powder. The body is kept for
several days, perhaps for some weeks, as this application
possesses the property of preserving the body to some
extent. The bark-powder and grease is applied every day
or two, and after a number of applications a kind of incrust-
ation is formed on the surface of the body.
Some of the old men who are related to the deceased
now come and scrape off some of this ashy layer from his
body. This mixture, which now comprises exudations from
the corpse, as well as the original ingredients, is called
ngurrung arat , and is supposed to possess occult powers
of retaliation by guiding the possessor of it into the camp
of the guilty party. The ngurrungarat scraped from the
exterior of the dead man’s body is placed in a little bag
called gur'aga, and is carried away by the old men to the
bahmbilli, a sheltered place where the tribal councils are
held, out of sight of the camp. There a fire is lighted and
when it has burnt down to a mass of hot coals, one of the
old fellows steps forth and throws a few pinches of ngur-
rungarab powder on the embers. The substance immedi-
ately begins to burn and send up smoke. If the smoke
ascends straight up, and goes a good height in the air
before it disperses, that signifies that the murderer lives a
considerable distance off. But if the smoke goes up a little
way and bends to one side, this indicates that the murderer
is located near them, and the direction in which the smoke
bends in either of these cases, shows the direction of his
camp.
A council is then held to consider who is the most likely
man in the locality pointed out by the smoke to have
1 Not the fruit tree, but the so-called apple tree of Australia, the
Angojohora of botanists.


caused the death of their comrade. Perhaps two or three,
or even more men are equally suspected in a certain camp
which the smoke indicated, and further measures are
necessary to sheet it home to the guilty individual. A
couple of clever men are selected to enquire into this
matter, and the first opportunity which occurs of visiting
the tribe containing the “ suspects,” these chosen men go
on pretence of bartering, or other feasible business. When
they get among the men of the other tribe, they let their
fire burn down, and some time when no one is looking, one
of them throws a little of his ngurrungarat powder on the
fire, and watches which way the smoke goes. Which-
ever one of the suspects happens to be in the direction
taken by the smoke is then singled out as the sorcerer who
killed their kinsman. These two men next go and sit down
near the suspect and watch him closely, to see if he is very
much perturbed and guilty-looking after the smoke has
found him out. The man by this time probably concludes
that he is suspected, and whether he is guilty or not he
becomes rather disconcerted, because lie realizes his danger-
ous position. This conduct confirms the spies in their con-
clusions, and they go back to their own people and report
the result of their mission.
A consultation is then held at the bahmbilli, and the duty
of retaliating is assigned to one or more of their special
sorcerers —fellows who are equal in skill to those in the
adversary’s camp. Several other men go with them,
including generally a couple of young men as recruits to
learn the mode of procedure, so that in later years they
may be able to take charge of similar expeditions. Some
of the older men will each have a little bag, guraga , con-
taining ngurrungarat powder fastened on the top of the
head amongst the hair. This bag, of its own accord, falls
over on the side of the head towards the camp of the man


they are seeking. When they get into the hunting grounds
of the adverse conjurer, they hide in scrubs or thickly
wooded or rocky places where he is likely to pass by. When
they see him, they “ sing a spell ” upon him in a low tone.
This is done to cause him to want to go about by himself,
unaccompanied by any of his relatives or friends. If they
see him climbing a tree they “ sing ” at him to cause him to
get giddy and fall to the ground.
If this “ singing ” has not the desired effect and the
enemy persists in keeping in company of another man, one
of the invading muyulus takes off his belt, ngulya, and tears
it down the middle, “singing” while he does so. This is
supposed to cause the two men to part company, in the
same way that the belt is parted. It is believed that if a
man be alone he is more easily overcome by the “black art.”
If they are fortunate enough to surprise their enemy when
he is separated from all his people, they approach him,
muttering incantations and pointing at him, and tell him
he has only so many moons to live. This generally so
terrifies him that he really believes he must die.
In addition to being guided by the ngurrungarat powder
above mentioned, a muyulu or sorcerer will mount upon a
log, rock or leaning tree, and point one of his fighting
boomerangs first in one direction and then in another, until
he feels the weapon pulling toward a particular quarter.
Then he knows that the camp of the enemy whom he is
seeking is located in that direction.
If a sorcerer obtain some of the excreta, hair, nails or
other part of an enemy’s body, he takes it to a “ squeaking
tree,” mauaraty , and places it between the touching sur-
faces of the two branches causing the “squeak.” When
the wind blows, this fragment is squeezed and ground to
atoms, and the owner is believed to suffer in the same way.
During the whole performance the old man “ sings ” toward


the person he wishes to injure. If the party whose destruc-
tion is sought be a greater conjurer than the man who
“sings” him, no harm can result from it.
Aboriginal Astronomy—the Zodiac.
All aboriginal tribes have names for many of the principal
fixed stars, and also for remarkable stellar groups. There
is generally a story about the star, which was in olden days
a man, the wondrous doings of which are duly recorded.
Not infrequently there are families of stars —the parents
and offspring, husbands and wives, and other relationships —
all being pointed out, and assigned their places in the nar-
rative. Legends are more numerous concerning stars
situated in the neighbourhood of the moon’s path through
the heavens, and in this way a zodiac may be said to exist.
The stars near the ecliptic and the zenith change their
positions in the sky more rapidly than those toward the
poles, and therefore more readily arrest attention. Besides
constellations at these high altitudes can be seen easily
when the people are camped in thickly wooded country,
whereas stars near the horizon would not then be visible.
Throughout the summer months, and during fine weather
at other periods, the blacks usually camp out in the open
air, where they have every opportunity of watching the
starry vault above them. The fact of the moon, who was
a human being in ancient times, wending its way through
these stars month after month, helps to increase the
peoples’ interest. There are always some clever old men
in the camp, who are the recognized repositories of the
lore of the tribe, who take advantage of this out door life
to teach the young people stories about some of the differ-
ent stars which may be visible at such times.
As soon as an old man commences one of these stories,
the young folk from the neighbouring camp fires congregate
around him and listen with avidity to his marvellous nar-


rations. A love of the supernatural seems to be born in
the human breast, and the Australian natives are no excep-
tion. The young people of the audience listen so atten-
tively that they are themselves able, in years long after,
to repeat the stories to another generation. In this way
the star myths and other native legends have been handed
down from time immemorial.
Conspicuous stars and star clusters all the way along the
zodiacal belt, have well-known names and traditions.
Moreover, each star figuring in the myths belongs to a
pliratry, section, clan or other subdivision, precisely the
same as the people of the tribe among whom the tale is
current. The names of the subdivisions, as well as the
names of the stars, change amongst the people inhabiting
different parts of the country. Sometimes the legends and
nomenclature of the stars will be substantially the same
among several adjoining tribes over an extensive region.
In other instances, not only are the names of the stars
different, but the traditions and the stars, connected with
them are altogether divergent.
The aborigines have no methods of accurately measuring
the annual circuit of the sun, but they know when the cold
weather commences; then the period when the flowers
come, and plants shoot forth buds ; and lastly, they realize
the time of the hot weather. They have discovered that
these periods follow each other in a certain fixed order
year after year; and the stars which occupy the northern
sky in the cold winter evenings travel on, and are succeeded
by others in the following season ; and that these are again
displaced by different constellations during the warm even-
ings of summer.
The aborigines of the Clarence River have a story that
the Pleiades, when they set with the sun, go away to bring
the winter; and that when these stars reappear early in


the evening in the eastern sky, they are ushering in the
warm weather. They are supposed to be a family of young
women, whose name was War-rlng'-garaf, and who belonged
to the section Wirrakan. 1 Among the same tribes, a Tauri
was a young man named Karambal, of the Womboang
division, who absconded with another man’s wife. He was
pursued by the injured husband, and took refuge in a tall
tree. His pursuer piled wood around the bole of the tree,
which he then set on fire, and Karambal was carried up by
the fierce flames into the sky, where he still retains the
colour of the fire. 2
In the frosty nights of the winter months, about three
or four hours before sunrise is a time when there is gener-
ally a stir in a native camp. The people have had their
first sleep, and the cold begins to make itself felt. The
men and women, especially those who are old, sit up and
replenish their fires. While doing this, their attention is
naturally directed to the sky, where they observe that the
stars then shining in the eastern quadrant are different
from those which were visible the previous evening. They
observe that these stars are trudging along after the others,
and will disappear at daylight.
Among the Ngeumba blacks, in the cold weather of mid-
winter, when the Pleiades rise about three or four o’clock
in the morning, the old men take some glowing coals on
bark shovels, and cast them towards this constellation as
soon as it is visible. This is done to prevent the spirit-
women, whom these stars represent, from making the
morning too cold. The women in the camp are not per-
mitted to look at all at the Pleiades in winter nights,
because such conduct would increase the severity of the
1 See my paper on “ Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Journ.
Roy. Soc. M.S. Wales, Yol. xsxi., p. 169.
2 Compare with my “ Folklore of the Australian Aborigines,” (Sydney,
1899) pp. 26 - 29.


frost. If a woman transgress this law, her eyes will become
bleary, and she will suffer from uterine troubles.
The blackfellows have not mapped out the sky into con-
stellations in the same way as Europeans have done, but
there is a certain amount of method in their arrangement
of the stars. For example, a man and his wives, his family,
his weapons, his dogs, are not generally far apart. Brothers,
uncles and other relationships are often separated by con-
siderable distances.
Among the tribes inhabiting the south-eastern portion
of New South Wales, <* Canis Majoris is Gundyeran ; a
Orionis is Gunung'ama ; <* Argus is Mirridyugga, the short-
nosed bandicoot. The Pleiades is Wanggatti; Milky Way,
Kurrewa ; the stars in Orion’s Belt and Club are Yuindya.
They have names for the Magellanic clouds. Nubecula
Major is Kurrug'gur, the shortnosed bandicoot. Nubecula
Minor is Wangalli, a kangaroo rat. At the time when
these star-clusters —the bandicoot and the kangaroo-rat —
are at their lower culmination, and therefore so near the
horizon that they are not noticed by untutored natives
living in thickly wooded country, they are supposed to have
gone away through the skies on a Pirrimbir expedition.
After they have taken revenge upon the culprit, the
nubeculse come into view again.
In the county of Kara-Kara, Victoria, there was an
immense pine tree growing out of the earth, the topmost
branches of which reached up to the sky. In the far away
past, people used to climb up the tree and walk about and
reside on the starry vault; and blackfellows who belonged
to the sky occasionally descended by the tree to the earth
to see their friends, and remained for a while. Visits were
frequently made for purposes of barter between the blacks
who were located on the earth and those whose hunting
grounds were away in the sky. In short, the tree was a


regular highway between the earth and the upper regions,
for a very long period. Old blackfellows have told me
stories of similar trees which reached up into the sky in
other parts of Victoria.
At that time the common magpie and black jay went
out hunting one day, and speared a dog which they thought
was a wild one. They lighted a fire and cooked the animal
in a hole with its head pointing towards its miyur , but they
had not time to remain there and eat it. So the magpie
picked up the carcass of the dog, still hot from the fire,
and carried it across the back of his neck home to the camp.
The hot body resting on the magpie’s neck so long, burnt
the skin and caused the white mark still seen across the
neck of that bird.
It turned out that it was the largest and best hunting
dog belongingto the lark which had been speared. By and
bye the lark called in his dogs and they came to him one
by one. As each dog appeared, the lark said impatiently,
“That’s only a puppy ! Where is my big dog?” But the
favourite dog did not return, and the lark was determined
to have revenge upon the whole tribe, but he said nothing.
He took his waddy and went and sat down by a fire near
the base of the great tree, and pretended he was carving
ornamental lines on the weapon. When no one was looking
he put live coals into a hollow in one of the roots, and
shoved them well underneath with the end of his waddy.
After a while the fire began to make headway and
crackled under the ground. Some blackfellows asked the
lark what noise that was. He replied that it must be two
of the top branches rubbing against each other, and they
appeared satisfied with this answer. But the fire increased
in vigour and fierceness under the soil, burning all the roots
until the principal one was reached, which shared the same
fate. Then the tree came down with a tremendous crash,


killing all the people who were under it. The fire con-
tinued to burn the trunk and every branch, until the whole
was consumed. The top of the tree formed Morton Plain,
with the charred remains of the people, turned to stone,
still to be seen there. A hollow was burnt in the ground
where the tree stood, making a large lagoon.
On the Darling River, New South Wales, from Bourke
down to Louth, I gathered the following star names from
old natives. There are longer stories connected with each
but I had not time to record them fully. The larger of the
two stars in the extremity of the tail of the Scorpion is a
crow and belongs to the phratry Kilpungurra. a Aquilse
was a great hunter, named Wukkarno, who was a Mukun-
gurra. He kept several dogs, and his boomerang is now
the Northern Crown. The planet Venus was a man named
Mirnkabuli, who lived in a gurli, or hut, made of grass,
and subsisted upon mussels and crayfish.
The Pleiades were a lot of young women who went out
on a plain searching for yams and a whirlwind came along
and carried them up into the sky, depositing them where
they are now seen. « Scorpii is an eaglehawk and belongs
to the Mukungurra phratry. The planet Jupiter was a
great Kilpungurra man of the olden days, called Wurnda-
wurnda-yarroa, who lived on roasted yams, and got his
reddish colour by being so much about the fire cooking his
food.
A great warrior of ancient times, named That-tyu-kul,
was camped at Swan Hill on the Murray River. One day
his two sons were out playing about the camp, getting
wattle-gum on the bank of the river. They saw a mon-
strous cod fish, Ban'-dyal, in a big waterhole, and ran home
and told their father. He got his canoe and hastened to
the spot, armed with all his spears. Upon sighting the fish
he heaved a spear which stuck into its back between the


shoulders, but it swam on to the end of the waterhole and
commenced forming a channel by tearing up the ground,
and in this manner allowing the water to flow after it and
bear it away from its enemy.
Bandyal did this so rapidly that Thattyukul was not able
to keep pace with him. He kept on travelling towards the
south-west, leaving a sinuous line of water behind him. At
dusk he camped and excavated a long, deep lagoon, where
he rested for the night. Thattyukul paddled his canoe
along the watercourse, and upon overtaking the cod fish
he hurled another spear at him, which stuck deeply into
the median line of his back, as before, but somewhat lower
down. This caused the great fish to start forward again,
digging out a channel wide enough to allow his immense
body to swim along. When night came he camped as pre-
viously, and made a large lagoon to rest in.
Here Thattyukul again overtook him and threw another
spear, which penetrated the spine in the rear of the two
former weapons. Thattyukul continued the pursuit for
several days with similar experiences until they reached
the neighbourhood of where the Murray Bridge has since
been erected. By this time Thattyukul had used up all his
spears, and had, besides, broken a piece off the end of his
paddle. At this spot, Bandyal the cod fish made a larger
hole, and Thattyukul lost sight of him, being unable to propel
his canoe fast enough with the broken paddle. He there-
fore abandoned the chase and landed on the bank, where
he set his canoe up on its end and it became a bial-bial, or
red-gum tree. He stuck his broken paddle into the ground
and it was transformed into a pine-tree.
The watercourse dug out by the cod fish in this encounter
became the present Murray River, and the spines now found
projecting from the back of the cod fish represent the spears
thrown by Thattyukul in his vain attempt to capture it.


Ever since that time canoes have generally been made of
the bark of gum trees, and pine wood is mostly used for
making paddles.
Thattyukul then started back overland through the mallee
scrubs and continued his course onward by way of the
Grampian Hills until he reached his own country. He
looked about and found his wife and children, accompanied
by his mother-in-law, Yerretgurk, on top of a mountain
whose sides were so steep that he could not climb up to
them, neither could they descend to him. He then called
out to his wife and children to jump down, one by one, and
he would catch them in his arms. First, his wife jumped,
then his eldest son, and lastly the youngest boy, and all
were landed safely. He next persuaded Yerretgurk, his
mother-in-law, to jump too, but he pretended he could not
catch her, and she fell heavily on the ground, and hurt her
face very much, which made her feel revengeful.
In time Yerretgurk recovered from her injuries, but she
kept the matter in her mind. One day she was prodding
her yamstick into the ground in a swampy place, and the
water spurted up. She shoved in her yamstick farther
and could feel something biting it. Upon probing deeper
she came to the conclusion that it was some large and
vicious creature. Then she dug a large hole in the ground,
which at once filled with water, in the bottom of which
she could feel the mouth of some animal with her yamstick.
She now spread rotten sticks across the top of the hole and
covered them over with leaves, grass, and rubbish, to
resemble a huge bandicoot’s nest. Then she brooded over
her past wrongs.
Yerretgurk next called Tliattyukul’s two boys, and asked
them to go and tell their father she wanted him to come
and killalarge bandicoot whose nest she had just discovered.
She requested Thattyukul not to strike at the animal with


his weapons, because that would break the body to pieces,
but to jump upon it with his feet. Being willing to make
amends to his old mother-in-law for his bad behaviour in
letting her fall from the rock, he came stealthily up to the
heap of rubbish and gave one bound upon the centre of it.
As expected, he went flop into the water, and the monster
at the bottom caught hold of his feet and drowned him.
Thattyukul’s uncle, Kulnapittyik, went in quest of him,
and having tracked him to the pond, put in his long arms
and pulled the body out on the bank. He was a great con-
jurer and succeeded in bringing his nephew to life again.
After a while they both went away to the sky, where
Tliattyukul became a Aquilse; his uncle was apotheosised
as a Capricorni, and his mother-in-law, Yerretgurk, was
transformed into a Eridani.
Sociology of the Tribes of Western Victoria.
Within substantially the same region outlined in my
account of the Dolgarrity ceremony, infra , the people are
bisected, primarily, into two phratries, called Gurogity and
Gamaty; the feminine forms of these being Gurogigurk and
Gamatygurk respectively. 1 Each phratry is again divided
into what may be distinguished, provisionally, by the name
of “clans” or “castes,” because they are not so well
defined as the “sections ” of the Ngeumba tribes treated
in earlier pages. The names of the clans are taken in some
instances from animals, and in others from inanimate
nature. Attached to each of these clans are lists of totems,
consisting of animals, plants, the heavenly bodies, the
elements, and so on. In other words, all creation, animate
and inanimate, is divided between Gurogity and Gumaty.
* Compare with my description of the “ Group Divisions of the Barkunjee
Tribes/’ who adjoin the people herein dealt with on the north. —Journ.
Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Yol. xxxii., pp. 241 255, with map of their terri-
tory. The Sociology of the Wiradjuri Tribes is given by me in Journ.
Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Yol. xxxi., pp. 171 - 176.


Then the totems of each pliratry are apportioned among
the clans of which it is composed, some clans possessing a
certain aggregate of totems and some another, as illus-
trated in the lists farther on.
Again, every clan has its own spirit-land, called^m'-T/ur, 2
a native word signifying “ home” or final resting place, to
which the shades of all its members depart after death.
The names of the miyurs are in all cases identical with the
names of the clans. These miyurs are located in certain
fixed directions from the territory of the tribe, some being
situated toward one point of the compass and some another.
Every man knows the direction of all the miyurs of his
tribe in addition to his own.
The following are the names of the “ clans ” into which
the pliratry Gurogity is subdivided, together with the
directions of the miyurs as pointed out to me by some old
aborigines, and which I then observed with a compass:—
Dyalup, the miyur of which bears W. 5° S. Burt murnya,
which has the same amplitude as Dyalup. Nyaui, E. 10° N.
Kuttyaga, the same direction as Nyaui. Burt Wirrimul
has a miyur bearing W. 25° S. Wartwurt bears N. 25° W.
Wiirt-pattyangal, E. 15° S.
The totems of these clans will now be given, following
the same order as the names in the last paragraph. First,
then, are the totems allotted to Dyalup grey emu, por-
cupine, curlew, white cockatoo (ngaiuk), wijuggla, wood
duck, mallee-lizard (yurkun), stinking turtle (widdyeruk),
flying squirrel, ring-tail opossum, bronze-wing pigeon.
Burt Murnya, a yam, has the plain-turkey, native cat,
mopoke, dyim-dyim owl, mallee-hen, rosella parrot, peewee,
all yams.
2 I first drew attention to these miyurs in my “Native Tribes of Vic-
toria, etc.,” (read March 4, 1904), Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia,
Vol. xliii., p. 69.


Nyaui, the sun, has the bandicoot, moon, kangaroo-rat,
black and white magpie, opossum, ngiirt-hawk, gum-tree
grub, wattle-tree grub, planet Venus. Kuttyaga, the white
crestless cockatoo, has substantially the same totems as
Nyaui.
Burt Wirrimal, the white owl, has a number of totems,
but I was unable to classify them.
Wartwurt is the heat of the sun at noon, and has bui-
wurrak or grey-headed eagle-hawk, carpet-snake, smoker
parrot, shell parrot, murrakan-hawk, dikkomur snake, ring-
neck parrot, mirndai snake, shingle-back lizard.
Wiirt-pattyangal, or shadow of Pattyangal is related to
Wartwurt and Durrimurak.
The following are some further totems of Gurogity, but
I could not ascertain the castes among which they are
apportioned: —quail, mosquito, wallaby, tree iguana, mussel.
The names of the clans into which the Gamaty phratry
is subdivided, with my compass bearings of the miyurs, are
as follow : —Durrimurak, and its miyur N. 15° E. Wuran,
with the same azimuth as Durrimurak. Muiwillak bears
N. 5° E. Dyallan, S. 5° E. Pattyangal has a miyur situ-
ated S. 40° W. Wanguguliak, S. 20° E. Burriwan’s miyur
bears N. 40° E. The totems attached to each of these
clans are as under : —Durrimurak has the warrungurra or
large turtle, musk duck, black duck, honey, native bee,
gatgat bird, ground iguana, death-adder, quandong tree,
biergalk tree.
The feminine equivalents of any of these clans are
obtained by adding gurk to the masculine name.
Wuran, the black cockatoo, has dyirkok hawk, pine tree,
grey-box tree. Muiwillak, a black snake, has the darker
emu, red-gum tree, water-mallee tree, all reeds. Dyallan,
a whipsnake, has the swan, dog, water, larger crow, white-


gum tree, grass parrot, platypus, water-rat or berper,
werpal or dark-headed eagleliawk, native companion,
wattle-bird or yanggak. Pattyangal, the pelican, has all
kangaroos, fire, buiba or non-stinking turtle, brambam-
bullak, plover, laughing jackass, a Crucis. Wanguguliak
or crow’s men ; Wa is crow and guli, a man ; the smaller
crow belongs to this clan. Burriwan, a hole in the ground
or in a rock. I could not find any totems of this subdivis-
ion, but it is friendly with Muiwillak and Wuran.
Other Gamaty totems, which I was unable to assign to
their proper castes are: —stringybark tree, wild hop, bull-
dog ant, white ant, leech, black:fish, perch, jew lizard,
mountain duck, honey bird.
It is unnecessary to state that the foregoing lists of
totems, collected by me from the blacks for purposes of
illustration, are only some out of a large number. And it
is probable that there are other clans attached to each
phratry beside those which I have enumerated. It should
also be explained that the district in which the totems
were obtained is a very large one, and I occasionally found
that an animal or plant which belonged to one clan in a
certain locality, was claimed by another clan at a different
place. In a few instances it was likewise observed that a
totem which was Gurogity in a certain portion of the tribal
territory was Gamaty in another.
The laws of intermarriage of Gurogity and Gamaty, and
the descent of the offspring are as exemplified in the sub-
joined table: —
Husband. Wife.
Son. Daughter.
Gurogity Gamatygurk
Gamaty Gurogigurk
Gamaty Gamatygurk
Gurogity Gurogigurk
According to the above table, Gurogity and Gainaty
intermarry one with the other, blit this is subject to the
following regulations. Take for example a Gurogity man
S—Oct. 5, 1904.


and his sister ; then, the man’s son’s child marries his
sister’s son’s child. In this case, which is the general
custom, a Gurogity marries a Gamatygurk, in accordance
with the table. In some instances, however, the man’s
son’s child marries his sister’s daughter’s child, which gives
the exceptional custom of a Gurogity marrying a Gurogi-
gurk, subject to the totemic regulations. If a Gamaty
man and his sister be taken as an example, the same laws
will apply, mutatis mutandis.
When referring to the origin of the intermarrying divis-
ions of Australian tribes in an article read at the Inter-
national Congress on Anthropology and Archaeology held at
Paris in 1900, I stated that I was quite clear that the
system of divisions into sections was not devised for the
purpose of preventing consanguineous marriages, but had
developed in conformity with the general surroundings. 1
In 1897 I stated that “ the sectional divisions may have
been inaugurated for the purpose of a distinctive nomen-
clature among members of the same family, ... to
distinguish the mothers from the daughters, the uncles
from the nephews, and the fathers from the sons, in their
respective generations.” 2
In 1900 I ventured to raise a hypothesis that possibly in
the distant past the present names of the sections repre-
sented small independent tribes, which became incorporated
with each other, for the purpose of mutual defence, or for
other reasons. 3 This theory was promulgated to evoke
discussion among the ethnologists of Europe and America,
as to its feasibility or otherwise. On the other hand, the
1 “ Les Indigenes d’ Australie,” Congres Internat. d’ Anthrop. et
<T Archeol. prAhistoriques, Compte Rendu, 12 Session, pp. 488-495.
2 “ Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N.S.W.,
Yol. xxxi., (1897) pp. 160-161.
3 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Yol. xxxix., p. 564, seq. I/Anthropologie,
Yol. xiii., pp. 233-240.


sectional names may have originated from repeated par-
titions of larger groups, but this is a controversial point
which need not be investigated here.
It is shown by the table that the children of both sexes
take the phratry name of their mother. This law also
extends to the clans ; for example, a Dyalupgurk produces
Dyalup children. And if she belong to the porcupine totem,
her offspring will be porcupines too. Again, the miyur of
the progeny has the same name and compass bearing as
that of their mother. To sum up the statements in this
paragraph —the children take their phratry, clan, totem
and miyur from their mother ; or what amounts to the
same thing, from their mother’s brother.
Every individual in the community claims some animal,
plant or inanimate object as his own special totem, which
he inherits from his mother. But all the totems of his
fellow-clansmen are friends of his. For example, if you
ask a Wartwurt man what totem he is, he will tell you his
own totem, and will then probably go on to enumerate
those of his clan.
The general law is as just laid down, but there are some
irregularities upon which I shall make a few observations.
For example, among the Gurogity people, the clans Dyalup
and Burt-Murnya are so much alike that they almost merge
into each other, and have the same miyur or ancestral
home. These remarks apply to Nyaui and Kuttyaga; and
among the Gamaty folk the same thing is observed in
regard to Durrimurak and Wuran.
Moreover, a man who belongs to Dyalup also claims Burt-
Murnya, whilst a Burt-Murnya man calls himself Dyalup
as well. Between Nyaui and Kuttyaga a similar affinity
exists, and also between Durrimurak and Wuran. If ever
Wurt-Pattyangal and Pattyangal were in harmony, they
now belong to opposite phratries and can marry one with


the other. Wiirt-Pattyangal has some reciprocity with
Wartwurt and Durrimurak; Nyaui with Burt-Murnya;
Burt-Wirrimal with Kuttyaga. Muiwillak has affinities
with Wartwurt, Dyalup with Wuran. Dyallan and Pattya-
ngal are related to each other.
The divisions have not reached the stage of development
which would enable one clan to marry only into another
specified clan, but there is a tendency in that direction.
For example, marriages of common occurrence are Wuran
with Kuttyaga ; Pattyangal with Wartwurt; Dyalup with
Dyallan. Muiwillak is also a favourite clan when betrothals
are being arranged by the old men.
In order to further emphasize or distinguish the different
divisions, the phratries and clans have their own style of
painting their bodies and dressing their hair. A very old
Gurogity blackfellow on the Wimmera River assured me,
some years ago, that he could discern a Gamaty man by
his walk. He also gave me to understand that the speech
of each clan was slightly divergent. The Wartwurt clan
spoke Wereka-tyalli; Muiwillak and Wiirt-Pattyangal spoke
Bewa-tyalli; Durrimurak and Wanguguliak spoke Yerra-
tyalli. He also mentioned Yagwa-tyalli; Yardwa-tyalli,
Buiba-tyalli and some others, but could not connect them
with any specific clan.
Each of the dialects just mentioned are named from tlieir
negative adverbs. Werreka, bewa, yerra, yagwa, yardwa,
buiba, all mean “No.” They are all sister tongues of the
Tyat-tyalli, a grammar and vocabulary of which I published
in 1902, 1 and together constitute one great language over
the whole territory referred to in my Dolgarrity Ceremony
of Initiation in later pages.
1 “ The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N.S.W.,
xxxvi., pp. 71 - 106.


The divisions outlined in the foregoing pages not only
pervade all the principal events of a man’s life, but they
accompany him into the grave and the land beyond. When
a member of a clan dies and is buried, the body is laid
horizontally, face upward, with the head placed toward the
part of the horizon which leads to the miyur or spirit-land
of the clan to which the deceased belonged. These miyurs
are divided into the same phratries and clans as the people
of the tribe, as explained in previous pages. The spirit of
a Gurogity man or woman goes to a Gurogity miyur, and a
Gamaty spirit travels away to a Gamaty resting place;
this matter being regulated, in both cases, by the geo-
graphic position of the spirit-home of his clan.
Each miyur has its fabled watering place. For example,
the shades of Dyalup, Burt-murnya and Burt-wirrimal drink
at Mumbul. Bial-bial water supplies Muiwillak, Wuran,
Durrimurak and Burriwan. Wartwurt drinks at Bummir.
Dyallan and Wanguguliak quench their thirst at Dyurnera.
In some of these places there is clear, spring water; in
others ordinary water-courses; some have greyish water ;
whilst others have sea-spray. I forgot to enquire about
the mythic watering places of some of the miyurs.
The spirits of the dead congregate in the miyurs of their
respective clans during their disembodied state, and from
there they emerge and are born again in human shape
when a favourable opportunity presents itself. See my
remarks on the transmigration or reincarnation of souls
in later pages of this work, under the head of “Miscel-
laneous Superstitions.”
When the men go out hunting and catch kangaroos,
snakes, opossums, emus and any other game, every animal
is cooked with the head pointing to the miyur of its clan.
And if dead animals are temporarily laid upon the ground
while the hunters are resting themselves on the way


home to the camp, their heads are turned towards their
respective miyurs.
A hunter carries weapons made from the wood of each
phratry. If he throws at a Gamaty animal, he uses a
Gurogity missile, but Gurogity game are killed with Gamaty
weapons. If a Gurogity animal be the subject of pursuit,
and a Gamaty spear lias been hurled at it with good aim,
without effect, then the hunter concludes either that the
game in question was partly or wholly a Gamaty, or that
there has been some mistake about the wood of which the
spear was manufactured. Forest kangaroos are usually
Gamaty but should one of them be chased by dogs and
escape from them, then that particular animal would be
considered Gurogity.
In the south-western portion of Victoria, along the coast
from the Glenelg River to Geelong, and reaching inland
approximately to the main dividing range, 1 we discover
that the phratry names, with their feminine equivalents,
are slightly different from those already described, as shown
in the following synopsis. The offspring take the phratry,
clan and totem of their mother.
Gurogity Kappatyar Kappaty Kappatyar
Kappaty Gurogityar Gurogity Gurogityar
Everything in the universe is divided between these two
phratries. Among the totems of the Gurogity are included
the following; Flying squirrel, small squirrel, opossum,
pelican, plain turkey, eaglehawk, kurogity (white crestless
cockatoo), plover, white cockatoo (ngaiuk), crane, black
duck, small night-jar, ironbark, oak, bloodwood, broom,
red-gum tree, peppermint tree, white-gum tree, red bull-
dog ant, tiger-snake.
1 For the language of these people, see my “ Native Tribes of Victoria,”
Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xliii., pp. 54-70 ; also my “Language of
the Bungandity Tribe, South Australia,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol.
xxxvii., pp. 59 - 74.


The undermentioned are some of the totems of Kappaty;
Dog, native cat, forest kangaroo, bat, crow, native com-
panion, swan, pelican, black cockatoo, wattle-tree, black-
wood, cherry tree, honeysuckle tree, stringybark tree,
black bull-dog ant, whipsnake (kirtok), eel, Are, rain, stone
tomahawk.
Spears, boomerangs, clubs, spear-levers, shields, etc.,
may belong to either phratry, according to the kind of tree
from which they have been cut. This matter is also some-
times determined through the owner of the weapon in
question.
The totemic families belonging to Gurogity and Kappaty
are divided into clans or castes, somewhat similar to those
in use among the tribes already described, but they are not
so numerous or elaborate. It is not, therefore, thought
necessary to furnish details of their structure.
In the country from Beaufort towards Hexham and
Wickliffe, a part of the region we are dealing with, I dis-
covered that the names of the phratries had changed
Kuttyaga being substituted for Gurogity and Kirtok for
Kappaty —as in the annexed table. The terminal syllables
of the male names are modified to suit the feminine suffix
and afford a euphonic pronunciation:
Kuttyaga Kirtogurk Kirtok Kirtogurk
Kirtok Kuttyaragurk Kuttyaga Kuttyaragurk
According to this table and the last preceding one, the
two phratries intermarry, the one with the other, but the
parties to the alliance must have the same relationship to
each other as those stated in the Ngeumba and Wimmera
tribes already dealt with. Moreover, a Kappaty sometimes
marries a Kappatyar, and a Gurogity marries a Gurogityar,
of the proper lineage. These laws are likewise the same
as those of the Parnkalla organisation, where the two inter-


marrying divisions are Maturri and Kirraroo, extending
from Port Lincoln to Lake Byre basin, in South Australia.
In describing the marriage laws of the Parnkalla nation in
1900, I showed that “ a man marries the daughter of his
father’s father’s sister’s son.” 1 In the same year (1900), I
described the limits of the country occupied by the Parn-
kalla nation, and supplied a map, which no previous author
had attempted, in which the boundaries were accurately
delineated. 2 Likewise in the same year, I described the
initiation ceremonies of the Parnkalla nation, including
the whole of Lake Eyre basin. 3 It must be stated that
Rev. C. W. Schiirmann was the first to report the names
of the two phratries of the Parnkalla tribe. 4 He also
described the ceremonies of circumcision and subincision.
Kuttyaga, as the reader will remember, is one of the clan
names among the tribes north of the dividing range on the
Wimmera River and tributaries, and means the white crest-
less cockatoo. Gurogity is the name of the same bird
among the coast tribes. Kirtok is the equivalent of Dyallan,
also a Wimmera clan, both words meaning the whip-snake,
in their respective languages. It appears therefore that
Kuttyaga and Kirtok have developed into the status of
phratries.
When Mr. James Dawson was writing his book on the
“Australian Aborigines of the Western Districts of Victoria”
in 1881, at pp. 2G-28, he mentions certain divisions of the
aborigines who can intermarry. He says, “ Kuurokeeteh
(my Gurogity), and Karkpcerapp (my Kiirtpirrap), are
1 “ Marriage and Descent among the Australian Aborigines,” Journ.
Eoy. Soc., N.S.W., Vol. xxxiv., p. 126.
* “ Divisions of the South Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Amer. Philos.
Soc., Philadelphia, Yol. xxxix., pp. 78-93, with map.
3 See my “Phallic Eites and Initiation Ceremonies of the South Aus-
tralian Aborigines,” op. cit., Vol. xxxix., pp. 622-638.
4 “Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln, South Australia,” (Adelaide,
1846), p. 9; and “ Native Tribes of South Australia,” (Adelaide 1879),
p. 222.


looked upon as sister classes. It is the same with Kappatch
(Kappaty) and Kirtuuk (Kirtok), and no marriage between
them is permitted.” In examining his text we find that
Kiirtpirrap is evidently a division or equivalent of Gurogity,
and that Kirtok is an equivalent of Kappaty. In pursuing
my ethnological investigations in that district of Victoria
I found Mr. Dawson’s statements correct.
These tribes, like those in the Wimmera River district,
have a spirit-home, which is called maioga in some of the
dialects, and mung'-o in others. All the clans have the
same maioga, which consists of an island a short distance
off the coast of Victoria, about half way between Warr-
nambool and Portland. The native name of this island is
Dhinmar, but it is known on the map as Lady Julia Percy
Island. On the shore of tlie mainland facing the island
there are some large rocks, into the base of one of which
the ceaseless rolling of the billows has worn a cavelike
recess, respecting which the natives have a superstitious
belief that it is in some way connected with Dhinmar.
Every deceased person, when buried, is laid with his head
pointing towards this island. His spirit then provides
itself with a firebrand, consisting of a piece of dry cherry
tree, because this wood emits a peculiar odour whilst burn-
ing, which has the power of warding off danger from the
bearer. The spectre then proceeds to the shore where the
rock is situated, where he divests himself of any clothing
or trinkets he may be wearing on his body, and disappears
over the intervening sea to Dhinmar. The spirits of all the
clans and phratries go to this island, which they occupy in
common, the same as they did in their native hunting
grounds. There they remain until reincarnated.
Sociology of the Tribes of Eastern Victoria.
If we assume a line drawn from Geelong through Oastle-
maine and Pyramid Hill until it meet the Murray River;


thence up that river to its source in Forest Hill; thence
from Forest Hill to Oape Howe; and thence along the
sea-coast back to Geelong. Then all the tribes who
inhabited the region included approximately within these
limits had a marriage system of which I shall now give
as full a summary as the space available in this journal
will permit.
In 1898 I communicated to the Anthropological Society
at Washington, U.S.A., 1 a short account of the intermarry-
ing laws and inaugural ceremonies of these people, but
during subsequent journeyings among the remnants of
the tribes referred to, evidence has accumulated which
enables me now to speak more definitely than was
formerly possible.
As in all other Australian tribes, marriages are regu-
lated by a system of betrothals, which are made by the
elders after a child is born, and not infrequently before
that event. For example, they wish to determine what
woman is the proper wife for a boy A. The old men
know who is the father of A, whom we may designate B;
from this they find 0 the father of B, or A’s grandfather
in the paternal line. 2 Next they discuss who was a sister
of 0, whom we shall denominate D. Then, a daughter of
one of D’s children will be the correct wife for A. That
is, a brother’s son’s child mates with a sister’s son’s child.
This is the regular or direct rule of marriage.
If O’s son’s child be allotted a spouse who is D’s
daughter’s child, the result is the marriage which I have
tentatively distinguished as “ rare,” when dealing with the
Ngeumba tribes in earlier pages.
1 “The Victorian Aborigines—their Initiation Ceremonies and Divis-
ional Systems,” American Anthropologist, Vol. xi., pp. 325 - 313, with map.
2 At the Wonggoa ceremony of initiation described farther on, the
sacred bullroarer is exhibited to the novices under the title of their
“father’s father.”


Although a youth may be allotted a wife from either one
of the branches mentioned, he must be limited to that par-
ticular lineage. For example, if he be assigned a spouse
in the “ direct ” order, he cannot be permitted to obtain
another wife from the “ rare ” line of descent. He may,
however, be allowed more than one wife, but they must all
come from the same lineage, if there should be any more
women available in that direction. This law applies to all
the tribes dealt with in this treatise.
In making the betrothals, the old men endeavour as far
as practicable, to arrange that the brothers and sisters
in certain families shall intermarry with the brothers and
sisters in certain neighbouring families, whether in the
same or in an adjoining tribe. This has the effect of bind-
ing the two families together by ties of kinship, and of
strengthening their claims to consideration in the tribal
councils. It also adds to their importance at the great
gatherings which take place for initiatory ceremonies,
barter and other purposes.
Let us take the birth-place of A of the above example as
a starting point, and call it “No. 1.” In order to get a
foundation to work upon, we will assume that owing to
marriages in prior generations, the man 0 of our example
had a wife betrothed to him in a district, say fifty miles
north of No. 1. It may be only a few miles away, or it
may be a hundred or farther still —the distance being im-
material. In due time, he brought his wife home to No. 1,
and his sister D was taken away to the northern family by
the brother of C’s wife.
After a while, C’s son B of our example, went, say, fifty
miles east to claim his allotted wife, and brought her to
No. 1. B’s sister, however, was taken away by the brother
of B’s wife, to her home in the eastern triblet. D, as we
have seen, went away northward and bore a son who may


be called E, who is brought up in the northern tribe, and
belongs to it. On reaching manhood, E goes into a tribe, fifty
miles westward, and brings home to his own country his
betrothed wife. E’s sister, however, is taken away to the
west in exchange. By and by E’s wife presents him with
a daughter, whom we shall designate F. Then the boy A
of our example is betrothed to the girl F, and he will go up
northward to claim her later on, and bring her home to
No. 1. The brother of F will also claim A’s sister, and take
her away to his own district.
It will be seen by the foregoing examples that the sons
remain in their father’s tribe or family, but the daughters
are taken away into other tribes in return for wives for
their brothers. This may be further illustrated by suppos-
ing that one family, X, has three sons and three daughters,
and another family, Y, has their progeny divided in the same
way. The elder son of the X family marries the elder
daughter of the Y family; the second son marries the second
daughter, and the third son marries the third daughter.
Again, the elder son of the Y family takes the elder daughter
of the X family in exchange for his own sister, and his two
brothers take the second and third sisters in the same way.
It could of course happen that one family might have all
sons, and therefore have no daughters to give in exchange
for wives for them, —or they might have all daughters,
which would land them in the same predicament,—but this
is got over by the following rule of aboriginal society.
Supposing there are four brothers, all married and have
families. Then each of the four brothers will call all the
children his, and the children will in like manner call each
of the four men father. The aggregate of these children
would probably be equally divided as regards sex, so that
the girls could be given in exchange for wives for the boys.
The children of several sisters would in a similar manner


call each woman mother, and each mother would look upon
all the children as her own. It must, however, be borne
in mind that each man, his wife and their own actual pro-
geny form one family and camp by themselves. The broader
terms of kinship just referred to being used merely as a
matter of courtesy and friendship.
In all the tribes of the eastern half of Victoria, 1 the boys
and girls alike inherit the same totem as their male parent;
thus, if the father be a kangaroo, the sons and daughters
will be kangaroos too, irrespectively of the totem of the
mother. Marriage between individuals of the same totem
is strictly interdicted; for example, a man who is an
opossum cannot marry a woman who is an opossum. It
appears, then, that the individuality of the wife, as well as
that of her totem, is lost. In the first place she is taken
into the tribe of her husband, her children are born there,
and belong to that tribe, and take the totem of their father.
The woman of course retains her own totem as long as she
lives. In a community such as this, one can readily under-
stand how clans or small triblets could be formed or
develop. Not only do the sons remain in their father’s
family or tribe, but their children are all brought up there
and learn to speak their father’s dialect, as stated in the
description of the Wonggoa ceremony in later pages of this
treatise.
By studying the genealogy given a few pages back, it
appears that A obtained a spouse from the same family or
clan which supplied his paternal grandfather with a wife,
and that his sister went away there in exchange. 2 If the
1 For the dialects of these people, see my “Aboriginal Languages of
Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N.S.W., Vol. xxxv., pp. 71 - 106 ; also “Notes
on Native Dialects of Victoria,” Vol. xxxvii., pp. 243 - 253.
2 In 1900 I described the sociology of a Gippsland tribe known as Kurnai.
On that occasion I followed the genealogy through the father’s cousin,
instead of tracing it, as now, through the father’s father, which although
amounting to the same thing, is more explicit. See “The Origin,
Organisation and Ceremonies of the Australian Aborigines, Amer.
Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, Vol. xxxix., pp. 560- 562 and 577, with map
showing the boundaries of the several aboriginal nations of Australia.


C, B and A of our example had moderate families, a good
few people would be added to No. 1 district in three gener-
ations. But this is not all. C, B and A probably had each
several brothers wlio all had similar families to themselves,
which would still further reinforce the population of that
locality. In these families where the totem is handed
down, as we have seen, from father to son in perpetual
succession, all the men mentioned would belong to the
same totem.
After a long time, the members of this family might con-
sider themselves strong enough to defend their own hunt-
ing grounds, and would become an independent triblet. If
they all belonged to the kangaroo totem, they could appro-
priately be distinguished as the kangaroo clan. If the clan
from which 0 and A obtained their wives were all of the
musk duck totem, they could be called the musk duck clan.
Again, the eastern people where B of our example ex-
changed his sister for a wife for himself, might be all crows,
and would be denominated the crow clan, and so on. The
name “ totemic clans ” may be used to distinguish triblets
constituted in this way.
For some reason, the kangaroo triblet might divide into
two or more smaller totemic clans and the musk duck
people the same. Some of the kangaroo men might go to
one clan for a wife and some to another, as in the examples
a few pages earlier, where the men went from No. 1 to the
north, east, west, etc. In this way all the clans, although
dispersed over a considerable territory, would be united by
bonds of kindship which would fuse them into one great
nation.
A girl wlio lias been betrothed to a certain man may die
before he gets her, and therefore, to neutralize the chances
of a man not obtaining a wife, more than one girl is usually
betrothed to the same youth. On the other hand, one girl


may be betrothed to several young men. If the man to
whom she is betrothed dies before he is old enough to claim
her, then she becomes the wife of one of the others. When
the parties to the alliance attain puberty, it is necessary
that the old men shall again meet and settle the point as
to who shall marry whom, because nothing can be done
without their ratification.
It must be remembered that until a youth has graduated
in all the inaugural ceremonies of his tribe, and has been
admitted to the rights and privileges of aboriginal manhood,
he cannot claim his promised wife, or be present at any of
the councils or deliberations of the men.
Moreover, when a man goes to claim his allotted wife,
he is required to stand out with his shield, while a certain
number of spears are cast at him by the girl’s brother. If
he be dexterous enough to ward off the missiles without
receiving a wound, and so prove himself a warrior, he can
take his promised spouse, but if not, he must go away with
his people a bachelor as he came. This is not such a seri-
ous ordeal as it appears at first sight. If the claimant does
not prove himself worthy of the girl, then it follows that
her brother cannot obtain the sister of the young man
whom he has wounded. It generally happens, therefore,
that when the brother is throwing the spears referred to,
he takes good care that they shall fall wide of the mark.
There are occasions, however, where the brother has some
other girl in view, or has a “down” upon the suitor, and
in such case does his best to injure him. This custom has
probably given rise to the stockmen’s yarns about “ mar-
riage by capture.”
It lias been said above that the woman and her totem
are absorbed by the tribe into which she marries, but this
must be received with some qualification. An old proverb
says, that “ blood is thicker than water,” and there is no


place where this is more real than in a blackfellows’ camp.
Her brothers know where she is, and will not forget her
totemic claims. A boy’s mother’s brother is an important
personage in all native assemblages, for whatever purpose
they have met. He is there to see that justice is meted
out to his sister’s son, as well as to take part in passing
him through the initiation and other qualifying ceremonies
of his tribe. And in communities where the progeny inherit
the totem of the mother, a youth and his maternal uncle
are fellow totemsmen.
The chief difference in the sociology just described, and
that of the tribes of Western Victoria, consists in the fact
that among the latter the totems are perpetuated through
the women, which renders the development of totemic
clans impossible. In Western Victoria the wives are taken
away from their own people into the families of their hus-
bands, as in all Australian tribes, but the children take
their phratry, totem and other designations from their
female parent; consequently, we find all the divisions
scattered indiscriminately throughout the territory of the
entire community or nation.
Before quitting the subject of sociology, it may be as
well to record in this place that I was the first author to
discover and report the existence of tribes in north-west
Queensland possessing eight divisions in their social struc-
ture. In 1898 I pubished a table illustrating this organisa-
tion on the Nicholson River. 1 In the following year, 1899,
I tabulated another set of eight intermarrying sections,
found among the Inchalachee tribe on Barkly’s Tableland
and the sources of the Gregory River in Queensland. 2 In
1 “ Divisions of Some North Queensland Tribes,” Journ. Eoy. Soc. N.S.
Wales, Voi. xxxn., pp. 251 - 252. The American Anthropologist, Yol. i.,
N.S., p. 596.
2 “ Divisions of Aboriginal Tribes of Queensland,” Journ. Eoy. Soc.,
N. S. Wales, Yol. xxxiii., p. 111.


1899 I also published the sociology of some tribes on Sturt’s
Creek, Ord and Fitzroy Rivers, Western Australia, which
was the first time the eight-section system had ever been
reported in that State. 1 That article was followed by
another in 1900, “defining the geographic limits of that
portion of Australia which is occupied by aggregations of
tribes distinguished by having eight intermarrying sections
in their social structure.” Moreover, among the tribes
adopting the “ eight-section system ” just referred to, in
Queensland, the Northern Territory, and in Western Aus-
tralia, I was the first to observe and publish the marriages
which are provisionally distinguished as “ alternative,”
“rare,” and “exceptional.” 8
In a communication to the Anthropological Society of
Paris, in 1901, when referring to the different systems of
Australian sociology, I stated: “Mais qu’il existe deux,
ou quatre, ou huit divisions de toute la communaute, les
principes fondamontaux qui reglent les manages entre les
divisions du groupe, et 1’ ordre de succession de la posterite
sont identiques en tout.”
Language of Mothers-in-Law.
Throughout the central and south-western districts of
Victoria, and in the south-eastern corner of South Australia
there is a hybrid tongue or jargon in use, comprising a
short code of words, by means of which a mother-in-law
can carry on a Jimited conversation in the presence of her
son-in-law, respecting some of the events of daily life. I
observed jargons of this kind among the Woiwurru, Bun-
wurru, Wuddyawurru, Thaguwurru, Tyapwurru, I)hauhurt-
1 Op. cit., p. 112.
2 “Wumby'a Organisation of the Australian Aborigines,” American
Anthropologist, Yol. ii., N.S., pp. 494 -501, with map.
3 American Anthropologist, Vol. ii., N.S., (1900), pp. 494 - 501; Queens-
land Geographical Journal, Vol. xvi., (1901), pp, 69-90.
4 “ Organisation Sociale des Tribus Aborigines de T Australie,” Bull.
Soc. d’ Anthrop. de Paris, Tome ii., Serie 5, pp. 415-419.
T—Oct. 5, 1904.


wurru and Bungandity tribes when studying and preparing
the grammars of these languages which I have already
published in New South Wales and America.
Mr. James Dawson also observed this “lingo” as he calls
it, among the Peekwurru and Ohaapwurru (my Tyapwurru),
people. 1 Mr. E. M. Curr says, “A father-in-law converses
with his son-in-law in a low tone of voice, and in a phrase-
ology differing somewhat from the ordinary one.” 3 This
jargon may have had its origin in the law forbidding a
youth to learn the language of the friendly tribe into
which he was relegated to be instructed in the national
observances and traditionary lore. 3 Perhaps a sort of
hybrid speech was invented to enable him to converse with
those around him, or within hearing of his potential mother-
in-law. Compare the foregoing with my “ Yauan, or Mystic
Language of the Kamilaroi,” communicated to the Anthro-
pological Institute of Great Britain. 4
Among some of the tribes of New South Wales and the
north-eastern parts of Victoria, I have observed that when
a man is conversing with his wife’s mother’s brother, he
speaks in a tone very little higher than a whisper, and his
uncle addresses him in a similar undertone/
The Wonggoa or Wongupka Ceremony.
The following pages contain an account of the initiation
ceremonies of the native tribes who originally occupied
that portion of North-eastern and Central Victoria situated
on the Upper Murray, Mitta Mitta, Kiewa, Ovens, Buffalo,
King and Broken Rivers. These rites were also in force
on the upper Goulburn, Yarra and Saltwater Rivers.
Although these parts of Victoria have been settled upon
1 “Australian Aborigines of Western Districts of Victoria.” (1881), p. 29.
* “The Australian Race,” (1886), Vol. hi., p. 461.
3 See the last paragraph of the “ Wonggoa Ceremony,” infra.
* Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol. xxxm., pp. 269 - 270.


by Europeans for very many years, nothing at all has
hitherto been done to obtain a comprehensive account of
the initiation ceremonies of the native tribes who were
formerly spread over it. The aboriginal languages of the
people had been equally neglected until I undertook the
congenial task of studying and expounding their gram-
matical structure. 1 The particulars herein reported were
told to me by native men who had passed through the
ceremonies.
When it has been determined to call the people together
for the purpose of inaugurating the youths of the tribes
into the privileges and duties of manhood, messengers are
despatched to the different sections of the community,
informing them of the time and place of the intended
gathering. A suitable camping ground capable of accom-
modating all the tribes who are expected to be present, is
selected near some river, creek or lagoon, in a part of the
tribe’s domain in which there is sufficient game to furnish
food for all the people during the continuance of the cere-
monies. In the vicinity of this main encampment, a circular
space, known as the gu-ang'-a , is cleared of all timber and
grass, and the. soil scraped off the surface in making it level
is used to form a low mound or embankment around its
outer margin.
When a messenger arrives near the camp to which he
has been sent, he waits till late in the afternoon, because
at that time the men have usually returned from their
day’s hunting, and then approaches the single men’s quarters
close to which he sits down. Some of the people go to him
and bring him into the ngulubul , where the headmen of the
tribe are then brought together. The messenger now states
where he has come from and produces the muddyigang or
1 “ The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales,
Vol. xxxvi., pp. 71 - 106.


bull roarer and other emblems of his authority, and tells
them the time and place of the general assembly. Two
men are generally sent together, for the sake of company,
but the one who is charged with the message is generally
of the same totem as the sender, and he delivers it to a
man of that totemic family in the tribe which he has been
directed to muster. Moreover, it is indispensable that the
messenger shall be a man who has passed through all the
inaugural rites of his tribe.
The messenger remains with this tribe until the time
arrives to start for the appointed meeting place. All the
men, women, and children are then mustered up, and the
journey commences. When they reach a point within a
few miles of the main camp, a halt is made, and they paint
their bodies with coloured clays in accordance with the
style customary in their tribe, after which the journey is
resumed —the men in the lead, with the women and children
following. On the approach of the strangers, the men of
the local mob, together with the men of previous contin-
gents who have arrived at the main camp, stand outside
the guanga circle, with their weapons in their hands. The
new arrivals march on in single file in a meandering line,
carrying their boomerangs. They enter the ring and march
round and round until they are all within it in a spiral fold,
with the novices whom they have brought with them in
the centre. The women and children, with leaves in their
hands, are standing in close proximity. The headmen now
call out the names of camping-places, hills, water-holes,
totemic animals and so on, in their native country. The
names of shady trees, blossoming and fruit trees, are also
mentioned. The men likewise call out the names of the
genitalia of both sexes. While they are making these
proclamations, they point their boomerangs towards their
own country, and stamp their feet.


After all the ceremonial connected with the reception of
the strangers is disposed of, they disperse, and erect their
quarters on the side of the general camping ground facing
towards their own territory. Several days, and in some
cases weeks, may intervene between the arrival of the first
mob and that of the last contingent, and in order to occupy
and amuse the people during this time, corroborees are
held every fine night by the light of the camp fires. As
soon as the last tribe has arrived, the headmen assemble
at the ngulubul , and haying consulted each other, they
determine the day when the novices shall be taken charge
of for the purpose of initiation. The band of men who
shall have control of the procedure in the bush are also
chosen at this meeting.
When all the invited tribes have reached the common
meeting ground, a series of special corroborees commences.
The first of this series takes place on the evening of the
day of the arrival of the last mob. At this dance, while
the women are beating their folded skins as usual, an old
man taps a couple of sticks together and stamps one foot
on the ground, and utters the grunt-like exclamations,
“ Rirt! yeh! wall!” Next day there is another dance,
when the old man changes the exclamation to “Yeh ! yeh !
wirr ! ” At the dance which takes place the same evening,
the old man shouts “Birr! wall! wirr ! ” Different words
are employed at eacli dance in prescribed order. On the
evening preceding the breaking up of the encampment, the
old man calls out “Bui! yeh!” On hearing this, every-
body knows that is the last dance of the carnival. At the
conclusion of the dance some of the men pretend to quarrel,
and others run apparently to quell the disturbance, which
suddenly ceases, and then all hands retire for the night.
Next morning all the people are astir at daylight, and the
proponents for initiation are mustered out of the entire


camp at some convenient spot, where they are painted and
invested with the brow-band, waist-belt and apron. Strings
made by cutting narrow strips of the skin of the ring-tail
opossum, with the fur on, and twisted, are bound round the
biceps and fore-arms of the novices. It is believed that
this binding causes the muscles of the arms to develop.
A guardian is now assigned to each boy. Such guardian is
one of the brothers, actual or titular, of the women from
among whom the novice could obtain a wife in accordance
with the laws of the tribe.
The novices are next conducted into the guanga , where
they stand with their heads bowed, surrounded by a cordon
of men. Before the boys are taken into the ring, each
mother secures a portion of her son’s apron, ngore , and
swings it round her head as she gesticulates and jumps about.
A large fire, which has been burning in the guanga all night,
has reduced itself to a heap of hot embers and ashes. The
mothers of the novices, and all the other women, with the
children, are also gathered up a little way from the ring,
where they are made to lie down, and are covered with
bushes, grass or rugs. A sufficient number of men are
appointed to keep guard over them, so that they may see
nothing of the next performance.
A number of men have provided themselves with green
boughs having a dense foliage and a stem about two or
three feet in length. They catch hold of these boughs by
the stem and hold them up over the novices where they are
standing in the guanga , thus forming a thick leafy canopy
above their heads. At a given signal from the chiefs, a
contingent of active men selected from every tribe present,
then pick up bark shovels, bundurra , shaped something like
a tennis racket, and commence throwing the hot ashes from
the fire above referred to, over the bough canopy. The
boys underneath are surging round and round in a compact


body, whilst the men hold the boughs close together over-
head, trying to ward off as much as possible of the falling
coals and ashes. The men and the boys shake their
shoulders, and jump, for the purpose of dislodging any of
the fiery shower which may descend upon their bodies.
This fire throwing ordeal continues until all the ashes and
embers have been distributed. 1
The heads of the novices are then covered with rugs and
they are marched away by their guardians till they get
quite out of sight of the guanga. They arrive at a place
where a line of holes about the size and shape of a human
foot and a few inches deep, has been dug in the soil, with
a layer of leaves strewn upon the bottom. Two holes are
dug for each novice who is to be operated upon. 2 The boys
are now turned rapidly round and round until they become
giddy, after which they are placed standing with their feet
in the holes. Each guardian then comes behind the boy he
has in charge, and kneeling down, puts his head between
his legs, so that the boy sits on his shoulders. Another
man stands along side, and places bis hands over the boy’s
eyes, so that he may not see or recognise the man who
takes out his tooth. A small piece of tough stick is placed
across the lad’s mouth to prevent his shutting it. During
these proceedings a mucldyigang is sounding in close
proximity. The tooth extractor must be selected from
among the men of one of the strange tribes. He pretends
to accept the office reluctantly, whereupon an old chief
pats him on the back with the open hand, and encourages
him to undertake the important task. A fresh “ dentist ”
must be appointed for each novice in the same manner.
1 Compare with, my account of the Bunan, in which, on the morning of
taking the novices away, they are exposed in front of a fierce fire, until
dazed and stupified by the heat. —“ The Bunan Ceremony,” American
Anthropologist, Vol. ix., (1896), pp. 835, 336. Proc. Qeog. Soc., Brisbane,
Yol. xv., p. 68.
2 Sometimes only one pair of holes were dug, and the novices were
placed in them in succession while the tooth was extracted.


The man entrusted with the dental operation, then steps
up and with his finger nail pushes back the gum from the
tooth to be extracted. Sometimes a headman walks along
and rubs the boy’s gum with a large quartz crystal for the
ostensible purpose of loosening the tooth and making it
draw out easily. The extractor then places one end of a
small wooden chisel against the front of the tooth and gives
it a smart blow on the other end with a mallet, which forces
it out. 1 More than one blow is often required to dislodge
the tooth, which is then taken out of the lad’s mouth with
the man’s fingers, and the gum pressed together. As the
tooth is held up to public view, all the men, who are stand-
ing around, shout wirr ! wirr ! and call out the names of
places in the novice’s native country, as well as the totems
of his family. A man near by swings a bullroarer. The
blood which flows from the wounded gum must be swallowed
by the boy—he cannot spit it out. The tooth is then
handed to the lad’s mother’s brother, or to his mother’s
mother’s brother, should he be living.
When all the lads have been operated upon, the guardians
assist them to withdraw their feet from the holes, which
are then filled up. The mallet and chisel are either burnt
or are driven into the ground. The novices are then taken
away to a resting place in the bush, where they sit down
on leaves spread on the ground. Here they remain motion-
less, with their hands held to their sore mouths, and the
rugs still on their heads so that they can see nothing of
what is going on around them.
All the able-bodied men start away and leave the novices
in charge of some infirm old fellows, and men who have
been maimed by accidents or fights. These feeble pro-
tectors commence lamenting among themselves, so that
the novices can hear all that is said, something as follows:
1 In some tribes both upper incisors were punched out.


“We are unable to take these youths through the bush and
provide food for them. Our great-grand-fathers used to go
about in canoes on the dry land as easily as on the water;
perhaps they will come and help us.” Just then a man, a
little distance off, gently swings a bullroarer, so that its
intermittent sounds apparently just die away upon their
ears. The eldest man says to the others, “ That is the
distant ripple of the paddle of my father’s father’s large
canoe ; let us go and meet him and he will take us any-
where we wish to go.”
They now assist the boys to rise, and all of them go for-
ward for some distance, when they encounter the men who
had gone away from them a little while previously. The
old men pretend to be very much surprised at this opportune
and unexpected meeting ; and amid much apparent rejoicing
the novices are given into the care of the same guardians
who had charge of them before. It should be explained
here that when the men went away ahead, as stated above,
it was for the purpose of giving them time to paint their
bodies and get their weapons and other belongings together,
to enable them to perform their share of the role in the bush.
Men and boys now journey on till they come to a creek
or waterhole where they intend to camp. A bough yard
of a crescent shape is made, and leaves strewn upon the
ground within it, on which the novices are placed sitting,
with their heads bowed ; and a fire is lit to keep them
warm. If a novice wants anything he is not allowed to
ask for it, but must make a sign to the guardian who has
charge of him. The men set to work and dig several lttle
holes, papal' tua, about the size of a wash-basin, and bend
a small green rod, with some leaves attached, over each
hole. The ends of the rod are inserted in opposite sides of
the hole, the rod forming a vertical arch, the centre of
which is a few inches above the level of the surrounding


surface. These holes are then filled with water carried
from the creek in native vessels. Some rush-grass is cut
and spread flat on top of the water, where it floats.
All the novices are now brought up to the papalwas,
where they crouch down and rest their elbows on the bank,
and bend their heads and necks over the rods, while they
each suck a mouthful of water through the net-like cover-
ing of loose rush-grass floating on the surface. They must
not swallow the liquid, but keep it in their mouths, and
rise to their feet. All the men likewise take a mouthful
of water from the holes in the same way. Men and boys
now approach the fire already mentioned and squirt the
water out of their mouths upon it —as many as possible
squirting at the same moment. The men then jump round
and sing:
“ Bingalga wanba warrana! yeh ! woh! ”
This chant is repeated over and over again for some
time, and when it is finished the novices are allowed to
drink a few mouthfuls of water by crouching down beside
the papalivcis, or water pans, as before. They are also
given some human ordure and animal flesh. In a little
while both boys and men go to rest for the night.
If the fire above referred to was extinguished by the
water blown from the mouths of the men and boys, it was
a bad omen, and portended that perhaps some evil would
happen to the party whilst engaged upon their duties in the
bush, or that some of the novices might divulge the secrets
later on, and be punished witli death for doing so. But if
the fire blazed up again after a short time, it was a sign
that everything would turn out right.
The following morning the party go out hunting, accom-
panied by the novices and their guardians. When stoppages
are made in the bush, the boys are placed sitting upon green
boughs spread upon the ground, and are not allowed to do


anything. During the afternoon one of the men, who is
remarkable for a rotundity of stomach, goes on ahead, and
with the assistance of some friends who accompany him,
disguises himself as a woman, and lies down in a sheltered
place. His friends then stick spears into the ground all
around him. Presently the rest of the party, apparently by
chance, pass along that way, and pretend that they suppose
the person lying within the circle of spears is a woman
about to give birth to a child. The novices are brought
forward to see the woman, and a number of men dance
round outside the spears, singing :
Bandhanggorba wirralgin ngaia.
The dancing and singing only lasts a short time, and then
all the party proceed with their hunting. On arriving at
the place which has been agreed upon as their camping
ground for the night, a yard is made for the novices in the
usual manner. Between this yard and the quarters of the
men, a space is cleared of the loose surface rubbish, and a
fire lit to provide the necessary illumination. After the
evening meal has been disposed of, the novices are con-
ducted out of their yard and are put sitting dowp in front
of the fire, while the men gp through various burlesque
representations. These performances consist for the most
part of imitating animals, or of scenes from the daily life
of the people, and are all accompanied by much merriment
and obscenity. Some of the animals selected are the
totems of those present, whilst others are connected with
the myths and superstitions current among the different
tribes.
During the next day, the burlesque of “Thunder,” muri-
muriwa, is enacted. The novices are brought up to a place
where several men are kneeling in a row, with pieces of
bark in their hands. These pieces of bark are about two
feet six inches long and about six inches broad at the widest


part. The outside man at one end of the row hits the ground
in front of him forcibly with his bark, and all the men utter
a low, rumbling noise and strike the ground in succession.
When this “ peal ” reaches the other end, the outside man
there hits the ground with his piece of bark and is followed
by the other men back to the original striker. This per-
formance is repeated several times backwards and forwards
and is intended to represent the rolling of distant thunder.
Some of the old men address the novices, saying “ Your
great-grandfathers are coming by and by to take you along
in their canoes on the dry land.” Presently the booming
sound of the bullroarer, muddyigang , is heard and the loud-
ness increases till it is quite close. The guardians call out
as if addressing some one, “ Wait a while ! the lads will get
into the canoes directly.” Almost immediately the rugs
are lifted off the boys’ heads, and they are told to look at
the men swinging the muddyigangs. Each guardian then
says to his novice, “ There is your grandfather.” The
swingers now advance and place a bullroarer under the arm
of each novitiate, who is at the same time cautioned against
revealing what he has seen and been taught during the
sojourn in the bush. Each novice is cautioned by a warrior
belonging to one of the strange tribes.
The reader will now be taken back to that portion of the
narrative where we left the women and children covered
over at the guanga. As soon as the men and novices get
out of sight of the camp, the covering is removed by some
old men who have remained in charge of them, and they
are set at liberty. The mothers and female relatives of
the novices then scrape together all the ashes and coals
which had been thrown over the youths in the way described
in an earlier page, and form a heap in the centre of the
guanga. Each mother has a reed spear on the end of which
she fastens the portion of her son’s ngore which she had


secured that morning, as stated, and then inserts the other
end of the spear into the mound of ashes, on the side which
faces her native country. All tfie spears thus decorated
with ngores, are now standing vertically, or nearly so, in
the heap, and the mothers and other near relatives dance
and jump around, singing the songs customary on such
occasions. 1
If any man belonging to the party who have charge of
the novices in the bush, has occasion to go back to the
women’s camp on a message or for any other purpose, as
soon as he appears in sight two of the women run to meet
him, each carrying a reed spear with the ngore attached.
They hold the spear over the man’s head and swing it in
such a way that the dangling ngore describes a circle all
round his head, about a foot distant from it. Then the
women run back to the guanga and stand their spears in
the mound of ashes as they were before. If there are two
or more men they are each saluted in the same way, after
which they march up to the camp and explain the business
upon which they have come.
The mothers of the novices eat practically the same kind
of food which is given to their sons in the bush, and must
remain silent the same as their sons. They sing the pre-
scribed songs every morning at dawn and every evening at
dusk ; and whilst standing singing they lift burning sticks
from off the fire and wave them repeatedly towards the
direction in which they suppose the camp of the novices to
be situated. The novices, their mothers and their potential
wives are all painted alike, according to the pattern of the
tribe to which they respectively belong. Each tribe lias
its own distinguishing style of painting at these ceremonies.
The mother of every novice has a woman to look after her
1 See my ‘ Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies,” Queensland
Geographical Journal, Vol. xvii., pp. 61 - 63.


and give her food. This guardian is generally one of the
sisters of her husband, or one of her own sisters. Each
mother has a small fire which she keeps alight all the time,
and she heaps the soil or sand up around it so that it cannot
be seen at a distance.
We will now resume the account of the proceedings in
the bush at the point where the novices were shown the
bullroarers, as described a few pages back. Next morning
the neophytes are taken to a place where there is a patch
of open and moderately level ground, from which the grass
has been removed. Within this space is a sheet of bark,
stripped from a gum tree, on which is cut the rude outline
of a man about half life-size, representing Dharamulan, a
mystic personage connected with the initiatory rites.
Sometimes this figure is formed by heaping up the loose
earth into the required shape ; and in portions of the region
herein dealt with there are other drawings on the ground,
some being heaped up, whilst others are cut into the soil.
Lying on the top of the human figure are two real bull-
roarers, 1 one being the mucldyigang or larger kind, and the
other the yirraga-minnunga , which is supposed to be the
wife of Muddyigang. The novices are brought up and shown
the image of Dharamulan, with his two descriptions of
bullroarers, and are invited to carefully observe them. The
men then dance round and sing:—
Dharamulan ngunning-a-wa
Nundhunna, yell! yeh! yell!
After this exhibition, the youths are warned against
revealing anything which has been said or done in the bush,
under terrible penalties of being cruelly murdered, or being
1 Among the Yarra and Saltwater River blacks —the Wurrundyirra-
baluk—where the Wonggoa Ceremony also extends, the bullroarer is
called berber'ogan. I got this name from “ Billy Berak,” a Woiwurrung
blackfellow.


seized with fearful maladies from which it is impossible to
recover.
One evening after dark the men play the opossum game,
dumpul. Several men of different stature ascend a tree
with dense foliage within sight of the camp fire. This is
done unknown to the novices. By and by the other men
say “Let us see if there are any opossums in that tree?”
and commence throwing sticks up among the branches.
Some of the men in the tree mimic the call of opossums
and micturate down upon the ground in imitation of a habit
of those animals. The men then descend the tree, one
after another, at intervals of a few minutes. A hunter
stands at the base of the tree, and as each “opossum”
comes down he apparently hits it on the head with a stick
and it falls upon the ground. During the performance the
audience make remarks upon the size and appearance of
each animal “ killed ” —that it is large, small, fat, and so
on. The last “ opossum ”to descend is the biggest of the
lot, and as the hunter knocks it on the head, it falls on its
back exposing the genitalia, and all hands call out, “ That
is an old buck ! ”
Different burlesques and songs take place every day and
every evening, but their essential characteristics are the
same. Among these performances for the instruction and
amusement of the company are mimic plays of the locust,
native companion, kangaroo, porcupine and other animals.
At all times when marching along through the bush care
is taken that the boys shall not walk under a leaning tree,
nor between two trees the branches of which press against
each other, because their future growth might thereby
be impeded, or some other bad luck befall them. If a
novice’s belt works loose and falls to the ground, it must
not be picked up and given to him again. His guardian
takes off his own belt and gives it to the boy, and takes in


exchange the one which fell off. And if it be necessary to
cross a watercourse or swamp when out hunting, the novices
are carried over on the men’s shoulders.
Whilst the men and novices are away in the bush, if any
of the men at the women’s camp wish to go out to see
them, they shout bu-u-u ! when they arrive within hearing,
and the bush mob answer them in the same way. They
march on, uttering the same sound, and are answered again
and again until they get close enough to the men’s camp,
where they are met by the old chiefs, and state the purport
of their visit.
Every aboriginal camp is kept free of excrementitious
matter. When any of the people attend to a necessity of
nature, they make a hole in the ground and cover the deposit
over with earth. This is perhaps not so much on account
of cleanliness as from their superstitious fear of anything
belonging to them being picked up by evil spirits, or enemies
prowling about the camp, at night or any other time.
When the ceremonies in the bush are over, the novitiates
are brought back to the confines of the women’s camp,
where a wall or screen of boughs has been erected, and a
fire lit at the butt of a tall tree close by. When the men
and boys get within about a mile of this place, they form
into a sinuous line, and advance in a kind of jog. All the
novices are in the front, painted and having a forked, leafy
bough fastened on each shoulder. Each Tmy’s mother’s
brother runs in front of him, with his guardian on one side.
On arriving within sight of the bough screen, the mothers
and aunts go out to meet their sons, each carrying a bunch
of twigs in her hand. A mother and her sister take their
places one on each side of her son and jog on with him.
They each strike him lightly on the hips with their twigs,
and shout “ yer! yer /” as they move onward. When the
novices arrive in front of the fire, they come to a stand,


ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIA. 1 1 9
and the mothers and aunts take up their places farther
back. Men who are in attendance place green bushes on
the fire —the women and novices throwing their boughs on
top of the rest. As soon as the bushes have burnt suffici-
ently to create a dense smoke, the novices are held in it by
their guardians until they are partially suffocated. They
are then conducted to a place prepared for them not far
from the men’s quarters. They are now called Narramang,
and can go out hunting with the men.
Early next morning the catechumens are again marched
away by their guardians and the old men, for the purpose
of receiving further instruction, and are kept in the bush
for such time as may be fixed by the elders. At the end
of the prescribed period they are again brought back to the
vicinity of the women’s camp and are required to stand in
a dense smoke. They are then released and are placed
sitting on a seat prepared for them. This seat, karkaria ,
consists of two long logs of wood laid side by side, with
leaves thickly piled up on top, for the lads to sit upon.
Their mothers have placed netted bags containing food
beside the seats for their sons’ use. The old women and
the mothers of the boys are looking on a short distance off,
but the young women must turn their faces the contrary
direction.
Every novice must spend a further term of probation
among some of the visiting tribes. It is also necessary
that they must attend one or more additional wonggoa
gatherings before they can become thoroughly acquainted
with the different parts of the ceremonial, and be admitted
to the higher grade. The novitiates are kept under the
control of their seniors for a considerable time, being longer
for the younger boys than for those verging upon manhood.
During this period they must not learn to speak the dialect
of the people among whom they are sojourning, because
U—Oct. 5, 1904.


every boy is required to perpetuate the speech of his fore-
fathers. A youth is generally sent to spend his probationary
term in the tribe from which he is to get his wife by and
by, when the old men are satisfied that he is entitled to
that privilege. A portion of the scarring of the youth’s
back, arms, and chest, is executed during this time, and lie
is instructed in the dances, songs, and folklore of the people.
The position, extent and pattern of the scarring is regu-
lated by the custom of the tribe to which the novitiate
belongs. When a youth has been scarred he is called
yenyanuga. See “ Mumbirbiri or Scarring the Body,” supra.
I have elsewhere described the Kannety ceremony of
initiation, practised by the aborigines of the south-western
districts of Victoria from Geelong westerly to the South
Australian boundary. I have also published full details of the
Wonggumuk ceremony, w r hich is in force in portions of the
central and northern districts of that State.
The Tyibbauga Ceremony.
11l the course of some months, or it may be a year or
two, or perhaps several years, after the youth has passed
through all the grades of the Wonggoa ceremony, he must
submit to the further rite of Tyib-bau-ga . The interval
which elapses between the two inaugural courses is entirely
in the hands of the old chiefs, being regulated by the boy’s
age. It is not necessary to form a circle upon the ground,
like the gucmga, neither is it imperative to convene the
whole community, as in the ceremonial of the Wonggoa.
But it is generally considered politic to consult with the
leading men of some of the neighbouring tribes, who may
desire to witness the proceedings, or perhaps bring a few
boys of their own to be initiated, Messengers, who must
be men who have passed through all the rites connected
with the ceremony, are despatched to arrange the pre-
liminaries, and when the time arrives the people proceed
to the place appointed.


It not infrequently happens that while a batch of noviti-
ates are passing through the Wonggoa, and before the tribes
disperse, such of the young men present who have submitted
to the requisite course of instruction at previous meetings,
are taken charge of by the headmen, and are admitted to
the final degree of tgibbauga. This is done to avoid the
trouble and delay of mustering the people again. It will
in some respects be more convenient to describe the pro-
cedure respecting one of the novices only, asking the reader
to remember that they are all treated alike. The following
details were related to me by a man who had been thus
initiated.
The candidate for initiation is taken from the single men’s
camp early in the morning, unknown to the women. A rug
is thrown over his head, and he is escorted by some strange
men to a retired spot a little way out of sight. Here a Are
has been lighted beside which are lying ready for use
.several bundles of the dry outer bark shed in the spring
time by the upper branches of some forest trees. A man
steps up to a youth and catches hold of the hair on one
side of the head whilst another man singes it off, little by
little by applying a lighted taper made of the bark just
referred to. This is done carefully and takes a good deal
of time —just sufficient blaze being applied to remove the
hair without injuring the boy’s skin. The hair on the other
side of the head is singed off in the same manner. Along
the middle zone of the skull, from the forehead to the back
of the head, a strip of hair, about two inches wide, is left
intact, and is curled into a ridge. Both sides of the head
from which the hair has been removed are then daubed
with pipeclay mixed with common earth. The hair in the
armpits, and the pubic hair, is also singed off. If any of
the youths have an inceptive beard it is similarly dealt with.
It should be explained that the hair on the sides of the
boy’s head is not wholly consumed, like that growing on


the other parts of the body. The operator separates it into
small wisps or coils, which he holds out horizontally, one
at a time, and then applies the taper near the roots, thus
severing the hair from the head. The whole is then
wrapped up with green leaves and tied round with string
made of opossum fur. This is attached to the desiccated
tail of a native dog, and hung upon a neck-lace which is
worn by the guguba or maternal uncle of the lad’s mother.
The youth’s body is greased and white stripes of paint
drawn upon his back, and from his forehead down his nose,
chest and stomach, extending right down to the end of his
penis. A belt is put round his waist, and green, leafy
boughs fastened in it to represent an apron or burrandity.
A forked green bough is fastened on each shoulder.
By the time these preparations have been completed it
is well on in the afternoon, and the novice is kept in a quiet
place out of the way of traffic. Most of the men and
women are awa£ hunting, and return to the main camp
about an hour before sundown, and commence preparations
for the evening meal. When everybody is busy dressing
and cooking the results of the day’s hunting, the graduate
is brought out suddenly and runs in amongst them, shouting
Hoh! hoh ! yeh ! yell! waho! He jumps and shakes his
legs like the men do at corroborees. In one hand he carries
a piece of smouldering bark, around the proximal end of
which green twigs are tied. In the other hand he holds a
club or other weapon, with which he occasionally taps the
burning bark, making sparks fly in all directions.
He promenades from one group of hunters to another all
about the camp, gesticulating and shouting in the same
way. He then withdraws to the place prepared for him
near the men’s quarters, where his guardian and a few old
chiefs look after him for the night. He sleeps with the
forked boughs on his shoulders, but next morning he casts


them away. His guardian then provides him with a bag,
dhulang munna , made of kangaroo skin, with a loop made
of string attached, so that it can be slung over the shoulder.
His head is freshly plastered with clay, and the painting
of his body is also renewed.
The graduate passes the loop over one shoulder, letting
the dhulangmunna hang under his arm on the opposite side.
In this bag he carries excrement of dogs and other filth.
He starts away at a sort of jog, shouting, and goes to a
camp in which is a girl who has been betrothed to him.
She steps forth and puts some stinking fish, maggotty flesh
or the like, into his bag.
He passes on to another camp where a man or woman
will perhaps call out “Tyibbauga! fetch me some water.”
He answers, “ waho !” and taking the vessel offered to him,
scampers off to the creek or water-hole and brings back a
small quantity of water with dirt in it. The person refuses
this, and then the novice goes and brings good water.
Several different persons may make the same request, and
lie similarly responded to.
Some one will ask him for food and he offers them some
of the evil-smelling commodities out of his bag, or perhaps
he brings them a few bare bones. Or he may offer them
stones, leaves, or grass. An old man may want him to
bring some firewood. He goes and gets a small stick about
ns thick as a man’s finger and a foot or two long, which he
carries on his shoulder, pretending to groan under its great
weight and throws it on the fire.
Some days lie carries in liis bag a live “ sleepy lizard ”
or a snake out of which the poison fangs have been taken
by means of a stick. In passing women and children sit-
ting down he casts the reptile in amongst them, which
scatters them hither and thither. He is not permitted,
however, to catch hold of a woman, or to interfere with


any of her work. Another time he collects a few rotten
toadstools, pieces of putrid meat, pounded charcoal, or
human excreta, and proceeds on his rounds. He will raise
a loud lamentation, and on the people running to him to-
see what is the matter, he pelts them with the contents
of his bag. Perhaps he has in his bag a live opossum from
which all the fur has been plucked. He suddenly liberates
the animal, which runs away among the spectators.
If he finds a little boy going about by himself, he picks
him up and runs towards a water hole with him, pretend-
ing he is going to drown him. On being pursued by the
child’s mother, or another woman, he lets him drop, and
goes on. Whilst travelling through the camp he is con-
stantly gesticulating in an indecent manner, and if he has
to comply with any necessity of nature, he does it wherever
he happens to be at the moment, in view of everyone.
If the graduate sees some men sitting at a camp, he will
challenge them to come and wrestle with him. If they are
roasting a small animal on the coals, he may rush up and
upset it into the dirt, or cast filth upon it, or perhaps he
will take hold of it and put it into his bag.
If a number of women or girls are bathing in a river or
waterhole near the camp, he sneaks up close to them under
cover of some bushes, and suddenly dashes out shouting
and gesticulating to make them believe that enemies are
assailing them. Several men run to the rescue, pretending
they think some wild blacks have attacked the women, and
the graduate disappears.
The guardian renews the painting of the novice’s body
and the sides of his head every morning and sees that the
contents of his bag are satisfactory. He also provides the
youth with a burning brand, composed of two pieces of dry
bark placed side by side, which he carries in his hand,
enveloped in green leaves. As soon as this bark smoulders-


away, it is replaced. The novice usually carries a weapon,
as a shield, a club, a spear, a tomahawk ; it is the guardian’s
duty to supply him with these.
Young women who are eligible to the graduate in mar-
riage, encourage him by replenishing his bag, and potential
brothers-in-law afford him every opportunity of displaying
his buffoonery. At intervals during all the peculiar cere-
monial practises of the graduate, above described, he calls
o.ut“Hoh! Hey! Waho!” whilst perambulating the camp.
Sometimes he jumps and quivers his legs ; at other times
he goes at a jog, swinging his body from side to side; or
any comical attitude in which he has been carefully drilled
by his guardian. Where there is a chance of introducing
the obscene or phallic element, it is taken advantage of.
It is part of the ordinary routine of the ceremony that a
number of demands shall be made upon the novice during
his peregrinations. Every man or woman who wishes to
assist him in consummating the prescribed ritual calls out
“Tyibbauga!” and is answered by the shout “Waho!”
The order is then given and it is the duty of the novice to
comply with the requests of the people, or at any rate
make a pretence of doing so.
The guardian or sponsor of the graduate is somewhere
whithin view all the time, and when the evening approaches
he takes his ward back to their own camping place, where
he attends to all liis wants and “coaches” him for the
duties of the next day. These itinerary performances, with
variations, continue from day to day until the hair, which
was singed off, begins to grow again. None of the perform-
ances above described are ever enacted by the youth during
the night time, but are confined exclusively to the day.
When the council of old men considers that ail the
necessary procedure has been gone through, the perambu-
lation of the camp is discontinued, and the youth is taken


to the single men’s quarters, where a place has been assigned
to him. He is not allowed to go into the women’s camp,
nor must he converse with any woman whom he meets.
The guardian and his people then give presents of spears,
rugs and other articles to the graduate’s father and his
people; and the latter in return make gifts to the guardian’s
friends, at a meeting which has been held for that purpose.
The graduate has now attained the final step in the initia-
tory course, and after a time he will be allowed to claim
the bride who has been betrothed to him, and exercise the
rights and burdens of tribal membership.
The Dolgarrity Ceremony.
Another form of initiation ceremony, called Dol-gar-rity,
of which the following is a condensed description, was
practised among the tribes who formerly roamed over the
north-western districts of Victoria from the Avoca River 1
westward to the South Australian boundary, and extending
from the Murray River southerly to the main range. The
following particulars were gathered by me in the native
camps.
The preliminaries connected with convoking the neigh-
bouring tribes at an appointed meeting place were sub-
stantially the same as those adopted in the Wonggoa, but
there was no circular enclosure like the guanga at the main
encampment. There was, however, a level portion of
ground cleared of all loose sticks and rubbish, for the pur-
pose of dancing on.
As soon as all the tribes who are expected in answer to
the summons of the messengers have made their appearance
the chief men of each contingent consult together, and fix
the day on which the principal function of the meeting
1 For the language of these people, see my article on “ Die Sprache des
Tyeddyuwurru-Stammes der Eingebornen von Victoria/’ Mitteil. d.
Anthrop. Gesellsch. in Wien, Bd. xxxiv., S. 71 76.


shall commence. They also choose the boys who are to be
operated upon, but this information is not communicated
to the women. When the eventful morning arrives, all the
people get up at daybreak, and congregate in a central
portion of the camping ground. All the boys are mustered
out of the whole camp and are put sitting in a row on green
boughs or pieces of bark spread on the ground for the pur-
pose. Several men who have been selected to take charge
of the boys are standing opposite, and have been carefully
instructed by the chiefs what boys are to be picked out
from among the large number who are sitting in the row
in front of them. The time of life at which a youth is con-
sidered ready for the ordeal is determined by the first
appearance of hair on the pubes and chin.
Each man has a small quantity of pipe-clay, in a liquid
state, concealed in his mouth. One of these men, pretend-
ing to discern a stranger in the distance, says to his
comrades “Who is that coming yonder? ” Another man
answers, “ Probably some one to see the boys.” This
causes the youths to turn their heads rearward to look at
the supposed new comer. As soon as they do so, each man
puts his forefinger into his mouth and pulls it out covered
with pipe-clay ; and on the boys again facing round to the
front, the men step up to them, and with their fingers draw
a white line down the faces of those who have been chosen,
from the forehead to the chin. This is a signal to the
women, as well as to all the other people in the camp, that
the youths thus marked have been taken possession of by
tlie elders, and the remainder of the boys in the row are
then dismissed.
The men who have been deputed to act as guardians to
the novices now take charge of them and paint their bodies
with red ochre and grease —the hair of their heads being
combed with pointed sticks and decorated with white


feathers. When all is ready a number of men armed with
spears surround the boys and their guardians, shouting and
beating their weapons together, and all of them march
away. The mothers of the novices, as well as the other
women present, make a pretence of resistance by gesticu-
lating frantically and throwing small sticks over the heads
of the men, but do not attempt to follow them.
Rugs are then thrown over the heads of the graduates
and they are conducted about a quarter or half a mile into
the bush, and put sitting down on bushes, in charge of a
few feeble old men. The strong agile fellows go forward a
short distance, for the purpose of painting their bodies and
otherwise preparing themselves for their duties. The
novices being now alone with the old men, the latter pre-
tend to discuss with each other, so that the boys can over-
hear them, something to this effect: “All the active young
men have gone away and left us poor old fellows to provide
for these youths. We cannot climb trees to catch opossums
or similar animals or procure honey. Neither can we run
after game upon the ground. What shall we do ?” Then
they chant a melancholy song to suit the occasion, and
some of them pinch the ears of the dogs to make them howl.
This has a very depressing effect upon the poor novices who
are sitting motionless, with the rugs still over their heads,
so that they can see nothing of what is going on around
them. Presently one of the old men says, encouragingly,
“ Never mind, we will do our best to obtain food for the
boys and ourselves. We can climb leaning trees for
opossums, and perhaps catch a few fish, or procure some
yams and grubs.” After a while they help the novices to
their feet and lead them along till they reach the place
where the other men went to a short time before. They
induce the novices to believe that they have accidentally
come upon their friends again. Each graduate is now given


into the charge of the man who is to act as his guardian
and sponsor throughout the remainder of the proceedings.
The guardian must not belong to the novice’s own people,
but is selected from one of the visiting tribes into which
the lad could lawfully marry later on.
The whole party now starts away and proceeds to a
secluded locality previously agreed upon, perhaps some
miles distant, where a camp is formed and the graduates
are placed lying down on a layer of green leaves upon the
ground, and are covered over with cloaks or grass —their
guardians remaining with them. A fence of boughs is
erected around where the boys are lying, to protect them
from the wind. This yard resembles a horse-shoe in shape,
with the open end to leeward, and all the men make their
own camps in close proximity. Between the quarters of
the novices and those of the men a space is cleared of all
sticks and grass, and one or more fires lighted beside it. In
the evening, after the youths have partaken of their allow-
ance of food, they are placed sitting in a row near this
prepared spot, and the men go through various semidramatic
performances, consisting of imitating the characteristic
movements and calls of different animals, and indulging in
many obscene gesticulations which are usually practised
on similar occasions, described by me in treating of the
inaugural rites of other tribes.
At tlie close of the evening’s functions, all hands lie
down to rest. During the night the boys are not allowed
to sleep soundly. The guardians keep continual watch,
relieving each other in turn. Just as a lad drops off to
sleep he is roused up again. Next morning the men go out
in quest of game, but the guardians remain with the boys
all day and prevent them from going to sleep. That even-
ing shortly after dark, a number of young men, under the
direction of the elders, provide themselves with large green


boughs, and run past where the novices are lying, shaking
and rustling the boughs, thumping their feet on the ground,
and uttering humming sounds in imitation of the roaring
of the wind. If any small saplings are growing near, they
are snapped off with a crash by some of the men. This
rushing past may be repeated several times, to make the
lads believe a violent tornado is blowing. When the “storm”
ceases, men and boys seek their night’s repose, but the
latter are awakened at short intervals, as before.
On the following day the depilation of the graduates is
commenced. The boys are carried out of the yard and
placed on their backs on couches of green bushes. They
are so worn out by having been kept awake so long that
they are in a state of semi-slumber and take but little
notice of what is done to them. A man sits down beside
each novice and begins pulling out the hair from the pubes,
under the arms and the incipient beard. When one man
becomes tired he is replaced by another; or two men may
be employed on the same youth. Beeswax or gum is used
upon the ends of the fingers to facilitate catching the hair,
which is pulled out singly. The men of the novitiate’s own
tribe do not take part in the hair-plucking operation—this
duty devolving upon the men of some of the strange tribes
present. The pluckers must be men who have been initiated
in the same way at previous gatherings, and are the poten-
tial brothers-in-law of the respective novices who are
assigned to them. The youth is not allowed to see the face
of the man who pulls out his hair, but must keep his eyes
closed.
Some of the headmen of each tribe sit on the ground near
by directing the proceedings, and a bullroarer, bumbir-
burnbir, is sounded in the vicinity. The hair pulled out of
each youth, is kept carefully by itself, and is given into the
charge of one of his relatives, in the same way that the


extracted tooth is disposed of in other districts. When
the plucking out of the hair has been completed, the novices
are raised to their feet by their guardians and other men,
amid the plaudits of the assemblage. Each graduate is
then painted, and is invested with a brow-band, mullengaran;
a man’s waistbelt, ngeyir; an apron, pain-dyip. Strips of
the skin and fur of a ring-tail opossum are fastened round
the biceps and the fore-arm —each arm being bound in three
or four places. Kangaroos’ teeth are fixed in the lad’s
hair, and a neck-lace, dyakurn, made of pieces of reed on a
string, is placed around his neck. The novices are then
cautioned in an impressive and earnest manner against
divulging the details of what they have passed through to
any person except the initiated.
Next morning after breakfast the men start out hunting,
taking the graduates with them. The latter are freshly
greased and painted, and carry a small green bush under
each arm. When one of the novices becomes thirsty, he is
allowed to crouch down on his elbows and toes at the
margin of a pool or stream, and suck up the water into his
mouth through a hollow reed which is given to him. The
guardian stands alongside and places his foot under the boy’s
throat, for the purpose of making the swallowing of the
liquid difficult and slow, so that he may not drink too much.
During the day the novices are brought within view of a
kangaroo, wallaby or other animal lying dead upon the
ground. Several men are walking about it, imitating eagle-
hawks and making the peculiar whistling call of that bird.
Upon being disturbed, they run along swaying their arms
up and down to represent the flapping of the wings of these
large birds to enable them to raise their heavy bodies from
the ground when they commence to fly away from their
prey. Sometimes this performance is varied by the men
representing crows instead of eaglehawks. In such case,
the action and cry of the crow is mimicked.


One evening by the light of the camp fires, a man takes
a small stick about fifteen or twenty inches in length, and
binds a piece of the pelt of some animal, newly skinned, on
one end, which he inserts into his anus, the free end of the
stick having previously been lighted in the fire. The man
now moves back into the darkness, swaying his rump with
the fiery caudal appendage from side to side, in imitation
of the bird known as the “ willy-wagtail.” Several men
may engage in this performance and sing the prescribed
song.
A week or more may be spent at these camping places
in the bush, the time being regulated by the weather and
other considerations. The programme of performances
changes every day, and each dramatic entertainment has
its own appropriate song, which is chanted by the men
engaged in it, or by the old men sitting near the fire. The
graduates are shewn the larger bullroarer, bumbir-bmnbir ,
and also the smaller one, mattyamuk, who is the wife of
the former.
In the remainder of the ceremony, from this point onwards
to the end, the procedure closely resembles the correspond-
ing portions of the Wonggoa, already described, and will
therefore be passed over. The graduates have to pass
through this ordeal of depilation at not less than two or
three different meetings of the tribes for that purpose
before they can be admitted to full membership, and be
called birnapkil. 1
Notes on the Initiation op Girls.
During several interviews with an old woman of the
Wuddyawurru tribe respecting the language and customs
. 1 Compare the foregoing summary with, my description of the “ Initia-
tion Ceremonies of the Barkunjee Tribes,” who adjoin the people herein
dealt with.—Journ. Roy. Soc., N.S.W., Vol. xxxii., pp. 241 - 255, with map
of territory. See also my “ Multyerra-Initiations-zeremonie,” Mitteil.
d. Anthrop. Gesellsch. in Wien, Band xxxiv., S. 77 - 83.


of her people, I obtained the following information respect-
ing the initiation of girls. At the first sign of the menstrual
flux, the girl is taken charge of by an elderly female, who
is not her mother, and is removed into the adjacent bush.
They are accompanied by some young matrons who help
the old woman in her duties. After painting the novitiate,
her arms are decorated with strings cut from the skin of
the ring-tail opossum, with the fur on. These strings are
bound round the upper arm about midway between the
shoulder and the elbow and also round the thick part of
the forearm. The strings are not wound tightly on the
arm, but like any other bandage which closely fits the limb
bound, they cause the arm to swell after wearing them for
some time.
The old dame, assisted by those who are with her, builds
fire by laying wood upon the ground and applying fire
until it is well ignited. Green bushes are then laid on top
of the fire, and on top of this covering of bushes earth and
sand are thrown to prevent the wood from blazing up,
and to augment the issue of smoke. Two of the women
present help the novice to get on top of this smouldering
heap. When she has remained in the smoke for a consider-
able time, the old woman hands the girl a yamstick, with
which she jumps off her smoking pedestal.
In the meantime, a hut or shelter has been erected of
boughs, into which the novice is put by herself and she
sleeps there all night —the other women sleeping a few
yards away. Next day the smoking ceremony is repeated
in the same manner, morning and afternoon. This pro-
cedure is continued until the novitiate is cleansed. The
bandages are then removed from the girl’s arms and she is
painted as before. A girdle manufactured from the fur of
animals is now put round her waist, from which depends a
narrow apron, ngurraty , made of emu feathers, covering


her pudendee. When the novice has passed through this
ordeal she is called ngurramdurragurk , an initiated
woman, and may be claimed in marriage by the man to
whom she was assigned from her childhood.
Among the Yota-yota and adjoining tribes on the Murray
River, the ceremony of “making young women ” is called
dhudcliwai , and may be described shortly as follows : When
a girl reaches puberty she is taken away some distance
from the camp by an old female relative. A moderately
large fire is lit, and when it burns quite down, the embers
and ashes are scraped off. Green leaves are then strewn
thickly upon this warm ground, and the girl is placed sit-
ting on top of the leaves until she is clean, being looked
after by the old women who are there. The first flux is
called durguggimuty , but a woman during her monthly
period at any time thereafter is called gartyibulla. When
the novice passes through this ceremony she is known as
dhuddiwai , and is painted like the other women of the tribe.
On the Mitta Mitta and Ovens Rivers the following is a
brief outline of the procedure as told to me by an old native:
At the first appearance of puberty, the girl is taken out of
the camp by some old women, and her body is anointed all
over with opossum fat and ground charcoal. The fresh
skin of a ring-tail opossum is procured and cut into very
narrow strips. These strands, with the fur remaining upon
them, are then twisted until they become small, rounded
strings, resembling cords. The arms of the girl, both above
and below the elbow, are then bandaged with a few coils
of this string. She is now lifted into the fork of a sapling
or tree, from six to eight feet above the ground.
A fire is lighted at the butt of the tree, on the windward
side of it, and a number of green boughs laid upon it.
Presently a dense smoke is produced, which ascends up
around the girl, the quantity of fume being regulated so


that it shall not suffocate her. This lasts for some hours,
when the novice is removed to a camp close at hand, where
she and her companions remain for the night. The same
ceremonial is repeated for a day or two longer, or until the
old women are satisfied that their object has been attained.
A waist-belt is now given to the girl, to which is attached
a small apron, dyabeng , which hangs down in front. She is
now qualified to become a wife.
After a married woman has a child, she and her babe
must be smoked by her old women friends, before she can
appear in the main camp. See also “Childbirth,” ante.
Aboriginal Mythology and Folklore.
Under this head will be recounted a few of the fabulous
or romantic stories current among the aborigines of New
South Wales and Victoria, which have been written down
by me from the mouths of the old men and women from
time to time. The folklore of any primitive people is
always valuable, as showing the bent of the human mind
in its earliest development, in accordance with the different
surroundings and conditions of life. Many native stories
are a mixture of legend, folklore and superstitious belief,
and could perhaps be classed under one or other of these
designations. I shall not, however, trouble with any class-
ification at present, beyond trying to include specimens of
the different kinds of tales.
Throughout their folklore we find evidences of the pro-
clivity of the native mind to account for any specialities of
animal structure or peculiar habits, as well as the remark-
able forms of lakes, rivers, trees, hills, arid other natural
phenomena. In perusing all the different classes of tales,
we find ourselves revelling in a new field of wonder and
beauty —the fairy land of Australian romance and poetry.
Mytliologic ancestors and fabulous monsters —a class of
genii—form a conspicuous element in their legends. Some
V—Oct. 5, 1901.


of these magical beings reside in the mountains, others in
dense scrubs, others in the clouds. Some have their abode
in deep waterholes, others live in the trees, others again
have bodies which glow like burning coals. Some of them
have the power of altering tlieir shape, or of increasing or
diminishing their size, at pleasure. Some of them can
vanish into the air, whilst others disappear under the ground.
All of them, with a few exceptions, are more or less
maleficent. Whether in human shape, or as monstrosities,
these creatures of aboriginal fancy or exaggeration were
possessed of supernatural powers ; and many of their habits
were different from those of the present race. Some of
them could form water-courses; some could cleave moun-
tains asunder and make hills from the material; others had
the power of causing springs to burst forth. Some were
assisted in their work by means of magical weapons and
wonderful dogs.
Obscenity is a prominent characteristic of all Australian
folklore. It is persistent in their rock pictures, in their
initiation and other ceremonies, as well as in their dances
and songs. Where the indecent element lias been eliminated
by missionaries and others, the peculiar manners and
character of the people have lost much of their real
personality. Human ordure also has its place in their
mythology, as well as in their most important ceremonies.
It is supposed to possess many virtues, among which may
be mentioned the power of speech, to personify the individual
who deposited it. It also enabled a man to catch whatever
he was pursuing, by the magical elfect of its odour. Human
fat also holds an important place in native enchantments.
If the various ceremonies of the aborigines can be called
a religion, it amounts to no more than a mystery and a craft,
in which the old sorcerers and warriors are the chief per-
sonages. Sometimes a sorcerer was supposed to intercept


the fleeting spirit of a dying person and so save his life.
Others professed to chase away supernatural enemies by
their menaces and gramarye. Others pretended they could
ameliorate the cold of winter by casting hot coals towards
certain stars. Some professed to be able to cure disease
by enchantment. Others again claimed to have the power
of bringing rain and causing the food supply to increase by
means of magic arts.
Stories similar in character to those recounted in the
following pages are found in every tribe throughout all the
Australian States. Necessary local variations are intro-
duced in different districts, to accord with divergent prac-
tices and modes of living, but the radical elements are the
same. Moreover, the animals which took part in these
folk-tales, everywhere in Australia had the same phratries,
sections, clans, etc., as the people of the tribe where the
tale is current.
In every part of Australia which I have visited, the bat
and the night-jar hold a peculiar place in the superstitions
of the people and figure largely in their stories. The
former is the friend of all the men and the latter of all the
women. In some tribes the woodpecker (tree-creeper) is
substituted for the small night-jar. Rev. L. E. Threlkeld
was the first to discover and report these specific totems
■of the two sexes. In his grammar and vocabulary published
in 1834 he states: —“ Tilmun , a small bird the size of a
thrush is supposed by the women to be the first maker of
women, or to be a woman transformed after death into
that bird ; it runs up trees like a woodpecker. These birds
are held in veneration by the women only. The bat, koluiuj-
kplung, is held in veneration on the same ground by the
men, who suppose the animal (bat) a mere transformation.”
Baiame. —A little better than half a mile westerly from
the railway station at Byrock, on the Western Railway


Line, 460 miles from Sydney, town of Byrock, parish of
Bye, county of Cowper, there is an outcrop of granite, about
an acre or more in extent. It is irregular in shape and
does not project more than a few feet above the surround-
ing country, which is practically level. The aboriginal
name of this granitic outcrop is Bai , a word signifying the
semen of men and animals.
On various parts of the exposed surface of the rock there
are a number of patches of a reddish-brown colour, the
staining being due to oxides of iron introduced by natural
agencies. These stained patches vary in size from a few
inches to several feet. They are of different forms, and
the imagination of the natives has assumed certain ferrugin-
ous outlines to represent hunting and fighting weapons,
utensils, tracks of men and animals, sacred instruments,
and other objects connected with their daily life. I made
a rough survey by compass and pacing of the positions of
some of the most important of these delineations, and
submit the following descriptions of them.
Near the northern extremity of the rock is a small hole
in which water collects in rainy weather and also during
every thunderstorm which falls, and remains for a consider-
able time. This little “rockhole,” called in the native
language wuggarbuggarnea , was a great camping place of
the aborigines when this part of the country was first
occupied by European settlers. And there is still residing,
in close proximity, the remnant of the old Ngeumba tribe,
accompanied by a few friendly aborigines from the sur-
rounding country.
Baiame, the principal hero in the mythology of these
people, is said to have had his home at this rock in the far-
away past. He dug the water hole with his stone hatchet,
and every time it became blunt during the operation, he
whetted it on the surface near him. The pictorial stains


on the rock are believed to have been caused by Baiame
laying down his magical weapons and other articles of his
equipment at different places upon it, the impressions of
which cannot be effaced.
About half a chain north-easterly from the rock-hole is a
natural depression in which sand and drifted soil collect.
This is supposed to have been the hole in which Baiame
cooked his game and other articles of diet. S. 45° E. from
the cooking-hole, and thirty-five links distant, is a very
good figure of a bullroarer (muddhiga), eighteen inches
long and nine inches across the widest part. Continuing
the same south-east bearing for a farther distance of 140
links brings us to the imprint of a prodigious fighting club,
six and a half feet in length by nine inches wide, called
dhurtubirra. Starting from this club and going south for
two hundred and fifteen links we come to a figure which
has some resemblance to a monstrous boomerang, nine feet
and a quarter long by eighteen inches in width. Again
starting from the dhurtubirra or club on a bearing of S. 40° W.
we find another boomerang-like formation, two feet nine
inches long and nine inches wide.
Close to rock-liole wuggarbuggarhea, is a narrow, coloured
streak, trending in a westerly direction for several yards,
which is said to be one of Baiame’s spears. On a bearing of
N. 25° W., from the rock-hole, at the distance of 25 links is
a gululla or native bag carried by the men, three feet long,
with a string attached for swinging it over the shoulder.
On another portion of the rock is a tolerably good repre-
sentation of a human footmark, two feet long and nine
inches across the widest part. It is the right foot, and has
five toes, the great-toe being about twice the length of
the others.
Here and there at wide intervals on the rock surface are
grooves worn by the actual grinding or sharpening of stone


hatchets, similar to the grinding places reported and illus-
trated in my article. 1 These grooves have been made by
the present and past generations of natives, who have lived
and hunted in the neighbourhood. A portable stone carried
by the natives in their bags, and used for whetting any of
their stone weapons, is called giwai. At other places there
are hollows in the rock where Baiame is believed to have
pounded nuts and ground grass-seed for the purpose of
making cakes.
There is a long straight crack in the rock, varying from
two to three feet in width, and about a foot and a half deep,
commencing at the rock-hole and bearing S. 25° E. for about
two chains and a quarter to the smaller boomerang above
described, and onward for a little way farther. This is said
to be the trail along which Baiame dragged his fire-wood
and larger game. It also served the purpose then, as at
present, of conducting storm water into the rock-hole.
Further imaginary portrayings include tracks of dogs and
other animals, the moon, stars and different objects, which
I had not time to examine.
Several miles from Byrock, near Ooronga Peak woolslied,
on the road going to Wilgaroon, there is a tank or dam
which has been made for watering stock. On the left of
the road in this locality, and not far from the tank, is a
large rock called Gu-lum'-bur in the native speech. On this
rock are some ferruginous stains similar to those already
described, which are said to be the marks of Baiame's
rump where he sat down to rest himself, his foot, his hand,
etc. At what is now the great copper mines at Cobar
there was formerly a cave or hole in the rock, which was
one of the camping places of Baiame in the days of long
1 “ SomB Stone Implements Used by the Aborigines of New South
Wales,” Journ. Eoy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Yol. xxvm., pp. 301 - 305, pi. 43,
%• 3.


ago. This hole sloped inwards, and there was red ochre on
its sides. Kiibbur in the native word for red ochre, and
has been corrupted to Cobar by the white people. The old
aborigines told me that before the copper mines were
worked, there were footmarks, boomerangs, bullroarers,
and other delineations on the rocks. The ore of copper
visible on the surface was believed to be Baiame’s excre-
ment deposited during his residence in the cave.
It is related that Baiame started from Oobar after a wild
bee, on the feet of which he had put bird’s down. He
followed the insect all the way to a large rook at Witta-
guna, in a cleft of which was the honey comb, which Baiame
succeeded in securing. There is still a bee’s nest in that
rock, but ordinary mortals cannot reach far enough into
the crack to get at the honey.
Baiame then went away northwards and formed a camp
in the solitudes of a forest. All the large trees lean
towards the camp from all surrounding points, 1 but the
small shrubs and berry-bearing trees grow straight up.
Hanging from the branches of the larger trees are bull-
roarers which are always sounding. [Wongaibon and
Wirraidyurri Tribe.]
Dhurramulcm. —Dhurramulan was a sort of half brother
or near relative of Baiame’s. His name is made up from
dhurru, thigh, and mulan , one side, the whole name mean-
ing leg-on-one-side, as he is said to possess one leg only.
He is also called ngullagelung , from ngulla , a tree, because
he lives in the trees. He had a voice like the rumbling of
distant thunder. It fell to his lot to separate the youths
from their mothers and teach them the Burbung ceremonies.
Dhurramulan had a fire or oven in the bush, in the bottom
* Compare with my “ Journey to Kurrilwan,” the fabled home of Baiame
among the Kamilaroi tribes. Folklore of the Australian Aborigines,
(Sydney, 1899) pp. 15 - 19.


of which were stones, which were kept continually hot.
The novices were brought to this place, with rugs cast over
their heads, so that they could see nothing of what was
going on around them. Dhurramulan caught a boy and hit
him on the back of the head, which caused one of his front
upper incisors to fall out. The tooth, by Dhurramulan’s
gramarye, then became a gunabillang , or rock crystal, a
sacred stone used in these ceremonies of initiation. He
then cast the lad into the fire and scorched all his hair off.
Sometimes he burnt the boy to ashes, and being a great
sorcerer, was able to restore him to human shape. He fed
the lads on wallumbil, a small wood lizard, which they
were obliged to eat raw. He also gave them his own
excrement to eat, and when they were thirsty, they drank
his urine.
Eventually, Dliarramulan went into different kinds of
trees, where he still resides, excepting during those times
when the initiation ceremonies are in progress. A piece
of wood, cut from any tree will make a muddhiga or bull-
roarer, which is also frequently called Dhurramulan, on
account of its humming sound, which represents his voice.
On the boles of some trees in the bush, generally between
the base and the first branches, there are circular or
irregular protuberances, some of which project outwards
half a foot or more. On the top surface of many of these
excrescences there are fairly flat or level places, on which
Dhurramulan is said to have a fancy for sitting or lying to
rest himself when he comes out of the tree. These pro-
tuberances or calabashes are called dhunnang by the Wir-
raidyuri people, and some of the old men told me that they
have sometimes found the upper side of a dhunnang worn
smooth by Dhurramulan’s repeated occupation. Like
some other Australian heroes, he has the magical power
of changing his' shape, and making his body smaller or


larger at pleasure, from the size of a little lizard or bird,
to that of a giant.
Miscellaneous Superstitions. —The Darkihung people
had a mythic malevolent creature resembling a man whose
body had a red glow like burning coals, who had his abode
in rocky places on the sides and tops of mountains. Fathers
used to warn their sons to keep away from such spots. His
name was Ghindaring, and his image was marked upon
the ground at their initiation ceremonies, with a vessel
containing human blood laid upon his breast. 1
Gu-ru-ngaty is the name of an aquatic monster among
the Thurrawal and Gundungurra tribes. He resides in
deep waterholes, and would drown and eat strange blacks,
but would not harm his own people. He usually climbed
a tree near the water, from which he kept a look out. If
he saw a stranger approaching, he slid down and dived into
the water, without making a splash, or leaving any ripples
on the surface. As soon as the individual began to drink,
he was caught by Gurungaty.
Mumuga is another fabled monster of the Thurrawal,
possessing great strength and residing in caves in mountain-
ous country. He has very short arms and legs, with hair
all over his body but none on his head. He cannot run
very fast, but when he is pursuing a blackfellow he evacu-
ates all the time as he runs, and the abominable smell of
the ordure overcomes the individual, so that he is easily
captured. If the person who is attacked has a fire stick
in his hand, the stink of Mumuga has no effect upon him.
The Wongaiboa natives believe that a spirit or wicked
person named Gurugula hovers about in the clouds and
in the air overhead. If he smells the fat of any animal,
1 See my “ Burbungof the Darkinung Tribe,” Proc. Boy. Soc. Victoria,
V01.x., N.S., p. 3 ; also “The Darkihung Language and Vocabulary,”
Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol. xxxm., pp. 271 - 281.


especially of fish, being burnt in the fire at night, he gets
very angry. In order not to provoke Gurugula, all cook-
ing is done in the day time ; and even then the people are
careful not to let any fat burn during the process. The
Thurrawal and Thoorga people have a similar story. The
effect of such a superstition as this would be to preserve
the fat for greasing their bodies and other purposes.
Guram'bugang is the Thurrawal name of a small, smooth-
skinned dark-coloured lizard seen among rocks and about
logs. Women and children are forbidden to injure this
animal. If a man gets a piece of grit, an insect, or other
irritating substance in his eye, he catches the lid in his
finger and thumb and moves it up and down, opening and
shutting the eye, repeating in a singing tone :
Bindi, bindi, gnrambugang
Dill, dill, dill!
The meaning is, “ Wake up, wake up, guram'bugang ” — dill
being merely a request to the injured eye to open. The
man continues to repeat these words and moving the eye-
lid, till the object falls out of the eye.
If children throw sticks, stones, or any missile at a bat,
Kubbucjang , it will cause their thumbs to become short.
If they point at that animal, to show its location to any-
one, they must point with the thumb, and not with the
finger. [Thurrawal tribe.]
Among the Ngeumba tribe, women and children of both
sexes must not look at the birds known as swifts, pulluru ,
which fly high in the air, or silliness would be the conse-
quence. These birds are believed to be the harbingers of
rain, but if the women look up at them, it would prevent
the rain coming. The swift is a Kubbi and belongs to the
guaimundhun caste.
In the legendary period it was unlawful for women to
converse with dogs, the consequence being somewhat


similar to the fate of Lot’s wife. The following are some
examples: —Among the Wirraidyuri tribes there is a story
that on one occasion during the period the youths were
away in the bush going through the course of initiation, a
dog left the party and went away back to where the women
were camped. They asked the dog where their sons were
and what they were doing, and he told them, whereupon
all the women and children were transformed to stone.
This happened near Lake Cudgellico, where there are some
rocks of different sizes, which at a distance, and good
stretch of imagination, bear some similarity to women and
children sitting down.
The natives of the south-east coast of New South Wales
have a legend that two women were out in the bush,
gathering burrawang seeds for food, which they placed in
their net-bags, kurama. During the day they met a dog
carrying a mullet, murra-murra , and asked him where he
caught it. Upon his answering their question, they were
immediately changed into stone, together with their bags
of burrawangs and tlieir yamsticks, gaualang. Rocks bear-
ing a fanciful resemblance to these women are pointed out
at a place on the hills between the Kangaroo Valley and
the coast.
If very bad thunder and lightning occur during the night,
the old men hold burning sticks in their hands and call out
to Merribi, the thunder, to go away to another place which
they name, and request him to take the lightning with him
as a torch, to show him light to fish for bulundyulung , a
small black fish. [Thoorga tribe.]
Upon the death of a native in the Wimmera district of
Victoria, the clever old men and relatives of the deceased
sit up through the night and watch the corpse. They
suddenly observe the tnuruk or ghost appearing at the body,
but do not see whence it came. After a short stay it goes


away towards the miyur of its clan. The muruk of the
slayer also comes to look at the corpse. The old men see
him approaching stealthily, and after looking at the body
he retraces his steps and disappears in the direction of his
own hunting grounds. Having ascertained by this means
whom to retaliate upon, they patiently wait for an oppor-
tunity to avenge their comrade’s death. See “Pirrimbir”
expedition in this treatise, ante.
Among the natives at Byrock, New South Wales, when
anyone is dangerously ill, the old wizards proceed a little
distance from the camp towards the setting sun and go
through some incantations for the purpose of inviting the
spirits of the sick person’s friends to come and see him.
One old man lies down on the ground and the others form
a circle around him several yards distant, so that they can
chase the spirits toward the man on the ground. The
object of the ceremony is to intercept the shade or war-
rungun of the invalid when it is trying to run away towards
the west. If the old man succeed in capturing the spirit
in some green leaves which he holds in his hand, and take
it to the sick man, he will recover; if he fail to catch the
spirit, the patient will die. The spirit is called warrungun.
The Kamilaroi people say that after death, their spirits
or internal parts, called Gundhaddyiba , go away up the
Barwon River and live under the mountains at the sources
of that stream.
On the Upper Lachlan River, flying foxes were supposed
to be clever fellows who, in the days of long ago, used to
travel about spying out the location of their enemies.
They could make themselves small and hang on the branches
of trees, so that any one who saw them would think they
were only loose pieces of bark. Upon becoming flying foxes
they continued their old method of camping.


Some of the Wirraidyuri tribes had the following cere-
mony for making rain. An old man took the rump of an
emu, the bone of a kangaroo’s leg and a white stone, all
tied together. He then dived into a hole of water, carry-
ing the parcel with him to the bottom, for the purpose of
saturating it with water. On coming to the surface again,
he swayed it backward and forward toward the west,
muttering incantations all the time. If he happened to see
a fragment of cloud coming up, he put the apparatus into
the waterhole near the bank, and waited for the rain.
The Wongaibon people call the mirage kullugu-kulli ,
literally, shingleback’s water, because it is believed to be
a mythic or magical water which supports the kullu or
shingleback, a kind of lizard which always lives out on the
arid plains far from water. Some of the Wirraidyuri tribes
thought the mirage was the smoke made by the fires of
supernatural beings, when cooking their game out on the
plains.
In the Thurrawal tribe the following observance was in
vogue for bringing down showers. A muyulu or doctor got
a piece of kurrajong bark, which he laid on a log and beat
with a stick till it became soft and flexible. Then he took
some stringybark and pounded it in the same way and
wrapped it around the kurrajong bark, and bound the whole
with string. This parcel was placed in a water hole, and
was believed to have the power of causing rain.
Another superstition which is firmly rooted among all
Australian tribes, is that of transmigration or reincarna-
tion. Ever since the time when New South Wales was
first settled by Governor Phillip, we have heard of the
inveterate belief of the blacks that they would reappear in
the form of other men after death. Buckley, the white
man who spent so many years with the wild natives of
Port Phillip, Victoria, is said to have owed his life to their


assuming that he was one of themselves who had come to
life again. A similar belief was discovered at Port Lincoln,
South Australia, in 1846, by Mr. Schurmann, who says,
‘‘they certainly believe in the pre-existence of the souls of
black men.” 1
It is stated in Rev. G-. Taplin’s work, that among the
Nimbaldi tribe, about Mount Freeling in South Australia,
a spirit called Muree, which may be either a male or a
female, meets a black woman, and throws a small waddy,
weetchu, under her thumb nail, or under the great toe nail,
and so enters the woman’s body. In due time she gives
birth to a child. 2
Rev. Duncan Mackillop reports that on the Daly River,
Northern Territory, the souls of children are supposed to
to be shut up in certain hills, scattered over the country,
and are given out when an infant is to be born. 3 Super-
stitions substantially the same in character as those above
referred to, in various forms to suit surrounding circum-
stances, have been observed in every part of Australia
where investigations have been made.
Dyillagamberra , the Rainmaker. —The natives of the
south-east coast of New South Wales have a legend that
a mystic personage named Dyillagamberra once lived
among them. When he went away from them lie travelled
up the valley of the Tuross River, and at short intervals
dug holes or springs, some on the sides of the hills and
others on the tops. This was to secure a supply of water
for his people, and the waterholes still remain. He made
these lagoons and springs all the way till he got to a
mountain the natives call Barrity'-burra at the head of the
Tuross River.
1 “ Native Tribes of South Australia,” p. 235.
2 “ Folklore, Manners, etc., South Australian Aborigines,” (Adelaide,
1879), p. 88.
3 Trans. Roy. Soc. South Australia, Yol. xvn., (1893) p. 262.


There is a deep lagoon or large waterhole at the foot of
the mountain, said to contain all kinds of fish which fre-
quent either the sea or the fresh water. In this lagoon
there is plenty of nyiwun (congevoi) attached to the rocks
around the margin or projecting above the surface of the
water. A large rock overhangs one side of the lagoon, and
away in one of its dark corners is the camping place of
Dyillagamberra, who lives upon the fish and congevoi. 1 On
the hillside, above the waterhole, the ground is strewn
with different kinds of shells, such as oyster shells, cockle-
shells, mussel shells and the like.
In time of drought, if two or three old men go to this
lagoon and ask Dyillagamberra to make rain, he pours
immense quantities of water out of the hole, and causes a
flood in the Tuross river, accompanied by great rain. When
asking Dyillagamberra to cause showers, the old men go
through certain ceremonial incantations, and throw a stone
into the lagoon to produce a surface ripple. They also
mention the locality and the people affected by the drought.
Sometimes the rain comes so suddenly that the people have
to seek shelter in caves, or in hollow trees, or under large
logs. Occasionally the showers are accompanied by hail.
How the Wongaibon obtained Fire. —In the far-away
past the aborigines had no lire, but had to cook their meat
in the sun. After a while it was observed that two old
women, gimma , the kangaroo-rat, and yumniar , the bronze-
wing-pigeon, always had sweet, tender meat to eat. They
had a small bag in which they carried the fire, shut up in
a nut of the needle-bush or thinhu. These women used to
go out into the bush by themselves and cook whatever
game they caught, and put the fire out. Different members
•of the tribe tried to find out what was done by the two
women in the bush, but all to no purpose, because they
1 Colocasia macrorrhiza.


were too vigilant. At last the night owl, bfillur, undertook
to watch them. This bird is the colour of the bark of trees
and sits motionless, so that it is very hard to see him as
he sits on the upper side of a branch.
Bullur went away ahead, making a wide detour, and
climbed a tree near a waterhole where the women used to
go. By and by they made their appearance, carrying a
fine fat iguana, and camped under the tree in which the
man was watching. They gathered some sticks and grass
and took the needle-bush nut out of their bag. The fire
came out of the nut and kindled the wood, and while they
were cooking the iguana, one of the women stood waving
her hands to and fro above the fire, to keep the smoke from
ascending, while she sang:
Ngullu ngulludhur butthu biiddlia.
As soon as the meat was cooked the fire was again put
into the nut, after which the women had a hearty meal
which made Bullur’s mouth water. When the day got
cooler they started back to the camp, and as soon as they
were out of sight, Bullur followed their example. When
he reported the details he had observed regarding the fire,
a council was held and it was decided to hold a big cor-
roboree, and invite the two fire-women to favour it with
their presence. It was hoped that the women might be
seized with a fit of laughter, or become so absorbed in the
performances, as to relax their attention to the bag con-
taining the fire, and thus give some dexterous fellow a
chance to snatch it up and run away with it.
When all the people had assembled on the corroboree
ground, the chief actors were painted in different colours
and performed in their most mirth-provoking style; but it
was all unavailing. The gimma and the yummar sat stoic-
ally beside each other, with the precious bag held between
them, as if it had more claims upon their attention than


all the hilarity which was going on in front of them. Then
some renowned dancers from an adjoining tribe were asked
to come and try if they could provoke the risibility of the
two old women. The pelican, ivirraia, and the black-and-
white magpie, kurruivur , came to the camp and executed
some wonderfully farcical performances, but their joint
endeavours were equally ineffectual.
The old men considered the acquisition of Are of such
great importance to their people that they decided to ask
still another tribe to send some of their most laughter-
exciting players. In response to this invitation two comical
characters volunteered —the black cockatoo, bilir, and the
shingleback, kulu. After some preliminary manoeuvres by
less distinguished men had been disposed of, the shingle-
back danced along, to and fro, on the point of his tail,
evacuating as he did so. This made a decided impression
on the two women, and arrested their attention, but they
still remained tolerably self-possessed. The black cockatoo
now jumped along among the performers, with his lower
bowel protruding through the anal orifice, and ordure mixed
with blood running down his tail. This exhibition proved
irresistible to the women, who broke out into uncontroll-
able laughter and rolled over on the ground.
This was the opportunity so long sought for. The sparrow-
hawk, girriki, picked up the women’s bag and ran away a
little distance, where he upset its contents upon the ground.
This liberated the fire, which spread in all directions among
the dry grass. The sparrow-hawk followed the Are and
“sang” to encourage it to go faster. By his magic he
produced a whirlwind which accelerated the spread of the
flames. As it blazed along, he put some of it into every
tree of the forest, both soft wood and hard wood, so that
Are can now be obtained by rubbing the two kinds of wood
together.
W—Oct. 5, 1904.


Ever since that corroboree the black cockatoo has reddish
stains on the feathers which grow on the under side of his
tail. Evidence of the glare of the flame also appears on
the back and head of the sparrow-hawk.
How ivater was obtained by the Kamilaroi people. —
On the Mehi and Gwydir Rivers, in the Kamilaroi country,
the natives say that in olden times there was no water on
the surface of the ground. The people had to depend upon
showers, the dew, and such moisture as they could procure
from roots of trees and vines. The iguana, yurundiali,
however, knew of a spot where there was a hole in a rock,
at which lie used to quench his thirst and then place a
stone over the top of it, so that it was hidden from the
eyes of passing strangers.
His fellows often noticed greenish layers or deposits,
such as usually float on the surface of water, about the
iguana’s jaws and on his head, when he came into camp,
but they could get no explanation from him. He always
looked sleek and contented, and never went in quest of
vines or similar substances. Attempts had frequently been
made to watch him when he went out hunting, but he was
too adroit to let anyone see him drinking. The sandpiper,
billidhu, at length volunteered to go out and see if he could
discover the iguana’s secret.
Next day the iguana started away by himself, and so did
the sandpiper. This bird has a habit of running along a
little way, and stopping suddenly, as still as a statue. Then
he makes another short run, and comes to another abrupt
standstill. He learnt this habit from dodging about after
the iguana, and has kept it up ever since. He kept his eye
constantly on the iguana, and every time that animal looked
in his direction, he came to a sudden stop, and was easily
mistaken for a dried stick projecting from a log, or for the
stump of a sapling. After a while the iguana climbed a


tree and pulled a young opossum out of a hollow'spout, and
after some exertion swallowed it.
Then the iguana changed his direction and went towards
a stony ridge. As he walked along he gazed around him
suspiciously and frequently, which increased the billidhu’s
watchfulness. On nearing a flat rock, he approached it
cautiously and slowly, pretending he was tracking some
animal. The billidhu now kept coming nearer and nearer,
and every time the iguana turned his head towards him he
stood still. The iguana finally halted and began removing
the loose stone which covered the water, which enabled
the billidhu to come quite close. A last look around satis-
fied the iguana that no one was within view, and he dipped
his mouth into the water to take a draught. By this time
the billidhu was alongside, and raising his tomahawk cleft
the iguana’s skull open. As the billidhu had not the talis-
manic secret of shutting down the water, it flowed out and
filled all the hollow places, so that everybody had plenty
of water, which has continued till the present time.
The Dhiel and her Water-trough. —Tlie dhi-el is a small
night jar, which remains in the hollow spouts of trees dur-
ing the day, and comes out in the night time, feeding upon
berry-bearing shrubs. This bird was a woman —a being of
mystery—in the far-away past and had two dogs, the soldier
ant and the leech. She generally camped some distance
back from watering places, and carried water for her own
use in a native trough, or kuddyil , of magical proportions
and manufacture. Dhiel was very friendly to all the people
of her own sex, but would kill and eat boys and men. When
a girl attained the age of puberty, she was taken by some
old female relatives into the bush, where she was treated
in accordance with the regulations briefly described under
the head of “Initiation of Women ” in earlier pages of this
work. Dhiel always assisted on such occasions.


It chanced on a day that two blackfellows who were out
hunting became very thirsty and went to her camp to ask
for a drink. She replied that there was very little water
in the kuddyil, and suggested that they had better both dip
their heads into it together, so that each might get some.
As soon as they did this, the kuddyil closed up around their
necks and made them fast. The soldier ant immediately
commenced to sting their bodies, and the leech which was
in the trough began to bite their tongues, while Dhiel her-
self beat them with her yamstick. When they were dead,
she roasted them, and she and her dogs fared sumptuously
for many days.
After a while, when the two men did not return to their
own camp, two of their friends went in quest of them into
the dry hinterland. In the afternoon they were sorely
pressed with thirst and approached Dhiel’s camp to beg a
drink of water. She received them with the same duplicity
as the former pair, and they met the same fate. Several
searchers went out, and were similarly disposed of by Dhiel
and her dogs. At last the crow determined to go out by
himself, in the hope of finding out what mysterious disaster
had befallen his comrades. He, like his predecessors, got
thirsty and went to Dhiel’s camp to ask for a drink. She
told him there was just a little water in the bottom of the
kuddyil and invited him to put in his head and drink. He
carried a charmed shield and when he bent his head into
the trough, he held the shield in front of him, reaching
from his chest to his chin. The leech jumped at his tongue
and the kuddyil attempted to shut upon him as usual, but
the magical shield prevented it.
The crow became very angry and ran after Dhiel to kill
her. She ran, screaming, first round a dhurri or white emu-
bush ; then around the yerriai , or apple bush; next the
dhikku , or black emu-bush; then the mulga tree; and lastly


the grey box. The crow at length overtook Dliiel and
killed her, as well as her dogs, and broke the enchanted
kuddyil to pieces with his club. Dhiel’s voice went into
all the trees around which she was chased by the crow. At
the initiation ceremonies the blackfellows use a munibear, 1
or small bullroarer which is manufactured from the wood
of any of the trees above mentioned. When the old women
at the Burbling ring hear the munibear sounding in the
adjacent bush, they say to each other, “ That is our kut-
thainga or playmate, calling out to us.” [Wirraidyuri
Tribe.]
Yandhcmgga. —Another kind of fabulous being is Yan-
dhangga, a small man, with a long beard flowing down to his
waist. He has a stone tomahawk naturally formed on his
right elbow, with which he kills blackfellows and procures
game. On this account he carries everything in the left
hand. After killing a man, he skins him and makes a bag
out of the pelt for carrying water into the dry sandhills
and ridges where he goes hunting. If a blackfellow is
walking along and observes Yandliangga, he will probably
begin thinking to himself what a queer looking man that
is. Yandliangga will then call out to him, “What are you
saying about me?” The blackfellow will reply that he
said nothing. Thereupon Yandliangga tells the man what
his thoughts were, where he is from, and the names of his
relatives. After that he kills and skins him ; but if the
man is some distant connection of his own, he allows him
to proceed. I was unable to learn whether the blacks
ascribed this supernatural knowledge of Yandliangga to his
reading the man’s thoughts, or whether it was supposed to
be due to his omniscience. [Wongaibon Tribe.]
1 See my “Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes,” in which I have
described the munibear and its uses, Journ. Anthrop. Inst., V 01. xxv., p.
298, pi. 26, fig. 39 (May 1896).


The Moon and its Halo. —Two women were carrying
the moon, giiva , seated on a pole between them, across the
Culgoa River. In midstream the moon was either thrown
off, or tumbled off the pole into the water and was washed
down and drowned. After a while he came to life again,
and went out into the mulga country near the Warrego
River. He stripped a lot of bark off leopard-wood trees,
and his reflection can be seen on the bark of this kind of
tree ever since. He carried all the bark which he had
stripped a long way, to a place on what is now known as
the Multaguna run, and made a large camp for himself. He
saw a mob of blacks and invited them to come and see him
corroboreeing.
He bad his bark propped up with forks all round the
corroboree ground, and asked the people, men and women,
to come inside the ring of bark. One man was outside and
the moon said to bring him in also. A woman who had
just given birth to a baby was sitting down a little way off,
and giiva told them to fetch her to the corroboree too.
After he had “ opened the ball,” he said, “ Now, all of you
must keep your eyes cast on the ground and don’t look at
me for a little while.” He then went round and pulled
down his leopard-tree bark quickly, which fell on top of the
people, crushing and smothering them all.
The halo, or large ring sometimes seen around the moon
during a moist state of the atmosphere, represents the ring
of leopard-wood bark under which the people were suffo-
cated. The scene of the catastrophe is now a small lake
on Multaguna Station. All the details of this story would
occupy many times the space I have been able to afford in
this article. [Kurnu Tribe, Darling River.]
Two Young Men and the Moon. —Giwa the moon had
two young relatives who had been trained to know some
magic. He was a heavy, corpulent old man, not able to


hunt much himself, so he had several dogs to help him.
His dogs were the bull-dog ant, the brown snake and some
others. The two young fellows mostly accompanied the
old man and assisted him in procuring food, but he did not
treat them well. If they caught a number of opossums
and brought them to the camp, Giwa used to cook them,
split them open, and eat the fleshy parts of the legs and
all the choice portions of the bodies himself, giving the
young men the back-bones and the heads. When they
brought home a buck opossum for themselves, old Giwa
waited till their backs were turned, and cut off the opossum’s
scrotal pouch with its contents, healing up the wound by
his magic, and then insisted that the animal was a doe,
which, consequently, the youths were forbidden to eat, by
the tribal laws.
Owing to his continual greediness the lads determined to
separate from the old man, but were rather afraid of his
powers as a wizard. They used to lie behind him in the
camp, and, because he could not turn round easily, he called
out “Are you fellows there ? ” and they answered “Yes.”
He rather suspected they would leave him, so he asked this
question frequently. At last they started off early one
morning, but before doing so they defecated copiously on
the ground a little way from the old fellow, and by their
gramarye conferred the power of speech upon the deposit,
to enable it to respond to Giwa’s queries. Every time the
moon enquired “Are you fellows there?” the ordure replied
in the affirmative.
The young men came upon an emu, which they speared
and carried on the top of a flat rock which protruded a few
feet above the surface of the ground. Having lit a fire on
the rock, they commenced cooking the emu, but suddenly
remembered that this bird was taboo to them, and consulted
as to how this difficulty could be surmounted. Being clever


fellows, they could pitch their voice so that it could be
heard a longer distance than the speech of ordinary mortals.
They called out to their aged relative to come and see them,
and he at once got up in surprise to find them gone. The
ordure was now silent and Giwa started olf in the direction
whence the call had come.
When the youths saw him coming, they had recourse to
their magical functions and caused the rock on which they
were standing to rise perpendicularly out of the ground
about twenty feet. They then called out “ Look, grand-
father, what we have here,” raising the emu into view. He
told them to throw it down to him, upon which they cut
off a slice from the fattest part of the body, and cast it to
Giwa. He caught it in his hands, but seeing it was mostly
fat, he threw it back to the lads.
This was a piece of artfulness on the part of the youths.
The flesh of the emu is forbidden to young people, who
cannot eat it till given to them by an old man. When
Giwa threw the portion of emu to the boys, they greased
their mouths with the fat, and ate the morsel of flesh which
was attached to it. They were now released from their
taboo, and could eat the animal which they had roasted.
They now asked Giwa to go and cut a sapling to lean
against the rock, so that he could climb up and join them
in the feast. He accordingly estimated the length of the
pole he would require, and went into the forest to get it.
While he was away the youths caused the rock to rise
some ten feet higher, consequently, when Giwa brought
his sapling it did not reach the top. The boys suggested
that he should go and find a longer pole, and in his absence
they again added to the height of the rock. Giwa went
away the third time to cut another pole, and succeeded on
this occasion, because the rock had not increased in height
during the interval.


Giwa prepared himself for the ascent, but on looking
round at his dogs, he asked the youths what he should do
with these. They suggested that lie should put them in his
shoulder bag and bring them with him. He adopted their
advice, and commenced climbing the pole, but owing to
handling the emu fat as stated above, his hands were greasy
and slippery. However, after much struggling, he managed
to reach within a few feet of the top, when the youths
caught hold of the pole and turned it rapidly round. This
had the effect of causing Giwa to lose his hold, and he fell
heavily to the ground on his back, killing his dogs and injur-
ing his spine. As he lay there, he sang a song while the
youths were enjoying their feast on the top of the rock.
This song has to be sung to the present day, when anyone
is allowed to eat emu flesh for the first time. Giwa walked
with a great stoop for some days after his fall, which is the
reason that the new moon always appears bent. [Won-
gaibon Tribes.]
The Yaroma— This is a creature closely resembling a
man, but of greater stature, and having hair all over the
body. Its mouth is large, which enables it to swallow a
blackfellow whole, without mastication. There are gener-
ally two of these monsters together, and they stand back
to back, so that they can see in every direction. Their
method of locomotion is by a series of long jumps, and at
every jump their genital appendages strike the ground,
making a loud, sudden noise, like the report of a gun, or
the cracking of a stockwhip.
Yarromas have short legs and large, long feet, of a differ-
ent shape to the feet of a human being. When one of these
monsters is heard in the vicinity of a native camp during
the evening, the people keep silent and rub their genitalia
with their hands, and puff or spit in his direction. Some
of the headmen or doctors shout out the name of some


locality a long way off, and the Yaroma is supposed to
depart to that place. If they cannot be dispersed by this
means, the men take sticks which have been lighted in the
fire —a stick in each hand —and strike them together to
throw out sparks. This usually causes the Yaroma to dis-
appear into the ground, making a flash of light as he does
so. If a man be pursued by a Yaroma his only means of
escape is to jump into a waterhole and swim about, because
these creatures cannot wet their feet. They have long
teeth which they sharpen on rocks in the high ranges ; and
some of the old men aver that they know of rocks where
there still remain marks of this grinding.
On one occasion, a blackfellow went under a large fig
tree to pick up ripe figs, which had fallen to the ground,
when a Yaroma, which was hidden in a hollow place in the
base of the tree, rushed out and catching hold of the man,
swallowed him head first. It happened that the victim
was a man of unusual length, measuring more than a foot
taller than the majority of his countrymen. Owing to this
circumstance, the Yaroma was not able to gulp him farther
than the calves of his legs, leaving his feet protruding from
the monster’s mouth, thus keeping it open and allowing the
air to descend to the man’s nostrils, which saved him from
suffocation. The Yaroma soon began to feel a nausea similar
to what occurs when a piece of fishbone or other substance
gets stuck in one’s throat. He went to the bank of the
river close by and took a drink of water to moisten his
throat, thinking by this means to suck into his stomach the
remainder of his prey, and complete his repast. This was
all to no purpose, however, for, becoming sick, the Yaroma
vomited the man out on the dry land. He was still alive,
but feigned to be dead, in order that he might perhaps have
a chance of escape. The Yaroma then started away to
bring his mates to assist him to carry the dead man to


their camp. He wished, however, to make quite sure that
the man was dead before he left him, and after going but
a short distance, he jumped back suddenly, but the man
lay quite still. The Yaroma got a piece of grass and tickled
the man’s feet, and then his nose, but he did not move a
muscle. Finally he got a bull-dog ant and made it sting
the man’s penis, but he never flinched. The Yaroma, think-
ing he was certainly dead, again started away for help,
and when he got a good distance off, the man, seeing his
opportunity, got up and ran with all his speed into the
water close by, and swam to the opposite shore and so
escaped. [South-east coast of N. S. Wales.]
Wallanthagang. —Wallanthagang was a small man-like
creature, but very tliiek-set and strong. He wore a lot of
pretty feathers in his hair, and carried a large bundle of
light spears. He obtained his food by catching parrots
which he speared in the feet, so that their bodies might
not be damaged for eating. He frequented the thick tea-
tree scrubs and brush in the swamps near Cambewarra
mountain, in the Nowra district, because parrots are usually
very numerous about there. He had a bag slung over his
shoulder in which he carried these birds. Only one of these
men are ever seen at the same time, and his camp fire has
never been observed, nor any place where he had been
camping or resting. The clever old blackfellows can some-
times hear one of these animals calling out yau! yau!
yauh !If a blackfellow met Wallanthagang in the bush he
would not speak, unless first addressed. He would then
imitate what the man said, as if trying to learn the language.
The blackfellow would probably think this boy-like personage
was poking fun at him, and give Wallanthagang a clout.
He would then rush at the blackfellow, and catching hold
of him, throw him up several feet into the air, and let him
fall heavily upon the ground. This would be repeated many


times in quick succession, until the man became very sick
at the stomach and quite helpless. Wallanthagang would
now carry the man to a bull-dog ants’ nest, and lay him
down on top of it, so that these insects might sting him
until he recovered. [S. E. Coast of N. S. Wales.]
The Wawi and Song-makers. —The Wawi is a serpent-
like creature which lives in deep waterholes, and burrows
into the bank, where he makes his den. He has a wife and
children who camp close to him, but in a different place.
A “doctor” or clever man can go and see the Wawi, but
must not go near his family. When a man is going on a
visit to this monster he must paint his body all over with
red ochre. He then follows after the rainbow some day
when there is a thunder-shower ; and the end of the rain-
bow rests over the waterhole in which is the Wawi’s abode.
The man then dives under the bank, where he finds the
Wawi, who conducts him into his den and sings him a new
song for the corroboree. The man repeats the song after
the Wawi until he has learnt it sufficiently, and then starts
back to his own people. When they see him returning,
painted red and singing, they know he has been with the
Wawi. The bard then takes a few of the other clever men
with him into the bush and they strip pieces of bark off
trees, and paint different devices upon them with coloured
clays. The pieces of bark ornamented in this way are
taken to the corroboree ground, and all the men dance, and
sing the new song. This is how new songs and dances are
obtained. The Wawi has the magic power of varying his
size from a few inches up to prodigious proportions. The
black streak in the Milky Way, towards the Southern Cross,
is one of the ancestors of the Wawi. He encourages snakes
and adders to bite the black people. [Wirraidyuri Tribe.]
Achievements of the Brcimbambults. —In the distant
past there lived in the north-western districts of Victoria


two warrior youths, who were brothers, named Bram-bram-
bulaty, 1 which in the aboriginal tongue means, Two-Brams.
These words the natives have shortened into Brambambult,
which is more euphonious and is the name by which the
heroes are mostly spoken of. They are sometimes called
Barm-barm-bult. I have collected a few examples of the
principal exploits of these mythic warriors, as told to me
by some old natives. It has been found necessary to
abridge tlie narratives very largely, and to omit portions
of them altogether, in order to bring them within reason-
able limits for publication in this article: —
1. The Ngindyal. —The ngin'-dyal was a bird-like animal,
having the shape and feathers of an emu, but of enormous
proportions, and was moreover, a great magician. She had
her nest at Wombagruk, containing only one egg, on which
she sat. She used to kill and eat all the people she could
catch. One day a crow came prying about, and the ngin-
dyal ran after him in a furious manner. The crow fled
across the country and ran into a cave or hole in the side
of a mountain, and came out at the other side. The ngin-
dyal rushed at the hill and struck it with her foot, which
split it in two, forming what is now known as Rose’s
Gap. The ngindyal continued on through the cleft in the
mountain and was graining rapidly on the crow till he came
to another mountain which w r as passed over in a similar
manner. The chase was continued until the crow reached
his own miyur or spirit land at Dyurnera," whither the
ngindyal had not the power to intrude, and turned back to
her nest.
Shortly afterward the crow left his miyur, and returned
to his ordinary hunting grounds. It chanced on a day that
1 See my “The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc.,
N. S. Wales, Yol. xxxvi., p. 84. .
2 Dyurnera is the fabled water of the clan Wanguguliak, to which the
crow belongs. See “ Sociology of the Tribes of Western Victoria, in
earlier pages of this work.


he met the Brambambult brothers near what is now Jeparit,
and told them all about his adventure with the ngindyal.
They begged of the crow to come and show them the place,
and the three of them started off, but they had a long dis-
tance to go. The crow did not care to risk another meet-
ing with the ngindyal, so when he had gone part of the
way, he said to the Brambambults, “ I’ll stop here while
you two go on to where I have told you of.” But the
brothers asked the crow to come on a little way farther.
They made this request, not because they wanted his assist-
ance, but because he was helping them to carry their large
load of weapons.
The three travelled on again, and presently the Bram-
bambults saw in the distance what they thought was a
bright star shining. The crow said “That is her eye; she
is there, sitting on her nest.” The Brambambults left the
crow there and advanced on the foe. The younger brother
went round to the farther side, when the ngindyal spied
him and got up to have a better view. By this time the
elder brother was quite close and hurled a spear, which
caught the ngindyal in the breast. She immediately turned
round and rushed at him, which gave the younger brother
an opportunity of throwing a spear, which wmunded the
ngindyal in the body. She then bestowed her attention
upon the junior assailant which allowed the elder brother
a chance to cast another spear.
They kept throwing spears alternately until the ngindyal
was considerably subdued by pain and loss of blood, and
then drove her before them towards what is now called
Horsham Plain. When wdty-gurk, the lark, saw the ngin-
dyal coming, pursued by the Brambambults, he came out,
carrying a bough in front of him, to hide himself from
observation. When he reached within range, he cast a
spear with all his force, which struck the ngindyal in the


chest and killed her. The Brambambults were somewhat
annoyed with the lark for depriving them of the honour of
slaying the ngindyal; but as a common enemy had fallen,
they did not quarrel about it.
The Brambambults then split each feather of the ngin-
dyal down the middle, casting one half of the feathers on
the right hand side and the other half on the left, making
two heaps. One of these heaps of feathers was converted
into a cock and the other heap into a hen, of the present
race of emus, which are incomparably smaller than the
ngindyal. It was also arranged by the sorcery of the
Brambambults that all future emus should lay a number of
eggs, instead of one only. The splitting of the feathers
above mentioned is still easily observable in the feathers
of all emus, which are double, or consist of two independent
shafts.
All the people then journeyed away to Wombagriik to get
the egg on which the ngindyal had been sitting. Although
every body tried their best, none of them could lift the egg,
till babimbal, a sort of wattle-bird, came. He picked it
up and put it into his bag, and carried it to Horsham Plain,
where it was cooked and made a great feast. The nest in
which the large egg lay is said to be still visible at Wam-
bagruk. The ngindyal now occupies the black patch in the
constellation of the Southern Cross, and the crow was
changed to « Argus, at a respectful distance from his
ancient pursuer.
2. Ngaut-ngaut. —Ngaut-ngaut lived out in tlie Mallee
country of Western Victoria, and belonged to tlie Ngur-
rumba-nguttya people, in the far-off legendary age. He
used to kill blackfellows and suck their blood. It was
impossible to hurt him with a spear or any other weapon,
except in the tongue, which was the only vulnerable part
of his body. The two Brambambults went out to punish


him, and caused a spring to break out at a place called
Gurabo, where he used to frequent. Having obtained the
leg bone of a kangaroo, they ground the smaller end of it
to a sharp, keen point, and placed this weapon, point up-
ward, under the water close to the bank. Then they
changed themselves into two dead trees —one on either side
of the spring.
One very hot day Ngaut-ngaut cajne up and looked at
the water, but he was suspicious. He came again next
day and stood between the two trees, with a hand on each.
He shook one of the trees, saying “ This is you, Brambam-
bult;” then shaking the other tree, he said, “And this is
your brother.” Receiving no answer, he shook the trees
more forcibly, and could hear bits of the rotten core rum-
bling down inside, the same as one can hear if a dead, hollow
tree be struck heavily with the back of an axe. This
satisfied him that they were really trees.
But Ngaut-ngaut still thought there might be enemies
lurking about, so he went some distance away to search
for them. The Brambambults then began to “sing” quietly
to themselves to make him more thirsty, and he came back
and shook the trees again with the same result. He went
away the third time, but not so far, because his thirst was
increasing, owing to the necromancy of the Brambambults.
On returning the third time, he put his mouth close to the
water, but changed his mind and did not touch it. Then
he went away again, but only a little distance. This was
repeated a few times to satisfy himself that there was no
danger near. He now lay down on his hands and knees
and dipped his mouth into the water to drink. The hidden
bone spike immediately shot up like a living thing and
went through his tongue into his head, killing him on the
spot.


3. Wirnbullain. —Duan, the flying-squirrel, followed a
kangaroo from somewhere near Stawell, and it ran away
northerly down the Wimmera River, forming the present
watercourse. The kangaroo grazed a long time about Lake
Hindmarsh, eating the grass quite bare, and formed the
lake. It went on and grazed about Lake Albacutya where
another lake was formed in the same way. From there it
travelled on to Lake Wonga, where it was overtaken and
killed by Duan. While he was cooking the kangaroo,
Wirnbullain, the tarantula, came up and commenced fight-
ing with Duan. The latter was getting the worst of it
and climbed up into a tree out of the way. Wirnbullain
commenced gnawing the base of the tree, and cut it down
with a few bites.
When Duan felt the tree falling, he bounded or flew into
another tree close by. Wirnbullain proceeded to cut this
tree down too, and Duan flew into another one. Then
Wirnbullain called his two daughters to come and stand at
the butt of the tree in which Duan had taken refuge, until
he himself cut down all the surrounding trees for some
distance. Wirnbullain next commenced cutting down the
tree occupied by 1 Duan, and as there were no more trees
close enough for him to fly into, he was caught by Wirn-
bullain and his daughters, who killed him. They carried
his body to their camp, as well as the carcase of the kan-
garoo which he had caught and feasted on them for several
days.
The Brambambults were nephews of Duan —his sister’s
children. When Duan did not come back to his camp in a
reasonable time, these two young fellows, accompanied by
tlieir mother, Dok, the frog, started away along his tracks.
On reaching Lake Hindmarsh, they left their mother there,
because she was tired. Going farther on, they met some
ants, mam, carrying Duan’s hair. He wore long hair and
X—Oct. 5, 1904.


used to dress it with red ochre. The younger Brambam-
bult at once recognized the hair and began to cry, because
he knew that his uncle must be dead. The elder brother
bade him be of good cheer, that they would by and by
ascertain the truth of the matter.
The two brothers wandered on and tracked their uncle
to Wonga Lake, where they discovered portions of his body.
Upon seeing the trees lying on the ground, which had been
cut down by Wirnbullain, they at once knew who had killed
their uncle. They then tracked Wirnbullain to Pine Plain,
where they found him with his two daughters. They killed
the father and took his two daughters for wives. These
girls, however, inherited their father’s dexterity in felling
trees, which scared the game away when out hunting. If
one brother went away round a kangaroo and turned it
towards the other brother, who was waiting to spear it,
then, just as he was about to launch the weapon, the
women would cut down a tree, and the noise of its falling
startled the kangaroo, which ran away.
After suffering this annoyance and disappointment from
their wives for some time, the Brambambults one day went
up to the two sisters, who carried bags across their loins
for holding such fruits and yams as they could gather.
They pretended that they wanted the women to carry their
shields for them, and asked them to turn their backs while
they placed the shields in the bags. As soon as this was
done, the men chopped the women in the back of the neck
and killed them. All tarantulas have had the mark of a
shield on the lower part of their backs ever since.
4. Dyuni-dyunity . —The Brambambults went to see their
brotber-in-law, Dyu-ni-dyu-nity, the night owl. On reach-
ing the camp, Dyuni-dyunity was out hunting, but his two
little sons were there, playing with something which
resembled the shoulder blade of a kangaroo. The Bram-


bambults asked their little nephews what bone that was ?
and they replied, “This is our mother’s shoulder blade; our
father and we ate the flesh off it this morning for breakfast.
Father killed our mother some days ago.” The Brambam-
bults became very wrath, because their sister had been
murdered and eaten, but they kept it to themselves.
After pondering over the outrage for a while, they asked
their nephews to build up a hut, consisting of nothing but
dry wood and boughs, and make a small door in one side of
it. They told the boys that the building was for their
father to sleep in that night, when he returned from his
hunting, as it looked like rain. The Brambambults then
went away and pitched their camp some distance off.
By and by Dyuni-dyunity returned and enquired of his
sons why they had built the hut. They replied that their
uncles had been to see them, and pointed out their camp
fire in the distance. This alarmed Dyuni-dyunity and he
said he. would kill the younger Brambambult before long.
He started out hunting next morning and brought home
human flesh. It was his custom every day to search about
for biackfellows, whom he killed and secured the daintiest
parts of their bodies, which he carried to his camp for him-
self and bis boys. He cooked some of the flesh and sent a
portion by his sons to the Brambambults’ camp, but they
refused it, saying that they had plenty of meat of their
own. Moreover, they told the lads that they were going
right away the same afternoon, into another part of the
country, and asked them to tell their father so. This was
a ruse to throw Dyuni-dyunity off his guard and make him
feel confident in his security while he slumbered through
the night. But the Brambambults only moved into a patch
of scrub, where they hid themselves.
That evening the Brambambults, who were clever
wizards, caused a heavy downpour of rain, which made


Dyuni-dyunity and his children seek shelter in the hut
which had been erected, and all of them went sound asleep.
During the small hours of next morning, after the rain had
ceased, the Brambambults went cautiously to the camp of
their brother-in-law, and found them all slumbering. They
carefully and noiselessly lifted the two lads and carried
them out of the hut —the elder Brambambult carrying the
elder boy and the younger Brambambult taking the younger
—and placed them lying on the grass out of the way of
danger. Then they set fire to the inflammable material of
which the hut was constructed, and it was soon enveloped
in flame.
Dyuni-dyunity did not feel the heat for some time,
because he had very long hair all over his body. When at
length he became aware of his position, he sprang to his
feet and picking up one of his clubs, struck out all around
him, thinking that his enemies the Brambambults might be
within reach of his blows. His club came in contact with
the poles supporting the building and displaced them, caus-
ing the fire to burn all the fiercer. It had, in fact, the
same effect as what we call “poking the fire.” Presently
the whole burning mass fell down on top of Dyuni-dyunity,
suffocating him and consuming his body.
The Brambambults carried their two nephews away to
their own camp, where they all slept till after sunrise.
The boys were then told to go to their father’s camp for
breakfast, but when they reached it there was nothing but
cinders and burnt bones. The boys, who had much of their
father’s cruel nature in them, then returned to Brambam-
bult’s camp, and told the younger brother that they would
kill him and take out his liver, to furnish them with break-
fast. The elder brother then said, “These boys will prob-
ably try to kill us some day in revenge for their father.’’
They accordingly fell upon the lads and destroyed them.


The site of Dyuni-dyunity’s camp, where the conflagra-
tion took place is still pointed out by the natives, about a
day’s journey northwards from Cow Plain. There is a
rocky outcrop, mixed with calcareous fragments which are
said to be the charred bones of Dyuni-dyunity.
5. Gartuk. —Another time the Brambambults came to the
camp of Gartuk, the mopoke, a Guro-gity man, who was a
great hunter and had several dogs of different kinds, one of
which was the sparrow-hawk. They asked Gartuk if he
had any flesh to give them, as they were hungry. He
falsely replied that he had plenty of does, but no bucks.
The Brambambults were not at this time released from
their taboo of female animals, and consequently could not
eat the meat which Gartuk churlishly offered them. The
Brambambults were vexed with Gartuk for his want of
hospitality, and started away. In a short time they dis-
covered a tree, in the fork of which was a recess, dyattyar ,
containing some water, of which they had a good drink.
It may be explained that some trees, at about ten or
twenty feet from the ground, or higher than that, are forked
into two large branches. If this fork is split slightly open
by a wind-storm while the tree is growing, the wood around
the injured part decays and rots, forming in course of time
a cavity into the centre of the bole of the tree. During
rainy weather the water runs down the branches into this
hollow part and fills it till it runs over. Such water remains
for a long time, being replenished by every shower. A tree
of this kind is readily distinguished by bushmen, owing to
the discolouration of the bark caused by the overflowing of
the water from the cavity down the outside of the bole of
the tree.
The brothers now returned to Gartuk’s camp and invited
him to come with all his dogs and have a drink. Arrived
at the tree, they told him to take his dogs under his arms,


so that both he and they could get a share of the water.
When the hunter and his dogs got into the dyattvar, the
Brambambults by their enchantments made the entrance
to the recess close up, shutting them all inside. The
brothers journeyed on, and left them there.
After a time, during which Gartuk had eaten his dogs to
sustain his own life, Babim'bal, a bird like the wattle-bird,
and his brother Bimbin, the woodpecker, came wandering
about the tree and heard Gartuk calling out for help.
Babimbal was anxious to release his friend from his con-
finement, but wished to exercise sufficient care not to
injure him by a chop of his tomahawk. Tapping the outside
of the tree at a certain place, he asked Gartuk if he should
chop a hole there. Gartuk replied, “ No, that is my belly.”
Babimbal tapped on another part of the bole and enquired
if it would be safe to chop at that spot, and got the answer,
“No, that is my eyes.” Other interrogations elicited the
replies “That is my back,” “That is my knees,” and
similar warnings.
By this time the patience of the rescuers was exhausted.
Bimbin chopped into the tree and accidentally cut Gartuk
on the stomach, the scar of which accounts for the white
place on the Mopoke’s belly to this day. At the same time
Babimbal, who was a very strong fellow, split the tree
down from above with heavy chops of his hatchet, so that
all the rotten wood, and earthy matter inside of the bole
rolled down on Gartuk’s head. The large bunch of feathers
on the Mopoke’s head is due to the mass of rubbish which
fell upon his skull on that occasion.
When Gartuk recovered, he pondered over how he should
be revenged upon the Brambambults. Some days after this
event he saw a cyclone coming. He ran to his camp and
got a large bag, made of kangaroo skin, into which he let
the cyclone rush, and tied it up securely. Another cyclone


came in a few day’s time, which Gartuk bagged in the same
way. He waited until a third hurricane blew, and he
secured it in another bag, which he placed with the rest.
Then Gartuk wanted to know where his enemies were,
and learnt that they were camped near Mukbilli. So he
started away carrying his skin bags. On getting within
view of Brambambult’s camp, he opened his three bags
simultaneously and liberated all the cyclones. The elder
Brambambult caught hold of a dog-wood tree and told
his brother to get a secure hold of a wattle tree. Dok, a
frog, the mother of the two youths, went into the ground.
By this time the triple-cyclone was upon them, and the
two trees were swayed and twisted in every direction.
The wattle tree was torn out of the ground and carried
into the air, taking the younger Brambambult with it. The
dog-wood tree withstood the hurricane.
When the fierceness of the storm had passed, the elder
brother let go his hold of the tree and Ddk came out of the
ground. Upon searching about they could find no trace of
the younger boy. The mother took hold of one of her teats
and squirted out some milk, to determine the direction in
which her son had been swept by the hurricane. The elder
Brambambult then started off along the course indicated
by his mother’s milk, and came to a place where his brother
had been fishing for eels, but had changed himself into a
small red-gum tree owing to the nankeen bird making such
weird noises. When the elder brother saw the tree he
recognized his brother by the way he was standing, being
similar to his attitude when he stood as a tree to watch
Ngaut-ngaut. Upon speaking to the tree, it regained the
human shape, and the two brothers went back and met
their mother. ,
At some time subsequent to the events related in the
foregoing pages, the Brambambults took their place in the


heavens as a and /? Gentauri, whilst the mother, Dok, was
transformed into a Crucis. The mother and her two sons
belong to the clan and miyur Pattyangal, and pliratry
Gamaty.
APPENDIX.
Since the foregoing part of this work was read before the
Royal Society on sth October, 1904, it has been thought
desirable to supply some additional information.
Note: —Portions of the Appendix are not suitable for the
general lay reader.
The Rite of Subincision.
Subincision, or splitting the lower side of the male sexual
organ, is a custom of very wide geographic range in South
Australia (including the Northern Territory), in Queensland
and in Western Australia. The rite of circumcision has
even a greater distribution in the same regions. In an
article on the “ Phallic Rites and Initiation Ceremonies of
the South Australian Aborigines,” 1 published in 1900,1 gave
a tolerably full account of the proceedings connected with
both the operations referred to. In amplification of that
work, I now wish to supply a couple of photographs illus-
trating the nature of the first mentioned rite.
Within a small area of the north-west corner of New
South Wales subincision is practiced. Circumcision pre-
vails in the same district, but extends somewhat beyond
the limits within which splitting the penis is in force,
reaching into New South Wales as far as Milparinka,
Tibooburra, Cobham, Broken Hill, and other places. 2
By permission of the Royal Society of New South Wales
I have reproduced the plate which accompanied an article
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Yol. xxxix., pp. 622-638.
2 See map with my “ Group Divisions and Initiation Ceremonies of the
Barkunjee Tribes,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N.S.W., Yol. xxxii., p. 255.


Fig. 1.
Fig. 2.
Photographs showing the effect of subincision on the organ,
on “The Mika or Kulpi Operation of the Australian
Aboriginals,” 1 by Professor T. P. Anderson-Stuart of the
Sydney University. The Professor’s description of the
plate will be adopted : —“ The subject of the illustrations
was from the Spinnifex district of North Australia. . . .
I was obliged to have two photographs of his genitalia made
in order to show the condition fnlly. It is seen that we
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Yol. xx:Z, pp. 115-122, plate vi.


have here the result of the operation in its fullest extent,
the cleft extending right up to the front of the base of the
scrotum, where the round opening, observable in Fig. 1 is
that of the urethra. The urethra in front of this is widely
opened, and it is not even a groove, for the corpora caver-
nosa project, so that instead of being concave, the urethral
roof is actually convex.
“ In the photograph, Fig. 1, where the man himself is
holding the organ, it is seen that the skin edges are pulled
away to the side, and the urethral surface is thus enorm-
ously extended. In the other photograph, Fig. 2, where I
am holding the organ in a suitable position to show the
glans, the wrinkling of the urethral mucosa, due to its
being so extended, is clearly seen. The prepuce was intact,
there having been no preliminary circumcision as some-
times occurs. The exposed urethral mucosa had the bluish,
injected, hardened appearance common to mucous mem-
brane in such circumstances. . . . The release of the
corpora cavernosa, caused by the cutting, permits the organ
to be flattened and widened, especially during erection.”
Fig. 1 shows the incised urethra pulled widely apart by
the man’s fingers, to reveal the interior of the canal. Fig.
2 represents the mutilated organ in its normal, quiescent
condition. It may be explained that these photographs
exhibit the incision extending right from the meatus
urinarius to the scrotum, laying the passage open in its
whole length. This is the most complete form of the
mutilation. In other districts, however, the incision com-
mences below the glans, say an inch from the meatus, and
extends part of the way to the scrotum, but leaving the
head of the penis and the meatus uninjured.
Whether a cleft is made in the middle portion of the
urethral canal, between the glans and the scrotum, as last
mentioned, or whether the cut extends from the meatus,


as in the photographs, the subject always afterwards passes
his water through the artificial opening. Moreover, the
incision of the urethral canal, in whichever manner it is
performed, does not prevent either coition or procreation.
It has been said by some writers that men who have
been subincised cannot be the fathers of families, but this
statement is altogether erroneous. In all tribes where the
rite is practiced, every male, without any exception, must
submit to it.
Additional Folklore.
The Bat , his Wives and the Native-Cat.— The bat in
olden times had for liis wives two willy-wagtails, wai-li-li ,
who were sisters. The native-cat was a sister’s son of the
bat, and resided with him. These two men were clever
and could work magical feats. After a while the bat
became suspicious that his nephew r the native-cat was too
familiar with his wives during his absence from the camp.
So one day these two fellows were out hunting for bees’
nests, and caught a wild bee. They had with them some
soft, line bird’s down and some honey. They put a little
honey on the bee’s legs, and then attached a tiny piece of
white down to them, so that they could see the bee flying
through the air towards its nest. Being heavily weighted
with the load of down on such a small creature, the bee
went slowly along, and rested frequently by alighting on
bushes.
After they had followed the bee some distance the native
cat pretended he had accidentally cut one of his feet on a
sharp stick. He had purposely made the wound in his foot,
so that he could have an excuse for remaining behind with
the two women. The bat gave the cat permission to stay
and rest his foot, while he himself continued the pursuit of
the bee. As soon as the bat went out of view T , the native-cat
healed his wounded foot by his gramarye, and played about


with the bat’s wives. The bat followed on after the bee,
and when daylight began to fade about sunset, he caught
the bee and put it in his bag, which lie hung near the camp
Are all night, to keep the bee from perishing in the cold.
He liberated it again on the following morning, and followed
it on towards its home. In due time the bee reached its nest
in the hollow branch of a tree, and the bat climbed up and
cut a hole large enough to just admit his hand, and took
out a little piece of honeycomb, which he ate.
Suspecting that the native cat was only pretending to be
sore-footed, and that his real object was to have improper
associations with his wives, the bat conceived a design for
retaliating. So lie waited near the locality of the bee’s
nest for a day, and rested himself till the cat and the two
wag-tails overtook him, having followed his tracks. The
bat pointed out the tree containing the nest to the cat,
and suggested that he should climb up and get a piece
of honeycomb for himself. The cat accordingly climbed
the tree, and put his hand into the hole which the bat
had cut the day before. As soon as he did so, the bat,
who was a great conjurer, caused the hole in the tree to
close up, and jam the cat’s hand fast, so that he was
held there and could not get away.
The bat then gave the cat an unmerciful beating while
he was caught in the tree by the hand. He chopped him
with his tomahawk in different places over his body, and
that is why the native cat is spotted to the present day,
the spots representing the scars of the wounds made by the
tomahawk. He then told the tree to let the cat free,
when he fell to the ground bleeding and almost dead.
The bat now went away in quest of his two wives, who
had cleared out when they saw the row commencing. His
dogs were the jumper ants and the “ soldier ” ants. Having
found his wives at a place called Nunbaddyang he killed


them by breaking their backs, and left them lying on the
ground unburied. This is why the tails of willy-wagtails
stand up at a great angle, as if broken, at the present time.
He took some of the pretty feathers out of the tops of their
heads, which he plaited in his beard, for ornament. Then
he cut off their breasts and fastened them on a string, like
a yirrambin or necklace. He likewise cut out the pudendse
of each women and attached them to a similar necklace.
He fastened the string on which were the four teats around
liis neck and let them hang upon his chest. The loop con-
taining the two pudendse he also passed over his head, so
that they hung down upon his back. Next he cast his
opossum rug over his shoulders and around his body, cover-
ing the two “necklaces,” with their appendages.
The bat now started for Gubburunga, a fabled locality
where there was a large mob of blacks, among whom was
the father of the two women he had killed. He told his
father-in-law, ngurambulla , the bower-bird, that the first
two wives had killed each other, and asked him for another
of his daughters. But the younger daughter noticed some
of her sisters’ head feathers in the bat’s beard and told her
father and brothers that she suspected her sisters had been
murdered. The bat kept his rug constantly wrapped about
his shoulders and chest. This excited the suspicion of the
brown-hawk, birrangga , so he said “ Let us all play ball,
buradhan ,” in the hope that the bat might relax the fasten-
ing of the rug when he got warm. But the bat played
with so much agility that no one could get near him. Then
the brown-hawk suggested that they should change the
game to another one, called yarrabir , which is played with
pieces of bark about half the size of a cricket bat. The
men ran about tapping each other on the shoulders and
chests with their bark. After a while the brown-hawk
tapped the bat so skilfully on the breast that he broke the


fastening of the rug and also severed the strings which
carried the neck ornaments. The breasts and pudendae of the
murdered women immediately fell to the ground. The bat
threw himself down upon them and by means of his rug
endeavoured to hide them, but they were seen by every-
body.
The brothers of the two women now commenced throw-
ing spears at the bat, but he dodged them and escaped into
a tree where he hid himself and his neck pendants. Being
now rather late, the people camped round the tree for the
night, intending to renew the attack in the morning. At
the first peep of daylight, while all the watchers slumbered,
the father-in-law of the bat made signs to him to decamp —
advice which was promptly acted upon. Some time after-
ward when the people woke up, they saw the tracks of the
bat and would have started in pursuit, but his father-in-law
persuaded them to let him go.
By and by, Ngurambulla, the father-in-law, went after
the bat and found him camped in a cave, with the breasts
and pudendae still supended from his neck. He enquired
where the women had killed each other and asked the bat
to guide him to the spot, in order that he might bury them.
This was agreed to by the bat, and when the place was
reached nothing was left of the two women but their bones,
which were scattered about in all directions. Ngurambulla
set to work and at length succeeded in gathering all their
bones, laying those of each woman in their correct relative
positions on the ground. Then he asked the bat for the
four breasts and the two pudendae, which he placed on top
of the skeletons to which they respectively belonged. He
now commenced singing and working enchantments, which
he continued for two days, fresh songs being introduced at
intervals. The breasts and pudendae gradually attached
themselves to the proper bones and the flesh began to form


all over the skeletons. At last the two women came to
life again and he took them back to Gubburunga where
their younger sister was.
The gathering up of the bones of his two daughters and
the long continued singing made sucli an impression on
Ngurambulla that he still retains the old habit of collecting
bones about his “ playhouses ” in the bush, where he sings
and mocks all the other birds around him. [Wirraidyur i and
Wongaibon Tribes.]
Origiii'of Tullhvaka Ana-branch. —In the old time there
was a family of sisters, comprising the carpet snake, brown
snake, whip-snake and mallee snake, all having human
shape —their ages being in the order of their names. They
were on one side of the river Darling, and the native cat,
papilla , who was then a blackfellow, was on the other side.
The sisters called to him across the water, and offered him
the eldest one of them as a wife. He merely answered
“ Kirrigugu! ” which is the native way of poking fun, or
treating anything with derision, and went a little way down
the river, where he planted.
One day the women shifted their quarters down the
river also. When the cat observed them he changed him-
self into a large fish and floated on top of the water in the
river in front of their camp. The eldest girl, the carpet
snake, swam out into the stream to catch the fish, but it
dived under the water on her approach. She returned to
the bank, and the fish again appeared floating. The brown
snake went out, and when she got near the fish, it dived
again. Then the whip-snake swam out, but met with no
better success. Last of all the mallee snake, mundhurra ,
the younger of the women, swam toward the fish, which
resumed its original shape of a man. At the same time,
by the cat’s conjuration, the bottom of the river came up
above the surface of the water, forming a small island in


mid stream. The cat caught the mallee snake and ravished
her, after which the island sank down again under the
water, and the mallee snake returned to her sisters. The
cat also swam away to the opposite shore, and went into
the bush, calling out “ kirrigugu ! ” till he was lost to view.
Some weeks afterward the cat made himself look like a
woman. He caused his penis to grow a great length, with
a protuberance at the glans about the size of an infant.
Then he wrapped his opossum rug around him and
approached the women’s camp, pretending he was a woman
carrying a small child wrapped in the rug. They all came
to him and invited him into their camp. The elder one,
the carpet snake, asked to see the baby, but the cat would
only let her peep through a crack in the rug, saying the
child would cry if exposed to;the light. Later on the other
women wanted to look at the infant, but were met by
some excuse. Late in the evening they all went to sleep
around the camp fire.
When their slumber was at its soundest, the cat got up
cautiously, having in the meantime contracted his virile
member to its normal proportions. Then he examined the
clitoris of each woman, commencing at the elder, and
passed them all by in a perfunctory way till he came to the
younger girl. He pulled her clitoris out gradually, work-
ing magical charms all the time. He continued pulling
and the clitoris kept on stretching till it was between two
and three feet in length. He bent it into the shape of a
boomerang, and flattened it between his lingers and thumb
till it was about three inches wide. He now cut it off with
his stone knife and transformed it into a real weapon. At
daylight he noiselessly left the camp.
During the day the cat went to a bend of the Darling
River and threw his enchanted boomerang, which he had
manufactured in the way described. It went whizzing


along the ground and cut a sinuous channel, into which the
water flowed. It then came whizzing back to its owner,
and while gyrating in the air near him, he blew strongly
upon it with his breath and it started on again. The cat
and his boomerang kept on and on for a long time till they
formed the Tulliwaka ana branch, spelt on our maps as
“ Talyawalka.” There are many interesting details of
their work at different places as they went along, but these
must be omitted for the present. [Kurnu Tribe.]
For other native stories, see my booklet on “Folklore of
the Australian Aborigines, ’ (Sydney, 1899).




BULLETINS
ET MEMOIRES
DE LA
SOCIETE D’ANTHROPOLOGIE
DE PARIS
EXTRAIT
PARIS-VI E
15, Rue de PEcole-de-M6decine, 15




(Extrait des Bulletins et de la Society d’Anthropoiogie de Paris.)
ORGANISATION SOCIALE DES TRIBUS ABORIGENES DE L’AUS TRALIE.
Par R.-H. Mathews, L. S.,
Membre associ6 stranger de la Soci6te d’Anthropologie de Paris.
En etudiant la structure sociale des Iribus primitives de l’Australie,
on decouvre que les individus dont une tribu est composee, sont par-
tages en deux principales divisions, ou phratries les fils et les filles
d’une phratrie epousant ceux de l’autre, conformement a de certaines
lois definies. Dans quelques parlies du pays, les deux phratries sont
les seules divisions employees a cet etlet. Dans d’autres localites il y
a une separation de chaque phratrie en deux sections, faisant quatre
divisions de la tribu.
Dans certains districts il y a quatre subdivisions de chaque phratrie,,
donnant ainsi un total de huit sections. Mais qu’il existe deux, ou quatre,
ou huit divisions de toute la communaute, les principes fondamentaux
qui r&glent les mariages entre les divisions du groupe, et l’ordre de
succession de la posterite sont identiques en tout.
Dans le present travail, on s’occupera seulement des tribus qui adoptent
huit leur structure sociale, et a cet effet je choisirai la
tribu Yungmunni. Cette tribu occupe un territoire etendu sur le plateau
qui separe les sources des rivieres, le Roper et le Daly, dans le Territoire
du Nord (Northern Territory) nom donne aux parties septentrionales
et aux centrales de l’Australie du Sud (South Australia). II sera neces-
saire de recourir a un tableau pour eclaire les descriptions donnees
dans le texte ci-dessus. Les hommes se distinguent des femmes au moyen
de la forme masculine, et de la forme feminine, du nom de toutes les
sections, Par exemple, Uwallaree est le masculin, et sa sceur Imballaree
est le feminin, et ainsi de suite dans tout le tableau.
Tableau
Phratrie,
Eemitch Inkagalla
Uwannee Imbawalla
Unmarra Imballaree
Tabachin Imbongaree
Uwallaree
Uwungaree
Urwalla
Yungalla
Imballaree
Imbongaree
Imbawalla
Inkagalla
Yungalla Immadenna Tabachin Tabadenna
i Ur walla Imbannee Unmarra Inganma'ra
B I Uwongaree Tabadenna Uwannee Imbannee
Uwallaree Inganmarra Eemitch Immadenna
D’apres le tableau ci-dessus il est evident que toute la tribu se divise


416 4 juillet 1901
en deux phratries, A et B, et que chacune de ces phraties contient cer-
taines categories de femmes, qui ont entre elles une succession perpe"
tuelle. Quand on considere la genealogie des femmes qui composent
la phratrie A dans la table ci-dessus on voit que la fille ap-
partient a la meme phratrie que sa mere, mais pas a la meme section de
la phratrie. Par exemple, Inkagalla produit Imballaree ; Imballaree est la
m&re d’lmbawalla; Imbawalla a une fille Imbongaree; et Imbongaree re-
produit Inkagalla, et cette s6rie se repute a jamais dans le m6me ordre.
Si Ton avait pris l’exemple de la phratrie B, on aurait obtenu un resultat
semblable. Les fr&res des filles, dans tousles cas, appartiennent a la
m£me phratrie et a la m6me section que leurs sceurs.
Le tableau num6ro 1 s’explique de lui-meme le pere, la mere, le fils,
et la fille de chaque division paraissent sur la meme ligne transversale de
la page. Selon les regies ordinaires ou « directes », du manage et de la
descendance qui sont indiquees sur la table, Eemitch prend Inkagalla pour
femme, et la posterite de l’union sont Uwallaree et Imballaree. Mais
Eemitch a l’alternative d’epouser une femme Imbawalla ; et dans ce cas la
posterite sera Uwungaree et Imbongaree. Encore une fois, voila Uwannee,
qui prend, comme epouse r6guli&re, Imbawalla et comme epouse alter-
native, Inkagalla; le nom de section de la posterite est celui de la m6re,
comme autrefois. De la meme maniere, un Unmarra peut epouser ou une
Imballaree ou une Imbongaree; en outre, la femme de Tubachin est Im-
bongaree dans la ligne directe, avec l’alternative d’une Imballaree.
De plus, dans les couples de sections Yungalla et Urwalla Uwungaree
et Uwallaree dans la phratrie B aussi bien que dans la phratrie A, le
manage et la descendance suivent les m6mes regies. En raison de la tole-
rance de la polygamie, il est possible a un homme, d’une section d£ter-
minees d’avoir une femme de la ligne « directe », et une autre de la
division « alternative)) —on la nomenclature des enfants selon l’ex-
plication donnee.
On doit specifier, cependant, que le plus grand nombre de manages, de
beau coup s’accordent avec ce que j’ai appele la ligne « directe ». Pour
qu’un manage ait lieu dans la ligne « alternative » ou irreguliere, il faut
que l’un des epoux sorte d’une famille eloignee, de manure & empecher
une proche parente entre les parties qui s’unissent.
Dans le but de jeter une lumiere additionelle sur les manages entre
parents selon la table numero 1, j’ai prepare une table
demontrant certaines parentis entre les gens de difierentes sections, ainsi
qu’il suit:


R.-H. MATHEWS. ORGANISATION DES TRIBUS ABORIGINES DE L’AUSTRALIE 447
Un homme.
Son neveu.
Son cousin germain.
Son cousin issu de germain.
Eemitch
Tabachin
Urwalla
Yungalla
UWANNEE
Unmarra
Ynngalla
Urwalla
Unmarra
Eemitch
Uwungaree
Uwallaree
Tabachin
Uwannee
Uwallaree
Uw'ungaree
Yungalla
Uwallaree
Uwannee
Eemitch
Ur walla
Uwungaree
Eemitch
Uwannee
UWUNGAREE
Yungalla
Unmara
Tabachin
Uwallaree
Urwalla
Tabachin
Unmarra
Tableau 2.
Le neveu, comme ci-dessus, est l’enfant de la sceur de l’homme ; les
cousins sont les enfants d’un frere et ceux d’une soeur; le cousin issu de
germain est l’enfant de l’enfant d’un frAre, et l’enfant de l’enfant d’une
soeur. Par exemple, Eemitch aun neveu Tabachin ;un cousin Urwalla; et
un cousin issu de germain Yungalla.
En comparant les deux tableaux nous observons ceci; que, selon ce
que j’ai appelA les lois « directes » du mariage, un homme prend sa
cousine issue de germain exemplum gratia, Eemitch epouse Yungalla
(Inkagalla). Mais, conformement aux lois « alternatives », un homme
est uni a sa cousine germaine, e. g. Eemitch epouse Urwalla (Imba-
walla). Dans le dernier cas, cependant, il faut que la parent Ade cousine
soit collatArale ou de la tribu, et pas du mAme sang.
Dans le tableau numero 2, je n’ai parle que des formes des noms mas-
culins des sections, afin de rester dans des limites raisonnables ; mais
le lecteur peut trouver le feminin de quelques uns des noms cites s’il se
refere a la table numero 1. Par exemple, quandje dis qu”Eemitch Apouse
Yungalla, je veux direqu’il Apouse lasoeur de Yungalla, Inkagalla, etc,
Si Ton etudie le tableau numero 2, on voit qu’Eemicht est l’oncle (le
frere de la mAre) de Tabachin ; Tabachin est allie de la mAme maniere a
Uwannee; Uwannee est l’oncle d’Unmarra ;et Unmarra est le frere de la
mAre d’Eemitch, Eemitch Atant le nom par lequel nous avons com-
mence. Cette suite d’oncles et de neveux se rApAte continuellement dans
le mAme ordre. Ces quatre sections appartiennent a la mAme phratrie ; et
elles font de doubles manages avec les quatre sections de la phratrie
opposAe, ou les femmes se succedent dans le mAme ordre (Voyez la
table numero 4). Si on prend les hommes des quatre autres sections, a
savoir, Yungalla, Uwallaree, Urwalla et Uwungaree, on peut demontrer
qu’ils sont allies de la mAme maniere.
Je vais maintenant tAcher d’Atablir que le mariage, la parentA, et la
ligne descendante des tribus Australiennes dependent principalement
du p^ re regie qui s’applique avec une force Agale a toutes les tribus, et
a toutes les parties de l’Australie auxquelles mes investigations ont pu
atteindre jusqu’a present.
Les personnes de tousles sexes Apousent des individus qui appar-


tiennent a la meme phratrie que leur pere. Par le tableau numero 1, nous
voyons que Yungalla epouse Immadenna, de la meme phratrie que
son pere. Immadenna prend pour mari un Yungalla, de la phratrie de
son p6re Uwallaree.
Toutes les personnes les homtries aussi bien que les femmes
epousent, dans la phratric de leur un individu appartenant la m6me
section que de celle de la m6re de leur pere. Si l’on prend un exemple
dans le tableau, on trouve que le pere d’Eemitch est Uwallaree, et que la
mere d’Uwallaree est Inkagalla. Eemitch epouse une Inkagalla, qui ap-
partient ainsi a la section de la mere de son pere. De plus, le p6re d’lnka-
galla est Tabachin et la mere de Tabachin est Immadenna. Cette Imma-
denna s’unit avec Yungalla, le nom de la section de la mere de son pere.
Lesenfanls des deux sexes prennent le nom dela section du grand’pere
paternel. Eemitch a un fils Uwallaree, et Uwallaree est le p6re d’Eemitch,
la section du paternel. De nouveau, Eemitch a un fils Uwal-
laree, et Uwallaree a une fille Immadenna, la forme feminine du nom de
la section a laquelle Eemitch, le paternel, appartient.
Comme I’indique le tableau n° 1, Eemitch et Uwallaree sont parents
l’un de l’autre comme pere et fils dans une alternation continue, et j’a
observe qu’ils poss&dent certains totems dont heritent leurs descendants.
Par exemple, Eemitch pelican est le p&re d’Uwallaree pelican, et dans la
generation la plus proche Uwallaree pelican est le pere d’Eemitch pelican.
Les autres couples de sections ont des totems qui leur viennent de la
meme maniere, et de ceci je donne un exemple dans le tableau ci-dessous :
Tableau 3.
Eemitch )
TT ~ [Groupe de totems.
Uwallaree )
Uwannee ) , .
moitie A
rT >Groupe de totems.
Uwungaree
Unmarra )
Urwalla iGroupe de totems.
Tabachin 1
moitie B
~ [Groupe de totems.
Yungalla ) r
Plus haut en traitant des mariages « alternatifs » j’ai demontre
qu’Uwannee peut se marier avec Inkagalla aussi; dans ce cas son fils
serait Uwallaree. De la meme rnani&re, Eemitch pourrait etre le pere
d’Uwungaree. Avec des totems qui descendent du pere a sa posterity, dans
les tribus oil la polygamie est mise en pratique, le totem d’Eemitch
pourrait etre transmis tant a Uwungaree qu’a Uwallaree, en supposant
qu’il choisit une femme dans chaque section sur laquelle il possede des
droits de mariage virtuels.
J’ai decouvert, qu’en consequence de la proche parente du sang men-
tionnee dans les derniersparagraphes, les divisions Eemitch, Uwallaree,


R.-H. MATHEWS. ORGANISATION DES TRIBUS ABORIGENES DE L’AUSTRALIE 419
Uwannee, et Uwungaree sont tres ami£s entre elles, et ces quatre sec-
tions se servent, plus ou moins, des mtmes totems; en consequence,
j’ai appele ces sections la moitie A. En d’autres mots, les totems men-
tionnes dans le tableau n° 3 comme appartenant primitivement a Eemitch
et a Uwallaree, sont aussi, jusqu’a un certain point, communs A Uwannee
et a Uwungaree. Les memes remarques s’appliqueront egalement aux
quatre sections qui restent, et a leurs totems, qui sont designes dans le
tableau comme la moitie B.
Generalement les enfants des deux sexes heritent du totem de leur pa-
rent mAle, mais des irregularitts ont ete observees dans la ligne directe
des totems dans quelques districts sur lesquels je recueille des renseigne-
ments complementaires.
Si Ton veut rassembler toutes les femmes de chaque phratrie, pour d -
montrer leur ordre de succession, en etablissant aussi la serie de la ligne
directe de succession des oncles et des neveux, le tableau n° 1 represente
un arrangement convenable des sections. Mais si pour suivre la trace des
regies du mariage et de la ligne directe par les hommes, et exposer les
deux moities par lesquelles la communaute est constitute, le tableau
suivant est alors un arrangement preferable.
Pfcre.
Mfere.
Fils.
Fille.
La
moitie A
' Eemitch
| Uwallaree
| Uwannee
Uwungaree
lnkagalla
Inganmarra
Imbawalla
Tabadenna
Uwallaree
Eemitch
Uwungaree
Uwannee
Imballaree
Immadenna
lmbongaree
Imbannee
La
moitie B,
r Unmarra
| Urwalla
1 Tabachin
l Yungalla
Imballaree
Imbannee
lmbongaree
Immadenna
Urwalla
Unmarra
Yungalla
Tabachin
Imbawalla
Inganmarra
lnkagalla
Tabadenna
La lecture de ce tableau demontre que les hommes de chaque moitie se
Tableau 4
reproduisent dans des generations alternatives; qu’ils epousent les filles
des hommes de la moitie opposee; et que les enfants appartiennent a la
merae moitie que leurs peres. On observera aussi que chaque homme et
chaque femme du tableau epouse un individu qui porte le nom de la
meme section que la mere du p£re de la personne prenant mari ou
femme.






PUBLICATIONS DE LA SOCIETE D’ANTHROPOLOGIE
RUE DE L’ECOLE-DE-MEDECINE, 1 5, PARIS.
BULLETINS
Les Bulletins de la Societe forment chaque annbe un volume in-B°.
Premiere serie, six volumes (1859-1865). Cette sbrie r6duite a un petit
nombre d’exemplaires ne peut 6tre cedee qu’avec les deux suivantes au prix
total de 420 fr.
La table alphabetique et analytique de la premiere serie redigee par M. Du-
re.uj (174 pages), se vend separement 1 franc.
Deuxieme serie, duuze volumes (1866 1877). Prix de la se, ie complete
180 fr.
Troisieme serie, douze volumes (1878-1889). Prix de la serie complete
180 fr.
Quatrieme serie, dix volumes (1890-1899). En vente.
Les volumes des annees 1871, 1873 et 1881 a 1899 se vendent isolement
10 fr., (7 fr. pour les membres de la Societe) et les fascicules depareilles, 2 fr.
Cinquidme serie, commencbe en 1900. Chaque annee forme un volume
grand in-8° public en 6 fascicules. Abonnement 12 fr. (le port en sus). Le fas-
cicule 2 fr. 50.
MEMOIRES
Neuf volumes grand in-B°. Le volume est vendu par l’bditeur 16 francs (le port
en sus).
Premiere s6rie, trois volumes. Les tomes I et II sont epuises. Le tome 111
est en vente au si6ge de la socibte.
Deuxieme serie, quatre volumes, 1873 a 1893.
On certain nombre de fascicules isoles de ces deux sbries sont en vente au
si£ge de la Societe, au prix de 2 fr. 50.
Troisieme serie, commencee en 1894.
Dans cette serie chaque travail ou memoire forme a lui seul un fascicule dis-
(inct qui pourra etre acquis separement au prix de 2 centimes la page.
VIENT DE PARAITRE :
Table generate des Publications de la Societe d'Anthropo-
logie de Paris (1860-1899) vol. in-8° de 240 pages. (Prix :
6 francs).




THE ORIGIN, ORGANIZATION AND CEREMONIES OF
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
(With Map.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L. S.,
CORRES. MEMB. ANTHROP. SOC., WASHINGTON.
{Read October 5, 1900.)
In this article it is proposed in the first place to give a short out-
line of the probable origin of the native tribes of Australia. Then
will follow the evolution of their social laws regulating intersexual
relations. A cursory reference will next be made to the initia-
tion ceremonies, but only so far as to suggest their development.
A comprehensive map will be added showing the geographic dis-
tribution of the different systems of intermarrying divisions through-
out Australia, together with the boundaries within which the customs
of circumcision and splitting the male urethra are in operation.
Having traveled very largely in all the Australian colonies during
the last quarter of a century, in the avocation of a surveyor, as
well as in grazing and mining pursuits, I have had unusual facilities
for observing the customs of the aborigines, and it is hoped that
the result of my researches may be found of some value for ethno-
graphic and geographic purposes.
Origin.
The origin of the aboriginal races of Australia is a subject of high
and enduring interest to students of anthropology in all parts of the
world; and for this reason lam tempted to submit, in as brief a
form as possible, certain views at which I have arrived in regard to
the peopling of the mainland of Australia and the adjacent island
of Tasmania.
In attempting the solution of this difficult problem it is necessary
to call in the aid of different branches of science, among which
geography, comparative linguistics, zoology, botany and geology
take a prominent part. Owing to the antiquity of the Australian
continent, and the consequent absence of written history, it becomes
necessary at the outset to propound a theory which will hold the
ground, reaching far back into prehistoric times, and then to exam-
ine how this hypothesis fits in with facts observed at the present
day.
reprinted from proc. amer. phtlos. SOC. VOL. XXXIX, NO. 164.


It will be assumed that in a former period the physical geography
of the Australian continent was different to what it is now. Geo-
logical investigations show that different portions of Australia have
been under water in succession more than once, or have been alter-
nately sea and land. The mainland of Africa and Asia at one
time had a comparatively unbroken continuity southeasterly as far
as Australia, Tasmania and New Guinea. Probably the extension
reached farther to the south and east, but the limits mentioned will
be sufficient for the present discussion. A great part of this conti-
nent—which has been called Lemuria, because it is supposed that
there the lemurs had their centre of development—now lies under
the Indian Ocean, but its former existence is proved by hydrographic
surveys which indicate by the banks and shoals now under water
where this great land was situated. Dr. Blanford has endeavored
to show that it was over this lost continent that many of the older
Indian animals traveled into Africa. And it is stated by Sir J. D.
Hooker, the eminent botanist, that a large assemblage of blossom-
ing plants characteristic of the Indian Peninsula are also inhabitants
of tropical Australia.
The first inhabitants who were dispersed over the continent
referred to were a black race of the Negroid type. They were not
necessarily homogeneous, because in moving southward and east-
ward people of neighboring tracts of country would to some extent
mix with each other by conquest or for purposes of mutual advan-
tage, and their language and customs would be modified in certain
particulars. These people form the primitive stock from which the
original inhabitants of Australia, Papua and Tasmania have sprung.
It is immaterial to our present purpose whether the cradle of the
human race was in Asia, in Africa or in the now submerged region
of Lemuria.
This primitive race spread southeasterly with comparative ease,
advancing slowly because its members were not numerous and the
tropical character of the country passed through made food abund-
ant and easily obtained. It is not to be expected that the people
would all keep together, or travel at the same rate. They would
divide into clans or small communities, some moving on in one
direction or along particular natural features—others proceeding in
other directions—others perhaps remaining stationary for long
periods in favorable localities. Useful arts would be developed
more in some of these tribes than in others, resulting from the


character of the country occupied and their general surround-
ings.
Some of the southerly branches of this wave of population
marched into Australia at various places on what is now the north-
ern coast of the continent, from whence they spread over the greater
part of Australia, continuing their course into Tasmania, which at
that period formed one mainland, and became what may be called
the autochthonous race. Northern branches of the same human
stream passed into New Guinea, New Caledonia, Melanesia and
Polynesia in the same way. That the race spread far and wide is
evidenced by the extensive distribution of its remnants. In the
speech of the present occupants of these lands traces of an original
stock language can be detected. A language can adopt and create
as many words as it pleases, without changing its character or alter-
ing its peculiar construction. Comparative philology must be
studied side by side with comparative ethnology. Moreover, in
their skeletal structure and general osteology the autochthones of
Australia resemble the African negroes and Melanesians, or perhaps
present a still more primitive type.
Such a migration as that outlined in the foregoing paragraphs
continued for a period of prolonged duration —how long it is need-
less to speculate upon here. One tide of population would be suc-
ceeded by others at irregular intervals, who would naturally follow
the pioneers, or advance guard, much in the same way that the
settlement of countries takes place at present, detachments entering
Australia at different points along the whole length of the northern
coast. It may be reasonably expected that the dialects and customs
of the later immigrants would differ in some respects from those of
their precursors, owing to their arrival at long intervals during suc-
cessive ages.
Instead of j being one race, they were probably a mixture of
several races of the same primitive type. It is likely that the
numerical strength of a clan or family would be small, and if they
kept by themselves for any considerable time the dialect of each
would be modified. A number of such small clans being distributed
century after century over such a large continent as Australia would
account for the immense variety of different dialects we find spoken
by the present inhabitants. This diversity of speech probably led
to perpetual hostility and distrust among petty tribes, and so kept
them separate. The existence of extensive arid tracts in many


parts of Australia necessitated migrations in search of water, and
this furnishes another factor in the wide distribution of the people.
In process of time the original race was followed by hostile tribes
of a more advanced type and possessing a higher degree of culture.
Depressions and elevations of the land due to volcanic agencies and
other disturbances of the earth’s crust, and the consequent incur-
sions of the sea, would in the interval have effected changes in the
relative position of sea and land, and have completely altered the
boundaries of continents and oceans. The connection between
Australia, Asia, Lemuria and Africa had been more or less sub-
merged, but there was still a comparatively uninterrupted land-
route between India and Australia via Ceylon, Nicobar and
Andaman Islands, Malay Peninsula, Java, Borneo, Celebes and
Timor.
The second migration, like the first, would continue to march
into Australia in small detached bands for a long period. In cases
where the two races met and came into conflict in regard to the
possession of country or otherwise, the new people, being better
equipped for warfare, would subjugate the local inhabitants —the
autochthonous race—and the customs, dialects and ceremonies of
the latter would be assimilated or to some extent superseded by
those of their conquerors. In this way most of the mainland of
Australia was overrun by the invaders, but they did not reach
Tasmania, because it had by that time become an island owing to
the submergence of a tract of land now occupied by Bass’ Strait.
There is nothing unreasonable in the assumption that these in-
vaders and the native tribes of the southern portion of India are
the descendants of a common stock —the Australians, owing to their
long isolation, having retained the primitive character of their Nean-
derthaloid ancestors, while the later Indian tribes have attained a
higher grade of evolution. Philologists have, however, failed to
definitely connect the Australian tongues with the wild races of
Southern India.
The Malay race, in my opinion, never invaded any part of Aus-
tralia. During historic times they visited the northern coast in
canoes or catamarans for the purpose of fishing for trepang, but
their intercourse with the Australians was restricted to the coast and
was very slight. Even if a few individuals occasionally intermarried
with the Australians and went inland among the tribes, they made
no deep impression either upon the race or the language.


Social Organization.
In examining the structure of Australian tribes it is found that
they possess fixed laws for regulating marital relations. In some
cases these laws are of a simple character and consist of the elders
of the tribe alloting the progeny of certain women to be the wives
of certain men ; in other cases the community is segregated into
two primary groups or phratries, the men of the one group marry-
ing the women of the other, with a reciprocal obligation. In some
tribes each of these two primary groups is bisected, making four
intermarrying divisions. Among certain tribes of the northern
portion of Australia, we find that each phratry or group is subdivided
into four sections, thus making eight divisions of the community.
These tribal divisions have been called Social Organizations or
Systems, and an attempt will now be made to briefly explain their
development among Australian tribes.
In portions of Australia, widely separated from each other, among
which may be mentioned part of the southern coast of South Aus-
tralia, part of the west coast of Western Australia and the south-
eastern coastal districts of Victoria and New South Wales, we dis-
cover that the intermarriage of the individuals of a tribe is of the
simple character referred to in the beginning of the last paragraph.
In some respects these people differ in physical type, in weapons,
in language and in their ceremonies, from the natives of other parts
of Australia, but resemble in several particulars the inhabitants of
Tasmania, which favors the theory already enunciated in this essay
in regard to their common origin.
The old men assemble in council at irregular periods, and as
often as may be necessary, for the purpose of appointing certain
young married women to be what is termed tooar to certain boys,
and such boys are likewise called tooar to these women. Care is
taken that the parties appointed tooar to each other are not closely
related by ties of blood. The boys are thenceforth forbidden to
speak to, or even to look at, these women ; and the latter are sub-
ject to a similar ban in regard to the boys. For example, if one
of the women bears a daughter she gives such child, when old
enough, to the young man to whom she herself is tooar; and if he
has a sister he is supposed to give her to one of the woman’s sons
in exchange for his own wife. These two men would therefore
stand in the mutual relationship of brothers-in-law.


A woman who is tooar to a man may die before she bears a
daughter—or such daughter although born may die before the
intended husband gets her—therefore to neutralize the chances of a
man not securing a wife, more than one woman is usually appointed
tooar to the same man. On the other hand, one woman may be
appointed tooar to several young men. If the man to whom her
daughter has been betrothed dies before he is old enough to claim
her, she then becomes the wife of one of the other men. These
rules may be further illustrated as follows : Lizzie, a married woman,
is tooar to Sam, Tommy and Jack, precedence being in the order
named. If Lizzie gives birth to a daughter this child will eventu-
ally become the wife of Sam. Should he, however, die before the
girl reaches puberty, she would be taken by Tommy as his spouse.
But if Tommy had also died then she would fall to the lot of Jack.
Each of the young men named may have several married women
occupying the position of tooar to them, to increase their chances
of obtaining a wife.
An unmarried girl on attaining puberty may be assigned to the
position of tooar in the same manner as a married woman. On her
obtaining a husband her daughters eventually become the wives of
the men who are entitled to claim them. This tooar relationship
precludes the possibility of a man having sexual intercourse or any
intimacy with any woman who might ultimately become his mother-
in-law. A man and woman who are tooar to each other theoreti-
cally occupy the positions of son-in-law and mother-in-law, and the
same restrictions as to mutual avoidance of each other apply in both
cases alike. A man may have more than one wife, but each of
them must be the daughter of a woman who is tooar to him. In mak-
ing the tooar appointments the old men endeavor, as far as practic-
able, to arrange that the brothers and sisters in certain families shall
marry the brothers and sisters in certain other families. The off-
spring follow the lineage of the father, and also adopt his totem in
most cases.
In ascertaining what woman is qualified to be tooar to a certain boy,
A, the old men, who are well acquainted with the genealogy of the
people around them, know that A’s father is B. They next discuss
the question who are the cousins of B. These cousins, whom we
shall distinguish as C, may be the offspring either of B’s father’s
sisters, or of his mother’s brothers. There will probably be several
of such cousins, some in each of the lines of descent just mentioned,


from among whom the old men will select one or more to exercise
the function of becoming the parent of A’s future wife. Let C l ,
one of the cousins of A’s father, be a woman who has been thus
chosen; then she is tooar to A, because he will by and by marry
one of her daughters. The old men may also appoint the mother
of A, or some other woman occupying the same position in the
genealogy, to be tooar to the sons of C l .
I am led to the assumption that the original or autochthonous race
possessed a somewhat similar organization to that just described, and
that the tribes under reference escaped subjugation by the invading
races, either because the latter were not able to overcome them, or
because they did not spread sufficiently far south and west as to
come in contact with the original people.
In going into regions adjoining those with which I have been
dealing, we encounter tribes possessing two intermarrying phratries
such as Mattiri and Kararu of Port Lincoln ; Krokitch and Kamatch
of Western Victoria; Muckwarra and Keelparra of the Barkunjee
tribes; Koolpirro and Tinnawa of the Yowerawarrika people, and
so on. As I was the first author who reported the two divisions of
the last mentioned tribe, 1 I shall proceed to deal with them as
typical of the others.
The Yowerawarrika and allied tribes in the southeast corner of
Queensland are divided, as I have before stated, into two phratries
called Koolpirro and Tinnawa. The natives have told me several
legends respecting ancestral warriors, and I have noticed that the
most valiant and distinguished men were always said to belong to the
Koolpirro division. This led me to think that Koolpirro was prob-
ably the name of a warlike tribe or clan in the remote past which
had conquered the Tinnawa, an adjoining people, and that each of
these tribes or clans originally possessed the tooar type of marriage
laws.
If we assume that this was so, and that the victors followed the
present practice of killing all the adult males, but sparing the
women, together with the little boys and girls, the Koolpirro men,
whether already married or not, would take one or more of the
women of the vanquished Tinnawa tribe as wives. As the Koolpirro
men would already have children by their own women, their offspring
by the strange women would require to be distinguished from the
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxiii, p. 108.


rest, and a very easy way of doing this would be to call them after
their mothers, Tinnawa. When the young lads whose lives had
been spared at the time of the slaughter of their fathers grew up to
maturity, they would take some of their wives from among the
Koolpirro women, and distinguish them by the latter name. Or in
other words the Koolpirro men would give their sisters to the Tin-
nawa men in exchange for their sisters as wives. This would
account for the origin of the two phratries Koolpirro and Tinnawa,
as illustrated in the following table:
Table No. i
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Child.
A Koolpirro Tinnawa Tinnawa
B Tinnawa Koolpirro Koolpirro
Instead of the conquerors killing off all the males in the way just
stated, it is customary in many places for two hostile families to
make peace by the exchange of wives. This practice was much in
vogue among the tribes on the Barwon river and its tributaries in
New South Wales, whose customs I had exceptional opportunities
of observing when stationed in those districts surveying government
lands during the years from 1871 to 1880. I have also witnessed
this usage among tribes in Queensland, and in the Northern Terri-
tory of South Australia.
It may be postulated that in ancient times the Koolpirro men
gave their wives to the Tinnawa men in exchange for the wives of
the latter, in order to terminate existing feuds, or for the purpose
of resisting a common foe. A man of the Koolpirro tribe, for
example, would of course have a Koolpirro wife and Koolpirro
children. He would give his wife to a Tinnawa man, and her chil-
dren by the new husband would be called Koolpirro the same as
before. This interchange of wives might be only temporary, or it
might continue during that generation. But in the rising genera-
tion the Koolpirro men would take their wives from the sisters of
the Tinnawa men, and conversely the same as at present.
It is seen by Table No. i that the resulting offspring in both
cases inherit the phratry name of their mother. They are also gen-
erally distinguished by her totem ; thus, if the mother be an iguana,
her children of both sexes will be iguanas. This rule is not
universal, however, for I have found tribes possessing a dual divi-


sion on the same principle as the Yowerawarrika, where the children
took the totem of the father.
Strength is given to the hypothesis of the coalescence of two
tribes by the fact that in an adjoining community, the Barkunjee,
we discover the phratry name Keelparra, evidently a dialectic modi-
fication of Koolpirro, which indicates that the tribe of that name in
olden times was widespread, and perhaps powerful. Among the
Barkunjee, however, Keelparra marries Muckwarra, the latter prob-
ably being the name of another vanquished or allied tribe occupying
different territory, and the two phratries became Keelparra and
Muckwarra.
We will now try to account for the introduction of the organiza-
tion containing/<?«r divisions. The Warkeemon community in north-
eastern Queensland, first reported by me in 1898, 1 is divided into
four sections called respectively Koopungie, Karpungie, Kellungie
and Cheekungie. Perhaps each of these names represented a small
independent tribe or clan in former times, having the tooar system
of relationship. To avoid repetition let us assume that Koopungie
and Karpungie became incorporated either by conquest or other-
wise, and intermarried on the same principle as Koolpirro and Tin-
nawa already dealt with. We will also suppose that Kellungie and
Cheekungie amalgamated in a similar manner, and intermarried one
with the other. This can be made clear by means of Tables Nos. 2
and 3, which will also show how the children were called, for dis-
tinction, by the same name as their mother in each case:
Table No. 2.
Husband.
Phratry.
Wife. Child.
Koopungie Karpungie Karpungie
Karpungie Koopungie Koopungie
Table No. 3.
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Child.
A Kellungie Cheekungie Cheekungie
B Cheekungie Kellungie Kellungie
We will now assume that the Koopungie and Karpungie confed-
eracy (Table No. 2) subjugated the Kellungie and Cheekungie
confederacy (Table No. 3); or that these two peoples thought it
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. A r , S. Wales, vol. xxxii, pp. 250, 251.


prudent and politic to amalgamate for the purposes of mutual defense.
This alliance could have been easily accomplished by the inter-
change of wives between the members of the opposite confederacies.
Koopungie could have taken the wife of Kellungie and could have
given his own wife to a Kellungie man. Cheekungie and Karpun-
gie could have exchanged wives in a similar manner, but there was
no alteration made in the names of the offspring in any case. For
example, the children of a Koopungie man were distinguished as
Karpungie the same as before the coalition and so on, as in the
following table, a careful perusal of which will make my meaning
more clear:
Table No. 4.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife. Child.
( Koopungie
( Kellungie
Cheekungie Karpungie
Karpungie Cheekungie
) Cheekungie Koopungie Kellungie
l Karpungie Kellungie Koopungie
In examining the above table, together with the two preceding
ones, it will be observed that a man, Koopungie, of the A phratry
in Table No. 2 marries a woman, Cheekungie, of the B phratry in
Table No. 3, and vice versa; and that a Karpungie man of the B
phratry in Table No. 2 marries a woman, Kellungie, of the A phra-
try in Table No. 3, and vice versa. It is also seen that the people
belonging to the two A phratries go together, and the two B phra-
tries together in Table No. 4. That is to say, the men of the
sections Koopungie and Kellungie of the A phratry in Table No. 4
marry the women of the two sections Cheekungie and Karpungie of
phratry Bin this new organization, and conversely. The men and
women of the respective phratries are therefore mutually related as
brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law. It is therefore apparent that
whether the organization consist of two divisions, as among the
Yowerawarrika, or of four sections like the Warkeemon, the com-
munity still retains the two primary intermarrying phratries, A and
B. Aggregates of totems, chosen from the fauna and the flora, are
attached to each division.
It now remains to explain the probable origin of the present
system of dividing a tribe into eight sections. If our theory is of
any value it should hold good in this system as well as in that of
four divisions already explained. The eight divisions of the


Wombya tribe, which I discovered and reported in the beginning
of 1898, 1 will be used for illustration. The names of the sections
are Choolum, Palyaringie, Cheenum, Bungaringie, Chingulum,
Yacomary, Chooralum and Jamerum. We will commence with the
first mentioned four of these names.
Choolum is the father of Palyaringie, and by referring back to the
Yowerawarrika tribe it is seen that the children in that system take
the name of the mother; therefore I shall assume that formerly the
Choolum and Palyaringie clans became consolidated by conquest or
otherwise, in the same way as the tribes we have been describing.
A Choolum man married a Palyaringie woman, and vice versa, the
children taking the name of the mother in both cases (Table No. 5).
A similar incorporation took place between the Cheenum and Bun-
garingie clans (Table No. 6). Afterward these two confederacies
amalgamated by interchanging their wives or sisters in the same
manner as the Warkeemon people, thus transposing the intermarry-
ing divisions, but leaving the names of the men’s offspring the same
(Table No. 7).
Table No. 5
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Child.
A Choolum Palyaringie Palyaringie
B Palyaringie Choolum Choolum
Table No.
6.
Phrairy.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
A
B
Cheenum
Bungaringie
Bungaiingie
Cheenum
Bungaringie
Cheenum
Table No.
7-
Phratry.
Hits band.
Wife.
Child.
* {
Choolum
Cheenum
Bungaringie
Palyaringie
Palyaringie
Bungaringie
g f Bungaringie Choolum Cheenum
l Palyaringie Cheenum Choolum
We will now deal with the remaining four divisions of the
Wombya tribe, namely, Chingulum, Yacomary, Chooralum and
Jamerum. At the present day Chingulum is the father of Yacomary,
and by again using the Yowerawarrika tribe as a basis, I will assume
I Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philada., Vol. xxxvii, pp. 151, 152.


that in former times the Chingulum and Yacomary clans became
incorporated and intermarried one with the other, the offspring
being distinguished by the name of their mothers (Table No. 8).
Chooralum and Jamerum were similarly coalesced (Table No. 9).
Subsequently these two confederacies became amalgamated in the
same way as those represented in Table No. 7, the section name of
each man’s children remaining unchanged. (See Table No. 10).
Table
No. 8.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
B
Chingulum
Yacomary
Yacomary
A
Yacomary
Chingulum
Chingulum
Table
No. g.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
B
Chooralum
Jamerum
Jamerum
A
Jamerum
Chooralum
Chooralum
Table
No. IO.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
B {
Chingulum
Jamerum
.Yacomary
Chooralum
Yacomary
Jamerum
A 1
Jamerum
Chingulum
Chooralum
A l
Yacomary
Chooralum
Chingulum
From eight separate tribes we have now illustrated the develop-
ment of two communities, one represented by Table No. 7 and the
other by Table No. to, each of which has four intermarrying divi-
sions in its social organization. At a later period these two com-
munities, whether as the consequence of war or peace need not be
considered, became consolidated into their existing form, and the
course followed in arriving at this result will now be investigated.
A man of the Choolum section in Table No. 7 took the wife of
a man belonging to the Jamerum section in Table No. 10 ; Chee-
num took the wife of Yacomary; Jamerum of Table No. 10 took
the wife of Cheenum in Table No. 7, and Yacomary took the wife
of Choolum. All these men belong to the A phratries in their re-
spective tribes. Again, a Chingulum man took the wife of a Bun-
garingie; Chooralum annexed Palyaringie’s spouse; Bungaringie
took Chooralum*S wife and Palyaringie took the wife of Chingulum.


These four men belong to phratry B. The intermarrying sections
of the new organization and those of the resulting offspring are as
follows :
Table No. ii.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife. . Child.
C Choolum
J Cheenum
J Jamerum
Yacomary
Chingulum Palyaringie
Chooralum Bungaringie
Palyaringie Chooralum
Bungaringie Chingulum
f Chingulum Choolum Yacomary
J Chooralum Cheenum Jamerum
Bungaringie Yacomary Cheenum
Palyaringie Jamerum Choolum
This redistribution of the wives of the men necessarily varies the
brother-in-law relationships. The men of the Choolum section in
Table No. 11 exchange sisters with the men of the Chingulum sec-
tion ; the Cheenum men marry the sisters of the Chooralum men
and vice versa; the Bungaringie men and the Yacomary men ex-
change sisters as wives ; and lastly the Palyaringie and Jamerum
men mutually intermarry with each other’s sisters. In every case,
however, the section name of each man’s offspring remains as it was
prior to the coalition —thus, Choolum’s children are called Palya-
ringie the same as they appear in Table No. 7, and Palyaringie’s
progeny still retain the name of Choolum.
According to Table No. 11 the wife of Choolum should be a
Chingulum woman, but by virtue of tribal custom he has the alter-
native of marrying a Chooralum. If he choose a Chingulum his
children will be Palyaringie, but if he take a Chooralum wife the
progeny will be Bungaringie, the section name of the offspring
being regulated by the mother’s division. A man of the Cheenum
section, whose tabular wife is Chooralum, can marry a Palyaringie
woman. In other words, the men of the pair of sections, Choolum
and Cheenum, can exercise their choice of a spouse over the same
two sections of women. Similar privileges are possessed by the
men of the other pairs of sections, namely, Jamerum and Yacomary
—Chingulum and Chooralum—and Bungaringie and Palyaringie,
who can select their wives from either of the corresponding pairs of
females in Table No. 11. Numbers of different totems are annexed
to the divisions.
The theory of the coalition of a number of small tribes within the


area where the Wombya organization obtains is supported by the
fact that in neighboring districts we discover that some of the sec-
tions appearing in Table No. n intermarry with others having an
entirely different name, and the offspring are also differently desig-
nated. For example, in the Inchalachee tribe a Palyaringie man
marries a Boonongoona, and the children are Boolangie. This
could be accounted for by supposing that in former times the Pal-
yaringie tribe became separated into two or more segments, one
branch going into certain territory, whilst another branch traveled
in a contrary direction, and that each branch ultimately became in-
corporated with different people, thus participating in the formation
of diverse communities in which many of the section names are dis-
similar. The same may be said of Bungaringie, who takes a Thim-
memill spouse, and the progeny are Warkoo. On the Victoria
river Chingulum marries a Chamaja woman and his children are
Jambajunna ; the wives and the offspring in each case being quite
different to those in Table No. n.
In examining the social structure of a large number of tribes, it
is seen that certain section names seem to be more universal or per-
sistent than others. For example, the name Chingulum, or its
dialectic variations Jungulla, Changally, Kingulla, etc., is found in
nearly every one of the tribes containing eight sections, from the
Gulf of Carpentaria all the way across the Northern Territory, and
extending onwards far into Western Australia. There is at the
present day a tolerably numerous tribe named Chingalee who
occupy a considerable tract of country between Daly waters and
Newcastle waters in the Northern Territory. And although we
cannot place too much reliance on the similarity of names, it is
possible that this may be a remnant of the larger and more wide-
spread nation from which the section name Chingulum has arisen.
The section name Cheenum, or its variants Jinagoo, Chanama,
Chunainjah, Janna, etc., is also found among most of the commu-
nities in the country lying between the northwest corner of Queens-
land and Western Australia. This seems to justify the inference
that at an earlier period there were, among others, two tribes
called Chingulum and Cheenum, each of which were spread over
an immense extent of country, and that they either conquered other
tribes or were themselves subjugated, or otherwise became amalga-
mated with the people around them or with subsequent influxes
from elsewhere, in the way I have endeavored to illustrate in prev-


ious pages, and so became scattered among a large number of dif-
ferent communities, as we find them at the present time.
In the foregoing pages I have endeavored to give a brief outline
of the Social Organization of the Australian aborigines by tracing
it through its various stages of development by means of examples
taken from the marriage laws still in operation in different parts of
the continent. Having studied this branch of the subject for many
years, I am led to the conclusion that neither promiscuous sexual
intercourse nor what has been called “communal or group mar-
riage”- has ever existed among Australian tribes. I feel equally
clear that the system of divisions into sections was not devised for
the purpose of preventing consanguineous marriages, but was
■developed in the way I have attempted to explain in this paper.
Initiation Ceremonies.
In my descriptions of the initiation ceremonies of various Aus-
tralian tribes, which I have from time to time contributed to dif-
ferent learned societies, I have reported that there is a feigned
quarrel between the fathers of the novices and the men who muster
the latter out of the camp for the purpose of passing them through
the ordeal of the inaugural ceremonial. I have also detailed how
human blood is sprinkled upon stumps of trees; in other instances
how it is collected in native vessels and eaten ; and also how one
or more of the men are killed to furnish a cannibalistic feast for the
people present.
This has suggested to me that perhaps the ceremonies were con-
siderably modified, if not originated, during the wars between the
clans or tribes referred to in the chapter on “Social Organization.”
If all the adult males were killed, as at present, then it is reason-
able to expect that the young captive boys would be brought up in
conformity with the ancestral customs of their captors. For the pur-
pose of doing this it would be necessary to remove them from the
influence of their mothers, who would naturally cling to the cus-
toms of their forefathers and endeavor to bring up their sons with
the same views.
If we investigate the procedure in the initiation ceremonies cur-
rent at the present day, for an example of which the Bora 1 of the
Kamilaroi tribe may be selected, we see that certain neighboring
1 R. H. Mathews, “ The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes,” Froc. Roy. Soc. Vic-
toria, Vol. ix, New Series, pp. 137—173.


tribes assemble at a common meeting ground and that the men of a
distant tribe take charge of the novices of another people who are
more or less strangers to them. We also observe that the novices
are taken away from their mothers at daylight, the time that an ab-
original tribe always makes an attack on an enemy. The mothers
of the boys are led to believe that an enemy really comes into the
camp and bears off their sons in a mysterious manner. The women
are prevented from seeing what actually takes place, owing to their
being hidden under grass, bushes, rugs, bark, or other covering,
but they hear what they believe to be the awful voice of the enemy
and the trampling of his heavy footsteps.
In describing the Kamilaroi Bora I have stated that great sexual
license is permitted to the men of the visiting tribes. In ordinary
everyday life a man is restricted to women of a certain section or
totem, but at meetings for initiation purposes these rules are much
relaxed, and a man is allowed to have intercourse with women of
different sections and degrees of affinity, who would be altogether
forbidden to him on other occasions. At the Bora ceremonies, as
soon as the novices and all their own men are out of sight, some
men of the strange tribes remove the covering from off the women
and take them away to another camp, where the men remain with
them for the purpose of superintending the due performance of all
the tribal regulations. The women are, in effect, prisoners during
these proceedings.
All these elements of the ceremonial may be emblematical or com-
memorative of an earlymorning raid of one hostile tribe upon another
in the distant past, one detachment of the men taking charge of the
women, while another detachment takes the youths away to be in-
structed in the customs and traditions of their conquerors. The com-
parison becomes all the more realistic when we discover that during
their sojourn in the bush with the old men the youths are shown many
things which are entirely new to them. They are taught another
language, known only to the initiated, which may be typical of the
language of their subjugators ; and even their own personal name
is changed to another, which is kept a secret from their mothers
and sisters and all the women of the tribe.
In native warfare, as already stated, the women are always pre-
served and taken as wives by the victorious party. 1 The sexual
1 Several of the vanquished party usually escape by flight; they are chiefly
active men, but young women often get away with them.


liberties to which I have referred probably had their archetype in
the libidinous orgies which took place when a bevy of strange
females was secured. The captors would make indiscriminate use
of the women for some little time, until they had leisure to effect
an individual distribution of them. This would take place as soon
as the totems of the women and other particulars were ascertained.
At the present day, when a woman is allotted to a man as his wife,
she must first submit to copulation by a number of men, whose
intercourse with her at other times would be a serious offense.
While the kooringal are marching off with the novices in their
custody, two men called buddenbelar rush out of the scrub and each
of them throws a boomerang at the aggressors. They then retreat
hastily and go away to fetch the beegay, whose participation in the
ceremony practically amounts to the rescue of the novices from the
kooringal. This is suggestive of a time when a number of small
tribes, occupying a large area, had been more or less friendly and
helped each other against a common foe. If an onslaught were
made upon any of these tribes such of the men who escaped would
seek the protection and intervention of some of their allies who
might be powerful enough to punish the offenders and liberate their
sons. Such a rescue may be symbolized by the interference of the
beegay at the present time, and the subsequent return of the novices
to the thurrawonga camp during the Bora.
All the tribes who arrived in early times were probably small
and lived in constant fear of surprisals by the people around them,
so that it would be unwise for them to confide the details of their
sacred ceremonies to the women, who might at any time be carried
off by conquerors and the secrets exacted from them by coercion.
This may have given rise to the existing custom of placing a cov-
ering over the women when the youths are being taken away.
It is a reasonable assumption that from the earliest period each
band of adventurers brought certain rites with them. Owing to a
superstitious adherence to former patriarchal customs, especially
strong in all primitive peoples, we would not expect to find that
any new system of initiation would altogether abrogate and super-
sede the older type, but would be blent or incorporated with it.
I am inclined to think that the plucking out of the hair—observed
among the Narrinyeri and other tribes of South Australia, a part
of the Barkunjee in New. South Wales and among some of the Vic-
torian tribes —has been handed down from the original inhabitants,


because analogous customs have been reported among Negroid
people elsewhere.
As the Tasmanians have been assumed to be the remnant of the
autochthonous race, some items of their initiatory customs may be
mentioned. J. Bonwick, in referring to this subject, says :
“ From all that I have been able to gather in my inqui-
ries among very old residents of Van Diemen’s Land it is my
opinion that the custom in connexion with young-men-making
[initiation] in New Holland, existed more or less with the different
tribes of the Tasmanians.” 1
J. J. de la Billardiere, speaking of his visits to the Tasmanians
between the years 1791-1753, says:
“ We observed some in whom one of the middle teeth of the
upper jaw was wanting, and others in whom both were gone.” 2
The same author says in another place :
“We were much surprised to see most of them holding the ex-
tremity of the prepuce with the left hand.”
In a vocabulary appended to his work he gives the native word
loira for powdered charcoal, with which they covered their bodies.
Among many Australian tribes one or more front teeth are punched
out ; in others the men take hold of their genitals and exhibit them
to the youths; and the smearing of their bodies with powdered
charcoal and grease is widely practiced in connection with initia-
tion ceremonies.
Speaking of the corrobories or dances of the Tasmanians, J.
Backhouse 3 reports:
“In these dances the aborigines represented certain events or
the manners of different animals; they had the emu dance, the
thunder and lightning dance, and many others.”
R. H. Davies, 4 in referring to the same subject, says :
“One is called the kangaroo dance, and is, along with some
others, most violent Some of these dances are evidently
lascivious.”
1 Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians (London, 1870), p. 202.
2 Account of a Voyage in Search of La Perouse (London, 1800), Vol. ii, pp.
72 and 76.
3 Narrative of a Visit to the Australian Colonies (London, 1843)* P- & 2 -
4 On the Aborigines of Van Diemen's Land (Launceston and London, 1846),
Vol. ii, p. 416.


Restrictions respecting food, 1 similar in character to those in
operation in Australia, have also been observed in Tasmania, some
people being allowed to eat only the male, others only the female,
of particular animals; whilst certain kinds of fish were forbidden
to some tribes.
J. Bonwick 2 tells us of the use of the bullroarer in Tasmania:
“ The wise men, or doctors, .... twirled round the magic
mooyumkarr, an oval piece of wood with a string, .... which
must on no account be seen by females.” He also states, at page
192 of the same work, that “ circles have been recognized in the
interior of Van Diemen’s Land.”
R. H. Davies® reports that when “ the males arrive at the age of
puberty they are deeply scarified on the shoulders, thighs and
muscles of the breast.”
The few references herein made to the customs of the Tasma-
nians have been taken from the works of early writers which were
published between thirty and a hundred years ago. It is likely
that the great secrecy which surrounds the celebration of inaugural
rites generally had the effect of precluding the white population
from witnessing or reporting what was done on such occasions.
An attempt has been made in this paper to deduce the inception
of many parts of the initiation ceremonies of Australian tribes from
their conflicts of the past by showing their strong resemblance to
what actually takes place in internecene wars among the natives of
the present day. During the long isolation of tribes, or confedera-
racies, special characteristics have developed, and modifications
have resulted in accordance with varying circumstances, among the
people of different districts, until the elaborate forms of the ceremo-
nies as we now find them have been evolved.
Explanation of the Map.
As already stated, a tribe is divided into sections, which are
known by distinguishing titles. If we travel through any consid-
erable extent of territory we discover that the names of these divi-
sions vary in different districts. In a certain tract of country the
1 J. B. Walker, Notes on the Aborigines of Australia (Government Printer,
Tasmania, 1898), p. 9.
2 Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians (London, 1870), pp. 175, 176.
3 Op. Cit., p. 412.


PROCEEDINGS AM. PHILOS. SOC.
VOL. XXXIX, No. 164, PLATE. VIII.
115 120
125
p30 <T“
Aral u r a S
K
no m 150
„\ 1
r
<£•
_ T
1 I 1
AflJSMAILM
MrtvilD
0> S'
,J -^/V
'■ V
h r e.i.ift /^
“l”’ 54 * 31 * f» | /
"unontf /.%/httr,s- ( /' (U/ , T ——L
//; /« tmL a >J& 1 —- —-
\ English
J3a.Ut.urtf, 4 4
fhrf Da
\-s' r •■-■ -> y
on
«*•/ 1
lL -sA
•*— s °\u T H
'wy/utim m * I
Sjjigl, Ch.oHo/tp»„ 1
JO
O too ZOO .300 tod 600 600 Sr/,,.-
\ 1 "'*7 fM
r >> <£
«*>. *
V *.s
R'
/A g u i r
-■Jtfue Mud H t>
O Ornotf /
\ 1 York W
\ T ""
—' —\ \ a
, \ \r n 1 A M ir-- «rbv/
1 j\ 1/ 1 WffitlL ■
1 \ “4„liP"“ , ?v
\ y'xtW ■* J
v>
52fL Careen
/ ■ Y / vi dd r j
inrta jf '4|W<* ** »< /•» /
15
\>er in
••^KT
/ %
K \?,\ f
r
/
\
' DatrJJYate
An o r t !i e i
91 \t
LWood»{\ \t|
If
%
jK,,•/*«//#'
r - v - ■
n
,y j -il
iKtrk<?town
A 6rUy)
* — j
7 —
• 1 '.«-•> J ' / /
1# v i\ w / /
f #ra^ r *T , T?i WlpL , , / /
r !f J
15
Dan, A;
T ervj^ft
** ■- - 1
4* y "
f J A
\'b. -
S'odn ty
a %3*IT(i ; 5 :
\j/iu.v
r n
V. Range \
r^7
u'
Itt^ 1 — 1 /< /
Jo/ X< Oart^ps TiwfirV&C? j*.Wffiil &&4CLbr,,s vr> /
a
2 0
■J.ltnra
22 \
TO* /9
Fy Hu&iPitdtJ xi" * % —-i
Nil* ****1
V- mv
J./ HoomKSR ' / W fasotiXa-
_ . JHf\ w e ST*
r>n 4\ /
,lWriiri‘tu.S>£
TWjJ}
L Mart lot
hn/
tald
cichhardtjffc njf'St
1
iw MY- DonneU Ann
SSi#
"'' * v> i '4s
’ /r« L '
/ 1
A ] ss]\ /
/? I /
. fAxu'. r . j s 3J ‘x?V w *tf/g /
IVr i / j'\ /
4/\ # -^-..---UV.., Ji&»//ntfWtiESKr l on j
a v / \,V J- ~ir /
r 4 /J\ > * s wmJ3mLt> /
20
„ )Mc y oynf x. - -——
0t ‘°‘/'-o, J ,‘ m gsa — C ~T MdSn*
J * VM ' V
cr s o ii Ti
'•tr'i \
i
' JjclL
25
•
--^r J 5'^kfiarV arVon
%illtcrl<ui<l
a.
'"\ __ c
- \ r *
——*■ f *4 at ii s. /\ \ T tfjT"-— -usjirfjV/; /
V 7 ] ,JV f? 90 ,
. SfV ! /Oiaytj^iii j v "' , ' r // £ jMty bor 'f&> •
1_ If .$/ • / ;F- v,n f>tV /
r lv,^‘"ll%w, u 'kl i Bfea *
?< *v, - t 6 ' 1 ." \ Vfe?pr Ms P«i»o
''M mwT
rhjtfv i„f^rowie.lki
i |iy t sW\filLf2 n
1imi yainatfcJL,, J/ili) % *<< farfAfJ
fed.
fw- ifm L
L ,_5y i‘;k^&&./ht£ y,h ‘ "■' *
* —4-
' shmsgmmpw w,re v"
, *«4. **•"'*
w mM s t rj
Gari lh, ’ aU |" i< 11 iiiMlH
\ AV l _Aiv
' ...,/iN • •• \ * vfionri***
*T
\ ' X rn^j:>Uc* r £>A -5W>
1 j ,1 A.
t'i&
Oil
T
stabinna South
A t T S T R
P*S%4 ''
ilSyi^P"
\ ' ,<^v.
N
.V V v -,
Axm
j' i
U^jt
25
K \
f'l/ \
«
4* fwe * s '^ v O O't off far f
TA' k A # s v x •
JpTfT .<»:
itrnlia
. fit.rr.ifiqctl < :^
1 ' ro /r.f*T'f
r /.7<»vv , /i.vra '
1 ■ « 1 ! i
SO
-•Hr jTiri^^ggt
\ ■eaKgafefyJ-;" vi
\ Vr * >n % 0^1
A ■ Norscni;'
,
L.<hmtn c i
tSf
» \ KmA
.. v "
S5
•fvt *
ir I'oilP
‘*o ■■qmju.
i< vria
i i
uvusti/,
p'Mir
30
tJSjjf, \
4 (i i* r a 1 A u '
\ cK< ltltroLlsh 1 " n 'Vadf•
Hi'
Ri^li
Ui^
jf* /(
/(k'L'rtit!
1
\ ,■ loeiiwm •rN x AU)tf<'V/*', T<, V-
\ ‘ a \T v• <- 4 «=>•• >k.
i d-fi A> r wx,;
>v ,
*'<■/, p
r.£h/« Kt ’’°y
v°
1®
35
\ , -V Hj
\ |
'*'**>, m <i
1
‘
aM&sRMmt'"'**'' ' /
r 11 > 11 e 1 Ia* d R ! %a Ji jf ■ //o, „, /i J
.36
\ o r i
W fi K £
1
o c
£iljv 4-"
fi «— y—
Hi/Jlof)
Tllswa delt
1
1
J10 115 120
J25
190 las
m
J46 ISO 156




sections will be known by one set of names, whilst among adjoin-
ing tribes a different nomenclature will be employed. Aggregates
of tribes holding the same divisional names may, for convenience
of reference, be called communities or nations.
I have prepared a map, showing New South Wales, Queensland,
Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia, on which is shown
the position of the boundaries of the several nations, each of which
is distinguished by a numeral, from 1 to 27. In explaining this
map I shall commence with the several nations possessing two di-
visions, then those with four sections, next the tribes with eight di-
visions, and lastly a brief reference will be made to those tribes
whose marriage laws are of the tooar type. The different systems,
with the territory occupied by each, can be readily referred to if
arranged in tabular form, as in Tables Nos. 12, 13 and 14.
Table
No. 12.
No. on Map.
Nation.
Phratry.
Sections.
Bangarang
( A
Boonjil
i
1 B
Wah
Booandik
f A
Krokitch
2
{ B
Kamatch
Barkunjee
f A
Muckwarra
3
1 B
Keelparra
4
Y owerawarrika 1
Same as
in Table No I.
Parnkalla
f A
Matturri
5
t B
Kirraroo
6
Kookatha
{ B
Kookoojaba
Ivoojeebinga
6<z *
Tardarick
1 B
Wartungmat
Munitchmat
The above seven nations adjoin each other, and the total terri-
tory occupied by them collectively is distinguished on the map by
a pink edging. It will be observed that this includes nearly
the whole of Victoria, about a third of New South Wales, part of
the southwest corner of Queensland and a considerable portion of
South Australia and Western Australia.
i I wish to thank Mr. A. M. Helling for his valuable help.


Table No. 13.
on Map. Nation. Phratry. Sections.
7 Wiradjuri 1
o f Dilbi Murri, Kubbi
8 Kamilaroi >
9 Darkinung) Ku P athin * Kumbo > J PP ai
f A
Thangatty | B
Kurpoong, Marroong
Wirroong, Womboong
u Dipp'i / l^ ar P e V in Barrang, Banjoora
1 l Deeajee Bunda, Derwine
w _ -v- • u f Wootaroo Moonal, Karilburra
12 Kooinmerburra<
l Yungaroo Kooeealla, Koorpal
Kogaj f Ootheroo Woongo, Kabaroo
\ Mallera Bunburri, Koorgilla
14 Mycoolon / A Jimalingo, Bathingo
L B Maringo, Kooperungo
f A Erainyer, Ararer
IS Goothanto j g Loo ra, Awonger
16 Warkemon Same as in Table No. 4.
i . f A Ajeereena, Arennymung
t B Perrynung, Mahngale
r Jamagunda Langenam, Namegoor
Joongoonjie 1 | (3 amanutta Packwiky, Pamarung
. . , f A Koomara, 2 Penunga
IQ Arrinda •< , ’ „ a
l B Bultara, Parulla
f A Kimbera, Bannicka
\ eeda 3 1 g Baljarra, Boorongo
\ eeda y g Baljarra, Boorongo
It will be observed that each of the above fourteen nations is
divided into four sections, and therefore all belong to the same
system. The aggregate of their territory, which is edged green on
1 My best thanks are due to Rev. N. Hey for his willing assistance.
2 A variation of these four section names is found among the tribes on the-
Upper Georgina river, and extending westwards into the Northern Territory, as
follows ;
Phratry . Husband. Wife. Child.
f Belthara Goobilla Drungwara
\ Koomara Drungwara Goobilla
f Goobilla Belthara Koomara
b l Drungwara Koomara Belthara
3 This tribe inhabits the Fraser river, Derby, the Lower Fitzroy and south-
wards toward the Oakover river, Western Australia.


the map, comprises about two-thirds of New South Wales, the
greater part of Queensland, a wide strip through the centre of South
Australia and more than half of Western Australia.
In dealing with the trjbes possessing eight intermarrying divi-
sions a table will again be employed.
"
Table No. 14.
A r o. o?i Map.
Nation.
Phratry.
Sections.
21
Wombya
Same as
in Table No. it.
r a
f Ungarria, Thakamara
22
Ulperra \
A
l Thaponungo, Jambena
B
L
f Jungulla, Thapongatee
l Joopilla, Cubadgee
1
\ A
/ Boolangie, Boonongoona
l Warkoo, Thimmemill
23
Inchalachee <!
B
j Kingulla, Bungaringie
1
l Noorachee, Palyaringie
The country inhabited by the three foregoing nations is edged
yellow on the map, and comprises a large extent of the Northern
Territory of South Australia, with portions of Queensland and
Western Australia. There are several aggregates of tribes scattered
over this immense area, among each of which the names of the
sections differ more or less, but the principle of the divisions in
them all is identical. In a paper published in the Proceedings of
this Society, Vol. xxxviii, pp. 75-79, I particularized the eight di-
visions as found in other tribes, showing the variations in the sec-
tion names in different localties.
Nos. 24 and 25 on the map represent the Adjadurah and Nar-
rinyeri nations respectively, who occupied the country fronting
Spencer’s Gulf and on the Lower Murray river.
No. 26 is the small nation of the Kurnai in Eastern Victoria,
and No. 27 shows the territory of the Thurrawall and allied tribes
in the southeast corner of New South Wales.
In the nations Nos. 24 to 27, inclusive, the social structure is
after the tooar or yooumree type already described by me. Adjoin-
ing the Great Australian Bight and on the west coast of Western
Australia there are also a number of tribes possessing this organi-
zation.
After much careful investigation I have succeeded in fixing on
the map the position of the blue line from Ato B. All the tribes


on the west of this line practice circumcision, but in the country to
the eastward of the line the custom is not in force. The line in
yellow, from C to D, and continued on along the blue line to B,
demarks the eastern limit of splitting the urethra—a genital mutila-
tion having a very wide geographic range over the central and
western portions of the Australian continent. The other blue line,
from E to F, determines the western boundary of the tribes who
practice splitting the urethra and circumcision, neither of
these customs being found between that line and the coast of West-
ern Australia. From the point F, along the coastal district to
Roebourne and Condon, the rites referred to are not now insisted
upon, and it is doubtful if their adoption by the natives there was
ever universal.






SOME ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES OF QUEENSLAND
AND VICTORIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
MEMB. ASSOC. ETRAN. SOC. D’ANTHROP. DE PARIS.
(Read October 3, 1902.)
Last year I contributed to this Society a short description of the
Gundungurra, one of the native tongues of New South Wales. In
the following pages it is proposed to furnish the outlines of the
grammatical structure of some aboriginal languages spoken by the
native tribes of Queensland and Victoria.
The method of spelling adopted is that recommended by the
Royal Geographical Society of London, with the following qualifi-
cations :
As far as possible vowels are unmarked, but in some instances
the long sound of a, e, and u are indicated thus, a, e, u. In a few
cases, to avoid ambiguity of pronunciation, the short sound of u is
thus represented, u.
G is hard in all cases. R has a rough, trilled sound, as in
“hurrah!” W always commences a syllable or word. Yat the
beginning of a word or syllable has its ordinary consonant value.
The sound of the Spanish n often occurs; at the beginning of a
Feprinted from Proceedings American Philosophical Society, Vol. xlii, JVo.ryj


word or syllable I have given it as ny, but when terminating a word
the Spanish letter is employed.
Ng at the beginning of a word or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound. At the end of a syllable it has substantially the sound of
ng in “ sing.”
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “ that,” with a slight sound of
d preceding it. Nh has likewise nearly the sound of th in “ that,”
but with an initial sound of the n. A final h is guttural, resembling
ch in the German word “bach.”
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k, in most
words where these letters are used.
Ty and dy at the commencement of a word or syllable has nearly
the sound of j. At the end of a word ty or dy is pronounced nearly
as tch in “batch” or “ditch,” omitting the final hissing sound.
All the details supplied in this article were taken down by myself
from the lips of the natives speaking the languages herein dealt
with —a tedious and laborious task.
The Murawarri Language.
In a communication to this Society in 1898 I described the social
divisions and laws of intermarriage prevailing in the Murawarri
tribe, together with a comprehensive list of totems, and will now
proceed to exhibit the structure of their language. This tribe
occupies an extensive region on the southern frontier of Queens-
land, between the Warrego and.Culgoa rivers, reaching also some
distance into New South Wales. Languages similar in grammar to
the Murawarri, although differing somewhat in vocabulary, extend
northerly into Queensland for hundreds of miles.
NOUNS.
Number. —Nouns have three numbers, the singular, dual and
plural. Gula, a kangaroo. Gulabural, a pair of kangaroos.
Guladhunna, several kangaroos. The suffix dhunna is frequently
shortened to dhu, in rapid conversation.
Gender. —Men, a man. Mugin, a woman. Guthrera, a small boy.
Gutheragamba, a small girl. The sex of animals is distinguished
by using, after the name of the creature, the words dhungur, male,
and guni, female, and these words take inflexion for number and
case.


Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative (or
nominative-agent), genitive, accusative, instrumental, dative ancf
ablative.
The nominative merely names the animal or thing, as, ngurun,
emu; dhaggun, padamelon; wirri, bandicoot; wagan, crow; mulli,
boomerang; kinni, yamstick; gundal, dog; gugai, opossum; ngura,
a camp; wungga, a bird’s nest.
Causative: Guladyu ngunna wirrunga, a kangaroo me scratched.
Instrumental: Mendyu wagan mullinyu bundhara, a man a crow
with a boomerang hit.
Genitive: Mugingu kinni, a woman’s yamstick. Wagangu
wungga, a crow’s nest.
Dative: Dhan yanna nguranggu, come to the camp.
Ablative: Dhirri yanna ngurango, go away from the camp.
Accusative: This is the same as the nominative.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify, and are simi-
larly inflected for number and case.
Nominative: Gundal kittyu, a dog small; gundalbural kittyubural,
a couple of small dogs; gundaldhu kittyudhunna, several small dogs.
Causative: Mugindyu thurdadyu guthera bundhara, a woman
large a child beat.
Genitive: Mengu thurdagu mulli, the large man’s boomerang.
Adjectives are compared by using such phrases as, thurda nhu,
kittyu nungga, large this, small that. Superiority is implied by
saying, thurdaburra, very large.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns are inflected for number and person, and comprise the
nominative, possessive and objective cases, some examples of which
are given in the following table. There are forms in the first
person of the dual and plural to express the inclusion or exclusion
of the party addressed :
Singular.
Nominative. Possessive. Objective.
Ist Person Ngadhu Ngundi Ngunna
2d “ Ngindu Ingga Bunga
3d “ Yallunggo Ngumtoga Bunha


Dual.
( Ngulli Ngulliga Ngullinya
ist Person y Ngullinumba Ngulligilunna Ngullinyai
Ngullinumba Ngulligilunna Ngullinyanumba
2d “ Nula Nulaga Nulanna
3d “ Yallabural Bulaga Burannha
Plural.
f Nginna Nginnaga Ngurranna
Ist Person p Nginnadyula Nginnagadyula Ngurranad'
Nginnadyula Nginnagadyula Ngurranadyula
2d “ Nura Nuraga Nuranna
3d “ Yalladhunna Dhurraga Dhurrana
There are forms of the pronouns signifying “tome,” “from me,”
“ with me,” and so on, as in the following few illustrations :
Dhangandhera dhiga, he brought it to me.
Dhirrithunggia dhigamil, he ran away from me.
Ngunnhura niambu, with me rests he.
Interrogatives: Ngannga, who? Nganngabural, who (dual)?
Nganngadhunna, who (plural)? Ngangagu, whom belonging to?
Minya, what? Minyanggu, what for?
Demonstratives: This, nhu ; that, nhurana. These demonstra-
tives are very numerous, according as the object referred to is in
front of, behind, near, or far from the speaker. Many of them
take inflexion for number and person.
VERBS.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, the usual per-
sons and tenses, and three principal moods—indicative, imperative
and conditional. There is a distinctive form of the verb for each
tense —present, past and future; but number and person are shown
by short pronominal suffixes to the stem of the verb. These rules
will be readily understood on perusing the following conjugation of
the verb, bundhera, to beat:
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
f ist Person...., I beat Bundhiyu
Singular.... J 2d “ Thou beatest Bundhind
/ 3d “ He beats Bundhibu
Thou beatest Bundhindu
f ( We, incl., beat Bundhili
I Ist eison i We, excl., beat Bundhilinumba
j2d “ You beat Bundhinula
3d “ They beat Bundhibula


1 We, inch, beat Bundhina
Ist Person | We, excl., beat Bundhinadyula
* 2d “ You beat Bundhinura
3d “ They beat Bundhira
You beat Bundhinura
They beat Bundhira
Past Tense.
C Ist Person I beat Bundharanyu
Singular.... J2d “ Thou beatest Bundharandu
1 3d “ He beat Bundharabu
Future Tense.
f ist Person I will beat Bunggunyu
Singular 32d “ Thou wilt beat Bunggundu
/3d “ Pie will beat Bunggubu
Thou wilt beat Bunggundu
Pie will beat Bunggubu
It is thought unnecessary to give the dual and plural numbers of
the past and future tenses.
Imperative Mood.
Positive Beat Bungga
Negative Beat not Bungga wulla
Conditional Mood.
I may beat
Wullawurri bunggunyu
Reflexive.
I am beating myself
I was beating myself
I will beat myself
Bundherriyu
Bundherriaiyu
Bundherriguyu
The inflexion continues through all the persons.
Reciprocal.
( We, inch, are beating each other Bumbullali
Dual \ We, inch, will beat each other Bumbullagi
Bumbullaguli
f We, inch, are beating each other Bumbullana
Plural j We, inch, will beat each other Bumbullaguna
The second and third persons of the dual and plural also take
reciprocal inflexion.
The following examples show the native way of expressing the
English verb “ to be ” :


Present I am well Murrin indivu (well am I)
P as t I was well Murrifi indayu (well was I)
Future I will be well Murrifi inguyu (well will be I)
ADVERBS.
Yes, kaila. No, wulla. Here, nunggo. There, ngurra. Now,
kunyegaila. By and bye, kunye. Yesterday, gunda. Tomorrow,
burda. A few days ago, buggera dhurungga. Long ago, muttya-
gaila. Perhaps, wullawurri. Slowly, mun-gi. Rapidly, kurdu-
gurdu. Where, dhirrungga ? Where (if two), dhirrambula?
Where (plural), dhirradhunna ? How many, minyungurra?
PREPOSITIONS.
In front, kurbu. Behind, billungga. In the rear, durungga.
Inside, mugungga. Outside, bullungga. Beside me, gurgungga
dhiga. Between, dhunnungga. Down, burrungga. Up, gunda.
Over or across (referring to a river, hill, etc.), gurrundha. This
side of, nhubaran. The other side, beyond, gowurrigurrundha.
Through, gaimyu. Towards, dhai. Away from, dhirra.
Several prepositions take inflexion for number and person : Be-
hind me, billunggadhiga. Behind thee, billunggabunga. Behind
him, billunggabuga. Behind us, billunggangurriga, and so on.
CONJUNCTIONS AND INTERJECTIONS.
It is not thought necessary to supply illustrations of these parts
of speech.
NUMERALS.
One, yaman. Two, kubbo. Several, murabirri.
The Wamba Wamba Language.
This language is spoken among the remnants of the native tribes
about Swan Hill on the Murray river, and extending southerly into
the State of Victoria beyond Lalbert and Tyrrell creeks, the lower
Avoca river, etc. The people are divided into two phratries,
Gamaty and Gurgity, the men of one phratry marrying the women
of the other. For lists of totems attached to these phratries, the
reader is referred to a paper I contributed in 1898 to the Anthro-
pological Society at Washington. 1
1 “ The Victorian Aborigines: their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional Sys-
tems,” American Anthropologist, Vol. xi, pp. 333, 334. Map of Victoria,
Plate V.


All the languages spoken in the eastern portion of Victoria are
identical in grammatical structure with the Gundungurra language
reported by me to this Society last year, although their vocabularies
are altogether different. Westward of the 145th meridian of lon-
gitude all the Victorian languages have the same structure as the
Wamba Wamba, with the exception of a strip of country on the
lower Murray river.
NOUNS.
Number. —Karrange, a kangaroo. Karrange bullang, two kan-
garoos. Karrange girtawal, several kangaroos.
Gender. —Wurtunge, a man. Laiur, a woman. Banggo, a boy.
Bannulaiur, a girl. Bupu, a child of either sex. The sex of ani-
mals is indicated by using the word mamo for males, and baba for
females; thus, willunge mamo, a male opossum ; willunge baba, a
female opossum.
Case . —The nominative : Wanne, a boomerang. Kenninge, a
yamstick. Wirrangin, a dog. Lurnge, a camp.
The Causative: Wurtulu karange dhakkin, a man hit a kan-
garoo. Laiuru bupu dhakkin, a woman beat a child.
Possessive: Wurtua wanne, a man’s boomerang. Every object
over which ownership can be exercised is subject to inflection for
number and person, thus:
C ist Person My boomerang Wannai
Singular J2d “ Thy boomerang Wannin
/3d “ His boomerang Wannu
.Thy boomerang Wannin
His boomerang Wannu
This declension extends to all the persons and numbers, in each
of which one example will be sufficient:
Dual Our, inclusive, boomerang Wannul
Trial Our, inclusive, boomerang Wannangurkullik
Plural Our, inclusive, boomerang Wannungur
Dative: Lurndal, to the camp.
Ablative: Lurnung, from the camp.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives follow the noun qualified, as kurwinge kurong-untu,
an emu large. Kurwinge bannutu, an emu small. They are in-
flected for number and case like the nouns, and comparison is
effected as in the Murawarri


PRONOUNS.
Pronouns have four numbers, singular, dual, trial, and plural.
There are double forms of the first person to include or exclude the
person spoken to. The following table shows the nominative and
possessive pronouns:
Singular.
ist Person I Yetti Mine Yenneu
2d “ Thou Nginma Thine Nginneu
3 d “ He Kinyi or Kalu His Kikinga
Dual.
(We, inch, Ngulli
xst Person... •? , * „
| We, exch, higullu
2d “ You Nyuia
“ They Kalubulang
Trial.
Ours, inch, Ngullidha
Ours, exch, Ngulludhu
Yours Nyuladhu
Theirs Kinyebuladhu
Ist Person J We ’ incL ’ Yan § urkullik Ours, inch, Yanguradhukullik
“‘ 1 We > exck > Yandakkullik Ours, exch, Yandhadhukullik
2d “ You Ngutakullik Yours Ngutadhukullik
3 d “ The y Kaludhanakullik Theirs Dhanadhukullik
Plural.
[We, incl., Yangur
xst Person. • • j We> excl>f Yandhank
2d « You Nguta
3d “ They Kaludhana
Ours, inch, Yanguradhu
Ours, exch, Yandhadhu
Yours Ngutadhu
Theirs Dhanadhu
There are objective forms of the pronouns, signifying me, with
me, towards me, from me, and so on. Interrogative and demon-
strative pronouns are also various and precise.
VERBS.
Verbs have the same numbers and persons as the pronouns, three
tenses and three principal moods; as exhibited in the following
conjugation of the verb “to sit
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
( ist Person I sit
Singular .... 3 2d “ Thou sittest
(3d “ He sits
Nga.ngan
Ngangar
Nganga


_ ( We, mcl., sit
Ist Person.,, 1 ~, ,
( We, exclu., sit
2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
( We, incl., sit
Ist Person... 1 w ,
| We, excl.,sit
2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
f . ( We, inch, sit
| We, excl.,sit
j2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
Ngangangul
Ngangangullu
Nganganyulu
Ngangabulang
Dual.
Ngangangurkullik
N gangan dhankullik
Ngangangutakullik
N gangandhanakullik
Trial.
Ngangangur
Ngangandhak
Nganganguta
Ngangandhana
Plural.
Past Tense.
l Ist Person I sat
Singular J 2d “ Thou sattest
(3d ‘‘ He sat
Nganginan
Nganginar
Ngangin
Future Tense.
( Ist Person I will sit
Singular J2d “ Thou wilt sit
/3d “ He will sit
Nganginyan
Ngangiuyar
Ngangin
The remaining moods are omitted, being similar in constitution
to those of the Murawarri.
This is the first occasion on which the trial, or triple, number
has been reported -in the verbs of any Australian language. Mr.
J. J. Carey, from the MS. of the late Mr. F. Tuckfield, 1 published
a list of pronouns in what he calls the Woddowro language, but
which I spell Wuddyawurru, in which he shows an incomplete set
of trial pronouns. He did not, however, observe the double form
in the first person of the dual, trial and plural, which is now com-
municated by me in the languages of Victoria for the first time. 4
Among the native tribes on the upper Campaspe, Lodden and
Avoca rivers, instead of kullik being the sign of the trial, the word
baiap is employed, as, Ngurnabuingunyinbaiap, we three sit.
1 Rep. Aust. Assoc. Adv. Sci., Vol. vii, p. 842 and p. 853.
2 I have, however, previously discovered and reported the existence of two
forms of the first person of the dual and plural in the nouns, pronouns, verbs,
adverbs and prepositions of the Gundungurra, one of the native languages of
New South Wales: Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xl, pp. 140-148.


Tyilbuingunyinbaiap, we three beat. It will be apparent that the
words baiap or kullik are merely superadded to the suffix of the
plural.
In the Motu, one of the languages of New Guinea, Rev. W. G-
Lawes reports that the dual and trial of pronouns are formed by
additions to the plural. 1
If a line be assumed to be drawn on the map of Victoria from
Melbourne to Echuca, then the whole of that portion of Victoria
situated on the eastern side of that line has no trial number in its
speech, but in all the languages to the west of that line the trial
number obtains.
ADVERBS AND PREPOSITIONS.
In principle these resemble the same parts of speech in the
Murawarri and Gundungurra, and some of them take similar
inflexion for number and person.
Interjections and exclamations are not numerous and have been
omitted.
NUMERALS.
One, yuwaia. Two, bulle. Several, girtawal.
1 Motu Grammar (Sydney, 1896), p. 9.






THE WOMBYA ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRA-
LIAN ABORIGINES
R. H. MATHEWS


(From the American Anthropologist (n. s.), Vol. 2, July-September, 1900)
THE WOMBYA ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRA-
LIAN ABORIGINES
By R. H. MATHEWS
The object of the present paper is to define the geographic
limits of that portion of Australia which is occupied by aggrega-
tions of tribes distinguished by having eight intermarrying sec-
tions in their social structure. It is proposed to give this type
of division the name of the Wombya organization, after the
Wombya tribe, owing to their having been the first people in this
part of the country whose sectional divisions were accurately
reported and described. 1
The accompanying map shows the northeastern corner of
Western Australia, the northern half of South Australia, and the
northwestern corner of Queensland, being the whole of the terri-
tory within which the Wombya organization prevails. Within
this region each native tribe is divided into two primary phratries
or groups, which may be called A and B. Each of these phratries
is subdivided into four sections, making a total of eight divisions
of the community. A name is given to each of the eight sec-
tions, by means of which the members of the different divisions
are readily distinguished ; and identification is further facilitated
by a masculine and a feminine form of each of these names.
The accompanying table, illustrating the divisions of the Chin-
galee tribe, exhibits the rules regulating the intermarriage of the
several sections and the names of the resulting offspring. Exami-
nation of the table will show that the sons of the women of either
phratry marry the daughters of the women of the other, and that
the children of both sexes belong to the same phratry as their
mother, but to a different division of it.
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., vol. XXXVII, pp. 151-152.


Taking the first name in the table, we see that a Jimmitcha man
marries a Nungalleeinjah woman, who is his regularly appointed
spouse ; but he has the alternative of marrying a Nalainjah maiden
instead ; or, polygamy being allowed, he may take a wife from
each of these sections. If he marry a Nungalleeinjah woman his
sons will be Taraleeinjah, and his daughters Naraleeinjah ; but if
he select a Nalainjah woman his sons and daughters will be Tun-
Divisions of the Chingctlee Tribe
Section of Parents
Section of Offspring
Husband
Daughter
Jimmitcha
Chunainjah
Chemarainjah
Tampachina
Nungalleeinjah
Nalainjah
Naraleeinjah
Nungareeinjah
Taraleeinjah
Tungareeinjah
Chulainjah
Chungaleeinjah
Naraleeinjah
Nungareeinjah
Nalainjah
Nungalleeinjah
Chungaleeinjah Nameeinjah
Chulainjah Nanainjah
Tungareeinjah Nabajinah
Taraleeinjah Nemarainjah
Tampachina
Chemarainjah
Chunainjah
Jimmitcha
Nabajinah
Nemarainjah
Nanainjah
Nameeinjah
gareeinjah and Nungareeinjah, respectively, the sectional name
of the offspring being determined through the mother.
Again, a man of the Chunainjah section, whose proper wife is
Nalainjah, can marry Nungalleeinjah. That is, Jimmitcha and
Chunainjah can exercise their choice over the same two sections
of women. Similar privileges are accorded to the men of the
other sections. Chemarainjah and Tampachina may marry as
stated in the table, or they may reverse their wives the same as
Jimmitcha and Chunainjah can. Chungaleeinjah and Chulainjah
may marry as in the table, or to either of the women opposite
their respective names. The same applies to Tungareeinjah and
Taraleeinjah and their alternative choice of a wife.
Totems consisting of animals, plants, and inanimate objects
are attached to certain pairs of sections, and these totems descend
generally from a father to his sons and daughters, but this rule is


subject to modification. Certain totems are allotted to, or are
inherited by, two sections in common, one of the sections belong-
ing to phratry A, and the other to phratry B. Hence we find
that Jimmitcha and Taraleeinjah, who stand in the relation-
ship to each other of father and son, have a collocation of totems
attached to them ; Chemarainjah and Chulainjah have another lot
of totems; Chunainjah and Tungareeinjah have another, and
Tampachina and Chungaleeinjah have their own totems in the
same manner. The section names composing each phratry are
those given in the “ wife” column of the table. The masculine
form of each name can readily be found in the “ offspring ”
columns.
As Jimmitcha is a man of A phratry, his son Taraleeinjah
belongs to B phratry, therefore it follows that the totems allotted
to this pair of sections will fluctuate from one phratry to the
other in each generation. And this also holds good in regard to
the totems of the other pairs of sections. Owing to the alterna-
tive allowed to a man in choosing his wife, already explained, the
men of the Jimmitcha, Taraleeinjah, Chunainjah, and Tungareein-
jah sections are more nearly related among themselves, as fathers
and sons, than they are with the men of the other four divisions,
who are their brothers-in-law. If we take Chemarainjah, Chula-
injah, Chungaleeinjah, and Tampachina as examples, it will be
found that the rules in force in the preceding four sections also
apply to these.
In tracing the genealogy in the direct line given in the table it
can readily be demonstrated that a brother’s son’s progeny inter-
marry with a sister’s son’s progeny ; but if we follow the descent
of the offspring in the alternative line previously referred to, it is
found that a brother’s children intermarry with a sister’s children.
Study of the table will show also that by taking the men of one
phratry in a certain order they are the fathers of the men of the
other phratry in continuous alternation ; taken in another order
they are brothers-in-law one of the other; and by taking them in


a different way they are related as brother’s children and sister’s
children. The reader can easily select examples for himself.
On the accompanying map, No. 1 shows the country of the
Wombya tribe, including Cresswell and Burnett creeks, Corella
downs, Eva downs, Beetalo downs, Walhollow downs, etc. 1 In
this tribe some of the totems have certain country assigned to
Fig. 61 —Geographic distribution of the Wombya organization.
them; for example, the Kangaroo, Eaglehawk, Emu, and White
hawk will each have certain plains, ridges, scrubs, waterholes,
and the like. The same custom is observed among different
tribes of this organization. Each section has also certain restric-
tions as to the animals and plants which they may use as food.
No. 2 is the territory of the Inchalachee and Warkya tribes,
who occupy the sources of Gregory and Georgina rivers, and from
Camooweal to Lake Sylvester. Their eight divisions have pre-
viously been given. 2
No. 3. The Yookala, Karrawar, Wonyee, and Yangarilla
1 For their divisions see Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, vol. XXXVII, p.
152.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , vol. xxxiil, p. 111, table 5.
AM. ANTH. N. S., 2 —32


tribes inhabit the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria from Calvert
river to the Nicholson, and southerly to the Inchalachee territory.
Their sectional divisions have also been reported. 1
No. 4. On the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria, from the Cal-
vert to the Roper, including the McArthur and other streams, are
the Yanyular, Willangan, Binbingha, and Yuggamurra tribes. 2
No. 5 on the map is the country of the Chingalee, Yungmanni,
and Koodangie people, whose social structure forms the subject
of the present article.
No. 6 represents the hunting grounds of the Koorangie, Mud-
burra, Tooinbol, etc., on upper Victoria river. Particulars of
their intermarrying divisions have been given. 3
No. 7 refers to the Geelowng, Oolwunga, Wartaman, and Hal-
lurra tribes on the lower Victoria. Their eight sections have else-
where been tabulated. 4
No. 8. On Ord, Fitzroy, and Margaret rivers and their tribu-
taries are the following tribes amongst others : Nigena, Keha,
Lunga, and Mayoo, whose eight sections have also previously
been given. 5
On Sturt creek and on Ord and Victoria rivers certain totems
are more generally known, and appear to be invested with
greater importance, than others. Among these are the white
crane, or spoonbill, and the eaglehawk.
No. 9 is the territory of the Meening, Jarroo, and Munga
tribes, inhabiting Sturt creek and stretching southeasterly, meet-
ing No. 10 on the map. Their eight divisions are particularized
in a previous paper. 6
I now wish to add lists of totems attached to certain pairs
of sections who are related as father and son alternately from
1 Ibid., vol. xxxil, pp. 251-252.
2 For their divisions see Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., vol. xxxvill, p. 77
table 3.
3 Ibid., p. 78, table 4.
4 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxm, p. 112, table 6
6 American Anthropologist, N. s., vol. 2, p. 186.
6 Journ, Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. XXXIII, p. 112, table 7


generation to generation. The section names given in the work
last quoted will again be used.
The Choongoora and Chabalye sections have the following to-
tems : Eaglehawk, water-snake, pelican, tree-snake, fish, mos-
quito, curlew, desert-quandong, death-adder, sugar-bag, centipede,
stone spearhead, shag, cockatoo, rat, wasp, nut-wood, grasshopper,
grass, pigeons (all kinds), plain turkey, ants, whistling-duck, and
native bee.
The totems of Chowan and Chowarding are as follow: Eagle-
hawk, certain stars, brown hawk, native dog, sun, rain, coolabah
tree, wild potato, black-head snake, clouds, thunder, ibis, water-
hen, boree tree, native-companion, black duck, and scorpion.
To the Chambeen and Changalla sections the undermentioned
totems belong: White crane, galah parrot, lignum bush, opos-
sum, wind, copperhead snake, iguana, mopoke, moon, lightning,
and frog.
Chagarra and Chooaroo are allotted the following totems:
White crane, blood-wood tree, mussel, kangaroo, native cat, rock
wallaby, wild orange, bilbee rat, wood duck, crow, and porcupine.
In consequence of the alternative rules of intermarriage, of
which mention has been made, certain totems are common to the
four sections Choongoora, Chabalye, Chowan, and Chowarding,
and other totems are common to the remaining four sections
above mentioned.
No. 10 represents an aggregate of tribes, among which may be
enumerated the Ulperra, Illyowra, Warramonga, Kaitish, and
Wolpirra, whose hunting grounds are from Tennant’s Creek to
Alice Springs, extending some distance on either side of the
overland telegraph line from Adelaide to Port Darwin. The
names of the sections and the rules of their intermarriage have
already been particularized. 1
The names of the sections in each of the tribal aggregations,
Nos. 1 to 10, differ somewhat, but the principle is the same
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , vol. xxxii, pp. 71-73 I vol. xxxm, p. 113.


in them all. The curved line (x —x —) on the map from the
Gulf of Carpentaria to the Indian ocean is the southern limit of
the Wombya organization. All the tribes adjoining this boun-
dary on the southwest, south, and southeast, possess a divisional
system comprising four sections only.
In their initiatory rites circumcision and introcision are prac-
tised, the former by means of a piece of stone chipped or ground
to an edge, the latter with a stick prepared for the purpose or a
smooth stone of requisite size and shape found in a watercourse.
Throughout the region represented on the map no woman is
allowed to marry until the operation of introcision has been per-
formed, nor can a man marry until after the ceremony of circum-
cision has taken place.
Among the tribes on Fitzroy river, Sturt creek, and at other
places, in the event of the death of a child, the mother is com-
pelled to carry its body about with her for several weeks and in
some cases for months. If a woman’s husband, or an adult son,
dies, the wife or the mother, as the case may be, is not allowed to
eat flesh for a long time, nor is she permitted to speak to anyone,
but must communicate by signs only, until the father of the
deceased bites her on the palm of the hand. This breaks the ban
of silence, and she may then converse with her people as before.
In cases of death from snake-bite, or the result of an accident
of any kind, the body is placed in a tree on a platform of sticks,
eight or ten feet from the ground, and is covered with boughs,
accompanied by the weapons of the deceased. When the death
is caused by violence, the body is not buried but is left where it
lies. In other cases the corpse is interred.
Owing to the barren character of most of the territory dealt
with in this paper, it is only on the rivers and creeks that water
can be relied on throughout the year. Back from these water-
courses there are weatherworn holes or depressions in rocks,
known as “ rock-holes,” in which water collects during rainy
weather. There are also a few small springs at wide intervals


where a limited supply of water can be obtained. In times of
drought these rock-holes and most of the springs become dry,
and the natives are compelled to keep in the vicinity of the rivers
and watercourses ; but as soon as the rain comes in sufficient
quantities to replenish the rock-holes and revive the springs, the
people make an exodus into the back country and remain there
as long as the water lasts, because that is the only time they can
pursue the game and obtain other foods in those parts of their
hunting grounds. They proceed first to where the water is
known to disappear most rapidly ; then they go to those places
in rotation where it remains longer, and in this way utilize their
water supply to the greatest advantage. They sometimes carry
water in bags made from the skins of small animals, such as wal-
labies and opossums, when going on hunting expeditions into
waterless country.






