

PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
llogal (Skographical (Societp of
(SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH).
‘‘ABORIGINAL WATER-QUEST”
A. T. MAGAREY, ESQ.
SESSION, 1894-6.
.Adelaide :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.




AUSTRALIAN 'ABORIGINES’ WATER-QUEST.
In gathering information as to the
aborigines’ water-quest in arid Australia,
I have to acknowledge indebtedness to the
works of most of our greatest explorers ; and,
also to the works of Baron Sir F. von Mueller,
F.R.G.S., F.R.5.,; to Mr. Maiden’s work
on Australian flora. To Tom Brown, Esq.,
Nullarbor Plains, Bouth Australia; Charles
Winneeke, Esq., F.R.G.S.; Edgar Giles, Esq.,
Ediacara ; Simpson Newland, Esq., Adelaide;
J. W. Jones (Conservator of Water), W. H.
Tietkens, F.R.G.S., New South Wales; D.
Lindsay, F.R.G.S, Explorer; R, Helms,
Esq., Naturalist E. E. Expedition, New South
Wales; G. W. Goyder, C.M.G.; C. Hope
Harris, Esq., Adelaide; Walter Gill, Esq.,
Conservator of Forests, Adelaide, I have also
received the testimony of bushmen, and in
some directions have made personal test and
experiment.
“It was often a matter of wonder tome that
in the height of summer, when the heated
ground was shimmering under the blinding
rays of the summer’s sun and
When the Simoom’s breath was scattering death
On all that yet could die.
When you would think it impossible for
mortals to live away from the one water,
yet away in the horizon’s distance, in a
country that you have visited repeatedly and
know to be absolutely waterless, a column of
smoke will arise, ‘ How can this be?’ is the
exclamation that escapes you. Even with the
wonderful powers of endurance of the Aus-
tralian aboriginal how can he be out there and
live? The half-civilized savage at your side,
upon enquiry, will reply, ‘He is all right!
That is so and so,’ mentioning the name.
‘He got tree-water.’” (W. H. Tietkens,
F.R.G.S.).
“The explorer is necessarily insatiable for
water; no quantity oan satisfy him, for he
requires it always and in everyplace.” Thus
writes Ernest Giles, one of Australia’s indo-
mitable explorers.
“ Doing a thirst” is a recently coined ex-
pression of bushmen in the newest gold region
of Australia, and means suffering the extreme
of privation and risk through lack of water
whilst in the eager pursuit of gold. And to
an exhausted bushman gold is infinitely less
precious than water, for then water means life.
How, in such arid regions, to know where
water may be found, and with almost absolute
certainty to obtain sufficient for life saving
it is the purpose of this paper to show, as
lucidly as limited space permits. The lesson
is learned from our aborigines, who live, and
love, and roam, and hunt, and pass away in
their waterless wilds—waterless to the un-
taught white man. The Australian aborigine,
dwelling as he does in realms where water is
scarce, has through the long ages during which
he has roamed his desert wilds stored up
much valuable knowledge as to water supply.
This knowledge has passed down from genera-
tion to generation, and, having come, the
white man, too, has inherited much of the
treasured lore. Unfortunately, however, of
this knowledge many bushmen are still igno-
rant, and to many ignorance has meant death.
Men in Australia have lain down under a
“water-tree” and died from thirst, whilst the
water they so terribly needed lay only two or
three inches under the scorching sand, and
beneath their out-stretched finger-tips. Sad,
but true; and the pity of it was that they did
not know that the water was there. The
aboriginal knows better. Trees, animals,
birds, insects, and rooks all yield up to the


aborigines of these wilda their rich secret of of 4 ft. in height, grows up to 30 ft. Bark
water supply. Of these this paper will
treat in detail. “Water-favoured” Aus-
tralia lies outside the scope of this writing.
Hence what follows refers specially to “ arid”
Australia.
Briefly let us pass in review the guides to
water above enumerated, but including the
aborigine.
FOREST LORE.
The mallee, needle-bush, currajong, casua-
rina, mulga, acacia, and young growth of
gum are the best of the “ water-trees,” storing
up supplies in root and stem, the root being
most often the source of supply in our arid
regions. These trees grow mually in a loose,
soft, dry, sandy, or loamy soil.
The Mallee. —The mallee scrub of our
arid regions consists mostly of Eucalyptus,
Dumosa, E. Gracilis, E. Incrassata, E. Oleosa,
E. Miorotheca, E. Paniculate, E. Populifolia,
and E. Unoinata. Of these the water-trees (or
water mallees) are Eucalyptus Miorotheca, B.
Incrassata, E. Oleosa, E. Paniculata, E. Popu-
lifolia. Eucalyptus Miorotheca is so named
from the extreme smallness of its seed vessels;
called also water-box. Large specimens grow
up to 80 ft. in height, with stem 4 ft. in
diameter. Named by the natives of Riverina
(Tangoon); of Murchison, W.A. (Oallaillo) or
( Yalthoo); of Western Queensland (Ooolybah).
smooth, outside whitish or reddish colour, the
bark seceding, so rendering the surface
smooth. Seed-vessels markedly “ribbed,”
as shown in Figure 1,
EUCALYPTUS OLEOSA, NATURAL SIZE AND
MAGNIFIED THREE TIMES.
EUCALYPTUS INCRASSATA, NATURAL SIZE.
Eucalyptus Incrassata flowers from growth
Eucalyptus Oleosa. —The leaves are oil-
bearing, tall bushes, branched from the root,
height 15 ft.; bark of young trees smooth
and pale. Seed-vessels have a bell-clapper-like
pistil which is characteristic (see Figure 2).
The roots of these water-mallees are of in-
calculable value to the natives, since it is
through their thorough reliableness as yield-
ing abundance of water for their needs that
the aborigines are enabled to go far away out
into the arid wilds, there to roam and hunt
and gather food with the utmost liberty and
confidence. The roots of these water-trees
run out from the stem for 40 ft. to 80 ft., and
lie at a depth only of from 2 in. to 9 in. below
the surface of the ground. The position of
these lateral roots is frequently marked by a
“rise”or “bulge”of the soil right over the
root. The roots are easily raised. A native
goes up to a water-tree and tries the ground at
from 4 ft. to 5 ft. from the stem, or, if guided
by a “ bulge” or a “ crack” (the crack some-
times almost! as fine as a hair, and scarcely
visible to the untrained eye of a white man),
finds the root at once. If the ground is hard
the soil is usually scooped away from over the
root with his wooden shovel, until it has been,
bared all along its length. If the soil is loose
he drives his yamstick, or spear-point, into the
ground, prises the root up, and thus breaks it
off near to the stem. Then, dropping the


spear or stick, he grasps the root with both imost freely during the spring and hot season,
hands, and, straddling its bed, shakes and
pulls up the root to its point. Then, breaking
it into lengths of 18 in. to 3 ft., he sets the
pieces on end against the trunk, standing
them in a ooolamin or a wallaby-skin bag, or in
a trough formed from the bark stripped from
the roots, by which bark —guttering it is
conducted into his water-vessel. Roots
of the size of a man’s wrist are best,
though roots from J-in. upwards are good.
If larger the root is apt to be too
woody, and the water does not flow freely.
Should the native hunter be very thirsty
indeed a portion of the root is broken off;
whilst the bark near one end is removed so as
to give only clean wood for the mouth. The
piece of root is then upended, the water
flowing freely into the hunter’s thirst-dry
mouth; another and another stick being simi-
larly raised as each is drained, until the thirst
is assuaged. One such long-stretched mallee-
root usually will suffice to satisfy the wants of
two or three thirsty men. For purposes of
water-oarrying one end of such sections qf
root is at times plugged up with clay, and in
this way water may be carried, retained in th e
root, for long distances. If need be numbers
of pieces of the root are placed horizontally in
a ooolamin, and so carried, the water not
flowing out when in this position, but flowing
readily when upended. Should the water
upon upending the root not spontaneously
flow freely the native hastens the process by
vigorously blowing at one end. He some-
times obtains the water by shaking (as we
swing a wet umbrella), when the contained
water comes out like fine rain. The bark is
generally stripped from the roots so as to give
perfectly clean and pure water. Each such
mallee-tree has usually from four or five to
seven or eight sideroots running out from the
stem at a few inches depth from the surface.
Trees growing in hollows between the long
rolling ridges will have a greater abundance
of water supply in their roots than those
growing upon the ridge tops. The sap flows
when the greatest demand is made upon the
tree to meet the stress of the rapid evapora-
tion. Examination and experiment de-
monstrate that there is far less flow
of water in roots in the cool season.
In the desert of South-Western Australia
the explorer Eyre saw the natives obtaining
water from roots only one inch in thickness,
the surrounding soil being dust dry. (Ed.
John Eyre, vol. i, pp. 349-351). The red
mallees of the West Coast (South Australia)
always have water-roots; quantity more
abundant in the rainy season than in summer.
This red mallee of those regions is evidently
E. oleosa. Gallons of water may be obtained
from their roots. A man is always safe as
concerns thirst with the red mallee about him.
It is a permanent water supply. From the
roots of E. miorotheoa a quart-potful of
water was obtained in half an hour. The
water thus obtained is beautifully clear when
fresh, deliciously cool, forming a most palat-
able and refreshing drink, free from any un-
pleasant taste. From the red mallee the
water obtained, after standing for some hours,
becomes discoloured (reddish-brown) and
turbid. The red mallee root of the west
coast of South Australia is very porous, the
water gushing out at once when the root is
set on end. On the Scotia Blocks, south-west
of New South Wales, the natives make high
stacks, 4 ft. or so, of the drained roots; why
is not evident. Natives sometimes travel from
Fowler’s Bay to Eucla in dry seasons, back
from the coast through the scrub country,
dependent mainly on mallee water. Round
about Ooldea, S.A., Mr. W. H. Tietkins
observed the same facility of depen-
dence for water supply upon the water-trees.
This red mallee is found usually in clumps all
over the dry parts of Australia, from the
Darling River to the Musgrave Ranges, and
from the west coast of Western Australia
through the Nullabor Plains to the Murray,
and north to the Mao Donnell Ranges. Infor-
mation concerning Central Western Australia


in this respect has not yet been obtained. It
occurs frequently immediately north of Ade-
laide, and all through the Murray scrub eas-
of Adelaide. The Needlebush (Hakealeut-
coptera, “ white winged seed”) is found very
generally all over Australia. Its usual
height is from 5 ft. to 8 ft., though full-
grown trees attain a height of 80 ft. The
diameter of the trunk of the small variety
at the base is 3 in.; the trunk usually is quite
short, and from this point it "forks.” The
wood of the Needlebush is porous and spongy,
similar to that of the honeysuckle tree. The
Needlebush is one of the very best of our
“ water trees,” the roots being water-bearing,
although it does not in this respect equal the
water-mallees. Mr. Morton Lockhart says of
it:—"ln an experiment on a water-yielding
" hakea,” the first root, about half an inch in
diameter, and 6 or 8 ft. long, yielded quickly,
and in large drops, about a wineglassful of
really excellent water (Proc. R.S. Viet,, 1860,
p. 132.)”
The Ourrajong.—The ourrajong (order
Sberouliacie, genus Brachyohiton) of Central
Australia, is a most reliable watertree. It
grows well in dry country, and is there
usually abundant. It is known in
some parts as the bottletree from
the shape of its stem. Evidently there
are several varieties named ourrajong.
It occurs in the Murrumbidgee country, in
north-western New South Wales, on the
Paroo, the Finke, and the Cooper, in Western
Australia towards Queen Victoria Spring ( i.e .
in the Great Victoria Desert), and through
the northern region of South Australia. It is
specially excellent as a water reserve. The
tree has several large roots, sometimes attain-
ing to a thickness of seven inches at the
trunk-end of the root. The roots are very
porous, and frequently contain incredibly large
supplies of water, which gushes out when the
pieces of root are set on end, the roots of the
tree yielding gallons of water. In some
regions natives subsist wholly on this source of
supply.
The Desert Oak (Oasuarina Deoaisneana) —
the sheaoak class of South Australia, —The
Casuarina is a water-storing tree, both in its
roots and also in the cavities which frequently
occur in its stem. The latter being a special
peculiarity of the tree (see seq. Hollow trees).
Referring to the Casuarina and its water
value, Mr. W. H. Tietkins writes:—“(Ooldea
Water, region S.A.), —Travelling once with a
small native boy of about ten years of age,
and towards the close of a dreadful day, the
waterbag long since emptied and the boy
gasping for water, and myself no better (the
boy was riding a very unusually tall camel,
we still had fifteen miles more to travel), all
at once a cry broke from him, and with one
bound he was off that camel and running
towards an oak-tree, well four chains distant
at least. I stopped the camels and went up
to him. He was clawing away at the hot
sandy soil, and at last—snap. A root one and
a half inches thick was broken, a hard pull,
and about eight feet of root was exposed,
lifting the soil as it was raised. About two
feet length was broken off and upended into the
mouth, and a cold drink the result. But not
sufficient; another and another length was
broken off till we had sufficient. We did not
take any more than one root, and I think
there were eight or ten more such roots—
enough in abundance for a dozen men. . . .
The water so obtained was cool, quite cool,
colourless, and refreshing, but I have noticed
that upon exposure to the air for a few hours it
becomes a pale-brown colour, such as would be
noticed in water into which a piece of bark
had been dropped.”
Bloodwood (Eucalyptus terminalis, of Cen-
tral Australia). —The bloodwood also is a.
" water-tree;” several Australian explorer®
refer to its qualities in this connection, Mr.
W. H. Tietkins says of it —“I have myself
obtained nearly a bucket of water from the
bloodwood tree at the Rawlinson Range. I
was cutting this tree down for smokehouse
purposes and the water was not required.”
Acacia. —Several varieties of acaoia are re-


ferred to by explorers and bushmen as “water- trying to obtain water before giving
trees,” the roots yielding a fair supply.
As good indications of the presence of water,
the following trees are noted by explorers
and others, e.g. Beefwood (aborigines’
yarra), L. A. Wells, E.E.E., p. 103,
Western Australia; black wattle, D. Lind-
say, p. 29; gum-trees, large size, p. 39;
pig-faces (plant), J. MoD. Stuart, p. 3, “con-
tain a irreat deal of moisture, and are a first-
rate thing for thirsty horses.” W. P. Auld
says of the plant—“ The members of Stuart’s
expedition named it ‘squash.’” And Mr.
Auld states that eaten as a vegetable it is a
splendid thing to cute scurvy.
Parakylia, another name for “Muneyeroo,”
a Portulacoa (variety of ice-plant).—Abundant
in many parts of arid Australia. It is a good
source of water-supply for camels. Mr. D.
Lindsay (E.E.E., p. 10) says of it—“A moist
plant; as good as water.” The South Aus-
tralian Register of 4th December, 1894, reports
that an Afghan, who had been most dreadfully
injured by his camels, thirty miles west of
Anna Creek Telegraph Station, had subsisted
through several days of agony and terrific heat
upon some parakylia, to which he had managed
to drag himself, and was saved from death
through the supply of water yielded by that
plant.
Stems of Trees and Water Storage.—
The stems of several varieties of trees, when
not too old, yield good and sufficient supplies
of water for life-saving. Young gum-trees,
stringy-barks (E. obliqua, and varieties of mal-
lee are used by the aborigines for this purpose"
The young growing trees are broken off from
their root, and the top removed. The root end
of the sapling is placed uppermost, and the
stick, set thus on end, to drain into ooolomin,
billy-can, or other vessel. In from ten totwenty
minutes, from several such sticks, a quantity
of water sufficient to Save life is easily
obtained. This statement holds good with
due qualification as to locality, but a bush-
man might always make the experiment,
if other resources fail, of in this way
up hope and effort and abandoning
himself to despair. The water obtained thus
is 0001, clear, palatable, and refreshing.
Hollows in Trees. A highly valued
branch of the aboriginal source of water-
supply exists in the storage of water in the
hollows of trees. Natives are enabled by
reliance upon this supply to make very long
stages through otherwise waterless areas.
Such water storages oocur far and wide all
over Australia. In the cavities of the desert
oak (Casuarina Deoaisneana) more frequently
than in any other is this supply found. In
the forks of this tree there frequently exists a
cavity of larger or smaller capacity, with
usually a very small orifice. When rain falls
the rainwater runs trickling down the limbs
of the trees to the fork, and some of this find-
ing its way through the orifice into the cavity
gradually the cavity becomes full, and hence
the aborigines’ supply. These hollow trees
are as well known to the aborigines of the
region as are the native wells and rockholes.
They are pointed out to friends and to whites.
The water stored is cool and pleasant. Being
inacessible to birds and animals the water is
both fresh and clean. Sometimes there may
be even two or three such cavities in the one
tree. The supply may be within reach from
the ground, or it may be necessary to climb
high up into the tree for a drink. The storage
chamber may be a cavity between the inner
and outer shell of the trunk or the carefully
lined hollow of some patient borer of wood.
At times the water is stored in the cavities
of decayed trees or in spouts of dead limbs.
Mr. David Lindsay (E.E.E., p. 129) describes a
lubra in Western Australia discovering such a
stock of water in the forked limb of a tree
growing on the edge of a salt lake, her atten-
tion having been drawn to the tree by a
moving rush of small ants, the tiny creatures
rushing in and out of a hole in the fork of the
tree. Upon testing the cavity with a dry
stick and finding upon withdrawal that the
end was wet, she went to a bush close by.


Breaking therefrom several twigs and loosen- “And at eight miles on The Hugh our eyes
ing their bark with her teeth she withdrew
the wood of the twigs, leaving the tubes of
bark. Fitting several such tubes together she
formed a pipe, which, being inserted in the
reservoir she had discovered, enabled her to
suck up the water and drink. The natives
also used hollow stems of grass or hollow reeds
for the same purpose. Again, a bunch or ball
of dry grass is fixed to the point of a spear and
thrust into the water-store. On withdrawal
the water is squeezed out into a vessel
and the process repeated till sufficient is
obtained. This last operation was seen at a
cavity in a murn, or mallee-oak, and is
described by Mr. John Cairns (“Transactions
of the Philosophical Institute of Victoria,
1858,”III., p. 32). Such reservoirs of water
are greatly valued by the aborigines, are used
by them year after year, and in x very dry
regions, because of their usefulness, become
widely known. These tree-reservoirs are a
well-known feature in the Nullarbor Plains
country of South Australia. The trees are
known locally as a box, but this term em-
braces several different varieties, according
to locality, and is botanioally inaccurate.
Fuller information must toe obtained upon
the point.
Having thus hastily, and therefore neces-
arily somewhat superficially, reviewed the
aborigines’forest lore in water-quest, the assis-
tance rendered them from their observation of
animal life will now receive notice.
BIRDS.
As thoroughly reliable guides to water in
very dry regions the birds have no rivals.
Some varieties of these should be named
“the bushmen’s water-finders.”
The Diamond Bird.— The diamond birds,
known variously as diamond sparrow, zebra
finch, chestnut-eared finch (Amadina casta-
notes), spotted pardalote (Pardalotus puno-
tatus), striped pardalote (Pardalotus striatus),
Figures 3 and 4, are of birds par excellence the
water-finders of the dry regions of Aus-
tralia. Stuart, explorer, says
and ears were delighted with the sight and
sound of numerous diamond birds, a sure
sign (italics mine) of the proximity of
water.” All the foremost Australian
explorers are agreed as to this sign.
The presence of flocks of zebra finches is an
infallible indication in dry country of the
nearness of water. Little or much, hundreds
of gallons or a teacupful, water is there. For
water these little twitterers must have, and
they must have it often. Any apparent excep-
tions are probably due either to the oversight
or the hurry of the traveller rather than to
any fallibility of the bird as an indicator of
water. So docile are these little fellows
(diamond birds) that they have been seen
sitting on the bare skin of an aborigine while
he was bending to his work of digging ont
with his wooden scoop a hole in the sand of a
creek-bed for water supply. And the observer
states that they seem to be in no way
disconcerted as he throws the sand over
his shoulder (where they are perched) as he
worked. Nor does the native resent at all the
presence or familiarity of his trusting little
feathered companions. He wants water, and
they are waiting to drink with him. After
travelling through miles on miles of the silent
bush, should the traveller come upon a small
flock of these birds he may know infallibly
that a supply of water is near by, and alert
intelligent watching will soon enable him to
find it.” “ They must have water, and have it
often, though maybe only a very little.” —E.
Giles, p. 93. The bird “ nests” in root-holes
in the banks of creeks and water-holes, and is
abundant wherever water is available.
The Pigeon. —Next in value to tbediamond
biid the pigeon, in its Australian varieties,
ranks high as a water-finder. The crested
dove, wire-winged dove or topknot pigeon
(Ooyphaps lophotes), the bronze winged pigeon
(Peristera ohalooptera), flock pigeon, and rock
pigeon (Petrophason; Gould) all come under
this section. The pigeon is found all over
Australia, and is always within reach of water.


It feeds upon grasses and seeds. It dies outt upon the ground by the telegraph line, being
over the plains to feed in the daytime, andl
dies in again to water at sundown. At sunset b
the pigeons in some parts may be seen flying;
in countless flocks, gathering in to the waters..
So numerous are they, and dense is the “flight,” ’
that they are found at times in hundreds dead
killed by flying into contact with the far-
stretching wire—so numerous that it seems
incredible. They fly very swiftly towards the
water, and the pigeon usually alights some ten
yards (often fifty yards) away from the water.
It waits awhile, and then walks quietly to the
Fig. 3.
SPOTTED DIAMOND BIRD OR PARDALOTDS PONCTATOS.


Fig. 4,
STRIPED DIAMOND BIRD OR PARDALOTE,
water and drinks. The bird drinks very
copiously, so much so that often after drink-
ing it is a difficulty and trouble to it to rise
from the ground. The flight away again from
the water is heavy, and consequently slow,
from causes above stated. An ordinary intelli-
gent and alert observer can form a fairly
accurate judgment from the style of the flight
whether the pigeon is going to water or
coming away from it, and in either case direct
his course aooordingly should he be in need of
water. The bird does not drink during the
heat of the day. Speaking of the rook
pigeon, Leiohardt writes; “They live
in pairs and small flocks; they fly
feed.”
out of the shade of overhanging
rooks, or from the moist wells of natives,
around which they cluster like flies around a
drop of syrup.” Stuart says:—“l observed
very large flocks of pigeons coming in clouds
from the plains in every direction towards the
ponds. Some time afterwards we saw them
coming back, and flying away into the plains
as far as the eye can reach, apparently to
Cockatoo. —The corella cockatoo (Caoatua
Gymnopis), white crestless; galar parrots
(cockatoo), rosebreasted cockatoo (Caoatua
Eos), both abundant in places, are very good
indications of available water supply.


Crows, Kitehavvks, and Soaring Eagles
also are indicators of water, but they are also
often found to be unreliable, being seen far
away from water.
Emu. —The emu (Dromanius), and laughing
jackass (South Australia “Kooyana,” Dacelo
gigantea) are both unreliable as “ water-
finders, ” since like the dingo and the kangaroo
they may be seen very far from water, subsist-
ing upon the moisture supplied in the food
eaten. In this respect these all greatly re-
semble the camel.
Geesb. —Geese flying low are a sign of near
water, and are seen at times in very dry
country, but with water in the vicinity
(Leiohardt, page 508).
Absence op Birds.— Stuart (pp. 285-291)
says:—“We have met no birds that frequent
country where water is.” “The absence of
birds proclaims it (Sturt Plains) to be desti-
tute of water.” The statement would refer to
waters accessible to birds. There might
possibly be root water or hollow-tree water
available to the informed traveller. (N.B. —
The presence of many birds of any variety is
certainly a sign of presence of water in the
neighbourhood.)
ANIMALS,
Kangaroo, Wallaby, and Dingo. —There
is considerable diversity of view amongst
explorers and bushmen as to the true value of
animals in the waterless regions of Australia
as indioatinsr nearness of water in such dry
country. The truth seems to be that, whilst
at times animals do serve as indications of the
presence of water, they are at other times not
so, but are untrustworthy and unreliable. A
thirst-famished bushman may grievously suffer
should he rely too greatly on signs of animals
as indicating water. The animals named are
capable of travelling very long distances
into or through arid country and of
subsisting for several days at least
upon food eaten. Under such conditions
even quite fresh tracks might lure a thirst-
stricken bushman to his death should he
follow them up too far, as their tracks have
been seen often in well-known country several
days’ journey away from any known water.
In very dry seasons the dingo (wild dog) will
travel long distances over many miles to a
water. They have been known, for example,
to travel from the interior country down ta
the Great Bight (west South Australia),
where upon the saacoast they will scratch
with their feet in the sand of the shore, and
so dig down to the fresh water to be found
there. They do the same thing (scratch for
water) in the creeks of the interior. Kan-
garoo and wallaby, too, through obtaining
sufficient moisture from the vegetable growth
upon which they feed, may remain for
some days or weeks or even months away
from supplies of water, and so are untrust-
worthy as water guides.
INSECTS &c.
Some forms of insect life are useful and
reliable as indicators of the vicinity of
water. Large and small red hornets and
the mason fly (like a long-legged wasp, really
a hornet) point to the proximity of water.
Ernest Giles (vol. 1, page 95) speaks of the
hornets, along with diamond birds, gathering
in swarms round the searcher for water, as
with his wooden scoop he sinks a hole into the
sand of a creek-bed to obtain the precious
supply. The long-legged wasp, with legs
drooping down, is seen in dry regionshovering
steadily over a special spot. An observer,
under these conditions, upon dismounting
from his horse found upon close examination
and test that the soil at the spot was quite
moist, and scratching or digging down there
would secure more or less of a supply of
water.
Mussell Shell. —The natives consume
these in great quantities wherever found. The
presence of heaps of shells beside waters
indicates the permanence of water supply at
the spot. Stuart says (p. 113, “ Loudon
Springs ’) —“Round about their fires were large
quantities of shell of the fresh-water mussel],
the fish from which they (the aborigines) had
been eating. I should think this a good proof


of the water being permanent.” From other
sources it is learned that Stuart is mistaken,
that these shells are not an indioation of per-
manence of water, lixing shells being found in
waterholes that have been dry for several years
in succession.
Water Frog. —Like the camel when
“ topped up” by his Arab master for a long
journey through dry country, the water frog
of Central Australia “tops up” ( i.e ., gorges
himself quite full of water) for a dry season,
whilst the water is still about him. He then
buries himself deep down in the soft mud at
the bottom of his waterhole—the mud dries
up and becomes thoroughly “ caked” all round
him. Thus he solstitiates until the next rainy
season comes round and releases him. —(Horn’s
Scientific Exploring Expedition).
DEW.
The aborigine has learned to avail himself
of every possible source of supply of water
in his fight for existence in ungenerous
country. He knows that in certain regions
special food supply may be found if only
he can have water whilst he if roam-
ing in that particular hunting ground.
Amongst his sources of water supply we
find that he avails himself freely of the
water stored up for him by the “gentle dew.”
The sweet, cool Aurora with tender compas-
sion for the dusky wanderer hangs on grass,
and reed, and shrub the day’s supply of
grateful water in the sparkling drops of clear,
fresh dew. These the native patiently gathers
into his spacious ooolamin. He starts oat
before sunrise, and gathers with sweep of
arm, or tap of stick, the hanging dewdrops
for his day’s supply. Sometimes a handful of
soft dry grass pressed into a ball shape is
swept as a sponge over the dew-laden grass,
and the gathered store of moisture is
squeezed into hie vessel; or the catching
utensil is held under the dew - laden
twigs of tree or shrub, and a gentle tap
sains the drops down for his frugal needs.
Ed. John Eyre (vol. 1, page 361) states that
be himself gathered thus a quart of water in
one hour from spangles of dew hanging on
grass and shrub. In the western regions of
Australia, along the great southern coast,
bark vessels are much used for water-bearing.
The sandalwood-tree is especially useful as a
dew-gathering tree, yielding a wonderfully
abundant supply of the dew water from its
leaves. Quite a good drink may be obtained
therefrom with the aid of a suitable catch
ment vessel. A traveller moving through
these trees in the early morning is soon
drenched to the skin. Mr. Tom Brown,
of Nullarbor Plains, South Australia, narrates
that a black lad came to him when twenty
miles out in the scrub-covered belt and gave
him to understand that he had come
in from a point whence he could
only have come by traversing an absolutely
waterless belt. The lad stated further that
two gins and a picaninny were also coming
across the plains by the same track, and would
come in the next day. The lad came in and
joined the station blacks’ camp. Wondering
at the strangeness of the incident, Mr. Brown
enquired from the other blacks how these
strange blaoks obtained water in their journey
across the plains. Their reply was, “ Get
water off the grass,” or shook off the bushes.
There are very heavy dews along the Aus-
tralian Bight coastline, and Eyre obtained
water thus on bis journey to the west. Both
kangaroo and dingo obtain this dew water for
their needs in these same regions. They run
through the dew-laden grass with their
tongues hanging out, and lap in the moisture
so gathered as they move.
NATIVE WATER CONSERVATION.
The Australian native has not hitherto been
given all the credit which is his due. Though
perhaps often thriftless and shiftless as re-
gards water conservation, he is not really so
much at fault here as some have represented.
In regions where rainfall is slight and storage
of water precarious the aborigine has pro-
vided for himself water storage after his own
fashion.
Rockholes. —One form of storage ; e in


his rookhole. Generally these tanks are
natural formations. In places, both west
and north, they have been found to be
artificial —formed by the natives themselves.
When a native commences forming a new
store chamber he works in a carefully
selected place, upon the level surface of a
rook face, with a hard and heavy stone. He
allows water to gather (or places it there) and
remain there awhile. The water softens the
wetted rook. He then pounds away again upon
the water-softened rock. The procedure is re-
peated at intervals until a cavity with bolding
capacity of from two or three up to hundreds
of gallons is hollowed out. Such rockholes
are often hollowed out and enlarged below,
and some of them have a capacity
of from 600 to 800 gallons. The water
storages they often protect from pollution
of animals, or stealth of wild dogs, by filling
the mouth or at times the entire cavity with
sticks or stones. In the reerion of the Tomkin-
son Range (Gulf of Carpentaria) a place was
seen where the aborigines had been at con-
siderable trouble to form a good catchment for
water. They had formed a rookhole or well in
the rock, and had out leading channels to con-
duct the rain water into this reservoir. The
channels were out into conglomerate ironstone;
evidently very hard and comparatively sharp
implements being necessary to secure the
result.
Native Wells. —These are sunk in soil or
sand, and usually contain only a meagre
supply. They are frequently hidden under
the cover of a bush, or in the midst of a
thicket, being therefore easily missed by the
thirsty seeker. Major Warburton says of
some wells that they are sunk with a slight
curve in the down course, the water being
thus shielded from the direct rays of the
burning sun, thereby ensuring a minimum of
evaporation ; and the contained water is also
kept cool. Native wells are often enlarged in
capacity at depth, are sometimes serpen-
tine in their course down to water, and
vary from 2 feet or 3 feet to 20 fee
and 25 feet in depth. It is most difficult
in some cases to reach the water at all, and at
times the water contained is so terribly fouled
with dead reptiles, dead birds, or rubbish that
even a water-famished horse has refused to
touch the utterly horrible beverage. Natives
slop the mouth of their wells with bushes or
sticks to protect from exhaustion, or fouling by
dingo, and other consumers of their scanty
store. Several explorers as Sturt, G. W.
Goyder, D. Lindsay, and Ohas. Winnecke,
describe native wells sunk through limestone
and other hard formation to 12 feet and then
driven horizontally 6 feet to 10 feet. Some
have openings like a staircase, some with regu-
lar steps for access, with in one case abundant
delicious cold water bubbling up at the end of
the drive. Such wells are at times long dis-
tances from creeks or known waters.
Native Dams. —Dams of native construc-
tion for the purpose of conserving
water have been seldom met with. Still
there are known instances. Ernest Giles
(“Australia Twice Traversed,” vol. 11, p.
93) describes a crescent-shaped dam of abori-
ginal construction formed of clay at Pyle-
bung, near Youldeh, west, South Australia.
The opening to the south, to receive the direct
flow of water. The dam was formed of the
clay dug out of the hole in which the water
lay, having been dug with small native wooden
shovels, and piled up to the following very
respectable dimensions, viz., 20 yards in
length, 5 ft. in thickness at the base, 2 ft. at
the top, 5 ft. high: an unique specimen of
aboriginal engineering skill, for which skill
the defamed native gets no credit. Simila
dams of native construction are fairly nu-
merous in this western country—the Boundary
Dam of Giles being a notable instance. The
lamented explorer Leichardt (“Journal”
page 405) describes a dam so constructed as to
arrest a seepage of fresh water oozing beneath
the bank of the Robinson River before the
outflow could reach the salt water of the river


itself. The retaining-wall of this dam was
formed of olay.
Scratching and Sinking for Water.—
Frequently there is water at comparatively
slight depth below the surface of the sand bed
of surface-dry rivers and creeks, no sign of
such water being noticeable on the surface.
Natives, dingoes, emus, explorers, cattle, and
horses in Australia’s wilds all have learned
this lesson, and in this way, by scratching,
digging, or pawing, obtain their supply.
“Emus and other birds adopt this course”
p. 107). Similar supplies are obtained
on the south seacoast, west of Port Lincoln,
the dingo travelling very long distances
from the interior to obtain water by scratching
in the sand. Fresh water is often found in
the sand of the seashore along the
south coast of Australia. In the Port Lincoln
Proper, near where Flinders first secured
water, it is spouting up out of sand-covered
rocks so far below high-water mark as at
every returning tide to be covered by the sea.
The presence of natives is always an indica-
tion to strange natives and to whites of the
proximity of water in some of the various
forma referred to. Signal and camp smokes
are always an indication of natives and of
water, though the natives may be difficult to
find, since they travel quickly and hide if wild
or in fear.
Water-poisoning by Natives.— lt is the
custom of natives at times to “doctor” or
poison some supplies of water, especially those
to which emus resort to drink. Their purpose
is to stupefy the'game thereby, that it may
more readily be captured. A variety of
nightshade, locally known on the Paroo as
‘ ‘ native myrtle, ” is there used for the purpose.
In places in Central Australia the native
tobacco, pituri, is similarly used. In the
Northern Territory the inner bark of a tree is
used. Leiohardt speaks of water accidentally
rendered poisonous through having, in igno-
rance of their properties, the seeds of a
variety of acacia soaked in them.
Water-carrying —Natives carry water for
domestic use in vessels, when they wish to
camp at a distance from water supply for the
purpose of hunting or seed and root gather-
ing. The coolamin, a vessel hollowed out of
wood, is in most general use. Another vessel
seen in use for the purpose was a hollow log
some 15 in. in length, with one end stopped
up with string, rubbish, and clay. An ex-
perienced observer (Mr. C. Hope Harris)
noted water being carried in a vessel, which
was taken to be made of a reversed dingo
skin, having the hair side inwards, north-
west of the Lakes of South Australia. Skins
of wallaby and of opossum seem to have been
in very general use for the purposes of water-
carrying. In the Northern Territory an un-
usually large vessel was noted, like a coffin in
shape, 6 ft, or 7 ft. long, hollowed like a
canoe, borne by two men, in use for carrying
water. Lubras of Charlotte Waters, South
Australia, when carrying their coolamin filled
with water use a rope of fur or hair wound
into a ring and placed upon the top of the
head, the coolamin resting safely in the cup
or hollow of the ring of rope, enabling the
bearer to walk erect, giving at the same time
free use of the hands for other purposes. A
coolamin of average size was on test found to
have a holding capacity of over two gallons.
A hollow root of old mulga has been seen used
for water-carrying. Vessels formed of bark
seen towards Fraser Range in Western Aus-
tralia by E, E. E. Mallee roots, with one end
stopped with olay for water-bearing have been
already noted. Cleverly folded and beauti-
fully formed buckets, formed from a single
palmleaf, are in use for similar purposes in the
Northern Territory—a marvel of ingenuity,
utility, and lightness.
INTRODUCING WATER TREES,
It would form a fair field for enquiry
whether some of the known water-trees of
other countries might not be introduced into
Australia for purposes of life rescue for bush-
men in regions of comparative water famine.
It may, too, be possible, by sowing their


eeedsin waterless regions, to extend the areas off
country for growth of our known Australian>
water-trees; so affording a wider supply off
these valued aids, for Australia’s hardy bush-
men.
CONCLUSION.
Having taken a cursory glance at the Water:
Quest of the aborigines of arid parts of Aus-
tralia, it will be well to note in what way their
water craft may be made of benefit to bush-
men and explorers, whose calling takes them
into those regions of water famine. The bush-
man should make himself well acquainted
with,
First—The water-trees, water mallees,
currajong, needlebush, bloodwood, casuanna
or desert oak, and acacia ; and when at a loss
for water he may go confidently to their roots
for supply.
Secondly—The presence of diamond-bird,
finch, pigeon, cockatoo, parrot, and hornet
should be looked for and, if seen, availed of.
Careful watching will disclose where they get
water, for water they must have.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
Thirdly—lf none of the above avail, let him
try scratching in the sandy bed of creeks for
water, as taught by the native, the emu, and
the dingo.
By resort to some one of these methods the
desert will be, many times, robbed of half its
terrors, and the unknown “Found Dead”
would less frequently figure in those lists of
lost bushmen published by our Australian
authorities.
The term “Aqua-fera” might, with much
advantage, be added to the names of our special
water- trees. The children of Australia should
in our State schools be taught to know and
recognise these trees, wherever met with. Let
this be done, and the present survey of our
‘ natives’ water quest’ will have been taken to
good purpose ; and the white Australian may
traverse the dry realms of arid Australia with
all the confidence of his dusky brother, the
Australian aborigine, who now is hovering on
the horizon of an early extinction, leaving us,
as one permanent memento of bis existence,
his legacy of lore in water quest.


3 1508 01581024 0
