





DIVISIONS OF THE
IE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
■
■
■
.




27080


DIVISIONS OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
WITH MAP.
(Plate VI.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read January 19, 1900.)
The territory dealt with in the following pages comprises approxi-
mately that part of the province of South Australia situated east of
the i32d meridian of longitude and south of the 24th parallel of
latitude, but is more particularly delineated on the accompanying
map. All the native tribes within this immense region are divided
into two intermarrying phratries, with the exception of some tribes
on the Murray river and Yorke’s peninsula, among whom no well-
defined divisional system has been reported.
I shall endeavor in this article to determine the boundaries of
the country occupied by certain aggregates of tribes possessing the
same divisional names and practicing similar initiatory rites, which
it is proposed to denominate nations, following the method adopted
by me in showing the distribution of the native tribes of New
South Wales, 1 Victoria 2 and Queensland. 3 A map is added, on
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Philada., xxxvii, 54-73, Plate v.
2 American Anthropologist , Washington, xi, 325-343, Plate v.
3 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Philada., xxxvii, 327-336, Plate xiii.
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXIX, NO. 161.


which is marked the geographic range of each nation and defining
also the limits within which circumcision and subincision are in
force.
I. The Parnkalla Nation
In 1846 the Rev. C. W. Schiirmann published a pamphlet on the
Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln , South Australia, in which, on
p. 9, he stated that the Parnkalla tribe was “ divided into two dis-
tinct classes, the Mattiri and Karraru people If a husband be
Mattiri, his wife must be Karraru, and vice versa , the children
taking invariably the appellation of that class to which their mother
belongs.” This is the first accurate record of the divisions of abo-
riginal tribes, not only in the colony mentioned, but in any part of
the Australian continent. Owing to this priority and for conveni-
ence of reference I have adopted the name of the Parnkalla tribe
for the whole nation. I shall endeavor to give the names and ter-
ritorial limits of a few of the most important of the many tribes of
which this large nation is composed.
The Rev. Mr. Schiirmann says 1 the Parnkalla language extended
“ from Port Lincoln probably as far as the head of Spencer’s
Gulf,” which would be about where Port Augusta now stands, and
that “ northeast of the Parnkalla was the Nukunna tribe.” The
Nauo, or Nowo, tribe adjoined the Parnkalla on the west 2 and in-
habited the country from Venus Bay to Koppawanata station.
Northwest of the Nauo, around Yardea station, was the country of the
Willeuroo tribe. The Parnkalla, Nauoand Willeuroo, were practically
the same people in language and customs, and are included in the
same nation on the map. I am informed by old residents that a
small tribe called Kooapudna was formerly located around Frank-
lin Harbor. These people are not mentioned by Mr. Schiirmann.
Mr. B. Hack states that a tribe, which he calls Noocoona, occu-
pied the eastern side of Spencer’s Gulf, from Port Augusta to Bun-
dalear (see map) and extended east to Coonatto. 3 As the Noocoona
of Mr. Hack were located in the country indicated by Mr. Schiir-
raann as being inhabited by the Nukunna, it seems safe to infer that
both writers meant the same people; for although the spelling is
different the pronunciation is substantially the same.
1 Native Tribes of South Australia (1879), p. 249.
2 Ibid., p. 249.
3 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), pp. 64-66.


Mr. Noble, a police trooper, in describing the customs of the
Alury tribe of the Flinders Range, 1 says they were divided into
“ two clans,” called Muttay and Arriee, which I have assumed are
intended to represent Mattiri and Karraru of the Parnkalla divi-
sions. Mr. Noble includes “ Crystal Brook and surrounding coun-
try ” in his description, which would overlap and include the ter-
ritory of the Noocoona tribe above referred to. This suggests the
inference that the Alury and Noocoona were subtribes of the same
people.
The Kooyeeunna and some smaller allied tribes occupy the coun-
try from South Lake Eyre, including Turret Range, Chambers
creek, Screech-Owl creek, and others, to Lake Torrens, and
southerly along its eastern shore as far as Nilpena station, where
they adjoin 'the Alury already mentioned. A friend of mine who
resided a long time on Willochra creek, in the heart of the country
occupied by the Alury tribe, says their proper name is Eeleeree.
He states that they are divided into the two groups, Mattiri and
Karraru, like the Hillary people, who are their near neighbors on
the western side of Lake Torrens. Both tribes circumcise and split
the penis of the youths, and their language has many words in com-
mon. The Kooyeeunna extend northeasterly to meet the Dieyerie’;
and on the southeast they are joined by the Kutchnamootha and
friendly tribes, who are spread over the district from Mount Free-
ling to Lake Frome and Lake Blanche. 3 East of the Kutchna-
mootha is inhabited by the Pulladapa tribe, including the country
adjacent to Lake Callabonna, and thence toward the New South
Wales boundary.
Adjoining the Kooyeeunna and Kutchnamootha, and reaching
northerly, beyond Cooper’s creek, is the territory of the Die-
yerie tribes. Their eastern boundary is approximately a line
drawn from Mount Freeling, through Lakes Blanche and Hope, to
Lake Perigundi. 3 From the debouchure of the Diamantina river
into Lake Eyre, up that river to Goyder’s Lagoon, taking in
Kalamurina, Cowarie, Mungarane and Berlino stations, is inhab-
ited by the Ahminnie tribe. Beyond the Ahminnie is the Wonka-
1 folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 64.
2 Mr. l£. M. Curr, in his book, The Australian Race (1886), refers to these
two tribes, whom he calls Cooyiannie and Kudnamietha. Vol. ii, p. 118.
3 Compare with description given by S. Gason in his Dieyerie Tribes of Aus.
Aborigines (1874), p. 11.


oora tribe, occupying the country from Macumba river nearly to
Alton Downs. The southern end of* their country is watered by the
Macumba river and the lower portion of Kallakoopa creek. North
of the Wonkaoora is the Wonkamudla tribe, reaching from Alton
Downs to Annandale and other stations.
The Wonkaoora and Wonkamudla tribes extend a long way to
the northwest into the desert country, consisting of sandhills, with
sterile patches and salt marshes between them. The only water in
this tract is obtained from native wells, called mickeries, and the
natives of that district are on this account known as “ the mickerie
blacks. ’ ’ These wells are for the greater number shallow holes, little
more than “ soakages,” and generally contain only small supplies
of water, but a few of them are as much as twenty feet deep, or more,
being wide at the top and tapering almost to a point at the bot-
tom, into which the water percolates through the loose strata.
Adjoining the Wonkaoora on the southwest are the Arrabunna
people, who inhabit the country from near the Macumba southerly
along the western side of Lake Eyre as far as Margaret creek,
where they adjoin the Kooyeeunna tribe already mentioned. The
Arrabunna extend up the Neale and Peake creeks till met by the
Andigarina people; toward the southwest they reach to Stuart’s
Range, where they adjoin the outposts of the Kookatha nation.
Touching the Kooyeeunna about Red Lake, and extending thence
southerly down the western side of Lake Torrens is occupied by
the remnants of the Hillary, Kakarrura, Yallingarra and other
friendly tribes, meeting the northern limit of the Parnkalla and
Nauo before referred to. I propose calling this tract of country
the Hillary Nation, after the Hillary tribe, mentioned by Mr. J.
Bryant in 1879. 1
In all the principal tribes or aggregates of subtribes and fami-
lies, whose boundaries are outlined in the preceding pages and
enumerated on the appended map as 1 to 10, the people are
bisected into the phratries, Matturri and Kirraroo, 2 the men of the
one marrying the women of the other. No previous writer has
attempted to define the geographic distribution of all the people
possessing this organization, and show the correct relative location
of each tribe on a map of South Australia. The collection of
1 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 103.
2 1 have adopted these forms of the Phratry names, because they are used by
the Kooyeeunna tribe, who are located near the centre of the nation.


reliable data, from which to prepare such a map, has been the
result of long and patient inquiry extending over some years.
The following synopsis shows how the two phratries intermarry
and the descent of the resulting offspring :
Table No. i.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Offspring.
Matturri.
A
B
Kirraroo,
Matturri,
Matturri,
Kirraroo,
Kirraroo.
All the people, men and women alike, bear the name of an ani-
mal or some other natural object, which is their totem. I have
noticed that certain totems which belong to one phratry in a
given district are found to belong to the other phratry among the
members of a tribe occupying a different part of the country.
Similar differences have been observed by me among the native
tribes of New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria. Therefore,
in supplying a few lists of some of the totems attached to the two
phratries—Kirraroo and Matturri —the name of the tribe will be
mentioned in each case. 1 will take the totems of the Arrabunna
tribe first.
The undermentioned totemic names may be enumerated as some
of those belonging to the people comprising the Kirraroo group :
Emu, Rainbow, Diver,
Mopoke, Scrub Turkey, Bull-dog Ant,
Fish, Gum Tree, Crane,
Common Fly, Top-knot Pigeon, Moon,
Sun, Clouds, Sandalwood Tree,
Rain, Lightning, Barley Grass,
North Wind, Thunder, Acacia,
Nardoo, Crow, Carpet Snake,
Hailstones, Opossum, Spoonbill,
Box Tree, Pelican, Beefwood Tree,
Needle Bush, Mimosa, Green Snake.
Among the totems of the people
may be mentioned the following :
constituting the Matturri group


Wild Dog, Eagle Hawk, Small Lizard,
Spider, Common Magpie, Brown Snake,
Curlew, Black Difck, Whip Snake,
Swan, Frog. Kangaroo Rat,
Grasshopper, South Wind, Wattle Tree,
Quandong Tree, Shag, Ring-neck Parrot,
Iguana, Quartz Stone, Mulga Tree.
Plain Turkey,
11. The Yowerawarrika Nation.
The Yowerawarrika tribe adjoin the Dieyerie Ahminnie, Wonk-
aoora and Wonkamudla on the east, and reach northerly and eas-
terly into Queensland. Their territory includes Coongie, Clifton
Hills, Pandy Pandy and Cordilla Downs. Adjoining the Yowera-
warrika on the south are the Yanderawantha, who reach from
Patchawarra creek southerly across the Cooper and down the
Strzelecki creek till they meet the northern limit of the Pilladapa
about Lake Callabonna. On the west they are bounded by the
Dieyerie, and on the east they extend within the Queensland and
New South Wales frontier. Innamincka, Tinga Tingana, Kano-
winna, Oontoo and other stations, are situated within the territory
of this tribe.
The social organization of the Yowerawarrika and Yanderawan-
tha consists of two intermarrying phratries called Koolpirro and
Thinnawa; a Koolpirro man marries a Thinnawa woman, and, vice
versa , the sons and daughters of the marriage taking the name of
the group to which the mother belongs. Arranged in tabular form
these rules of marriage and descent appear as follows :
Table No. z.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife. Offspring.
Thinnawa, Thinnawa.
Koolpirro, Koolpirro.
Koolpirro,
Thinnawa,
There is a collection of totems attached to each phratry. The
following are some of the totems of the Koolpirro people :
Carpet Snake, Rainbow, Rat,
Red Ochre, Pigface, Native Companion,
Crow, Emu, Curlew.
Kite-hawk, Pituri.


The Thinnawa division claims the undermentioned animals and
objects amongst others :
Iguana, Eaglehawk,
Plain Turkey,
Black Duck,
Plover,
Bull-Frog, Shag,
Jew Lizard, Dingo,
Witchetty, Native Cat,
Crane,
Diver.
Ground Frog, Kangaroo Rat,
Water Rat,
The phratry name Koolpirro is the equivalent of Kirraroo, and
Thinnawa corresponds to Matturri of the Parnkalla organization.
Koolpirro is likewise equivalent to the pair of sections Woongo and
Koobaroo, and Thinnawa to the pair, Bunburri and Koorgilla, of
the tribes adjoining them on the northeast.
111. The Barkunjee Nation.
The divisional system and initiation ceremonies of the tribes
constituting this nation have been fully reported in my paper pub-
lished in the Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales,
Vol. xxxii, pp. 240-255.
IV. The Adjadurah Nation.
The Adjadurah tribe occupied Yorke Peninsula, a long tongue of
land lying between St. Vincent and Spencer Gulfs and reaching
north as far as Crystal brook. Mr. McEntire says these natives
were more similar to the Adelaide tribe than any other; and Mr.
E. M. Curr states that the language of the Adelaide blacks resem-
bled that of those occupying Yorke Peninsula more than the lan-
guage of the natives of the Murray river. I have compiled the fol-
lowing comparative vocabulary of twenty-four words used by both
tribes, selected from four different authors—Teichelmann and
Schurmann, 1 Edward Stevens, 2 E. McEntire 8 and E. M. Curr. 4
1 Grammar and Vocabulary of Aboriginal Language Spoken by Natives
of Adelaide (1840), pp. 1-176.
3 your. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxiii, 498—501.
3 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 63.
4 The Australian Race (1886), ii, 146, 147.


English.
Teich. and Sch,
Adelaide.
E. Stevens.
Adelaide.
E. McEntire.
Y. Peninsula.
E. M. Curr.
Y. Peninsula.
Kangaroo
Opossum
Dog
Nanto
Pilta
Munthu
Nantoo
Bilta
Kadli
Kari
Kua
Cudlee
Curree
Kuddelee
Kadle
Carrie
Gooa
Emu
Crow
Swan
Fish
Egg
Kudlyo
Kuya
Guldyoo
Guy a
Cooyar
Kooya
Muka
Mokka
Kakka
Mudla
Minni
Tea
Head
Makarta
Mudla
Kukaa
Mudla
Midna
Teeya
Murra
Thidna
Meedla
Meena
Mena
Tia
Teeth
Hand
Foot
Marra
Tidna
Moora
Tidna
Mirra
Didna
Breasts
(female)
Blood
Ngammi
Karro
Umme
Ammie
Garro
Gerra
Excrement
Reed Spear
Fire
Kudna
Kaya
Goodnarie
Giea
Gadla
Puiyu
Tindo
Kudla
Gurdla
Booyoo
Tintoo
Birra
Smoke
Sun
Tindoo
Cackera
Deento
Bigha
Moon
Kakirra
or Piki
Purle
Boorlee
Barloona
Burlie
Die or Dead
Moorloona
Barluna
Besides the affinity of their speech, the Yorke Peninsula and
Adelaide natives had many customs in common. Mr. E. M. Curr,
Mr. E. McEntire and Mr. T. M. Sutton report that circumcision
was practiced on Yorke Peninsula, and the last-named author men-
tions the use of a bullroarer. 1
Teichelmann and Schiirmann state that in the Adelaide tribe a
youth was called Pappa after being circumcised; Turlo was the
name of the circumcisor; and the being who first taught the rite
to their ancestors was named Yura , who also punished those who
neglected to carry it out. He further says that a bullroarer called
Kadnamangutta was employed hi the ceremony. It was a thin, oval
piece of wood, five inches long and an inch and a half wide, tied to a
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc., S. A. Bek., Vol ii, 3d series, p. 17.


string, by which the natives swung it rapidly round, causing a hum-
ming noise. Females and children were not allowed to see it.
Mr. G. F. Angas reports that circumcision was in vogue among
the Wirramayo tribe, who occupied the vast scrub country to the
northwest of the river Murray, and that an instrument called Wittoo
Wittoo, an oval piece of wood fastened to a string of human hair,
was whirled round with great rapidity, producing a loud, roaring
sound. 1
Owing to the similarity of the dialects of the Yorke Peninsula and
Adelaide tribes, the prevalence of circumcision and other customs,
together with the fact of their being adjoining neighbors, seems to
me to justify the assumption that they were practically the same
people. I have therefore included these two tribes in one nation.
Mr. McEntire and Mr. Sutton say that in the Yorke Peninsula
tribe the children followed the father. Having read all that both
these writers have to say on the subject, I am nevertheless of opinion
that the descent of the children depended directly on the mother,
being led to this conclusion by inquiries I have made from old resi-
dents of that part of the country and from natives of adjacent tribes.
Whether or not they were divided into two intermarrying phratries,
like the nations to the north and west of them, appears to have
escaped the notice of early investigators.
V. The Narrinyeri Nation,
The tribes composing this nation have been dealt with in my
article on “ The Victorian Aborigines,” 2 so that a brief reference
will be sufficient in the present treatise. Their territory was chiefly
in South Australia, but extended a little way into the adjoining
colonies of New South Wales and Victoria. Their southern limit
was Lacepede Bay, whence they reached along the coast to Cape
Jervis and up the Murray river almost to the junction of the Dar-
ling (see map). They did not practise circumcision, and their lan-
guage differed from that of their neighbors. The Rev. G. Taplin,
who is the most experienced of the early writers on the customs of
these people, gives no group divisions, and says descent was counted
through the father. 3 In the Barkunjee and Booandik tribes, who
1 Savage Life in Australia and New Zealand, Vol. i, p. 99.
2 American Anthropologist (Washington), xi, 336-343.
s Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (Adelaide, 1879), p. 157.


adjoin the Narrinyeri, the descent is on the mother’s side, although
they marry into the phratry of the father, and the children are
brought up in his tribe.
VI. The Booandik Nation.
More than three-fourths of the entire area of this nation is situated
on the other side of the boundary between South Australia and Victo-
ria, and their social organization has been described in my paper on
the aborigines of the latter colony. 1 I wish to repeat here, however,
that the community is divided into two intermarrying phratries,
called Krokitch and Kamatch. If a man belongs to the Krokitch
division his wife must be taken from among the Kamatch people,
and vice versa —the children taking the name of the phratry to
which their mother belongs.
VII. The Kookatha Nation.
Lying to the west of the Parnkalla, Hillary and Arrabunna Na-
tions, the country is occupied by several tribes, including the Koo-
katha, Geebera, Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warnabinnie and some others.
This aggregate of people will be designated the Kookatha Nation,
and the following is a brief outline of the geographic distribution
of the different tribes composing it.
The Kookatha tribe extends from the Stuart Range, taking in
Lake Phillipson, Mount Eba Station, Wilgena Station, Mount
Finke and Lake Bring. The Geebera people are on the north of
Lake Gairdner. Between the Gawler ranges and the head of the
Great Australian Bight we encounter the Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warna-
binnie and other tribes, inhabiting the coastal districts. The peo-
ple of the interior are more friendly among themselves than with
the coast people, and speak a slightly different dialect. They all
mix together, however, in their great corrobories, and have simi-
lar ceremonies of circumcision, subincision and the enlargement of
the vaginal orifice. The coast tribes do not extract a front tooth
from the upper jaw of the males, but this custom prevails all over
the back country.
In the Geebera tribe, and for a long way westward of them, the
two intermarrying phratries are designated Kookoojiba and Koo-
cheebinga, and the resulting offspring take the name of their
1 American Anthropologist, xi, 331-336.


mother’s phratry, which may be exemplified in tabular form as
under:
Table No. 3
Phratry.
Husband. Wife. Offspring.
Kookoojiba, Koocheebinga, Koocheebinga
Koocheebinga, Kookoojiba, Kookoojiba.
Among the coastal tribes, in order [to prevent]consanguineous
marriages, the chief old men appoint certain women to be uumree
to certain young men, and the men thus selected are also uumree
to these women. This can be illustrated by supposing that a
woman who is uumree to a certain man has a son and a daughter.
The man, who may be called A, who is also uumree to her, takes
her daughter as his wife, and if he himself has a sister he is sup-
posed to give her to the woman’s son, who would, of course, be his
wife’s brother. Then the man A and his wife’s brother would be-
come what the natives call maratho, which signifies that they must
always assist one another in time of danger. A man and woman
who are uumree , therefore, stand in the relationship of son-in-law
and mother-in-law. They never speak to one another as long as
they live, and avoid looking at each other if possible, yet remaining
the best of friends.
Female children are betrothed in their infancy to such of the
males as may be entitled to claim them as their wives in accord-
ance with the laws of the tribe. A man is supposed to contribute
something in the way of food to his future wife, until she is old
enough to go and cohabit with him.
Where the law permits, women who have very dark hair and
complexions are appointed uumree to men whose complexions and
hair are lighter, and vice versa. This distinction in the color is
also apparent in the betrothals, a lighter girl being betrothed to a
darker boy, and a darker girl to a lighter boy. In all cases, how-
ever, the parties who are uumree, and also those who are betrothed,
must belong to opposite phratries. 1
The tribes who adjoin the Kookatha nation on the west are sub-
stantially the same people in language and customs, and extend
onwards into western Australia. Commencing about Israelite Bay
1 The Parnkalla divisions, Kirraroo and Matturri, are known at least as far
west as Murat Bay, owing to the intermarriage of the people of the two nations.


and extending a considerable distance westerly and northerly along
the coast of western Australia, the tribes are divided into two inter-
marrying phratries 1 called Munnichmat and Wartungmat, with
groups of totems attached to each, particulars of which will be given
in another article.
VIII. The Andigarina Nation.
Bounding the Arrabunna on the northwest are the Andigarina
and friendly tribes, occupying the country up the Alberga river to
the Musgrave range, and onward to the Petermann ranges and
Lake Amadeus, where they meet the Locrudgee tribe. The Andi-
garina and Loorudgee are divided into four sections, called Koo-
mara, Panungka, Bultara and Parulla, particulars of whose inter-
marriages have been dealt with by me elsewhere. 2 This organiza-
tion, with some modifications in the names of the sections, and in
the order of their intermarriage, extends westward across the colony
of western Australia to the Indian Ocean. 3
Lying northward of the Andigarina, and adjoining also the
Wonkaoora and Wankamudla referred to in a previous page, is the
Arrinda tribe, occupying the country at Macumba, Dalhousie,
Charlotte Waters and the Lower Finke river, and stretching north-
easterly a considerable distance. They have the same four sections
as the Andigarina, and their rules of intermarriage and descent are
identical. The Arrinda and Andigarina people have a similar
language.
Northeasterly of the Arrinda are the Yorrawinga and friendly
tribes, located on the Field, Woodrofifeand Georgina rivers. They
1 Divisions on the same principle, but differing in the names of the phratries,
are also found on the northeast coast of Queensland, between Cardwell and Cape
Melville. In some places the names are Koorabunna and Kooragoola—in others
Darboo and Tooar—in others Chunna and Jaypar, and so on.
2 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Phila., xxxviii, 79.
8 Among the Weedokarry tribe in western Australia, the following table shows
he names of the four sections and their rules of intermarriage and descent :
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Offspring.
f Butcharrie, Burronga, Banaka.
I Kurrimurra, Banaka, Burronga.
B f Burronga, Butcharrie, Kurrimurra.
I Banaka, Kurrimurra, Butcharrie.
Kurrimurra, Butcharrie.


have four intermarrying divisions named as follow : Koomara, Bel-
thara, Gaballa and Deringera.
Adjoining, but farther to the northward than the Andigarina,
Loorudgee, Arrinda and Yorrawinga people, are a number of tribes
who are distinguished by having eight intermarrying divisions, in-
stead of two, or four, as in the communities herein described. This
eight-section organization extends northerly to the Gulf of Car-
pentaria and Cambridge Gulf, and will be dealt with in another
article.
The language spoken by the Arrinda and allied tribes, and reach-
ing a long way into the eight-section system, has been ably studied
and explained by the Rev. H. Kempe. 1
Explanation of the Map.
I. The Parnkalla Nation.—This is the largest nation in South
Australia, occupying a territory of upwards of 700 miles in length,
by a maximum width of 300 miles. In consequence of the immense
tract occupied, it has been thought advisable to locate on the
map certain communities, consisting of one or more of the tribes
constituting the nation. These communities are represented as
Nos. 1 to 10 on the map, and are all divided into the two phratries,
Matturri and Kirraroo, already explained. The names of some of
the principal tribes in each community are as follow : No. 1, Parn-
kalla, Nauo, Willewroo and Kooapidna tribes. No. 2, Nookoona
and Eeleeree. No. 3, Kooyeeunna and others. No. 4, Kutchna-
mootha. No. 5, Pilladapa. No. 6, Dieyerie. No. 7, Ahminie.
No. 8, Wonkaoora and Wonkamudla. No. 9, Arrabunna. No. 10,
Hillary, Kakarraru and Yallingarra tribes.
11. The Yowerawarrika Nation.—The principal tribes compos-
ing this nation are the Yowerawarrika, Yandrawontha, Wonka-
murra, Mullinchie, Kullally and others.
111. The Barkunjee Nation, extending into New South Wales,
has two intermarrying phratries, Muckwarra and Keelparra, and the
offspring belong to their mother’s division.
IV. The Adjadura Nation, comprising the tribes on Yoilke Pen-
insula and around the district of Adelaide.
1 “A Grammar and Vocabulary of the Language Spoken by the Aborigines of
the Mac Donnell Ranges, South Australia,” Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, Vol.
xiv, pp. 1-54.


Proceedings Amer. Philos, Soc,
Vol. miX No, 181, Plate VI.




V. The Narrinyeri Nation. —This and the next following nation,
VI, have been described by me in The American Anthropologist ,
Vol. xi, pp. 331-343.
VI. The Booandik Nation, reaching into Victoria. There are
two phratries, Krokitch and Kamatch, the men of the one marrying
the women of the other.
VII. The Kookatha Nation.—The principal tribes are the Koo-
katha, Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warnabirrie and others.
VIII. The Andigarina Nation, consisting of the Andigarina,
Loorudgee and Arrinda tribes, with four intermarrying divisions, as
explained in the text of this paper. To show the wide geographic
range of this system, it is interesting to notice that on the Batavia
river, in the extreme north of Queensland, the Joongoonjee tribe
is divided into two intermarrying phratries, called Chamagunda
and Gamanutta; the former is subdivided into two sections, named
Langename and Namegoore, and the latter into two, called Pack-
wicki and Pamarang. The children of both sexes belong to the
same phratry as their mother.
There are no feminine equivalents for these section names, but
each phratry has a collection of totems, which the natives call edeet,
some of which are the emu, dingo, rock, bamboo, wood, crow, fire,
kangaroo, carpet-snake, sea, shark, sun, black-duck, rat, pigeon,
fresh water.
The reader’s attention is invited to a line (see map) from Port
Augusta, passing east of Lake Frome and entering the New South
Wales boundary south of Tilcha. All the tribes to the west,
northwest and north of this line practice the rite of splitting the
penis in addition to that of circumcision. There is a belt of coun-
try, including Yccrke Peninsula, Adelaide, Bundalear, and extend-
ing into New South Wales, in which circumcision only is in force ;
the southeastern limit of this tract is also delineated upon the map
as far as the New South Wales boundary. From the latter point
onward, through the Australian Continent to the Gulf of Carpenta-
ria, the position of the line separating the tribes who practice cir-
cumcision and splitting the penis from those among whom neither
custom is in vogue, is defined on maps accompanying contributions
by me to> different societies. 1
1 Jo-urn. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 240-255, PL xii; Proc. Amer.
Philos. Soc. Phila., xxxvii, 327-336, PI. xiii.






PHALLIC RITES AND INITIATION CEREMONIES OF
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
OP PARRAMATTA, NEW SOUTH WALES.
(Read October 5, 1900.)
This paper is intended as a continuation of the one I communi-
cated to this Society in January last on Divisions of the South
Australian Aborigines; and the map thereto appended, Plate VI,
represents the territory within which the rites now described are in
operation. Exigencies of space render it necessary to treat the
subject in the briefest possible manner, but it is hoped that each
part has been described with sufficient fullness to give a consecutive
account of the proceedings.
It may, perhaps, be as well to state that I was appointed by the
Government of South Australia a land surveyor in 1883 and a
Justice of the Peace in 1884, both of which positions I still hold,
bv which means I have had opportunities which would not other-
wise have occurred of carrying on my inquiries respecting the cus-
toms of the aborigines in that colony.
Circumcision.
When a tribe has a few boys old enough to go through this
ordeal, messengers are dispatched by the head men to several of
the neighboring tribes to ascertain if they also have some youths
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC. VOL. XXXIX, NO 164.


ready for the ceremony. One of the lads to be operated upon
whose body is painted with red ochre and grease, with down feathers
in his hair, is sent with each messenger. The age at which the
boys are circumcised varies from about eight to twelve years,
depending upon the growth and development of the subject and
other circumstances.
People occupying country a hundred or a hundred and fifty miles
distant respond to an invitation of this kind, and assemble at a
general camping ground which has been fixed upon by the initiator
of the proceedings. The men of each tribe approach the main
camp painted and in a meandering line, stamping their feet, and
are accorded a formal reception by the local mob, after which they
establish their quarters on the side nearest their own country. The
boy who accompanied the messenger is borne into the general en-
campment on the shoulders of one of the men, and the old chiefs
shout out the names of well-known localities in the district they
have come from. They also mention flowering trees such as the
wattle, remarkable mountains and shady trees. 1
In a secluded place, a short distance from the main camp, a
space about twenty-five or thirty yards in diameter is cleared of all
grass and loose rubbish and partially surrounded by a fence of
boughs, where the circumcision of the novices will be carried out
later on. These gatherings are generally arranged to take place
shortly after the new moon makes its appearance, so that there will
be moonlight during some part of every night for two or three
weeks; and where circumstances permit the summer time is chosen
—the season of the year in which game and vegetable products are
the most abundant being preferred.
Festive and preliminary ceremonials are carried on for some days
after the last mob has arrived, which I need not now occupy the
space to detail. While these performances are in progress the head-
men assemble at their private meeting place near the camp, and
determine the date on which the novices will be circumcised. As
the men of one tribe circumcise the youths belonging to another, as
soon as the date is announced the men of the several mobs present
pretend to quarrel with each other, on account of their boys being
compelled to submit to the rite. During the night considerable
sexual intercourse is indulged in, but this privilege is accorded only
to those persons who would be entitled to marry each other in con-
1 Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, N. S., Vol. x, pp. 4 and 32.


r
x ormity with the tribal laws, and would not be extended to the
novices.
On the afternoon of the following day the youths to be operated
upon are conducted to the prepared place before referred to and
are kept there all night. When the men are taking the boys away,
the mothers and other female relatives of the latter dance around
and gently strike the men of their own phratry on the shoulder with
the open hand. For example, the Koolpirro women would strike
the Koolpirro men, and the Thinnawa women the Thinnawa men.
After this the women retire, and are not permitted to witness any of
the secret portions of the rites. The men who have the custody of
the novices are accompanied by young fellows who were circum-
cised and subincised at previous gatherings of recent date.
A cold night is usually selected for taking charge of the boys, and
they are kept at their camp without sleep or clothing. The men
shove and pull them about to keep them awake, under pretence of
watching for the approach of an enemy. At the first appearance
of daylight a short passage is formed by some men standing in a
row on one side and some on the other. During this time bull-
roarers are sounded in the bush close at hand. A novice is carried
along the passage referred to and laid face upward on the backs of
several men who are clustered together, and his limbs are held fast.
An old man, selected from one of the visiting tribes, then pulls the
foreskin forward and cuts it off with a sharp flake of stone. The
foreskin is then held up in view of those standing around and its
appearance is hailed by acclamation. A new name is now con-
ferred upon t'he graduate by which he will in future be distinguished.
Those who have charge of him put dust or ashes on the wound to
stop the bleeding. Being sleepy, cold and weary from the effects
of the previous night’s proceedings, his body appears to be numb
and almost insensible to pain.
The same ritual is gone through in regard to every novice oper-
ated upon and a fresh circumcisor is appointed for each. These
men profess to undertake their duty with reluctance, and are rubbed
over with dust by their comrades before commencing the ceremony.
Different ways of disposing of the foreskin are practiced in different
parts of the territory treated of in this paper. In some districts it
is eaten by the man who cuts it off and his friends, the men stand-
ing around being responsible that this is done. In other cases it is
eaten by the elder brothers or brothers-in-law of the novice; in


others it is buried in sand or otherwise dealt with, according to
the custom of the tribe in whose country the rite is carried out.
When all the subjects have been operated upon, they are placed
standing beside their guardians, while two men sound bullroarers in
their presence. Some armed warriors now advance in a menacing
attitude and threaten the boys in fierce loud tones that if ever they
divulge any part of the secret ceremonies to the women or to the
uncircumcised, they will be punished with immediate death. About
noon human blood is sprinkled over the bodies of the novitiates, and
they are kept near the place where they were circumcised during
the remainder of the day.
All the ceremonies being now at an end, toward evening there is
another mock quarrel, and during the ensuing night the men of
each tribe lend their wives to the men of the other tribes present ;
this privilege, however, is restricted to individuals belonging to the
proper intermarrying divisions, and to men who have passed the
prescribed initiatory rites. The following morning all the visiting
tribes disperse and start on their return journey to their own hunt-
ing grounds, taking their respective novices with them.
Each tribe takes charge of its own novices, who are kept under
the control of their sponsors after their return to their own country.
They are taken away to a camp in the bush until their wounds are
healed, during which period they must not be seen by women, and
are restricted to certain kinds of food, in accordance with the direc-
tions of the old men. Several fires are now lighted to the windward
of the graduates, so that they may be enveloped in a dense smoke,
after which they are brought back by their guardians to a place pre-
viously arranged, where they are met by their mothers and female
relatives, and are then taken to a camp near the single men’s
-quarters. At the next meeting of the tribes for initiation purposes
these young men will be permitted to be present at all the secret
ceremonies which may take place.
C. Provis reports that “ among the natives of Fowler’s Bay,
South Australia, after the boys were circumcised their hair was
daubed with grease and clay and rolled into several divisions like
rat’s tails. A rounded pad composed of emu feathers, grease, clay
and human excrement was then placed on top of the head and all
the hair brought up over it and securely bound in its place.” 1
1 Folklore , Manners , etc., of South Australian Aborigines (Adelaide, 1879),
pp. 99, 100.


Subincision.
Splitting the lower side of the male sexual organ is denoted by a
different word in each of the several communities among whom it
is practiced. It will therefore prevent any confusion as to what is
meant if we disregard the native nomenclature and substitute the
English term Subincision-, a name which has already been used by
some writers and clearly indicates the character of the rite.
Some time after the wound caused by the circumcision has healed,
the tribes are again brought together and the ceremony of subin-
cision performed. The length of time between the two operations
varies among different tribes, and is also subject to the convenience
of mustering the people and other circumstances. The interval
may be only a few months, or it may be a year or two, or perhaps
several years. The age at which it is performed is entirely in the
discretion of the old chiefs, and fluctuates from about fourteen to
eighteen years.
All the preparatory arrangements are substantially the same as
already stated in dealing with “circumcision ; ” and the proponents
for initiation must be young fellows who have already submitted to
that rite at previous gatherings. On the evening preceding the day
fixed for the ceremony, the novices are taken to the appointed
place near the camp, where they remain all night without clothing
or rest of any kind. No youth who has not been subincised, nor
any female, is allowed to see any part of this ceremony.
Early in the morning a novice is caught and thrown face upward
on the backs of a heap of men, similar to that described in the cir-
cumcision ceremony, and held in position, a bullroarer being
sounded by one of the men within hearing, but out of sight. In
some cases a man sits astride his chest, so as to render movement of
the body impossible. One of the assistants then takes hold of the
youth’s penis in his fingers and stretches it full length upward
along the abdomen. He uses both hands in catching the glans—
a hand on each side—and holds it in such a position as to expose
the meatus and the urethral canal as fully as possible. The oper-
ator, who is chosen from among the strange tribes present, then
with a sharp flint cuts the urethra open, extending the incision from
the meatus toward the scrotum about two inches, and in some
cases almost back to the scrotal pouch. In other districts the urethra
is split from near the scrotum to within about an inch of the glans,


but leaving the head of the penis and the meatus uninjured. In
the latter case the length of the cleft is from one to two inches or
more.
The graduate is then released, and a piece of soft bark or a
bundle of fur or down, greased with animal fat, is laid in the incis-
ion to keep it open. Wet clay or ashes moistened with a man’s
urine are also put in the wound to assist the healing. The organ is
then bound round with string manufactured by the natives from the
bark of a shrub or small tree bearing a yellow flower which grows
in the sand hills.
As each youth passes through the ordeal he is placed standing on
one side of the cleared space, and when the ceremony is concluded
they are all congratulated by the men present, and the caution in
regard to keeping the secret is again repeated. The young men
are then taken away by their guardians into the bush, and when
their wounds are healed they are brought back to a prepared spot in
the vicinity of the camp and presented to the people of their tribe.
This is done with certain formalities which need not now be entered
upon, after which they are invested with the belt, the kilt, and
other articles comprising the simple dress of an Australian savage.
During the ceremony of subincision—or at that of circumcision
if the latter only is practiced—one or two men are killed and eaten
by the visitors, who also drink the blood. The tribe in whose ter-
ritory the circumcision or subincision has been carried out—these
being the people who summoned their neighbors to attend the cere-
monies—have to provide the person or persons thus sacrificed from
among themselves. I also have evidence of this cannibalistic rite
among the tribes occupying the eastern portion of Australia, where
the initiation ceremonies take a different form. 1
The Rev. C. W. Schiirmann was the first author to accurately
describe the mutilation of the penis among Australian tribes. 3 In
1846, when speaking of the Port Lincoln natives, South Australia,
he states: “It consists of a cut from the orifice of the penis along
its lower side down to the scrotum, thus laying the passage open in
its whole length.” In 1845, Mr. E. J. Eyre also reportshaving
observed this peculiar custom in the same part of the country.* As
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xxxvii, p. 66.
Journ s Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , Vol. xxxii, p. 250.
3 Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln , South Australia (Adelaide, 1846)
P- 15-
3 Journs. Expeds. Discov. Central Aus. (1845), Vol. ii, p. 332.


regards slitting a portion only of the urethral canal and leaving the
head of the penis intact, a police trooper named Richards, in speak-
ing of the natives of Fowler’s Bay and Davenport Creek, South
Australia, says : “ An incision is made in the penis from near the
testes to nearly the end.” 1 C. Provis, a corporal in the police
force, referring to the people near the same district, says : “ An in-
cision about half an inch long is made in the urethra between the
scrotum and glans penis.” 2
Whether the incision is made from the meatus or there is only
a perforation in the middle of the urethral canal in the way de-
scribed, the subjects always afterward pass their water through the
artificial opening. The men partially squat down during micturi-
tion and hold the penis horizontal with one hand. After the
wound heals the urethra appears as a mere groove which becomes
callous ; and in those cases where the glans is split, the penis dur-
ing erection becomes flatter and broader at the extremity than in
its natural condition.
There is a widely spread opinion among laymen, and a few medical
men have been found concurring in the same view, that the object
of this rite is to prevent impregnation. I have made searching
personal inquiries over an immense extent of country in Queens-
land, South Australia and Western Australia, and have collected in-
contestible evidence that men who have been operated upon in this
way can be the fathers of families. Another equally erroneous
popular belief is that some of the men are left intact for the purpose
of propagating the race. Having carefully investigated this matter
I am quite satisfied that in any case where such men have been
observed they have been merely visitors from other tribes where the
custom was not in force.
Scarring the Body.
Raising cicatrices by means of cutting on the back and chest is a
custom of wide prevalence among the Australian aborigines, but
more importance is attached to the ceremony in some districts than
in others. From Cooper’s Creek to the Great Australian Bight the
rite may be briefly described as follows:
The subject is kept awake without food or clothing during a cold
night, as in the two last described ceremonies, and in the morning,
1 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 103.
2 Ibid., p. 99.


as soon as it is clear, blood is sprinkled over his body from the arms
of some of the initiated and he is required to drink a small quantity,
which must be that of a man older and stronger than himself. He
is then laid on a heap of green bushes piled up on the ground to
serve as a platform, where a man who is not a relative cuts certain
lines on the back of his shoulders, on his chest and on the arms
with a sharp flake of stone similar to that used in circumcision.
The position and extent of the scarring is regulated by the custom
of the tribe to which the novitiate belongs. During these proceed-
ings the men standing around make a great noise. After this cut-
ting, which is all done on the same day, a coat of ground charcoal
mixed with grease is applied to his body, and he is kept at that
place for two or three days.
He is then taken away into the scrubs by some initiated men
who act as his guardians and provide him with food. He is not
permitted to speak above a whisper, and firesticks are occasionally
held close to the wounds to make them open and protrude as much
as possible during the process of healing, in order to leave raised
scars. Every evening about sundown he is freshly painted with a
mixture of charcoal and grease on the arms, chest and face, the
mixture being applied freely to the gashes in the flesh.
In the course of about six weeks preparations are made for
returning the graduate to the tribe. He is now at liberty to go in
quest of such articles of food as game, honey, roots and so on.
Next he is painted with red ochre and grease on the lower parts of
his body and on the hands and arms as far as the elbows. He is
then taken to a spot near the main camp, where he is met and wel-
comed by the old men. A feast then takes place at which he con-
tributes all the provisions he may have succeeded in obtaining, and
gives presents to the men who participated in the ceremony of
scarring his body.
As already stated, the youths are taken away from the women
after they are circumcised, again when they are subincised,
and again after their bodies are scarred. During these long so-
journs in the bush with the old men they are permitted to see and
listen to certain dances and songs, the secret lore of their fore-
fathers and the traditional customs of the tribe. A mystic lan-
guage or vocabulary is also inculcated, which is known only to
those who have passed through the prescribed course of instruction.
Every man and woman, all the animals, plants and surrounding


objects, as well as the principal places in their hunting grounds,
have a secret name by which they are spoken of among the initi-
ated, in addition to the general nomenclature with which the
women and children are familiar. After the novitiates have passed
through the final stages of the inaugural rites, the instruction thus
briefly outlined is continued for many years at the single men’s
camp, at which the catechumens have now the right to be present.
In the portion of South Australia where subincision is not prac-
ticed the scarring takes place some time after the boys recover from
the effects of circumcision. And in the districts where depilation
is the initiatory rite, as in the Narrinyeri and adjacent tribes, the
scarring succeeds that ceremony.
It not infrequently happens that after a batch of novices are cir-
cumcised, as described in earlier pages, and before the tribes dis-
perse, such of the young men present who have passed through
that ordeal at a previous meeting, and have attained a sufficient
age, are seized by direction of the head-men and the rite of sub-
incision performed upon them. This is done to save the delay and
trouble of mustering the people again for the latter ceremony, in
cases where the graduates are few in number.
It may be stated that the women, girls and little boys are forever
afterward forbidden to go near any of the localities where the rites of
circumcision, subincision or scarring have been carried out, these
spots being rigorously tabooed to.the uninitiated. This taboo ex-
tends to the initiated of a lower degree ; for example, a circum-
cised youth could not enter upon a place where subincision had
been performed, and so on.
Certain restrictions as to the food to be eaten by the novices at
different periods of their course of instruction have to be com-
plied with, in accordance with ancient custom, under the super-
vision of the old men.
Initiation of Women.
It may be stated generally that among all Australian tribes every
girl on attaining puberty is violated, either in a natural way or by
artificial means, before she is permitted to have a husband; this is
a tribal law from which there is no escape. Among the people
treated of in this paper.it is found that certain mutilations are per-
formed upon the young women by which the vaginal orifice is per-
manently enlarged.


When one or more girls have reached the requisite age, which
is determined by the first menstrual flux and the development of
the breasts, a meeting of the tribe takes place and some festivities
are indulged in. The girls are taken by some old women a short
distance from the camp, where they are met by men who take
charge of them and conduct them to a place where everything is
in readiness for the purpose. These men are Noapa to the nov-
ices—that is, they are men whom they could marry in accordance
with the tribal laws. Here a girl is caught and placed lying face
upward on the ground, and her hands and feet are held by the
men present. An old man, appointed for this duty, then inserts
two or three of his fingers, bound round with human hair, into the
vaginal orifice for the purpose of stretching it. Sometimes a
smooth piece of wood or stone, of the requisite thickness and
length, is used to accomplish the same result. In either case the
operation is continued until bleeding takes place. In other dis-
tricts the lower part of the vaginal wall is lacerated with a sharp
stone, the incision extending more or less into the perineum.
Forcing a large body into the vagina in any of the ways just de-
scribed causes a rupture of the fourchette, similar to that which
usually takes place in the first parturition ; and cutting with an
edged stone effects the same purpose. Bleeding from the wound is
arrested by plugging fur or birds’ down into the passage. Shortly
afterward all the men present, one after the other, avail themselves
of their right of prelibation, or, as it is termed by the French
anthropologists, droit du culage.
These mutilations, like those upon the men already referred to,
are commonly supposed by Europeans.to be done for the purpose
of rendering the women incapable of bearing children, but I have
gathered abundant evidence that there is no foundation whatever
for this assumption.
Depilation.
This ceremony, the principal feature of which is plucking the
hair from the bodies of the graduates, is practiced in the Narrin-
yeri and Booandik nations, 1 occupying the southeast corner of
South Australia. As it is substantially the same as the Kuranda
ceremony of some of the Barkunjee tribes, described in a paper
contributed by me to the Royal Society of New South Wales in
1 The American Anthropologist , Vol. xi, pp. 331-343, Plate V.


1898, it will be sufficient to give the following resume from my
previous work. 1
The preliminaries connected with inviting the neighboring
tribes and their assemblage at an appointed meeting place are
almost identical with the practice of other districts. The time of
life at which a youth is considered ready for the ordeal is deter-
mined by the first appearance of hair on the pubes and chin. On
the morning of the day settled upon for the principal ceremony all
the people are astir at daylight. The boys to be operated upon,
who have been gathered out of the camp the previous night, are
now painted all over with red ochre, their hair being combed and
decorated with the white down of birds. When all is ready the
guardians take charge of the novices, and a number of men armed
with spears surround them in a circle, and all of them march away.
The men make a great noise, shouting and beating their weapons
together, but the boys remain silent, with their heads bowed
toward their breasts.
The mothers of the novices and other women present make a
pretence of resistance by throwing pieces of sticks over the heads
of the men, but do not attempt to follow them. The men and
graduates then proceed to a secluded locality previously agreed
upon, perhaps some miles distant, where a camp is formed, and the
novices placed lying down on a layer of leaves upon the ground,
and are covered over with cloaks or grass, their guardians remain-
ing with them. All the other men make their camp in close prox-
imity. Between the quarters of the boys and those of the men a
space is cleared of all sticks and grass, and a fire lighted close by
it. In the evening, after the youths have partaken of their allow-
ance of food, they are placed, sitting in a row, near this prepared
spot, and the men go through various pantomimic performances,
consisting of hunting and other scenes, imitating the animals
which are the totems of those present, and certain obscene gesti-
culations which are usually practiced on similar occasions. Dif-
ferent burlesques take place every evening, and also sometimes
during the day if the men are not otherwise occupied.
A week or more may be spent at these camping places in the
bush, the time being regulated by the weather and other considera-
tions. When conducting the novices from one camp to another
they are obliged to hold a bunch of green boughs in each hand.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxii, pp. 243-245, Plate XII.


During the afternoon of one or more of the days of this period the
novitiates are carried a short distance from the camp, and placed
lying down on bushes thickly strewn on the ground, and rugs
spread over them. A man then sits down beside each novice, and
commences pulling out the hair from the pubes, under the arms
and the incipient beard ; when one man gets tired he is replaced
by another. Beeswax or gum is used upon the ends of the fingers
to facilitate catching the hair, which is pulled out singly. The
men of the novitiates’ own tribe do not take part in the hair-
plucking operation, this duty devolving upon the men of the dif-
ferent strange tribes present. The pluckers must be men who
have been initiated in the same way at previous gatherings, and are
the potential brothers-in-law of the novices who have been
assigned to them. Some of the head-men of each tribe sit on the
ground near by, directing the proceedings, and a bullroarer is
sounded in the vicinity. The hair pulled out of the bodies of
each youth is kept carefully by itself, and is given into the charge
of one of his relatives, in the same way that the extracted tooth is
disposed of in other districts. When the plucking of the hair has
been completed the novices are raised to their feet by their guar-
dians and other men, amid the shouts of all present. Each
graduate is then painted and invested with the usual regalia of a
man of the tribe.
The novices are then cautioned against divulging the details of
what they have passed through to any person except the initiated.
They are now taken to a place where the women have formed a
new camp, where they are met by their mothers and other female
relations, who light fires to the windward of them, enveloping
them all in a dense smoke, caused by placing green grass, bushes
or weeds on the burning wood. The graduates have to pass
through this ordeal of depilation at not less than two or three
different meetings of the tribes for that purpose before they can
be admitted to full membership and be permitted to take a wife.
While the novitiates are going through their course of initiation
in the bush with the old men they are shown the sacred bullroarer,
and certain crystalline quartz stones which are supposed to protect,
or in some way to confer magical powers upon, their possessor.
In the Narrinyeri, and in the Adjadurah nation adjoining them
on the west, marriages are regulated by the old men in accordance
with fixed rules. The sons and daughters of particular women are


allotted as husbands and wives respectively to the sons and daugh-
ters of certain other women, these matters being arranged during
the infancy of the parties to the marriage, and in some cases before
they are born. In order that every man and woman may be sure
of obtaining a conjugal mate, several persons are appointed to each
individual of either sex, the same persons being often eligible to
several different people. When they all grow up to manhood and
womanhood each man claims the woman who has been assigned to
him, or, if she has died, he takes one of the other women who
were appointed to meet such a contingency. In like manner, if
the allotted husband of a young woman loses his life, she is taken
by one of the other men provided for the purpose.
Miscellaneous Phallic Rites.
Besides the inaugural rites herein described, I am acquainted with
other forms of initiation ceremonies in different parts of Australia,
in all of which great prominence is given to the sexual organs. In
aboriginal carvings of human beings on rocks and on trees, in
raised or carved figures on the ground, and in paintings on the
walls of caves, the sexual organs are conspicuously displayed.
There is much in these rites and customs suggestive of the exist-
ence of some form of phallic worship at an earlier period, if not
still actually observed, among the Australian aborigines.
In the great gatherings for the Bora ceremonies of the Kamilaroi
community a gigantic horizontal image of Byama, a mythologic
ancestor, is formed by heaping up loose earth upon the surface of
the ground. 1 He is represented lying on his back, with a piece of
wood cut into a representation of the human penis projecting from
his abdomen. This organ is disproportionately large compared
with the dimensions of the body. The initiated men assemble
daily on the Bora ground and dance round this image, uttering
guttural incantations and making remarks referring to the great size
of the penis, and while so engaged they catch hold of their own
genital organs in both hands. Similar representations have been
observed by me among the Wiradjuri, Koombanggary and several
other tribes.
Not far from the image of Byama is the earthen representation
of his wife, also of colossal proportions and lying on her back,
1 Proc, Roy. Soc. Victoria , Vol. ix, N. S., p. 144.


with the pudenda prominently exposed, around whom the men
execute many libidinous dances.
On a Bora ground at Gundabloui, Moonie river, in addition to
Byama and his female consort, there were the images of a man
and woman lying together behind a tree 1 in the act of copulating.
Similar shouting and dancing to that just described was indulged
in around these figures.
Bora grounds always consist of two circles, defined by a low
bank of loose earth, with a pathway connecting them, called
thoonburnga, a word derived from Ihoon, the Kamilaroi name for
the penis. The initiated men in going from one circle to the
other walk along this track, which is supposed to represent the
penis of Dharramoolan, a mystic evil being who is said to preside
over the Bora ceremonies.
When the men assemble at the Bora circle and proclaim their
totems, as described in my previous memoirs, 2 they also shout out
the name of the penis. Certain localities in their territory are
called by names made up from those of the genital organs of both
sexes.* In many tribes the sacred bullroarer is rubbed upon the
penis of every novitiate present at the inaugural rites.
During the secret portions of the ceremonies, the novitiates are
placed sitting on bushes on the ground, with their hands clutching
their genitals. The men place themselves in many obscene atti-
tudes, in some cases fastening a piece of bark to the penis to give
it the appearance of being of great length. 4 At other times they
smear that organ with blood to make the boys believe that they
have a menstrual flow, like the women. In some instances the men
rub their penis on the food given to the novices; in others, they
stand in front of the boys, displaying their genitalia, and invite
them to take particular notice. 6
In the pantomimic performances in the bush, in which the
totems are represented, a man is hidden in a hollow place in the
surface of the ground and covered over with leaves. When the
men of the Kooringal presently turn him out of his lair—pretend-
ing to the novices that they think it is the nest of a gigantic bandi-
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxiv, p. 416,
3 Ptoc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. x, N. S., p. 4.
s American Anthropologist, Washington, Vol. ii, N. S., p. 141.
4 Ibid., Vol. ix, N. S., p. 166.
5 Journ. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland Bch., Vol. xv.


coot —they roll him over on his back and examine whether he is
a buck or a doe.
Among all the aboriginal tribes with which lam acquainted mas-
turbation and sodomy are practiced on certain occasions. 1 It is
more general in the Kimberley district and Northern Territory
than elsewhere reached by my inquiries, but I have traced them
in the inaugural rites and ceremonial corrobories of the natives in
all the Australian colonies.
In previous articles I have referred to the enactment of an ob-
scene and disgusting tableau, called Boballai} In several rehear-
sals of this tableau which I have witnessed there was no actual
sodomy, but some of the old head-men present told me the vice
was perpetrated in former times during this portion of the Bora
ceremonies.
Mr. R. B. Smyth narrates a legend of the Victorian tribes which
credits Boonjil, a traditionary ancestral chief, with micturating
continually for several days upon the earth, the ample store of
urine flowing away and forming the great sea. 3
In the Dieyerie tribe the men obtained blood by wounding the
penis for the purpose of fixing the down of birds upon their bodies
at certain ceremonial dances. Mr. S. Gason 4 states that when the
people of that tribe wish to make the wild fowl lay an abundant
supply of eggs some of the able-bodied men sit in a circle, each
having a bone from the leg of a kangaroo, sharpened at one end,
with which they pierce the scrotum several times They
are generally laid up for two or three weeks afterward and are
unable to walk.
Dr. E. C. Stirling, in describing the customs of some tribes in
tne Northern Territory, states that in some cases of severe illness
the sick man is anointed all over with blood obtained by piercing
the labia minora. The patient is held by several women while she,
whose blood is being used, rubs it all over his body, after which a
coating of grease is used. A sick woman may be similarly an-
ointed with blood taken from the male urethra. 5
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xxxix, p. 125.
2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxv, pp. 333, 334.
3 Aborigines of Victoria (Melbourne, 1878), Vol. i, p. 429.
4 The Dieyerie Tribe of Australian Aborigines (Adelaide, 1874), p. 25.
5 Horn Expedition Central Australia, Part iv, p. 182.


Both male and female urine is applied externally in several kinds
of sickness, and is believed to be an excellent remedy. At the
initiation ceremonies of many tribes the novices are made to drink
the urine of the men, and also to eat human excrement. 1
In several districts, when a boy reaches seven or eight years of
age or upward and dies, his mother must submit to the plucking
out of the hair of the pubes by the people of her own tribe.
Although the rites and customs described in the foregoing pages
may appear very horrible to us, yet we should remember that the
•savage has been brought up amid similar scenes from his childhood,
which causes him to view them in a different light from ours. To
him they have all the sanctity and force of divine law; and any
neglect on his part to conform to long-established custom would
bring down upon him the hostility of the community, and subject
bim to all the retributive terrors of superstition.
Reference to the Map.
The map to which these references apply is Plate VI, accom-
panying my paper on the “ Divisions of the South Australian Ab-
origines,” published in No. 161 of the present volume of the
Proceedings of this Society, pp. 78-93.
The region within which circumcision is performed, and also
that in which the additional rite of subincision is practiced, are
plainly delineated upon the map in question and fully explained in
the letter-press at p. 93.
The map also shows the Narrinyeri nation, V, in which the rite
of depilation or hair-plucking is in operation, which also extends
into the part of the Booandik nation, VI, which is contiguous on
the south.
Scarring the body is in vogue over the entire territory delineated
on the map, but is carried out with greater ceremonial in some
parts than in others.
Initiation of women is also practiced over all the country repre-
sented by the map, but the more rigorous forms of it, detailed in
the letter-press, belong to the immense districts west and north of
Port Augusta, reaching to the boundary of South Australia in both
these directions.
In the northern part of the Kokatha nation, among the Hillary,
1 American Anthropologist, Washington, Vol. ix, p. 339.


Kooyeeunna, Dieyerie, Ahminie, Wonkaoora, Wonkamudla, Yow-
erawarrika and Yanderawantha, the custom of extracting one or
two of the front teeth is carried out, females being included in
some of the tribes mentioned. In the remainder of the territory
shown on the map the teeth are not interfered with.


ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Memb. Assoc. Soc. d'Anthrop. dt Paris).




ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES of the NORTHERN TERRITORY.*
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Memb. Assoc. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.)
In 1890, the Rev. H. Kempe, a missionary at Hermannsburg, on
the Upper Finke, completed a valuable grammar and vocabulary of
the language spoken by the aborigines of the Mac Donnell Ranges,
Alice Springs, and the Finke River, in the Northern Territory of
South Australia.! From careful inquiries made by means of friends
who have resided in that part of the country I have obtained reliable
information that there is a similarity in the construction of all the
dialects along a wide zone of territory from Alice Springs northerly to
Davenport Range, and from Alice Springs southerly to Macumba
River. I am now engaged in obtaining particulars of the tongues
spoken in different parts of the Northern Territory, which I hope to
submit to this Society on an early date. For the present I shall con-
tent myself with adding, at the end of this paper, a vocabulary of
the Chingalee dialect, spoken at Daly Waters, Powell’s Creek, and
Elsey Creek.
In the following pages it is proposed to deal briefly with the social
organisation, rites, and customs in force among the native tribes of
the Northern. Territory.
Every tribe consists of two primary divisions, which may be called
phratries —a word used for a similar purpose among the ancient
Greeks —the men of one phratry marrying the women of the other.
Among the native inhabitants scattered over about three-fourths of
the Northern Territory we find that each phratry is subdivided into
four sections, making eight partitions of the community. Every
seotion has an independent name by which its members are recognised.
And, moreover, the women are distinguished from the men by a
feminine form, of the name of each division.
All children, boys and girls alike, born into the tribe, bear the
name of on© of these sections, and also that of some animal, plant, or
inanimate thing, which is their totem. These may be called ancestral
appellations; in addition to which each person has an individual
name, by which he is distinguished among the men and women of his
tribe. Every youth who passes through the inaugural rites receives a
* Taken as read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland,
May 27, 1901.
(f) Trans. Roy. Soc. S.A., vol. xiv., pp. 1—54.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVI.


secret name, which is known only to the initiated; and further, he
possesses what may be called a titular name, which indicates the
degree he has attained to in the initiation ceremonies of his people.
Every woman likewise has a secret name, of which she herself is not
informed —this knowledge being possessed by the initiated men only.
There are also relationship names, which need not now be further
referred to.
Along the boundary line between the Northern Territory and
Western Australia., there are a number of tribes on the Negri and
Behm Rivers, Sturt’s Creek, Stirling Creek, and other watercourses,
among whom may be mentioned the Mayoo, Jeelowng, Neening,
Jarroo, Munga, and other tribes, possessing eight sections in their
social structure. Four of these sections form a phratry, which may
be distinguished as A, whilst the remaining four constitute phratry B.
which can be clearly illustrated in tabular form, as under:
TABLE No. 1.
Phratry Husband Wife Son Daughter
tl. Chungulla Narbeeta Chambijana Nambijana
2. Choolima Nanagoo Chapota Nemira
A 1
3. Changary Nambijana Chinuma Nanagoo
\4. Chavalya Nemira Choongoora Narbeeta
1 5. Clioongoora Nungulla Chavalya Nabajerry
6. Chinuma Naola Changary Nhermana
7. Chapota Nabajerry Choolima Naola
,8. Chambijana Nhermana Chungulla Nungulla
The above table shows the husband, wife, son and daughter belong-
ing to each of the eight divisions, on the same line Across the page.
For example, Chungulla marries Narbeeta, and the progeny are Cham-
bijana and Nambijana, and so on. This I have called the ordinary or
“direct” rule of marriage. Chungulla can, however, in certain cases,
exercise the right of marrying a Nanagoo woman. I have distinguished
such a marriage as irregular or “ alternative.” Again, Choolima
takes Nanagoo as his regular spouse, and his “alternative” wife is
Narbeeta. Besides these irregularities there are- others of less fre-
quency. For example, Chungulla can occasionally marry a Naola
woman, and Choolima can take a Nungulla as his wife, but such mar-
riages may be designated “rare.” Whether Chungulla marries Nar-
beeta, or Nanagoo, or Naola, his children are Chambijana and Nam-
bijana, as in Table No. 1.
In the other pairs of sections, Changarry and Chavalya—Choon-
goora and Chinuma—Chapota and Chambijana. —marriage and descent
follow the same laws, mutatis mutandis. It should be stated, however,


that the majority of marriage® are in accordance with what is here
termed the “ direct’ law. Before a union can take place under the
alternative” regulations, or under those which I have called “rare,”
either the man or the woman must belong to a distant family, so as
to guard against nearness of kin.
In examining Table No. 1 it becomes apparent that Chungulla and
Chambijana are related to each other as father and son in continuous
alternation; and it is also found that they have certain totems which
descend with them ; for example, Chungulla Opossum may bei the
father of Chambijana Opososum, and in the next generation Cham-
bijana Opossum will be the father of Chungulla Opossum. The follow-
ing table illustrates the pairs of sections possessing the relationship of
father and son, together with some of the totems appertaining to
them :
TABLE No. 2.
/Chungulla f Wllite crane > galah, lignum, opossum, wind, copper-
ed Chambijana 1 headed snake, iguana, mopoke, moon, lightning,
J I fr °g*
•2
£ Choolima \ crane » blood-wood, mussel, kangaroo, native cat,
lChapota' j wada by, wild orange, bilbee, wood duck, crow,
I porcupine.
/ Eagleliawk, emu, water-snake, tree-snake, pelican, fish,
/Chavalya mosquito, quandong, curlew, death-adder, honey,
• Cboongoora j centipede, stone spear-head, shag, cockatoo, rat,
P 3 ' wasp, nut-wood, grasshopper, grass, all pigeons,
» l plain turkey, ants, whistling duck, native bee.
.2 \
I I Eagleliawk, stars, brown hawk, dingo, sun, rain,
IChangary ) cooliba tree, wild potato, black-headed snake, clouds,
\Chinuma J thunder, ibis, water-hen, boree tree, scorpion, native
( compardon, black duck.
In general the progeny, boys and girls alike, inherit the totem of
their male parent, but in this matter irregularities have been observed,
which lam now investigating. In treating of the “alternative” mar-
riages in a preceding page, it was stated that Chungulla could also
marry Nanagoo, or Naola, and in a similar manner Choolima could
wed Narbeeta, orNungulla. In consequence of polygamy being sanc-
tioned, it is possible for either Chungulla or Choolima to take one
wife from the direct section, and another spouse from the “ a Item an
tive ” division, and a third from the “ rare ” class, which increases the
difficulty of tracing the totems. (See Table No. 1.)
Owing to the close blood relationship subsisting between Chun-
gulla, Chambijana, Choolima, and Chapota, I have discovered that
the same totems are more or less in use among these four sections,


whom I have accordingly called Moiety Ain Table No-. 2. In other
words, the totems given in that table as belonging primarily to' Chun-
gulla and Chambijana, are also to some extent' common to Choolima
and Chapota. The same remarks will apply in: all respects to' the
totems of the remaining four sections, which are distinguished as
Moiety B in the table-. Marriage between persons of the same totem
is forbidden if they belong to families inhabiting neighbouring hunting
grounds; but where the parties to the union come from remote dis-
tricts, and, therefore, cannot be any blood connection, I have observed
individuals of the same totem living as man and wife.
On Sturt Creek and on Victoria and Ord Rivers, certain totems
appear to be invested with greater importance than others. Among
these may be mentioned the White Crane and Eaglehawk, all the
totems in the community being divided between these two birds. (See
Table No. 2.) In other places, patches of country are said to belong
to certain totems ; for example, the kangaroo, white hawk, emu, eagle-
hawk, etc., will each have a particular ridge, scrub', plain, waterhole, or
the like. Every section is subject to certain restrictions as to the
animals and plants which they may search for and eat. Certain foods
are also tabooed to pregnant women and young people of both sexes.
Over the whole! of the country drained by the Victoria: River and
its numerous affluents, extending northerly toi the Fitzmaurice, Flora,
and Daly Rivers, we find a considerable number of important tribes,
including the Moodburra, Kangarraga, Cheeal, Tewinbol, Bilyanarra
Wartaman, Oolawunga, Muttangulla, etc,, who have the same organisa-
tion as that given in Table No. 1. The following are the masouline
and feminine forms of the names of each section—the numbers 1,2,
etc., corresponding to those in the table referred to:—-
1. Jungalla, Nungalla; 2. Joolama, Nowala; 3. Dho-ngaree, Non-
garee; 4. Dhalyeree, Nalyeree; 5. Jimidja, Namaja; 6. Janna, Nan-
nakoo; 7. Jeemara, Nee mar a; 8. Jambijana, Nambean.
The country around Daly Waters, Newcastle Waters, and Powell’s
Creek is inhabited by the Chingalee tribe, between whom and the
Victoria River are the Kwaranjee and other people. East of the
Chingalee is the Koodanjee tribe. Their divisions have the following
masculine and feminine names : —l. Chunkaleeinja, Nunkaleeinja; 2.
Chulainja, Nalainja; 3. Tunkareeinja, Nunkareeinja; 4. Taraleeinja,
Naraleeinja; 5. Jimmitcha, Namuinja; 6. C'hunainja, Nanainja; 7.
Chemarainja, Nemarainja.; 8. Tampachina, Nambajina. These eight
names, with dialectic modifications, have been observed by competent
friends who have made inquiries l for me from the north-west corner
of Queensland, along the shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria! to the Roper
River, and over all the country lying between there and the overland
telegraph line, and are fully described by me in other publications.


Among the tribes on the Upper Roper and its tributaries, on the
Katherine, and thence north-easterly to the Goyder River, the or-
ganisation is the same, but the nomenclature of the eight sections is
as follows:—1. Yungalla, Inkagalla; 2. Urwalla, Imbawalla; 3.
Uwungaree, Imbongaree; 4. Uwallaree, Imballaree; 5. Eemitch, Im-
madenna; 6. Uwanee, Imbannee; 7. Unmarra, Inganmarra; 8.
Tabachin, Tabadenna.
From the point where the boundary line between the Northern
Territory and Queensland meets the Gulf of Carpentaria, and thence
southerly to the junction of the Rankine and Georgina Rivers, extend-
ing westerly beyond Elkedra and Alroy Downs, and easterly into
Queensland, is inhabited by the Inchalachee, Warkya., Wanyee, Kur-
rawar, Yookala, and several other tribes, possessing eight divisions, as
under, all the rules of marriage and descent being precisely the same
as in Table No. 1 :
TABLE No. 8.
Phratry Husband Wife
Son Daughter
1 Kingilla Nolangma
Naratyoo Neeonama
A
Akamaroo Jummeeunya
Komeranjee Neemurrama
Bongarinjee Jummeeunya
Boolarinjee Neemurrama
Warkoo Neeonama
Boolanjee Nolangma
I Boolanjee Nungallama
] Warkoo Nurralama
Boolarinjee Nulyarama
Bongarinjee Nongaryma
B
1
Komeranjee Nulyarama
Akamaroo Nongaryma
Naratyoo Nurralama
Kingilla Nungallama
A few of the above names are varied in different parts of the tribal
districts. In some places Na.ra.tyoo is called Burralanjee; Warkoo is
Narrabalanjee; Komeranjee is Boonangoona ; and Akamaroo is known
as Thimmermill. 1
The first author to report the existence of an organisation contain-
ing eight sections among the natives on the Finke River, Alice Springs
and Mac Donnell Ranges, was the Rev. Louis Schulze, a missionary at
Hermannsburg. 2 They were next referred to by Dr. E. C. Stirling in
1896, 3 and by Spencer and Gillen in 1897. 4 Mr. Schultze, and the
other writers who followed his classification, divided the eight sections
into two moieties, which did not represent the phratries, nor give the
correct descent of the offspring. On the 12th of June, 1898, I read a
(1) Journ Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, vol. xxxii., pp. 251-252. Ibid., vol. xxxiii.,
p. 111.
(2) Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, vol. xiv., pp. 223-227.
(3) Report Horn Exped., Part iv., p. 46.
(4) Proc. Eoy. Soc., Victoria, vol. x., N. S., p. 19.


paper before the Boyal Society of New South Wales, in which, inter
alia, I gave the following tabulation of the two phratries, and the
sections composing them 2 :
TABLE No. 4.
Phratry Husband Wife Son Daughter
/ Ungala Knurraia
' Parulla Panungka
Mbutjana Mbutjana
Koomara Koomara
A i
I Pungata Mbutjana Knurraia Knurraia
' Bultara Koomara Panungka Panungka
Panungka Parulla
Knurraia Ungala
Bultara
Pungata
Bultara
Pungata
Koomara Bultara
Mbutjana Pungata
Parulla
Ungalla
Parulla
Ungala
What has been said in explanation of Tables No. 1 and No. 2
regarding direct and alternative marriages, the descent of the pro-
geny, and all other matters, applies equally to Table No. 4. Mr.
Sohultze had previously reported the occurrence of alternative mar-
riages, and he states that “whether Bultara has a Koomara or
Mbultjana for his wife is immaterial .... the children are
Panungka.” According to my investigations, his conclusions are cor-
rect.
In the Warramonga tribe about Tennant s Creek, the names of
the eight sections, how they intermarry, and the resulting offspring
are as under:
TABLE No. 5.
Phratry Husband Wife Son Daughter
B -
Jungulla Numajillee Ambajona Lambean
Joopalla Naponunga Takamara Nakamara
Tapongatee Lambean
Kubadjee Nakamara
Taponunga Naponunga
Jungaree Numajillee
Jungaree Nongillee
Taponunga Narala
Kubadjee Nabadjee
Tapongatee Napongatee
Takamara Nabadjee
Ambajona Napongatee
Joopalla Narala
Jungulla Nongillee
Taking the first name in the table, we see that a Jungulla man
takes a Numajillee woman, who is his regularly appointed, spouse;
and his family are Ambajona and Lam bean; but he has the alter-
native o*f marrying a Naponunga maiden instead, and polygamy being
allowed, he may select a wife from each of the sections mentioned.
(2) Jour. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, vol. xxxii., p. 72.


A man cf the Joopalla section, whose proper wife is Naponunga, can
marry Numajille©—that is, Jungulla and Joopalla can exercise their
choice over the same two sections of women. Similar privileges are
accorded to the men of the other pairs of sections, who may reverse
their wives in the same way. Everything which has been said in
the explanation of Tables 1 and 2 applies to this table.
The Yorrawinga, Yoolanlanya, Yanindo, and some other tribes are
located on the Upper Georgina, Woodroffe, Field, Hay, and other
watercourses, and reach some distance within the Queensland frontier.
Among them there are only four divisions, instead of eight., with
rules of intermarriage and descent as indicated in the following
synopsis :
TABLE No. 6.
Phratry Husband Wife Offspring
A ( Deringara Koomara Belthara
I Gubilla Belthara Koomara
Belthara Koomara
T 3 | Koomara
Belthara
Deringarra
Gubilla
Gubilla
Deringara
To the South-west of the people represented in Table No. 6, and
on the South of the organisation described in Table* No. 4, the region
is occupied by the Arrinda, Andigarina, Loorudgie, and other tribes,
having the following intermarrying divisions :
TABLE No. 7.
Phvatry Husband
. ( Parulla
I Bultara
Offspring
Koomara
Panungka
Panungka
Koomara
( Panungka
I Koomara
Parulla
Bultara
Bultara
Parulla
Throughout the whole of the province of South Australia situated
to the southward of the tribes represented in Table No. 7, I have
described the social organisation of all the different communities
in a paper on the “ Divisions of the South Australian Aborigines,"
published in the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
{Philadelphia, U.S.A.), Vol. xxxix., pp. 78-93, with a map of South
Australia, showing the boundaries of every native community in the
province.
In a tract of country reaching inland easterly and southerly from
Port Darwin, marriages are arranged by the elders, who are* well
acquainted with the genealogy of the various families composing the
tribe. The daughters of certain women are betrothed to the sons of
certain other women, and on such children attaining puberty they
become man and wife. The relationship subsisting between these two


women is practically that of cousins, and their respective progeny are
second cousins. In determining the betrothals the old men are guided
by the totem of the parents of the children, in addition to their
pedigree. Although there are no sharply defined divisions, like those
enumerated in Table No. 1, yet upon closely investigating both systems
of marriage regulations, they are found substantially the same in
their fundamental principles.
The initiatory rites of circumcision and subincision to which the
youths are subjected, are practised over the whole of the Northern
Territory, with the exception of the region lying north-westerly of a line
drawn approximately from the mouth of the Victoria to the mouth of
the Goyder River. In a portion of this district, from the Daly River
round along the coast to the Liverpool River, circumcision only is in
vogue. Even when associated with subincision, circumcision is the
principal ceremony, and its celebration is attended with many for-
malities and repulsive practices, which are fully described by me
elsewhere. The age at which it is performed varies from six to
twelve years.
It may be explained that subincision consists of cutting open the
penile portion of the urethra from the meatus unirarius towards the
scrotum. The length of the incision varies in different localities, being
in some cases continued nearly to the scrotum, whilst in other places
it extends downwards about two inches. Again, there are regions
where the incision commences below the glans, say an inch from the
meatus, and extends towards the scrotum some two* or three inches.
In this form of mutilation the head of the organ is left intact, whilst
in that last described it is split open. The incision r ' f the urethral
canal, in whichever manner it is performed, does not prevent either
coition or procreation.
When the girls arrive at puberty the vaginal orifice is enlarged,
the process varying in different tracts of country. In some districts
it is accomplished by a man inserting his fingers 1 and using sufficient
force to stretch the parts. A smooth stick prepared for the purpose,
or a smooth stone of the requisite size and shape found in a water-
course, are also used for this operation. Over a very large geographical
area the enlargement is effected by lacerating, or cutting slightly
into, the perineum with a stone knife. The mutilation, whether by
forcible rupture or cutting, does not' affect the uterus or ovaries in any
way, and there is no apparent diminution of the woman's child-bearing
power. No woman is allowed to marry until this operation, in one
form or another, has taken place.
All over the Victoria River country, and reaching southerly to
Lake Amadeus, the natives have an ingenious way of trapping hawks,
which are very numerous and form an article of food. A blackfellow


and his family, or perhaps a few men who are friends, go out cn a
ridge where there are rocks with bunches of spinifex (Triodia pungens)
growing in the immediate vicinity. They set to work and gather a lot
of moderate sized pieces of stone, say from 20 to 50 pounds in weight
or more, and lay them in the form of a square or rectangle about
three or four feet each way. A wall is built up by laying tier upon
tier of stones-—merely balanced one on the other, without mortar—
to a height of about four feet, the height being less or more according
to the scarcity or otherwise of building material. The primitive
structure is roofed in by laying sticks horizontally from one wall to
the opposite one, and over these a. few green bushes are thrown,
for the two-fold purpose of affording a shade to the occupant, and
hiding him from view. A small hole is left in this airy roof about
a foot or eighteen inches in diameter, and there is also, an opening in
one of the walls large enough for a man to crawl through.
The hunter who is to do the trapping has provided himself with an
iguana, opossum, leg of a wallaby, or any suitable bait, which he
partially roasts to make it. all the more readily scented by the birds
of prey. He then goes into the trap and sits down, holding the
broiled iguana or other bait up through the opening in the roof.
His companions now set a light to two or three bushes of spinifex,
growing some on one side and some on the other of the trap, and
go away to their camps, or into another part of their hunting grounds.
The smoke from the burning spinifex, which ignites slowly, soon
attracts the hawks, which come flying to' the scene', because they are
accustomed to see and capture rats and other small game, running
before bush fires. Kangaree rats and bandicoots build their nests
at the bases of spinifex, which affords them a good cover. A hawk
will soar round and round close to the fires, and the man moves his
bait to attract attention. As soon as the hawk espies this, it
swoops down on the wing, and grasps the iguana in its talons. The
moment it does this, the man below instantly takes hold of the feet
of the bird in his right hand and pulls it down into the trap, whilst
with the left hand he catches the head, and bites deeply into the
animal's neck with his teeth, near where it joins the skull, causing
instant death. He then pushes the bait up again through the roof
and waits for another hawk, which is caught in the same way. This
is continued either as long as any birds are jn sight, or until the
hunter has caught sufficient for his present requirements.
To catch the larger game, such as kangaroos and emus, a hunter
will conceal himself behind a bush or screen of boughs which he has
prepared, near a track along which these animals are known to travel
to a watering-place. At other times a man will plant in a similar
way close to a rock-hole, and when the animal is drinking will knock


it over with a club or spear. Another way is for the hunter to
carry a bush sufficiently large to conceal his body, and walk slowly
and stealthily towards a number of emus, kangaroos, or other game,
until he gets near enough to l use his weapons.
To form a weir for catching fish, the natives of the Victoria and
Roper Rivers select a part of the river which runs over a flat, rocky
bar, and build a wall of loose stones from side to side, in .the form of
the letter V, but with an opening at the apex, which is down stream.
The water can percolate freely through any part of the wall, but fish
are carried by the current towards the opening. Men and women
stand in the stream and catch the fish in their hands, pitching them
out on the bank or into vessels. If a catfish is seen, one of the fisher-
men drives a spear into it and lands it in that way; it being dangerous
to catch these animals with the naked hand on account of the pro-
jections on the head.
Fish are sometimes caught by throwing small leafy branches of
bloodwood or gum trees into waterholes, and leaving them to soak.
Next day the water is discoloured and tastes strongly of the leaves,
causing the fish to come to the surface in a> stupefied state, where they
are caught by the natives, who are watching for them. In small
waterholes, whose depth is not greater than up to a man's chest, the
natives collect a quantity of spinifex, and fasten it together in a layer
across one end of the waterhole, reaching from the bottom upwards
close to the surface. A number of men then push this wall of spinifex
before them towards the other end of the hole, driving the fish in that
direction, where men and women are watching for them. Any of the
fish attempting to turn back over the top of the spinifex wall are
caught or speared by the men who are there.
The women carry yamsticks made of any very hard wood, between
four and Jive feet in length, one end of which has a chisel-shaped edge,
and the other a point—both these extremities being hardened in the
fire, and are kept sufficiently sharp by scraping from time to time
with a flake of hard stone. The weapon is used in searching for
edible roots, grubs, and other insects, and also for digging out iguanas,
rats of different kinds, porcupines, frogs, or any creature which bur-
rows in the ground. In digging for yams of different kinds' they do
not pull the plant completely out of the ground, as a white man does
a turnip, but loosen the surrounding soil sufficiently to enable them to
break off the bulb—the top being left in the ground to take root again
or run to seed.
A few different kinds of trees bear fruit, nuts, and edible berries.
Tbe Leichhardt pine and other trees produce a species of fig which
furnishes good eating when ripe. There are some native vegetables
called cucumbers, melons, and potatoes, which have some slight resem-


blance to the European products, and a small wild grape grows in the
jungles. Seeds of the eucalyptus and grass seeds are used as food.
The latter are ground on a flat stone by rubbing with a smaller one
held in the hand. Water is used in grinding most seeds, which are
usually very hard. The mee-uk'ka tree bears pods, each containing
a number of seeds, which are pounded and ground fine. The pul-
verized mass, in either case, is made into a cake and baked on the
coals.
The nut-wood tree grows on the downs, from ten to twenty feet
high, bearing fruit resembling a nut which is much sought after by
the natives, both for the fruit and the kernel.
When long periods of drought occur in any kind of country —and
during very wet seasons and excessive floods in low-lying lands—game
of all sorts, as well as fish, become so scarce that famines necessarily
follow, and many people die of starvation.
Along the valleys of most of the rivers and creeks there are plenty
of tea-trees growing, which have a soft outer bark which peels off
easily without injuring the bole. This bark is largely used by the
natives as a protection against the rain. In the desert country, where
there are no tea-trees, the people make a kind of rug or covering out
of long grass, which they cut off with stone knives near the ground, and
plait it into a close mat. A breakwind is made by bending over the
tops of the spinifex and laying a few bushes around the camp fire.
The natives then cover themselves from the rain with the grass rugs.
Water-bags are made from the skin of one of the legs of a large
kangaroo, or from the whole skin of a wallaby, or other small animal,
lor carrying water on hunting expeditions into waterless country.
Wooden vessels (referred to in the next paragraph), are commonly used
for bringing water into camp, and also for conveying it short stages —a
few handfuls of grass, or small twigs, broken from a. green shrub,
being placed on the surface to prevent its splashing out as the bearer
walks along.
Wooden vessels for holding water, honey, or in short, anything, are
made, in the following way, out of the branch or trunk of a tree which
has soft wood resembling the kurrajong, or cork-tree. A piece of
timber of the required size, varying in length from one foot up to three
or four, is cut off with a stone hatchet—a part of the branch which has
a bend in it being preferred. The operator then commences on the
concave side, and chips out as much wood as he can with his hatchet—
cutting the chips parallel to the grain of the wood, not- transversely.
For finishing the scooping out of the utensil he uses a double-ended
chisel. This tool is made of a slightly curved piece of very hard wood,
known as “ desert gum,” from fifteen to twenty inches long, on each
end of which is inserted a piece of hard stone, chipped or ground to a


cutting edge. The edges of the stones are at right angles to the plane
of the curvature of the wooden handle. One end of this tool is pro-
vided with a narrow edged stone, and the other with a wider, for use
in different portions of the vessel; and the bend in the handle enables
the workman to use the implement with facility on the curved surfaces
of the interior. The sharp stones are secured in the ends of the chisel
by means of gum, which is obtained in some places from the roots of
spinifex, in other parts from the beef-wood tree, and again in others
from the grass-tree. There is more gum on the side on which the
concavity of the handle occurs, to resist the greater pressure, or con-
cussion of the blow, on that side. . The gum, when first collected, is
broken fine by pounding it either with a stone or ai piece of hard
wood, and is then held close to the fire, causing it to run together into
a lump, which is carried about until required. When they want to
use some of it they soften it before the fire. In many tribes a chipped
or ground stone is fastened in the end of the throwing stick, and used
as a chisel.
To protect their feet from the sharp stones in rugged country, or
from the hot sand of the desert, the natives sometimes make' shoes, or
sandals, from the bark of the tea-tree, with a string tied over the foot
to keep it on. This string is made from thedbark of a shrub with a
yellow flower which grows on the sand hills. In some districts the shoe
itself is made with strands of the bark of the same tree, worked in the
manner of netting, and is fastened on the foot as just stated. In other
parts these shoes are made of animal fur, woven into a net with very
small meshes. 1
Shoes are also sometimes made of emu feathers matted together to
form the soles, which are fastened on the foot with string in the usual
way. It has been, erroneously said that such shoes, which are worn
only by old conjurors, do not leave any tracks on the ground which
could be detected by others, but the real explanation of their im-
munity from pursuit is because no man would attempt to follow the
tracks of an individual using shoes of this character, from a super-
stitious dread of the magical powers of the wearer.
Tufts of feathers of the common brown hawk, emu, or plain turkey
are sometimes worn by the men under their belts', as a charm against
their enemies, or for the purpose of adding valour to the wearer. Some
men possess waistbelts made from the hair of a deceased warrior, which
are supposed to preserve those who use them from their enemies or
evil spirits. The fat of such a warrior is often mixed with coloured
clays, and rubbed over the bodies of the young men. Belts are also
(1) Captain Cook states that he saw natives in Tasmania who had their feet
protected from the rough stones by means of pieces of animal skin.


made partly or wholly from the hair of a man’s mother-in-law, sup-
plied by her to his wife at various times. Remnants of food are des-
troyed or buried in the sand to prevent their falling into the hands of
mystic creatures, or enemies from another camp. If a man fear that
his wife, or one of his wives if he have several, wishes to get rid of
him, he never lets her see where he defecates, because she might take
some of his excreta and give it to an old sorcerer, and get him to
“ point a bone,” or work some other magic for the purpose of destroy-
ing her husband. In some tribes it is a universal rule that the women
never see where the men evacuate; if within view, the women must
turn their faces in the opposite direction while a man is so engaged.
If they see a whirlwind passing along, catching up leaves, small
twigs and dust, or if a violent thunderstorm is imminent, an old man
will collect a handful of long grass and micurate upon it—or perhaps
several men may join in the latter act—after which he sways the grass
to and fi*o in his hand in the direction of the approaching danger,
muttering some incantation the while, by which means he thinks the
storm or whirlwind will be stopped, or at any rate be bereft of its
kaleful influences. If the whirlwind turns off in another direction, or
the storm clouds disperse, both of which are very probable con-
tingencies in that arid country, he believes that his efforts have been
successful. If, however, this expedient is ineffectual, then he considers
that the evil spirit is more powerful than himself.
Some of the old men, the Shamans of the tribe, profess to have the
power of causing the supply of animals, fruits, vegetable roots, and
'other sources of food to increase. If an abundance of wild ducks is
desired, a man of the wild duck totem officiates as the Shaman; if
iguanas, an iguana man is supposed to take charge of the enchant-
ment, and so on.
On the upper Georgina and Field Rivers, the Yorrawinga natives
have a tradition that there was once an enormous snake-like creature,
called Wakana, endowed with supernatural powers, whose trail marked
out rivers and watercourses wherever it went. At every place where
there is a big waterhole at the presnt day, they aver that Wakana
camped at that spot after having done a hard day’s work. They like-
wise believe in an evil-disposed being in human shape, called Arenga,
who prowls about the camp at night; he is covered with feathers, and
has claws like the eaglehawk, and can fly like that bird. These natives
have names for the four quarters of the compass; the south is v'ilga,
the north aralinga, the west atugrabinga, and the east erawina. The
moon is algunda, and when a new moon appears they sing a peculiar
chant for the occasion. The Southern Cross they call waubara, the sun
•awigela, the planet Venus warjera.
Rock paintings are fairly numerous in the Victoria River basin,
especially on Gordon and Jasper Creeks, the Wickham and elsewhere


The watercourse® are bounded by rocky escarpments, the bases of
which are hollowed out in places by the action of the weather and
other causes. In these depressions, which are more or less sheltered
from the rain, the natives draw pictures of alligators, fish, human
beings, flying foxes, kangaroos and other things, in pipe-clay, red ochre
and charcoal. In some places where there is a sufficient rock surface
the natives delineate an immense snake-like monster, twenty or thirty
feet in length, which is said to have dug out waterholes and formed
rivers in olden times.
Mr. Michael Costello gave me the following account of some rock
paintings on the Valley of Springs Station, on the Limmen River.
There are four remarkable flat-topped sandstone hills, called “ The
Archers,” all about the same height and shape, looking like ancient
castles. They consist of immense blocks of Desert Sandstone, and are-
shown on the Government maps of the Northern Territory as Mount
Thomas, Mount John, Mount Charles, and Mount David. Nine
miles up a valley, and at a part of it where there is a. narrow gorge,
there are some native paintings. The gorge is about a mile and a half
south of the Limmen River, and a stream of fresh water runs through
it all the year round. On both sides of this gorge there are some in-
teresting paintings on the bare rocky walls, many of them being done
fairly well for the natives. There are pictures of alligators, snakes,,
fish, blackfellows in fighting attitudes, and some painted hands. Their
favourite drawing was tne snake, 1 some of the representations being of
fabulous forms and sizes. In riding through the bush on the Limmen
River, Mr. Costello informs me he has frequently noticed rough out-
lines of large snakes cut into the white bark of gum trees. The natives-
also sketch boomerangs and shields on the bark of trees, and paint
them on rocks.
If there is a man, in the general encampment who has two or more
wives, and an unmarried fellow takes a fancy to one of them, or cornea
to the conclusion that he will annex her, he watches tjll some night
that she is sitting at her camp fire, her husband being absent in some
other part of the camp, when he suddenly seizes her and carries her
off to his own fire. As soon as the husband learns what has occurred
there is a row, consisting of much angry recrimination between the
two men, but none of the other people interfere. If the husband
thinks the usurper is stronger than himself he lets him retain the
woman, otherwise there is a fight, after which the victor takes final
possession of her. This method of securing a wife is called jarrada,
but the women thus appropriated must belong to the section from
which the man can lawfully select a spouse.
1. Serpent worship —or the fear of serpents—has been observed in almost every land,
of which we have any knowledge


When a man dies, a platform is made by placing sticks horizontally
across the spreading branches of a low tree, and on this the corpse is.
laid, covered with bushes, paper-bark or grass, and is left there till
the flesh decomposes and the bones fall to the ground. The relatives-
of the deceased now visit the spot, breaking the bones of the arms and
legs in some cases, and. eating the marrow. They have a superstitious
belief that eating marrow confers strength and superiority upon them.
The bones are carried away and placed in caves or clefts in rocky
places, or interred. In many districts the bodies of deceased persons
are buried in the ground, in others they are burnt. In rocky country,,
instead of laying the dead body on an arborial platform, it is placed
on a projecting shelf of rock on the faoe of a cliff. In all cases the
weapons of the deceased are placed with his remains, and if, as some-
times happens, the body is not disposed of in any way, his weapons
and effects are left at his camp, and are never touched or used by any
one. Like other Australian natives, when a man dies his death is
attributed to some designing person in another tribe, and the injury
must be avenged. This retaliation is called warring-arree.
The rainy season commences about December every year, and the
hierarchy have observed that certain conspicuous stars are in par-
ticular parts of the eastern sky on the evenings of that period. The
old head men, therefore, avail themselves of this knowledge, and
muster their tribe on the approach of such times, for the purpose of
going through certain ceremonies for producing rain. The old
Shamans also know from tradition and experience that the rainy
season comes to an end when the same remarkable stars are in the
western sky early m the tvening, which is generally about the begin-
ning of March, and consequently if there is too much rain in any given
year, these men work somewhat similar enchantments to bring fine
weather. The gatherings for the production, as well as for the cessa-
tion of rain, may continue for some time with intervals between them.
I have observed that the men of certain sections of a phratry or
moiety will have charge of bringing the wet at one oorroboree, and the
men of a different set of sections of another phratry will be the prime
operators at the succeeding ceremony.
Periodic journeys are made into the territories of adjoining and
distant tribes for the purpose of exchanging manufactured or natural
products. The routes along which the people travel on these occasions
seem to have been fixed and acknowledged from time out of mind.
The period of the year is usually the autumn, because then the rock-
holes, springs and watercourses have been replenished by the annual
rains. For example, the natives of the Upper Victoria travel east-
ward to Newcastle Waters; thence northerly to Daly Waters, Birdum
Creek and Katherine River, returning by way of Delamere and:


Gregory Creek. Residents of the Wickham River go westward to the
Negri and Ord Rivers, which they run down a long way, coming back
by Auvergne on the Baines, and thence up the Victoria River home.
There are several of these bartering or trade routes in different dis-
tricts, and the journeys, which occupy a long time, are marked by good
feeling and festive corroborees throughout.
The principal weapons in use are the barbed spear, fish spear,
womera, tomahawk, bomerang, a two-handed waddy, stone knife,
double-ended chisel, and yamstick. The natives are very dexterous in
making stone spear-heads. They get the jaw of the crocodile, either
upper or lower, and break it into flakes by means of a heavy stone
held in the hand. The bones of these animals are very hard and do
not break easily; with them the workman chips suitable stones into
the requisite shape for spear heads. When, after much patient labour,
the necessary form is attained, the serrations are made by pressing a
small sharp piece of crocodile bene against the edges, chipping out
small gaps at regular intervals all the way along. The war'reedilla,
a hunting boomerang, a little over two feet long, is made on Sturt
Creek, with a hook projecting from one extremity, on the convex
edge, or back, of the weapon. The hook, which is about five or six
inches in length, extends backwards, forming an angle of thirty cr
•forty degrees at the point of juncture. This implement is in use
mong all the tribes from the Western Australian boundary right
across the Northern Territory into Queensland, where it was met with,
under substantially the same name, by Dr. Roth. 1 It is mentioned by
Mr. D. W. Carnegie, 2 who saw it among the natives in Western Aus-
tralia.
Flat sticks, or boards, called mirral'loo, varying from five feet to
nearly twice that length, from three to six inches in width, and thin,
are used by the natives of Sturt Creek and elsewhere in different im-
portant ceremonies. Bullroarers and message-sticks are also employed.
All these instruments and their uses, which are of a secret character,
form the subject of another article.
Marks are formed on the bodies of men and women by means of
cuts with stone knives. Soft sandstone, ground fine, or charcoal
powder, in either case mixed with grease, are rubbed into the cuts t>o
raise scars. Ashes mixed with soft animal fur or the down of birds,
are also applied to the incisions to keep them open. Long horizontal
scars are made across the chest and stomach; short vertical lines,
either straight or slightly curved, being cut on the shoulders, back and
limbs.
(1)“ Ethnological Studies, etc., Queensland Aborigines,” p. 145, Fig 353
'(-2) “ Spinifex and Sand,” p. 343.


Cannibalism is practised over the whole of the territory treated of
in this paper. A man's body is cooked in a hole dug in the ground in
the same manner as a kangaroo, emu, or other large game. It is a
common belief among these natives that infants reside in rocky hills,
and in the dense foliage of forest trees, before they enter the bodies
of the women who give them birth.
The inhabitants of all the islands in the Gulf of Carpentaria are
virtually the same people,
in language and customs, as those on the
adjacent mainland.
In the
Led list of fourteen members of the Chinga-
case given the section and totem of the
following tabulated
lee tribe, I have in each
individual, the totem of 1
his or her father, the totem of his or her
the offspring:
mother, and the totem of
Individual (man or woman),
Totem of
Individual’s
Father.
Totem of
Individual’s
Mother.
Totem of
Individual’s
Offspring.
Name.
Section.
Totem.
1 Charlie
Chuna
Blk. striped
snake
Blk. striped
snake
) Blk. striped
j" snake
Lucy (wife) Nala
Native bee
Streculia
Native bee
Harry Chuna
Nora Nala
Earth-worm
Iguana
Nut-grass
Blk. striped
snake
Earth-worm
Iguana
J- Iguana
Palmer
His wife
Chula
Nana
Honey
Kangaroo
Honey
Large water-
snake
Nut-grass
Kangaroo
j- Honey
Rowley
His wife
Chula
Nana
Kangaroo
Honey
Kangaroo
Streculia
Bandicoot
Honey
[- Kangaroo
Tunkaree
Watersnake
Iguana
Ground
honey
Honey
[Water-
j snake
5a Belle
Nemara
Honey and
Kangaroo
Iguana
Streculia and
Bandicoot
6 Jack
6a Mary
Chula
Streculia
Wallaby
Iguana
Streculia
j- Streculia
Nungalee
Wallaby
W atersnake
7 Jumbuck
Tunkaree
Iguana
Iguana
Watersnake
8 Brumbie
Tunkaree
Plain-grass
Iguana
Not certain
Plain-grass
It will be observed that No.
“ alternative ” section, that is, Nei
has taken a spouse from the ‘ rare
Nungallee, instead of a Nana or N«
No. 7, are both of the same totem.
According to this table,
Nemara instead
5 is married
to a woman
of the
of Nabajina.
No. 6
Nameeinja. The
’’ section, his
present wife
being a
parents of
Jumbuck,
the children of Nos. 1,3, 4,5, 7, and 8,
take the totem of the father; but
the totem of the mother. The wi
totems. Examination of the tote
the offspring of Nos. 2 and 6 have
wives of Nos. 5 and 6 have each two
totems in the fourth, fifth, and sixth
columns shows that some of them follow the father and some the


mother, whilst others inherit the totem of neither parent. In other
instances, not included in this table, I have found that among the
offspring of the same parents there is considerable irregularity—some
of the children having one totem and some another. lam inclined to
think, however, that if one had time to prepare tables of genealogies
for two or three generations, taking into account the “ alternative ”
and “rare” as well as the “ direct ” rules of intermarriage, the totemic
laws of descent might be found to be more fixed than at present
appears. This and other matters connected with the totems will be
further dealt with when certain investigations on which I am now
•engaged shall have been, completed.
In many of the tribes dealt with in this article the section to
which the offspring belong is determined through the mother. If
Chuna. marry Nala, his children will be Tunkaree and Nungaree; if
he take an “alternative” wife, they will be Taralee and Naralee; and
if he choose a partner from the Nameeinja or “rare” section, they
will be Tampaehina and Nabajina.
Again, in some tribes although a man may marry into three
different sections, he cannot do so concurrently. For example, Chuna
can marry Nala, or, polygamy being in vogue, he may take two or
more Nalas, but until they die, or are “ divorced,” or run away, he
cannot many a woman belonging to either of the other two sections
over which he has marital rights. In like manner, while he possesses
a ‘'rare” or an “alternative” wife, the same law will apply to' him.
It is, perhaps, unnecessary to add that, moreover, marriages within
the prescribed sections are more or less regulated by betrothals in all
aboriginal tribes.
VOCABULARY.
This vocabulary contains a first instalment of about 210 words in
the language of the Chingalee tribe, whose boundaries I have already
stated. Substantially the same tongue is spoken along that portion of
the overland telegraph line from Adelaide to Port Darwin, comprised
between the Katherine River and Tennant’s Creek. On the west of
the telegraph line, including the Victoria River, Camfield Creek, Sturt
Creek, the Negri and Ord Rivers, and extending onwards far into
Western Australia, the structure of the language is the same as the
Chingalee. This will also apply to the dialects in all the country
between the part of the overland telegraph line referred to and the
■Gulf of Carpentaria, comprising Playford Creek, Cresswell Creek, and
the rivers Calvert, McArthur, Limmen, Roper, Hodgson, and Strang-
Ways.
Throughout this enormous region, with very few exceptions, the
grammar of the language is substantially the same, although a large
number of words may differ more or less widely, or although the


’vocabulary is almost quite divergent. The following is a synopsis of
the grammatical elements of the dialects analyzed from a mass of
information on this subject collected by me within the geographic
limits indicated.
Nouns have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, and the usual
•cases; they are declined for number and case by means of postfixes.
Adjectives are declined similarly to the nouns they qualify. Pro-
nouns have the same numbers as the nouns, and are declined for pre-
sent, past, and future time. The verbs have three numbers, with the
usual persons and tenses ; and three moods—the indicative, impera-
tive, and subjunctive. A verb and the suitable pronoun are merged
into one word, which can then be indexed by suffixes for all the tenses,
as well as for number and person. Adverbs and prepositions have
their places in the language, but there are few conjunctions and inter-
jections. There is no article corresponding to aor the.
As the equivalent of English words will be most frequently' re-
quired, I have put them first throughout the vocabulary. The spelling
is as nearly as possible the same as in English. Words of the same
character are placed together under separate headings, thus: —Family
terms. —Parts of the body. —Natural objects. —Animals.—Weapons.—
Adjectives. —Verbs. —Miscellaneous.
Family Terms, Etc.
Man, Pia Husband, Unbeah
Old man, Mullaga
Woman, Nay-annee
'Old woman, Immakinnee
Boy, Ahwah
•Girl, Weewinnee
Baby, Korragulla
Father, Keeta
Mother, Bellannu
Wife, Kabinnee
Elder brother, Bapa
Younger brother, Burdatdah
Elder sister, Beebinnee
Younger sister, Burdatannee
Children, Wawalla
Copulation, Yanganu
Masturbation, Jeepanu
Parts of the Body.
Head, Tummungeh
Hair, Tatagura or Melabana
Eye, Ahbanjuh
Face, Ejeeju
Ear, Lungah
Nose, Kullamee
Smell, Bijwanggetju
Mouth, Ajarahgoolu
Teeth, Ahbinju
Uheek, Kukunda
Forehead, Wuddaru
Beard, Jinteemee
Tongue, Talana
Stomach, Tunardgu
Breasts (female) Ahbulluh
Arm, Peeannee
Hand, Munda-munda
Finger-nail, Meelinjee
Thigh, Tarramullu
Calf of leg, Illikbee
Foot and foot-mark, Yunku
Toe, Übanna
Skin, Kurranu
Blood, Borajah
Bowels, Billa-billa
Excrement, Oomee
Urine, Myaggu


Sun, Olajennee
Moon, Badungarra
Bn
Mi
Stars, Kommaranjee or Chinkachee
Clouds, Medeye •
Sky, Kullamarra
Ra ; n, Eepilkinnee
Rainbow, Kingmee
Light, Ellabarungoo
Dark, Kommaru
Sir
Th
Li^
Gr
Stc
Hii
Crt
Morning, Warrarunga
Day, Adajudaju
Night, Warraru
Heat, Adalagu
Cold, Korramunmulla
Fire, Pooba
Water, Eepilka or Kalarunga
Milk, Choomoolka or Ahpulluh
Food, Ivundurru
Demon, Warrajee
Shadow, Eeleechinku
Wind (strong), Myamba
Gri
Nu
Pla
Str
Tr(
Ba
Wc
Cai
Ho
Pat
Ho
Gr<
Animals.
Porcupine, Kallamijee
Fish, Kagwag
Pel
Lai
Native dog, Wolloggu
Bees, Burrungali
Tail of animal, Bundamee
Kangaroo, Kunclialowree
Wallaby Kallamali
Opossum, Chukalajee
Bandicoot, Patkoclah
Emu, Kinnee-injinnee
Iguana, Wollanja
Eaglehawk, Dundaninguh
Crow, Onkalay
Wild turkey, Kunnainju or Korka
badee
Weapons.
Wood-spear, Kunnarinju
Shield, Tarramee
Tomahawk, Warra-warra
Natural Objects.—Nouns.
Breeze (light), Looarkoo
Mist, Illeebanku
Smoke, Ookalu
Thunder, Dundunbeeaju
Lightning, Dojamee
Ground, Korrallu
Stone, Ketcheelulu
Hill, Kuncharu
Creek, Cliurkulu
Grass, Peekarra
Nut-grass, Appajimmee
Plain-grass, Urpajinghee
Streculia, Maekemmee
Trees, Toranku
Bark, Koranu
Wood, Pooba (same as fire)
Camp, Maruh
Hole, Kwawah
Path, Karratbee
Honey, Wungoorah
Ground honey, Onkaroonee
Mosquito, Konamaru
Earth-worm, Eepurooh
binee
Galah. Kila-kiladee
Stoneknife, Taperree
Boomerang, Kurrabadu
Club, Kudru
Pelican, Looinnee or Belladee
Laughing-jackass, Karkanah
Native companions, Dallywa
Black cockatoo, Larikpinnee
Butcher-bird, Kudparenkee
Fly, Ivonninga
Black striped snake, Wahlacha
Water-snake, Eddengaddah
Large water-snake, Kawalajah
Kite-liawk, Dedinguna


Alive, Wunga
Dead, Bellenneegunna
Big, Mullaga (also Head-man )
Small, Kullagulla
Long, Breeja
Short, Mummaringee
Good, Badwarrah
Bad, Akkeeabudah
Hungry, Tunnnundurra
Th i rsty, W unj ungan u
Black, Kubbreekubbra
Full, Bada-bada
Empty, Dayloonga
Quick, Kala
Slow, Wahdruku
Eat, Tarrangiju
Drink, Eepilka tarrangiju
Sleep, Munundigu
Sit, Ajjoo
Go, Wirree
Come, Unkoo
Speak, Ambanaju
Walk, Adu
Run, Tarkandammee
Bring, Abawah
Take, Espeere
Lift, Eepandammee
Carry, Tallada
Make, Unkalammee
Yes, Yoo-yoo
Alright, Wallee-wallee
No, Kabee
Exclamation, Ahwoo !
I, Iyah
Eh ? Nah ?
Mine, Arrana
To-day, Talangu
Yesterday, Eetaju
To-morrow, Wetanagah
That one, Eeninneekee
Adjectives.
Blind, Kummumurra
Deaf, Longajitcliah
Strong, Tatahla
Weak, Munmunbeeaku
Wild, Eeminjee
Light, Tumundara
Afraid, Elleewala
Sweet, Wungurra
Right, Walanbala
Wrong, Areenama
Straight, Wajankaka
Crooked, Kitteelagu
Tired, Whyabbee
Verbs.
Break, Larkamijee
Strike, Myammee
Fall, Udkanna
See, Ahtanganu
Hear, Unkanaju
Know, Lunkunanu
Give (request), Mawa
Give, Winnanagme
Like, Ahkitbee
Sing, Annainkaja
Weep, Uhkanaju
Miscellaneous.
I don’t know, Ayununku
Where? Wahjanay
Why ? Ahdanana
One, Tuukabennee
Two, Ukadilla
Three, Morkunbilla
Four, Tatawallah
Five, Dardu
Lamentation, Keening
Frightened, Illawollennee
Heavy, Bundundara
Fight, Myamunkummmee
Kill, Myanwarrajinnee
Cutting the private parts
woman, Beebajana


APPENDIX.
ABORIGINAL ROCR-CARVINGS.
In 1894 I contributed an article to this Journal on the “Aboriginal
Rock Pictures of Australia,in which I suggested that search sE'ould
be made for carved rocks in the valleys of Queensland river's and on
the coast. Since then I have learnt of some interesting aboriginal
carvings on the Burnett River, parish of South Rolan, county of
Cook, in Queensland. These drawings are cut on some flat rocks
situated in the wide channel of the river mentioned, at the junction of
Pine Creek, and about four miles south-easterly from the township of
South Rolan.
The rocks containing the carvings are a kind of hard sandstone,
which are quite dry during the greater part of the year; but in time
of floods are totally submerged. Owing to the latter circumstance,
and long exposure to the weather, many of the drawings are now
scarcely distinguishable. Most of the figures are small, varying from
a few inches in length to upwards of two feet, representing native
weapons, animals, human footmarks, and nondescript devices. The
outline of each figure is marked out by a groove cut into the hard
surface of the rook to a depth ranging from onet-cighth to one-quarter
of an inch, the width of the groove varying from less than half-an-
inch in the smallest, to about an inch and a-quarter in the largest
specimens.
The mode of execution was to make a row of indentations or punc-
tures along the outline of the drawing, by repeated blows with sharp-
pointed pieces of hard stone. The distance between the indentations
varies from about a third of an inch to half-an-inch or more, being
farther apart in the larger objects. After the punctures were com-
pleted, the spaces between them were also chippd out, thus making a
complete groove around the exterior of the drawing. The positions of
these punctures are still easily discernible, being somewhat deeper and
wider than the other portions of the outline, thus remaining as a
witness of the method adopted in carrying out the work.
Old residents of the district have known of the existence of these
rock carvings for twenty-five or thirty years, but very little attention
has been given to them, and so far as I know, no definite description of
them has hitherto been published. By the kindness of a friend 1
succeeded in getting a portion of the rock chiselled out, on which is
carved the representation of a human foot. The block of stone is now
in my possession, and will be exhibited to any one desirous of ex-
amining it.
(1) Proc. Roy. Geog. Soe., Aust., Queensland, vol. x., pp., 46-70,


OUTRIDCE PRINTING CO., QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.






