

ABORIGINES
and
THE FRANCHISE
FACTS and SUGGESTIONS
By
PROFESSOR A. P. ELKIN
Author of CITIZENSHIP FOR THE ABORIGINES
President, The Association for the Protection of Native Races.
August 6, 1946
PRICE: 3d.


Published by
The Association for the Protection of
Native Races
Hon. Secretary, Miss Ruth Swann,
Alice Street, Granville.
The Association also publishes
THE PROTECTOR, which contains article on
Aboriginal Conditions and Needs.
PRICE 3d.


Aborigines and The Franchise
PROFESSOR A. P. ELKIN
In view of the present discussion concerning Aborigines and
the Franchise, the following facts should be borne in mind.
(1) The South-Eastern States.
There is no mention of Aborigines or half-castes in the elec-
toral Acts of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia.
Therefore as British subjects born in those States, they can be
enrolled and can vote at the State elections. Some do so. Hither-
to no pressure has been brought on them to enrol, but some "half-
castes” now realize that they can be fined for omitting to perform
this duty. The absence of compulsion has been understandable,
especially in South Australia, where there are still numbers of
bush full-bloods, for it was assumed that the Aborigines, with few
exceptions, would not be capable of voting intelligently.
Granted these State voting-rights, it follows from Section 41
of the Commonwealth Constitution that those Aborigines of New
South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, who avail themselves
of their privilege to enrol and vote in the State elections can also
vote in all elections for the Commonwealth Parliament. It is
true that Section 39, sub-section 5, of the Commonwealth Electoral
Act (1901-35), definitely precludes (amongst others) any
Aboriginal native of Australia from having "his name placed or
retained on any roll or to vote at any Senate election or House
of Representatives election”, but the same sub-section provides
certain exceptions, the first of which is, "unless (a) he (e.g. an
Aboriginal native of Australia) is so entitled under Section 41 of
the Constitution”. The meaning of the latter is clear. "No adult
person who has or acquires a right to vote at elections for the more
numerous House of the Parliament of a State shall, while the
right continues, be prevented by any law of the Commonwealth
from voting at elections for either House of the Parliament of
the Commonwealth”. The sequence is clear: a person who has
or acquires the right to vote in State elections shall not be pre-
vented from voting in the Commonwealth elections.
An opinion, however, has been recently received from Can-
berra that the Electoral Administration always has assumed that


a right under Section 41 of the Constitution must have been
acquired prior to the passing of the Commonwealth Francnise
Act 1901. This is hard to understand, and is contrary to the
opinion of a former Solicitor-General. Section 41 of the Consti-
tution says not only "has a right to vote”, but also "acquires” such
a right. Surely "acquires” refers to rights obtained in the States
after the date of the Act, not previous to it. The interpretation
therefore, seems valid that Aborigines of the three States referred
to, who have reached 21 years of age since 1901 and have been
enrolled for the States, can vote at Commonwealth elections.
The only question is whether they should be compelled to
enrol and vote in both and Commonwealth elections. To
do so in New South Wales, Victoria and eastern South Australia
would help the Aborigines, almost all of whom are mixed bloods,
to realize their responsibilities as citizens. They are receiving
benefits. The present latitude should continue in most of the
western half of South Australia.
(2) Western Australia and Queensland.
The position is different in Queensland and Western Aus-
tralia. In neither can an Aboriginal native of Australia be en-
rolled or vote at the State elections; therefore he can be pre-
vented from voting at Commonwealth elections, and as a matter
of fact, has not enrolled.
Western Australia specifically precludes persons of "half-
blood” from voting. (The Statutes of Western Australia, 19th
George V., 1928. Part 111, Section 18(d) ). This term "half-
blood” is not necessarily as precise as it appears, because in the
Aboriginal Acts of that State, a half-caste included the child of
a person who was a true half-caste, irrespective of whether the
other parent was half-caste, full-blood or white; the present Native
Administration Act (1905-36) defines as Aboriginal not only full
bloods, but also all mixed bloods, except octaroons, those quad-
roons who have not been declared by a magistrate to be "natives”,
and also natives exempted from the provisions of this Act. It
may be inferred that the only persons, with any Aboriginal
admixture, who can vote at the elections of this State are octa-
roons, "free” quadroons and exempted natives. On the other
hand, if in the administration of Electoral Act, no notice is taken
of the Native Administration Act (1936), and if "half-blood’
means "half” and not "mixed-blood” in general, then all persons
having a preponderance of non-Aboriginal ancestry, are entitled to
enrol for the State, and, therefore, also to vote at Commonwealth
elections.
The Queensland Elections Act (1915-30, Section 11a, defin-
itely disqualifies a "person who is a half-caste as defined in the
Aboriginal Protection and Restriction of Sale of Opium Acts,
1897-1907, and which half-caste is subject to the control and gen-
eral supervision” of the Director of Native Affairs. In the


Queensland "Aboriginals Preservation and Protection Act of
1939”, a half-blood is a person with more than 25%, but not
a preponderance, of Aboriginal blood. Half-bloods living in the
general community, and not declared to be in need of the pro-
tection of this Act, are outside its provisions. These persons
should be granted the franchise in their State, and therefore in
the Commonwealth.
In the Northern Territory no Aboriginal native can vote, but
half-castes and persons of lesser caste living independently in the
general community are not defined as Aboriginals, and presumably
can be enrolled and vote. Aborigines are excluded from the
law-making powers of the Commonwealth (Constitution, Section
51 (XXVI) ), and in the Territory are only dealt with under
Ordinance, coming "within the plenary powers of legislation for
the Territory but not within any specific item of Federal legisla-
tive power.”
(3) Points for Decision and Revision.
The first need is for Queensland and Western Australia to
bring their definitions of half-blood into line with the adminis-
trative principle of the Commonwealth, (e.g. as in the Social
Services Department) by excluding persons of 50% or less
Aboriginal ancestry from the definition Aboriginal, so that such
persons may be entitled to the franchise from the Commonwealth
point of view. Only for specific exceptional reasons should half-
and lighter castes be disqualified for State franchise. Moreover,
tke Constitution does not say that only persons who possess the
right to vote at State elections, may vote at Commonwealth elec-
tions, but simply that such persons shall not be prevented from
doing so. There seems to be no reason, therefore why the Com-
monwealth should not give all persons who are 50% or less
Aboriginal in descent, the franchise. If so, it would be anomalous
for a State to debar them.
The next question to decide is whether Aborigines or "half-
castes” living on Government or Mission Settlements should be
denied the franchise. In the south-eastern States such persons
are not disqualified. In Western Australia, however, many
Aborigines and half-bloods could be included under that State’s
Electoral Act (1928), Part 111, Section 18 (b), which disqualifies
any person "wholly dependent on relief from the State or any
charitable institution subsidised by the State”. The Queensland
Electoral Act (1915-30), Section 11 A, is more specific. It dis-
qualifies a half-caste who is "subject to the control and general
supervision of the Protector of Aboriginals, whether by being an
inmate of any institution for Aboriginals or an inmate
of any Mission Station or like institution, and whether
hired out for employment with any employer, and who, notwith-
standing such hiring-out, is still under the control and general
supervision of the Protector of Aboriginals.” In other words, in


these two States, mixed bloods living on Government Settlements
and Missions, (in Queensland even though they may be hired out
to an employer), are regarded as wards or rather as minors. The
Western Australian Act only excludes persons if they are wholly
dependent on relief from the State or an institution subsidized by
the State. Whether this section of the Act is applied to half-
bloods or not, and that depends to some extent on the Native
Administration Act and the manner of its implementation,—it
points, at least, to a temporary solution. Mixed-bloods, and I
would add full-bloods also, wholly dependent on a Government
or Mission Institution throughout a certain period, e.g. the twelve
months immediately preceding an election, might not be con-
sidered eligible for the franchise, provided however, that if they
have been enrolled previously, they will not be disfranchised,
except under the same conditions which operate in the particulai
State for the disfranchising of other citizens.
This would exclude persons of all degrees of Aboriginal
ancestry, who, because they have not yet adjusted themselves to
our economic conditions, are living on Government or Mission
stations and reserves. But it would not exclude those who go out
to work from time to time in the general community, whether
or not under agreements arranged by a Government Department.
It would also not exclude those who earn part or all of their
keep, by working for wages or for rations and clothes on such
Government or Mission stations, provided they are twenty one
years of age. The term "part” would need definition; it might
refer to work for three days a week or for six months a year.
Administrative difficulties would have to be surmounted. In any
case, if native education and training be seriously undertaken, this
need be only a short transition phase, at the conclusion of which
the term "part” could be eliminated. Moreover, if men are
eligible, for the franchise, their wives should not be debarred
from it.
(4) Qualifications.
Certain qualifications for the right to enrol and vote have
been implied in the preceding. In considering this aspect of the
matter, it should be remembered that in Australia the franchise
is not a reward to be earned by good conduct or by proficiency in
literacy or in anything else; it is a right to which British subjects
born in Australia are entitled, and which can only be taken from
them when they are excluded for some good reason from the
general community. Aborigines are British subjects of the Aus-
tralian variety by virtue of their birth; they have, moreover,
shown this through what many of them, both full-blood and
mixed-blood, did for Australia in and during the war —including
their service in coast-patrols and in labour units in North Aus-
tralia.
It should also be emphasized that the exercise of the fran-
chise is not an accomplishment, but an experiment in citizenship


It is itself training in thinking, in making decisions, and in respon-
sibility, for those who view it seriously. This is as true in the
case of Aborigines as ourselves, and the opportunity should not
be denied the former. To say that very many, or most
of them will not exercise the franchise as dispassionately or as
intelligently as our best citizens, is not to say that they would
exercise it less intelligently than hosts of non-Aboriginal voters.
Apart from the matter of total dependence on an Institution,
it is doubtful whether any qualifications should be required in
addition to adulthood (21 years of age) and the ability to speak
and understand English, including the significance of the order
denoted by the numbers one to twenty. Understanding of num-
bers may be necessary for filling in, or of instructing a presiding
officer to fill in, a ballot paper. The standard of English should
not be defined, and should not be high, for it it were high, many
of the present white voters should in fairness be disfranchised.
The ability to write and even read, while a laudable ideal, is not
a requirement in the case of the latter; arrangements are made for
illiterates to vote. Authorities should therefore hesitate to re
quire this from Aborigines or mixed-bloods, especially, too, since
ability to read and write is not definitely prescribed as a qualifi-
cation on the part of a non-British immigrant seeking naturaliza-
tion. He has to furnish "satisfactory evidence that he has an
adequate knowledge of the English language.” No mention if
made of teSts of "adequacy,” whether in reading, writing, or con-
versation. The procedure is apparently of an arbitrary nature.
"The Governor-General in Council may, in his absolute discretion,
grant or withhold a certificate of naturalization as he thinks most
conducive to the public good.” Good character (particularly-
meaning no tendency to subversive activities) seems to be more
important than literacy and rightly so, in the case of such persons.
(Commonwealth Year Book, 1929, p. 934; 1941, p. 305).
(5) Ex-Service Men.
Finally, section 6 of the Commonwealth Electoral Act was
repealed in 1943 and a new section 6 inserted to the effect, that
subject to subsection 4 of section 39 of the Electoral Act, 1918-40
(which disqualifies persons of unsound mind, persons attainted of
treason, or persons imprisoned for a year or more) a qualified
member of the Forces shall, during the war and for a period of
six months thereafter, be entitled to vote at any election as an
elector of the Division in which, immediately prior to his appoint-
ment or enlistment as a member of the Forces, he was ordinarily
resident. A qualified member of the Forces for the purpose of
this subsection, is one who is not under 21 years of age, or if he
is, is serving or has served outside Australia, or, if discharged, is
not under 21, or if he is, has served outside Australia.
As this new Section is not subject to subsection 5 of Section
39, which disqualifies Aboriginal natives of Australia, presume dy


persons, irrespective of degree of Aboriginal ancestry, who nave
served, or are serving, in the Forces are entitled to vote until six
months has elapsed after the termination of the war.
If they are entitled to vote for this period, because of war ser-
vice, there seems to be no valid reason for disfranchising them
at the end of the six months’ period, except on the ground of
age, that is, if still under twenty one.
(6) Summary.
(a) Aborigines, irrespective of caste, can enrol and vote at
elections for Parliament in New South Wales, Victoria and South
Australia, and therefore, in accordance with Section 41 of the
Commonwealth Constitution, cannot be prevented from voting at
elections for both houses of the Commonwealth Parliament.
(b) The compulsory sanctions regarding enrolment should
be put ihto operation, but with understanding, in New South
Wales, Victoria, and eastern South Australia.
(c) Queensland and Western Australia exclude from voting
all Aborigines with a predominance of Aboriginal blood, and also
various groups of half- and lighter castes
(d) These two States should revise their definitions so that
in their Electoral Acts Aboriginal persons of half- or lesser castes
should not be disqualified as such from voting for the State and
Commonwealth.
(e) Persons of Aboriginal descent living on Government ot
Mission stations should not be thereby disqualified from either
the State or Commonwealth franchise, unless they were wholly
dependent for relief from such institutions for a prescribed period
(e.g. twelve months) preceding the date of the elections; and pro-
viding further, that, once having been enrolled, they shall not be
disfranchised by reason of again becoming dependent on such
institutions, unless a similar disqualification applies to non-
Aboriginal citizens.
(f) Disfranchisement of persons of Aboriginal descent should
only be on the same grounds which apply in the case of other
citizens.
(g) The franchise is not a reward or a skill, but a right and a
training in citizenship, to which British-born subjects are entitled.
These include persons of Aboriginal descent.
(h) The qualifications, required of Aborigines for the fran-
chise, apart from having reached the stipulated age, and some
degree of independence of institutional relief (referred to in point
(e)), should be ability to speak and understand everyday English,
including the meaning of the numbers one to twenty. Ability to
read and write should be a recommendation, rather than an abso-
lute requirement.


(i) The Commonwealth should declare that all persons not
possessing a preponderance of Aboriginal ancestry are qualified
for the Commonwealth franchise provided they satisfy the require-
ments referred to in point (h).
(j) Both Commonwealth and State Acts, where necessary,
should make clear that all persons of Aboriginal descent (full-
blood or less), exempted from the provisions of a State’s Abori-
ginal Act, are thereby entitled to both State and Commonwealth
franchise.
(k) All persons of Aboriginal descent who served in the
Forces, and have attained the age of twenty-one, should retain,
or be given, both State and Commonwealth franchise.
A. P. ELKIN.






"ARGUS” PRINT, PARRAMATTA.
