

'W A • < ’ 1
n
rajBRAR^p
*dfÉt* '
#8*
V
I
s
1i
1 ft
df
1 j
. .
'
j


>v
iSf






[From The American Anthropologist for October, 1897]
AUSTRALIAN CLASS SYSTEMS
R. H. MATHEWS
In an article under the above title published in the Ameri-
can Anthropologist for December, 1896, volume IX, pages 411
to 416, I gave a short account of the class system of the Wi-
radjuri tribes, New South Wales. 1 The editor of that journal
found it necessary, in order to provide space for my paper, to
abridge it in certain particulars, and, among other matter, ex-
cised some details relating to the descent of the children. As
these details form an essential part of the paper, without which
it would be incomplete, I have again submitted them for publi-
cation. They fit into the original article between lines 34 and
35, on page 414, and should be read in conjunction with that
article. The following is the matter which was excised.
An explanation of the rules regulating the descent of the
children under the four class and totemic divisions will now be
given, and in doing so the same sixteen totems mentioned in
i See also my paper on the “ Kamilaroi Class System of the Australian Aborigines,”
Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), x, 18-34.
27082


THE AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[ Vol. X
Table A will again be adopted, so that throughout our examples
we may be dealing with the same people. The totem names
given in that table will be taken in the same order, so that a ready
reference can be made to any number from Ito 16. The pecu-
liarity of a mother producing children having a different totemic
nomenclature to her own has not, so far as I am aware, been ob-
served by any previous investigator, and is now published for
the first time.
No. 1, Matha Emu is the mother of Kubbitha Flying Squirrel.
No. 2, Matha Red Kangaroo is the mother of Kubbitha Bandi-
coot.
No. 3, Matha Brownsnake is the mother of Kubbitha Porcu-
pine.
No. 4, Matha Ground Iguana is the mother of Kubbitha Na-
tive Bee.
The four little Kubbithas who are born in this way will grow
up and become the mothers of another generation of Mathas,
each little Matha having the same totem name as her mother’s
mother, as follows :
No. 5, Kubbitha Flying Squirrel is the mother of Matha Emu.
No. 6, Kubbitha Bandicoot is the mother of Matha Red Kan-
garoo.
No. 7, Kubbitha Porcupine is the mother of Matha Brown-
snake.
No. 8, Kubbitha Native Bee is the mother of Matha Ground
Iguana.
Taking now the totems belonging to the Ippatha and Butha
pair of classes we find a similar result :
No. 9, Ippatha Mallee Hen is the mother of Butha Common
Fly.
No. 10, Ippatha Opossum is the mother of Butha Goonhur.
No. 11, Ippatha Eaglehawk is the mother of Butha Gray Kan-
garoo.
No. 12, Ippatha Jew Lizard is the mother of Butha Codfish.
In the next generation the Buthas just referred to will become
the mothers of other Ippathas having the same totems as those
mentioned in Nos. 9 to 12, thus :
No. 13, Butha Common Fly is the mother of Ippatha Mallee
Hen.
No. 14, Butha Goonhur is the mother of Ippatha Opossum.


Oct. 1897] AUSTRALIAN CLASS SYSTEMS 347
No. 15, Butha Gray Kangaroo is the mother of Ippatha Eagle-
hawk. ,
No. 16, Butha Codfish is the mother of Ippatha Jew Lizard.
A careful perusal of the foregoing genealogy will show that
among the tribes treated of in this paper any given totem is
always the mother of a certain other totem. 1 For example, an
Ippatha Eaglehawk, No. 11 in the above list, is invariably the
mother of a Butha Gray Kangaroo. Of course, her sons will be
Kumbo Gray Kangaroos, but I have omitted the names of the
males, because they will be understood by the reader in each
case. In the next generation the relationship is reversed, and
Butha Gray Kangaroo, No. 15 in the genealogy, becomes the
mother of Ippatha Eaglehawk.
I wish to make the following corrections in my paper on
“Australian Class Systems,” published in the American An-
thropologist, volume IX, page 413 : In line 28, for No. 10
read “ No. 12 ; ” in line 30, for “ No. 11 ” read “ No. 10 ; ” and in
line 32, for “ No. 12 ” read “ No. 11.”
1 Among the Kamilaroi tribes every totem reproduces itself; that is to say, the chil-
dren of an Emu mother are always Emus. Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), vol. x, p.
22. But owing to the different course of descent which I have discovered among certain
tribes of the Wiradjuri people, the Emu is the mother of the Flying Squirrel.


A !
y)\


AUSTRALIAN ROCK CARVINGS.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.






PROCEEDINGS. AM. PHILOS. SOC.
VOL. XXXVI, No. 155, PLATE IV.
Australian Rock Carvings.


AUSTRALIAN ROCK CARVINGS.
(Plate IY.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read May 7, 1597.)
At a meeting of the Royal Society of New South Wales, held on
the Ist of August, 1894, I read a paper on “ The Aboriginal Rock
Carvings and Paintings” in that colony, for which I was awarded
the Society’s medal. 1 I also contributed papers on the same subject
to the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain, 2 the Royal Society
1 Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxviii, 329, 330.
2 Jour. Anthrop. Inst., London, xxv, 145, 163.
KEPRINTED FROM VOL. XXXVI, NO. 155, PROC. AMER. PIIILOS. SOC.


of Victoria, 1 the Royal Geographical Society of Australia 2 and other
learned bodies. Since then I have continued my researches, and
have succeeded in discovering several other groups of native carv-
ings not hitherto recorded, a description of which I have thought
are worthy of being recorded.
In the papers above referred to I havé described the way in which
these carvings were executed by the native artists, their geographic
range, etc., so that it will not be necessary in the following pages
to again refer to these parts of the subject. The accompanying
plate shows much the largest and most varied as well as the most
valuable collection of rock carvings hitherto published. All the
figures are drawn to scale from careful measurements and sketches
taken by myself, and the position of each on the Government maps
is also stated in the descriptions, so that they can readily be found
by persons desirous of visiting them. As all the carvings are sit-
uated within New South Wales, it will not be necessary to add the
name of the colony in the description of each figure.
Plate IV. Rock Carvings.
Fig. i. This huge, roughly drawn figure of a man is carved on a
table of Hawkesbury sandstone, almost level with the surface of the
ground, on the old road from Peat’s Ferry to Sydney, and is about
half a mile northerly from Vize Trigonometrical Station, Parish of
Cowan. The old dray track, now little used, passes over this figure,
which has caused some of the lines to become rather indistinct.
From the feet to the top of the head measures ten feet eight
inches. 3 Both eyes are shown and a diagonal line across the face.
There is a line across the body at the waist, across each arm near
the shoulder, across the left thigh, and the left ankle. An un-
finished line rises from the left thigh, outside of the figure. The
right hand and part of the left shoulder have been obliterated by
the traffic along the road referred to.
Figs. 2,3, 4 and 5. This group of carvings appears on a flat
l Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vii (N. S.), 143, 156.
2 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), X, 46-70; ibid, xi, 86-105.
3 For other gigantic carvings of men, the reader is referred to the following
plates in various papers written by me on this subject : Figs. I and 6, PI. 16,
Jour. Anthrop Inst., London, xxv, 145-163; Fig. 5, PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust., Queensland, xi, 86-105 5 and Fig. 7, PI. 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria,
vii (N. S.), 143-156.


sandstone rock, about a quarter of a mile in a northwesterly direc-
tion from Taber Trigonometrical Station, Parish of Broken Bay.
There are a man and a woman in the attitude of aboriginal
dancers ; the man is about four feet six inches high from his feet to
his hands. The head contains eyes and mouth, but no nose, and
there is a belt around the waist consisting of one incised line. On
the upper side of the belt, and projecting from it, are two incised
lines extending upwards about five inches. Lines are also cut across
the arms above the shoulder, with short lines similar to those pro-
jecting from the belt extending a few inches along the centre of each
arm. The hands have four fingers and the feet four toes each. The
penis is shown in this figure by a single incised line, 1 instead of on
the way usually found in native carvings.
On the right of the man is a female figure, much smaller, without
eyes or mouth. The mammae are depicted in the manner usually
employed by the Australian aborigines in their paintings or carvings
of women. 2
Another carving, Fig. 4 i n this group, represents a male figure,
which is interesting on account of the lines rising from the head,
which may represent hair, or may perhaps be intended for feathers
or other ornaments stuck in the hair. The hands have four fingers
only, and the feet have been carried away by the weathering of the
rock.
On the same rock is another of those grotesque forms, Fig. 5>
which are hard to definitely identify, and may be intended either
for some kind of lizard or for a human being.
Fig. 6. The large sandstone rock containing this carving is dis-
tant from Taber Trigonometrical Station about fifteen chains in a
westerly direction, Parish of Broken Bay. It is on the top of the
range dividing Smith Creek from Coal and Candle Creek.
This shield is four feet five inches long by two feet broad, and has a
longitudinal and a transverse subdivision. In the upper right-hand
quarter are four jagged holes cut in the rock, and five similar holes
in the lower right-hand quarter. The upper left-hand quarter of the
shield contains five similar holes and the lower left-hand quarter six,
1 Compare with Fig. 4, PI. 2, of my paper on “Australian Rock Pictures,” con-
tributed to the Anthropological Society of Washington, and published in The
American Anthropologist , viii, pp. 268-278.
2 For an interesting carving of a woman dancing, see Fig. 3, PI. 2, American
Anthropologist , Vol. viii, pp. 268—278.


or twenty holes altogether. These holes are not in any symmetrical
design, but appear scattered irregularly over the surface of the shield,
and have probably been intended for ornamentation. The ethno-
logical collection of the Australian Museum in Sydney contains a
hielaman, or shield, from Queensland which has a longitudinal line
and two median horizontal lines, and is ornamented with a ground-
work of red dots. On the other hand, these marks may be intended
to represent the indentations made by spears.
Near this shield is a hollow, or “pot-hole,” in which water col-
lects in wet weather. Around the margin of this small pool of
water are a large number of grooves or hollows worn by the abo-
rigines in sharpening their stone tomahawks. For illustrations and
descriptions of similar grinding places, see my paper on “Some
Stone Implements Used by the Aborigines of New South Wales,”
Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxvii, pp. 301-305, Plate 43, Fig. 3.
Figs. 7-13. These carvings are all on the same flat rock, situated
within Portion No. 1140, of forty acres, in the Parish of Manly
Cove. The first three are apparently intended for eels, varying in
length from four feet three inches to six feet one inch. Figs, nto
13 are all of the same kind of fish, but of different sizes. lam un-
able to say definitely what fish is intended to be represented, but it
has been suggested perhaps that they are grupers. The length of
the smallest is two feet four inches, and that of the largest four
feet two inches.
Fig. 14. This drawing, which is on the same rock as Fig. 26,
represents a man about five feet eight inches high, with a boomerang
lying near him. The left hand has four fingers and the right five.
The distance from the right toe to the centre of the boomerang is
one foot two inches, the length of the latter being two feet four
inches. The end of one of the weapons shown in Fig. 60 almost
touches the right foot.
Fig. 15. This well-executed figure of a buck kangaroo is carved
on a large flat rock of Hawkesbury sandstone, near the southern
boundary of Portion No. 717 in the Parish of Manly Cove. The
drawing appears to have been intended to represent the animal bent
down in the attitude of grazing. The eye, one of the ears and the
mouth are shown, the latter being open, which is unusual.
Figs. 16 and 17. These carvings are found on the perpendicular
face of a large standstone rock about five yards from the left shore
of Cowan Creek, about seven or eight chains above its confluence


with Cockle Creek, in the Parish of Gordon. Fig. 16 repre-
sents a fish five feet nine inches long and about two feet nine
inches across the body at the widest part. This fish has
two eyes and three small dots about two feet three inches from
the point of the nose, which are perhaps intended to represent
gills. The tail is divided by two curved lines extending from the
back to the belly. Within the outline of the larger fish there is a
small one about eighteen inches long by eight and a half inches
across the body. There are six representations of boomerangs, the
most I have yet observed in so small a space, three of them being
within the outline of the large fish, two partly within and one out-
side of the said outline. 1
Ten feet five inches farther to the right from the nose of the large
fish, on the vertical face of the same rock, are two small animals,
Fig. 17, which are probably intended to represent kangaroo rats,
judging by their size and general aspect. 2 They are each about one
foot four inches in length, and are fairly well executed.
The side of the rock on which the figures are cut faces north-
easterly, or towards Cowan Creek. These carvings are somewhat
uncommon on account of being executed on the face of a vertical
rock, such drawings being generally found on horizontal surfaces ;
they are, however, sometimes met with on rocks occupying different
slopes between the two positions mentioned.
Fig. 18. This curious drawing is on the same flat rock as Fig. 26,
and is probably intended to represent a fish, real or 'imaginary. 3 It
is five feet three inches in length.
Fig. 19. This figure of a wallaby is on the eastern continuation
of the same rock as Fig. 26, but is on the Government road separating
Portions Nos. 1139 and 1140 before referred to. The length of the
wallaby from the tip of the nose to the end of the tail is four feet
five inches ; it is in the attitude of jumping, and the eye is shown.
1 Three feet seven inches to the left of the tail of the larger fish is the carving
of an iguana six feet long which is shown as Fig. 11, PI. 3, of my paper on “ The
Aboriginal Rock Pictures of Australia,” Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queens-
land, Vol. x, pp. 46-70.
2 Kangaroo-rats are represented in Figs. I3and 14, Pb 99»'^ us^ra^r -S my paper
on this subject in the Report of the Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Vol. vi, pp. 624-637.
3 For other examples of nondescript or monstrous creatures drawn by the
aborigines the reader is referred to Fig. 6, PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust.,
Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105; Fig. 10, PI. 9> Rroc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, \ol.
vii (N. S.), pp. 143 -i s6*


Fig. 20. This figure, which is three feet eleven inches high
and on the same rock as Fig. 26, is probably intended to represent
a boy. The correct number of fingers is shown on each hand.
Fig. 21. This remarkable carving is on a large, flat rock of
Hawkesbury sandstone on the western side of the road from Pymble
to Pittwater, within Portion No. 23 of 320 acres in the Parish of
Narrabeen.
The drawing represents a man with a weapon in his left hand,
which is raised over his head. It is not clear whether the weapon
is a nullanulla or a tomahawk, resembling one as much as the other.
This carving is one of unusual interest, as it shows what appears to
have been intended for a breast on the left side, as if the native
artist had at first intended to draw a figure of a woman and had
afterwards changed his mind. Or it may have been drawn to repre-
sent a dilly bag carried by a string over the right shoulder, with the
bag hanging under the left arm. Again, it may have been intended
to show some deformity which existed in the man it was designed
to represent ; or perhaps the intention was to delineate some real or
legendary personage having the characteristics of both sexes.
The head contains eyes, but no other features ; the feet are drawn
in the usual way, but the hands are not shown. From head to foot
the man stands five feet eight inches high. The rock on which this
figure is carved slopes gently towards the southwest, and the bear-
ing of the figure from feet to head is N. 50° E.
Fig. 22. This figure of a man five feet eight inches high is on the
same rock as Fig. 26. The eyes and mouth are shown, and the
hands have each only four fingers.
Fig. 23. This figure of a woman, one foot seven inches high, is
drawn on the same rock as the last described. The hands and feet are
omitted, but the paps are shown as in other carvings of females de-
lineated on this plate. This figure is interesting on account of the
comparative smallness of its size.
Fig. 24. This figure of a man six feet high is on the same flat
rock as Fig. 15. The fingers are shown on the right hand, but not
on the left. On the left side of the head and coming partly within
it is a shield one foot nine inches long and five inches wide, with a
bar across it near the middle. The penis of this figure is drawn in
an unusual style, showing the foreskin.
Fig. 25. This human figure is three feet three inches high, and
although the sex is not shown I am inclined to think it is intended


to represent a young girl. I have arrived at this opinion by
comparing it with Fig. 23 on the same rock and with Fig. 36 in a
different locality. It may also be compared with Fig. 11 Plate
9, of my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in
N. S. Wales,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Victoria, vii, N. S., pp. i 43 -I s^-
Fig. 26. This carving is delineated on a flat rock of Hawkesbury
sandstone sloping northerly, within Portion No. 1139 of twenty-four
and one-half acres in the Parish of Manly Cove. This drawing is
apparently intended to represent the wombat, an Australian animal
with a very short tail and heavy body. Like many other native
drawings, the animal is shown much larger than the natural size.
From the point of the nose to the end of the tail it measures nine
feet eight inches, and across the body at the widest part it is four
feet. The plate shows the figure exactly as it appears upon the
rock, the usual careful measurements having been taken. Within
the outline of this carving is what appears to be a snake three feet
six inches long. 1
Fig. 27. This carving, which probably represents a shark,- is on
the same rock as Fig. 26, and is eleven feet long. There are two
dorsal and one ventral fin and a fairly good tail. The nose of this
fish is very pointed, a peculiarity I have observed in other native
drawings. Near the mouth is a boomerang one foot eight inches
long, on the concave side of which is a small oval figure. Farther
on towards the tail of the fish are two other oval figures of larger
size, but I am at present unable to suggest what they are intended
to represent —they might conceivably be meant for eggs.
Fig. 28. This figure is on the same rock as Fig. 61, and repre-
sents a man four feet four inches high. Contiguous to-his right
hand are two oval figures about a foot long and nine inches across,
which may have been intended to represent shields, or possibly the
eggs of<a bird. A similar object is shown in Fig. 61.
Fig. 29. This group of carvings is situated on the horizontal sur-
face of several large tabular masses of Hawkesbury sandstone, all in
1 This carving is shown as Fig. 14, PI. 3, in P a P er on “ The Aboriginal
Rock Pictures of Australia,” in Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Qld. Bch., Vol. x,
pp. 46-70. . „. -p,
2An immense fish carved on a rock by the aborigines is shown in Fig. 15, PI.
in my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in N. S. Wales,
published in Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. vu (N. S.), pp. 143" I 5 6 *


close proximity to each other on the western side of the cleared
road leading from Pymble along the dividing range between Cowan
and Cockle Creeks, about half a mile southerly from “ Bobbin” Trig-
onometrical Station, in the Parish of Gordon. 1
The largest emu 2 is six feet three inches from the beak to the end
of the tail, and is five feet high, in the attitude of looking for food
or at something on the ground ; and although the neck is rather too
short, it is a very fair picture of an emu. Only one leg is delineated,
and the foot is shown in continuation of the leg.
The other emu, which is much smaller, measures three feet two
inches from the beak to the tail, and stands three feet five inches
high. In this drawing the eye has been added, and one leg with
its foot is delineated in the same way as that of the large emu.
Between the last two birds is a small one, fifteen inches from tail
to head, and fourteen inches from pinion to pinion. Were it not
for the presence of wings and the shortness of the neck and legs we
might suppose this to be intended for a young emu to complete the
picture. As it is, however, it appears to represent some bird upon
the wing.
Fig. 30. This carving is also on the continuation of the same
flat rock which contains Fig. 29. The figure measures two feet four
inches in extreme length, one foot two inches across the fore feet
and one foot four inches across the hind feet. The head is four
inches long and the tail nine inches. This drawing appears to be
intended for a flying squirrel, as it resembles that animal more
1 Besides Figs. 29 to 37, inclusive, shown in this plate and now described, there
are on the same cluster of rocks some other carvings which are described by me
elsewhere, the positions of which are as follows : About five paces from the snout
of Fig. 31 is a group representing a man and woman in the attitude of dancing.
Iveai them is a native “dilly bag” and several human footmarks cut into the
rock, lor a description of this group of carvings see my paper on “Aboriginal
Rock Paintings and Carvings in N. S. Wales,” published in Proc. Roy. Soc. Vic-
toria, Vol. vii (N. S.), pp. 143-156, PI. 9, Fig. 8.
About twenty-five or thirty paces in a southwesterly direction from the last-
mentioned carvings is another group representing two men and two emus. For
a drawing of this group, see Fig. 3, PI. 2, in my paper on the “Rock Pictures of
the Australian Aborigines,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society of Australasia, Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.
2 A group of six emus are represented in Fig. 1, PI. 2 , in my paper on “Aus-
tralian Rock Pictures,” published in The American Anthropologist, viii
268-278.


closely than any other I can compare it with. It may, however, be
intended to represent some bird.
Fig. 31. This figure is delineated on the same flat rock of Hawkes-
bury sandstone as Fig. 29. It measures four feet five inches from
the point of the nose to the tip of the tail ; the head contains an
eye and there is also a dot on the ear, apparently to indicate the
hollow part of it. I submit that this is intended to represent an
opossum, 1 because the portion of the body is more horizontal
than in figures of kangaroos and kangaroo-rats, in which the fore
part of the body is always more or less elevated. The position of
the tail, pointing slightly upwards, also strengthens the supposition
that it is an opossum.
Fig. 32. This carving is on a flat rock of Hawkesbury sandstone,
not far from the last-described carving, and appears to be intended
to delineate a bird on the wing, 2 but it is difficult to suggest what
bird is the likeliest to be indicated, and in trying to arrive at a definite
conclusion the forked tail should not be lost sight of. From the extrem-
ity of one wing to that of the other measures three feet, and the total
length from the head to the end of the tail is one foot eleven inches.
It is well known that the natives had animals and birds as totems ;
among these may be mentioned the eagle hawk, the crow, the white
cockatoo, the emu, the kangaroo and so on.
Fig 33 This peculiar carving is executed on the same group o
flat rocks as the preceding, and delineates the lower part of the
body of a man, from the waist downwards, the knees being bent
outwards, with the feet also in the same direction. From the out-
side of one knee to the outside of the other measures three feet eight
inches The figure may have been intended to indicate that the
man was sitting on the rock, the rest of the body being upright
and not shown ; or perhaps it was intended to convey the idea that
the rest of the man’s body had gone into the rock, leaving this part
protruding. I have seen similar figures carved upon rocks, ut
they are uncommon, 3
1 For another carving of an opossum see Fig. 7, FI. 3, Ptoc. Ko). G cog. S
Ausl., Queensland, p. 67. p , ;1
2 For carvings of birds on the wing the reader is referred to Fig. 2, PI. 99, il-
lustrating my paper on « Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Aborigines of New
South Wales,” published in the Report of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, \o\.vi,W-
. For a similar carving see Fig. 10, PI. a, attached to my paper on R°ckP.c-
lares of the Australian Aborigines," Croc. /toy. Cnf. Ann. Am!., Queensland.
Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.


Fig- 34- This small figure is also on the same line of rocks as
Fig- 3 1 - It is one foot seven inches high, and the same distance
from hand to hand. The head is rather bird-shaped, and has an
eye ; there are incised curved lines reaching from the arms to the
head on each side, the meaning of which I am unable to suggest.
I his figure is most likely intended to denote a “piccaninny” or
young aborigine, because there was room on the rock to draw a much
larger figure if it had been desired. We frequently, I might say
mostly, find figures of men drawn in caves which are not larger than
this, but in such cases the small-sized figures are chosen on account
of want of room on the cave walls. 1
Fig- 35- This carving is on a continuation of the same flat rock as
Fig- 31 and is another of those objects found in aboriginal draw-
ings the precise identity of which it is difficult to arrive at. It is
probably intended for the echidna 2 or porcupine, but I would, how-
ever, throw out the suggestion that it may be intended to represent
a dilly bag. Some color is lent to this view from the lines drawn
across it ; the dot, which may represent the eye, is, however, against
the latter theory.
Fig- 36. This carving is delineafed on the continuation .of the
same flat rocks as the preceding, and represents a female two feet
seven inches high and about the same distance across from hand to
hand. 3 The arms are very long for the size of the body, and there
are four fingers on each hand, but the feet are not shown. In the
centre of the head is a small hole or dot, and there are two similar
holes on the chest, but whether they were put there by the native
artist or are merely water-worn indentations in the rock is uncer-
tain. Above the figure there is a bird-like object which at the
nearest points is two and a half inches from the head. This may
be intended as an ornament to the head, or it may be where some
other figure has been commenced and abandoned. The breasts are
drawn in the usual way adopted by native artists, and there is a
short incised line apparently intended to represent the pubes.
1 A few feet from this figune is a carving of an iguana seven feet two inches
long, shown as Fig. 9, PI. 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. vii (N. S.), p. 153.
2 For similar carvings see Figs. 11 to 17, PI. 2, American Anthropologist,
viii, 276.
3 For a colossal carving of a woman nearly twelve feet tall, the reader is re-
ferred to Fig. 2, PI. 16, of my paper on “The Rock Paintings and Carvings of the
Australian Aborigines,” your. Anthrop. lust., London, Vol. xxv, pp. 145-163.


Fig. 37. This carving is also on the same flat rocks as Fig. 3 1 * It is
evidently intended to represent a male, probably a youth. It has
the same bird-like head as Fig. 34, a form not uncommon in
native carvings. The legs are short, but the termination of them
is well defined, showing that they were originally drawn as they
now appear. Near the extremity of one of the legs is a small un-
finished drawing eight inches long by two inches wide.
Fig. 38. This large fish, apparently intended for a shark, is de-
lineated on the same rock as Fig. 15 j it is fourteen feet four inches
long and three feet nine inches across the widest part of the body,
not including the fins. It has a pointed nose like Fig. 27 and other-
wise closely resembles that fish. 1
Fig. 40. This interesting carving is delineated on the same rock
on which Fig. 26 appears and represents a fish two feet nine inches
long and one foot across the body at the widest part. It has a
dorsal and a ventral fin and a small, well-formed tail. An incised
line, similar to that marking the outline of the fish, extends from
its mouth for about five feet six inches along the rock. This is
evidently intended as the picture of a fish caught on a line.®
Fig. 41 consists of a circular figure with a winding lind extend-
ing from it to another figure one foot six inches long and six inches
wide. Within the former is one of those oval objects referred to in
Fig. 27. Both this and the preceding carving, Fig. 40, are on the
same flat rock as Fig. 26. <
pjgg. 42 and 43’ Fig. 43 i unable to offer any explanation
of at present. Fig. 39 no doubt intended either for human hands
or the paws of some animal. 4 The upper one has three fingers, the
lower one four, each having a thumb in addition. Fig. 42 is, in
my opinion, a human hand with part of the arm attached, and not
1 The reader is referred to my paper on “ The Rock Paintings and Carvings of
the Australian Aborigines,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxv, pp. 145-163, PI. 16,
Fig. 7, for a carving of a very large shark, 33 f ee t 10 inches in length.
2 For a similar carving of a fish caught on a line see hig. 13» 1 !• 2 > illustrating
my paper on “The Rock Pictures of the Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust., Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.
3 Collins says he saw the natives of New South Wales fishing with a hook and
line. The line was made of the bark of a small tree, and the hooks of the pearl
oyster shell, which they rubbed on a stone until it assumed the shape desired.
Account of the English Colony in N. S. Wales, 1798, Vol. i, pp. 556-557.
* For a similar hand see Fig. 1 (g), PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queens-
land, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.


a foot, as might be supposed at first sight. Compare with repre-
sentations of feet in Fig. 61.
Figs. 44 to 47. On the same rock as Fig. 26 are representations
of fish of different sizes, ranging in length from two feet two inches
to six feet. Six inches from the mouth of Fig. 45 are two lines
crossing each other, one being ten inches long, the other five.
Fig. 48. This figure of a man five feet nine inches high appears
on the same rock as Fig. 61 and is close to it. The eyes, mouth,
and the proper number of fingers are delineated, as well as a belt
round the waist. A small oval figure, similar to those seen in Fig.
27, appears close to the belt on the right-hand side.
Fig. 49. This appears to me to be part of a shield, which was
left when half finished. It is two feet five inches long and ten
inches wide. It is on the same rock as Fig. 47 and is close to it.
Fig. 50. This interesting drawing of a fish four feet six inches
long appears on the same flat rock as Fig. 15. There are two dots
for the eyes, on the same side of the head, a peculiarity of native
drawing frequently seen in representations of fish.
Fig. 51 is on the same rock as the preceding, and is a very good
drawing of a fish four feet five inches long.
Fig. 52 represents a shield three feet six inches long and one
foot eight inches wide, and is on the same rock as the last two
figures. Attention is drawn to the unusual point at the end.
Fig. 53. This figure represents a shield four feet three inches in
length and one foot nine inches in breadth, with a longitudinal and
a transverse subdivision. This carving is on the same series of flat
rocks as Figs. 7 to 13 and is not far from them.
Fig. 54. This drawing, which is on the same rock as Fig. 26,
may have been intended to represent a fish, or perhaps the skin of
;ome animal.
Fig. 55 is on the same rock as Fig. 26, and represents a human
figure five feet one inch high, the sex of which is uncertain. Five
fingers are shown on each hand.
Figs. 56 and 57. Fig. 56, which is eighteen inches long, is appar-
ently intended to represent the native tomahawk, with handle
attached. Fig. 57, which is one foot nine inches long, may be
either a nulla nulla or a tomahawk. These figures are carved on a
mass of Hawkesburg sandstone more than an acre in extent, about
five chains from the eastern side of the old road from Peat’s Ferry
to Sydney, and about a mile northerly from the rock containing
Fig. 1.


Fig. 58. This large fish is carved on the same mass of sandstone
as Fig. 1, but several yards farther south, and close to the old dray
track. It measures twenty feet five inches from the snout to the
farthest end of the tail, and thirteen feet from point to point of
the fins. Across the larger of the fins, which appears to be the
dorsal, is an incised line, such as is frequently met with on the
bodies of different animals drawn by the aborigines. The two eyes
are shown on the same side of the head, a mode of representing
the eyes often observed in native pictures. The greatest width of
the body, independently of the fins, is eight feet. 1
Fig. 59. This representation of an eel is three feet four inches
long, and five inches across the widest part of the body ; from
point to point of the fins measures seven inches. There are four
bands or lines across the body. It is carved on the same flat rock
as Figs. 56 and 57. For other carvings of eels, see Figs. 7, 8 and
9 of this plate.
Fig. 60. It is difficult to arrive at a definite conclusion as to
what these figures are intended to represent. One is ten feet long,
the other twelve, and they each have an average width of three
inches. They occupy a position on the rock very close to Fig. 14»
the end of them almost touching the right foot of the latter. Per-
haps they represent spears or yamsticks ; or were possibly intended
for large snakes.
Fig. 61. This interesting carving is on a flat rock ( of Hawkes-
bury sandstone with Portion No. 796 of 9 ac. 2 r. 3 p., Parish of
Manly Cove. It represents a man six feet high, with a belt round
the waist and bands round the arms near the shoulder, similar to
those seen in Fig. 1. Within the outline of the body is a very
good representation of a human foot, twelve inches long, four
inches across the toes, and three inches across the heel. 2 About
three feet behind the heel of the last-mentioned figure is another
human foot, not so perfect as the first, twelve inches long and hav-
ing only four toes. Eleven inches farther away in the same direc-
1 For a monstrous carving of a shark, nearly thirty-nine feet long, see my paper
on “ The Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Aborigines of N. S. Wales,” pub-
lished in Rep. Australas. Assoc. Adv. Sci., vi, pp. 624— 6j7> FI. 99> Fig. jO.
2 Human footmarks carved on rocks are represented in Fig. 8, PL 9, illustrat-
ing my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in New South
Wales,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria, Vol. vn
(N. S.), PP- 143-Ï5 6 -


tion is an oval object, but what it is intended to represent I am at
present unable to offer an explanation. The two last-described
figures are shown in their relative positions to each other, but are
not so in reference to the man. They are shown above the head of
the latter on the plate to fill out a vacant space, but a careful
reading of this description will indicate their true position.


[From the American Anthropologist for October, 1896]
THE BUNÂN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
R. H. MATHEWS
Among all the aboriginal tribes of Australia, when the boys
approach the age of puberty a ceremony to initiate them into
the privileges and responsibilities of manhood takes place. In
this paper I propose to describe the initiation ceremonies of the
native tribes occupying the southeast coast of New South Wales
from about the Victorian boundary northerly to Bulli, a distance
of about 300 miles, and extending inland from 80 to 100 miles.
Among the tribes inhabiting this district and parts of the counties
of Wallace, Cowley, and Murray the ceremony is called the
bünân.
I
The tribes occupying the territory to the westward gradually
merge into the Wiradthuri community, and the latter extends
westerly down Murray and Murrumbidgee rivers to somewhere
near their junction. The initiation ceremonies of the Wiradthuri
tribes referred to are known as the bürbung.
The Wiradthuri and coast tribes attended one another’s meet-
ings for the initiation ceremonies, as old men of Shoalhaven river
have told me that they attended the bürbung on Tumut river,
and some of the Wiradthuri people about Yass have stated that
they were present at the bünân at Queanbeyan or Braidwood.
Along the zone or tract of country where the Wiradthuri and
coast tribes join each other the ceremonial of the bürbung and
bünân respectively would probably be found to have some modi-
fications of detail to meet the views of both communities.
As a type of the initiation ceremonies throughout the coast
district comprised within the limits previously laid down, I shall
44 (327)


select the tribes who occupy Shoalhaven river and adjacent dis-
tricts, and will endeavor to give a detailed description of the
bûnân as carried out among them.
The main camp and Bûnân ground. —The tribe in whose country
the bûnân is to take place finds a suitable locality within its own
territory and selects a ground which has previously been used.
The women know nothing of these arrangements, but the camp
is shifted to some place not far from the selected spot, and the
men commence renovating or making the ring. In the evening
they assemble at the wurrawurrudthang, and the headman, fol-
lowed by the others, all with a bough in each hand, runs through
the camp, taking a serpentine course. They make frequent
pauses, first swaying their boughs downward and then raising
them over their heads, uttering guttural noises the while. They
then form into a group in a clear space, shout out the names of
the principal camping places, water holes, etc, in their country,
and disperse.
When the women who have been to a bûnân before see this
procession and hear the noise the}'' know there is to be a general
gathering of the tribes for the purpose of initiating the boys.
The whole tribe —men, women, and children —next day remove
to the place selected for the general encampment, generally on
a moderately level piece of ground, not far from water, and where
plenty of wood for fuel is obtainable. The local tribe is the first
to pitch its camp, and the other tribes encamp around this. On
a cleared space in the central part of the camp corroborées are
held almost every night. (Plate vi, figure 1, a, b, c .)
At a retired spot in the bush, a short distance from the general
camp, the headmen have a private meeting place called wur-
rawurrudlhang, where they congregate to consult on such tribal
concerns as may be brought before them by the leading men of
the several contingents present, and also to arrange the various
details of the ceremonies. Here they have a fire around which
they sit, and none but the initiated men are allowed near it.
(Figure 1, d.)
As soon as the local tribe have erected their camp the initiated
men proceed with the preparation of the bûnân ground work,
generally carried on while the messengers are away gathering
the tribes.
The last bûnân which was held by the Shoalhaven river tribes




1
Ü
1 AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST VOL. IX, PL. VI
tj
il
1 f
/
i Ai#
i
i
!
j'f
et
i
11
!>
Fig.l
S
Fis- G-
f
f
Fis -2-
_î>
rac; j
eu
j
©
•
l
r
Fis-5
&
u
®
Âb A b
oo
\ kb' ih
\ k Mai* CW
e * * •••••••*•«’
• •••••*
• •
6 • • • • *C
Fis-6
° c .1
b b
• e
Fi
G-
eu
• •>
"i
t -
s!lP^I§lP~
1
vN
1 _j
e/
g
“
I
g
?
y
il
)
i
y
ï
*-4- '
U
Fis -y
0 • j
• • • j
9 0 0 * j
0 ° 0
. \ •
Su
ci <
XJ
*b •••,£/
'■ 1 • • •
S O *•*'...• . •
• >. •
*1 / • . CU
fl * «
fjc, • . X/
/
7
Scalts
Chains Fig- 1
0 12 3 4- 8 12 K
F=frT>r,jJ \i>»mk hnnï \»m>i -tw/Hü MWA IlltnA
Feet 2 7
0 5 10 20 30 40 50 G0 70 80
ü"‘ i > • V « T
ff tj. /ja then S de/f.
THE BUNAN CEREMONY
*)\


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 329
took place about eight or ten years ago, at a place two miles and
a half N. 13° W. from Cooloomgatta trigonometrical station, in
the parish of Cooloomgatta, county of Camden, New South
Wales. Last year I visited the bûnân ground with some abo-
riginal natives and found it in a tolerably good state of preser-
vation. I took careful and complete sketches and measurements
of all its surroundings, from which I have prepared accurate
drawings, which will now be described.
The general camp (figure 1) was pitched, on level land in a
forest, near a small watercourse rising in the western side ol the
Moean range and flowing southwesterly into Broughton creek,
a tributary of Shoalhaven river.
About six chains from the center of the camp was cleared a
circular space, called the bûnân, measuring 34 feet 9 inches in
one diameter and 32 feet 6 inches in another. The loose soil
scraped off in making it smooth was used to form the boundary
and was about a foot or more in height. A narrow pathway led
from this circle to a smaller cleared space, whose diameters were
18 feet 6 inches and 16 feet 6 inches (figure 4). lhis circular
space, like the larger one, is bounded by a raised earth wall. In
each of these circles there is an opening left as an entrance for
the pathway, and the embankment is continued outward about
8 feet along each side of the pathway in both instances (figures
3 and 4). Standing at the larger circle the magnetic bearing
therefrom to the smaller one is N. 50° E. and the distance from
one to the other is 265 paces.
Starting from the larger ring and proceeding along the track,
at the distance of 158 yards, on the left side, is a raised earthen
figure of a human being 7 feet long and surrounded by an em-
bankment similar to those used in defining the boundaries of
the rings, but not so high (figure 5, g).
At the distance of 236 yards from the starting point, or 29
yards from the smaller ring, on the same side of the track as the
figure last described, was a heap ol earth a foot high, having
a basal diameter of about two feet. It was surrounded by a
raised earthen wall, like the preceding figure, a space about a
foot wide being left between the heap and the circular embank-
ment, along which some of the old men danced, waving their
arms to and fro (figures 1 and 6, h).
Inside the smaller ring (figure 4) was a horizontal representa-


tion of Dharamoolun, about 8 feet long, formed by heaping up
the loose earth, the height of the earth at the man’s breast being
about a foot. During the ceremonies a quartz crystal is laid on
the head of this figure.
At the time of my visit the foregoing were the only figures dis-
tinguishable on the turf, but my native guides stated that when
the bünân ground was freshly formed a number of nondescript
patterns and devices were cut in the soil similar to those shown
in the plates illustrating my papers describing the initiation
ceremonies of the Kamilaroi and Wiradthuri tribes, 1 My guides
also, pointed out some faint, indistinct forms of animals, also
made by means of raised earth or by cutting a nick or groove
into the surface of the soil along their outline. There were thus
represented the porcupine, the kangaroo, fish, snakes, and others.
In the raised figure of the porcupine the quills were represented
by inserting numerous small sticks.
Around the small ring and for a distance of 130 yards near
each side of the track toward the larger circle a number of trees
were marked with the tomahawk, some of them close to the
track and others at various distances. I counted 29 marked
trees and copied the devices on nine of the most representative
of them, which are shown in figure 8, ato i. All the figures and
devices, whether raised or graven upon the ground or cut upon
trees, are known by the native name of muttima.
Around each important figure on the ground a space was
cleared on which the men could walk, and a similar space
around each of the marked trees, the loose soil being scraped
into heaps encircling the butts of the treés.
Gathering the tribes.—The headman of the tribe whose turn it
is to call the community together sends messengers to the various
tribes whom he wishes to be present at the ceremonies, and in
this matter the totems are regarded —that is, the messengers are
generally of the same totem as the sender of the message, though
they may be chosen on account of their fitness for the duty, irre-
spective of totemic distinctions. It not unfrequently happens
that a messenger is sent on his mission alone, but men are gen-
erally sent together, one of whom belongs to a different tribp to
the headman ivho issues the message. The tribe to whom the
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, xxiv, pp. 411-427.


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 331
two messengers are sent pay more attention to them if one is
from a remote part of the territory. The strange man merely
accompanies the messenger, who is provided with a bullroarer
(mooroonga or mudthi ), a quartz crystal, and all the articles worn
by a man when fully dressed. In some tribes a message stick
is carried in addition to these emblems. He carries his own
weapons with him and has yellow or white paint on his legs
from the knees down and the same color on his forehead band.
His companion is similarly decorated.
On the arrival of a messenger at a camp, usually in the after-
noon or early in the morning—because at these times the men
are at home —he sits down in sight of the camp of the single
men. Some of the men go and speak to him, lighting a fire and
offering him food and water. On learning that he has a message
to deliver they go and inform the chief men, who come to where
he is sitting. After some conversation the messenger opens his
bag and produces the mooroonga , the crystals, and other articles,
and delivers the message, stating who it is from and the time
when and place where the bûndn is to be held. Tie then pro-
ceeds with the rest to the single men’s quarters, and all the
initiated men in the camp are called and informed of the mes-
sage. All then run in a serpentine line through the women’s
camp, making a peculiar noise, by which the women know of
the call for a meeting for the bündn, and there is general rejoic-
ing. Having gone in this manner through the camp, the men
form into a group in a clear space close by and dance round a
few times, calling out the names of a few camping places, etc,
after they disperse to their own quarters. 1 hat evening,
after dark, the messenger swings his bullroarer a short distance
from the camp and the women commence singing the songs
usual on such occasions.
The next day or perhaps in a few days’ time the messenger
leaves this camp and proceeds on his journey to deliver a like
message to another tribe. He would thus proceed until he
reaches the farthest tribe or section of a tribe whom he has been
directed to summon. Sometimes, however, the messenger goes
no farther than the first tribe, the headman of whom sends the
message on by one of his own men, of the same totem as the
original messenger, who carries the message to a man of the same
totem in the tribe to whom he has been sent.


At the several places where the tribes camp at night by the
way corroborées are generally held at night at the camp fires.
When within a few days’journey of the bünàn ground a man is
sent forward to inform the headmen there that the tribe will
arrive about a certain day. Frequently no such notice is given,
because the men at the main camp are expecting arrivals from
different places and are always ready painted every afternoon.
Moreover, it adds to the excitement of the meeting for these con-
tingents to come without warning.
Arrival of contingents. —When a strange tribe arrives to within
half a mile from the general encampment a halt is made while
the men paint themselves with pipe-clay, drawing lines on their
faces, chests, and limbs; they also put on all their articles of
dress and arrange feathers in their hair.
When all is ready the messenger who has brought them sounds
a bullroarer somewhere out of sight, and the men,-about two feet
apart in a single zigzag line, follow their headman. The women,
children, and novices of the contingent follow in a group. Every
man holds in each hand a green bough 1 about 18 inches long.
At short intervals the leader pauses and, turning half round to
the right, swings the bough in his right hand into the air, and
this action is repeated by all the other men. Then he turns to-
ward the left, and swings the bough in that hand into the air,
which is also repeated by all the others. As they swing the
boughs they give a shout. They thus go through the main camp,
looking in at every hut or gunyah , after which they march toward
the large circle, shouting and swaying their boughs. They are
now joined by the men of the local tribe and other men who
have arrived on previous occasions, and all approach the circle,
the newcomers being in the lead. The women and novices are
all standing in a group in the center of the ring, 2 having come
straight on while the men were going through the camp.
The men now enter the ring through the opening in its wall
and form a cordon around the women (figure 2). If the tribe is
a numerous one, there may be two or three circles of men. The
men dance for a few minutes, and then close in around the
i Sometimes the men have a boomerang or other small weapon in one hand and a
bough in the other.
2 Infirm old men and women and small children would not go into the ring, but would
sit down close by.


Oct. 189(5] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 033
women, in the center of whom the novices are standing, and raise
their bushes into the air. Each man then walks outward to the
boundary of the ring and lays his boughs outside ot the embank-
ment. As every man goes to the part of the wall nearest to him,
the boughs are scattered all round it. After this the women and
novices withdraw, and sit down outside of the wall on the side
farthest from the pathway, with their backs toward the lattei,
and the women commence to sing and beat their rugs. The
headman of the local tribe then calls out the names of a few of
the chief camping grounds, holes, or remarkable places in
his country, and all the men present shout. Ihe headmen ot
the other tribes follow in succession, each naming a few chi et
places in his country.
The headman of the local tribe now starts along the pathway,
followed by his own people; the headman of another tribe,
accompanied by his people, follows, and thus all the men
the ring. The women remain sitting, and continue to sing and
beat their rugs, the novices remaining with them. The newly
arrived men are shown the drawings on the ground and trees.
At the chief figures the men stop and dance and shout, but some
of the muttima are only looked at in passing, or a short halt is
made in front of them. The wizards go through various forms
of jugglery, pretending to bring different substances out of their
bodies. On arrival at the small inclosure the old men enter it
and dance round the figure of Dharamoolan (figure 4), the rest
of the people going round outside the embankment. All the
men then return along the track and go into the large circle and
dance round. The women now cease singing and get up and go
away to the camp, the men shortly following. The men and
women of the new arrivals, visiting tribes, erect their quarters on
the side of the main camp nearest their own country.
That night the local tribe makes a corroborée for the benefit oi
those who arrived during the afternoon. On nearly eveiy suc-
ceeding night a corroborée is held, the tribes taking their turns to
provide this amusement in the order ol their arrival.
Daily performances at the bünân ground. —\\ hile waiting for the
arrival of other tribes, the men and women already assembled
daily go through preliminary performances similar to those just
described, beginning a few hours before sunset.
After partaking of the evening meal the young men of the


tribe ivhose turn it is to make the corroborée that night commence
to paint. While this is being done one or two bullroarers are
sounded at short intervals in the adjacent forest. Fires are lit on
a cleared level space in a central part of the camp convenient for
all (figure 1, c.) This corroborée ground is used by all the tribes
present. As the men of each tribe corroborée in turn, the women
of each tribe beat time and sing for their own men.
Every morning at or before daylight and every evening about
dusk a bullroarer is sounded by one of the single men in the
vicinity of the camp. When this is heard in the camp the
elderly women begin to sing, and at intervals the men raise a
shout in unison with one another. Every evening the boys go
and sit among the women as they sing.
Taking away the hoys. —When all the tribes expected at the
bünân have arrived, the headmen hold meetings at the wurrawur-
rudthang and select the ynoroonga or band of men who accom-
pany the novices and their guardians into the bush. The
yooroonga are strong, active men, ivell acquainted with the tribal
customs, who peform the different pantomimic feats and assist
the headmen to carry out the various rites and maintain dis-
cipline. The day of taking away the boys is also fixed at these
meetings, and a guardian ( jumbi ) is assigned to each novice.
This guardian is one of the brothers, own or tribal, of the women
from among whom the novice could obtain a wife in accordance
with the tribal laws; in other words, he is the brother-in-law,
actual or titular, of the novice he has in charge.
About sunrise on the appointed morning the men go through
the camp in single file, with bushes in their hands, and muster
all the women, novices, and children to that side of the large
ring farthest from the pathway. A sister or some near relative
accompanies the mother of each novice and remains with her
and carries her yamstick and a net bag in which are a head-
band and other articles of dress which she is entitled to wear
after her son is taken. This woman also paints the mother in
the manner customary in her tribe. One of the headmen takes
the yamstick, with the bag attached to it, and inserts it in the
ground a little way inside the ring, by this means defining the
place where both mother and son are to sit. The mother of each
novice is then seated outside of the embankment opposite her


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 335
own yamstick, her relative sitting behind her. The other women
and children sit on the ground farther back.
Each novice is painted with red ocher and grease by his
brother-in-law, assisted perhaps by other relati\ es (figuie o, b).
The boys are now also invested with the belt, headband, and
other articles of a man’s attire. The other men of the tribes
gather wood, and they kindle a large fire, mulleech or mulleej, in
the middle of the ring (figure 3, a). When the painting and other
preliminaries have been completed the guardians take the novices
on their shoulders and carry them into the ring, followed by
several other men, who keep up a guttural chant. Each guard-
ian then lets his novice down and seats him on the bank imme-
diately in front of the mother of the boy, who puts her arms
around his waist, he being within the circle and she just outside
(figure 3). He is directed to gaze intently into the fire, which
by" this time is a mass of blazing embers, his guardian remain-
ing near him to watch that this instruction is strictly complied
with. The novices of each tribe are generally placed in groups
on the side of the ring which faces in the direction of their own
country, their mothers and the other women of their tribe being
also in a group by themselves just outside. In the plate, I have
shown both novices and women all in one place to save space
and to prevent confusion.
All the novices, who are called yangomidyang , are similarly
placed in a row along the inside of the embankment, at the op-
posite side of the circle to that from which the track emeiges.
Their mothers, who are behind them, are also requiied to look
into the fire. If the mother of a boy is dead or is absent, the
mother of one of the other boys looks after him as well as her
own son, or perhaps a tribal mother or relative of the boy takes
him in charge. The headmen walk about, directing the proceed-
ings generally, and the other men stand in different groups, most
of them being on the side of the ring opposite to where the
women are.
As soon as the boys have been placed, a number of men walk
several times around the fire, between it and the novices, clap-
ping their hands and repeating an exclamation at each step. At
a sound made by the headman these men fall down with their
heads toward the fire, where they lie still for a short time. \V hen
the headman considers that boys and men have been sufficiently


exposed to the fire, he hits the ground with a piece of bark which
he holds in his hand, and the other men, half stupefied by the
heat, rise. They then step back and stand outside the embank-
ment. All the women and children are now told by the old
men to lie down, and are covered over with rugs and bushes,
some of the men walking about to see that the covering is not
removed.
When all is ready the principal headman gives the signal, and
two men sound bullroarers near the ring, walking along, taking
up their position near the side from which the path emerges
(figure 3, g). Each guardian then catches his novice by the arm,
leads him along the pathway, the boy, dazed and stupefied by
the heat of the fire, keeping his eyes cast on the ground and re-
maining silent. All the men beat their boomerangs and other
weapons together and shout, making a great noise, which some
of them keep up till the boys and their guardians, accompanied
by most of the men, are out of sight. The covering is then taken
off the women and children by the men whose duty it is to
watch them, and they are set at liberty. The women who have
charge of the mothers now invest the latter with the articles car-
ried in the bag. After this all the women and children proceed
to a new camp, which will be described in subsequent pages.
Ceremonies in the bush. —When the novices get out of sight of
the women a halt is made and a rug is thrown over the head of
each hoy in such a manner that he can see only the ground at
his feet. The novices are told by their guardians that a number
of things will be shown to them by and by, and that they must
pay attention to what they see and hear, but must not speak or
laugh or he afraid. They are then taken along the pathway and
are shown the drawings on the ground and on the trees, a short
stop being made before all the principal figures, around which
the old men dance. During this time the doctors or wizards go
through various tricks of jugglery, pretending to bring up out of
their mouths certain substances, such as quartz crystals, pieces
of bone, string, etc, collectively known by the nam ejoea.
The novices are next placed standing around the outside of
the smaller ring. Some of the old men enter it through,the
opening in its wall and dance round the figure of Dharamoolun,
extending their arms toward it, then drawing them back again,
exclaiming “Dharamoolun! Dharamoolun!” several times in


Oct 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 637
succession. The novices, standing outside of this cordon of old
men, wave their arms in a similar manner (figure 4). The nov-
ices, the rugs still on their heads and their eyes cast down, are
next taken farther into the bush and seated on the ground.
All the men now paint themselves a jet black with powdered
charcoal and grease. As soon as this painting is completed they
go into the bush to a place which has been previously selected
as a suitable camping ground. Here and there on the journey
saplings are bent over, under which the novices have to pass in
a crouching attitude, and at other places are logs under which
they have to crawl on their hands and knees at the bidding ot
their guardians and the other men. Several stoppages are made
and at each the men go through different performances. Some-
times they imitate flying foxes. Several men go on ahead
unknown to the novices, and one man climbs up a tree and
hangs on with his hands and feet to a branch, another man hangs
on to the first, and so on till there are as many as one man can
support. The novices are then directed to look up and see the
suspended men. In succession these men drop on their feet and
all then dance up in front of the novices. At another stopping
place a number of men are covered with bushes, under which
they make a humming noise like bees. At a signal the bushes
are thrown down and the men dance before the boys. Some-
times a number of men go ahead and climb trees and saplings
and imitate the song of the locusts. The novices are brought on
under the trees and are told to look up, after which the men
descend to the ground and dance about.
On arriving at the camping ground a space about 60 feet or
more in diameter is cleared. In the center of this space, which
is called mudthiwirra , is raised a heap ot earth about a foot high,
called thalmoor, and on top of this a fire is lighted. Around this
space the men of the various tribes make their camps, each in
the direction of their own district. The guardians and the nov-
ices camp by themselves at one side of this cleared space, in a
semicircular yard of boughs, having one or more fires lighted at
the open end. The boys lie down on bushes and leaves, their
heads being covered with rugs, some of their guardians remain-
ing constantly beside them. During the time that the novices
are out in the bush with the old men they are forbidden to


speak ; if they want anything they must make signs to their
guardians.
After the camping place has been arranged another small space
is cleared and a line of holes the size and shape of a human foot
are dug about six inches deep. 1 When these preparations are
completed the novices are brought out and are placed standing
with their feet in the holes described, with their guardians beside
them. The yooroonga, fantastically disguised, then kneel down
in a line in the clear space, the outside man at each end having
a piece of bark ( boonboon ) in his hands (figure 6, a , d). These
pieces of bark are about 2i feet long and 6 inches broad at the
widest end. One of these outside men hits the ground in front
of him forcibly with his piece of bark and all the men utter a
low, rumbling noise, each man in succession bending his head
toward the other end of the line. When the movement reaches
that end the other outside man now hits the ground with his
bark in a similar manner and the men bend their heads the con-
trary way. This performance, which is repeated several times,
is intended to represent the breaking of the waves on the sea-
shore and their recoil. The line of the performers is approxi-
mately at right angles to the nearest seacoast, so as to correctly
indicate the direction of the waves.
Each guardian then comes behind his boy and, kneeling down?
puts his head between the boy’s legs. The guardian remains in
the kneeling position, with the novice on his shoulders, while
another man stands behind him, with one hand over the eyes of
the novice and the other hand holding his chin in such a way as
to keep his mouth open. A man acéustomed to the work of
extracting the teeth or who has watched the operation on pre-
vious occasions then advances and placing one end of a small
wooden chisel ( dthungan ) against the tooth gives it a smart blow
on the other end with a wooden mallet ( bunyah ), which forces
it out. More than one blow is frequently required to dislodge
the tooth. Sometimes the headman rubs the boy’s gum with a
large quartz crystal for the ostensible purpose of loosening the
tooth and making it draw out easily. The tooth is either spat
out or is taken out of the mouth with the fingers, but all blood
flowing from the wounded gum has to be swallowed. During
i Sometimes only one pair of holes are made, and the novices are placed in them and
operated upon one after the other.


Oct 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH MALES 339
the operation the headman stands by directing the proceedings,
and a large bullroarer ( jummngong ) 1 is sounded impressively by
a man standing in the rear. The ceremony of knocking out the
tooth is done either on the afternoon of the day of arrival at the
inudthiwirra or the day following, according to circumstances.
As soon as this ceremony is concluded the men take oft their
queer disguises and throw them on the ground where the foot-
holes are made, together with the pieces of bark used loi hitting
the ground, and everything is covered over with the loose rub-
bish which had previously been scraped away. The mallet and
chisel are either burnt or driven into the ground.
The novices are then taken back to the mudthiwirra and are
given human excrement, of which they have to eat a small
quantity. At night the fire on the thalmoor is kept burning
brightly to afford light to the men, who continue to play various
games and dances the greater part of the night, very little sleep
being indulged in. These performances consist for the most
part of imitating animals with which the people are familiar or
scenes from their own daily life, and, like the ceremonials of
other savage races, are mixed with obscence gestures. During
the day the men hunt to provide food for all the,party, but the
novices remain in the camp in charge of a few of their guardians.
These proceedings occupy about three or four days, the per-
formances at the camp fire being somewhat varied every night.
All then leave the mudthiwirra early in the morning, carrying
with them all their belongings, and go to some place where there
is a large water hole, the novices walking with their guardians,
still silent and with their faces cast downward. Before leav-
ing the fire at the mudthiwarri the novices are given pieces of dry
bark lighted at one end. As soon as this piece of bark smoulders
they renew it with another. On the way to the water hole some
of the yooroonga go on ahead, unknown to the novices, and one
lies down in a hollow place, such as a hole where a large tree has
been burnt out or in a natural depression, or a shallow hole is
dug in some soft or sandy soil. This man is covered over with
a lhdit layer of bushes or rubbish, and holds in his hand a small
bush, as if it naturally grew there. When the guardians and
a The jummagonq is a very large bullroarer used by the men when away with the boys
in the bush • the 'mooroonqa is a smaller instrument, and is used in mustering the
tribes, and on all occasions, when it is required, in the vicinity of the women s camp.


novices reach this spot a halt is made, and the man begins to
groan and move, thus causing the bushes and rubbish with
which he is covered to shake and heave up and down. Some of
the old men go through various incantations around this figure,
and at a signal the man gradually rises out of the ground, throw-
ing aside the bushes, and stands up in front of the boys.
All hands arriving at the water hole, the boys are stood upon
the banks. The men go into the water hole, pretending to look
for turtles, crayfish, eels, or the like, but in reality to wash off
the charcoal powder with which their bodies had been painted.
They splash or lave water with their hands upon the boys
standing on the bank, the latter waving their arms to and fro in
the direction of the water hole, imitating the actions of the men.
These then come out of the water hole and walk about till they
are dry, or light a fire to warm themselves if the day is cold.
A start is now made toward the place where the women have
erected the new camp. When they have gone on a short dis-
tance some of the yooroonga, who are a little way in the lead,
stop and two of them stand out in a clear space, one of whom is
sounding the jummagong and the other the mooroonga. The boys
are now brought to a stand and are told to look at the men who
are swinging the bullroarers. The headmen then tell the nov-
ices that what they now see and hear is the instrument which
they heard at the large ring and at the other places since they
have been out in the bush. They are cautioned under pain of
death not to reveal anything they have seen or heard to the
women or children or any uninitiated person. The bullroarers
are then handed to the boys for their inspection, and they are
invited to use them. They are now permitted to walk erect and
to look around. When the day is far advanced a suitable camp-
ing place is chosen, where they remain all night. Next morning
the journey is resumed, and on coming near the new camp men
and neophytes lay down their weapons and other articles which
they have carried and decorate themselves to meet the women.
The men and boys are painted with stripes and patches of white,
according to the manner of their tribe, and the boys are invested
with the belt, kilt, head-band, and other articles of a man’s
attire. The men are also dressed in their full regalia. As soon
as these preparations are completed, one of the men swings a
bullroarer and the others raise a loud shout or cooee and are
answered by the women at the camp.


The new camp. —Immediately after the departure of the boys
with their guardians from the bünân circle the women and chil-
dren and some of the men who are left to supervise and assist
them pack up all their belongings and shift to a suitable place
which has been chosen by the headmen, and there erect a new
camp, each tribe occupying the side next its own country.
Sometimes this camp is formed only a short distance, in other
instances it may be several miles from the original camp. Close
by it is a partially inclosed space, called the dhurrawangan , built
of saplings and bushes, with an opening in the side, over which
the saplings are sometimes bent to form a kind of triumphal
arch (figure 7, b).
Each mother is accompanied by the female guardian whç has
remained -with her. Only those women are qualified for the
duty of guardian who have had a son initiated at a previous
bünân. These guardians and the mother of the novices are col-
lectively called yanniwa, and have a camp to themselves close
by the camp of the other women, only the old women of the
tribe being allowed to go near them. All the yanniwa have had
to carry firesticks in their hands ever since the boys were taken
away, and they have also been required to sing the customary
bünân songs at the camp fire every morning and evening. While
they are singing these songs they lift burning sticks from off the
fire and wave them in the direction of the novices. They thrust
their yamsticks into the ground in a row and dance along facing
them while waving the burning brands.
Early in the forenoon of the day on which the novices are to
return,*one of the yooroonga goes on ahead to the new camp and
announces their approach. The yanniwa then go from their
camp to the dhurrawangan, each woman carrying in her hand a
piece of burning bark, which on entering the inclosure they lay
on the floor, their fiery ends together, the other end pointing
toward the woman who places it. Before going into the inclos-
ure each mother inserts her yamstick vertically into the ground
near the entrance. These yamsticks are all in a row, and on each
one is a net bag, belonging to the owner of the stick, filled with
small green bushes. Some of the old men who have remained
with the women also go with the ya,nniwa to the dhuvvawangan
and light a fire near the outside of one end of it (figure 7, g ).
All the other women in the camp also repair to the dhurrawangan


and lie around the outside opposite the opening or doorway,
where they are covered with bushes by the men. The yanniwa
are gaily painted, and wear strings of shells, eagle-hawk’s claws,
and teeth of animals around their necks and in their hair. Each
of the mothers is provided with a piece of bark, called jinnin,
about a foot or eighteen inches long and two or three inches
wide, tapering smaller toward the end held in the hand. These
pieces of bark are painted with lines and dots of pipe-clay to
make them ornamental.
Return of the hoys. —When the necessary preparations are com-
pleted at the dhurrawangan the party from the bush makes its
appearance. The men, painted and wearing their full regalia,
advance in a group, the novices being in the middle; on getting
near the latter are taken on the men’s shoulders. The principal
headmen walk by themselves just outside of the other men. A
bullroarer is sounded somewhere in the rear just out of sight of
the women, and the guardians march into the dhurrawangan and
let the boys down from their shoulders, each in front of his own
mother, being guided by the arrangement of the yamsticks near
the door. The yooroonga stand near the entrance. Each mother
then approaches her son and taps him lightly on the breast with
the jinnin; the guardian then turns the boy round, and the
mother taps him on the back in a similar manner. The guard-
ians again take the novices on their shoulders and carry them
out of the dhurrawangan , when they let them down on the ground
and conduct them away to a camp a short distance off, where
they remain for the night. As soon as the boys are out of sight
of the dhurrawangan the covering is taken off the other women,
who return to the camp ; the yanniwa come out of the inclosure,
carrying with them the firesticks before described, and return
to their own quarters.
While the women and yanniwa are going away some of the
old men who have been there from the first throw green bushes,
which they have in readiness, on top of the large fire before re-
ferred to, making a dense smoke ( booraylang ), and all the men
who were out with the boys in the bush stand round the leeward
side of the burning boughs. The smoke caused by the buTning
of the green leaves ascends around them. After this fumigation
the men disperse, some going into the women’s camp and others
to the boys’ quarters. Until now the boys have been called


Oct. 189C)] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 343
yangomidyang , but from this time forth they are ranked as woorgal,
men.
That night some of the old men are present at the camp of
the neophytes, and forbid them to eat the flesh of certain animals
until they receive permission from the elders of the tribe. Young
men who at previous bündns had been prohibited from eating
certain kinds of food are at this meeting relieved from any further
restriction in regard to it. A few animals are, however, tabooed
as food until a man has been to several bündns or has attained a
certain age. These forbidden animals to eat are called mookoo to
the young men. At the conclusion of these proceedings one or
more of the men go into the bush some distance from the women’s
camp and sound a bullroarer, after which they return to their
own quarters and everybody retires for the night.
The day after the ceremonies the entire camp is again removed
to a new site, as on other occasions ; the several contingents
camp around the local tribe in» the direction of their countiy,
and each one makes a corroborée for the amusement of the others.
These corroborées are held on a common ground, which is in a
convenient part of the camp. The women belonging to each
tribe beat their rugs and sing for their own men during the night
on which it is their turn to perform.
When all the merry-making is over, if any of the people pres-
ent have a personal grievance to bring before the headmen or
a complaint to make respecting a violation of the tribal laws, the
matter is fully discussed by the elders of the several tribes, and
punishment is meted out to the offending parties in the presence
of the men and women of the whole assemblage. As it would
be a breach of the tribal customs for the neophytes to appear
before the women, they are debarred from witnessing these pro-
ceedings, but are permitted to witness those at the next bündn
ceremonies which take place.
The next day all the tribes from other places who have at-
tended the ceremonies pack up their things and take their de-
parture for their respective districts. There now remains only
one further rite to be carried out before the neophytes are finally
liberated, and this is performed by the men of each tribe on their
own contingent of novitiates some time after their return to their
own country.


Final ceremony. —The boys belonging to each tribe, after hav-
ing been shown to their mothers at the dhurrawangan, as already
described, remain with some of the old men of their own tribe,
camping in the bush, perhaps some distance from where the
women are, gaining their own living during a period of proba-
tion which is fixed by the headmen. During this term, which
may extend over several months, the neophytes are not per-
mitted to go into any water or to look into it. If it becomes
necessary for them to cross a stream they must get some one to
carry them over it.
At the end of this period of probation they are again brought
back by their guardians to a place near the women’s camp, where
a platform of bark about a foot or eighteen inches high has been
erected. The yanniwa , painted and dressed in their ornaments,
are at the platform, having laid down their firesticks on the
ground close by ; the other women of the tribe are also present,
a little farther back, and some o£ the old men stand near direct-
ing the proceedings.
When everything is ready a signal is given, and the guardians
appear with the boys on their shoulders, a bullroarer being
sounded out of sight. The men let the novices down from their
shoulders and leave them standing on the platform. Each
mother now steps forward and taps her son with a piece of bark,
ji.nnin, on the breast and on the back. From that time until
now the boys have been compelled to carry a firestick, dhungga ,
in their hands when they went out hunting or when removing
from one place to another, and the yanniwa have continued to
do the same, but from this time they need not do this. The
yanniwa leave their firesticks lying on the ground w r here they
put them down at the platform, and those used by the novices
were thrown away when they were taken on the men’s shoulders.
The yanniwa and other women return to the camp, and the
neophytes are no longer kept under restraint; they are now free
and can go about among the men, although they must not asso-
ciate with the young women, nor must they allow any woman’s
shadow to fall upon them until the old men who are the reposi-
tories of the tribal laws and traditions allow it.


GRAVURES k PEINTURES
SUR ROCHERS
PAR LES ABORIGÈNES D’AUSTRALIE
M. R. H. MATHEWS L. S.
(Extrait des Bulletins de la Société d'Anthropologie de Pans,
tome IX, IV* série).
PARIS
1898




(Exlrail des Bulletins de la Société (l’Anthropologie de Paris).
Gravures et peintures sur rochers
par les aborigènes d*AustraUe
Par M. R. 11. Mathews L. S.
Depuis plus de vingt ans, il existe près du hameau de La Pé-
rouse, situé sur le rivage septentrional de Botany Bay à 16 kilo-
mètres environ au sud de Sydney (New South Wales) une colonie
d’aborigènes, laquelle compte peut-être aujourd’hui quarante
personnes des deux sexes, la plupart mulâtres. C’est la seule
postérité des races indigènes qui habitaient ces lieux lors de
l’occupation du pays par les Anglais en 1788. Le gouvernement
de New South Wales, tout en accordant aux vieillards et infirmes
des dons hebdomadaires, exige des autres qu’ils se suffisent àeux-
mèmes. Pendant que je visitais cette colonie à la recherche de ren-
seignements sur les habitudes des natifs, ceux-ci m’ont montré des


' 21 JUILLET 1898
dessins représentant trois grands poissons gravés sur les pla-
ques polies du grès de Ilawkesburg (qui borne la baie susdite),
ajoutant que c’était l’œuvre de leurs ancêtres avant l’arrivée des
blancs. Pensant que MM. les membres de votre société prendraient
intérêt à ces croquis (qu’on trouve tout près du monument érigé à la
mémoire de la Pérouse), j’en ai fait un dessin qui les reproduit soi-
gneusement et auquel est jointe une carte du lieu où ils se trouvent.
Le court extrait suivant, de l’llistoire officielle de New Soutb
Wales l , sera peut-être intéressant pour votre société « Les vais-
« seaux Y Astrolabe et la Boussole, de l’expédition française com-
ic mandée par La Pérouse appareillèrent de Botany Bay le
« 10 mars 1788. Pendant leur séjour ici, le Père Le Receveur ,
« embarqué sur 1’ « Astrolabe » en qualité de naturaliste, mourut
« par suite de blessures reçues en quelque malheureuse affaire
« aux Navigator Islands. On lui érigea un monument commémo-
« ratif, avec l’inscription suivante :
HIC JACET LE RECEVEUR.
Ex. F. F. Minoribus Galliae Sacerdos
PHYSICUS IN CIRCUMNAVIGATJONE MUNDI.
DUCED. DE LA PÉROUSE
O 8 1 1 T 17 FEB. ANNO 1788.
« Ce monument ayant été détruit bientôt après par les natifs,
« le Gouverneur Phillip fit graver l’inscription sur cuivre et la
« fixa à un arbre voisin.
« On n’a jamais revu ni La Pérouse ni ses vaisseaux depuis. Une
« expédition entreprise dans le but d’apprendre leur sort n’a pu
« rien découvrir. Ce fut seulement quarante ans plus tard que le
« capitaine Dillon, du vaisseau « Research », appartenant à la
« compagnie des Indes de l’Est, constata que 1’ « Astrolabe » avait
« fait naufrage sur un récif de corail et que la plus grande partie
« de l’équipage avait péri. Les survivants furent rejetés sur les
« îles Mallicolo et moururent plusieurs années avant la visite du
« capitaine Dillon, Un monument, portant l’inscription suivante,
« a été érigé à la mémoire de La Pérouse à Botany Bay et est
« encore debout à l’heure qu’il est :
A LA MÉMOIRE DE MONSIEUR DE La PÉROUSE.
Cette terre, qu’il visita en 1788, est la dernière d’où il a fait parvenir de
ses nouvelles. Erigé au nom de la France par les soins de MM. Bou-
gainville et Ducampier, commandant la frégate « La Thêlis » et
la corvette « L’Espérance » en relâche au Port Jackson en 1825.
Le fondement posé en 1825.
Elevé 1828.
1 Epilome de l’Histoire Officielle de N. S. W. (1883), pp. 20-21.


R. H. MATHEWS. GRAVURES ET PEINTURES SUR ROCHERS
En plusieurs localités de l’Australie, les aborigènes ont coutume
de peindre en diverses couleurs des représentations de mains,
d’outils, d’èlres humains, d’animaux divers. On trouve ces pein-
tures sur les murs des abris sous roche naturels, aux pieds des
grands rochers, dont la partie en saillie les protège contre a
pluie. . ~ . . ,
Afin de mieux renseigner le lecteur sur ce point, j ai juge con-
venable de joindre à cette note descriptive, un dessin (fig. 4) re-
produisant les peintures, que j’ai copiées dans deux de ces excava-
tions. , , .
Le procédé dont usaient les artistes aborigènes pour exécuter
des gravures et peintures semblables à celles ici décrites est
amplement indiqué dans un essai, que j’ai communique a Ins-
titut Anthropologique de La Grande-Bretagne et je me borne a y
renvoyer l .
Figure I Ce poisson énorme paraît représenter un requin ;
il est gravé sur la face horizontale d’une masse de grès de Hawkes-
bury, qui borne la Botany Bay, au hameau de La Perouse, et a
11.78 mètres de longueur. Les deux yeux sont places ( u meme
côté de la tète, ce qui, du reste, se voit très souvent dans es
peintures aborigènes de divers animaux. Cette gravuçe se tiouve
à cent soixante mètres environ vers le sud-ouest du monument de
La Pérouse.
Figure 11. En dedans du contour de la partie antérieure de
la première figure, on voit un autre poisson ayant 4 m. 52 de lon-
gueur. A vrai dire on peut se demander si l’artiste a voulu donner
l’idée du plus grand poisson avalant l’autre, ou bien s’il a place
là son poisson le plus petit parce que la surface du roc en ce point
s’adaptait mieux à son travail.
Figure 111. Cette représentation, très bien rendue, d un pois-
son avant 4 m. 14 de longueur, est gravée sur un rocher au niveau
du sol, à cent vingt mètres à peu près au sud-ouest du monument.
L’artiste, à ce qu’il semble, a dû tenter à deux reprises de repro-
duire la division inférieure de la queue.
Note explicative de la carte jointe à la gravure :
Au nord-ouest du bas promontoire sur lequel le hameau est
i Journal Anthrop. Inst. London, vol. XXV, pp. 14/, 100.


21 JUILLET 1898
bâti, on trouve Frenchmans Bay (la baie du Français) ainsi nom
mée en l’honneur de La Pérouse.
Fig. 1,2, 3. Poissons gravés sur rochers.
A. Point où on a érigé le monument à sa mémoire.
B. Situation du rocher montrant les deux gravures (I et 11).


C. Situation du second rocher portant la figure (III).
D. Bureau télégraphique d’où part le télégraphe sous-marin de
New Zealand.
E. Tombe de Le Receveur, une dalle portant l’inscription
précitée entourée d’une barrière de fer.
F. Restaurant.
G. Bureau de poste.
11. École publique.
I. Douane.
J. Emplacement de la colonie aborigène ci-dessus mentionnée.
Excavation. I. Cette excavation est située au pied d’un haut
escarpement de grès du Ilawkesbury sur la rive droite de Cox s
Creek, commune de Coolcalwin , comté de Phillip. On y voit soixante
quatre mains imprimées en rouge, outre les traces plus ou moins
distinctes de vingt-cinq autres mains. Il y en a encore sept autres,
peintes de la même couleur, ce qui fait en somme soixante et
onze mains encore visibles. Parmi les autres peintures, on distin-
gue une figure ovale, esquissée en rouge et d’ou sort une marque
rouge s’étendant jusqu’à ce qui parait représenter un Waddy
d’aborigène, peint sur le roc. A droite de ce Waddy on en voit
deux plus courts marqués par une ligne rouge, et tout près du
plus petit de ceux-ci se trouvent trois traits, courts aussi, de cou-
leur rouge. Au-dessus de ces derniers on voit une figure indé-
finissable, aux contours irréguliers toujours de couleur rouge.
Plus loin est l’empreinte d’une main gauche visible et entourée
d’une ligne rouge. Le dernier dessin a droite peut repiesenter un
sac aborigène, avec les cordons déliés *.
Excavation 11. - Celle-ci est creusée dans un grand rocher de
grès situé près de la rive gauche de Dural Creek, commune de
Coonbaralba, comté de Hunter , on y voit trente-huit représenta-
tions de mains dont la plupart sont peintes en blanc, d’autres en
rouge, d’autres encore en jaune. Trois de ces mains sont pres-
que inscrites dans une ligne blanche, l’artiste ayant voulu peut-
être les distinguer des autres, L’une des mains est remarquable
par cette particularité qu’elle présente deux pouces, effet qu’on
1 Les dessins de quatorze des mains peintes au mur de cette excavation
ont déjà paru, voir, planche XIV, figure 4, Journal Anthrop. Inst., Londres,
vol. XXV, pp. 145-163. ... •


co
c5
O
e>G
X 5 O
u
ce +*
<D
<U
ZL, 60
tr 1 j-3
s 2
"rt £
CO <£>
© S
6D d
3 a
P 'S
eu
fl
« c
■"ï • ‘5
'JS (/j /—>
*2 S
Jl o
«3 S
jfi o
Ë O
31 _
3
w g-
-3
tn --
O) CU
tn _
p 3
03 <M
7 1


semble avoir produit en mettant d’abord la main droite sur le roc
puis en projetant un liquide colorant autour et enfin en y posant
l’autre main afin d’obtenir l’autre pouce, d’une manière semblable.
Dans certaines figures, on a reproduit le bras jusqu au coude
ou peu s’en faut.
Le dessin le plus remarquable en ce point est celui qui se
compose d’une combinaison de lignes blanches et rouges et de
deux rangées de points blancs. Il est bien regrettable que la plu-
part de ces inscriptions étranges aient disparu, par suite de l’émiet-
tement du rocher, formant la paroi sur laquelle on les a éxécu-
tées.
La partie du rocher en saillie sur ce point a permis à la pluie
d’y entrer, ce qui a très vite fait s’émietter le grès qui résiste mal
à l’action de l’humidité.
Le monument érigé à la mémoire de La Pérouse, dont je vous
adresse une photographie, que j’ai fait faire exprès, est vu du côté
de l’Est. La porte de l’enceinte est ouverte afin de laisser mieux
voir le piédestal. Le côté de Sud porte l’inscription reproduite au
commencement de cet essai, moins la date de l’érection, qu’on a
gravée sur le côté oriental ; les côtés du Nord et d’Ouest portent la
traduction anglaise de l’inscription. Le monument est entouré
d’un mur bas en pierres surmonté d’une barrière de feç; ce mur est
percé d’une porte sur le côte. Les officiers et les equipages des
vaisseaux français de passage ont coutume de rendre visite à ce
monument. Dans une de ces occasions, 1 equipage d un bâtiment
de guerre afin de laisser trace de sa visite, vissa sur la base du
monument une plaque métallique portant 1 inscription qui suit.
t Le Bruat »
a La Pérouse et ses compagnons
Discussion.
M. Capitan. Cette communication présente un très réel inté-
rêt, c’est surtout un intérêt d’actualité.
Aujourd’hui qu’on s’occupe très particulièrement de la question
des gravures et peintures sur rochers aux époques préhistoi iques,
ces renseignements sont précieux à enregistrer.
Ces peintures, ces gravures sur les parois des abris sous roches
australiens, indiquent des habitudes ethniques en tous points


analogues il celles des habitants préhistoriques des grottes de Pair-
non-Pair en France ou de la Mouthe ou encore d’Altamira en Es-
pagne.
Elles rappellent aussi les gravures étudiées assez récemment
dans des grottes du Yucatan par les savants Américains.
La comparaison de ces usages assez récents,que l’on a signalés
d’ailleurs dans toutes les parties du monde avec les similaires
des époques préhistoriques jette une vive lumière sur ces derniers
et permet d’en comprendre la genèse.




JMP. y AF:


The Gundungurra Language
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.


THE GUNDUNGURRA LANGUAGE.
BY R. H, MATHEWS, L.S.
{Read October 1901.)
The Dhar'rook and Gun'dungur'ra tribes respectively occupied
the country fiom the mouth of the Hawkesbury river to Mount
Victoria, and thence southerly to Berrima and Goulburn, New
South Wales. On the south and southeast they were joined by the
Thurrawal, whose language has the same structure, although differ-
ing in vocabulary.
Besides the verbs and pronouns, many of the nouns, adjectives,
prepositions and adverbs are subject to inflection for number and
person. Similar inflections have, to some extent, been observed in
certain islands of the Pacific Ocean, but have not hitherto been
reported in Australia. I have also discovered two forms of the
dual and plural of the first personal pronoun, a specialty which has
likewise been found in Polynesian and North American dialects.
Traces of a double dual were noticed by Mr. Threlkeld at Lake
Macquarie, New South Wales, and traces of a double plural by Mr.
Tuckfield in the Geelong tribe ; but the prevalence of both forms
of the dual and plural in different parts of speech in any Austra-
lian language has, up to the present, escaped observation.
Orthography.
Nineteen letters of the English alphabet are sounded, comprising
fourteen consonants — b, d, g, h, j, k, 1, m, n, p, r, t, w, y —and five
vowels —a, e, i, o, u. Every word is spelled phonetically, the letters
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC. VOL. XL., NO. 167.


having the same value as in English, with the following qualifica-
tions :
Unmarked vowels have the usual short sound.
Vowels having the long sound are distinguished by the follow-
ing marks :
â as in fate I as in pie oo as in moon
â as in father ô as in pole ee as in feel
ou as in loud
It is frequently difficult to distinguish between the short or un-
marked sound of a and that of u. A thick or dull sound of iis
occasionally met with, which closely approaches the short sound of
u or a.
G is hard in every instance.
R has a rough trilled sound, as in hurrah !
Ng at the beginning of a word, as ngee = yes, has a peculiar
sound, which can be got very closely by putting oo before it, as
oong-ee', and articulating it quickly as one syllable. At the end
of a word or syllable it has substantially the sound of ng in our
word sing.
The sound of the Spanish fi is frequent, both at the beginning
or end of a syllable.
Y, followed by a vowel, is attached to several consonants, as in
dya, dyee, tyoo, etc., and is pronounced therewith in one syllable,
the initial sound of the d or other consonant being retained. Y
at the beginning of a word or syllable has its usual consonant
value.
Dh'is pronounced nearly as th in “ that ” with a slight sound of
the d preceding it.
Nh has nearly the sound of th in “ that ” with an initial sound
of the n.
The final h is guttural, resembling ch in the German word
“ joch.”
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k in most
words where these letters are employed.
A sound resembling j is frequently given by the natives, which
can be represented by dy or ty ; thus, dya or tya has very
nearly the same sound as ja.
In all cases where there is a double consonant, each letter is dis-
tinctly enunciated.


W always commences a syllable or word and has its ordinary
consonant sound in all cases.
At the end of a syllable or word, ty is sounded as one letter ;
thus, in beety-bal-lee-man, it is disappearing, the syllable beety
can be obtained by commencing to say “beet-ye,” and stopping
short without articulating the final e, but including the sound of
the y in conjunction with the t—the two letters being pronounced
together as one.
Articles.
The equivalents of the English articles, “a” and “the,” do
not occur in this language.
Nouns.
(i) Singular . .
. . A man
Murrin
Dual ....
M urrinboolallee
Plural . . .
. . Several men
M urrindyargang
(2) Singular . .
. . A kangaroo
Booroo
Dual ....
Booroolallee
Plural . . .
. . Several kangaroos
Boorooyargang
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual and plural :
It will be observed that the dual and plural suffixes vary slightly
in form, according to the termination of the noun.
Gender. —Mur'rin, a man; bul'lan, a woman; boobal, a boy;
mullunga, a girl; goodha, a child of either sex; warrambal, a
young man. Another name for a man is boual ; a married man is
kunbeelang ; a married woman is boualillang. Generally the males
of animals are distinguished by the addition of goomban, and the
females by dhoorook. The males of certain animals have a name
which distinguishes them without stating the sex; thus, the male of
wallee, the opossum, is known as jerrawul, while the female is wallee
dhoorook. Goola, the native bear, has burrandang for the male
and goola dhoorook for the female. A few animals have a distinc-
tive word for the female as well as for the male ; thus, the female of
the wallaroo is bâwa, and the male goondarwâ. Others again have
the suffix koual for the male, and nouai for the female. The words
for “ male ” and “female” are inflected for number like other
adjectives.
Case. —There are two forms of the nominative, the first naming
the subject at rest ; as, Boual ngabooroman, the man sleeps. The


second shows that the subject is doing some act ; thus, mirreegangga
wallee burrâran, the dog an opossum bit. Mirreegang is a dog in
the first nominative.
The possessive case takes a suffix both to the possessor and that
which is possessed :
Murringoo warrangangoong, a man’s boomerang.
Mirreegangoo goodhâwoong, a dog’s puppy.
Bullangoo goodhâyarroong, a woman’s children.
Booroongoo dhoombirgoong, a kangaroo’s tail.
Any object over which one can exercise ownership can be con-
jugated by possessive suffixes for number and person :
, First Person . . . My boomerang Warrangandya
Singular, -j Second Person . . Thy boomerang Warranganyee
l Third Person . . His boomerang Warrangangooi
Warranganyee
Warrangangoong
f pj rst p erson f Our boomerang, incl. Warrangangulla
I lrs e j Our boomerang, excl. Warrangangullang
Dual. . 4 second Person . . Your boomerang Warranganboola
L Third Person . . Their boomerang Warranganboolangoo
f ( Our boomerang, incl. Warranganyinnang
I FirSt erson - * | Our boomerang, excl. Wârranganyillung
r irsi r-eisuu. . _
l Our boomerang, e
Plural . -j Second p erson . . Your boomerang
{ Third Person . . Their boomerang
Warranganyoorung
Warrangandyunnung
The accusative does not differ from the nominative. There are
a few forms of nouns for the dative and oblative, but these cases
are frequently shown by modifications of the verb ) as, I carried to
him, he carried from me. They are also indicated by the pro-
nouns ; as, with me, to me.
Pronouns
Pronouns are inflected for number, person and case. There are
two forms of the dual and plural in the first person. The following
table shows the nominative and possessive cases :
I Goolangga
Mine Goolanggooya
Thine Goolanyingoo
Singular. ; Thou Goolanjee
Dhannooladhoo His
Dhannoogoolangoo
f We, inch Goolanga Ours, incl. Goolangalia
We, excl. Goolangaloong Ours, excl. Goolangaloong
Dual . . • Y e Goolamboo Yours Goolambooloong
They Dhannooboola Theirs Dhannooboolangoo


f We, inch Goolanyan Ours, inch Goolanyannung
Plural . J We, exc f Goolanyilla Ours, excl. Goolanyillungoon
I Ye Goolambanoo Yours Goolanthooroong
They Dhannoojimmalang Theirs Goolangandyoolang
These possessives admit of variations to include two or several
articles and in other ways. There are also forms of the pronouns
signifying, with me, with thee, and so on as follows :
First Person With me Goolangngooreea
Singular.
Second Person . . . With thee Goolangooroonyee
Third Person .... With him Goolangooroong
f Fj rst p erson f With us, inch Goolangooroongulla
J ( With us, excl. Gaolangooroongullung
I Second Person . . . With ye Goolangoorooloong
Third Person .... With them Goolangooroolangoo
Dual.
First Person f With us, incl. Goolangooroonunnung
1 With us, excl. Goolangooroonullungoo
Second Person . . . With ye Goolangooroonooroong
Third Person .... With them Goolangooroodyunnung
Plural.
There are other modifications of the pronouns to meet different
forms of expression. The demonstratives and interrogatives are
inflected for number and person like the rest.
Adjectives.
Adjectives take the same dual and plural numbers as the nouns
(i) Barri buggarabang
A wallaby, large
Barri woolallee buggarabangoolallee
A couple of wallabies, both large
Barridyargang buggarabangargang
Several wallabies, all large
(2) Bullan yeddung
A woman pretty
Bullanboollee yeddungboolallee
A couple of pretty women
Bullandhar yeddungdyargang
Several pretty women
with which they are used :
Comparison is effected by saying, This is heavy—that is heavy ;
this is smooth—that is not ; this is sharp—that is very sharp.-
When used predicatively, as yooroang or yoorwang, he is strong,
an adjective can be conjugated through all the tenses and moods
of an intransitive verb :


Present Tense.
First Person . . .lam strong Yooroangga or Yoorwangga
Singular. / Second Person . Thou art strong Yooroandyee
Third Person . . He is strong
Yooroang
f p irst p erson fWe are strong, incl. Yooroanga
11 We are strong, excl. Yooroangaloong
Second Person . Ye are strong Yooroangboo
Third Person . . They are strong Yooroangboola
’ . _ (We are strong, incl. Yooroanyun
First Person. . t ° „
lWe are strong, excl. Yooroanyulla
Second Person . Ye are strong Yooroanthoo
Third Person . . They are strong Yooroanjimmalang
Dual. . .
Plural. .
The past and future tenses are not given, owing to want of space.
Verbs.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, the usual per-
sons and tenses, and three principal moods, viz., indicative, im-
perative and conditional. The verb-stem and a contraction of the
pronoun are incorporated, and the word thus forrped is used in the
conjugation.
INDICATIVE MOOD.
Present Tense.
i
First Person. .
. I throw (throw I)
Yerreemangga
Singular. ,
Second Person
. Thou throwest
Yerreemandyee
Third Person .
. He throws
Yerreeman
First Person. .
| We throw, inch
Yerreemang'a
Dual . . ■
1 We throw, excl.
Yerreemangaloong
Second Person
. Ye throw
Yerreemanboo
Third Person .
. They throw
Yerreemanboola
First Person. .
( We throw, inch
Yerreemanyan
Plural .
l We throw, excl.
Yerreemanyalla
Second Person
. Ye throw
Yerreemanthoo
Third Person .
. They throw
Yerreemandyoolung
Past Tense.
S First Person. . . I threw (threw I)
Second Person . Thou threwest
Third Person . .He threw
Yerreering'ga
Yerreerindyee
Yerreering


f r . , n fWe threw, inch
I First Person. . 1 ’
t We threw, excl
j Second Person . Ye threw
| Third Person . . They threw
Yerreering'a
Dual .
Yerreeringaloong
Yerreeringboo
Y erreeringboola
I First Person. . { We threw, inch
(. We threw, excl.
I Second Person . Ye threw
i Third Person . . They threw
Yerreeooranyan
Yerreeoorany ulla
Yerreeooranthoo
Y erreeooradyoolung
Plural
Future Tense.
Singular.
First Person. . .1 will throw
Second Person . Thou wilt throw
Third Person . . He will throw
Yerreeningga
Yerrenindyee
Yerreenin
f . y, ( We will throw, inch
I First Person . . -j
t We will throw, excl.
1 Second Person . Ye will throw
Yerreening'a
Dual,
Yerreeni n galoong
Yerreenimboo
Third Person . . They will throw
Yerreenimboola
I T ,. .r, fWe will throw, inch
b irst Person. . < '
( We will throw, excl.
Second Person . Ye will throw
Third Person . . They will throw
Yerreeninyan
Yerreeninyulla
Plural
Yerreemunanthoo
Yerreemunadyoolung
IMPERATIVE MOOD.
Singular . . Second Person .... Throw thou
Yer'-ree
Dual .... Second Person . . . ■. Throw ye
Yer'-ree-ou'
Plural. . . Second Person .... Throw ye
Yer'-ree-a-nhoor'
CONDITIONAL MOOD.
Perhaps I will throw Yerreeningga
booramboonda
If a negative meaning be required, it is effected by means of an
infix, mooga, between the verb-stem and the abbreviated pronoun.
One example in the first person singular in each tense will exhibit
the negative form of the verb
I am not throwing
I did not throw
I will not throw
Yerreemoogamangga
Yerreemoogaringga
Yerreemooganingga
This negative infix can be applied in the same manner to all the
persons of the three tenses.
There are numerous modifications of the verbal suffixes to con-
vey variations of meaning ; as, “ I threw at him,” “ He threw at


me," etc., which can be conjugated for number and person. Case
can also be indicated in this way, as already stated in dealing with
the nouns.
Verbs have no passive voice. If a native desires to state that a
fish was swallowed by a pelican, he would say, “ A pelican swal-
lowed a fish."
Prepositions.
Some prepositions can be used separately, as dhooreegoong, be-
tween ; warroo, around ; willinga, behind, and several others,
thus : Dhooreegoong ngullawoolee, between trees two or between
two trees ; gunbee warroo, the fire around or around the fire.
A prepositional meaning is often obtained by a verb ; thus,
instead of having a word for “up " or “down,” a native will say,
Boomaningga, up I will go ; woorâramuningga, down I will go.
Many of the prepositions admit of conjugation for number and
person, as in the following example :
Singular.
( First Person . . . Behind me
< Second Person . Behind thee
( Third Person . . Behind him
Willingia
Willinganyee
Willingâwoong
„. f Behind us, mcl. Willmgangulla
1 Behind us, excl. Willingangullung
‘ Second Person . Behind ye Willingangâwooloong
Third Person . . Behind them Willingangawoolangoo
' f Behind us, incl. Willinganyanung
irst erson '• j Behind us, excl. Willinganyanungoo
' Second Person . Behind ye Willinganthooroong
Third Person . . Behind them Willingadyanung
Dual,
» Plural
Adverbs.
Space will not permit of a list of adverbs any further than to
illustrate how some of them can be conjugated :
First Person . . Where go I Ngoondeeneea
Second Person . Where goest thou Ngoondeeneenee
Third Person . . Where goes he Ngoondeeneeoong
Singular
f. r Where go we, incl. Ngoondeeneenga
| First Person. . j where gQ we excl Ngoondeeneengoolung
Dual • • j Second Person . Where go ye Ngoondeeneewoo
Third Person . . Where go they Ngoondeeneewoola


First Person j Where g° we > incl - Ngoondeeneennun
Plural Where go we, excl. Ngoondeeneenulla
' Second Person . Where go ye Ngoondeeneenoo
Third Person . . Where go they Ngoondeeneeyoolung
Adverbial meanings are sometimes conveyed by means of verbs,
as beetyballeeman, he (or it) goes out of sight. Conjunctions
and interjections are few and unimportant.


INITIATION CEREMONIES OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L S.






PROCEEDINGS AM. PHILOS. SOC.
VOL. XXXVII, No. 157, PLATE V.




INITIATION CEREMONIES OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
(Plate V.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read March 18, 1898.)
The Koombanggary tribe, which was at one time both numerous
and important, inhabits the country from the south side of the
Clarence river along the sea coast about as far as Nambucc.a, ex-
tending westerly almost to the main dividing range. On the south
they are bounded by the Thangatty tribe, occupying the Macleay
river. The Anaywan tribe, scattered over the table land of New
South Wales, bound the Thangatty and Koombanggary people on
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXVII, NO. 157.


thewest. As no description of the Bürbüng of these tribes has yet
been published, I have prepared the following brief account of that
ceremony as practiced within the district indicated. Their social
organization is after the Kamilaroi type, being divided into four
sections, 1 with numerous totems consisting of animals, plants and
other natural objects.
A Bürbüng is held at any time that there are a sufficient number
of boys old enough to be installed as tribesmen ; and the headman
of the tribe, whose turn it is to take the initiative in calling the
people together for this purpose, is generally agreed upon at the
conclusion of the previous inaugural gathering which took place.
When the appointed time comes round, the tribe who are charged
with this duty select a suitable camping ground within their own
territory, and some of the initiated men commence preparing the
ground. While they are employed at this work, the principal head-
man dispatches messengers to such of the surrounding tribes as he
wishes to join in the ceremony. These men are selected from among
his own friends and belong to his own totem. Each messenger has
generally one or more other men with him to keep him company,
and he is provided with the emblems usually carried on such occa-
sions, namely, a bull-roarer, several articles of a man’s dress and
some native weapons. The conduct of these messengers on thejr
arrival in the proximity of the camp of the people to whom the
invitation has been sent is very similar to the procedure previously
explained in my descriptions of the initiation ceremonies of other
tribes. , ,
The situation of the general encampment as regards water and
food supplies, and the location of the visiting tribes around the local
mob, are also substantially the same as already stated. In a retired
spot, a short distance from the main camp, the headmen have a
private meeting place, called the bunbul, where they congregate to
discuss such matters as they do not wish the women to hear. They
have one or more fires around which they sit, and none of the un-
initiated men are allowed near them. The women must not intrude
upon the bunbul, even if the men are not there. The single women
and girls also have a place near the camp, but in the opposite direc-
tion, where they assemble to work at making nets, headbands and
1 1 have given the names of the divisions of these people in my paper on » Ihe
Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Waits,
xxxi, 168-170.


such like. Every aboriginal camp is kept free from excrementitious
matter. When the people go out to attend to any necessity of
nature, they at once make a hole in the ground and cover the
deposit over with earth.
In close proximity to the camp is the bürbüng or public ring,
bounded by a low earthen embankment, with a narrow sunken
pathway called maro, leading about four or five hundred yards into
the forest to another circular space, formed in the same manner,
known as the eeteemat, in the floor of which the butts of two sap-
lings are firmly inserted, having the rooty ends upwards. These
inverted stumps are called warringooringa, and are prepared in the
way described in my papers dealing with initiation ceremo-
nies elsewhere. 1 The maro enters both the circles through
a narrow opening left in the embankment, and the latter is
continued outward a few feet along either side of the path where
it meets the rings. Within the eeteemat there are also sometimes
two, and sometimes four, heaps of earth, about a foot and a half or
two feet high.
Around the outside of the eeteemat and along both sides of the
pathway referred to, there are a number of trees marked with the
usual mootfibeera devices, as well as the outlines of an iguana, a
squirrel, the new moon and other figures, all chopped into the bark
with a tomahawk. On one side of the path are some tracks of an
emu’s foot, cut into the surface of the ground a few feet apart, as if
made by that animal running along. These tracks lead away some
distance into the adjacent bush, forming a sort of curve or semi-
circle around the eeteeviat ; and on following them up they are found
to terminate at the prone figure of an emu, ngooroon, formed by
heaping up the loose earth into the required shape. All over the
body of the emu thus drawn in high relief small twigs of the oak or
wattle tree are closely inserted to represent the feathers of the bird.
All the sticks and loose rubbish are scraped off the surface of the
ground for several yards around this figure, for the purpose of danc-
ing on.
Approaching the eeteemat, near one side of the pathway, there is
a low mound of earth about a foot high. This is called kooroor-
ballunga, and a fire is lit on top of it during the time that any per-
1,4 The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes,” Journ. Anthrop. xxv, 325.
* 2 The fronds or leaves of these trees bear some resemblance to the emu’s
feathers.


formance is going on, such as the arrival of a tribe, their daily
games and the ceremonial connected with the removal of the
novices.
In the vicinity of the marked trees is a gigantic human figure
named Dharroogan or Gowang, lying extended on the ground,
composed of the loose soil scraped off the surface for some yards
around. A little way farther on, near the eeteemat, is the prostrate
image of a wallaroo, formed in high relief in the same manner. In
building all the earthen figures just described, stones or pieces of
wood are first heaped up on the ground, almost to the height of the
object required, and on top of this the loose earth is thrown to com-
plete the figure and give it the necessary shape. The finished draw-
ing represents the intended animal in high relief on the surface of
the ground.
A rope made of stringy bark is stretched between two of the
marked trees which are not too far apart, and about midway along
this rope there is a bundle of leaves and finely frayed pieces of soft
bark, supposed to represent the rest of a ring-tail opossum. 1
When a strange tribe reaches a point somewhere within an easy
stage of the main camp they paint their bodies with colored clays
in accordance with the style customary in their tribe, after which
the journey forward is resumed, the men in the lead, with the women
and children following. On the approach of the strangers, the men
of the local mob, and also the men of previous contingents who
have arrived at the main camp, stand outside the bürbung circle
with their spears and other weapons in their hands, and sway their
bodies to and fro. The new arrivals then march on in single file,
in a meandering line, each man carrying his weapons in his hands;
they enter the ring and march round and round until they are all
within it in a spiral fold. They now come to a stand and jump
about, the headman calling out the names of camping grounds,
water-holes, shady trees, etc., in their country. After this they
come out of the ring and each detachment of the hosts enter it in
succession and act in a similar manner. For example, the contin-
gent from Kempsey, who had arrived first, entered the ring and
called out the names of remarkable places ; next, the contingent
from Armidale did likewise ; then the contingent from Tabulam,
and so on. Lastly, the men of the local Nymboi river mob enter
1 All the animals drawn upon the trees, or on the ground, represent the totems
of some of the people assembled at the main camp.


the ring and act in the same way. While this reception is being
accorded to the men, the women, novices and children go into the
camping ground and take up their quarters on the side nearest their
own country.
The men of the newly arrived contingent are next taken along
the track to the sacred ground, and are shown all the markings in
the soil and on the trees, the earthen figures in high relief, and
the fire, at each of which they dance and give a shout. They then
start along the tracks of the emu, some men being on one side and
some on the other, the front men pretending to be following the
jnarks in the ground. They make short grunt-like exclamations as>
they run along and all the other men follow in a body. On reach-
ing the figure of the emu, they all give a shout and dance round on
the clear space before referred to.
They next assemble around the eeteeviat and are shown the war-
rangooringa, on the roots of each of which an old man is sitting
performing magical feats. Some of the headmen enter the ring
dancing and singing round the heaps of earth and the warrangoo-
ringa, after which the two men descend from the latter and join the
others. All the wizards or “ doctors ” take their turn at produc-
ing rock-crystals, blood, string and other substances from different
parts of their bodies. After each trick, these clever fellows run
with their heads down amongst the men who are standing outside
the ring, who jump around to get out of their way. At the conclu-
sion of these performances all the men go back along the track, and at
about, say fifty yards from the bü?'büng , they are met by the novices,
who join the procession, taking their places with the men of their
own sectional division, 1 who enter the ring and dance round a few
times, naming remarkable localities in their several districts, their
totems, etc., and the women, who are standing around outside,
throw handfuls of leaves at them, after which they all disperse to
their respective quarters.
A week or two, and in some cases a much longer time, elapses
between the arrival of the first contingent and the last mob who
have been invited from the surrounding districts, so that the earlier
arrivals have a good while to wait at the main camp. During this
period carraborus are held almost every fine night, the different
tribes present taking their turn at providing the evening’s amuse-
ment. The men go out hunting every day and the women proceed
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. IVales, xxxi, 169.


in search of vegetable food, but there are always some of the old
men and women in the camp. Each afternoon when the men re-
turn from the hunting or fishing expeditions, which have engaged
them during the earlier portion of the day, the men of the local
tribe start from the camp and walk away to the eeteemat, carrying a
boomerang or some other weapon in each hand. They are shortly
afterwards followed by the men of the other tribes, each mob start-
ing in the order of their arrival at the main camp. On reaching the
ring they look over the moombeera, the raised and carved figures on
the ground, the warrangooringa, etc., and go through practically
the same routine —and return to the bürbüng in the same manner —
as on the arrival of a new tribe. On some days during their visit
to the eeteemat, the bullroarer is sounded, and the men beat the
ground with pieces of bark held in the hand. It may be that a few
additional trees are marked on these occasions, or some improve-
ments are made in the earthen figures, or any other extra work
which may add to the embellishment of the ground.
As soon as convenient after the arrival of all the tribes who are
expected to join in the ceremony the headmen assemble, and after
a consultation among themselves they determine the day on which
the novices will be taken away for the purpose of initiation. The
Kooringal, or band of men who are to take charge of the ceremo-
nies in the bush, are selected and the locality fixed where the women
are to erect the new camp and wait for the return of the novices.
On the morning which has been decided upon for taking the boys
away, the whole camp is astir at daylight. The painting of the
novices is now proceeded with, all of them being adorned with red
ochre and grease from head to foot. Each boy is then invested
with a girdle, to which four “ tails ” or kilts are attached, one hang-
ing down in front, one at each side and one behind. They are
then conducted into the bürbüng ring and placed sitting down on
the raised earthen wall, the boys of each tribe being in a group
by themselves on the side of the ring which is nearest their own
country. The mother of each novice is then seated outside the em-
bankment a few yards behind where he is sitting ; his sisters and
the other women are placed on the ground a little farther back. A
screen of boughs is erected between each group of mothers and their
sons. One or more of the headmen now go along the groups of
novices and throw a rug over the head of each boy. All the women
and children are told to lie down and keep still, and are covered


MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
with rugs, bushes or grass, which have been placed in readiness for
the purpose. The women then commence making a low humming
or chanting noise, and several old men armed with spears keep
watch over them to see that no attempt is made to remove the cov-
ering or look about.
When these preliminaries have been completed, two men sound
bull-roarers ( yoolooduree or yeemboomul) in close proximity and a
few other men come along the path and run round inside the circle
beating the ground with pieces of bark, similar to those described
in my paper on The Bürbüng of the Wiradthun Tribes d All the
men who are standing about the circle shout and beat their weapons
together, a separate detachment of men being located near each
group of women for this purpose. During the combined noise of
the bull-roarers, the shouting and the beating of the ground, the
guardians advance, and, assisted by some of their friends, raise the
novices on their shoulders and carry them away, their heads being
still covered with the rugs to prevent their seeing anything. The
novices are taken as far as the commencement of the moombeera ,
where they are placed lying on the ground with the rugs spread over
them. Here they are kept a short time until the women depart
from the bürbüng, particulars of which will be given presently.
This delay also furnishes an opportunity to the men who have been
chosen for the kooringal to go on to the kooroorballunga and paint
their bodies jet black with powdered charcoal and grease.
The novices are then raised to their feet and the rugs are adjusted
on their heads in such a manner that they can only see the ground
in front of them. Their guardians lead them along the pathway
and they are shown the marked trees, the drawings on the ground,
the fire, the squirrel’s nest, etc., and are told to take particular no-
tice of all these things. They are next conducted along the tracks
of the emu until they reach the bird lying on the ground, as already
described, around which some old men dance and all the people
give a shout. After this they proceed to the eeteemat , and the
novices are placed standing in a row. On being told to raise their
eyes, they see two old men sitting on the warrangooringa exhibit-
ing different substances out of their mouths, whilst some of the
other men are dancing around the heaps of earth. An old man
with a coolamin of human blood now approaches the novices and
rubs some of the blood on their wrists. The guardians again bend
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxv, 308, PI. xxvi, Fig. 40.


down the boys’ heads and a start is made for the bush. The war-
rangooringa stumps are then pulled out of the ground and placed
upon the fire, some of the men remaining in the vicinity until they
are consumed.
I must now take the reader back to the bürbüng ring. Shortly
after the guardians and novices get out of sight, the bushes and
other coverings are taken off the women and children by the men
who have remained in charge of them. They then gather up their
baggage and remove to another locality, perhaps several miles dis-
tant, where they erect a new camp, each tribe selecting their quar-
ters on the side of the camping ground nearest their own country.
Before starting from the bürbüng, a pole is inserted in the ground in
a slanting position, elevated and pointing in the direction of the
place where the new camp is to be established. If this locality is
some distance off, a long pole is used, making a considerable angle
with the horizon, but if the camp is not far away, the pole is shorter
and the angle of elevation less. The upper end is decorated by
having a bunch of green boughs, grass or feathers attached to it.
This indicator is left for the guidance of any natives who may
arrive at the main camp after the assemblage has broken up.
As already stated, the novices have started with the men into the
bush. They march along with the rugs projecting on each side of
the face like a hood —their guardians being with them, and the
other men following, making a considerable noise. During the
afternoon they arrive at the place where it is intended they shall
remain for the night. A semicircular yard is made of bushes or
bark, and the novices are placed sitting on leaves spread upon the
ground, their backs being toward the men’s camp, which may be
fifty or sixty yards away. This camp is called karpan. Between
the men’s quarters and the yard in which the novices are kept a
space is cleared of all loose rubbish, and one or more fires lit to
afford sufficient illumination. After the evening meal has been
disposed of, the boys are brought out of their yard and are put
sitting down facing the fires, while the Kooringal go through
various pantomimic representations and traditional songs. These
performances consist for the most part of imitating animals with
which the people are familiar, or scenes from their daily life ; and,
like the ceremonials of other savage races, are largely mixed with
obscene gestures. The animals selected include, amongst others,
the totems of some of the novices, the headmen and the kooringal.


*62 MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
During the day the men go out hunting, to provide food for all
the party, but the novices remain in the camp in charge of a few of
their guardians. Several days may be spent in one camp, or per-
haps a fresh camping place is reached every night, especially if
game is scarce. In the latter case it would be necessary for the
novices and guardians to accompany the rest of the men. The
novices march along with the rugs on their heads, and when stop-
pages are made in the bush they are placed sitting on the ground
with their hands clutching their genitals. On arriving at the place
which has been agreed upon as the camping ground for the night,
a yard is made for the boys in the usual manner. During the
evenings at these camping places human ordure is occasionally
given to the novices in addition to their daily food. If they want
anything they are not allowed to ask for it, but must make a sign to
the guardian who has charge of them. Some or all of the men who
are not attached to the kooringal may go away for a day or two to
another camping place some miles distant in quest of food, and
contribute a fair share of game to the maintenance of the novices
and guardians.
The period spent in the bush with the kooringal is about ten
days or a fortnight, being regulated by the weather and other con-
siderations. Different burlesques and songs take place every day,
but the general character of the procedure is the same. If the
wombat totem is represented, the kooringal crawl under a log as if
going into a wombat’s hole ; if they select the scrub-turkey, all
the men scratch the ground with their feet, kicking the rubbish
backwards into a large heap resembling the nest of those birds; and
so on for any other totems which may be represented.
When the course of instruction in the bush is nearly completed,
■some strange men, called irghindaly or wyendee , come from the
ahrowanga, or women’s camp. They belong to a distant part of
the tribal territory, and this is their first participation in the cere-
mony. On approaching the karpan, they utter a weird noise, like
the howling of the wild dog, and advance in single file, each man
holding a leafy bough in front of him, which hides the upper part
of his body. The novices are led to believe that a strange mob of
blacks are coming to attack the camp. They are then raised to
their feet, and placed standing in a row, with their guardians, some
of the kooringal, standing on the right and some on the left of the
row of boys, having the latter in the middle, holding their hands


MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
to their ears. By this time the irghindaly have reached the camp,
and form into a line parallel with and facing the row of men and
novices. They jump and shake their boughs, and then, throwing
the latter on the ground, they retire a few yards. The kooringal
now step forward and pick up the boughs and strip the leaves off
them, shouting wah ! wah ! while doing so. The irghindaly then
consult with the headmen, and arrange the time for the return of
the novices to the ahrowanga, after which they go back to the
camp from which they have come, and inform the women when the
boys may be expected. The mission of the irghindaly is analogous
to that of the beegay of the Kamilaroi, described by me elsewhere,
namely, to liberate the novices from the rigorous custody of the
kooringal.
That evening at the karpan, by the light of the camp fires, some
of the usual totemic representations are enacted by the kooringal,
after which some of the old men chant Dharroogaris song. About
sunrise next morning the novices are placed standing in a row
beside the camp, with their eyes cast upon the ground. All the
men then run about pretending to throw pieces of stick at a squirrel
in a tree, and while they are doing so two men step into an open
space and swing the yooloodury . The blankets are then lifted off
the heads of the novices, who are requested to take particular notice
of this ceremony. Some armed warriors now rush up to each of
the novices in a menacing attitude, and caution them against
revealing what they have been taught during their sojourn in the
bush. At the conclusion of these proceedings, everything is packed
up and a start made toward the women’s camp.
After proceeding some miles the party come to a halt at a water-
hole or running stream. Here a fire is lit, and they partake of such
game as may have been caught during the morning. By and by
all the kooringal gather on the bank of the water-hole or creek, and
one after another goes into the water, washing off the black coloring
matter, after which they come out, and paint their bodies all over
with pipe clay. During this time the novices are sitting on the
bank of the water-hole —or near the fire if the day is cold—and do
not participate in the washing and painting ceremony. This water-
hole is one which is always used for the same purpose at every
bürbüng which takes place in this part of the tribal territory, and is
never used for bathing on any other occasion. The journey forward
is then resumed, and one of the men goes on ahead to report that the
bush contingent will shortly arrive.


64 MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18 r
I must now give some further particulars of the new camp erected
by the women, referred to in an earlier page. The same camp
may be occupied all the time the novices are away, or the women
may shift to a fresh camping ground every few nights, in conformity
with the movements of the kooringal. A patch of ground is cleared
near each of these camping places, to which the mothers and
sisters of the novices repair every evening for the purpose of sing-
ing and dancing during the time the boys are away in the bush with
the headmen. As soon as the women are informed of the day which
has been fixed for the return of the kooringal, they proceed to this
cleared space and erect an avenue of boughs, called the arrowanga,
in the following manner. In this work they are assisted by the old
men who have been with them all the time, and also by the irghin-
daly contingent. A number of small green saplings are cut down
with tomahawks, and the stems are inserted in holes made in the
ground, all in a line—the bushy tops being sufficiently close
together to make a leafy screen, about four feet high. A few feet
from this, another line of saplings is set up, parallel with the other.
The two rows of boughs are fixed in the ground with a slant
toward each other, so that their tops almost meet overhead, forming
a kind of arched avenue long enough to hold all the kooringal. A
few yards on one side of this avenue, and parallel thereto, the
women light about four fires, beyond which they sit down in a row r
and commence chanting in monotonous tones.
When all is ready, a signal is given by the men who have charge
of the women, and the bush mob approach in single file, all painted
white, as already stated. On coming in sight of the arrowanga
the novices and their guardians stop behind, and go to another
camp a little way off, where they remain for the night. The women
are now told to lie down, and are covered with bushes. The
kooringal march on and enter the avenue of bushes, one after the
other, and sit down with their legs gathered under them in the
usual native fashion. During this time a small bull-roarer, called
dhalgüngun , is sounded out of sight in the rear. A few of the head-
men jump round outside the avenue, beating together two boom-
erangs, and muttering wooh ! wooh ! After going round two or
three times, they shout birr ! birr ! and all the women stand up and
dance round the men who are hidden in the avenue. After going
round a few times, the women commence pulling down the bough
screen, upon which all the kooringal rise to their feet, and also'


1898.] MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 65
commence pulling the bushes out of the ground, breaking them
smaller and throwing them on the fires as they jump about. The
women also assist in breaking the twigs off the boughs and placing
them on the fires. By this time a dense smoke is issuing from the
burning bushes, and some of the kooringal stand in the smoke
around each fire until they are all sufficiently fumigated. A few of
the old headmen stand round directing the proceedings, and the
irghindaly assist in throwing bushes on the fires when more smoke
is required. While the kooringal are standing on the smouldering
boughs, the women come up and rub their hands on them, ostensi-
bly to wipe the white paint off them. When the ceremony is over
it is getting near sundown, and the kooringal mix with the women
and irghindaly, and all of them go into the camp adjacent.
During the forenoon of the following day the mothers and sisters
of the novices, accompanied by some of the men, again muster at
the arrowanga, but on this occasion no bough screen is erected, and
the women are allowed to see everything which takes place. Some
fires are lit and green bushes cut and laid round ready for use. At
the camp to which the novices and their guardians went the even-
ing before preparations are also made for the approaching cere-
mony. The bodies of the boys are smeared over with ashes from
the camp fires, and the hair of their heads is singed, to make the
women believe that they have been burnt by the evil spirit and
have just emerged from the fire. After a mutual interchange of
signals that everything is ready at both camps the guardians and
novices start forward, marching two and two till they arrive at the
arrowanga. As they approach.the women shout “ Heh ! heh !” and
throw pieces of bark over their heads. The irghindaly lay some of
the green bushçs on the fires and each guardian conducts his novice
into the smoke, which curls upward around them both. The
mothers of the boys, who have been standing on one side, now ad-
vance and rub their open hands over the bodies of their sons, after
which they rub their teats on their mouths. The sisters of the
novices next step forward and rub their feet on their brothers’
ankles. During the whole of this ceremony the novices keep their
eyes cast down, and do not look at their mothers or sisters. A
signal is now given and they scamper off with their guardians to a
camp which has been prepared for them not far away.
At the conclusion of the ceremonies at the arrowanga all the
tribes shift camp to another place, perhaps a few miles away, and


66 MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
next morning the novices are brought up in close proximity, where
they are again smoked, after which they are invited to partake of
food spread upon nets by the women. They are then conducted to
a camp a little way from the men’s quarters, where the old head-
men show them quartz crystals and other sacred substances; and
also small pieces of wood called bandhanyay or kungara, on which
certain mystic lines are made, said to be the work of Dharroogan.
They are forbidden to eat certain kinds of food until released from
these restrictions by the old men.
The ceremonies being now at an end, the visiting tribes make
preparations for starting on their return journey, and in a few days
most of them are on their way homeward, each tribe taking their
own novices with them. The latter are kept under the control
of their seniors for a considerable time, and must conform to cer-
tain rules laid down by the headmen. It is also necessary that they
shall attend one or more additional Bürbüng gatherings before they
can become thoroughly acquainted with the different parts of the
ceremonial and be fully qualified to take their place as men of the
tribe.
On the Macleay river there is an abbreviated form of inaugural
rite, known as the Murrawin, and among the tribes occupying the
Nymboi and Mitchell rivers there is a short ceremony called the
Walloonggurra. Both these rites are of a probationary character,
leading up to the fuller ceremonial of the burbling, from which
they differ in so many respects that I have thought it necessary to
describe them in separate articles.
Before cannibalism ceased to be practiced by the tribes dealt
with in this paper it was the custom to kill and eat a man during
the bürbtmg ceremonies. The victim was an initiated man of the
tribe, and his flesh and blood were consumed by the men and
novices. I am preparing an article dealing fully with this and
similar customs, so that further reference is unnecessary at present.
Explanation of Plate V.
The bürbüng described in the preceding pages completes a series
.of articles written by me on the different types of initiatory rites
of the aboriginal tribes scattered over the whole of New South Wales.
I have now prepared a map of the colony, defining the boun-
daries of the several districts within which each type of ceremony


1895.] MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 67
is in force. On this map I have marked the approximate position
of these boundaries, and have assigned to each district a distin-
guishing numeral, from 1 to 9, so that they can be readily identi-
fied. It is outside the purpose of this paper to define the areas
occupied by the people speaking the different dialects prevalent in
each district, but the names of some of the most important of them
will be stated in a general way under each number. The reader
will be referred to certain articles which I have published describ-
ing the initiation ceremonies, and also the totemic divisions of the
tribes located inside the boundaries shown upon the map.
No. 1 on the map represents a wide zone of country stretching
from near the Murray river almost to the Barwon, occupied chiefly
by the Wiradjuri-speaking people. This includes the VVonghibons,
a branch of the Wiradjuri, who are spread over the country from
Mossgiel to Nyngan. 1 On the Lower Murrumbidgee and extending
up the Murray from about Euston are several small tribes speaking
the following dialects : The Eetha-eetha, Watthi-watthi, Kianigani,
Yuppila, Yota Yota, Boorabirraba and some others on the upper
Murray whose initiation ceremonies are the same as the Wiradjuri.
For my descriptions of the bürbüng of these people the reader is
invited to peruse the following publications : Journ. Anthrop. pnst.
London, Vol. xxv, pp. 295-318; Ibid., Vol. xxvi, pp. 272-275.
Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), Vol. xi, pp. 167-169, and
Journ, Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxi, pp. 111-153. I have
also dealt with their totemic division in the last-named work, pp.
171-176.
No. 2 includes the country of the Kamilaroi, Yookumble, Wal-
laroi, Pickumble, Yuollary, Wailwan, Moorawarree and a few
others. The Bora ceremony of these tribes is described by me in the
following works : Journ. Anthrop. Inst. London , Vol. xxiv, pp.
411-427; Ibid., Vol. xxv, pp. 318-339; Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S.
Wales, Vol. xxviii, pp. 98-129; Ibid., Vol. xxx, pp. 211-213;
Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. ix, N. S., pp. 137-173. I have
described their totemic divisions in Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Hales,
Vol. xxxi, pp. 156-168.
No. 3. In this tract of country the Bunan ceremony is in force.
Some of the dialects are the Thurrawall, Wodi Wodi, Jeringin,
Ngarroogoo, Beddiwell, Mudthang, Dhooroomba, Gundungurra
1 Mr. A. L. P. Cameron kindly furnished me with the location of the Wong
hibon, Eethee Eethee and Watthi Watthi tribes.


68 MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
and Wonnawal. I have given a comprehensive account of this
ceremony, with a plate illustrating the Bunan ground and the dif-
ferent objects connected with it in the American Anthropologist,
Washington, Vol. ix, pp. 327-344.
No. 4 represents the country occupied by the tribes speaking
the Darkinung, Wannerawa, Warrimee, Wannungine, Dharrook
and some other dialects. Their country commences at the Hunter
river and extends southerly till it meets and merges into that of the
people of No. 3. Their ceremony of initiation is known as the
Narramang, which is described in a paper published in Proc. Roy.
Soc. Victoria, Vol. x, N. S., pp. 1-12. Their totemic system is
dealt with in Journ. Roy. Soc. JV. S. Hales, Vol. xxxi, pp.
170-171.
No. 5. Within this area, which extends from the Hunter river
almost to the Macleay, the initiation ceremonies are of the Keeparra
type described by me in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. London, Vol. xxvi,
pp. 320-340. This tract of country is inhabited by the remnants
of the tribes speaking different dialects, some of the most important
of which are the following : Wattung, Gooreenggai, Minyowa, Molo,
Kutthack, Bahree, Karrapath, Birrapee, etc. North of the Hunter
river and extending along the sea coast to about Cape Hawk there
is an elementary ceremony called Dhalgai, which I have included
in the article last quoted.
No. 6 represents the hunting grounds of the tribes whose initia-
tion ceremonies are dealt with in the preceding pages. Their sec-
tional divisions are the same as the tribes in No. 5, and are described
in Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxi, pp. 168-170.
No. 7 comprises the country of the Bu.njellung, Gidjoobal,
Kahwul, Nowgyjul, Watchee, Yackarabul, Ngandowul and some
other small tribes, whose initiation ceremonies are of the Wandarral
type, described by me in Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. x, N. S.,
pp. 29-42. Districts Nos. 2,7, 8 and 9 cross the boundary of
Queensland, and Nos. 1 and 8 extend some distance into the Vic-
torian frontier.
No. 8. On the west of Nos. i and 2 are the Barkunji, Bung-
yarlee, Bahroongee, Wombungee, Noolulgo and some other tribes,
occupying the country on both sides of the Darling river, as well as
on the Lower Paroo and Warrego. South of the Murray river are
several small tribes, among which may be mentioned the Wamba
Wamba, Waiky Waiky, Latjoo Latjoo, Mutti Mutti, etc. I have


referred to the totemic divisions of the Barkunji and kindred tribes
in Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland, Vol. x, p. 32. Their
initiation ceremonies are described by me elsewhere.
No. 9. In this triangular portion of New South Wales we
encounter the advance guard of those tribes who practice circum-
cision and subincision, extending thence northerly into Queensland
and westerly into South Australia. The customs of these people
will be dealt with by me in another article.
APPENDIX.
The Nguttan Initiation Ceremony.
In this article it is intended to give a short account of the Nguttan,
an abbreviated ceremony of initiation practiced by the native tribes
of the Williams and Gloucester rivers and surrounding country.
Although it is not necessary to muster the whole community for the
purpose of installing the youths into the privileges of tribesmen by
means of the Nguttan, yet it is always thought safest to consult with
the headmen of some of the nearest neighboring tribes, who may
also have one or more youths old enough to pass through the ordeal.
The preliminaries are arranged by means of messengers, and when
the appointed time comes round the tribes proceed to the appointed
meeting place. Here the combined concourse indulge in corrobo-
ras and songs at night by the camp fires. The men of each tribe
dance in their turn and their women beat time for them.
When the festivities have , lasted for a few days the headmen
decide upon the time for taking away the novices. Early on the
appointed morning all the men assemble under pretense of going on
a hunting expedition, or perhaps they represent that they are making
an incursion into the country of a hostile tribe for the purpose of
avenging some supposed injury. The novices are mustered out of
their mothers’ camps and are taken charge of by the men. The
women are not told anything about these proceedings, but all the
elder ones and those who have been present at similar gatherings
before form their own conclusions in regard to the purpose of the
meeting.
A number of the men, with the novices amongst them, start first,
and are immediately followed by the rest of the men, singing and
shouting as they march along in the rear. The novices are told that


70 MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. LMarch 18,
these incantations are for the purpose of making a plentiful supply
of game, or to cause them to be victorious over their enemies. The
men are painted in the manner customary on these expeditions.
After traveling perhaps several miles they come to a water-hole or
running stream, where a halt is made. The novices are now taken
charge of by the men who have been appointed for this duty.
Each of these men is the brother-in-law—actually or collaterally—
of the graduate who has been placed under his care.
The novices are stripped naked, and after being painted are
placed sitting cross-legged on the ground, with both hands grasping
their genitalia and their heads bowed toward their breasts. Their
guardians and some of their relatives remain with them, but all the
other men go away, taking their departure quietly and a few at a
time so that the boys may not know that they are gone. These
men go away to a suitable camping ground, perhaps a mile or* two
distant, which has previously been agreed upon, and there they
erect a camp of bark or bushes and spread leaves on the ground for
the novices to lie upon. They then go into the bush hunting to
provide food for themselves and the rest of the party. Late in the
afternoon the guardians and other men who remained with the
novices bring the latter to this new camp—each boy with his eyes
cast down and being forbidden to look at anything around him—
and place them lying down upon the leaves with rugs thrown over
them. Fires are lit near where they are lying, 1 and they are sub-
jected to considerable heat, which causes them to perspire very
freely, but they are not permitted to move and must keep silent.
During the evening, perhaps an hour after sundown, by the light
of the camp-fires, some of the usual totemic dances, described by me
in previous communications, and other instructive performances, are
gone through by the men, and the novices are allowed to sit up and
look at them. Some of the men exhibit their genitals to the boys
and invite them to pay especial attention to a number of other
obscene gestures. After this human excrement is thrown to the
novices, which they are required to eat, and also to drink urine out
of a native vessel. At the conclusion of these proceedings all hands
lie down for the night.
Early next morning about half the men start away without the
knowledge of the boys and go into the bush in quest of food.
1 Compare with the fire ordeal described by me in “ The Bunan Ceremony of
N. S. Wales,” in the American Anthropologist (1896), Vol. ix, pp. 335, 336.


1898.] MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 71
About midday they return, and on coming within hearing of the
camp they commence making'a weird noise, like the howling of the
native dog, and advance in single file, each man carrying a leafy
bough which hides his face and chest. When these men, who are
called ghirrang, reach the camp where the novices are they spread
out in a line and spring up into the air, waving their arms and
uttering grunt-like exclamations. The novices are led to believe
that the ghirrang belong to a hostile tribe and will perhaps attack
them and their guardians.
The ghirrang and other men then produce several small sheets of
bark stripped from trees, on which some dharroong devices have
been carved, similar to the marks on the trees standing around a Ree-
parra ground. 1 These pieces of bark are placed at intervals of a few
yards along the cleared space which was used for dancing and per-
forming upon the previous night. The novices are now brought
out in front of these pieces of bark and are invited to take particu-
lar notice of them. They are at first shown the dharroong on one
sheet of bark, and are then taken to each of the others in succes-
sion, but are not allowed to speak a word.
When this part of the ceremony has been disposed of, the men
form into two divisions—one mob standing on one side of the
cleared space and another mob on the other side—the gràduates
being placed in a row facing them. The humming sound of the
bull-roarer, mudthinga, is now heard a little way in the rear, and
almost immediately two men step out into the opening, each man
swinging one of these instruments at the end of a string. The usual
obligations of secrecy are then imposed upon the neophytes, after
which the sacred mudthinga is rubbed upon their penises, chests,
arms and other parts of their bodies. While doing this the string
of the bull-roarer is placed round each lad’s neck in rotation.
The guardians, novices, and all the rest of the men now start
away from that place, and proceed toward the women’s camp—
which, it should be mentioned, was removed to another locality
the same day the men and boys went away. A man is sent
ahead to announce that the contingent from the bush will return
presently, and upon receipt of this message the women muster on
a level, open parcel of land contiguous to their camp. Here the
mothers of the neophytes spread nets upon the ground, on which
1 See my “ Keeparra Ceremony of Initiation,” yourn. Anthrop. Inst., Vol.
xxvi, pp. 320-338, PI. xxxii, Figs. 6 to 13.


MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
they lay food for the use of their sons. The sisters of the novices
and the other women also assemble near this spot, which is called
ngurra nyalla.
When these preliminaries have been arranged, the men and boys
come marching on, painted and dressed in their full regalia as men
of the tribe, and as they approach the women throw sticks over
their heads. I'he novices step forward to the nets, and eat the
food which their mothers have provided for them. After this the
women return to their own camp, but the graduates are taken by
their guardians to a place near the single men’s quarters. During
that evening some of the old headmen show the novices the sacred
white stones, which are so much valued by all native tribes.
These white stones, which in this district are called buggan , are
said to be found in the scrubby mountains beyond Bandon Grove,
near the head of the Williams river, and are supposed to be the
excrement of Gœn Mudyer Dhingga (Gœn of the Hairy Hands), a
malevolent being who has his abode in these mountain fastnesses.
A number of clever old men—the so-called wizards of their tribes
—used to make periodical expeditions into these regions for the
purpose of obtaining supplies of the buggan. On these occasions it
was not considered safe for a man to travel alone, but it was neces-
sary that several should go in company. At their camps at night
they were required to sing songs similar to those which form part
of the keeparra ceremonial, and the camp-fires had to be main-
tained by burning certain kinds of wood to be found in that dis-
trict. During the night, while the old men were asleep, Gœn was
supposed to appear, accompanied by some of his coadjutors, and put
white stones into their dilly bags.
If any of the old men of the company had been remiss in their
observance of any of the tribal customs, they would keep awake,
holding a burning brand in their hand, in order to protect them-
selves against Gcen’s evil designs. The only way in which such
men could secure the sacred buggan was to search for them along
the sides of hills or watercourses, where they had been deposited by
Gœn.
Every youth who graduates through the Nguttan is required to
attend the next keeparra ceremony which takes place among his
own people—or the bürbüng of those tribes who adjoin them on the
northwest —in order that he may receive further instruction in the
sacred initiatory rites of the community.


1898.] MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 73
Short or probationary forms of inauguration ceremonies are found
in several districts, and a knowledge of them is highly valuable, as
exhibiting the various stages through which a youth must pass before
he is qualified to take his place as a full man of his tribe. In a
different portion of the same tract of country, there is another ele-
mentary ceremony known as the Dhalgai, described by me else-
where. 1 Both the JVgullan and the Dhalgai are practiced in parts
of the geographical area represented as No. 5 on the map of New
South Wales hereto appended (Plate V).
1 “ The Dhalgai Ceremony,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol. xxvi, pp. 338-340.




(From the American Anthropologist (N. s.), Vol. 3, April-June, 1901)
INITIATION CEREMONIES OF THE WIRADJURI
TRIBES
By R. H. MATHEWS
In 1896 I contributed two articles on Australian class systems, 1
describing the social organization of the native tribes composing
the Wiradjuri community in New South Wales. They are
divided into four groups, called Ippai, Oombi, Murri, and Kubbi,
having the marriage laws and rules of descent as set forth in de-
tail in the articles referred to. In other papers I have dealt with
the inaugural ceremonies of certain tribes in the northern 2 and
southern 3 parts of the Wiradjuri territory, but have never before
had the opportunity of describing the ceremony as performed in
the western portion.
Early in the year 1898 a Burbung took place in thè parish of
Gunnabonna, county of Mossgiel, New South Wales. The native
encampment was about half a mile from Blake s waterhole, on
Canoble run, about 8 miles east by north from Canoble head-
station, or about 33 miles easterly from the town of Ivanhoe.
This ceremony, at which two novices were admitted to the privi-
leges of manhood, was attended by the aborigines from Hillston,
Keewong, Cobar, Ivanhoe, and Paddington.
In connection with this gathering the manner of summoning
the tribes to attend, the procedure in taking the novices away,
the ceremonial performances in the bush, and subsequent ritual
were substantially the same as described in my former articles on
the Burbung of the tribes of Lachlan -and Murrumbidgee rivers,
1 American Anthropologist , IX, 411-416 ; Ibid., X, 345—347-
2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Lond., xxv, 295-318; Ibid., XXVI, 272-285.
3 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxi, 111-153; Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust.,
Q. Bek., xi, 167-169.


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[n. s., 3, 1901


mathews]
IV IRA D J UR I INITIA TION CEREMONIES
hence they need not now be further dealt with. A description of
the Burbung ground and its surroundings will, however, be of in-
terest for purposes of comparison.
The circular inclosure called the boorbung was about 23 paces
in diameter, and was formed by heaping the loose surface soil
around its circumference, forming an embankment about a foot
wide and six inches high, in which a narrow opening was left to
afford access to the interior. From this opening a pathway led
away northerly through a forest of myall and other trees 560 paces
to the goombo , consisting of the usual four elongated heaps of
earth, 1 not unlike graves ; and a few paces farther on was the
gareel, or fence of boughs. There were no inverted stumps* at
the goombo, as they are not used by the natives of this district.
The following were some of the carvings in the soil : Starting
at the goombo, and going 5 paces toward the boorbung inclosure,
was the representation of a serpent-like monster called the kurrea
(figure 53, 1), outlined in the soil by a groove cut with a sharp-
edged wooden instrument. This was by far the longest native
carving in the soil that I had ever seen, the distance from the
head to the tail, following the sinuosities of the body, being 130
feet, while the width, which was fairly uniform, was from 15 to 18
inches. Within the outline of the posterior portion of this monster
were two other incised lines, one on each side, but whether these
were intended to represent the intestines, or for the purpose of
ornamentation, or to denote a young animal within the larger
one, I could not learn.
Not far from the kurrea's head was an oval object representing
an emu’s egg (figure 53, 2), 2 feet 6 inches in length. Farther on
was a kangaroo (3), a little over 6 feet high. In one of the bends
of the monster’s body, a man upward of 10 feet high was deline-
ated, with an elongated body and short legs (4). There was also
the drawing of a dog (5), about 4 feet long, and on the opposite


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[n. s., 3, 1901
side of the serpent’s body was a large boomerang (6), and a little
way farther a nulla-nulla (7). Then there was an elongated depres-
sion, nearly 3 feet long, 14 inches wide, and 6 inches deep (8), repre-
senting the pudenda of a woman. Small leafy twigs and green
grass were suggestively stuck in the loose soil around this de-
pression. The drawings shown in the illustration are in their cor-
rect relative positions as they appear on the side of the path.
In several places along the pathway there were cut in the soil
representations of the footprints of men, emus, and kangaroos ;
boomerangs, eggs of birds, and patches of the usual yowan pat-
terns. At other places some small sticks, leaves, and rubbish
were scraped into circular heaps, about 3 feet in diameter and
2 feet 6 inches high, representing the mallee-hen’s nest. There was
also an imitation of a wombat’s burrow.
About a hundred yards from the great serpent was a drawing
apparently representing some imaginary animal of the dog or
opossum tribe (9). This was a little over 9 feet long, exclusive of
the tail. Only a few trees were marked, because most of the tim-
ber growing near the pathway was too small for the purpose.
The few markings were not noteworthy. In one of the trees was
the imitation of an eagle-hawk’s nest.
At the ceremonies connected with the arrivals of strange tribes,
and during the daily performances while awaiting their arrival, an
image of Dharamoolan was set up in the vicinity of the goonibo.
A sapling was found with two branches growing opposite each
other, and these branches were cut off at about the length of a
man’s arms. The bole of the sapling was then cut through on one
side of these “ arms,” sufficiently long for the head, and on the
other side of the branches, or arms, it was again cut through at a
distance of about five feet. On this framework, mud mixed with
grass was plastered and fastened with string, so as to make a rude
figure of a man with only one leg, since according to aboriginal
mythology the maleficent being known as Dharamoolan has one
leg only. This figure was either propped up with forked sticks or


MATHEWS]
WIRADJURI INITIA TION CEREMONIES
laid against a tree to support it in an erect position. Two of these
images were used at the Burbung referred to, but sometimes
three or four are made, if the assemblage is a large one. They
are carefully hidden away and covered with bushes when not in
use, and at the conclusion of the ceremonies they are destroyed
in a fire.




Extrait des Bulletins et Mémoires de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris.
Par R. H. Mathews, I. S.,
Associé étranger de la Société d'Anthropologie de Paris
LANGAGE DES KURNU, TRIBU D’INDIGÈNES DE LA NOUVELLE GALLES DU SUD
(Traduit par M. Oscar Schmidt).
Dans un article précédent adressé à la Société, je me suis occupé du
langage des Wailwan, l’une des tribus indigènes de la Nouvelle Galles du
Sud. Dans celui-ci j’essaierai de démontrer la formation grammaticale du
langage de la tribu des Kürnü, occupant un territoire étendu sur la
rivière Darling.
La grammaire du langage Kürnü est des plus intéressantes, car elle
possède des caractères que je n’ai, jusqu’ici, observés dans aucun des
autres idiomes indigènes de la Nouvelle Galles du Sud. Ainsi, par
exemple, on observera dans la table des pronoms que leur forme est
modifiée pour exprimer le présent, le passé ou le futur. On verra, aussi,
que les pronoms régis par des verbes transitifs diffèrent de ceux employés
avec des verbes mtransitifs. Bien que le verbe ait son présent, son passé
et son futur, leur pronom suffixe indique également le temps.
En 1902 j’ai communiqué à la Société Royale de la Nouvelle Galles du
Sud 1 un résumé de la grammaire Kürnü, mais j’avais omis les verbes et
autres détails parceque je n’avais pas encore saisi toutes les difficultés
que présentent les pronoms et les variations peu communes qu’ils subis-
sent en conjonction avec des verbes. Depuis ce premier rapport succinct,
un voyage à travers cette tribu m’a permis de recueillir de nombreuses
données nouvelles.
LA. GRAMMAIRE KÜRNÜ.
Le territoire des tribus indigènes parlant le langage Kürnü commence
au Darling, entre Tilpa et Louth, et s’étend sur les deux rives de ce
fleuve jusqu’à Bourke, et même un peu au-dela. Il remonte également la
1 Jow'nal delà Société Royale de la Nouvelle Galles du Sud. Vol. XXXVI, p. 154-157.


18 FÉVRIER 1904
rivière Warrego jusqu’à Ford’s Bridge. Des dialectes du Kürnü sont par-
lés le long du Darling, en aval, depuis Tilpa, via Wilcannia et Ménindie,
jusqu’à Wentworth, soit sur une distance d’environ 350 milles. Le lan-
gage Kürnü, avec quelques modifications de dialecte, pénètre également
en arrière du fleuve Darling, jusqu’au lac de Tarowoto et aux Barrier-
Ranges et remonte la rivière Paroo jusqu’à la frontière du Queensland.
J’ai recueilli, moi-même, dans le territoire des Kürnü, parmi des vieillards
sérieux et intelligents des deux sexes, les éléments suivants de leur
langage.
ORTHOGRAPHE.
Le système d’épeler employé dans le présent article est le même que
celui de ma communication précédente sur le langage Wailwan, déjà
publiée par la Société d’Anthropologie.
Articles.
Les pronoms démonstratifs remplacent, dans leurs différentes formes,
l’article défini. L’équivalent de l’adverbe anglais « here » (ici), ainsi que
ses variantes, est souvent traite comme un pronom démonstratif dans le
langage indigène. Ces indigènes ne paraissent pas se faire d idee abstiaite
d’un homme, d’un émeu, ou d’autres sujets semblables, mais parlent
toujours d’un homme ou d’un animal défini et se servent, en conséquence,
d’un démonstratif, tel que : « cet homme », « l’émeu la-bas », ainsi de
suite. S’il s’agit de spécifier qu’ils n’ont qu’un seul objet en vue, ils le
font en employant le pluriel qui peut être considéré comme remplaçant
notre article indéfini.
SUBSTANTIFS.
Les substantifs ont le nombre, le genre et le c.as.
Nombre. Il y a trois nombres : le singulier, le dual et le pluriel. Le
dual et le pluriel sont formés en ajoutant le nombre « deux », ou « plu-
sieurs » au singulier : Thurlta, un kangourou; Thurltapakula, un couple
de kangourous; Thurlta gutthalagu, plusieurs kangourous.
Genre. Pour les humains le sexe est défini par l’emploi de mots
différents : Wimbadga, un homme; Kumbukka, une femme; Kurtyungga,
un garçon ; Karnkali, une fille; Mundhanggura, un enfant, sans distinction
de sexe.
Le genre des animaux est démontré par l’usage de mots indiquant le
mâle ou la femelle : Thurlta dhuladya, un kangourou mâle.
ngammugga, une kangourou femelle.
Quelques animaux mâles ont un nom qui les distinguent, sans que le
sexe soit spécifié et quelques femelles se reconnaissent egalement à un
mot spécial. Dans ces cas, il est inutile d’indiquer le nom de 1 animal.
Cas. Les cas principaux sont : le nominatif, le causatif, l’instrumen-
tal, l’accusatif, le génitif, le datif et l’ablatif.
Nominatif. Lorsque l’action décrite reste avec le sujet, le- substantif


R. H. MATHEWS. LANGAGE DES KURNU
n’est pas décliné. Exemple : Wimbadya ngingganunna, l’homme est assis.
Causatif. —Lorsque l’action décrite peut être transférée à un objet,
à l’accusatif, le sujet prend un postfixe : Wimbadyawa waku bûrtatyi,
l’homme un corbeau tua. Kulliwa yerrandyi dhuttalyi, un chien un opos
sum mordit.
Instrumental. Dans beaucoup de langages australiens, dont j’ai
étudié la grammaire dans de précédents articles, le suffixe est le même
pour l’instrumental etiecausatif, mais en Kürnü c’est le sulfixe génitif qui
est appliqué au cas instrumental. Exemples : Kumbukkavva wimbadya
bulkatyi kurnkarna, une femme un homme battu avec un yamstick.
Wimbadyawa thurlta bundatyi karpukkarna, un homme un kangourou perça
avec une lance. Kutyunggawa thapura wurtatyi mulkarna, le garçon une
morue attrapa avec un filet. Bulkawutthurn wangulu wunnarna, tua lui un
wallaby avec un boomerang.
Génitif. Wimbadyarna wunna, le boomerang d’un homme. Kumbuk-
kama kurnka, le yamstick d’une femme. Kullirna gurni, la queue d’un
chien.
Accusatif. Est le même que le nominatif.
Datif. Yuppira, un camp. Yuppiramirra, à un camp.
Ablatif. Yuppirandu , d’un camp.
ADJECTIFS.
Les adjectifs suivent les substantifs qu’ils qualifient et subissent les
mêmes inflexions quant au nombre et au cas : Wimbadya wurta, un
homme grand. Wimbadyawa wurtawa wunna ngartatyi, un homme grand
un boomerang jeta. Wimbadyarna wurtarna wunna , le boomerang d’un
homme grand.
Le suffixe est souvent omis de l’un des mots et appliqué soit au subs-
tantif ou à l’adjectif seulement, pour en indiquer le nombre ou le cas,
l’euphonie de la phrase en réglant l’emploi.
La comparaison des adjectifs s’effectue par deux déclarations positives,
telles que : Ithugûndyalka, ithugaru dhulugalla, ceci est bon, l’autre est
mauvais.
PRONOMS
Les pronoms kürnü ont plusieurs inflexions spéciales qui ne se trouvent
pas dans les autres langages australiens que j’ai signalés, toute une série
de pronoms ne s’applique qu’aux verbes transitifs, tandis qu une autre
série ne s’emploie qu’avec les verbes intransitifs. Déplus, ces pronoms se
modifient tant pour les verbes transitifs que pour les verbes intransitifs,
selon qu’ils se rapportent au présent, au passé, ou au futur. Ils ont éga-
lement une forme double de la première personne, selon qu’il s’agit de la
dualité ou du pluriel.
Voici un tableau de pronoms nominatifs, employés avec .des verbes
transitifs, dans chacun des trois temps. En dehors de leur usage comme
pronoms, ils expriment, en même temps, les dilférentes formes du verbe


136 18 FÉVRIER 1904
auxilliaire « être »; exemple : ngutthu qui signifie non seulement «Je »,
mais aussi « Je suis ».
PRÉSENT
PASSÉ
FUTUR
Ngutthu Wutthu Gutthu
Singulier
Ng’irndu Wirndu Girndu
Ngutthara Wutthera Gutthera
Nous, incl. Ngulli Wulli Gulli
Nous, exclus. Ngutthevangulli Wuttherawulli Guttheragulli
Vous Ngupa Wupa Gupa
Dual
Ils Ngutthevangulu Wutthernwulu Guttheragulu
Nous, incl. Nginna Winna Ginna
Vous, exclus. Dhûndinginna Dhûndiwinna Dhündiginna
Pluriel
Vous Ngurta Wurta Gurta
Ils Ngutthê Wutthê Gutthê
Les pronoms dont on se sert avec les verbes intransitifs diffèrent de
ceux qui précèdent, à la première et à la seconde personne, au présent,
passé et futur, ainsi que l'indique le tableau suivant :
PRÉSENT PASSÉ FUTUR
Nguppa Wuppa Guppa
Singulier ] Tu
Ngimba Wimba Gimba
Ngutthara Wutthara Gutthara
Les pronoms étant les mêmes au dual et au pluriel pour les verbes in
transitifs et transitifs il n’y a pas lieu de les répéter ici.
Les pronoms possessifs sont les suivants
l re personne : à moi
2 e à toi
Ngari
Ngoma
Singulier
3 e à lui
Wutthuna
( à nous, inclus. Ngullina
personne, j nougj exclus. Wuttherangullina
2 e à vous Naupunna
Dual
à vous Ngupunna
3 e à eux Wulthawuna
( à nous, inclus. Nginnunna
l re presonne . nous> exclus. Dhündingimama
Pluriel
2e à vous Ngurtunna
30 à eux Wutthina
Les formes
suivantes à l’accusatif sont celles des pronoms au singulier
( l re personne : moi
|2 e toi
( 3 e lui
Ngunnha
Ngûmma
Ginnunna
Singulier


R. H. MATHEWS. LANGAGE DES KURNU
Il existe d’autres modifications des pronoms signifiant « vers moi »,
» écarté de moi », etc. comme dans les exemples suivants :
i lie personne : vers moi Ngunnhari
Singulier |3e _ vers lui Gitthunari
Dual : l re personne : vers nous, inclus. Ngullinari
Pluriel : l ra vers nous, inclus. Nginnanari
( lre personne : de moi Ngunnarndu
Singulier | c j e j u - Gitthunarndu
Dual : t r ° personne: de nous, inclus. Ngullinarndu
Pluriel : l re de nous, inclus. Nginnanarndu
Avec moi, ou près de moi se dit : Ngariri
Dans chacun des exemples que l’on vient de lire les inflexions peuvent
être appliquées à toutes les personnes du singulier, du dual, ou du
pluriel. .
Interrogatifs. Qui (au singulier) windy aka. Qui (dual) wmdyula. Qui
(au pluriel ) windyiwindyi. A qui, windyagunnagi. Quoi, mxnnha. Pourquoi,
minnhamundi.
Démonstratifs. Les démonstratifs sont très nombreux et variés et
indiquent la position, la dislance, la direction, la grandeur, le nombre,
la personne, la possession, etc. Tous les pronoms de la troisième per-
sonne sont, de fait, des démonstratifs ce qui explique leur irrégularité et
l’absence de leurs rapports étymologiques.
Voici quelques exemples de ces démonstratifs : Ceci, ithu. Cet autre-ci,
ithugari. Ces deux, ithuwutu. Tous ceux-ci, ithangirnga. Cela, githu. Cet
autre là wutthagari. Cela là-bas, wurradyalanaga. Cela derrière moi, dhur-
nangurrina. Cela (au dessus de moi), buringunna. Cela (au dessous de moi),
kukuruna. De ce côté (de la personne à laquelle on parle), yaumirri. De
l’autre côté (de la personne à laquelle on parle) wurramüngamim. Ce
grand là, wurtûwurri. Appartenant à ceci, ithuna. Appartenant à ces deux,
ithuwuna. Appartenant à tous ceux-ci, ithinna.
Beaucoup de ces démonstratifs sont modifiés pour les adopter aux
verbes transitifs ou intransitifs qui les accompagnent et aussi pour cor-
respondre avec le temps, comme c’est le cas pour les pronoms.
VERBES
Les verbes ont trois nombres et trois personnes et comportent une
variante « inclusive » et « exclusive » à la première personne du dual et
du pluriel.
Chaque temps a sa forme distincte, mais le temps est également in-
diqué par des pronoms suffixes ajoutés au verbe ou qui les accompagnent.
Voici, par exemple, une conjugaison abrégée du verbe bulka, trapper,
ou tuer.


18 FÉVRIER 1904
Indicatif présent
( 1 1-0 personne : Je frappe Bulkangunna-ngutthu
Singulier j2 e Tu frappes Bulkangunna-ngirndhu
(3" 11 frappe Bulkangunna-ngutthara
Nous ne croyons pas nécessaire de donner des exemples du dual et du
pluriel, les variations des nombres et des personnes pouvant être expri-
mées en appliquant à chaque cas le pronom spécial que l’on trouvera
dans le tableau des pronoms nominatifs indiqués dans une page précédente
de cet article.
Passé.
l l re personne: J’ai frappé Bulkangga-wutthu
Singulier %2 e Tu as frappé Bulkanyga-wirndu
3 e Il a frappé Bulkangga-wutthara
Futur.
( l ro personne : Je frapperai Bulkara-gutthu
Singulier j2 e Tu frapperas Bullcara-girndu
3 e Il frappera Bulkara-gutthara
Impératif.
Frappe, bulhalla. La forme négative ou prohibitive s’exprime ainsi :
killa bulkalla, ne frappe pas.
Conditionnel.
Frapperais-je? Killamura bulkaragutthu
Réflexe.
La forme réflexe du verbe décrit l’action du sujet opérée sur lui-même.
( Je me frappe Bulkamuldhanguppa
Singulier jJe me frappais Bulkamuldhangga-wuppa
(Je me frapperai Bulhamuldhava-guppa
Impératif.
Frappe-toi Bulkamuldlia.
Réciproque.
Une forme du verbe sert à exprimer l’action commune et réciproque
de deux ou plusieurs personnes ; cette forme est évidemment restreinte
au dual et au pluriel :
Nous (dual inclusif) nous frappons l’un l’autre, Bulkamilla-ngulli. Nous
nous sommes frappés l’un l’autre, Bulkamillangga-wulli. Nous nous frap-
perons l’un l’autre, Bulkamillara-gulli. Dans les exemples qui précèdent
toutes les personnes et les nombres peuvent être indiqués par des pro-
noms.


R. P. MATHEWS. LANGAGE DES KURNU
La conjugaison d’un verbe intransitif ne change que par les pronoms
qui lui sont ajoutés comme le démontre l’exemple suivant de ngingga,
asseoir :
Indicatif.
Présent : l re personne J’assieds Nginggangunna-ngnppa
Passé : l re J’assis Nginggangga-wuppa
Futur : l re J’assiérai Nginggara-guppa
Et ainsi de suite pour les autres personnes et nombres en employant
les pronoms appropriés indiqués dans les tableaux précédents.
Les verbes, transitifs, aussi bien que les intransitifs, ont également des
formes indiquant que l’action décrite est immédiate, proche ou lointaine,
soit au passé, soit au futur; ces formes expriment également la continua-
tion ou la répétition de l’action. De nombreuses modifications des verbes
servent à mettre en valeur toute une série de nuances de signification,
dans lesquelles nous nous abstenons d’entrer pour le moment.
Le passif n’a pas de forme spéciale et la phrase : « un garçon fut puni
par son père » serait exprimée par la paraphrase : « un père a puni son
garçon. »
ADVERBES
Oui, ngi. Non, ngattha. Ici, küngara. Là, wurra. Là-bas, wurityallinnaga.
Aujourd’hui, kailpomainka. Hier } yillana. Demain, wambirna. tantôt, gumi.
A l’avenir, gundigundyi. Premièrement, mirraga.
Où es-tu, windyarra ngimba. Où vas-tu, windaywurra dhani ngimba. Com-
bien, ngulthurra. Comment, nunguna.
PRÉPOSITIONS
Devant, mirrika. Derrière, ngunda. Entre, bukkula. A côté, gungo. En
bas, baikabika. En haut, wunggalu. Dedans, ngungguru. Autre côté, murlaka.
Ce côté (de la rivière), wurrangurraga. Derrière moi, dhurna-ngariri.
Derrière toi dhurna-ngumari. Derrière lui, dhurna-gitthunari.




BULLETINS
ET MÉMOIRES
DE LA
SOCIÉTÉ D’ANTHROPOLOGIE
DE PARIS
EXTRAIT
PARI S-V I e
15, Rue de l’Ecole-de-Médecine, 15




Extrait des Bulletins et Mémoires de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris
LE LANGAGE WAILWAN
Par M. R. IL Mathews. L. S.
Traduit par M. Oscar Schmidt.
lie langage Wailivan, l’un des idiomes des naturels de la Nouvelle-
Galles du Sud, est parlé sur les deux rives de la rivière Barwon depuis
Walgett et, en la descendant, jusqu’à Brewarrina; il s’étend en remon-
tant les rivières Castlereagh, Macquarie et Mara à environ 70 milles vers
le Sud, où il rencontre d’autres idiomes : le Wiradyuri et le Wôngaibon. A
l’Est du Wailwan on parle le Kamilaroi et au Nord, le Yualeai.
Nous nous occuperons d’abord des différentes parties du discours
démontrant les déclinaisons des substantifs et des adjectifs les modi-
fications des pronoms la conjugaison des verbes, puis de quelques listes
sommaires d’adverbes et de prépositions. Nous ferons suivre ce travail
d’un vocabulaire de quelques-uns des mots les plus importants du langage
usuel. Cet exposé n’a pas la prétention d’en donner une grammaire com-
plète, mais seulement un aperçu de sa structure grammaticale.
Nous espérons qu’il intéressera les philologues en leur permettant de
comparer les différentes langues des naturels d’Australie avec celles
d’autres peuplades primitives.
ORTHOGRAPHE.
Dix-huit lettres de l’alphabet anglais nous ont servi, comprenant treize
consonnes : b , d , y , h, k, l, m, n, p, r, t, w, y, et cinq voyelles : a, e, i, o, u.
Le système d’orthoépie que nous avons adopté est celui qui a été
recommandé par la circulaire de la Société Royale de Géographie, de
Londres, sauf les modifications suivantes :
Autant que possible, nous avons laissé les voyelles sans signe spécial,
mais dans quelques cas le son prolongé de a, e et u a été indiqué comme


suit : â, ë, ü. Dans quelques cas les sons brefs de u et o ont été notés
ainsi : ü, ô.
Le G est toujours dur et le W n’a été employé qu’au commencemen t
d’une syllabe ou d’un mot.
N g commençant un mot ou une syllabe a un son nasal particulier ; à
la fin du mot il prend le son de ng, dans le mot anglais « sing. »
Le son de l’n espagnol est assez fréquent; au commencement d’un mot
ou d’une syllabe je l’ai exprimé par ny, tandis qu’à la fin du mot, c’est la
lettre espagnole qui a servi.
Y au commencement du mot ou de la syllabe conserve son son habituel.
Dh ressemble beaucoup, comme prononciation, au th anglais dans le
mot « that, » avec une légère nuance de d pour commencer. Nh se rap-
proche également du th, dans le mot « that », mais en y ajoutant un son
initial d’n.
Le T se confond avec le d; le p avec b et g avec k dans la plupart des
mots où on se sert de ces lettres.
Ty et dy au commencement d’un mot ou d’une syllabe se prononcent à
peu près comme l'y anglais ou comme ch; ainsi : dya ou tya ressemblent
beaucoup à ja ou cha.
A la fin du mot ou de la syllabe ty ou dy sont prononcés comme tch,
dans les mots anglais : « pitch », « catch », mais en omettant leur son
sifflant final.
SUBSTANTIFS.
Les substantifs sont soumis aux variations de nombre et de genre et à
la déclinaison.
Nombre. Ceux-ci sont de trois degrés : le singulier, le double et le mul-
tiple. Exemple : Mulyan , un épervier, mulyangali, une paire d’éperviers,
mulyangalga, plusieurs éperviers. Quelques substantifs ont une forme spé-
ciale de pluriel qui leur est particulière comme : wiringamboi, plusieurs
femmes.
Genre. Pour les humains, celui-ci est exprimé par différents mots, tels
que : thur, un homme; wiringa, une femme; wurru , enfant d’un des deux
sexes.
Pour les animaux, le genre est indiqué par l’addition d’un mot signi-
fiant « mâle » et « femelle », comme : Kuragai mundava, un opossum
mâle; Kuragai gunal, un opossum femelle. Baba et gunni, les termes
usuels de « père » et « mère » sont également employés dans le même but,
surtout pour les oiseaux.
DÉCLINAISONS
Les substantifs sont déclinés par des suffixes dont les principaux
expriment le nominatif, le causatif, l’instrumental, le génitif, l’accusatif,
le datif et l’ablatif.


Le nominatif est la racine du substantif comme : thur wingana « l’homme
est assis » et cette racine n’a pas de déclinaison.
Le causatif représente le motif d’un acte exprimé par un verbe transi-
toire et spécifié par un suffixe, tel que : Thuru murrawi gume «un homme
un kangourou a frappé». Mirrigu kuragai kutthe, «un chien un opossum
mordu ».
Génitif. Thuranggu hier, « le boumerang d’un homme»; Wiringanggu
kuni , « le baton (yamstick) d’une femme ».
Une particularité du génitif que l’on retrouve dans le Wailwan et dans
beaucoup de dialectes australiens, ainsi que dans plusieurs îles de la
Mélanésie et ailleurs, consiste dans l’addition d’un suffixe possessif à un
grand nombre de substantifs dont nous donnons les exemples suivants :
I l re personne : Mon Boumerang : (boumerang de moi) Bierdhi.
Singulier )2 e Ton Biernu.
3 e Son Bierlugu.
Lorsqu’il est question de deux ou de plusieurs objets
Biergalidhi : Boumerangs deux à moi.
Biergalgadhi : plusieurs à moi, etc.
Instrumental. Lorsque c’est un instrument ou une arme qui repré-
sentent le but éloigné du verbe il prend le même suffixe que dans le cam
satif, exemple : Thuru waru bume bieru, « un homme un corbeau frappa
avec un boumerang ».
Datif. Le datif et le génitif se ressemblent, exemple : Nguranggu, « à
un camp ( ngura ) ».
Ablatif. Ngurandyi , « d’un camp ». L'accusatif est le même que le
nominatif.
Dans toutes les déclinaisons mentionnées ci-dessus, la forme du suffixe
varie généralement avec la terminaison du substantif. Elles sont cepen-
dant sujettes à certaines règles euphoniques consistant à relier le suffixe
avec les diverses terminaisons de manière à en assurer une prononciation
facile et agréable.
ADJECTIFS.
Les adjectifs sont placés après les substantifs qu’ils qualifient et sont
déclinés de la môme façon : Thur bitthe, « un homme grand »; Thuru
betthegu murrawi gume , « un homme grand frappa un kangourou »; Tliurgu
bitthegu hier, « le boumerang d’un grand homme ».
Lorsque la dernière lettre du substantif a fait subir une modification
euphonique au suffixe, comme nous l’avons indiqué plus haut, le causa-
tif et le génitif se ressemblent quelquefois comme dans les deux derniers
exemples. Dans ce cas, toute ambiguïté est évitée par le sens du texte.


La comparaison se fait par assertions positives, comme : Nginya yedda,
nginya wurrai, « ceci est bon, ceci est mauvais ».
Si un adjectif est employé comme prédicat, il peut, en y ajoutant
les suffixes nécessaires, être converti en verbe, et il suit alors toutes les
formes de conjugaison de celui-ci. Exemple : Yeddadhu, je suis bon (bon
moi); Yeddagedliu, j'étais bon; Yeddagalagadhu, je serai bon et ainsi de
suite pour toutes les personnes, les nombres et les temps.
PRONOMS
Les pronoms sont personnels et ont le nombre et le cas, mais n’ont pas
de genre. Il y a deux pronoms pour le singulier, pour la dualité et pour
le pluriel; on se sert de l’un des deux lorsque la personne à laquelle on
parle est comprise dans l’action et de l’autre lorsqu’elle en est excluse.
Voici une liste des pronoms nominatifs, possessifs et objectifs :
Singulier.
4 re pers. :je Ngadhu mon Ngaddhi moi Dhi
2 e ;tu Ngindu ton Nginya toi Nu
3e —; il Ngillu son Ngigula lui Lugu
Dualité.
j nous, incl. Ngullu nos, incl. Ngulligi à nous, incl. Ligi
4 re pers. I excl. Ngullina excl. Ngullingina excl. Ligina
2 e : vous Ngindiwulu vos Nginyanula à vous Nula
3 e : ils Ngillibula leurs Ngigulagu eux
Lugula
Pluriel
( nous, incl. Ngeane nos,incl. Ngeanigi à nous, incl. Ngenaga
1 pers. I excl. Ngeaninna excl. Ngeanigina exci. Ngenagina
2 e : vous Ngindugal vos Nginyuga à vous Nugal
3 e : ils Ngillugula leurs Nguggagala eux Lugugal
Les formules compactes des pronoms ci-dessus sont surtout employées
comme réponses à une interrogation. Exemple : Qui est assis là-bas? peut
provoquer la réponse : « Ngulligina ; et à la question : Qui est-ce? on peut
répondre : « Ngeanigina ». Dans le langage courant, cependant, les indi-
gènes se servent plutôt des contractions indiquées dans notre paragraphe
des « Verbes ».
Il existe également des formules de pronoms objectifs signifiant « vers
moi », « de moi », « avec moi », etc.
Pronoms interrogatifs. Qui, ngandi? Qui (l’a fait), nganduwa? Pour
qui, ngangu? Quoi, minyang? Pourquoi, minyangu ?
Démonstratifs. Ceci, nginya. Cela, ngunna. Ceux-ci sont mis après les
substantifs et sont déclinés dans leurs nombres doubles et multiples.


Des mots distincts sont employés pour indiquer la position relative de
l’objet de la personne qui parle, tandis que d’autres spécifient cette posi-
tion vis-à-vis de la personne à laquelle on s’adresse.
Les pronoms de la troisième personne servent aussi fréquemment de
démonstratifs; de là le très grand nombre et l’irrégularité de ces pronoms
dans le langage australien.
Les pronoms démonstratifs acquièrent également souvent le sens de
l’article défini, comme par exemple : Kuragai nginya qui peut signifier
soit « cet opossum » ou « l’opossum » selon le texte. Les adverbes « ici »
et « là » sont généralement identiques à « ceci » et « cela » et ont ainsi,
parfois, le même sens que l’article défini.
VERBES
Les verbes ont le nombre, la personne, le temps et le mode usuels.
Comme les pronoms, ils ont des terminaisons inclusives et exclusives
pour exprimer la dualité ou le pluriel à la premiere personne.
Chaque temps a sa terminaison spéciale, comme : gumurra, gumc,
gumullaga, le présent, le passé et le futur du verbe « frapper ». Une con-
traction du pronom est ajoutée à la racine du verbe pour désigner le
nombre et la personne.
Voici, par exemple, en abrégé, une conjugaison du verbe gumulli
« frapper ».
Indicatif présent.
( l re personne :Je frappe Gumurra-dhu
Singulier <2° Tu frappes Gumurra-ndu
|3e 11 frappe Gumurra-lu
( Nous, inch, frappons Gumurra-li
h l re personne j excl., Gumurra-lina
Dualité \ Vous frappez Gumurra-ndula
(3e _ Ils frappent Gumurra-lula
!/ Nous, inch, frappons Gumurra-ne
l re personne excl., Gumurra-ninni
2e Vous frappez Gumuvra-ndugal
Us frappent Gumurra-lugal
Le passé et le futur ont des terminaisons variables indiquant les inter-
valles plus ou moins longs dans la durée de l’action. Ces difïérentes
terminaisons restent les mêmes pour toutes les personnes, soit au singu-
lier pour la dualité ou au pluriel. En ajoutant la parcelle pronominale
nécessaire, le verbe acquiert une terminaison spéciale pour chaque per-
sonne et chaque nombre de tous les temps comme l’indique la conjugai-
son de l’indicatif présent donnée ci-dessus. Nous nous contenterons donc
de donner un exemple àla première personne, singulier, au passé et au
futur.


Passé.
J’ai frappé, indéfini
Gume-gadhu
Singulier \ J’ai frappé ce matin
l re personne ) J’ai frappé hier
Gume-ngurranyedhu
Gume-gumbirradhu
J’ai frappé il y a longtemps Gume-ngargambodhu
Futur.
Je frapperai tout de suite Guniulla-galladlm
Singulier j Je frapperai, indéfini
l re personne Je frapperai demain
Gumulla-gadhu
Gumulngurriagadhu
Gumullagawandugadhu
Je frapperai bientôt
Impératif.
Singulier : Gumullagu, frappe quelqu’un
Dualité : Gumullagulla, frappe deux
Pluriel : Gumullagugal , frappe tous
Conditionnel.
Gumullagayadhu, peut-être je frapperai
Mode réflexe.
La forme réflexe du verbe est celle que décrit l’action que le sujet exé
cute directement sur lui-mème :
Présent : Je me frappe Gumadijillingadhu
Passé : Jemefrappais Gumadyillingedhu
Futur : Je me frapperai Gumadyillingndhu
Mode réciproque.
Celle modification du verbe s’applique au cas où deux ou plusieurs
personnes se frappent réciproquement et se limite, par conséquent, à la
dualité et au pluriel.
Dualité : Nous (inch), nous frappons les uns les autres : Gumullanullali.
Pluriel : Nous Gumullamillane
Gumullamillane.
11 est entendu que dans tous les exemples précités les autres nombres,
personnes et temps sont sujets aux mômes inflexions.
Le passif n’a pas de forme spéciale. Ainsi, la phrase « un chien a été
mordu par un serpent » est exprimée par « un serpent a mordu un
chien ».
ADVEIIBE.
Voici quelques adverbes qui, dans la conversation, se placent géné_
râlement après le verbe :


Oui, ngaru. Non, wail. Ici, nginya. La, ngunna. La bas, gurar. A présent,
dhulungurra. Tantôt, wanduga. Il y a longtemps, ngurgambo. Demain,
Iciimbirragali. Hier, kumbirra. Toujours, tkugowai. Cornent, widdyu? Quand,
widdyuwaru? Où, wundha? Pourquoi, minyali? Où es-tu, wundhullandu?
Vite, burrai.
PRÉPOSITION.
Devant, wirringa. Derrière, wuggurwila. A gauche, mirambil. Entre,
wongga. Au-dessus, ngunnawa. Au-dessous, ngunnadhur. Dehors, ngullugal.
Plusieurs de ces prépositions sont sujettes à des inflexions indiquant
le nombre et la personne, comme dans l’exemple suivant se rapportant a
tout ce qui se trouve k gauche :
/ lr* personne : Ama gauche Mirranggadhi
2 e A ta gauche Mirrangganu
/3e Asa gauche Mirranggalugu
et ainsi de suite pour toutes les personnes de la dualité et au pluriel.
Wirringgadhi , devant moi. Wuggurwiladhi, derrière moi et les suivants
sont soumis aux mêmes inflexions.
Interjections et Exclamations.
Yà! pour appeler l’attention. Cliùli ! signifie chut! Nginyatanduna, équi-
vaut k « bien fait ! »
Nombres.
Un, muggu. Deux, bulagar .
CONCLUSION.
Le langage dont un aperçu a été donné dans les pages précédentes
reproduit la langue indigène parlée dans une vaste région de la partie
centrale de la Nouvelle-Galles du Sud. Partant d’Albury, sur la rivière
Murray et en nous dirigeant à 600 milles vers le Nord, sur une largeur de
350 milles nous trouverons, tout le long de notre route, des dialectes du
Wailwan. Dans ce voyage nous passerions successivement k travers les
terrains de chasse des Wiradyuri, Wongaibon, Wailwan, Kamilaroi,
Yukumbil, Yualeai, Pikumbil, et d’autres tribus parlant toutes des dia-
lectes d’une même grande langue.
Tout cet article est le résultat de mes recherches personnelles, parmi
les tribus indigènes, sans le concours d’aucune autre personne. Aussi, n’y
a-t-il que ceux qui connaissent toutes les difficultés que rencontre la col-
lection de pareilles données au milieu de races sans culture et sans litté-
rature d’aucune espèce qui peuvent se rendre compte des obstacles que
j’ai eu à surmonter pour réunir les détails qui m’ont permis de tixei la


forme grammaticale du langage de quelques-unes des tribus indigènes
importantes. Des erreurs et des omissions sont presque inévitables dans
la première édition d’un ouvrage de cette nature. C’est pourquoi l’auteur
sollicite l’indulgence du lecteur pour tous les défauts qu’il pourrait décou-
vrir en parcourant ces pages.
Les cérémonies d’initiation des Wailwan, Wongaibon et Wiradyuri,
connues sous la dénomination de Burbung ont été longuement décrites par
moi dans d’autres articles *.
Les cérémonies d’initiation parmi les Kamilaroi, Yukumbil et autres
tribus sus-mentionnées et dénommées la Bora ont également été ample-
ment décrites par moi ailleurs 2 .
L’organisation sociale de toutes ces tribus est la même, avec de légères
modifications et consiste en quatre coutumes appliquables aux mariages
entre eux, dénommées : Murri, Kubbi, Ippai et Kumbo, que j’ai décrits
avec tous leurs détails dans d’autres journaux 3 .
APPENDICE
Le langage lyattyalla.
Depuis deux mois j’ai écrit un article pour la Société Royale de la
Nouvelle-Galles du Sud, sur « Les langages des Indigènes de Victoria »
que cette Société a sous presse et qui remplira environ trente-cinq pages
de leur Journal.
Le duel est très répandu dans les langues australiennes, mais dans
toutes celles de la partie Ouest de Victoria, ainsique d’un certain péri-
mètre dans l’Australie Méridionale, il existe un nombre triel, fait qui n’a
pas été signalé dans aucune autre partie du continent australien. C’est
pourquoi j’ai pensé qu’un résumé condensé de la forme grammaticale du
langage lyattyalla , tel qu’il est parlé sur les bords de la rivière Wimmera,
pourrait intéresser les membres de votre Société s’occupant de linguis-
tique.
Substantifs.
Comme nombre, les substantifs ont le singulier, le duel, le triel et le
pluriel. Les cas sont déclinés analoguement au Wailwan excepté que
dans le lyattyalla le propriétaire, ainsi que sa propriété p ennent tous les
1 Le Burbung des tribus Wiradhuri. Journal de Vlnstitut d’Anthropol. de Londres ,
vol. XXVI, pages 295-318 et vol. XXVI, pages 272-285. Le Burbung des tribus du
Murrumbidgee. Journal de la Société Royale de la Nouvelle-Galles du Sud, vol.
XXXI, pages 111-153.
! Le Bora dos tiibus Komilaroi, l’rocé lès de la Soc. Royale do Victoria, vol. IX,
N. S., pages 187-173 Aussi dans le Journal de Vlnstitut Anthropol. de Londres , vol.
XXV, pages 318-339.
3 Les divisions totémiques des tribus australiennes. Journal de la Société Royale
de la Nouvelle-Galles du Sud, vol. XXXI, pages 154-170.


deux un suffixe, bien que ce suffixe diffère dans chaque mot. En voici
quelques exemples : Wutyu, un homme; gattim-gattim, un boumerang;
mais « le boumerang d’un homme » s’exprime par : Wutyuga gattim-
gattimuk. La grammaire admet aussi que la propriété, pour donner plus
d’harmonie à la phrase, y figure en premier quelquefois et, dans ce cas,
il y a transposition des suffixes. Ainsi, au lieu de dire ; Laiura lahrnuk ,
le camp d’une femme, nous employons une tournure plus euphonique en
disant : Lahrga laiurk. Laiure st « une femme »et Lahr est «un camp ».
Les variations des suffixes, régies par les dernières lettres, du substantif
décliné s’appliquent, comme dans le langage Wailwan, dont nous avons
parlé, également ici.
Adjectifs.
Ceux-ci suivent les substantifs auxquels ils sont affectés et subissent les
mêmes règles de déclinaison.
Pronoms
Nous ne donnons ici que les
pronoms nominaux
Singulier
Yurwek
Yurwin
Yuruk
Nous, incl.
Nous, excl.
Vous
Yurwal
Yurwalluk
i
Yurwula
Yurbullang
Triel
Pluriel
Nous, incl. Yurwengurrakullik Nous, incl. YurwengurraL
Nous, excl. Yurwendakullik Nous, excl. Yurwendak
y ous Yurwuddakullik Vous Yurwuddak
jl s * Yurwennakullik Ils Yurwennak
11 est apparent, par le tableau ci-dessus, que le triel est formé par l’ad
dition d’une terminaison spéciale au pluriel.
Verbes
Dans la conjugaison des verbes, le nombre triple est, comme pour les
pronoms, indiqué par l’addition de kullik au suffixe du pluriel. Dans tous
les autres cas le verbe subit les mêmes variations que dans le langage
Wailwan.
Adverbes.
Ceux-ci sont les adverbes usuels d’affirmation, de négation, de temps,
de place, etc. Quelques-uns d’entre eux peuvent être déclinés quant au
nombre et la personne :


Singulier : Où es-tu? Windyar
Duel : Où êtes-vous? Windyawul
Triel : Où êtes-vous? Windyatkullik
Pluriel : Où êtes-vous? Windaty
Il y a également des formes spéciales de déclinaison pour le passé et le
futur et pour tous les nombres et personnes.
Prépositions.
Comme les substantifs et les adverbes, quelques prépositions ont leur
déclinaison :
l re personne: Derrière moi Walmengek
Singulier ]2 e Derrière toi Walmengin
3 e Derrière lui Walmenguk
11 en est de même pour les nombres double, triple et pour le pluriel.
Interjections et Exclamations .
Celles-ci ne sont pas nombreuses, mais, comme les prépositions, subs-
tantifs et autres parties du discours, elle peuvent être déclinées :
Singulier : Arrête Tyarrigif
Duel : Arrêtez Tyarriyiwal !
Triel : Arrêtez Tyarriguatkullik
Pluriel : Arrêtez Tyarriyuat
Nombres : Un, kainp. Deux bulaty
VOCABULAIRE.
Le vocabulaire contient environ deux cents mots du langage Wailwan
recueillis par moi dans les camps des indigènes. Les mots d’une même
espèce sont groupés sous des en-têtes différentes, comme : La famille
le corps humain entourage naturel animaux adjectifs verbes.
Nous avons pensé que ce classement serait plus commode pour les
recherches que s’ils étaient placés
La famille.
Hommes, collée
tivement Mali
Un homme Thur
Homme intelli-
gent Wirringan
Chef Dhurrungal
Garçon MurraJcunga
Femme Wiringga
Fille Mariyungga
par ordre
alphabétique.
Vierge Kumadhilia
Jeune femme Nikimikai
Mari et femme Nguan
Enfant des deux
sexes Wurra
Père Bubba
Mère Gunni
Frère aine Kukka
Frère cadet Kullumi
Sœur aînée Gatthi
Sœur cadette Giddyurai


La corps humain. Entourage naturel.
Tète Wulla Soleil Dhuni
Front Ngulu Lune Giwa
Barbe Kir Etoiles Girrila
Moustache Muludyin Planète Vénus Ngindigindiwa
OEil Mil Ciel Gununggulla
Nez Muru Pluie Ngiddyunna
Derrière du cou Nan Grêle Mugorai
Gorge Nugi Eau Kulle
Oreille Kuringgera Sol Thagun
Bouche Ngundal Pierres Kurrul
Lèvres Willi Lumière Ngullan
Langue Thulle Obscurité B allow i
Dents Wira Feu W*
Poitrine Wirri Fumé Budhu
Poitrine de Miel Wurrungunna
femme Ngummu Herbe Gurun
Nombril Gindyur Feuilles etarbres Gira
Estomac
Epine dorsale
Bras
Avant-bras
Aisselle
Coude
Main
Doigts
Pouce
Hanche
Genou
Mollet
Tibia
Pied
Sang
Graisse
Peau
Anus
Penis
Testicules
Désir sexuel
Vagin
Nymphae
Copulation
Sperm
Masturbation
Urine
Excrément
Nirrimirri
Nuru
Kilkilburi
Ngunuga
Murra
Wurria
Gunendyir
Dhurra
Bundni
Kaia
Piyu
Bhinna
Goai
Gudlial
Yulai
Mundai
Burn
Girinya
Munne
Wugga
Gunggamulli
Buddhe.
Wirringraimuddha
Kil
Giaia
Camp Ngura
œufs Kubbo
Ombre Kual
Echo Wurrungun
Nourriture
(viande)
Dhingga
Nid d’oiseau Mudhi
Mammifères.
Chien Mirri
Kangourou Murrawi
Porc-épic Thigarila
Chien sauvage Yugi
Opossum Kuragai
Rat-kan gourou Bilbn
Padamelon Wiru
Bandicout Guru
Chauve-souris Wibullabulla
Oiseaux.
Emu Nguri
Plongeur Duguru
Canoir noir Budunba
Canard-Teal Dharawaiya
Canard des bois Kunambi
Canard sifflant Thipaiyu
Canard musqué Wukkabuddhal
Épervier
Mulyan


Ibis Willidubai
Pélican Wirea
Corbeau Waru
Cygne Burrima
Pie riante Kuguburra
Cacatoès blanc Murai
Courlis Kawila
Pigeon bronzé Yamur
Pigeon séden-
taire Munumbi
Wag-tail Diridyiri
Hirondelle Millimaru
Poissons.
Morue Kuddu
Crevette Dhunul
Poisson-chat Dhungur
Ventre-jaune Biddhàn
Brème Bunnqull
Bunngulla
Brème argentée Birnnge
Écrevisses Wingga
Reptiles.
Iguane de terre Dali
Iguane des arbres Gugar
Serpent noir Yugai
Serpent-tapis Yubba
Vipère Murrai
Tortue Munggalia
Invertébrés.
Araignée
Gillidya
Mouche com-
mune
Moustique
Centipède
Burimul
Kummogin
Yerrir
Adjectifs.
Mort Buga
Grand , Bitthe
Petit Buttyu
Long Kungal
Court Ngurdhu
Bon ou bien Yudda
Mauvais Wurra
Wurrai
Affamé
Rouge
Blanc
Noir
Vert
Prompt
Jaloux
Malade
Fort
Lourd
Colère
Fatigué
Chaud
Froid
Jeune
Vieux
Manger
Boire
Dormir
S’asseoir
Aller
Parler
Dire
Yerringin
Girawil
Bunggoba
Bulvoi
Gidyungidyun
Burr ai
Courir
Kurugur
Girrumbia
Apporter
Prendre
Porter
Kurgirri
Murdil
Kulgigara
Iri
K irru
Gunundai
Verbes.
Casser
Battre
Dharridyanna
Nurrunnha
Yuanna
Winy a
Yunna
Ngea
Dhumbulludha
Bunnhagunna
Thai-gaga
Ngullugal-gaga
Tomber
Voir
Entendre
Grandir
Siffler
Se lever
Wumburra
Gumma
Guma
Être debout
Cracher
Dhuane
Nganki
Jeter
Winnungulli
Yurunnha
Wilwa
Wurraga
Warrana
Ngundyar
Gurarwa
Ngunhi
Donner
Chanter
Pleurer
Danser
Éternuer
Tousser
Voler
Wuggaimulli
Yungani
Wuggagiri
Thigar
Gunungguna
Munnamulli
Dhullungaimba
Bugaia


R. H. MATHEWS. LE LANGAGE WAILWAN
Mordre Kutthulli Voler (en l’air) Wurramha
Souffler (avec Sauter Baranhi
l’haleine Bumbilli Rire Gindam
Bâtir Womma Gratter Wirmuggiri
Tuer Gumaibugagu Pincer Nimmulli
Hacher Kugga Frotter Muma
Attraper Mummulli Sentir Budhe
Grimper Walgagiri Prétendre Bir
Mourir Gurinya I








LANGUAGES OF THE NEW ENGLAND ABORIGINES,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
associe etranger soc. d’anthrop. de paris.




LANGUAGES OF THE NEW ENGLAND ABORIGINES
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
associe etranger soc. d'anthrop. de paris.
{Bead May 15, 1903.)
Synopsis. —lntroductory—Orthography—The Anêwan Language
—The Banbai Language—A Mystic Language— Anéwan Vocabu-
lary.
The native tribes of New South Wales are disappearing rapidly
before the advancing tide of European population, and unless some
Reprinted, prom Proceedings American Philosophical Society. Vol. xlii, No. ryj.


250 MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
person qualified for the task shall take up this highly important
subject, the languages and the customs of an interesting primitive
people will be lost to science.
The languages spoken by the native inhabitants of the New
England district of New South Wales are quite different in vocabu-
lary and intonation from those found in any other part of New
South Wales which I have visited. Therefore I consider myself
very fortunate in being the first author to report their grammatical
structure.
In the following pages I shall endeavor to record and preserve
the elements of two aboriginal languages, with a vocabulary of one
of them. All of the materials of the grammars, and also of the
vocabulary, have been collected by me in the camps of the abo-
rigines, and were noted down direct from the mouths of the native
speakers, so that I can become entirely responsible for their
accuracy.
In common with other Australian languages reported by me, the
Anëwan and Banbai tongues possess a double form of the first
person of the dual and plural, in every part of speech subject to
inflection, by means of which the person spoken to may be
included or excluded. It may be stated here that I was the
first author to give full details of this peculiarity in the languages
of Australia, 1 although it had been observed to a certain extent in
some of the islands of the Pacific Ocean, and among the Amarinds
of North America. These two languages likewise contain a dual
and plural number in all parts of speech.
It is hoped that these efforts of mine may prove of some value,
by enabling philologists to compare the native tongues of Aus-
tralian tribes, not only among themselves, but with other languages
in the islands of Polynesia, Melanesia, and various parts of the
Pacific Ocean, as well as with the speech of other primitive tribes
in different parts of the world. • *
The space at my disposal in the Proceedings of this Society
render it necessary to describe only the leading elements of the
languages dealt with.
Orthography.
The system of orthoepy adopted is that which is recommended
by the Royal Geographical Society of England, but a few addi-
1 “The Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., Vol. xl, p. 140.


1503.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 251
tional forms of spelling have been incorporated, to meet the
requirements of the Australian pronunciation, as follows :
As far as possible, vowels are unmarked, but in some instances
the long sound of a, e and u are indicated thus, â, ë, ü. In a few
cases the short sound of u has been marked thus, ü.
Gis hard in all cases. R has a rough, trilled sound, as in the
English word “hurrah!” W always commences a syllable or
word.
Pig at the beginning of a word or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound. At the end of a syllable or word it has substantially the
sound of ng in the English word “ sing.”
The sound of the Spanish n is frequent ; at the beginning of a
word or syllable I have given it as ny, but when terminating a word
the Spanish nis used. Yat the beginning of a word has its ordi-
nary consonant value.
Dh is pronounced nearly as ih in the English word “ that,” with
a slight sound of d preceding it. Nh has also nearly the sound of
th in “ that,” but with a slight initial sound of the n.
TMs interchangeable with d; p with b ; and g with k.
Ty and dy at the commencement of a word or syllable have
nearly the sound of the English j, or the Spanish ch ; thus, dya or
tya closely resemble ja or cha. At the end of a word or syllable ty
is sounded as one letter, closely approaching the tch in the English
word “catch,” but omitting the final hissing sound.
In all cases where there is a double consonant, each letter is
enunciated.
The Anewan Language.
The remnants of the Anëwan tribe are scattered over the southern
half of what is known as the “table-land” of New England, in-
cluding Macdonald river, Walcha, Uralla, Bendemeer, Armidale,
Hillgrove and other places.
ARTICLES.
The indefinite article, a, is not represented, but the demonstra-
tive pronouns, in their numerous modifications, supply the place of
the definite article, as “this man,” “that woman,” “ yonder hill.”
The English adverb, here, in its several native forms, is frequently
treated as a demonstrative, and is then also a substitute for the
definite article.


252 MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
NOUNS.
Nouns have number, gender and case.
Number. —There are three numbers —singular, dual and plural.
Kana, a crow. Kanaburala, a pair of crows. Kananyeta, several
or many crows.
Gender Gender in the human family is denoted by different
words. Tana, a man. Kettyura, a woman. Romunna, a boy.
Këmika or nganda, a girl. Kwanga, a child of either sex.
Among animals gender is distinguished by using words signifying
“male" and “female." Pwëla, an opossum. Pwëla rula, a male
opossum. Pwëla imbarra, female opossum.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative, instru-
mental, possessive, accusative, dative and ablative.
Nominative : This case simply names the subject, as imboanda, a
kangaroo ; naia, a yamstick, without any change in the noun.
Causative : When a transitive verb is used the noun takes a
suffix, as Tananda imboanda nyuna, a man a kangaroo is beating.
Kettyuranda pwëla nyuna, a woman an opossum is beating.
Instrumental : This takes the same suffix as the causative. Ketty-
uranda tana nyuna naianda, a woman a man is beating with a yam-
stick. Tananda imboanda nyümbina arkananda, a man a kangaroo
hit with a boomerang.
Possessive: Tanango arkana, a man’s boomerang. Kettyurango
naia, a woman’s yamstick.
Accusative : This is the same as the nominative
Dative : Rullagu, to a camp.
Ablative : Rullünge, from a camp.
It should be mentioned that in all the expressions illustrating the
several cases, both in the Anëwan and Banbai languages, the demon-
strative pronouns are omitted, for the two-fold purpose of saving
space and of avoiding confusion by introducing any more words
than are really necessary to show the declension. For example,
where I have given “man kangaroo hit with boomerang"
would be fully expressed by the native thus: “Man this-on-my-
right kangaroo yonder-in-front boomerang struck-with," or as the
subject might require.
These remarks apply to every example of aboriginal sentences
throughout both the languages dealt with in this article.


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 253
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives succeed the nouns they qualify, and take the same
inflections for number and case.
Tana birkungirra, a man large.
Tanango birkungirrango arkana, a large man’s boomerang.
Tananda birkungirranda kwanga nyuna, a large man is beating a
child.
It is not necessary to give examples of the other cases.
Comparison of adjectives is effected by two positive statements,
such as, This is good—that is bad ; runyerra indya—irrunga indy-
unda.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns have three numbers, with inclusive and exclusive forms
in the first person of the dual and plural. The following table
exhibits the nominative pronouns:
Ç Ist Person I
Singular .... 32d “ Thou
3d “ He
r
f We, incl.,
1st
Person..
1 We, excl.,
Dual. . . .
2d
H
You
L 3d
ii
They
r
( We, incl.,
I St
Person..
1 We, excl.,
Plural ...
2d
<<
* You
3d
«
They
The possessive and objective pronouns
Singular.
Ist Person Mine Yinga
2 d “ Thine Nyunga
3 d “ His Onning
l Ours, inc., Tenyunga
Ist Person.. .-j Q urSj exc ] t> Tambiga
2 d “ ... Yours Twanyung
3 d “ ... Theirs Lambiga
f Ours, inch. Nyambiga
Ist Person.. .-j Q urg> exc Nyanyambiga
2d “ ... Yours Nuka
2d
3 d “
Theirs
Yukka
Indyukka
Gambaua
Twukka
Takana
Nyukka
Nâla
Audilia
Nalena
are as under
Me Enna
Thee Nunya
Him Onna
Us, inch, Tenya
Us, excl., Tuanya
You
Them Walanya
Us, inch, Nanyabura
Us, excl., Nanyumbinga
You Audumbinga
Nambiga
Them Nanya


There are forms of the pronouns meaning “away from me,”
“towards me,” etc., which must be passed over for want of space.
Interrogatives: Who, anunga. What, nyanga. What for,
nyangabura.
Demonstratives : This, indya. That, indyunda. The demon-
stratives are numerous, and of various forms, frequently taking the
place of pronouns of the third person in the singular, dual and
plural. This accounts for the great diversity of the third personal
pronouns, which have little or no etymological connection with
the others.
The demonstratives in this language, by the combination of simple
root-words, can be made to indicate position, direction, distance,
movement, possession, number, person and size. If space permit-
ted, I could show tables of these demonstratives which would be
most important for comparative purposes. This applies also to the
Banbai demonstratives.
VERBS.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, with the usual
tenses and moods. There is a form of the verb for each tense,
which remains constant through all the persons and numbers of
that tense. Any person and number can be expressed by using the
required pronoun from the table given in the foregoing page.
Following is a short conjugation of the verb Nyuka, “to beat
or strike.”
Indicative Mood—Present Tense.
{ist Person I beat
2d “ ...., .Thou beatest
3d “ He beats
and so on through the dual and plural.
Yukka nyuna
Indyukka nyuna
Gambaua nyuna
Past Tense.
Singular ist Person I beat Yukka nyumbina
Future Tense.
Singular ist Person I will beat Yukka nyumarala
Imperative Mood.
Beat, nyumera
Beat not, yinna nyumera


Conditional Mood.
Perhaps I will beat
Yukka neta nyumarala
Reflexive.
Present. . I beat myself
Past .... I beat myself
Future .. I will beat myself
Yukka nyugatina
Yukka nyugatimbina
Yukka nyugatila
Reciprocal.
Dual. .. .We, exclusive, are beating each other, Tàla nyutaka
Plural.. .We, exclusive, are beating each other, Nâla nyutaka
ADVERBS.
The following are a few of the more commonly used adverbs :
Yes, ngeh. No, apala. Today, lunna. Tomorrow, yün. Soon,
lanabura. By and bye, loka. Long ago, toangga. Now, ilan.
Recently, irrandya.
How, thanggana. Where, renya. How many, thambula. Here,
âwa. There, gamba. The two last are frequently used as demon-
stratives.
PREPOSITIONS.
In the rear, yanda. In front, gattanda. Around, ldnggai. In
the middle, umünda. Up, dapai. Down, irrakirran. Between,
ilkongga.
CONJUNCTIONS.
The general absence of conjunctions is attributable to the nu-
merous modifications of the different parts of speech, by means of
which sentences are brought together without the help of connect-
ing words'.
INTERJECTIONS AND EXCLAMATIONS.
These parts of speech are not numerous.
NUMERALS.
One, nyoanda. Two, tuala.
The Banbai Language.
The aboriginal tribes speaking this language adjoin the Anéwan
community on the north, and are located at Guyra, Ben-Lomond,
Wollomombi and Kookarabooka.


256 MATHEWS—LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
NOUNS.
Number. —There is no special declension for number, but the
noun is followed by words signifying two or several.
Ginggër bulabulari, kangaroos two.
Ginggër girrawa, kangaroos several.
Gender. —Man, thaimburra. Woman, burranyen. Boy, bod-
yerra. Girl, dillanggan. The sex of animals is denoted by words
meaning “male” and “female” respectively, placed after the
creature’s name, as, Margan dyillawara, a buck wallaby. Margan
kandura, a doe wallaby. Among birds, boro means a cock, and
ngapara, a hen.
Case. —There are the nominative, causative, instrumental, pos-
sessive, accusative, dative and ablative cases.
Nominative: Tua, a boomerang. Kunnai, a yamstick. Wan-
dyi, a dog.
Causative : Ginggëru nganya bittang, a kangaroo me scratched.
Burranyendu nganya buang, a woman me struck.
Instrumental: Thaimburradu nganya bindaimang tuandu, a
man at me threw a boomerang.
Possessive : Burranyengu kunnai, a woman’s yamstick. Thaim-
burrangu tua, a man’s boomerang.
In the Gundungurra, and in several other aboriginal languages
of New South Wales and Victoria, the article possessed takes a
suffix, as well as the possessor. For example, warrangan means a
boomerang, and murrin a man, but “ a man’s boomerang ” must be
expressed, , 1
this peculiarity of a double suffix in the genitive case of Australian
nouns had not been observed by any previous author.
Dative : Nguralami, to a camp.
Ablative : Nguranga, from a camp.
Accusative : This is the same as the nominative.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives take the same inflections as the nouns which they
qualify.
Thaimburra burwai, a man large.
Thaimburradu burwaidu nganya buang, a man large me struck.
Thaimburrangu burwaigu tua, a large man’s boomerang.
1 “The Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., Vol. xl, p. 143.


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Comparison : Nyam dhurrui—nyam yonggo ; this is good—that
is bad. Nyam dhurruiünba, this is very good.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns have the nominative, possessive and objective cases, as
in the subjoined tables. There are two forms in the first person of
the dual and plural—one in which the person or persons addressed
are included with the speaker, and another in which they are ex-
clusive of the speaker. The following is a list of the pronouns in
the nominative case :
Ngaia
Nginda
Ngurrung
' ( We, inch,
Ist Person... -j We> excL>
2d “ ... You
3d “ ... They
( We, inch,
Ist Person... •< „ T .
( We, excl.,
2d “ .. You
3d “ ... They
Ngulli
Ngulligai
Bulala
Bulagai
Nyeülla
Nyeüllagai
Nguddyil/ndya
Yangbêndu
The possessive and objective forms of the pronouns are exhibited
Singular.
1st Person...,
Ngunyo
Me Nganya
2d
«
Nginnu
Thee Ngëna
3d
U
. .His
Gurragunga
Him Nyam
Dual.
Person ..
( Ours, incl.,
Ngullimba
Us, incl., Ngullinya
1st
| Ours, excl.,
Ngullimbagai
Us, excl., Ngullinyagai
2d
«
Yours
Bullamba
You Bulanya
3d
a
Theirs
Bullambagai
Them Bulanyagai
Plural.
Person ..
( Ours, incl.,
Ngeümba
Us, incl., Ngeanya
1st
1 Ours, excl.,
Ngeumbagai
Us, excl., Ngeanyagai
2d
<< *
Yours
Nguddyimba
You Nguddyinninya
3d
«
Theirs
Ittyàran
Them Ittyàrambën


258 MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
There are also forms meaning “ with me,” nganyumbulla. Ngaia,
as in the table, is used with an intransitive verb, as, ngaia nganggi,
I sit ; but when a transitive verb is used, the pronoun is changed to
ngatya, as, Ngatya bônggi, I beat. These rules apply to the other
persons and numbers. Other forms of the pronouns are omitted
for want of space.
Interrogative pronouns : Who, wuttanya. Whom belonging to,
wuttanyannin. What, minya. How many, minya-minya.
Demonstrative pronouns : This, nyam. That, mumum. These
are frequently used as adverbs, and they mean “here” and
“ there.”
VERBS.
The rules for the conjugation of verbs are similar to those of the
Anëwan language. An example in the singular number of each
tense will be sufficient :
Indicative Mood—Present Tense.
!ist Person
2d “
3 d
I beat
Ngatya bônggi
Nginda bônggi
Ngurrung bô nggi
Thou beatest
He beats
Past Tense.
.1 beat
Singular Ist Person.
Ngatya boang
Future Tense.
Singular Ist Person I will beat Ngatya bôanggo
The imperative, conditional, reflexive and reciprocal forms of
the verb will be passed over for want of space.
ADVERBS.
Yes, nge. No, wunâ. Today or now, gillu. Tomorrow, gur-
lau. Soon, gurubilli. By and bye, kangâ. Long ago, dhullümba.
Yesterday, nyukkumba. Certainly, yare. How, dyirrung. Per-
haps, dyirraugam. Where, dyota. How many, minya-minya.
Here, nyam. There, mundyaba. Yonder, mungga-munggara.
Marëda, far away. Close to speaker, tulbaia.
The adverbs “ here ” and “ there ” are often used as demonstra-
tive pronouns, and have the same meaning as “this” and “ that.”


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES
PREPOSITIONS.
In front, munggara. In rear, wallungga. Between, pimita.
On the other side, kawatadyula. On this side, ilâmgidda. Up,
kaba. Down, warri. Around, kokari.
Conjunctions and interjections are omitted.
NUMERALS.
One, kurrukun. Two, bulari.
A Mystic or Secret Language.
Before concluding this short article on the speech of the Austra-
lian aborigines, I wish to refer to a secret language, used by the
men at the ceremonies of initiation, but which is never spoken in
the presence of women, or in the presence of those youths who
have not yet entered upon the prescribed course of initiation.
Whilst the novitiates are away in the bush in charge of the elders
of the tribe, they are taught a mystic name for surrounding objects
of every-day life, for animals, for parts of the human body, and
short sentences of general utility. This language is different in
different tribes. ,
I was the first author to draw attention to this mystic tongue, 1
and during the past year I contributed to the Royal Society of New
South Wales some vocabularies of the secret languages of the
Kurnu 2 and other Australian tribes. I consider my discovery of
this secret form of speech is of great linguistic importance, and
invite my readers to peruse the vocabularies referred to.
In connection with this subject it maybe mentioned that in 1901
I contributed an article to the Royal Geographical Society of
Queensland, on some “Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremo-
nies/’ 8 in which I published several sacred chants in the secret
tongue, which are the first songs of the kind ever set to music.
Vocabulary of Anewan Words.
The following vocabulary, containing about 210 of the most im-
portant words in general use by the Anëwan tribes, has been pre-
pared by me from notes taken in the camps of the aborigines.
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxv, p. 310.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 157-160.
5 Queensland Geographical Journal , Vol. xvii, pp. 61-63-


260 MATHEWS—LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
Every word was carefully written down by myself from the mouths
of the natives.
In a communication to the Royal Society of Victoria in the year
1896, 1 I gave a comprehensive description of the initiation cere-
monies of the Anêwan, Banbai and other tribes. Again in 1897,
I contributed a paper to the Royal Society of New South Wales, 2
in which I described the Anëwan laws of marriage and descent,
with lists of their totems. On account of the two articles referred
to, it has not now been thought necessary to repeat the subjects
therein dealt with.
English.
Anewan.
English. Anew an.
Man tana
Boy runic
Teeth yella
rumunna
Tongue tünda
Elder brother irkomba
Younger bro-
Navel dyikanga
Back twila
ther ilpaminda
Father pêta
Woman kettyura
Girl kemika
Arm kyünda
Shoulder irringala
Elbow indina
Hand nyella
Elder sister pauana
Younger sister paua
Calf of leg yula
Thigh illan
illanba
Mother irrapella
Child of either
Knee gwunba
Foot nyalla
sex kwanga
Heel nungan
Blood gwianba
The Human Body.
Woman’s
Head kwulla
breasts ipinda
Fat pyenm
Forehead tui
Hair of head relia
Beard nutvi
pyenna
Skin twunda
nutyina
Penis duna
Eye ila
Testicles ilwundandha
Semen bunsran
Nose nyanba
bungan
Jaw dhanda
Copulation bungadala
Masturbation bungalulamun
Ear nakuna
1 “ The BQrbüng of the New England Tribes,'
ix, N. S., pp. 120-136.
Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria , Vol
2 “ The Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,’ 1
Vol. xxxi, pp. 168-170.
” Journ. Roy. Soc. iV.jN.J Wales ,


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
English. A newan.
English. A newan.
Rainbow rumira
Venereal tharpunda
Anus bfilla
Large flat rock lara
Camp rulla
Mammals.
Excrement ngunba
Urine itirra
Natural Surroundings.
Kangaroo imboanda
Porcupine iwutta
Wild-dog irritanga
Opossum pwela
Flying-fox ramana
Kangaroo-rat bara
Sun nura
Moon ternda
Stars ikina
Sky rünbinna
Thunder lâmutika
Native-bear lauanha
Wallaroo lumulla
Bandicoot imbunga
Ring-tail opos-
Lightning kimmitta
Rain yünggara
Fog ngatta
Snow ikana
sum aunda
Native-cat kyura
Wallaby kyatta
Tiger-cat yâra
Bat lyunganda
Frost lala
Hail arrepanna
Water ukünda
The ground kyuna
Stones rola
Sand raikana
Birds.
Darkness illona
Birds collec-
tively pillang
Emu runda
Coldness inganna
Fire inba
Smoke rutta
Eagle-hawk lambara
Black-duck rungara
Night lonna
Food (fleSh) kara
Pelican wuyara
Laughing jack-
ass rokala
Food (vegeta-
ble) kyaia
Honey irrota
Crow kana
Swan dyuwula
Native-compan-
Hill kuta
Watercourse ret.ta
Any tree dulla
ion rualgunda
White cockatoo ërpatha
Black cockatoo wellara
Leaves of trees indora
Path kurra
Shadow
Summer
Winter
tonba
Common mag-
ilkaiwa
pie
Plover
imbota
tyerwanba
tharringga


262 MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
English. Anewan.
Curlew rilwinnu
Brown-hawk ôwara
Parrokeet imbanga
Mopoke ürküng
Fishes.
Perch
indanga
lyünda
Jewfish
Codfish
Sprat
guyu, or ruta
birran
indhurra
Reptiles.
Black iguana rutyala
Water iguana nhawala
Ground iguana tyunda
Spotted iguana laipara
Jew-lizard nura
Snakes collec-
tively yenda
Death-adder minda
Rock-lizard roppung
Turtle yiwang
Stinking-turtle werra
Big frog imbottonga
Carpet-snake imbiâla
Sleepy lizard pwoggana
Invertebrates.
Bee ronnang
Locust warra
Centipede engara
Louse irrakanba
Nits of lice minna
House-fly rulunga
Spider âlman
Mosquito irwala
English. Anewan.
Bulldog ant
(red) thanda
Bulldog ant
(black) oppunga
Scorpion imbünda
Crab thambanna
Trees and Plants.
Mountain ash o-inba
Kurrajong nunggutta
Ironbark girranba
Stringy bark indwarra
Wattle luna
Grass-tree dunburra
Peppermint nêwurra
Apple-tree tünba
Gum-tree orrulla
Scrub-gum-tree bikkara
Pine wungulla
White box yina
Reeds moanda
Forest oak rëwilla
Cherry-tree poara
Jeebung lwainda
Weapons, etc.
War spear kyenba
Hunting spear anbelang
Jagged spear mumberin
Spearshield indüta
Club shield bekang
Club raipella
Spear thrower womur
Boomerang arkana
Tomahawk mukung
Fighting-hook lënyang
Nulla-nulla rularokara
Koolamin tilla
Net bag loia


English. Anêwan.
Yamstick naia
Stone knife imbônda
Adjectives.
Large
Small
Good
Bad
birkingirra
latherana
ronyerra
irrünga
imbyura
Hungry
Thirsty
Quick
ambia
ngunna
Slow
numbadia
Afraid
Angry
Greedy
no-aran
anagana
myüna
Verbs.
English.
Walk
Break
Give
Sing
Weep
Steal
Bite
A new an.
nadiga
Catch
Climb
Hear
nuppanati
wammin
unumbia
peka
twaka
nomekka
irruttela
anamarai
irrukka
nugguna
indeka
Laugh
Scratch
See
Dance
Swim
Stand
Throw
Pretend
Swallow
nirmatin
aikunna
thekinna
imbwiana
râgya




THE MÜRRAWIN CEREMONY.
BY
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S„
Corresponding Member Ssc. d’Anthrop. de Paris, etc.
(Read at a Meeting of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Brisbane,
October '22nd, 1900).




THE MURRAWIN CEREMONY.*
By R. H- MATHEWS, L-S.
(Corres. Memb. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris, etc.)
Among the Thangatty and their allies on the Macleay River and
tributary streams, New South Wales, there is a preliminary form of
initiation ceremony known as the Murrawin. This rite is also found
among the Koombanggary as far north, approximately, as the Bellin-
ger River, and also south of the Macleay to about Hastings River,
occupied by the Birrapee and other tribes. Unlike the Burbung (1)
or Keeparra (2) ceremonies, which involve summoning the entire com-
munity, the Murrawin can be proceeded with by two or three adjoin-
ing tribes, who assemble for this purpose, being brought together in
the usual way by means of messengers sent round by the headmen.
When the tribes have met at the appointed place a number of the
initiated men of each tribe go several miles into the bush and clear a
small piece of level ground of all loose rubbish and grass. On this
clear space they form a ring about twenty feet in diameter, bounded
by a low embankment of the loose earth scraped from within. They
next make two or three small bullroarers, called gheewarra or guarra,
and return to the main camp. These proceedings, which are the com-
mencement of the ceremony, are called Gheewarra balaliny.
That evening, after dark, some of the oldest men go away about
200 or 300 yards from the camp of the rest of the people and form a
small camping place for themselves, which is called Thoorapee, where
they light a fire. They then swing a gheewarra, and beat their hiela-
mons with a nulla nulla, singing the incantations usual on such oc-
casions. When the initiated men at the main camp hear this, some
of the eldest of them go and join the old men at their new quarters.
These men do not all start at once, but a few go at one time and a few
at another, and some of them carry food to the old men. Next aay
the men at the thoorapee go out hunting, and on returning they swing
a gheewarra the same as before, and more men from the main camp
join them. This procedure is carried on for a few nights, until all
the initiated men from the tribes present have joined the old fellows
at the new camp.
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland,
October 22nd, 1900. ..
(1) Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. (Philadelphia, U.S.A.), vol. xxxvii., pp. 54—69;
Pro. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vol. ix., NS., pp. 120—136.
(2) Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, vol. xxvi., pp. 320—338.


The men belonging to one tribe then commence to abuse those of
the other tribes present for coming to carry off their sons. The men
of each tribe take their turn in hurling invectives against all the rest.
After the free use of heated language for some time, the matter is al-
lowed to drop. A feigned quarrel of a similar character always pre-
cedes the taking away of the novices, in all the initiation ceremonies
with which I am acquainted.*
The following morning early the gheewarra is sounded as
usual, and after breakfast all the people shift camp to
another locality, where the women, boys, and girls camp in
one place, and the men in another. The men then go out
into the bush to the ring they had previously prepared. They
approach it in single file, tapping their boomerangs together,
and having marched once round it they enter it and dance. During
this time some of the men are standing outside beating a shield with
another weapon. All hands then leave the ring and start homewards,
hunting as they go. On approaching the thoorapee they walk in In-
dian file, carrying such game, honey, or roots as they may have ob-
tained. This procession is called Ngooraykoo bimbinnie. The ghee-
warra is sounded as usual, and the men presently carry the game to the
women’s camp, where they have supper. They afterwards return
to their own quarters, where they sing and beat their shields, and
dance by the light of the camp fires, stamping on the ground heavily
with their feet. The time has now arrived for separating the novices
from their mothers, and handing them over to the headmen for uie
purpose of initiation. It will be convenient in some respects to de-
scribe the procedure as if applying to one novice, although there may
be several boys to be operated upon at the same time.
At the conclusion of the preliminaries referred to, all the men
at the thoorapee get small pieces of dry bark, which had previously
been made ready, and place one end of them in the camp fire for
the purpose of being ignited. They then each take one of these
pieces of burning bark in their hands and swing them in the air,
dancing and jumping about while doing so. They now start towards
the women’s camp, carrying the firebrands in their hands, and shout-
ing. When the women hear the shouting and the stamping of the
men’s feet, and see the waving of the fiery pieces of bark, they strip
the novice naked and put him standing near their own camp fire,,
with his mothers and sisters beside him. The men carrying the burn-
ing bark approach, and run up close to the boy, a® if going to catch
him, and then retire several paces. They do this again in the same
* Proc. Boy. Soc., Victoria, Vol. ix., NS., p. 152; Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol.
xxv., p. 327.


way, and on the third time one of the men, who stands in the relation-
ship of brother-in-law to the novice, and is acting as his guardian, then
steps out, and, catching him by the arm, leads him in amongst the
men, who raise him astride his guardian’s shoulders. All the men
then start away back to their own camp, the man carrying the novice
being in the middle. The mothers and sisters commence shouting
“Wy ! Wy !” and throw firesticks after the men.
On reaching their own camp—the thoorapee—the men place the
novice lying down, face upwards, on the ground in the light of the
camp fire, and two of them sit straddle-legs across his body. A
couple of men then catch the boy by the shoulders, two more take hold
of his feet, while one man supports his loins, and raise him from
the ground as high as they can, with the two men sitting astride his
body, and lower him down again. This is repeated two or three
times, and at its conclusion the men participating in the performance
catch hold of their genitals, inviting the boy to pay particular atten-
tion. Each man then rubs his hands over the nose and mouth of the
novice, after which he is put lying down on leaves, with more leaves
thrown over him, near the fire.
A number of the men then get each a stick, about the size of a
walking stick, and stand in a row in the light of the camp fire. The
boy is uncovered and placed sitting up, and directed to look at the
men, who then all rush towards him, pointing the end's of the sticks
close to his face, as if going to poke out his eyes. Two of the other
men, one on each side of the boy, stand out, armed with nulla nullas,
and pretend to defend him. The men with the sticks retire several
paces and turn their backs in the direction of the boy. They then
step backwards towards him, and when standing around him they
bend their posteriors over him and state that it is their intention to
evacuate upon him The men with the nulla nullas again interpose,
and apparently save the youth from this indignity. By this time it
is getting late, and the boy is covered over with leaves near a fire,
and is not permitted to move during the remainder of the night. If
he should happen to want to attend to any call of nature, no matter
what it is, he must do it where he lies. He is not allowed to scratch
his head or any part of his body.
Early next morning two or more of the principal old women go
close to the men’s camp and throw each a boomerang, the weapon fall-
ing a little way short of where the men are. These old women then
start back towards their own quarters, and when nearly there are met
by all the other women, carrying each a small bundle of sticks in
their hands, and waving their arms up and down. The old women
join these, and all of them proceed in the direction of tVo men’s
-camp, muttering incantations.


In the meantime the men lift the novice from where he has beeiu
lying all night and place him on a man’s shoulders —sitting astride
the man’s neck, with his legs dangling down in front. All hands then
start towards the women’s camp, and when about half way there tne
boy is let down, and stands beside his guardian, in the centre of the
group of men. As soon as the women referred to reach this spot
the novice is raised up so that he is standing with one foot on each
shoulder of the man who is supporting him, and is exhibited to tüe-
women, who thereupon commence throwing their bundles of sticks at
the men who have the boy in charge. The men then raise a shout
and hold up their spears and other weapons vertically in the air all
round the novice, so that he is hidden from the women’s view. He is
now lowered astride the man's neck as before and carried back to
the men’s quarters, where he is covered up in the customary manner.
The women also return to their own camp.
A number of the principal men now start to the quarters of
the women, and on approaching it they pull handfuls of grass, which
they take and give into the hands of little boys of all ages who are
standing with their mothers ready to meet the men, and the boys
hold the grass to their breasts. The men then retreat a short dis-
tance and collect handfuls of small sticks, which they bring up, and
give to the little boys, who throw the grass away and hold the sticks
against their breasts. These lads are not yet old enough to be taken
away for initiation, and this ceremony is gone through to make them
grow up strong. The men then start back to their own camp, and on
their way gather handfuls of grass, which they scatter over the novice
where he is lying. As soon as the men go away the women and child-
ren shift their quarters to another locality, perhaps several miles
distant. They are accompanied by some of the old men, and the
mothers of the novices are required to sing certain songs morning and
evening, and eat such food as is prescribed for them.
We must now return to the men’s camp, which has not been
removed from where it was. During the day some of the men go out
hunting to provide food, the guardian and the old men remaining
all day with the novice at the thoorapee, singing the incantations
customary on such occasions. On the return of the hunters in the
afternoon they procure a pole about twenty feet in length and three
or four inches in diameter, in preparation for the next performance,
which is called Goorooyoonbang. The novice is then put sitting near
the fire, with his head bowed, and his eyes cast down. About a dozen
of the men then go and stand with one of their feet on each side of the-
long pole referred to, and stooping down simultaneously they all
catch hold of it with both hands and raise it from the ground a little-
higher than their knees. They are all facing where the novice is


sitting, and the front man, who is chosen for his unusual strength, has
another man, of small stature, sitting astride his neck, waving his
arms up and down and contorting his face. The end of the pole is
brought up quite close to' the novice’s face, and he is told by his guar-
dian to raise his head and look. The men astride the pole are so
placed that when the boy looks he can see the whole line of men one
behind the other. The men then move the pole forward and back-
ward between their legs, and tell the boy they are going to run it
through him, uttering obscene remarks all the time. The scene
before him is so very unlike anything he has ever been accustomed to
that he is put into a great state of fear and awe. The youth s head!
is again bent down, while preparations are made for the next scene.
The. men now get off the long pole, and turn it at right angles
to its former position, and all stand in a line, with the pole in front
of them, holding it in both hands, and swaying it from side to side in
unison. The boy is again directed to look, and when the performance
has lasted for a few minutes the men all let go the pole at once, and!
it falls with a thud upon the ground ; they pick it up again, and after
swaying it, let it fall in the same way. This is repeated several
times, and then the pole is carried away and placed leaning against
an adjacent tree. Some further singing bv the old men brings the
day’s performance to a close, and all hands go to sleep by the camp
fires.
Next morning before sunrise some of the men lay one or more
shields upon the ground close to the novice’s head, where he lies
asleep. They then sit down alongside, with their boomerangs in their
hands, and at a given signal commence hitting the shields with the
flat sides of the boomerangs, making a terrible discord, which awakens 1
the boy with a sudden start. When he shows the first sign of
awakening/a, man who is standing beside him for the purpose throws
a rug over his head, so that he cannot see the cause of the great noase.
The weapons are then put away, and the novice is allowed to sit up,
half stupefied, and his ears still tingling with the harsh din.
One of the men had previously climbed a tree with tolerably
dense foliage in the proximity of the camp, and got among the
branches in such a position that he could extend his arms and catch
hold of a branch in each hand, with his feet resting on another branch
which is partially hidden. Some of the men now say among them-
selves that there is a stranger up in one of the trees. The novice is
then helped to his feet, and brought out and told to look up the
tree. On raising his head he sees the man among the branches hold-
ing on with both hands and dancing with his feet, which have the
appearance of being unsupported. Some of the men pretend to throw
weapons at the man in the tree, and while the novice is gazing at him'


-two other men a little way in the rear commence swinging gheewarras.
The boy is then told to turn round and look at these men, and while
he is doing so, some armed warriors step out in front of him and
caution him in the usual manner against revealing this part of the
ceremony, or any of the secret performances he has seen in the bush,
to women or the uninitiated. The men who were swinging the
ghewarras then approach the boy, and, having rubbed the instru-
ments on parts of his body, place the string around his neck. After
this the novice is painted as a man of his tribe, and is invested with
•the belt, kilt, and other regalia comprising a man's dress. The novice
is next taken to the small circle in the bush already referred to.
Some pieces of bark are stripped from adjacent trees, and on them
are carved spiral, quadrilateral, and other designs such as are seen
on trees at the Burbung and Keeparra grounds described elsewhere
by me.(l) These strips of bark are laid on the ground near the ring,
and the novice is directed to pay special attention to what is shown
him, after which the obligation of secrecy is repeated.
The following day the novice is freshly painted, and all hands
start towards the women’s camp. On nearing it a, number of the
young men put up quarters for themselves and the novice, where
they stop with him for the rest of the men going into the
camp. The next night the novice and his companions shift
their quarters a little nearer to the main camp, and continue coming
closer and closer every night until at length the novice is brought
right into the single men’s quarters. He is now allowed to associate
with the men and accompanies them when they go out hunting, but
he is not permitted to mix with the women and children during a
term of probation, which is fixed by the head men, who also impose
upon him certain restrictions in regard to his food. At the next
Burbung or Keeparra which is held among his people, he will be
present with his sponsors to receive further instruction in the initia-
tory rites, and will then be shown the Bahram, or white stones, and
also the sacred pieces of wood, Kunggara, on which certain mystic
carvings appear, which the natives say is the work of Dharroogan, or
Howang, a maleficent being, who is supposed to possess supernatural
powers, and to exercise some mystic authority during the performance
of the inaugural ceremonies.
It may be interesting to state that the tribe who practise the
iMurrawin type of inaugural ceremony possess a social organization
consisting of four intermarrying divisions. The masculine and femi-
nine forms of the names of the sections, showing how they intermarry,
(1) For a report of the Burbling of the Koombanggary, Thangatty, and Anaywan
•tribes see Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., xxxvii., 54—59. For an account of the
[Keeparra see Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Lond., xxvi., 320—338.


with the names of the respective
belongs, will be readily understood
TABLE
sections to which
m tabular form : —
No. 1.
the offspring',
Phralry Husband
Wife
Son
Daughter
. ( Kurpoong
Wirrakan
Wirroong
Wanggan
( Marroong
Wanggan
Womboong
Wirrakan
„ | Womboong
1 Wirroong
Kooran
Marroong
Karragan
Karragan
Kurpoong
Kooran
T
On the Tableland
of New England among the Anaywan and'
On the Tableland of New England among the Anaywan and'
friendly tribes, the four section names are somewhat different, as
under : —
TABLE No. 2.
Phratry Husband Wife Son Daughter
j Irpoong Irrakedna Irroong Patyang
A j Marroong Patyang Imboong Irrakedna
p ( Imboong Matyang Marroong Arrakan
I Irroong Arrakan Irpoong Matyang
To each of the phratries in the above tables, there is an aggre-
gate of totems attached, consisting of animals, plants, and inanimate
objects, and descent is counted on the female side.
The two sections, Irpoong and Marroong, always marry the Im-
boong and Irroong pair, but the rotation of the intermarriage of the
individual sections, constituting the phratries A and B, varies in different
districts. For example, in some parts, instead of the rules of marriage
following the order represented in the foregoing tables, an Irpoong,
provided he is not barred by nearness of kin, may marry Patyang,
and Marroong may take Irrakedna as his spouse. The descent of the
children is not, however, affected by this variation, the progeny of
Irrakedna being always Irroong and Patyang, whether she is married
to an Irpcfong or Marroong husband. This alternative law applies,
mutatis mutandis, to the marriages of the sections in phratry B. Mar-
riages between persons of the same totem are not permitted, unless
the parties to the alliance belong to a widely separated lineage.
The organisation represented in Table No. 1 is in force among
all the native tribes spread over that portion of New South Wales
from the Hunter River to the Clarence, and extending back from the
coast to the main dividing range. In some places, as in New England,
Table No. 2, they reach beyond the range a little way down the
western slope; whilst at other places, for example, on the tributaries
of the Upper Hunter, they do not go as far inland as the dividing
range. Within the geographic limits indicated there are a consider-
able number of tribes, among the principal of which are the Koom-
banggary, Bunjellung, Thangatty, Anaywan, Birrapee, Bahree, Molo,
Kutthung, Warrimee, Minvowa, Watthung, G-ooringai, and others.
















Rock Carvings of the Australian Aborigines.
By R. H. Mathews, Licensed Surveyor;
Honorary Corresponding Member.
[With a Plate.]
[Read at a Meeting of the Society, May 30, 1899.]
In former communications to this Society I have drawn atten-
tion to some remarkable drawings, carved by the aborigines on
the exposed surfaces of sandstone outcrops. Considering the
primitive tools used by the natives, the production of these carv-
ings must have been the result of immense labour, especially in
regard to the larger figures, some of which are upwards of 60ft.
in length. The aboriginal artists had no idea of perspective, and
none of their figures are copied from nature, but exhibit a con-
ventional style of drawing, which has probably been handed down
from the time of their ancestors. It is with a view of collecting
data, from which some conclusions may be obtained respecting
the origin and meaning of these and similar carvings, that I have
prepared the annexed plate and descriptive letter-press. I hope
that some of the readers of this journal will endeavour to discover
rock carvings in any parts of Queensland where there may be
suitable rocks for the purpose.
Nos. 3 to 7, and 8 to 10, represent groups in their correct relative
positions on the rocks ; the remainder of the drawings are fitteçl
on the sheet in such a manner as not to occupy any more space
than is necessary. All the carvings herein dealt with are in New
South Wales; and unless otherwise stated are in the county of
Cumberland.
No. 1 is a remarkable drawing of a fish whose entire length
from the nose to the farthest part of the tail is 21ft. lin. The
mouth is open, with four ciliary lines 7in. long rising from the
upper lip. There are three short fins along the belly, and the tail
has three divisions, which is rather unusual. The narrow dorsal
appendage is peculiar, being 9ft. lOin. long, surmounting a short
fin which rises only 19in. from the back of the fish. This carving
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, Brisbane, Vol. XIV.


is situated near the southern boundary of Portion No. 1499, in
the parish of Manly Cove, on an extensive denuded surface of
Hawkesbury sandstone, sloping slightly towards the south.
No. 2 represents a woman 3ft. 7in. high, being one of a numeious
batch of drawings carved on a large rock within Portion No.
1139, in the parish of Manly Cove. This figure was originally
reported by me to the Royal Society of Victoria,* and is now
reproduced on account of its unusual interest.
Nos. 3 to 7 are carved on a large rounded mass of Hawkesbury
sandstone abutting on the eastern side of the main load from
Dural to Wiseman’s Ferry, and are distant 42 chains in a
northerly direction from the north-west corner of Portion No. 43,
in the parish of Frederick. No. 3 is apparently the
profile of a human being in a sitting posture, and measures sft.
4in. from the top of the head to the posterior. No. 4is a boom-
erang apparently held in the hand of the last figure. No. sis a
fish 2ft. lOin. long, near to which is another boomerang, No. 6.
The male figure, No. 7, has his arms extended upwards. On the
same large rock are several other human figures, which I con-
tributed to the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain.f
Nos. 8,9, and 10 represent a group of three human figures,
carved on the same flat rock as No. 1, and not far from it. Nos.
8 and 9 are two drawings of men, the former being sft. 7in. and
the latter sft. 9in. high. Between them is a woman, No. 10, 4ft.
11 in. in height.
No. 11 is a remarkable fish, carved on a northerly continuation
of the same mass of rock as that containing the last group, from
which it is distant three or four chains. From the snout to the
farthest point of the tail measures 18ft. Within the outline of
the posterior portion of the fish is the figure of a man sft. Bin.
high, No. 12; and attached to one of the long ventral fins is a
shield, No. 13, with a longitudinal and a transverse bar. In a
former paper! I described an emu with a shield drawn upon its
body; and in another instance a kangaroo with a shield was
* Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vii, N.8., 158-154, Plate ix, Fig. 11.
f Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxvii, 511, Plate xxx, Figs. 24 to 28.
J Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q ), x, 66-67, Plate 8, Fig. 3.


represented.§ Perhaps in such cases the animal is intended to
portray the totemic ancestor of the artist.
No. 14 is another strange drawing of a fish, 9ft. lOin. in length,
carved on the same rock as No. 1, which it resembles in some
respects.
No. 15 is cut upon the same rock as No. 2, and represents a
woman sft. lin. high. The three figures of females, delineated
in the annexed plate, are highly interesting, owing to the
omission of the mammæ. The latter are frequently represented
in a pendulous form on either side of the chest in aboriginal
drawings of women.
Nos. 16, 17, and 18 are carved upon a sandstone surface on
the ridge at the head of Berry’s Bay, one of the inlets of Port
Jackson, in the parish of Willoughby. The large fish, No. 16,
measures nearly 22ft. in length, and within the tail portion is a
human figure, No. 17, with a peculiarly formed head. There is
another male figure, No. 18, also within the outline of the fish,
but the grooves are so nearly obliterated by the wasting of the
rock as to be almost indistinguishable. A few yards from No.
16 are some other small carvings, including human figures, fish,
and other objects, which are not shown in the present plate.
Nos. 16 and 17 were described by me in an article published by
the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain,|| and are now
reproduced for the purpose of showing No. 18, which was inad-
vertently omitted on that occasion. The name of the parish was
also erroneously stated to be Alexandria, instead of Willoughby.
Nos. 19 to 22 are carved on an extensive surface of sandstone
almost level with the ground, over which passes a bridle-track
from Mangrove Creek to the Hawkesbury River, in the parish of
Spencer, county of Northumberland. What these objects are
intended to represent it is difficult to determine. The three
rabbit-like animals may portray the native bear, or perhaps
they were intended to represent some insect. No. 19 looks like a
bee or fly.
§ Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxv, 161, Plate 16, Fig. 3.
|| Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxvii, 538, Plate 30, Figs. 11 and 12.
CORRECTION. — Vol. X., page 69, line 13, for “ a chain and three-quarters
westerly ” read “ about thirty chains in a south-easterly direction.”


1
4 it
fir \
Ip'
■
:


THE THOORGA LANGUAGE.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Memb. Assoc. Etranger Soc. d'Anthrop. de Paris.




THE THOORGA LANGUAGE.
By R. H. Mathews, L.S., Memb. Assoc. Etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
Prefatory.
In the following pages an attempt will be made to supply the out-
lines of the structure of the Thoor'ga, or Thur'-ga, language, which is
spoken by the aborigines scattered along the coast of New South Wales
from Bermagui northerly to Jervis Bay.
To the north and north-west of the Thoorga are the Thur'rawal,
Dhar'rook, Gun/dungurha and Ngoonawal tribes. Adjoining the Thoor-
ga on the south are the Jirringan, Thâwa and other communities. The
speech of all the tribes mentioned is similar in grammatical structure,
although differing more or less widely in vocabulary, and constitute
a language which differs in several important respects from that of
the natives of other portions of New South Wales.
The above aggregate of tribes covers the territory between the
Hawkesbury River and Cape Howe, extending inland till met by the
gr eat Wiraijuri nation, whose speech belongs toi the Yookumbill order,
which I have briefly outlined in the Appendix hereto. It is hoped that
the two types of Australian languages described in this pajier may be
found useful to philologists.
The different parts of speech will be first dealt with, showing
the declensions of nouns and adjectives, the modifications of pro-
nouns, and the conjugation of verbs. A few songs used at the initia-
tion ceremonies come next, after which there is a vocabulary containing
about four hundred and sixty carefully-selected words from the Thoorga
tongue.
Every word in this paper has been taken down by myself from
the Ups of several old men and women of the Thoorga tribe on different
ccasions, according as opportunities offered to make special journeys
among them. The student of ethnology will readily understand all
the difficulties and patient work appertaining to a first attempt to
reduce to writing the language of a savage people possessing no litera-
ture of any kind, where all the particulars have to be gathered orally
from the native speakers. I therefore crave the indulgence of the
reader for the incomplete form of this article, as well as for any
errors which are necessarily incident to the first edition of a work of
this character. On a future occasion I hope to complete the task
upon which a commencement has now been made.
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, 28th
November, 1901.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVII.


Orthography.
The vowels used in the Thoorga language are a, e, i, o, u ; and the
consonants, b, c, d, g, h, j, k, 1, m, n, p, r, t, w, y. In this treatise
every word is spelt phonetically, the letters having the same value
as in English, with the undermentioned qualifications:
Vowels have the usual short sound, unless marked, as follows:
âas in late I ïas in kite êas in bear
â ~ ~ far I ô,, ~ vote
It is hard to distinguish between the short, or unmarked, sound
of a and that of u, a difficulty also met with in several other languages..
Combinations of vowels are pronounced thus:
ee, as in meet; 00, as in moon; ou, as in loud.
In order to get the native pronunciation as accurately as possible,
it has been found necessary to make certain combinations of conso-
nants when spelling some of the words.
Ng at the beginning of a syllable, as nga, has a peculiar nasal
sound, which can be got almost exactly by assuming oo to be placed
before it, as 00-nga, and then pronouncing the two syllables as one.
At the end of a syllable, it has the sound of ng in sing, but more nasal.
The sound of the Spanish nis frequent. At the commencement of
a word or syllable I have represented it by ny, as nyir, which is
articulated as one syllable. At the termination of a syllable, n is
adopted, as yoo-in.
Y, followed by a vowel, is attached to several consonants, as dya,
lyee, byoo, tya, and so on, which are pronounced as one syllable, sound-
ing all the letters. Y sometimes follows a consonant at the end of a
word, as in gur-ra-gaty, meaning slow. In such cases it must form part
of the preceding syllable; thus, gaty should be pronounced all in one.
Dh, whether at the beginning or end of a word, is pronounced
nearly as th in that, with a slight sound of d preceding it ; thus, dhoo-
gan, a camp, and kan-nargo-badh, a, porcupine. Frequently th is used
instead of dh, when an initial t sound is substituted for that of the d.
Nh at the commencement of a syllable, as nhoor, is pronounced as-
the th in that, with the sound of n before it. At the end of a word, it
resembles nth in tenth, omitting the final hissing sound.
The final h is guttural, closely resembling the ch in the German
word joch.
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k.
R has a rough trilled sound as in the exclamation hur-rah ! no
matter what its position in the word may be.
The sound of j at the beginning of a syllable is often given by the
natives as ty or dy, thus, tya has substantially the sound of ja.
Ch, which seldom occurs, is pronounced as in church.
The accent is shown thus, Kul'la, and when two syllables are
accented, both are marked in the same way.


When there is a reduplication of a consonant, as in boorra, each
letter is distinctly enunciated.
To Mr. H. E. Hookey, manager of Wallaga Lake Aboriginal
Station, I wish to express my thanks for his courtesy in allow ng me
to have free access to the natives under his charge, and for other acts
of kindness during my visits to that portion of the district while
engaged in my ethnological investigations.
Articles.
There are no articles, such as the equivalents of “ a” and “ the,” in
the language.
The usual arrangement of words in a sentence is to place the nomi-
native first, then the adjective, and lastly the verb, as Koongarangga
jiroura thunnan, the opossum leaves eats (is eating). An adjective
qualifying either the nominative or objective, follows its noun. Space
will not admit of examples at present.
Nouns.
Nouns are subject to variation on account of number, gender, and
case—the inflexion being effected by means of suffixes or postpositions.
Number. —There are three numbers, the singular, dual, and plural.
The singular number denotes one ; the dual number two, or a pair; the
■plural number more than two. Generally, the dual is formed by
adding the termination burra to the word ; the plural is ,formed by
suffixing burraga; as in the following examples:— «
(1) One opossum, Koong'ara
A pair of opossums, Koong'arambur'ra
Several opossums, Koong'arambur'raga
(2) One kangaroo, Boo'roo
A pair of kangaroos, Boo'roowur'ra
Several kangaroos, Boo'roowur'raga
(3) One boomerang, Warang'an
A pair of boomerangs, Warang'anbur'ra
Several boomerangs, Warang'anbur'raga
In the first example the name of the animal ends with a vowel r
and the syllable is closed by the annexure of the letter m. which is then
followed by the suffixes burra and burraga respectively. The letters m
and b are closely related to each other in sound ; in the articulation of
the former the air escapes through the nose—in the latter through the
mouth. Therefore, the introduction of the m before thi 6 makes the
whole word flow more easily than if the m were not there.
In the second example the creature's name concludes with on, which
is closely allied to w in sound, therefore the b is dropped from the
beginning of the next syllable, and a w substituted for it, making the
whole word read boo'-roo-wur-ra—the two syllables roo-wur melting
into each other.


In the third example, the name of the object terminates with n,
and the suffix is added without modification. It appears, therefore,
that the suffixes are liable to variations which are apparently designed
for the sake of a pleasing, easy pronunciation.
Gender. —There are two modes of indicating difference of gender
in nouns :—(1) By using different words for the male and female ; and
(2) By affixing some word indicative of sex.
Yoo'in is a man, wanggan a woman. Kum'mera means an old
man ; karn'ga an old woman. Gub'bogoobal, a boy ; yan'dabal, a girl.
The gender of animals is usually expressed by forming a compound
with another word, as Wuddhungffir beâno, a male dog ; wuddhungffir
wang'ganmano, a. female dog, wang'ganmano being derived from wang'-
gan, the name of the human female.
For a few of the animals a specific word represents the male, with-
out naming the animal, but in the case of the female the animal name
must be stated, followed by a distinguishing word. For example, the
male of the koong'ara, opossum, is called kumburroo'ga, whilst the
female is spoken of as koongara-kooroo'roo. G-umbâwur, native bear,
has the single word buFrunda for the male, but the female is repre-
sented by giving the name of the animal, followed by kooroo'roo,
thus— gumbâwur-koorooroo. A female kangaroo is called immer, as
booroo-immer.
When the name of any animal or inanimate object is mentioned,
without some word specifying the sex, the masculine gender is
invariably understood.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, nominative-agent,
possessive, accusative, dative and ablative.
The nominative is expressed in two ways, the first being called the
nominative—the second the nominative-agent. The noun is unaltered
if we merely name the object under consideration, as, wuddungur tham-
bâmoolaga, a dog I saw. But if we speak of the object, as performing
any act, a suffix is required, as wuddungurra koongara buddhal, the
dog an opossum bit. Koongarangga jiroura thunnan, an opossum
leaves is eating. The form of the suffix varies slightly with the termi-
nation of the noun to which it is annexed, as in the last two examples.
Frequently the agent-suffix is omitted altogether.
The possessive (genitive) is formed by adding the suffix noo, or its
variants, to the name of the object possessed, and dha, or a euphonic
modification, to the name of the possessor, as follows :
Wanggan, a woman —wnrran, a child ; but wanggandha wurranyoo
is a woman’s child.
Yooin, a man — bimbîa, a shield, and yooindya bimbîânoo, a man's
shield.


Wurran, a child—thoogan, a camp ; but wurranya thooganoo is a
child’s camp.
The possessive case of a large number of nouns is effected by a
suffix corresponding to the person and number required, thus forming,
one word, which can be inflected as under :
(Ist person My camp Thoogandhooga
Singular '2nd ~ Thy camp Thooganoong
(3rd ~ His camp Thooganoo
~ ( Our camp (inch) Thoogangul
list person ! our _ ! excl j Thoogangulluntr
Uual .. "i 2nd ~ Your camp Thooganbool
(3rd ~ Tlieir camp Thooganumbool
nprson jOur camp (incl.) Thooganyin
1 1st person | Q ur (excl.) Thooganymnunga
Plural i 2nd „ Your camp Thoogandlioor
(3rd ~ Their camp Thoogangadhan
The native words in the above table read thus:—Camp my, camp
thy, camp his, and so on.
In the accusative there is generally no change in the noun, as,
Wanggandha wurranyoo gâray thunnan —the woman’s child a snake
is eating.
The sense of the ablative case is often obtained by mpans of the
objective : Wuddungurra koongara buddhal —the dog the opossum
bit ; that is, the opossum was bitten by the dog.
The dative case is sometimes obtained in a similar way : Eedhun-
gooroo murrawarnoo mirreejigga ngoomal —the mother her daughter
a bandicoot gave, or, the mother gave a bandicoot to her daughter.
Usually the ablative and dative oases are shown by suffixes to the
noun, and in a few instances they are indicated by modifications of
the verb.
Adjectives.
Adjectives have three numbers, and are placed after the nouns
they qualify. When an adjective qualifies a ncun in the dual or plural,
the requisite suffix is attached to both :
Yooin garaeeha, a man bad
Yooinburra garneenamburra, a pair of men bad
Yooinburraga garneenamburraga, several men bad.
The suffix is often omitted from one of the words, leaving the noun
only, or the adjective, to indicate the dual and plural.
Adjectives also take the same possessive, dative, and ablative
suffixes as the nouns with which they are used.
The comparison of adjectives does not follow the same rules as in
European languages, but there are several ways of comparing one
quality or quantity with another. One method is to use a stronger form


THE THOORGA LANGUAGE
of the same word, thus, birraga, large ; birragambora, above the
average size ; birragangoodhoo, very large.
Referring to a couple of boomerangs, which are equally good, a
native would say, Warrangan neen jummagadha—warranganwal
jinginda jummagadha, Boomerang this good—boomerang other that
good; that is, This boomerang is good, that other boomerang is good.
If a better weapon were produced, he might say, Warrangan jummagan-
goodhoo, boomerang very good.
Where one of the objects compared is smaller or inferior in any way
to the other, the speaker will use words to imply, small this, large that,
or as the case may require.
Comparison may be effected by using different words, as,
goorougoora, fast; jôambadhoo, resembling the speed of a falling star.
We have seen that when used qualitatively, adjectives are inflected
for number and case; when they are used as predicates, they are
inflected for person and number, and are placed foremost in the
sentence :
(Ist person lam good (good I) Jummagambaga
►Singular J 2nd ~ Thou art good (good thou) Jummagambee
(3rd ~ He is good (good he) Jummagaman
(Ist nerson j We are good (inch)
list person l We ? ( exc l.)
:2nd ~ You are good
(3rd They are good
Jummagambung
Jummagambungulla
Jummagamboo
Jummagamburra
Dual
1, , (We are good (incl.)
Ist person , We _
2nd ~ You are good
3rd ~ They are good
Jummagambun
Jummagambunga
Juin rnagam ban
J mnmagamburraga
Plural
Any adjective which is used in this way, as, I am strong, hungry,
glad, and so on, can be inflected as in the above example. They also
admit of inflection for past and future time, like intransitive verbs.
One example in the singular of each tense will be sufficient :
( Ist person I was good
Singular -j 2nd ~ Thou wast good
(3rd ~ He was good
And so on for the dual and plural.
Ist person I will be good
Jummagain bool aga
•J ummagamboolee
Jummaganibool
.7 ummagambobooga
Singular -! 2nd ~ Thou wilt be good Jumrnagamboboonee
(3rd ~ He will be good Jummagamboboon
It appears, therefore, that any adjective which describ s a quality
or attribute, which can be connected with a personal pronoun, as “ I
am good,” “he is merry,” “we are sick,” can be conjugated in the
same manner as an intransitive verb. The primary use of these words
as adjectives is exemplified in such expressions as “ A good woman,”


a merry boy,” “ a sick man,” and they are then declined for number
and case only. Many adjectives, as bright, sweet, frosty, thick, and so
on, cannot be used as verbs.
It would be better, perhaps, to include the predicative adjectives
among the verbs, but I have thought it as well to illustrate them under
the present heading, for the purpose of keeping all the adjectives
together.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, and aie
without gender. The nominative and possessive pronouns are as
under :
(Ist person I Ngïaga Mine Ngïagangool
Singular 2nd „ Thou Indeega Tlnne Indeegangool
(3rd ~ He Jeenjulla His Jellanudda
We (incl.) Ngïawung Ours (incl.) Ng'iawunga-
lool
,Ist person , Wg ( exc i.) Ngïawungulla Ours (excl.) Ngïawungal-
Dual ...' ( angool
2nd ~ You Indeewoo Yours Indeewool
3rd ~ They Jeenjullowurra Theirs Jellanowurra
/ (We (inch) Ngïawan Ours (incl.) Ngïawunyun-
goo!
Ist person -j We ( excl> ) Ngïawanga Ours (excl.) N gïa wunga-
j [ gool
Plural i2nd ~ You Indeewan Yours Indeewun-
thungool
3rd ~ They Jeenjullowur-Theirs Jellanowur-
raga raga
These pronouns are not much used as separate words, except in
answer to a question, or assertively. If some one ask, “ Who is going
hunting?” a man may answer, “ Ngïaga,” I am, or "
we (dual exclusive) are. If an inquiry be made, “ Whose food is this?”
some one may reply, “ Indeegangool,” thine; or “ Ngïawunyungool,”
ours (plural inclusive), and so on.
There are other forms of the above pronouns, meaning “ for me,”
“ with me,” “ from me,” etc., which extend through the three numbers
and persons. And the number of a noun can be expressed by means
of the pronoun, thus, a native could say, in reference to a couple of
anything, “ Ngïagangoolowurra,” mine both; if referring to several
articles, he might say, “ Ngïagangoolowurraga,” mine all, and so on.
Pronominal suffixes, in abbreviated forms, are used in great num
ber and variety in the declension of nouns, adjectives, verbs, preposi-
tions, and adverbs, examples of which are given under these parts of
speech in the present article.
The equivalents of the demonstrative pronouns, “ this and “ that,
are declinable for dual and plural number, and also have modifications


to express possession. In these demonstratives—and also in the per-
sonal pronouns—there are two forms of the nominative case, one being
the simple nominative, and the other the nominative agent, as already
explained in dealing with the nouns in an earlier page.
The interrogatives “who” and “what” have numerous inflections
for number, person, and case, a few of which are as under :
Who art thou, wunnunggawee
Who are you (two), wunnunggawoo
Who are you (several), wunnunggawun
Who is there, wannungga nyoon
What is the matter (with thee), minyamanee
What is the matter (with them, several), minyamanlia
Who is this for, wannungalool nyeen.
Other forms of these interrogatives represent, belonging to whom
and what, from whom and what, etc.
If there be any relative pronouns, they have up to the present
escaped notice.
Verbs.
Verbs have three numbers—the singular, dual, and plural. There
are three principal moods —the indicative, imperative, and subjunctive,
or conditional, with indications of an infinitive, which I have not yet
succeeded in establishing.
There are three persons and three primary tenses—present, past,,
and future —and possibly a perfect is occasionally used. Conjugation
is effected, by numerous postpositions, among which there is consider-
able regularity. What are called participles in English become part of
the inflexion of the verb in the native tongue. »
The stem of the verb and the pronominal suffix with which it is
used, together form one word, as, Booroo thambâmoolaga, a kangaroo
saw I; Booroo thambâmoolee, a kangaroo sawest thou, and so on.
This permits of the verb, and its corresponding particle, being inflected
together throughout all the tenses. When a pronoun is post fixed to a
verb in this way, the former is very much contracted. The following
is the conjugation of the verb Jama, “ to talk or tell.”
Active Voice—lndicative Mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
1 1st Person I talk Jamaga
Singular 2nd ~ Thou talkest Jaraanee
(,3rd „ He talks Jaman
h,,!. Pprson i We talk ( incL ) Jamoong
I ( talk (excl.) Jamoongalla
j 2nd ~ You talk Jamooroo
(3rd ~ They talk Jamandawurra
|i s * l We talk ( incl -) Jamooin
I |We talk (excl.) Jamooinga
12nd ~ You talk Jamooroon
(3rd ~ They talk Jamana
Dual
Plural ..
Jamana


PAST TENSE.
1 1st Person I talked Jdîmoolaga
■l2nd ~ Thou talkedst Jamoolee
(3rd ~ He talked Jamool
i _ (We talked (incl.) Jamoolung
Ist Person ( We talked ( exck ) Jamoolungulla
(2nd „ You talked Jamooloo
(3rd ~ They talked Jamoolawurra
I (We talked (inch) Jamoolun
(Ist Person | We talked excl Jamoolunga
■ ] 2nd „ You talked Jamooloon
(3rd ~ They talked Jamool a
Singular
Dual
Plural
FUTURE tense.
( Ist Person I will talk Jamooga
Singular -( 2nd ~ Thou wilt talk Jamoonee
(3rd ~ He will talk Jamooan
_ (We will talk (incl.) Jamooung
Ist Person | We wi jj ( e xcl.) Jamemoongulla
Dual ...-l 2nd ~ You will talk Jameemboola
3rd ” They will talk Jamoonawurra
, (We will talk (incl.) Jameembun
1 1st Person j We wi p ta j k ( e xcl.) Jameeminga
Plural... ( 2nd tf You will talk .Tamoonan
(3rd ~ They will talk Jamooana
Imperative Mood— present tense.
Singular 2nd Person Talk (thou) Jamoor
Dual... 2nd „ Talk (you two) Jamooroo
Plural 2nd Talk (you all) Jamooran
FUTURE TENSE
Singular 3rd Person Let him talk .Tamooya
Dual .3rd „ Let them talk Jamooyawurra
Plural 3rd „ Let them talk Jamooyâwa
Conditional Mood—present tense.
(Ist Person 1 may talk Jamooga-wanda
Singular ' 2nd „ Thou mayest talk .Tamoonee-wanda
(g rd He may talk Jamoon-wanda
PAST TENSE.
) Ist Person I may have talked Jamoolaga-wanda
Mtv«tttar L2nd ~ Thou mayest have talked Jamoolee-wanda
k 13rd ~ He may have talked Jamool- wanda
Passive Voice.
There is no special form for the passive voice. The phrase,
opossum was bitten by a dog," is expressed in Thoorga by saying,
dog bit an opossum.


Middle Voice—lndicative Mood.
present tense.
Singular 1 1st Person I talk to myself Jamunjaleega
Dual ...Ist ~ We (incl.) talk to ourselves Jamunjaleeng
Plural... 1 1st ~ We (excl.) talk to ourselves Jamunjaleean
PAST TENSE.
Singular Ist Person I talked to myself Jamunjaleenolaga
FUTURE TENSE.
Singular Ist Person I will talk to myself Jamunjalooga
Each of the three tenses in the last examples contain all the persons
and numbers, but I have only shown sufficient to illustrate their
structure.
There is a reciprocal inflection of the verb in the dual and plural,
as under :
We (dual incl.) talk to each other Jamunjaleeang
We (plural incl.) talk to each other Jamunjaleean
The negative form of the verb consists of in-fixing the syallable
ngamba between the stem of the verb and the termination, as in the
following example in each tense :
Present I talk not Jamangambaga
Past ... I talked not Jamoolngambaga
Future I will not talk Jamoongambaga
And so on through all the persons of the singular, dual, and plural.
Various modifications of the verb are made, to convey different
shades of meaning, of which the following are a few examples, which
extend to all the persons and numbers:
I talk to thee
Jamagoon
I talk for thee ... ...
Jamoonamagoon
.Do not talk to me ...
J amoongambeengga
I gave to him
Ngamalaga
He gave to me
Ngamaleengga
I took from him
Moondardillaga
He took from you two
Moondardilool
I took from you all...
Moondardillagoondhoor
A man caught a wallaby
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagal
A man caught a wallaby for himself
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagamil-
leel
A man caught a wallaby for me ...
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagamoo-
leengga
A man caught a couple of wallabies
Yooindyoo jarroogamburra dhub-
bagalool
A man caught several wallabies ...
Yooindyoo jarroogamburraga
dhubbagalin (that is, a man
several wallabies caught)


It will be observed that the dative, ablative, and possessive cases
are often included in the verb, as “ to,” “ from,” “ for, etc. The
number of the verb in some expressions agrees with the subject, and in
others with the object, noun.
The Thoorga natives employ a verb meaning “to become, or to
intend,” in future time, which can be used with an adjective or another
verb, and in such cases the adjective or verb need not be declined.
In the following example the adject,ve bulwul, strong, will be
taken :
(I become, or intend to) Bulwul anyerreeooga
c j be, strong ) 3
singular J | Thou wilt become strong „ anyerreeoonee
(He will become strong ~ anyerreeoon
IWe (inch) will become strong Bulwul anyerreeoong
JWe (excl.) „ „ „ „ anyerreeoongulla
Dual ••• )You ~ ~ » anyerroonthoo
(They „ ~ „ ». anyerroonawurra
(We (inch) will become strong Bulwul anyerrooin
D !We (excl.) „ „ „ >. anyerrooinga
Ilural s You „ „ „ anyerrooan
They ~ ~ ~ ~ anyerroonawurraga
Prepositions.
Post-positions, or the equivalent of what are called preppsitions in
English, are of two kinds, one of which compr.ses separate words, as
booroongoona, between. The other kind consists of various particles
suffixed to verbs, nouns, and adjectives, which give them a preposi-
tional meaning. Thus, instead of using a separate word for “ through,”
there is a verb, “ irreetboolaga,” meaning “ through-went-I,” which
can, of course, be conjugated for number, person, and tense.
The following are a few words exhibiting a prepositional sig-
nificance :
Booroongoona boonbalwurra, between two trees.
Bunnerwawalan boonbala, the other side of the tree.
Burreetboolaga, across came I (as across a river).
Nyirroowaga, down go I (as down hill).
Dhulleeboaga, up go I (as up hill).
Gooroomboaga, around go I (as around a camp).
Like nouns, some prepositions can be conjugated by suffixing an
abridged form of the requisite pronoun :
(] st Person Behind me Burgidha
Singular i 2nd „ Behind thee Burgïoong
(3rd ~ Behind him Burgieen
i Behind us (inch) Burgïangul
Ist lel ’ son | Behind us (excl.) Burgïangulling
Duàl ...j 2n d ~ Behind you Burgïyool
Brd „ Behind them Burgïanumbool


list Person l5 e !” n 'l us ( inc H g ur « a « ian y>“
Plural •] (Benina us (excl.) Burgagïanymnunga
1 2nd >, Behind you Burgagïandhoor
(3rd ~ Behind them Burgagïeedhan
“ In front of me,” “ on my left,” etc., can be conjugated similarly.
Adverbs.
Adverbs may be either primitive words, or they may be derived
from adjectives, from, which they differ so little that the use of the
word determines what part of speech it belongs to. The numerous
inflexions of the verbs lessen the necessity for the employment of
adverbs, and hence diminishes their number in the language.
The following are a few examples of phrases containing adverbs, or
having an adverbial meaning:
Wuddha wuddungur, where is the dog?
Mullee wabboolee, why didst thou go?
Werndoong wabboolee, when didst thou go?
Jummagamanyeen willian, well he runs.
Yooka nannomanyee, how dost thou know?
For some other examples, see the end of the Vocabulary.
Some adverbs can be inflected for number and person, like nouns
and prepositions:
Ist Person Where am I Waddunggabaga
Singular • 2nd ~ Where art thou Waddungabânee
3rd ~ Where is he Waddungaban
flqt Pprann i Where are we ( incl -) Waddungabung
j) UAL J | Where are we (excl.) Waddungabungulla
1 2nd ~ Where are you Waddungabânoo
(3rd ~ Where are they Waddungaburra
list Person -I are we (m°l ) Waddungaban
Plural (Where are we (excl.) Waddungabanga
2nd ~ Where are you Waddungabanhoor
,3rd ~ Where are they Waddungaburraga
The meaning of the word “instead” is obtained by the following
expression:—Yannoon— mïooga, goes he, stop I; that is, he goes
instead of me.
Conjunctions.
The number of conjunctions in the Thoorga dialect is very limited.
Their general absence is attributable to the numerous modifications of
the verbs and pronouns, by which means sentences are brought together
without the help of connecting words.
Exclamations.
Yï, calling attention. Wuddhou, hillo ! Yuggadya, surprise. Moolo
mooloonga, vexation. Most of these interjections have a dual and
plural form.


N UMERALS.
The cardinal numbers, which are indeclinable, are as follows :
One*— mir'dindhâl ; Two—jirree'ba; Three—toor'oongad'ya ; Four “
jirree'bawal jirree'bawal ; Five—mur'nawal, or a hand; Ten—Thou a,
the two hands ; Many— thou'a-mullan.
Once, mirdindhalee. Twice, mungundhawurra. Thrice, dooreen-
gawurraga. First, murrool. Last, walleengal.
The ideas of the natives in regard to numbers, quantity, and size,
are very limited.
Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies.
In an article contributed to the Anthropological Society, of Wash-
ington, in 1896, I described the Bunân 1 ceremony of initiation in force
among the native tribes occupying the south-east coast of New South
Wales from the Victorian boundary to Bulli, and extending inland
from eighty to a hundred miles. Since then I have also described a
preparatory inaugural rite, called the Kudsha\ which is practised by
the same people. This tract of territory includes the hunting grounds
of all the tribes referred to in the present treatise.
In the papers referred to, I have given the words of certain sacred
songs used in the celebration of the ceremonies, but am now in a
position to incorporate the music of some of them in this article. The
words of one of the songs chanted by the old men in the presence of
the boys are :
Dharamooloon, Dhurramooloon
Bingilbee moondanunna
G-ummerâwarawâ
These words are droned monotonously ad libitum to the following
music :
Another song has the following words and music :
Dharramooloonga gale wirrabroo ganga
Ngoorungga wirraleema.
-itit’V-tX. p2*.T’
1 American Anthropologist, vol. ix., pp. 327-334.
2 Journ. Roy Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxiv., pp. 276-281.


The words and music of another song are :
Ngalalba waloolba jilleejilleen.
l<t-l He- yôC
One of the songs used by the women in the morning during the
time their sons are away with the chief men undergoing initiation is :
Jihbarâra mur'ragadyah'
Yam / ungad'yenah /
This is sung to the following music :
Ngul'leejee gâwinjee mullind'a
G-unïlyee mong'gajee
The music runs thus, repeated as long as required
During the same period the mothers of the boys chant songs in the
evening, of which the following is a specimen :
Anothei song sung by the boys mothers, with the accompanying
music, is as follows:
Millingalee kubberinya, millingalee kubberinya
Bingandabee pambeeloonya
Mirreewala pambeeloonya


BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
£?/TV n 4&n be* /if,»! -Jrct Lcot t/Jn- re
These are the first songs of the aborigines of this part of New
South Wales which have ever been set to music. It may be mentioned
that the words of these chants possess no meaning to the present
natives, having been handed down from one generation to another.
They were probably in the language of conquering tribes in the past. 1
They are considered sacred, and are never used except at the initiation
ceremonies, of which they constitute an important essential.
APPENDIX.
The Yookumbill Language.
In order to add to the value of this article it is proposed to furnish
an abstract of the grammatical structure of the Yoo-kum'-bill, or
U-kum'-bil, language, spoken by the natives of the Upper Macintyre,
the principal source of the Barwon River, New South Wales.
This language is representative, in its fundamental principles, of the
speech of the aborigines of more than three-quarters of the geographic
area of New South Wales, being one of the most widely spread of Aus-
tralian tongues. This type extends southerly from the Macintyre and
Barwon rivers to the Murray, and stretches easterly to include the
north-east coast of New South Wales from the Hawkesbury River
northwards. It also covers a great part of Queensland.
Nouns.
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual and plural numbers, as
follows :
Singular A kangaroo Bun'dar
Dual ... A couple of kargaroos Bun'darbu' ta
Plural Several kangaroos Bun'darmundiin'ba
Gender. In the human family different words are used to distin-
guish the sex, as —gib'beer, a man ; uk'keether, a woman ; woo'nar, a
young boy ; mee'kai, a young girl ; gir'rï, a child of either sex.
The gender of animals is shown by adding words signifying ‘'male ’
and “female” respectively, as, goo'pee boo/roo, an opossum male;
goc'nee, an opossum female. These distinguishing words are
different when speaking of birds, thus, boidhoorba is a cock and
gooneedhar a hen.
iR. H. Mathews.—“ The Origin, &c., Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Amer. Philos
Soc., Phila., U.S.A., vol. xxxix, pp. 556-578,


Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, nominative-agent,
possessive, accusative, dative, and ablative.
Nominative.—Gibbeer, aman; ïng-gal, a child.
Nominative-agent,—Gib'beeroo ïng'gal, u'mea, a man a child beat.
Possessive.—Gibbeergoo bur'gan, a man’s boomerang; ukkeether-
goo koo'nee, a woman’s yamstick; bun'dargoo dhoon, a kangaroo’s tail.
In the Thoorga language the object possessed also takes a suffix.
Accusative. —In the example given above for the nominative
agent, it is seen that the word ïnggal, a child, does not change. When,
however, an instrument is the direct object of the verb, it takes a
similar suffix to the nominative-agent, as, uttha burgandoo dhoowânee,
I am boomerang threw.
Dative.—Ngoo'ra is a camp; ngoo'raga munnayettee, to the camp
come.
Ablative.—Ngoo/randee munnal wandeebia, from the camp go
away.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are declined for number and case, and are placed after
the norms they qualify.
Bundar muggan, a kangaroo, large
Bundar mugganbuta, a couple of kangaroos, large.
Bundar mugganmundimba, several kangaroos, large.
The inflexions for case are :
Nominative-agent.—Gibberoo muggandoo ïnggal umea, a man big
the child beat.
Possessive.—Bundargoo muggangoo dhoon, a large kangaroo’s tail ;
gibbeergoo muggangoo burgan, a big man’s boomerang.
Dative.—Gibbeera mugganda yetteemunna, the man big come to
(come to the big man).
Ablative.—Gibbeeree muggandee munnal, the man large go from.
Comparison is effected in a manner similar to that employed in the
Thoorga; and certain adjectives, when used as predicates, can be con-
jugated like intransitive verbs, the same as in that language.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the nominative, possessive and objective cases, but
are without gender. The following are the nominative :
11st Person I
2nd „ Thou
3rd „ He
Uttha
Inda
Singular
Numbo
list Person { We (incl.)
2nd ~ You
,3rd ~ They
Uttee
Dual
Utteenumbo
Utoota
Numbotuta


fist Person f We C inc i’)
j Ist r erg on sw e (exol.)
Plural "j 2nd „ You
3rd ~ They
The possessive and objective
under :
Ngunïnda
Ngunner
Indaner
Utooldiner
forms of these pronouns are as
My Ngea
Singular - Thy Innoo
His Numbcgo
( Ours (inch) Uttininno
Ours (excl.) Uttinung<
iiUAL •••1 Yours Innooboo
(Theirs Ngulbootf
(Ours (inch) Ngananin
Ours (excl.) Ngananin
Plural .. j y ours Inanoo
(Theirs Nguldeen
Thee
Him
Utoo
Innunnoo
Utuluttoo
(Ours (incl.) Uttininnoo Us (inch) Uttinna
Ours (excl.) Uttinungo Us (excl.) Uttinunna
j Yours Innoobootangoo You Inunnabuta
(Theirs Ngulbootangoo Them Utoomeea
(Ours (inch) Ngananinnoo Us (inch) Nyunnunda
Ours (excl.) Ngananner Us (excl.) Nyunnuna
| Yours Iminoo You Inânêa
(Theirs Nguldeenoo Them Utooldeena
It will be observed that these pronouns have two forms in the first
person of the dual and plural, one of which includes the pea-son
addressed, and the other excludes him.
Interrogatives. —Ngana woonee, who is there? Nganda bundar
umea, who struck the kangaroo ? Nganoona burgan, whose boomerang ?
Nganbi, who from? Ngandoona, who did that? Minya nha, what is
that? Minyanginda, what for? Minyungi, how many? Wundha,
which or how? Wundha beepoonda, which is the best? Wundha
inda immemeea, how didst thou do it?
Demonstratives.—These are very numerous and are inflected for
number and case, and usually follow the word qualified. Space forbids
examples.
Verbs.
There is a difference in the termination of the verb for each of the
tenses, as umunge, beats now; umea, did beat; umul, will beat.
There are, moreover, variations in the past and future tenses, to
express slight differences in past and future time, thus, umulgamba,
did beat this morning, etc. ; umulnga, will beat to-morrow, etc. (See
conjugation hereunder.) These variations are the same in all the
persons and numbers of the tense to which they respectively apply.
Any required number and person in each tense can be shown by
using the necessary pronoun, as, uttha umunge, I beat; uttee umunge,
we (dual) beat; ngunïnda umunge, we (plural) beat. It is apparent,
therefore, that each tense form remains constant throughout all ite
persons and numbers.
In these respects the Yookumbill verb differs materially from the
Thoorga and kindred tongues, in which there is a distinct verbal ter-
mination for every person and number in each tense.


THE THOORGA LANGUAGE
Some of the numerous modifications of the verb will be understood
from the following conjugation of the verb “to beat.’ 7 The present
tense isi given in full, but in the past and future the first person only
of the singular is taken.
Active Voice—lndicative Mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
i Ist Person I beat Umunge uttha
2nd ~ . Thou beatest ~ inda
3rd ~ He beats ~ numbo
Singular
( Ist Person i We ( incL ) beafc
) lst ierSOn j We (exd.) beat
) 2nd ~ You beat
( 3rd ~ They beat
uttee
Dual
~ utteenumbo
~ utoota
numbotoota
( , . v> (We find.) beat
1 Ist Person j We beat
) 2nd You beat
( drd „ They beat
ngun'inda
ngunner
indaner
utooldiner
Plural...
PAST TENSE.
Singular l I beat just now Umea uttha
Ist ! I beat this morning Umulganiba uttha
Person f I beat some days ago Umul-byane uttha
These forms of the verb are repeated through all the persons of
the singular, dual and plural. Thus, for the second person singular
we have—umea inda, umulganiba inda, umulbyane inda. For the
third person singular we use—umea numbo, umulganiba numbo,
umulbyane numbo. They can also' be applied to all the persons of the
dual, and to all the persons of the plural, in the same manner, by using
the proper pronounsi, which are tabulated in a previous page.
FUTURE TENSE.
(Singular /I will beat presently Umul uttha
Ist •< I will beat to-morrow j T t i - ...
-n I Umulnga uttha
Beeson or some future time )
And so on through all the persons and numbers.
Imperative Mood
Beat thou Uma inda
The negative form is—
Beat thou not Yooka uma inda
Conditional Mood.
I may beat
Umulieea uttha
Middle Voice—indicative mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
I am beating myself Umungngge uttlia


PAST TENSE-
I did beat myself
Umungingïange uttlia
FUTURE TENSE.
I will beat myself Umungâ uttlia
Imperative Mood.
Beat thou thyself UmungilJeea inda
There is a reciprocal form of the verb, which is necessarily restricted
to the dual and plural :
We are beating each other, Umullella uttee.
This reciprocal has also a past and a future l tense.
Many other variations of verbs could be given, but this is precluded
by exigencies of space.
Adverbs.
Yo, yes; yooka, no; yooumbange, no one; nha, here; unna, there;
nunggoa, yonder; numboo, that; dhouakal, a little; mooigeer,
-quickly ; boothoo, slowly; peepoon mea, well done; ngardha mea,
badly done; wanda ngea ngoora, where is my camp? wandabungga
inda munnal, where goest thou away ?
Interjections.
Ya! calling attention. Thuttea! stop! Wirro wirro ! equivalent
to Oh, dear ! ,
Numerals.
Dharrar, one; boota, two; bootagarar, three; dharara, once;
bootagoo, twice; dhararmunnia, first; guttunnee, last; moolan moo-
lan, middle.
Prepositions have their place in the language, but conjunctions are
few and unimportant.
THOORGA VOCABULARY
Man (collectively), Yoo'-in-
rarga.
A man, Yoo'-ifi
bur'- Old woman, Karn'-ga
Wife, Dhun'-na-ma
Girl, Yan'-da-bal
Old man, Kum'-mer-a
Father, Bang
Clever man, Moo'-yoo-loo
Mother, Moeng'-a
Young man, Nhur'-ma
Elder brother, I)hâ'-dha-dhâ
Youth, Kab'-bo-goo'-bal
Younger brother, Mï-â'-ga
Small Bov, Wur'-ran
Elder Sister, Mâ'-ma-dhâ
Woman, Wang'-gan
Younger Sister, Mur'-nung-gan
The
Human Body.
Head, Kab'-Mn
Eyebrow, Men-mir'-koon
Forehead, Goon'-doo
Eye lid, Meed-pum'-bo
Hair of head, Jou'-oor
Nose, Nô'-goor
Hair of beard, Yar'-ran
Nostril, Ngoor-doo-ngcor-doo
Eye, Mab'-o-ra
Jaw, Mun'-tha


Back of neck, Nung'-goor
Throat, Kam-mee
Ear, KooP-ree
Mouth, Thâ'-ga
Lips, Weel'-leen
Tongue, NguPnah
Teeth, Ee'-ra
Chin, WaP-100
Chest, Bing'-al
Navel, KoP-ree
Navel string, NcoP-reech
Stomach, Bin'-dhee
Abdomen, Moo'-roo
Rump, Mun'-jee
Anus, GoonLnee
Flank, Kung'-gul
Back, Barh-ka
Penis, Bum'-da
Erection, YooP-doo-bâ-ga
Testicles, MooP-ra
Vulva, Kul'-la
Clitoris, Mee'-gurn
Hair on privates, Moo'-roo-goo-
Semen, BooP-ra
Copulation, Kon'-de-jâ-lin-ba
Sexual desire, MuP-100-goo-dh<i-ga
Sun, Nou'-a, or, Bag'goran
Moon, Thou'-a/ra
Stars generally, Jing'-gee
Sirius, Goon-je-ran
Alpha Orionis, Goo-nung'-a-ma
Orion’s Belt, YooMiî-dyâ
Pleiades, Wang-gaP-tee
Canopus, MiP-ree-jig-ga
Milky-way, Kur-ray'-wâ
West wind, Koo-roong'-a-ma
Cold ditto, Koo-nam'-ma
East wind, Jir-rirP-jee-ring
Cold ditto, Bee^wâ'-wa
South wind, Mir-reeng'-a-ma
North wind, Pal'-ya
The Human Body— Continued.
Ann, Kï'-kan
Elbow, DhuP-leeng
Hand, Murn'-a
Finger, WâP-doo
Finger-nail, Yoo'-100
Knee, Ngoo'-mo
Shin, Boo'-yoo
Foot, Dhun'-na
Blood Jer-râ'-lee
Fat, Byoo'-wan
Natural Surroundings.
Picture, Bô-an'-yoo
Clouds, Mong'-a-la
Sky, Mir-ree'-war
Thunder, MeP-ree-bee
Dew, Jing'-ee-a
Mist, Moor'-yan
Fog, GuP-ral
Snow, Goon'-um-ma
Frost, Dhug'-gatch
Hail, Dliun'-dul-la
Water, Ngad/-yoo
Sea, near, KaP-thoo
Masturbation, Kud'-da-gud'-da-bâ
Urine, Jil'-100-ow'-ga
Venereal, Bum/-bo-ra
Excrement, Goon'-nee
Woman’s breasts, Ngab'-boo-nâ
Woman’s milk, Ngam'-miivya
Shoulder, KcV-ko
Thumb, Koo-loong'-00-100
Calf of leg, Jab'-boor
Thigh, Boorn-daP-ya
Big-toe, BiP-ra-ga-yoo-loo'-dha
Little-toe, Koo'-bee-jï-ang'-a
Pleel, Tung-gul
Sole of foot, Dhun'-na-dha
Bowels, Goor-goon
Skin, Wâ-dhoon-gan'-yan
Lightning, Goo-rang'-00-ran
Rain, Bun'-na
Sea, distant, Ngur-rou'-an.


Sparkle of Waves, MiF-lum-bâ-wa
The Ground, Koo-raP
Mud, NhoorW-ba-bâ
Stones, Boor'-ran
Sand, Jâ'-jo-an
Light, Bin'-nin-gul-la
Darkness, Gik-wa
Heat, Ngoo'-boo-lin
Coldness, Dhug'-gar
Fire, Kun'-bee
Smoke, Tur-ro'-wa
Day, Ngoo-roong'-a-roo
Night, Dhub'-boo-ra
Morning, Boo^moo'-la-ga
Evening, Ee-re-bee'nee
Sunrise, Bug'-ga-ran kar-rick-
bung'-arleen
Sunset, Bug'-ga-ran ee'-rik-boo'
yal
Food, Thung'-â
Kangaroo, Boor'-roo
Porcupine, Kan , -na-go-badh ,
Native Bear, Koor'-a-ban
Wild dog, War'-re-gal
Opossum, Koong'-ar-a
Flying-fox, Kar-a-mon'-da
Kangaroo-rat Wang-gâ'-lee
Wombat, Bung-gâ'-ta
Emu, Mur'-re-a
Eaglehawk, Mun'-yung-ga
Crow, Wâ'-goora
Black duck, Wom-ba'-ra
Teal duck, Goom'-bur-rarga
Wood duck, Koon-ar'-rook
Pelican, Kar'-oong-goo'-ba
Laughing Jackass, Koo'-goon-yâ-
Native Companion, Koor'-a-dhoo
White Cockatoo', Ngow'-al
Black Cockatoo,
Sea-gull, Mâ-ran
Natural Surroundings— Continued.
Honey, Gou-ang'-gal
Hill, Bun'-gui’-ree
Creek, Bud'-dâ
Camp, Thoo'-gan
Path, Bur'-doo
Mammals.
Birds.
Grass, general, Wad'-dhan
Tree, general, Boon'-bal
Bark of trees, Boon'-boon
Leaves of trees, Jir-rou'-a-ra
Wood, Gou-go'-al
Home, Mung'-gur-ra
Hole. Gâ'-goor
Lump, Boo'-bun-dhâ-ga
Egg, Gou'-â-na
Shadow of a man, Moo'-ran-jân-
Shadow of a tree, Kum'-bo-ree
Echo. Bur'-ré-wur'-re-gan'-yon
A sore, Kun'-ja
Flying-Squirrel, Pong'-goo
Bandicoot (short noee), Koor'-a-
goor
Bandicoot (long nose), MiP-ree-
j ug-ga
Ring-tail opossum, 800-gâMee
Native Cat, Mid'dhargoon'-ee
Wallaby, Bud-dhâ'-lee-ma
Swan, Koon'-yoo
Pheasant, Jâ'-goo-la
Bird (general), Boo'-jan
Common Magpie, Koo-rim'-ba ga
Slate Crane, Koor-ar-ay'-ga
Plover, Bin'-jarring'-a-ring
Curlew, Kwee'-ir-wur'-wur
Quail,. Boor'-boor-an
Fish hawk, Nyir'-ra
Brown hawk, Bib-bur-noong'-ga
Shag, Bir-ro'-a-ra
Cormorant, Bin-yâ'-roo


Fish (general), Ma-'ra
Whale, Moo'-ree-ir-ra
Killer, Mâr'-nun-na
Star-fish, Tyoong'-ga
Guard-fish, Woor-am'-been
Guard-fish, small, Koo'-bee
Shark, Wal'lim-boor-a
Great Shark, Dâr'-lou-an
True Valley, Bâ-ja
Porpoise, Dhâ'-wur-ree
Jew-fish, Ir-rim-bâ'-goon
Schnapper, Bar-râ'-ran
Squire, Nar-râ'-wan
Iguana (tree), Bur-nâ'-ga
Iguana (water), Jer'-ra-burt
Jew Lizard, Jar-râ'-gar
Snake, general, Kâ'-ree
Bee, Moor'-room
Locust, Kur'-lan
Centipede, Dhâ'-jar
Louse, Mool'-a
Mountain Ash, Ngan-dhou'-ur
Lillypilly, Kul-lung'-ur-ra
Myrtle, You'-ee-a
Tree-fern, Jer-rung'-a-ra
Kurrajong, Koor-â'-man
Tea-tree, Boo'-ar-la
Ironbark, Goorn-dee'-ra
Stringy bark, Ko/-bâ
White box, Koor'-a-bar
Wattle, Bid'-dhoo-dhoo
Grasstree, Meeng'-gô
Peppermint, Bur'-rum-bur-ra
Swamp Yam, Boong-üb-la
Land Yam, Goor-âm'-an
Ferns, Mung'-ga
Bullrushes, Nyoor'-goon
Fishes.
Whiting, War'-ra-boo-gan
Toad-fish, Jir-neel'-boon
Bream, Boor'-00-my-el
Black Bream, Wâ'-gal
Silver Bream, Gâm'-ban
Flat-head, Dhug'-gul-la
Mullet, War'-re-gul-la
Small mullet, Dyee'-bur-ra
Flat-tailed mullet, Gar'-ree-ba
Salmon, Bur-re-go-an
Eel, Bur'-ra
Stingaree, Gwee'-â-la
Reptiles.
Turtle, Bil'-le-ma
Big Frog, Koor'-gaty
Insects.
Common fly, Nâ'-ka
Spider, Mur'-rar
Mosquito, Nay'-100-goo
Bull-dog Ant, Kur'-roor
Trees.
Red gum, Yâ'-la
River oak, Oom/-bul-wur-ra
Forest oak, Bib-la
Cherry tree, Ma-mâ'-ja
Jeebung, Bub-bud'-dhal
Cabbage tree, Dhur-rou'-a
Blood wood, Goor'-gool
Spotted gum, Dhur-râ'-nee
Honeysuckle, Bâ'-birr
A squeaking-tree, Mou'-a-rutch
Plants.
Cutting grass, Nyee'-reen
Reeds, Kum-bae'-ra
Burrawang, Bung-gou'
Nut of burrawang, Ib'-bur
Death-adder, Boo'-boo-goor'-ning
Sleeping Lizard, Bir'-reen
Swamp Mahogany, Mud-dhou'


Weapons, Etc.
Spear, hunting, Bir-ree'-wa
Koolamin, Bun'-gul-lee
Spear, plain, Jar'-ram-bâ-dhee
Fishing-line, Wa-rou'-ur-ra
Spear, jagged, Kam'-ma
Fish hook, Thoo'-la
Fish Spear, Ga^rou'-at
N et bag, Mud'-boo
Shield for Boomerangs.MilMe-dhoo
Yamstiok, Gâ'-ga
Shield for Spears, Bim-by'-a
Canoe, Kur'-ree-ja
Club, Boon'-dhee
Ribs of Canoe, Kur-bung'-a-ma
Spear thrower, Wom f -ur
Lining of Cance, In'-nul
Boomerang, War-rang'-an
Paddle, Wâ'-ree
Tomahawk, Moon r -doo-ba,
Child’s play canoe, Dhâ'-le-gir
Fighting hook, Bud'-dharwul
Stone or Shell Knife, Kur'-rang-
Stick to throw, Jâ-jur'-na
ang'-an
Adjectives.
Alive, Mur'-ro-wan
Dead, War-râl
Large, Birraga
Small, Koo-bid'-ya
Long, Yar'-ung-am
Short, Bar'-lâ
Good, Jum'-ug'ga
Bad, Gar-neen'-a
Hungry,
Th irsty, Kâ-bo ot-ban-dha n'-ing-a
Distant, War'-ree-gam-ban
Near, Nyoo'-neel
Red, Mun'-ya-mun'-ya
Grey, Wur'ree
White, Wur'-ra-wur'-ra
Black, Bur-ou'-ra
Full, Thood'-bun-dhool
Empty, Kar'-rargul-lum-bee'-wan
Quick, Goo-rou'-goo-ra
Slow, Gur'-rargaty
Blind, Med'-bo-an
Jealous, Ngoon'-a-roong-oor'-a-ga
Flat, Bil'-wur
Round, Boo'-bun-dhan
Sick, Gun'-ja-ma'-ga
Lame, Nun'nung-gar'-a-ga
Deaf, Wa-rag'-a-dhâri
Strong, Bul'-wul
Light, Bir-ree'bir-ra
Afraid, Goo'-roo-bâ-ga
Courageous, Goo'-roo-barngam -bâ
ga
Sweet, Jeen-ga
Angry, Jâ-joo-la'-ran
Right, Yag-goon'-a-dha
Wrong, Gur'-na-mun'-ya
Straight, Ngoo'-rum-ban
Crooked, Gang'-gool-wur'-ra
Tired, Eed-bool'-a-ga
Greedy, Ka'-roo-dhan
Silent, Jan-bub'-boor
Stupid, Wam'-boor
Ripe, Wâ'-nhal
Blunt, Moor'-doo-boo-ra
Sharp (edge), J ar'-ra-ran
Sharp (point), Nyâ'-garn
Fat man, Byoo'-wan-gee
Lean man, Yab'-bin-gee
Hot, Now'-an-mâ-ka
Cold, Koo'-yoo-doo
Clear (sparkling),
dha
Dirty (ae water), Burl'-gun
Glad, Ir'-ring-gâ-ga
Sorry, Goor'-ngam-bâ-ga
Deep, Ka'-goor
Weak, Gul-lâ'-boan
Heavy, Moon/-door
Shallow, Dhoon-bun'-yil


Live, MuF-rooâ-ga
Die, Moo'-boo-râl
Eat, Thun r -na-mâ-ga
Drink, Ngoon'-dhoo-loong-a
Sleep, DhuF-ree-ga
Sa, My'-ee-ga
Go, Wab-boo-boo-ee
Tell, Ja'-ma^ga
Speak, You'-a-ga
Walk, Yan'-na-ga
Run, WaP-le-â-ga
Bring, MuF-ran-di-ga
Take, Wab'-bun-di-ga
Lift, KuF-neet-bar
Carry, E-lee-moo^-dhan-yal-lun
Make, Yab'-bun-jâ-ga
Break, Gam-booP-arjal-la-ga
Strike, By'-eel-la-gug'-ga
Fight, Kam/-ba-jal-la-ga
Fall, Goong'-o-bâ-leen
Observe, Thoom-bâ'-mala-ga
Hear, NgaF-rariug-ga
Know, Nan'-noo-mâ-ga
Think, Boon'-jel-â-ga
Grow, Dhoo'-re-ga
Give, Ngoo-ma'-la^ga
Like (love), Ngoom'-bco dhâ-ga
Sing, Yang'-gal-lâ-ga
Weep, N y oong-go-â'-ga
Cook (as food), Kan'-na-moo-ga
Marry, Yoo'-nin-ja-loong'-ul-la
Sneeze, Jir-ngam'-bâ-ga
Cough, Gud'-da-ba^ga
Steal, Kar-rang'-a-lee
Burn, Gun'-na-moor
Ask, Kun-ny / -armoo‘-ga
Barter, N goo'-man-j â-long
Bind, Na'-râ-ga
Bite, Bud'-dhoon-e-ga
Blow, hit, By'-ee-lug-ga
Blow*, with the mouth, Boom-ba'-
larga
Build, Jin'-ya-mooga
Verbs,
Catch, Nun'-ba-ja-ga
Climb, KuP-la-wal-ga
Cover, BuF-ree-moor
Cry, Nyoong'-go-an
Cut, ThuF-gan-jar
Die, Moo'-boo-ral
Drop (from the hand), NgaF-ram-
bil-lil
Drop (as rain), NgurP-wan
Fear, Goo'-roo-goon-dhâ-ga
Feed, Dhiuri-na-ma-ga
Frighten, Goo'-ra-bun-yaz-ree'-moo
ga
Fly, YaF-rabba-ga
Hang up, Dhang'-gar-moor
Hear, NgaF-râ-ga
Hold, Gar-gang'-ar
Jump, WaF-da-gâ-ga
Keep, Yoo'-nâ-ga
Kick, BooF-doo-100-ga
Kiss, Noom'-boodug-ga
Laugh, Ngad'-jee-lee-ga
L earn, Kan '-n an-d him'-m ee-1 oo- ga
Leave off, Wun'-nar-ran
Scratch, Wanri-an-jaP-le-ga
Let go, WaF-nud-dha
Loss, Dhoon-boong'-a-lug-ga
Perspire, Bug'-ga-ra-ma'-ning-ga
Pinch, Nyeen-mooP-la-ga
Plunder, Kar-rang'-al-la-ga
Praise, Jum'-ma-gang'-oor
Be quiet, Jâr-room'-boor
Rejoice, Yel'-la-gâ-ga
Remember, Boon'jâ'-ga
Forget, WP-an-dhâ-ga
Rend, KaF-deer-â-ga
Return, WaP-lim-by'-a-wan
Rise, Been'-dar-ga
See, NyulMag-ga
Search for, War-dal'-100-wul'-ga
Send,
Shake, Boor-un-gal-la-ga
Shine, MiF-lum-bub-ban'


Bp re ad, Y ar-ra-ran-j ar'
Stand, Dliar'-ree-ga
Suck, Ngoon-dhoob-leen
Swim, Yang'-ân
Talk, Yâ'-woo-ga
Taste, Gan'-un-dhoo-ga
Touch, Dhoo-dhoo-gou'-ga
Turn away, Ga-rang'-a-lir
Twist, Koo-in'-moor
Yes, Ngâ'way
No, Thug guy '-il
Here, Nyeen
There, close by, Nyun'na-dha
There, a little way, J
There, farther away, Jeen-al'-ee
bur-ra
Yonder, Jin'-na-dha
Distant, War 7 ree goon-da
Near, Mub'-boom-bah, and nyun'-
Where? Wud'-dha
Why? Mul'-lee
Late, Kâ'-reen
To-day, Nhou'-i
Yesterday Boo'-gee-â
Tomorrow, 800 râ'-ja
Day after that, Yar'-ra-der-ou'-al
V erbs — Continued.
Wash, Boo'-100-moo-ga
Rub, Wab-bun-jab-la-ga
Spit, Joo'-joo-bâ ga
Smell, Mir-ra gou' a-ga .
Throw, Bin' gou'-00-ga
Pretend, Bur'-nang
Hunt, Kur'rum-ba-loo'-ga
Adverbs.
wal'-lin
When? Wern'-doong
Now, Jab 100
By-and-bye, BuT-la-boo
Behind, Bur-grdha
Outside, Dln'-a-nud-dha
Middle, Doo'-la-yin
Over, across. Burd-bo'ga
Paint (ones self), Mib-ling'ba-100-
Day after to-morrow, Boora'-ja-
Once only, Mir'-dhan-dhâ'-ga
How? Y ock'-a
Hereafter, Bul'-la-bo-goo'-dha
Long ago, Yer'-ra-der-ô-al
Front, Bin'-dyee-oou'-ya
Right hand side, Dhoor-gi'-an-dhee
Left hand side, Wad'-bur ray'-an
Enough, Goon-ja




THE WALLOONGGURUA CEREMONY.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S., Corresponding Member Anthrop. Society,
Washington, U.S.A., Etc.
[Read at a Meeting of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland,
May 31st, 1900.]




the walloonggurra ceremony.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L-S-, Corresponding Member Anthrop. Society,
Washington, USA., Etc.
[Read at a Meeting of the Society, May 31st, 1900].
It is intended in the following pages to give a short account of a
form of initiation ceremony in force among native tribes scattered
over that part of the north-east coast of New South Wales, which
is watered by the Orara, Boyd, Mitchell, and Upper Clarence rivers,
and bounded on the west by the tableland of New England. The
principal languages spoken by the inhabitants of this tract of country
are the Koombanggherry and Bunjellung. They have the Kamilaroi
organization! being divided into four sections, with numerous totemic
subdivisions, and having descent counted in the female line.
The people who are to participate ip the ceremonies are called
together by means of messengers sent into different parts of the
community by the headmen. When the people have assembled at
the main camping ground, corroborées are indulged in every night
in a cleared space in a central part of the camp. No embankment
or wall is raised around this clear space, similar to the raised earthen
circles of the Keeparra, Wandarral, or Burbung, described by me
m former memoirs.
In a retired spot about fifteen or twenty chains from the main
camp, the men clear a circular piece of ground, about ten yards in
diameter, by removing all loose rubbish and grass from its surface,
which is levelled and made smooth. The loose earth scraped from
within and around the circle is heaped up so as to form a boundary.
This place is called the Walloonggurra, and a fire is lit near one side
of it.
About dusk on the evening which has been decided upon for
taking the novices away from their mothers, all the men proceed
to the Walloonggurra, shouting as they go. On arriving there, they
dance and sing, and swing the dlialgungwn, a small bull-roarer
used by the natives of these districts. The women then muster
the novices and bring them into the cleared space in the centre of the
main camp, where they strip them naked, putting feathers in their
hair, and place them, lying on their backs, in a row, with rugs
f See my paper on “ The Kamilaroi Class System of the Australian Aborigines.”
Proc. Royal Geo. Soc. of Aust. Q., X, 18-34. Also, “The Totemic Divisions of
Australian Tribes.” Journal Royal Soc. (N.S.W.), XXXI, 154-176.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XV.


thrown over them, leaves having been strewn on the ground for
them to lie on. The mothers and female relatives of the boys now
dance and sing around them by the light of the camp fires.
The men at the Walloonggurra then light pieces of dry bark,
which they had cut in readiness, and start through the dark-
ness to the quarters of the women, waving their fire-brand and
jumping and singing as they go along. When they reach the women s
camp, the men who have been appointed guardians to the novices
uncover them and help them to rise to their feet, when each boy
is placed astride his guardian s shoulders, and a rug is thrown over
his head. The men then start back to their own camp, the
guardians carrying the novices being in the middle. The mothers
and sisters of the boys commence shouting, and throw burning
sticks from the camp fires after the men.
On arriving at the Walloonggurra the novices are placed lying
down on a bed of leaves strewn thickly on the ground, and rugs
spread over them. Fires are lit near the boys to make them warm
and perspire freely.* The men dance and sing until they feel weary,
and then go to sleep. The boys are kept here all night, and are not
allowed to turn over, or in any way change the position in which
they have been placed lying by the fires. If they want to attend to
any necessity of nature, they must do it where they lie.
The following morning a number of the men ornament their bodies
with a few stripes of red ochre and pipe-clay and march to the camp
of the women, and throw small pieces of bark over the heads of the
latter. These men then retrace their steps towards the Walloong-
gurra, and on the way gather handfuls of grass, which they carry
and throw over the novices where they are lying in the same
spot where the men placed them the previous evening. The boys are
now uncovered and are taken on their guardians shoulders into tne
Walloonggurra ring, the other men dancing round, shouting and
elevating their spears in the air. The boys are then taken out of the
ring, and are painted with red ochre and grease, and placed sitting
on a couch of leaves near the camp fires. They have to catch their
genitals with both hands, with their heads bent down, and must remain
in that position with their guardians in charge of them.
Shortly after the men have thrown the pieces of bark over the
heads of the women, as already described, the latter pack up their
baggage, and start away to another place, called the Bridtharan
camp, perhaps some miles distant, which has been decided upon as a
suitable camping ground. Some of the old men remain with them
for the purpose of seeing that everything is carried out according to
tribal custom. Near this new camp the women clear a small space
* Compare with the fire ordeal described by me in “ The Bunan Ceremony of
N.S. Wales,” in the American Anthropologist (1896), Vol. IX, pp. 335-336.


of ground on which they light a few fires, around which the mothers
of the boys, and the elder women, all of them painted according to
rule, dance and sing every night.
After the women have taken their departure from the original
ring in the manner just stated, the novices are helped to their feet,
and are placed in a row, with their heads bowed, round the
Walloonggurra. Some old men stand out in the ring, and catching
hold of their genitals, tell the boys to raise their eyes and take
particular notice of those parts. The old men next elevate their arms
above their heads, and the boys are directed to look at their armpits.
Their navels are exhibited in the same way. The men then put
their fingers in each side of their mouths, and draw their lips
outward as wide as possible, lolling out their tongues, and inviting
the special attention of the novices. They next turn their backs, and
stooping down, ask the boys to take particular notice of their pos-
terior parts. During each of these exhibitions the other men
standing around give a series of shouts. All the men then jump
round and clap their hands on their bellies ; they then turn their
backs and clap their hands on their rumps. Next, a number of the
men crouch on the ground on their knees and elbows, and other
men get on top of them, going through disgusting gestures. At the
conclusion of these burlesque proceedings the novices are again put
lying down near the camp fires, and are covered with rugs as before.
In the course of a short time all hands start away from the
Walloonggurra, and proceed to another camp several miles distant.
Here the novices are placed sitting on leaves spread on the ground,
cross-legged, with their heads bowed on their breasts, clutching their
genitals with both hands, their guardians remaining constantly with them.
They are not allowed to converse either among themselves or with
their guardians. If they want anything they must make signs, and
the guardians then attend to their requirements. The men go out
hunting during the day, and the usual performances of imitating
totemic animals, mythologie creatures, and so on, are gone through
at night by the camp fires. As these representations are similar in
character to others described by me in the initiation ceremonies ot
various other tribes, it is not considered necessary to give further
details at present.
During the stay at this camp, which is generally only for a few
days, the novices are compelled to partake of the most disgusting
kinds of food and drink at certain periods, in addition to their
ordinary food ; and many obscene and indecent practices are enacted
by the men in view of the novices, amongst which may be mentioned
the following : The old men mb their genitals on the food which is given
to the boys ; at other times they smear the faces of the boys with human
excrement ; and on other occasions they rub their hands on their own
persons after which they rub them over the faces of the boys.


About four or five hundred yards from this camp a circular space,
called the muggindyoon, about fifty or sixty feet in diameter, is
cleared, and is surrounded by a wall of loose earth, about six inches
or a foot high, with an opening two or three feet wide in the side
nearest the camp—a narrow pathway leading from one place to the
other. On either side of the track where it approaches the ring,
and also around the boundary of the latter, the trees are marked
with the customary moombeery devices. Several patterns, consisting
of wavy lines and imperfect ovals, and quadrilaterals, are also cut
into the surface of the ground, with sticks sharpened at one end foi
the purpose.
On the afternoon of the last day of their stay at this camp the
men take the novices to the muggindyoon a few hours before sundown.
One of the clever old men goes ahead, and ascends a tree near the
pathway, above referred to, and when the novices reach the tree they
are halted, and their guardians tell them to look up, pretending that
there is a native bear among the branches. On raising their eyes
they see the old man sitting in a forked branch, pulling pieces of
string out of his mouth with his hands, or performing other feats of
jugglery. The novices’ heads are again bent down, and they are
taken a little farther on, where another stoppage is made. A pole
has been inserted in the ground, on the upper end of which a clump
of bushes and bits of bark have been tied, in imitation of the nest
of the ring-tailed opossum. The novices are told to look at this, and
then the men hit the bushes or strips of bark and knock them off the
pole. The markings on the ground and on the trees are next exhibited
to the boys, each carving in the soil, and each marked tree being
shown separately, shouts being raised by the men at each exhibition.
As soon as the novices have been shown everything in the
vicinity of the muggindyoon, an old man makes his appearance,
carrying in his hands a coolarnin, or bark vessel, containing human
blood collected that day by making incisions in the arms of several
blackfellows, in the way described by me in other publications.*
A piece of tough bark about nine inches long and nearly the thickness
of a man’s finger, one end of which has been beaten with a mallet
to make it fray out and form a kind of mop, is lying in the vessel
containing the blood. This old man comes in amongst his audience,
and requests each man and boy to hold out his right hand. The
old man then goes along, and with the bark mop, dyundya, he
deposits some of the blood out of the coolarnin in the palm of the
hand of everyone present, who at once lap it up with their tongues.
This blood ceremony is called yeelungajy. The old man then takes
* In former times this blood was obtained from a man who was killed for the
purpose, and portions of his body were eaten ; but for several years past this has been
discontinued, in obedience to our English laws.


the coolamin containing the remainder of the blood and places it m
the centre of the ring, in a slight depression made for the purpose to
keep the vessel from capsizing.
A novice is now taken into the muggindyoon by his guardians
and friends, who hold him up on their shoulders with his face in the
direction of his own country. He then spreads out his arms horizon-
tally, and sways his breast from side to side*, on which all the men
standing around give a shout. Each novice is held up in succession,
and when the ceremony is over they stand with their guardians in
a row on the other side of the ring, and the men clap their hands on
their thighs. The guardians and the other men are then supplied
with pieces of bark, called gootan, about two feet six inches in length,
and four inches in breadth at the widest part, tapering smaller at
the end to be held in the hand.! The men and boys now walk round
inside the ring several times, and the men hit the ground with the
gootans, after which they come out, and the boys are placed sitting
in a row at a fire which is burning near the ring. The old man who
has charge of the yeelungajy now brings it out of the muggindyoon,
and places it in front of the novices, and rubs a little of it on their
arms. Bark mops, dyundya, similar in character to that already
described, but very much smaller, are now given to the novices, one
to each, which they dip into the blood and convey it to their mouths.
The guardians and other men standing around also sip some of the
blood in the same way, until it is all consumed.
Everyone now leaves the muggindyoon, and all go back to theii
camp, which as before stated is a few hundred yards away, where tht
men stand in a group in a clear space, and the novices are put stand-
ing in a row close by, with their eyes cast upon the ground. The
men then separate into two divisions, some going to one side and
some to the other, and two or three of them step out into the open space
and commence singing dhalgunguns. An old man then comes up
to each boy, and putting the string of the dhalgungun around the boy’s
neck, rubs the instrument on his breast, penis, under his arms and on other
parts of his body, inviting him to take particular notice of it. Some
armed warriors now advance in front of the novices and caution them
that if ever they divulge any of the ceremonies they have seen in
the bush, but more especially anything respecting these bullroarers, J
to an uninitiated person they will be killed. Each novice is cautioned
by a man belonging to a tribe other than his own.
* *• The Burbung of the New England Tribes, New South Wales.” Proc. Royal
Soc., Victoria, IX (New Series), 133.
f Journal Anthrop. Inst., XXV., 308, plate XXVI., figure 40.
♦ See my paper on “ Bullroarers used by the Australian Aborigines.” Journal
Anthrop. Inst., XXVII, 52-60, plate VI.


By the time these ceremonies are concluded it is getting dark,
and all hands set to work packing up their movables, and make a
start towards the women’s camp, which may be a mile or two distant,
or perhaps farther. They walk in file, two or three abreast, some
men being in the lead, the novices with their guardians in the
middle, and more men bringing up the rear. On coming in sight of
the camp of the women, the latter are seen gathered round some fires
close by, dancing and singing. This place is known as the ngoora ;
and the mothers have kept up this singing and dancing by these
fires every night since their sons were taken away into the bush by
the headmen. On getting near the ngoora the boys and their
guardians drop out of the procession, and go into quarters by them-
selves, which have been provided for them a short distance off.
All the other men go on and gather round the women, and join m
the dancing. Shortly after this all the people retire to their camps,
and go to sleep for the night.
Next day, early in the forenoon, the mothers and female relatives
of the novices paint their bodies and put ornaments in their hair,
and proceed to the ngoora, where they were dancing the night before,
which is in close proximity to their camp. They are accompanied
by some of the men who have remained with them all the time the
boys have been away. The fires are replenished, and green bushes
are cut and placed beside them. While the women are making these
preparations, the guardians are busy in the camp of the novices,
painting them with white and red stripes, and putting birds’ feathers
in their hair. They are also invested with the belt, kilts, and head-
band, which constitute a man’s dress. The old men who have charge
of the women then take the sisters of the novices, about fifty or a
hundred yards away from the fires, in the direction from which the
novices will presently approach, and place them sitting down in a
row a yard or two apart, with their faces towards the fires.
The novices, with their heads bowed, now make meir appearance,
walking with their guardians, who place the boys sitting down beside
their sisters, who catch their brothers by the hand. There is thus a
row consisting of novice and his sister, succeeded by another novice
and his sister, until all the boys are in their places, with their
guardians near them. The novices and their sisters do not look at
each other, or speak a word. All the other men come up behind this
row, a headman standing at each end, uttering a kind of gutteral
chant. The guardians then tell the boys and girls to get up and run
towards the fires. When they have gone about half-way, they are
told to sit down, and the men who are following them behind throw
pieces of sticks over their heads. They then get up and run on again,
and when approaching the fires, the old women standing there each
throw several pieces of bark over the heads of the boys and those


BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S., ETC.
who are with them. When they get close to the ngoora, the sisters
drop out of the procession, and the mothers of the boys step forward
and catch their sons by the hand and lead them to the fires, on which
the green bushes above referred to have been thrown. The novices
stand on these bushes, which emit a thick smoke, which rises up
around them. The mothers rub their hands on their sons, while hold-
ing them in the smoke, after which the sisters come up and rub their
feet on the feet and ankles of their brothers. Some of the novices
are smoked at one fire and some at another, after which they are
taken away by their guardians to a camp which has been erected for
them in close proximity. The guardians and other men are smoked
in a similar manner, after which the men and women disperse to their
camps.
In the course of a few weeks’ time, or perhaps a longer period,,
the novices are again brought in sight of the women’s camp, which has
been shifted to another place, and are met by their mothers, painted
as before, who provide food, which is spread upon rugs, or upon
pieces of bark, laid upon the ground. The boys carry the food away
with them to a camp near the men’s quarters, where they remain
with their guardians, or perhaps their uncles or other relatives, and
after a time are brought right into the single men’s camp. From
this time onward the neophytes mix with the men, and go out hunt-
ing or playing with them, but they are still kept under the care of
some of the older men of their relatives until they have passed
tnrough some further training in the secret customs and beliefs of
their forefathers. They must not associate with the women, or let a
woman’s shadow fall upon them, or upon anything belonging to them.
In the foregoing brief description of the Walloonggurra, which is
the first ever published, it will be observed that this form of initiation
is of more than ordinary interest, because it differs very widely in
many particulars from similar rites practised by tribes occupying
other districts. I regret that exigencies of space have compelled me
to abridge my descriptions so very much that portions of the narra-
tive may be a little out of their proper sequence in some instances, and
other portions have had to be omitted. I possess very exhaustive
notes of the whole ceremony, gathered by myself amongst the natives,
from which it is intended on a future occasion to supply a more
comprehensive article.
The Walloonggurra is an elementary form of initiation, and the
neophytes who graduate in this way must subsequently submit to the
Burbung ceremonies of the tribes to which they belong. At the
fuller ceremonial of the Burbung the novitiates will, amongst other
things be shown a larger bullroarer, Toolooduree, and also fiat,
narrow pieces of wood, called Kungara, having certain mystic marks


upon them, which the old men state are the handiwork of Dliarroogan,
an evil being in human shape, who is supposed to have control of the
inaugural rites.
For details of the Burbung of the Koombanggherry and Bunjel-
lung tribes, the reader is referred to my description of that ceremony
published in the “ Proceedings of the American Philosophical So-
ciety,” Philadelphia, U.S.A., Yol. XXXVII., pages 54-69. In that
article I have added a map of New South Wales, showing the boun-
daries of the several tracts of country in which the different forms of
inaugural rites and totemic divisional systems are in force throughout
the colony mentioned. The reader is also invited to peruse my paper
on the initiation ceremonies of the Barkunjee tribes, published in
the “ Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales,” Yol.
XXXII., pp. 240-255, and the map thereto appended.










31508023277323


r
i J
;
V
r
