

1937.
COMMON WEALTH. OF AUSTRALIA.
ABORIGINAL WELFARE.
INITIAL CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND
STATE ABORIGINAL AUTHORITIES
HELD AT ,
CANBERRA, 21st TO 23rd APRIL, 1937.
By Authority:
L. 3T. JonNS'ros, Coraraomvoalth Government Printer, Canberra.
F. 1939.




ABORIGINAL WELFARE—INITIAL CONFERENCE OF COMMON-
WEALTH AND STATE ABORIGINAL AUTHORITIES. HELD AT
CANBERRA, 21ST TO 23RD APRIL, 1937.
At llio 1 Trim Levs Conference held at Adelaide in
.1030, it was decided that there should be a Conference
of CliicC Protectors and Hoards controlling aborigines
in the States rind the Northern Territory,
2. In pursuance of that decision, the initial Con-
ference was convened by tbo Commonwealth Govern-
ment, and was held at Parliament House, Canberra.
3. The Minister for the Interior, the Honorable T,
Paterson, M.P., who is vested with the control of
aboriginals in the . Northern Territory, opened llio
Conference.
4. The representatives of the Commonwealth and
Stales worn as follow:—-
CVnnrcmvKA r/nr.
Mu. <T. A. Ca RRomis, Secretary, Department of the
Interior.
Dr. 0. E. Cook, 0.8. E., Chief X > rotootor of Abori-
ginals, Northern Territory.
New South Walks.
Dr. K. S. Morris, Member of the Aborigines Pro-
tection Board, New South Wales,
Mit. B. S. llaricnrss, Member of the Aborigines Pro-
tection Board, New South Wales.
Mr. A. 0. Pettit, Secretary, Aborigines Protection
Board, New South "Wales.
Victoria.
Honor able 11. S. Bailey, M.8.A., Oluof Secretary,
Victoria, Chairman of the Board for the Protec-
tion. of Aborigines.
Mr._ L. L. Chapman, 'Umler-Seerelmy, Victoria,
Vice-Chairman, of the Board for the Protection
of Aborigines.
Qujeekmlan n.
Mr. 3. W. Br,eaki.i;y, Chief Prulector of Abori-
ginals, Queensland.
South Australia.
Mr. M. T. Mi.Beain, Chief Protector of Aboriginals,
South Amtrnlia.
Pjioi.i’RSßoit .1. B, Clet. and, Chairman of Advisory
Council of Aborigines, South Australia.
Western Australia.
Mr. A. 0. Neville, Commissioner of Native Affairs,
Western Australia.
5. Mr. H. A. Barreugnr, of the Department of the
Interior, Canberra, acted as Secretary to the Con-
ference.
0. The following resolutions wove passed:—
DESTINY OF THE RACE.
That tins Conference believes that the destiny of the natives
nf aboriginal origin, but not of the full blood, lies iu their
ultimate absorption by the people of the Commonwealth, and
it therefore recommends that all efforts be directed to that
end, (See p. 21.)
UNIFORMITY OF LEGISLATION.
That tbe details of administration, in accordance with the
general principles agreed upon, be left to the individual
States, but there shall bo uniformity of legislation as far aa
possible. {See p. 21.)
JM939.—2
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT.
Titit(;, subject Lo l.lit! previous vosolutioii, efforts of all fcitato
antliurUkiH should Ihi direct*'*.! towards tlu: education of
children of mixed aboriginal blood at while standards, ami
their subsequent employment under i.ho same conditions as
whites with a view to their taking their plate in the white
eounnimity uu an equal footing with (.lie whites. (See p. 21,)
SUPERVISION OF FULL-BLOOD NATIVES.
'.riml, this (.'imlfrem'O nfllrjna the principle that the general
policy in respect of 11111-hlDod natives (dirmld lie—
(«) ’i'(» educate. lu white nl,andar<[. children, of tin; de-
ti'ilmlizcd living near centres of white population,
mid tinhwijueiitly to place them in employment in
lucrative, occupations, which will not bring them
into economic or social conflict -with the white
community;
(M To keep the semi eiviliml under a benevolent super-
vision in regard to employment, social arid medical
sendee in their own tribal ureas. Small local
reserves! selected for tribal suitability should ho
provided in these tribal areas whero uucuiployablo
natives nmy live as nearly us poa-sibio a normal
tribal life, mid muibjccti rouble tribal ceremonies
may continue si ml to which employees may repair
when unemployed. The ultimate 'destiny of these
people should he their elevation to clans (a);
(r) To preserve as far as possible the imcivilhusd native
ju his normal tribal ntatn by the establishment of
inviolable reserves; each .State or Territory deter-
mining for itself whether mission activities should
he piimlncled mi these reserves and the. conditions
under which they nmy he permitted. {Seo p. 34.)
RACIAL PROBLEMS.
.Roii.liy.iug that the pursuit of this policy ami its ultimata
.realization, unless subject to enlightened guidance, may result
in racial conflict, disastrous to the happiness ami welfare of
tins coloured people, tins Conference is of opinion that the
Commonwealth should take such steps as seoui desirable to
obtain full information upon racial problems in America and
Smith Africa for submission to a further conference of Chief
Protectors to he hold within two years. {Sea p. .15.)
DEFINITION OF “NATIVE",
That llio definition of “native” in any uniform legislation
adopted by other States nr the Commonwealth, ho based on
the definition cmrtnmini hi the 2/alive Administration Act,
ISHJfi-1 of Uu; Statu of Western Australia, (flee p, 21, ]
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE
COMMONWEALTH.
Thai, the Commonwealth give financial assistance towards
the Stab's moat requiring it to assist them in the care, pro-
duction ami education of natives which, unless extended, will
bring discredit upon the whole of Australia.
This resolution is put forward for the following reasons:—
(1) That the principle adopted by this Conference of the
ultimate absorption of the native race into the
ordinary community can only be achieved by a
considerably extended programme of development
and education,
(2) That the work of the Status is already saving to
the Commonwealth a very considerable sum by
reason of tiio fact that there is being maintained
nt the cost of the States a large number of people
who would otherwise he in receipt of the invalid
or old-ago pension or other assistance directly from
the Common weal tli for which they arc now
■ineligible.
(1) That the people of all the States are already con-
tributing the whole cost of the care of natives in
the Northern Territory, and it is only equitable
that the people of Australia should also assist iu
other parts of the Commonwealth.
(■;(■) That following the precedent in other British
dominions!, it is reasonable that the Commonwealth
Government should hoar a considerable part of the
cost. (Sec p. 34.)


CORPORAL PUNISHMENT.
That this Conference la not seized of the necessity for
corporal punishment. (See p. 135.)
POLICE OFFICERS AS PROTECTORS.
That -further discussion of this subject be postponed until
the next conference. (See p. 32.)
FEMALE PROTECTORS.
While Uio use of female protectors or inspectors for the
supervision of female natives in populated areas may in
places bo desirable, the general appointment of women is
not considered practicable, because of the very scattered
nature of native camps, the difficulties of travel and the
isolation. {Sen p. 33.)
CHAINING OP NATIVES.
That where, far the safety of tlie escort and the security
of the prisoners, it is necessary to subject the prisoners to
restraint, it is the opinion of the representatives from the
States and Territory concerned that the use of the neck chain
while travelling through, bush country is preferable to the
use of handcuffs, for huniftnitavi.au reasons ami having regard
to the comfort of the prisoners. (Sec p. 32.)
COURTS FOR NATIVE AFFAIRS.
That the jurisdiction of the Court fur Native Affairs shall
be confined to eases in which both parties are natives.
That mixed cases—'those in which a native is involved
against a white man or a man of other race—be dealt with
liy the ordinary courts of the State or Territory.
That natives be not allowed to plead guilty in any case,
except with tho approval of tho Chief Protector.
That a native charged before a white man’s court shall
have adequate representation by counsel or a protector, or
both.
That no confession before trial shall be sought or obtained,
or, if obtained, it shall be disregarded by the Court. {See
section (10 (1.) of the Native Administration Act, 1905-193 G
of Western Australia.)
That for the purpose of this resolution a -native shall be
a native as defined by this Conference. {See p. 31.)
COMPELLABILITY OF WITNESSES.
That in the opinion of this Conference any native woman
who, at the time of the commission of the alleged offence,
was living as the consort of the defendant and who may
reasonably be expected to continue in that association during
and subsequent to the legal proceedings, should have the
protection of law accorded to a legal wife. (See p. 30.)
INTOXICATING LIQUOR.
That uniform legislation he adopted to provide that the
supply of intoxicating liquors (including methylated spirits)
to natives, as defined in the new definition, shall be an offence.
{Sec p, 23.)
OPIUM DROSS.
That this Conference is of the opinion that, in order to
prevent tho smoking of opium dross by aborigines, the Com-
monwealth should give consideration to a scheme to place all
opium addicts in Northern Australia, of whatever nationality,
under strict .medical supervision, in order to control the supply
of the drug, with a view to effecting the euro of the individual,
thu reduction of the number of addicts in the future, and
especially for the purpose of preventing any trade in opium
dross. {See p. 25.)
PENSIONS AND MATERNITY ALLOWANCES.
That all natives of less than full blood be eligible to receive
invalid and old-age pensions and maternity allowance on the
recommendation of the State authority, to whom the grant
should he made in trust for the individual. {See p. 27.)
RETURN OF NATIVES TO HOME STATE.
That provision be made to give discretionary power to
return to his home State any aboriginal temporarily rcsldout
in another State. {Sec p. 22.)
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY TO MISSIONS.
That no subsidy be granted to any mission unless the
mission body agrees to comply with any instruction of tho
authority controlling aboriginal affairs in respect of—
(a) the standard of education of natives on the mission;
(b) the measures to be taken for the treatment of sick-
ness and the control of communicable diseases;
(c) the diet of natives fully maintained on the mission j
(d) the measures to be taken to regulate the hygienic
housing of natives; and
(e) the maintenance of the. mission in, a sanitary
condition,
mid that the mission bo subject to regular inspection by an
officer of the authority. {See p. 29.)
CONTROL OF MISSION ACTIVITIES BY
GOVERNMENT.
Tbat governmental oversight of mission natives is desirable,
To that end suitable regulations should be imposed covering
such matters as inspection, housing, hygiene, feeding, medical
attention and hospitalization, and education and training of
inmates, with which missions should be compelled to conform,
(to; p. 30.)
COMPOSITION OF FUTURE CONFERENCES.
That future conferences should consist of representatives
of Protectors and Governmental Boards. {Sac p. 2th)
7. Tin? members of tlio Conference fire of opinion
that the bringing together of tho representatives of the
various States and of tlio Commonwealth affords an
excellent opportunity for a free interchange of ideas
and discussion of aboriginal problems, and that it iw
desirable that similar conferences should continue to bo
held annually, particularly between tins Common-
woaltli mid those (States whore tlio stage of develop-
ment of the natives is reasonably akin, and ■whore there
are common difficulties of administration to be
solved. It would bo of advantage if the place
of meeting could be changed each year, so that repre-
sentatives might come into close contact with tho actual
problems as they arise in each part of the Common-
wealth.
S. The Department of the Interior, Canberra, has
offered to establish a Secretariat, for future conferences,
and to provide liaison between the various States and
the Northern. 'I Vri'itory.
9, A report of the proceedings of the Conference is
appended.
fH. S. BAILEY.
.1. A. OABEODUS.
0, E, COOK.
E. SYDNEY MOEBIS.
B. 0. HAEKNESS,
Signatures-, A. 0. PETTITT.
L. L. ODABMAN.
J. W. BLEAKLEY.
M. T. MoXJSAN.
J. B. OLELAND.
A. 0. NEVILLE.


ABORIGINAL WELFARE —INITIAL CONFERENCE OF COMMON-
WEALTH AND STATE ABORIGINAL AUTHORITIES, HELD AT
CANBERRA, 21ST TO 23RD APRIL, 1937.
PROCEEDINGS.
The conference mot .at Parliament House, Canberra,
on the 21st April, 1937, at 11 a.m. The Minister for
the Interior (Honorable T, Paterson) delivered the
opening address.
OPENING ADDRESS.
Mr. PATERSON.—I wish to welcome you Lo Can-
berra on behalf of the Commonwealth. Government.
Some of you have come a long distance to attend this
Conference, notably, Mr. A. 0. Neville from Perth
and Hr. C. E. Cook from Darwin.
As you arc aware, this Conference has been called
pursuant to a decision arrived at by the Prorriiors
Conference held at Adelaide in August of last year.
Bor a number of years persons and associations in-
terested in the welfare of the aborigines have made
representations to the Commonwealth Government in
regard to matters affecting aborigines. Many of the
representations related lo aborigines under the control
of the Btatcs, as well as those corning within the juris-
diction of the Commonwealth. Repeated requests were
made that the Commonwealth should assume control of
all the aborigines in Australia; that u kind of national
council should be set up to control matters affecting
aborigines; and that these questions should he submitted
for consideration at a Premiers Conference.
The Commonwealth Government, therefore, con-
sulted the last Premiers Conference ou the subject and
it was decided that it was impracticable to hand over
the control of all lire aboriginal people in Australia
to the Commonwealth, but that it would be advisable
to have periodical conferences of Chief Protectors and
Boards controlling aborigines in the States and the
Northern Territory. You arc assembled bore to-day
following upon that decision.
This Conference is an epoch-making event. It is
the first conference of all the governmental authorities
in Australia controlling natives. The public has taken
the greatest interest iu this meeting', and sumo decisions
of a concrete nature arc expected to result from your
deliberations.
The welfare of the aboriginal people is a matter
in winch all the Governments of Australia are vitally
interested, and into which politics do not enter.
Although the political opinions of governments may
differ-materially on general questions of policy, there
is only one consideration where aborigines are concerned
and that is: What is best for their welfare? The
problem calls for the earnest consideration of all
Ministers and officers vested with the duly of controlling
natives and ministering to their wants.
As Minister controlling the Northern Territory, I
appreciate to the full the important task that is en-
trusted to you and the many .difficulties that have to bo
surmounted. I also realize that the problems which
confront one State may bo totally different from those
of another.- Nevertheless, nothing but good can result
from your meeting one another iu friendly discussion
and assisting one another with the experience gained
in the performance of your duties in your respective
States ami Territories.
'As you have a long agenda I shall now leave yon to
your deliberations. I fool sure tliat something con-
structive in the interests of the aborigines of Australia
will be forthcoming from this meeting,
CHAIRMANSHIP.
Mr. OARRODHS, —Onr first duty is to elect a
chairman of the Conference. "We have one Minister
of the Crown present, the Honorable 11. S. Bailey,
Chief Secretary of Victoria. I think it would be
fitting for Mr. Bailey to take the chair.
Resolved —
That ttio llniuimblis H. S. Bailey, Victoria, be
i'luuvinun of the (Junfomicu,
Mr. BAILEY.—I am prepared to take the chair for
soma little time, at any rate, lam attending tko Con-
ference as chairman of the Aborigines 3 Protection
Board of Victoria, of which the Chief Secretary of
the State is ex officio chairman, Actually, however, the
problems relating to aborigines arc not acute in Yie-
loria. Wc have, comparatively speaking, only a-hand-
ful of full-blooded blacks in onr State. Wo have a
larger number of half-ouatea, about 500 altogether.
The Government of Victoria has always made snbstmi-
t:ai provision for the aborigines within the Stale, I
came hero principally as an onlooker, wishing to ascer-
tain the views of the representatives of other States
which are called upon to deal with aborigines. 1
appreciate the courtesy of the Conference in electing
me chairman, and shall be glad to preside for some
little time. Thou, I think, it would he fitting for the
Conference to appoint another chairman. Questions
relating to the aborigines affect States like Queensland
South Australia, and Western Australia, more than
Victoria, and probably New South Wales.
PRESS REPORTS.
Mr. BAILEY.—The Conference should now decide
whether the press is to he admitted to the Conference.
Mi', () ARROHirS. —I understand that the press is
not particularly anxious to be present, but desires that
reports lie. made available by the chairman or secretary
at the hm.-ch.-eon am I afternoon adjournments.
Tiesolfrd—-
Tlmt the press lie not, admitted to the Oonfercuoe, but
that reports lie prepared by the secretary and issued to the
press.
VOTING POWER.
Mr. CAIUi ODUkf.-—The Conference should now
determine in what manner votes shall he recorded. We
have three delegates from one State, two from some
others, and only one from others. I suggest that each
State or 'Territory should record dug vote.
Resolved —
Tlmt Lfiieli .Stale or Territory be entitled to one vole.


.MATTERS PUT FORWARD BY ftUEERSLAND.
Mr. BLEAKLEV. —I wish to submit tho following
matters on behalf of Queensland;
(c,j Uniform policy lie adoi'led, broad iniuiifh to cuvor tlio
difleront conditions in the various iSinU-s, biielly on t-lio
fulion ing lines :
(i) Protection nf the imrmulic irilics, their gradual
development to KcH-dcpeiirlmiee and restoral ion
of racial pride ami eoulidence;
(ii.) Control, rdlii-f and protection of the del rihali/cd;
(iii) Moral protection of females, dicck mi inheegenn-
tiuii;
(iv) Upliftnient of superior mwsliriuul;
(vl Health control, nutrition, medical cmiti^
(vi) Sympathetic government—defence ol [ii’iinilivu
oiremiuiM,
(/;) L'uifmm legislation for nujipresisiiiii of almsiw, [>ru-
leclinu from exploitation, cheek of trallle in drink, drugs,
and prostitution.
(r) Co-opeiation between the State administrations he
aimed at, in the matter of controlling imgrulimis, return ol
ahscoiulorw, wife deserters and stranded natives,
{(/.) J\ definite sum lie niadc available hy the. Commomvmi.lth
Clovermmmt for capital CNpemliture un ihivehipnu'iit of aim-
rigimii institutions towards self-mipiioit.
I have prepared a memorandum on tire waiters
mentioned, which ready ;ih follows; —
lii presenting the motion from. Queensland for
dismission, I feel that it will be generally agreed
that the care of the; aboriginal races should be
considered from a nation-wide, rattier than from
the individual Stale point of view.
In recent years keen ini,crest has been shown
in countries overseas in the treatment, of the abo-
rigines of Australia, and it is unfortunate that
the Oommonweall.il Govormnent has had to suffer
considerable annoyance and inconvenience because
of garbled and often mischievous stories which
have been circulated through tho press, such
stories often originating in the ignorance in the
different States of the aim ami operations of tine
others.
There is quite evidently a need for more
co-operation and unity, as such attacks arc
directed at Australia as a nation, rather than at
the particular States that might or might not be
at fault. Local incidents have often been magni-
fied Into excuses for wlirTpsalo condemnation.
Tho Premiers 'Conference has already decided
that centralized control ia not - practicable or desir-
able, ft view entirely agreed to by the Government
of Queensland. Conditions differ so in the north-
ern as compared with tho southern States; dis-
tances, say, from Oaahemi, arc too grout for
many unifiers requiring prompt measures.
Each State can administer its own aboriginal
problems more economically through its own
machinery, while the establishment by a cen-
tralized government’of the special machinery for
such, administration would prove far too costly.
Moreover, each State is vitally in teres led in the
conditions of its own aborigines because of the
bearing those conditions must have upon tho
health, morals, and good order of tho comm unity.
Tu considering any united policy it will help (ci
classify tho types of aborigines to he dealt with,
as under: —
(a) The primitive nomads still free to live their
own life and maintain themselves on
game and hush foods, and whoso country
is still inviolate, or has been reserved for
native use;
( h ) Those still living a precarious existence on
their own country, hut whose lands have
been selected for pastoral occupation,
their maintenance hy hunting restricted
jmd often their able-bodied hunters
absorbed into the pastoral industry;
(r) The detribaliml, whose country lias boon
usurped by settlement, their tribal life
and natural means of subsistence
destroyed, and who live a more or less
mendicant life, dependent‘upon relief or
casual employment, and are exposed to
social abuses. They have lost tho arts
of limiting, and become accustomed to
civilized foods, clothes, and amusements,
their vagrant condition, making them a
nienaec to tho health and morals of the
community;
(</') The crossbreed. This lype alone presents
several different classes, each requiring
special treatment —
1. Those with n preponderance of
aboriginal blood and entirely
aboriginal in character and
leanings.
2. The cross with lower typos of alien
races such, aa I’acific Islanders,
Malays, Africans.
3. The European-aboriginal cross or
those with higher .Asiatic types.
4. Tho quadroon, and octoroon with
preponderance of European
blood.
Drawing upon our own nxperumco in Queensland,
It has boon found necessary in protection of the
(a.) class, (o reserve for their use sufficiently largo
tracts of their own country to ensure the undis-
turbed enjoyment of their own native life and
means of subsistence and protection from abuses.
Tins alone is not sufficient. Tho natives have to
be protected, not only from the trespasser, but also
from the temptation calling at tho gate, once they
have tasted alien vices.
In affording this protection certain tilings arc
essential. The first is power to enforce the
inviolability of the reservations and tho second is
benevolent supervision with authority to exercise
such power, while maintaining friendly contact
ami affording medical ami other relief. Not the
least; important, in fact It might be called tho main
aim of such suporvinimi, should ho the gradual
adaptation of these nomadic people to tho inevit-
able change to the settled life, and the raising from
(:1m Koil of the subsistence previously obtained from
game . and bush foods wliitdi supply is steadily
being diminished through the encroachment of
while sotthnicnr.
In Queensland over 11,000,000 acres or 8,500
square miles of country is reserved for aborigines
with strict Jaws to prevent trespass. This coun-
try is chiefly on Gape York Peninsula, practically
the only part of the State where the primitive
noniady can be said to be living their own life In
llioir own country, ami the supervision is provided
by a chain of mission stations on tho coast from
Morningl,on Island to Gape York and down to
Gooktown. Those mission stations arc all in the
charge of religious bodies, as it is found that such
bodies with their volunteer officers who take up the
tyork from missionary motives, thus ensuring con-
of policy, can carry it out most
economically and successfully. Tho superinten-
dents arc also appointed protectors of aboriginals
and protectors of fisheries, giving thorn necessary
powers, to protect their wards from imposition.
Whileythe main object of the mission bodies is
the spiritual earn and instruction of tho people,
they willingly collaborate with the administration
in-carrying out the policy of gradual adaptation
of the nomads to tho settled life. Recognizing that
any drastic change or forcible weaning’ of the old
people from their tribal habits would ho a hardship


mid would only court failure, efforts are con-
centrated or l lie training of the children, at first the
foundlings and weaklings sent voluntarily to the
mission to bo cared for. The mission life with its
regular food, shelter, comfort and companionship
soon attracts others. As these young people grow
up, and are educated—the hoys trained in farm-
ing, gardening, fishing and skilled trades, and the
girls in domestic accomplishments suitable to their
simple station they are encouraged to mute and
settle in villages, cultivate garden plots, raise pigs,
poultry and bees, help in the farming, enttlc-rais-
ing and fishing, and become self-supporting. Many
of the young men engage as crews in the shelling
industry or work vessels of their own on the com-
nuuui.l system.
These trained young people are the best mis-
sionaries to the old nomads. Their example in-
duces the old people to attach themselves partially
to the mission, coming in from spoils of “ walk-
about” to earn tobacco, tomahawks or knives by
casual labour or bartering bush foods for trade
goods or flour. They usually display interest in the
young gardeners when the food crops are ripe,
and would frequently eat the produce if allowed
to do so,
On some of the larger reserves, out-station
villages have been slanted on suitable river shies in
the country of some of the primitive tribes
hitherto untouched, by some of the trained
aboriginal couples, with considerable success. The
lines followed have been those of the mother
mission—education of' the children, and object
lessons in simple husbandry. The white mis-
sionaries visit periodically for medical treatment
and religious instruction.
If further evidence is needed that Hie primitive
aboriginal is beginning to understand and appre-
ciate the benefits of the settled village life and
productive work, especially when lie can see that
the fruits are for his own use, the native settle-
ment at (Jowal Crook on the oxtronic point of
Cbipe York can he cited. This settlement Anns
formed twenty years ago by the remnants of the
old (Seven Bivens and Bed Island tribes entirely
of their own volition, and has been developed by
their own efforts to a neat, well-laid out village of
bark cottages, where the 200 inhabitants maintain
themselves by gardening, hunting, fishing and
gathering bush foods. The only help received
from the department has been gifts of tools, fenc-
ing material, a fishing-boat on time payment, and
occasionally some rations when the crops have been
destroyed by wild cattle and pigs. An island
iiativc, who teaches the children and acts as mis-
sionary, is paid a small salary, hut the natives
govern themselves with their own councillors and
police, the local protector, twenty miles away by
sea, visiting oneo or twice a year for inspection
and advice.
These village police have frequently given valu-
able assistance in the capture of desperate native
.characters on the peninsula wanted for murder,
wife abduction and cattle killing.
All the foregoing reserves arc vested in trustees
representing the department, and the controlling
church bodies, thus, giving some assurance of
stability of tenure and conservation of native
interests.
With regard to the interest displayed overseas
in the question of the preservation of the
aborigines in Australia, it has been of considera-
.able interest at this juncture to receive from a
private source a copy of a circular letter written
by the Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection
Society of London to various philanthropic bodies
seeking their views on a scheme they proposed to
place before the Australian governments for the
development of aboriginal reserves in productive
industries, in trust, fur (he benefit of ihe natives.
While the society quotes the miuwchk r>£ such
trusts in oilier countries, the selicrne. is so much
on all fours with the nmshiu i-eserve system in
Queensland as to justify the belief that the ideas
in the main have come from that State’s publica-
tions, especially aa they quote from its annual
report that; £1500,000 of native funds in .held in
trust, mid suggest that this money should ho
borrowed and used for the furtherance of ihe
scheme. As a matter of fact, this money amount-
ing actually to £200,000 is the aggregate of the
balances of over 0,000 individual savings bank
accounts which must always bo available to the
owners for their benefit when required.
Although they are a different type of people
from, and superior to the mainland aboriginal,
being Polynesian in strain, nud naturally village-
dwellers and horticulturists as wtdl as fishermen,
the Torres Strait tribes, whose islands have been
edosedy reserved, afford an example of the degree
to which natives can la; developed to .self-
dependence.
'Those people, numbering 3,J100, entirely maintain
themselves with their fleet of 20 vessels working
in the shelling industry, and by gardening, pig and
fowl raising and fishing. They bnvo their own
trading station, financed from their own funds
with, several branch retail stores. The main part
of the, proceeds of the' fleet’s catch, and wages
oarued by the surplus men on other fleets, amount-
ing to about £20,000, passes through tiledr own
stoves, the profits being devoted to their own
benefit.
These islanders also govern their domestic
affairs with their own councillors and police,
elected by themselves, the only cost to the
department being for administrative machinery,
including school teachers ami vessel. As
the result of the policy of segregation, these people
although progressing in civilisation, have achieved
this development on improved native linos and not
as poor imitation whites, for they still retain their
native customs, arts, crafts- and music,
The people of (b) class probably present the most
difficult problem. The usurpation of their hunting
grounds has resulted in destruction of their
native culture ami contamination from contact
with llu: alien race. Their helpless posilion
exposes flown to tcmptalious and vices to which
they easily fall a prey, mainly huuansc of the food
poverty caused by destruction of their natural
means of subsistence.
The employment of their ablcbodiecl young
people, oven whore such services are paid for
aggravates, rather than relieves, the hardship, as
few employers will accept the burden of maintain-
ing the 'whole of the aged ami young camp rela-
tives of their employees.
.Even where relief can be given, Issues of flour,
rice, tea, sugar and beef offal arc inadequate sub-
stitutes for the native game, and. fruits of. which
limy have been, deprived.
In most places education of the children is
impossible, as such bnnefits are unprocurable hi the
locality itself for the children of the employer,
except at heavy expense.,
The obvious and eventual solution would be
to transfer all such people .to institutions where
the desired care, control and education could be
given, but wholesale, herding of tribes to strange
country cannot be, done without hardship. Another
factor in the problem, though it should not be


urged at the expense of tho, native, is that, wbat
is perhaps the most important asset of this vast
Commonwealth, the pastoral industry, would be in
a sorry plight if deprived of its native labour
in outback places whore white labour is not only
difficult to obtain, but often inferior in quality.
In fact it is known that many pastoraUsts claim
that their stations could not have been developed
without aboriginal labour.
Until these dispossessed people can bo provided
for and gradually absorbed into suitable reserva-
tions, it is essential that effective legal, and super-
visory machinery be provided to protect them
from abuse and imposition and to ensure relief
from, privation and disease. The young should also
receive education of a vocational character to
equip them to protect, themselves in business deal-
ings and enhance their value in employment.
The (c) class referred to as dotribalized will
he found mostly on the outskirts of country towns
and mining camps. Many have never known any
different environment, in fact, have little
knowledge of native culture. "What they know of
hunting has depended upon civilized firearms;
they cannot live without European food and
clothing, or amuse themselves outside of the hotel,
the billiard room, pictures or racecourse.
Although usually asserting their ability to look
ai'tov their own earnings, they are invariably in
need of protection from their own Ignorance and
improvidence.
The moral tone of these camps is often lower
than that of the more primitive classes, as this type
of people is usually too sophisticated to be con-
trolled by the native laws and the moral code of
tho superior race. Consequently, the majority of
tho inmates arc of mixed breed, many of the
children are illegitimate, being lucky if their
parents arc of the same nationality and aro living
together. The unattached females, however, arc
much in demand for domestic servants, and the
males as station hands, drovers and for fencing,
scrub-falling, horse-breaking, and contract work.
This makes the removal of tho unemployed
dependants who are left behind in tho camps a
difficult matter.
Usually State school education Is available for
these children, whose attendance is compulsory,
but objections at times are raised by the parents
of white children because of the alleged unhealthy
tone of tho camp home life. To meet this objec-
tion, where numbers justify establishing a separate
school, this has frequently been done.
It, will be obvious that, in the ease of this typo
of native tho need is for effective protection and
supervision of these camp dependants, ensuring—
;t. Sanitary living conditions.
2. Protection from, abuse..
3. Moral control.
4-.. Support of their dependants by tho able-
bodied.
C. Proper upbringing of the children.
This has been met in Queensland either by
establishing a village on reserved land a reasonable
distance from the town, where the families have
been helped to erect decent huts, enclose grounds,
make gardens, provide water supply and sanitary
conveniences, also school facilities if needed; or by
transferring the families to a suitable settlement
where the above conditions can be assured under
efficient supervision.
The first measure is adopted where conditions
are favorable as inflicting less hardship.
It is perhaps in regard to this class more than
any others that drastic measures are needed for
moral control and protection of females and sup-
prossion of miscegenation. The whole environ-
ment creates a taste for the delights of civilized
life that arc an irresistible snare to them, making
them an easy prey to the unscrupulous white or
alien.
In Queensland, for a quarter of a century, the
marriage of whites and blacks has been rigidly
restricted, and every encouragement has been given
to marriage of crossbreed aboriginals amongst their
own race!” The result is that 9a per cent, of tho
crossbreed children born aro the issue of purely
native unions, and SO per cent, of these are born
in wedlock.
There is vide difference of opinion as to what
is due to the so-called half-caste, but, as already
pointed out, not every half-breed is the child of
a white father. Many may be of half aboriginal
blood, but wholly aboriginal in nature and
leanings.
This type, and those, crosses of lower alien races,
will be more happily absorbed by their mother’s
people in circumstances where they can be givon
vocational and domestic training to take their
part in the development of a self-contained native
community.
The superior type of half-breed, with tho neces-
sary intelligence and ambition for the higher
civilized life, is entitled to the opportunity and help
to make his place in the white community. But
we must not be disappointed if what appears to
bo ambition turns out only to be a desire for
freedom from supervision.
The system in Queensland provides for grant-
ing exemption to half-castes shown to be intelli-
gent and well-conducted, and not living or associat-
ing with aboriginals. But perhaps 50 per cent,
of such cases have nothing to show after years-
of freedom, live from hand to mouth, often on the
dole, and frequently drift hack to camp life, where
they have to look for wives.
The case of these superior crossbreeds has
exercised our department for sonio time, and, as the
result of exhaustive inquiries in other countries
and States, it has been decided that it is futile to
expect these crossbreeds, no matter how light in
colour, to successfully make a. place for themselves
in tho civilized community without being equipped
with the vocational knowledge and the respectable
home background to overcome the handicap of the
racial prejudice and inferiority complex. Without
such equipment they cannot combat the drift to
the ranks of the unemployed and to life in. the
slums.
Briefly, the scheme approved hy my department,
and of which a trial is soon to be given by the
establishment of a half-caste' industrial colony,
is—
1. Industrial and social development of present
settlements for full-blood and inferior type
of half-castes.
2. Establishment of half-caste colonics for
superior types of half-castes and quadroons
now labouring under handicaps as in (1),
ensuring—
Education for the children.
Benevolent supervision of community life.
Opportunities for protected home life and
home industries.
Medical and health supervision.
Secondary vocational training for youths.
3. System of apprenticeship of rural school
trainees to civilized trades or professions
in safe home influence with co-operation of
the State Children’s and Apprenticeship
Committee.


4. Special consideration to tlie uplifting of tlie
living conditions of station-bred aboriginals,
half-castes and quadroons and provision of
educational facilities.
I think it. is generally recognized that the care
of the aboriginal, no matter what the breed, is, to
a large degree, a health problem. The prevention
of disease amongst those people is of vital import-
ance to the welfare of iho white community as well
as a, duty that may ho owed to the natives
themselves who are often victims of our own social
vices.
As the native’s own natural food resources are
becoming exhausted so he is forced to substitute
the artificial foods of civilized life of whose nutri-
ment value, in his ignorance, be has no know-
ledge. Thus we find him often subsisting on
polished rice, refined white flour, tea and sugar,
instead of the game, roots and fruits of the bush
which in his wild days provided him with a
balanced diet.
The question of proper nutrition is on important,
and at times a difficult, one, for it ia one thing
to order a balanced ration for your native, but
quite another thing to make him eat it. Another
result of the change to civilized food is the in-
creasing need for dental attention. Probably half
of the civilized natives, especially half-breeds, have
at an early age to be provided with artificial teeth
or fillings.
In imposing the laws of the white man’s
government upon the native, too little consideration
has in the past been given to the degree which
the influence of his native code may have had upon
his actions. The need for a special court for
natives, on the lines of the Children’s Court, in
which the Penck can he assisted by officers or
persons experienced in native customs and laws,
has more than once been emphasized. Already in
some States, legislation provides for defence of
primitive offenders and the safe-guarding of such
prisoners from ignorant pleas of guilty..
In the event of a uniform pediey being adopted
it will greatly facilitate administration throughout
the various States if uniform legislation can also
be framed for the suppression of abuses, protection
from exploitation, and cheek of tho traffic in drink
and drugs.
If, similarly, the various State administrations
can co-operate for mutual assistance in such mat-
ters as controlling the migrations of indigent
natives, the return of absconders from settlements,
the tracing of wife deserters and stranded natives,
it will materially assist in the effective care
of these people. I am able to acknowledge with
gratitude much useful help in the past from the
aborigines departments of neighbouring States in
the above direction.
Like other social questions, the effectiveness of
the measures for the betterment of the races is
largely dependent upon finance. Unfortunately,
the aboriginal has no vote, and in the past the
work has been often cliscouragingly retarded
because of the State government’s inability to
spare the- necessary funds. Queensland has prob-
ably been more generously treated by its govern-
ment in the matter of financial provision than some
other .States, but the dependence of the department
upon the political and financial position, has often
been an obstacle to progress in the work of
ameliorating the conditions of tho distressed.
As already stated, the inevitable depletion of
the natural food resources makes it essential that
the now nomadic natives should be steadily taught
to develop for themselves a settled community life
in conditions and with such practical assistance
as will enable them to attain a measure of self-
dependence.
Experience has shown that this help should not
bo confined to supplying their .physical needs, but
rath or should he in directions to enable them, to
become solll-snpport-lug. Help in cash Is of course
essential, especially in the early development
stages, to pay for coat of management, but practical
help is also needed in tho way of material,
plant, machinery and stock to nimble tho productive
iuduslries to he developed as fully as possible
towards solf-suppnrfc and the iipliftineiit of the
people on improved native lines by their own
efforts.
Tim suggestion is, therefore, offered to this Con-
ference that the Commonwealth Government,
which is the parent government of this continent,
ami tlm one looked to by tho people overseas as
respoiiHLhlo for tho proper treatment of tho abori-
ginal . races, might consider the question of
assisting tho development of the existing and
future aboriginal communities hy making available
mi adequate annual grant to he devoted to purely
capital expenditure in approved directions towards
development towards self-support.
Summary of Past AiuminiNAi, Policy.
In reviewing tho conditions 30 years ago and
the progress made since that time, it is shown
that tlie results could not have been achieved with-
out an objective.
Summarized, the policy in tho past has boon —
(a) To keep the few primitive natives who are
still living the nomadic life under bene-
volent supervision by affording medical
and other relief, to win their confidence
unci through the children gradually induce
them to adapt thorn selves to the inevitable
change to the settled industrious life.
(&) liocogniziug that with the encroachment of
civilization on their limiting grounds it
is only a question of time whon the no-
madic lifo will ho impossible, the aim
has boon to establish them in time, with-
out undue wrench from their old environ-
ment, in self-contained villages under a
simple form of self-government helped by
benevolent instruction in husbandry.
(c) To secure for the semi-civilized natives
of Torres Strait tho opportunity to de-
velop to a higher social life and self-
dependence nu improved native lines,
avoiding Europeanization as far as pos-
sible, and to protect them from con-
tamination and exploitation.
(d) To afford the detribalized, that is, tho
wandering natives whose country has
already boon usurped, effective protection
from abuses and exploitation in their
contact with civilization.
(c) To provide accessible machinery for medi-
cal treatment and relief, to take
measures for the discovery, prevention,
isolation and treatment of disease, and
for the promotion of hotter health con-
ditions in the interests of the European
as well as aboriginal community.
(/) To assist troublesome, degraded and desti-
tute aborigines and half-castes to rehabili-
tate themselves in Government controlled
institutions of a serai-penitentiary nature,
and develop to social and industrial self-
dependence.
(p) To assist the crossbreeds of superior breed
and inclinations to overcome their social
handicaps and fit themselves by education


and technical training to take their place
properly equipped in the white com-
munity.
(//.) Generally, to assist all classes of tho abori-
ginal races lo win to a position of self-
respect and gclf-dependencc.
Mr. BAILEY.—I suggest that further consideration
of the matter introduced by Mr. Bleakley be postponed
until after the luncheon adjournment.
PROPOSED SOCIO-ECONOMIC INVESTIGATION OE
THE HALT-CASTE PROBLEM.
PROFESSOR CLELAN.D. —It is clear tome, after
hearing Mr. Bloaklcy’s statement, that conditions differ
considerably in the various States, and that what may
be applicable to high-rainfall, areas in Cape York
Beninsula, may not be applicable to the dry western
portions of South Australia. I have prepared a
memorandum embodying certain suggestions for an in-
vestigation into conditions as they exist in South Aus-
tralia, and it is possible that some of Lina conclusions
finally reached may conflict with those reached by Mr.
Bloaklcy. The memorandum is as follows:
Tho number of half-castes in certain parts of
Australia is increasing, not ns a result of addi-
tional influx of white blood, but following on
intcr-marriage amongst themselves, ‘where they
are living under protected conditions, such as at
the Government aboriginal stations at Point
Pearce and Point McLeay, in South Australia.
This may be the beginning of a possible problem
of the future. A very unfortunate situation
would arise if a large lialf-eastc population breed-
ing within themselves eventually arose in any of
the Australian States. It seems to me that there
can be only one satisfactory solution to the half-
caste problem, and that is tho ultimate absorption
of these persona in tho white population, I think
•that this will not necessarily lead in any way to
a deterioration of typo, inasmuch as racial inter-
mixtures seem, in most eases, to load to increased
virility.
The problem, however, should be faced at its
beginning, and it is suggested that tho whole ques-
tion of the half-caste should he thoroughly investi-
gated by some person specially trained in the
study of social and of economic, problems. Such a
survey would include ascertaining the conditions
under which these people live in the neighbour-
hood of country towns, on stations, and on govern-
ment reserves, Tho best kind of occupation Cor
these people, for instance, on cattle and sheep
stations, or 'on farms, and the various possibilities
for technical education should also he inquired
into.
The investigation should also consider the best
method for the gradual absorption of the half-
caste into the community, going thoroughly into
the question aa to whether half-castes in general
can assume responsibility and be reliable, or
whether, on an average, they must be considered
as belonging to the. submerged, more or less, unem-
ployable type of white. It is, also advisable that
some scheme should bo got out by which the two
sexes can have opportunities of meeting and so
marrying under suitable conditions.
Such, in brief outline, is tho suggested scope
of such a socio-economic investigation. Such a
work could he begun -with great advantage in
South Australia, and I have the permission of
the Yiee-'Ohancellor to say that the Council of
the University of Adelaide would view favorably
any suggestions submitted lo it that such a survey
should be carried out under the direction of its
Department of Economics in conjunction with the
Hoard, for Anthropological Research of the
University.
Though I have not express authority to say so,
I have reason to think that the State would grant
special facilities for the investigation. As the
problem is one of value, not only lo South Aus-
tralia, but to most of the other States as well,
and to the Commonwealth, I would suggest that
the special expenses incurred—t think £l,OOO n
year for two years would probably be necessary—
might be reasonably borne by the Commonwealth.
Government.
As far as the southern States arc concerned, investiga-
tions could, I believe, bo best carried out in South
Australia, and the University in that State is pre-
paml to undertake the direction of tho work. It
would be necessary, of course, to appoint a special
Investigator, who would have to be paid. The;
Slate would make available all' the facilities it could,
bat I think that the actual expenses should bo borne
by the Commonwealth, as the results of tho Investiga-
tion. would be for the benefit of the Commonwealth
as a whole. If necessary, the work could ultimately
be extended to the Northern Territory, Western Aus-
tralia and Queensland. It is very important to ascer-
tain whether the half-caste is able to take his place
in I;lie community •under present conditions, or whether,
on the average, lie will always prove to bo only a
grown-up child who will have to be protected and
nursed.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION.
Mr. NEVILLE.—The opinion hold by Western
Australian authorities is that the problem of the native
nice, including half-castes, should be dealt with on a
long-range plan. We should ask ourselves what will
be the position,- say, 50 years hence; it is not so much
the position to-day that lias to be considered. Western
Australia has gone further in tho development- of such
a long-range policy than has, any other State, hy
accepting the view that ultimately the native's must he
absorbed into the white population of Australia. That
is the principal objective of legislation which was
passed % the Parliament, of Western Australia in its
last session. I followed closely the long debates which
accompanied the passage of that measure, and although
some divergence was, at times, displayed, most members
expressed the view that sooner or later tho native and
the white populations of Australia must become merged.
The Western Australian law to which X have referred
is based on tho presumption that the aborigines of Aus-
tralia sprang from the same stock as we did ourselves;
that is to say, they arc not negroid, but give evidence of
Caucasian origin. I think that the Adelaide
Anthropological .Board has voiced the opinion that
there is no such thing as atavism in the aboriginal, and
Dr. Oilcuto Ims expressed the view to which I have
referred. Wo have accepted that view’ in Western
Australia.
In Western Australia the problem of the aborigines
has three phases. Tn the far-north there are between
7,000 and 8,000 pure-blooded aborigines; in the middle-
north the number of half-castes is increasing, and the
full-blooded aborigines are becoming detribalized, and in
the south-west there are about 5,000 coloured people.
Wo have dropped tho use of the term “ half-caste”. As
a matter of fact, in the legislation passed last session the
term aborigines 55 has been discarded altogether; we
refer to them as natives whether they be full-blooded or
half-caste. Quadroons over the age of 21 years are,
however, excluded. Emm childhood quadroons are to bo


treated as whites. In my State there are several insti-
tutions for the treatment of the natives, including
eleven missions and a number of departmental establish-'
raenta. At the mission stations, tbe natives are en-
couraged to multiply by marriage, with a conse-
quent increase of .population. The missions arc
thus aide to claim that they are doing valuable
work for the natives. Undoubtedly they a'rc doing
good work, but they keep an increasing number
of natives on their properties, whereas the departmental
institutions, whilst; approving marriages, encourage
the natives to mix with, the general coimnuiiily,
and earn their own living which, .1 am glad to
say, they are doing. A a a matter of fact, for
gome years now I have not been able to supply sufficient
youngsters of both sexes to meet the demand for their
labour.
As I have pointed out, the policy of ll ip missions is
in direct eon Hast to that of the department, because
they do not encourage the young people born on the
mission properties to leave them. The ultimate result of
this policy in Western Australia will be an increase of
the number of coloured people, that is, half-castes, and
a diminution of the number of full-blooded aborigines.
It seems to me that tbe task which confronts us is
educating ami Training these people to enable them to be
assimilated into tbe white community. Accordingly we
have taken steps to improve the health and physical fit-
ness of the coloured population. At present only about
10 per cent, of these people show any sign of ill-health,
and the majority of the complaints from which they
may suiter are trifling. This has been ascertained over
two or three years of intensive medical inspection.
If the coloured people of this country are to be
absorbed into the general community they must be
thoroughly fit and educated at least to tbo extent of
the throe it’s. If they can road, write and count,
and know what wages they should get, and how to
enter into an agreement with an employer, that is all
that should he necessary. Once that is accomplished
there is no reason in tbo world why those coloured
people should not lie absorbed into the community. To
achieve this end, however, wc must have charge of the
children at the age of six years; it, is useless to wait
until they arc twelve or thirteen years of ago. In
■Western Australia wb Lave power under the act to
take any child from its mother fit any stago of its life,
no matter whether the mother be legally married or not.
It is, however, our intention to establish sufficient
settlements to undertake the training and. education of
these children so that they may become absorbed into
the general community.
Another important point is marriage. 1 realize that
the problem in Queensland, as outlined by Hr.
331.eak.Iey, is different; hut the natives in ■Western Aus-
tralia are mostly of “purer” stock. There is some
Asiatic blood in the. north, and a certain amount of
negroid strain also is to be seen due to the fact that
some of the early settlers brought with them to Western .
Australia negro servants who loft their mark on the
native population. The negro strain remains. Tim
Asiatic cross, however, is not a bad one. We
find that half-caste Asiatics do very well indeed; in
fact, very often they beat the white cross. In order
that the existing state of affairs in Western Australia
shall continue, and in order to prevent the return of
those half-castes who are nearly white to the black,
the State .Parliament has enacted legislation including
the giving of control over the marriages of half-castes.
Under this law no half-caste need be allowed to marry a
full-blooded aboriginal if it is possible to avoid it, but
the missions do not. always take steps to prevent this
from occurring; they allow the half-castes under their
control to many anybody.
1f.1939.—3
Dr. AtO.RK.IS. —You cannot stop them from having
babies oven if they don’t marry.
Mr. HEVJLLE.—Wc realize that. As a. matter of
fact that very often does occur as the result of half-
castes mingling with whites; but that does not matter
very mutdi. What does matter is that, when a child
is born and tho father cannot be found, the child
becomes a charge upon the State.
Another matter upon which wc differ from Queens-
land is in tho fundamental character of the natives. Mr.
JUeukloy lias mentioned settlements and cultivation;
our experience is that one can never make a farmer
out of a native—seldom even out of a half-caste. In
Western Australia blocks of land have boon granted
to (lie natives and all that they have done ia to build
humpies and then sit down. Without constant super-
vision it; is impossible to make thorn cultivate land.
Thou wo have the important difference between the
female and the male. In furtherance of the scheme
which we have in view, wc have definitely excluded
from certain provisions of the act a male adult person
of half-blood who is living more or less like a white
man. "Wc give him the benefit of the doubt, and tell
him that so long as he does certain things and con-
forms to the act we shall not worry about him. In
other words, wo give him a chance to enter into the
communal life of the State. Many have taken advan-
tage of this provision and have done so. However, it is
a gradual process to merge the two races. As I have
explained, in Western Australia we have full-blooded
aborigines, half-castes from detribaiized blacks, and
half-castes producing their own children. In the lower
half of (.be (State we arc approaching tbe stage where
balf-caatcH will be able to bo assimilated. It will be,
perhaps, 25 years before the same stage is reached in
the middle north, and 30 years in the far north. In
any case there is no reason why we should not adopt
n long-sighted policy.
An important aspect of this policy is the cost. The
(1 iff ere ut States are creating institutions far the wel-
fare of tin; mi Live nice, and, as the result of this policy,
the native population is increasing. What is to be
the limit? Arc we going to have a population of
I,(K)O,UOU blacks in the Commonwealth, or are wc
going to merge them into our white community and
eventually forget that there ever were any aborigines
in Australia 1 ? There arc not many now, whereas not
so many generations ago there were a groat many.
When Western Australia was first settled in 1839 it
is .alleged that there was a population within the Stale
of 35.000 natives. In the south-west portion of the
State alone there were 13,000 natives. In 1901 the
native population in the south-west was reduced to
1,419, of whom 45 per cent, were half-castes. To-day
there are nearly 6,000 natives in the same area, so
1 venture the opinion that in 25 years’ time the native
population in that district alone will have increased
to 15,000. How can we keep them apart from the
community? Our own population is not increasing
at such a rapid rate as to lead us to expect that there
will be a great many more white people in that area
25 years bonce than there are at present. The
aborigines have inter-married with our people. I know
of some SO white men who are married to native women,
with whom they are living happy, contented lives, so
I see no objection to the ultimate absorption into our
own race of tho whole of tho existing Australian native
race. In order to do this wc must guard the health
of the natives in every possible way so that they may
be, physically, as fit as is possible, The chil-
dren must be trained as we would train our
own children. The stigma at present attaching
to half-castes must be banished. In Western Aus-
tralia half-caste boys and men take part in football,
cricket and other games on a footing equal to that
of their white clubmates, but arc excluded from the


social life of the cnunnunity. They feci this deeply,
as do their white companions lu sport, This state
of affairs will have to disappear.
To do all these things into which we in Western. Aus-
tralia have put our hearts, will require much greater
expenditure than is at present allowed for native
welfare purposes. The present level of expenditure
for this purpose in Western Australia is ridiculous.
My calculation is that, excluding the 10,000 full-
blooded natives in Western Australia who are con-
sidered to be outside the iniiiumec of civilization, the
cost incurred to ensure the well-being of each native
is 30s. 2d. a head. In other States the expenditure a
head on this account is as fallows; Queensland,
£2 10s. 7d.; New {South Wales, £.l as.; South Aus-
tralia, £5 10s. lOd.; and Victoria, lid 4s. 4d. The
■per capita coat of educating a while child in Western
Australia to-day is about £lO 10s. a year, yet in that
State 30s. a year is supposed to cover everything,
including food, clothing and education of our native
population. It is a ridiculous huth, but my State is
not in a position to expend a large amount of money
on these people, and X think tin; suggestion made by
Mr. Lleakley, that the Commonwealth should render
assistance in this direction, is excellent. In my State
there are certain institutions, such as cattle stations,
on which the natives arc housed. Those are almost
self-supporting, so we do not need capital for them;
but monoy in needed in other directions. In conclusion,
I emphasize tluil Western Australia has no native
problem. .Its problem is a financial, one. If we had
tlie money we could embark upon [lie policy I have
outlined.
CONDITIONS IN VICTOHIA.
Mr. DAiUET. —A citation of the conditions obtain-
ing in Victoria may bo of interest in view of the state-
ment by Mr. Neville of the desire of Western Australia
to absorb the, half-caste population into the white popu-
lation. Victoria’s coloured population, is small, and it is
concentrated at Lake Tycrs, whereas, formerly, there
were three aboriginal centres in the State. The inten-
tion behind the establishment of (ho Lake Tycrs camp
was the training of half-castes to enable their absorp-
tion into the general community. Tins is where the
difference between densely populated and sparsely
populated States becomes evident. At Lake Tyors wo
have a school at which three Education Department
teachers arc employed. There is a sowing class for
the training of the girls who are very apt pupils. We
also train the boys and mm in farm work. I agree
that it is difficult to got them to do any such work;
they have to be kept under constant supervision. Xhoy
are employed on clearing bind, road construction, dairy-
ing and similar pursuits. Our principal difficulty is
that as soon ns a girl, becomes competent to take a posi-
tion as a domestic servant and enters domestic service, it
is no time before Am comes buck to the Lake Tycrs
Station either pregnant or. worse still, with two or
three little children. It is difficult in a Stain with a
large white population to prevent such things from
happening. Shortly after I became Chief Secretary
.1 investigated, the rase of a girl who had been with
the Salvation Army for eight years and the cases
of two other girls who were in the Oakloigh Convent.
The lady in charge of the Salvation Army Homo told
mo that the girl was thoroughly domostieatod and a
magnificent cook, capable of taking a position any-
where. Accordingly I decided to give her-a trial out-
side. I obtained a position for her with a farmer in
the Western District. The two girls at the Oakleigh
Convent were doing splendid fancy-work and I also
decided to give them a trial outside. Within six
months those girls were just about as degraded as they
could possibly be. They all came under the influence
of some hoboes and went off with them, with the result
Mi a t not long after limy came back to the Lake Tyors
Elation diseased. These are not the only'examples
I canid cite; they are three outstanding oases which I
have in mind and they exemplify the difficulty of
absorbing this class of people amongst the whiles in
areas where there are large white populations. The
half-castes get into the hands of degenerate whites, and
that is the end; they go on breeding in the same way.
Mr. NEVILLE.—Wo have had much the same diffi-
culty in Western Australia. .lively administration has
Trouble with half-caste girls. 1. know of 200 or 800
girls, however, in Western Australia who have gone
into domestic service and the majority are doing very
well. Our policy is to send them out, into the white
community, and if a girl comes back pregnant our
rule is to keep her for two years. The child is then
taken away from the mother and sometimes never
sees her again. Thus these children grow up
as whiles, knowing nothing of their own environ-
ment. At the expiration of the period of two
years the mother goes bach into service so it
really docs not matter if she has half a dozen
children. Our new legislation makes it an offence for
a. white man to have sexual intercourse- with a colored
girl. About twelve prosecutions are pending for con-
traventions of.that provision of the new act, and before
long I am sure that there will be a diminution of that
trouble.
PROPOSALS BY QUEENSLAND.
Mr. LLEAKLEY;—I make tlio following suggestions
for consideration by the conference; —
1. That the conference recommends the deter-
mination of a basic living wage for all male and
female aborigines and half-castes throughout Aus-
tralia, and that a uniform sliding scale of remuner-
ation below such basic wage for old and inefficient
workers be arrived at.
2. Following the determination of a basic
wage, all aboriginal and half-caste women not in
receipt of Slate aid shall be eligible to receive
Commonwealth maternity allowances pro rata to
the-, determined bugle wage and proportionate to
the existing basic wage for whites.
fl. All aborigines and half-castes over the age
of On years male, and 00 female, not in receipt of
State aid, shall be eligible for the Commonwealth
old-age pension, to be assessed on the determined
basic wage for aborigine,s and half-castes pro-
portionate to the existing basic wage for whites,
4. Effective measures shall be taken by the Com-
monwealth Government to prevent unlicensed
foreign fishing vessels working in Australian terri-
torial water’s to the detriment of aboriginal sea-
men; also to prevent abuse of aboriginal
women by foreign indents by establishing an effec-
tive armed patrol for Northern Australia.
5. That representations be made for the estab-
lish n unit of a leprosarium in. Northern Australia
for the reception and treatment of northern abo-
rigines.
in Queensland ive have minimum rates of wages,
hut the rates for aborigines arc considerably lower
than those for white men, and wo have a certain
amount of difficulty with employers who recruit native
labourers in another State and introduce them into
Queensland.
ECONOMIC PEOBLEM.
.Professor OLE-LAND.—An aspect of the native
problem which I should like to have considered is, that
the still fully tribalized natives who have not come into
contact with the white man should be kept intact, either
by means of reserves or in some equally effective way.
I make this suggestion essentially on economic grounds,
because it does not pay to have these people detrihalized.


lii tin) Musgravc Ranges wo havo ibO or iiOO uahvcs who
are still in their tribal state, and who are muck better
occupied in entirely subsisting from the products of
the busk than they would otherwise be. They are
occupying the country bettor than it would be by
two or ilircOj or perhaps half a dozen white men wko
would despoil the waters, and then be forced to give up
their holdings wken the first drought rendered them
useless. The detribalization of the natives .[ have in
mind wilk the admixture of white blood would increase
the expenditure- of the State, .-:o it would pay us
better to keep those people intact, than to try to
improve them, and kelp them socially. Another sug-
gestion I have to make is that in compiling a census
of the population of Australia we should include every
one, and not exclude half-castes and full-blooded abo-
rigines. The result would be a showing of the native
population as part of the general population of the
country. Thus, instead of the census allowing the
northern parts of Australia to be populated with only
a few thousand people, wo could show it as being
Incapable of maintaining a higher number of persons
than are now actually there.
Conference, adjourned at !:].■>() p.m. until ~ p.m.
CONDITIONS IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
Mr. HAILEY. —I suggest that, before any decisions
are arrived at on the various subjects raised this morn-
ing', the conference proceed to a general discussion of
those subjects.
Air. MoLEAN. —1 think that more satisfactory
results would be obtained if the conference dealt with
one subject at a time.
Dr. COOK.—I agree; with Mr. McLean, but the state-
ments of Mr. Uleakley, .Professor ('lnland and Air.
Neville were so informative that I think it would be
well if tko representatives of each Stale or Territory
first outlined-conditions in their State or Territory for
the information of the Conference. If that is agreed
to, I shall briefly detail the provisions made in the
Northern Territory, in the hope that repvesenta-
tatives of New South "Wales and Victoria will do
the same in respect of their States. Then, having those
views before ns, we could proceed to deal with the
several items, one by one.
The conference having accepted my suggestion. I.
shall refer, first, to the advance made in connexion
with the treatment of half-castes in the Northern Terri-
tory. About 1029, the Commonwealth committed itself
to a policy of lifting the half-castes to the standard of
the whites. That policy, which has since been adopted
by Western Australia, has been availed from time to
time, and, therefore, I shall give reasons for it. The
white population of the Northern Territory is less than
4,000. Unless some unforeseen event occurs, such as
the discovery of oil in. payable quantities, or of valuable
deposits of precious metals, that population is not likely
to exceed 10,000 or 12,000 during the next half-century.
Notwithstanding that the establishment of a garrison,
naval base and airport at. Darwin will increase the
present white population there, and provide further
avenues for employment and development, I do not
think that my estimate will be exceeded. Thu natural
increase of the white population in the Northern Terri-
tory is minus .3 per 1,000, so that, if left to itself,
the white population would eventually die out. The
natural, increase of the half-caste population of the
territory is IS per 1,000. The census reveals a half-
caste population of 758 in the territory, but as half-
castes with alien fathers are not included in the
half-caste population, the estimate is low. A more
correct approximation of the half-caste population of
.the territory would be 900. They are nearly all young,
at least half of them being children. We have to face
the position of raising them collaterallywith the white
population of 4,000. In other words, there is now a
population of half-castes numbering one-fifth of the
total whites, and having a natural increase of IS per
.1,000 compared with the white rale of minus
.?> per 1,000, and it, is only a matter of a
few years before the half-caste population will
approximate that of the white population. Jn my
opinion, the Aim-thorn Ton-1 Tory cannot absorb all those
people in employment, and, consequently, l;hu question
of disposing of the ball'-casto population arises. Should
(he total population roach 10,000, there will bo work
for, say, 3,000 of them. The problem will thou arise
as ro who will do the work that is available. If half-
castes are employed, the whites will he unemployed, and
they will leave the country. If, on the other hand, the
whites are employed, the luilf-castcs will be out of
work, and will have to be maintained by the Com-
monwealth Government. The . prospects in 50
years’ time may' be classified in one of throe groups.
First, there might be a white population in employ-
ment, all t:.Uo work available being performed by white
men. .Included in the population would be a large
number of luilf-imal'e adults, physically fit for work, but
unable to obtain it, because of exclusion by law. They
would be dependent on the territory for their niainlcMi-
auce. Becoudly, instead of excluding them by law from
employment, they might be employed in one of two
ways. They might be employed as a subject race, at
lower rates of pay, with white men occupying the super-
vising positions. That,’ however, would deprive large
numbers of white men of the opportunity to live in the
Northern Territory, and the work would ho performed
by an Inferior type of individual existing on a lower
'.standard tluui that of the white. In such cir-
cumstances, the extra white population would
have to migrate. Thirdly, the half-caste and the white
man might be given parity, each competing with the
other for the work available. In rbat event, the half-
caste would have to go if he could not; compete with
the while. Each of these alternatives has its unsatis-
factory aspect. I suggest 'that if the half-caste
is maintained at an inferior status, and lie
multiplies more quickly than is the rase with whites,
an untenable position will eventually arise. The Imlf-
eastc population will probably rise in revolt, and, in
any case, it will create racial conflict which may be
serious. If, on the other baud, the half-caste is raised
to the leva! of the; ‘whites, he will be able
to migrate to other parts of Australia, and compete
(.here with white men on an equal footing should
employment not bo available for him in the territory.
Thai would relievo the tension iu the territory. After
consideration of these alternatives, the Commonwealth*
decided ro raise the half-caste to the level of the whites.
The children, are to be educated as whites and appren-
ticed in industry as whites, and will compete in the
labour market as whites. So far, the Commonwealth
litis seen no reason to regret tb.es policy it has adopted,
although it has been iu operation for only seven or
eight years.
If wo accept that policy in relation to the half-
castes. and admit all its implications, the question of
the aboriginal; raises a similar problem. In respect
of aborigines, the Commonwealth recently adopted a
policy somewhat analogous to that detailed by Mr.
ißlcakley. It divided tho aborigines into three classes.
Eirsl. there are the wild, uncivilized blacks, who,
temporarily at least, arc to.he left on their reserves
to live their own lives as. aborigines, uninfluenced by
white activities, except that, the Minister- may
permit missions to exercise some control over
them. Secondly, them arc the semi-civilized .abori-
gines, living in the neighbourhood, of white
settlements —chiefly pastoral properties—and .it is
proposed that they shall continue more or-less as at
present. They, will continue to he employed on stations,


care being taken that they and their dependants
shall not suffer Lit reason of flie employment of able-
bodied young’ men. In the vicinity of such places of
employment it ia proposed to -provide reserves where
unemployed aborigines will be more or less maintained
under tribal conditions by those in employment, and
whither, during periods of unemployment, those who
have been employed may votive. The, purpose of ihese
reserves is to provide the aborigines with the moans
of continuing their present state of existence!—a semi-
tribal life—but the ultimate intention is that they
shall be brought- under the same control as is now
proposed for those who arc regarded as dell'ihalized.
In the vicinity of the ■white set!lcrneiits, it is proposed
that the detribalized aborigines shall he educated 'and
trained in various avocations, in. which they can make
a living without competing with tho whites. There is
no essential difference) between the policy of the (lom-
mouwealth and that detailed by Mr. Bhetkley.
Wore, a policy of /e-fa wz faire followed, the
aborigines would probably he extinct in Australia within
60 years. Most of the aboriginal women would become
sterilised by gonorrhoea at an early age; many
would die of disease, and some of siarvation. If abori-
gines are protected physically and morally, before long
there will be in the jS! outlier a Territory, a black nice,
already nimiboring about 10,000, and JiiidLipyltng at
a rate far in excess of that of the whites. If wo leave
them alone, they will die, and wo shall have uo problem,
apart from dealing with those pangs of conscience
which must attend the passing of a neglected race. If,
on the other hand, wc- protect them with the elaborate
methods of protection which every conscientious pro-
tector would adopt, wo shall raise another problem
which may become, a serious one from a national. view-
point,, for wc shall have in the Northern Territory, and
possibly in North-western Australia also, a largo black
population which may drive out tho white.
The policy of the Commonwealth is lo do everything
possible to convert the balf-castc into a white citizen.
The question arises whether the same policy should
not be adopted in regard to tin? aborigines, in my
opinion, there are three ahernulives, h’irst, wo may
adopt a policy of laitsez fLitre, which, lo every Pro-
tector of Aborigines, is repugnant; secondly, wc may
develop an enlightened elaborate system of protection
■which will produce an aboriginal population that is
likely'to swamp the white; or, thirdly, we may follow
a policy under which the aboriginal will be
absorbed into the white population. JVIy view is (hat
unless the black populaliou ia speedily absorbed into
the white, the process will soon bo reversed, and in
-60 years, or a little later, the white population, of the
Northern Territory will he absorbed into tho black.
I suggest, that we first decide what our ultimate objec-
tive should be, and then discuss means to that end.
CONDITIONS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Mr. IIARKNESS. —I am attending the Conference
a? a member of the Aborigines 5 Protection Board of
New South Wales. I am an inspector of .schools, not
an expert on aborigines. I have, however, had soine
contact with them, The board is constituted of. the
Commissioner of Police, tho IJiider-Scerctary, who is
my own brother, Dr, Morris; the Director-General of
Public- Health, four Members of Parliament, and
Air. Mitchell, who was once Superintendent of Police.
The board seeks to take cave of the aboriginal people,
whether they be full-bloods, half-castes, octoroons or
quadroons. Our problem is not so difficult as that
of. the : other States, excepting Victoria, where it is
almost negligible. We have 1,000 full-bloods, and
the number is diminishing, and about 10,000. half-
castes, and the number is rapidly increasing. What,
has been said by oilier speakers is true in principle
of -New youth Wales. Air. Pottitl, knows a great deal
about, the internal administration of the department,
lint I. have visited quite a number of our stations. We
have about dll throughout New South Wales, and on
each of them we hove a tearhcr-iuanagcr. There ia
difficulty in comparing costs in one State with those
in another, for the cdriunnst.uiicob vary greatly. The
problem, as I see, it, Is, however, not primarily one
of linaiu.'O, although wo have always boon luvndicappcd
by lack of funds. Quite a revolution has occurred in
ibe approach to the problem during the last lon years.
('ertuin slalions luur been rebuilt, ami the people have
been g.vcn more self-respecting conditions. Generally
I,heir mil look has greatly improved. Good homes have
been provided, nod the men and women Lave been
belter able to perform their functions. Many of the
men have been induced to seek outride employment.
Ultimately, however, we shall have to grapple with tho
problem, and f think wo should take the long view.
Every cd'ort should he made to merge these people into
the whim population. Their potoufhilLlies arc, uf
course, very great. In my experience, I have conic
across quite competent men and women of line charac-
ter, and if wc could merge (limn into the general popu-
lation, the problem would become a minor, and not a
major, one, I think it is splendid that the, Common-
wealth Government lias seen lit lo call us (.ogolhoi* lo
consider (die situation, Wc do not wish to have the col-
lateral growth of an untonelialdo population in Aus-
tralia. I have, seen something of tho problem in
America, and it would he tend bio to contemplate any
surli riiuuliou arising in Australia. If wc tackle the
problem early we shall hr; able in avoid such a calamily.
1 was appalled by wlmt Dm Conk said about the
Northern Territory in fhe course of his very lucid
s].eeidi. It ia awful to think that flic white, race in
llic Northern Territory is liable to bo submerged, not-
withstanding (hut on this contiiient i)8 per cent, of
ihe population is of British nationality. If vc minim
callous we shall undoubtedly am the black race vanish.
There is an historical appeal in preserving a vanish-
ing race, but I think we should seek to assimilate these
people. In New South Wales, wo arc doing most, of
the things which Mr. Bleakloy referred to in In's lino
report, i am sure that Air. Mack ay would be very
pleased if any members of this conference could find
t me to visit some of our stations to see for themselves
what is being done, particularly in the way of making
these communities self-supporting. I have in mind a
staiiou of about 240 pebplc some miles out of Quii'indl.
The men there get work on the surrounding stations
and thou return to their reserve. They earn quite a
good living and are more or less contented. We also
have a system of taking girls iu the early adolescent
stage and training them for domestic service. These
girls reach, quite a high standard. Unfortunately, of
course, if they go buck to the old surroundings, they
revert to the old habits, and particularly to the lower
moral standard, and become the mothers of illegiti-
mate children early in life. Jt is not for this genera-
tion that we must work, it is for the next generation.
'My brother baa taken one. of these hoys as a gardener,
and is getting quite good work from him, and
I have taken a girl into domestic service. Sho ia
intfdligent, industrious, and (dean, and submits to
reasonable discipline. I do not think that If she were
Lo go bade to her station she would revert to the old
standards, but, of course, .one never knows. I am sure
that if wo can put into operation spine improved tech-
nique in the handling of these people we shall be able
to alter their attitude to life, and make it possible for
them to be assimilated into the community, and become
good citizens. I appreciate that the problem in the,
Northern Territory, ‘Western Australia ami Queensland
is very much more difficult than that which faces us.


Perhaps Dr. Morris and Mr. Pcititt, who is onr most
knowledgeable delegate, as secretary of the board, will
be able to amplify what I have said.
CONDITIONS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Mr. MeLKAJSf.—I find that Lhc problems outlined
by tlie previous speakers are very similar to those
which we have to face in South Australia. The differ-
ence is chiefly in degree. What Dr. Cook had. to say
is to a large extent inn; in our exponent*-. People who
are promoted, especially those who arc less than full-
blooded aborigines, multiply very quickly. Until twenty
years ago the two settlements in South Australia, at
Point MeLeay and Point Pearce, were under the control
of missionary agencies, but they thou came under
the control of the Government. At that time the
population was largely full-blooded aborigines. To-day
the population is practically all half-caste. On
one station we have only six full-bloods and on the
other -only Mb It; appears essential to merge them
people into the white race, and a start should
bo made without any groat delay. Most people, 1
think, a re of the opinion that the lmlf-cast.es ami those
of lesser degree of aboriginal blood should ultimately
be absorbed. People of oilier races are being absorbed
in Australia to-day and are bceinmug part and parcel
of our general community. Wo have- Greeks, Maltese;,
and Italians, in particular, entering into (bn communal
life of our cities and country towns. dolour is lost
fairly rapidly wlum there Is a mixture of white blood
with the aboriginal, but unfortunately racial
characteristics ami habits am not so easily laid aside.
This is particularly true of balf-casies herded together
in institutions. Children, two nr three removes from
full-blood, have, blue eyes, fair hair and other features
which, if they wore mixing with while people, would
make it difficult to distinguish them from people, of full
while blood. The difference in reliability, independence
and abiiily to maintain themselves is very marked in
half-castes from institutions and those who have grown
up in. oiithaek areas and bum had lo feud for them-
selves, more or less. The half-caste who bus grown
up in the bush is able to take his place as a worlamni
and is generally considered by employers to be fairly
competent. Thai is not so true of balf-casies who have
grown up in institutions. This lends to the enmdmdou
that linif-cnslca should be encouraged to leave institu-
tions and mingle more freely with the general public.
There are, however, many practical difficulties con-
nected with this progressive atop. "When I say that the
half-castes in institutions have inherited their lack of
ambition from the full-bloods, I do not speak depre-
ciatingly of tlio full-bloods who, undor natural condi-
tions, use the means of livelihood at their disposal to
the fullest extent. Linder the sheltered conditions of
the institution, the half-castes increase quite rapidly.
The population at Point -Pearce, for example, has
doubled itself in seventeen years. The people who grow
up in institutions seem to have deeply embedded in
their minds the obi story that as the Government took
their land from them it is responsible for their future
existence. They resent interference with any un-
hygienic mode of living, are not willing to adopt
proper conditions of sanitation and will not take stops to
protect themselves or their families from infectious
diseases, They seem to be incapable of sustained effort
and have many other peculiarities. 'Whether these un-
favorable tendencies are accentuated because they are
herded together has not been definitely proved, but I
am of the opinion that this herding is one of the chief
obstacles to progress. Families and individuals who
have left institutions and settled among white com-
munities have nearly always been the cause of trouble,
invoking white .residents, local governing bodies and
the department responsible for the care of the abori-
gines. The usual request is that they be removed from
townships and sent bank to reserves and institutions. It
is only among the lower order of whites on the outskirts
of country towns that they can mingle. It is generally
said that the locality in which they settle becomes
a hotbed of immorality, and that the low-class whites
lake drink to them and encourage, thorn to lend their
women to lire white hoboes of the town. Lack of
employment has been one of the main stumbling blocks.
IVc have not been able, in record years, lo iiiul'employ-
nicnt for our white population, and tills makes it very
difficult to find work for aborigines. Moreover, when
work is found for them it is difficult to keep them
at it constantly. The men arc very ready to leave
one job for another, or for no job at all. I am not
altogether in favouT of controlling the children. In
insiiiulhnis. Parental control, even though it. may bo
doubtful, is hotter, in the end, for a ediild than mstltu-
tol ml control. .1 have given very careful consideration
lo this subject and am of the opinion that the host, time
lo take half castes and quadroons away from mission
Nations and a!) origin a I reserves is when they marry.
If you take away a. couple jnsl; married and find
employment for the man in a country town and
aho provide him with a home, he will be able, in
snme fashion at least, to control bis children. They
will be abb; to attend school with white children, and
will have a much better opportunity to live a successful
life than children who are kept together in an institu-
tion, I do not say that very much progress is likrdy
to be in ado by the fal-hor and mother, They will
always bo a difficulty, hut their children will have a
beM-cr opportunity than if kept on an Institution.
The ultimata result will be that the children will attain
to a degree of self-reliance and self-respect that will
give them u definitely Improved status. In regard to
vvhal; .Mr. .Bhmkley said about liall’-eiistc eonminurtK!',-)
mir experience is that these people arc quite unwilling
to do any service in return for what is done for them
unless they receive payment. That is a stumbling
Mock. We also have difficulty in dealing with these
people when they commit breaches of the regulations.
The only method available to us is the law, and if a
pro-edition is instituted the penally can only he im-
prisonment or a fine. Mostly, the people concerned go
to gaol because prison Ufo is not altogether disagree-
able to (hem.
CONDITIONS IN NEW SOUTH WALES. .
Mr. PJiITTTTT.— I The crux of (his problem' is the
adoption of some means of merging the half-castes
into the general community. Our experience lias been
that when these people are put to it to paddle their
own caooe they have not made much of a success of
it, They leave their reserves and generally reside on
the outskirts of some town or village and there they are
very apt to become a reproach to the neighbourhood.
Some provision should be made by which we could
say, u This particular man and his family should be
given some opportunity to settle outside'a reserve ”.
Wo should then be provided with the means to make
sued] a transfer possible. It seeing to me that some
scheme, such as that in practice at Hammondville,
might have possibilities. Canon Hammond obtained
an area of land near Liverpool, which lie subdivided.
He secured a certain amount of money, with which
ho built cottages. Into these places he placed -unem-
ployed people who were down and out and who were
likely to become pariahs. The result, lam told, has
very good. I suggest that this conference should
nonmlor the possibility of evolving a scheme of that
kind for dealing with quadroons, and others who
naturally fall outside the four corners of our regula-
tions. If these people were put into a settlement of
that description I think something might be done with
them.


Mr. BAILEY.—Is there any supervision in the
Hammond unemployment, camp'?
Mr. PETTITT. —Canon Hammond exercises some
supervision. The allotments and the cottages were made
available to the people concerned for a small rental
of ss. or 6a. a week, and in the course of five, six or
seven years the buildings become the property of the
tenants.., The money received from the rentals is used
to build other houses and the scheme has a snowball
effect. I understand that a fair proportion of the
people who went into these places have returned to
more or loss normal employment. I am not saying
that the .scheme could bo adopted in its- entirety, but
something along the same linos might be tried.
Mr. BAILEY.— Would you not have the concentra-
tion idea again in practice if that procedure were
adojffed ?
Mr. PETTITT.—I understand that Canon Kaiu-
inoml’s scheme has. been criticized on the ground that
it is developing a community of an undesirable
character, but (danon Hammond denies that this is so.
Of course, the same criticism has been advanced
nf settlements developed in the ordinary way by
govern men t aid to the unemployed. It is said
that they result iu a concentration of the same type
of people. That is a. point that would need lo be
considered, Mr. McLean spoke about the children of
half-castes attending ordinary day schools. Our ex-
perience has been that in very many cases objection
lias been raised lo this by Parents and Citizens .Asso-
ciations and sometimes other provision lias had to be
made. There are influences pulling in various
directions.
Mr. BAILEY.—Ls not the objection generally on
the basis of health or unhygienic conditions?
Mr. PETTITT.—There seems to be a groat deal of
prejudice and antagonism on the score of colour alone.
There is a good deal of mealy-mouthed hypocrisy about
this business. Even some church people who should
support us and who, in the abstract, agree that the
aborigines have had a raw deal and that something
should ho done for thorn, often say, when it conies to
the practical appilication of the principle: “For God’s
sake do something for these people, but do it along-
side other men and not alongside us”.
As far as citizenship rights are concerned, every
aboriginal, whether full-blooded or otherwise, possesses
a State vote, while every half-caste enjoys a vote for
Federal purposes. Except when they are on the
reserves, and except that they are not allowed to obtain
liquor, they enjoy all the rights and privileges of the
white people. They may join unions, work where they
like, and live where they like. It is not true to say that
they are inarticulate. Only a little while ago, at a
political gathering, there was passed a motion inspired
by a half-caste who had been dealt with on one of our
reserves.
Statements have been made from time to time about
aboriginal girls in domestic service becoming pregnant.
In New South Wales, we throw the responsibility on
the employer for the physical and moral well-being of
apprentices. As a matter of fact, the number of girls
who get into trouble is negligible. Most of them serve
right through their apprenticeship, and continue in
the same employment for years. We consider that if
we can keep them away from the dangers of camp life
until they reach years of discretion we are doing good
work. They are employed both in the country and in
the city, .and we are very careful in the selection of the
homes unto which they are introduced. In the cities
there is a constant demand for them from the best
class of suburb, and we never have any difficulty in
finding places for them.
Dr. MDREISWhat chance is there of those girls
marrying?
Air. PETTITT. —Wo make provision for that by
allowing them to return to their own homes for a
holiday after a number of years. There they generally
moot some young fellow of thoir own colour. Some-
times they arc married more or less immediately, and
remain, or arrange to marry sumo time in the future.
The problem then, of course, is to set the young man
up in life independent of the reserve.
Mr. McLEAN'. —Are these girls eons trained hy force
to remain in their employment, and, if so, what happens
when they quarrel with their employers?
Mr. PETTITT.—Wo deal with each case on its
merits. Very often wc find that it is a question of
incompatibility of temperament, and we move the girl
to other employment. It has sometimes happened that,
after two or three shifts, a girl meets with an employer
with whom she is perfectly happy, We do not force
a child to remain in a place if she is miserable there.
Mr. .BAILEY.—Is it your experience that, when
half-castes marry and set up homes of their own, they
tend to harbour other blacks?
Mr. PETTITT. —There is a tendency in that direc-
tion, but we have many instances in which the setting
up of such homes has been attended by outstanding
success. I know of one couple who married, and built
a first-class cottage -which was fully paid for, and
their standard of living is equal to-that of any one else.
Mr. BAILEY.—My own opinion is that it would
be better in the interests of half-castes to take them
away from their parents, but I know that public
opinion would not sanction such a course.
GENERAL DISCUSSION.
Mr. NEVILLE.—Dr. Oook referred to the problem,
of preserving the full-blooded aborigines, and I agree
largely with what he said. In my opinion, however,
(he problem ia one which will eventually solve itself.
Tlicro are u great many full-blooded aborigines in
Western Australia living their own natural lives. They
are not, for the most part, getting enough food, and
they arc, in fact, being decimated by their own tribal
practices. In my opinion, no matter -what we do, they
will die out. It is interesting to note that on the
departmental cattle stations established in the far
north for the preservation of these people, the number
of full-blooded children is increasing, because of the
care the people get. The establishment of these stations
has. also had the effect of putting an end to the cattle
killing which formerly prevailed. At the present time,
however, there arc in Western Australia about 10,000.
full-blooded aborigines who are dotribalized, but among
them there are only 1,933 children. On the other hand,
among the 2,1)09 half-castes there arc approximately
2,000 children. It will be seen, therefore, that the
problem of the future will be not with the full-bloods,
but with the coloured people of various degress. The
full-blooda may be looked after on, the cattle stations
for^ the time being, but their number is decreasing
rapidly as the result of tribal practices. In a bad
season in the north practically no children are reared,
while in a good season the number may be fairly con-
siderable. Infanticide and abortion are extensively
practised amongst the bush people. They follow then-
own customs, and no attempt to influence them has
much result. We have to consider whether we should
allow any race living amongst us to practice the
abominations which are prevalent among these people.
Mr. HARKNESS.—Do they actually kill the
children \
Mr. NEVILLE.—Yes, they just knock them on the
head if they cannot feed them. Of course, if there
is food, the children arc fed and looked after. How-
ever, so many women have become sterile through the
practice of abortion that the percentage who-can bear
children is now small,


At the present time, there arc between 4,000 and
5,000 natives, mostly full-bloods, employed in Western
Australia. They are giving excellent service on cattle
stations, and there is no dearth, of employment. .In
fact, not enough of them are available.
Mr. BAILEY.—What, about the womenfolk of the
men employed on the stations?
Mr. K'EVJidVE- TTic women work also. If a
station owner takes on an aboriginal man be must also
feed and look after that man’s dependants. We say
that an idle native is a bad native, and we try to
induce Ihem to work in one way or {mother. Even in-
dustrial work docs not come amiss lo the natives, We
manufacture about 10,000 garments a year for the
natives, and every one of them is made by the natives
themselves. They work the sowing machines just as
well as do white girls.
Reference Ims been made to institutionalism as
applied to the aborigines. It is well known that
coloured races all over (he world detest institutionalism.
They have a tremendous affection for their children.
In Western Australia, we have only a few institutions
for the reception of half-caste illegitimate children,
but there are hundreds living in camps close to the
country towns under revolting conditions. It is infin-
itely better to take a child from its mother, and
put it in an instila.it,ion, whore it will be looked, after,
than to allow it to be brought up subject to the
influence of such camps. .We allow the mothers to go
to the institutions also, though they are separated from
iliG children. The mothers are camped some distance
away, while the children live in dormitories. The
parents may go out to work, and return to see that
their children arc well and properly looked after. Wo
generally find that, after a few months, they are quite
content to leave their children there.
Mr. HARKNESS.—What happens to these children
afterwards?
Mr. hTEVILLE.—-They leave in time and
go into service or other employment, and they may
return to the institution at any time, if they like. Our
experience is that they come, to regard the institution
as their home, and arc happy to return to it for their
holidays. These homes arc simply clearing stations for
tho future members of the race. Wo recognize that
we cannot do much with the older people, except look
after them and see that they am fed. As regards the
younger people, from twenty years upwards, we can
find employment for them if possible, but it is of the
children that wo must take notice. You cannot, change
a,native after ho lias readied the age of puberty, but
before that it ia possible to mould him. When the
quarter-caste home, in which there arc now nearly 100
children, was started we had some trouble with the
mothers. Although the children were illegitimate, the
mothers were greatly attached to them, and did not
wish to be parted from them. I adopted the practice
of allowing the mothers to go to the institution
with the children until they aafisfiod themselves that
they -were properly looked after. The mothers werc-
then usually content to leave them there, and some
eventually forgot all about them.
Mr. BAILEY.—Are the children, during their hours
of recreation,. allowed to . run back to their mothers
who are camped at . the institution?
Mr. NEVILLE.—Ho. The native settlement is
divided into two parts, the compound, and the camp,
which is about half a mile away. When they enter the
institution, the children are removed from the parents,
who are allowed to .see them .occasionally in order to
satisfy themselves that they are being properly looked
after. At first the mothers tried to entice the children
back to the camps, but that difficulty is row being
overcome.
Hr. MORRIS.—What percentage of those quarter-
caste children, marry whites when they grow up?
Mr. NEVILLE. —There has not yet been time for
them to grow up.
Mr. HARKNESS.—Can your department take them
bv force up to any age?
‘ Mr. NEVILLE.—Yes, up to the age of 31.
Dr. COOK.- - -The point I tried lo make in my earlier
remarks was that if wo leave the aborigines in the
north alone they will die. out. On the other hand, if
we bring thorn under our influence they will breed, and
(heir numbers increase until they menace mir security.
Mr. 11ARKNESS. —Do you' think we should en-
courage thorn to breed?
Dr. COOK. —I am not expressing an opinion at the
moment. As protectors of aborigines, having regard to
these possibilities wo should discuss what our policy
Is to be. During the last seven or eight years, between
40 and 50 coloured girls have married whites.
Df. MORRIS.—I am afraid we cannot expect such
satisfactory results in other parts of Australia where
women arc more plentiful than in the northern Terri-
tory,
Dr. OOOK. —The answer is that wo must make the
coloured girls acceptable as wliit.es.
CONDITIONS IN VICTORIA.
Mr. CHAPMAN. —We are all agreed that the most
urgent problem is the absorption' of the quadroons
and octoroons into tho white community. The trouble
is that conditions vary considerably us between one
■State and another. As Dr. Morris has pointed out, it
is probably much easier for coloured girls in the North-
ern Territory to get white husbands than it would be
for such girls in Victoria. Moreover, there ia little
scope in Victoria for the employment of aborigines
or half-castes on stations. Again, the powers of control
exercised by the departments in the various States vary
very greatly. Mr, Neville has told us that in Western
Australia the department enjoys practically unfettered
control. Under the Victorian act, only full-blooded or
half-castc natives who, by licence, reside on a station,
or who apply for residence, come under our legislation.
There is nothing in the law governing the sale of
intoxicating liquor to aborigines to prevent the sale of
the liquor to half-eaatca.
In Victoria, many of the half-castes have been living
under civilized conditions for five generation's, and they
would raise an outcry, in which they would receive
support from white people, if any effort, were made to
deal with them on lines upon which it is proposed to
deal with half-eastos in Western Australia. Our
experience in Victoria is that half-castes will do work
under supervision, but they cannot be trusted alone.
For example, some of them wore engaged recently in
road work near Lakc.Tyers. A hnshfi.ro occurred and
every pick, fork, shovel and hoe with which they were
equipped was destroyed in tho fire. The result was
that the work was held up until they were re-equipped.
That, is an example of their lack of, responsibility.
Wo had yet another indication not so long ago. Under
supervision they built an excellent barn and stablea,
with . a concrete floor, on the station. The
manager told me that he arrived just in time to pre-
vent them from laying the concrete before they had put
tho posts in position. Another difficulty is the inability
of the aborigines to fond for themselves. According to
our latest statistics, tho number of half-castes at Lake.
Tycrs is about 240, whilst, in the whole of Victoria,
tho number is SSG, which means that more than 300
nf them arc fending for themselves, as members of the
community. These people arc in no way under super-
vision of the Board. Tho only control we have is over
those at the Lake Tyers Station—half-castes
residing on the station with the permission of the
Board. At Framllngham, outside Warrnambool, we
have an area of land which was originally a station for


the care of aborigines, but which was dosed some film 1
ago. J.t has now become a community settlement for a
number of quadroons and octoroons, who, entirely with-
out authority, have settled there. Some of them are on
sustenance work, and some eke out an existence at tim-
ber cutting. One man, quite without authority, has
ftmeed in 70 acres of land, and is running 35 cows.
The condition of those people is deplorable, and the
residents of thcdistrict have approached the State Go-
vernment with a request for the supervision of the
settlement. The residents have also offered to form
a local committee to assist in the supervision of the
camp. Some of the huts are built of bark, and the
whole area is strewn with tins and empty beer bottles.
The settlement is an undesirable development in a
civilised community. As I was saying, as the result of
experience of five generations of natives living in con-
tact with white people 1111(101’ these conditions, the
promise of half-castes to maintain themselves is not
very hopeful. Of course, there are individual families
who are able to, and who do take care of themselves.
At Condah, three families of half-castes are conducting
successful farms, and along the Murray Elver there
are camps similar to the one at Framliugham. The
moil under control at Lake Tyors do excellent work,
but on occasions, when they have gone away to suck
occupations as bean-picking at Orbost, they have left
their families at the station to lie kept by the Govern-
ment, and have earned good money, but invariably the
majority return to the station absolutely penniless
and, in some cases, the worse for drink, and often
the worse for disease. It ia then tho job of the
management; to nurse them hack to health.
GENERAL.
Professor CLELAjSTD.—I should like some
elucidation of Dr. Cook’s statement, and I should
like to know if lie bad in mind a race of
pure-blood aborigines, or one of mixed half-castes,
Did he mean that the pure-blood aborigines, if
left entirely to their own resources in their own
country, hunting, and living as they have done
for ages, might he expected to increase beyond
the present limits, if they were protected from coming
into contact with white m«i ? I cannot imagine the
Mnsgrave Range aborigines, left as they arc, increasing
beyond their present numbers, I think that the death
rate would not decrease, but I foresee that, despite tho
measures' taken, the tribalized natives would escape
vigilance and become detribalized, so in (hat way their
numbers would diminish. It would be. much more
economical to leave them in. their present tribal con-
ditions. Wo have a big enough problem to keep tlus
detribalized natives without having to cope with a a
influx from the tribalized natives,
Dr. COOK.—Possibly the confusion in Professor
Olelaud’s mind is due to the fact that I approached
the half-caste problem first, and then discussed the
full-blooded aborigines. ¥c are faced with the problem
of tho half-castes multiplying. To overcome that, wo
arc suggesting a policy of treating the half-caste as a.
white, so that the male can take Ills place in a white
community, and the female can be accepted aa the wife*
of a white man. That is the half-casto aspect of the
problem. Under the policy of la-issnz fairo., aa suggested
by Professor Oleland for the Musgrave Ranges
aborigines, and as the Oonirnonwealfh authorities sug-
gest for Arnhcira Land, at the best, the rate of popula-
tion increase at present existing will be maintained,
but the number will not vary greatly, clue to the habits
and mode of living of tho aborigines. These factors
will keep the natives’ numbers much the same as they
have been for four or five centuries. If we meddle
with them, bring them into reservations, attempt to
eradicate their bad habits, and give them a white out-
look, we shall be raising another colour problem, Are
wo going to do that or not?
Mr. JiLEAKLET.—T am satisfied that tho problems
of Wosleru Australia, the Northern Territory and
Queensland are similar, but probably different
altogether from those of Now South "Wales, Victoria,
and South Australia. I do not think that members of
the Conference have exactly grasped what we have in
prospect in Queensland. We have a fidl-blooded
aboriginal population of about 10,000, of which, say,
one-thinl, or, at the most, 1,000 are living a nomadic
life. Very few of them have not come into contact
with while people, the result being that, although they
are living a nomadic life., and are maintaining tribal
practices, many of which are harmful, they need
supervision. It in essential, first of all, to realize that
we have no right to attempt to destroy their
national life. Like ourselves, they are entitled
to retain their racial entity and racial pride.
Put it is evident that they cannot bo left to
work out their salvation without some benevolent
.supervision. It is also evident that the en-
croachment of while settlement is gradually destroy-
ing the natives 1 natural means of subsistence.
"While their native life should not be interfered with
more than is necessary, it seems essential that they
should be encouraged gradually to change from the
nomadic life, particularly now that their means of
subsistence is becoming precarious. They should learn
tn raise from tin 1 soil something of the means of
subsistence, of which they are now being deprived. It
is essential that they should bo saved from being
destroyed by contaminating influences, because, after
all, I dare say, even in the wildest parts of the north-
west, the primitive native is suffering from contact
with the lower type of white,people-—joiners, stockmen
and others—-who invade his territory. It seems essen-
tial that there should bo men there exercising super-
vision, upon whom we can depend to see that the
natives are protected, and who will so educate them that
they will gradually abandon the destructive practices,
which arc responsible, it is claimed, for a great deal of
the sterility of the race. It seems to me to he a case of
either helping these people inulor protection and super-
vision gradually to change their lives, so that they
can maintain, themselves in happier circumstances, or
allowing them to take their chance against the invading
j’aee. They have no chance whatever in competition
•with white races. In. the first placo, the native is vote-
less. Contact with white races has resulted in the birth
of a number of half-breeds, a great number of whom
have been fathered by a low type of white man. The
result is that (1m half-breed, although ho may not have
the colour of tho aboriginal, Ims his habits, and conse-
quently cannot happily be absorbed into the white
nice. The half-breeds must he protected. The
ahongi.Uiils’ own leanings do not make him a very
settled worker. Probably, the form of employment a
native likes host of all is in tho pastoral industry,
because it is nearer to his own life than any other
occupation that can be given to him. Ho is fond of
horses, and makes a good rider. The natives’ tracking
ability and knowledge of tho country, particularly their
own country, make them valuable employees. "We have
found that even tho semi-civilized need protection and
control, otherwise they become a menace to tho white
rneo by reason of their low social conditions, and their
susceptibility to disease and illnesses, which, in a white
c-omnnuiity, we arc better able to control. In Queens-
land, as I have said, perhaps not more than 9,000
of these people are living on reserves and, of course,
are under supervision. Perhaps another 4,000 or
5,000 arc living in contact with whites in districts in
various forms of employment. "We have found it
necessary, if we are to protect them, to keep them under
constant supervision, because whilst a white employee
is able to demand the statutory living wage, some
employers consider it sufficient if they give an


aboriginal ss. a week, despite the fact that, in
many cases, an aboriginal employee is more worthy of
his pay than is the type of while man wlio is willing
to go to those far-distant localities for employment.
After all, (he labourer is worlliy of his hire, and there
is im reason why. because lie has no vote find is
ignorant, the aboriginal should he exploited by the
white employer. Not only h it necessary to ensure that
the natives receive adequate remuneration, it Is also
necessary to ensure that when they do receive their
wages they are not defrauded of them, or Inveigled into
gambling games by white men.
Air. MARK NESS.—is it your experience tluit
natives .have n leaning towards gambling?. That is
our experience in New South "Whies.
Mr. BidCAKI .EY -Yi *s, They arc ah infected
with the gambling fever. 'We consider, however, that
it is not fair to deal drastically with the gambling
until wo can offer them, something better in the way of
i e-creation,
Mr. JIAIiKNESS.—'What have you done in the
provision of recreation halls?
Mr. BLEAK LEY.—Several have been provided, but
we do not allow government money to be expended iu
that direction. The natives are encouraged to raise the
funds themselves for that purpose, and they do so from
sports and their plmre of the gate proceeds of football
and cricket matches wdiieh are occasionally arranged
against the teams of white men from the surrounding
towns. Their sportsmanship in these encounters lias
often been much better than that of their white oppo-
nents, Decently wdieu an ahorigimtl team played a
game at one (.outre, 70 or SO miles from their settlement,
they waive complimented on their conduct, which, it
was said, was in marked, contrast lo that of their while
opponents.
ML BETTII'T.—.In Queensland, are these people
living in sliaekK?
Mr, JTLEAKJVKY.—In the settlements, the aim is
to induce them Lo adopt civilized Jiving conditions.
There are dormitories, schools and hospitals, supervised
hy resident or visiting medical officers. ’Wlioncvcr
possible the hospitals are iu charge of trained nurses
with general-midwifery certificates, the wardrnalds mid
warclsiucn being trained from the educated, natives.
Tim native girls are in dormitories controlled by a
white matron, who also hns charge of the
buys and the infants in tbo baby clinics. A number
of mothers take their children to the clinics. Nat.
every child has to bo handed over to the charge of
the dormitory system. If a mother is able to take
care of her children, she is allowed to do so. If she
neglects Idiom, we have tbo power to. take them from
her, and put them Into dormitories.
The Conference may have inferred from my paper
read tills morning that we still segregate a number of
hall-castes in institutions. 1 should explain that they
are the type which wc arc satisfied arc incapable of
holding their own in competition with whites out-
side. To show you that wo are not out of sympathy
with the views of Dr. Cook and Mr. Neville, I
emphasize that, for about 25 years, we have had a
system under which half-caatcs, either men or women,
but mostly men, are given exemption from control.
Wo are particularly careful about the women because,
ns the Conference knows, it is so easy for the women to
drift into circumstances not good for them. Unfortu-
nately, the result of the exemption system has not always
been encouraging. Many of these men, after working
for probably ten years or more in contact with and'iu
competition with, white labour, have, saved a decent
sum of money. We took the view nt first that If these
men were fit to be given exemption, it was only fair
that they should be allowed to handle their own.money.
Accordingly, in a number of eases, half-castes who had
saved as much as £l5O, which was to their credit in
(heir bank accoiuits, lirul these balances handl'd over
tn them. In tli-e majority of cases they .squandered it
all within six months. I mention that to show the need
for benevolent supervision.
A year or two bade I collected information from
various Stales and from Ceylon and Nomaea as to
what was being done to help half-castes with
a view to profiting by their experience. It
will bo admittod that a half-caste with DO per cent,
of European blood lias the right to he given a chance
to make good. A half-caste with 50 to 75 per cent,
of European blood, tinder a ay alum of benevolent help,
should be able to hold bis own in a oouminnity; but,
in order to chi so, ho would have to make a living,
and thus would need to know a trade.. The attempts
marie in South Australia to give snob persons an
opportunity to make good wore, it will ho admitted,
not tumoimiging. Their failure was due mainly to
lour big handicaps under which they were living,
First, there was the colour prejudice. A great many
white people have a prejudice against employing, or
having in their homo, persons of coloured blood.
Secondly, they suffered tdie handicap of an inferiority
complex. They felt keenly their half-cas to position,
which made it difficult for them to hold their heads up.
Thirdly, were uneducated.. No doubt they could
Irani, write ami count, but they were not educated In
the rim I ter of protecting- themselves in business deal-
ings. Fourthly, they had no technical equipment
whatever.
Conference adjourned at J h dO pan.
TUT)lid OA.Y, 22 APRIL, JOIST,
The Oonferenee resumed nt fhffi) turn.; the Honorable
H. ,S. Bailey in the chair.
GESTEUAL DISCUSSION,
Air. BLEA.KLEY.—WhiIe 1 realize that Dr. Coal;
lias hurl very long experience iu the territory, and is
qualified to express an opinion as an administrator,
.‘in anthropologist and a medical practitioner, I should
like to have some more evidence, if it can be produced,
to justify tho pessimistic view that he expressed yester-
day as to the menace 0 f the absorption of the white
race by the coloured race in the Northern Territory. At
tlm time of my visit to the Northern Territory in 1928,
the native population was estimated to be 21,000, includ-
ing SOO half-castes. During the following nine years
the numbers have decreased, for according to Dr. Cook,
they are now under 20,000, including 000 half-castes.
If the preponderance of the native population is in
any way a menace to the white people in the territory,
is this not more likely to be accentuated if the
aborigines are not to bo controlled? It seems to me
that control would bo a safeguard. The commission
that is at present studying the development of indus-
tries in the ISTorf hern Territory, and ways and means
of encouraging white settlers there, may be expected to
have some beneficial results, and it will, I presume,
make recommendations to deal with any danger of
kind suggested by-Dr. Cook. In the main, the
policies in the Northern Territory "and ‘Western Aus-
tralia are in accord with that of Queensland allow-
ing for differences in local conditions. In-Queensland
we distinguish between cross-breeds of definite aborigi-
nal leanings, and those of civilized leanings. . All
young half-castes and also aborigines are given educa-
tion and, where possible, vocational training. Dor
years past the policy has been to give the intelligent
and ambitious adult half-castes the opportunity to
secure thoir freedom and maintain themselves in &
civilized community, but wo have found them sorely at a
disadvantage by reason of racial,- educational, and tem-
peramental disabilities. Investigations showed that


the parents of young half-castes had first to bo uplifted
before these young people could be placed in a civilized
community under conditions which would enable them
to win a place and hold it,
Air. HARKNESS.-'At what age do you take the
young people?
Air. BLEAKLEY.—We take them for rural train-
ing between fourteen and sixteen. At sixteen wo
apprentice the boys to the skilled native tradesmen.
They receive elementary training in wood work, sheet
metal, leather and iron. work. It is usually possible
then to ascertain where their inclinations lie.
Air. HARKNESS.—Is this urban or rural train-
ing ?
Mr. BLEAKLEY. —It might he either. The hoys
are also given some training in agriculture, poultry-
raising and the like. Such instruction would bo given
in the proposed superior half-caste colony.
Air. McLEAN, —Are those training schools in close
proximity to balf-caste settlements.
Mr. BLEAKLEY. —'Rural schools are provided in
almost every country district of Queensland. There is
one about four miles- from our main settlement The
half-caste lads attend the schools with the white chil-
dren, and there Las been no difficulty about; it, even
though the lads return to the settlement where their
parents live, They come out of the settlement early
in the morning, and go hack in the evening.
Air. HARKNESS.—How long has this scheme been
in operation?
Air. BLEAKLEY.—For about three years. The
first lot of boys, on finishing* their two years 5 course,
were absorbed in the ranks of the skilled workers in
the settlement. So far we have not tried to place tlie
hoys in outside ranks.
Mr. HARKNESS. —But that will have to be done
ultimately?
Air. BLEAKLEY.—‘Wo ’ propose to establish a
superior half-caste colony and a reserve for the purpose
has been selected. "We also give similar training to
full-blooded hoys who show aptitude.
Air. HARKNESS.—"What the Conference desires is
to devise some means to merge these people into the
general community ultimately.
Air. BLEAKLEY.—We think that that could bo
done if a superior half-caste colony were established,
though I am not suggesting that it should he called
by such a name as it may be desirable to release them
from the handicaps associated, with their aboriginal
origin. The half-caste parents of the young
people of -whom I am speaking can only overcome their
own disabilities by liberal help and supervision. If
their children are to enter the industrial ranks, and
work with white boys and gilds of similar age they
must have a healthy and respectable home back-ground.
The idea ia not to spoon-feed them, but to equip them
to accept suitable employment. The idea ia that they
shall receive rural school training in all skilled trades
and in pastoral and agricultural work, and then be
introduced through the apprenticeship system to the
occupations found most suitable.
Air. HARKNESS.—The'greatest difficulty will be
found in lifting the standard of the people so as to
make them acceptable to the white community.
Air. BLEAKLEY.—This superior half-caste colony
could be a sort of clearing house. In our view it is
absolutely impracticable to expect these people to come
into the white community without technical equipment.
Mr. HARKNESS.—Your idea is to make them feel
equal to the occasion?
Mr. BLEAKLEY.—ExactIy.
Air, CHAPMAN. —What Air. Eleakley has outlined
is largely what is. already being done in Victoria and
New South Wales. Queensland 1? only’ reaching out
to the stage of development that we have already
attained. I do not think the Conference should spend
time in going into fill these details. "We ought to affirm
a general principle.
Mr. BAILEY.-—lf we lay down the broad principles
the details can be curried out as far as possible in
each State.
Air. BLEAKLEY. —I wish to have the general
principles defined. In Queensland, thaw is definite
opposition to any scheme for the marriage of half-
caste girls to white men far the following reasons:-—-(I)
'None hub the lowest type of white nmn will be willing
to marry a half-caste girl, and as the half-caste women
married by the white men .are likely to gravitate to
aboriginal associations such marriages have very little
chance of being successful; (2) there ia the danger of
blood transmission or “throw back”, as it is called,
especially as the introduced blood, as in many Latin
races, has already a taint of white blood ; (11) such
a scheme makes no provision for other wives of young
men of the same breed.
Mr. NEVILLE. —It has been made apparent that
Queensland has five nr six limes more money to
spend on native people than 'Western Australia has
to spend. The ideas that Mr. Bhmkley has been placing
before us have been broadcast for a number of years.
In "Western Australia wc have no fixed wages or awards
for the natives. Wo are perhaps twenty years behind
Queensland in matters of this sort. In these circum-
stances it is not of much use for us to discuss all the
details of a scheme which involves heavy expenditure.
What wo want to do is to state broad principles so that
the aim of the various States may be to attain to such
development. The young aborigines of our State are
wards of the Commissioner up to the age of 21 yours.
Tim Commissioner is entitled to treat these young
coloured. people in loco parentis. That applies to
quarter-caste children living under native conditions,
but quarter-caste children living under other conditions,
may, if necessary, he taken to court to be declared
natives within the law. Our method of deal-
ing with these young people has been to find
decent employers, for them, A good many
employers have taken both boys and girls at a
fairly early age. Up to sixteen years no question of
wages arises but when sixteen years of ago is reached
the scale of wages becomes applicable. Children
taken under such conditions never go back to their
beginnings. They take their food in the kitchen with
the rest of the staff on a homestead. We do not permit
them to go back to native conditions. When their
holiday time comes they travel to Perth and if they
wish to go to see their parents on the reserve they are
allowed to do so for a limited time. If they lose one
position wo do our best to find thorn another. When
they are 21 years of age they become practically free
and can do as they like as members of the general
community. Eirsfc and last with us it is a matter of
the money available. If we had more money we could
do very much more than we have been doing.
NATIVES NOT OP PULL BLOOD.
Mr. BAILEY.—A good i many draft motions have
been submitted to me. I suggest that we attempt to
narrow down the issues some,what. Perhaps wo could
deal first with the natives of other than full blood
and then those of full blood. The full-blooded natives
are not of much concern, really, in New South Wales
and Victoria, or in South Australia, for they are so
few in number; but the natives of less than full blood
are of concern to all of us. If we could deal with the
position of the natives of less than full blood we could
perhaps then go hack to the very important and serious
position in the Northern Territory, outlined for us by
Dr. Cook.
Professor OLELAND.—In the interests of uni-
formity, I should ho glad if we could reach some
decision which would not leave any suggestion that wc


are careless about the ultimate (ale oC the full bloods.
I would not like an idea to get abroad (but tberc is any
suggestion of a deliberate attempt on tho pari; of tbe
Conference to hurry up the dotribilization of
the full bloods. There are sentimental and
scientific reasons why such, a course would be
very unwise. Wo would achieve exactly the
same object hi the ultimate if we dealt first
with natives of less than lull blood. I am sure that
very vigorous objections would be taken by scientists
to any attempt to hasten the dotriliiUzation of the
full-blooded aborigines, for they are unique and one of
the wonders of the world. Very general and strong
opposition would bo raised to any deliberate attempt
to detribalize the full Woods.
Mr. CARROHUS.-—I agree to some extent with what
Professor Ololaud has said. It would be desirable
for us to deal first with tbe people of mixed Wood.
Ultimately, if history is repeated, the full bloods will
become half-castes.
Mr, BAILEY.—I think thrive is a good deal in what
Professor Cloland and Mr. Oarrodus have said. Per-
haps wc could find sonic term that will make the, dis-
tinction that wo wish to observe, and yet, define tbe
broad principle that wc have in mind.
Mr. NEVILLE.—If we can find a term that will
apply to people of mixed blood I shall, lie satisfied.
Resolved-
That this Coiiteronne bolicvos that the destiny of the natives
<if aboriginal origin, but not of the full blood, lies in their
ultimate absorption by the people of the Commonwealth • anti
it therefore roeoiiiincmln that all efforts be directed to that
end.
Mr. BAILEY.—The next question to consider is
bow this state of affairs is In be brought about. Mr.
Neville lias suggested that, the administration of tbe
natives can best be carried out under tbe direction of
the individual States concerned, but with adequate
financial assistance from tbe Commonwealth.
Mr. OAKROIDUS. —I think that any request for
financial assistance from the Oominmiwealth should
bo embodied in a separate motion. As for the sugges-
tion that tho Commonwealth might take over the
activities of tho States in regard to tho protection of
aborigines, it was decided at tho last Premiers Con-
ference that such, action would be impracticable and
undesirable.
Mr. NEVILLE.—So long as we are agreed on broad
principles, tbe details of administration bad best be
left to the various States,
.Resolved —
That the details of administration, in accordance with the
general principles agreed upon, be left to the individual
(States, but them shall bo uniformity of legislation as far as
possible.
Hanolved —
That, subject to tbe previous resolution, efforts of all State
authorities should be directed towards the education of
children of mixed aboriginal blood at white standards, and
their subsequent employment under the same, conditions as
whites with a view to their taking their place in the white
community on tin equal footing with the whites,
Mr. BARENESS. —Aro balf-caatea, on an average,
capable of being educated up to white standards? In
our State, we have a special syllabus for such children
which does not take them beyond the ordinary standard
for a white child of nine years of age, but emphasis is
laid on teaching them the mechanical arts. We assume
that they have' not the ability of the ordinary white
child.
Dr. COOK.—In tho Northern Territory, we have
found that, given equal chances, the average half-caste
is not inferior in mental ability to the average white
child. It ia true that the percentage of children of
outstanding ability may he higher amongst the whites,
but the half-caste has sufficient intelligence to give
him tlig right to demand equal opportunity. In tlio
past, wc also bail a special syllabus ■which brought
tho half-easl-os up to the standard ol’ while children of
about twelve years of age, hut experience has shown
us that they are capable of going beyond that.
definition OF NATIVE.
Mr. CHAPMAN. —I think it is desirable that the
Conference should agree upon a suggested definition of
u natives ”.
Mr. SEVILLE.—In tho West Australian Act, the
position is set forth very clearly. One section states
that—•
Tlim* .dial! be a department under tho Minister to lie called
Ike Department'of Native Affairs, and to be charged with the
duty of promoting the welfare of the natives, providing them
with food, clothing', uicjditune, and medical attendance, when
they would otherwise lie destitute, providing for the education
of native children and generally assisting in the preservation
and well-being of the natives.
Another section defines “native” aa follows: —
“ Native ” means—
(a) any person of full-blood descended from the original
inhabitants of Australia;
(h) subject to the exceptions Mated hi this definition
any person uf less than full-blood who is descended
from the original inhabitants of Australia or
from their full-blood descendants, excepting, how-
ever, any person who is—•
(1) a quadroon under 21 years of age who
neither associates with or lives substan-
tially after the imuiuur of the class of
persons mentioned in paragraph («.) in
this definition unless such quadroon ia
ordered by a magistrate to he classified
aa a native under this act;
(2) a quadroon over 21 years of ago, unless
that person is by order of a magistrate
ordered to be classed ns a native under
this act, or requests that he be classed as
a native under this act; and
(3) a person of loss then quadroon blood who
was horn prior to the filsl. day of Decem-
ber, 193 C, unless such person expressly
applies to he brought under this act and
the Minister consents . . .
Mr. McLEAN,—Even after five or six generations,
the progeny of tho continuer] marriages of half-castes
will still he liaH-castoa.
Mr. NEVILLE.—-Yes. But there is provision to
exempt them from tho act. All cases are jiulgocl on
their merits. The provision covering such eases is as
follows :
The Minister may issue to any native who, in. his opinion,
ought not to be subject to this act, a certificate in writing
under hia hand that such native is exempt from tho provisions
of this act, and from and after the issue of such certificate
such native shall be so exempt accordingly:
But any such certificate may be revoked at any time by
the Minister, and thereupon this net shall apply to such
native ns if no such certificate had been issued.
Provided that any native who iu aggrieved on account of
tho refusal hy the Minister to grant surili certificate or of
the revocation by the Minister of his certificate under this
section may appeal to a magistrate in tho magisterial district
in which ho resides. The magistrate may make such order
regarding the issue or revocation of tho certificate as in his
opinion the justice of the case requires, and such order
shall be given effect by the Minister. Such appeal shall be
in accordance with tho regulations, which may proscribe the
time for appealing and the procedure to be followed,
Mr. BLEAKXEY.—The Queensland law extends a
similar privilege to lialf-castes, but not to full-blooded
aborigines. Western Australia ia also ahead of Queens-
land in that it makes provision for appeal against
the Minister’s decision.
Mr. NEVILLE.—In Western Australia, tbe Minis-
ter exercises tbe prerogative of tbe Crown and - can act
contrary to tbe opinion of tbe department. He bas tbe
power to withdraw the privilege, if it is abused, and baa
done so.
'Resolved —
That the definition of “native 55 in any uniform legislation
adopted by other States or the Commonwealth, bo based on
the definition contained in the Native Administration Act,
IfJOu-lOSfi of the State of Western Australia.


RETURN OF ABORIGINES TO HOME STATE.
Air, CHAPMAN.—I think that discretionary power
should exist for State authorities to return to his
home State any aboriginal who ia temporarily resident,
in another Slate, In Victoria, wo have had unfortu-
nate experiences of natives coming across the border
from another State in order to avoid disciplinary action
by that State, nr what, they might consider to be pain-
ful medical treatment imposed upon them. We have
no power to return them to their home Slate, unless
they happen to be vagrants.
]VIr. EL'EAKLEY,—In Queensland we have had
similar trouble.
Air, NEVILLE.—In Western Australia we do not
differentiate be I ween States, or between aborigines.
Wc call them all natives of Australia. Wo have power
to take any native from any one part of the State
to any other part, or even to put. him across the border.
Frequently, natives come from other States into West-
ern Australia, but we can always put them out of the
State if we desire to do so.
Dr. COOK.—Tn the Territory wc define “aborigi-
nal ” as an aboriginal native of Australia.
Mr, OHAPMAN.—-Our difficulty is that natives who
come fiorn another State are not under our jurisdiction.
Tim only time they cun bo forcibly 'returned io
their place of origin is when they have committed
a crime, and an order for their expulsion is issued by
a magistrate.
D'r. MORRIS,--It is not intended tu prevent bona
fide migration of natives?
Mr. CHAPMAN.—No. All that ia required is dis-
cretionary power to deal with undesirablea,
Mr. NEVILLE.—It is a fundamental principle of
the Constitution that there shall be free intercourse
between the States, in Western Australia, wo some-
times receive at the Kalgoorlie Hospital South Aus-
tralian natives who arc conveyed oa the trans-Aus-
tralian railway. They receive exactly the same treat-
ment as do our own natives, hut South Australia, of
course, is saddled with the cost.
Air. PETTTTT.—The position-is met in New South
Wales by the following provision in the law*.—
Sa. (I.) Where an aborigine or a person apparently hav-
ing uu admixture of aboriginal blond is, in the opinion of
tlie board Jiving iu insanitary or undesirable conditions!, u
stipendiary or police magistrate may, on Liiti application of
the board, order sttclt aborigine or person tn remove to a
reserve or pJa.ee controlled by the board, or. if snob aborigine
or person is but temporarily resident in thi* State, to return
to the Stale whence he came within a time specified in the
order.
(■2.) Any such order imiy on n like application ho can-
celled or varied by iho same or another stipendiary or police
magistrate,
(A) Until such an order is e.anp.elh'il every aborigine or
other person named therein in that behalf hIimII he and remain
under the control of the hoard while ho is in this Slate.
Air. CHAPMAN.—-That meets the position, no
doubt, in New South Wales, but a similar provision is
needed in the legislation of the other Slates and in
the Commonwealth law. During the centenary
celebrations in Melbourne, solely in tlio interests
of the aborigines at Lake Tyers, we refused
to allow a concert party from that station to visit
Melbourne. At ibe same time, a troup of aboriginal
minstrels from New South Wales, despite all our efforts
to prevent them, came to the celebrations. Later, they
were found engaged in a drunken melee in front of
one of the city’s leading hotels. The newspapers
eritic.ixed the authorities for failure to control the
aborigines, but we had no power over them, and had
no means whereby we could have them sent back to
New South Wales. Of course, it a native visitor is a
decent fellow, we do not want to send him back.
Resolved —
That provision bo made to g-ivo discretionary power to
return to hia homo Stale, nny aboriginal temporarily resident
in another State.
ADMINISTRATION.
Mr, NEVILLE. —I move —
That in the interests of the natives of Australia, the prin-
ciple; crmuiiiml in section 4 01 the Native Administration Aet
of Wi-slcm Austniliii be adopted.
Motion lapsed for want of a secondin', after several
delegates had pointed out that each Statu already had
similar legislation.
supply op iiauoa and drugs to natives.
Mr. OHABMAN.—I move—
tl'lnit It Ik; an nlTimce io supply intoxicating llipior or drugs
to any native.
Tn some States methylated spirits is included in the
definition of “ liquor ”.
Mr. NEVILLE. —I second the motimi.. This matter
is largely one of definition. Before the act of Western
Australia was amended it was easy for a half-caste to
obtain liquor, but an altered definition of “native”
improved the situation considerably. Section IS of the
act reads—
{L} Any person vim fells, supplier, or gives nny fenuenteil
apiritninia nr oilier intoxicating liquor, iu any quantity wlml-
.'H<ii;vev, either alone or mixed with uny other snlistanen, nr
any opium, to any native shall be guilty of an olTenee and
liable, on summary conviction, to a penalty not exceeding One
hundred pounds or to any term of imprisonment not exceeding
yix months, or to both.
Until recently the control of the supply of liquor to
natives wus one of our greatest difficulties. There was
always conflict between the Licensing Act and the
Aborigines Act. ’Now, the only natives who can obtain
liquor are those who have been definitely exempted by
the Minister. The Western Australian legislation, is
operating successfully.
J)r. COOK.—In die Northern Territory Ordinance
wo go further than the Western Australian legislation,
Section 23 (7) provides—
A lioeiuv mJut.ll not he iamicd to any jutbou to employ
iibongimw on ,any premises in respect nf wliidi a publican's
licence or a storekeepers licynee, granted Tinder the law for the
time being in force in the territory relating tn the supply of
intoxicating liquors, is in force,
Tn 1036 the ordinnneu was amended to enable a half-
caste to drink in hotels, on the production of u certifi-
cate of exemption from the Chief Protector. A half-
caste may now bo exempted from the liquor provisions
of the ordinance, although he remains under the
ordinance for other purposes. The amendment was
found desirable, because many half-castes of a superior
type who bad been provided with homes, for which
they were paying, resented the imputation that they
were a subject race, and not entitled to accompany their
friends when taking refreshment. It was desirable to
grant them this privilege without sacrificing the power
to manage their estates until they became solvent. If
they abuse the privilege, the exemption is withdrawn.
For some time I opposed the amendment, but as the
then existing ordinance tended to make them regard the
Ohiel: Protector as an enemy rather than as a friend,
I agreed to it.
The drinking of methylated spirits is a problem in
the Northern Territory. This spirit has been ruled to
be not within the definition of “intoxicating liquor”.
A special ordinance was passed making it an olfeuco
for any person to supply methylated spirits to aborigi-
nals or to drink it. The provision applies to whites as
well as to blacks,
Mr, ELEAKXEY.—The legislation of Western Aus-
tralia contains similar provisions prohibiting the
supply of liquor or poisons to aborigines. In respect
of liquor, the penalty ranges from a minimum of £2O to
a maximum of £uo. The penalty in respect of opium
is £IOO or three months’ imprisonment for the first
offence, and six months’ imprisonment, without the
option of a fine, for a second offence. In respect of
other poisons, such as morphia, cocaine, and cliloro-
dyne, the penalty is £SO. There is also provision to


deal with persons in possession of opium. fi’.lio act con-
tains ii proviso that it shall ho a dcfnure it' tho person
can show that the drugs have boon issued on the pro-
scription of a qualified medical officer. Provision is
also made lo deal with persons who introduce liquor
on reserves, and to punish übangmea found in the
possession of liquor. The net m-ognmas that there are
many respectable haif'Castos, and, accordingly, pro-
vision is made., for their exemption. Any half-caste
who holds a certificate of exemption may obtain a
drink, 'flic onus is placed on the publican of ascer-
taining' if such, a customer is so exempt.
Mr. PhITTITT.—Tho act of .New Mouth Wales has a
short provision in section 9 which has proved effective
in dealing 1 with the supply of liquor to natives. it
also couinina a satisfactory definition of ‘■'liquor”
which was amended last year to include methylated
spirits.
.Mr. MOKRi kS.--Tlic Dangerous Drugs Act of JSTcw
Mouth Wales is most fai'-rcaeliing in its afreet, and
mods the situation.
Mr. CdIAPMAiV.—-The conlrol of poisons in Vic-
toria is most stringent.
.Mr. PKTTlTT.—Although (im New South Wales
act defines nn aboriginal as a full-blooded or half-caste
black, the definition goes further and includes the
words “any person having apparently an admixture of
aboriginal blood There have not, been many
instances in which objection has been taken to the pro-
vision preventing such people from obtaining drink.
It may ho desirable that tho act of New South Wales
should go further and provide that it shall be an
olTernx! for an aboriginal to be found in the possession
nf liquor.
Mr. N K VJ IdJh— Onc man who claimed that ho
was I he offspring of two half-castes successfully con-
ics ted a prosecution, and, consequently, ilici dc-ffnilioa
bad to be, altered.
In regal'd to poisons, difficulty arose because of the
number of natives who used strychnine in large quan-
tities in ili<! destruction of vermin. Ou two occasions,
slryclinino purchased for poisoning vermin was thought
to he flour, with the result that Ml or 4.0 natives died.
There have hcou olhur instance,-; in which deliberate
poisoning has boon suspected. Jt is now an offence,
to supply I hose people .with poison. Sod-ion (37 of the
act provides that any person who, without a permit
from (.ho prelector, ,supplies any native with any poison
or noxious substance shall be guilty of an offence. The
supply n£ poison is always under the control of the
protector. There is no definition of “ noxious sub-
stance”.
Mr, M.rLKAN”.—The act of South Australia con-
tains no jirovision for controlling the supply of liquor
f:o aborigines; that matter is dealt with under the
.Licensing Act, which deals with tho supply of liquor
to any aboriginal native of Australia or any half-caste
of that race.
Mr. QUA LIMAN".—I ask leave to amend the motion
to read —■
Thai, in any amendment n( the law provision ho made to
ivalriot nr control I,ho supply of intoxicating liquors mid
pornoim to natives, ami that tin l definition of “liquor” include
methylated spirits.
Dr. COOK. —The courts do not regard methylated
spirits as a spirituous liquor.
Jienolvc<l —
That uniform legislation lo adopted to provide that tho
supply of inloxira.tfiig liquors (including methylated spirits)
to natives, ns defined in the now doJlmtion, shall be an offence.
TRAFFIC m OPIUM.
Dr. COOK, —There is a tendency to believe that
legislation to control the traffic, in opium actually con-
trols it. That ffi not so in fact. In the Northern
Territory the traffic in opium is one of tho most
umlcsh'ublo features associated with the degradation
of (he aborigines. There is a comparatively large
Chinese population in the Territory, and for ninny years
nmijliors of Chinese there hove smoked opium. The
retail price in Darwin Is about £lO for a 5-oz, tin, Con-
sequently, those engaged in the traffic have sought a
market for the dross, or charcoal, which remains after
the opium has been smoked. This dress is put up in
packets similar to A.P.O. powders and. sold to the
aborigines. In order to purchase opium at the
enhanced price the Chinese have had to find a market
tin* the dross, and lliey are selling it lo the aborigines.
For this reason, we have endeavoured to prevent the
employment of aborigines by the Chinese, bat: we have
been advised that wo cannot legally exclude a Chinese
who Australian-born from his rights unless wo can
establish that a definite offence Ims been committed.
.1 suggested to tho department that in order to control
this traffic we should enter into it ourselves. We
could import; opium at about £1 an ounce from
Malaya. Perhaps the confiscated opium would supply
all needs. It could bo issued to Chinese certified by a
medical officer as addicts, and subsequent issues could
be made to depend upon tho return of the dross for
destruction. The aborigines who are habitues could
be jilaced in institutions for treatment for tho cure of
the habit. In this way, opium could he made available
to Chinese addicts at a price which would make
smuggling unattractive. This system would prevent au
extension of the smoking habit. The Customs Depart-
ment rejected my proposal, It was said, among other
things, that as Australia was a signatory to the Inter-
national Convention controlling opium it was quite
imjmssihlc for the Government to trike up the matter.
My reply is that the Convention, wliicdi was designed
ultimately to eliminate the use. of opium for smoking,
Ims failed to achieviS that end after a 30 years’ trial.
"We are entitled therefore to try some other method.
If the price of opium could be reduced, and the dross
controlled, the aborigines could undoubtedly be pro-
tected. The Customs Department has twice rejected
my proposal.
Air. ELEAKLEY.----Queimsland is very interested Li
this subject. Dr. Cook’s proposal, though it would bo
'regarded as reactionary by many people, is well worthy
nf consideration. Undoubtedly the aborigines obtain,
the dross. In Queensland they will pay almost nny
price for it. They mix the ash in water for drinking.
I do not know how this suggestion would he received
in Queensland, but it is worthy of consideration.
Professor OLELAND.—Although the proposal
seems, at. first sight, to he radical, I shall support it,
for its adoption would undoubtedly materially reduce
tho ill-effects on the native inhabitants of opium smok-
ing. I can see no other system than that of licensing
which is likely to have, the desired effect.
Mr. BLEAK-LEY.—An idea of the difficulties that
we meet with in dealing with the opium traffic will
he gained when I relate the following incident: On
two occasions parcels of opium thrown overboard from
vessels that have come from China have been picked
up on our northern reserves. One parcel contained
£1,500 worth of opium, and the aboriginal who found it
returned it through his superintendent to the Customs
Department. He was given £5, which, disgusted him
and, incidentally, other people, as ho might havo icon
tempted to soil it for a much larger sum. Ou another
occasion a parcel of £I,OOO worth .of opium was picked
up on the coast near Cairns.
ACr. CAEItODIIS.—Our department is in sympathy
witli Dr. Cook’s proposal, but we are helpless in the
matter. The decision rests finally with the Customs
Department. That department says that as Australia
is hound by tho International Convention on the sub-
ject it is impossible for the Commonwealth Government


to engage in the business. But, although our depart-
ment is helpless, an expression of opinion from this
Conference might be useful.
Mr. BAILEY. —While this subject is of great
importance in regard to the aborigines, the proposal
that Dr. Cook has made would have far-reaching effects.
1 doubt whether it would bo wise for us to deal with
it in the broad way that Dr. Cook has suggested, but
the Conference might make a voeonmi.ondati.on in regard
to opium dross. I do not think that we could go so far
as to suggest that opium should be admitted free.
Dr. COOK.—That is jiofc quite what I suggested.
My proposal is that some statutory authority, possibly
the Comptroller-General uf Customs, should be author-
ized to obtain supplies from the factory in Malaya.
The ojmun should be handled by a government
monopoly. Issues should be strictly controlled, and
additional supplies should be granted only when the
dross is returned. Any free importation of opium
would defeat the whole scheme.
Mr. BAILEY,— But would not the adoption of your
proposal encourage the smoking of opium? If the
Chinese in the Northern Territory could get opium
under a permit system would not the Chinese else-
where in Australia want it, and would they not he
likely to get it?
Mr. OARRODUS.—That is one of tho objections
raised by the Customs Department.
Dr. COOK.—-The purpose of the prohibition under
tho International Convention was to prevent the smok-
ing of opium by Chinese ot any one else; but that
purpose has not been achieved, and the whole scheme
has definitely failed. In fact, it has given rise to abuses
which have resulted in an extension of the evil and
an increase of the number of opium smokers. I sug-
gest that the traffic should be controlled under permit,
and that issues should be made to confirmed opium
addicts perhaps on a sliding scale. As Ihere i.s more
support for tins proposal round the table than I
expected ,il to receive, I move —
That this Confanince ia of the opinion that in cnakr to
control the .smoking of opium dross by aborigines, the Com-
monwealth Government should give conaiileration to a. scheme
to provide confirmed opium smokers, certified to be sndi by an
approved medical authority, with, opium at a price which will
render illicit importation uneconomic, on condition that the
dross of the opium issued is returned for destruction before
further issues are made.
Professor OLELAND. —I second the motion.
Mr. NEVILLE. —I do not want the evil associated
with the dross to spread. "We have had no trouble of
this kind in our north-west.
Dr. COOK. —If 'Western Australia is not affected
by the problem it will not bo affected by the remedy.
Air. MoLEAN.—The motion refers 1,0 confirmed
opium smokers. Are there not other opium smokers
who may not fall within that category? Is it not likely
that the “dross which they have will bo supplied to tho
aborigines?
Dr. COOK.—Under my scheme there would
be no opium from which, they, could get dross.
My experience in Malaya showed me that it is possible
to estimate fairly accurately the quantity of opium
required by a confirmed smoker. Such people could
he issued with a little below, their requirements. The
dross that they returned could he analysed to make sure
that no ash was mixed with it. If on analysis it was
found to he less than should have been returned a fur-
ther reduction could be made in the amount allowed
to tho person concerned.
Mr. MoLEAN, —Would not the person who had not
reached the stage of certification still he a potential
purchaser of smuggled opium?
Dr, COOK. —I doubt it. In any case, things could
y,?t bo worse than they are. There are about 50 or 60
persons in die Northern Territory who would conic
within the definition of certified. They are Chinese,
of course,
Mr. BLEAKLEY. —Do you know of any other pos-
sible market for opium which might permit a profitable
business to ho continued?
Dr. COOK.—The aborigines would provide a possible
market, but I have never known aborigines to_ buy
opium. They get only the dross. The other Asiatics
in the Northern Territory, apart from the Chinese, do
not smoko opium. Our aborigines use an ingenious
arrangement with a soda water bottle to smoke the
dross,
Mr. BLEAKLEY.—Do not the aborigines mix the
dross with water and drink it?
Dr. COOK. —They smoke the dross as I hart-
explained. Any objection that may bo raised to my
proposal can be countered by the statement that at
least it could not lead to worse conditions than those
which prevail at present. If my scheme were tried,
and U did not prove successful, it could be abandoned.
Air. HARKNESS. —How dues the opium affect the
aborigines?
Dr. COOK.—It affects them in the same way as it
affects the Chinese. Those who use it become indolent
and lazy. They crave for opium and hang around
Chinatown in the hope of getting it. They prostitute
their women ami are guilty of every rice in the
calendar in order to obtain money to purchase dross.
'Finally, they may succumb to tuberculosis or similar
maladies.
Dr. MORRIS.—I think it would he unwise for this
Conference to pass a motion asking the Commonwealth
Government practically to stultify itself in the eyes of
the world. I sympathize entirely with Dr. Cook’s views,
but 1 do not think we should take the drastic step of
urging the Government to do something that ia not
only wrong in the eyes of the world, but. is also illegal
lor signatories to the International Convention.
Perhaps we could get the same result hy indirect means.
Wc could say that addicts, regardless of colour, should
be placed under medical control. They could be pen-
sioned, perhaps, and placed hi an institution.
Dr. COOK.—I think Dr. Morris lias rather mis-
understood my desire. "What I wish is to control the
consumption of opium on a scientific basis. It would
not be practicable to place the 50 or 60 aborigines in the
Northern Territory in an institution, for some of them
are at Pine Creek, some on the Katherine, and some at
Darwin. Some of these people are engaged in profit-
able businesses. It is wrong to say that the control
of opium, as I have suggested, is against the view of
all the people of the civilized world. In Malaya and
Java the control of opium is a government monopoly.
Very large numbers of people in the East smoke opium,
and supplies are provided from government-owned and
maintained factories. It is, therefore, not right to
regard this traffic as universally illegal. I am suggest-
ing departmental control under medical supervision,
find, if necessary, I am prepared (o amend the motion
to make that point dear.
Mr. CHAIhM AI\ T .-Wc should consider whether it
i.s within the scope of this Conference to express an
opinion upon a matter that is essentially federal in
its application. I have to, aak myself whether it is ray
business, ns a representative of Victoria, to tell the
Commonwealth what it ought to do in the Northern
Territory. I fed that the purpose of this Conference
is to suggest'procedure which is more or less applicable
to all the States, or, at any rate, to two or three of
them. This problem exists only in Darwin, so far
as I know, and, ns such, is a matter entirely for
Commonwealth administration.
Dr„ MORRIS. —After all, we arc merely urging the
Commonwealth to give consideration to the matter.


.Or.' COOK.—Tim matter also affects Queensland
and Western Australia. Importations of opium come
mostly from the Malay States and Java. It is
imported ]iy persons who are opium addicts, and, if
they have more tluui they want for their own nso, thoy
can (export it to other States.
Unsolved —
That this ConConnnu is of tins tijunion that, ill order to
prevent tlio smoking of opium dross by ulmriyiiics, the Com-
monwealth should give eaiwulination to a saliciiu: to place
all opium addicts in Northern Australia, of whatever
JiatloiLiiiity, muter strict medical supervision, in order to
control the supply of the drug, with a view to effecting
tin; cure of the individual, the reduction of the uiiinhnr of
addicts in the future, and especially for tlio purpose of
preventing any trade in opium dross.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC SURVEY.
Brofessor (ILELAN j).—l move—
That this Conference supports the suggestion that a
socio-cuonomic investigation of the half-eaato people be.
eoninienced in South Australia, under the direction of the
.Dopavtuiont of Economics of the University, with tlio co-
operation of the Protector, and recommends that Common-
wealth (inamual assistance for approved purposes, not to
exceed £2,000 spread over a period of two years, he made
available to enable this survey to he made. A report should
he submitted to a later Conference with a view to the
extension of the work to other Slates.
Such a survey would enable us to assess the capacity
of the half-castes to take their place in the ordinary,
economic life of the white community. If it was
found that valuable results followed from the investiga-
tion in South Australia, it might be extended to other
States. At any rate, the information obtained in
South Australia would probably he found to he
applicable to other parts of the Commonwealth also.
Mr. ITARJvNESS.—-I believe that, the. more infor-
mation that is collected in regard to this matter, the
better. It cannot possibly do any harm, and it ought
to do a great deal of good.
Hr, MO.RIi.IS. —Is it worth while spending such a
lot of money? We already have a tremendous mass
of information available; we know what ought to be
done, but the difficulty is in getting it done. I fail
to see what inf on natiem that is not already in our
possession can be obtained by an academic investigation.
Professor (IRELAND.—A trained economist should
be able to obtain information and arrive at con-
clusions-which would he of value to ns.
Mr. NEVILLE. —Experience has shown that royal
commissions and similar investigating bodies do not,
as a rule, obtain information that is not already in
the possession of departmental heads, but their recom-
mendations carry greater weight, and are usually acted
upon, while those of departmental heads may be
ignored.
.Dr. MORRIS.—That may bo so, but the recom-
mendations of the authority which this motion
envisages would not carry the same weight as those of
a royal commission.
Mr. BARENESS.—There is certainly a limit to
the amount for which we can ask. Is it practicable
to ask for £3,000 a year for this purpose, and then to
come along to the Commonwealth and ask for further
assistance?
Dr. MORRIS. —I consider that the money could be
spent better in other directions,
Mr. BAILEY. —-If money is obtained from the Com-
monwealth responsibility should rest on the States to
spend it to the host advantage, I am not in favour
of the motion.
Motion negatived. * .
INVALID AND OLD-AGrE TENSIONS; MATERNITY
ALLOWANCE.
Mr. BAlLEY.—Another subject for the considera-
tion of Conference is the desirability or otherwise of
making a recommendation to the Government that the
maternity allowance should be payable, not to the
mothers, but to the authorities which control aborigines
and provide the necessary hospitals and medical atten-
tion for mothers.
Mr. CHAPMAN. —Before dealing with that particu-
lar aspect, it might be desirable to discuss in general
terms the Commonwealth assistance given to State
aboriginal authorities. 1 make I his suggestion because
a. strong argument could be advanced in favour of a
proposal that the Stales should accept responsibility
for the maintenance, bousing and clothing of aborigines,
and tlie Common wealth responsibility fur their educa-
tion. In my o|iiuiun, no useful service is performed
by Ihe payment of the imitc'ruii.y allowance on the
present basis. It results in some persons being eligible
for the allowance whilst their immediate neighbours
arts not. If the Commonwealth would grant a specific
amount for assistance to State authorities, perhaps pen-
sions and maternity allowance payments could be
eliminated.
Mr. HARK NESS.—The question of the education
of half-eastcs and of lighter-coloured natives should
receive consideration. In New South Wales, iu collabo-
ration with tho Education Department, wo appoint to
reserves teacher-managers, and endeavour to secure the
services of a man whose wife is a trained nurse. Under
this system, teaching is subordinated to managerial
duties, with tho result that the standard of education
is not high—about equal to that of a child of ten years
of ago. The potentialities of half-castes, however, is
much greater than that, and should rise with the pro-
gressive elimination of aboriginal blood. If it were
decided to appoint a manager and a teacher as indepen-
dent persons to each reserve tho expenditure would be
doubled, or increased by at least £IO,OOO a year. The
money would have to come from the States or the Com-
monwealth. What I have in mind is a, comprehensive
scheme of iimincc in which the maternity allowance is
only a minor matter. If tlio mother receives medical
attention and baby clothes, and also gets child endow-
ment which might amount to oos, or £3 a week, that is
all'slio should expect.
Mr. OAR'RODUS.—The Commissioner of Pensions
is forced to abide by the pensions law. Unless it were
amended he could not pay to Statu authorities either
a pension or the maternity allowance which, at present,
is payable direct to the person concerned. I think it
is doubtful whether the Commonwealth would agree to
a proposal which would render natives eligible for
pensions or maternity allowances.
Mr. BAILEY.—TIie motion suggested by Mr.
Chapman rends—
That all natives of leas than-full-blood be eligible to receive
invalid and old-age pensions on the recommendation of State
authorities, to whom the amount should be paid in trust for
the individual.
That would necessitate an amendment of the law. The
samn objection applies to the suggested alteration of the
method of paying the maternity allowance. It would,
I think, be advisable for the Conference to hoar the
views of the Commissioner for 'Pensions on this matter.
Mr. McLEAN.—The maternity allowance is pay-
able only to persons In ■whom black blood does pot pre-
dominate. In our opinion this restriction results in
injustices in some settlements where mothers with, say,
five-eighths aboriginal blood, are denied the allowance,
whilst those one-eighth whiter receive it although
both arc living under similar .conditions. It
was suggested to., the Commonwealth Government
that, in cases'where it was certified, by the State
authorities that the claimants wore capable of making
propor use of the money, the allowance should he paid
irresjjective of the ratio of white to aboriginal blood.
The reply of the OorainonweaUli Government was that
full consideration had been given to the representa-
tions but that the Government regretted that it was
unable to see its way to take steps to amend the relevant


acts in the direction suggested. It is a question now
of whether a further request from the Conference}
might not induce the Coinmomveallh to reconsider
this mutter.
Mr. BLEAKLEY.—Wc have the same difficulty in
Queensland, but to a certain extent we are able to
supervise the spending of the "maternity allowance by the
recipients, since the .superintendents of the settlements
handle all correspondence to and from the inmates.
In most instances we have no difficulty iu inducing the
mothers in allow the authorities to place the money
in the savings bank, and also to pay to the authorities
a fair proportion of the allowance to cover iho cost ol
medical and hospilal treatment received during their
confinement. It nftens happens, though, that a woman
in outside districts escapes supervision and squanders
the money. It would ho of advantage if some provision
could he made whereby the administration responsible
for the welfare of the half-castes could ho rceogm/.cd
by the Commissioner for Pensions as the channel
through which the allowance should lie paid to the
recipients.
Mr. BAILEY.---Mr. A. Molford, Com missioner
of Pensions, is in attendance, at the request of
the Conference. TVe shall be glad to hoar from him
in regard to pensions to aborigines and half-castcs,
particularly in respect of payments lu mothers whose
medical and hospital expenses are met by the State.
Mr. METEOR!).-—An aboriginal woman, or a
woman in whom there is a propondemice of aboriginal
blood, may nol receive the maternity allowance. There
is nothing in tlm act In debar a half-caste mother from
receiving the allowance, and it is paid Lo all such. The
act does not define an aboriginal or a half-ca.sto. Tho
law provides that;' the allowance shall bo paid to the
mother of the child. There is no provision for it to he
paid to any one else. Tho act would have to be amended
to enable payment to be made to any ono besides the
mother.
Mr. BLEAKLEY, —Asiatic half-castes are excluded
from the allowance, I nmloral.and.
Mr. METEOR*!).—OnIy if there is in them a
preponderance of Asiatic or aboriginal blood.
Professor OLELAND.— If a Protector is in loco
paroi/vh, do not all business iTamiactions take place
through him?
Mr. METEORT),—The doparlmeut socks the advice
of- the Protector iu all eases of doubt, or in which
such advice is considered desirable, and generally it
acta on his recommendation. The money is paid to
the mother by moans of a money order. The depart-
ment has no control over its spending. Even in the
case of a mother who is an unmarried minor, payment
is made to the moth or. The position is the same in
cases in which tho "Protector is the trustee of the
half-caste. The mother receives the payment. There
is no provision for her to sign an authority for it to be
paid to the Protector.
Mr. NEVILLE.—In many cases the money is
squandered, and in others the existence of an allowance
places a : premium on the procreation of children.
Some of the questions which have tn he answered are
difficult to answer -as, for instance, those which ask
■whether the claimant is deemed to be an aboriginal;
or a person iu whom there is a preponderance of
aboriginal blood ; or whether she resides, or has resided,
in a native reserve during certain periods. In answer-
ing them, wo have to rely on reports from local police-
men, and as they frequently remove from place to
place, conflicting reports arc inevitable. These cause
difficulties with the Federal Department. That difficulty
does not apply to applicants living iu settlements, and,
accordingly, wo encourage prospective mothers to attend
hospitals at the time of birth. Anomalies frequently
arise, such as one woman living m a camp being
granted an allowance and another woman in the same
camp having it rofiiHuil. If it, could bo arranged that
payment be made to the .Protector, as trustee, there
would lie 'Siune guarantee that the right person received
the money and that It was properly spent. Under
existing conditions, that is impossible,
Mr. M.ETFOIii).---T!ic request is reasonable, and I
shall place it he Co re the Minister,
Mr. RAILFV.—"What Is the position in regard to a
woman confined in a public hospital?
Mr. M KTFORF).—The money is paid to her at any
addro.-s she elects to give. Lf, subsequently, she pays
some, of it to the hospital, she may do so. Until
recently, n woman, could anthorine another person to
collect [he money on. her behalf, 1ml: because this pro-
vision 'was abused, that cannot now be done. Payment
is made only to the mother.
Professor OAKLAND. —To whom would the money
be paid In respect of a mol her who is certified as insane
and whose property is iu llio custody of the Public
Trustee?
Mr. .MET FORD,—If, after waiting a reasonable
Lime tor her to recover, there is no improvement, the
money is paid to the Master in Lunacy. It would
appear reasonable to do the same in the ease of abo-
rigines, bin .I understand that the Master in Lunacy has
greater powers than are vested in any Protector of
Aborigines. I shall place that point also before the
Minister. An amendment of the act would be necessary
to enable payment In be made to the Protector.
Mr. McLEAN.—Would you favour tho maternity
allowance being paid to any mother, irrespective of the
degree of aboriginal blood, if certified by tho
local protector ns a person who will put it to proper
use ?
Mr. METFOE’D.--'No. It is not the policy of the
Uover.uiitont to extend the privileges under the act.
Mr. BLEAKLIiV.— M any aboriginal women are
more entitled to the allowance than are some of the
half-caste women who receive it. It may happen that
two sisters with the same mother hut different fathers
apply for (lie allowance, but because of the provision
of the act only one receives it. Such differentiation is
not understood by the natives, and causes resentment.
Mr, METEORI).—The law in regard to invalid and
old-age pensions is similar to that governing the
in at monty allowance, in that no aboriginal native, nor
any person in whom there is a preponderance of abori-
ginal blood, may receive a pension. Half-castes, how-
ever, are entitled to it. It is significant that the Royal
Commission on Pensions in 100(1 specifically recom-
mended that aborigines be debarred from pensions.
Although the act of 11)08 has been amended nineteen
times, no alteration of that provision has been made.
Half-castes living on reserves arc; not granted pen-
sions, because they are regarded as already having
received benefits provided by the States for aborigines,
as such. They cannot get benefits from the Common-
wealth which are denied to aborigines.
'Mr. NEVfLXR.—I shall give a few instances in
respect of which I should Hike Mr. Mctford’s opinion.
Tho first relates to an old-age pensioner who claims
that he is a half-caste, but is probably an exempt
aboriginal. Another concerns a man who resides in the
camp, and lives as a native.. He draws a pension. A
third case is that of an old woman, who is the mother
of a large family, all of whom are natives in law. Her
pension money is expended in liquor by members of
the family. A fourth relates to the widow of a aoldior
—a. white man. She is almost an aboriginal, but
although she lived among natives in the camp she
received a pension of £2 2s. a fortnight. At my request,
the military authorities paid her pension to me, as her
trustee. If that can be done in respect of a military
pension it should he possible in other pensions.


Mr. .METROIU).—The cases mentioned by Air.
Neville are unknown to the department. It ia difficult
to trace persona who leave the reserves. If Mr. Neville
will supply particulars of the cases he lias mentioned,
they will be inquired into.
Trofcsfior CLELANL).—The act surely intended that
the word ‘‘’aboriginal” should apply only (o persons
Jiving in fern, nalurac to whom it would be ridiculous to
pay the money. The term “aboriginal” should be
applied only lo pure-blooded aborigines, ami any one
with an .admixture of white blood should be eligible
for a pension.
Mr. AIETEORI).—I have no reason to believe that
llic word “ aboriginal ” implies more than its generally
accepted meaning.
Mr. BAILEY—ShouId not a person in whom there
is not a preponderance of aboriginal blood bo entitled
to a pension, whether within or outside a settlement?
Mr. METEOR!).-—lf living in a settlement .he is
debarred from receiving a pension.
Air. MoLEAN.—It is difficult to understand the. dif-
ferentiation between a half-caste living on a station
and receiving relief from a State, and a white person
who also receives assistance from another State depart-
ment.
M.r. LETT ITT.—-There are numerous instances of
persons who have left reserves and arc living elsewhere
under shocking; conditions, in order to obtain pensions
which were denied to thorn when living under decent
conditions on the reserves,
Air. CJI ATAI AN.—I take it that the position is
that the Commonwealth regards a half-caste who lives
in a settlement as one who has nccepled the status of
aboriginal.
Mr: METEOR!).—Thn t Is so,
Air. CHAPMAN. —In ’regard to pensioners living
in institutions, I understand that the pension is divided
between the institution and the individual.
.Mr. ATETEORL).—That is so. Of a total pension
of 10s. a week, sa. 6d. us paid to the individual, and
3.35. 6d. to the institution for his upkeep.
Air, CHAPAIAN.—The point is that, a half-caste
living in a settlement ia as much entitled to u pension
as ia a white man living in an institution practically
at the expense of a State.
Afr. METEOR!).—Persons living in aboriginal
reserves and being treated as aborigines by the State,
cannot get benefits which tho Commonwealth law denies
to aborigines. This question has arisen from time to
time, but the Commonwealth Government has not seen
fit to change its policy.
Resolved —
That all natives at luss tlnui full blond b« oligililn to roccmi
invalid and old-age pensions and maternity allowance on
tiio rficommeijda.tiou of the State authority to vbom tbc grant
should be made hi trust for tho individual.
COAST PATROLS.
Afr. NEVILLE. —Action taken, by. the Common-
wealth Government in the last few days has clarified
the situation regarding tho necessity for the patrol of
tho north Australian coast, but I am not yet clear
as to whether its decision to patrol the northern waters
means that the long coastline of Western Australia
will be patrolled, A study of tho map wilhshow the
large number of native reserves which have to be pro-
tected in our State. The Commonwealth Government,
I understand, lias warned foreigners away from
aboriginal reserves in the Northern Territory, but
unless similar action is taken with respect to the north-
ern coast of Western Australia a most serious situation
may occur when foreigners go there. They have been
there before, and they may go there again. Some
aboriginal reserves in- western Australia have, impor-
tant settlements-upon them, and at present there are no
adequate means for their protection. The necessity for
Mil fflicioiit patrol of tliy cofi.sl, lias been bel'ore the
Way turn Australian aulhorities for m long time. Many
years ago, the kSfcate tried to induce the Commonwealth
to outer into a joint arrangement whereby a patrol
lugger manned by a unlive crew and commanded by a
white man, [m.-fumbly a protector of aborigine*, would
In.* provided. The Commonwealth did nothing', and also
failed to take action when the .subject was revived a
decade lalcr, The Commonwealth, however, is now
doing alone what; it was asked-In do in co-operation
with the fftules, at least in respect of its own territorial
waters. The vast numbers of aborigines in the northern
parts of Western Australia render it imperative! that
tlio Comiuonwealih palm! should not he limited to (die
Northern Territory. .It is (.rue that, because of ils
ruggeduoss, the greater pari, of (lie norlhcrn coastline
is iinponetralde; hut where Iho resttrves are situated
there is access to the laud from the .sen, so there is real
danger lhat these areas will he penclraled by foreigners
unless .slept! are lakeu to prevent, tlieir entry. Tins
natives themselves a're quite capable of putting up a
.stiff resistance against strangers who invades their
domains. This has been displayed on numerous occa-
sions. ffiuco our slutlonn have been in existence, how-
ever, there has not been, much trouble, We arc Con-
cerned now a.bmit tbu coastline. Some years ago, a
while man settled 'near the const on one of the reserves,
and it look us nearly t.wo yearn to eject him. J.f
foreigners arc abb; to settles on the reserves they will
create havoc among this natives. Steps to premit them
from doing so arc beyond tin; powers of police patrols,
because! sometimes it takes four or five inontdis for a
police patrol to reach a settlement, whereas mi efficient
patrol boat would soon be on tba sreue. .1. assume that
the (hmrmonwealth has jurisdiction over (lie three-mile
limit all along- the count.
Mr. CARKODUS.—The Oommonweallh acts under
its cost rums authority.
Mr. NEVILLE.—I take it, then, that the patrol
vessel will bo available to patrol the "Western Australian
coast? if that is not so, there is reason to fear a
tremendous upheaval between the blacks and foreign
visitors in I.lm near future, That disturbance could
take place, and it wonl<l bo wricks before news of it
reached civilization, Lately, the installation of pedal
wireless sots has removed, much of the likelihood of
trouble in the interior, but. J ronteud that the Oonmion-
wealth should assist Western Australia by extending
ils patrol boat service beyond the. region* of the
IN or them Terri tory.
Mr. BAILEY.—Mr. Paterson referred at the dinner
the other day' to the .subject of the coast: patrol.
Evidently the Federal Government realizes responsi-
bility in connexion with this matter, so that probably
the situation will be mot if we pass a short motion
requesting that (die patrol lie extended to the coasts
of the north-west of Western Australia and of northern
Queensland.
Mr, OAREODITfh—The boat that is being obtained
is to cost £27,000. We would have been satisfied with
a smaller boat to cost about £lB,OOO. The decision was
affected by representations from Queensland to the
effect that the Queensland coast needed patrolling. The
Minister for Trado and Customs made an inquiry, and
it was decided to purchase a boat at a cost, of £27,000,
which will patrol, not only the coast of the Northern
Territory, bnl; also parts of the coast of Queensland
and the north-west: of Western Australia. The boat
will be ready in about nine months’ time. How far
down the coast on either side, of the Northern Territory
the heat will go, I do not know. Wo consider that wo
have enough work to keep it fully occupied, hut
experience will show whether one boat can meet the
needs of the situation.


Mr. NEVILLE.—I am satisfied with what Mr.
Oarrodns has said. I have no authority to speak for
Western Australia on this subject, except train Ike
native point of view, hut my Minister asked me to
introduce the subject at the Conference, because he
desired to know if parts of the Western. Australian
coast were to be included in any patrol service. I am
quite prepared to leave it at that.
Mr. BLEAKXKY. —We in Queensland are equally
interested, and I had a motion on the subject to submit
to the Conference. Protection is needed on the Queens-
land coast, just as much as on tlio Western Australian,
coast, Wc have one patrol vessel, but she Is alow, and
her usefulness is limited. Quite recently we had news
of a sampan in an inlet to one of the reserves, and
the patrol boat went, after her, but the speed of the
patrol boat was only seven knots, while that of the
aampau was much greater. However, the sampan was
ultimately chased away. To that extent, tbo patrol
is worth while.
LEPERS.
Mr. NEVILLE.—This item was included in the list
of items from ‘Western Australia, with the idea that we
might seek some financial assistance, hut I do not wish
to any anything more about it at this stage.
Mr. BLEAKLEY.- —Queensland also had a motion on
this subject. It is very hard on natives if they have
to ho shifted from their own district to a distant
leprosarium.
NATIVES ON TRANS-AUSTRALIAN LINE.
Mr. NEVILLE.—This subject concerns both South
Australia and Western Australia. The presence of
natives along the trans-Australian line has been a source
of great, trouble for many years to Western Australia,
but the difficulty has been solved in one respect at
least. I suppose this, also, would come under the head-
ing of those items in respect of which Commonwealth
assistance is desired. The Commonwealth Government
has assisted us aa far as possible hy making rules
governing the train crews and workers along the line,
but, unfortunately, there is no control of the passengers
on the trains. Continually, passengers write to the
press on this subject, and adverse comments are pub-
lished in the Endish newspapers about the miserable
conditions of the natives. I absolutely deny that the
natives along the Western Australian section of the line
ore living under miserable conditions. They did do so,
but that is not their condition to-day. Wo have stationed
two white married couples among these blacks, and
they are now completely under control. They are pre-
vented from begging at the trains, and are properly
fed and dressed, at considerable cost. We really have to
maintain about 100 natives in idleness to keep them
away from the trains. When we we're coming across
the other day, I wa.s shown some well dressed and well
cared for natives quite a distance from the train, hut
when we crossed the border, the conditions were quite
different. I do not want to criticize the South Austra-
lian control in any way, and hi a sense, the natives
cannot be blamed for coming to the train.. I merely
want to place the facta before the Conference. When
these natives approach the train, they are received
with extraordinary sympathy hy the passengers, who
give them money, fruit, cake, and many other things,
and in every way possible encourage them. At
Immarna about 100 very dirty natives of all sorts and
conditions, dressed in filthy rags, crowded to the train.
I have never seen such a collection. I should have
been ashamed to have had anything to do with them.
The train stopped at that station for nearly twenty
minutes and these natives swarmed round it like files.
One extraordinary feature of this business is that
although, ten years ago, there was hardly a child to be
seen among the natives along tbe line, there must
have been from 30 to 40 children from ten years of
age and downwards in that company. Knowing the
natives as 1 do, I am quite satisfied that those children
were bred for the purpose of begging. The mothers
carried them along the train on their backs, and the
little children held out their hands to the passengers
who gave them shillings, sixpences and other coins.
Their pathetic appeal could not ho resisted by the pas-
sengers. It seems to mo that only two tilings can
be done to remedy this state of affairs. They must
be taken away from the line altogether, which would
involve the expenditure of considerably more money
than ‘Western Australia or South Australia can spare
for the purpose, or tbe passengers must, in some way,
he prevented from making gifts to them. It is not
charity to these people to give them money. It is
actually pauperizing thorn. On our end of the lino they
are already properly fed and clothed, and they dn no!;
really want for anything. As things are, it is difficult
to keep them from contact with the passengers, I
understand that the natives arc allowed to travel
■without charge on what is known as the “tea ami
-sugar train”, which, once n week, carries rations
between Kalgoorlio and Port Augusta. 'The natives
get oil this train and get off at some station a distance
from their own locality and bog from the people on
the passenger train when it arrives there.
They really move from place to place, ami it ia very
difficult to do anything with them. I suppose it
would cost £3,000 or £4,000 in capital expenditure to
provide adequate quarters for thorn away from the
linn, and it would probably cost £I,OOO a year to main-
tain them, This must be done, or the Commonwealth
Government must request passengers to cease making
gifts to them. Unfortunately, a feature of the adver-
tising in connexion with the trans-Australian trip is
that aborigines may bo seen along the route. These
aborigines, however, bring only discredit to the Com-
monwealth. Another element that adds to the difficulty
of the situation, should he mentioned. , There ia a
native walk between the south coast and gold-fields
which is used by 800 or 400 people, who, from time to
time, come down from the interior to enjoy the sym-
pathy of train passengers. "Wo have chocked this to
some extent, but wo cannot altogether stop it, Mr.
McLean’s problem is very much the same as ours, hut
is probably accentuated by certain missionaries who
encourage the people to come to the railway line.
Unless wc can get financial help to correct this state of
affairs, it is likely to continue.
Mr. IIARKNESS.—CouId not the railway authori-
ties be told to declare the railway stations out of
bounds ?
Mr. MoLEAN.—The fads arc as Mr. Neville has
stated. This has been a burning issue between the
Commonwealth railway authorities and our Govern-
ment for some time. Wc issue rations at only one
point along the line, and that about four miles from
the railway, where there is water, our object being to
keep the natives back from the stations. 'Wo issue
them with clothes so that they may appear more or
less respectable, bub we find that they hang the clothes
on a tree, and present themselves in their rags before
the passengers so as-to excite sympathy. The only
solution I can see is to have permanent police officers
on duty to turn the natives back from the railway.
REPRESENTATION AT SUTURE CONFERENCES.
Mr. CARRODUS. —It is desirable that this Confer-
ence should express an opinion on the question of
representation at future conferences of bodies interested
in aboriginal work. My department has been
approached by various bodies asking for representation
at this Conference. As we all know, there are various


bodies throughout the Commonwealth which interest
themselves in the aborigines. Probably, when it is pro-
posed to hold another conference -of this kind, similar
requests for representation will be made, and wc must
decide whether to accede to them or not, Per
instance, are we to admit representatives of
the missions and of anthropological societies, &c.?
My opinion Ik that future conferences should be con-
ducted in the same w r ay as this one; that they should
be attended by the representatives of the various Gov-
ernments, men who am paid to do this work, and who
are familiar with it. If we extended the scope of
representation we should have all sorts of warring
factions present at the conference. Some anthropolo-
gists may ho in violent opposition to the missionaries,
and it would be impossible to achieve any unanimity.
If these societies and bodies wish to put forward recom-
mendations they can he submitted to those conferences
which will prove, to be a fine sifting ground. My
department, and, I am sure, those of all State Govern-
ments, will at till times he phased to receive these
suggestions, and submit them to future conferences for
consideration, but it is important that the findings of
tbo Conference- should be those of Government repre-
sentatives, so that they will bo authoritative.
Mr. .BLEAKXEY,—I agree with what Mr. Carrodus
lias said. If wo extended the scope of representation,
the Conference would he swamped with arm-chair
experts who would take control of proceedings out of
the hands of the representatives of responsible depart-
ments.
Mr. NEVILLE.—There ought to be a permanent
secretariat to whom these outside authorities could sub-
mit recommendations and suggestions.
Mr. C AIRE ODDS.—We are prepared to take on
that work. As soon as the communications are received
they will ho circulated to all tho State authorities, and
sulxsequently the proceeding's of the Conference will ho
printed and circulated to those bodies which have
submitted recommendations.
Resolved —
That future Conferences should consist of representatives
of Protectors mid Governmental Boards,
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 0E ABORIGINAL
RESERVES.
Mr. OAEEODTJS. —It is the policy of tho Common-
wealth 'Government that there shall bo no economic
development of aboriginal reserves, hut we recognize
that there are difficulties in the way of enforcing such
a policy. If a prospector discovers a valuable gold
mine in a reserve, the force of public opinion would
possibly compel the Government to allow the mine to
he exploited. That is why we try to prevent prospectors
going into such areas. I should like to hoar an expres-
sion of opinion from other representatives as to whether,
in their opinion, that is a right policy to pursue. At
the present time, all kinds of people are seeking permis-
sion to go into the reserves, and what are we to do?
Very strong influence is being brought to hear just now
to allow a party to go through the southern part
of our reserves into Western Australia on a prospecting
expedition. It would help us if we were to obtain an
expression of opinion from this Conference as to what
should be the policy regarding economic development
of aboriginal reserves.
. Mr. BLEAKLEY. —We experience the same diffi-
culties from prospectors and others desiring to enter
the reserves. We have legislation stating that, not-
withstanding anything in the Mining Act, no one may
enter an aboriginal reserve without the authority of
the Protector. Nevertheless, from time to time, pres-
sure is brought to bear upon the Minister to waive the
rule. In practice, we find that a great many applica-
tions for entry arc not genuine. They come from
persons who pose as prospectors merely for the purpose
of getting into touch 'with aboriginal women.
.Mr, NEVILLE.—Wc have in ’Western Australia
ih1,000,000 acres sot aside us reserves for aborigines.
Of (hat area 11,000,000 acres arc mi the borders of
South Australia and Western Australia. As a general
rule, wo forbid any trespass on reserves, and prosecute
those who violate the law. That, however, is not going
to help ns much if a native picks up a piece of gold,
and brings it into civilization. Our eastern reserve has
already been penetrated by u number of expeditious
in search of gold during recent years. Wo make those
organizing such expeditions enter into a bond of £IOO
to abstain from doing certain tilings, and wn require
thorn to report to us when they come out. That is all
very well so far as it goes, and up to the present there
have been fow abuses. However, it is impossible to
police such an enormous area lying as it does just
hack of our gold-holds, and there is a constant trickle
of prospectors from the gold-fields out into the Never
Never, There are also prospectors coining into the
area from the other side, and, in some instances,
tragedies have occurred. It is now proposed to put
into effect a policy under which, if gold or other
minerals arc discovered, they shall ho exploited partly
for the benefit of the natives, to whom we consider they
belong, "We know that if a rich gold strike were made
in an aboriginal reserve, it would bo utterly futile to
try to prevent a rush. No law could keep men out once:
gold was found. Therefore, wo say, 'would it not be
hotter when gold is found in snob an area to allow it to
bo worked on condition that every ounce won shall be
subject to a royalty for the benefit of the natives? That
is the policy wc propose to pursue in future. The gold-
field would he proclaimed, and excised from liio abori-
ginal reserve on conditions. I do not think that any
attempt absolutely to prevent the economic development
of aboriginal reserves would be successful, and it would
merely retard the development of tho State. If, by any
chance, Lassoter’a Beef were discovered it would he a
wonderful thing for the State, and we should not
attempt to prevent its exploitation. There would still
he plenty of land left for the aborigines.
■Dr.. OOOK.—While I am in general accord with the
view of Mr. Neville, I do not think that private pros-
pecting should he allowed in the central 'reserve. All,
prospecting should be done by official parties.
Professor CLELAND. —There seems to he very
little hope of payable gold being found in this area,
in any ease, so that no good purpose could be served
by allowing private prospectors to enter it. So far
as the natives are concerned, only harm could result,
because they would eventually ho detribalizocl.
Mr. OA.RRODUS.—The Commonwealth Govern-
ment is influenced by the fact that there is in the
Northern Territory such a huge area that lias not yet
been prospected, that it is undesirable to allow prospec-
enter the aboriginal reserve until the rest of the
territory has been combed.
Dr. MORRIS.-—This is purely a matter of policy,
and I do not think that the conference is called upon
to record a resolution in respect of it.
Mr. BAILEY,'—The Commonwealth has taken, a
stand so far as its own reserves are concerned. As for
the States, I do not think that wc, at this Conference,
are called upon to take any action.
Silling suspended from 1.80 p.m. to 7.50 p.m,
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES TO MISSIONS.
In camera:
Resolved —
That no subsidy be granted to any mission unless the
mission body agrees to comply with any instruction of the
authority controlling aboriginal affairs in respect of—
(cr.) the standard of education of natives oh the mission*
{h) the measures to be taken for the treatment of sick-
ness and the control of communicable diseases;


{(•!) (Im diet iif nativca fully nniinl.iilm'd on the mission:
p/l the niramireH to he taken in regulate the hygienic
housing of natives; and
(e) the maintenance of the mission in a sanitary
condition,
ami that the mission ho. subject to regular inspection by an
olfit'or of tin* authority.
CONTROL OF MISSION ACTIVITIES BY
GOVERNMENT.
'Resolved —
That govc-i'miumtiii oversight nf mission natives is desirable.
To llmt end suitaltie ivynbttimis should bo imposed covering
such matters as inspection, housing, hygiene, feeding, medical
attention and ImqiiLuli/.iitioji. and ediu-atiim and training of
inmates, with which missions should he compelled to conform.
Conference adjourned a I 9..'id p.m.
Fill DAY, 23 APE IX. 1037.
The Ooufoi-onco resumed nt 0,30 a.m.; the Honor-
able 11. S. Bailey in the chair.
COMPELLABILITY OF ABORIGINAL FEMALE
WITNESSES.
’Mr. CAEXiODUH.—The (knmnouwe nil li Govern-
ment seek* from tin* Gonfemiee a definition of tlic
wife of a native. This definition. is required in order
that an ordinance, passed hy the Commonwealth for
the purposes of extending to tho wives of aborigines
the sumo protection in.law as Is given to the wives of
white men with regard to their uon-couipellahilky to
give evidence against their husbands in court actions,
shall have the desired effect. Tim Western Australian
Government has inserted in its law on this subject a
provision that the wife of the native shall not ho
a compellable wilness, but in (lie Northern Territory
wn have had difficulty in defining exactly the term
‘‘wife” in relation to aborigines,
Mr. lIARKNESS. —Do yon moan “legal wife”?
Mr, OAERODITS. —Just “wife”. It is desirable
to havo an approved definition because .marriage cus-
toms vary according" to tribal laws.
Air. BAILEY.—There is no difference of opinion
as to the desirability of the wives of aborigines not
being compelled to give evidence against their husbands.
All that is necessary is that there shall be satisfactory
evidence that a woman is the wife of an aboriginal
who may bo charged with an offence.
Profeasor OLELAND.—"WouId the evidence of a
native woman, who was compelled to give evidence
against, her husband, be of any real value in a court
of justice?
Mr. OARRODUS. —In several cases in tho Northern
Territory tho only material evidence available against
an aboriginal has been that of the Inbra with whom
he was living at that time, and they have been decided
upon that evidence. The Supreme Court of tho Terri-
tory lias always adopted the practice of taking her
evidence. It does not regard a lubra living with an
aboriginal as being - his wife.
Air. BAILEY.—It is for the court to decide whether,
a woman is, the wife of an accused person.
Mr. NEVILLE. —In 'Western Australia we have
not called upon alleged wives of aboriginal prisoners
to give evidence against, them. Wo do not think it is-
fair to do so, "because a lubra may be intimidated,
merely by a glance from the prisoner, and wo have
coma to the conclusion that -such evidence as she
may give is virtually useless. The law establishing
the court which deals with crimes between natives
contains a provision covering the point raised by Air.
Oarrodus. In my State wo regard tho tribal wife of
a native aa being legally married to him. Even in the
•settlement of the estates of deceased aborigines the
woman living with the deceased prior to his death
is regarded as being legally married to him, and
entitled In his estale. To decide who is or is not a
native’s wife is difficult. Often coloured men are found
to he living with women with whom, in the strictly
legal souse, they should not bo living, In some tribes
custom allows their members to have four or five
wives. Our experience is that fear of punishment
would prevent a woman from giving ovidtme-e against
the man with whom she was living, whether or not
she came within tho legal definition nf the term “ wife
Dr. COOK.—As Protector of Aborigines in (lie
Northern Terrilory 1 consider that a native woman,
in the mailer of eompelluhilily In give evidence, should,
be accorded the same protection ns is accorded to a
white woman, She should not ho forced to give, evi-
dence against her husband whether or not she is legally
married to him. it a lubra warn compelled to give
evidence in such circumstances she would incur her
husband’s displeasure and their family life might ho
shattered. She might even lie brulally assaulted, or
killed, I suggest that the Conference pass a resolmlon
defining the term “wife” as being a woman who, nt
the time of the alleged commission of the offence for
which a prisoner is charged, is living with him, and
can ho regarded as being likely to continue to live
with him subsequent to the decision of the court. I!' it
appears that the normal association between the two
individuals is likely to continue, the woman should he
protected.
Air. BLEAKLEV.— Fn Queensland the tribal wife
of an aboriginal receives the same protection as is
accorded to the wife of a white man.
Air. (JAIiEODUH. —Put that covers only tribal wives.
Many natives 1 1 nve wives who are not tribal wives.
'Mr, ’BLEAKLM Y.—Yes ; F agree that a wider defini-
tion is needed,
Mr, XEVILLE, —Under some tribal laws even the
unborn child of a woman is the. tribal wife of a man
sixty years of age. The infant child of another woman
may also he his wife. 1 suggest a motion on these
lines —
That any woman who ulumhs in relation to a prisoner as
bis wife may not tic a compellable witness.
Professor OLELAKT). —Dr. (look wants a mure
•comprehensive definition than that.
Dr. COOK.—There may be a whole group standing’
In relation as the wife of an aboriginal; we desire to
protect those living with, him us wives.
Air. BAILEY —We all agree that a woman living
with an aboriginal as his wife or his reputed wife
should not be a compellable witness. I like Dr. Cuek’s
broad definition.
Resolved —
That in the opinion of this Cnufcn.'iicc any native woman
who, ah the than of thu commission of tin 1 alleged oJTcnco,
was living Jus tlm consort of the dei'emtnnl amt who may
reasonably by expected to cmitume in that association during
ami subsequent to Uio legal proceedings, should liavo tlm
protection of law accorded to a legal wife.
SPECIAL COURT FOR NATIVE OFFENCES.
ATr. CARliOUUS.—Representationa are frequently
made to the CouTumuwealth Government that natives
should not he tried in a white rnnu'.s court, but in a
special court for native eases only. That is all right
when the case is one between natives, ’in Pap mi and
Now Guinea, native courts deal with offences as bc-
Iwemi native and native. The departmental opinion is
that in eases in which white men. avo concerned, tho
tidal should be in a white man’s court, but that cases
between natives he heard before a special court. So
far, the Commonwealth has not established' special
courts for between natives in the Northern
Territory


.Mi - . BLEAKLEY.—Two years ago, the Queensland
Government decided against the establishment of a
special court for natives, ft, however, agreed that in
cases in which natives were charged with oH'miees—•
whether between natives or against whites—no abo-
riginal person ahull be allowed to plead guilty unless,
before such plea is made, the Ciiief 'Protector certifies
t hat the charge is understood by the accused, that ho
understands his rights of trial, end tlmt the Chief Pro-
tector himself believes Unit a plea of guilty is reaHouahlo
in the circumstances. In nearly every instance the
court lias decided not to allow a native to plead guilty.
Provision is also made for the proper legal defence of
native prisoners and for a Protector to address the
court on behalf of the prisoner, in Queensland we
luivo provision for a native court, elected by the
hi,mates, to deal with minor offences between natives on
a reserve. Serious offences, too involved for a native
court, arc heard before a Protector or a visiting justice.
Mr. NKVlLhhh—A special court for natives should
deal only with offences between natives. Where white
men are concerned, the trial should be in the ordinary
courts of the State. Where a native is charged with
an offence against a white person, the act of Western
Australia provides that he may be represented by coun-
sel, and have the protection of the Chief Protector.
In my opinion, not only tribal offences, hut all offences
between i. natives, including charges of murder, should
be heard before a native court, such, court to consist
of a special magistrate appointed by the Crown and
a nominee of the Chief Protector. It should ho given
practically a free band. Difficulty was experienced in
obtaining convictions by juries of white men charged
with assaulting natives. Invariably, the white man
was acquitted, and consequently juries have been
abolished lu Hindi case’s. In Western Australia, all
andi cases arc now heard hy a magistrate; (hey are
not dealt with hy .J ustices, Tribal practice is accepted
as evidence in a native court.
Mr. PLEAKhEY.—I agree that offences between
natives and whites should he hoard in the ordinary
courts of the laud, so long as proper defence is pro-
vided for the native.
Mr. McLEAN.—Wr? must provide for eases iu which
the Protector ia a police officer and may also ho the
prosecutor.
.Mr. NEVILLE.—Iu such cases a special protector
should be appointed.
Ilesolvnd —
That the jurisdiction of the Court for >Tativo Affairs shall
he confined to eases in which bol.li parties are natives.
That mixed cases—those in which a native is involved
against a white, man or a man of- oilier race —be dealt
with by the ordinary courts of the Slate or territory.
That natives be not allowed to plead guilty iu any case,
except with the approval of the Chief Protector.
That a native charged before a white man’s court shall
have adequate representation by counsel or a protector, or
both.
That no confession or statement before (rial shall he sought
or obtained, or, if obtained, it shall be disregarded by the
enuri. [AVi? section 00(1.) of tin; 'Native .1 diiiiniNfrttlion J. el,
IftOfi-mWi of Weston] Australia.)
Tlmt. for the purpose of this resolution a native .shall be
a native as defined hy Ibis conference.
CHAINING OP ABORIGINES.
Mr. CAEEODUS. —Previously, it, was the custom in
the Northern Territory to chain prisoners by the neck
when being brought for trial, but a change of Govern-
ment substituted handcuffs for chains, The police
objected, on the ground that chains around the neck
allow prisoners much greater freedom of movement
and cause less discomfort than handcuffs. Recently,
the Minister for the Interior (Air. Paterson) witnessed
a demonstration of the two methods, and was convinced
that the chaining of prisoners around the neck is a
much more humane practice than handcuffing. As the
('oiniiionwealth haw been siworely criticized for chain-
ing iiylivos, 'I should like, (.o hoar tlio opinion of
delegates.
Air. I!LMA K LEY.— Wo have been criticized on ibis
score also iu Queensland. We have left the matter 1.0
the discretion of tlm Police .Depart me at. Tim safety
of i lia escort depends upon llio security of the moans of
restraint placed upon liU prisoners. "When natives
lyivo to fvuvel Jong’ distances the ride is, wherever pos-
sible, to provide moans of transport to obviate walking.
Professor CLELA N1,).-—I think the Conference could
safely go so far as to say that when the usn of chains
is necessary the ucek chain is pr-cferuhle to the luuid-
cuff for liimimio reasons, but all instances of the usu
of chains should hr: reported.
Air. C.VJillODljfS.- TJiut would lie done in the
genera! way. The use of chains is confined to tiro
remofo areas from which prisoners have to be brought.
Air. QUA PA! AN.---Is (ho chain used on witnesses
as well as prisoners who haw to he brought long
distances from the hiisliiJ
Dr. COOK. —Sometimes it lias boon.
iVlr. NEVILLE. —This has boon mil issue in
Western Australia for .10 years or more and
if. has been (.[(‘ended that the use of light made
chains is more humane than handcuffs -when
bringing prisoners from long distances iu the
hush. The practice is not adopted unless it Ik
necessary, but when prisoners, and even witnesses, have
to he brought from the bush the use of light nook chains
of (> 07.. a foot; is adopted. There have been a few
iinfommato instances, of course, but action has been
taken nguinst those responsible. Wo must lake caro
of the safety of an officer who may have to go out
fIOO miles to bring in several natives. This matter was
referred to in the report of the royal commission
appointed in. P.k’4 to investigate, report ami
advise upon mailers iu relation to the condition and
treatment; of aborigines. The Commissioner reported
as follows:
1 Juid no o]i|mrtmii(,y of seeing natives “on I,lio pliant”
other titan tlio prisoner* at llroonu) (Inol while working outside,
I midersliiiul they were chained with 11m wnuuj class of chain
ns would In* used in tin* ease of natives under police escort
in the lilish, nlllmugh the prisoners I. saw writ chained by
the ankle mid not liy Hie; neck. The practice has keen
described iiy one willies* liefore, (lie Ommiission as one mlin-
ing tlio 'greatest misery and degradation. With fill respect
In tlmt, witness—a Judy whose views show numistakahly her
well-intentioiUMl, hut, I think, extravagant;, ideas of what
should Ik: done for tlio native — l noticed, no such direct. linked,
they seemed per/eetly conifortaliic in their chains, they had
every freedom of action, and apparently did not notico’tlieiu.
(ltln‘l witnesses of great experience inmnipxt natives—men
of immune ideas and expressing their honest conviction —lavu:
said that the. practice, is not. only jieee.saury iu many eases
but, properly carried out, inliicts no hardship on the native,
The Ikvereml J. U. P. Love, tlio Superintendent of Kimnmnya
Mission, at Port (Ucorge IV., probably Urn moat aatisfnclorily
roiidneteil mission I inspected. expressed liio opinion tlmt
chains lire infinitely preferable to liaiidcnirs, and t.lie practice!
is certainly not cruel. 'He thought a neck claim the most
humane way of restraining native prisoner*. This opinion
was supported by Mr, A. W. Canning, who particularly advo-
cated Huiimng liy tlio nock mtlier than hy the wrists, 11m
lafter method preventing t] lo native from defending himself
from all sick by insects.
Kiializin" the difficulties of a police escort,, possibly consist-
ing (H . U ' constable, properly taking chavgu of a number of
wild natives in their own country, T do not sen how chaining
can avoided, it would appear to ho necessary, both from
the point of view of the safety of (.lie. exporting constable and
also in order to prevent escape, Chaining may possibly have
taken phice when ant strictly necessary. Tlmt could hardly
be' avoided when the decision is left to an individual
discretion.
Chains may lie used whore they are necessary. la the
gaols an ankle chain is used, but wh.cn natives travel
from the bush the neck chain ia preferable. This is the
testimony of all the people who have had anything to
do iu a direct way with the natives.
Air. BAlLEY.—Unfortunately tlio chaining is not
always done in a humane way.


'Air. PETTMTT. — I I, Link the psychological effect of
the use of tlie word “ chain ” should be considered.
People object to the chain uji tho ground that it is a
reversion to tho methods of the old feudal days. Could
not a light wire rope bo used?
Mr. NEVILLE,—We have to consider the safety of
our officers, who are sometimes required individually to
bring in bait' a dozen natives from places 400 miles
distant.
Air. .BAILEY, —The native who is brought in may
In: innocent of the charge, and yet may have to walk
that long distance.
Air. NEVILLE.—That is true. I have not always
been, favorable to the methods of tho police. I am
glad to say tho bad old days are past and so are the
bad old methods.
Professor CLELAND. —I think wo ought to take
care to make it clear in any motion that is passed that
neck chains may be used only for humane reasons.
Air. BAILEY. —It seems to mo that this subject
should be dealt with by tiro representatives of Queens-
land, Western Australia, and the Northern Territory.
Wc should not drag in the other States, in which it is
never necessary to use chains in the circumstances that
have been described.
Air. NEVILLE.—What wo wish to do is to affirm
that the methods now being employed to bring
in prisoners from lung distances commend themselves
to tho Conference.
Dr. COOK. —If the Conference ia not willing to say
that the neck chain is preferable to the handcuff when
natives have to travel long distances under escort, wc
may as well leave the subject alone.
Mr. BAILEY.—Why could not a bund round the
waist meet tho ease?
Air. NEVILLE.—The natives frequently escape
when they arc; secured by tho ankles and the waist;
but they have not boon able to escape from tho nock
chain.
Resolved —
That whnre, fur tho safety of the escort and the security
of tho prisoners, it is necessary to subject tho prisoners to
restraint, it is the opinion of the representatives from the
States nml Territory concerned that the use of tho nock chain
while travelling through bush country is preferable to tho
use of handcuffs, for humanitarian reasons tuul having regard
to the comfort of the prisoners.
POLICE AS PROTECTORS.
Air. CAIIIIODDS'.—Strong criticism has been
offered of the practice of appointing police as pro-
tectors, it being alleged that in that capacity the offi-
cer concerned is able to act in the dual role of prosecutor
and defendant. I should like the conference to express
an opinion on this subject. Our view is that, as the
financial position improves, the practice of appointing
police as protectors should be discontinued, but that
it would he impassible to adopt that general principle
immediately. It would cost a large amount of money
to duplicate the personnel in many parts of Western
Australia and the Northern Territory, in order that
tli ere might be both a police officer and a protector.
In any case, when a policeman prosecutes, a protector
is sent, to watch tbe interests of the native concerned.
Resolved- —•
That fuvlhor discussion of this subject be postponed until
the aiext conference.
WOMEN PROTECTORS.
Air. OAKRODTJS.—"We arc frequently being
requested, chiefly by women’s organizations, to
appoint women protectors in the Northern Ter-
ritory. It is claimed that .in many eases where
liibras are concerned, tbe services of women pro-
tectors would be more beneficial, generally speak-
ing, than the services o£ men protectors. We
are prepared to admit that in some instances the
appointment of women protectors is desirable, par-
ticularly where there arc big communities; but in the
bush country, it would be practically impossible to
appoint women protectors. Such appointments would
involve the appointment of protectors for the women
protectors. We do not think that the time has yet
arrived for the appointment of women protectors.
Air. NEVILLE, —We have had some experience in
Western Australia of women protectors. I do not
think that the organizations which are asking for the
appointment of women protectors mean women pro-
tectors at all. They have in mind women inspectors,
which is a very different thing. Some years ago, in
compliance with the request of several organizations,
we appointed half a dozen women, protectors, but they
did absolutely nothing at all. They were honorary
officers, and gradually dropped out of all activity.
In only one ease, did ana of those women protectors
make a report to the department. We have since
been requested again to make such appointments, but I
cannot see that they would have any beneficial result.
Under our act we arc given authority to appoint
such inspectors. There is also provision under the act
to appoint women medical officers. We have authority
to inspect all natives, whether suspected of disease or
not, Personally, I think that that goes a little too far.
It should only be necessary to inspect natives suspected
of disease. I think that as far as possible ■ women
should he inspected only by women, and this is the
departmental procedure proposed, I have already
given instructions that no native woman is to be
examined, except by a doctor or some responsible woman
in the district.
Air. GAEEODUS.—How tumid that be done in tho
distant inland?
Mr. NEVILLE.—Men do not wish to make such
inspections, and wherever it is possible for the inspec-
tions tn be made by women they should be so made.
Thai would be about the only reason why wc would
appoint women inspectors. As regards native girls
employed in domestic service a woman inspector is, of
course, more fitted to look after them than a male
inspector would be.
Mr. HARKNESS.—It seems to me to bo a mutter
which might be left to the discretion of the individual
States,
Air. ."BAILEY.—I agree with that.
Air. CARRODUS. —I should like to obtain an expres-
sion of opinion on tbe subject from tho representatives
of tho bigger States as to whether or not it ia practicable
to employ women protectors. Some organizations
which interest themselves in native welfare have urged
us to appoint women whose duty it would bo to rim
about the bush like police officers inspecting tho natives.
It is not practicable under our conditions, though
something of the kind might he done in regard to big
native settlements near the towns.
Air. AIcLEAN,—I think tlm idea would only be prac-
ticable in the bush if women attached to the stations
were appointed protectors. I do not think that women
belonging to the organizations referred to should be
appointed, because, for the most part, they know very
little of the conditions affecting the'natives. In many
the points brought forward by organizations
in the cities are utterly ridiculous when applied to bush
natives. , ' '
A£r..BLEAKLEY.—In Queensland, we had a woman
inspector for many yours. "We found that, while her
services wore useful to inspect girls in service within
a hundred miles of the cities, she was quite useless in
regard to bush natives in the more distant areas.


.Mr. NEVILLE. llmro is also the difficulty that
aboriginal women will usually not give, in formation to
a white* woman. Tlio fad, is that native women are
regarded a.s 1,5 m chattels of their men folk, who will not
allow them to give information when it la sought. Snob
information can he obtained only from tlio men by a,
man.
Jicsohwd: —
While the n.se of ivimuni proieetnri-i nr inspeef.nrs for the
supervision of IVinaJe natives in populated avmih may in
piiieea he desirahle, the gemival .'ippointimnit of ivnimat is
not cmisiflereil prartirahle. Ijei'iuise of the. Very seattuml
nullin’ of unlive nmipa, Ike iliniaulties of truvnl ami the
isolation.
COMMONWEALTH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO
TILE STATES.
.Mr. .NEVILLE.' A strong c'a.sc cun he made out
in favour of the granting of financial assistance by the
Conmmmvoallh to the States for fim maiiifommeo of
their Nalivc AfV:ii i'h Departments, and; in my opinion,
(his (JouJnreiiee should adopt u resolution recommend-
iug the (Jon unomvoul t;h Dove rumen t to make such
assistance available to the (Slates in proportion to their
requirements. In Western .Australin, the annual expen-
diture on natives amounts to £l. ;i,Os. 2d. for each native
within the con lines of civilisation. Since 1840 wo have
■spent nearly ;£1.250,000 mi the natives, including
£US,U(J(.( on the Kotlucst establishment, which was a
penal sdtlcnmnl; for natives. Tim average annual
expenditure over the (en year periods ending 11)15,
1025 and 11)85 has been, respectively, £24,810, £21,817
and X 2-1,015. Thus it will he seen that the average
yearly expenditure Ims been practically the same over
tlio whole period, amounting roughly to £BO,OOO. The
reason j hat the figures I have quoted arc somewhat
below that amount is because llie revenue derived from
our end,lie stations is set oil against tlio expenditure.
If we. had. sufficient capital to make those, cattle stations
more productive the demands upon the Treasury would
be reduced as lias happened in Queensland. It is
impossible to do what thin Conference suggests should
be done on an expenditure of 80s. a head for each
native. All we can do is to maintain the existing ser-
vices, and provide ilm indigent with, a certain quantity
of food and clothing. The food is neither sufficient
nor of the right kind. It lucks the very things that
the people need. The natives in our State 1 exist on
four articles, meat, ton, /lour unci sugar. Tor tlio most
part they da not get much meat. I am not going to
give (he details of tlio ration because I am not proud
of it. Over and over again, we have urged that more
money should he made available, but the Treasury
has told ns that it cannot ho clone. Lately, I have
Ihjc.il pressing for the establishment of additional settle-
ments, and always I have received the answer: “Wait
until we have been to tho Loan Council”. When the
Ministers return from the Loan Council we are told
that they wore not able to got what they wanted.
Hiuec the presentation of the report of tho recent Royal
Commission, a little more money has been made avail-
able, hut it has been devoted mostly to health services.
Xu my State, all health services connected with the
natives are under my department, with the single
exception nf measures devoted to the control
of leprosy. Fortunately for ua the country hos-
pitals accept native cases. Wo ara just about to
establish a contributory medical fund into winch all
employers of native labour will pay a stipulated
amount, according to the number of natives they em-
ploy, and from this fund we shall he able to provide
medical attention and hospital service. We havo four
or five native hospitals in the north, which cost us a
considerable amount of money, but the standard is not.
equal to that of white hospitals because we
have not sufficient funds. Wc recognize that one
of Ihe main features of native administration must be
the establishment of suitable settlements as clearing
bouses. At the pro-seat time, we have only one such
settlement in "Western Australia, but we need more.
1 think that Western Australia lias done very well by
its natives. Under the old Constitution, it was pro-
vided that a sum equal to one cent, of the revenue
over and above £500,000 a year should bo devoted to
the natives, it was found as years wont on that this
provision was absurd, and it was varied to provide for
tho voting of £IO,OOO by Parliament each year. Even-
tually, this .proved to be insufficient, and the amount
was increased by sums provided annually in the
Estimates. Had the original provision continued we
should now be spending over £BO,OOO a year on the
natives, and. the total expenditure to date would have
been over £2,000,000. After the report of the Royal
Commission was received I estimated that, in order to
carry out its recommendations, it would be necessary
to provide an additional £15,000 for capital expendi-
ture, and another £15,000 a year for maintenance. The
Government could not provide this amount, how-
ever, and now, owing to bad seasons, &e., it is probable
that wo shall not be able to have the vote increased.
As a result, the natives are suffering, and we are coming
in for a good deal of criticism, some of which is
justified. We cannot advance without more money.
Wc have 5,000 children requiring training and educa-
tion, but wc have no money to provide it. In fact,
wo can barely keep thorn in food. • The shin-
ing spot is the success of our cattle stations. They
do not pay completely, but they contribute to the main-
tenance of the natives. The principal station has on
it 18,000 head of cattle, as well as numerous otlmr live-
stock. It costs "between £7OO and £BOO a year, and
makes a fair return to the Treasury. If we had addi-
tional properly equipped stations, wo could do a great
deal -more work among the uncivilized, natives and
those who are becoming detrlbnlizcd. On our principal
station there is no adequate housing for children, and
there is no provision for technical training of the
half-castes at any of our institutions. We have in
Wcsto.ni Australia, a Lotteries Commission, which is a
useful institution, and from which we get special grants.
The commission has helped us to improve our settle-
ments, and has given us money for hospitals and
medical requirements 1 but because of its constitutional
limitations, there are certain things which it cannot
do. It has just furnished us with funds for technical
training at the principal settlement, but that is only a
triflq compared with our needs. If any State has claim
for Commonwealth consideration in this matter, it is
Western Australia. It has a good record in its treat-
ment of the native population, which, was estimated at
55,000 when white settlement began, and is now about
30,000. Because our white population is small, the
cost to support the natives within the Stale is 15s.
per capita. That is an unfair imposition on a small
population. Wo consider that the whole of Australia
should contribute towards the support of our native
inhabitants. I gave evidence on this subject before the
Royal Commission on the Constitution some years
ago, when I urged that tho whole of the people
of Australia should he taxed equally for the upkeep
of the native race. -In Western Australia we have
the greatest number of natives, and-we should receive
assistance to carry on. I therefore plead that this
Conference urge the Commonwealth to help the most
necessitous States in this matter. Unless the work of
caring for the natives is greatly extended, Australia
will be discredited. There is to-day a vast body of
public opinion in other parts of the world contending


that wc are nut doing the right thing hy our aborigines,
X do not suggest that that feeling is entirely justified
hut where there is smoke; them is fire, and without
financial support from the Commonwealth the position
will not bo improved.
Mr. ELEAKLEY.—1 n Queensland, although the
Government is most generous, our work un behalf of
the natives is being retarded because of insufficient
funds for offecilve development of the resources of the
institution to self-support. I support Mr. Neville’s
appeal and had Intended to move a motion in some-
what siiuilar terms.
Air. ITARKNESS.—Our national'pritta denuintLs
that we do something more than we am doing. The
Comracnwraith Government should assist those States
which have small white, hut largo aboriginal popula-
tions, to continue, to develop the work they are doing.
"Professor CLEL.'VND.- —In support of Air. Neville’s
ease, I point out that tin.; whole population of Australia
contributes to the upkeep of natives in the Northern
Territory. That being so, it is reasonable to urge that
some expenditure of Commonwealth money should bo
devoted to the welfare of natives in the States.
Mr. CHAPMAN.—I suggest that if the Conference
agrees to a resolution on the lines suggested by Air.
Neville, it should be accompanied hy an outline of the
reasons actuating it in doing so. On behalf of West-
ern Australia, Mr. Neville has rnado a powerful plea,
based on the financial weakness of his State, and the
fact that it has a large native but small white popu-
lation. I remind the Conference that it has already
resolved that an. effort be made to absorb the aboriginal
population into the white population. That can only
be achieved by a considerable extension of om* activi-
ties. The Slates should continue to hold themselves
responsible for the actual maintenance of the natives,
whilst the Commoutvofilth should he responsible for
their mental development, which ia a necessary pre-
cedent to their absorption in tho white population.
It should be pointed out to the Common wealth that
the activities of tho aborigines protection boards in the
various States have relieved the central Government
of considerable) expenditure on invalid and old-age
pensions mid other social services, for which natives
would be eligible but for tho fact that they were
being supported hy those hoards. The Commonwealth.
Statistician's figures should be used as a basis for
arriving at the actual saving to the Commomveallh in
this direction, ami the. amount so saved should be
allocated among the Stale authorities according to tho
extent of their responsibilities and activities.
Resolved —
That the Cimnncimvuuli.il give financial assistance In ilio
Slates most requiring it to assist them in the care, pro-
tection ami education of natives which, unless extended, will
bring discredit upon the whole of Australia.
This resolution Is put forward for tho following reasons:—
(1) That the principle adopted hy this Conference of the
ultimate absorption of the* native race into the
ordinary community can only he achieved by u
considerably extended program me- of development,
mill education.
(2) That the work of (he .States Is already saving to
the Cominnmveall li a, very considerable sum hy
reason of the fact that there ia being maintained
at the cost of tiie .States a largo number oi people
who would otherwise he in receipt of the invalid
or old-age pension or oi lier assistance directly from
the <.'uinmrjii\venlth for which they are now
ineligible.
(3) That the people of all the States are already con-
tributing the whole cost of tb« euro of natives in
the Northern Territory, mul. it is only equitable
that the people of Australia should also assist in
other parts of the Commonwealth.
(4) That following the precedent • in. other British
dominions, it is reasonable that the Commonwealth
Government should bear a considerable part of tho
cost.
SUPERVISION OP PULL-BLOOD NATIVES,
Dr. COOK,—T move—
That this Cimfmmce alllniH tin* principle that the. general
pulley in ri:s|fit fillf-lilootl natives should in:—
(if) To educate to white bUuular-d, children of the detri-
bnliKod living near centres oi white population,
ami subsequently to place thorn In employment, in
lucrative occupations, which will not bring them
into economic or social conflict with tin: white
community ;
(/>) To keep the scmi-clvilimL muler 11 benevolent super-
vision in regard to employment, social and medical
services in their own tribal areas. .Small local
reserves selected for tribal suitability .should bu
provided in these tribal ureas where nnmnjiloyable
natives! may live ns nearly as possible a normal
tribal life, ami uiudijeetional tribal ceremonies may
continue mid to which employees may repair when
unemployed. The ultimate, destiny of these people
should be their elevation to ohms (a);
(r) To preserve as far ns possible the uncivilized native
in his normal tribal state by the oslahlishment of
inviolable reserves-, each Stale or Territory deter-
mining for itself whether mission activities should
ho conducted on these reserves and the eondiuoiH
under which they may lie permitted.
Tim motion expresses the policy which is lining followed
in the Northern Territory, and which, 1 understand,
is also the policy of "Western Australia and Queensland,
Mr. NEVILLE, —1 suggest that the word “unobjec-
tionable” should qualify the reference to tribal cere-
monies in paragraph ( b } of the motion. In Western
Australia, we have decided that some of the tribal
customs must cease. Several tribal customs have a
deleterious effect on the natives, and they must cmi.sc.
We do not desire to Interfere with customs that are
not harmful, but wo have taken power to stamp out
tribal customs and rites whenever they arc considered
to he harmful,
Professor OLELAN.I),—•The question, arises as to
what arc actually objectionable customs. 1 see no
objection to the continuance of customs which have
no rloVtovious effect on the natives.
Mr. NEVILLE.—It would be fur the State adminis-
tration to decide which were and which -were not
objectionable customs, In India, child’marriages have
been prohibited by law. In Australia wu should have
power to prevent the acquisition of children by' old
aboriginals.
.Dr, LOOK.—I agree In the iiielnsion of the word
“ unohjeetionabk'. ” in my motion.
Motion amended accordingly and agreed to.
RACIAL PROBLEMS.
Dr. COOK.—The policies adopted in respect of half-
castes and aboriginals originated with the Common-
wealth, and, us a Commonwealth officer, I feel
a considerable responsibility in regard to them.
When previously .1. addressed the Conference on
this subject, I stressed the possibility of developing
a coloured race which would be a menace to the white
population in the north. It cannot be disputed that
the, effect of the policy which this Confeu'cnce Ims
adopted, may. have just that result. Therefore, it
must be administered in such a way as to ensure
that racial conflict will, be avoided. Tho danger of
such conflict arising can be visualized from a study of
conditions in North America, Not many years ago,
the. United States of America was divided by a civil
war on the question, of tho treatment of the negro
population. Even to-day, the 'colour problem in that
country is so acute that a negro convict is hi grave
danger of being lynched. Recently the carrying out of
a sentence of death passed on a negro was made tho
occasion for conviviality and carnival. More recently,
two coloured men, suspected of being involved in the
murder of a white man, were taken from tho police
and burnt to death. Such things happen to-day
in a community not very different from our own.
There is at present no evidence of any such attitude to-
wards the coloured people in Australia, for in this


country tlm aboriginal native is regarded with con-
ic niptnoms fnlmnicc. .But whim lie has boon elevated
to a position almost equal to that of a white’‘conflict
may lie expected unless that stage is reached only after
enlightened development. 1 move—
Ueiili/iii>f Hint Hie pursuit id this policy ami iU ultimate
renli/iiUcm, unless sulijvet to enlightened may result
in racial conflict, (lisnstnnis to the happiness ami welfare of
the coloured people, this conference is of opinion that the
Commonwealth should lake such steps as seem desirable to
obtain full information upon racial problems in America ami
Month Africa for. submission io a further conference of Chief
Protectors to he field within two years,
.Mr. NEV i second the motion, although I
<io not think that Dr. (look’s fours will be realized.
■ln Western Australia there has not been imndi trouble
of Ihe kind mentioned, and in tins cases which have,
arisen (ho persona concerned Aver; 1 severely punished.
If wo adopt the policy agreed to at this Conference., the
danger referred to by Dr. (look should not arise, because
iho absorption of the natives into the white race will
take place before trouble is likely to occur.
Mr. [i,LKAKLEY.-"-Dr. (look may be needlessly
apprehensive, but as conditions in (he 'Northern Terri-
lory am dMTerent from those in Queensland, I support
the motion. I know of very few instances of alarming
molestation of white women by aborigines, or of native
uprisings.
Motion agreed to.
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT.
Mr. GA.HiiODUS.—Tim subject of the infliction of
corporal punishment ou natives has been before the
('oiiimonwejilth Government on several occasions, par-
ticularly in connexion with the administration of Now
Guinea.. In the opinion of n Judge of that Territory.
It is ridiculous (o bring a native before the court three
months after an offence has been committed and. limn
punish him. He. recommended lim passing of an
ordinance authorizing responsible officers to inflict
whippings under certain conditions immediately after
the offence has been committed. The New .Guinea Act
prohibits the Hogging of natives, as does also the
Gnvcmnnt of the League of Nations, although whipping
and other minor forms of corporal punishment are
allowed. Our legislation prohibits whipping, although
in Kenya, another British possession, whipping is per-
mitted. In every ease the punishment may be inflicted
only hy a responsible officer who must report the hap-
pening. A iial ivo is capable of understanding the
meaning of punishment given on the spot; and if it is
given in the presence of other natives, and ho is made
to appear ridiculous, it is much more effective than
placing him in. gaol, where he gets a taste of the white
man’s fond and probably' causes more trouble later.
I should like an expression of opinion on this subject.
Professor CLELAND.—There is much to he said for
inflicting some form of corporal punishment, on the
spot, but, in my opinion, it .should be administered only
after consultation with, the old men of the.tribe, and
should actually be administered by them or under their
direction. Tt need not necessarily be done by a white
person at all, although under his supervision.
Mr. BAILKY. —I do not think that any Protector,
should he authorized to inflict corporal punishment in
the way suggested. We have approved of the establish-
ment of native courts, and wo should not agree to
punishment without trial.
Mr. BLEAKXEY.— I do not like the idea of an
officer having authority to inflict corporal punishment
on natives without some form of trial, although I
realize that summary punishment is likely to have
more effect than punishment which is delayed. Not.
only is the power liable to abuse, but reports of such
happenings are also likely to bo greatly exaggerated.
Mr. BAILEY—I do not think that punishment
should he inflicted ’without an order of the court. We
might, however, agree to a court ordering adequate
punishment.
Mr. NEVILLE,—In the past corporal punishment,
men to the extent of unmerciful flogging, was allowed;
but the act now,in force in Western Australia does not
permit natives to be whipped (although it provides,
by regulation, for. the caning’of minors)'. Adult
hush natives, who arc generally quiet and peace-
ful, are just as likely to misunderstand a whipping as
detention in gaol. A native who acts in accordance
with tribal law does not understand why he is punished
for his action. A black man seldom kills a white man,
unless he is provoked. My State does not favour the
corporal punishment of adult natives, hut it agrees
that minors living in settlements should ho punishable.
Dr. COOK.—Normal aboriginal customs sometimes
cause excruciating agony to the young people, hut they
lolerate it without complaint. One of our moat
experienced officers advises that, a mild form of cor-
poral punishment inflicted by a white may defeat its
own object, ill that, while not really hurting the
offender, it may cause him to regard (he white man. with
contempt, and himself as a hero.
Professor CLELAND.—Punishment inflicted by, or
under the direction of, the old men of the tribe-would
probably be effective.
Dr. COOK.—The officer to whom I have referred
suggests that, instead of being designed to inflict pain,
punishment should be directed towards making the
eilnmler look ridiculous in ihc eyes of the oilier natives.
Mr, BAILEY.—No white man is punished except by
an order of a court, and we should require an order
of the court before punishing a native. I see danger
in allowing a Protector of Aborigines to inflict corporal
punishment. If it ia permitted, lie will soon cease to
be regarded aa a protector.
Resolved —
That thin CmilVmuv is not seized of the mmessil.y fnr
corporal punishment,
ABORIGINAL WOMEN.
Mr. CAK.RO.IHTS.—The Commonwealth Aboriginals
Ordinance contains very stringent provisions in regard
to immoral intercourse with native women. The pro-
visions dieniaelvea seem complete, but in applying them
great difficulty is experienced. Unless ho is caught red-
handed, there is little chance of convicting an offender,
because in most instances the lubra, even if she has
not solicited intercourse, will not give evidence. Gan
the Conference .suggest more workable provisions?
Professor -OLELAND.—It may be that, although
convictions are difficult to obtain, the ordinance pre-
vents a great deal of illicit intercourse.
_Mr. BLEAKLEY.—The Queensland Daw also pro-
vides for the punishment of persons having illicit inter-
course with native women. Jt is a defence if the man
can prove that he is lawfully married, under tribal laws,,
to the woman. The provisions of section 9 of tho
Aboriginals Protection Ae.l, 1934, which covers con-
sorting with, or procuring or inducing native females
for illegal intercourse or trading such women in prosti-
tution have proved effective. During the last two
years there have been six or eight successfulprosecutions
and these have had a deterrent effect. The law provides
that no man shall be convicted of being the father of
an illegitimate child horn of an aboriginal or half-caste
•woman on the word of the mother alone.


Mr. NKVILL.E.-i > i'ioi' to the: passing of our pre-
sent act' we had had similar experiences to those out-
lined -by Mr. Carrodns. It was almost impossible, to
bring a man to hook because the word “ cohabit ” only
was used. Since then the law has boon substantially
amended. 1 direct attention to section 46 of the Native
Administration Act in which, as will he seen, the words
“sexual, intercourse ”, “habitually living”, “cohabi-
ting ” and “ soliciting ” are used. The section also
gives ns power in other ways. Hut difficulty is created
by reason of the fact that, fiction must be taken within
six months. It is often impossible to toll whether a
child is the offspring of two natives until after it is
burn. However, wo have had some success with the
new lan 7 and 1 feel sure that equal success may lator
be, attained under , the provisions applying in the
Northern Territory. "We have adopted the of
making inquiries for ourselves in addition to relying
entirely on police investigations, and wo have found it
satisfactory. The new act came into force last Decem-
ber and at, least a dozen cases instituted under its
provisions have good prospects of success.
Mr. ,BT;EAKLEY.--I suggest that a. motion be
carried to the effect. Ilia! il is desirable that uniform
legislation should he passed to provide for the effective
protection of native females.
Mr. CARRODUS. —L think it will ho satisfactory
if we merely have the record that the subject was
discussed by the Conference and that the provisions of
various State acts were described.
Mr. HAILEY,—In that ease we will not takfi a
motion on the subject,
REPORT 03? PROCEEDINGS.
Mr. CARRODUS. —Although we shall have a
Hansard record of the proceedings of the Conference
I think it would be desirable to print a summary of
the resolutions in the front of the, report. The report,
of course, is not verbatim. It is a miming record.
Mr. HAILEY.—I think that that course would be
appropriate.
MATTERS EOR POST-CONFERENCE
CONSIDERATION.
Hrofesaor OLELAND.—As wo have now reached
tho end of our agenda.-I wish to suggest one or two
additional matters for consideration. I. refer first to
the traffic in wild dog scalps and -suggest that it should
be strictly controlled under licence.
Hr. COOK:—Perhaps that subject and also the con-
trol of central Australian reservations, referred to in
die agenda, Item (5) (h), could be referred to the repre-
sentatives of South - Australia, Western Australia and
the Northern Territory for conference after the con-
clusion of the meetings of the full Conference,
Mr. NEVILLE. —That course will suit me.
MATTERS EOR CONSIDERATION BY NEXT
CONFERENCE.
Mr. BLEAKXEY.- —Before the Conference con-
cludes 1 should like consideration to bo given to the
following proposals —
That it i« advisably in. the Internets of 'natives- in the
northern areas that a 3.e.pn)sariiim he established in a suitable
pines in the tropics. . .
That aborigines employed in the pastoral and agneummu
industries should have a definllo basic value placed upon
their labour sufficient to enable them to live in Comfort and
gupuori tho unemployed members o! their families.
That it is desirable that there should be some fund estab-
lished from which aged natives living in a civilized maimer
and not eligible for Commonwealth Old-age and Invalid Pen-
sions should be able to obtain such benefits.
That it; is desirable that as far as may be jiraelimldo in
caeli Stato uniform measures should be adopted for the control
relief and protection of the detribfili/od, particularly in regard
hi their engagement in employment and business dealings.
That in the opinion of this Conference the question of health
is one of the most important factors in the aboriginal protec-
tion problem and it is desirable that as far as may bo
prneticable there should be some uniform and definite policy
governing the prevention ami control of disease, including the
fixing of a nutritious and balanced diet, dental care and other
necessary health measures.
Mr. BAfXEY.—It is hardly desirable to turn our
attention to such important mat-tors' witbiu a, few
minutes of the conclusion of the Conference.
Mr. CARHODUS.—I suggest that the matters
referred to by Mr. Bleaklcy be listed for consideration
at a subsequent conference.
Mr. BLEAKLEiY.—SeveraI of these matters were
contained in the motion submitted by mo in the first
part of the agenda paper; but as to some extent they
may bo regarded as details of the general policy, .1.
shall be satisfied with the course suggested if it he
tho wish of . the Conference.
REPRESENTATIONS BY MISSIONARY AND OTHER
INTERESTED ORGANIZATIONS.
The representations submitted by the National Mis-
sionary Council of Australia, the Victorian Aboriginal
Group, the Australian Aborigines’ League, the Women’s
Christian Temperance Union of South Australia and
others were fully considered by tho Conference.
Definite decisions in regard to many of the subjects
mentioned were arrived at. Other matters were
deferred for consideration at a subsequent Conference.
CONFERENCE SECRETARIAT.
A Secretariat was ■established for the collation of
matters to be discussed at future conferences, and it
was notified that ail bodies and organizations desiring
to submit representations for consideration should for-
ward them to the Secretary, Conference of Common-
wealth and State Aboriginal Authorities, Department
of tho Interior, Canberra.
EXPRESSION OF THANKS.
Mr, HAILEY'. —As the Conference has now con-
cluded its business I wish to express thanks to the
Commonwealth Government for having made this
assembly possible. The exchange of views and
experiences by the members of the Conference must
prove definitely beneficial to all interests concerned and
should lead to improved administration in respect of
the aborigines generally. I take the opportunity, also, to
thank Mr. Hnrrengor for his assistance as secretary
and in preparing reports for . the press. I stated at
the beginning of the Conference that 1 did not expect
to be present at all the sittings, but I am glad that it
Ima been, possible for me to do so.
Dt. MORRIS.—We are all under a debt of gratitude
to the Chairman for the' exceptionally able manner in
which he has conducted tile work of the Conference.
I am sure that all the members of the Conference
would like this fact recorded.
lip.ftolved —
That hearty thanks lie extended to tho. Chairman for tho
very efficient manner in which lie has discharged hia duties,
Mr, CARRO.DUS.—I wish to say on behalf of the
Minister for the Interior, who is unable to be present,
that lie appreciates the work that has been done in
connexion with the Conference. These meetings have
been extremely helpful to all concerned and must prove
permanently beneficial in our work.
The Conference coned--- 1 - 1
Authority; L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra,
