

**s
ter
THE
WESTMINSTER REVIEW
VOLUME XII.
OCT. 1829—JAN. 1830.
LON D 0
PRINTED FOE THE PROPRIETORS, AND PUBLISHED BY
ROBERT REWARD, AT THE OFFICE OF THE WESTMINSTER REVIEW,
2, WELLINGTON STREET, STRAND.
1829.


T. C. Hmiard*
33) Fat«r-uotter-roi»r.


your laws for the admission of foreign produce, obtain adequate prices.
They are distressed by bad prices., and your laws prohibit them from
gaining higher ones. You must admit that this is established fact,
and not speculation.’—p. 100.
They are distressed because they chuse to grow what nobody
wants from them, and demand to be paid for it. They are
distressed because the laws allow them to take twenty shillings
from the people, but do not allow them to take thirty. Like all
others who live upon the public, their wants will keep pace with
any laws that may be made lor their encouragement. Tell the
inhabitants of St. Giles’s that a tax on bread shall be laid for their
support, and the only consequence will be that they will soon
demonstrate that they want three times more. The horse-
leech and her two daughters, are no types of a caste that once
obtains a legal right to live on the community. A country
that should be inundated for the sake of breeding horse-leeches,
—with a promise to supply as much blood as the accumulation
of their numbers should demand, —would be the fitting repre-
sentative of such a situation as we live in.
r ln the next place, why are your shipowners distressed ? Are over-*
trading, the currency, machinery, &c. the causes here ? If the question be
ridiculous, you compel us to put it. Your shipowners are distressed
because they cannot obtain remunerating freights, and they cannot
obtain such freights because you have placed them by law in these
circumstances—in a considerable part of their trade, they must either
accept losing freights, or incur the greater loss of abandoning it to
foreigners, and suffering their ships to rot in port ; the rate of freight
fixed by law in this part of their trade must of necessity be the rate in
their trade generally.’—p. 100.
The ship-owners are distressed (if they are distressed ; —some
people think when they have occasion to make new docks, they
are not distressed), because they insist upon building ships that
nobody wants to employ. Ship or wig, the theory and practice
are the same. The community says, We do not want your wigs.
‘ But you shall have them/ says the peruke-maker, ‘or else
what is to become of me V The community does not want
their ships -Is it intelligible ? There are other British trades-
men, on whom the same amount is expended that would
be expended on the ship-owners ; and with this material ad-
vantage besides, that a difference equal to the difference of
freight is saved to the consumers. The ship-owners want to
have an act of parliament to take the employment and profits
from these tradesmen and give them to themselves, and saddle
the consumers with a loss equal to the difference of freight
besides. What they complain of is, that “you have placed
vox.. %\\,~Wesiminster Review . M


them by law in these circumstances 99 that they cannot take what
they would. Many other classes have precisely the same com-
plaint against the Jaw ; as the new police can testify.
f And now why are your silk, glove, and lace manufacturers
distressed ? They cannot obtain prices which will yield profits to the
master and necessaries to the workman. Why are their prices so bad?
Because they cannot raise them to remunerating ones, without having
their trade taken from them by foreigners. If the prices of the silk
manufacturers Were rajsgf] §ixpeflcg per yard* and those of the glove
manufacturers were raised in the same proportion, you are well aware
that foreigners would destroy the trade of both. As to the lace manu-
facturers, foreign blond lace has destroyed their trade already. Here is
one cause of the distress • another is to be found in the fact which you
cannot question, that the large import of foreign silks, gloves, and
lace, destroys a vast mass of employment, and keeps the market
constantly glutted. Your laws demonstrably prohibit these three
manufactures from obtaining adequate prices, and take from them
much of their trade.’—p. 100.
The demand for f remunerating prices/ always means making
people pay for something they do not want. It means robbing
one tradesman who can make what people will voluntarily buy, to
give the same amount of employment and profits to another that
cannot; with a loss to the consumer equal to the difference of
price besides. ‘ That the large import of foreign silks, gloves,
and lace, destroys a vast mass of employment/—instead of being
a ‘ fact which you cannot question/is an assertion of which
the truth has been disproved. It destroys no employment in the
long run. It only shifts the employment, from those who cannot
make what any body wants to buy, to those who can; —with a
saving to the consumers of the difference of price besides.
What the laws demonstrably do, is to hinder all these classes
from being robbed for the sake of giving half the produce to
the others-. What the laws demonstrably do, is to say* ■ No man
shall have the power of causing others to lose a shilling, on
pretence that sixpence of it will find its way into his own
pocket/
* Several other interests are placed by your laws in similar circum-
stances. Looking at all who are dependent solely or principally on
agriculture in the United Kingdom, including the landowners and their
dependents, as well as the farmers and their servants, they must compre-
hend one-half the population. The Shipping Interest, Silk Trade, and
other Interests, circumstanced as we have stated, cannot have less than
two millions of souls dependent on them. Here, then, is the majority
of your population 3 —here are twelve or fourteen millions of people,
strictly bound by your laws to constant loss and suffering. These
millions have had one-fourth, one-third, and, in very many cases.


1830.
Free Trade,
163
the whole of their property destroyed by your laws 3 and they are
prohibited by them from obtaining higher—taking into account the
losses which bad seasons, &c. must for ever entail on the farmer and
trader—than distress-prices. To ascribe their distress to over-trading,
the corn law, and the thousand-and-one other causes which you plead,
is an absurdity too gross for other ears than those of lunacy. It
is not theory or speculative opinion, but it is a matter of arithmeti-
cal demonstration and a fact established by conclusive experiments,
that your laws render it impossible for these millions to obtain prices
and hold employment which will protect them from constant loss and
suffering.’—p. 100.
This is adding up the amount of what every monkey used to
take out of his neighbour’s pan, and charging it as a common loss.
The proposition urged is, that if there was a return to the
venerable system, it would be a good to the community in
general, and the majority of the population in particular would
get rich. To which there are two answers first, that the
community at large could not be benefited, but the contrary ;
secondly, that if half the population of monkeys did get rich,
it must be taken out of the pans of the others,—which those
others would be blameable to allow, if they can hinder it. The
6 Interests/always mean the interests which particular indivi-
duals or knots among the monkeys, have in what they can
plunder from the others.
The argument about small notes has been alluded to already.
It is imperiously necessary to skip and go on. The show-man
becomes tiresome, and has nothing to produce but the same
creatures over and over again.
* But you say the cheapness is so precious to your consumers. Mr.
Huskisson speaks of a “ British public” which benefits enormously
from being thus dosed with cheap pennyworths. Where is this
“ British public?” Is it to be found amidst your landowners, farmers,
and husbandry labourers ? No. Does it exist amidst your shipowners,
silk manufacturers, and makers of gloves and lace ? Certainly not.
Can it be discovered amidst your cotton, woollen, and iron manufac-
turers, or your producers of Colonial produce? Still, no. But there is
your monied interest. The cheapness destroys the employment of
capital, and reduces interest 5 the capitalist cannot invest his capital •
the fundholder can only obtain an inadequate rate of interest, and he
cannot employ his money more profitably. The mass of the British
population demonstrably suffers severe distress from the cheapness,
and no “ British public” can be seen which benefits from it. Blind as
you are, you see that it is a scourge to your consumers—and, of course,
we need not say what it is to your producers.’-—p. 107.
This again, is adding up what each monkey ceases to take
out of his neighbours pans, and denying that there is any
m 2


monkey public that gains to the same amount. What they
took, was their own gain ; whether any body lost it or not, is
what nobody can tell. And this leads to the real explanation,
which is, that the very individuals who stickle for the right of
taking from their neighbours, pay their quota in the end. It
may not be positively certain, that they each without exception
individually lose as much as they gain ; but it is plain that
this must be the case with by far the greatest part. It is a
fallacy, that demands of Mr. Huskisson to prove, that each par-
ticular ‘ interest ’ to whose depredations he puts an end, is
bettered by the process. If it is so, it is so much the better;
and there is no doubt that it will happen in many cases. But
still the proposition started with is not, that each of the pil-
ferers will necessarily be the better, but that somebody else
will be the better, the proposition is, that there is no general
policy in pilfering. There may have been some of prodigious
pouches, who contrived to be the gainers after all. But the
proposition is, that for that very reason, they ought to be taken
by the throat till they disgorge.
But as before, it is necessary to skip and go on. There can-
not be fifty people in the country, incapable of carrying the
monkey parallel through all that may be omitted.
'The grand principle of genuine politicaleconomy is— National wealth
and prosperity flow from the good profits and wages of the individual ;
therefore, give these to the greatest number . That of the savage counter-
feit you follow is in reality — National wealth and prosperity flow from the
had profits or wages of the individual; therefore give loss and hunger to
the greatest number. Could any thing be conceived more preposterous,
than to attempt to produce general wealth and prosperity by making
every business a losing and starving one ? and yet this is precisely
what you are doing.’—p. 115.
The obligation of the country to the defenders of abuse is
infinite, for coming down from the high stilts of imagination
and glequanea, and 68flde§6ifldiag to fight upon vulgar que§=
tions of arithmetic and common life. It is infinitely easier
to meet them there, than when they contended for ‘ social
order , and the like incomprehensibles. In the piesent case,
for example, is it possible that any body can fail to see, that
what they propose by their recipe, is to increase the profits
and wages of one individual, by diminishing the profits and
wages of some other ? If the profits and wages in the trades
which nobody wants, are to be increased by giving them a forced
employment, it is clear that the profits and wages in some other
trades will be diminished in a corresponding degree by the em-
ployment that is taken from them, and that there will be a loss


to the consuming public equal to the difference besides. That
national wealth and prosperity flow from the good profits and
wages of the individual, is in itself a great truth. But then
these good profits and wages must arise from a positive increase
of trade in the aggregate, which can only be the result of freedom;
and not from robbing one man to serve another. The rate of profits
and wages depends on the velocity with which trade on the
whole is increasing or the contrary. In mathematical terms, it
varies as the fluxion of the trade ; and this again depends upon
the progress that is making in pushing forward the whole scale
of production, by obtaining an increased command over the first
necessaries of life, and is not to be effected by shutting ourselves
up in a rat-trap and rubbing our halfpence against each other.
It is this which demonstrates the limited utility of the vari-
ous palliatives, with which men amuse themselves instead of
applying their efforts to the removal of the great evil which
is the shutting up. Such, for example, are the proposed reme-
dies of " economy / of "clubs for reducing the price of the
necessaries of life/ and of "co-operative societies.’ If the rats
were to be advised to economize or to 4 co-operate/ it is evident
that so long as there was a law restricting the quantity of corn
they should be allowed to consume, all that they could do by it
would be to make their respective shares go a little further than
before, and to cause the division to approach a little nearer to
equality. But none of these inventions could cause a hundred
rats to get fat upon the allowance of twenty-five. In so far
as on their first application they produced a temporary alle-
viation of the misery of the classes whose shares had been
smallest, they would tend to the production of a certain degree
of increase in the population of rats in these classes. But as
soon as this effect was accomplished, all things would go on as
before ; except that the palliative which had been applied
already, could not be applied afresh. The secret of good liv-
ing, with rats or men, consists in keeping open the connection
with the power of procuring a continually increasing quantity
of food ; and whichever of them allow themselves to be cut off
from it to please their betters, condemn themselves to starve
for their amusement.
Finally, in order to support the monkey system,
" Promote religion \j)f the kind which will make men servile^ —protect
public morals \jnnong those who are to give and not to take ] —repress vice
and infidelity \by setting each man to rob his neighbour , and religion to
hold the door] —keep the different classes of the community in strict
subordination to each other [that slaves, white and black , may continue
as they are] —and cherish the principles, feelings, and habits, which give


stability, beauty, and happiness to society £ constituted on the basis that
every man shall feed out of his neighbour's pot who can'^\ —p. 118.
It is not easy to imagine what possible connection religion can
have with the question whether monkeys are best fed out of
each others pans, except as a blind. Somebody is to be per-
suaded, that it is pious to be plundered. Somebody is to be
robbed by the intervention; and somebody else is to get fat.
This is the end-all and be-all of the anti-liberals piety. They
call upon God, that they may take from man. They take away
our means of living on this earth; and offer us their bill on
heaven, payable to bearer, in return.
Nobody believes that the system of plundering one tradesman
to please another, can hold out much longer. It is right, how-
ever, to take all possible means to accelerate its fall. Wherever
it has been tried—in England, in America, in France—there
appears to be a general consent to come to an avowal of its folly.
The means to hasten this, are, first, to endeavour to bring forward
the manufacturers who are injured by the prohibition of the
foreign trade. Thus in France, for example, the wine-growers are
finding out, that they are the people who are depressed by the
foolish attempt to produce iron and cotton goods, instead of
buying them from foreigners with wine. In the next place, to
impress on men in general, the high degree in which they are
interested in the question in their character of consumers; and
the certainty that if there is the least apparent doubt whether
they are among the final gainers by the monkey system or not,
the truth is that they are enormous losers. Finally, that the
people should speak out, and not allow themselves to be beaten
down by the sound and fury of their opponents. The system
is only the monkey system after all, whatever may be the Babel
of noises got up among its supporters. The government
is willing ; but wants the aid of the public voice. It rests
mainly with the public, whether they will continue to be fed out
of one another’s pans, or not.
AnriVIII. — The Picture of Australia: exhibiting New Holland, Van
Diemen's Land, and all the Settlements, from the first at Sydney
I , to the last at the Swan River. London. 1829, Whittaker and Co.
MEW Holland is one of those countries about which a great
deal has been written and very little is known. It is of
course easy to state its distance from the other great continents
of the world, to inform the reader in what degree of latitude
and longitude it is found, and to conjecture pretty nearly the


circumference of its vast and varied shores. With the aid
of a few intelligent settlers, and clever navigators, a tolerably
correct picture may be sketched of a small portion of the
eastern coasts, with some few points, here and there, on the
other parts of the shore ; but beyond this our real knowledge
does not extend, and if we proceed, our descriptions must
be grounded in great measure on theory and conjecture.
Information, however, is continually on the increase. The
courage and enterprise of our countrymen are perpetually con-
ducting them into the unexplored regions of this new world,
and the occurrences of almost every day throw some new light
upon its singularly mysterious recesses.
From Wilson’s Promontory, the most southern point of New
Holland, to Cape Howe, a distance of about two hundred miles*
the shore is low, sandy and barren. Hills, however, are dis-
coverable at a considerable distance inland ; but of these, or
the interjacent country, nothing whatever is known. The
character of the coast still continues the same, or nearly so,
from Cape Howe to Shoal Haven River, the only difference
being, that the low, sandy beaches already noticed occasionally
give place on this part of the coast to stony hills, or extensive
swamps. Among these swamps, unfit for culture, and un-
inviting even to the savage, the mode may be studied by
which in this extraordinary portion of the world, the earth
encroaches upon the dominions of the ocean. Here a pro-
cess, similar to that which bestowed Lower Egypt upon the
children of Misraim, and which is alluded to by Herodotus and
described by Volney, is now going on before our eyes. A small
bay, or inlet of the sea, is first cut off from the great body of
waters by a sand-bank thrown up by the action of the waves,
and thus becomes a detached lagoon ; the sun evaporating the
enclosed waters, and plants springing up in the mud, the lagoon
by degrees becomes a marsh. As the process of evaporation
proceeds, the mud assumes greater consistency, vegetation
becomes more active, rank jungles are formed, trees spring up,
and at length the waters are excluded altogether, and man finds
the soil firm enough for his footsteps.
From Shoal Haven River to Breaksea Spit, the shore is of a
bolder and more varied character, consisting sometimes, as in
the neighbourhood of Port Jackson, of a range of lofty, perpen-
dicular cliffs, alternating with low, sandy beaches, backed by
lagoons. In this line of coast there are numerous natural
harbours, some of which are capable of receiving vessels of all
sizes, while others are only adapted for smaller craft. For some


distance farther northward, the shore assumes a new aspect, the
margin of the sea being covered with impenetrable forests of
mangroves; but when we have passed Shoal Water Bay, and
Broad Sound, the land swells into lofty hills, the roots of which
run out in bold promontories into the Pacific. From this point
to Cape York the curse of barrenness prevails upon the coast,
there being, according to captain King, nothing like a river or
spring of any consequence to be found in a space of seven
hundred miles. Doubling Cape York, and following the vast
sweep of the Gulf of Carpentaria, for upwards of nine hundred
miles, we find a shore equally barren, and presenting to the eye
nothing but vast sheets of blue mud or sand, with a back-ground
of marsh, flooded in rainy weather and scorched to dust during
droughts. This line of coast terminates at Cape Wesel, but
little or no change takes place in the character of the soil.
Even where a river exists, it is said to roll its fruitless waters
over sterile plains; but this can only be true of the vicinity of
the sea, for the thickly-wooded hills, discoverable in the dis-
tance, prove that the desert which stretches round this portion
of the island is merely a narrow belt.
Proceeding onward from Cape Van Diemen to Northwest
Cape, we still find low shores, burnt up during the dry season,
inundated during the rains, and covered over, at intervals, by
thick forests of mangroves, by vast beds of salt, or by saline
plants. It is probable that the description given of this
part of the coast by navigators resembles that which, ac-
cording to Plutarch, in his Life of Theseus, ancient geogra-
phers were accustomed to give of all remote and little explored
regions : “ here, said they, in their maps, are nothing but im-
passable morasses, or trackless deserts/’ Four hundred miles,
at least, of this coast, have only been seen at intervals from a
distance out at sea ; and the imaginations of those who thus
glanced at it as they were driven along before the wind, being
rather gloomy than cheerful, the land was at once pronounced
to be unfertile and uninhabitable. Few countries, however,
could be judged of correctly from such flying observations.
In sailing along the shores of England or France we should
frequently, were we to trust implicitly to the aspect of the coast,
pronounce the soil to be eminently barren, while behind the
bleak cliffs, vallies and plains of the greatest luxuriance and
beauty are found.
From Northwest Cape to Cape Leewin the character of the
coast, with the exception of the small portion surveyed by
captain Stirling, appears to be little if at all known. The French


expedition under Baudin sailed along it, and bestowed names
on a few islands and promontories, but added very little to our
knowledge of the country; and captain King, imagining that
the task had been performed by them, appears to have sailed
coolly along the shore, without examining it at all. From lat.
31°, however, to Cape Leewin, the soil has been found so fer-
tile, the air so balmy and refreshing, and the scenery so fine, that
it has been proposed to bestow the name of Australian Hesperia
upon the country; and, although this boyish piece of pedantry
be ridiculous, it must be confessed that the character of the
coast in the neighbourhood of the Swan River is exceedingly
different from that which the older navigators attributed to the
whole western coast of New Holland.
From Cape Leewin to Port Lincoln, the coast, if we can at
all rely on the hasty and imperfect observations of those navi
gators by whom it has been examined, still presents a low and
barren aspect to the ocean, excepting the five hundred miles
immediately west of the Bight, which consist of one unbroken
line of cliff*, six hundred feet high, frowning over the ocean,
and concealing completely the nature of the country behind it.
Eastward of the Bight, the shore swells into high well-wooded
hills, terminating at Wilson’s Promontory, the point from which
we set out.
In this hasty glance round the shores of this vast continent,
or island, it will be perceived that nothing has been said of the
embouchure of any large river. No river of any magnitude has
in fact been found to pour its waters into the ocean on any side
of the island; and the author of the Picture of Australia, who
seems to place a little too much reliance on the reports of
navigators, concludes from this circumstance that no such
river exists. It should be remembered, however, that on
the north-west coast, which has been only partially seen from a
great distance, captain King found violent currents setting
out from the land, and thence concluded very justly that he was
passing the embouchures of some vast rivers. Subsequently a
salt river of great magnitude has been discovered in the inte-
rior, but where it rises, or whither it flows, has not yet been
determined. Whatever may become of the Lachlan and Mac-
quarie, which are irrationally supposed to terminate in a marsh,
it is utterly improbable that the vast body of waters which con-
stitutes the newly-discovered stream should be dissipated in
morasses. It is not easy, however, to understand upon what
grounds Mr. Cunningham conjectures that this river must flow
through nearly the whole length of New Holland, a probable
length, considering the usual course of rivers, of not less than


six or seven thousand miles, and fall into the sea on the north-
west coast, between Cape Baskerville and Cape Levegne, in
lat. 17°. The course of the river, where captain Sturt, its dis-
coverer, saw it, was towards the south-west; and, unless the
nature of the country, which, however, is hitherto unknown,
forbid it, the more probable inference would be, that it must
fall into Spencer’s Gulf, above Point Lowly. Mr. Cunning-
ham says, indeed, that having had a long conversation with
captain Sturt, he was induced to believe that, although it was
flowing in a south-westerly direction where it was discovered,
and as far as its course was observed by captain Sturt, it after-
wards made a bend toward the north-west. But upon what
grounds was he induced to form this opinion, which, by his
own account of the matter, it is clear was not that of captain
Sturt himself? “ The result of this conversation was,” says he,
“ to induce me to give it as my opinion,” &c.—evidently insinuat-
ing that, on this point at least, his opinion differed altogether
from that of the discoverer. He afterwards, indeed, alludes to
his true reason for conducting the waters of the Darling to the
north-west coast; which is simply a desire to support some
particular theory which he has formed of the interior. But, as
there exist no materials at all from which any rational theory
can be formed, he might as well have given us a theory of the
interior of the moon.
At present, however, as the interior is nearly unknown, and
as the mouth of no great river has yet been discovered on any
part of the coast, the most interesting inquiry appears to be,
whether the new settlement near the Swan River, on the western
shores of New Holland, possesses any real advantages over the
colonies in New South Wales. The best mode of determining
this point appears to be, to recapitulate concisely the character-
istics of both sides of the island, and allow the comparison to
be tacitly made by the reader himself. The “ Australian
Hesperia ” of the Quarterly Review, extending from latitude 31°
to latitude 34° 30' south, is estimated to contain from five to
six millions of acres, of which the greater part is supposed to
be fit for the plough. On this tract of land it is calculated
that at least a million of souls might find comfortable sub-
sistence. It must be allowed, however, that the examination of
the country by captain Stirling was rapidly and imperfectly
performed, and that the language in which he describes it is
particularly vague. “We found,” says he, “ the country in
general rich and romantic, gained the summit of the first range
of mountains, and had a bird’s-eye view of an immense plain,
which extended as far as the eye could reach to the northward,


1830. Aboriginal Natives of Australia 171
southward, and westward. After ten days absence, we returned
to the ship; we encountered no difficulty that was not easily
removable (and therefore no difficulty); we were furnished with
abundance of fresh provisions by our guns, and met with no
obstruction from the natives.” Ihe Quarterly Review, tin ough
whose paper captain Stirling has laid his account before the
public, appears desirous of throwing discredit up ol } the French
account of this coast by saying that “ captain Stirling describes
the weather as very different from that which the Liench ex-
perienced ;” which will not appear to be a very extraordinary
circumstance, when it is added, that the former visited the
country in the beginning of Autumn, and the latter in the
beginning of Winter. There is usually, even in England, some
little difference between September and December.
The climate of the New, or “ Australian Hesperia, appears
to be somewhat humid. The Summer winds are said to be
invariably accompanied by rain, and the land and sea breezes
create a moisture in the atmosphere, which renders the cli-
mate cool and agreeable. It is not added that it is thus
also rendered salubrious. The same coolness and agieeable-
ness are produced by the same means at Lima in Peru,
in the Konkan, and in Malabar; but they are purchased with
agues, fevers, and a hundred similar evils. It must, however,
be allowed, that if this moisture be not particularly favourable
to human life, it greatly promotes vegetation, and mainly con-
tributes to the keeping up of that rich and romantic appearance,
which captain Stirling so much admires. The gentle zephyrs
which sport upon the shores of this Hesperian land appeal to
possess very powerful wings, for in the course of theii summei
gambols they have, in imitation of the whirlwind and the hur-
ricane, lifted up the sand from the beach, and scattered it ovei
the whole face of the hills, a circumstance which seems to have
favoured the old opinion that this side of the island was a
sterile waste. It appears, however, that having passed the
limestone ridge, generally about three miles in breadth, which
runs along the sea shore, we find a plain, the average bieadth
of which may be about thirty miles, extending to the foot ot
the mountain range, which runs almost parallel with the coast
Coal has not yet been found at the Swan River, but there
appears to be the greatest probability that abundant mines of
it exist there. Fresh water is plentiful; and upon the moun-
tains trees of enormous magnitude were observed. But the
advantages of this colony are thus briefly recapitulated by Mr.
Fraser, the scientific companion of captain Stirling :


/In giving my opinion of the land seen on the banks of the Swan
River, I hesitate not in pronouncing it superior to any I ever saw in
New South Wales, east of the Blue Mountains, not only in its local
character, but in the many existing advantages which it holds out to
settlers. These advantages I consider to be,
4 First, the evident superiority of the soil.
f Secondly, the facility with which a settler can bring his farm into
a state of immediate culture, in consequence of the open state of the
country, which allows not a greater average than two trees to an
acre.
f Thirdly, the general abundance of springs, producing water of the
best quality, and the consequent permanent humidity of the soil j two
advantages not existing on the eastern coast. And,
f Fourthly, the advantages of water-carriage to his door, and the
non-existence of impediments to land-carriage/
Let us now turn to the eastern shores of the island. New
South Wales, which has been described by so many writers
that we may be supposed to possess the materials for forming
a just idea of it, has been divided into ten provinces, of which
the most important is Cumberland. This province, which was
the first settled, and contains the capital of New South Wales,
extends about fifty miles along the shore, from the mouth of
the Hawkesbury River to the commencement of the Illawarra
forest. Its greatest breadth may be estimated at about forty
miles. Although fertility be not the general characteristic of
Cumberland, certain portions of it, as the banks of the Hawkes-
bury River, and the Cow Pasture Plains, are of extraordinary
richness, and the general appearance of the country, rising into
gentle hills, and studded with elegant villas, is luxuriant and
picturesque. It has been our good fortune to be favoured with
the valuable MS. Journal of Mr. Dawson, the late agent to the
Australian Agricultural Company : a document full of interest
and novelty, to which the present article will be largely indebted ;
and which, it is with pleasure we add, will ere long be given to
the world. Of Cumberland Mr. Dawson says he found the country
different in some degree from the idea he had previously formed
of it from the published descriptions. It is not in general,
he says, so picturesque and romantic as is imagined at home,
though the scenery is sometimes very fine. The traveller has
to go many miles through woods, even in the located districts,
without seeing any traces of human habitations; and when he
approaches a settled place, he most frequently discovers a house
with a few straggling small buildings, in the midst of fifty or a
hundred acres of cleared or partially cleared land, surrounded
by interminable forests. Occasionally dwellings of more im-
posing exterior, with farms, out-houses, &c. as in England, arq


1830. Aboriginal Natives of Australia, 173
met with, in fine situations, commanding views beyond the
surrounding woodland ; but very few of these are found twenty
miles from Sydney. Where the soil is pretty good, it is lightly
timbered, occasionally resembling a gentleman’s park ; but the
traveller soon loses this idea on finding no mansion at the end
of the scene. In fact he plods on all day from park to park, as
it were, and lies down at night, with his horse tethered beside
him, near some pool of water. He there strikes a light, and
kindles a fire to boil his tea-kettle and fry his bacon. If he be
rich enough he will of course have a sumpter horse and a tent;
but if not, the hard ground and a blanket are his bed and cover-
ing. If it should rain, he strips off’ a sheet of bark from the
nearest tree, and lies down under it, sheltered and secure. Rven
should he get wet, he scarcely ever takes cold, or experiences
any other than a momentary inconvenience, which he forgets as
soon as he puts himself in motion in the morning.
The province of Camden, which lies between the Cow Pasture
and Wingee-Caribbee Rivers, extends indefinitely towards the
south. The coast is covered with a thick forest; and a lofty
chain of hills, called the Merrigong Range, running parallel
with the shore, traverses the whole province. On both sides of
these hills, but particularly on the eastern, a vast extent of level
lands, called the Cow Pasture Plains, was formerly over-run by
herds of wild cattle, which, having escaped from the farms of the
early colonists, and betaken themselves to the woods, were dis-
covered fifteen years afterwards on these plains, immensely
increased in numbers. Settlements, however, have been at
length formed in this district, and, in spite of the government,
which has made every exertion to preserve them, the wild herds
have almost vanished before the depredatory colonists. The
Illawarra district, which forms the most extraordinary feature
in the scenery of this province, commences about forty miles to
the south of Sydney, and extends as far as Shoal Haven River.
On the east, this vast and singular forest, which by its luxuriant
tropical character, reminds the traveller of the woods of Gund-
wana or Orissa, is bounded by the ocean ; and a high range of
hills, rising abruptly from the sea, sweeps round its back from
north to south, and terminates at the Shoal Haven River. In
this forest, among numerous trees which science has not yet
named, the cabbage palm towers to a vast height, and the red
cedar abounds; and, to add to the tropical appearance of the
scene, a thick jungle is every where found.
In Argyle, another of the southern provinces the limits of
which have not yet been determined, the land is wild, lofty, and
covered with deep snow during the winter months, Here the


174 Aboriginal Natives of Australia . Jan,
kangaroo, the emu, the wild duck, and every other species of
Australian game, are found in the greatest abundance. Exten-
sive marshes, and immense barren flats, occupy the interior of
Argyle, in which two large lakes, and the sources of numerous
small streams have been discovered.
Westmoreland, which occupies the eastern slope of the Blue
Mountains, extends northward from Argyle to the parallel of
Broken Bay. The surface of this province is rough and irre-
gular, but rich in scenery and not destitute of fertility.
The maritime province of Northumberland has been but par-
tially explored ; but, although the sea coast is far from indicating
it, the interior, which is an elevated plateau like the interior
of Upper Normandy, is said to be fertile and salubrious.
Of a portion of the province of Durham we are enabled, from
the interesting manuscript journal of Mr. Dawson, to give a
fuller and more satisfactory account than has yet been pub-
lished.—The writer left Port Stephens on the 10th of Novem-
ber, that is, in the early part of the summer, and proceeded for
a short distance by water. Landing in the evening, and
encamping during the night in the woods,
c We proceeded,’ he says, f next morning, about four miles, through
a rather poor but grassy country, alternating between low hills and
flats, near the banks of the Karuah. After crossing the stream called
Hawthorn’s River, we found the country improve, until we arrived at
the River Stroud, where it assumes a still superior aspect. The soil
here is remarkably rich, lightly timbered, and adapted either for
grazing or cultivation. It is also exceedingly well watered by various
streams which fall into the Karuah.’
* Having crossed the Stroud, we proceeded northward, keeping as
near the Karuah as the deep jungle on the west would permit, and at
length came up to the edge of the stream near a conical hill, which
the natives call Telligary. The distance from the Stroud to this hill
and its connecting range maybe about three miles, the country in
the intermediate space being of various character, some portion being
poorer, but the greater portion consisting of low undulating
lightly timbered with apple tree, the almost never failing sign of
good land. For about a mile and a half further we followed the
course of the Karuah, over several rich alluvial flats, or meadows,
alternating with low forest hills of good quality. After crossing other
rich meadows, and stony but grassy hills, well adapted for sheep
walks, we reached a very beautiful little valley, watered by the
Karuah, and two smaller streams, which there pour their tributary
waters into that river. Here we encamped for the night. Our native
guides, who had now, however, travelled beyond their experience,
saw near our resting place some tracks of their wild brethren of the
woods, and betrayed strong symptoms of fear. This is always the
case when they approach strange tribes, savages always regarding


strangers in the same light as enemies. Great numbers of kangaroos
were seen in this valley.
f From this spot we proceeded onward through rich meadow land,,
and crossed a ridge of low but very rich hills, on which I bestowed
the name of Davis’s Hills. The country around was very much
broken, and many of the hills of considerable elevation, the herbage
on their sides being very line, and well adapted for sheep. Having
passed these hills, we came suddenly upon a large tract of country
thickly timbered and of inferior quality, over which the lire had
recently spread. The lire had evidently been occasioned by the
natives, whose footsteps were tracked over the burnt ground with
intense interest, by our sable friends, who appeared greatly alarmed
at the idea of coming in contact with them. On a sudden they
stopped and crouched, like so many setters pointing at their game,
making signs to me at the same time, and calling out softly, and
with extraordinary animation, “ Black fellow, massa ! black fellow,
mass a !”
f At the same moment I saw a party of about twenty natives, at a
short distance in front of us, squatted round a fire, over which they
appeared to be roasting their food. As I was alone with my black
guides at some distance ahead of our party, I made signs to the latter
to halt, lest the strangers should run off through fear, before I could
approach them. The two blacks who accompanied me reluctantly
consented to advance behind my horse, until they saw no signs of
opposition from the tribe, when they came forward with their muskets,
holding up their hands in token of peace, at the same time talking
loudly in their own language, which was answered in the same tone
by the strangers.
c When we had approached to within about thirty yards of them,
they suddenly appeared to be alarmed, and running to a tree near the
fire, where they had placed their spears, they snatched up their arms,
and put themselves in a warlike attitude, pointing their weapons at
me, as if intending to throw immediately. I now ordered my friends
to fire upon them, if they intended to hurt us ; and I instantly cocked
my pistols to do the same. On calling out hastily to them, however,
in a threatening tone, in their own language, they threw down their
spears, and ran off to a bush close by, where they all concealed them-
selves, except two, who approached us in a friendly attitude. When
I saw their design, I immediately advanced to meet them. We shook
hands cordially; and, in token of friendship, I gave them such things
as I considered most useful to them, particularly tomahawks. In
return they presented some of their roasted kangaroo to the guides,
who seemed greatly to enjoy the repast, as well as the conversation
that ensued, which was a long one. Those who had run away, could
not, however, be induced to return, though strongly intreated by
their two companions.
r After leaving these natives, we travelled over a fine grassy forest
country, consisting chiefly of low hills, backed by high ranges on the
right, while on the left the river flowed through a thickly timbered


flat of inferior soil. Through these forests we made our way with
considerable difficulty, and afterwards emerged on a fine plain, covered
with tender grass.’
Mr. Dawson found the land in the immediate vicinity of the
Karuah, the course of which he was still pursuing, to be a fine
grassy plain, which as it receded from the stream swelled up
into gently undulating hills, thinly covered with trees. “ The
scenery,” he says, “ was here beautiful, and resembled a gentle-
man’s ornamented grounds in England.” Kangaroos were seen
in great numbers, and one, weighing upwards of one hundred
and fifty pounds, was killed. Kich grassy plains, and low hills
covered with trees, were discovered as far as the eye could
reach; and the vallies between the ranges were watered by
numerous beautiful streams.
During the fifth day’s journey the party discovered a fine
river, which they called the Avon :
* We crossed it/ says Mr. Dawson, 'at afording-place, and encamped
on the other side, on the verge of an extensive and exceedingly rich
plain. The waters of the Avon are excellent, and abound with fish,
chiefly perch, which we caught easily with bent pins baited with grass-
hoppers. We here saw some wild ducks. Kangaroos, too, were
feeding in the meadows in considerable flocks, unusually tame, and
of a larger size than common. Our native companions being excel-
lent shots, and keen sportsmen in every other respect, we were never
without duck, pigeon, quail, kangaroo, or fish. We had five natives.
Of these three led our packhorses, a fourth wheeled the perambulator,
and the fifth led the kangaroo dogs, and looked out the game, which he
did most dexterously and with signs of pleasure and animation not to
be described.’
These brief testimonies of Mr. Dawson in favour of the
natives, tend strongly to shake the opinion vulgarly entertained
of their intellect and character, especially as they come from
a person of much natural sagacity, and whose powers of obser-
vation had been considerably increased by experience.
The greater number of those writers who, in their reasonings
on human nature, have had occasion to allude to the aboriginal
inhabitants of Australia, appear to have delighted in repre-
senting them as the last link in the chain of humanity.
M. Bory de St. Vincent, w r ho delivers his opinions in a very
decisive tone, appears to dwell with peculiar satisfaction on the
disgusting picture of these poor savages which his fancy has
produced. Their retreating forehead, their distended nostrils,
their hideously prominent lips, which constitute something like
a snout, give them, in his opinion, a striking resemblance to
the mandril ape; and nature having refused them the further


point of resemblance which wrinkles and a peculiar colour
would furnish, they have been at the pains to supply the defect
by art. Their eye-brows are thick and projecting ; their mus-
tachios thickest on the middle of the lip ; their hair is black,
but neither crisp nor woolly, generally falling in large masses,
something resembling curls. It never, he says, grows very
long. The beard seems to be scanty, though the whiskers are
bushy enough. This writer allows, however, that they possess
fine dark eyes not expressive of ferocity. The ear, though
large, is well formed. The body is stout, and well proportioned;
but the arms, thighs, and legs, both in men and women, are
unnaturally slender. They are accordingly weak, in comparison
with Europeans. The women are not much wider across the
loins than the men; though their breasts, which grow long
with age, are at first large, firm, and hemispherical.
This description of their physical form, however, is much
nearer the truth than that which follows of their moral condi-
tion. It is here that the genuine resemblance to the brute is
found. Aristotle imagined that man could not exist in total
ignorance of the social state; but M. Bory de St. Vincent is of
a quite different opinion. Here, he says, are human beings
without religion, without laws, without arts, living in pairs,
entirely ignorant of the first principles of society. To add still
more to their brutality, they are utterly destitute of modesty,
have no clothing, no habitation, not even a tent to defend their
bodies against the inclemency of the seasons, to which they
expose themselves with the most stupid resignation. Nature
itself seems to have condemned them to perpetual wretched-
ness, having bestowed upon them a country which produces
no eatable fruit, no nutritive root, no animal which can be
domesticated.
Virey, in his “ Histoire Naturelle du Genre Humain,” pre-
sents us with a still more frightful picture of the poor Austra-
lians. Agreeing with his old enemy Bory de St. Vincent in
describing them as resembling monkeys, he adds that they
have woolly hair, small eyes, haggard looks, cocked-up noses,
enormous beastly mouths, and round bellies like an alderman.
The women, who, he says, have ugly hanging breasts, are re-
markable for their extreme lasciviousness, even from their
tenderest years. He is more generous, however, in some re-
spects than his rival declaimer; for, having denounced these
poor savages as the lowest and most brutal of the human race,
he bestows upon them a few of the comforts of the state of
nature; viz. a hut, the bow and arrow, and great skill in the
chase. His generosity, however, has carried him too far; for,
vop, xii f — Westminster Review . n


however skilful the Australian may be in the chase, he has not
yet been found in possession of the bow and arrow.
M. Lesson, who is in general a better-informed writer than
the preceding, agrees with Bory de St. Vincent in describing
these miserable negroes as buried in the most profound igno-
rance and wretchedness, and in a state of moral degradation
which almost places them on a level with the brute. He does
not, however, assert that they live like the inferior animals in
pairs, ignorant of all ideas of society ; but remarks that they
are collected into small tribes, which have no communication
with each other. It is difficult to understand precisely what he
means by <f communication.” These little tribes are sometimes
at peace, and sometimes at war, with each other \ and this, we
imagine, is to have some kind of communication. Besides, it is
ascertained that many of these tribes speak the same language;
and that persons living in the vicinity of each other, and speak-
ing the same language, should have no manner of communica-
tion, is difficult to be conceived.
To make out the case against these savages completely, M.
Lesson observes that of all the social habits of their white neigh-
bours they only adopt such as are vicious and degrading; for
example, the habit of drinking. But is not this the case with
the poor and the miserable, even in the most polished countries
of Europe ? If we blame these wild men for not adopting vir-
tues of which we fear they catch but few glimpses among the
colonists, what are we to say of the canaille of Europe, who,
amid ail the blaze of science and civilization, refuse to be philo-
sophers, and remain obstinately and blindly attached to vice
and misery ? According to this mode of reasoning the body of
every nation in Europe are still savages, ignorance and vice
being every where more prevalent than knowledge and virtue.
The pleasures of the senses are the most intelligible of all
pleasures ; and in the hands of a man of acapacity for legislation
tll§ toyg of the for these pleasures might be convert-
ed into a means of civilizing him.
But the most absurd accusation of all is to come. M.
Lesson charges these poor creatures with immodesty, because
they go entirely naked without shame. But were our first
parents immodest in Paradise ? Are our children immodest,
because, if not prevented, they would run about, as they do in
Hindoostan, in the same state ? The immodesty is in the
writer’s own mind. The connexion between the idea of modesty
and the idea of clothing is arbitrary ; and if the naked savage
perform no indecent action, he may be regarded as at least
equal in point of modesty to a Parisian whether in breeches or


petticoats. Besides, it is well known that among many nations
highly civilized, nakedness is sometimes regarded as a sign of
purity. The ascetics of Hindoostan, who profess an extraordi-
nary degree of virtue, go entirely unclad. The ancient Greeks
represented many of their Gods and Goddesses naked ; and
civilized ladies, of unimpeachable virtue, view these statues
without a blush. To a truly modest mind, as Livia finely
remarked to Augustus, a naked human being, whether male
or female, is but a statue.
To contrast, in some measure, with the accounts of the above
writers, with whom Mr. Mai thus exactly agrees, we shall now
present the reader with Mr. Dawson’s description of the manners
and character of these people. On many points he concurs
with the writers whose opinions we have been detailing. He
observes, for example, that both in men and women the arms,
the thighs and the legs are too slender for the body ; but he
saw no corpulent persons in the country. The forehead was
always retreating ; the eye-brows bushy ; the eyes black and
piercing, but deep sunken. The nose, however, instead of
being cocked up, as M. Virey describes it, is most frequently
aquiline, though it is sometimes found artificially flattened.
The hair of the head is always, as it is well described by Peron,
long and lank ; but with some individuals it is finer, with
others coarser, as in Europe. The hair of the children is gene-
rally soft and fine, like their skins. M. Lacepede gravely asserts
that the Negroes are white when first born, and only become
black gradually as the air operates upon their complexions.
The Australian when first born is of a bright copper-colour, and
if he afterwards grows darker, the change is rather attributable
to the oil, soot, and ochre, with which he incessantly daubs
himself, than to the effects of climate. The beard is short and
curly, but very thick. As this appendage, however, is rather
regarded as a nuisance than an ornament, the Australian con-
trives with a burning stick to shave himself, on particular
occasions. When he is fortunate enough to procure a Euro-
pean to operate with a razor upon his chin, he conceives him-
self, like the Turcoman chief in Hajji Baba, to be in possession
of supreme felicity, and grins from ear to ear with inexpres-
sible gratitude. In fact had M. Lesson but once beheld one of
these chocolate-coloured Australians under the hands of a skil-
ful barber, he would no longer have despaired of their civiliza-
tion. The cheek bones are high, as in the Tartar race, and the
whole visage has a square cast, like that of the Mongols.
Though they appear to have made but little progress in the
arts of life, they are not, as M, Bory de St. Vincent imagines,
k 2


insensible to the advantages of a comfortable hut; but on the
contrary, whenever the inclemency of the weather renders
shelter desirable, they erect very neat little dwellings with poles
and twigs, the door of which is always on the lee side. On
that side also the fire is kindled, that the wind may bear the
smoke away from the hut. They are, moreover, extremely par-
ticular in the choice of their food; never eat any thing raw
or tainted ; and select the purest water to drink. They are,
however, a voracious people ; generally drink ardent spirits, in
the neighbourhood of the colonies ; and, consequently perhaps,
are remarkably short-lived.
The women, as among all other nations, are smaller than the
men. M. Lesson asserts that they are still uglier and more
disgusting; but this is not the fact. On the contrary, amoncr
the young women, Mr. Dawson saw many that were very pretty,
and, except that their limbs were somewhat too slender, particu-
larly well formed. Their bosoms were full and handsome, their
waists small, and the breadth across the loins correspondino’
with the developement of the form above.
Instead of the extraordinary lasciviousness attributed to them
by M. Virey, the women of Australia exhibit a remarkable
fidelity to their husbands, and, as might be inferred from that
circumstance, are fond and affectionate mothers. Adultery is
punished with excessive severity. The first act of courtship,
savage as it seems, is generally a mere ceremony, to which the
women submit not unwillingly. The savage has no time for
long courtship, and knocks his mistress down, and carries her
off by force, that her virtue may appear unimpeachable, and her
resistance great. After this cruel ceremony, she is not generally
ill-treated. Mr. Dawson, in fact, observes that the Australians
seldom or never make use of any thing which is given to them,
without sharing it to the last morsel with their wives. Accord-
ingly, when the husband dies, he is long and deeply lamented
by his wife, who would not, in such a state of society, affect
or feel grief for a tyrant.
Having made these general remarks, w r e shall present the
reader with an extract or two from Mr. Dawson’s Journal, which
contains more valuable information on this subject than any
printed book with which we are acquainted.
f The natives,’ says the Journal, f are naturally a mild and harmless
race of savages, and where any mischief has been done by them, it
has generally arisen, I believe, from the bad conduct of their white
neighbours. I have, perhaps, had more intercourse with these peo-
ple, short as my residence has been here, and more favourable oppor-
tunities of seeing what they are* than any other person in the colony*


My object has always been to conciliate them* to give them an interest
in cultivating our friendship, and to afford them protection against
injuries and insults. They have commonly been treated, in distant
parts of the colony, as if they had been dogs, and been shot by convict
servants for the most trifling offences. There has, perhaps, been more
of this done near this establishment, and on the banks of the two
rivers which empty themselves into the harbour, than in any other
parts of the colony. The speculators in timber formerly obtained
licences from the governor to cut cedar and blue gum for exportation,
on lands not located. As much of these kinds of timber was discovered
in this quarter, parties of sawyers and fellers w r ere sent hither to pro-
cure them. These persons are generally desperadoes, emancipists as
they are called 3 and sometimes convicts are mingled with them, com-
manded by an overseer, who is generally a fit leader for this kind of
banditti. These persons, who are the first to come in contact with
the natives, conciliate them, as long as they can make them subser-
vient to their wishes 3 but they soon contrive to offend them, by
striking them, shooting them, or taking away their wives 3 and the
consequences are just such as might be expected. These wild men
lie in ambush, and spear their oppressors when they can 3 and the re-
sult generally is, the flight of the whites to another part of the
country.
* When I arrived at Port Stephens, the natives frequently com-
plained to me, that the whites had shot their relations and friends,
and showed me many orphans whose parents had thus fallen near this
spot. They pointed out one white man, on his coming to beg some
provisions for his party on the river Karuah, who, they said, had
killed ten, and the wretch did not deny it, but said he would kill them
whenever he could.
‘ Having, from my first landing here, done every thing in my power
to prove to these poor natives that I intended to be their friend and
protector, a growing confidence, which is now complete, has been the
result. During a short residence at Port Stephens, previous to the
arrival of the servants of the establishment, I was visited by a consi-
derable tribe of natives, who were very desirous of being on friendly
terms with us. 1 encouraged this disposition, by presenting them
with such food as we could spare, and also a quantity of tobacco, of
which they are particularly fond. 1 also gave to each man a toma-
hawk (or mago, as they call it), which they prize above all earthly
things. They are likewise very fond of biscuit, bread, or flour, which
they knead and bake in the ashes, as they see our people do. But
the article of food which appeared most delicious to them, was the
boiled meal of Indian corn 3 and, next to that, corn roasted in the
ashes, like chesnuts. Of sugar too, as well as of every thing sweet,
they are inordinately fond 3 and one of their greatest treats is to get
an Indian bag, which has contained sugar. This they cut in pieces,
and boil in water, which they then drink, until they sometimes be-
come intoxicated, or blown out, like an ox in clover, and can drink
no more.


' Having discovered what things were most to their taste, 1 in-
formed them, on setting out for Sydney, that I should soon return in
a corbon (large) ship, with a murry (great) number of white people,
and murry tousend things for them to eat. Upon this they set up a
great shout, and expressed the same kind of boisterous pleasure as
school-boys do, when a holiday, or any very agreeable thing, is pro-
mised them by the master. They promised to get—Murry tousend
bark. O plenty black fellow, massa, got plenty bark. Tree, four,
pive nangry (three, four, live days) make plenty bark for white fellow,
massa. You come back soon—we look out for corbon ship, on cor-
bon water (the sea). We tee (see) massa, we lookout, we get it
bark !” After this they chattered among themselves, laughing inces-
santly, and appearing overjoyed at what was to come. I then gave
them a sugar bag, with some sugar, and an iron pot to boil it in.
These they bore off in triumph to their cam}), a short distance from
my tent,• and when the delicious beverage was prepared, they sent to
inform me, that, with my permission, they would perform a corrabaree,
or dance. Of course 1 consented, and they proceeded to make an
immense lire with dried wood, and then set their sugar-pot by the
side of it. After this I observed that they all retired to their camp for
a short time, and when they returned, I noticed that their bodies were
painted in different parts with pipe-clay, in a very curious and even
handsome manner. They had chalked straight lines from the ankle
up the outside of the thighs, which made them appear by fire-light as
if dressed in Hussar pantaloons. Their faces were painted with red
ochre, and their breasts with serpentine lines, interspersed with dots.
They were perfectly naked, as they always are, and in this state they
began to dance.
f A man, and one or two women, act as musicians, striking two
sticks together, and singing one of their rude songs. The dance is
exceedingly pretty and amusing ; but the kind of motion of the limbs
is such as no European could imitate. It resembles that of one of
those puppet harlequins sold to children at fairs, more than any thing
else. They sometimes change places in a confused manner, and then
file off in pairs ; after which they return with increased ardour in a
phalanx, four or live deep, keeping up the harlequin-like motion alto-
gether, in the best time possible, and making a noise with their lips
like— ff proo, proo, proo,” which then changes to grunting like the
kangaroo, of whose voice this is an imitation. It is not unlike that
of a pig. Their eyes were all turned towards me, and when 1 laughed,
and appeared much pleased, they quickened their motions. At length,
when they were tired, they turned their backs, and disunited with a
loud shout, which gradually turned into a hearty laugh.
f During the dance, I observed the women standing in a circle by
themselves, practising a curious kind of motion with their legs. The
calves of the legs are brought sharply in contact, and produce a sound
like that of the clappers which are used in gardens to frighten away
birds, only less loud. On inquiring why they did not dance with the
men, I could get no other answer than that they never did.


f The natives are the best-natured people in the world, and would
never hurt a white man if treated with civility and kindness. 1 would
trust myself any where with them, and with my own blacks, as 1 call
them by my side, I should fear no enemy I could meet with in the
bush. They are excellent shots, and I often lend them a musket to
shoot kangaroos, which is always taken care of and returned. When
away from the settlements they appear to have no settled place of re-
sidence, although they have a district of country which they call their
own, and in some part of which they are always to be found. There
is not as far as I can learn, any king or chief among them. They
have certain customs and ceremonies which appear to be common to
all the tribes, and they meet in large bodies to indict punishments on
members who offend against certain rules, but I could never discover
the authority which calls them together, or regulates the measure of
punishment.
f In general, the culprit, whatever be his offence, is compelled to stand
for a certain time, with a target in his hand, and defend himself from
the spear of whoever among the assembled multitude chooses to throw
at him. They are so dexterous that accidents seldom happen 3 though
the criminal is sometimes killed.
f Of their wars and the motives which lead to them, little is known.
One tribe receives, or supposes it receives, injury from another. A chal-
lenge is sent, but from what authority, or of what kind, no one appears
to know. If I inquire, they will not inform me. They meet, how-
ever, on an appointed day. At first a good deal of parleying takes
place in tones of defiance. They menace each other with their spears,
and by flourishing their short clubs or waddys, stamping all the while
with their feet. Then they retire for a moment, and again come to
close quarters, pushing each other about, their tones of defiance be-
coming more violent, till they are at last worked up to a state of fury.
This being the proper moment for beginning they roar out the word
“worr! worr! worr /” (dwelling with deep emphasis on the r) and
fall-to with their waddys upon each other’s head, dealing about blows
that would fell an ox, until two or three individuals fall, or are dis-
abled, when the victorious party utter a terrible shout or yell. Some-
times after hard fighting they retire a little, flourish their clubs in the
air with loud menaces and violent gestures, and then they fall-to again
until they are tired, when they generally disperse with their heads
broken or bleeding. They seldom kill each other. Their spears are
not used upon such occasions, although they carry them to the fight,
and menace each other with them. Their skulls are found to be much
thicker than those of Europeans 3 and were not this the case, they
would be crushed by the first blow of such a weapon as the waddy.
‘ The women, who frequently suffer from the violence of their hus-
bands temper, perform all the drudgery of the family, as is the case
among all savages. They bring home the fire-wood 3 make the nets
for fishing 5 and carry every thing which is borne about with the tribe
except their instruments of war. They make string out of bark with
astonishing facility, and as good as you can get in England, by twisting


and rolling it on the thigh in a curious manner with the palm of the
hand. With this they make nets, larger than a cabbage net, of
curious workmanship, the meshes being almost as small as those of a
purse, and not a knot being any where to be found in them, except at
the finishing. These nets are suspended to a string tied round their
foreheads, and hanging down their backs, serve as work-bags, or reti-
cules. These contain all the little articles they carry with them, such
as fishing-hooks, made from oyster-shells 3 prepared bark for string, and
gum for gluing their war and fishing spears 3 and sometimes oysters and
fish, when they move from the shore to the interior. With this net, and
frequently a child astride on their shoulders, they move off with the
men, generally in parties. They are remarkably fond of their children,
and if their parents die, the children are adopted by the unmarried
men and women, and are taken the greatest care of. Thev are ex-
ceedingly kind and generous to each other, although their women
work like slaves when it is necessary. If [ give tobacco, or anything
else to one of these men, he shares it unasked with the first person he
meets. When in company with others around a fire, a man never eats
anything given to him, till he has first given a part of it to his wife, or
the other women near him.
The following is deeply interesting :
f On reaching a place where I had established some sawyers, about
four miles from the harbour, 1 found that two of the wives*of our im-
ported servants had eloped with two emancipated convicts 3 that their
husbands, accompanied by a constable, had been in search of them,
but in vain ; that in returning home with some natives, who also as-
sisted in the search, the constable had either accidentally, or by design,
killed the principal black of all the tribes in the vicinity. The sawyers
appeared dreadfully alarmed, saying that vengeance would certainly be
taken 3 that as they were at the outposts, they would be the first to be
speared 3 and that they must immediately be furnished with fire-arms
to protect themselves. To this, however, I did not agree, as I believed
my influence over the natives, and the power I possessed to send off
the offender, would satisfy them, and preserve the peace.
f The two natives who accompanied me stood mute on hearing the
news. Their features betrayed no unusual concern, and they said not
a word till we took our departure for a station where I had established
a farm. After leaving the sawyers I began by saying I was sorry that
poor Tong had been killed 3 that I had liked him and all black fellows
much 3 that I had sent two white fellows off to be hanged, for killing
little Tommy of the Myall 3 and that I would have the constable
hanged too. This seemed to satisfy them in some measure, and we
at length arrived at the farm. Their cheerfulness, however, had fled,
and they sat down by the fire in the hut, sad and pensive, expressing
no anxiety to eat, although before they had heard the news they had
been longing for their dinner. They spoke not a word except when
spoken to. I anxiously watched their motions and appearance,
although 1 had no apprehension of danger from them. In a short


time two others,, whom I had made constables, came in with sorrowful
countenances; and I began to converse with them about what had
happened. When I had done speaking they shook their heads in a
sorrowful way, and then went up to the other two natives, and began
to converse with them.
‘ On my arrival at the spot where the accident or crime had taken
place, I found that as soon as the death of Tong had been made known
to his countrymen, they all crowded to the place. They tied a hand-
kerchief over the wounds in his head, which had been shattered to
pieces, and then two natives carried him off upon their shoulders, the
whole multitude following, and crying and howling most piteously.
They were moving on in this way, in the most regular and decent
order possible, when the surgeon and my nephew arrived to examine
the body. This would not have been permitted to any other white
people, as they never allow the bodies of the dead to be seen if they
can avoid it. Respect for us, however, induced them to put down the
body after a little explanation, but the examination appeared to excite
a good deal of uneasiness, and called forth a few wild and plaintive
expressions from one of the natives before mentioned, “ Bail (not) dat,
massa, bail dat, black fellow no like it.” The^ surgeon left them as
quickly as possible, not wishing to hurt their prejudices.
‘ Before my return all the natives, except about eight, who had
always been employed about my tent, had left the settlement. On ex-
pressing to them my surprise that their friends had left us, they re-
plied “ Bail dat, massa, they come back again by and by. They go
udder side harbour to get pipe-clay. They cry murry long time—
put on pipe-clay—then come back 3” and so they did. What became
of the body of the deceased no white person knew, for they carefully
concealed the place of interment. The oldest man of the tribe made
his appearance one day, after a week’s absence 3 and having welcomed
him, I inquired why he had staid so long away. He made no answer 3
but one of my native domestics whispered, “Dat make it house for
black fellow dat die meaning that he had been preparing and earth-
ing up the grave of the deceased, whose name has never been men-
tioned since his death. They make their graves where they can, in a
soft, sandy, soil, where they dig with their hands to a considerable
depth, and as near to the birth-place of the deceased as possible.
f After a week’s absence they returned in their canoes from the oppo-
site side of the harbour, a few at a time. The women were plastered
over the head, face, and breast, with pipe-clay, and those who were
nearly related to the deceased were covered over with it as far as the
hip bones. Their appearance was frightful, and represented the ex-
treme of wretchedness and despair. When any of the women met
me, particularly the old ones, they held up their hands, shook their
heads in token of grief, and appeared to express an affection for me.
I condoled with them and I always thought that we parted mutually
satisfied with each other. When I inquired after the deceased’s wife
and son, a boy about eighteen months old, the answer that she
was gone to the Bungwall Ground, to patter (eat) Bung wall, and to
mourn 3 that she would return one day, but not yet. It is not usual


for them soon to return to the place where any near and dear relation
has died. Bungwall is fern root, which they roast in the ashes, pound
to a paste between two stones, and are very fond of. It appears to be
nutritious. On inquiring for the deceased’s mother, and younger son,
about six years old, I was told she would soon be here, when she
would come and see me. A few days ago (this account was written
on the spot) I saw a miserable object coming up the hill towards my
tent, pipe-clayed all over, resting at intervals, and leaning against the
trees a if too weak to come on. While I was surveying this object
at a distance, the little boy came running towards me, exclaiming with
all the eagerness and vivacity of a boy—“ Mamma come, massa! dere
mamma. look massa ! you see Yes, George,” said I, “1 do see ”
and I immediately went to her. As soon as she saw me, she held up
ovnrfl!! KS /i n‘ th i? r bod - y , be , nt half forward, and wept till the tears
overflowed her white-wasned cheeks, in streams of unaffected grief
ho.ne'aTtL fZ!" t0 her 80rrow ’ and S ave her *
When the work from which the above extracts have been
made, shall appear, the public will possess the materials for
terming a just opinion on the natives of Australia. There is
enough already to demonstrate the fallacy of the accounts of
tliose whom caprice or interest has led to traduce their fellow
SThe E htl some liber “‘ Rom “ wro,e «■"<
Art. 1 X.~De Keapmanfen Venetien in Julius Cesar , twa Toneelstik-
kenfen Willem Shakspea.re vutit Ingels foarfrieske trog R. Post-
„,llUll_'US' Drukt to Grinz, bij J. Oomkens. 1829.
The Merchant of Venice and Julius Caesar, two plays of William
insen Pea [s c 29 Wt English F 'nsby R. Posthumus. Gron-
-2’ w\ L ZI° eT S f n °, abe S t roor - Demter foar ie « fen Gabes folk
J- Delange (no date, but the last edition is of 1829 )
T folks em ‘7. Defange! ° f ' SAr °° r ‘ Gabes
JN the Anglo-Saxon period of our history, so close was the
, res e m blance between the English and the Frisian languages
that the first teachers of Christianity among the Frieslanders’
l eie /r S f WhOVISI . tedthem from our isla nd. and who found
o difficulty m making themselves intelligible. The ancient
Frisian tongue though modified and changed by time has been
preserved to a great extent even to the present day, in the open
country of Friesland. It has been novv and’then the subject of
inquiry among philologists. More than a century and a half aa o
it excited especially the attention of Franciscus Junius, who
spent some years in the country for the purpose of studying it
more attentively, and who left the result? of his investigations


with the rest of his valuable MSS. to the Bodleian library; it
has occupied the researches of Professor Rask of Copenhagen
who has published a Frisian Grammar, and has been collect-
ing materials for a Frisian Dictionary ; and of late a great ac-
cession of patriotic zeal has led to the creation of a society in
Friesland, one of whose prominent objects is the cultivation of
the national or rather provincial idiom, which has within a short
time received the interesting contributions whose titles are the
head of this article, and which may be considered excellent repre-
sentatives of the present situation of a language, whose affinities
with our own are still very remarkable ; though ten centuries
have been necessarily producing a greater and a greater aliena-
tion.
The old Frisian language is only to be discovered at different,
distinct, and distant epochs, between which there is hardly
any thing like a link of union. Probably the most ancient
document left, vras the Frisian hymns, of which Junius ap-
pears by his MSS. to have made so much use in the composition
of his unpublished dictionary. They formed a par.t of the Junian
collection in the Bodleian, but, according to a memorandum
in the Catalogue, they were stolen from the library more than
a century ago, and so little attention has been given to the
subject, that the theft never, perhaps, excited an inquiry till very
lately, when the works of the renowned linguist have become
an object of some curiosity. The dictionary has preserved a
considerable number of extracts, though perhaps scarcely
enough to enable the most diligent inquirer to form a very ac-
curate notion of the then state of the language of Friesland ;
nor is it quite certain there is evidence enough to decide
that the Carmina Frisica were really written in the spoken
tongue of that country. Those who have studied the Gothic
dialects whether in their Teutonic or their Scandinavian form,
know how difficult it is to affix to many of them their precise
locality. An undetermined orthography adds not a little to the
perplexity of the examination, and the narrow extent over which
a language is spoken instead of diminishing, only increases the
difficulty, as fewer authorities combine to mark the common
standard. Even in the time of Fr. Junius, the orthography
was so little fixed, that the writings of their living authors
are found with very different modes of spelling; and in our
days the two books which are taken as the immediate sub-
ject of this article, and which emanate from the tw 7 o individuals
who must undoubtedly be considered as the greatest living
authorities, represent an orthography so unlike, as frequently to
cause considerable embarrassment to the reader who is unac-
quainted with the systems of both.


In a large part of ancient Friesland the language has left no
traces behind it in the present day. In East Friesland it has
been superseded by the Low German, or Platt-teutsch, and in
Groningen by the common Dutch, modified by a few provincial
idioms of Frisian character, however, such as the common form
of address Yow for the Frisian Jo, the Dutch Gij or the English
You, Of the language of East Friesland many records remain,
and the writings and reprints of Wiarda, a very indefatigable
philologist, who died a few years ago, have given considerable
extension to the knowledge of the East Frisian tongue. His
Asega book, especially, was a valuable contribution to our
acquaintance with the language and the law 7 s of Friesland ; and
from the whole of his publications, taken together, a pretty
correct estimate may be formed of the language used in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Its close resemblance to
English may be judged of from any sentence taken at random,
as for example :
Tint rjucht skref God selva use Hera ; that thet was thet
This law (right) wrote God himself our Lord 3 then that was that
Moyses latte thet israhelitske folk thruch thene rada se and of there wilda
Moses led the Israelitish folk through the red sea and on the wild
wostene and se* komon to the? herge ther is heheten Synay. Tim
wastes and they came to the mountain that is called Sinai. Then
festade Moyses twia jiuvertich dega and nachta; therefter jef God him
fasted Moses two and forty days and nights 3 thereafter gave God him
twa y stenena tefla ther hi on eskrivin hede tha tian bodo , tha skolde
two stone tables there he on written had the ten laws that should
hV leva tha israheliska folke .’
he teach the Israelitish folk.
In the Junian collection of the Bodleian is a volume printed
about 1460 at the convent of Anjum, containing the Laws of
Friesland, by Hidde fen Cammingha.* The Cammingha family
is one of such antiquity, that an old proverb says of them, “The
Cams were with Noah in the ark.” This volume, which con-
tains a great many annotations and collections, in the hand-
writing of Junius, is probably the oldest undoubted specimen of
the language of Friesland Proper, and certainly shows the
closest resemblance to that of Eastern Friesland.
Between the middle of the fifteenth and the middle of the
seventeenth century scarcely any thing is found to show the
march of the language towards the situation in which it was left
by Gysbert Japicx, who died in 1666; the greatest of Frisian
♦ It Rjuecht-boeck fen alre fryja Freezeua freeska Landrjuecht droekt
in kleaster by Jr. Hidde fen Cammingha Parochyaan om it jier 1460,


poets, and by far the most popular writer of the Frisian tongue.
Whether or not he introduced a new orthography, or adopted
that which had obtained currency in his time, we have no
means of knowing, but the difference in the manner of spelling
gives a very changed appearance to the language, and seems to
show more extensive modifications than the progress of two
centuries would have probably brought with them. It is very
likely, however, that even in Japicx’s time the idiom was little
used in social correspondence, as it was certainly little employed
for literary compositions. With no established standard, or re-
cognized mode of spelling, the few persons who wrote in the
Frisian followed therefore their own caprices. Gysbert Japicx
was a school-master at Bolsward ; and his fame as a writer led
Fr. Junius to visit and to dwell with him for some time. The
subjects of his poetry are not very ambitious or sublime. His is
* the talk
Man holds with common man in the daily walk
Of the mind’s business.’
And his is a gentle and a joyous humanity—living in an atmos-
phere of peace and friendship—springing up to the sounds of
gladness, and echoing them back with vigorous eloquence. He
was a good and a happy man, —whose religion, though serious,
was cheerful, —whose wit, though playful, was chaste, —and
who was not “ led astray ” by that “ light from heaven ” which
he has described in one strangely concatenated word : the
' Gaest-glanz-hymmel-silligh-fjoer.’
It would seem as if it were destined that every two hundred
years there should be a Frisian revival. The thirteenth century
fave the Frisian hymns and many of the most interesting of the
risian laws, —and then there is a dreary vacancy for two cen-
turies,—after which the Cammingha volume appears. Two
other centuries pass, producing nothing; and then Gysbert
Japicx appears on the stage himself, creating an era. He is no
sooner dead, than the language seems abandoned and forgotten,
till the nineteenth century ushers in a number of new candi-
dates, who appear likely to obtain for the Frisian tongue an
attention to which it is undoubtedly entitled, and which it has
seldom received.
The appearance of the Translation of the Merchant of Venice
and Julius Csesar is really a very interesting event in the history
of Frisian literature. It is the work of Mr. Posthumus, a
clergyman of the Reformed religion, living at Waaxens, a small
village in the neighbourhood of Leemvarden, where almost shut
put from literary intercourse with the world* ha has acquired so


profound and thorough a knowledge of our language, as to have
given a version of our Oergreate tSjonger, surpassed in correct-
ness by none that has ever appeared. In the Julius Ceesar the
versification of the original is preserved,—not so in the Mer-
chant of Venice, —a circumstance to be regretted, as Mr. Post-
humus has undoubtedly proved his capability to adapt the
Frisian to the English rhythms. In glancing over the version,
no one error, in the right understanding of the original, has been
observed. As a specimen of the language, we will give a pas-
sage from each of the plays. The beautiful description of
mercy— ( The quality of mercy is not strained/ is thus reiv
dered:—
'Port. Genade wirt naat uut de minske wronger!, jae dript
az de mijlde rein nut de loft op de pleats oender her. Jae iz ien
doebbel lok. Jae rnakket him lokkig, dij jouwt, in him, dij krijt.
Jae iz it machtigste ijn de machtigste. Jae stiet de keuning op
sijn troon moaier az sijn kroon. Sijn schepter wijst it geweld
fen wradske macht oon, de eigenschip fen ontsjoch in majesteit,
weriju de schrik in freese foar keuningen sit. Mar genade giet
dit schepterswaaien to boppe ; jae sit op her troon ijn de herten
fen keuningen j jae iz ien eigenschip fen God sels. In ierdske
macht lijkket dan it measte op Gods macht, az genade mei
rjuechtfirdigens pearet. Pearom , howol dijn pleit rjuechtfirdig
iz , betink , Jood, dat nei de gong fen it riuecht nin ien fen
uus behaden wirde kin. Wij bidde om genade: in dat selle
bidden leert uus alls om de dieden fen genade mei genade to
foarjilden.’
From Julius Caesar we give the commencement of the 2nd
Scene of the 2nd Act. It will be found admirable in every
respect. J
longer in hliksim, Cesar komt ir ijn sijn
nachtklean oon.
Ces. Hijmmel, nog ierde, wiern’ tonacht ijn rest.
Calphurnia roap trijeris ijn ’e sliep :
~ Hui. Help I Jae moardje Cesar.” Iz hier ien ?
len slaaf komt ir oon.
Slaaf. Mijn heer!
Ces. Siz oon de presters, dat jae oaiferje, in
Bring mij her miening, ho ’t trijbelje sil.
Slaaf, Mijn heer! Ik sil it dwaan.
(Hij giet hinne.
Calphurnia komt ir oon.
Calph. Wat mien jo, Cesar? Tink jo uut to gean ?
Jo sette joed jou foet naat boetten door!
Ces. Cesar sil uut. Pe dingen , dij mij non


So drijge, saegen’ nooit oors az mijn reg:
Jae rinn’ wei, az jae Cesars aansicht sjeanb
Calph. Cesar! Ik Ijeauwde nooit ijn foargespins.
Mar ’t makket mij nou bang. Hier z ien oon hoes,
Dij boetten dat, wat wij heard habbe in sjoen,
Oerfremde wonders uus foartelt, dij ’e wacht
Sseg. Ten lieuwinn* jonge op de striette, in eak
Gappene grseven, joene’ her deaden oer.
Moedgreate in gleaune fjuechtljue, bij elkoar
Op rijggels ijn de wolken set, so az ’t
Heart ijn de slag, habb’ dear so slein, dat sels
It bloed deldript iz op it Capilool :
It fjuechtgeraas trograttele de loft,
In hijnzers wrinsgen’, in ljue, dij dear ijn
It stearren laaien’, suchten’ swier, in trog
De strietten habbe schijnsils schriemd in goeld.
O Cesar! dizze dingen geane her
Boetten alle oenderfijnninge. In ’k frees her.
Ces. Wa kin J t ontrinne , wat barre sil nei
De wille fen ims Goden, great ijn macht?
Cesar sil dogs uutgean: Want dit foarsiz
Jilt al de wrad neat minder az Cesar.
Calph. Az bidlers stearr’, dan wirt nin stirtstier sjoen.
Mar ’e Goden sels foarsizze prinsen’ dead.
Ces. Altijd stearr’ bange ljue jamk foar her dead :
Mar tijge manneri prieuwe ’e dead mar iens.
Fen al de wonders . dij ik ooit hab heard ,
Iz ’t mij it fremdst’, dat mannen freese kinn’.
Dear jae sjogg’, dat de dead, it ein, dat men
Naat kin ontkomme, komme sil, az hij
Sil in wol komrne.’
But as a means of verbal comparison between the present
state of the English and Frisian idioms we extract a verse from
the dedication to Dr. Bowring; it is certainly a very striking
example of affinity.
Lijkaz Gods sinne swiet uus wrad oerschijnt,
Like as God’s sun sweetly our world o’ershines.
Her warmtme in Ijeacht in groed in libben schinkt;
Her warmth and light and growth and life sends 3
Lijk az de mijlde rein elke eker fijnt :
Like as the mild rain each acre finds :
So dogt eak dat, wat ijn uus, minsken, tinkt.
So does eke that, what in us, men, thinks.
Dij sprankel fen Gods fjoer, ijn uus lein, jouwt
That sparkle of God’s fire, in us laid, gives
Oeral eak Ijeacht in freugde oon Adams team,
O’eralleke light and joy on Adam’s train


Wer clij wenn’t, hulken, oaf paleisen bouwt,
Where they dwelt, hulk (cottage) or palaces build.
In fen wat folk hij iz, ho hij him neam.
And of what folk he is, how he him (self) names.
Of this verse it will be observed, that of fifty-two words fifty-
one are still preserved, and very slightly changed in the English
language, while only one (Freugde) has been superseded by a
word of Norman origin.
And for the sake of the liberal and generous sentiments they
breathe, the following verses are transferred to these pages in
an English form.
To Anglo-saxon blood so near allied *
The Frisian with your reverence, reverence brings
To your great Alfred ; sharing in your pride.
When Caedmon, Shakspeare, or when Milton sings ;
Their songs sound sweetly, as when Gysbert’s strains
Are sung by thee ! whose verse midst English friends.
For foreign hymns a welcoming audit gains ;
And Friesland’s genius with thine England’s blends.
Thou hast seen Friesland—Friesland hast thou known,
Who hast seen many a land, used many a tongue ;
All have their faults and virtues ; we our own ,
Yet know to good the Frisian heart is strung.
And Friesland sheds its rays of glory bright,
bias had—has still, how many a noble name !
Names that have shone like stars thro’ mist and night.
Sacred to memory’s records and to fame.
Thou hast seen this—see here thy Shakspeare stand,
Uttering in Frisian words his tuneful thought 5
De Fries, dij de Angel-Saks so nei ijn ’t bloed
Besibd iz, eer’t mei jou de oergreate foarst,
Jou ALFRED; C.EDMONS , SHAKSPEARES, MILTONS, loed
Klinkt svviet bij uus, lijkke az ? t loed uut de boarst
Fen uus ijnljeave gijsbert ’t ear ijnrint
Fen jou, mijn bowring! dij oon ’t Ingels’ folk,
Oors ,az \va ’t eigen mooi rnar prijs’t, besind ,
Uus Frieslanz wit in kinst foarklearje az tolk.
Dat Friesian babb’ jo sjoen in *t kinnen leerd;
Jo, dij rju naasjes Scegen’, talen sprekk’,
Witt’, dat de Fries sijn goed heeg acht’t in eer’t,
Howol naat blijn foar eigen lek in brek.
Ja, Frieslanz slip jocg eak sijn Ijeacht al mei
Oon ooren: ’t Hie, ’t bet jiett’ sijn greate lie,
Dij mist in nacbt foardreauwen , in drieuw’ wei.
Wa ’t dan eak naat woll’ sjean , wat Friesian die,
Jo, dij dit sjoch , sjean’ bier jou shakspeare stean,
In hear him sjongen mei ien JVieske tong’!


■4\
THE
WESTMINSTER REVIEW
VOLUME XII.
OCT. 1829—JAN. 1830.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETORS, AND PUBLISHED BY
ROBERT HE WARD, AT THE OFFICE OF THE WESTMINSTER REVIEW,
2, WELLINGTON STREET, STRAND.
1829.
