

ABRIDGED REPORT
... ON THE . . .
Northern Territory
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
Tfts Tlatutal features, (Pastures, fllMneral, (present
IResonrces, anb jfuture (possibilities.
With some account of the position Port Darwin wilt eventually hold
as the Brindisi of Australia, when the Trans-Australian
Railway—from South to North. —is completed, by virtue of its
propinquity to the Asian-Pacific terminus of the great Russian
Railway, linking up the main Continental systems, f rom Calais
to Port Arthur, whereby the ocean voyage from England to
Australiais reduced to eight days, or twenty days, including
rail and steamer.
WITH PHOTOS. AND PLAN.
Approved and Issued by
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION TO FEDERALISE THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
Office : 452 Collins St., Melbourne.
COPYRIGHT.
flDelbourne:
Green and Fargher, 14 M'Killop Street.
1902.




THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION TO FEDERALISE THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
(South Australia).
Objects: 1. To collect such complete and unassailable data as to show the necessity and desirability of Federal control of the
Northern Territory {533,620 square miles) of South Australia.
2. To urge the immediate completion of the Trans-Australian railway (from South to North) to Port Darwin, and
to represent the case fairly , as far as the route is concerned , in accordance with the data collected.
3. To seek the attainment, by systematic propaganda, of a more vigorous and liberal policy for the development and
settlement of the country.
Central Office ; 452 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
AUSTRALIA TO LONDON VIA THE GREAT
SIBERIAN RAILWAY.
Nearly 10,000 miles of the new route between Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane,
and London, are covered by railway. The recognised line opens for serious traffic at the end of
1903, and, being made on the most modern principles as to scale and equipment, entitles it to act
aggressively in securing a large share of the mail, passenger, and light express trade between
Europe and Australia. There seems no reason to doubt it will give easier, quicker, and cheaper
traffic than at present by the all-water route. Its existence as a competing route may be delayed
for want of railway transport to the gateway; or, in other words, from the Southern Australian
capitals to Port Darwin; but nevertheless, the Great Siberian railway which is destined to play a
most prominent part in the immediate history of the Far East and Australia will prove such an
important factor in the domestic traffic across the Australian continent as to make it certain that the
completion of the line to Port Darwin will, before long be undertaken. Political considerations apart, the
entry of these two “ trans-continentals,” fed at both termini—Port Darwin and Port Arthur—by ships of
the Atlantic type, able to maintain a speed with the regularity of a railway train, would ensure a
twenty days’ mail and passenger service all the year round between the Australian capitals and
London. The railway from west to east, from Calais to the Asian-Pacific, is a concrete fact.
That its completion will have material influence on Australian interests in the future should be
recognised. The quickest route between Australia and London will henceforth lie through Port
Darwin and Port Arthur, the terminal ports of the two great railway systems.
RESOLUTION PASSED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION TO
FEDERALISE THE NORTHERN TERRITORY (SOUTH AUSTRALIA).
“ Mbereas, the European mail service contracts between the several Australian
States and the P. and O. and Orient Steamship Companies expire in 1905, and in
connection with the renewal thereof it is apparent that a series of proposals will be made-
by other steamship companies to obtain a change in route and more rapid communication
with Great Britain ;
“Hub Mbereas, under the Federal policy and .general circumstances of the
expansion of the Commonwealth’s external commerce, it has been suggested to the
Federal Government to grant subsidies or pay a poundage on Australian mail matter sent
in the future by the Vancouver, Canadian-Pacific route, and by the San Franciso, and New
York route ;


“ant) TOercas, among the routes to be taken advantage of in the future in
obtaining the establishment of rapid steam and rail communication with Great Britain and
Europe generally, it is clear that on the completion in 1903 of the Russian-Manchurian Railway,
affording a direct line from Calais and other French channel ports to Port Arthur in the
Asian-Pacific, this route is destined to rival in importance all other ocean or land routes projected
to link Europe with Australia;
“Hub Mbcreas Port Arthur being within a distance of about 3000 miles
from Port Darwin makes the above-mentioned Russo-Port Arthur route to Australia one of
the most beneficial that has been proposed, and will in time supersede, for all mail and
passenger traffic between Europe and Australia, the present ocean routes ;
“Bub "Mbereae both British and foreign steamship companies are building
fleets of fast steamers to run services between Vladivostok or Port Arthur and Asian-
Pacific Ports, in which schemes it is a foregone conclusion Australia will be included;
“Bub Mbereas Queensland is steadily pursuing a policy of railway construction
with the ultimate object of connecting Charleville with Cloncurry and Normanton, on the
Gulf of Carpentaria, thus leaving a gap of about 160 miles between Cunnamulla and
Bourke (N.S.W.), on the South, and about 800 miles between Cloncurry and Pine Creek, on
the North, to bridge over to complete railway communication between all the Southern Capitals
and Port Darwin—
“Be It IResolvcb, that in the opinion of this Association, the time has
arrived when the Federal Government should have some defined course of proceeding in
fostering a mail route which will reduce the ocean passage between Europe and Australia
to a minimum, and which being the shortest in point of time must eventually become the
cheapest, and in consequence the most frequented. That in view of the Russo-Port Arthur
route possessing these advantages when open for traffic in 1903, the Federal Government
be asked to assist, by a subsidy or poundage on mail matter, the establishment of a British
line of fast steamships of sufficient dimensions to develop a passenger and goods traffic.
And for the purpose of the latter, to have insulated holds and equipped with the most
improved refrigerating machinery, and required by contract to be of such speed to travel
18 knots per hour, to operate between Port Darwin and Port Arthur, or till such time
that Port Darwin is connected by rail with the Southern Capitals—between Normanton and
Port Arthur, calling at Hong Kong and Manila en route. The time occupied on voyage between
terminal ports, including stopping, to be limited to 8 days from Port Darwin and 9 days from
Normanton, to attain—as far as is practicable—a 20 days’ express service between the Australian
capitals and London.
“Bub be it further IResolveb, that the Federal Government be asked
to have the railway completed to Port Darwin by 1905, the date the oversea mail contracts
expire; and at the same time be requested to promise that any proposed new contract for
the carriage of mails to London, whether the Imperial Government be the predominant
partner in the contract or not, shall be subject to review by the Federal Parliament, and
only come into force on the resolution of both Houses.”
Copies of this Resolution were forwarded to the Prime Minister of the Australian
Commonwealth; the Postmaster-General of the Commonwealth; the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, London; the Premiers of the six States in the Australian Commonwealth; the Minister
controlling the Northern Territory, Adelaide; the Hon. V. L. Solomon, M.P., the mover of the motion
in the Federal House of Representatives that the Commonwealth take over the control of the Northern
Territory; the North Australian League; the General Council of Australian Chambers of Commerce,
Melbourne; the principal Chambers of Commerce in Australia ; the Imperial Russian Consul-General
at Melbourne, for transmission to his Government; the Chambers of Shipping and Commerce, London,
Hong Kong, Manila, Singapore, and Calcutta ; the British Ambassadors in China and Japan ; the
China-Australian Steamship Companies; the Australian Press, and the leading British shipping journals
throughout the world.
G. R. McMINN, President,
J. J. RENDLE, Secretary.
Melbourne, 3rd February, 1902.


Mr. Wilson's Route to Port
Darwin.
Miles.
Sydney to Bourke (con-
structed) .. .. 503
Bourke to Eulo or Cunna-
mulla (proposed) .. 105
Cunnamulla or Charleville
to Cloncurry (proposed
Queensland connection) G3O
Cloncurry to Pine Creek
(proposed) .. .. 804
Pine Creek to Port Darwin
(constructed) .. 145
Totai,— Sydney to Port
Darwin .. .. 2247
Brisbane to Port Darwin,
via Charleville .. 1880
Melbourne to Port Darwin,
Waßlnyney.. .. 2335
Adelaide to Port Darwin,
via Leigh’s Creek and
Queensland main line
junction, near Long
lleach .. .. 2154
South Australian direct line
to Port Darwin, across
Central Australia.
Miles.
Adelaide to Oodnadatta
(constructed) .. Gf 8
Oodnadatta to Pine Creek
(proposed) .. .. 10G3
Pine Creek to Port Darwin
(constructed) .. 145
Totai.— Adelaide to Port
Darwin .. .. 189 G
Melbourne to Port Darwin,
via Adelaide .. 2343
Fremantle to Port Darwin,
via Tarcoola and I’ort
Augusta .. .. 3114


INTRODUCTION.
*.Ta.
'HE numerous enquiries from all parts of the Commonwealth and from Great Britain which
are constantly being received by members of the Melbourne Branch of the North Australian
League and the National Association to Federalise the Northern Territory—who have interests
in common—for information respecting the Northern Territory, have led the Council of the
latter body to issue this monograph. It is made up of observations and personal experience of the
President and many of its members, who have resided in the Territory for long periods, and of
compilations gathered with care from authoritative manuscripts, diaries, books, and official documents
and publications. In the selection of material, embracing a large amount of interesting and
valuable information relating to the topography, geology, mineral wealthj and climate of the country,
including its live stock and pastures, with reference to their economic value, respect has been shown
to the personal knowledge and work of men whose opinions carry weight, not only with the people
on the spot, but are everywhere received and believed, as demonstrated by the continual reference
to them in Parliamentary debates, official utterances, and newspaper articles, and care has been taken
to adhere closely to the original text when either quoting or abstracting. The aim of the compilers
has been to get at the solid facts of every question in controversy, to state these facts lucidly, and
to arrange them methodically with a few brief conclusions and deductions, which may be drawn
from an investigation of the data concerning the resources of the country and the light that is
thrown upon the subject by the measures being taken to place it under the control of the Common-
wealth Government, as the first step toward prosecuting with vigour the completion of the Trans-
Australian Railway to Port Darwin, all tending to afford a much more intelligent understanding of
its geographical position, its peculiar characteristics and possibilities. From a perusal of the photo and
maps, which accompany the publication, of the Roper River region, which occupies a portion of
that great section of the Gulf of Carpentaria country, so rich in promise, and attracting at the
present time more attention than any other one section of the Territory, enough can be seen to warrant
the statement being confidently made that the development of this portion of the Territory may be
undertaken to advantage and with a surer prospect of return for the money invested there, either in
horse-breeding, stock-raising, or the special Industries connected with the supplies of fresh and
preserved meats, than perhaps in any other part of Australia; whilst the flesh of the buffalo,
which exist in vast numbers on the lands between the Roper and the Arafura Sea, can also be
made to serve as an article of commerce, in the form of Meat Extract. All that is sought for is
intelligent investigation. It will amply repay the effort. With every due allowance for the blunders
committed in the past, the Northern Territory can rest upon its merits. With the railway through
the continent, thus giving a field for the development of the country, which is now almost a sealed
book, and a common political identity with the Commonwealth—ensuring the same treatment for
interchanging intelligence and merchandise as given to our principal goldfields—that portion of the
vast Australian continent will not compare unfavourably, in whatever light it may be placed, let
that comparison be where it may. Such advantages as these cannot long remain unheeded, but
must speedily attract whatever capital may be required (and it is required) to open it up to mining,
agriculture, and commerce, outside of what the country itself possesses. All interests have felt, and
still continue to feel, that the completion of the railway across Australia is the question of questions
in which the Northern Territory’s advancement is wrapped up. Let the Commonwealth Government
not delay a moment longer than necessary in devising means to complete this great national and
material work on which the prosperity of this extensive and most productive region so largely
depends.
The Compilers—
G. R. McMINN, C.E., S.M.
(Formerly Senior Government Surveyor of the
Northern Territory.)
J. J. RENDLE, F.G.S.A.
(Author of “The Solfataras of the New
Hebrides.”)
Melbourne, November, 1901 <


THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
ITS EXTENT.
name “ Northern Territory,” now universally adopted to designate the northern portion of
the Australian Continent, annexed to South Australia by Royal Letters Patent on July 6th,
v 1863, is the title used in all State papers and legal documents in regard to the vast region
with which we have to deal. Its extent can never be fully realised until one has travelled from
end to end over it, embracing as it does 523,620 square miles, or 335,116,800 acres—a territory in
area equal to France, Germany, Holland, Belgium, Switzerland and Italy combined. It is bounded
on the north by the Arafura Sea or Indian Ocean ; on the south by the 26th parallel of South
latitude; on the east by the 138th meridian of east longitude; and on the west by the 129th
meridian of east longitude. The tropic of Capricorn, which is the point at which the sun turns
again towards the Equator, occurs at 23 degrees 28 minutes latitude, so that with the exception of
about 2J degrees it is in the tropics or Torrid Zone. The coast line included in the before-mentioned
limits, starting from the 138th degree of east longitude, about 120 miles west of the Albert River,
comprises the western shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria, trending northward to Cape Arnheim, thence
west to Port Essington (its most northerly point, latitude 11 degrees south), thence south-west
across Van Diemen’s Gulf and through Clarence Strait to Port Darwin; and thence to longitude
129 degrees east —Cambridge Gulf, into which, about 100 miles within the boundary, the Victoria
River flows. The whole coast line is indented with good-sized bays and estuaries, and dotted with
islands. Without including the latter, it has about 2000 miles in length of seaboard, along
which there is a succession of secure natural harbours, affording anchorage for ships of considerable
tonnage. The rivers flow into the various bays, and being mostly navigable, offer easy means of
access to the interior of the Territory from every side. These advantages cannot be over-estimated.
PHYSICAL CHARACTER.
The coast is very low and flat, and rises by a gemle incline at the rate of about
5 feet a mile; but there are low ridges of quartzite, slate, and sandstone rising almost from the
sea-level to a height of 50 feet or more, gradually increasing to xooft. They run north and south,
that is generally speaking, with a trend to the eastward, As they are traced 10 the south, from
these ridges small creeks and tributaries take their rise, and descend towards the main valleys, in
which there are permanent waters. The lower portions bounding the coast are partly sandy beaches,
but chiefly mud flats thickly fringed with mangroves. The country inland is chiefly of a very level
character, over which railways could be easily constructed.
At a distance of from 30 to 100 miles from the coast a table-land is met with,
varying in height from 300 to 500 feet, and near the Victoria river it attains the height of 1,700
feet. In the neighbourhood of the Gulf of Carpentaria there are no lofty ranges, and the shores
are very level for a considerable distance inland. A few years ago it was customary to regard the
central portion of the Territory as a barren desert, but the travels of recent explorers have entirely
dispelled that illusion. There are now well-beaten routes across the continent to Port Darwin,
along both flanks—Queensland and West Australia—to say nothing of the considerable traffic
along the overland telegraph line; and it is interesting to note that the routes are marked by the
same characteristics—low granite and conglomerate ranges, timbered with myall and mulga scrub,
magnificently grassed, and traversed by numerous sandy creeks ; some excellent country for pastoral
purposes occurring both on the east and the west of the overland line, there being more ranges
and open country to the eastward, most of the creeks met with running to Lake Eyre.
As may be expected in traversing such a vast distance, the journey winds through some wretched
country of sandhills and stony rises, poorly grassed, but the large areas of splendidly grassed
valleys and flats, with water in abundance for nine months out of the year, have excited both
surprise and wonder in the minds of those who have visited and explored the country.


THE CLIMATE.
The climate is tropical, except on the table-lands- where the temperature is lower. There
are but two seasons, the dry and the wet. The different changes of these seasons are so uniform
and regular, that they may be predicted almost to a day. The wet season begins about the end
of October, and lasts about five months, the rainfall during January and February being very heavy.
The maximum temperature at this time of the year is 96 degrees, and the minimum at night 65
degrees. During the remainder of the year it is equable, and not extremely hot, except just prior to
the setting in of the rainy season. There is almost an entire absence of those enervating influences
which prostrate the European labourer in other tropical countries. Dry heat prevails during the south-east
monsoon, which is a mitigating circumstance unknown in India and the greater part of the Indian
Archipelago. The rainfall at Port Darwin in 1896 was 67*360 inches; in 1897, 73*990; in 1898, 57*97;
in 1899, 59*27; in 1900, 47*87. The average rainfall near the coast is about 65 inches. As we
leave the seaboard the climate becomes drier and colder, until, in the centre of the continent,
the thermometer falls below 30 degrees. Drought reigned over many parts of the Territory during
1900, so that the rainfall recorded at the various stations' in the course of that year cannot be
taken as the average in regard to those particular localities. The rainfall has averaged 45 inches
for the past twenty years. Leichardt, writing about the physical characteristics of the country
about the Gulf of Carpentaria, on page 377 of his work, says:—“The most interesting fact,
and which had already been observed by Captain Stokes, was the moderate temperature of this part of
the country. If my readers compare my observations on the weather, from latitude 15 degrees
55 minutes at the east coast, to latitude 17 degrees 39 minutes on the west coast, they will be
struck by the general complaint of cold nights. If they compare the direction of the winds,
they will find that at the east coast the southerly and south-westerly winds were very cold, and
that they became southerly and south-easterly at the apex, and turned still more to the eastward
at the west coast. In comparing these directions of the wind, I was led to the conclusion that
the large plains were the origin arid cause of these winds. The bracing nature of these winds,
and of the cold nights, had a very beneficial effect on our bodies, etc.” Landsborough, in the
record of his “ Exploration of Australia, from Carpentaria to Melbourne,” after quoting the above passage
by Leichardt, on page 106, says;—“ Leichardt was on the coast during the winter months. My
own stay on the Albert River was during the hottest season of the year, viz., from November to
February, and during that period I carefully registered the records of the thermometer, and thus
found the mean range to be very much lower than in some parts of Victoria and New South
Wales, so that the very circumstances which elsewhere cause a high temperature to exist, produce
the very opposite condition at the Gulf of Carpentaria.” This question of temperature is all-
imponant in relation to the pastoral capabilities of the Gulf country.
SOME OF THE SPRINGS AND RIVERS.
The use of an unlimited supply of water, minimising the risks of the pastoralist and the
agriculturist, is absolutely essential to ensure the permanence and prosperity of the present settlement,
and the progress of future settlement in areas not yet occupied. Therefore, to pass under brief
review the peculiar features of the river systems and natural reservoirs of the Territory is clearly
within the sphere of the work undertaken. Ernest Favenc, a well-known authority on North
Australia, in the Sydney Morning Herald, writes:—“ The physical formation of that portion of the
Northern Territory which lies at the foot of the Gulf of Carpentaria is singularly illustrative of
the peculiar formation of most of the continent. The main dividing range, which here, as usual,
forms the edge of the central table-land, is, although of no considerable height,' abrupt, rugged, and
well defined. To stand on the brow of it in some places where the nature of the country affords
an extended outlook, one could fancy oneself on our own Blue Mountains (New South Wales)
reduced to one-third of their size. In this range the heads of the many short rivers running into
the Gulf take their rise, and in their channels, during the early stages of their abbreviated lives,
are to be found some of the finest springs in Australia. Their sources, independent of rain or
drought, are hidden deep in the table-land. They burst forth from its edge at certain levels, and,
after rioting joyously for perhaps a mile or less, suddenly disappear again in the same mysterious
manner that they appeared. ... At the head of the Limmen River is the main range, which, at
the head of the Macarthur, gets lower and less pronounced, loses all individuality, and becomes
simply a ridge, a watershed, and at times only a slight rise. Still, insignificant as it is, it is
8
The Northern Territory.


S.S. “Claud Hamilton,” P.S. “South Australian,” and Barque “Bengal,” moored to landing depot on the Roper River
(90 miles from mouth of river), Northern Territory, discharging material for Adelaide to Port Darwin Telegraph Line.




representative of the main dividing range, separating the coastal from the inland waters; but the
springs no longer burst forth in the picturesque manner that they do where the range is pronounced
and rugged. Still, on the head of the Roper River there are many good permanent springs, mostly
indicated by green reeds and clumps of pandanus, and the water, to use the somewhat vulgar
simile of the Territory, as clear as gin (when Palmerston was a free port Batavia gin was the
national drink).”
THE ROPER RIVER.
The Roper River falls into the Gulf of Carpentaria, in latitude 14 degrees 45 minutes south
latitude, and 135 degrees 35 minutes east longitude, opposite Maria Island, in the south-west
corner of the Gulf. In an official report on the Northern Territory, dated June 16th, 1880, Mr.
E. W. Price, the Government Resident, observes:—
“ Then there is the Roper, navigable for steamers of 1000 tons for over 100 miles. A
party is now away under the charge of Mr. McMinn, the senior surveyor, making surveys
on that river and the Strangways, with a view of throwing open the splendid land there,
which has hitherto been reserved. So that, even without the assistance of railways, there
is at present every facility to bring produce from the land adjacent to those rivers to
Port Darwin.”
The Roper River Bar, which is seven miles from the heads, has from thirteen to fifteen
feet of water on it at ordinary tides during the dry season, from April to December, and during
the rainy season as much as eighteen or twenty feet. It is quite smooth, being sheltered by
Maria Island as a breakwater; an island about seven miles long by three miles broad, and its
shores abound with excellent fish, not forgetting oysters and cockles. There is excellent anchorage
to the west of the island, and ships making for the Roper have no difficulty in picking up
the entrance to the river, having the island for a landmark. The river at the mouth is about one
and a-half miles wide, shortly after narrowing to 600 yards, and continuing at from 350 to 800
yards wide for thirty miles, with not less than eighteen feet of water. At about thirty-five miles,
the water shallows for a short distance. Thence to the landing depot there is abundance of water
—if the shallows are avoided—all the way up the river, varying in width from 400 to 800 yards,
and at the landing depot 120 yards. Above the dep6t, which is ninety miles from the sea, the
river could be safely navigated to Leichardt’s Bar, six miles from the dep6t, by vessels of ten feet
draught. This bar, and the stretch for a mile or so above it, are rocky flats. Forty
miles more could be ascended by small vessels. The banks at the mouth are low plains,
belted with mangrove spurs coming down to the river at intervals. About thirty miles up, the
rises come close to the water with timber, mostly gum and acacia. From this upwards, the banks
are covered with paper bark and many creepers and beautiful shrubs. The strata of the hills on
the Roper is red sandstone. The dip to the south, and nearly all the hills terminate in abrupt
bluffs towards the north. The soil on the plains is a red sandy loam, and will grow anything.
There are many creeks and rivers falling into the Roper. There are also several lagoons of salt
and fresh water near the sea, and several fresh-water lagoons inland.
One of the most interesting sources of supply to the Roper River is that coming from
what is known as the “Bitter Springs;” why called bitter is not easily explained, for a use of the
water fails to detect anything of an unpleasant nature. This spring bursts forth from a low
limestone cliff, about three miles from the Roper River, and has wrought a channel of a cavernous
character through the limestone country which it traverses, and through which the water seethes
and boils whilst travelling at a furious rate in unvarying volume. Without doubt, it is one of
the finest natural sources of water supply to be found in Australia, and really one of the chief
sources of the Roper. A glance at the accompanying chart of this magnificent stream will show
it to be the most important river the Territory possesses for navigable purposes. As will be seen
by the photo illustration, kindly lent for purpose of publication by Mr. S. J. Mitchell, one of the
members of Parliament in the South Australian Legislature for the Northern Territory, the steamer
“ Claude Hamilton,” the tug “ South Australian ” and the barque “ Bengal,” are moored alongside its banks,
ninety miles from its mouth, unloading ca>go for the overland telegraph construction party. Other
large steamers, the “ Palmerston,” under the command of Captain Carrington, who checked the survey
of the river, the “ Tararua ” and the “ Omeo,” both well known in the Australian and New Zealand
trade, have discharged, at the same spot, material for the overland line.


The Northern Territory a Rival in Stock-raising and Pastoral
Industries to the Argentine.
HORSE BREEDING.
In the course of his annual report for the year ending December 31st, 1900, on the
condition of the pastoral industry in the Northern Territory, the Government Resident (Mr. Justice
Dashwood) states: —
“ I have taken every opportunity of urging upon the pastoralists of the Northern
Territory the advisability of engaging in the enterprise of breeding horses of the right
stamp for export to the East, and particularly as Indian remounts. That there are
thousands of square miles of country suitable for this purpose, and which under the land
laws can be acquired from the Government on the most liberal terms ... I have
lately had the advantage of reading an article written by Commander Cresswell, r.n., c.m.g.,
and published by the Allahabad Pioneer, proposing that the Indian Government should
establish ‘horse depots in the Northern Territory, for breeding and training remounts for
the Indian army.’ Captain Cresswell was one of the pioneers of the table-lands adjoining
Queensland, and has a thorough knowledge of that country, which he considers admirably
adapted for the purpose he advocates. His article contains most useful and interesting
information, deals with facts and figures, and is well worthy of perusal by those interested
in this subject.” (See Parliamentary paper, No. 53, of 1899),
The South African war has brought into prominence the necessity of the War Department
having at all times a full and good supply of suitable remounts for its troops, and in no part of the world
could better country be obtained than the table-lands of the Northern Territory. As Mr. Dashwood briefly
points out, there are thousands of square miles in the Territory which are quite as well adapted for
the breeding of horses as the wide rolling plains and pampas of South America. Take, for instance,
the country lying about the Mac Donnell Ranges, splendidly grassed, well watered, with a climate
(owing in a great measure to its elevation) not to be surpassed. In the Gulf country, on the uplands
of the Macarthur, Limmen and Roper Rivers there are areas, owing to the variety and luxuriant
nature of the grasses, equally well adapted for horses. In fact, the capabilities and development
of horse breeding in this zone are limitless. The zone traversed by Mr. Justice Dashwood on the
route from Borroloola to Port Darwin is described by him to the Minister controlling the Northern
Territory in the following telegraphic message
“Powell’s Creek, September 19th, igoi.
“Arrived here yesterday. Had a most interesting journey over the table-lands.
Have travelled hundreds of miles over magnificent plains, consisting of rich black and chocolate
soil, thickly grassed with Flinders, Mitchell and a variety of other excellent stock grasses.
All the stock I saw, both young and old, are fat and healthy. I consider the only
requisite to make these lands the finest pastoral country I have seen is a sufficient supply of
permanent water, which it sadly needs, and owing to the lack of which immense areas
remain unstocked. On some of the stations vigorous steps are being taken to supply this
want, and I have every reason to think that the satisfactory prices obtainable for stock, which seem
to me to be likely to continue for some time, will stimulate development in this direction.
It has been proved beyond doubt that practically inexhaustible supplies of water can be
obtained on the table-lands at depths varying from 250 to 450 feet.”
When it is therefore taken into consideration that the foregoing is the condition of the
table-lands in Carpentaria, between the Macarthur and Powell’s Creek, in the interior, it will be
readily appreciated what are the material values of the table-lands of the adjoining Macarthur and
Roper country, which, as already described, has an exceptionally fine water system, Harcus, a recognised
authority on the Territory, on page 154 of the work before quoted, says:—
“It is almost certain to become the entrepot from which Australian horses will be
shipped to the Indian Government as remounts for the army.”
12
The Northern Territory.


A. B. Paterson [Banjo), the well-known Australian author, and Special Commissioner of the Sydney
Morning Herald to the Far East, in a series of articles of travels to that journal, gives in its issue
of September 28th, 1901, a sketch of the Northern Territory. Writing from Port Darwin on August
14th, describing the coast lands from the Gulf of Carpentaria to Port Darwin, he says:—
“These low-lying lands are very rich with big rivers and plenty of water —the rain-
fall is about Bft. per annum—and the soil would grow any kind of tropical product; coffee,
hemp, rice, or anything of that sort. Back of the flat country is the table-land, where splendid
cattle and horses are bred, and where there is also plenty of water.”
In pasture countries with large unsettled areas of elevated rich land the present condition
of the horse-breeding industry is exciting a good deal of <11501135100, and various schemes have been
suggested to encourage the production of roadsters and troop horses in the territory under notice,
where, as has been shown, on the opinion of competent authorities, there is such a wide field.
During the last year there had been the greatest revolution in horse-raising in Australia known for
twenty-five years. The tremendous demand for remounts in South Africa had simply cleared
Australia of horses that were here unsuitable for anything. Animals that would not have fetched
more than or £\ locally had sold for and £\b, and the demand for draught horses for
New Zealand, Western Australia and other places had quite cleared the eastern states of their
surplus. The present demand for India of the better class of carriage horse went to show there
was no branch of stock-raising more profitable or promising than horse-breeding. The bookings by
the British-India line alone for September-October of this year to carry to India amounted to 3300
animals, and the trade is still very active. Owing to the scarcity of horses suitable for military
purposes, the shipments from Victoria and South Australia are lessening, while from Queensland the
number is gradually increasing. The prices of late having grown sensibly dearer in Australia,
America, and the Argentine, the British Government, according to cablegrams in the Australian
press on October 26 this year, purchased 16,000 horses in Russia. The average price received in
India for Australian-bred remounts is £45 per head. Of course, a good portion of this sum went
to the middleman; but, in a scheme submitted by Mr. Alexander Wilson, of Sydney, to
the British War Office authorities for the establishment of an Imperial horse-breeding estate on an
area of 5000 square miles in the Northern Territory, commencing with 10,000 brood mares and
200 stallions, that gentleman states in his letter to the Secretary of State for the Colonies that
after six years there should be available on this basis an annual draft of 5000 head, and the annual
outlay then would be, say:—Management, interest, losses, renewals and
repairs, /3000 —,£40,000. Cost per head, 5000 for — £B per head. Keeping on hand:
Could be kept on hand and in hand for £1 per head per annum. Earlier returns, says Mr.
Wilson, could be obtained by picking up colts, using the farms as depots, and working them out
in mobs to the main run. If the heavy profit of the middleman’s intervention could be saved in
carrying on the horse trade with India, the above figures of Mr. Wilson show the very considerable
gain in breeding horses for Army use. A recent article on the subject in the Melbourne Age
briefly but pithily puts the case as follows:
“The Imperial authorities, at enormous expense, obtained hcrses from Australia,
Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Africa, Canada, the United States, and other countries, as well,
of course, as from Great Britain. They should be, therefore, pretty well able to form an
opinion as to the best class of animals for the purpose. . . . Given an incentive such as
has now arrived, in the shape of a great demand, Australia should supply a large proportion
of these valuable animals, and, what is more, profit handsomely by the business. There
are two or three considerations which must be put in the forefront:— -
“1. The providing of the best horses for home service.
“2. The breeding of a first-class animal for export.
“3. The general improvement of the breed.”
The writer of the Age article referred to gives the opinions of Remount-Inspector Beckwith,
of the Victorian Police Department, whose knowledge of horses is very wide, and also Colonel Tom
Price, Commanding Officer of the Victorian Mounted Infantry, who, besides being a good judge of
horses, has obtained personal experience of the behaviour of horses at the South African War while
in command of the Victorian Mounted Contingents. Inspector Beckwith said:—
13
The Northern Territory.


“The points wanted in an Australian-bred horse for war are (i) good bone and a
big frame ; (2) good clean legs, free from hereditary weakness and blemish ; (3) plenty
of stamina and heart. That would be a good strain, and it will have to be a good strain
to produce it. The best Arabs would be the best horses for most of the points. When
I was buying horses for the various contingents (for South Africa) I thought it was a
misfortune to see so many good mares going out of the State (Victoria) which were quite
good enough to breed from. ... It may interest you to know that the French system
is also carried out in India, which country has a standing order for stallions that go to
the Indian studs. Most, if not all, the horses exported from Victoria are not bred here,
but across the border in New South Wales and Queensland. They are driven down, and
then shipped from Melbourne, 1 should say quite e ghty per cent, of them.”
Horses bred in the Northern Territory are also sent overland to the southern capitals for
sale and shipment, and would be included in Inspector Beckwith’s statement regarding exported
horses being bred in New South Wales and Queensland. Colonel Price said :
“ I should say immediately, without any question at all, introduce the best Arab
stallions. I don’t mean the racing ponies .that come down here and are only suitable for
polo. I mean the famous breed of Arab sires from right back in Africa and Arabia and
India; the breed from which we used to get the good old * Sydney-sider ’ of more than
twenty-five and thirty years ago. Those were real good horses. We want thoroughbred
Arabs of 14*2 that will carry 14 stone, and go all day and all night—real hackney
Arabs. . . . Pay ? I should think it would if it were done properly, on the French
system. I’m very glad The Age is taking it up ; it’s a question worth handling, and
there’s money in it. The only thing is, if we’re not sharp we shall not have any mares
left to breed from. I should say, out of the horses I personally bought for the different
(South African) contingents, that sixty per cent, were good mares; it was a shame to send
them away.”
It might be said that the South African war will not be always with us, and the day
must come when Australian exports of remounts to that country will cease. That may be so,
but the failure of horse-breeding establishments in India, despite the importation there of pedigree
stallions, will always place the latter country at the command of the Australian horse-breeder. No
stronger testimony of this can be adduced than from the pages of the Queensland Agricultural Journal
for August, 1900, a Government publication. In an article in that issue on “ Horse Breeding for
Military Remounts,” the author deals with the practical difficulties in the way of Indian horse-
breeding, his remarks are worthy of careful consideration;—
“ The Indian Government has expended enormous sums on horse-breeding stations,
with the result that these establishments have proved absolute failures. One of the
difficulties to be faced by the Indian authorities has been the want of facilities for running
foals in the open. Mr. Kersagee {sic) an Indian gentleman who accompanied Veterinary
Lieutenant-Colonel Anderson, who has been in Australia for the purpose of buying horses
for the Indian military service, when interviewed by Veterinary Lieutenant-Colonel Irving
on the subject of the Indian horse-breeding stations, admitted that they were a failure.
He said:— ‘ We cannot let our foals run out in the open on account of the tigers. These
animals will approach a village and carry off a man, so there is very little chance of
letting mares and foals run loose. The climate, also, is against the building up of
stamina in our native-bred horses. Station after station has been given up, and we
import our horses mostly from Australia.’ ”
The moral of all this is;—The country near the head waters of the fine rivers in the
Northern Territory, flowing into the Gulf of Carpentaria, notably, the Roper and the Macarthur,
with their excellent feeding herbage, abundant water, and cool climate, is especially adapted by
nature for producing the required type of army horse, with less cost to the breeder than in almost
any other country in the world. Horses bred on these uplands have the soundest of constitutions,
and hoofs that stand the batter of the hardest roads. The present war in South Africa has
emphasised the necessity for a continuous supply of horses, both for cavalry remounts and for
artillery and transport ; and has also called attention to the necessity for another class of horses—
namely, one suitable for mounted infantry. In the latter class size is not so much desired.
14
The Northern Territory.


as a mounted infantryman having to mount and dismount rapidly a wiry, well-bred galloway,
ranging from 14-2 to 15 hands, is what is required. While it would take some time
and careful breeding to breed up to the right standard in sufficient numbers for the supply of
heavy cavalry horses, the table-lands of the Northern Territory, in the localities named—and the
same could be said of many other districts—could produce in any number the fastest and most enduring
horses for light cavalry, artillery, mounted infantry, and transport use. The main point to observe
in starting on a large scale is first of all to fix the type, and select sires and mares accordingly.
The horse-breeding industry, not only in the Northern Territory, but on all large areas of medium
quality and hilly country in New South Wales and Queensland, will undoubtedly become the
country’s principal source of riches.
In the magazines for September, 1901, there are several articles about national horse supplies.
One of the most interesting is in La Revue ScientiHque, and is about Russia. The author bears out
our own remarks regarding mounted infantry in the future. This means much more than it used
to because it seems generally agreed now that, whether cavalry be able to act as important a part
as heretofore or not, the infantry should for the most part be mounted. It is therefore - very much
apropos that Mr. Thomas Dyke has published in the Empire Review a brief, but pregnant, article
on England’s “ Future Horse Supply.” For a very long time (the Pall Mall Gazette in a review of
the article says) Mr. Dyke has been intimately connected with horse breeding in Great Britain, and
not many can speak on the subject with greater authority. That gentleman takes alarm at the
probable source of supplies of artillery and commissariat horses to the War Office being cut off.
It may not be generally known that the London Omnibus, and other Tramway Companies in the United
Kingdom, furnish the bulk of the War Office requirements in these classes. In 1899 the number of
omnibus horses in use in the United Kingdom had risen to 44,000 odd, then fell to about 37,500.
The question Mr. Dyke argues is whether this falling off movement will continue, and none but a
positive answer appears possible. The reason of it lies in the displacement of horses in all great centres
of population by electricity or some other tractive power. Mr. Dyke says the British War Office would
be extremely short sighted if it continued to place its dependence any longer on the tramway stables for
its horse supply, and he makes no secret of his conviction that no reliance can be placed on British
farmers as a permanent source of supply. They are more profitably employed in breeding heavy draught
horses than army remounts. Mr. Dyke advises the War Office to trust to the British Colonies in the
matter, making use of the crisp remark, “ They can breed the right kind of horses cheaply! ” The
Secretary for War, replying to a question in the British House of Commons in September last, said that
cavalry and artillery horses sent from England to the South African war cost on an average £42, while
remounts obtained in Canada cost about and those procured in Australia, the United States and
Hungary from £2O to £2s. The Adelaide correspondent of the Melbourne Argus, in the issue of
September 12, 1901, states: —
“ One of the largest horse sales recorded in the history of South Australia took place
yesterday and to-day, when 240 head were sold by Barker Brothers. There were nearly a dozen
buyers representing South African and Indian traders, some of whom came to Adelaide for the
first time to buy. Competition, especially for hacks, remounts and gunners, was animated, and
the prices recorded were the highest obtained in South Australia for many years. One draft of
fifty horses from Oodnadatta (Central Australia) averaged £iy 17s. per head, and thirty-two
from Warrina, which, like Oodnadatta, is in the far north of Central Australia, averaged
£22 17s. nd. The highest price realised was ”
The South African demand is likely to continue for some time to a limited extent, but the
exportation of Australian horses to India must increase. The exports for ten months of this year
number upwards of 8,000, and the bookings, as before mentioned, for transport space are still very
numerous. Judging from the importance the Australian export horse trade holds to-day, it is one likely
to be considerably developed within the next few years on account of the energy and sagacity shown
by those who are calling the attention of the British War Office to the inducements for establishing
breeding stations in the Northern Territory. One fact must not be overlooked. A cable message,
published in the Australian press on November 12th, announced that the British War Office
remount agents, who have purchased over 70,000 horses in Hungary for South Africa, have
reported that the supply of remounts in that country is now completely exhausted. The horses of both
Hungary and the Argentina, according to recent published reports, were found most unsuitable for South
African work When onts considers the rough treatment that Australian horses receive, travelling
day after day a long overland journey from dawn to dark, many nights with no greater
refreshment than a whack on the rump with the bridle as they are turned out to grass on
15
The Northern Territory.


land many times as bare as your hand, it is simply marvellous the endurance of the Australian
horses. This is due to their being able to stand fatigue on small rations, whilst their footsureness
in crossing fords, and climbing tedious country, are well-known.
HORNED CATTLE.
Although 280,000 square miles of the Territory were leased, only 20,000 square miles were
stocked; but it must be remembered that the leasing concessions to develop the pastoral lands were not
made until 1897, and further liberalised by the Northern Territory Land Act, assented to November
22nd, 1899. The provisions under the latter Bill, enabling lessees to surrender existing leases, and
obtain fresh leases on more favourable conditions for a term of forty-two years, and providing
payment for improvements to the out-going lessee, have been hailed with satisfaction by the
Pastoralists, who, without question, now hold their runs, both as regards rent and tenure, on more
favourable terms than could be obtained in any of the other Australian States.
The Territory is essentially a pastoral country, but the relatively small number of live
stock grazing there bore no comparison to the grazing properties and capabilities of the country.
The latter was the true test. As an instance of this, the Hon. J. Lewis, a member of one of the
leading firms of Stock and Station Agents and Salesmen in South Australia, addressing the South
Australian Parliament in September, this year, on a motion dealing with the Northern Territory,
said :
“ That one district alone was capable of keeping 10,000,000 sheep. Barkly’s
table-land, of which very little was known, was a tract of very good country between
latitudes 17 and 21, and adjoining the Queensland border, and extending in a westerly
direction about 150 miles. Some of the cattle bred on that country, after travelling 1150 miles,
sold in the Adelaide market at about £\i 10s. a head, and some sheep which were recently
travelled down brought 16s. He believed that country was capable of carrying from eight
to ten million sheep. It had a very good rainfall, and suffered very little from drought,
and was better to go squatting on than the dry salt-bush country, which this country
would well replace. Some members would remember that the country was known as the
Herbert River blocks, and brought, as rent, up to £2. or £3 a mile. It was close to
the Gulf of Carpentaria ports.”
Mr. Mitchell, the member for the Northern Territory, said:—
“There was the Roper. That river flowed through magnificent black soil flats
and rich lands, and its watershed was enough to make a prosperous land of the Territory.
One friend, who spent many years in the Territory, said that the bullocks working every
day in the district where he was were too fat to work, so much feed did they get. At
another place grass was so high that it collected in the stirrup-irons when going on horse-
back through it; and now and again the collection proved so painful, that it had to be
cleared. The Pastoralists’ party would find that their fellows were turning longing eyes
to the rich pasture lands of the north, and were casting up the cost of working runs
there. And every true man who wants to help to push the world would certainly want
to se; such a large part of it as the Northern Territory sent upon its proper course.”
The Hon. Mr. Sandford, in the course of the debate, made special reference to the pastoral
lands of this vast region, and concluded by saying :
“The world would not look on and see those magnificent pieces of God’s earth
unoccupied.”
Mr. John Costello, of Lake Nash, in his evidence before the Royal Commission on the
Northern Territory in 1895, said :
“ There is a large area of country from Newcastle Waters and the head of the Roper
to the Queensland border at Camooweal. This magnificent belt of country, known as the
table-land, may be said to be the cream of the pastoral land of the Territory. I have the
fullest and greatest faith in the future of squatting in it.”


The report of the Royal Commission and the recent debate in the South Australian
Parliament on the Hon. J. Langdon Parsons’ motion dealing with the transfer of the Territory to
the Commonwealth Government, abound with statements and speeches, made by reliable, practical
men, of the condition and prospects of the country for stocking and settlement. The last-named
gentleman presents the position thus :
“No doubt the question will be asked: ‘Why, then, is not the pastoral industry
in a more prosperous condition ? ’ To this a threefold reply may be given. (i) Just at
the time when cattle were cheap, and stocking was proceeding rapidly, the red-water disease,
caused by ticks, I believe, developed, decimated the overlanding herds, and stopped all
enterprise. (2) The great financial crisis in 1891-2 caused the calling-in of capital in
outside investments, and the abandonment of - a large number of promising pastoral
undertakings. (3) The protracted drought, which has so terribly reduced the sheep and
cattle in Queensland, New South Wales and South Australia, has, in degree, been experienced
in the Northern Territory, and the scarcity and high price of stock has necessarily stopped
inland and northern pioneer projects.”
Happily, the disastrous causes enumerated by Mr. Parsons, which were unparalleled in the
history of any country, are now removed. It is not pleasing to make remarks of such an
extremely adverse character, but nothing can be gained by hiding the difficulties that overwhelmed
the pastoral interest of Australia, from one end to the other, for a protracted period. The reports
from the inspectors of stock at Camooweal, Roper River, Victoria River, and Borroloola,
and the Stock Department at Palmerston, under dates from November 30th, 1900, to March
21st, 1901, printed as appendices to the Government Resident’s Report on the Northern
Territory for the year 1900, all bear testimony to the healthy condition of the herds, and the
abundance of feed and water in their several districts. The exports of horned cattle for the year
1900 were 8,490, declared value, ,£39,277; as compared with 11,604, °f the value of for
1899. A special and an extra-local interest attaches to the following paragraph in the report
referred to. Mr. Justice Dashwood states :
“The effect of the removal by the Western Australian Government of the
prohibition on the importation of stock has, as I anticipated in my report of last year,
improved to a certain extent the prospects of our pastoralists—opening a market which has
been closed for some time past to their fat stock—and I believe that a good deal of
country has been taken up with the bona fide intention of stocking it in order to take
advantage of the outlet."
The latter part of the above paragraph doubtless refers to the 6,234 square miles of
country taken up on the Roper River. Since Mr. Dashwood’s report was written the Common-
wealth tariff has been introduced, under which inter-state free trade is established, so that not only
has the Northern Territory pastoralist gained free access for his stock in Western Australia, but
in all the other Australian States as well. The removal of the inter-state barriers, and the
present high prices for fat stock, has given a considerable impetus to the live stock trade. Train-
loads of fat cattle are continually passing down the line from Hergott Springs to Adelaide and
Melbourne. Some of the animals come from stations as far north as Daly Waters and McDonnell
Ranges ; the rail freight from Hergott to Adelaide, being £1 per head, and £2 to Melbourne.
A correspondent in a recent issue of the Northern Territory Times and Gazette, published at Port
Darwin, writes:—
“It is a thousand pities that the Territory is not more heavily stocked at the
present moment, when there is such a bright outlook ahead, for I can assert from my own
knowledge that there are large areas of as good pastoral country as is to be found anywhere
in Australia—well watered and grassed—which is not carrying a hoof. Since the Victoria
River Downs Station changed hands, some 5700 fat bullocks have been mustered and
despatched to market, every head of which, without exception, reaclred their destination
(Perth, W.A.) in a satisfactory condition. Wave Hill Station has also sent away 1000 fat
bullocks up to date, and expect to despatch another 500 head before the close of the
current season. The average weight of 500 head of the cattle shipped from Victoria Downs
Station, on arrival in Perth, W.A., was 605 lbs. Wave Hill Station has already branded
for this season 8000 head of calves, and my informant states that there are at present


fully 8000 well-grown bullocks upon this run. These figures serve to show what may be
expected from this industry in future, when the vast areas available for pastoral purposes
shall have been stocked.”
While not lessening the advantages of having command of the home market in all the
Australian States, still there can be no gainsaying the benefit which the West Australian goldfields
will be in the future to the Northern pastoralists, in opening up to them—both in volume and
value —probably the best cattle market in Australia. Had the Territory been developed and heavier
stocked, fat stock could have been brought from there, and the famine prices, that ruled for beef
and mutton in the large centres of population on the southern seaboard during the last year, could
have been prevented. As things now are through the scarcity, the high prices for stock have not
had the beneficial effect on the Territory to the degree it might have had, It is scarcely within
the province of this compilation to enter on a dissertation of the breeds of cattle most suitable to
the Territory. Herefords and the class universally known as Shorthorns are the prevailing breeds
of cattle for beef on the Australian continent. The Aberdeen-Angus black polled cattle, of which
there are several stud herds established in all the States, have been crossed with the Shorthorn,
and the type produced give the finest beef of any breed. The “ natives ”of all breeds in the
Territory are an excellent basis of hardy stock on which to build; their ability to travel long
journeys and carry their condition and quality with them being well known. In time the frozen
meat trade will supersede that in live cattle, and this great factor is to be considered.
Besides the English grades, there are moJerately good herds of Madura and Sourabaya
cattle brought from Java. They are small, useful, thriving beasts. Being indigenous to the climate
and pasture they lay on beef quickly and kindly. The Messrs. Bradshaw’s run on Arnheim’s Land,
in the Arafura Territory, adjoining the northern boundary of the Roper River blocks, comprising
about 20,000 square miles, is a good type of the cattle and hors 2-breeding stations in this part of
the Territory. In a description of the place in the Melbourne Age of July 14th, 1900, Mr.
J. Bradshaw gives an estimate of stocking with 5000 breeding cows at a cost of He
has had large experience in the North, and sensibly insists that nothing pays unless done well.
“In these latitudes,” says Mr. Bradshaw, “an ox matures and fattens in three years, so that in
the fourth year there would be several thousand bullocks available for export." Some of the stations
draft out at eighteen months instead of keeping them till they are three or four years old, or
aged, waiting for a market; there are so many advantages to be obtained by doing so—where
facilities are at hand—quick return of money, greater capacity for breeding numbers, smaller
percentage of loss, safe market, and relieving the run in case of drought, etc. There is always a
demand in the right season in the State of Victoria, where the grazing holdings are small, for
young cattle to “top up” for the fat stock market. It does not pay to breed on the high-priced
farm paddocks in" the South, near centres of population, whereas the opposite prevails on the large
runs in the back country, and in the Far North, Breeding has for all time admittedly paid better
than feeding, and the Northern Territory cattle breeders devote themselves, as they must do, to
the rearing of large numbers of profitable young stock. Freezing works are becoming more general
in the large cattle breeding districts in Northern Queensland, whereby the transit charges of the
meat in carcass to the home markets are very much less than those on fat stock.
THE BLUE BUFFALO.
At the early settlements, formed by Sir Gordon Bremer in 1824, on Melville Island, and
also at Raffles Bay, near Port Essington, previous to the final adoption of Port Essington, a
number of buffalo brought there from Timor for the purpose, were turned adrift. These have
increased in a most amazing manner, spreading for hundreds of miles along the coast, and for
many years a considerable and profitable industry has been in ' existence for merely shooting these
animals to obtain their hides and horns, for which there is an excellent market. During the early
settlement days in the Territory the buffalo was the only meat available to the European residents;
the meat fetching as high as is. per lb. at Port Darwin. Indeed, buffalo meat is still the only
animal food diet of Europeans in out-of-the-way places on the northern coast. Had some means
been adopted to utilise the surplus meat, either by saltine, or turning it into jerked, smoked, or
extract of meat, a much larger profit would have been made, and a great waste of available flesh
food avoided. Quoting again from Mr. Bradshaw’s article in the Melbourne Age, he says:—


“ Considerable revenue might be obtained from the buffalo at present depasturing on
the Arafura country (meaning the country adjoining the Roper River blocks); their hides
and horns are worth together 155., while their carcases would yield £\ per head in meat
extract.”
Mr. F. E. Harris has stated in his letter on the Roper River concession, which appears
elsewhere, that in the course of his travels on the Roper—going and coming—his party frequently
came on to buffalo tracks crossing their path. The original haunt of these animals—the Blue
Swamp buffalo—on the mainland, was on the Cobourg Peninsula; but of late years they have ;
been kept on the move by the shooters. In localities where the blacks are numerous, it is no
uncommon thing to come on pads all worn bare through long grass, and with the appearance of
being constantly used, and branching away in different -directions. These pads are very much
patronised by the Blue buffalo. They are very curious in their habits, says Mr. Heber Percy in
his account of the Florida Station, walking enormous distances, always on pads if they can, and
walking, seemingly, for the pleasure of doing so; refreshing themselves and freeing themselves of
mosquitoes and flies by walking now. and again in a muddy claypan. They are generally found
congregated in herds of twenty to fifty of all sizes, under the guidance of a single full-grown
male, oftentimes of enormous size. But stragglers are often met with in the Gulf country.
The young males, being turned out of the herd by the patriarch as soon as they approach
maturity, become wanderers for life unless they can re-establish themselves, or gain a footing
in other herds, which can only be done by killing or driving off the leading bull. The lessee
of Melville Island, Mr. E. O. Robinson, who has been a resident of the Northern Territory for
over twenty-five years, and the owner of, perhaps, the largest herd of buffalo in the world—
some 25,000 head on Melville Island—kindly gave the compilers a lot of information regarding the
animals. -He estimates that he and others have exported over 50,000 buffalo hides, and says he
has never seen a tick on one of them. They are among the finest, softest, and most pliable that
reach the London market, and the majority of them are quite equal to the hide of the Russian
buffalo. He thought this fine quality was due to the sea climate and nutritive pasturage of the
island, comprising about 2400 square miles, and separated from the mainland by Clarence Straits,
its eastern end being fifteen miles from the Australian coast. He further observed that he had
not the slightest trouble to domesticate the creatures, and when once broken in the largest beast
allows himself to be led about by a child. The young were taken from the cow-buffaloes, branded
and yarded by themselves, and within a fortnight of so doing they became so docile and broken-
in as to be employed hauling timber and dragging loads. An aboriginal woman is given charge of
a mob of twenty of these animals to take out to pasture. She leaves the home paddocks early in
the morning with them, returning at nightfall, and will so protect them as to be their tyrant and
master. As a beast of draught the buffalo has astonishing powers of hauling heavy traffic over
bad and broken country. No other animal except the elephant can travel with such ease under
heavy loads. By choice it is semi-aquatic, for when off duty it delights in wallowing in swamps,
taking a mud bath. The buffalo-shooters take pack-horses and go out and camp alongside the
blacks (aborigines), and get their help to skin the buffaloes and pack the hides. The method of
capture, by whites and natives alike, is to shoot “ bullocky ” (meaning buffalo) while racing along-
side, from which the reason is obviously plain why so many solitary animals are found wandering
far from the haunts of their fellows. “Bullocky” has had the best of the hunt, assisted in the
escape by plunging into a swamp or stream which happens to be near, and on gaining a footing on
the other side makes for a hiding-place beyond the range of the guns. This, of coarse, relates to
the buffalo which have been running wild for the greater part of the last century.
Buffalo beef is of a very rich, dark, juicy nature, and will produce about ralbs. extract
per beast, the average weight per head being about 700 lbs. Mr. Robinson stated that amongst all
the buffalo seen and shot in the Northern Territory he has never seen a diseased beast, and
this is the general opinion, he adds, of all the hunters who have been and are now shooting
there. Therefore meat extract, or any nutriment made from the buffalo, must have especial value
in being so perfectly free from any of the diseases common to horned cattle. On being asked
whether the stock degenerated through inbreeding, Mr. Robinson said, not on the mainland, for
they were a mixed breed, as some newer stock imported by the South Australian Government and
placed ,on Escape Cliffs, and also some imported by the Eastern Extension Cable Company, got
loose and mixed with the original herds. There has been no visible degeneration of the character
of the buffalo in the Territory within the memory of the oldest resident. In Java, Timor, and
the surrounding islands, where these animals originated from, no attention is given to breeding, and


no deterioration is known to take place. Mr. Robinson remarked that while Europeans in the
Territory would not eat the bull fl :sh of Sourabaya cattle, they not only eat buffalo beef, but the
veal was considered a delicacy. They also used the buffalo milk, as well as the white butter (ghee)
made therefrom. The buffalo was by nature a Northern Territory settlers’ beast; and when some
project was established for converting its flesh into meat extract or bovril it will play a more
important part in the pastoral products of Australia than it does now. Perhaps some pupil of the
late Baron Liebig might yet discover the value of the North Australian buffalo flesh, instead of
being allowed to be wasted as a worthless by-product. The subject will be referred to again
later on.
The South Australian Government did not issue licenses for shooting buffalo. All buffalo
country in the Territory was held under pastoral lease, and the lessees were, as a rule, buffalo
hunters. The wild buffalo was treated by the Government as “unbranded cattle,” and belonged to
those upon whose land they wandered. Hunters, not being the lessees of such land, were treated
by the law as trespassers; so that persons hunting buffalo were strictly confined to those invaders
within their own boundaries. Branded or tame buffaloes were regarded precisely as other branded
live cattle—possession and property resulted from the branding, and though they should escape from
control, were held still to be in the possession of the person to whom they had belonged.
THE MEAT EXTRACT INDUSTRY.
It seems likely that such concentrated essences as “Bovril,” “Vimbos," “Bovrine,”
“Extractum Carnis,” and “Liebig’s Extract of Meat” may prove the most profitable way of utilising
not only the buffalo, but the indigenous sorts of cattle in the Northern Territory. The experience
gained in the meat-producing countries in the world go to show that dead meat, marketed in some
form or other, pays for export better than live cattle. The enterprising individual or company who
shall be the first to instal an effective process plant in the Territory for the production of meat
extract, either in the liquid or solid, for culinary purposes, will reap a rich harvest. A cursory
glance at the patent records of England, America and the Continent reveal the fact that a large
number of the processes patented there under various names, and particularly the meat tabloids and
bouillon tableiies, are for the conversion of offal into products for human consumption. In the countries
named nothing connected with the meat industry is allowed to be wasted. Only in a rich pastoral
country, sparsely populated, like Australia, could such waste of valuable products be tolerated. But
the fact that it is so is no reason why an effort should not be made to create an industry which
shall add to our largely-increasing export trade of pastoral products. It has been admitted by an
authority beyond all question that Northern Queensland and the Northern Territory—especially in
the Gulf country—could in ordinary seasons raise and market cattle on terms Argentina could not
touch. That owing to the good rainfall and rich pasturage in the Gulf country, cattle could be
moved along the stock routes to the slaughtering or transport dep6ts for eight months out of the
twelve. In the Melbourne Argus of April 23rd, 1901, an account is given of an interview,- by a
member of the staff of that journal, with Mr. W. Linton Millar, representative of Bovril Limited,
London. The writer says:—
“Mr. Millar is making the round of the Australian States. The primary object of
his visit has to do with the canning factories of New South Wales and Queensland. His
firm draws large supplies of meat extract from these States, and the directors wish to
satisfy themselves as to the process of manufacture employed in the factories. Once they
have Mr. Millar’s report on this matter the fact will be duly proclaimed to the British
consumer. While pursuing his investigations in this direction, it is not unlikely that
Mr. Millar may have a look round generally, with a view to determine the possibility of
increasing the sources of his firm’s supplies. Hitherto Hovril Limited has drawn a portion
of its supplies from Australia’s formidable competitor—the Argentine. It may even be that
in the event of a suitable district being found—a distr 1 ■ t outside those from which existing
canning factories draw their cattle—the directors mighi consider the expediency of starting
a factory on their own account. Such a district must offer a sufficient supply of cattle at
cheap rates, and be open to water carriage. Needless to state, Victoria is hardly likely to
be thought of in this connection; cattle are altogeth r too dear here (Victoria), for Mr,
Millar’s purpose. New South Wales, and more especially the eastern border of Queensland,
offer inducements, but those areas are already under tii'nte to local factories from which


Buvril Limited draws supplies, and Mr. Millar points out that no interference with present
arrangements would be entertained. There only remains then the Gulf country in the
Northern Territory. Six years ago cattle in the latter place were so plentiful that they
mght have been bought at from 12s. fid. to £1 per head; to-day there are practically no
cattle in the Northern Territory. It may be, however, that cattle could, be produced in
either of those districts sufficient to meet the requirements of a factory that would handle
annually about 50,000 head of cattle after the first year or two. The effort would certainly
appear worth making.”
Mr. Millar was in Australia at a time when, owing to a drought of unprecedented severity
on the western plains of Queensland and New South Wales, there was not only a great dearth
of cattle, but, in consequence of the stock routes being destitute of both feed and water in these
districts, it was found impossible to move stock from the runs to market. West Australia and
other slates that were dependent on Queensland and New South Wales for store cattle, had their
supplies cut off, and the Northern Territory graziers, taking advantage of the high prices that
ruled, sent to the southern markets lean cattle, that, at ordinary times, would not have realised
the transport charges. For the last year, till within recent rains, every beast fit to travel was
sent to the abattoirs in the southern capitals. This scarcity of cattle in Queensland led to the
early closing down of nearly all the meat works, and a forced cessation of industry, at a time
when the demand was abnormal, and prices at their best. Since the drought broke up in Northern
Queensland, the country is clothed with a verdure that, starting from the point that all flesh is
grass, vanishes Mr. Millar’s doubts as to the future supply of cattle in the Northern Territory
into thin air. The meat industry will easily extricate itself from the difficulties it was placed in
a few months ago. Re-stocking has commenced everywhere, and, as the cattle come to maturity,
they must be slaughtered. The surplus over internal consumption was bound to show itself shortly,
and it was equally bound to be exported on terms which would pay to export. And it goes
without saying that this surplus will be secured for that branch of the export trade which offers
the best remuneration —whether as frozen meat, preserved meat, or meat extract. The export beef
trade, viewed from the conditions that make for success, namely, the animals, the pasturage, the
water, the long season, the natural facilities afforded by the rivers and bays for steamers of large
tonnage, the abundant and cheap supply of native black labour to look after the stock on the
runs, and lastly—but the most essential for cattle-raising on a large scale—the large areas of rich
land that can be obtained on long tenure, at a low rental, with equitable terms for improvements
on the expiration of the lease, combined with the right of purchase at a fair value, prove beyond
question that it will ultimately centre in the Gulf country of Northern Queensland and the
Northern Territory* As one authority on the subject exclaims:—
“If beef is worth 30s. per 100 lbs. in Melbourne, it will generally be about ss.
lower, or 255., in Sydney, 20s. in Brisbane, 15s. in Townsville, and 10s. on the Gulf ;
and that shows where the bulk of the export trade will hail from. It then costs, in an
ordinary season, about 10s. per head of cattle per annum to raise them, which means
30s. per head for three years’ growth.”
And the exponent of the industry referred to was convinced that Argentina, in spite of
cheap labour, could not show as good results.
We close these remarks upon the general subject of raising cattle for meat extract,
reiterating once more the fact that the buffalo, which cost nothing but the grass, is worth, at present
prices for three-year-old cattle, £\ per head in meat extract, to say nothing about hides and horns.
FREEZING WORKS.
Keeping in mind the position regarding cattle and the country discussed in the preceding
notes, leaving the buffalo out of the question, very much of what we there stated will apply to the
frozen m' j at industry, and we need not go over the ground again. Mr. Sidney Kidman, of the
great Australian cattle dealing firm of Kidman Bros., on his return to Adelaide on Aug i-t 18th
this year, after a long trip through the far north of South Australia, Queensland, and the Northern
Territory in search of stock for the Adelaide, Melbourne and West Australian markets in the
course of an interview with a representative of the Adelaide htertiser, said:—


“There were no less than 7000 and odd bullocks travelling up the Flinders from
the Gulf stations above Burketown, bought for the meatworks at Normanton, Ross River,
Alligator Creek, Broad Sound, and Eagle Farm (all in Queensland), These meatworks
have bought something like 70,000 bullocks. At these works they tin the beef, make
extract, and freeze the carcases. They treated something like 170,000 head in igoo, and
200,000 in previous years. Some of them treat as many as 370 bullocks a day. I was
at the Ross River works at Townsville on August 7th, and on that day they treated over
300 of Lawn Hill bullocks from the Gulf. These bullocks were netting the owners some
five guineas a head, after paying for droving 500 miles to Hughenden, and then railage to
Townsville. The railage per bullock is only Bs. from Hughenden to Townsville, some 240
miles. The meatworks have been a grand thing for the owners of cattle runs in the
Gulf and North Queensland. Everything is utilised at these works, and nothing wasted.
I purchased in my travels 17,400 fat bullocks and cows, 7000 of which are now on the
road for Adelaide and Melbourne. I have also purchased 10,500 to leave later on. I
passed 7000 travelling from Avon Downs to Hergott. They are from the Northern
Territory, and will travel about 1300 miles before they are trucked. The track is in
splendid condition to within fifty miles of Hergott, and they are all fat."
In speaking about the country, Mr. Kidman stated that in places there was splendid grass,
but there was not stock to eat it. On the Herbert River the country was looking wonderful,
clover and feed being from one foot to two feet high. In the letter from the London correspondent of
the South Australian Register, which appeared in that journal of November 7th this year, the writer
states that the late Mr. Walter Griffiths aroused some interest in the Northern Territory among
financial men in London, as a desirable locality for the establishment of a dep6t for breeding
remounts for the Imperial service. “Once more,” the London correspondent of the Register says, “it
is given a somewhat better character than the Southerner may consider it entitled to bear. A
young stockman writes under date July 14th, 1901, from Bottle Tree Hut, on the Negri Station,
Northern Territory, to his uncle in London, ‘that the station has the most important advantage of
being situated in a country free from drought, which he declares has by this time been well
proved.’ He reckons there are on this property over 60,000 head of cattle, and considers that if
it were given a show to dispose of its bullocks it would bring, in three years, profit to
the owners, and with its long leases it ought to be quite a fortune-making concern. The Negri
Station consists of about 2000 square miles of country.’*
It is a great and a slow task to understand how to turn this vast and rich pastoral
territory to profitable account. The wheel of nature is large, and a complete revolution occupies a
long time. Enterprising Britons have ventured on the freezing and canning industries in the
Argentine, and the majority of them have made money. Yet it is safe to say, had they a know-
ledge of the pastoral resources of the Northern Territory, there would have been the same readiness
to invest in enterprises of a like character there, had they been forthcoming. A succession of good
trading seasons and handsome profits, of course, give substance and favour to similar carefully
considered projects. The frozen meat industry on a really comprehensive scale has been found
very suitable for joint-stock enterprise, as witness the gigantic companies working in the freezing
and canning industry in the Argentine and Queensland. The closing of the British ports against
Argentine live stock has led to a considerable expansion of the shipments of frozen meat, conse-
quently that country and Australasia were now more in line as competitors in Great Britain. The
position was one to be noted, for even with the high prices ruling for cattle in Australia during
the last year or so, it did not seem that the Argentine could elbow Australasia out of the trade.
Despite the low prices in Great Britain for frozen meat, we find the chairman of the River Plate
Fresh Meat Company, Limited, at the annual meeting held in London in the middle of this year,
saying:—“ The success of this company has led to competition, which was growing every day.
A number of estancieros (a term similar to the Australian squatting companies), were proposing
to combine in order to ship frozen meat on their own account.” The frozen meat companies were
doing so well out of the Argentine squatters (estancieros), that the latter proposed to carry on the
industry for themselves in the future.
To come nearer home, the Central Queensland Meat Export Company, Limited, an
Australian company with its head-quarters at Melbourne, paid a dividend, during * igoo, of over
one hundred per cent, on its subscribed capital. The statistical information furnished by the Frozen


Frozen
Beef.
rSgg
1900
1901
From—
Cvvt.
• ,, Cwt.
Cwt.
Australasia
528,626
551,032
• • •
276,474
United States
2,098,295
2,185,409
• • •
2.497.053
Other Countries
195,801
389,893
610,401
Total
2,822,722
3,126,334
...
3.383.928
Meal Trade Association shows that about nearly half the quantity of beef consumed in the United
Kingdom is brought from abroad in the following order United States of America, Argentina,
British North America and Australasia.
The Board of Trade returns of the imports of frozen beef into the United Kingdom during
the first nine months of 1901 have been made available, and an interesting comparison of the
exports from Australasia can be drawn therefrom. The figures for the first three quarters of this
and the previous two years are given thus:—
The exports of beef from Australasia this year (xgol) include 98,422 cwt. from Australia,
and 178,052 cwt. from New Zealand.
Most of the United States supply is chilled beef, because of the short time in transport
on voyage, as well as live cattle (the latter is not included in the above return); the future export
cattle trade of that country gives rise to pertinent inquiries to the advantage of other meat
exporting countries.
A large number of the cattle ranches in America were being gradually absorbed for agricultural
purposes, and the day was not far distant when, owing to the increase in population in the United
States, and the smaller area on which to raise cattle, the English markets will be wholly supplied
from the Argentine and Australia. Through the recent energetic action of the Agent-general in
London for South Australia, that State has been fortunate to secure some very large contracts for
flour for the Imperial War Office. To judge what it would mean if the meat contracts for the
British army were secured by Australians: Taking the army as consisting of 200,000 men, it
requires, to supply their daily food, according to the rations scale, 666 bullocks, 4444 sheep, or
1818 pigs. These figures, extended into one year’s supply, give an excellent market for meat
producers for some time to come. Mr. Justice Dashwood, in his Annual Report on the Northern
Territory for 1900, discusses the pros and cons of establishing meat-freezing works in the Territory.
The claims of the Victoria River, on the north-west of the Territory, had been advocated by one
section, and the Roper River, in the Gulf country, by a more numerous section... The cattle
dearth, and the results of the Queensland drought, were in every one’s mind while the discussion
was under notice. And as the Government Resident penned his report at Palmerston on May
20th, igoi, some time before the drought broke up in the interior, he was very cautious in stating
that there were not sufficient cattle in the Northern Territory at the time to warrant the establish-
ment of freezing and canning meat-works; and that if it were determined to erect such works on
one of the rivers in the Northern Territory, they should be erected either on the Roper or Limmen
Rivers, as being the most convenient and suitable for the majority of stockholders. In the meantime
Mr. Dashwood is of opinion that shipments of live stock to the East, if systematically and properly
carried out, were the best and most profitable means of absorbing the surplus fat stock in the Territory for
some time to come. Unless for breeding purposes, or where there was no cold storage, the whole
tendency of to-day was in the direction of producing cheaper and better appliances for handling
carcases of fresh meat. Owing to the havoc rinderpest is working in many districts of the Orange
River Colony and the Transvaal, for a long time to come the population in these places must rely
upon cold storage importations. Glancing at the map, and regarding Australia’s almost isolated
position from the rest of the civilised world, and the immense distance which separates her from
its chief markets, it is only too apparent that Australia must necessarily travel on the lines she is
going in developing the frozen meat industry.
Without undervaluing in the least Mr. Dashwood’s conclusions, the all-important point is
the organisation of a company with adequate means of a commercial nature, that can offer the
inducements to stock-breeders to raise sufficient cattle to call into existence freezing and canning


works of the kind desired. With Mr. Dash wood we also agree that it will require a very
considerable nucleus to start this industry going in the Territory in a thorough manner, and to
maintain a continuous export trade. But we take it that the South Australian Government, or the
Commonwealth Government, should the latter take over the control of the Northern Territory, has
also a duty to perform in this coming trade, in assisting to establish pioneer works. Some time
ago the South Australian Government expressed its willingness to give a bonus of to any
bona-fide company that undertook to provide a like amount, for the erection of freezing works at a
place to be approved by the Government. The lessees of the Roper River blocks have made
application for the grant, and the South Australian Premier promised that the matter would be
brought under the notice of the Federal Cabinet when the transfer of the Territory was being
discussed. The South Australian Government has shown the utmost consideration, and granted
every concession possible to the Roper River lessees, to stimulate the effort made by them to promote
the industry. As the transfer of the territory has not yet been assented to—and under any
circumstance the giving of bonuses to any industry by any State in the Australian Common-
wealth can only be with the consent of the Commonwealth Government—understanding as
we do the complexity of the question, and the interests to be consulted, which require time for
its accomplishment, there is no reason to doubt the sincerity and assurance of the South Australian
Government to assist the producer in any way. All good things come to those who know how
to wait —and' to work for them. It has been satisfactorily demonstrated, not only by the
Government Resident, but by those who have spent the greater part of their lives in the Northern
Territory, that the Roper River site is a good one for the erection of freezing and canning works.
The photo, view of the Roper depicts a scene ninety miles from its entrance, where the depth of
water is such as to afford the necessary site and conveniences for works and factories of the kind
required, and despatch of the products by ocean steamers, which it would be hard to surpass in Australia.
The picture speaks for itself, and practically decides the issue. The advantage of its geographical
position in having a more settled climate than in the extra-tropical part of the continent, is a
feature not easily estimated without considerable experience. But it must be apparent to the broad
mind, which can grasp the magnitude of this coming trade, and the rapidly-augmenting progress of
the Australian Continent, that from a politico-economical point of view, the establishment of freezing
works at various suitable coastal spots to dispose of the cattle raised in the Territory is a sine
qua non to the country's speedy development, that it should enjoy a constant stream of immigration
to its fertile lands.
PRESERVING AND CANNING WORKS.
Queensland is an example to profit by. Since 1863 there have been five exceptionally
severe droughts in that State—in 1868, 1882, 1883, and 1884, and the one that has just broken up,
which has lasted from 1895 to the middle of igor. In addition, there have been a number of droughty
years which, while not causing very heavy losses, prevented pastoralists getting any increases from
their flocks and herds. Looking at the carrying capabilities of the Queensland lands during these
years, it is self-evident that dependence must be placed more upon the capabilities of tropical areas
than upon those of a sub-tropical and temperate area. It is not the slightest use to grow cattle
against the mandate of nature. One great consideration, and the great essential in producing meat,
is- in improving the pastures. The difficulty in getting stock to market or to shipping centres
through drought-swept country is so obvious as not to call for further remark. Having shown
that the Gulf country, both in Queensland and within the Northern Territory, can grow cattle with
more regularity than on the sub-tropical areas, and that freezing works on the Roper River are
necessary for its commercial future, a wise policy will be not to place all the eggs in one basket,
but to follow the Argentine and Northern Queensland practice in combining freezing with canning.
The consumption in the British Navy of salt and preserved beef, which are supplied by America
to-day, are considerations which should weigh in adding these branches to the proposed works on
the Roper. It may be urged that a large consumption of canned meats, in the face of low
prices for frozen beef and mutton, can hardly be expected; but there are instances in which they
are the greatest convenience, while for ships’ stores, mining camps, and where fresh meat is not
easy of access or cooking is a difficulty, there these canned meats supply a want that could not
be otherwise met. More especially is there a demand for canned corned beef. The trade in
canned meats of all kinds is so enormous that it is almost impossible to give definite figures. When
the war is over in South Africa mining prospectors will so stretch themselves out over its whole area


that it becomes well-nigh impossible to estimate the demands of the South African trade alone in
the future for Australian preserved meats. It should be remembered that beef is prepared for
the can in more ways, and the canned product is of greater commercial importance, than any other
meat. First we have the smoked and dried beef, commonly called chipped beef. Fresh beef is
canned in either the boiled, roasted or potted form. Beef tongue is canned in either the potted
form in the same manner as beef, or whole. A very large trade can be done in jerked beef,
cured in the sun, sliced and made into long bundles, and packed in raw hides, which shrink upon
it and keep it very tight, for India and all through the islands of the Indian Archipelago, where it
is an article of native trade. But canned corned beef, boned and packed as solid as possible in
the cans, will doubtless be the staple product. The whole success of the scheme lies in putting
up first-class goods and placing them on the market in the right way. There is no reason why
Australia should not, with her cattle resources and transport facilities with other countries, double
or treble her exports of preserved meats in a short time. The Argentine and the United States
will not be such formidable competitors in these goods in the British and South African markets
when we become more fully acquainted with the art of canning.
WATER POWER FOR ELECTRIC MOTORS.
The Roper River is one of the largest in North Australia. Its watershed, including tributary
streams, measures about 10,000 square miles. Its mean annual discharge can be calculated in cubic
miles. Its annual discharge in the wet season is such that ships far out in the Gulf of Carpentaria
can draw fresh water from' the ocean, and in the dry season the river is fresh within forty miles
of the sea. Enough motive power can be generated by dynamos, driven by a water wheel, erected
at a very trifling expense, at the falls at Leichardt’s bar, a few miles above the landing depot,
ninety miles up the river, sufficient when converted into mechanical power for refrigerating the
largest chambers, hauling and traction purposes. A light electric tramway could be laid and worked
over any part of the Roper country at a very low cost, and an electric lighting plant installed at
the settlement, and through the works, cheaper than any other system of efficient lighting. There
is an enormous water force available in the Roper in the driest season, and the day will assuredly
come when the falls at Leichardt’s bar will be harnessed to the electrical machine. Other than
the question of the plant, very little engineering preparation is needed in the utilisation of the
powers of Nature that at present run to waste.
MINES AND MINERALS.
The Northern Territory is no exception to the general run of countries which have a
history of mining prosperity, of mining adversity, and of mining in prospective. The honour of
being the discoverer of gold in the Territory is due to a man named Gandy, employed on the
overland telegraph-line work. That was in 1870, but owing to the infrequency of mail communication
between Port Darwin and Adelaide the rush did not set in until 1872. The crash came in the
following year. It is computed that while the “boom” lasted there were fully 4000 white settlers
in the Territory. Out of the ashes of the past has arisen the settlement of the present day.
That past was a failure; but it was the failure of a people, and not of a country. Success or
failure is regulated by exactly the same principles in mining as in other industries or enterprises.
If the directors are experienced, and the manager is experienced, honest, and competent, a mine
should succeed just as any other business in such hands would succeed; but if opposite qualities
are conspicuous, so will be the opposite results. But it is the repetition of the old, old story of
every mining “boom” over again, familiar to mining investors in all parts of the world alike, and
these pages need not be filled with the details. However people expect to succeed in mining on
principles which produce failure in other businesses is one of those paradoxes no one outside of
mining can understand. But so it is, and when the disappointment comes they do not look for
cause and effect, but exclaim that gold mining (especially) is a fraud. But cause and effect is
there, nevertheless. To express it mildly, the mistakes connected with mining in the Northern
Territory are common to every new field. What amount of gold was obtained in the first
“rush" will never be known, but the quantity exported between 1881 and 1900 amounted to
478,840 ounces, of the value of The exports of the several other metals for ,the ten
years 1886 to 1895 were as follows:—Copper, tin, and silver, making
a grand total for the period named of worth of ores exported. In 1900 the value of the
25
The Northern Territory.


copper ores alone amounted to which was equal to about one-third of the whole of the
former years. Mr. C. E. Herbert, the senior member for the Northern Territory, in quoting these
figures in the South Australian Parliament on a motion moved by him on August 21st last, for
the erection of Government smelting works at or near Port Darwin, said: “That was an indication
of what was being done by those miners in the Northern Territory; it showed the minerals
that could be obtained there, and proved the impetus that had been given to mining.” That
gentleman then proceeded to give details of the grades of several parcels of ore sent for treatment
oyer 2000 miles away, to the nearest smelters in New South Wales, and at a subsequent date
succeeded in getting his motion carried. Mr. Lynott, manager at the time for Messrs. Amos
Brothers and Broad, informed the Government Resident at Port Darwin that back from the
Macarthur there was an undoubted gold-bearing region. He had travelled over it, and was of
opinion that the belt stretched from the Croydon field (Queensland). The Macarthur country
adjoins the Roper River on the south, and has been proclaimed a goldfield. Mr. G. R.
McMinn (the joint author of this compilation), some years ago, when goldfields warden and
resident magistrate in the Macarthur district, called the attention of the Government in an
official report to the geological resemblance of the country around the Macarthur to the Newcastle
coal district of New South Wales, and advised boring for coal in the vicinity of the Macarthur
River. In 1891 the Inspector of Mines, Mr, J. V. Parkes, reported on the country between the
Macarthur and the Limmen. Although he saw no large outcrops of any importance,-'he directs
attention to the fact that in some places gold, silver, and probably other valuable minerals, would
be discovered by systematic prospecting. He also saw some float shale in the Macarthur, which
he presumed had become detached from its bed by the rush of water. He considered the place
worth testing, and recommended that a shaft be sunk. Mr. H. Y. L. Brown, the South Australian
Government Geologist, has since advised the boring for coal on the Macarthur. To the north-west
of the Roper is another proclaimed goldfield, in which are situated the Maude Creek and other
auriferous reefs, about 15 miles from the Katherine. Samples taken by the Inspector of Mines
showed the lodes to be rich in silver, besides containing copper, whilst the quartz contains large
quantities of fine gold, in conjunction with iron and pyrites, Mr. Brown, in his report on the
Maude Creek reefs, says:—“This is a promising locality for gold prospecting, the work hitherto
done being, comparatively speaking, unimportant.” As the locality is within a few miles of the
north-west corner of the Roper River Concession and the strike of the lodes from north 40 deg. to
80 deg. west, with a dip to the east, it is quite probable that the prolongation of these lodes will
be met with along the eroded beds of the creeks and watercourses of the upper portion of the
Roper. ' The Rev. J, E. Tenison-Woods, F.G.S., etc., in a report to the South Australian
Government on “The Geology and Mineralogy of the Northern Territory” (1886), writes;—
“I confidently assert that the Northern Territory is exceptionally rich in minerals,
only a small portion of which has been made public. I do not believe that the same
quantity of mineral veins of gold, silver, tin, copper, and lead will be found in any
country so singularly and exceptionally favoured as Arnheim’s Land is in respect to mineral
riches. Of the mines that have already been worked, in gold especially, they cannot be
said to have gone to any depth, but all nearly have shown unusually good ore," and it is
unquestionable that not 25 per cent, of the veins visible have ever been worked at all.
As to the causes of this, and the depression in the mining interest in the Territory
generally, the report will give ample details, but it is for no want of mineral deposits.
Years will not exhaust the discoveries to be made here when the difficulties of labour will
be got over, as they will be surely tre long. The peninsula of Arnheim’s Land will
become one of the great mining centres of Australia. Tin will eventually be one of the
great sources of mineral riches in the Northern Territory, especially as it occurs in the
form of reef tin, which is so comparatively rare.”
Mr. Herbert, in the course of his speech referred to in the South Australian Parliament,
to erect smelters at Port Darwin, said:—
“I am convinced from what I have seen that no part of Australia can show tin
lodes to the same number and extent as the Northern Territory, though in particular
instances, such as Mount Bischoff, they may be richer. The instances of this will be seen
in the detailed descriptions of the mines such as Mount Wells, the mines on the McKinlay
River, Mount Shoobridge, and the Finniss. The Northern Territory may be emphatically


pronounced to be a tin country. Some of these properties promise a rich reward when
properly developed, and equipped with suitable dressing machinery. One specimen of tin
oxide, which I obtained from Mount Lynes, weighed no less than 76 lbs.”
In January, 1882, at the request of the South Australian Government, the late Professor Tate, Elder
Professor of Natural Sciences at the Adelaide University, accompanied the Hon. J. L. Parsons, Minister for
the Northern Territory, and others, on an official visit to the Northern Territory, to report specially
upon its geology and mineral characteristics. The following sentence from Professor Tate’s official
report will show that he formed a high opinion of the mineral resources of the Territory:—
“The development of the mineral resources of the Northern Territory is but in
its infancy, and I believe that rich stanniferous lodes will be found. Rich auriferous
lodes abound over a large tract of country. It is my honest conviction the gold reefs
can be worked profitably, and to a considerable depth."
Mr. W. J. Sowden, now the editor, and one of the proprietors, of the South Australian Register ,
and who accompanied Professor Tate’s party, in his book, The Northern Territory As It Is,
(1882), writes :
“If it does not produce tin and gold in large quantities, which shall astonish
people who are not over-susceptible to the emotion of surprise, I beg to be put down as
a false prophet.”
Since the visits of the Rev. Tenison-Woods and Professor Tate, both the Chief Inspector
of Mines (Mr. J. V. Parkes), and the Government Geologist (Mr. H. Y. L. Brown), have presented
to the outside world an account of their explorations (1891 and 1895) in two most valuable
and exhaustive memoirs, with photographic views, geological maps and sections. These scientists
not only give much additional information concerning the mineral wealth of the Territory, but put
it in such a clear and succinct manner that those interested in the development of the country
will read therein a true description of the lodes and deposits, the whole comprising an excellent
showing of its varied mineral resources, and the great opportunity that presents itself in this vast
mining field, which has up to to-day been barely scratched.
Mr. Brown sums up:—
“ The present gold-mining fields are capable of much further development. They
should go in for deep mining. They are only working on the surface now. There is a
good deal of country for prospecting in the neighbourhood of the existing goldfields. A
good proportion of the best mining country is still open. The rock formations there are
essentially those in which gold may be expected to occur, and are well worth prospecting.”
Mr. Parkes concludes:—
“I have no hesitation in saying that the Northern Territory is phenomenally
rich in minerals, but more especially in gold and tin.”
The histories of all the great Australian mining fields—past and present—Bathurst, dunes,
Bendigo, Ballarat, the Ovens, the Burra, Kapunda, Moonta, Broken Hill, and several other minor
fields, are very much in common. They were discovered without any previous prospecting, in quite
an accidental way, by shepherds and boundary-riders while attending their flocks and herds on
pastoral runs. Where the now celebrated Broken Hill Proprietary Company and others are working
the rich silver lodes of the Barrier Range was the most unlikely of all places to search for mineral
treasure, amidst a waste of sand and saltbush. Mount Morgan, Mount Lyell and Kalgoorlie are the
notable exceptions to Australian mineral finds. These fields were discovered by prospectors. Already
we know that the whole of the Gulf of Carpentaria country within the Queensland boundary is rich
in minerals, as witness the Palmer and Croydon gold-fields, the tin discoveries between Herberton and
Normanton, the Cloncurry copper field, and close to Burketown, on the border line of the Territory,
argentiferous lodes have been found. And in the only district in the Gulf inside the Northern Territory
where a little prospecting has been done—in the Maoartlmr River District—gefld and other minerals
have been discovered.
27
The Northern Territory.


Mr. J. Bradshaw, in the article already quoted from, Melbourne Age, July 14th, 1900, writes:—
“Mr. George Ligar told me that in moving the cattle towards the Roper River—a
circuitous, but the only passable route from Arafura to Port Darwin—he saw several outcrops
of grey, ( orange, and green stone, which he now knows must be copper ore.”
And to quote that gentleman once more :
“ There is no doubt but that the Macarthur lodes travel northward, underlying
the mdrshy plains of the Roper River, and radiating into Arafura.”
Mining • enterprise at , the present time appears to have sustained a check, and mining
interests, generally* . arc depressed beyond, .measure. This is largely due to market operators, but
in a progressive country like . Australia, the present state of things cannot long remain. The facts
revealed to us in the rocky symbols above and below the surface in the country between the
Macarthur and the Arafura Sea, known as Arnheim’s Land, are enough to justify Tenison-Woods’
promise of a full sum of prosperity. -The conditions are most favourable. With science, capital,
and a trans-continental railroad from the southern, mining fields to the heart of this distant region,
the Northern Territory is destined to rival—if not to supersede—the older goldfields of Australia.
Everything necessary in the way of materials for an extensive, economical, and convenient mining
region, exists there.
POPULATION AND LABOUR.
The population, according to the 1901 census of the Northern Territory, exclusive of the
aboriginal inhabitants, is as follows: —Europeans—males, 880; females, 286. Other races (chiefly
Chinese, Japanese, and Malays)—males, 2729; females, 201. Total, 4096, The Bishop of Carpen-
taria, in a recent interview' with the South Australian press, stated that there Were about 20,0b0
aborigines in the Territory, and 15,000 in North Queensland. The Northern Territory natives were
a better 1 class than those seen about the coast towns in Queensland. They are fairly numerous in
the Macarthur and Roper River districts, and are very friendly under proper treatment. When
well used they are mostly ready, tractable and -faithful, and have proved of the greatest service in
survey camps and to pastoralists on the Gulf stations. Their perceptive faculties are very acute,
and their reflective, for the purposes of hunting and tracking both man and beast, far surpasses the
white man’s. The hunting of the buffalo or other wild cattle brings out all their bodily and
mental powers; they will often follow the tracks of a buffalo till the beast, is fairly tired out.
As messengers, stockkeepers, horsebreakers, and hunters, they are used with . advantage. They
make good servants, and many of them employed about the home stations and permanent camps
are good gardeners and agriculturists. They work for very little, and their food is of the plainest
kind. Mr. Bradshaw, in the Age article before us, writes:—“ By a system of firmness and tact I
have no difficulty in making good workers of the worst of Australian savages, and I have no
doubt whatever but that the natives of Arafura (Arnheim’s Land) can be profitably utilised for all
manner of work, their remuneration being only food and tobacco and other trifles.” Mr. E. O.
Robinson, the : experienced buffalo-hunter and lessee of Melville Island)' personally assured the
compilers that he found the services of the natives more valuable (and in ' some cases indispensable)
than white men; but, as in the more settled parts of Australia, their numbers diminish, and they
gradually dwindle away before the progress of civilisation.
PORT DARWIN.
For the benefit of those not conversant with the geography of the Territory it may be
stated that Palmerston and Port Darwin are indiscriminately applied -to the; one settlement, although
rightly, Port Darwin is the harbour and Palmerston the town. It is the seat of the Territorial
Government and the starting point of the Submarine Cable. Its public, and many of its private
buildings, are constructed of a fine-grained sandstone, and are comfortably secluded in groves of
tropical- trees. Viewed from the harbour, which is second to none in Australia, -the town presents
a handsome and picturesque appearance. - In the outlying districts, reached by train from Port
Darwin to Pine Creek, 145 miles, large mining interests have been acquired by English and French
syndicates. The settlement is a most eligible and healthy one for a tropical climate, and has
28
The Northern Territory.


many advantages as the site of a large city, which it is bound in time to become. The harbour
is accessible to ocean-going vessels of the largest draught; a natural site exists for a dry dock,
and the projections of the coast are admirably suited for the erection of lighthouses and forts.
The various lines of steamers engaged in the Australian-China and Japan trade call at Port
Darwin en route to Melbourne and Sydney, and vice-versa. At present this is the only means of
passenger communication between the Southern and Northern coast towns. The distance by sea from
Adelaide to Port Darwin, via Torres Straits, is 3683 nautical miles. When the trans-continental
railway is completed, Port Darwin will not only be the. main door to the Far East, but the gateway
of Australia, and will, apart from being a place of great commercial importance itself, powerfully
influence progress and settlement in the Territory.
THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILWAY.
It has long been in contemplation to construct a trans-continental railway from Adelaide to
Port Darwin, and already about half the line is completed; 688 miles have been constructed at the
Adelaide end, as far as Oodnadatta, and 145 miles at the Port Darwin end to Pine Creek, leaving
a gap of 1063 miles through the centre of the continent to be bridged. This, it was estimated,
would cost £'5,500,000, including the necessary rolling stock. The railway was a most - desirable
one, as it would open the goldfields which' were known to exist in Central Australia, and would
prove a highway for Australia’s trade with the East. It is fully anticipated that, before long, the
Federal Government will take into consideration the question of taking over at a comparatively early
date the whole of the railway systems of the several States, and, doubtless, one of the first
questions arising therefrom will be the establishment of a uniform gauge on the main interstate
lines. This would inevitably open the question of gauge on the Adelaide to Port Darwin connection,
transforming it to the unified gauge, whatever that may be. A mere guess, at the present, is in
the direction of a 4ft. B|in. gauge being adopted, as a middle course of unifying the three gauges
—3ft. 6in., 4ft. B|in., and sft. 3m. —in use in the several States to be transformed. Of the 688
miles at the Adelaide end of the Port Darwin line, 548 miles are laid to the 3ft. 6in. gauge, and
the same applies to the 145 miles from Port Darwin to Pine Creek. The first important feature
about the scheme is that the trans-continental line will in the future be chiefly needed for quick
passenger traffic, and the carriage of mails ; that it should go as straight as possible, because the
shorter the route, the more advantageous it would be. On these issues a conflict of professional
and well-conceived lay ideas are being poured forth in the Australian press and magazines, making
a most painstaking effort to settle, not only the battle of the gauges, but the route it shall take.
The compilers of these pages do not presume to determine which of the two routes advocated is
the best. All they want is to see the railway finished, and look to the end, rather than the
means of obtaining it. The eventual value of the line is, that it will open the best possible and
shortest route between Australia and Europe: a completeness of communication, including facility,
rapidity, and security, that will be of immediate advantage to the development of the whole of
Australia. Port Darwin is quite 2000 miles of ocean nearer England than the chief ports
(Adelaide, 1 Melbourne, and Sydney) on the Southern and Eastern coasts of Australia are.
When the 1 great Siberian railway now in progress is completed—as expected to be—in 1903,
and steamers run, in connection with this line, between Port Arthur and Port Darwin, the
journey from Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane to England, and vice-versa, will occupy
little more than one-half the time it does at present. And should overland railway connection
between Europe and India be made, extending the system, to Singapore, it will reduce the ocean
voyage from continent to continent to less than five days, including the crossing between England
and France. Of course, the India and Europe connection depends upon considerations mainly political
in character, over which the Imperial Government only possesses a partial control, and while there is at
present no prospect of such a connection being established, the Siberian route is practically au fait
accompli. Baron N. de Passek, the Imperial Russian Consul at Melbourne, replying to a deputation
from the Melbourne branch of the North Australian League upon the subject, said:—“The Russian
Government does not intend to stop doing all that can be done to make the Trans-Siberian railway
the commercial highway between the East and the West,” The Australian press refer to this new
route as coming on with a rush; the object aimed at being to reduce by one-half the fares from
London to all ports in the East—Australia included. Two steamers, the Mongolia and the' Manchuria,
for this new line, are being completed for service at Trieste, and two others are being built in
San Francisco to follow. The construction of other steamers is among the early possibilities, the


ultimate route of which will be to connect Vladivostock and Port Arthur with all ports in the Far
East and Port Darwin. To the north of the latter place, and within a few days’ steaming, lie Java, the
Philippines, Japan, China Proper and India, containing a population of 800 millions—one-half of the entire
human race. Obviously, from a commercial point of view, it is to the interest of Australia to do
everything possible to open this great mine of wealth—not the wealth of gold, but of commerce
and trade with the East. The filling up of the long gap in the partly-achieved trans-continental
line may not be all that is required to give the touchstone to the Northern Territory, and start
the march of mankind in their career of victory over, its unsettled and uncultivated lands, but
however much other springs are needed, the railway will be a tremendous factor in the future
history of the country. If then, the Northern Territory be what it appears to be; if its climate,
soil, mineral and pastoral resources, and commercial capabilities be as represented—and there is no
reason to doubt its riches—why leave its future destiny to time and circumstances? No time
ought to be lost in the commencement of this national undertaking. The country is favourable for
railroad construction, there being no very steep grades to overcome at any point. If
the line - from Oodnadatta is carried forward in a north-easterly direction, skirting the
Herbert River country and the Gulf of Carpentaria, thence along the head of the Roper
direct to Pine Creek, the present terminus of the Port Darwin section, it would traverse an
immense area of magnificent country, which in time to come, as its potentialities are better under-
stood, will attract a considerable population. Major-General Sir William Jervois, R.E., late Governor
of South Australia, when visiting Port Darwin some years since in connection with defence matters,
said, “ Pqrt Darwin is the key to the East,” and here, as has been remarked, it is evident the
future emporium and gateway of Australia will be found. The same gentleman, in speaking of its
commercial importance, used frequently to remark, in vindication of South Australia’s independent
undertakings in the Northern Territory, that it would not only well repay the Government their
outlay, but present such a source of national wealth as to see in future “ the tail waggle the
dog." It is hardly possible to overrate the value of carrying the line across the continent close
to the Gulf of Carpentaria, for it must not be forgotten .that on this route there are indications of
large and valuable coal deposits, both on the Queensland border and on the Macarthur, which
would be of great service in war time in being easily delivered at Port Darwin to coal British
warships that may come there for supplies, should this necessity ever arise. When all these
considerations are taken together, we must repeat what we have said in the earlier portion of our
remarks, that the completion of the railway across the Australian Continent to . Port Darwin is a
grand and noble undertaking, and notwithstanding that it will cost to complete, it will
be the best investment Australia could make. In a word, an active and enterprising population
will be poured into the country, every element of progress will be cultivated, and the productive
countries almost abutting its shores will be brought, into active and profitable intercourse with all
parts of Australia. The railway only is wanted to open a new world. If then we show by the
undertaking of such a work, the balance sheets of the pastoralists, the frozen and canned meat
exporters, the merchants and manufacturers, must increase immensely, we surely make out a case
for the good of Australia generally, as far as the aggregate produce of labour and capital is
concerned. , Thousands of the present generation would benefit by this great railway undertaking,
and the prospect of opening up to settlement new country would be sufficient to induce capitalists
to come forward and support a national work, which shall give to the Commonwealth of Australia
another State, and mark out for enterprise the commerce of the East, of which the future expansion
must be so great.
CAPTAIN F. CARRINGTON’S LETTER.
The following letter, from Captain Carrington, of the s.s. “Coogee,” formerly commander
of the South Australian Government surveying steamer “ Palmerston,” who corrected the early
surveys of the Roper River, is self-explanatory
“ S.S. ‘ Coogee, *
“Melbourne, November rotb, igoi.
Messrs. Gilbert R. McMinn and J. J. Rendle, Melbourne.
“ Dear Sirs,
“ Your letter asking to be granted the use of my personal charts containing
the corrected survey of the Roper River (Northern Territory) carried out by me and the


"Tararua” at the Roper River Wharf, 90 Miles from the Mouth o f the River (Northern Territory, South Australia).




officers under my command of the South Australian Government steamer “ Palmerston,” has
reached me, and as you say the information is to be made public in the work you are
compiling on the Northern Territory, I readily accede to your request, and have pleasure
in forwarding same to your address.
“To the latter part of your request, that you would like to have my opinion about
the country I saw, I think it would take up too much of your space to enter on reasons
for my opinion, but I unhesitatingly make the assertion that the Roper River country will
be found to contain some of the best pastoral lands in Australia, and I should say
minerals will be found in the beds and in the vicinity of the upper watercourses.
“On my return to Adelaide in November, 1886, on the termination of survey
work of the Northern rivers, I read a paper on ‘The Rivers of the Northern Territory
of South Australia’ before the South Australian Branch of the Royal Geographical Society
of Australasia, and I cannot do better than select a few of the more important points in
that paper to convey my impressions about the Roper River country:—
‘“The river is navigable for vessels drawing 12ft. for a distance of upwards of
ninety miles in the driest season.
“‘We found no difficulty in picking up the entrance, which is sheltered by Maria
Island, lying some fourteen miles east of it, the most conspicuous landmark being Gulnare
Bluff, some fourteen miles from the outer bar; but for permanent navigation the entrance
should be efficiently marked by beacons.
“‘ We steamed to the junction of the Roper and Hodgson at the rate of nearly
seven knots an hour.
“ ‘ Both the Hodgson and the Wilton flow into the Roper. The Wilton is
unnavigable and filled with rocks at its junction.
“ ‘ The Hodgson was examined for a distance of about four miles. About three
miles from its junction with the Roper there is a rocky bar extending across the river
with just sufficient water for our launch. The river at our farthest, runs through a rocky
gorge, and the country on its banks much cut up by watercourses. Grass and herbage
abundant.
“‘We landed our cargo and stores close up to. Leichardt’s Bar, where a township
has been laid out. It is not yet sold, but will in time become a prosperous place.
“ ‘ The natives on the Roper, from several authorities, were said to be somewhat
treacherous. My own experience, however, is directly contrary. One of them measured
6ft. in height, with a chest measurement of 38Jin.
“‘ To give some idea of the rainfall on this area, I got to Leichardt’s Bar on
the eve of the 22nd December, and during the night the first rains of the season came
on. It rained heavily for seven consecutive hours, and the river rose Bft. during the
night.
“ ‘ The rivers of any country are an index to its rainfall and consequent fertility.
Now, the area within the watershed of the Roper has an average rainfall of over five
feet, or quite four times that of South Australia proper. ’
“ The practical value of such rivers as the Roper, Limmen, and Macarthur, which
are situate close together, lies in the fact that they are the natural outlet for a tract of
country considerably larger than the island of Tasmania.
“ The current in the Roper is not sufficiently swift in any part to in anyway
interfere with navigation. Sailing vessels could work up with the tide. Small, handy crafts
frequently navigate all the Northern rivers for long distances, carrying stores to the various
stations.
“ Perhaps the value of such rivers as the Roper on the east, and the Victoria on
the west, as commercial highways, may be better shown by comparison. In comparing


them with others, I have only in view their capabilities as harbours, and means of access
to the interior. Bearing this in mind, I have no hesitation in saying that these two
Northern rivers are far superior to the Thames and Mersey (Great Britain), or Hooghly
(Bengal).
“ From the facts mentioned, it will be seen that this corner of Northern Australia
is not going to be the least important part of it, more especially when we consider the
fact that gold, silver and coal have been found in it at numerous places, and much, no
doubt, will be worked. The pastoral and mining future of the Northern Territory—•
particularly in the Roper country—can only be limited by the limited facilities of mankind.
Nature has, apparently, done everything possible. I could say a great deal, but I feel
assured your Mr. McMinn’s experience in this part of Australia, in making a topographical
survey of the country—for it must be remembered that my work was confined to the
rivers and territorial waters—well fits him to act as recorder of everything possible to be
told. It is apparent that the prospective revenue from the staple industries—pastoral and
mining—in the Northern Territory will, when the country is understood and occupied,
more than offset the expense of administration
“I am pleased to know that you are calling attention to the resources and
possibilities of the Northern Territory—particularly the Roper River country—because I have
always held that the rich river lands of the Gulf of Carpentaria possess all the favourable
conditions to yield good results to large enterprises, I shall be pleased at any future time
to forward you any further information within my knowledge, in the hope that it may assist in
developing a locality in which I have always taken a deep interest, and which I feel
assured will amply reward intelligent investment of capital.
“Yours very truly,
“ F. Carrington.”
SUMMING UP THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
In summing up the conclusions which we arrived at in regard to the present and future
of the Northern Territory, it seems to us that our chief remaining function is to emphasise a few
of the points which claim attention as a field for the employment of capital. All who have
followed us in the description of the country will have gathered what our own opinions are of the
Northern Territory—that it is a country of unlimited possibilities, and that it only requires capital
guided by knowledge to develop it. The riches, both mineral and agricultural, are there, but they
want developing. The noblest designs and the most energetic well-doing are likely to fail when
they are not supported by the financial world and the feeling of the people. To whatever extent
the colonisation of Australia is bound up with gold mining, there is no denying the fact • that it
has supplied the population of every settlement of any importance, and what is true of the past
does not widely differ in that respect to-day. In our present Australian condition population
attracts - population, spreading itself over the auriferous areas in the footsteps of the more
adventurous prospectors, who are for ever creating incipient “rushes.” In this fact we recognise
the vast drafts that mining of every kind is bound to draw to the Northern Territory with the
completion of the overland railway. Moreover, through the benefit of the railway, it will be possible
for small parties of scantily-equipped prospectors to exploit districts where the conditions are all but
hopelessly unfavourable to undertake the search to-day. Consequently the railway presents itself as
creating a new epoch for mining in the Territory. It only needed a glance at the maps issued
by the Government Geologist of South Australia to see that only a distance for about 200 miles
from Port Darwin, in the vicinity of the Overland Telegraph Line and the Pine Creek Railway, had
been scratched, the deepest shaft there being not more than 200 feet. It is the recognition
of these facts, and the handful of people, in spite of difficulties, who have won so much
mineral 'wealth from the few spots tried, that makes us feel confident of the future of
mining in the Northern Territory. The next point inviting consideration, and the more immediate
one, judging from the attention now being given by the Imperial War Office to the subject of
establishing remount depots in the Northern Territory, is that of horse-breeding. There is bound to
be a demand for horses for South Africa for some time to come. The shipments from foreign ports to


that country now number about 10,000 animals per week, and orders are being placed with Australia
at the present time to supply 16,000 more. Major-General French, the Military Commandant of New
South Wales, has taken the matter up in an earnest way, and the Prime Minister of the Common-
wealth is keeping the subject prominently before the Imperial Government. Horses reared on the
table-lands of the Northern Territory, in the Gulf country, stand the tropical voyage to India, and the
close packing in a steamer’s hold on such a long voyage as South Africa, better than animals bred in
the colder regions of the Australian continent. Pneumonia and enteritis are the common causes of death
among horses carriecf in a steamer’s hold, caused through heat and bad ventilation. Therefore, if they
are fairly heavy animals, and shipped in good condition, the Northern table-land horses have the best
chance. Besides, on the Indian voyage, if shipped at Port Darwin or other Northern port, the time is
shortened by at least ten days, which tells very much on the condition of horses’ legs and feet, when
kept standing in one position for a long time. As has been said, the table-lands between the Macarthur,
Powell’s Creek, and the Roper are well adapted for horse-breeding. Another question which has come
to the fore is that of erecting freezing and canning works on the Roper River, in connection with
cattle raising. The South Australian Government was anxious to do everything possible in a policy of
concerted action with the Commonwealth Government, to foster the frozen and preserved meat
industry in the Territory. This matter has, however, not got beyond the initial stage. Cattle
are cheap in the Territory because there are practically no droughts, and because the
grazing grounds are, in a sense, inexhaustible. A feature to be borne in mind with regard
to this region is the splendid rainfall, which averages sixty inches per annum for a
considerable distance inland from the coast, thus ensuring a never-failing supply of feed and
water. There is no country in the world where live stock can be grown so cheaply as in this
part of Australia. Realising this, for not an acre of the coast and river frontage runs are useless,
while the low lands are often flooded, it should not be forgotten that buffalo and pigs thrive well
on these low-lying swampy coast lands and flats of the big rivers. Both these animals are gross
feeders, and are admirably adapted for the indigenous salsolaceous herbage common to these
localities. One great fact to be remembered in this connection is, owing to the absorption of
the pastoral lands of the Southern States (Australia) for closer agricultural settlement, the pastures
on which the cattle for these markets were formerly raised are no longer available for that purpose,
and this is becoming more pronounced every day, so that in the near future there will be no other
country available and suitable for stock-raising except that situate in the Far North, otherwise the
Northern Territory. Consequently the future will imperatively require that all freezing and canning
and other works dealing with the preservation of meat for export be of necessity located in the
northern portion of Australia. The Southern States will always present a large market for cattle
raised in the north, which are now overlanded to Hergott and trucked by rail from thence to the
distributing centres of population in the south. With the advent of the completion of the trans-
continental railway, and its projected feeders, the method of supply will, in ordinary course, be
changed into carrying chilled meat; hence, in due time, the dead meat industry in the north will
grow of its own volition. As showing the possibilities and the interests which are being developed
in this direction, quite a number of Australian steamships engaged in the coastwise trade are being
fitted with cooling chambers of large capacity to cope with the growing dead meat trade. The
removal of all interstate fiscal barriers will, as a matter of fact, enable chilled meat from the
Northern Australian ports to be brought to the Southern capitals and disposed of at a
much greater advantage than was formerly the case under the overlanding system of live
cattle. One other point is worthy of attention. We have become too accustomed
in Australia to fix our eyes too exclusively on the United Kingdom as being almost the sole market
for our export maat trade, and to underrate the rapid changes taking place in the “ unchanging
East,” altogether forgetting the part Australia is bound, some day or other, to play in
that region. Remembering the changes going on in China, the stride Japan is making in
adopting Western civilisation, the occupation of the Philippines by the Americans, the increase
of population in Java, the settlement of Siberia in the Pacific, in fact, we may say we
are witnessing the renascence of Asia. These places lie ready to our hand, 'within a
week’s steaming of Northern Territory ports. Are we to remain indifferent and apathetic to
the opportunities which these markets —with over five hundred million inhabitants—present for
the development of our frozen and canned meat industry, and allow our rivals in the Argentine
and America to seize them ? Between 1892-7, over 10,000 fat bullocks were shipped from the Territory
to Java, and the trade was only put an end to in the latter year by the prohibitory regulations of the
Java Government to land cattle there coming from Australia, at a time when the tick disease


EXPORTS 1 l88l TO
Gold, 458,475 ounces
1899.
... value
■^1,572,214
Copper Ore
... j,
55.464
Tin Ore...
... 1 }
28,123
Silver Ore and Bullion
... j,
48.733
Hides and Horns
... »
38.744
Cattle
• • • • y
345.170
Wool
72,524
Fish (dried)
... 5 >
5,742
Horses
21,441
Sheep ••• • >. •••
... n
9,973
Trepans
... > >
98,311
Pearl Shell
... i
118,393
Total value
...
p. evaded on the Northern Queensland runs, when, owing to the precautionary measures adopted by the
South Australian Government to prevent its spread in the Northern Territory, creating an unnecessary
scare in the minds of the Java authorities, the export live cattle trade was brought to an abrupt
termination, 'and nothing has been done since to re-establish this lost trade. Again we call attention
to the opportunities presented by Western Australia as a market for live cattle. It is imperative, therefore,
that we should adapt ourselves to the changed circumstances of the time, and exercise a little foresight
in dealing with a perfectly changed condition of affairs. The fine rivers in the Gulf of Carpentaria,
especially the Roper and the Limmen, possess unquestionable advantages over any other that can be
named as sites for freezing and canning works. These rivers afford access to the richly-grassed valleys
and table-lands of the interior, where stock can be depastured, and, within easy distance of travel, be
transported in ocean steamers to all parts of the world; and, as a factor of success in competing against
countries where transit by rail to the seaboard is a necessity, is as the breath of its nostrils. This
feature in itself would neutralise any disadvantages which might be named. Among other facilities is
the excellent telegraphic system across the continent. For some time it has been contemplated to
extend the lines to encircle the country; the projected extensions are Port Darwin to Wyndham
in North-west Australia, and from North Queensland to Port Darwin. The latter projection will
traverse the pastoral runs on the Gulf to the Roper Station, thus affording to the runs on the
route telegraphic communication with the outside world. Even at present, pastoralists can connect
their runs with the overland line at the cost of about £lO a mile. Finally, we adduce an example as
one reason for our optimism. In United Australia for August, igoi, the Hon. V. L. Solomon,
M.H.R., in an article on the Northern Territory gives the following summary of its exports ;
The exports during 1899 amounted to per head of population, while the imports for the same
period were per head. These figures are not only conclusive as to the volume of products
raised in the country, but suggestive of still greater progress in view of the - immeasurable
advantages which would accrue to the Territory by the adoption of a bolder policy of adminis-
tration, combined with the construction of the much-needed railway. From this point of view it
is some satisfaction to find that the Premier of South Australia (the Hon. J. G. Jenkins) was at the
present time dealing with the fundamental question underlying the whole subject—that is, the
terms on which the transfer of the Territory shall be made to the Commonwealth Government;
and, indeed, it was highly gratifying that the Premier and his colleagues in the Cabinet had
been able to show, by their speeches in Parliament, how warmly their own feelings on the matter
were reciprocated by those persons scattered over Australia having interest at stake in the
Territory. They were all laid under a deep debt of obligation to the South Australian Government,
who had to control their destinies, for the dogged persistence against many odds, in framing a
practical working plan for the purpose of accomplishing so- great and beneficial a result. There
can be but one anticipation of the general sentiment of the Commonwealth Government in response
to the negotiations on the subject. The Prime Minister’s (the Rt. Hon. Edmund Barton) remarks
upon the matters brought within his purview by the correspondence passing between the two Govern-
ments are valuable, and are reproduced as follows :
“Subject to a satisfactory result to our enquiries being obtained, the desire of
the Federal Government is to take over the Northern Territory, but a good deal must


depend on that result. Many of the details, financial and administrative, have not yet
been considered. I shall point this out when I make a statement in Parliament on the
motion brought forward by Mr. V. L. Solomon.”
With pardonable egotism, we recognise the wonderful advantages which would accrue from
establishing freezing works in the Northern Territory. So much has been said respecting the
opinions of a number of reliable authorities who hold some very decided and correct views on
the Territory, that our own collective opinion has been placed, to some extent, in the background.
It has been a greater pleasure, and given us some amount of confidence, to approach the subject
on the strong evidences supplied by well-known people on whom reliance can be placed, rather than
work out theories of our own. In the casting up of the evidence, however, we must take the
liberty of observing that our own eyesight and experience possess claims to attention. To be more
precise, we state with diffidence certain transactions of one’s daily life. For over twenty-six years
Mr. McMinn, one of the writers responsible for these statements, has been associated with the
country, twenty years of which he occupied the important position of Senior Government Surveyor,
and twice Acting-Government Resident for considerable periods together, so that he has spent almost
a lifetime surveying in the very region, the future of which is involved in a policy of greater courage,
determination, and enterprise, to attain success. Mr. Rendle, in another sphere, as a writer on
Australian economic subjects in the Australian and London financial and technical press, has also had
such opportunities of travel in the Far North as to have a good practical insight of the matters
discussed. And whether we have succeeded or failed in impressing our collective views upon our
readers, each one must judge for himself; our task is completed.
CONCLUSION.
In concluding these notes, we must convey our grateful acknowledgments to Mr. F. E. Benda,
the permanent Secretary of the Northern Territory Department of South Australia, for the assistance
rendered in placing at our disposal every report and plan available in his department. The broad,
comprehensive view which this gentleman takes of all affairs connected with the Territory, and the com-
plete grasp he has of the situation inspired by a genuine belief in its immense possibilities, gives rise to the
hope that he will be retained as head of the Administration, should this vast region—six times the size of
the State of Victoria—be transferred to the Commonwealth Government as Federal territory. We also
desire to mention particularly the services rendered by Mr. W, Strawbridge, the Surveyor-General
of South Australia. Without the indispensable plans and details connected with the survey of the
Territory, any estimates about the country could be little better than guesses—not even approximately
true. The very complete plans furnished by the Survey Staff under his charge go far to
familiarise the minds of people with the idea of linking the North and South together, and to
show the advantages which would accrue from it. And in this respect it is only right to say
how very much indebted we are to Captain Carrington (now Commander of the S.S. “ Coogee")
for the use of his charts, containing the corrections of the earlier surveys of the Roper River.
The floods there since Captain Douglas made the first survey, and subsequently completed by
Captain Lowrie in 1870-72, made a further marine survey of the Roper desirable. In addition,
we thank this gentleman and Mr. F. E. Harris for so kindly responding to our invitation to
contribute a few observations drawn from their experiences in this tract of country. We have a
generous acknowledgment to make to the Hon. V. L. Solomon, M.P. (member for the Territory in the
Federal House of Representatives), the Hon. J. L. Parsons, M.P. (of the South Australian Legislative
Council), formerly Government Resident and Minister for the Territory, and Messrs. Herbert and
Mitchell, M.P.’s (members for the Territory in the South Australian Legislative Assembly), for the free
use made of their writings and speeches. No attempt, has been made to harmonise the divergent views
these gentlemen take of the transfer of the Territory to the Commonwealth; it is enough for us to
know they are animated by the one desire—pure and simple—to push the country ahead. We
are more concerned with the common results than the arrangement with regard to the transfer.
We have largely availed ourselves of the editorial columns of the South Australian Register and
The Advertiser, for up-to-date information, in order to follow closely in time’s footsteps, and although
the events recorded are the property of the universal public, we respectfully acknowledge the
sources of our information. And to Mr. Sowden, Chief Editor of the Register, we take pride in
saying that we used his work The Northern Territory As It Is, as a sort of umpire to settle those
matters between the collahorateurs which were remitted for discussion at the round table conference,
and through whose assistance compromises were avoided. Every reference bearing on the items


challenged was diligently searched for and placed side by side, to see how far they could be
adopted and shared. When the question, as it soon did, narrowed itself down to be influenced by
the weight of evidence, the prospect of arriving at an agreement did not long remain in suspense. Such
was the assistance we received to enable us to appreciate the true worth of the writings before us.
English capitalists have over and over again offered to build the railway on the land grant system, and
to reimburse South Australia her outlay on the Northern Territory, some odd, for a free hand
to exploit it, but Australian interests will not permit of the introduction of a principle which was useful
enough in the days of the Honourable East India Company, which have been sorely Hied in South
Africa, and which only quite recently was distinctly discouraged in the case of New Guinea. The
sound statesmanship which put a stop to the alienation of large tracts of land in that island will
certainly forbid a similar experiment on an even larger scale in the centre of the Australian continent.
Yet, to bring this vast region of fertile soil into profitable use, the linking up of the North with
the South is of paramount importance, and would confer incalculable benefits upon the whole of
Australia.
THE END.
