

' v .




FOREWORD
AS Officer Commanding the sth Australian Field Ambulance it has fallen to
/% me to write the foreword of our small book. It is the work wholly of
members of the unit, both as regards letterpress and illustrations.
The intention of the Committee was that it should have been ready to send home
to our relations and friends as a Christmas Greeting. This, however, was not possible
to do, owing largely to the Military exigencies of the latter months of the year.
Nevertheless, I am sure it will be welcomed and appreciated by men of the Unit
and their friends, as some record of their doings in three years of active service.
Under war conditions a detailed history of the Ambulance could not be attempted.
What this book will do, I think, is to show, by anecdote and story, something of
the spirit of the men who have been bearing their share of the " burden of the
day " on Gallipoli, in the Western Desert, and the long winter months of the
Somme.
This Souvenir carries with it to Australia our high hopes and warmest greetings
to the friends whose part it has been to have had to remain at home.
W. L. CROWTHER, Lieut.-Colonel
sth Australian Field Ambulance.


KILLED IN ACTION
LIEUT.-COL. J. J. NICHOLAS
LANCE-CORPORAL BAILEY, A
PRIVATE CONNELLY, E. J.
CORPORAL CHALMERS, L. E.
(2nd Div. S.C. att.)
PRIVATE DODD, E. H.
PRIVATE DAVIS, C. F. H.
LANCE-CORPORAL GILLANDPRS, H.
PRIVATE GRAY, D. R.
PRIVATE HIGGS, J. G.
CORPORAL HOOKWAY, C. N.
PRIVATF LUKE, W. C.
PRIVATE LAKE, Y. L.
PRIVATE McAULAY, J. C.
PRIVATE MARTIN, A. V.
PRIVATE POTTER, E. E.
PRIVATE PORTUS, F.
PRIVATE RAMAGE, E.
PRIVATE SNASHALL, E. A.
PRIVATE SEARLE, F. M.
DRIVER TAYLOR, V. R.
PRIVATE VENTEMAN, W. O.
PRIVATE WESTCOMBE, P. E.
PRIVATE WAIN, J. W.
DIED OF WOUNDS
PRIVATE BOTTOMLEY, A. E.
DRIVER BUTTER WORTH, J.
PRIVATE COE, A.
PRIVATE CARROLL, J. B.
PRIVATE GETTING, G. A.
PRIVATE HARRISON, J.
PRIVATE HUNT, A. L.
PRIVATE PARSONAGE, T. H.
PRIVATE REDMAN, H. S.
PRIVATE TOUT, R. J.
DIED OF SICKNESS
PRIVATE LEISHMAN, C. T.
PRIVATE WHITEHEAD, W. H.


A SHORT HISTORY OF THE AMBULANCE
i ? 1 AHE "A" and "B" Sections of the sth Australian Field Ambulance were
1 I formed at Liverpool Camp, N.S. Wales, on 16th March, 1915, under the
' JL commando! Lieut -Col. R.E. Roth,D.S.O., V.D. Fromhereamove was
made to Queen's Park, Waver!ey, where training was carried out. It had been
intended to form " C " Section of Tasmanian Troops, but eventually a complete
N.S. Wales unit was formed.
Since its foundation the strength has been kept up by troops from all States, so
that the whole of Australia is now represented in our ranks. All branches of
training were carried out at Queen's Park until, on the 12th May, 191$, an
advance party of one officer and 13 other ranks left for Egypt by the s.s. " The-
mosticles." On the 31st of the same month the Ambulance Transport Sub-
divisions and part of " C " Section left by the s.s. u Ajana," and the main body
followed by the s.s. "Ceramic," on the 25th of June.
During the voyage to Egypt the "s.s. "'Ajana" called at Bombay and all the
horses were disembarked owing to the extreme heat prevailing in the Red Sea.
On entering the docks the vessel struck the lock gate and buckled her bows.
This accident gave the fortunate troops on board a week in Bombay while the
damage was being repaired.
Proceeding to Suez, the men entrained for Heliopolis, where they went into
camp and rejoined by the main body, who had crossed without incident.
After a brief period in Egypt for training and equipping, the unit, minus transport, left for Gallipoli, and
arrived at " Anzac Cove " before daylight on the 22nd August, 1915. Eight officers and 198 other ranks dis-
embarked in the early hours of the morning, and the last party reached the shore just after daylight. During the
remainder of the day the unit rested in Reserve Gully. About 7.30 p.m. it left for " Hell's Point " and the first
real field work of the Ambulance was done by the section of bearers who were called on to assist in carrying
wounded from Hill 6c.
On the following day, the 23rd, the Ambulance set up its first dressing station by establishing an aid post at
" Waldon's Point," and this was, moreover, the first Ambulance Post set up by the 2nd Australian Division.
From 7 p.m. on the 23rd August till 4 a.m. the next morning 307 casualties passed through the Aid Post, which


consisted merely of a small operating tent, where six medical officers and staff were working continuously. Ihe
Ambulance bearers had to carry all stretcher cases an approximate distance of three miles during this action. These
figures give some idea of the strenuous work performed by the unit in its initial action. Our first casualty
occurred on the 23rd, when Pte. Ramage, W., was killed whilst collecting wounded with other volunteers in
" no man's land."
On the 7th September " B " Section moved to " Pope's Post " while " A " and " C" Sections went to " Rest
Gully." Later on "B " Section moved to " Mule Gully." About the 12th of December preparations commenced
for the evacuation. 'When 36 volunteers were called for to remain with the battalions to assist with any men
wounded at the last minute, every man in the unit, it is pleasing to record, volunteered for the duty, and many
felt a keen disappointment in having to leave with the main body on 15th December.
From the 23rd August to the 31st November 2,934 patients were attended to, and, of these, 969 rejoined their
units for duty.
After leaving the Peninsula the Ambulance spent a few days at Lemnos, and it was here that the first Christmas
was passed. Leaving Lemnos, Alexandria was reached on Bth January, 1916. The men entrained for Tel-el-Kebir,
where the Transport Sub-divisions rejoined, and the Ambulance complete left for Ferry Post on the Suez Canal.
While here "C" were sent to form part of the 15th Australian Field Ambulance and the remainder left Moascar
for France on 17th March, 1916.
Without mishap our transport, the s.s. "Arcadian," arrived at Marseilles on the 22nd March, 1916, and the
following night the unit entrained for Northern France. The impressions of this three days' journey will never
be forgotten. Waving handkerchiefs, smiling faces and thrown kisses greeted us from every farmhouse and
village, and at every railway town through which we passed gifts of flowers and fruit were pressed on us.
Our & destination was a small French village about 25 miles from the line. In the distance could be seen the flashes
of the guns and flares, and the reports of the shell explosions came floating back to us.
Lord Kitchener and General Joffre reviewed the Australian troops a few days before they took their place in the
firing line. The area was a quiet one and no heavy actions took place.
On the Ist July, 1916, we moved to the Somme to take part in the great offensive. Here the Australians
confirmed their reputation by the capture of Pozieres Ridge and village The sth during that time was in charge
of the evacuation of a divisional front and all patients passed through our headquarters at Becourt Chateau. After
a very strenuous week the Ambulance moved back to Canaples, where recuperation and reorganization took place.
Here a new "C " Section was formed and the Ambulance was brought back to its former strength. On 29th
August, 1916, we again took our place in the line where the great battle was still raging, and worked with the


■ bearers of other Ambulances on a line of evacuation running through the place where
Pozieres had once been, out to Mouquet Farm. After a week or so we left for Var-
dencourt and from there took over part of the line in the Ypres sector. Here we
had a very auiet month and then returned to the Somme front for the winter. Our
headquarters were at Becordel, while the bearers worked in the Flers, Montauban
and Delville Wood sectors. The second Christmas was spent in this area, and a
very muddy Christmas it was.
After a rest at Ribemont our headquarters took over the post in the German-made
dug-outs under the remains of the famous Contalmaison Chateau, and worked the
Advanced Dressing Station in Martinpuich. We were there when the evacuation
-i of Bapaume took place, and on the first signs of it an advanced post was placed at
Le Sars on the Bapaume Road. A number of stretcher squads of the sth formed part
of the pursuing column, whose work was to keep in close touch with the enemy.
The next action in which the Ambulance took part was the famous Bullecourt battle,
where the Australians broke the Hindenburg line. The stretcher-bearers of all the
Ambulances engaged earned special praise for their magnificent work under con-
stant observation and shell-fire, and unfortunately more casualties were suffered
than in any previous action. .
After Bullecourt the Australians received a long-earned rest, and during May, June
and Tuly excellent weather favoured the various forms of sport and training which
took place. Later we moved to the St. Omer district and further training too p ace.
Here, too, the 2nd Division was reviewed by General Sir Douglas Haig on the
Until shortly before this time j! H.Phipps, D.5.0., had been in command of the unit for a period of
Di„io„ and the ,h shared hi the wo* which
h ±rrded « the Sk- =
P PM., one Military Medal and bar, and 37 Military Medals. Staff-Sergeant C. M. COPPIN.


"FALL IN," FIFTH
ALL the chaps who were lucky enough to be within sight or calling distance of the
warrantofficer at a certain camp on the Somme, where weed-pullingand shell-hole
filling formed the chief part of our daily routine, received a shock one day by a sudden
order to give a hand. The least that had happened, so many thought, was that Fritz had
broken through and was advancing over the nearest hills; or that peace had been de-
clared and that all were needed to help pack up and get away in a quarter of an hour.
All were keen, and eagerly asked what was to be done. The Colonel was dressing pre-
paratory to his Blighty leave, for his three months were up. But he could not complete
his dressing, lor that part of his apparel which usually had a bad habit of slipping away
when most needed had fallen from his fingers between the duck boards and was lost.
His collar stud was in the grass. All hands were groping to help the distressed officer.
They combed the grass out, using the best combing-out methods of War Office fame,
but could not find this rare stud. At last someone asked the Colonel what sort of
a stud it was. Was it gold with a diamond front or just silver? "No," snapped the
Colonel in his usually cheery style when
in a hurry ; "it was an ordinary metal
one gone black with wear; but," he ad-
ded, " I have had the blessed thing for
donkey's years." H NELSON.
6


THE PLACE OF A THOUSAND
SKULLS
I WAS in the skeleton of a place more from curiosity
than anything else ; but when I entered through
the shattered side doorway my spirit was gripped by
the awful scene of desolation and desecration.
My mind wandered back. Once there were assembled
here in sober dress of rusty black the simple country
folk, with, perchance, Monsieur le Comte and his lady.
There, under the shivered relic of the east window, the
kindly cure ministered with soothing voice and ready
sympathy to the spiritual welfare of his flock.
And now—. The whole floor of the sacred edifice is
piled ten feet high with smashed stonework and splin-
tered wooden rafters. Not a vestige of the stained glass
windows remains. The altar is crushed beneath tons of
shapeless masonry.
I sat on a fragment of a stone column near which, in the
centre of the aisle, yawns a dingy vault opened up by
the forces which destroyed the edifice. There in the
bottom of it are hundreds of skulls, some seen clearly D4D4ITMF rH , ll!ra
in the light, others dimly through the shadows. Victims
they were of the fury of the great Revolution, and, after the merciless embrace of the guillotine, their friends pro-
bably conveyed their heads in secret to this place, that at least some part of their body might rest safe in the
precincts of the Mother Church. Vain hope !
The Hun came, and with his "kultur" violated the sanctuary of the dead. And now, through the roofless,
shattered frame of this House of God those silent lips send up their mute appeal for justice to the God of
Justice. Till then let no man, however kind and reverent, hide them again in the darkness of their rudely dis-
turbed rest. Let them not resume their silent lonely vieil until the powers of darkness have been overthrown.
J. DEVINE.
BAPAUME CHURCH


JOSS
YOU'RE not a bad old sort;
Are yer, Joss ?
A real old cheery sport;
Ain't yer, Joss?
You sometimes get a mail,
But more often there's a tale
Of woe for we poor coves —
Ain't there, Joss ?
You're a smiling little bloke;
Ain't yer, Joss ?
An' you're dinkum 'neath your cloak
Of bluflin', Joss.
If we worry yer fer " greens "
Or we put the " hard " for " beans"
Round yer " dial " a smile beams—
Don't it, Joss ?
You're a 'uman sort of chap,
" Ah wee," Joss ;
And yer ears begin to flap
(" Compree," Joss ?)
When a near or distant hail
Seeking parcels or some mail
Tells the everlasting tale—
Pestering Joss.
You're a patient sort of thing ;
Ain't yer, Joss ?
" Pip to you," 'as got no sting;
'As it, Joss ?
If we chip, its just "haw, haw,"
And yer stick it, s'elp me, lor',
All the muck wot's poked at yer—
Don't yer, Joss ?


"GIBRALTAR," POZIERES


A DAY IN CAIRO
ONCE outside the barrack walls the sense of freedom gives rise to expectations of a ripping ( time in that
old but none the less fascinating city of Cairo.
Before the trains are reached your approach is the signal for a con-
tingent of boot-blacks, who emerge from every corner and hiding place, each
clamouring for one's custom. But, armed with a cane, one succeeds in keep-
ing these dirty, hatless urchins from getting too close.
Above the bedlam the piercing cry can be heard " Shine your boots, Mister ?
Good shine, Captain ; fair dinkum shine ? Ki Wi —no shine no money !
Bucksheesh shine, Sergeant ! " Amid countless other attractions one boards
the train.
Speeding along through densely populated streets, a paper boy screeches in your
ear, "' Gipshun Mail , to-morrow's news, give it half piastre." Others plying their
wares to passers-by call, " Come inside, very nice, very good, very sweet, very
clean, Mr. Mackenzie."
A wily old Gippo, with his eye to business, is not slow to pick up new arrivals
and stealthily approaches with, " Guide, Mister, dinkum guide ; Pyramids,
Sphinx, Citadel, and Dead City." But you pass on through a motley crowd
around an ancient mosque into the Mousky, where amid a tinkering of brass,
peculiar Oriental smells and seething masses of people, you purchase a souvenir
of Egypt, gain access to the main thoroughfare, hire a garry, drive to the
Obelisk Restaurant, irrespective of traffic and in record time, dine sumptuously,
wend your way to the railway station and leave Cairo satisfied.
W. E. C. CAMPBELL.
Thi?£L£ f"OR /) t"l^U>f r


'FLERS THE CRUCIBLE
STAND here on the hill and watch that village in the hollow being converted into a desolation worse than the barest desert.
Geyser-like clouds of dust and showers of debris start out of the ground with a breathless suddenness. Slowly the fantastic cloud spreads
and dissipates and the rubbish tumbles back again ; but there is no rest for the torn and tortured earth. Before the last particles have
fallen another hole is rent only a few yards away, then another and another, until the whole landscape is blotted out by kaleidoscopic
groupings of writhing columns of angry smoke and dust. The very gates of hell are opened.
Clouds of pink brick dust contrast with others varying from pure white through all the shades of grey to the deepest black. Shapes and
forms reveal themselves for a moment, and then float off in shapeless masses of smoke.
There is a certain primitiveness about it which appeals to every instinct of fear we have inherited from our myth-making ancestors. There
is also a fascination in watching the slow death of a place of human habitation under the whip of modern scientific destruction. Can it be
that in that spot happy children once played and men and women loved, married and died peaceful deaths ? Can it be their homes which
are being ground to dust and converted into rubbish heaps ? The contrast is almost beyond the grasp of our minds. It seems as if we are
falling back through all the ages to the time when the earth was without form and void. We are watching the death throes of centuries of
peaceful life and unambitious toil.
This village of Bullecourt is only a specimen in miniature of what is happening along hundreds of miles of once beautiful country. Down there
life and death meet face to face. The supermen there are working out in agony and sweat the future destinies of the world. The deepest
passions of hatred vie with that love which lays down its life. The intensity of a whole lifetime is crowded into a few breathless minutes.
The storm will pass and calm will reign once more. Nature will cover over the ghastly holes and ruins with her green mantle, and man,
what will he do ? Will he resume the old life and the old ideals, or will he heed the lesson of this second crucifixion which we see taking
place before us ?
Spots like this do not belong to France alone—they belong to the whole of mankind by the pledge of blood. Unless the outlook for the
future is to be black and hopeless, they are the places which mark a new birth and a new order of things for all thinking peoples.
Australian manhood is there in that fiery crucible and the metal proves equal to the test. Far distant though she is, Australian history is
being made there, and she is being brought to the test which decides her place among the nations. She has an opportunity for looking herself
straight in the face, for examining her institutions and her customs apart from any preconceived ideas, for realising once and for all that she
is not an isolated part of the world which can live to itself.
May she show in it all a courage equal to that of the men down in yonder village whose every moment may be their last. K. S. C.


/
1 ' *0^
■/*
km ■ * 1
BELGIAN BATTERY CORNER


" STIFFNESS "
SCENE—A trench on the Somme. TIME—B p.m., frosty winter night.
DRAMATIS PERSONS —SERGEANT ROARER, PRIVATE DOPE.
(ROARER discovered walking along trench. Lifts up blanket cohering exit of Private Dope's dug-out.)
ROARER : " Now, look 'ere, young feller, you put that blanky candle out toot sweet. Do you want the blooming 'Un to lob a 4 Minnie '
on us ? " f
DOPE : " Orl right, Sarg ; just arf a tick. Blime, ain't it cold ? Freezin' still, I s'pose ?"
ROARER ( shortly ) : " Yus." ,
Same scene two hours later. (ROARER sees candle still alight. Rushes to dug-out and Violently jerks curtain aside.)
ROARER : " 'Ere, wot did I tell yer about that light ?■ Blime, it's two hours since I-—( notices Private Dope peacefully sleeping,, rushes oyer and
shakes him.) Hey, hey ! Wike up, d n yer. Why the 'ell didn't yer blow out that candle w'en I told yer, eh ! "
DOPE ( sleepily ) : " Cos I can't, Sergeant."
ROARER : " Can't ? Wot'cher mean, yer idiot ? "
DOPE : " No, Sergeant, I can't. I've tried 'bout a dozen times an' I can't."
ROARER : " But, good Lord, feller, why can't yer ?"
DOPE (plaintively ) : " Cos it's froze."
A GUTSER
Red Cross bloke, to machine gunner coming through Noreuil carrying his Lewis, after the German failure there : " Say, mate, gave Fritz a
rough time this morning, didn't you ?" The M. G.: " Yes, he went 4 nap,' but when he looked at his hand he found he only had ace,
rag, ace." A * J' D *
THE PIOUS MULE
The mud was about three feet deep everywhere and a limber full of coal had been bogged the night before. Gloomily the transport officer
inspected the position and aired his views on the mental calibre of the unfortunate individual who was responsible for the catastrophe.
A cheerless driver appeared leading an equally despondent nag. He hitched up and mournfully asked the " hoss to " git up. The animal
" got up " about nine times in succession and as unfailingly pitched on to his knees immediately afterwards. _
The transport officer smiled sneeringly. "Go on," he said, " finish 'em—God bless mother and father and make me a good little hossT
OBVIOUS !
The discussion lingered round languages and dialects. " Well," said the Clever One, " I'm dashed if I know. I can speak pretty decent
French, and yet nearly everywhere I go the natives cannot understand me."
" H'm ! " said the Quiet One in the corner. " Throws a strong sidelight on the startling deficiencies of the French educational system,
doesn't it?" J' Ds
i3


AN AUSTRALIAN MOTHER
TO HER SON
ON ACTIVE SERVICE
DEAR son of mine, the baby days are over,
I can no longer shield you from the earth ;
Yet in my heart always must I remember
How through the dark I fought to give you birth.
Dear son of mine, by all the lives behind you,
By all our fathers fought for in the past ;
In this great war to which your birth has brought you,
Acquit you well, hold you our honour fast.
God guard you, son of mine, where'er you wander •
God lead the banners under which you fight :
You are my all, I give you to the Nation,
God shall uphold you that you fight aright.
14


IDEAL HOUSE


THE RED CROSS BLOKE
HAVE you seen him out in billets ?
Have you seen him swanked to kill ?
Walking up those boulevards—the beggar
makes me ill.
Then he'll sneak your tart, one Sunday
And say it was a joke-
That lean, lithe, lanky, long necked, loose-limbed,
laughing Red Cross Bloke.
Have you seen him in the trenches ?
Have you seen him in the mud ?
Seen him dodging lumps of shell and laughing
at a dud ?
Have you seen him lumping stretchers where the gas
would make you choke ?
That lean, lithe, lanky, long-necked, loose-limbed,
laughing Red Cross Bloke.
Have you seen him giving water ?
Have you seen him giving fags ?
Though he's not a picture post-card in his worn-out
heap of rags ;
But he's up and down those duckboards working like
a flaming moke—
That lean, lithe, lanky, long-necked, loose-limbed,
laughing Red Cross Bloke.


HOW FATE SIDED WITH THE BATMAN
YOU should hear the batman tell the following story. Two of our officers slept in a dug-out cut in the side of the
hill at Pope's Post on the Peninsula. One of them, in spite of the advice of his batman, slept with his feet, instead of
his head, towards the hill. (Anyone who has slept in a dug-out will know what it is to have instinctively done the
latter.) Despite further protests he also insisted on having a box, in which plates, knives, forks and other things were kept,
fastened well up on the wall so that to get at it meant reaching across the head of the bed.
There were three acts in the drama which followed. The major was asleep at the commencement of each of the three acts —but
not at the close. On the first occasion the batman was reaching across to get some spoons and was trying to do so without
waking the occupant of the bed. But he was unfortunate enough to dislodge a fork, which fell on the major's face. Naturally,
when he was roused in this rather telling way he was not in a very placid frame of mind, and humble apologies followed on
the part of the batman.
A couple of days later a tin of cocoa had been put into this same box, but was stood on its side instead of its end. Strangely
enough the time it chose to roll out was when the officer was again having an afternoon nap, and it hit the same part of his
anatomy as the fork had done. The dialogue which followed was similar to that of the previous occasion, except that even
more forceful declarations of innocence were necessary on the part of the batman.
The climax came when the treacle tin got to work. Somehow or other it had got tilted and the luscious fluid had percolated
slowly through the cracks in the box until at last a thin stream obeyed the law of gravitation and began to seek the earth.
At first it must have felt like flies, because several attempts to wipe away the trouble were made before the major awoke to the
full horror of it. His exclamations brought the batman running in, and the spectacle that met his gaze was too much altogether
for his sense of the correct relations between an officer and his batman. He exclaimed, "My goodness, if you could only see
yourself! " and in his excitement jumped on the major's bare toe. Then dread of the consequences got the upper hand and he
fled. But the box was shifted.
Told by T. HALL.
" SAME THING "
THE new O.C. was stirring things up. He had procured a brand new bugle, and on parade one beautiful morning he
wanted a bugler. Sternly he glared among the serried ranks. Then, " I want a new bugler," he shouted.
Deathly silence rent the atmosphere. At last one dilapidated individual bashfully pushed through to the front and
stood with modestly downcast eyes. " What ! " said the enquirer. u You a bugler I "
The wreck shuffled his feet uncomfortably. " Oh," he emitted, " a bugler ! I thought yer said a burg-ler."
J. D.


THE CHANGING OF THE GUARD
THE new major had arrived and the Ambulance knew. The guard knew best of all. Once
they were amiable free lances who wandered, stick in hand, by day and nodded drowsily at
night. Now ? Well, the major had arrived. After several attempts the guard grew stiff
of knee, saluted all officers, stood to attention when troops marched past, and, well, the 44 changing "
of the guard had taken place.
O.C. 'Erbie tells the story of those sad strange days of transition. 44 I 'eard a voice say, 4 Corporal
of the guard,' so I sez, 4 Youse go away and let we'es alone ; we be tired enough without youse
coming and making a noise at this time of night.' Then I 'ears, 4 I'm orderly officer ; youse wrap
your blanket around you, corporal, and come outside. I want to speak to you.' I sez, 4 We'es haz
no need to wrap ours blanket round us ; we'es be fully dressed.' Then I goes outside and he ast
me if everything was allright. So I sez, 4 Yes, and the prisoner's inside.' 4 Very good, corporal,'
sez he ; 4 where's the piquet on duty ?' I tells 'im 'e do pass 'ere two minutes ago ; that should take
'im to the end of the duckboards by this.
The major 'e goes and finds the piquet, and to my surprise—for I'se be corporal of the guard, and
knows what had ought to be done—that piquet lets 'im come right up and never sez a word. The
major 'e sez, 4 Guard, why didn't you halt me ?' And then the piquet goes and sez, 4 I never
knew whose youse was.' Well, they talk a bit, and then they does it all over again. This time the
piquet s 4 Haltyouse come, here while 1 idmtii£es> yezl " The uryjjOtf W3& amdi evemi ww
he refers to the regimental days at B when 'Erbie was O.C. guard. T. D. DUGGELBY.
OVERHEARD IN A REST CAMP WARD
4'*"* ~ "W~MRST PATIENT : "When a man gets back to civvy life he will find it hard to get away from
/ - u? • army habits ; some of them may be useful too."
J JL SECOND PATIENT : "Yes. When I get back there will be a dug-out in the back yard, a
machine gun enfilading the passage way and front door. There will be a dump of Mills' for splitting up
amongst rent collectors, beggars, and tradesmen with bills.
"The family will parade at 6 in the morning for roll call and orders. Tom and Harry will be permanent wood-choppers and Dick will be
on water supply and drain fatigue. The missus will draw rations at 6.30 after sweeping out the house and scrubbing the babies. My mess
will be brought to me in bed at 9 a.m. ; the general mess will be in the kitchen. Any of the kids wishing to make complaints—we must
have justice—will be paraded by the missus. Groundless complaints will mean several days' confinement to house. School bags will be
worn at all times, and "
Chorus of Patients : " One, two, three OUT." K.


TALES OF A BARGE
FOOLISH people have sometimes raised questions as
to the patriotism of the English working classes ;
but, if the following is typical, as I personally think it is,
then little may be said against them.
At the foot of the hill on which stands the Australian
Auxiliary Hospital at Harefield runs the Grand Junction
Canal, through the manufacturing towns of Rickmans-
worth (coloquially Ricky) and Hatford.
By the good nature of their crews the barges were
convenient ferries for the convalescent patients who
could board them as they negotiated the lock. The
bargees did not resent the most intimate interrogations
into their strange and nomadic life, and took a pleasure
in telling tales of boats and barges and motors, with their
technical differences, not at all apparent to the uninitiated ;
of barges built of oak close on a century ago still sound
and providing home and occupation for their fortunate
owners, of the modern steel barges and still more modern
motor boats, steered from the bow by the bargee's wife ;
tales of how the canal companies were substituting wages
for the old system of private ownership, tales of journeys
from Liverpool and Birmingham to London, and far
wanderings in these placid inland waters.
One cold winter day in 191 5, the days when the nation
had not yet been convinced of the supreme effort required


to win and cheap optimism was taught as the correct attitude, two Australian convalescent
soldiers on their way to Ricky boarded one of the barges. In the usual Australian way they were
soon in conversation with their elderly hosts (eligible men among the bargees joined up early), who
had tramped through the slush of the tow-path for fourteen miles, with another six to reach their
destination, a slow horse and numerous locks reducing the speed to about a mile per hour.
Darkness, the end of their allotted ten hours day, and Ricky arrived simultaneously. The soldiers
were treated to a conversation between the two old men forming the crew which will long live
in their memories.
" What abaht it, Bill ? Tie up 'ere and go 'ome ? " " Dunno, Joe, the shop 11 be closed by the
time we gets there, and it's a night out of bed if we goes on." "Yes, but they may want the
stuff first thing in the morning and 'ave to wait for us if we don't." " Oh, well, it s Government
stuff, so I suppose we'll 'ave to do it." And the soldiers involuntarily saluted two humble patriots
as they set out through the gathering rain on their purely voluntary and unrewarded sacrifice.
We had chaffed them, on first going aboard, about their queer relic of a horse with its three odd
legs and one which didn't work at all. " Yes, 'e aint much of an animal, is 'e ? Terrible slow ;
not a patch on a little mule we 'ad last week. Ye know we're on Government work and the
little beast belonged to them. Not 'arf a willin' little beast ; treat yer fair if yer treated 'im fair.
'E 'ad a shrapnel wound and came from a place with a long name—er —Gally-Poly, that's it.
Knows it, do yer ? Yes, and some of yers knew this mule. Some of yous chaps was waitin'
rahnd this lock when we come through, and just as we started off agin some one called out
somethin' strange, and yer orter see that mule. Up went 'is ears and 'e looks rahnd as though 'e
knows 'em —looked quite a new animal —and then 'e gets back in the collar and 'e give a pull
and a 'eave, and gor-blime 'e didn't arf snap that tow-rope."
B. CARVER.


MENIN ROAD


JUST WHAT DID HE MEAN ?
The medical officer was going his usual rounds in the rest camp. He came to one patient who, he suspected,
was "swinging the lead." After testing him, he said, "Now, if you were in civil life, would you come to
me ?" " No, sir," replied the guileless patient; " I'd go and see a doctor."
THE COMMON LANGUAGE
Any good sized French house is called a chateau. The English are getting familiar with the word and it will
soon be used to signify any dug-out or billet where soldiers sleep.
Its English form is likely to be chat-o. K.
MODERN COOKERY
Humble private to cook-house wit : " What's for dinner to-day ? " " Camouflaged stew." "Oh my, what's
that?" "Curry." K .
SCENE—NEAR THE PYRAMIDS
DISCOVERED —One Australian soldier eagerly searching the pages of a guide-book.
Enter —The Guide.
GUIDE : " Good morning, sare "
AUSTRALIAN : u Morn'n. What'cher want eh ? "
GUIDE : "Me very good guide, sare. Speak English, French, Italian, Spanish, Arabic, Gre "
AUSTRALIAN : " Speak American ? "
GUIDE (with outspread palms) : " Sure.''
AUSTRALIAN : " Speak Australian ? "
GUIDE : " Oh, sare, my ruddy oath." J, p)
ECONOMY THE WAY TO VICTORY
Extract from T95 0 history of the war : "By dint of prolonged researches, we have traced back into the
deciding causes of the war and have discovered that the turning point was a certain day when, in a rest camp,
toothbrushes were issued to the patients at the rate of one toothbrush between six patients. The Germans
were so disheartened at this evidence of intention to persevere to the bitter end that they gave up all hope."
22 K.


IN MEMORY OF OUR COMRADES
FALLEN IN BATTLE
They died,
Their striving was not vain,
Nor was their strife as carnal
As such is wont to be.
'Tis merciful deliv'rance
To save from battles' thrall
The fallen, worn, and weary
Who' 've risked their life, their all—
Grand sacrifice of Self,
For that .... another soul.
To them the guerdon be,
In human's quest for fame :
They sought for others' freedom
And sought not for renown.
True, man has sown his evils :
What recks it then his fate ?
Beyond, tho' sins lie naked,
His death will compensate.
And when the sword of Right and Truth
Has crowned for aye the Dove of Peace,
Then laud and love their memory
Whose glorious motto well could be—
" Est dulce pro amico mori."
H. R. BIRCH


DECORATIONS
LIEUT.-COL. J. H. PHIPPS. Mentioned in Despatches and awarded D.S,O.
MAJOR C. L. CHAPMAN. Mentioned in Despatches.
CAPTAIN V. W. SAVAGE. Mentioned in Despatches.
PRIVATE ROBERTS, A. L. - - - - D.C.M.
CORPORAL ABBEY, A. - M.M.
PRIVATE ADAMS, A. - - - - - M.M.
PRIVATE ABERDEEN, M. C. - - - - M.M.
LANCE-CORPORAL BAILEY, A. M.M.
PRIVATE BARWICK, B. C. - - - - M.M.
LANCE-CORPORAL BENSON, H. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE BURGESS, N. - M.M.
SERGEANT CHRISTMAS, C. R. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE CATT, C. - - - - - - M.M.
PRIVATE COE, A. ----- - M.M.
PRIVATE CONNORS, J. H. - - M.M.
PRIVATE CHADWICK, J. - M.M.
SERGEANT DRANSFIELD, F. A. - - M.M.
SERGEANT FRANKLAND, R. H. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE FRANKLAND, H. J. - - - M.M.
LANCE-CORPORAL FORREST, A. - M.M.
CORPORAL FRANKS, H. W. - - - - M.M.
SERGEANT FOSTER, A. G. - - - - M.M.
DRIVER HAYWARD, R. E. - - - M.M.
SERGEANT LING, I. T. - M.M. and Bar
SERGEANT JEFFES, S. G. - - - - M.M.
WARRANT-OFFICER LONG, G. H. - - - M.M.
LANCE-CORPORAL MUNRO, E. C. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE McCAFFERY, H. G. - - - - M.M.
PRIVATE OLIVER, F. O. - - - - - M.M.
LANCE CORPORAL OPIE, F. - M.M.
CORPORAL POWER, C. O. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE PICKING, A. S. H. - - - - M.M.
PRIVATE RIDGE, F. G. - - - - M.M.
PRIVATE ROBINSON, J. J. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE RAY, A. ------ M.M.
SERGEANT SMITH, C. W. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE SEARLE. C. J. - - - - M.M.
PRIVATE SNASHALL, E. A. - - - M.M.
PRIVATE SHIRT, G. N. - - MM.
PRIVATE THOMSON, R. W. B. - M.M.
LANCE-CORPORAL WATTERS, A. T. A. - - M.M.
PRIVATE WASSON, J. M. S. - - - - M.M.


3 1 508 00246521 4 j


; : " " i
.
