

ginncnu (Socitfg of stto .South; SEalts
ABSTRACT OF PROCEEDING'S, 26th NOVEMBER, 1890.
The Ordinary Monthly Meeting of the Society was held in the
Linnean Hall, Ithaca Road, Elizabeth Bay, on Wednesday evening,
26th November, 1890.
Dr. James C. Cox, Vice-President, in the Chair.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting were read and confirmed.
The Chairman then addressed the Meeting as follows ; “At the
last Meeting of the Society only one month ago our esteemed Pre-
sident, Professor William John Stephens, M.A., F.G.S., was present
with us and presided over our deliberations with his accustomed
dignity and ability, and without any serious premonition of the
mournful event which all too soon was to overtake us. As Senior
Vice-President it now becomes my sorrowful duty to announce to
you formally his decease on Saturday last, 22nd inst., after a short
illness ; and in making this announcement I would at the same time
ask to be permitted to give expression to my own sincere personal
regret. Professor Stephens was a Member of Council during
1875 and 1876, President in 1877 and 1878, Vice-President in
1879 and 1880; Co-Honorary Secretary in 1881-84, and again
President from 1885 until the close of his life a few days since.
Thus by his long official connection with the Society dating from
its very foundation, his regular attendance at our Meetings, and
the zeal and ability displayed in the discharge of his various
official duties, apart from his personal qualities and his contribu-
tions as a working member, our deceased President has earned our
warmest gratitude and approval. A s resolutions suitable to the
occasion will be brought forward for your consideration, and in
view of the Annual Meeting, now not far off, at which it is
customary to deal more in detail with events which so directly
concern the welfare of the Society, I need not longer occupy your
attention on the present occasion.”


The following Resolutions were then unanimously adopted :
(i.) Proposed by Mr. R. Etheridge, and seconded by Mr. John
Brazier, “That this Meeting desires to place on record an expres-
sion of its high appreciation of the long and valuable services
rendered to the Society by our deceased President, Professor
W. J. Stephens, M.A., P.G.S., of its regard for his memory, and
of its profound regret for his untimely death,”
(ii.) Proposed by Mr. Henry Deane, and seconded by Mr. P. R.
Pedley, “ That the sincere symj>athy of this Meeting be tendered
to Mrs. Stephens and family, together with an assurance of the
high esteem in which Professor Stephens was held by the Society
with which he was so long officially identified.”
On the motion of Mr. P. N. Trebeck, seconded by Mr. T. G.
Sloane, the reading of Papers and other business was deferred,
and the Meeting adjourned out of respect to the memory of the
late President.
F. Cunninghame & Co., Printers, 146 Pitt-street, Sydney.


'A
V
y
4
<yj
/. i. (c


Hi I ill i
3 1508 01759129 3
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
