

ABSTRACTS
OF
ACTS OF COUNCIL
FOR THE GUIDANCE OF
*
MASTERS OF ‘VESSELS
IN THE PORTS OF
VAN DIEMEN S LAND.
This Book to be returned when the Vessel is cleared out, or the Master
to pay to Clearing Officer the Shillings and Sixpence,




ABSTRACTS
OF
ACTS OF COUNCIL
*
FOR THE GUIDANCE OF
MASTERS OF VESSELS
IN THE PORTS OP
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
1851.




ABSTRACTS
OF
ACTS OF COUNCIL.
1 VICTORIA, No. 18.
Sect. 6. And be it enacted that the Master of every
Vessel belonging wholly or partially to any subject of
Her Majesty shall have painted and shall keep at all
times painted so as to be easily legible on the outside of
the stern of every Boat belonging to such Vessel the
name of such Vessel and of the Port to which she
belongs and the Master’s name withinside the transom
in white or yellow Roman letters not less than two inches
in length on a black ground under a penalty not exceed-
ing Ten Pounds.
Boat 9 to have
the Vessel’s
name to
which they
belong paint-
ed on them.
2 VICT. No. 5.
Sect. 3. And be it enacted that there shall not at any
time be discharged thrown out or unladen from or out of
any Vessel or Boat whatsoever within any Port Haven
or navigable Creek or River within this Colony any bal-
last rubbish earth stone or filth excepting only upon the
dry land where no tide ever flows or at such other places
as the Port Officer may appoint under a penalty (to be
paid by the Master or Person commanding such Boat
or Vessel) of not less than Two Pounds nor more than
Fifty Pounds.
Ballast &c.
not to he un-
°n ry an *


Ballast &c.
not to be
landed on
any public
Pier &c.
Tarpawlings
to be used.
Timber or
bulky arti-
cles not to be
left on any
Pier.
Injuring
Beacons or
Sea-marks.
Masters to
furnish par-
Sect. 4. And be it enacted that if any ballast gravel
rubbish earth stone wreck or filth shall be landed from
any such Boat or Vessel upon any Public Pier or place
used for the landing of goods or passengers or any place
where ballast or rubbish is prohibited to be laid the
Master or Person commanding such Boat or Vessel shall
forfeit and pay a Penalty of not less than One Pound
nor more than Ten Pounds unless (upon notice for that
purpose given by the Harbour Master) the same shall be
removed within twenty-four hours next afterwards.
Sect. 5. And be it enacted that in the taking in of
ballast into any Vessel or Boat and also in the discharg-
ing of the same every such Vessel or Boat shall be pro-
vided with and shall (under the like penalty as aforesaid
on the Master or Commander of such Boat or Vessel)
make use of one or more tarpawling or tarpawlings of
sufficient size and properly stretched and spread so as to
prevent any part of such ballast from falling into any
such Port Harbour Creek or River.
Sect. 8. And be it enacted that if any Timber or
other bulky article be left on any Public Quay or Pier
after twenty-four hours’ notice to remove such articles
shall have been given by any Justice of the Peace or by
the Port Officer or by any Officer of the Customs to the
Owner or Person in charge of such Timber or article it
shall be lawful for any two Justices on proof of such
notice having been given to issue their Warrant for
removing such Timber or article and for selling the same
and out of the money arising from such sale to pay the
expenses of such removal and sale paying the overplus
if any to such Owner or Person.
Sect. 9. And be it enacted that if any person shall
remove or wilfully injure or destroy any Buoy Beacon
or Sea-mark used for the convenience of navigation or
for the preservation of Vessels or shall make any Boat
Timber or other article fast to any such Buoy Beacon or
Sea-mark he shall forfeit and pay a penalty or sum of
not less than Ten Pounds nor more than One hundred
Pounds.
Sect. 10. And be it enacted that every Vessel arriving
in this Colony from beyond Sea shall be boarded by the


Port Officer or some Person deputed by him to whom
the Master or Commander shall furnish such particulars
of the ship’s voyage and concerning her crew and pas-
sengers and shall deliver such documents in his posses-
sion concerning the same respectively as shall be then
lawfully required of him together with all Mails and
Letters directed for persons in this Colony as by the Act
commonly called the Post Office Act is prescribed.
Sect. 11. And be it enacted that all Vessels arriving
in any Harbour in this Colony having Gunpowder on
board exceeding the quantity of twenty-five pounds shall
hoist an Union Jack at the main and if any Vessel shall
moor or anchor at the usual anchorage in any such Har-
bour until all the Gunpowder on board exceeding that
quantity shall have been secured in such Magazine and
conformably with such regulations if any as shall have
been or shall be from time to time appointed for that
purpose by the Lieutenant-Governor the Master or Com-
mander of such Vessel shall forfeit and pay a penalty or
sum of not less than Ten Pounds nor more than Fifty
Pounds—Provided that nothing herein shall be taken to
apply to Gunpowder on board of any of Her Majesty’s
Ships or Vessels of War or those of foreign nations.
Sect. 20. The Harbour Master shall appoint the
place where the Vessels shall anchor and it shall be com-
petent for such Harbour Master or person when so
directed by the Port Officer to remove or cause to be
removed any Vessel from any berth alongside any quay
or from or to any part of the Harbour whenever such
removal shall in his opinion for the general accommo-
dation of the Shipping be proper.
Sect. 25. And be it enacted that every person (except-
ing the Pilot Port Officer or Harbour Master) who shall
upon any account or pretence without the special per-
mission or authority in writing of the Lieutenant-Gover-
nor go on board or alongside of any Vessel arriving in
any Port of this Colony with Convicts before all of such
Convicts shall have been landed from such Vessel shall
forfeit and pay a penalty or sum of not less than Two
Pounds nor more than Ten Pounds.
Sect. 26. And in order to prevent any vessel lying in
ticulars of
ship’s crew
&c. and de-
liver up
Mails.
Vessels land-
ing or taking
in Gunpow-
der.
Persons go-
ingalongside
v j cts ori ’
board,
Watch to be


kept on
board
es&e s.
Masters
about leaving
the Colony
to deliver
list of Crew
and Passen-
gers and Ves-
sel may be
searched.
In certain
cases a
Special Li -
cence may be
given.
any Port Harbour Creek or River of this Colony from
being piratically seized by Convicts be it enacted that
every Master or Commander of any Vessel so lying as
aforesaid and not dismantled shall cause a sufficient
watch or guard to be kept on deck both by day and by
night of not less than two men if the Vessel exceed the
burthen of one hundred and fifty tons or of one man if
the Vessel be of less tonnage or shall forfeit or pay for
every neglect so to do a penalty or sum of not less than
Two Pounds nor more than Twenty Pounds. And every
seaman on board of any such Vessel who shall be proved
to have been the immediate cause of such neglect shall
forfeit and pay a penalty or sum of not less than One
Pound nor more than Ten Pounds or in default of pay-
ment shall be liable at the discretion of the Magistrate
to imprisonment and hard labour for any period not ex-
ceeding one month.
Sect. 27. And (in order to prevent the escape of
Convicts and other persons desirous of absconding from
the Colony) be it enacted that the Master or Commander
of every Vessel shall twenty-four hours before clear-
ing out at the Custom House deliver to the Collector or
Controller a list in duplicate containing the names of the
Crew and Passengers intending to leave the Colony in
such Vessel one of which lists such Collector or Control-
ler shall forthwith forward to the nearest Police Office
And it shall be lawful for any Justice of the Peace
Officer of Customs Port Officer or Constable and their
assistants respectively to search every such Vessel and
to detain any person found on board whose name is not
contained in such list and to cause him to be brought on
shore or otherwise detained as circumstances may require
—And if any such Master or Commander shall permit
any person to embark on board such Vessel whose name
has not been entered in such list so delivered he shall
forfeit and pay a penalty or sum of not less than Ten
Pounds nor more than Fifty Pounds.
Sect. 28. Provided always that (in order to prevent
injury to passengers or others whose names may have
been omitted from error or accident) it shall be lawful
for any Police or Assistant Police Magistrate to grant to
any passenger or person whose name is not contained in
any such list as aforesaid a special licence to depart from


the Colony in such Vessel if it shall be shown to the
reasonable satisfaction of such Magistrate either that the
name of such passenger or person was not inserted in
the said list owing to mistake or inadvertence or that the
omission was for some other reason unavoidable—And
for every licence so granted there shall be paid by the
person applying the sum of Five Shillings.
Sect. 29. And be it enacted that if any Master or
person in charge of any Vessel or boat whilst in any
Port Haven Creek or navigable River of this Colony
shall not answer to the challenge of any Offieer of the
Customs sentry or other person acting in that behalf in
the discharge of his duty such Master or person in
charge shall forfeit and pay a penalty or sum of not less
than Ten Shillings nor more than Ten Pounds.
Sect. 30. And be it enacted that if any person shall
wilfully resist or obstruct the Master or Commander of
any Vessel or any Justice of the Peace Officer of Customs
Port Officer or Constable whilst searching for or en-
deavouring to secure or discover any Convict on board
or reasonably suspected to be on board such Vessel or
shall rescue or knowingly assist in rescuing any Convict
discovered on board the same every such person in any
case so offending shall be deemed guilty of a misde-
meanor and shall suffer such punishment by fine and im-
prisonment by fine or imprisonment only with or without
hard labour in either case for any term not exceeding
three years as the Court shall award.
Sect. 31. And be it enacted that if any Master or
Commander of any Vessel shall know that any Convict
is concealed on board and shall not immediately deliver
such Convict into the charge of some Constable or of the
Principal Superintendent of Convicts such Master or
Commander shall be deemed guilty of a Misdemeanor
and shall be subject to the like penalties as persons con-
triving or assisting in the escape or intended escape of
Convicts from the Colony are by law liable to.
Sect. 32. And be it enacted that no Boat (except
such as belong to the Vessel) shall be towed or kept
alongside of any Vessel proceeding out of any Port in
this Colony whilst she is under weigh without permission
of the Port Officer or of the Pilot on board.
Vessels and
Boats to
answer all
Challenges.
Resisting or
obstructing
Searchers.
Masters not
delivering up
Convicts.
Towing of
Boats by
Vessels under
weigh.


Masters to
get spritsail
yards fore
and aft &e.
No Vessel to
Unmoor
without
notice to
Harbour
Master.
Vessels quit-
ting the
Colony not to
weigh anchor
Until after
examination.
Vessels to
Unshot guns.
Persons
dying on
board ship to
be buried
ashore.
Sect. 33. And be it enacted that all Masters of
Vessels in any Harbour of this Colony shall get their
spritsail yards fore and aft and rig in their jib and driver
booms when required by the Harbour Master or his
assistant and shall strike their yards and topmasts top
their yards and get in their anchors and swinging booms.
Sect. 34. And be it enacted that no Master of any
Vessel shall unmoor or quit her anchorage in any Port
of this Colony without the previous permission of the
Harbour Master nor having unmoored or set sail with
the intention of going to sea shall any such Master
again come to anchor without permission of the Port
Officer unless compelled to do so by some unavoidable
cause—But in any such case he shali not fail on demand
to deposit his clearance with the Port Officer until about
again to sail nor shall he again weigh anchor without
permission from such Port Officer.
Sect. 35. And (in order to prevent the escape of Con-
victs) be it enacted that no Master of any Vessel about
to sail from any Port of this Colony shall weigh anchor
until such Vessel shall have been duly examined and
searched or having weighed anchor shall bring up lay-
to or deviate from her course within the limits of such
Port unless compelled by weather or other unavoidable
cause nor shall he suffer his vessel to be afterwards
boarded by any Boat or Vessel whatever excepting
Pilots’ Boats or Boats from the Police or Customs.
Sect. 36. And be it enacted that all Vessels entering
any Harbour in this Colony shall unshot their guns at
the distance of not less than two miles from the anchor-
ing station under a penalty on the Master or Commander
of every such Vessel.
Sect. 37. And be it enacted that when any person
shall die on board of any Vessel lying in any Port of
this Colony the Master or Commander of such Vessel
shall as soon afterwards as conveniently may be cause
the body of the deceased to be brought on shore and
interred.


2 VICT. No. 22.
Sect. 56. And be it enacted that it shall and may be
lawful for any constable or other peace officer having
reasonable grounds to suspect that disorderly conduct
is taking place on board of any ship or vessel lying in
any of the said ports or harbours or upon request of any
person or persons stating their reasons for such request
to go on board any such ship or vessel and inquire into
any riot or disturbance and shall and may with the per-
mission of the Commander Master or other person
having charge of such vessel confine and take on shore
any person or persons guilty of disorderly conduct insub-
ordination or refusing to work as aforesaid and lodge
such person or persons in the nearest watch-house there
to remain until conveyed at the usual hour before any
Police Magistrate and it shall be lawful for the magistrate
before whom such person or persons are brought to hear
and determine such case and to deal with such offender
or offenders as is hereinbefore directed with respect
to persons charged with disorderly conduct insubordi-
nation or refusing to work on board any ship or vessel
lying in the ports or harbours of Hobart Town or
Launceston.
Constables
allowed to go
on board
ships in har-
bour on sus-
picion of riot
&c. and with
permission of
commander
take any
party or par-
ties before a
M agistrate
to be dealt
with accord-
ing to law.
Sect. 57. And be it enacted that every seaman or
mariner who shall be in any public-house or any street
or public place in the towns of Hobart Town and Laun-
ceston and George Town at any time after the hour of
nine o’clock at night or before sun-rise in the morning
shall unless such seaman or mariner shall produce a
written pass from the master or other person in charge
of the ship or vessel to which he shall belong or a dis-
charge from the master of the ship or vessel to which
he last belonged be taken into custody by any constable
and lodged in the nearest watch-house and taken at the
usual hour of the following morning before one of the
police magistrates unless in the mean time the master or
other person in charge of the ship or vessel to which
such seaman or mariner may belong shall sooner apply
for his discharge.
All seamen to
be provided
with a writ-
ten pass from
their officer
in charge of
the ship after
nine o’clock
at night or
liable to be
lodged in
the watch-
house.


4 WILLIAM IV. No. 18.
Sect. 18. And whereas after the arrival of vessels in
the ports or harbours of this Island from parts beyond
the sea letters and newspapers directed to persons within
this Island have been in some instances a long time de-
tained on board thereof—Be it therefore enacted that all
mails bags boxes or packets of letters or newspapers and
also all loose letters and newspapers which at the time of
the arrival of any vessel within the limits of any such
port or harbour shall be on board of such vessel directed
to any person or persons within this Island or its De-
pendencies shall at the request of any Postmaster or of
the Port Officer of such port or harbour or of any person
duly acting for such Postmaster or Port Officer or person
(excepting always letters concerning goods on board such
vessel and to be delivered with such goods or containing
any conveyance or other deed commission writ or affidavit
and letters sent by any private friend by way of intro-
duction only or concerning his private affairs) and if any
master passenger or other person on board of such vessel
shall knowingly detain on board of such vessel or keep
in his or her possession any mail mail bag mail box packet
letter or newspaper (except as aforesaid) after such re-
quest made as aforesaid he or she shall forfeit and pay for
every letter or newspaper so detained or kept a penalty
or sum of not less than One Pound nor more than Five
Pounds.
Letters on
board ship.
Sect. 19. And in order to encourage the due and
expeditious delivery of all such letters and packets—Be it
enacted that every master or other person on board of
any such vessel shall be entitled at any time after the
expiration of twenty-four hours next after the arrival of
such vessel to receive from the nearest Postmaster (who
is hereby required to pay to such master or person) the
sum of one penny for every letter or packet so delivered
as aforesaid excepting only letters or packets addressed
to the Lieutenant-Governor such master or person giving
a receipt for the money so received by him which receipt
shall be to such Postmaster a sufficient acquittance aud
the same shall be allowed to him in his account accord-
ingly.
Allowances
for such let-
ters.


Sect. 21. And whereas masters and other persons
having the command of vessels departing from this Island
have in some cases refused to receive on board such
vessels and in other cases having received on board have
refused to convey therein letters and packets from per-
sons within this Island or its Dependencies directed to
persons at places beyond the sea whereby great damage
and inconvenience have in some cases been sustained by
merchants and other persons —Be it therefore enacted
that if any master or person having the command of any
vessel about to depart from this Island shall (after being
thereto required by any such Postmaster or Port Officer)
refuse or wilfully neglect to receive on board such vessel
any mail or bag or box of letters directed to any part or
place beyond the sea for which such vessel shall then be
bound or shall refuse or neglect carefully to deposit such
mail or bag or box in some secure and dry place on board
of such vessel or to convey the same upon her then in-
tended voyage such master or person shall for every such
offence forfeit and pay a penalty or sum of not less than
Fifty Pounds nor more than One hundred Pounds-
Provided always that every such master or person in
command who shall duly receive on board any such mail
or bag or box (for the purpose of conveying the same
according to the direction thereof) shall be entitled
immediately to demand and receive from such Postmaster
or Port Officer for the carriage thereof one penny for
every letter contained therein (excepting only for de-
spatches from the Lieutenant-Governor) such master or
person giving a receipt for the money so received by him
which said receipt shall be a sufficient voucher for such
payment and the same shall be allowed in account at the
Post Office accordingly.
Vessels de-
parting from
the Island
compelled to
take Mails.
14 VICT. No. 5.
Sect. 1. Be it therefore enacted that from and after the
time when this Act shall come into operation the rates or
charges of Pilotage payable by virtue of the said firstly
recited Act or this Act in respect of any vessel entering
into or proceeding from any Port in this Colony or its
Fees payable
to Pilots to
be hereafter
paid to the
Port Officer.


Dependencies shall be paid by the Master or Commander
thereof to the Port Officer or person acting as such of
such Port to be by him accounted for and paid into the
Colonial Treasury of this Island and any Pilot entitled to
any such rates or charges of pilotage shall upon ap-
plication in the usual way obtain payment thereof from
the said Colonial Treasury anything in the said firstly
recited Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
Sect, 4. And be it enacted that the fees or sums by
1 the said firstly recited Act directed to be paid to the
Harbour Master or person acting as such ot any Port of
this Island or its Dependencies for the services in the
said Act specified shall henceforth be paid by the Master
or Commander of every Vessel in respect of which the
same shall be incurred and payable to the Port Officer
or person acting as such of such Port to be by him
accounted for and paid into the Colonial Treasury of this
Island any thing in the said firstly recited Act to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
Sect. 6. And be it enacted that henceforth no amount
of pilotage rate whatsoever whether inwards or outwards
shall be chargeable charged upon or be payable in respect
of any vessel trading regularly between anv Ports of this
Island or its Dependencies or any~oTsnch ports and any
Port~of the Continent of New Holland or the Colony of
New Zealand or any~Dependency thereof except where
the MaiteFbFXlommainleFof such vessel
require the services pCITPiIot and shall employ one
accordingly and it such Master or Commander shall
eniptoyli pilot he shall be liable to pay and
shall pay in manner herein directed the full amount of
pilotage rate according to the draught of the vessel as
such rate is specified in and by the said Schedule to the
said firstly recited Act annexed and this Act any thing
in the said firstly recited Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding—Provided always that no such vessel
shall be so exempt from Pilotage but the full rate of
pilotage shall be payable for the same as though such
vessel were not so trading regularly as aforesaid unless
such vessel shall by certificate under the hand of the
Collector of Customs or person for the time being acting
as such at one of such Ports of this Island or its Depen-
dencies be declared to be so trading and to be entitled to
Harbour
Master’s fees
to be here-
after paid to
Port Officer.


such exemption and unless the Master or Commander of
such vessel shall have obtained and shall produce when
required by the Port Officer or person acting as such of
any Port of this Island or its Dependencies or by any
Pilot licensed as in the said firstly recited Act directed
who may board such vessel a certificate under the hand
of any such Port Officer or person acting as such that
such Master or Commander is qualified to conduct and
navigate his said vessel into such Port of thislsland or
its Dependencies—And provided also that no such vessel
shall be entitled to such exemption from pilotage unless
she shall from the time of approaching within six leagues
of the shore up to the time of her anchoring in the har-
bour keep flying at her mast or main-mast head as the
case may be such distinguishing flag as the Lieutenant-
Governor shall from time to time forlhat purpose direct.
RULES AND DIRECTIONS FOR THE RE-
GULATION OF THE PORTS OF HOBART
TOWN AND LAUNCESTON.
By His Excellency Sir William Thomas Denison,
Knight , Lieutenant-Governor of the Island of
Van Diemen s Land and its Dependencies.
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas by an Act of Council, intituled “An
Act to amend and extend the Laws in force in this
Island for the Regulation and Preservation of theJPorts
and Shipping, and for other Purposes connected there-
with,” the Lieutenant-Governor is empowered, with the
advice of the Executive Council, from time to time by
any proclamation for that purpose made and published,
to issue suchrules and directions respecting the remisaion
and payment of pilotage rates and charges, the duties and
Harbour Masters, and other per-
sons employed and acting in carrying out and effectuating
the several objects of the therein firstly-recited Act, (that
is to say), the Act of Council intituled “ An Act to con-
solidate and amend the Laws for the Preservation of
the Ports and the Regulation of Shipping within the


same,” and of the Act now in recital, the mooring,
unmooring, and removal of vessels, the mode of applying
for and obtaining by the Masters or Commanders of
Vessels the services of the Pilots and Harbour Masters,
and otherwise for the better governance and regulation
of the Ports and Shipping within this Island and its
Dependencies as to such Lieutenant-Governor with such
advice as aforesaid shall seem necessary or desirable ;
and such rules and directions in like manner from time
to time to amend, alter, or revoke as occasion may
require; and any such rules and directions when so
made and published are to be deemed and taken to be
part and parcel of the said Act, and to be of the same
force and effect as though the same were therein specifi-
cally enacted, anything in the said therein firstly-recited
Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding : Now
therefore I the said Lieutenant-Governor, by virtue and
in pursuance of the powers and authorities by the said
recited Act in me vested, do, by this Proclamation for
that purpose made and published with the advice of the
Executive Council, issue the Rules and Directions fol-
lowing, (that is to say) —
1. No Vessel shall receive a Certificate of exemption
from pilotage until she has been two months in the
Colonial trade without interruption^
2. When the Master or Commander of a Vessel
wishes to be removed either from her moorings or from
her berth alongside the wharf, he must write an appli-
cation in a book in the Port Office; and the Officer
whose duty it may be to superintend the removal must,
when he has performed this duty, make an entry in the
book opposite to the application, stating the date when
such removal took place, and signing his name to the
entry.
3. When a Vessel is about to leave the port, the
Master or Commander must write his requisition for a
Pilot in a book in the Port Office, stating the hour the
Pilot will be required.
4. The Master or Commander of every Vessel leaving
the port must call at the Port Office and discharge all
pilotage and harbour dues; and upon producing the


receipt for the same to the Collector of Customs, and
discharging all other dues to the Customs, the Vessel’s
clearance will be forwarded to the Port Officer.
5. The following are to be considered removes upon
which the harbour-due of One Penny per ton will be
charged :
Ist. The anchoring and mooring a Vessel on arrival,
whether inside or outside the Harbour Master’s
limits, (which is a line drawn from Battery Point
to Macquarie Point), except those Vessels exempt
by the Act of Council 10th Victoria, No. 1.
2nd. Any removal in the Port, unmooring and
moving to the wharf, to be considered as one
remove : hauling off the wharf and remooring to
be considered as one remove : or if a Vessel be
taken alongside the wharf at once on arriving
from sea, that is to be considered as only one
• remove. Unmooring and preparing for sea to
be one remove, except when the Vessel is out-
side the Harbour Master’s limits, and then only
on a written requisition.
6. All Vessels entering the River Tamar for the
purpose of seeking for trade, and proceeding no fur-
ther up than George Town, and not breaking bulk,
are to be exempt from pilotage except upon requiring
the services of a pilot.
7. All Colonial traders taking the Gypsy steam-tug \
from Launceston to Bryant’s Bay, or the converse, are j
to pay only two-thirds pilotage.
8. The limits of the Port of Hobart Town, for the
purposes of the Port Regulations, to be a line drawn
from Little Sandy Bay Point to Tryway Point.
9. All Vessels after having anchored in the Port
are (without being required to do so) to rig in their
flying jib-booms; and are not to run them out again
before her departure from the Port without the per-
mission of the Port Officer.
10. The Harbour Master, his Assistants, or any Pilot,


while removing any Vessel from one anchorage to
another, may make her fast to any other Vessel.
11. The Senior Harbour Master is the second Officer
of the Port, and will take charge of the Port Officer’s
duties in his absence : both Harbour Masters to be avail-
able for any general duty which the Port Officer may
require of them.
13. The Pilots in charge of Vessels entering the Port
are not to permit any boat to come alongside except
the Boarding Officer’s boat, the Customs’ boat, or Health
Officer, before the Vessel is properly secured at her
anchorage.
Given under my hand at Government House,
Hobart Town aforesaid, this first day of
May, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-
one.
W. T. DENISON.
By His Excellency’s Command,
P. Fraser, Colonial Secretary .
H3T This Book to be returned when the Vessel is cleared out, or the
Master to pay to Clearing Officer the sum of Two Shillings and
Sixpence.
THE END.




