

ABSTRACT
OF THE
SECOND PART OF A PAPER
ON
THE OGHAM CHARACTER,
READ BEFORE THE ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY,
JUNE 11. 1819.
BY
THE REV. CHARLES GRAVES,
PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN.
DUBLIN:
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS,
BY M. H. GILL.
1849.


ABSTRACT,
&c. &c.
In the former part of this Paper a general account was given
of the monuments on which inscriptions in the Ogham cha-
racter occur; and from the nature both of the monuments
themselves, and of the inscriptions which they bear, it was
argued that the theory of those antiquaries who refer them to
a period anterior to the introduction of Christianity into Ire-
land is not only unsupported, but is even contradicted by
facts.
The great majority of these monuments are characterized
by circumstances which more or less distinctly mark them as
belonging to the Christian period. Several of them are in-
scribed with ci’osses, of a very ancient form, and to all appear-
ance as old as the Ogham inscriptions on them. Many stand
in Christian cemeteries ; others in the neighbourhood of cells
or oratories. Some are still called after ancient saints, though
the inscriptions on them do not exhibit the names by which
these saints were ordinarily known. Again, some of the in-
scriptions prove, beyond all doubt, that the persons whose
work they are were acquainted with the Latin language. Like
some of the very ancient sepulchral monuments of Wales and
Cornwall, the Ogham stones, in general, bear either a single
proper name in the genitive case, or the proper name accom-
panied by the patronymic ; the names themselves being such
a 2


as meet us continually in documents relating to the early his-
tory of the Christian Church in Ireland.
If this question respecting the age of our 1 Ogham monu-
ments could be settled by a single instance, there is a stone
in the churchyard of Kinard, in the county of Kerry, which
might be referred to as furnishing decisive evidence. This
monument is inscribed with a cross,
and the name mariani written in
the Ogham character; and there
are no grounds for pretending that
it is lass ancient than any other
Ogham monument in existence.
Now, not only does this name, ma-
iuanus, which is equivalent to the
Irish Mmlmaireo , belong to Chris-
tian times, but we have reason to
suspect it to be as late as the tenth
or eleventh century.
But as there are Ogham monu-
ments, which neither by their own
nature, nor by that of the inscrip-
tions upon them, furnish us with any
means of directly estimating their
antiquity; and as, moreover, it is al-
leged that the Ogham alphabet and
character, having been invented in
the most remote Pagan times, con-
tinued in use after the introduction
of Christianity into this country;
it becomes necessary to analyse the
structure of this alphabet itself, in
order to obtain materials for estimating the time and manner
of its formation.
The following brief account of the Ogham alphabet is
taken from the tract on Oghams in the Book of Ballymote,


and from the Uraicept, an ancient Irish grammatical treatise,
of which several copies are extant. It is the more necessary,
as errors have crept into the statements which all the most
distinguished Irish antiquaries have made respecting the
Ogham, O’Flaherty, Malloy, M‘Curtin, Harris, Ledwich,
and O’Connor, not to mention General Vallancey, Mr. Beau-
fort, and Mr. O’Flanagan, have fallen into mistakes as regards
the power or number of the letters.
At the close of the Ogham tract in the Book of Bally-
mote are given about eighty different forms of the alphabet,
exhibiting the various modifications to which it was subjected.
The following, which is the first given, appears to have been
its original form :
Prom this the transition was an easy one to the form in
which it is commonly presented, viz.:
In fact, all that was necessary was to make the stem-
strokes of the letters in the primitive alphabet continuous.
The next change made seems to have consisted in the ad-
dition of characters denoting diphthongs:
Of these the two which stand for ea and oi, as may be
collected from a passage in the Uraicept, were first added.
The three latter appear to have been occasionally employed
in other ways. Thus the symbol for u was made to stand
for y. The symbol for to is said to have been also used for
p ; and we are told that the symbol for cxe denoted likewise
ccj.chj uch, and nob.


It is deserving of notice that, of the diphthongs, none but
the first has been as yet found on ancient monuments.
Some modern writers state that p was denoted in Ogham
by a short stroke parallel to the stem-line. This, however,
seems to have been a recent contrivance, resorted to by per-
sons ignorant of the manner in which that letter was repre-
sented by those who used the Ogham in ancient times. The
proper mode of writing/? was by bh; and the I'Jraioept as-
signs a reason for this practice, viz. that/? is an aspirated h.
We are also presented with a spiral character, said to de-
note z. This too is a modern invention, growing, like the
one just mentioned, out of ignorance. The ancient Irish,
when they had occasion to write words containing the letter z,
substituted pc,or po for it. Thus in the Liber Hymnorum we
find the names Elizabeth and Zacharias spelled Elistubeth
and Stacharias ; and in the copy of the Uraicept, in the Book
of Lecan, the name of the Greek letter t, is written pceca.
The fourteenth letter of the Ogham alphabet was certainly
intended to represent z\ but the Irish character employed to
signify its power being somewhat like that which stands for y,
it was supposed to denote that letter. Others, again, have
taken it for ss, contrary to all ancient authority.
The inventors of the Ogham alphabet gave to its letters
the names of trees or plants, as follows
b, beich, birch.
I, Imp, quicken,
p, peapn, alder,
f, pail, sallow.
n, ntn, ash.
h, huacb, hawthorn.
o, ouip, oak.
c, cmne, holly?
o, aoll, hazle.
q or cu, queipc, apple.
m, mum, vine.
s°pc, ivy.
05, njeoal, broom or reed,
pc or z, pcpmp, blackthorn.
P, puip, elder,
a, culm, fir,
o> onn, furze,
u, up, heath,
e, eabao, aspen.
>, ma&, yew.


ecc, eaßab, aspen,
oi, oip, spindletree.
ui, inllectnn, woodbine.
ia ipm, gooseberry.
ae, qmbancoll, twin coll: as it
is formed of two oolls, c’s, or
sets of four parallel strokes,
laid one across the other.
The Ogham, like the Greek Alphabet, is called Bethluis-
nin, or Bethluis, from its first two letters. The former name
seems to have given rise to the assertion, that in one form of
the ancient Irish alphabet the letter n stood third. There is
nothing in the Uraicept to. countenance this statement; on
the other hand, there are passages in it which show that the
word nm was occasionally taken in a general signification, and
was used with reference to all the letters of the alphabet in-
differently.
The'letters of the Bethluisnin are all called trees (peafia);
but that name is applied in a special signification to the vow-
els, as being trees in the most proper sense. The conso-
nants are termed side-trees (caoßomna); and the diphthongs
over-trees (poppeaßa). The continuous stem-line along which
the Ogham letters are ranged is termed the ridge (opuiin);
each short stroke, perpendicular or oblique to it, is called a
twig (pleaps).
The formation of the Ogham characters indicates a divi-
sion of the alphabet into groups, each containing five letters.
Each group is named after its first letter. Tims the letters
b, I, f, s, n form the b group (cncme b); h, d, t, c, q, the A
group (aiome h) ; and so on. The diphthongs (poppeua) form
a group named the popcncme.
One of the first things to be remarked in this Ogham al-
phabet is the separation of the letters into consonants and
vowels. This arrangement alone ought to have satisfied any
scholar that it was the work of a grammarian, and not a ge-
nuine primitive alphabet. Again, the vowels are arranged ac-
cording to the method of the Irish grammarians, : who have


divided them into two classes, broad and slender. The broad,
u, o, u, are put first; the slender, e, i, last, At whatever time
this distinction had its rise, it was not by any means strictly ob-
served by the earliest writers of this country. Frequent vio-
lations of it are to be found in the orthography of the Irish
passages in the Book of Armagh, and of the names which
occur in the most ancient inscriptions.
There is scarcely any particular in the foregoing account
of the Ogham alphabet which does not indicate a connexion
between it and the Runic alphabets, especially the later and
more developed ones, such as were used by the Anglo-
Saxons, and were constructed by persons acquainted with
the Roman letters.
The most ancient Runic alphabet was commonly divided
into three groups of letters (fitter); thus, fu, th , o, r, k — h }
n, *, o, s—t, b, I, m, o ; and there existed an almost infinite
variety of cryptic alphabets, all founded upon this one princi-
ple, that the symbol for any letter indicated, in the first in-
stance, to which of these three groups it belonged, and, in the
next, the place which it held in that group.,
No better instance can be given than the following alpha-
bet, described by Liljegren in his Ohutlfira, p. 50:
Here we see not only an exemplification of the principle on
which the Ogjram alphabet is constructed, but even a develop-
ment of it in a form very nearly the same as that of the
Ogham itself. Goransson, in his Bautil, p. 232, gives a figure
of an ancient monument, on which occur a few words written
in these Ogham-like Runes, the remaining part of the in-
scription being in Runes of the common form.
Other Runic alphabets were formed by repeating the initial
letter of each group a different number of times, to denote each


of the remaining- letters in that group. Thus the symbol for
f, -written thrice, stood for th; two h’s for nj and so on.
Here again we have an instance of the use of the principle on
which the Ogham alphabet was framed.
It seems extremely probable that the forms of the letters
in the Runic alphabet, figured above, and in the original
Ogham alphabet, suggested the notion of naming the letters
of the latter after trees. The Ogham vowels, which have
twigs (pleapya) on both sides, are termed simply trees ; the
consonants, which have branches only on one side, or branches
placed obliquely, are called side-trees.*
The idea of a stem-line as a rule or guide to the rest of
the characters seems to have been borrowed from the Runes,
Goransson furnishes us with several instances of Runes stand-
ing on, or depending from, a single straight line. It was also
not unusual to make a vertical straight line the common stem-
line (gtrtf) to a number of Runes, whose characteristic strokes
(fSimcGtvcfeu) branched out from it consecutively.
The letters a and o are denoted by the same characters
in the oldest Swedish Runic alphabet and in the original
Ogham. This circumstance may help us to account for the
* Vollnncey noticed tlio rosomblnnco of the Ogham oharaotora to trees j but lie
seems to have thought that tho/om was adapted to tho uamo, ratlmr than the name
to tho form:
“From the Boot of Oghams, translated and published in my Vindication, It ap-
pears'that tho first Ogham characters wo intended to represent trees; thus, ~J" :
which is exactly tho Chinese key, or character for a tree, except the additional ob-
lique strokes, —Prospectus of a Dictionary of the Language of the ancient
Irish , Introd., p, 84.
It ought also to ho mentioned, that an Arabic collection of alphabets, by Ibu
Wahslnh, translated by Von Hammer, contains two tree-shaped alphabets j of which
one is constructed on precisely the same principle as the Ogham. This work, which
for a time imposed upon the. half learned, is now proved to be of no authority. Thu
greater number of the alphabets which it contains are merely fictitious 5 and its pro-
tended explanations of Egyptian hieroglyphics are all found to be Incorrect.


formation of the vowel group in the Ogham alphabet. Be-
ginning with the vowels a and o, for which he found Runic
characters already formed, viz., stem-strokes, with one or two
strokes across, the alphabet maker went on to invent charac-
ters for the remaining vowels, on the same principle.
So much for the tree-form of the Ogham letters. Their
tree-names seem to have multiplied in somewhat a similar
manner. In the original Runic alphabet but two of the let-
ters are named after trees: thorn, and birch. In the later and
more developed Anglo-Saxon alphabets we find the number of
tree-names increased to six : thorn, yew, sedge, birch, oak,
and ash. The contriver of the Ogham alphabet named all his
letters after trees. In this case, as in the former one, we see
a progress in a certain direction, obviously arising out of a
desire to systematize.
When we come to consider the powers of the letters in the
Ogham, we find fresh reason to infer its close connexion with
the Runic alphabet.
The letter h, though excluded from the number of radical
letters by modern Irish grammarians,* was manifestly thought
Indispensable when the Ogham alphabet was framed. We
cannot otherwise account for the fact, that a character is as-
signed to it, the removal of which would entirely disturb the
symmetry of the scale. This indicates that the framers of
the Ogham were influenced by a regard to a foreign alphabet
into which h enters as a radical letter. We find han element
in the oldest Swedish alphabet of sixteen Runes, as well as in
the Semitic alphabets, with which some writers have vainly
endeavoured to connect the Ogham,
Again, the letter p is wanting, both in the original Ogham
and in the oldest Runes. And in the later Runic alphabets
it is represented by a dotted b, ( Stunginn Biarkan.) On
* O'Donovnn’s Grammar of tho Irish Language, p. 81.


the other hand, p is a primitive letter in the Phoenician al-
phabet.*
Hickesf presents us with two alphabets of Runes, such as
he supposes were in use amongst the Anglo-Saxons after the
influence of the Danes had been established in England. In
these we find a character standing for q, and called eweorth j{
another called stem, denoting st or z; another named ing,
probably equivalent to ng, the thirteenth letter of the Ogham,
The diphthongs are placed at the end of both, as in the
Ogham.
The division of vowels into the two classes of broad and
slender, though it be a really existing and important one,| is
not noticed, so far as we are aware, by the ancient Greek,
Latin, or Arabian grammarians. In the Scandinavian lan-
guages it is observed; and rules founded upon it are given in
the Danish and Swedish grammars of the present day.
It is vain to assert that the Irish grammarians who used
and wrote about the Ogham were unacquainted with the
Scandinavian or Anglo-Saxon Runes. We have their own
evidence to the contrary. Amongst the Ogham alphabets
figured in the Book of Ballymote we find two Runic alpha-
bets tolerably correctly written ; one is called Ogham na
Coochlannach (the Ogham of the men of Lochlan). The
other is named (the Ogham of the foreigners);
and along with it are given the Icelandic names of the letters.
But the most conclusive testimony on this head is furnished
'by a fragment lately discovered by Mr. Eugene Curry in a
MS. in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin. A folio of
* Qagonii Mon. Scrip, et Lit. Phoon., p. 41.
f Grom. Anglo-gux. ct Mmsogoth,, pp. 136-8.
t Ilonoo, no doubt) the Irish mime of q, queipe or oneijic, wbidi etas not
doom to bo a genuine Irish word, But wlwt is tho origin of eweorth f It seems as
If It had boon formed according to the analogy of peorth (a pawn), tlio name given
to tho Anglo-Saxon Kune for p.
§ Latham on tho English Language, p. 132.


vellum, used as a fly-leaf to bind together a small fasciculus
included in the volume, was found by him to have contained a
short poem furnishing rules for the construction of a Runic
Ogham, and followed by the alphabet itself written in full. The
first five letters of the latter are wanting, and some of the re-
maining ones are very indistinct. Enough, however, is left
to show that it was a fully developed and comparatively recent
alphabet of Runes, arranged according to the order of the
letters in the Ogham alphabet. The following fac-simile
exhibits as much of it as is at all distinct.
The beginnings and endings of several of the verses are
illegible; but their general purport appears from the parts
which remain. They were merely intended to remind a per-
son of .the mode in which the several Runes were formed;
thus: cas a hook [turned] towards you: two fingers up in c ;
pc two twigs on a twig—two fingers in the back of o —two
twigs from one root in u—s-c.
Fortunately the last line is perfect, and contains the fol-
lowing distinct recognition of the introduction of the Ogham :
Cucao email a qiuaill claioeim pi Coohlano '
In cojum nap leap api a laim pem po bapben.
Hither was brought, in the sword sheath of Lochlan’s Mng,
The Ogham across the sea. It was his own hand that cut it.
If this statement be true, it would appear that the Ogham
alphabet of twenty-five letters, simple and compound, arranged
in a peculiar order, was introduced into Ireland from some
part of Scandinavia or northern Germany. But, wherever
it had its origin, the order of its letters must have been fixed
upon before the tree-shaped characters were invented; arid
this order, as we have already observed, being founded on


the distinction between consonants, vowels, and diphthongs,
proves the alphabet not to be a primitive one, but the contri-
vance of a grammarian.
The assertion that the Runic Ogham, just described, was
cut upon the sheath of a sword, is in accordance with what we
know of the customs of the Northern people. The hilt of
the sword with which Beowulf slew the Grendel’s mother is
described as having been marked with Rune staves (Beowulf,
1. 3388); and in the Edda we find Brynhildr teaching Si-
gurdr to cut the Sigrunar (victorious Runes) on the hilt and
other parts of bis sword (Brynhildr, Quid. I. 6). The Ar-
chaeological Album (1845), p. 204, furnishes us with a repre-
sentation of a silver swoi’d-hilt thus inscribed with Runes,
which was found some time ago in Kent.
It is worthy of notice that the most ancient authorities
number Ogma, the inventor of the Ogham character, amongst
the Tuatha De Danann. Those who believe that race to
have been a northern one will regard this circumstance as a
confirmation of the theory which connects the Ogham with
the Runes. As for the name of Ogma, it seems likely to
denote only a mythological personage. He is described as
being the grandson of eiaoctm {Scientia).
Dr. O’Oonnor, who took most pains to examine the struc-
ture of the Ogham alphabet, seems to have felt considerable
misgivings as to its antiquity. He distinctly avows his belief
that it originally had but sixteen letters; and, in consequence
of this supposition, he is forced to admit that the tree-shaped
letters“(ybrm«A' rectilineares) may be of modern invention.
He even expresses a doubt as to the date of the Uraicept,
which is the oldest authority on all points relative to Irish
grammar. Still he maintains that the Irish possessed a pri-
mitive alphabet of sixteen Ogham letters, all named after trees.
All that can be said in reply to this assertion is, that
if we deny the antiquity of the Ogham alphabet as it has


been handed down to us, we have no proof remaining- of
the. existence of any older Ogham. The monuments, whose
antiquity is so much boasted, bear inscriptions in the com-
monly-received Ogham. The most ancient manuscript trea-
tises on grammar describe it, and no other. These being
the only evidences which we possess, bearing upon the ques-
tion before us, if they be set aside, we are abandoned to
mere conjecture. The truth is, that nearly all the assertions
which have been put forward by Irish antiquaries, respecting
the origin and use of letters amongst the ancient Irish, rest
upon the authority either of the Tract on Ogham, so often
alluded to, or of the Uraicept: and, on this account, an ana-
lysis of these treatises ought long since to have been given
to the world. When critically examined, they will be found
to be compositions of a much later date than is commonly
assigned to them; nay, even devoid of peculiar ancient ele-
ments which, we might suppose to have been wrought up by
later writers, interpolating and commenting upon them. The
Uraicept, in its present form, cannot have been written before
the latter part of the ninth century; and its authors, whoever
they may have been, were persons whose notions of grammar
were derived from Priscian and Donatus.
We may, indeed, be reminded that the most ancient Irish
tales contain allusions to the use of the Ogham character in
remote pagan times. A tale in the Leabhar na hUidhri men-
tions a monument erected in memory of Fothadh Airgtheoh,
whose death is referred to the third century. The story of
Deirdre, published by the Gaelic Society, contains a similar
allusion (p. 127). The Book of Ballymote preserves an an-
cient tract, which mentions the Ogham monument of Fia'cli-
rach, who is said to have died A. D. 380.
Before we can estimate the value of this testimony, we
must approximate to the date of the composition of these
tales. Their evidence will be of little weight if it should ap


pear that they were written long after the erection of exist-
ing Ogham monuments, which certainly belong to Christian
times.
The conclusion to which Mr. Graves has arrived,’ as re-
gards the origin of Ogham character, is shortly this, that it
was framed by persons acquainted with the later and deve-
loped Runic alphabets, such as were used hy the Anglo-
Saxons. If this conclusion be well founded, the existence of
Ogham monuments in Ireland does not prove, as is commonly
supposed, that the Irish had the use of letters before the in-
troduction of Christianity into this country. On the other
hand, it must be admitted, that even if the recency of the
Ogham he granted, the question respecting the time of the
introduction of letters into Ireland still, remains unsettled.
Long before the invention of the Ogham character, it seems
likely that the Irish may have had letters of some kind: either
Roman letters obtained from Britain, or Runes derived from
some of the Northern nations, with whom they certainly had
intercourse in very remote times.
Mr. Graves exhibited a rubbing of an inscription on one
of the upright stones supporting a cromleach at Lennan in
the parish of Tullycorbet, county of Monaghan.
The inscription, though not deeply cut, is well preserved,
being executed on a smooth part of the stone, completely
sheltered from the action of the weather.
Of its genuineness Mr. Graves acknowledged that doubts
might be entertained, inasmuch as no similar inscriptions have


been yet discovered in this country. At the same time he
thought it desirable to bring it under the notice of antiqua-
ries, in order that, if it be spurious, competent authority may
pronounce it to be a forgery 5 or, if it should appear to be ge-
nuine, that other inscriptions of the same kind might be sought
for on the cromleachs which abound in this country,
Mr. Graves suggested that some persons in the neigh-
bourhood of Tullycorbet might possibly possess information
calculated to throw light on this question.
The characters employed in the inscription seem to be
Runes depending from a stem-line; a mode of Runic writing
which certainly was in use, though not the commonest. Mr.
Graves abstained from offering any conjectures as to the
reading of the inscription; hoping that, if it should prove de-
serving of their attention, some of the English or Northern
antiquaries, who have made Runes their special study, might
be induced to exercise their deciphering powers upon it.
THE END.
