

ABSTRACT OF A LECTURE
CRIMINAL LEGISLATION, PRISON DISCIPLINE, AND THE CAUSES
OE CRIME, AND ON CAPITAL PUNISHMENTS;
DELINEATIONS
OF THE CHARACTERS OF
ALEXANDER AND CHARLES ROSS,
CONDEMNED FOR ROBBERY AND WOUNDING AT CALOOLAII, AND
EXECUTED AT DARLINGHURST, MARCH 18th, 1863 ;
AND OF
JOHN BOW AND HENEY
ESCORT ROBBERSBOW WAS REPRIEVED AND IMPRISONED TOR LIFE,
MANNS WAS EXECUTED AT DARLINGIIURST, MARCH 26,
THE FALLACIES OF
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT REFUTED,
AND THE
CONDUCT OP THE EXECUTIVE, AND OP THE REV. DR. STEEL,
CRITICISED AND CENSURED.
HR. A. S. HAHI&TBN,
PRACTICAL PHRENOLOGIST,
328, GEORGE STREET, A FEW DOORS SOUTH OF HUNTER STREET.
PRICE, SIXPENCE.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME, GENERAL STEAM MACHINE PRINTER,
184, PITT STREET.




{Y)yys^ ] f
DELINEATIONS.
The following brief Sketches of tlio men wore written after a
careful and minute examination of their heads, in their separate
cells, in Darlinghurst Gaol:—
Sketch of the character of Alexander Ross.
The brain of Alexander Ross is largo, and his temperament is of a
highly nervous and elastic quality. The entire organism of the man is
indicative of activity and power, endurance , and varied physical and
mental energies. He is greatly above medium in all the resources of
active propelling power, and has intellect to enable him to become a first-
class mechanic in any of the branches of iron, wood, or stone work. His
is not the low, flat, or retreating type of brain which is generally found in
connection with the character of the murderer, the madman, or the
imbecile; but it is a type which, in modern times, is too commonly found
to belong to men who have committed the most awful and the most
numerous crimes. Self-esteem, Firmness, Combofineness, Destructiveness,
and Acquisitiveness are all large, and they are terribly active from tempera-
ment, as well as from misdirection in early life, and throughout manhood.
These powers, having but little check in small Veneration and defective
Conscientiousness, and being urged into continual action by a crafty and
constructive intellect, renders such a man at all times dangerous to the
peace of society. With a mind restless in its cunning devices, and bold
and lawless in its adventures, Alexander Ross required greater care, a
wiser and firmer discipline in childhood, and a better example and more
favourable opportunities in boyhood and early manhood, than fall to the
lot of most young men. Children, boys, and men of his stamp arc more
likely to become swindlers, robbers, and murderers, than those whose
energy and intellect are greatly below the average, inasmuch as the wrong
direction of the faculties and the abuse of energy tend directly to the
perpetration of evils of the worst kind, and makes the conduct of the
delinquent as dangerous to his own peace as it is to the best interests of
the State. In addition to the tendencies to and causes of crime already
enumerated, Alexander Ross has a powerful endowment of that passion
which seeks the society of the other sex, and which, if ungoverned and
improperly exercised in boyhood and youth, leads to the lowest depths of
crime, and so thoroughly maddens the brain by the consuming fire of lust
as to almost entirely obliterate the moral sentiments, and this, too, in a
mind more than commonly endowed with the powers of reason and imagina-
tion. Ross asked me, in a tone of command, to toll him at once his
leading feature of character, or his greatest fault. I instantly placed my
hand upon the posterior portion of his head, and told him that, in youth,
he must have been given to wildness of desire in connection with the


passion already referred to; upon which he gravely and remorsefully
remarked that, when even a hoy, he robbed his father to obtain money to
indulge his propensity, and that ever since ho had led a life of misery and
almost continued imprisonment.
When I directed my eyes, and his attention in particular, to his
broad, and rather commanding and well-formed forehead, I remarked,
that, “had I the power to conjure up all the spirits of evil to assist me in
a knowledge of the causes that had tended to bring him into his present
lamentable position, that I, even as a practical phrenologist, must ac-
knowledge my surprise, inasmuch as his wonderful quickness and great
breadth of capacity in reasoning from effect to cause, and from cause to
effect, was such as to bring fully, clearly, and continually before his mind,
all the near and remote, the present and the future consequences of his
crimes. He conversed with me for nearly half-an-hour, and manifested
the utmost interest in the revelations of the various points of his character
to which I had called his attention, but his attention was earnest and un-
equivocally reflective, when I told him that throughout his entire life he had
been sinning against the clearest evidence of his own powerful reason.
Like Rush, the murderer, he was a bold and proud advocate of his own cause,
and most ingenious in forming excuses for his crimes; but very unlike
Rush in his hopes and convictions ; for, from the first, and during the period
between his condemnation and his execution, he had made up his mind to
die, and often remarked, that he must suffer death, though he was innocent
of the intent to fire the pistol that wounded his victim. Another feature in
the character of Ross is deeply interesting, in a phrenological point of view;
and that is, his very moderate organ of Love of life—he is hollow and cada-
verous at the front and lower portion of the temporal bone, on a line with
the bottom of the socket of the eye. This hollow indicates but moderate
Alimentiveness, and defective Love of life; and the defect of the latter organ
is a cause of the indifference to life, which bad men entertain respecting
the preservation of their own lives, and which leads directly to an absence
of regard to the lives of others.
Many men are totally indifferent to life, and are, therefore, if badly
inclined, readily led to enter into schemes of reckless daring, which involve
the sacrifice of the lives of others.
Captain Melville, as he was called, strangled himself a few years ago
in the gaol at Melbourne. Rocky Whelan, who met his fate firmly at the
gallows a few years ago, in Hobart Town, confessed to the priest to five
deliberate murders he had committed; and directed his Reverence to the
five lonely spots where the bodies of his victims would be found.
When this instinct of love of life is small, and when the true enjoyment
of life has been crushed out of a man’s nature by an early career of crime,
and by the debasing influence of a system of prison discipline, which was
in practice when Alexander Ross first suffered imprisonment for his crimes,
it is only to be expected, under these circumstances, that Hope, Faith, Charity,
Justice, and devotion, the leading attributes of Christian humanity, will
become clouded and obscured, and that nothing is left of the man but the
abuses of his animal desires, and the utter perversion of his intellect.
It will be seen at once, by reasonable men, that it is truly an awful
responsibility which rests with those, who in the first instance pass
sentence of imprisonment on men like Alexander Ross, and who may be
utterly ignorant of the means to improve such men by a judicious prison
education and discipline, by which they may become fitted for the society
of honest men when set free.
I could write a book upon this character, in connection with the organ-
isation of brain which forms its natural basis, but must conclude with the
remark, that the world has lost the use of the superior energy and excellent
natural intellect of the man Alexander Ross, because of the early perversion
of his passions, the misdirection of his intellect and the deplorable ignorance
of the constitution of human nature by nearly all who have hitherto had
the management of criminals.


Sketch of the character of Charles Ross.
The organisation of brain of this man is marked with some striking
features. The great force of the animal passions is indicated hy remarkable
width between, and great height backwards and above the ears. Like his
fellow-prisoner, Alexander Ross, he has great Firmness and Self-esteem. The
power of bis passions is intensified by great fixedness of purpose and a strong
sense of self-assurance—of self-satisfaction. To this development are
added the defects of very weak reasoning powers, very limited organs of
Charity, Faith and Hope, and small Conscientiousness. The forehead is
narrow, and particularly so towards the upper region. All the refining and
elevating sentiments which impart the sense and the love of the beautiful,
arc small, and when wo consider that he has strong social and conjugal
affections, and that these have been estranged and denied of legitimate
exercise, we can readily understand the depth of depravity to which such a
mind might readily fall, if placed in the presence of even the ordinary trials
and temptations of life. But the feature most striking in his form of brain
is the one connected with the propensity to theft. Acquisitiveness is
extremely large; this, with defective Benevolence and a small of Justice,
are sufficient to harmonise with the character of the robber, especially when
we consider that Self-esteem and Firmness are powerfully developed, and that
these organs must, in a brain like his, take a wrong direction, if not power-
fully affected by the presence of superior moral and religious influences.
Veneration is fairly developed ; and he certainly manifested the language
of this organ in his deportment; but the spirit of devotion —of reverence,
and of self-abasement, which true veneration expresses, would be but little
regarded if he was exposed to the temptation to gratify his various power-
ful propensities. The likeness in expression and in form of face and brain
of Charles Ross to the scull of the criminal Wilkinson, which I now hold in
my hand, is truly* remarkable. Wilkinson was executed in Tasmania, after
having suffered fifty-two sentences of imprisonment and punishment in
prison. The Private Secretary of Sir Henry Young, Governor of Tasmania,
presented me with this scull in exchange for a cast of the notorious Rocky
Whelan, some of whose murderous deeds I have recorded in my sketch of
Alexander Ross. This scull of the murderer Marshall, executed eight years
ago in Tasmania, assisted to illustrate my lecture upon the management,
classification, and reformation of criminals. The elite of Hobart Town, of
both sexes, were present at my lecture, and were not ashamed to acknow-
ledge that the illustrations and demonstrations brought before them in the
light of scientific truth, were of more importance to society than the
encouragement of that foolishly effeminate and ignorant sensibility which
professes to be shocked when beholding the naked “ dome of thought ’—“ the
palace of the soul ” —the paragon of Almighty workmanship. The conduct
of Mr, Private Secretary Solly, and of strong-minded and honest men every-
where, contrasts nobly with the Judas Iscariot-like weakness and selfish-
ness of Charles Cowper, who sold his master, Truth, not indeed for silver,
but for that which is equally base, the fear and applause of ignorant men.
I may here state that the Colonial Secretary would not sanction the
taking of casts of the heads of the executed men. He also opposed all
application of the principles of practical phrenology in the classification ot
prisoners, and said that it was all wrong to allow me to examine the heads
of the most notorious of the criminals.
Charles Ross' scull, if in my hand now, would portray the character of
the dead, and speak a solemn lesson to the living. _ It would show the
great preponderance of the animal over the moral and intellectual develop-
ment, and would point to the left to the gallows, as the strongest evidence
which remains of our barbarity as a civilised people ; and to the right, to
the revelations of the science of mind, the science of Phrenology—which
unfolds the true theory of Virtue and Vice, and the true practice for the
prevention and punishment, and the ultimate abolishment of all the more
liideous forms of crime.


Charles Ross portrayed to tho last moment of his life his extreme
Firmness and wonderful Self-reliance; and his refusal to have a parting
pressure of the hand from his fellow-criminal was an awful indication of
his lack of Charity and Impenitence. Believing as he did, until tho last
moment of his life, that his connection with Alexander Ross had led him
into his awful position, ho was deaf to the voice of common brotherhood,
and selfishly held himself aloof on the scaffold from the touch of kindness,
from tho expression of mutual forgiveness.
There is little more to say of special interest regarding this man,
excepting that he had a strong bodily frame, great memory for the past,
extraordinary strength and minuteness of observation regarding persons,
objects, dimensions, weights, and relative positions ; these qualities would
make him an excellent bushman, labourer, carter, carrier, currier, _or
expert at any thing connected with the tilling of the earth, and the hewing
of wood, and the drawing of water. His desire to be be favourably thought
of, and his Self-esteem, were evidently powerfully influential motives in
his conduct; and it is to be deeply regretted that the sentiments of Love
of Approbation, and Self-reliance, were not in early life more steadily directed
to the attainment of true dignity and an honourable fame, instead of having
acted in consort with his selfish propensities, seeking the admiration of
the wicked, and delighting in being one of the chiefs among rebels against
the laws of God.
Sketch of the character of John Bow.
My first impressions of Bow when I saw him on trial were less favour-
able, than those I now entertain, after a careful study of his mental organi-
zation. At first he looked defiant, and but little subdued by his position; in
the condemned cells, however, his deportment was very becoming, earnest,
quiet, and respectful, and utterly free from bravado, indifference, and
hypocritical servility. There was no murmuring, no whining, no false hope,
no rebellion, and no”evidence of resentment to the law in his deportment.
He seemed to believe that death was his doom, was deserved, and was
very near its consummation, and that he had reflectively made up bis
mind to meet his fate resignedly. When I asked him if I could oblige
him by communicating with his relatives in the event of his death, he
simply thanked me, and said no. Hope seemed to have but little influence
on his dark mind, but Reason and Veneration were evidently active, the
former giving him reasonable conviction of the enormity of his crime
and of its consequences, and the latter imparting that spirit of self-
abasement which arises either more or less in the minds of all men who
are conscious of having committed serious offences against the laws of
God and man; —of all men, who have an ordinary amount of Reason,
Reverence and Conscience, and who have not been seared in their moral
sensibilities by a false morality, and a continued application of wrong
principles for correction and reformation in prison descipline.
Bow is about twenty-one years of age, with broad chest, powerful
muscles, an ardent sanguineous temperament, and a brain of very large
dimensions. Large Veneration, a fair share of Benevolence, active Cautious-
ness, and considerable organs of Reason and Imagination, arc the favorable
features of his organisation. Opposed to the steady and right exercise of
these favorable qualities, he is deficient in the organs of Conscientiousness,
has but little steadiness of thought or continuity of mind, is a rover by
nature, from love of change and constitutional restlessness, and also from
impulsive desire and the strongest dislike to plodding or
settled. His mind, though of considerable capacity of reflection, is not of a
kind to receive education and instruction readily, partly from lack of fixed-
ness of thought, and partly from a defect of the organs of perception ; and
consequently a defect of memory for the elements and details of knowledge.
Ho could become a sensible, and even a good man, but it would require


many years and great labour to make him really clear-headed and clever
in the usual branches of scholastic knowledge ; and much pains and self-
denial would be necessary to render him really steady and contented. His
mind will not readily arrive at maturity, but reason and great energy being
inherent in him, he only requires proper time, vigilant watching, and
superior knowledge and example, to become a man of more than average
ability, and much more than average energy. His whole nature, however,
is in rebel arms against close confinement within the jaws of a gaol, and
unless be is educated in prison, and his mind recreated by alternate and
useful labour and instruction, ho will be maddened into the attempt to
escape.
It requires a comprehensive knowledge of the physical and organic
laws which rule over human nature, to understand the awful sufferings of
a mind like Bow’s, when confined in prison without varied resources of
physical recreation and mental instruction.
A knowledge of nature’s laws in these respects would go far to assist
in a safe, wise, and triumphant system for the classification of prisoners,
and unless these views arc entertained and acted upon by the constituted
authorities it is in vain to expect either safety, improvement, or reforma-
tion.
The amorous propensity of Bow, combined with his youth, his impulsive
passions, and his very sanguine temperament will become awful barriers
in the way to a complete subordination of his spirit to penal restraint;
therefore I say boldly, yet respectfully, that there is an awful responsi-
bility rests with the Authorities who have the management of such men,
and that they are bound by the laws which govern human nature, and by
the command of God, to give their serious and most deliberatively
reflective consideration to all the means within the scope of their observa-
tion for the amelioration of the condition of the prisoner, and for the
perfect security to the public against the maladministration of justice, and
the laxity and weakness of inefficient prison training and discipline.
To hang Bow would be simply barbarous, revengeful, and impolitic;
to spare his life is merciful, only on the condition that his powerful energies
are turned to use for the public benefit, and to his own moral and
intellectual improvement.
To keep such a man idle, physically or mentally, and to expose him to '
temptations from lack of vigilant superintendence, is to encourage him in
thoughts and deeds of murder, with the view to escape from a confinement
unredeemed and unrelieved by appropriate bodily and mental exercise.
Combativeness and Destructiveness are large in Bow, and must be legitimately
employed, or they will turn to mischief:—act upon his Reason, his
Benevolence, and his Conscientiousness, and the day may come when
governor and people, friends and foes, will rejoice that John Bow escaped
the gallows.
Sketch of the character of Manns.
The organisation of brain of Henry Manns is one which is too commonly
found among the youths of this colony. The type of head which indicates
thoughtlessness, unsteadiness, and disregard for justice, is not, however,
peculiar to the native youth, but found among a large class of young men
only a few years subject to the influences of colonial life:—men who left
the old country ten, eight, or six years ago in quest of gold or of improve-
ment in fortune, in one way or another. Many of such young men were
before they left homo much given to roving unsettled habits, and the life
they have led in this colony, travelling from diggings to diggings, and from
town to town, in a speculative gambling spirit, has tended in many
instances to break down the domestic and social affections —to prevent the
growth of Veneration which produces obedience and patience,—and to
lower the tone, and sap the foundation of the principle of justice.
It would be very unfair to fix upon the Native Youth all the fickleness,


inconsistency, folly, vanity, profanity and roguery which exist in the
young men of the colony—and I fear it must he admitted that the colonial
native has been taught many of his evil habits by a class of imported men
much above him in pretentions to education and family respectability, but
really below him in moral conduct.
Some men who claim the title of gentlemen, and who have been
appointed to government offices, and to Commissions of the Peace, have
often presented to the uneducated colonial youth an example anything but
instructive, except in the ways of evil. 1 have seen Magistrates, Medical
men, Lawyers, Squatters, Government officials, Settlers, Stockmen,
Butchers and Butchers’ boys, Bullock drivers, and Billiard markers, all
playing in the same game of Pool, winning and loosing money on terms of
equality, and it has often happened in my presence that the Magistrate
drank more deeply and lost his money more recklessly than any one of
his companions in the game. In the inland towns of both Victoria and
New South Wales scenes such as I have described were very common a
few years ago, and I believe they are still to be witnessed.
The Press of both colonies has described much of the disgraceful con-
duct of some of the men who have been placed in positions to act as a
terror to evil-doers; and, therefore, it would be well if the Executive, which
has thought fit to carry the letter of the law out with vengeance against
poor Henry Manns, would at once purge the magistracy and the constabu-
lary of those members whose conduct, if viewed in the light of impartial
justice, has been but little better than that of the victims of the executioner,
ft is the weakness of the colonial native to seek to imitate the Englishman
in his follies and his vices, and he often surpasses him in the daring and
startling atrocity of his crimes ; but he has had but few opportunities to
acquire even the groundwork of a wise, domestic, social and moral training
which is now generally happily in practice in England, Though society
must be protected against the criminal acts of all men, it is nevertheless but
just and reasonable that we take into account all the disadvantages which
the colonial native labours under before we presume to pronounce our
judgment regarding the measure of his crime. The young stockman,
horse-dealer or carrier, who journeys hither and thither between Sydney
and all the inland towns, is placed in the most unfavourable circumstances
for the acquisition of moral training and of every kind of proper discipline,
and, therefore, it is demanded on his behalf that he may, in the future,
receive such a practical moral education and training until he is thirteen
or fourteen years of age, as shall enable him to resist the temptations to,
and to see the folly and misery consequent upon, a course of criminal con-
duct ; particularly that kind of conduct which he has hitherto been prone
to indulge in during his visits to Sydney, Money spent—time wasted —
character disgraced—situations lost, and bodies and minds diseased by a
sojourn of a few weeks or months in Sydnejq are terrible causes of crime
in young men when they return to ply their avocations in the country,
unguided by good example—almost as distant from the influences of civili-
sation as the savage of the bush —destitute of all noble traditions and
associations which influence the youthful mind in the hornc country, and
with passions perverted and imaginations polluted by reflections upon the
scenes they witnessed during their various visits to the fountain of
wickedness, the metropolis of New South Wales.
The foregoing remarks regarding the causes of crime are not put forth
to vindicate the conduct of Henry Manns, nor are they intended to excuse
the conduct of those among the youth of the colony who sympathise with,
or assist in the crimes of, the notorious ruffian, Gardiner, but are intended
only to explain the causes which operate to debase the character and to
lower the moral organisations of the native youth ; and for these reasons
to show that the case of Henry Manns, even under the strict justice of the
law, is one which demands the exercise of the prerogative of mercy, and
one which cannot be too much studied in connection with the approaching
trials of men for the same or similar crimes.


The following is a brief but candid delineation of the character of the
last victim of the gallows. Let us pray that the future may be for ever
free from such a horrible blood-cloud as that which blackened the southern
sky on the morning of March the 26th, 1863.
The head of Henry Manns is about the average in size. The
temperament is a mixture of the fibrous and sanguine, a combination which
gives physical endurance and activity, and is specially adapted for manual
labour and arduous out-of-door exertion. His constitutional and his mental
qualities are in harmony with his life as a bushman and carrier, stockman
and equestrian, therefore he was not tempted to commit crime by being
placed in an unsuitable position in life, though very unfortunately for him
he was early associated with men whose example led him into ways of
idleness and folly, vice and crime.
He is not a man of much strength of character in any way, yet be has
much more than an average share of Firmness , and a very large develop-
ment of Self-esteem; these two organs existing in such power would readily
and resolutely determine him in any course which his other faculties saw
to be suited to their gratification ; and, therefore, it is of the utmost impor-
tance to place before such young men examples which may give their pride
and resolution of character a right direction ; and it is always irnpera-
tive upon parents to see that the self-will of their children which is noble
in itself should be in early childhood and youth rightly directed.
Henry Manns is restless, fickle, very impulsive, and much disposed to
idleness and rovingness of though These defects arise from lack of the
organs of Concentrativeness and Causality, and also in a measure from
active Hope and large Acquisitiveness, which prompt in such an organization
to a gambling and speculative spirit, to the devising of plans for immediate
gratification, and to a neglect of the calm and settled ways of industry.
Self-esteem being large, and Conscientiousness small, would make him very
unscrupulous regarding the means of attaining his ends, and Love of
Apjirobation being only moderate, would leave him almost regardless of the
applause or opinions of those who might reproach him for his conduct.
His deficiency of reasoning power is very evident; of forethought of a
reasonable kind he has but little ; and this, with the absence of active
Conscientiousness, and an indifference to a sense of character, renders him
open to yield to any temptation which offers a chance of immediate selfish
indulgence.
He has not, however, a mind inclined to, or capable of, much deep
design of evil, and in the absence of inducements from without, he might
act for a long time in a way so as to be as free from reproach as most young
men in similar circumstances. He is more passive than active as a cri-
minal, yet under a powerful stimulus he would be almost reckless of
consequences. He would join others in that which was cruel, though he
would*not deliberately act the ruffian or murderer.
1 remarked to him, thatl would not be afraid to meet him alone in the
bush ; he replied, with a smile, that I had no reason to fear him.
1 certainly would not fear such a man, but I would not trust him, in
point of honesty or fidelity, after having examined his head, and especially
if I knew the circumstances under which his eArly life had been spent.
All men with large Acquisitiveness, Self-esteem, Firmness, Comhative-
ness, and Destructiveness, combined with small reflective and deficient
moral qualities, are unreliable in principle, unfaithful in friendship, and
never to be trusted in circumstances which offer them the chance of large
immediate gains and gratifications. The lack of the organs of Concentra-
tiveness, tends to weaken the domestic tics, and to make the amorous
propensity roving and unfixed ; therefore as a whole, Henry Manns has a
very unfavorable organisation as compared with really good and steady men.
But he has a fair share of Benevolence, a moderate degree of Veneration,
and an average endowment of social feeling, is hopeful and self-relying, and
neither deeply disposed to villany nor cruelty, and for these reasons he is open
to receive impressions for good, and capable, if rightly disciplined for a few


years, of being educated and trained to the choice of a line of conduct totally
different from that, which by a stretching of the letter of the law against him,
brought him to the gallows, and which was caused as much by the force of
very unfavorable circumstances in youth, as by the defects of his organ-
isation of brain. His Firmness and Self-esteem under an opposite kind of
early training, might have become associated with a course of conduct
which would have prevented the abuse of these organs, which give force to
the leading features of his character; and had his active perceptive
powers been better educated, so as to stimulate his organs of
reflection to the study of moral principles, and to the understanding of
his position as a member of the social body, he would have been more alive
to the duties of life, and capable of more clearly understanding the laws
formed for the prevention of crime, and the right government of society ;
and consequently of foreseeing the consequences of crimes to which he was
liable from the strength of his propensities, and the weakness of ins moral
sentiments. His deportment in prison, his readiness to receive good
impressions when all temptations to crime were absent; his hopeful and
cheerful manner to the last hour, and his calmness and self-possession
throughout the terrible ordeal of preparation for death; all these features
harmonize with his organic development indicated throughout this brief
sketch of his character, and forcibly protest, in the name of humanity,
justice, and reason, against the horrible and diabolical practice of legal
strangulation, and call loudly for improved criminal legislation and a
better mode of criminal treatment.
OPINIONS,
Criticism upon tho conduct of the Executive and the Hev. Dr.
Steel in connection with this awfully interesting subject.
Tho law has executed its barbarous work this morning. The
unchristian sentiment of blood for blood is the plea of those who have
satisfied the full measure of their revenge by deciding upon the deliberate
strangulation ot theirfellow-crirninal—the unfortunate victim,Henry Manns.
Their plea, however, does not hold good in the case of their victim, inas-
much as the intent to murder was not clearly brought home to him ; and,
as no murder was actually committed, I am fully impressed with tho truth
of the painful conviction that tho foul and deliberate murder that was
committed this morning was cither a sacrifice to false notions of political
necessity, or a deliberate act of revenge on the part of the authorities by
whoso impious fiat the doom of tho victim was sealed.
Under all the circumstances that have transpired in connection with the
trial and condemnation of the Escort Kobbers —the pleadings on their
behalf of eminent counsel—the evidence of the matured wisdom of some
of the greatest of English Judges regarding the clearly defined law of the
ease—the magnitude of the petitions presented for the extension of mercy
—the youth and ignorance, and therefore comparative innocence, of tho
men, contrasted with great criminals—the evidence of the science which I
sincerely advocate, and the truth of which I clearly demonstrate—and tho
voice of the people which, in this case, is truly the voice of God —I say
that, under all these circumstances, I can only come to the conclusion that
the authorities (I cannot call them statesmen) implicated in this diabolical
proceeding were either morally incapable of taking a wise and just view of
the enlightened policy practised in England, or were influenced by a vin-
dictive desire to strike terror into the minds of those who had escaped tho
gallows for years, through the time-serving, truckling, hypocritical and
imbecile conduct of the heads of the Government. Sacrifices by blood


have long been abandoned in the religions laws and ceremonies of all
nations that have adopted the benign principles of Christianity; but the
ignorance which demanded life as a propitiation to the gods of the heathen
is not so much to he deplored as that perverse sinning against the light
which has characterised the conduct of the people’s Ministers in the
present deplorable case.
I am prepared to prove that all executions are hut legalised murders ;
hut the execution of Manns this morning was, in my opinion, an illegal
murder. If the evidence is to he believed, which has been brought forth
in this case, regarding the practices and opinions of great English authori-
ties, and if I am right in my opinion regarding the motives and causes which
led the Executive to carry the law beyond its boundaries in the execution of
Henry Manns, then I submit that the only practical and righteous way to act
in the matter is, to call upon the country to unite in a demand for the dis-
missal of those members of the Executive by whose barbarity or imbecility
the law has been stretched to the sacrifice of life.
When the stern letter of the law is modified on behalf of mercy to the
rejoices in the triumph of benevolence, and wise men,
considering the various motives to crime which actuate men under different
circumstances and conditions of life, and different innate tendencies to evil,
see that the policy of a merciful executive is the safest and justest, because
it harmonises with the moral law as written in the constitution of man,
and as it is clearly evidenced in the attributes and the will of God.
To be permanently affectual for good, the laws of the Legislature of any
country should bo established in accordance with the everlasting principles
of justice and mercy ; but as none but God can make perfect laws to meet
every case, man, under a reasonable conviction of his moral and intellectual
weakness, should lean to the side of mercy, and this principle is imperative
in all cases which involve the risk or the sacrifice of life.
Has Charles Cowper a mind so seared in conscience and so obtuse in
reason—so dead to the feeling of human brotherhood, and so defiant to the
pleadings of fifteen thousand of his fellow-citizens more generous than
himself, as to defend the part he took from the first, to hang the men, Bow
and Manns ?
Is the Colonial Secretary so stagnant in reflective perception, as not to
be able to foresee the indignant reproach that must follow his name for
many years, for the hangman’s part he has taken in forcing the rope round
the neck of a man, who might, but for the spirit of destructiveness in, and
the incapacity of, a colonial minister, have lived to give the world an evi-
dence of the gratitude which flows from the exercise of mercy, and of the
impolicy of capital punishment, especially in cases similar to the present.
Is there a man in this assembly reckless enough of his own good name
as to rise to his feet and signalise himself as the defender of the part which
Charles Cowper has taken in the deed of blood which was witnessed within
the walls of the gaol this morning ?
If there is such a man present, I give him now ten minutes to defend
the Colonial Secretary against the accusations 1 publicly bring against him ;
namely, an unjust and obstinate disregard of the truth of law as propounded
by the most eminent authorities : of a prejudiced and wicked desire to lag
behind tiro enlightened spirit of the times, or of the determination to inflict
a present blow as a revengeful compensation for the feebleness and unprin-
cipledness of his past conduct.
Charles Cowper may, in the altitude of his pride of place, pooh-
pooh these statements as the ravings of an enthusiast ; he may totally
ignore the organisation of human nature, in his theories of punishment, but
it will require many years of acknowledged contrition to wipe the blood-
stain from his forehead, which the spirit of Mrs. Manns has placed upon
it this morning.
But after all is said and done against Mr. Cowper, bo is not a whit
worse than the slaves who worship him, and I would say a word to them
upon this subject: they have flattered him, and fawned upon him until he


feels himself as a God; they have tortured him with their importunities
until he has more than once been on the verge of madness, and have
forced him into so many artifices, plans, intrigues, diplomacies, and ambas-
sadorships, as to leave him no time to judge wisely and comprehensively
on the awfully sublime subject of criminal jurisprudence, Charles Cowper
has a wonderfully elastic—apt—rapid—clear, business and commercial
capacity, and excellent ability for the general routine of political manage-
ment ; but he is not a man capable of doing justice to enlarged principles
of political economy, and much less is he fitted to adjudicate wisely on
subjects of such moral magnitude as has agitated the public mind in the
case of the escort robbery, which involved the principles of the highest
jurisprudence.
I would now say a word or two regarding the conduct of the Eev. Dr.
Steel; and as I was an ear and eye witness to the truth of my
remarks I trust that you may give me credit for giving you a candid
and impartial statement.
On last Sunday-week evening I attended Dr. Steel’s Church, and
heard him preach a sermon which in the main charmed me exceedingly,
because of the energy, earnestness, and true eloquence with which it was
delivered, but more particularly, because throughout the various comments
he made on the contents of the ninth chapter of Genesis, from which he
took his text, he exhibited a spirit and power of erudition and research
which were truly delightful, and in the chief points most logical,
philsophical and convincing.
It is because I reverence Dr. Steel, and know him to be a power for
good in Sydney, that I strongly protest against the abuse of intellect he
manifested, and the bad taste and bad example he displayed when he
attempted to vindicate the barbarous practice of capital punishment.
I say bad example and bad taste, because the men, Bow and Manns,
were then praying for that mercy which is dictated by a true Christianity ;
and many good and Christian men, quite as capable of forming a correct
judgment on the vexed question of capital punishment, were praying to
both God and man for the exercise of clemency on behalf of the condemned
men. I say barbarous practice, because every tender feeling of humanity
rises up against it; the principle of justice renounces all connection with
it; benevolence abhors it; wisdom derived from experience condemns it;
sound policy is opposed to it; all the light of Hope and Faith is ex-
tinguished by it; our ideas of man’s capacity to improve are frustrated by
it; and the example of our Divine Mediator is, by it, opposed and repu-
diated, and set at naught.
I willingly give Dr. Steel the benefit of all the argument which he
can extract from the passage which says, “ Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by
man shall his blood be shed : for in the image of God made He man.”
This was the passage which gave tone and the language of authority
to the remarks of Dr. Steel, which no doubt fell with powerful effect upon
the minds of his hearers.
The first clause of this passage 1 look upon as a prophecy, and treat it
as such; the latter clause does not in any way clearly enlighten us upon
the subject, though it most emphatically warns us against defiling, defacing,
or destroying that which was created in the image of God. This is not a
place to fully argue this subject, but it is a place to introduce a few passages
from the lips of our Saviour as an antidote to the blood-spilling propensity
which seems so deeply rooted in Dr. Steel and Charles Cowper, inspite of all
the Christian learning of the one, and all the practical experience of the other.
“ But I say unto you who hear, love one another, do good to them
that hate you.’’
*• Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use
you.” “ And as you would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise.” “ Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy.”
“Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time—thou shalt not
kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment. ’’


<• Bat I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother with-
out a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment ; and whosoever shall say
to his brother, llacca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever
shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.’ ’
These are the words of our Saviour; and if they do not in principle
forbid the practice of deliberate murder by the public executioner, I know
nothing of the meaning of the English language.
“ Recompense to no man evil for evil,’’ is the language of Paul the
apostle; and there are hundreds of passages in the New Testament which
testify strongly against the spirit which inflicts capital punishment. But
if these passages I have cited are not enough to convince men of the utter
atrocity of capital punishment, and of its total incompatibility with the
precepts and example of Christ, I must be forced to the conclusion that
in the minds of all men who lean to opposite opinion and opposite
feeling, there still lurks the spirit of vengeance and bitterness which is the
growth of early prejudice and misconception of the ways of God to man.
I throw out these remarks, in connection with the sermon and the
name of Dr. Steel, in the hope that he may reconsider his opinions upon
such an important subject as the life or death of man, and that he may, if
still inclined to vindicate capital punishment upon Bible authority, choose
an appropriate season for the expression of his views. Surely, if we
believe that God may and does pardon, even at the last* hour, it does seem
cruel in man to attempt to stop the current of mercy that has begun to
flow to save a brother sinner from the gallows.
My object in mentioning the name of Charles Cowper so prominently
in the present case, is to indicate that he, as the chief of the Executive,
should be foremost in support of all clearly defined scientific principles
which tend to the amelioration of the condition of humanity; and, that
his conduct, by ignorantly and imperatively forbidding the practical study
of human nature by an examination of the formation of brain of the
criminal, is an evidence of his moral and intellectual incapacity for the
leader of a liberal Responsible Government, whose acts should harmonise
with the progressive spirit of the times.


MU. HAMILTON’S PETITION
TO HIS EXCELLENCY.
To His Excellency the Eight Honorable Sin John Young,
Baronet, G-overnor-in-Chief of New South Wales, &c., &c.
May it Please Youk Excellency—
The humble Petition of Archibald Sillars Hamilton, sheweth ;—•
That your Excellency’s petitioner has, from the nature of his avocation,
taken a deep interest in the impending fate of the two condemned men—
Henry Manns and John Bow—and has considered it his duty to place before
your Excellency a prayer containing a few remarks and suggestions in
humble reliance upon, andpcrfect faith in, your Excellency’s wisdom in giving
due consideration to everything which may nearly or remotely affect your
Excellency’s final decision in a matter of such awful importance as the life
or death of the aforesaid two young men, who are but yet in the dawn of
manhood.
The studies of your Excellency’s petitioner have, for twenty-six years,
been daily directed to an examination of the connection subsisting between
the nature and the degree of crime, and the formation and organisation of
the human brain, and for this reason ho trusts that your Excellency may
deem the following facts sufficient to justify the propriety and sincerity of
this petition.
Your Excellency’s petitioner having been permitted by the honorable
Colonial Secretary to visit the condemned men in their separate cells, and
having, at the request of the men themselves, made a careful examination
of their organsations of brain, has the happy satisfaction of assuring your
Excellency that, in point of intellectual and moral qualities, they stand in
favourable contrast with men generally condemned for such grave offences,
and that, in perfect accordance with the favourable features of their organ-
isations, they have indicated their tendencies to what is good and right
by conducting themselves meekly since their condemnation. These marks
of innate intellectual and moral capacities, combined with the propriety of
their deportment in prison, conspire to warrant the reasonableness of the
belief that the extension of your Excellency’s clemency would be followed
by perfect safety to the lives and the property of the public as far as the
future career of these men could be concerned, especially as the improved
system of prison discipline now in force in Great Britain must soon be
adopted in this colony.
Your Exellency’s petitioner humbly prays that the relative degrees of
tendency to crime existing in man’s origanisation may be considered a sub -
ject worthy of your Excellency’s thought at this important crisis in the
history and punishment of crime in New South Wales; and that your
Excellency may deem it a wise exercise of mercy to spare the lives of the
condemned men, Bow and Manns, seeing that the prayer of this petition
is founded in moral justice—is urged on the fourfold plea of ignorance,
unfavourable circumstances in youthful training, the fact of freedom from
the reproach of crime in their previous years, and the fact —of greater im-
portance than all of these —that they arc, by virtue of natural capacity and
sound physical constitution, capable of receiving by an improved system


of prison discipline, such an amount of moral and intellectual education as
to warrant the belief of unltimte and entire reformation.
Your Excellency’s sparing mercy put forth in this instance would, in the
opinion of the petitioner, exercise a benign influence upon the characters
of the condemned men, and also upon the future conduct of thousands of
young natives of the colony who would live to witness the results of a now
code of prison discipline, and who would gratefully look back to the period
of time when the prerogative of mercy was exercised so opportunely by
your Excellency, as the advent of a safer, wiser, and more merciful policy
in the punishment and reformation of the criminal.
Your Excellency’s petitioner most humbly prays that the evidence of
science may not be altogether ignored in a case of such dread importance
as that which forms the burden of his prayer, especially as such evidence
on behalf of the unfortunate men does not in any way or degree presume
to interfere with the opinions or decisions of the law.
This petition to your Excellency being conceived in benevolence, and
supported by reason, appeals directly to those attributes in your Excellency’s
character, and therefore your petitioner hopefully anticipates and earnestly
prays that mercy may be extended.
And your petitioner will ever pray.


1508
01400902
