

ABUSES OP THE LAW
%lTci
COLONIAL LAW REFORM ACT.
J. T. FISHER, Esq,.,
earrister-at-Daw.
TO THE PUBLIC
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
COLONIAL LAW REFORM.
The Colonial Law Reform Act has now been before
the public of New South Wales Jbr some time. So
also has the measure for the Amalgamation of the
Profession and the future Education of our Students
at Law. I beg leave to remind you of the leading
provisions of both measures, which, are not mere
theoretical suggestions, but based upon actual practice
and experience.
THE COLONIAL LAW REFORM ACT.
The Colonial Law Reform Act provides for the
establishment of one form of action or proceeding
for both legal and equitable matters. This reform
has long since been established and acted upon in
the United States, in Canada, and in the East Indies,
and the great Judicature Commission of England,
have at last recommended it to be adopted in England.
The Colonial Law Reform Act also abolishes the
present cumbrous and expensive pleadings and
practice both at Law and in Equity, and.introduces
a plain and concise system of pleading, and a simple
and intelligible practice. It further provides for
frequent and simultaneous sittings of judges, with
or without juries, to dispose of purely legal questions,
and any disputed questions of fact.
REFORM IN EQUITY COURTS.
As is now well known the Court of Equity is seldom
resorted to, but the Colonial Law Reform Act will
enable equitable matters to he disposed of expedi-
tiousty, easily, and cheaply, through the medium of
concise pleadings, of frequent judicial sittings, and of
references to accountants, merchants, and others,
when accounts are to he examined and other inquiries
made.
OBSTACLES TO LAW REFORM HERE.
That we are far behind the age will appear from
this consideration to which we call especial attention.
In England long ago proceedings in the office of Mas-
ter in Equity were greatly reformed. In 1865, Mr.
Attorney-General Hargrave introduced into the
Upper House of Parliament of New South Wales an
Act of. Council for adopting the English reforms in
the Master of Equity’s office her*?, but it was dropped
in consequence of Sir W. Manning pointing out that
it would be necessary to adopt other English Acts,
and that the matter would require further considera-
tion. Now, consider how this colony stands. The
abuses in the present mode of proceeding in the
Master’s office are notorious. They were so in 1865.
In that year some patchwork legislation was pro-
posed and rejected, but nothing whatsoever was pro-
posed in its place. And so from that day down to
the present time we have gone on groaning under a
system of which the public has an abhorrence. Are
we to go on in this way lagging behind the age ?
Why not then take the Colonial Law Reform Act of
1869 and adopt it as it stands if no one will propose
a better remedy. To say we had better wait till we
see what England does, is almost to react, on a large
scale, what was done in the Upper House of Parlia-
ment in New South Wales in 1865*
USELESS AND EXPENSIVE ISSUES. NEW TRIALS.
The Colonial Law Reform Act will put an end to
the numerous perplexing issues joined between the
parties to an action, and which have been frequently
stigmatised, hut down to the present time have re-
mained in full force and vigour, greatly adding to
the amount of the lawyer’s bill, but greatly sub-
tracting from the amount of justice administered.
THE CHIEF justice’s OPINIONS.
The present Chief Justice, in 1867, gave evidence
before a committee of the Upper House, in New
South Wales, and called attention to the mischief of
these numerous issues, hut down to the present time
they have remained uniuterfered with—the abtiso
still remains. So also does the facility of obtaining
a new trial, although in 1867 the present Chief
Justice deliberately stated his opinion, that the law
ought to be altered in that respect. Now the Colonial
Law Reform Act has some practical provisions on
this subject, which render almost impossible the
abuse of new trials, and which ensure a new trial
only in eases where at the first trial there has been
an absolute miscarriage and failure of substantial
justice.
INJUSTICE INFLICTED YEARLY ANB CONTINUING.
Let us pause, and reflect upon the large amount of
injustice which is inflicted from year to year in this
colony, through the absence of these necessary law
reforms. No doubt the G-overnment have consented
to the issue of a Law Commission, for the purpose of
inquiring into the subject. But this will not satisfy
the public of New South Wales. Nor should it.
When the necessity of Law Reform is notorious, and
when we have approved precedents of Law E.eform
to govern our steps, why should we dally further
with the subject ? Why should we not follow the
practical Americans and Canadians at once ? Are
we to confess that we are so incompetent to frame
and mould and perfect a measure for the reform of a
crying evil, staring us daily in the face,, that we must
wait to see how England will frame its bill before we
of high standing in this colony. Ought such abuses,
of which the foregoing is a very moderate specimen,
venture to act P Depend upon it, when England of high standing in this colony. Ought such abuses,
can, in spite of vested interests, succeed in framing of which the foregoing is a very moderate specimen,
some such bill, —we shall find it so inapplicable to to be even practicable? And if they can be put down
our colonial Legislation and position, so bound up by the operation of the provisions of the draft
with English forms and English Acts of Parliament, Colonial Law Reform Act of 1869, is it not high time
that we shall be obliged, as Mr. Attorney-General to set about adopting them ?
Hargrave was obliged in 1865-to abandon the idea taxing costs, overcharging. '
ot its adoption.
the working of fetty vractice rules. There is an important observation to be made in
T , • , , j , ~ , . reference to the above bills of costs. From one bill
I will take one instance at random, and that in a of £l , 17s . 6d . one . th ird was deducted on taxation,
very trifling matter, to shew the working of our name , Yi £4 4f) , Prom tbe otber bill of £l3 4a 7d
petty practice rules, and the manner in which this i no , m
t i’ • , i ~ • • « was deducted on taxation one-iourtn, namely, £3 Is.
abuse would he obviated by the provisions of the But who does not see what a pei . nicio ’ us demoralising
Colonial Law Reform Act. A person in business in leadi into t tation rule F f action ig laid down _!
Sydney brought an action against a customer to re- especia s lly for go F me kind of practi ti one rs-hy the
cover a loan, and the customer being pressed, and F sent ’ tem of costs . A s F licito it £ is
desiring delay, pleaded several pleas-one denying [ ustified £ sendi into the otber side ’ a bi j JF f c0 ’ sta
this loan, one alleging a set-off another asserting J w hich he knows will he most surely cut down should
special payment but utterly false and untrue m it be roferred to taxati and w i ich if it be not
point of fact. Among the rules of the Supreme ferred to taxation, puts him in possession of an
Court are some that a replication shall be hied to amount exceedi wh F the ia jugtl £ entitled to , In
tl }° P le ff aa ., of defendant in certain cases and the E land a clerk K wbo can concoct, inflate, and spin
plaintiff thought his case was one in which a reph- -rv ril • * , . * . R ~
cation need not be filed. The defendant, thereupon d r D tnlrALt ' tv i 08 B lf a P nze >.
assuming that the plaintiff was hound to file a repli- 1,1“ S, LT a clerk is
n *. r rrv, i • equally valuable. Inis objectionable system the
cation, filed a judgment of non pros The plaintiff Law Keform Aot m J akes an att J t to deal
took out a summons before a judge to set aside this w F
judgment. The judge, however, ruled against the * IT , nr , lf , r .
J 1 ■ 4.-W AA’ • & A i • ar i • ° JEREMY BENTHAM AND LAW CHARGES.
plaintiff, and dismissed his, the plaintiff s, summons .
with costs. Thereupon the two following bills of -*■ Re m * n( * °* fhe great Jeremy Bentham, one of our
costs were sent by the defendant to the plaintiff. reformers “ was shocked by the abuse of the
T „„„ proiession of the law which was chosen for him hv
HOW LONG BILLS OF COSTS ARB MADE UP. v • «j, „ rpi i n V- V T ~ *
. his lather. The particular abuse which made him
t / -i • J c Alio launuA. paiuu,uicu wuiuu maue mm
Jones (plaintiff) and Smith (defendant). recoil was the custom of making the client pay for
Defendant’s costs on judgment of non pros herein, three attendances in the office of a Master in
Instructions and warrant to defend, 9s. 2d.; search Chancery when only one was given. The law he
for praecipe and paid, 4s. 4d.j entering appearance found on examination, was full of such things •' but
and paid, 12s. Id.; notice thereof, 45.; search for still the lawyers asserted on every occasion that the
declaration and paid, 4s. 4d.; having received copy law was the perfection of reason. He, however had
perusing same, 6s. Bd. ; term fee, 165.; instructions sufficient moral sensibility and self-reliance to say to ,
for pleas, 6s. Bd.; drawing instructions to counsel himself that these things, however profitable they V
to settle same, 13s. 4d.; attending him therewith and might bo, were frauds, and that between them and 'IS-- .'A >
thereon, 6s. Bd.; paid his fee and clerk, £2 4s. 6d. ; himself there should bo a gulf fixed."— EdinburahUi? : • -
drawing order lor leave to plead, 53. : copy and Review. -> . /fjgL. »
attending for judge s signature with copy pleas, Bs. other provisions in colonial law reform act 5 'A
4d. ; copy pleas and particulars of set-off to file and mi,,, ■ it c . , , , *®h
for serviced 3s. 4d.; attending filing and paid, 4s. 4d.: The Colonial Law_ Reform Act has several pro- '
copy to servo and attending serving, ss. 4d.; search : / ns > eac 1 0 jw ich in itself amounts to a large
for replication and paid. 4s. id.; drawing prmcipe 1 “> .instance, the reduction of the fees of A ,
for judgment, as.; attending so file, Sa. 40. : oali Court toa nominal amount, upon the principle that W
,■ ■ A , . , j ’ i . suitors Ought not to he taxed or compelled to mv ■* - •
filing, 55.; drawing costs and copy, Bs.: copy and - .. , ‘ , ouuipeiieu to pay
• 5 , tees tor resorting to the tribunals of mstice for the
service, 6s. 4d.; drawing appointment to tax and ~, , , P . . . ' , , J,, 10r LnG
copy, 3s. ; attending to got signed and paid, 4s. 4d.; m-nUinnsUi? VM aims ‘. r ®fer to. all of these
copy and service, 4s. 4d. ; attending taxing, 6s. Bd. ; U.,. ~ u c impossible, considering the limits
paid, 6s. ; filing costs and copy, 4s. 4d.; drawing 18 <K le3s '
judgment and paid, 55.; entering proceedings, 18s. THE pee lic must eoroe on law reform.
6d.; signing judgment and paid, 13s. 4d.; term fee, Enough has surely been said to demonstrate the
letters, &c., 15s. Total, £l3 4s. 7d. necessity of the public putting their shoulder to the
Jones (plaintiff), a nd Smith (defendant). wheel, and themselves forcing onwards the great
Defendant’s costs under order of the Judge, dated question of Law Reform. It will not do to saj b
September, 1868. Let the lawyers settle it themselves. De Tocquevile
The plaintiff having served summons to set aside says of the lawyers in the United States “ Law-
judgment of non pros, instructions to oppose same, 6s. yers are sometimes obliged to yield to the current
Bd.; perusing the affidavit in support of summons, of public opinion, which is too strong for them to
3s. 4d. ; attending to search if same filed, 3s. 4d.; resist; but it is easy to find indications of what their
drawing affidavit in opposition, 10s.; engrossing same, conduct would he if they were free to act as they
55.; attending to swear, and paid, 7s Bd. ; attending chose. The Americans who have made such copious
to file, and pjiid, 4s. 4d.; instructions to counsel innovations in their political legislation have introduced
to oppose, 6s. Bd.; briefing summons and affidavit, very sparing alterations in their civil laws, and that
for counsel, f 1; drawing observations and copy, with great difficulty, although those laws are frequently
13s. 4d.; attending counsel therein, at 6s. Bd.; paid repugnant to their social condition. The reason of this
his fee and clerk, £2 4s. 6d.; attending chambers that in matters of civil law the majority is often
when application dismissed with costs, £l Is.; draw- obliged to defer to the authority of the legal profession,
iug order, 65.; copy to get signed and attending for and that the American lawyers are disinclined to inno-
Judge’s signature, 8s Bd.; copy and attending serving vate when they are left to their men choice."
same, Bs. Bd.; drawing appointment to tax and copy.
35.; attending to get signed and paid, 4s. 4d.; notice IT WAS PORCED 0N THE lawyers of new toek.
copy and service, 45.; bill of costs and copy, Bs.; The fusion of law and equity, cheap and short
copy and service, 7s. 4d.; attending taxing, 6s. Bd.; pleadings and practice, and frequent judicial sittings
paid 2s. 6d.; attending to demand costs, 6s. Bd.; and similar reforms were embodied in one code, in
letters, &c., 7s. 6d.; drawing fresh appointment to New York, on the 4th July, 1848, and forced upon
tax costs of judgment of non pros, and copy, 35.; the lawyers by the people. Should the reforms con-
attending to get signed and paid, 4s. 4d,; copy and tained in the-Colonial Law Reform Act he carried
service, 4s. 4d. ; total, £ll 17s. 6d, the lawyers will not suffer very much, for a large
these oppressive costs prevented by the law amount of legitimate business will be sure to spring
reform act. R P th® law can be cheaply administered. Many
These hills of costs in this trifling matter speak for Uho kn^iiTj I 'TT d defen^ ants >
themselves, Now, if the Colonial Law Reform Act PF e ! e , nt dela 5 ’ ai ? d Rn ’
had been in force what would have been the state of creffi om defiance much tTb fi
things? In the first place, by that Act parties are of soffitWalitv * 7 ’ " SCandal
deemed to be at issue on the filing of the defence—no ’
other pleading or proceeding is allowed or necessary, THE w;RITER ’s qualifications.
and therefore all the expense attendant upon the I think it right to add a few words explaining the
doubtful construction of these irritating rules of claim which I have to he regarded as a competent
practise (quite foreign to the merits of the case) authority upon the subject to which I have called
could not have arisen. And, in the second place, attention. I was in the laborious and successful
by the Colonial Law Reforni Act a defendant practice of my profession in this colony from 1842
must verify his statement of facts upon oath, and, to 1854, having before my arrival in this colony
m , caae - re % r , red , to ’ defendant practised as a special pleader in England for three
could not have filed his false plea of satisfaction of years, and afterwards practised as a barrister in the
the loan because he could not have sworn to its Courts at Westminster and upon the Oxford Circuit. ■
truth, and so he could not have gained time, nor During my recent eleven years’stay in England I
availed himself of a mere formal slip by the plaintiff’s always occupied chambers in the Temple, along with
solicitor, as he was enabled to do, and so to saddle my brother, Mr. R. A. Fisher, of the Oxford Circuit
the plaintiff with costs to the amount of £24. the editor of the Great Digest of the Law Reports in
ihese bills of costs and this specimen of what is the England, now going through the Press. I took much
consequence of numerous petty practice rules is hut a interest in the profession in England, and in the
sample of what happens in a great many cases, working of law reforms there, and I had particular
though not very often m the offices of the solicitors reasons for watching the County Courts of England


FISHER’S LAW REFORM ACT.
THE DISTRICT COUIIT JUDGES.
Since my return to this colony, within the last
three years, and the resumption of my profession
here, I have had full opportunity of becoming
acquainted with the administration of law in the
Supreme Court, on its civil side, and in the District
Courts. I can truly assert that the administration of
justice in the District Courts as I have witnessed it
before Judge Dowling, Judge McFarland, and Judge
Simpson (and I hear that Judge Francis and Judge
Meymott are equally able) will not in any way suffer
in comparison with the administration of justice in
the County Courts at home. lam satisfied that we
need not have any apprehension in importing into
the Supreme Court the expedition, the simplicity, and
the cheapness which belong to the pleadings and
practice of the District Courts.
THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES.
And there can he no apprehension as to the able
and upright working out of the Law Reform Act by
the present Judges of the Supreme Court. It is no
I, imputation upon them, that they have not intro-
duced Law Reform, their duty being to administer
the law as they find it. Moreover, neither they nor
the law officers of the Crown, nor barristers in full
practice, can possibly spare the time and study re-
quisite for considering and framing a large measure
of Law Reform. I trust I have said enough to show
the expediency of considering this question of Law
Reform at the pending elections.
TORRENS’S ACT.
Leaving on one side the reforms I have brought
forward, I now call attention to Mr. Holden’s pro-
posed extension and improvement of Torrens’s Act.
It is well known that the passing of this great boon
to the public, although limited in its operation, was
strongly opposed by the profession. It is also very
well known that the public consider this measure an
excellent one, and avail themselves of it as far as
they can. It is remarkable that many legal gentle-
men of standing have resorted to the Lands Title
Act in reference to their own landed properties.
This speaks volumes. Consider the working of this
Act in one or two instances and compare it with the
working of the old law. A friend of the late Mr.
Dick bought a Sydney property for a few thousand
pounds, and the solicitor of the purchaser sent in a
hill of £5O for examing the title and completing
the conveyance. It so happened that the seller of
the property had paid his solicitor a similar sum
when he purchased the property. Mr. Dick’s friend,
therefore, went to the expense of a few pounds, and
brought his title under Torrens’s Act. This enabled
him to mortgage the property (the expense amounting
to only forty shillings) afterwards to pay off the mort-
gage without any expense in reference to deeds, and
finally to sell the property right out without any
further expense beyond two pounds being incurred
by either purchaser or seller. Now, if this title had
not been brought under Torrens’s Act, each mort-
gage would have entailed an expenee of from £3O to
£4O, and each conveyance, by way of sale, would
have cost £5O. This, be it remarked applies only to
the expenses to which each buyer is put, and not to
the seller’s expenses, when he is selling. Now take
the case of a working man buying his piece of land,
either on credit or money down. Under Torrens’s
Act, the expense is a mere trifle. So if he wishes to
mortgage under Torrens’s Act, in order to complete
his house, the expense is a mere trifle. But if the
title under which he purchases has not been, brought
under Torrens’s Act, there is no knowing what the
expense may be. And if he desires a little money
on loan, the expense of a mortgage—from £8 to £lO
—very often deters him from so doing. Therefore
the public should make a strong effort to get an ex-
tension of this beneficial measure, Torrens’s Act.
The Commissioner, Mr. Holden has prepared a proper
measure, the passing of which should be urged on by the
public. At present, the working of the law is this—
At each transfer of property, whether by way of
mortgage or of absolute sale, the abstract of title is
gone over, the same objections made, the same
answers thereto given, the same expense, no matter
how large, incurred. But, under Torrens’s Act,
when the title has been passed once it is passed once
for all. The expense once incurred, it is over, and
not, as at present, uselessly incurred at every change
of ownership. No doubt the extension of Torrens’s
Act will somewhat affect the business of some of the
present conveyancing lawyers. There cannot he a
question as to this. But these individual cases of
hardship cannot he received as an argument against
the introduction of a great public benefit. Pro-
fessional men, of high standing, indeed, would not even
condescend to put forward such an argument. One
very eminent man, to whom the mastering and ap-
plying conveyancing knowledge has been the labour
of a life time, declared to me that although much of
his knowledge must pass away as so much useless
lumber, yet that he felt that public justice, and the
spirit of the age, required that the principles and
practice of real property which take their rise in the
barbarous old feudal ages, should very soon give
place to the simplicity and moderate expense of the
Land Titles Act, As observed by Mill, in his
“ Claims of Labour ; ” “ The stamp tax, which the
State levies on the transfer of small properties, is a
trifling matter compared with the tax levied by the
lawyers. The law charges are the same on the
smallest transaction as on the greatest. There is no
real reason why the transfer of laud should be more
difficult or costly than the three per cent, stock, except
that more of description is necessary to identity the
subject matter ; all the rest is the consequence of
mere technicalities, growing out of the obsolete in-
cidents of the feudal system.”
AMALGAMATION OF THE PROFESSION
AND LEGAL EDUCATION OF STUDENTS.
According to my expressed intention in former
addresses to the public of New South Wales, I now
beg to urge upon you, from a political point of view
only, the necessity of speedily establishing a practical
and efficient scheme for the legal education of young
men in this colony. That such a system does not
now exist I have no hesitation in deliberately
asserting. I believe it is pretty generally admitted
to be the case. And as to the general attainments of
the young attorney, I have, not very long ago, heard
the Judges lament the low standard reached by some
of them. One general common scheme of education
for the young advocate and the young attorney is
requisite in this small colony to ensure emulation,
competition, and anything like a moderate degree of
efficiency. In the neighbouring colony of Victoria
no one can come to the bar who has not matriculated
at the Melbourne University, or been called to the
bar in England. There is no necessity, and it would
not be expedient to impose this condition here. But
there can be no objection to conferring a certain
privilege—as I have, indeed, proposed in my
education scheme—upon University graduates. Let
the ranks of both branches of the profession be open
to every one of good character, as indeed they are
now; but let us have, what at present we are without,
a severe intellectual discipline established, as in
Canada and elsewhere, where the profession is
amalgamated. I propose that that the legal profession
should be amalgamated and incorporated, as in
Canada, with Benchers or Governors for the govern-
ment of the society, under the title of the College of
Law, or Lyceum of J ustioe.
OUR DEMOCRACY AND THE AMERICAN DEMOCRACY.
What an important part will soon have to be
performed by our lawyers will be obvious on reflect-
ing upon the nature of our Americanised institutions.
We are a complete democracy, although we are
subjects of Queen Victoria.
Many lament this, others do not; but the practical
way of looking at the matter is this—we must deal
with our institutions, and the broad principles on
which they now depend, in the best manner that we
can; and with the light furnished to us by the
experience of other countries.
Now in the United States, where the profession
is amalgamated, the lawyer is always well educated
and profoundly versed in his profession. Books of
travels attest the cultivated minds of those who are
engaged in a forensic career. The law books which
are written and published in America are of the
highest order, and are cited and relied upon in the
English Courts of Justice. The part which the
American lawyers have played in polities we all
know. Why, then, should not the Australian de-
mocracy, where as yet public education is but in its
infancy, making provision for ensuring the complete
and efficient education of the young men who are to
be its future leading politicians, lawyers and Judges.
IMPORTANCE OF GOOD LAWYERS IN A DEMOCRACY,
De Tocqueville, speaking of the importance of the
legal profession in a democracy, observes ;
“ The more we reflect upon all that occurs in the
United States, the more shall we be persuaded that
the lawyers, as a body, form the most powerful, if
not the only counterpoise to the democratic element.
In that country we perceive how eminently the legal
profession is qualified by its powers, and even by its
defects, to neutralise the vices which are inherent in
popular government. When the American people
are intoxicated by passion or carried away by the
impetuosity of its ideas it is checked and stopped by
the almost invisible influence of its legal counsellors,
who secretly oppose their aristocratic propensities
to its democratic instincts, their superstitious attach-
ment to what is antique, to its love of novelty, their
narrow views, to its immense designs, and their
habitual procrastination to its ardent impatience.
As the lawyers constitute the only enlightened
class which the people does not mistrust, they are
naturally called upon to occupy most of the public
stations, They fill the Legislative Assemblies, and
they conduct the Administration they consequently
exercise a powerful influence upon the formation of
the law, and upon its execution.”
WHO BECOME GOOD LAWYERS.
To become a good lawyer, and exercise influence in
the colony, a large amount of intellectual labour is
required. In the Rev. Mr. Zincke’s hook of recent
travels in the United States we are told that a large
number of the sons of wealthy Americans are mere
walking gentlemen. They have not energy to dis-
tinguish themselves. The son of the farmer or
tradesman, or working mechanic, it is who becomes
a successful, hard-headed lawyer. But then there is
the training provided for him by the educational
institutions of the country, both general and technical.
My object is to introduce a training equally as effi-
cient. I beg to remind you that I propose that a can-
didate for entry as a student of law should he of the
age of eighteen, and that he should be competent to
pass a very stringent examination as to general
attainments; that lecturers should he appointed,
with instructions to suit their subjects to the first,
second, and third years of studentship ; that law
classes should be formed, and periodical examinations
established, with a scale of substantial premiums to
such as distinguish themselves, that two debating
societies for the junior and advanced students should
be formed, and that at these debating societies con-
stitutional and general questions should he made the
subject of debate in addition to technical questions,
and that all members of the University should be
entitled to become members as well as other indi-
viduals on being properly introduced.
I further propose
“ That no one shall be eligible to he a Barrister or
Attorney, or a Police Magistrate , or Clerk of Petty
Sessions , or a Crown Commissioner , or a Clet k in any
of the Law Courts , or Law Offices of the Crown , who
has not been scrolled as a member of the Lyceum of
Justice for three years, and duly attended lectures ,
passed the examinations , and assisted at the meetings of
the debating societies.”
In conclusion I hava to observe upon the Reform
of the Law that there can be only one opinion as to
its necessity and importance, and as to the legal
education of our youth under the amalgamation of
the Legal Profession, we have only to look a few
years onwards, to arrive at the conclusion that the
legal education of our youth is second to no political
question in regard to its necessity and importance.
T. J. FISHER.
Chambers, Elizabeth-street, South.
COLONIAL I?AW REFORM ACT OF 1869.
Whereas it is expedient to facilitate, simplify, ex-
pedite, and cheapen the administration of justice in
the Supreme Court of the colony of New South
Wales. Be it enacted.
GENERAL JURISDICTION OP THE SUPREME COURT.
That the Supreme Court shall from the passing of
this Act continue to have the several jurisdictions
wherewith the said Court is now invested by virtue of
any Charter, Act of Parliament, Act of Council, or
otherwise ; and every Judge of the said Court, when
sitting as the said Court, as hereinafter provided,
shall have jurisdiction at common law, and in equity,
and in insolvency, and in all ecclesiastical matters,
as well as the like jurisdiction as that now exer-
cised by the Primary Judge in Equity, and shall
have jurisdiction in all prohibition and habeas corpus
oases, and appeals from inferior courts, as provided
for by any Act of Council, and shall exercise all the
powers which are given by any Act of Council to the
Primary Judge in Equity either sitting alone or in
conjunction with another Judge, but shall not have
original jurisdiction over oiiminal informations, or in
appeals from the Supreme Court Sittings in their
criminal jurisdiction, either in Sydney or on Circuit.
GENERAL COURT, SPECIAL COUKT, CIRCUIT COURT.
The Supreme Court, in its Common Law jurisdic-
tion, both on the Civil and Crown side of the Court,
and its Equity, Ecclesiastical, Insolvency, and Eccle-
siastical jurisdiction, shall be distributed into General
Court Sittings, Special Court Sittings, and Circuit
Court Sittings.
GENERAL COURT SITTINGS.
The Supreme Court in a General Court Sitting
shall determine all cases whatsoever arising out of
actions, or otherwise, whether at Common Law or in
the exercise of Equitable Jurisdiction, which may be
brought for review, and by way of appeal from a
Supreme Court Special Sitting, or a Supreme Court
Circuit Sitting, as hereinalter provided, or upon
special cases agreed to by consent of parties for
determination by such Supreme Court General Sit-
ting. The Judges holding such General Sittings of
the Supreme Court shall at the least be three in
number, and the concurrence of a majority shall be
necessary for pronouncing judgment.
SUPREME COURT SPECIAL SITTINGS.
The Supreme Court Special Sittings, having such
jurisdiction as aforesaid, shall hear and determine all
issues of fact and of law in civil cases, with or
without juries, and all motions and proceedings
arising out of any actions brought before it. They
shall hear and determine applications for judgment
upon failure to put in a defence, actions set down for
hearing upon complaint and defence put in, appli-
cations for judgment upon special verdicts, applica-
tions by way of motions for new trial of issues tried
by Referees or for judgment upon the report of
Referees, as herein provided. They shall hear all
motions in actions or proceedings in the Court;
whether at Common Law or in the exercise of Equit-
able Jurisdiction, all applications for new trials to be
made after the trial of issues of fact at the same
sittings; and, generally, all other questions not
assignd specially to the General Court or Circuit Court
Sittings. The Supreme Court Special Sittings may
be held before one Judge or before two Judges. One
or more Supreme Court Special Sittings may be held
simultaneously in Sydney, for the trial of issues
of fact either with or without a jury.
SUPREME COURT CIRCUIT SITTINGS.
The Supreme Court Circuit Sittings shall be held
before one or more Judges in the circuit districts of
the colony, for the trial of issues of fact in civil cases,
with or without juries, and for the hearing of appli-
cations for new trials of such issues as hereinalter
provided, and the Judge or Judges holding the same
shall also hold a Supreme Court Special Sitting in the
same district.
DISTRICT COURT JUDGES.
Every District Court Judge, who shall be or shall
have been appointed a District Court Judge under
the provisions of the District Courts Act of 1858, and
of the Act passed to amend the same on the 13th
of December, 1865, shall on being nominated and
authorised thereto by the Governor, with the advice
of the Executive Council, have full power to act as a
Judge of the Supreme Court in the disposal of all
business, both civil and criminal, at the Circuit Court
Sittings of the Supreme Court in any district, or at
any place, and shall have the same powers and
authorities in as full and ample a manner as a Judge
of the Supreme Court, acting as such at any Circuit
Court Sitting of the Supreme Court. And every
District Court Judge appointed after the passing
of this Act shall permanently reside in the district
whereunto he is apppointed.


SUPREME COURT SPECIAL SITTINGS IN SYDNEY.
In Sydney, one of the Judges shall hold a Supreme
Court Special Sitting, upon every judicial day in
every week for the hearing of motions and applica-
tions, at the Court-house, Sydney, and for the trial
of issues of law, and for the transaction of such
other business, as is now usually disposed of by
Judges in Chambers. Every proceeding com-
menced before one of these Judges may be con-
tinued before another with the same effect as if com-
menced before him.
EXTRAORDINARY SITTINGS.
The Governor, with the advice of the Executiv 6
Council, whenever the public interests require it,
may appoint extraordinary Supreme Court General,
Special, and Circuit sittings, and designate the Judges
by whom they are to be held, and such Judges may
be either Judges of the Supreme Court or District
Court Judges, who for such purpose shall have the
same powers and authorities for acting judicially at
the said Sittings in as full and ample a manner as a
Judge of the Supreme Court has.
TIMES OF HOLDING SUPREME COURT GENERAL AND
SPECIAL AND CIRCUIT SITTINGS.
The Supreme Court General Sittings shall be held
at Sydney at least six times in the year, to be fixed
by the Judges at the commencement of every year,
and each shall be continued as long as, in the
opinion of the Judges holding the same, the public
interests require.
Supreme Court Special Sittings, either one or
more, shall be held at Sydney for the trial of issues
of fact, either with or without a jury, once a month,
save and except in the month of January, the days
of commencing to hold the same to be fixed by the
Judges at the commencement of every year. A
Supreme Court Special Sitting for the trial of issues
:f law shall be held every month. These Supreme
Court Special Sittings shall be in addition to the
daily sitting of a Supreme Court Special Sitting in
Sydney, as hereinbefore provided. The Supreme
Court Circuit Sittings shall be held at least four
times in the year by one of the Judges of the
Supreme Court, and the Judge holding a Supreme
Court Circuit Sitting shall at the same time hold a
Supreme. Court Special Sitting, and continue it until
the adjournment of the Circuit, or longer, if the
public interests require. The times of holding such
Circuit Sittings shall be fixed by the Judges at the
.commencement of every year.
VACATION.
The offices of the Supreme Court shall be closed
■u,nd there shall be an entire cessation of judicial
business, from the 23rd December to the Ist of
February.
ATTORNEYS AND BARRISTERS
All persons entitled to practise as Barristers, or
Attorneys, or Proctors, in the Supreme Court at the
massing of this Act, shall be thenceforward entitled
to Practise both as Barristers, and also as Attorneys
and Proctors, in all Courts in the colony ; and rules
shall be framed hereafter by a Law Society, to be
hereafter incorporated, for regulating the admission
of persons as Barristers, Attorneys, and Proctors,
and in default of such Law Society being incorporated,
they shall be framed by the Judges of the Supreme
Court, and the Law officers of the Crown, and six
Barristers, and six Attorneys of the Supreme Court
to be appointed for regulating the admission of
persons to practise as Attorney, and Barrister, and
Proctors, in the several Courts of this colony.
ACTIONS AT LAW AND SUITS IN EQUITY.
The distinction between actions at Law and suits in
Equity, and the forms of all such actions and suits here-
tofore existing, are abolished; and there shall be here-
after but one form of action for the enforcement or
protection of private rights , and the redress or prevention
of private wrongs, which shall be denominated a civil
action, —the party complaining to be known as the
plaintiff, and the adverse party as the defendant.
All persons having an interest in the subject of the
action, and in obtaining the relief demanded, shall
be joined as plaintiffs. Any person may be made a
defendant who has or claims an interest in the
subject of the action adverse to the plaintiff, or who
is a necessary party to a complete determination or
settlement of the questions involved therein. The
Court shall determine any controversy between
parties present in Court, without prejudice to the
rights of others, but when a complete determination
of the controversy cannot be had without the presence
of other parties, the Court shall order them to be
brought in.
COMMENCEMENT OF CIVIL ACTION.
Civil actions must be commenced by the service of
a writ of summons, endorsed in actions for a sum of
money, with a notice that plaintiff will take judg-
ment if the defendant fail to put in a defence, and
endorsed in all other actions with a notice that
plaintiff will, if defendant fail to put in a defence,
apply to a Supreme Court. Special Sitting for the
relief thereby demanded.
JUDGMENT UPON FAILURE TO PUT IN A DEFENCE.
In actions for sums money only, plaintiff may file
in the Prothonotary Office proof of service of summons
and that no defence has been put in, whereupon the
clerk shall enter judgment for the sum sought to be
recovered. In other actions plaintiff may, in like
manner, apply by motion to the Supreme Court
Special Sitting for the relief demanded in the com-
plaint. If the taking of an account, or the proof of
any fact be necessary to enable the Court to give
judgment, or to carry the judgment into effect, the
Court may take the account to hear the proof or
order of a reference. And where the action is for the
recovery of money only, or of specific, real, or
personal property, with damages for the withholding
thereof, the Supreme Court Special Sitting may order
the damages to be assessed hy a referee or referees or
by a jury.
PLEADINGS.
All the forms of pleadings heretofore existing are
hereby abolished, and hereafter the forms of pleading
in civil actions shall be as follows : —The only plead-
ings to be allowed are as follows :— The complaint on
the part of the plaintiff, and the defence on the part of
the defendant, and also a counter claim on the part of
the defendant. The defendant’s defence may be,
Ist, by way of objection or demurrer to the legal
sufficiency of the complaint; or, 2ndly, by way of
denial of the allegations in the complaint; or, 3rdly,
by way of partial denial of the allegations in the
complaint, and the assertion of new matter; or,
4thly, by way of admission of all the allegations in
the complaint and the assertion of new matter. Such
new matter respectively, if constituting distinct and
independendent grounds of defence, shall be divided
and numbered accordingly.
The complaint shall contain a concise statement of
the facts constituting the cause of action in ordinary
language, without repetition, and in such a manner
as to enable a person of common understanding to
.know what is intended, and shall conclude with a
demand of the relief to which the plaintiff considers
himself entitled.
The defendant's defence and the defendant’s counter
claim shall be framed upon the same principles of
conciseness and simplicity as hereinbefore declared.
The plaintiff’s reply to the defendant’s counter claim
shall either deny the same or set forth new matter,
in like manner as in a defence to a complaint.
Every complaint, defence, counter claim, and reply
shall be verified upon oath by the party, his agent, or
attorney, to the effect that he believes it to be true.
CONSTRUCTION OF PLEADINGS—AMENDMENTS.
In the construction of a pleading, for the purpose
of determining its effect, its allegations shall be
liberally construed, with a view to substantial justice
between the parties.
The Court shall, in every stage of an action, dis-
regard any error or defect in the pleadings or pro-
ceedings which does not affect the substantial rights
of the adverse party; and no judgment shall be
reversed or affected by reason of such error or defect.
The plaintiff and defendant, respectively, may be
allowed, on motion, to make a supplemental com-
plaint, defence, or reply, alleging facts material to
the case, occuring after the former complaint, defence,
or reply.
BEING AT ISSUE.
When the last pleading has been filed and served,
the parties shall be deemed to be at issue.
REFEREES, OFFICIAL AND NON-OFFICIAL.
A Referee, or Referees may be appointed by the
Court to try an issue of fact in a civil action and re-
port a judgment theron, to ascertain any other fact
in a civil action, when necessary for the information
of the Court, and report the fact either with or
without an opinion thereon. The court may direct a
reference where the parties consent thereto, and
where the trial of an issue requires the examination
of a long account on either side, in which case the
Referee or Referees may be directed to hear and
decide the whole issue or to report upon any specific
question of fact involved therein. So also it may be
directed where the taking of an account or the making
any inquiries and obtaining information are neces-
sary for the information of the Court before judg-
ment, or for carrying a judgment or order into
effect. So when a question of fact other than upon
the pleadings arises, upon a motion or otherwise, it
shall be lawful for the Court to direct that the
parties or their attorneys shall attend upon the
Referee and Referees during such investigation,
inquiry, or taking of accounts. In all such cases, the
Court shall furnish the Referee or Referees with
such part of the proceedings, and such detailed
instructions, as may appear necessary for his or their
information and guidance; and the instructions shall
distinctly specify whether the Referee is merely to
transmit the proceedings which he may hold on the
enquiry, or also to report his own opinion on the
point referred for his investigation.
OFFICIAL REFEREE AND NON-OFFICIAL REFEREE.
The Master in Equity for the time being at the
passing of this Act shall be Chief Official Referee of
the Supreme Court, and shall perform the duties of
the Referees hereinbefore mentioned, either singly or
in co-operation with other Referees, either official or
non-official, according to the order of the Court. The
Chief Official Referee shall have all the powers, and
shall perform generally all the duties of the present
Master in Equity, and his name of office shall be
Chief Official Referee of the Supreme Court instead
of Master in Equity. The Prothonotary, first clerk,
and secend clerk shall also be empowered to act as
Official Referees, either singly or in conjunction with
other Referees, either official or non-official, according
to the order of the Court. A non-official Referee may
be any person who shall be qualified as a juror. The
scale of remuneration shall be either according to the
scale of fees in the schedule hereto annexed, or by
agreement of the parties to the action or motion.
TRIAL OF ISSUES
Issues of law, in the first instance, shall be tried at
a Supreme Court Special Sitting. All issues of fact
shall be tried by a Supreme Court Special Sitting, or
a Supreme Court Circuit Sitting, and not by a jury,
unless the parties consent to a trial by jury, or unless
the trial of the same by a jury is ordered apon appli-
cation by either of the parties, or unless the same be
referred, as hereinbefore provided, to a referee or
referees.
PROCEEDINGS AT A TRIAL.
The proceeding at trials of issues of fact before
Supreme Court Special Sittings or Circuit Court
Special Sittings, whether with or without a jury,
shall be generally the same as under the present
practice.
RULES OF EVIDENCE.
The rules of evidence shall be generally the same
as are now in force under the present practice, and by
virtue of the rules laid down by the several Acts of
Council relating to the Law of Evidence ; but there
shall be no new trial upon the ground of the improper
admission or rejection of evidence unless it can be
clearly seen by the Court that the same was material
and affected the substantial rights of the party as
against whom such evidence was rejected or admitted.
THE PROPOSITIONS CONTENDED POR BY EITHER PARTY
AT THE TRIAL.
Any party may, and if required by the Court shall,
when the evidence is closed, submit a distinct and
concise proposition, the conclusion of fact which he
claims to be established, or the conclusions of law
which he desires to have adjudged, or both. They
may be written and handed to the Court, or, at the
option of the Conrt, oral, and entered in the Judge’s
minutes ; but in either case they must be entered
together, with any exception that may be taken if
either party require it.
APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT GENERAL SITTING.
An appeal may be taken to the Supreme Court
General Sitting from the judgment or order of a Su-
preme Court Special Sitting or Circuit Court Sitting,
either in their civil or criminal jurisdiction. This
appeal may bo taken from a judgment entered upon
the finding of a jury by direction of a Supreme
Court Special Sitting, or of a Supreme Court Circuit
Sitting, or entered after a trial without a jury by
such last-mentioned Courts, or entered after the
hearing of an action, upon complaint and defence put
in or entered upon the Report of the Referees. An
appeal may be taken from an order made by any
Supreme Court, Special or Circuit Sittings, in any
case when the order grants or refuses a provisional
remedy, when it grants or refuses a new trial, where
it involves the merits of the action, when it affects a
substantial right; and generally appeals may be
taken from all orders and judgments to the Supreme
Court General Sitting, except as is otherwise pro-
vided to the contrary in this Act.
Security shall in all cases be given by the appel-
lant upon every appeal for due execution of the order
or judgment appealed for, and for payment of all
costs which shall finally be adjudged on appeal.
INJUNCTIONS AND RECEIVERS.
In any action in which it shall be shown to the
satisfaction of the Supreme Court Special or Circuit
Sittings, that any property which is in dispute in
the action is in danger of being greatly and irrepa-
rably injured or alienated by any party to the action,
it shall be lawful for the Judge holding such Special
Sittings, to issue an injunction to such party, com-
manding him to refrain from doing the particular
act complained of, or to give such other orders for
the purpose of staying and preventing him from
doing great and irreparable damage to, or alienating
the property, as to such Court may seem meet. And
in all cases in which it may appear to such Court to
be necessary for the preservation or the better man-
agement or custody of any propeity which is in dis-
pute in a suit, it shall be lawful for the Court to
appoint a receiver or manager of such property. If
the injunction be granted by the Court without
notice, the defendant at any time before the trial
may apply upon notice to a Supreme Court Special
Sitting to vacate or modify the same. The applica-
tion may be made upon affidavit or oral evidence
produced by defendant, which may be opposed by
affidavit or oral evidence produced by the plaintiff.
If it shall appear to the Court that injunction was
applied for on insufficient grounds, or if the claim
of the plaintiff is dismissed, or judgment is given
against him by default or otherwise, and it shall ap-
pear to the Court that there was no probable ground
for instituting the action and obtaining the injunc-
tion, the Court may (on the application of the de-
fendant) refer it to a jury or referees to assess the
amount of the damages sustained by the defendant
by reason of the putting in force the writ of in-
junction.
All distinctions at present in force between costs
as between party and party, and costs as between
attorney and client, and ordinary costs and extra
costs, shall be and are hereby abolished ; and here-
after under the denomination of costs shall be in-
cluded the whole of the expenses necessarily in-
curred by either plaintiff or defendant on account of
the action and in enforcing judgment. A scale of
costs applicable to the proceedings in an action, and
to motions and orders, shall be prepared upon the
passing of this Act by the four Judges of the
Supreme Court, assisted by their taxing-officers, and
all costs as between party and party or as between
attorney and client shall be taxed according to such
scale. The costs payable by an unsuccessful party
to a successful one, shall in addition to the costs re-
ferred to in the said scale include all necessary ex-
penses incurred in respect of witnesses’ expenses,
whether skilled or otherwise, expenses of commis-
sioners in taking evidence, fees of Referees, and all
expenses incident to the reference.
All provisions in the Act of Council, commonly
called the Common Law Procedure Act, and the Acts
of Council amending such Common Law Procedure
Act, and in all other Acts of Council now in force,
providing that no costs, or only a certain specified
sum in respect of costs, shall be recovered by plain-
tiffs in certain cases, shall remain in full force.
NEW TRIAL.
# No new trial shall be moved for except for exces-
sive damages, or for newly-discovered evidence
FISHER’S LAW REFORM ACT.


r| r „ #"j rxi f&/ fA Q
I & r [fa 1
FISHEE’S LAW EEFOEM ACT.
which could not by reasonable diligence have been
discovered and produced at the trial, or for mis-
conduct of a jury, or for their verdict being contrary
to evidence, or for a substantial error in point of law
by the Judge, or upon exceptions taken down at the
trial in writing—the same being material and affect-
ing the substantial rights of the party. No new
trial can be moved for in respect of excessive damages
or in respect of a verdict being against evidence, or
for a substantial error on the part of the Judge, except
notice —first oral and then in writing—be given
in open Court immediately after the verdict; and
thereupon the Court shall appoint a day in the same
sitting for hearing the application upon the Judge’s
minutes. An appeal from the Judge’s decision, upon
an application for a new trial, may be taken to a
Supreme Court General Sitting—the plaintiff, in case
he is the appellant, giving security for costs, and the
defendant, in case of his succeeding, giving security
for complying with the judgment as well as for costs.
The costs of an abortive trial shall abide the event of
the second trial and judgment.
TRIALS BY REFEREES.
The proceedings on trials by Referees shall be as
near as may be to the practice hereinbefore laid down
with respect to trials before a Supreme Court Special
Sitting.
The Report of the Referees upon the whole issue
stands as the decision of a single Judge, and judgment
may be entered thereon in the same manner as if the
action had been tried by such Judge, and their
decision may be excepted to and reviewed in like
manner as on trials before a Judge, and the motion
for new trial or appeal therefrom shall be made to a
Supreme Court Special Sitting, whose decision shall
be final and as conclusive as if it were the decision of
_ Supreme Court General Sitting. When the
Referee reports the facts, the Report shall have the
effect of a special verdict.
JUDGMENT,
When a trial has been had judgment shall be
entered by the clerk in conformity to the verdict,
unless the Court order the case to be reserved for
argument, or for further consideration, or grant a stay
of proceedings or a new trial. If a Counter Claim
established at the trial exceed the plaintiff’s demand
so established, judgment for the defendant must be
given for the excess ; or, if it appear that the de-
fendant is entitled to any other affirmative relief,
judgment must be given accordingly.
PROCEEDINGS AFTER JUDGMENT.
When an execution against property of the judg-
ment debtor, or of any one of several debtors in the
same judgment issued to the sheriff is returned
unsatisfied in whole or in part, the judgment
creditor at any time after such return made, shall be
entitled to an order from a Judge of the Court
requiring such judgment debtor to appear and answer
concerning his property before such Judge, or a
referee appointed by a Judge of the Court, at a time
and place specified in the order.
After the issuing of an execution against property,
and upon proof by affidavit of a party or otherwise,
to the satisfaction of the Court that any judgment
debtor has property which he unjustly refuses to
apply towards the satisfaction of the judgment, such
Court may, by an order, require the judgment debtor
to appear at a specified time and place to answer con-
cerning the same ; and such proceedings may there,
upon be had for the application of the property of the
judgment debtor towards the satisfaction of the
judgment as are provided upon the return of an
execution.
MOTIONS AND ORDERS.
Every direction of a Court or Judge made or
entered in Meriting, and not included in a judgment,
is denominated an order. All applications to the
Court, whether exparte or otherwise, and whether
the same have heretofore been made by way of
petition or otherwise, shall be by way of motion.
JURISDICTION OVER OFFICERS.
The Supreme Court, either at a General Court
Sitting ora Special Court Sitting, shall have, and
exercise all the several powers and jurisdictions now
had and exercised at Common Law, or in Equity
generally, or under and by virtue of any Charter,
Act of Parliament, or Act of Council, in respect of
Receivers appended by the Court, Guardians of
Infants, Committees of Lunatics, Attorneys, Sheriffs,
Coroners, and all Officers of the Court, in as full and
ample a manner as now exercised by the Supreme
Court, or any Judge thereof, or by the Primary
Judge in Equity.
FEES OF COURT.
No other fees shall be taken in the Supreme Court
except as provided in the schedule hereunto annexed.
And the same shall be payable in the form of stamps
of the amount required attached to the writs, or other
paper proceedings filed in Court, pursuant to the
scale set forth in the schedule hereunto annexed.
REPEAL AND SAVING OF EXISTING ACTS AND RULES.
All statutes, Acts, and rules, and orders of the
Supreme Court relating to actions and suits and
motions at present in force in this colony, and incon-
sistent with the general provisions of this Act, in-
cluding the Common Law Procedure Act of 1853,
but not the Acts amending the same are hereby
repealed. All existing rules and orders of the Supreme
Court in its Common Law and Equity Jurisdiction
are hereby repealed, and the rules and orders herein-
after in force shall be those which are set forth in the
schedules hereunto annexed. Provided always that
the 17th of Victoria, No. 7 ; the 16th Victoria, No.
3 ; the 18th Victoria, No. 6 ; the 4th Victoria, No.
6; the 22nd Victoria, No. 14; the 11th Victoria,
No. 27 ; the 3rd Victoria, No. 15—and the provisions
of the Common Law Procedure Act, relating to the
recovery of costs are hereinbefore mentioned, are to
remain in full force and effect in so far as they relate
to the extension of the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court and of the several Judges thereof, and to the
powers of arrest and foreign attachment therein set
forth, and to the rules of practice made by the
Supreme Court in relation thereto, which said rules
of practice are set forth in the schedule to this Act of
Council.
ACTIONS AND SUITS PENDING.
The provisions of this Act shall apply to future
proceedings in actions and suits heretofore com-
menced and now pending, as follows: —1. If there
have been no pleadings therein, to the pleadings and
all subsequent proceedings. 2. Where there is an
issue of law or of fact, or any other question of fact
to be tried to the trial, and to all subsequent pro-
ceedings. 3. After a judgment or order to the pro-
ceedings to enforce, vacate, modify, or reverse it.
ECCLESIASTICAL JURISDICTION OF THE SUPREME COURT.
The rules relating to the probates of wills and ad-
ministration of intestate estates, and the rules in
general which are now in force in the Supreme
Court in its Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction shall continue
in force notwithstanding any provision in this Act*
[See the said rules in Schedule hereto lettered D.]
RULES OF PRACTICE AND PLEADING AND SCALE
OF COSTS.
The Rules of Practice and Pleading, and all other
provisions set forth in the schedules hereunto an-
nexed, and the scale of fees of Court and the forms
of proceeding in the schedules hereunto annexed
shall be of the like force and effect as if they had
been inserted in the body of this Act.
INTERPRETATION CLAUSE.
Words used in this Act in the past or present tense
include the future as well as the past and present;
words used in the masculine gender include the femi-
nine and neuter; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural the singular ; the word person
includes a corporation as well as a natural person ;
writing includes printing, or printed paper ; oath in-
cludes affirmation or declaration. The following
terms also have, in this Act, the signification hereby
attached to them, unless otherwise apparent from the
context:—
The word “property ” includes property real and
personal.
The words “ real property ** are co-extensive with
lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
The words “ personal property ” include money,
goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of
debt; the word “district ” signifies judicial district.
COMMENCEMENT OF ACT.
The provisions of this Act shall come into operation
on the first day of January, 187 .
SHORT TITLE OF ACT.
In citing this Act in any instrument, document, or
proceeding, it shall be sufficient to use the term, The
Law Reform Act of 187 .
Schedule of Rules of Practice, Pleading, Forms.
Scale of Costs, and other Matters—Lettered A.
OFFICERS OF THE COURT.
Under this heading the rules prescribe the several
duties of the Chief Official Referee, the Prothona.,
the Sheriff, the Judges, Clerks, Commissioners
circuit districts. These rules are similar to th(
now in force.
HOURS OF ATTENDANCE AT THE OFFICES.
These rules are similar to those now in force.
PARTIES TO ACTIONS.
Under this heading rules are framed with respect
to the proper parties to sue and be sued, including
the cases of married women, infants, and trustees.
The rules provide for the joinder of parties who are
united in interest, and for bringing before the Court
the representatives of large partnerships, also for
making parties to the suit persons who are interested
but refuse to become parties.
THE WRIT OF SUMMONS AND SUBSEQENT PROCEEDINGS.
The form of the writ of summons is taken from the
Common Law Procedure Act. The provisions re-
lating to the indorsements on every writ, to the issue
of writs by complainants in person, to the renewal of
writs, to the mode of service of such writs where the
parties sued are either in or out of the jurisdiction,
of the Supreme Court, to non-appearance by the
defendant and judgment by default, are taken chiefly
from the Common Law Procedure Act, the same
being also made applicable to cases where general
relief, equitable or otherwise, is required by the
parties suing against the party sued.
PLEADINGS.
Under this heading the rules provide in general for
the framing and amending, and construction of the
pleadings authorised by the Act, forms being set forth
in subsequent schedules.
TRIALS OF ISSUES IN FACT, AND ISSUES IN LAW.
The rules provide for the making up of cause lists.,
notice of trial, notices to produce, and so forth. They
are similar to those now in force.
TRIAL WITH A JURY.
The rules provide in what manner the verdict of a
jury shall be given and noted, and how judgment
shall be entered in conformity therewith.
TRIAL WITHOUT A JURY.
The rules provide the mode in which the Judge
shall note the facts found by him, and his conclusions
of law, and the entry or postponement of judgment.
ENTERING JUDGMENT.
The rules provide how judgment shall be entered
upon the verdict of a jury, the decision of a Judge,
and the report of Referee or Referees, and in cases
where a party dies before judgment.
PROCESS OF EXECUTION.
The rules relating to process of execution, and to
the effect of death, marriage, and insolvency upon
the proceedings, are similar to those in the Common
Law Procedure Act.
ACTION OF EJECTMENT.
These provisions are nearly the same as those in
the Common Law Procedure Act.
APPEALS.
Provisions for appealing in all c.ases and for the
security to be taken from the parties are set forth.
Provisions relating to costs where parties are suc-
cessful and to the apportionment of costs between
parties to an action are set forth.
INJUNCTIONS, RECEIVERS, REFERENCES, INFANTS,
LUNATICS.
Rules are set forth relating to the above. They are
chiefly taken from the Equitable Rules now in force.
COMPUTATION OF TIME.
The rules are similar to those in force in Equity
and Common Law.
MISCELLANEOUS RULES.
These relate to affidavits, motions, the enlarge-
ment of time for taking proceedings &c. They are
similar to those in force in Equity and Common Law.
Schedule of Forms, lettered B.
Schedule of Fees of Court , C.
Schedule of Rules under the Ecclesiastical Jurisdic-
tion, D.
Schedule of Rules under the Foreign Attachment Act,
E.
Schedule of Rules relating to Arrest, F.
General Steam Machine Printers, 186 Pitt-street, Sydney.
:inghame & Co.
