

I :■;* ■" I
I SR 88 I
B. ...... - I
v».
■




ACCLIMATISATION SOCIETY'S DINNER.
(Reprinted from the Yeoman")
The second dinner given under the auspices
of the Acclimatisation Society of Victoria
took place on Wednesday evening, at Scott’s
Hotel, Coliins-street west.
About sixty gentlemen were present. Mr.
Edward Wilson, president of the society, oc-
cupied the chair, having on his right Gover-
nor Sir Charles Darling, K.C.8.; Mr. W. C.
Haines, M.L.A.; and the Hon. J. P. Bear,
M.L.C.; and on his left M. Follet, French
Vice-Consul; Captain Tyler, A.D.C.; and
the Hon. W. Degraves, M.L.C. Mr. D. S.
Campbell acted as vice-president, supported
right and left by Mr. T. J. Sumner and Mr. T.
Austin; and among the guests were the Hon.
T. T. A’Beckett, M.L.C.; Mr. T. Loader,
M.L.A,; Professor Wilson, Mr. Lachlan Mac-
kinnon, Mr. John Mackenzie, Mr. S. H.
Bindon, Mr. F. Taylor, Mr. John Steavenson,
Mr. J. Sparkes, Mr. A. J. Duffield, Dr. Joseph
Black, Dr. Madden, Dr. W. Thomson, Mr. T.
P. Fleetwood, Mr. A. Pnrchas, Mr. J, B.
Were, Mr. Adam Burnes, Mr. H. Creswick,
Mr. H. E. Watts, Mr. W. G. Sprigg, Mr.
Maguire, Mr. J.C. Ricards, jun,, Mr. T. Drys-
dale, Mr. John Carfrae, Mr. Charles Ryan, &c,
The whole affair was highly successful.
Not only was it a fitting tribute to the
cause of acclimatisation, but it was also a
complete triumph of gastronomy. All the
varieties of “fish, flesh, and fowl”obtainable
—indigenous and imported were repre-
sented; and there was in consequence a re-
past as gratifying to the bon vivant as to the
man who looks upon the multiplication
of our food resources merely from
the utilitarian point of view. There
were several kinds of soup oyster, Mur-
ray lobster, wild turkey, and kangaroo.
The fish included “cod”from the Murray, trum-
peter from Hobart Town, eels caught at
Van Yean, and perch brought from Gipps
Land. Among the entrees were curries, pates,
and salmis , in which wombat, bandicoot, and
paroquet figured conspicuously; but the
bonne bouche was certainly the “ vol au vent
of frogs.” With regard to the more substan-
tial features of the feast, it may be observed
that, although there were saddles of Chinese
mutton and kangaroo, the un doubted de
resistance was a saddle of mutton (weighing
451b.) cut from a Leicester sheep, and pre-
sented by Mr. T. F. Hamilton, of Gisborne.
There was also a famous haunch of venison,
but it had not been hung long enough to
thoroughly satisfy epicures. Other sorts of
game were plentiful, and English pheasant
and hare were discussed simultaneously
with native companion and mallee hen.
Of the vegetables, the yams and sweet
potatoes were much inquired after. There
was a great assortment of sweets, one pro-
minent item being a pudding named after
His Excellency the Governor. The wines in-
cluded some choice European varieties, sam-
ples of the best vintages of New South Wales,
South Australia, and Victoria; a sparkling
American wine—Catawba—grown in Ohio ;
and some colonial Madeira, thirteen years old,
made by the late Mr. Bear. The success of
the entertainment was considerably enhanced
by the response made to the Acclimatisation
Society’s appeal for “ palatable contribu-
tions.” Among these contributions was a


fallow bnck, a black swan, and some walla-
bies, sent by Mr. M‘Haffie, of Philip Island;
a number of pheasants and rabbits, by Mr. T.
Austin, of Barwon Park ; a hare, by Mr.
W. Lyall; yams and sweet potatoes, by
Mr. E. Dacomb, of Portland ; and several
bottles of home-made colonial pickles,
by an unknown donor. The contributions
by the Acclimatisation Society of Queensland
consisted of sugar bananas, pine-apples,
green ginger, arrowroot, oranges, and pre-
serves, from the estate of Mr. Charles Coxen;
some sugar from the station of the Hon.
Louis Hope; and a number of yams and
sweet potatoes; and we understand it was
matter of regret to Mr. L. A. Bernays and
other gentlemen connected with the Queens-
land society, that, owing to the short notice 4
other articles could not be sent. For other
information anent the viands, we must refer
our readers to the subjoined “ bill of fare ”:—
LE MENU.
Sydney rock oysters,
les potages.
A la tortue.
Aux huitres.
Au Dindon sauvage.
A la queue de kangaroo.
A la bisque d’ecrevisse du Murray.
LES POISSONS.
Les cabillauds de Murray, sauce crevettes.
Le fillet de merlan au gratin.
Le fillet de sole a I’orliz.
Le mullet grille & la maitre dTiotel.
La matelotte d’anguille.
Les anguilles frites au beurre.
Le perch de Gipps Land a la Nanteuse.
Les anguilles du Yan Yean a la Tartare.
Le perch du Murray k la Chambord.
Le poisson noir, sauce Genoise.
Le carrelet, sauce Normande
Le fillet de trompeter au turban.
Le dorade au bleu.
LES ENTREES.
Le vol au vent de grenouille k la poulette
La chartreuse de pigeon sauvage.
Le fricandean de wombat aux epinards
Les cotelettes de venaison, sauce champignons
Le fillet de canard noir, sauce d’orange.
Le bandicoot en currie.
Le civet de chevreuil.
Le pate chaud de perroquets.
Le salmi de sarcelles aux truffes.
Le lapin sauvage saut£ a la chasseur.
LES FROIDS.
La mayonaise de volatile.
Le chaud froid de gibier.
Do. do. poulet nuuveau.
L’Aspic d’escalop de lapin native
Do. de pigeon native
La galantine de dindoneau.
Hfire de sanglier
Le cochon sauvage du Goulbourn
Le jambon glac6—langues giacSes.
LES ROTIS.
Le selle de mouton cle Chine.
L’agneau de Chine garni de pilaf.
Le lapin de Bar won Park, bouilli sauce celery.
Le dinde bouilli sauce celery.
Les dindes rotis.
Les poulettes.
Les oies roties.
L’oie du Cap Barren.
Le canard sauvage roti.
Le jambon braisl au Madeire.
Le lapin de Barwon Park roti.
Hauche de venaison.
Selle de kangaroo.
LE GIBIBR.
Le faisan. Les oiseaux de wattle.
Le lievre. Le dinde sauvage.
Le native compagnon. Le canard noir.^
Le canard des bois. Les pluvier dores.
Le pintade roti. Les wombats.
Les bandicoots. La poule de mallee.
Les sarcelles. Les cailles.
LEGUMES BE LA SAISON.
Les yams de Queensland.
Les pommes de terres donees.
ENTREMETS.
Les corbeilles garnis.
Les biscuits aux amandes.
Les meringues Suisses.
Les biscuits de Savoie k Porange.
Les tourtes aux pommes.
La chartreuse de fruits.
La gel£e de Danzick.
Les pommes aux riz meringues.
Le boudln de Darling.
Le fondu au Parmesan.
Les gateaux Napolitains.
Le blanc mange a la Moscovie.
Les beignets d’ananas.
La Charlotte a la Parisienne.
Le gelee au Madeire.
Le compote d’ahricot de Chantilly.
Le meringue a la creme.
Le boudin de coutarde.
Le boudin de Victoria.
Le macaroni au gratin.
OMELETTES SOUELEES.
Le boudin glace a la Cerito.
Les crimes aux fraises glacees.
CAFE.
[translation.]
BILL OF FABE.
Sydney rock oysters.
SOUPS.
Turtle. • Australian wild turkey
Oyster. Kangaroo tail.
Bisque of Murray lobster.
FISH.
Boiled Murray cod and shrimp sauce.
Fillet of whiting au gratin.
Fillet of soles a Torliz.
Grilled mullet a la maitre d’hote!.
Matelotte of eels.
Guardfish.
Gipps Land perch a la Nanteuse.
Yan Yean eels a la Tartare.
Murray perch k la Chambord.
Boiled black fish, sauce Genoise.
Flounders k la Normande.
Fillet of trumpeter au turban,
John Dory.


ENTREES.
Vol au vent of frogs.
Chartreuse bronze-winged pigeon.
Fricandeau of wombat and spinach.
Cutlet of venison* sauce mushrooms.
Fillet of black duck, sauce orange.
Curried bandicoot.
Civet of venison.
Paroquet patties.
Salmis of teal aux truffes.
Wild rabbit a la chasseurs.
COLD.
Mayonaise of fowl. Aspic of native pigeon.
Chaud froid of game Galatine of turkey.
Do. do. spring chicken. Boar’s head.
Aspic d’escalop of rabbit Wild Goulburn pig.
Cold hams—-Cold tongues.
BOILED.
Boiled rabbits, Barwon Park, celery sauce.
Boiled turkey, celery sauce.
ROASTS.
Saddle of Chinese mutton. Chinese goose.
Chinese lamb with pilaw. Wood duck.
Guinea fowl. Ham braise, Madeira sauce
Spring chicken. Barwon Park rabbits.
Cape Barren goose.
Haunch of venison.
Saddle of kangaroo.
GAME.
Pheasants. Wild turkey.
Hare. Black duck.
Native companion. Plover.
Wood duck. Wombat.
Bandicoot. Wid - eon.
Teal. Mallee hen.
Wattle bird. Quail.
VEGETABLES IN SEASON.
Queensland yams, sweet potatoes.
SWEETS.
Corbeilles garnis. Blanc mange h la Mos-
Biscuit of almonds. covie.
Swiss meringues. Pine-apple baignet.
Savoy orange biscuits. Parisian Charlottes.
Apple tarts. Madeira jelly.
Chartreuse of fruits. Compote apricot of Chan-
Dansic jelly. Tilly
Apples of rice meringue. Meringue of cream.
Darling pudding. Custards.
Fondu au Parmesan. Victorian pudding.
Neapolitan cakes. Macaroni au gratin.
OMELET SOUFLBT.
Cerito ice padding. | Strawberry ice cream.
Coffee.
WINES.
Australian Wines.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Hermitage. Erlana.
Mataro. Tokay.
Verdeilho. Malvoisie.
Riesling.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Hock. Kaludah.
Frontignac. Cawarra.
Muscatel. Cawarra, red.
Red Dalwood.
*
Foreign Wines.
Chablis.
Madeira.
Clicquot champagne.
Deinhard and Jordain’s sparkling hock.
Burgundy.
Deinhard and Jordain’s still hock.
White Hermitage.
Amontillado sherry.
Gold Campbell’s port.
Claret.
Chateau Lafitte claret.
The dinner was served d la by which
it is to be understood that almost everything
was carved at the sideboard, and handed
round by the waiters. The effect of this proceed -
ing was to prolong the repast over a period
of something like three hours and a half— an
arrangement which, judging by results, was
not at all unsatisfactory to the great majority
of the guests.
At the close of dinner,
The Chaieman rose, and proposed “ The
Queen.” It was hardly necessary for him (he
remarked) to say that this was the first toast
of the evening, and it was still less necessary
for him to enlarge upon it at any length. If
it were necessary to say anything in favour of
the Queen it would be easy to speak volumes,
but as it was not necessary to do so, he had
nothing to do but to say “ The Queen,” and
ask the assembly to drink Her Majesty’s
health as that health ought to be drunk in
all British communities. (Cheers.)
The toast was drunk with great loyalty and
enthusiasm.
The Chaieman next gave “The Prince of
Wales and the rest of the Royal Family.” In
proposing the toast, he observed that it was a
curious illustration of the soundness of the
principle of acclimatisation —which they had
met that night to celebrate in one of its more
genial phases —that England had long been
following the practice of acclimatising no less
persons than her Sovereigns. There was
something very remarkable, indeed, in a
proud, jealous, and somewhat distrustful
people like the English persisting in being
governed by a race which was, to a great
extent, of foreign extraction. They were well
aware that the mother of the present Queen
of England was a German, that the great and
good father of the Prince of Wales was also a
German, and that the Prince had taken a
native of Denmark for his wife. They could
look with perfect satisfaction to the result of
occasionally introducing fresh blood into the
country. (Hear.) It was unnecessary for
him so say anything to commend the toast to
their hearty reception; and he would, there-
fore, simply conclude his remarks by repeating
that it was a singular fact that a race of
proud, glorious, and somewhat self-conccited


islanders had accepted as one of the best ar-
rangements, and one which had consequently
stood the test of centuries, that they should
be governed by a race of Sovereigns essen-
tially introduced from foreign countries.
(“Hear, hear,” and applause.)
The toast having been duly honoured,
The Chairman again rose and proposed
“ His Excellency the Governor.” Not only
was it the habit of Englishmen to acclimatise
their Sovereigns, but it was also their habit to
acclimatise the representatives of their Sove-
reigns—the Governors of the British colonies
(laughter); and he thought that they might
congratulate themselves upon the experi-
ment. (“ Hear, hear,” and applause.) It was
a matter of considerable importance to the
people of Victoria that they had introduced
into the colony periodically—at longer or
shorter intervals—gentlemen perfectly free
from all the local ties and petty prejudices
which were apt to grow up in colonial so-
cieties : and each of whom came here to do
his duty to the British Government and to
the colonists in a spirit of perfect integrity,
apart from all other or ulterior considera-
tions. (Hear, hear.) In this interchange of
the representatives of the Sovereign there
were very great advantages, even in the ac-
climatising aspect—which was the aspect in
which they had chiefly to estimate the func-
tions of the Governor on such occasions as
that upon which they were then assembled—
for by it they gained the benefit of the infor-
mation of gentlemen who had probably
visited and resided in countries dissimilar to
Victoria, and when they parted with such
gentlemen they usually parted with very
sincere friends. As an illustration of the
beneficial effects arising from the interchange
of Governors, he might allude to the fact that
Sir George Grey, who bad distinguished him-
self by the great interest which he had taken
in acclimatisation when he was prematurely
sent to New Zealand to settle that unhappy
Maori war, which was not settled to this day,
had found still further time to introduce into
that interesting colony (so highly adapted for
he varied forms of animal life some new
animals, in sufficient quantities to establish
the breed. In their friend Sir Henry Barkly
the people of Victoria had a gentleman who
always took the greatest possible interest in
the proceedings of the Acclimatisation So-
ciety, and from whom they were constantly
in the receipt of letters containing varied in-
formation, and indications of a sincere wish
to assist in promoting the objects of the
society to the utmost of his power. (Hear,
hear.) Of their present Governor he could
speak in the most favourable terms, if he
ventured to refer to a wider range of subjects
than acclimatisation, but with these subjects
he had nothing to do on such an occasion.
The fact that Sir Charles Darling was present
amongst them that night was an indication
of his interest in the great cause of acclimati-
sation. From the time he had arrived in the
colony His Excellency had manifested deep
interest in the Acclimatisation Society. He
had consented to be its patron; he had
favoured it with his presence whenever he had
been requested to do so; and he had not
refused it access to his purse, which was one
of the best tests of the sincerity of his inte-
rest in the society. (Applause.) Associated
with the idea of acclimatising their Sove-
reigns and the representatives of their Sove-
reigns, the Governors, he would call upon
the assembly to drink with all enthusiasm
the health of Governor Sir Charles Darling.
(Cneers.)
The toast was drunk very enthusiastically,
and with musical honours.
His Excellency, in responding to the
toast, said that he might justly be considered
one of the most insensible and callous of his
species if he did not duly appreciate the very
vigorous efforts which they had just exercised
in his service, which were the more remark-
able as they had just followed the laborious
and very exhaustive and exhausting proceed-
ings which they had so sedulously applied
themselves to for no less a period than four
hours. (Laughter.) That consideration added
considerably to the debt of gratitude which he
felt he owed them for the reception which
they had just given him. He was very sen-
sible of the compliment; and he could assure
them that, although he had been able to do as
yet but little in the cause of acclimatisation,
he was thoroughly sensible of the great ad-
vantages which every community must de-
rive from an interchange of the products of
the earth, and of the arts by which these pro-
ducts were turned to good account. (Ap-
plause.) He confessed that he felt himself
at that moment, mentally and oratorically,
very much in the same position as he felt,
physically and gastronomically, about four


hours ago. There were then before him a
vast variety of dishes, to which he might
direct his attention, and there were now a
very great variety of subjects upon which he
might dilate, if he did not bear in mind the
salutary admonition of the president—that,
though their eating was to be long, their
speaking was to be short. (Applause and
laughter.) He could not observe that admo-
nition more effectually than by adhering to
the motto which he intended to be the rule of
his conduct, and to exemplify to the fullest
extent so far as he was connected with this
society in its work of acclimatisation,
namely, by “ deeds, not words.” (Applause.)
He appealed to the assembly whether he had
not amply fulfilled the duty imposed upon
himself in that respect that night; and
having practically shown that he fully appre-
ciated some of the most important objects in
which the society could engage, he would not
make any further remarks, as he should have
future opportunities of conferring with the
society. He again sincerely thanked them for
the honour which they had done him, and as-
sured them that he should be happy to meet
the members of the society on future occa-
sions, and he hoped that the society would
continue to make marked improvement and
progress. (Applause.)
The Chairman then called upon the com-
pany to toast “ The Legislature of Victoria.”
It was a very common thing, he observed, to
make sneering and disparaging remarks with
regard to the Legislature. He would be the
very last to assert that it was everything that
could be wished; but he must say that, after
watching for some years the proceedings of
Legislatures with much higher pretensions, he
felt inclined to contend, on the part of the
Legislature of Victoria, that the members of
that body, with all their faults, had un-
doubtedly shown a capacity for a great deal
of very useful and practical legislation.
(Hear, hear.) As far as the Acclimatisation
Society of Victoria was concerned, he could
not do otherwise than speak in the most
favourable terms of the Legislature. No
Legislature in the world had treated the cause
of acclimatisation so liberally. (Hear, hear.)
In the course of the discussions which had
taken place as to what the society had done
with the money entrusted to its care, un-
favourable remarks had been made—and
where, in any large community, could' a large
subject be discussed without eliciting un-
favourable remarks ?—but the votes submitted
by the Government and sanctioned by the
Parliament had been liberal to an unex-
ampled extent (cheers); and, therefore, he
maintained that they were bound to judge by
results, and not by the tone which marked
discussions leading to those results. He be-
lieved that anything unfavourable which
might have been said in connexion with
those grants was the result of want of infor-
mation, or want of diligent inquiry. The
society was perfectly prepared to have its ex-
penditure of the sums entrusted to it tho-
roughly examined into; and to show that
what had been done could not have been ac-
complished at a smaller outlay. (Hear, hear.)
The attitude taken by the Parliament with
regard to acclimatisation had been the means,
not only of making the society eminently
useful in developing the resources of this
splendid country, but also of exercising a
great influence, by way of example, on the
neighbouring colonies. Within the last week
he had received communications from two
very different quarters, which showed the in-
terest with which the progress of the acclima-
tisation movement in Victoria was watched.
The one case was that of Queensland. Accli-
matises in that rising colony wrote for infor-
mation as to the proceedings of the society,
and intimated that their Parliament was pre-
paring to follow the example of Victoria with
regard to the rendering of state assistance.
The other case was that of the Canterbury
settlement, in New Zealand. There the pro-
vincial Parliament, a body with very limited
means, had voted £I,OOO in aid of the recently
established acclimatisation society, and had
also given it a large grant of land. (Hear,
hear.) And appreciating, as they did, the
generous spirit which had animated the Par-
liament of Victoria, it should be remembered
that there were matters connected with accli-
matisation wtiich could be accomplished only
through assistance from the public revenue.
Private enterprise was one of the finest things
in the world if the object to be attained came
legitimately within its scope ; but there were
many objects which could not possibly be
secured by private enterprise. He need hardly
refer to the experiment which had been at-
tended by so brilliant a result—the introduc-
tion of the salmon, the successful accomplish-
ment of which would make the colony


famous throughout the world. What private
gentleman, what owner of fifty miles of river
frontage, unaided hy public money, could
have done this? (Hear, hear.) He men-
tioned it as one of many experiments which
could not be undertaken without the ready
and cordial support of those who had the con-
trol of the public purse. (Hear, hear.) With
these observations, he begged to propose “ The
Legislature of Victoria” with all its faults.
(Laughter, and cheers.) “ Let us,” continued
the chairman, “ appreciate what is good in it.
Stirring times are coming, but while we
struggle to make the Legislature better, let us
be precious thankful that it is no worse than
it is. At all events let us, as acclimatisers,
do the Legislature of Victoria the j ustice to say
that it has set an example with regard to ac-
climatisation which legislatures all over the
world would do well to follow.” (Loud cheers.)
The Hon. J. P. Bear acknowledged the
toast on the part of the Legislative Council.
He said he had no desire to make any allu-
sion to politics on such an occasion, but he
could not help remarking that if the Legisla-
ture had manifested similar energy to that
which had been exhibited in the formation
of the Acclimatisation Society and the con-
duct of its operations, a very much better
state of things would be existing in the
colony. He hoped that the approaching
general election would induce men who had
a stake in the country to come forward and
give a share of their time to the manage
ment of public affairs. If such a disposition
were evinced, he had no doubt that the two
branches of the Legislature would be brought
more into accord with each other, and that
their united deliberations would be for the
general good. (Cheers.)
Mr. W. C. Haines responded on behalf of
the Legislative Assembly. The Legislature,
he remarked, had been toasted “ with all its
faults;” but the faults were attributable not
so much to the members of the Legislature as
to the constituencies. If the gentlemen pre-
sent considered there were defects in the body
to which he belonged, they would shortly
have an opportunity of remedying those de-
fects themselves. (Laughter.) He believed
that the present Legislative Assembly bad
done its duty very fairly to the country. He
believed that the legislation emanating from
that body had been such as to afford well-
grounded satisfaction to the colonists gene-
rally. The desire of the Assembly to aid the
work of acclimatisation had already been
dwelt upon by the chairman. He trusted the
Assembly would continue to exhibit the same
disposition. In aiding the work of acclimati-
sation, the Legislature was conferring a sub-
stantial benefit upon the country. The his-
tory of successful colonization in Australia
was the history of acclimatisation. The
prosperity of the country was traceable, to a
large extent, to the introduction of the
merino sheep by Sir Edward Macarthur; and
the good work thus begun was now being
carried on by the society. But there were
many indirect advantages which might arise
from the society’s efforts. There were many
colonists who bad brought with them a taste
for the sports of the old country. He was
afraid they would not be able to acclimatise
the English country gentlemen, but he
thought the colony might be made so attrac-
tive as to retain its own country gentlemen.
This could be done by stocking the country
with game, and by affording the facilities for
sport which existed in Europe. And how
much better would it be for the community
to have the bush occupied, not simply by a
mere collection of pauper agriculturists, but
by country gentlemen who would have some-
thing besides the pursuit of wealth and the
founding of fortunes to engross their atten-
tion. Were this state of things to prevail,
many persons now opposed to the capitalist,
and desiring that he should be driven
across the Murray,” would speedily appre-
ciate the value of his presence here. If they
desired to be a prosperous community, the in-
terests of all classes must be mutually co-
existent. He did not desire the capitalist ex-
pelled, nor the poor man unduly trodden down.
He desired to see all classes colonized, and the
one progressing hand in hand with the other ;
and this could be accomplished if the colo-
nists generally were only true to themselves.
(Hear, hear.)
The Chairman said that the next toast
which he had to propose was “ The Acclim -
tisation Society of France, with its president,
Monsieur Drouyn de Lhuys.” In proposing
that toast he proposed the toast of the parent
society of acclimatisation. It was France
that first conceived the great idea of acclima-
tisation, or, at all events, that first gave it
practical expression. From the day it was first
conceived it had been followed up with very


considerable resolution and persistency, and
it had ended in very brilliant results. The
Acclimatisation Society of Victoria, from the
earliest days of its formation, had received
an amount of co-operation, friendship, and
kindly interchange of feeling which was
highly flattering to it. It was most re-
markable that M. Drouyn de Lhuys, while
charged with all the cares of the office
of Minister of Foreign Affairs, in one of
the most important empires in the world,
coaid still find time to watch over the in-
terests of the Acclimatisation Society of his
native country, and to show his friendly feel-
ing towards kindred societies by extending
information relative to acclimatisation even
to the most distant parts of the world. From
its origin the Victorian Acclimatisation
Society had received the most friendly offices
from the society of which M. Drouyn de
Lhuys was the president. It had also received
most handsome presents, and every informa-
tion which it was possible for the Acclimati-
sation Society of France to give ; in fact, that
society had treated the Victorian Acclimati-
sation Society rather as a pet child than as a
society organized amongst a people foreign to
themselves. (Applause.) The chairman con-
cluded by saying that he would associate with
the toast the name of the representative of
France in this colony—the Comte de Castle-
nau. He regretted, however, that that gentle-
man had been prevented from attending
the dinner, in consequence of indisposition,
but the toast would be responded to by the
Vice-Consul for France.
M. Follet, the French Vice-Consul, re-
sponded. He regretted that Comte de Castle-
nau had been unable to be present, as he
would have replied to the toast far more elo-
quently than he (M. Follet) could attempt to
do. He was sure, however, that he but ut-
tered the sentiments of the illustrious presi-
sident of the Acclimatisation Society of
France in stating that the prosperity and
progress of the Acclimatisation Society of Vic-
toria possessed his entire sympathy, and that
he hoped long to be in friendly relations with
it. (Applause.) M, Follet concluded by pro-
posing “ The Acclimatisation Society of Great
Britain, with its president, the Duke of New-
castle, and other kindred societies.”
Mr. L. Mackinnon, as a member of the
council of the Acclimatisation Society of Great
Britain, returned thanks for the honour
which had been done that society. The accli-
matisation societies of Great Britain and
Victoria, said Mr. Mackinnon, stood in a very
different position. The Victorian Acclimati-
sation Society was liberally supported by the
Legislature of the colony, and it had a fine
new country in which to developa its efforts;
but in England neither of those circum-
stances existed. He knew that the Accli-
matisation Society of Great Britain took
great interest in the proceedings of the Vic-
torian society, and was constantly holding it
up as an example. Though the English Ac-
climatisation Society was doing very far
short of what was being done here, it was
still doing something to promote the work of
acclimatisation; and he was sure that it
would be highly gratified by the expression
of kindly sentiments from the Victorian so-
ciety, and that it would be encouraged to
persevere in its efforts by finding that they
were appreciated here. (Applause.)
Mr. S. H. Bindon also responded to the
toast, and took the opportunity of making a
few remarks on the progress of acclimatisa-
tion generally. He was glad to see that all
classes of society took an interest in the
work, as was evidenced by the character of
the company that night. The merchant and
the banker, the banker and the discounter,
the importer and the exporter, the squatter
and the farmer—in fact, every class in the
community, including even the lawyer, was
more or less represented on that occasion,
and he regarded the circumstance as a re-
markable proof of the increased interest
taken in the cause of acclimatisation. (Ap-
plause.) It would also be recognized as some
evidence of the utilitarian character of the
Acclimatisation Society. The objects of
the society were more or less concealed
under a very hard name, but any one
who looked at the way in which the
society was worked would see at ouce that its
true objects were to increase the products of
the land and of the waters also, and to mul-
tiply the occupations of the people. The
objects of the society were, therefore, of a
highly utilitarian character. (Hear, hear.)
Independent of that ground, there were other
reasons why they ought to be glad to see on
that occasion so large an assemblage of
different classes of the community—namely,
because such meetings gave them the oppor-
tunity of discussing matters relating to the


development of the resources of the country.
In England, many opportunities were afforded
for the different classes of the community
to meet together which did not exist here.
The English country gentlemen met several
times a year at the grand juries, quarter
sessions, agricultural gatherings, and last, not
least, at their fox-hunting clubs. They talked
together on such occasions about their farm ■
ing, their horses, and their short-horns; and it
was such meetings as those which had produced
in England men like Sir Tatton Sykes, whose
influence in his own county—Yorkshire—
was recognized by every man who knew the
difference between a hack and a racehorse, or
a short-horn and a poll cow. It was such
meetings which had drawn out the exertions
of men like Colonel Townley, of Lanca-
shire, who had done as much for the turf
as he had done for short-horns. It was in
such meetings as those where men like
Mr. Austin were found, who had done
more than any other man in this colony,
not only to draw gentlemen around him, but
to show them sport; and who had also done
more to develope the resources of the colony
than any other man. (Applause.) Such
meetings as the present did good even if they
effected no other object than to enable the
friends of the Acclimatisation Society to meet
round the social board, and he for one should
be very glad to see them of more frequent
occurrence. (Applause.)
His Excellency the Governor, on risirg to
propose the next toast, said he really found
himself in a position of much difficulty—a
position somewhat akin to that of the gentle-
man who, at an advanced hour of the even-
ing, and under more exciting circumstances,
usually gave the toast of “our noble selves.”
He had been asked to undertake the duty of
proposing “Prosperity to the Acclimatisation
Society of Victoria,” coupling with the toast
the name of the president, Mr. Edward Wil-
son. (Cheers.) The merits of Mr, Wilson
rested altogether on their own basis, but the
toast of the Acclimatisation Society was
one in which he was very naturally in-
terested, because he had the honour to be
the patron of the society and also a subscriber
to its funds. On the present occasion he ap-
peared in the double capacity" of a guest of
the council, and a specimen of the good effects
of colonial acclimatisation; and he was satisfied
that he now presented himself under very
different and improved circumstances to
those under which he appeared when
presided at the annual meeting of the
society shortly after his arrival in the
colony. (Laughter and cheers.) A con-
siderable portion of the duty which would
have devolved upon him in asking the com-
pany to drink to the Acclimatisation Society
had been taken out of his hands by the
speeches which had been delivered by the
president, Mr. Haines, Mr. Mackianon,
and Mr. Bindon. The objects which the
society had in view, and the benefits which
it conferred upon the community, had been
fully set forth, and therefore it would be out
of place at so advanced an hour for him to
enlarge upon them. He would rather—as a
man of practical business —confine himself to
the more immediate objects which presented
themselves, and he maintained that the pre-
sent entertainment furnished abundant cause
for congratulation on the success which had
attended the operations of the Acclimatisation
Society. At the same time, he considered that
the carte— admirable as it was, and greatly
as it had ministered to their pleasure—con-
tained, perhaps, not so many specimens which
had been acclimatised for the advantage of
residents of Victoria, as specimens of articles
which might be acclimatised with advantage
in other lands. The entertainment also
proved that they had succeeded in acclimatis-
ing not only the creatures and productions
of the earth, but also the art of cookery and
the art of dining. (Hear, hear.) With re-
gard to the president of the society, there
must be many gentlemen present to
whom anything he could say of Mr.
Wilson would be only wasting advocacy.
The zeal which he had displayed in
promoting the interests of the society—the
enthusiasm with which he devoted himself
to the cause of acclimatisation, even at the
risk of exposing himself to a little pleasant
sarcasm—entitled Mr. Wilson to their
warmest approbation, and to the thanks
of the community at large, (Hear, hear)
With these observations, he begged to pro-
pose “ Prosperity to the Acclimatisation
Society of Victoria,” with its president, Mr.
Edward Wilson. (Great cheering.)
The Chairman, in returning thanks, re-
marked that with regard to the more personal
part of the toast, the less he said the better
With regard to the society, he had only to oh


serve that he believed it to be steadily and.
persistently pursuing a useful course. He
would refer any of those who were inclined to
be sceptical or sneering, to the detail of what
the society was patiently doing week by
week. Every Tuesday, with a regularity
which was not rivalled, he believed, by any
other Acclimatisation Society in the world,
the council of the society met to discuss the
interests of their project. The proceedings were
recorded in the daily papers, and the pub-
lic could judge for themselves as to the
character of the attendances. The council
included some of the best men in their
several capacities in the whole colony; and
he did not think that any non-commercial
society in Victoria—any society not estab-
lished with a view to personal profit—had its
meetings attended in anything like the same
numbers. Acclimatisation could not secure
immediate results. Years were required be-
fore it could bear anything like definite fruit;
and only those who studied the subject in
its more philosophical aspect could knowhow
long and how patiently acclimatisers had
to wait before results sufficiently palpable
to strike the unobservant mind were secured.
(Hear, hear.) Through the efforts of acclima-
tisers the colony, from being in a compara-
tively unfurnished condition with regard to
articles of food, had become one of the best
stocked countries in the world. This was the
work which the society sought to promote,
and in this work the society deserved the
assistance of every one who wished well for
the colony. (Cheers.)
Dr. Madden proposed “ The Friends of
Acclimatisation who have advanced the
cause by private enterprise,” coupling the
toast with the names of Mr. Duffield and Mr.
Austin. (Applause.) There were two dis-
tinct ways (said Dr. Madden) in which the
prosperity of a country might be increased —
the one was by developing the materials
already existing in it, and the other was by
importing. Every man in Victoria owed a debt
of gratitude to the persons who had assisted to
increase the material wealth of the colony in
either of those two ways. They were all aware
of the advantages of co-operative assistance,
and of the encouragement derived by sharing
responsibilities; and for these purposes accli-
matisation societies were exceedingly useful.
If much was said of what a society could do,
how much more might bo said of those
individuals who, without the help of a
society, and of their own personal risk,
succeeded in introducing new animals, or
new and useful products, into a country ?
The name of Mr. Duffield naturally led
to the mention of the alpaca; and no topic
could more fully and practically represent the
difficulties and discouragements connected
with acclimatisation. (Hear, hear.) He would
leave Mr. Duffield, if he were so inclined, to
tell his own account of the difficulties which
he had encountered, and make a few re-
marks on the alpaca in connexion with
mercantile enterprise. It seemed often to
be forgotten that acclimatisation was es-
pecially a matter of experiment, and
that in every experiment there must be
a certain amount of doubt and uncertainty.
(Hear, hear.) Many persons had already de-
decided that the alpaca was of no use to this
colony; but he maintained that the whole
experiment of the acclimatisation of the
alpaca was yet in the future. They did not
yet know what could be done with it in this
colony, and therefore it would be unwise to
form any conclusion until time had enabled
them to complete the experiment. The alpaca
was a most valuable animal in its own
country, and no doubt it would be useful in
Victoria. (Hear, hear.) If they looked at
the history of various useful animals, they
would find much to encourage them. For ex-
ample, he might allude to the merino sheep.
Every squatter or wool-grower would acknow-
ledge that the fleece of the merino sheep was
greatly superior to that of the Cotswold; yet
exactly 400 years ago, Edward IV. of Eng-
land presented King John of Arragon with
twenty Cotswold ewes and four rams, and
they were the progenitors of the present
merino sheep. What, however, was more in-
teresting was that, at first, the shepherds of
Spain merely boasted that the wool of their
sheep was nearly equal to English wool,
but, at the present day, merino wool was
incomparably superior. Why should not
Australia do as much for the alpaca as
Spain had done for the Cotswold sheep ;
and might not both the fleece and the flesh
of the alpaca be valuable acquisitions to
the colony? (Hear, hear.) In reference
to the services rendered to the cause of
acclimatisation by Mr. Austin, so much had
already been said by Mr. Bindon, that he
would make very few remarks. He would


simply'say !]that the young men of Victoria
took to shooting, fishing, and hunting as na-
turally as ducks took to water, and that, there-
fore, they ought to be very grateful to Mr.
Austin, who had been so successful in intro-
ducing game into the colony. (Hear, hear.)
The toast was drunk with enthusiastic
applause.
Mr. Duffield, in acknowledging the toast,
said that to have been associated with the
friends of the cause of acclimatisation,
was to have been associated with the
noble women who first introduced wheat into
Peru, with the noble men who first laboured
at populating that country with useful ani-
mals, and with all those renowned names—
by many, alas! unfortunately, forgotten—
who did good, and never did harm. (Applause.)
To have his name associated with the names
of those persons, and with the Victorian
Acclimatisation Society and Mr. Austin, was
a great honour, for which he expressed his sin-
cere thanks. He had laboured, and hoped still
to labour, in adorning and making useful
this great country. (Hear, hear.) It was well
known that he bad attempted to introduce
the alpaca into Victoria upon a large scale,
and the attempt had failed, though not from
any fault on his part, or on the part of the
gentlemen who were associated with him in
the enterprize. They had failed, but their
failure was to be the cause of a future experi-
ment, based on better experience, and out of
which would, no doubt, issue a great and per-
manent result. (Hear.) The Government of
Victoria had announced to him their inten-
tion of recommending the Legislature to give
a premium of £IO,OOO for the introduction of
1,000 alpacas. He had accepted that proposi
tion, and he had no doubt that when it was
submitted to the Legislature it would meet
with their approbation. He should await the
result of that proposition being submitted to
the Legislature, and he had no doubt that it
would eventuate in his return, in a very short
time, to Peru, to superintend—this time in
person —the collection of the flocks of alpacas,
the marching them down to the coast, and
the shipping of them and bringing them
to this colony. (Applause.) He beieved
that the result would be most satisfac-
tory. It would be a pity for them to lose
the experience which they had gained, and it
would be a still greater pity if, after having
obtained permission to take away a number
of alpacas, they were not allowed to avail
themselves of it. By the action taken by the
Government of this colony, he believed
they would be able to avail themselves
of that privilege, and make the alpaca
a permanent success in this country. (Ap-
plause.) In the accomplishment of that
result he knew one gentleman at least who
would be highly pleased, and whose pleasure
would be a source of immense gratification
to him (Mr. Duffield). He alluded to the
president of the Acclimatisation Society, who
was an ardent friend of the project from the
beginning, when most people, perhaps, were
bound to look cold upon it, and when some
were even inclined to doubt its honesty.
(“ Hear, hear,” and applause.)
Mr. Austin also responded to the toast. He
intimated that in his efforts at acclimatisa-
tion he had met both with success and with
failure. Last year he lost nearly 200 birds,
from various causes ; but this year he had
reared about 100 pheasants, and, amongst
other things, he had also been successful in
the breeding of blackbirds, thrushes, and
hares. Several of the members of the Accli-
matisation Society had bad the pleasure of
shooting some of the birds which he had
reared ; and if any of the members desired to
promote those field sports which were so
popular in the old country, he would be
happy to give them a few birds for breeding
purposes, if they would take the same care in
the feeding and management of them as he
had done. (Applause.)
Mr. H. E. Watts proposed the last toast on
the list—“ The Promoters of the great Salmon
Experiment.” He thought it would be very
ungiateful on the part of the company if they
were to separate without paying due honour
to the labours of so great and patriotic a
benefactor to the country as Mr. J. A. Youl.
(Cheers.) At so late an hour he would
not dwell at length upon the merits of the
great salmon experiment. He believed it
would be generally admitted to be one of the
greatest and most glorious efforts in acclima-
tisation ever made; and this alone would
justify them—if they needed any justification
whatever —to continue the work of accli-
matising the birds, beasts, and fishes of all
climates. (Hear, hear.) As far as Victoria
was concerned, he had not the slightest doubt
that the salmon might be considered as fairly
acclimatised ; and he submitted that some


little credit was due to those who had had
the management of the experiment in this
colony. Considering that none of them ever
hatched a salmon before, and that they knew
not how to set to work about it, the fact that
they had hatched far more, in proportion,
than those hatched in Tasmania was very
creditable indeed to the colony. (Hear, hear.)
When he last saw the salmon they were in as
healthy and vigorous a state as anyone could
desire. He hoped the Legislature would
enable them to continue the experiment next
year. In conclusion, Mr. Watts called upon
the company to drink to the health of Mr. J.
A. Youl, the introducer of the salmon into
Australia. (Cheers.)
The Chairman observed that, having been
associated with Mr. Youl to a certain extent
in the salmon experiment from the first, he
should have much pleasure in communicat-
ing to that gentleman the manner in which
his name had been received. He saw the
salmon that afternoon. In the miniature
trout stream at the Ice Company’s works they
were as lively as little fish could be, exhibiting
instincts as remarkable as those of salmon
of twenty pounds weight. Already they had
the audacity to rise to the surface, apparently
prepared to take, if not the fly, at all events
something equivalent to it; and thus they
held out to the angler a prospect of the
most invigorating description. (“ Hear,” and
cheers.)
The company then separated.
Among the contributions to the Acclima-
tisation Society on the occasion of the expe-
rimental dinner, we ought not to omit a box
of excellent colonial cigars—the leaf grown at
Dandenong—kindly presented by Messrs.
Politz and Co.
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.






