

ACCLIMATISATION.
BY
EDWARD WILSON.
BEAD BEFORE THE
ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
London:
UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS, 109A, CANNON STREET,
AND AT CHILWORTH, SURREY.
1875.




ACCLIMATISATION.
To such of us, at all events, as have had any experience of
Australia, it shouldnot be necessary to say much in favour of the
project of acclimatisation; for there, indeed, we are pretty nearly
all acclimatised together. Having brushed aside—perhaps in a
somewhat too peremptory manner—our dusky fellow-subjects, the
original occupants of the soil, we have occupied their lands, with
what success my hearers very well know. We n with
us almost all—if not absolutely all—the useful . dutiful
animals by which we have been accustomed to surroum K . selves.
And we have found, I think without a single exception, mat they
thrive at least equally well as in their old homes, —some of them
certainly very much better than, in the lands from which we
brought them.
In ventilating the idea of acclimatisation, we have long felt the
want of a now word more accurately defining our meaning. What
we seek to do is rather to distribute the good things of the earth
than necessarily to acclimatise them. In what we have done we
have discovered some wonderful facilities for adaptation to a new
climate and a new set of surroundings ; but, as a rule, our principal
efforts should probably be directed to simpler forms of distribution
—taking the good things of one country to some other country, or
rather, to all other countries, in which all those good things might
be advantageously introduced and established.
It seems a singular fact that in the complete furnishing of the earth,
so much has been left for us to do. A bountiful Providence has
showered upon mankind a profusion of good things, but whether
from wanton disregard, from a lazy want of observation, or from
whatever other cause, there seems to have been a singular
negligence in the use of opportunities of distributing them. It
seems as if the task had been left to us of conveying suitable things
from one place to another, and we have been contented to perform
this task in a very perfunctory and hap-hazard way.
We are assured by our scientific friends that animated nature
presents us with, I think, about one hundred and forty thousand
b 2


varieties; and of all this prodigious wealth of beauty and ex-
cellence of various forms, we have practically—at least so far as
domestication is concerned—only availed ourselves of some thirty
or forty ! In fact, I think it would puzzle our friends to eumerate
more than that number of things with which we have thoroughly
identified ourselves.
Much has undoubtedly been done in the acclimatisation or dis-
tribution of useful things, but what has been done seems to be almost
trivial in comparison with the possibilities ; and I have long
argued that what has been done, whether by private enterprise or
by public effort, is a mere fraction in the work that we have to do.
I hold that this is the proper interpretation of the original command
to man : “ Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and
subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the
fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the
earth.” I consider that it is a waste of opportunity to have done so
little, and that, having paved the way by opening up fresh
countries by conquest or colonisation, the grand scheme of
distribution should be elaborated scientifically, systematically, and
exhaustively. I hold that we should never rest until every country
on earth is duly furnished with every good thing which that
country is capable of maintaining.
And here I wish to say explicitly that in the term “ good ” I
refer to things not simply useful in a practical and economic, or
mercantile sense, but good in the sense of adding in any way to
the legitimate enjoyment of mankind.
Having helped to agitate this idea in many circles for many
years, and in that process having been associated with many most
excellent and philanthrophic men, I have been struck with the
difficulty of impregnating the minds even of such men with the
entirety of this idea. One has a speciality of one kind—another is
apt to have formed a very energetic opinion in some other
direction ; but I have rarely found any man capable of enter-
taining the idea of the exhaustive application of the process of
distribution,
I have somewhere endeavoured to illustrate my meaning by
remarking that with no wish to underrate the value of any
contribution to any section of society, it has been my object to apply
the adaptation of this principle literally to all, to fairly grapple
with the grandest of such efforts, but never to rest in dealing
even with the comparatively insignificant. I do not seek
simply to furnish new articles of export or import to the merchant
and manufacturer. I do not wish to limit ourselves to adding


new forms of useful productions to the gardener or the agri-
culturalist. Ido not ask you to stop at a desire to supply fresh
forms of amusement to the sportsman. I wish to do all that can be
done legitimately in all these directions. But, as I have stated
elsewhere, my interpretation of the project of acclimatisation has a
scope beyond all this, and which will never be adequately fulfilled till,
including all the good things of the various sections of the
community to which I have alluded, we have exhausted everything
that a beneficent Creator has afforded. A prominent feature in
our scheme is, by attention to even seeming trivialities, to lighten
the path of the wayfarer and to furnish new pets to the child.
To those who have studied what can be done in this way, and
have had some little opportunity of observing the wonderful effects
of efforts to render the world more interesting and beautiful, it
becomes a matter of the most pleasurable contemplation as to how
interesting and how beautiful the world would become, if full
justice were done to this scheme.
We have all felt in our trips by land or by water what interest
was given to the day in putting up a few coveys of partridges; in
the rousing of a hare, springing from her lair close under our
feet; in a flight of flying fish; or in a sudden flitting across the
landscape of a flock of bright-coloured paroquets.
There is no vast practical value in any of these things, but their
passing across our fields of vision adds life, and colour, and
incident to our daily existence; and I want to see a great deal
more of this. At present it seems as if the world were only
partially furnished, as if, in point of fact, we were contented to
drag on existence in a world ludicrously unfurnished, as compared
with its capabilities. What should we think of Her Gracious
Majesty, if we heard that sbe entertained her guests at her splendid
palace at Windsor upon bare deal tables, and allowed them to sleep
on the ground ? How would our club-houses in Pall Mali and
St. James’s-street look if supplied only with the fittings of an
ordinary barrack or national school ? We have long since been
told, in his own cheery way, by our noble President, how happily
he passed the day of attaining his majority, riding over the wilds
of North America in a pair of corduroy trousers, much split across
the knees. But we should feel greatly surprised if he had carried
such primitive doings into his maturer life, and startled his friends
at the “Carlton,” the House of Lords, or in the stately halls of
Kimbolton, with any such apparition as he described. And yet
this represents the condition with which we content ourselves
in regions which, however delightful and however capable of beauty,


would be infinitely more beautiful and infinitely more delightful, if
adequately furnished with everything that Nature has so bountifully
supplied.
I was riding, recently, through one of our English parks—
exceedingly beautiful, umbrageous, and furnished with all that
hydrangea, fern, and rhododendron could supply; but as I
passed out at the gate, after a ride of something like three miles,
I remarked to my companion that I thought we had not seen
a single living thing I
Now let us fancy what a dreadful waste of opportunity is here
represented. Without any great stretch of the imagination
perhaps fifty things could be suggested which would have lent
variety and animation to the scene—not necessarily expensive,
not necessarily entailing any elaborate treatment or care—to
render a ride through such regions one continuous round of
enjoyment, instead of leaving upon the mind that dreary sense of
solitude and of wasted opportunity.
In the remarks with which I am intending to trouble you, I wish
to make it distinctly understood that in the project of acclima-
tisation according to my interpretation, is included the whole
vegetable as well as animal kingdom, although those who know me
best consider that having rather a craze in the latter department,
I may not be very earnest in the former. On the contrary, no one
can have formed a higher estimate than myself of our duty in
covering the earth with beautiful forms of vegetation, and adding
to our useful products of the garden, the orchard, the farm, and the
forest.
After glancing hastily at the remarkable successes lately achieved
in India through the introduction of the tea-plant and the cin-
chona, and trying to estimate the future results of those valuable
plants, let us look for a moment at what is being done in various
parts of the earth by some of the native trees of Australia. We
have, of course, all heard of the Eucalyptus globulus, and may notice
the very frequent references to that wonderful tree which meet us
constantly in the papers. Opinions are divided as to the merits
associated by enthusiasts with this tree ; and men of high scientific
attainments still challenge the authenticity of the reports of its
more sanguine adherents. At the same time, it is worth while
remembering the very important fact that, from some cause or
another, where the gum-tree grows swamps appear to lose their
deadly character. The astonishing power of this tree in the con-
sumption of stagnant water has been tested by actual experiment
by a scientific American, who calculates that a moderate-sized tree


will drink up something like seventy gallons of water in twenty-
four hours, giving out in return that peculiar aromatic odour which
many people believe to be a specific against miasma*
I have always taken humbler ground in advocating the claims of
this wonderful tree. It is adapted for a very large area of the
more temperate regions of the earth. It is stated by Dr. Mueller
to be the fastest-growing tree in the World ; and if it has no other
merit, it has that very important one of being good fuel.
But trees have other uses than this. We have reason to believe
that the welfare of many nations has been seriously compromised
by the reckless destruction of their timber ; that the climate has
been thereby modified, the rainfall influenced, and the whole order
of the seasons greatly affected. We are accustomed to hear Spain
referred to warningly in this respect; and those of us who have
travelled through that country must have been impressed with the
parched and arid look of immense portions of its surface*
We may then glance at the wonderful results of the cultivation
of the larch in Scotland. The larch is not indigenous to Scotland,
and yet what Wonderful effects have been produced by its diligent
•cultivation! Hill-sides have been clothed, the landscape has been
beautified, shelter has been given to varied crops and varied forms
of stock ; and it would be difficult to enumerate the advantages
that the introduction of this one beautiful tree has conferred upon
our industrious and intelligent neighbours in the North, I was
lately speaking to a very competent authority about the condition
of New Zealand, and was assured that unless attention were paid
to the effective clothing of that country with some form of timber,
before the native forests are destroyed, the results could not fail to
be most disastrous. From the peculiar form of those islands, and
their situation in latitudes liable to prodigiously high winds, the
whole country would be so blown over by perpetually recurring
tempests, that, without adequate tree protection, it would be
impossible to do justice to their otherwise great opportunities.
It is only the student of trees who can heartily appreciate the
value of this form of addition to our landscape; but, considering
the illimitable variety available in form and colour, there seems
something really sad in the small devotion of public attention to
this department of the development of the resources of the different
nations, particularly of the temperate zones.
It was with great pleasure that I lately came accidentally into
contact with a gentleman at the head of the Forest Department of
one of the Indian Presidencies, and found how thoroughly they
were impressed with their necessities in this way, and what admi-


rable steps they were taking to do justice to the occasion. I was,
however, very grieved to learn from him that so little attention is
devoted to forestry as a national object in England, that we had to
send away our young men, preparing themselves for forest cultiva-
tion, to schools in Germany to fit them for future usefulness in
such work. Is it not a little shocking that a country with the
dependencies of Great Britain, with all their splendid varieties of
soil and site and climate, should not recognise as thoroughly as
any people the importance of this special branch of what we call
acclimatisation ?
I now wish to'point to a particular feature of this great scheme,
to which I want energetically to direct the attention of my hearers.
The project being large, and the subjects to be dealt with being
very various, it seems obvious that different forms of enterprise are
not only permissible, but requisite. Some things may be fairly
introduced by the individual, some things may be properly left to
the enterprise of associations, some things rise to the dignity of
national effort, and can only be properly dealt with by national
resources. It is in this latter department that I think we shall
find a lamentable deficiency. Statesmen and politicians are too
absorbed, forsooth, in the details of their several routines to con-
descend to such forms of usefulness as these. Yet, allowing great
scope to private enterprise and to co-operative association, there
still seem some things so large that only national resources can
properly cope with them ; and it seems a pity that Governments,
naturally humane and beneficent, should not spare some portion of
their attention for such directions as these. In point of fact, it
seems almost as if we were going backward. It would, I think,
puzzle my hearers to quote any great national effort of this kind in
recent years ; although we all know that in the romantic catas-
trophe of the “Bounty,” resulting in the formation of one of the
most interesting communities in the world—that of the Pitcairn
Islanders, Captain Bligh was at the time of the mutiny engaged
in a Queen’s ship in conveying the bread-fruit tree from the South
Sea Islands to the West Indies.
I shall not soon forget the circumstance of my broaching a pro-
position of a similar nature to the late Duke of Newcastle. In
those days we were stumbling about in the preliminary stages of
the experiment of conveying the salmon to Australia, a project in
which our friend Mr. Youl has since been so brilliantly successful.
I tried to convince his Grace that amongst the less employed of
the vessels of the Eoyal Navy some one might be set apart for so
interesting an experiment as this. It is something, in these


matter-of-fact modern days, to be able to stagger an English Duke
and Cabinet Minister; and I shall not readily forget the expression
with which the Duke asked me what I thought John Bright would
say if he heard that the Queen’s ships were being converted into
herring-boats ? I need scarcely add that my very startling pro-
posal received no acceptance ; although I must say, in justice to
the Duke of Newcastle, that he always showed the most sympa-
thetic feeling for the whole project of acclimatisation, and once
encouraged us with the remark, that “ it assumed almost a form of
Creation itself.”
Here I would, by the way, render hearty homage to the ready
reception of our overtures on the part of another Duke and Cabinet
Minister, and especially as the concession then so frankly made
is capable,! believe, of being utilised to a much greater extent than
we are at all at present aware of. I went as one of a deputation,
many years ago, to the Duke of Somerset, who was then the First
Lord of the Admiralty, and endeavoured to interest him in our
project, and to secure his co-operation through the vessels of Her
Majesty’s service. We were received in the most kindly and sym-
pathetic manner, -and there and then was issued an order, still
existent, to all captains in the Navy to render to our cause every
service in their power.
Of this very much greater use may be made than what at first
may seem probable. In the process of distribution those things
seem most thoroughly adapted to a country which come from some
other country corresponding in climate, latitude, &c. For instance,
take the three countries of nearly corresponding latitudes—South
America, South Africa, and Australia. We find them provided, in
the one case, with the cassowary; in the second, with the ostrich ;
in the third, with the emu—three birds in many respects ana-
logous, and leading to well-founded expectations that where any
one of the three can live, all three can live equally well. But
between countries of corresponding latitudes there is but little
opportunity of traffic, as the productions of those countries so
nearly correspond that there is not much opportunity of inter-
change, and consequently of inter-communication by ship. In
such circumstances, it seems obvious that a little timely assistance
rendered by unemployed vessels-of-war might greatly hasten on
this replenishing of the earth, for which I am humbly pleading,
and supply new forms of beauty and usefulness in directions to
which it would be otherwise difficult to convey them.
I have often looked at the fine, roomy decks of those large ships,
and thought of the more than motherly care bestowed by honest


Jack upon anything in the nature of a pet confided to his charge,
and have mourned over the small results from such splendid
opportunities.
Let us take a case in point. I select the herring of our northern
seas. Let us reflect, in the first place, upon the prodigious num-
bers in which it visits our coasts ; the rich harvests it affords to
some of the most manly and enterprising of our race; the oppor-
tunity it gives for the cultivation of the very best seamen in the world.
That my hearers may form some adequate idea of the importance of
this fish, both as an article of export and as one contributing to
the food of the people, it may be stated that in the year 1874
no fewer than 2,047,599 barrels, containing on an average 700 fish
each, were caught by boats owned by Great Britain and Ireland,
and of this quantity more than a million barrels were exported.
Then let us consider the ease with which this useful fish is pre-
served, and rendered capable of transmission to the very ends of
the earth, and its astonishing savoriness when it gets there. Let
us, last and not least, trace its power in rendering palatable food
otherwise insipid. I ask you to accompany me to the Irish cabin,
in which poverty and unsatisfied appetite are apt to take such
sorrowful forms, and appreciate, as far as one can appreciate, the
virtues of that highly-flavoured little fish, which is reported to add
relish to the family dish, and even when reduced to its infinitesimal
form, at once leads to the economising of the family resources,
and stimulates the imagination of the child, in constituting an
ingredient of the meal known as “ potatoes and point.”
We have already, I understand, in the Southern Hemisphere, a
very excellent fish nearly related to the herring—l mean the
pilchard, which sometimes shows itself in shoals upon our coasts
in Australia, and of which I have recently heard very favourable
reports when found along the shores of South Africa. The exist-
ence of so nearly related a congener would seem to point to the
obvious suitableness of the vast southern oceans for the herring;
and I ask my hearers to imagine the service rendered to mankind
by the transmission of such a fish to seas of such expanse. It does
not seem as if the transmission off the herring to the south should
be a matter of any serious difficulty. It would not require to be
nursed during long months with the paternal care lavished by Mr.
Youl upon his favourite salmon. It seems as if all that would be
necessary would be to secure the ova in a fertile condition in these
temperate seas, and convey it as rapidly as possible into seas of
corresponding latitude in the southern hemisphere. Set Mr. Frank
Buckland a job like this, and within a few weeks the thing would


be done, and we might leave it to the herring itself to indicate its
arrival on all our coasts in its own peculiar way, and in its charac-
teristic wealth of numbers.
If it be argued that there is anything infra, dig. in the employ-
ment of ships provided for the noble game of war in offices com-
paratively so insignificant as the conveyance of the spawn of fish,
I think it would be well for us occasionally to remodel our estimate
of the relative value of the victories of war as compared with the
less pretentious victories of peace. To the practical mind, influ-
enced fairly, if not extravagantly, by conceptions of utilitarianism,
there is something exceedingly horrifying in the waste apparent in
the simple preparation for possible wars. We go on board one of
the splendid vessels constituting, for instance, our Channel Fleet,
and we see expensiveness of the most pronounced type meeting us
at every step. Thousands of the finest fellows in the world are
idling away their time, and pining for more active and more intel-
ligent employment. We may, unhappily, want them some day for
the final purpose for which they are engaged : but that day may
never come, and meantime it seems to me a form of waste amount-
ing to absolute sinfulness to lose any opportunity of utilising such
tremendous forms of usefulness. The men themselves would be
very much better occupied by some simple form of employment,
and they would feel prouder and more contented in their several
spheres if they were impressed with the idea that they were doing
something of a useful character. These ships, during the winter
months, are many of them ordered off to milder climates for the
sake of the health of the crews. They go to Madeira, Lisbon,
Oporto, or wherever else it may be. It seems to me that they
might still go to a mild climate, and be employed in the meantime.
They should, of course, be kept within reach of recall. For, if the
worst came to the worst, even Prince Bismarck, in his most fero-
cious mood, will never be able to eat us up in a week; and, in any
case, vessels might be better employed in such work in pleasant,
sunny seas, than in running one another down in an Irish
fog.
We ought, I think, as a nation, to do a great deal more than we
do in such directions. It might save us from imputations very
unpleasant, and not unattended with formidable danger. In recent
years, for instance, we have shown our hatred of war and its
horrors to such an extent that we are apt to be charged by our
Continental neighbours with having lost our grand old heroic
spirit—with having become tainted with a low mercenary sentiment,
and with having sunk into liability to pusillanimous terrors. This


is a very bad character to have, and the fact of such a suspicion
existing may lead some day to such insult or line of policy upon
the part of other powerful States as may result in a terrible retri-
bution. Would it not be better to be able to say to such Powers,
“We do not believe in Wars. We see the folly of such prodigious
expenditure in preparation for such murderous business. We
think we can employ the flower of our youth better than in dress-
ing them in special array, and reserving them for the murder of
their fellow-creatures. We do this because we have become con-
vinced of the mischiefs and horrors of war—not from cowardice,
not from having lost that warlike spirit, of which we have shown
some signs in times past, not even from motives of a narrow
economy. The same sums which you waste in so objectionable a
manner we spend in exploration, in colonisation, in the interchange
of all kinds of valuable commodities, and in covering the earth with
all manner of good things. If you ask us what we are doing with
the flower of our manhood, we point to the Northern and Southern
Poles, to the least known regions of the sources of the Nile, to the
centre of Australian deserts, to the heights of the Rocky Mountains
and the Himalayas. As the principal explorers, colonisers, mer-
chants, and acclimatisers of the earth, we find an ample and an
adequate mode of expenditure. And we ask you whether it is not
better so to employ our more energetic spirits than in condemning
them to the barracks and the parade-ground : so to employ our
money than in wasting it in gunpowder and pipe-clay.”
Let us take another case, adapted apparently for national effort
■ —the transference from South Africa to Australia of some of that
prodigious wealth of animal life in which the former so abounds.
In Australia there is no indigenous deer or antelope. In South
Africa there are such varieties of animal life that their enumera-
tion would be tedious. How interesting to introduce amongst our
Australian colonies some of those beautiful types. But South
Africa, like Australia, produces wheat, and wool, and wine,
the orange, the fig, and the olive. And the very similarity of pro-
ducts, which seem to indicate ease of adaptation in a new thing,
arrests intercommunication and prevents traffic. A Queen’s ship or
two, in their passages round the Cape, might render services which,
not so offered, might never otherwise be available.
And now for a glance at our fresh-water fishes. Has it ever
occurred to my hearers to calculate the awful waste of space and
opportunity in the still waters of this country ? While we have
the lordly salmon sailing up and down our rivers, we can, perhaps,
have little to urge as to the occupation of our running waters. Of


course, nrncli more scope should be given him by sweeping away
the little, miserable obstructions by which one landholder tries to
steal a march upon another in securing more than his fair share
of the salmon as they pass to and fro. Still, at all events, the
rivers are tolerably provided with very beautiful fish. But what
can we say of our ponds, canals, and some of our smaller lakes ?
We can say carp, and tench, and roach, and pike. Is there no
better fish in all the world for such purposes than these ? It is
urged that with proper attention in the preparation even they may
be made eatable ; but I demur altogether to the recognition of a
fish which is greatly dependent on its cooking for becoming pala-
table food. A fish, like every other animal, should have some
decided excellence in itself; and I have every reason to believe
that there are plenty of better fishes in the world which might
easily be introduced and cultivated in our still fresh waters to very
much better effect than our little bony and muddy friends that I
have enumerated. We once succeeded in sending home living
specimens of the Murray cod of Australia, which does very well
there in our waterholes, stagnant during several months at a time,
and which might be found to suit the English climate. lam far
from saying that this is the most suitable of all fish ; on the con-
trary, I should think that there must be many others much more
suitable. I believe there are several kinds of fish in the North
American waters which might easily be introduced. And I have
seen the sterlet in the tanks of the Brighton Aquarium, which I
have also seen swimming in the tanks of the markets in North
Germany, and which is reported to be a very manageable and pala-
table fish.
If we once get a good fish, we ought then to utilise our still waters
much more thoroughly than we do, combining perhaps with
that utilisation the forms of amusement which seem to be so
popular. A pond should be treated like a poultry-yard—furnished
with a certain quantity of its special occupants, and these duly
supplied with some sort of food, causing them to pass rapidly to a
useful and edible stage, and constituting the water, like the land,
an available addition to our resources in the way of food supply.
What can be done in that way may be judged of by a statement
made to me by the late Mr. Fennell, that one of the proprietors on
the Tay had let his fishing for something like six thousand a year;
but by mismanagement the tenants had rendered the thing unpro-
fitable, and had to give up the arrangement. On this the proprie-
tor took the matter into his own hands, placed it under proper
supervision, cleared a profit of twelve thousand a year, paying


him a better rental per acre, Mr. Fennell assured me, than any
dry land he had in the county.
Let us imagine, then, the enormous space devoted to ponds,
minor lakes, canals, &c., over the United Kingdom, now almost
useless; and let us try to estimate what that area would produce in
circumstances of proper scientific and systematic cultivation.
Thus far I have instanced those things the treatment of which I
consider either suited to national effort or to the action of asso-
ciations. When we come to minor matters with which individuals
are in the highest degree competent to deal, I wish, after some
little experience in such matters, to give my hearers a hint which,
if accepted, may he a source of very great happiness to them.
While surrounded more or less continuously by such beautiful
things as those whose cause I am pleading, the mere happiness of
such surrounding is dependent to a great extent upon the associa-
tion of idea. The same thing will supply a very varying amount
of enjoyment to different individuals. One person may have an
extreme appreciation of colour, of beauty of form, of special ele-
ments of movement, of excellence of song, or of some other quality
in an object. And thus it is that one person walks through the
country or lounges in a garden absorbed in some consideration
miles away from the objects by which he is surrounded, while
another iffunges with an ecstacy beyond expression into every little
detail of which alone the educated and sympathetic nature is
capable. But imagine the pleasure of appreciation of a particular
form of beauty, of whatever kind, to one who has done something
to introduce that particular form of beauty into new regions, and
to bring it under the notice of other appreciative eyes and ears.
I wish to make this distinctly understood, and I would take an
illustration which occurs to me very frequently in my country
walks.
In the year 1858 I sent out to Melbourne, under the care of a
kind and attentive friend, a consignment of the common song
thrush of England. They were turned out in the neighbourhood
of Melbourne, soon bred, and freely scattered over a considerable
area, and when I was last in the colony I noticed them in the
gardens around Melbourne fluttering about the bushes, and singing
as cheerfully as in their native land. Since that day the song of
the thrush has been productive of a degree of pleasure to my ears
very difficult to describe; for admiring, as one must admire, the
wonderful richness and beauty of its note, I always feel that in
having done something to introduce to new observers that admir-
able quality of song, the song itself reaches my ears with very


greatly enhanced agreeableness. Indeed, I often think that nobody
in the world hears the thrush sing with the pleasure that I hear it.
And I say to any one who may feel inclined to challenge this state-
ment, “ Go and try the experiment.”
Is it too much to hope that out of the large number of men who
have attained such brilliant success in the splendid dependencies of
the Empire, it should become a sort of fashion for each one to take
up some one or two obviously suitable additions to the country with
which he has been specially identified, and never rest until he has
made it his own ? Is it not a sort of duty that we owe to the
countries which have done so well by us ? Such service would be
a graceful tribute, and free us from imputations which I am afraid
many of us deserve ; in showing a disposition on our part to regard
success of a very remarkable degree more as a result of the magni-
ficent opportunities which have been afforded us than as proceeding
from any transcendent merits of our own.
There are small things and inexpensive coming within the scope
of our scheme as well as the more pretentious things to which I
have alluded. For instance, by a recent ship I sent out to Mel-
bourne a consignment of the common glow-worm, having twice
before succeeded in landing them in the colony apparently quite
healthy, and lighting their beautiful little lamps as cheerfully as
in an English lane. One might be asked “ Why send out
such trivial things as glow-worms ? ” But I have all along
endeavoured to vindicate the claims of the comparatively trivial.
Let us fancy what an addition might be made to our beautiful
summer evenings in Australia by a few things like these ! The
young people of those lands, like the young people of other lands,
will fall in love with one another, and will indulge in their evening
rambles ; and, as in other lands, probably they will occasionally fal]
a little short of topics for conversation. What debt of gratitude
would they, so circumstanced, not owe to anyone who should pro-
vide them with such materials as the light of the glow-worm and
the song of the nightingale ?
Another hint—trivial, but suggestive. At my own place I have
a sheet of water, with a small island in the centre, covered with
rhododendrons, magnolias, and some larger trees. In the course
of last summer it occurred to me, as a happy inspiration, that
this little island had worn sufficiently long its comparatively un-
tenanted look, and that I ought to take steps for its occupation. I
consequently placed on it a couple of the little monkeys which our
kind friend, Mr. Jamrach, so readily supplies at so moderate a
price. And the success has been so pronounced as to elevate the


whole thing into a distinct discovery. I really do not know when
I have seen anything more enjoyable than the darting about over
the upper branches of the trees of these playful and beautiful little
creatures. They have, of course, to be taken in for shelter during
the winter months ; but during summer they have retained their
health perfectly, and have seemed to be as happy as the day was
long. Having myself seen the wild monkey in Ceylon, and also
watched the little party which has long delighted the inhabitants
of the Eock of Gibraltar, I knew pretty well the amusement that
these little things would afford in a semi-wild condition; but I had
no idea, until I had the opportunity of watching leisurely the
doings of these little creatures, of the great enjoyment derivable
from their wonderful playfulness, gracefulness, and agility. Indeed,
I have often found myself led to think that our good friend Mr.
Darwin, when he walked off with our tails, has also, perhaps, been
guilty of depriving us at the same time of many of our most en-
gaging and attractive qualities.
The peopling of the little island with such interesting inhabitants
has also had another good effect; for their fame has spread rather
widely through the neighbourhood, and the young people are pro-
mised by affectionate parents that if they will but keep quiet and
behave prettily for a certain length of time they shall be brought
down the first fine day to see me and my monkeys. And, in thus
being able to hold out an incentive to youthful virtue, it is a
pleasure to feel that there still lingers in one’s path some forms
of usefulness ; and, rapidly waning as one’s opportunities may be
in larger matters, it is a great comfort to find oneself fit to be thus
classed with Mrs. Winslow’s Soothing Syrup, and other much-
prized narcotics, as a “ real blessing to mothers.”
There is a deeper value in all this than at first sight appears to
be the case. In devoting one’s attention to matters like these, little
by little grows up the unspeakable love for all these things. It is
singular to notice how rapidly and inevitably that love grows ; and
in varying and enhancing the attractions of a country life to our
young people, we lead their thoughts into healthier channels than
they are apt sometimes to find, and do more than we can well
calculate in diverting them ideas from the frivolities and dissipations
of the town.
And to the grown man not less than to the child are hints like
these capable of useful application. How many of us do we see
impressed with too great earnestness in a special pursuit, and that
pursuit running more immediately in the direction of money!
Over and over again have I pleaded seriously with most estimable


men so situated, and have begged of them, almost on my knees, to
consider whether some modification of life would not he advantageous
to them and all belonging to them. “ You are rich enough,” I have
said, “too rich probably; for, when you are no longer here, the
money which you are so anxious to store up will probably make
your sons idle and hand over your daughters to the fortune-hunter.
Modify your efforts in that way—accept the relaxation of a little
holiday-making, pleasantly applied, and keep yourselves alive as the
advisers of your sons and daughters during the more critical phases
of their careers, instead of hurrying through the counting-house to
the grave, leaving behind you overloaded coffers, which will work
more harm than good even to those you love the best.”
It is sad to one of country tastes to notice most intelligent people
habitually rushing into the narrow courts and alleys of this murky
city, spending the long hours of every week-day in gloomy, half-lit
offices, and burying themselves in what I call the rabbit-warrens
and rat-holes of E.C., when they might beneficially afford a certain
percentage of then* time for purer air, and for identification with
things which they would find more delightful than they can believe,
if they would but take the trouble to become intimate with them.
We must now turn to a very serious department of this scheme.
I allude to the possible mischiefs which may be done by the intro-
duction, by accident or mistake, of something which may turn out
to be objectionable; and this is a matter which deserves very grave
consideration, as any mistake is calculated greatly to add to the
influence of that very large section of mankind who sneer at all this
kind of enterprise. Any fool can sneer. In fact, as far as my
observation goes, the more complete the fool the more perfect he is
apt to be in this very mischievous accomplishment. This is an
animal which there is no necessity to acclimatise or distribute.
He is able to take good care of himself. You find him in every
land, making himself perfectly at home, and indicating powers
of reproduction which leave far behind even the rabbit, the rat, or
the house-fly. Poor patient labourers in the cause which I am
advocating have been, and are even now, seriously encumbered by
the sneers of those who, doing little or nothing for the world
themselves, try to compensate for their apathy and uselessness by
seeking to disparage the work of others.
Meantime, grave mistakes may easily be made, and we must
always be on our guard against the accidental introduction, probably
through the agency of some lurking parasite or seed of noxious
weed, of something which may perhaps creep in amongst more
eligible associates. It has always been held that we owe the


Bathurst Burr, which for a long time gave such trouble to our
settlers in New South Wales, to seeds introduced originally in the
manes and tails of horses from Valparaiso. We know what the
thistle has done for us in Australia, and remember the aggressive
yellow “ Capeweed,” which is establishing itself in many parts of
the colonies. We have, of course, heard of the misdeeds of the
sparrow and the rabbit; and while we are certain to introduce
incidentally such things as the housefly and the bug, and our
faithful companion the Norway rat, and other troublesome camp
followers which hang on the track of civilised man, we ought to
be always on our guard to minimise these evils as far as possible.
But in dealing with great work we must not be deterred by
craven fear of possible danger. Are we not to have the vine
because of the Phyloxera vastatrix? Are we to forego the potato
because some vigilant eye has detected the American beetle? The
very nature of civilisation involves many such troubles, and we
must deal with them in an intelligent spirit, seeking out the
best mode of coping with a particular trouble, and opposing its
progress with a stern hand. We hear of certain wealthy gentle-
men in Victoria who have been committed to the expenditure of
thousands a year in endeavours to keep down the, rabbit. I recol-
lect seeing a paragraph in the Field newspaper many years ago,
intimating that the natural enemy of the rabbit was the black pole-
cat, and that the introduction of a few specimens of that animal
would save all those thousands a year. And, perhaps, when so
modifying natural action as we do by the prosecution of our special
form of enterprise, we ought to accustom ourselves to look to
natural modes of checking nuisances rather than to artificial
modes. Nature has a wonderful faculty for balancing the various
forms of animated life with which she has to deal. If a bird
becomes too numerous, a special hawk appears to have been sent
to keep it in check; and so throughout the piece.
The sparrows, which are apt to do so much mischief in the
gardens in neighbourhoods to which they have been recently
introduced and in which they most congregate, should have been
dealt with in a very resolute way long before they attained such
a position. A sparrow which comes over the garden-wall in
the early summer after the young peas or ripening fruit, should be
shot in flagrante delicto. When he has once tasted these delicacies
he is perfectly certain to come back, and very soon will bring his
father and mother, brothers and sisters, wife' and little ones. He
takes some time to make the discovery, but having made it h©
becomes a very inveterate character indeed. We unfeathered


bipeds, alas ! have no monopoly of criminality. Amongst sparrows
and wild animals generally there is the convict character, easily dis-
cernible, and just as pronounced as amongst ourselves ; and the
convict must be dealt with as we ought to deal with our own con-
victs—in a very uncompromising manner indeed. A false senti-
mentalism amongst them, as amongst ourselves, may gradually
convert an ordinary well-doer into a very objectionable character.
Crime in pea-stealing, as crime in watch-stealing and bank-breaking,
should be nipped in the bud.
Wild animals are a great deal more amenable to a form of
education than is generally supposed. I say this advisedly, as I
have had many illustrations of it in my own case. On one occasion
I rented a very excellent vineyard, in the fruit of which I was
greatly interested. At the bottom of an adjacent paddock was the
slaughterhouse of the neighbouring village, haunted, as such places
usually are, by the carrion crow of the colony. As my grapes began
to ripen, my men told me that they were so attacked by the crows,
that unless something were done I should not have a single grape,
I gave them a gun or two, and told them when they shot crows to
hang them up by the heels ; and I rigged up in the vineyard a few
scarecrows of more than usually ferocious aspect. My success in
thus checking the attack at its outset was a matter of profound
surprise, and has impressed me ever since. After a few days, not
a crow ever came into that vineyard. I used to see them sailing up
and down along the outside of the fences, glancing towards my
grapes with a disdainful eye, and describing me one to another, in
as plain language as a crow could use, as a very bloodthirsty
and disreputable person, with whom no properly constituted
carrion-crow would be justified in holding any communication
whatever.
It is all very well to laugh at this remark, but those of us who
have mixed, as all of us should seek to mix, with what are some-
times playfully termed “dumb animals,” will soon get to learn their
language quite as well as We understand the language of each other;
and in many instances it will be found a much more agreeable lan-
guage than what has been somewhere quaintly described as the
cackle of the daws of parliaments, or the shrieks of the kites of
officialdom. »
Perhaps amongst the legitimate functions of acclimatisation
may be enumerated Eradication. In setting about so serious a task
as that of remodelling the arrangements of Nature herself, we ought,
I think, to assert our right to destroy some things for the purpose
of smoothing the path of more valuable things. Many of my


hearers will recollect the terrible ravages of the wild-dog in Aus-
tralia, and the serious expense and anxiety consequent upon his
once almost übiquitous existence there. We have stood upon very
little ceremony with this rapacious rascal; and over hundreds of
miles of country where he once roamed, not a single specimen is
now ever seen. Our Indian fellow-subjects ought long since to
have taken example by what we have done in Australia with the
wild dog, in coping with that dreadful character, the tiger. It was a
most shocking thing to hear in the discussion upon the paper read
by Lord Napier of Ettrick to the Society of Arts, that the wild beasts
of India are calculated to destroy annually something like ten
thousand of our fellow-subjects; ravaging whole districts, condemning
large and fertile tracts to sterility, and horrifying us with the
knowledge that individual animals have been known to have
destroyed one or two hundred of our fellow-creatures. It was a
shocking thing, when the discussion recently occupied the columns
of the daily press, to find any man coming forward to justify the
preservation of the tiger, on the plea that without his existence India
would be so intolerably dull, that the more active spirits amongst
the military and officials would not consent to accept service there.
It is surely a dreadful thing when “ sport,” as it is called, is pur-
chased at such a price as this.
Eradication may appear a singular form of acclimatisation, but
it is not the less necessary to clear a way for the introduction of a
good thing by the removal of something not so good. And in
venturing upon so serious a business as that modification of natural
resources with which it seems to have been a part of the designs of
Providence that we should be charged, one must be prepared to
deal resolutely with an injurious thing, whenever its mischievous-
ness becomes apparent. And we should deal with it not only
resolutely, but with intelligence. I think there is great opportunity
for reducing to a sort of science the process of dealing with
objectionable things. We neglectthis too much, and, consequently,
are not only subjected to endless annoyances, but the very process
which I am advocating is objected to by timorous men on the
ground that, in attempting to introduce a good thing you may bo
unconsciously introducing something very seriously objectionable.
Man ought to be more confident in his superior intelligence, and
should be prepared to use that intelligence in keeping the upper
hand of such forms of even serious annoyance. To the sparrow
which comes over the wall, at least as promptly as to the Emperor
who audaciously strides across the boundary of international rights,
one should always be prepared to say—“My friend, I am essentially


a man of peace. But it is as well that it should be always un-
derstood, with the utmost distinctness, that I do not intend to stand
any nonsense of whatever kind.” Bor want of this resolution, and
the knowledge of the necessity of its exercise, with what annoyances
are we not constantly met. We know so well the fussy and incom-
petent house-mistress, helpless in presence of the minor troubles
with which every establishment is apt to be beset. What can wo
think of the competency of a poor creature, who babbles of flies,
and gnats, and ants, and who considers that black-bettles and
mice are the necessary accompaniments of cheese and jam ? We
know the ignorant and cowardly gardener, who quails before the
cricket, the woodlouse, the aphis, and the red-spider; and the farmer,
who despairs of his root crops because the turnip-beetle flies forward
open-mouthed and barks at him as he enters the paddock. We
ought to accustom ourselves to deal peremptorily and effectually
with all such things. A man has more sense than a sparrow, an
aphis, or a turnip-beetle; and a woman, if she is good for anything,
has more sense than a mouse or a cockroach I And it is the duty
of people to keep such things in proper subjection.
In a recent paper I saw a notice that the wolves in France num-
bered, with their whelps, each spring about two thousand, and that
each, preying upon live stock to the extent of £4O a year, cost the
farmers many times that amount in the necessity of folding some-
thing like twenty millions of sheep ! We know what this means by
our experience of Australia, where, as I have said, the dingo has,
under the beneficent influence of strychnine, been very extensively
annihilated. A large settler there told me that, in a country once
very subject to then* ravages, he has now never seen a single speci-
men for more than fifteen years.
In all that I have said I wish to let it be distinctly understood that
I have dealt with the subject in the capacity of a lover of nature, —•
in no sense as a sportsman. I wish to see the earth filled up with all
manner of good things, to be utilised in their several ways ; but I
have small sympathy with the man so quaintly described by the
French critic as rising in the morning and saying : “ What a fine
day ! Let us go out and kill something [” I cannot understand the
pleasure of inflicting death. It seems to me that the logic of the
thing would point rather in the way of increasing life, to enjoy the
fineness of the morning, than in signalising the pleasant weather
by an act of destruction.
No one, I am certain, can enjoy his walks in the country more
than I have done, although I never saw a fox-hunt, or a hare
coursed, or shot a game bird, in my life. Even in this country,


addicted to sport as it is, I cannot help expressing the belief that
worthy Paterfamilias, with an affectionate wife and loving children
dependent upon him, may he better employed than in breaking his
neck over our fences, And it seems singular that a man cannot
enjoy the pleasures of a ramble in the country without seeking for
something to kill; without encumbering himself with a piece of
complicated ironmongery, weighing from six to nine pounds,
troublesome even when quiescent, and in action noisy, ill-smelling,
and liable to serious accident to oneself or friend.
I now have, in approaching the conclusion of my paper, to
address a few words of friendly remonstrance to a class to which I
think this remonstrance should not have been required. I allude
to our scientific men; and I say with some sadness, that it appears
to me that, with a few most honourable exceptions, our scientific
friends have not devoted their attention, and have not given the
assistance to this cause, which the world has a right to have ex-
pected from them.
Such successes as have been achieved have been worked out by
the more ordinary practical men of the world ; and the blunders
that have been made, the expenses that have been uselessly incurred,
the time that has been lost, and the want of perfectness in the
elaboration of the whole scheme, I believe, is in some sort attribu-
table to the want of sympathy with us in quarters in which, I think,
we have had the best title to look for it. One would unwillingly say
anything to hurt the feelings of men, earnest enough in their
careers, and favouring the World with invention, discovery, and good
effort of various kinds. But in such work as I have endeavoured to
depict here, it is a sorrowful spectacle to contemplate (if there be
any justice in the suspicion which I throw out) that Science shows
a disposition to stand with folded hands—with a sort of incredu-
lous smile upon her intelligent face, and conveying to us more
earnest spirits a kind of misgiving that she really does not wish us
to succeed. Why this should be, I am utterly at a loss to conceive.
My interpretation of Science is that one of its special uses is to ren-
der its learning and discovery practically useful to the busy world.
And I think that scientific man is false to the great cause which
he represents, who is content to arrange, guard, and survey his
wonderful collections, without being constantly impressed with the
wish to utilise each several thing to the utmost extent of which it
is capable.
One sometimes is driven to wonder whether the only explanation of
such laxity as I seem to see, may be found in the misgiving that
on a future day—thanks to the enterprise of such as are doing so


much to modify the surface of the earth—they will be driven to
the necessity of re-writing their catalogues, and remodelling their
musty old cabinets. But it is sad to think of such knowledge,
stored up in abundance in so many varied quarters, and not as
practically available as it seems that it might be and should be
made.
I know what severe things may be said of me in speaking thus
plainly of a section of society for which we all feel so great a res-
pect and affection. I throw out the hint, however, in the most
friendly spirit—in sorrow, not in anger—and I only beg of them,
however indignant they may be with me, to occasionally ask them-
selves whether they have really endeavoured to popularise their
favourite science to the utmost extent of which they conceive it
capable.
In this brief review of the arguments for and against this scheme
of acclimatisation, I have said that I have rarely met a man readily
appreciative and receptive of the entire scheme, and that, amongst
many reasons for justifying neglect, it is not very common to find
a good one. One such man I found, and one such reason; and
with a reference to them I will conclude my paper. My friend had
himself done “ yeoman’s service ” in the good cause, and had a heart
for further effort as expansive as the cause itself. We had been
one day discussing its varying phases, when he somewhat startled
me with the most formidable objection I have yet heard to it:
“ Why, if the world ever became as varied and interesting, and
bright and beautiful, as this project seeks to make it, we should
none of us ever wish to go to Heaven,”
tTNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS, LONDON AHl> CIIILWORTn.


