

AN ACCOUNT
OF
THE “RUSH” TO PORT CURTIS,
INCLUDING LETTERS ADDRESSED TO THE “ARGUS” AS SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT FROM THE FITZROY RIVER.
BY FREDERICK SINNETT.
GEELONG:
PRINTED BY RAY AND RICHTER, MOORABOOL STREET.
1859.
PRICE, EIGHTEENPENCE.




AN ACCOUNT
OF
THE “HUSH” TO PORT CURTIS,
INCLUDING LETTERS ADDRESSED TO THE “ARGUS” AS SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT FROM THE FITZROY RIVER.
BY FREDERICK SINNETT.
GEELONG:
PRINTED BY RAY AND RICHTER, MOORABOOL STREET.
1859.




PREFACE.
In deciding to republish my Port Curtis letters to the
A rgus, I am able to put forward the usual excuse—the
“ advice of numerous friends.” But, to speak the truth,
and shame —all who don’t—quite as many good-
natured friends with delightful candour advised me
to do nothing of the kind. Had I known that
so much delay would have arisen in this process
of republication, I think I should have followed
the advice of the latter rather than of the former
counsellors, because the interest in the subject of
this little book has now almost expired. The delay
has, at all events, enabled me to complete the tale of the
Port Curtis Rush, and to record the main events in that
most remarkable episode of the past year, from the first
rumour of the Canoona gold discoveries to the close of
the “ Victoria’s” mission of relief, and to the date of our
last interesting news of the canoe voyage down the


Fitzroy. This “ republication ” accordingly contains
more than twice the matter of the original letters.
I have continued to use the words “ Port Curtis,”
because that name has been popularly given here
during the past few months to the whole district referred
to. Port Curtis proper, however, lies nearly fifty miles
to the south of Keppel Bay, into which the Fitzroy
empties itself, and to which almost all the fleet of
adventurer-laden vessels sailed ; and, accordingly, neither
I, nor one in five hundred of those who “ went to Port
Curtis,” really got nearer to it than when running along
the eastern side of Curtis Island, opposite to the southern
end of which is Port Curtis proper, and at the northern
end Keppel Bay.
Geelong , 20 January, 1859.


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Chapter I.—Citizen nomads—The distance they travel—
Gold discovered at Port Curtis—Consequent excite-
ment —Thirty vessels laid on—l join the throng.... 7—15
Chapter ll.—Departure of the Admella—Striking in-
stance of conjugal attachment—The open sea—
Crowd and confusion—Pass Sydney Heads—Rough
weather Put into Newcastle News from El
Dorado— Dismal buildings—A voice from the Rubble
—A visit and an accident—Despondency—Mount
Warning—Coral Islands The Comet—Off Port
Curtis 16—34
Chapter lll.—The Canoona—Discouraging reception—
Disheartening accounts—The Fitzroy River —Tem-
perature —Mosquitoes—Fire-flies—The tent house-
hold—Rowdy neighbors—An alarm—Revolvers—
Prospects as to gold-digging—Rockhampton official-
ism—A party chased by blacks 35 —51
Chapter IV. —The “ Pancake” — Rockhampton Falls —
The Moreton Bay fig—A novel propeller—A magni-
ficent Reach—Tea and turn-in—News from Canoona
—Strong current—Slow progress—Overtaken by the
Canoona—Pheasant Place —A pot of tea—Unli-
censed victuallers—Drunkenness not prevalent .... 52—76


PAGE.
Chapter V.—Start for Canoona —Aborigines—White and
black murders Vindictive spirit A successful
Canoona digger—Canoona at last—Mr. Chapel—
Shakespere improved—A walk round the diggings—
Washing-holes—Captain O’Connell —Pickwick’s oc-
cupation—Temperature—Success of the diggers—
Future uncertain 67—82
Chapter Vl. —“ Oh, dearest Emma!”—Hard drinking—
A “ hair of the dog”—A Chinese row—An explorer’s
return—Rockhampton again—Lynch-law—Depar-
ture from Rockhampton—Homeward bound —Home
again 84 98
Chapter Vll.—Alarm in Melbourne —Steps taken by
Government—Dinner to Captain Moodie—A return
match—Captain O’Connell’s proceedings—A little
bill—Land sale at Rockhampton—High prices rea-
li- ed —A canoe voyage—The bottle-tree —The Dawson
country—The Fitzroy—Rocks and rapids—A marble
mountain —Conclusion 94 —111


CHAPTER I.
Ihe nomadic habits and unsettled condition of our
great gold-digging class is constantly being illustrated in
a “new rush.” A rumor reaches some centre of digging
population that a rich deposit has been discovered
and the more restless and dissatisfied are easily
moved to try their luck anywhere else rather than
where they are. If the good news prove groundless, the
abortive “rush” is seldom heard of far out of its
own neighborhood; if otherwise, armies of diggers at
once take the road from all directions for the new field.
Along with the regular rank and file, as in the case of
other armies, marches a body of camp followers, often
even more numerous than the main force on which they
depend.
The active and energetic competition now pervading
every kind of business in Victoria, ordinarily enables
the digger to be sure that wherever he goes there
will be very few consumers upon the ground
before purveyers for their various wants will be
B


there too. Nor must the word “ want ” be under-
stood in any limited sense. The most artificial demands
are anticipated by speculators ever on the watch for some un-
supplied desire convertible to profit. It requires, frequently,
but a very few weeks to convert a solitary gully in which
the settlers’ cattle have hitherto undisturbedly browsed,
and which, except for the occasional visits of the stock-
man, has not been seen by man’s eye from month’s end to
month’s end, into a regularly organised town with its
mile or two of crowded streets, its stores and shops
and public houses, its doctors and lawyers, its theatre
and other places of amusement better and worse, its
newspaper —aye, even its own little Circumlocution
Office and official centre.
One thing, indeed, commonly regarded as rather
essential to towns, is not to be met with so soon
—viz., a house. Houses may come in process of time,
but they are regarded as of secondary importance —as
things for which there is no immediate hurry, and
as much too fixed an investment to be ventured upon at
once. Ten thousand persons may flock to a place in the
course of a few weeks, and a few weeks afterwards not as
many hundreds may remain. Canvas is the best build-
ing material for a nomadic people, and the digging
population of Victoria is not only nomadic, but nomadic
in a way of which the world has previously had few
examples. Bedouins pitch their black tents in small
groups. Tartars wandering to find pasturage for
their flocks and herds, do not crowd greatly to-


gether; but the Victorian digger is a citizen as
well as a nomad. He has many of the habits of a
townsman, though as itinerant as a Tartar; and while
he is as ready to strike his tent and march off to some
distant spot, as if he were a Pawnee on a hunting
excursion, whither he moves the population, the divided
labor, the organisation of a town, and often a large one,
go too. How unhealthy this unsettled state is, in many
respects, and how much it is to be desired that the
firm roots of property and social relationships should
bind down more men to fixed homesteads than are so
bound now, it would be foreign to present purposes to
discuss.
Immense distances are not unfrequently travelled in
going from an established gold-field to a “ new rush.”
For example, when the Ararat diggings were opened up
a couple ©f years since, miners flocked thither from all
parts of the colony. From the Eastern diggings the
distance to be travelled was between two and three hun-
dred miles, and the journey with drays occupied nearly
a month. There have also been rushes into distant
parts of Hew South Wales even since our gold-fields
have been yielding their rich crops to our peculiar kind
of spade husbandry. But the most remarkable and
distant rush that has yet occurred in Australia, is
that which recently took place to Port Curtis —a mar-
vellous wild goose chase, wherein I had the honor to join.
The first rumor of discoveries of gold at Port Curtis, or
rather on the Fitzroy River, reached Sydney in July


last •* but it was not till towards the middle of Sep-
tember that the excitement, which was already
*On the 23rd of September, and when the Fitzroy fever
was nearly at its height in Sydney, the Sydney Morning
Herald published the following account of all the real
intelligence that had been then received from the re-
ported dorado :
“ On the 25th July the Jenny Lind arrived, bringing
intelligence that rich gold-fields were discovered. No-
thing material beyond this was stated.
“ On the 3rd of August the Uncle Tom and the Albion
were laid on.
“On the 24th August the Coquette arrived, and
brought the intelligence in a form calculated to make
some impression. A letter, addressed to Mr. Cohen,
stated that a first-rate gold-field was found, and that a
large parcel of gold was expected. A small quantity was
forwarded, as a specimen of its kind. So much interest
did this news excite, that the steam vessel Eagle was
laid on, and advertised to leave on the Ist September.
She left accordingly, with forty-four passengers.
“The Jenny Lind returned a second time to this port on
the 7th of September. She brought good accounts of
the diggings, and a letter which stated that 100 men
were employed upon them. Other letters confirmed this
intelligence, and stated that gold was found near the
surface ; that from 10s. to 20s. per day was made by the
diggers, and that about 27 lb. of gold had been already
raised. The Jenny Lind brought with her about 60 ozs.
“On the 18th September the Uncle Tom returned, and
announced that twelve persons only were left at Glad-
stone ; that there were 400 men upon the diggings, and
that there was supposed to be about 30 lb. of gold
amongst the diggers. A letter stated also, that the men
were earning from £6 to £7 per week. The Uncle Tom
brought 22 oz. of gold.
“A despatch, dated the 7th September, from Captain


raging fiercely in New South Wales, had fairly
extended to this colony. Thenceforth, and until
O’Connell, reported the gold-field officially. He stated
that there were 300 persons at Canoona; that there
were individual instances of great success; that
about 80 ozs. of gold had been sent up ; and that it
was desirable to proclaim the gold-field, as prescribed by
the act. It was found, he stated, to the north of the
Fitzroy River, and was known as Livingstone, No. 3.
Under the same date, a ietter was received from Mr.
Samuel Gearside, who reported that he had arrived at
Port Curtis ; that the news was astonishing ; that he
had met a man who had told him that he had made 22
oz. of gold in one week ; and that there were about 300
men at the diggings. A woman also had received a
letter from her husband, stating that he had obtained £lOO
worth of gold, after having been away but a fortnight.
“ Such, then, is the amount of direct intelligence which
we have obtained from the gold-fields. We meet daily
with persons who affirm that letters have been received
privately, containing facts of an astounding nature,
but that self-interest induces their suppression
for the moment. We can scarcely imagine that
all these statements are false; still, we have been
very unsuccessful in tracing them to reliable authority. In
some instances, they have evidently been mere rumor,
and, probably, the rumor has been due to sinister mo-
tives. At the same time, if the whole be founded in
delusion or deception, its authors are entitled at least to
the very doubtful credit of success. The effect pro-
duced has certainly been very marked, and even marvel-
lous. Eighteen vessels have left during the last three
weeks, and 1,580 passengers from the Ist to the 20th
September, for the gold-fields. Twenty vessels, includ-
ing steamers, are now advertising—some for the con-
veyance of passengers only, and others for the exclusive
conveyance of goods.”
B 1


suddenly extinguished by the stream of disastrous
intelligence that flowed in some weeks afterwards, the
In contrast with the limited positive information that
existed, wild rumors of the most extravagant character
were being incessantly circulated. The following para-
graph is from the same number of the Sydney Herald
that contained the paragraph just extracted :
“ Gold Rumor. —A rumor was extensively circulated
on Monday evening, to the effect ‘ that a letter had been
received from Port Curtis, stating that a man in a party
of three had made £7,000 as his share in one gold find.'
We determined, if possible, to trace this report to its
source. A gentleman in office, Mr. A., had heard it men-
tioned by Mr. 8., of the Exchange, who it was said had
seen the letter. A second gentleman had it, on what he
considered most reliable authority, namely, five mercan-
tile men and one ‘ high official.’ As the official resided
out of town, we deferred further inquiries until Tuesday
morning. Yesterday we sent to Mr. 8., who said he had
heard it from Mr. C., a Custom House Agent; to Mr. C. we
accordingly went, who referred us to Captain I). ; that
gentleman was not at home, but a relative of his in-
formed us that she had heard her brother mention that
such a letter had been received, although she had not
herself seen it; pursuing our inquiries, we at length
heard that the letter was in the possession of the toll-
keeper at the Parramatta toll-bar. A special messenger
was at once despatched thither. Stone, the tollkeeper,
said he had heard of the letter, but had not seen it, —he
had, however, received a letter from Port Curtis, on Sa-
turday night last, and was kept up until two o’clock on
Sunday morning by persons wishing to see it; on the
faith of that letter he further informed our messenger, his
two sons intended to go to the Fitzroy. This is only
one of the many rumors that have been afloat for the
last few days which we have endeavored to sift, and in
each case have met with a similar result.”


flame burned more and more fiercely every day. Yield-
ing to the most causeless infatuation that it has ever
been my lot to watch, not only did diggers troop down
to Melbourne from all the gold-fields, north, south,
east and west, within the Victorian boundary, but appoint-
ments were thrown up, and paying businesses abandoned
by hundreds of men who were utterly incapable of
giving “ a reason for the faith that was in them” that
fortune awaited them upon the Fitzroy.
Every dead wall in Melbourne and Geelong was covered
with flaming placards announcing the immediate depar-
ture of various ships for Port Curtis and Keppel Bay. The
Fitzroy gold-fields were obtruded upon public attention
in multitudinous ways. Every shopkeeper had got
something to stick in his window with a ticket recom-
mending it as specially adapted to supply some pressing
want of Port Curtis diggers. Every puffing advertiser
used Port Curtis as his catch word. The press certainly
did not stimulate the prevailing excitement, but all
the attempts to check it which public writers made
were quite unavailing. It was in vain that the risks to
be run were urgently pointed out day after day. The
excitement grew by what it fed on. No one could be
brought to believe that every one else was wildly acting
upon the vaguest information. A. could not believe that
B. and all the other letters of the alphabet were as mutable
as himself. Almost every one of the multitude that
joined in the rush was persuaded that so great an effect
must have a proportionately great cause. When ships


began to sail with hundreds on board, sagacious reasoners
far and near began to feel sure that there “ must be
something in it,” and took ship at once —themselves
to become arguments in favor of the departure of others.
At the end of September thirty vessels of all classes
were laid on in Melbourne and Geelong for Port Curtis.
Some enthusiasts even rigged out boats of five or six
tons burden, and boldly set out on a fifteen hundred
mile voyage in such small craft, while steamers and
large passenger-ships carried their hundreds at a time.
But in the midst of this large exportation of people it
was to be noticed that very few merchants made ventures
in goods. There were plenty of men ready to hazard
their lives in a wild experiment, but men of business
were not to be persuaded to risk their goods upon such
slight information. So little was generally known about
Port Curtis, indeed, that the most contradictory accounts
of its climate were published in the newspapers, and no
one seemed able authoritively to say whether it was or
was not, as the majority of the accounts declared it to be,
a low swampy region, from which the hot tropical sun
drew forth pestilential vapours amid which no European
could labor and live. >
As I felt great curiosity to know what the truth about
the Port Curtis diggings was, it occurred to me one
evening, that the simplest and surest method would be
to go and see for myself. I had for some time stood
rather in need of a sea voyage and a holiday
from the cares of my regular occupation, and as I


revolved the matter in my mind, there now appeared to
be an opportunity for obtaining both. -I proposed to
the proprietors of the Argus to visit and report upon the
Fitzroy diggings as special correspondent. My offer was
accepted, and although there were some obstacles to be
overcome, and some arrangements to be made before I
could get away, a few days sufficed to dispose of these
difficulties, and on the 2nd October I was ready to sail
in the Admella, then lying with her steam up alongside
the Sandridge jetty.


CHAPTER II.
The Port Curtis fever was by this time rising to its
height, and as with two or three friends to “ see me
off,” I drove down to Sandridge in a passenger cart,
with a tent and other suggestive equipments protruding
therefrom, we became the objects of attention and envy.
One man within my own knowledge, had that very day
thrown up a good place, and had told his master that,
if he were to die for it fifty times, he must and would
go, for he had heard (indirectly of course) that a
friend of his was getting five ounces an hour ! The
general belief among uneducated people was and the
more educated were not prepared to deny its truth—that
Port Curtis was a new Guinea Coast but at once richer
and more deadly than that fever-stricken storehouse of
barbaric wealth.
When we got down to Sandridge the jetty was
crowded with spectators and the friends of pas-
sengers going by the Admella, insomuch that it
was difficult to squeeze one’s way on board. When
once there, the crowding was scarcely lessened.
Quantities of goods were still going on board


—passengers’ luggage was being thrown in promis-
cuous heaps about the decks. For every passenger
there must have been, I fancy, an average of three
friends seeing him off, and the noise and dirt and con-
fusion were indescribable.
The passengers were of all nations, and all languages
were mingled in Babylonian confusion. High over
all, however, predominated the marvellous shrieks
and vocal jerks and drawls peculiar to the utter-
ance of the equally strange oaths, wherewith dearly be-
loved brother Jonathan expresses the genius of his
people ; of course the percentage of Yankees was con-
siderable in the case of such a speculative proceeding
as the Port Curtis “ rush and equally of course, the
proportion of friends that came down to take one last
long lingering liquor with each adventurous “ old hoss ,r
was prodigious.
When late in the afternoon the warps were cast off
the jetty, it was densely crowded by shouting and
cheering friends and spectators, and amid hurrahs and
hat waving, and the strains of a brass band concealed
somewhere in the mass of people, we stood out into the
Bay.
About a mile off, we came to a stand-still while the
emigration officer boarded us, and while some attempts
were made to shake things and people a little into their
places, now that the encumbering swarm of “ long shore ”
visitors had been got rid of. The task was not an
easy one, however. We were much overcrowded as it


was; and the unfortunate agent of the vessel, who had
made himself a mark for all attacks by mounting
a magnificent crimson fez, was incessantly assailed
by relays of murmuring, menacing, or reproachful
steerage passengers, who could not find berths. Still
all offers to take back passage money and be set ashore
were received with derision. So bent were the people
on going—so convinced were they of the fortune that
only needed to be picked up a week from that time,
that I believe they would have stowed themselves away
in the cross-trees rather than not at all. Boats full of
men that could not go came alongside to look with
envious eyes at those that could. One old
waterman who had brought some one on board,
and who stood balancing himself in the bows
of his boat, and holding on by the rope’s-end
that had been cast to him, observed with an evident
sincerity that would probably not have gratified the
absent lady—“ Ah, if they’d only hoist my boat aboard,
and take me and she together, I wouldn’t so much as
ask to go and say ‘good-bye’ to my old woman.”
At about five o’clock, Mr. Broad, the Emigration Officer,
left us ; the screw once more was set in motion, and we
steamed down the Bay, the evening being fine, though cold.
I found one or two personal acquaintances among the
passengers, and I had been introduced to some others
before the Admella left the wharf, and altogether, though
we had a few curious customers in the cabin, I liked the
prospects of the voyage so far as my fellow-travellers


were concerned. After a nondescript dinner-cum-tea
meal, much in favor on board Australian steamers, on
the first day of the voyage a group of us held a serious
smoke over things in general and Port Curtis in parti-
cular upon the poop. The loftiness of the super-
structure of expectation then erected upon a most
weak foundation of known facts, outraged all laws of
architecture; but there is something very infectious
about hope, and I suppose there were very few out of
the passengers on board, who were not irrationally
expectant.
It was long after dark before we reached the Heads, and
there we met the steamer Telegraph from Sydney. What
ardent desire there was to speak her, and hear the latest
intelligence from the land of promise ! But she steamed
steadily past us in the opposite direction, and there was’
much of mortification in the thought that it would be two
or three days at least before we should hear the
news that was passing within two or three hundred
yards of us. However, being left at liberty to make
news for ourselves, we took care that it should be good,
and stayed discussing it for some time after the lengthened
swell that came rolling up from the southward told that
we had passed out of Port Phillip Bay into the open sea.
The next morning I was confirmed in an impression
that I had formed the previous afternoon, that ours was
not a very carefully or well governed ship. When I went
on deck I found it still lumbered up with goods, while the
ordinary nautical observance of washing decks appeared
c


,to be altogether disregarded. There was no room for
walking, the quarter-boats being swung in board over
the poop, though the weather was beautifully fine, and
the sea smooth. A good deal of room was also taken
up by a certain small steam-boat, whereof more here-
after, which was being conveyed to the Fitzroy on
spec,” and of which the stern overhung one side of
the Admella, while the stem overhung the other, and
which had to be passed under with crouching contor-
tions of the body if one wanted to go forward. Forward,
the confusion was worse confounded. A quantity of bags
of coal encumbered the decks, and had been trodden by
hundreds of feet until the bags had burst, and
there was scarcely an inch of clear deck to stand upon.
Below in the steerage, the berthing provision was
inadequate to the number of passengers, and the clamor
of complaint was loud and general.
A smooth sea and beautiful morning dispelled most
of the ill humor that defective accommodation had gene-
rated, and people were fortunately more inclined to
regard the bold and rugged scenery about Wilson’s Pro-
montory than to grumble. At about nine o’clock we
passed the new lighthouse, which with its pretty white
cottage and outbuildings looked like a toy-edifice cut
out of cards and perched upon the mighty cliffs. It
stirred the admiration even of some transatlantic gen-
tlemen in the coaching interest, albeit nationally and
professionally bound rather to look down upon creation.
“ T’aint bad scenery, 8.,” said one, kindly patronising


old Dame Nature’s work. “ No, t’aint,” said 8., spit-
ting approvingly; and I felt that such was my own idea,
however much better expressed.
On the following morning, the 4th, the weather was
still fine, but the wind so nearly a-head as to render our
canvas of very little use. We rounded Cape Howe
early, and kept sufficiently close to the coast to get a
good view of the lighthouse and entrance to Twofold
Bay, and of the “ Dromedary” and other bold hills
inland. In the course of the morning we saw a whale
spouting and rolling his huge bulk among the waves,
which broke over him as on a rock, and indicated his
whereabouts when he had got too far off to permit us
to see his proper person.
The sea was rougher than it had been,*and though the
cabin table continued to be pretty well attended, there
were a good many passengers who evidently approached
their dinners, not as friends to be cordially greeted, but
as foes to be striven with and overcome by the aid of
high courage and a fixed determination.
We passed Sydney Heads early on Tuesday, the 5 th,
though not so soon as was at first reported, as a bay
taken to be Broken Bay, turned out to be Botany Bay.
The mistake might have been serious had we designed
putting into Sydney; but as it happened, it was of
little consequence. It blew heavily all the morning, the
coast being much ■ obscured by drifting rain and mist.
The decks, as I have before mentioned, were greatly
encumbered, and this “ top hamper ” caused the steamer


to lie over and roll about a good deal. The passengers— i-
those at least who were not in their berths —crowded
together out of “the wet” under the lee of boats,
hatchways, or anything else that afforded an oppor-
tunity for a “ smoke and a yarn,” or for watching the
enormous grey masses of rain-dimpled water that rose
under us, and rolled heavily away to leeward. When
tired of this I tried to read “ Westward, Ho,” lying on
the weather-side sofas in the saloon; but I had to drop
the book and hold on every few minutes, as some despe-
rate lurch caused the swing-trays to bump against the deck
—not now properly above them —and the water no longer
to splash, but to settle for some seconds, dark and green
and solid, against the scuttles on the lee-side. I then
tried the deck ‘again, but soon afterwards a heavy burst
of rain sent most of us below, where a snug little party
was formed to transact a “liquor” under difficulties,
sitting on the cabin floor, where our American friends told
divers amusing stories, particularly about the gratuitous
alarms of some fellow-passenger on a former voyage,
who used “ to get so frighted that his boots rattled on
the deck.”
The rain and wind lasted all day. As we approached
the mouth of the Hunter in the afternoon, a particularly
fierce squall came on, accompanied with such heavy rain
as completely to hide the coast. Very fortunately the
rain did not last long, for when the thick curtain was
partially withdrawn again we found ourselves running
dead on shore. Had we continued on our course ten


minutes longer the position of the Admella would have
been very precarious. As it was, a sailing vessel in a
like predicament would have been in great danger. The
helm was put hard-a-port, however, and the steamer’s
head brought up into the wind, into the very teeth of
which she drove out to sea again with the canvas
flapping. We began to be afraid that we should
not succeed in making Newcastle before dark; but in
the dusk we were gladdened with the sight of the
light on “Nobby,” and soon afterwards rounded that
remarkable rock—which, now that the top has been
blown off, looks like a great Dutch cheese—and got
into smooth water. Inside the breakwater, however, our
gallant commander and his auxiliary contrived to run
us upon a sand-bank; but after a considerable amount of
excitement and confusion and contradictory orders, the
rising tide favored us so far that we were able to back
off again, no harm having been done.
The great anxiety now was, of course, to get news from
Port Curtis. Somehow, during the last few days, we,
having been out of the way of anything to counteract the
exuberant suggestions of our own fancies, had been doing
what we liked with the Fitzroy Diggings, and had, in
imagination, entered upon the possession of the utmost
good fortune there. The first regular damper we sus-
tained came from Captain U ■, who went ashore with
Captain M‘Ewan, and soon returned to tell us “ Good
news from Port Curtis. Some of ’em are making as
much as five shillings a day.” At first we thought he was
c 1


joking, but when a number of the previous day’s Sydney
Morning Herald was procured, we found that, to say the
least of it, the brilliant accounts previously circulated
were not confirmed. The aggregate length of the faces
on board must have been increased by some fathoms as
this blow fell upon the general hopes. I did not go ashore
that evening ; having been in Newcastle before, and re-
membering that it was not a very exhilarating place even
in fine weather, I thought that Newcastle on a wet night,
and under the influence of bad news, was something not
to be lightly undertaken. Some of the passengers who
did venture returned on board, mere masses of mud and
wrath, and declaring Newcastle to be the darkest, dirtiest,
and most disgusting seaport they ever set foot in.
Next morning, L., R, and I went ashore, through the
rain and a particularly offensive plaster, chiefly com-
posed of clay, water, and coal-dust, but which is only
considered common mud in Newcastle. We made one
or two calls and purchases, and were introduced
to the reading-room of the Chamber of Commerce,
which was tolerably well-furnished with books and
newspapers. We feared there would not be time to visit
the coal-mines, which are some miles off, but we as-
cended a hill behind the town crowned with an obelisk,
which makes a capital landmark to vessels entering the
bay. From this hill there is a splendid view of the
coast, the River Hunter, and the surrounding country;
but we only got occasional glimpses of the scenery
through the shroud of mist and rain.


Newcastle must be a prosperous town, I suppose;
and various people are expressing their confidence in it,
in freestone, and brick and mortar ; but its appearance
is not prepossessing. Almost every other house is a
public house, and most of the larger edifices are in the
George the Third or Camberwell-Green order of archi-
tecture, and have been built years ago by convicts, who
seem to have impressed their own sullen stamp upon
their handiwork. There is a large half-finished and now
nearly wholly-ruined wall behind some gaunt barracks—a
wall the design and purpose of which it is difficult to com-
prehend. Perhaps it had no purpose except that of penally
wearying the sinews of those that carried about the big
stones that compose it. I don’t think sadder buildings
©
exist than some of these New South Welch masses of
masonry, which say, as plainly as human tongues could,
“ O ur huge ugly bulk was reared, not because we were
wanted, but because to build us was dull, hard work, that
droves of bondsmen and villains could be driven in chains
to do.” One may almost hear the walls tell the par-
ticular stories of the crimes and sufferings that went to
build them : —“ Half-a-dozen men were flogged about
that stone with the weather-stain upon it. They were
dragging it along on a truck when, being more than
usually beaten and cursed, they suddenly stopped
by a common impulse, belched out a torrent
of blasphemy from their black, exasperated hearts,
and paid for the dark pleasure of that minute’s
free utterance of pent-up hatred with the torture


of their backs, and extra months of confinement. With
that other stone here in my rubble, close by your
hand, a man beat out the brains of two of his
fellow-convicts. He had no grudge against them,
but wanted to get hanged, and proceeded accord-
ingly. Why he killed two instead of one I can’t say.
Perhaps when his hand was in he couldn’t stop it. Over
there, five men who had managed in some inexplicable
way to get their shackles off, rushed at the guard,
fractured the skull of one of them, and made a dash for
liberty. Two of them were shot dead on the spot, two
got away, but were found dead of their wounds shortly
afterwards, and one, after a few months of utter misery
in the bush, gave himself up and was hanged. That
was the way a good many of those who built me went.”
Such are the pleasant associations connected in the
older colony with many buildings, like that dilapidated
wall at Newcastle.
It was pleasant to turn from the dismal monuments
of the dark days of New South Wales to more modern
structures, in which all tended to a purpose, and in
which the desire to economise, not waste, human labor
was apparent. The railways to the mines had been
much improved since my previous visit two years before,
and trains of coal waggons were frequently running along
them, though there had been a sort of strike among the
miners, consequent on the Port Curtis excitement. The
railway to Maitland had also been finished since then,
and looked in good order, and pleasantly suggestive of


progress. We called on the contractor for this line,
who was slightly known to me, and to whom L. had
a letter. L., being a man of lively imagination, had
already in it erected a pleasant residence, and cultivated
a fertile garden on the banks of the Fitzroy. The gar-
den was nearly perfect, but required some bananas and
plantains to make it quite so ; and L., who, I believe,
also had some Other business with him, was anxious to
make interest with Mr. W. for the forwarding of some
of these things to Port Curtis. We found him inhabit-
ing a pretty cottage on the outskirts of the town, and
with a pleasant garden sloping down to his recently
completed work—the railway. He received us very
hospitably, and we remained his guest for some hours,
casting occasional glances towards the Admella’s funnel,
half a mile off, to see that she made no signs of de-
parture. A pleasant visit, however, had rather a disas-
trous close, poor R. meeting with a severe accident which
rendered it impossible for him to proceed with the
vessel, and left him a close prisoner to the house. It
was very fortunate for him that he fell into such good
hands, but he was sadly depressed at not being able to
proceed to Port Curtis, as to which place we had heard
rather better rumors during the day than on the preced-
ing evening.
We were told that the steamer would sail at eleven
o’clock on the morning of the 7th, but it was late in the
afternoon before she got away. Everything was in inex-
tricable confusion. The decks were lumbered with coal,


and the utmost disorder prevailed among the passengers.
Many of them were drunk, and most of the rest de-
sponding. A good many had been so discouraged by
the bad news that they had sold their £lO passenger
tickets for 10s., and one man we heard had expressed
such disgust with the whole Port Curtis adventure that
he lighted his pipe with his ticket, and took passage
back to Sydney en route for Victoria. Nevertheless, for
one that wanted to return, there were still many anxious
to proceed, and each vacated berth was readily filled up
at Newcastle, while many applicants for passages had to
be left behind. Altogether, our passengers and crew
numbered about 180 when we left Newcastle. The pilot
quitted us at half-past four a little way outside the
Nobby, and the captain, who had been looking the pic-
ture of misery for some time, and who had done little
but anathemetise the voyage and bemoan his own fate ‘
amid the horrible confusion of the last hour or two, now
went sadly to hover over his charts. There was a decided
feeling of “want of confidence” in our “executive.”
Neither captain nor officers had the neat alertness
that should characterise men in charge of a fine passen-
ger steamer. They went about their decks as if they
completely shared the general feeling of want of confi-
dence in themselves, nor did any attempt appear to be
made to avert by intelligent organisation the utter
confusion in which the crowded passengers dwelt. As
the captain hung over his chart in the saloon, L.
asked him whether there was anyone on board who had


ever been up the coast before. “No!” said he, with a
sigh that was at once somewhat ludicrous and somewhat
alarming.
The wind continued dead ahead, as it had done almost
all the way from Melbourne, pertinaciously drawing-
round more and more to the north as soon as we got so
far that an easterly wind would have been a fair one.
Still the weather was fine, and there are few pleasanter
things than to be going along with a bright sparkling sea
around and a bright blue sky over head, and the gra-
dually changing panorama of a strange coast before one’s
eyes. Under such influences, better news from Port
Curtis smuggled itself on board every day. Whether
collected at the trucks of the masts, or forcing its way
in through the ship’s bottom, assuredly we began again
to hear more favorable intelligence than had reached us
at Newcastle, and once more was witnessed something-
like what Dr. Johnson describes a second marriage to
be—the triumph of hope over experience. On the Bth
we saw vast shoals of fish pursued by clouds of black
birds, but though two or three times the steamer passed
right through a shoal, and the fish were leaping by
thousands round us, all attempts with hook and line
were unavailing. The coast scenery passed on the 9th
was very striking—Mount Warning, especially, attract-
ing attention by its height and the enormous and per-
pendicular crag which forms its summit and faces to-
wards the north. To judge from its appearance, I should
imagine the almost perpendicular portion of the moun-


tain to be nearly 1,000 feet high—the whole height of
the mountain being perhaps 4,000 feet. The country
along this portion of the coast is, I believe, altogether
uninhabited, though a few miles inland commence the
great table lands of New England, which the New South
"Wales squatters have now largely stocked both with
cattle and sheep. Under the lee of an island we saw, the
same day that we passed Mount Warning, a couple of
vessels at anchor. A good deal of speculation was
hazarded as to what these vessels were poked away in
that strange corner of the world for. Probably they
were engaged in getting cargoes of cedar.
As we got further north the weather every day became
warmer, but the wind still continued unfavorable. On
the 10th we passed the George, three weeks out from
Sydney, and crowded with passengers. They must have
envied our steam-power that enabled us to face both wind
and current, while they stood out close-hauled to sea,
doomed to stand in again on the other tack, and after
sailing a hundred miles or so to find themselves nearly
in the same place next day. Flying-fish made their
appearance at about this part of the voyage, and added
to the beauty of the sea, which, while bright with thou-
sands of sparkling blue waves, was sufficiently free from
swell to cause great consumption of the Admella’s stores.
Even among those “ luxurious slaves whose souls would
sicken on the heaving waves” under ordinary circum-
stances, there was now “no thought of dastard flight”
from their dinners. On the contrary, they rather erred


in the other direction, and the captain was lifting up
the voice of lamentation all day long about “thirteen
hundred pounds of beef and a ton of potatoes” that had
been taken on board at Newcastle, and which were now
nearly consumed. He had no doubt some little cause
for complaint, because, as always happens on board a
loosely-governed ship, provisions were grossly wasted,
both through mismanagement on one side, and reckless-
ness on the other. There was a mere scramble for
provisions in the steerage during the last days of the
voyage, and in this scramble the weakest went to the
wall and got nothing, or next to nothing, while
others were flinging overboard the surplus of their
seizures. Several times whole loaves drifted past and
were left astern, and on these occasions our unfor-
tunate captain walked the poop in anguish, praying
aloud that the perpetrators of such shameful waste might
come to want.
However, as we approached the end of the voyage,
minor considerations were nearly lost sight of. At noon
on the 11th our place was about thirty miles south and
eighty miles east of Keppel Bay, and we looked forward
to being at anchor there that night.
This day was memorable to me in two ways. For
the first time I saw coral islands, and seeing one’s
first coral island is, I consider, an event in one’s life not
lightly to be considered or soon forgotten. All Robinson
Crusoe, and all that Robinson Crusoe once was to my
soul, rose to it again upon the occasion. To me “ coral
D


reefs” and “south sea islands” had from childhood been
names connotative of all kinds of marvellous beauty, and
the subject of wistful dreams during many years of ex-
istence passed under the smoky canopy of London, the
“ stony-hearted stepmother.” How often did lin those
years take long walks about the docks—among the most
interesting walks to be taken in London—and conjure
up, at the sight of some strip of palm leaf or other relic
from the south seas, a vision of the beautiful islands from
which it had come ! In my mind’s eye I saw those real
“ gems of the sea,” in their glorious azure setting, glow-
ing with beauty beneath an overarching sky of perpetual
summer. The thin waving line of foam that just moved
and murmured over the scarcely perceptible strip of white
sand across which the foliage stretched towards the
ocean, served to heighten rather than disturb the perfect
repose in which the lovely islands lay. My mind could
conceive nothing more exquisite in nature than the coral
islands that I used to see in the London docks.
Those that I saw with my physical eyes* were, to speak
plain truth, somewhat disappointing. At about two
o’clock on the 11th there was a cry of “land” from the
masthead, and after long and anxious looking towards
the quarter indicated, I could see two small places where
the edge of the horizon seemed a little rough. As we
drew nearer, the roughnesses rose more out of the water,
and gradually developed themselves into two low and
somewhat barren islands, covered with rather stunted
* The Bunkas Islands.


and scrubby looking trees. The verdure and extreme
beauty I had pictured were not there, and the trees were
not much greener than gum trees; but I was glad to be
told that these islands were wretched specimens of their
kind. They were among the farthest outposts of the
great barrier reef, and coral islands were not to be fairly
judged by them, any more than vines are to be judged
by the wretched appearance of those languid vegetables
that it is customary to ill-treat by nailing against the
brick walls of houses in the new road near Paddington.
But there was this characteristic of the coral island about
them, which we saw plainly as we got nearer—an outer
reef that served as a breakwater, and left a strip of sea,
“ smooth as harbor glass,” between the true island and
the ocean.
According to the charts, there appeared to be a fair
channel between the two islands; and between them
we were going accordingly, when it became clear
that they were connected by a reef, along the whole
length of which the waves were breaking, fine as the
weather was. Accordingly the ship’s head was turned
to the westward, and we left both islands upon our star-
board side.
I said that this day was memorable in two ways. In
the evening a comet was visible for the first time—or, at
all events, was seen for the first time from our ship. It
bore nearly due west, with a bright tail stretching over
about twenty degrees of the sky.


The wind in the afternoon was fair, but we did not
succeed in reaching Keppel Bay. At half-past ten at
night we were off Curtis Island, and the weather be-
coming cloudy, the anchor was let go in about thir-
teen fathoms. This brings me to the scene of action,
to describe which I was engaged as Special Correspon-
dent to the Argus; and therefore I shall reprint, in the
words I used at the time, my narrative of what passed
before me.


CHAPTER III.
Rockhampton, 14th October.
In spite of the announcement, “ Port Curtis within five
days, which flamed upon the placards of the Admella
when I left Melbourne, it was exactly ten days after we
cats off our moorings from Sandridge Jetty that we anchored
in Keppel Bay. We were detained two days at New-
castle, and had to contend with malevolent winds, that
so shifted, as we ran round the coast, as to be nearly
dead a-head of us during the whole passage. Add to
this, the coal we got at Newcastle was, rightly or
wrongly, blamed for not being possessed of true steam-
generating properties, so that the number of revolutions
which our screw made per minute was much lower than
it should have been, and than was stated to be the
average of its performances.
d 1


Our voyage was uneventful, but rendered somewhat
disagreeable by over-crowding and extreme mismanage-
ment, which did not, indeed, seriously affect the cabin
passengers, except that the'floor of the saloon was
covered with sleepers from the steerage every night, but
which caused the utmost discomfort, and even suffering,
in the fore part of the ship.
I reached Rockhampton only yesterday, having
been brought up the last twenty miles or so by the
Canoona, a celebrated steam-clipper, formerly on the
“Cremorne Line,” and then familiar to most of your
readers under the name of the Dispatch. She has
undergone strange mutations since she left her builder’s
hands as a ship’s long-boat; and I suppose he will be
not a little astonished to hear of her recent fate—
brought on the deck of the Admella, to puff along the
waters of the Fitzroy, with a screw in her stern, and an
engine of about “ half-a-pony power,” as Dickens said,
to send her through the waves at the rate of a good
three knots an hour, all things being propitious.
I suppose long before this letter reaches Melbourne,
the insane rush to this place, which was in progress
when I left, will have entirely subsided, and that Port
Curtis will be as extravagantly in disfavor as it was
preposterously praised. I must tell you, however, that
I cannot yet speak positively about the diggings, except
to say that the prevailing tone is one of great dissatis-
faction ; but here—almost on the spot —it remains as
impossible to me to reconcile the accounts I hear as it


was to comprehend the truth about these diggings while
still in Melbourne. To-morrow morning lam going up
to Canoona, which seems to recede from me as I advance,
and which I find to be still some forty miles off. lam
already, however, forty or fifty miles nearer to it than
hundreds of those persons got, who, having come 1,500
miles upon the faith of baseless rumors of a fabulous
yield, turned tail in Keppel Bay, never quitted the deck
of the ship that brought them, but returned to the place
whence they came upon grounds as ridiculously insuffi-
cient as those that tempted them hither. There have
been hundreds of such enterprising travellers. The
City of Hobart only landed between thirty or forty from
her teeming decks, and other vessels have also carried
back the majority of those they brought. Many pas-
sengers by the Admella even (although her’s was, on the
whole, a good human cargo to send off to a place where
much has to be borne, and where vigor, resolution,
some pecuniary means, and a practical knowledge of the
gold digging business are indispensable) have pitched
their tents alongside of the ship, to await her return,
without having even got so far as Rockhampton, while
many more purpose going no farther.
Our reception was, indeed, thoroughly discouraging.
In Keppel Bay a large ship lay at anchor as we steamed
in. We passed close by her, and as we did so hundreds
of hands along her bulwarks waved us away ; while,
amid a hurricane of voices, clearly rose the ominous
words, “ Go back !” “Go back !” “ Shicer !” “ Shicer !”


changing much foolish expectation into equally foolish
despair, while even the less wildly hopeful were greatly
depressed. When the pilot came on board, although
the accounts he gave were somewhat less gloomy than
the cries of the passengers on board the Grand Trianon,
from him we learned of the return of the City of
Hobart, with all her passengers —as we were then told ;
of the fact that a brig lying at anchor before us had still
on board of her sixty of her passengers, who did not
mean to set foot on shore, so utter was the failure of the
Fitzroy diggings ; and other things to equally unsatis-
factory purport. Of those who boarded us in Keppel
Bay, however, were some who gave much more hopeful
accounts, and who said, with great justice, that it would
be absurd to care about the impressions of people who
were frightened back from the very threshold of the
place they had come so far, and with such high hopes,
to reach.
Our captain was at first disposed to land us upon the
shores of Keppel Bay, saying that this was as far as he
was bound to bring us. This proceeding would have
caused much inconvenience to us all, great suffering to
many, and, probably, death to some ; for at Keppel Bay
there is “ neither house, nor fence, nor dove-cote,” and
the aborigines are very troublesome, while numbers of
our passengers were quite unprepared to meet the diffi-
culties they would in this case have encountered. How-
ever, at the intercession of Captain Moodie, formerly of
the City of Sydney, and who is now the agent here for


the company to which that vessel belongs, Captain
M‘Ewan agreed to take his vessel as far as he safely
could up the river. As I subsequently learned, the fact
that Captain Moodie had been mobbed and shot at by
his passengers contributed a little to develop an accom-
modating spirit in our commander; but I feel persuaded
that our Victorians would not have resorted to the too
forcible arguments in which some of the less creditable
of the New South Welshmen placed reliance.
As we steamed up the river we met several returning
vessels crowded with passengers, and from every deck
came the same warning cries, and over every bulwark
arms waved us back, in the same way that they had done
from the Grand Trianon. Such seemed to be the ortho-
dox and established Fitzroy River welcome to strangers;
but the country itself, though it had no speech nor lan-
guage, made its voice heard to other purport. Be there
gold in quantity here or not, the Fitzroy is a noble river,
running through a noble country. The river mouth is
just within the tropic of Capricorn, but I was disap-
pointed in not seeing anything very strikingly tropical in
the scenery or vegetation. The appearance of the coun-
try was characteristically Australian, and though I have
travelled over many thousands of miles of Australian
ground, I say with confidence that the Fitzroy is as fine
a river and rolls through as fine a country, as I
ever saw in those travels. During the whole of
its course, so far as I have yet seen it, the river is
nearly as broad as the Thames at an equal distance


from the sea. Much inferior as it may be to the Mur-
ray in length, it is far superior to that stream, in the
fact that the navigation is unimpeded by any bar at the
mouth, and with a competent pilot on board to avoid
certain treacherous shoals, vessels drawing nine feet of
water may at all times reach Rockhampton with perfect
safety; one gentleman assures me that vessels drawing
twelve and even fourteen feet can do so at present, but
I cannot absolutely vouch for this. A little way back
from the river rise lofty ranges of picturesque and well-
wooded hills, and nearer to the banks broad green
plains spread out, suggestive of future settlement and
cultivation. Extensive mangrove swamps, indeed,
border the river along much of its course, but elsewhere
the waters have cloven through the ground to show a
geological section, of which the upper stratum is a
deep black soil, that invites the plough, and scorns
the notion of manure. The stories we heard in Mel-
bourne about the extreme heat and the unhealthi-
ness of the climate are, so far as my experience goes,
and so far as the best information I can get from old
residents assures me, pure fictions. The pilot told me
in Keppel Bay that there was no sickness here, and
certainly I have seen none. A medical gentleman who
came in the Admella, armed to the teeth with quinine
and other drugs, is going back disconsolately. It is hot
certainly during the day, but I have watched the ther-
mometer carefully, and have not yet seen it at more
than 85 ° in the shade, *and that only onoe, The


average during the day since we got into Keppel Bay
has been about 78°. At night it has got about ten
degrees cooler, and towards morning—to judge by my
feelings, for I am sorry to say my love of science was
not so ardent as to make me get up to look—l should
imagine that the thermometer has not stood at more
than 60 °or6s °. Of course, it would not do to
generalise from the results of a three days’ experience,
but old r residents tell me that it will not get very
greatly hotter than it is now. There are, of course, no
hot winds, and in the tropics, the variation between the
temperatures of winter and summer is much less con-
spicuous than in higher latitudes.
Touching mosquitoes, they appear to be very nume-
rous in some places, and they are certainly of a gigantic
stature, which ought to enable them to take a first prize
in a mosquito show, should Mr. Barnum ever get one
up ; but I have seen very few of them or of flies either.
The mosquito netting I brought with me remains packed,
and the veil which I bought, with fearful misgivings as
to the attacks it was to withstand, is unworn. My tent
is pitched here within twenty yards of the river bank,
and yet not one mosquito has hummed about my ears
since I began to write, though the flame of two candles
attractively stuck in bottle necks, should have shown
them the way in, had there been any about ; but there
seem to be none, and if I walk out into the soft and
balmy air to look at the comet, though I hear something
of the buzz of insect life, it only thrusts itself upon the


attention in tlie beautiful form of fire-flies darting by-
thousands through the shrubbery of the river bank.
I suppose the majority of my readers never saw a fire-
fly. I saw them for the first time two nights ago, and
it was a most pleasurable surprise to me. The Admella
was moored to the river bank. It was raining, and I
had come upon deck to indulge in the deleterious prac-
tice of smoking under an umbrella in the gloaming.
Presently I saw pale sparks shooting about the bushes,
and recognised with startled gratification what the sparks
were. As it grew darker the living stars shone out
more brilliantly. A friend who came up from below,
and who, like myself, had forgotten that fire-flies were to
be expected, exclaimed, as his eye first caught sight of
them, “ Holloa! what are those lights among the
bushes Subsequently another fellow-passenger and
myself pursued science and fire-flies under difficulties,
and, scrambling through mud and scrub, caught three of
the insect gems. We brought them on board in my
handkerchief, through the texture of which they shone
out brightly, and, when placed in a tumbler, were clearly
luminous in the presence of the cabin lamps. Finally,
when we let them go they flew merrily away, with their
blue electrical-looking lustre undiminished.
I ought rather, however, to tell you about Rockhamp-
ton than to rhapsodise about fire-flies. Until the old
inhabitants were amazed at the sudden rush of popula-
tion from a distance, and at the news received —via
Sydney and Melbourne —that the neighboring diggings


at Canoona were so marvellously rich, the flourishing
town of Rockhampton consisted of two slab houses, one
of which was, of course, a public house, and the other a
store. This morning I suppose the population was
about five hundred or six hundred. This evening I
should think it is two hundred or three hundred more,
for a schooner and a steamer have arrived crowded with
passengers—some from the Grand Trianon and others
from the City of Sydney, which arrived in Keppel Bay
this morning. Several wooden buildings are going up,
but the majority house under canvas, like myself. In
my tent I have two other inmates—one of them is a very
agreeable Irish gentleman, who came here to establish a
commercial house, but, who, I am afraid, does not now
see his way to fortune by that path, quite so clearly as
could be wished; the other is a powerful Scotchman
from the Victorian diggings, who has developed many
sterling qualities, and particularly a genius for bush-car-
pentering (the table on which I am writing is a part of
his to-day’s handiwork), which have won me over quite
to forgive some little personal peculiarities which I did
not admire in him as a fellow-passenger. For instance,
as he sat next to me at table he never seemed to be able
to consume his meals to his satisfaction except with his
left elbow in my plale. Moreover, he had the astonish-
ing property of eating eggs with his knife, after which
he would send that instrument of all work flourishing
about the table into the butter, among the potatoes,—in
short, here, there, and everywhere, in obedience to the
E


dictates of a powerful and truly catholic appetite. But
these are but spots on the sun of an excellent man’s
character.
We dwell three in one tent, not because there is any
scarcity of tents, but because it is both more agreeable
and more safe to do so. There are a good many “ row-
dies” about, although I heard that the worst have re-
turned to Sydney, whence they came ; for you will be
glad to hear that respectable Sydney men themselves
regard the influx of Victorians here as a safeguard
against the scum of scoundrelism which comes to the
surface of the movement when the New South Welch
hive swarms upon occasions at all similar to this, and
which tells how much our sister colony is still affected
by the virus of convictism which contaminated her
youth. We encountered one remarkably pretty specimen
of what are here known as “ Sydney roughs” yesterday.
We got here at about four o’clock, and immediately pro-
ceeded to pitch the tent on a piece of ground allotted to
us for the purpose. From the tent next to us on the
one side there came forth a most repulsive-looking
scoundrel, who seemed to be vexy drunk, but who, I
believe, was assuming a vice though he had it not upon
this occasion. Under the cover of his simulated intoxi-
cation, he came rolling about among us, and among some
other “Admellas” who were pitching their tents close
by, and we suspected, and subsequently had additional
reason to think, that he was merely making a prelimi-
nary survey with a view to plunder. To mild remon-


strances he only replied with a stream of the most vile
language I ever heard. I have been within earshot
of some very hard swearing and coarse language in my
time —I feel sure an “ army in Flanders” would not
greatly startle me ; but such a mixture of blasphemy and
filth as this fellow employed I never heard, or could have
conceived before. At last an “Admella” threatened to
throw him into the river if he was not quiet, and this
had for a time the desired effect. But just as night fell
he came to the entrance of our tent again ; upon which
L., my Irish friend, who had graduated in California,
told him, in a manner suitable to his comprehension, that
his presence was bad enough in the day time, but that
if he came skulking about the tent at night he should
infallibly be shot. Upon this hint he retired. Late
in the evening, about ten o’clock, we were surprised to
hear him and his party striking their tent. A little
while afterwards I heard a boat moving off just below
our tent, and as I knew that a boat belonging to
Captain of the Admella had been moored there, 1
thought, perhaps, our pleasant-spoken acquaintance was
making off with it. Directly I mentioned my suspicion
to L., his Hibernian-crm-Californian impetuosity
prompted him to run out, and threatened to fire on the
boat if it were not immediately brought back. How-
ever, though the challenge was not answered, I was glad
that a milder course was adopted. L. and M. ran off to
give the alarm at the Commissioner’s, while I remained
in charge of the tent. While they were away, I ascer-


tained, however, that it was not the Captain’s boat after
all that had been taken—she still lay safely where she
had been moored, and I was beginning to think we had
been wofully precipitate, when another boat pulled in
from a vessel lying in the river, and I was hailed to
know whether I had seen any one take a boat away
from the bank. In fine it turned out that a boat had
been stolen, although not ours, so that when the police
came down, a quarter of an hour afterwards, we were
redeemed from the ridiculous position of having called
them up for nothing, and were enabled to furnish them
with a genuine larceny after all. We were very glad at
all events to get rid of our questionable neighbors, and
slept the more soundly on account of their absence.
Still, we took care to have our revolvers ready for an
emergency.
Almost everybody carries a revolver here, by the way,
and shots are going off in all directions, at hawks (of
which there are great numbers) or other birds, or empty
space, all day long, and till the ear almost ceases to
notice the sound. I have been told that fire-arms have
also gone off more disastrously not far hence, and that
a prospecting party had an affray with blacks, in which
thirty-six of the latter got shot. I have not been able to
learn the particulars, however, nor do I absolutely know
this to be the fact. The blacks are, however, both
numerous and troublesome, I believe, and the whites I
suppose, as usual in the outlying districts of New
South Wales, very ready to shed black blood upon small


provocation. I have not yet seen any of the aborigines
myself, but very likely I may to-morrow, in going to
Canoona.
This place I feel bound to go and see, but I believe
there is very little doing there now; and so far as the
auriferous prospects of the district are concerned, they
entirely depend upon what may be the success of
prospecting parties, of which many are already out.
As it is said they find the “color of gold” almost
everywhere, and as there is no doubt at all that the
little patch at Canoona was exceedingly rich while it
lasted, I should certainly hope that a good workable
gold-field will yet be discovered in this district. I have
seen about twenty ounces of Canoona gold, which were
in the hands of a storekeeper. It was singularly dark
in color, and consisted of coarse grains and nuggets —a
golden gravel. The Ballaarat men seem to like the look of
the gold, and I have no doubt that the ground will now get
well turned over and examined, which it never has
been yet. At Canoona it was mere scratching of the
surface; and in any comparisons you may be making
between the number of immigrants hither and the
amount of gold sent down, you must bear in mind
that comparatively few of those who have come have
actually dug at all. Most of the men now remaining
belong to a better class for this place than those who
have gone. We have hundreds of experienced miners
now, who mean to give the place a fair trial at all
events. I cannot get accurate statistics as to the
E 1


quantity of gold that has been sent away, but I am told,
on good authority, that it cannot be less than 2,000
ounces. A good deal also remains in the diggers’
hands, I believe.
Prices here are not very high, although the dearest
thing is something that it is to be particularly wished
were cheap—namely, bread. It is very bad and scarce,
and the price is a shilling for a loaf weighing a pound
and a half. Flour is not dear, in proportion, however,
and as several more bakers are establishing themselves, I
doubt not that bread will soon be cheaper. Here are a
few more retail prices of things bought by myself or my
neighbors :—Mutton, 6d. to Bd.; potatoes, 5d. ; tea,
3s. 6d.; sugar, Bd.; porter and ale, 2s. per bottle ;
brandy, 7s. ; biscuits, 9d. per lb.; candles, 2s. ; soap,
Is. ; bacon, Is. 6d.; matches, Is. 9d. per box of 500.
Water is now abundant at Rockhampton, the river being,
since the rains, fresh,' except towards high water. The
tide, I may mention, rises here five or six feet. A
Chamber of Commerce was started this evening, with
about a dozen members. The meeting was held in
Captain Moodie’s tent, and Mr. Kent Hall, who came
here in the Admella, occupied the chair.
If I may venture to give any general opinion at all
about this place, which, however, I as yet do with great
hesitation, it is that it will not turn out a “ shicer” so
far as gold digging is concerned, while that it is a fine
field for colonisation in other respects I have little doubt.
But I am very much afraid that there will be much indi-


vidual suffering. Many importers are sending back
their goods, in the fear that the means of paying for
them may not be forthcoming, and that, as people will
not starve, goods would be plundered. No doubt, if no
more gold is found, this will be the case, for crime natu-
rally follows upon the heels of destitution. Assuredly
no more people should come here at present, but I sup-
pose it is now superfluous to give that advice. I
suppose there must still be nearly three thousand people
on the way hither, for we were among the early arrivals
after all, and the winds which retarded us have kept
back most of the sailing vessels altogether. If this
number pours in suddenly, and if the people are as des-
titute as it is to be feared they in many cases are, I do
not see that anything except the speedy discovery of a
fresh gold-field, or the removal of the surplus population
at the public expense, can save this place from being the
theatre of some very frightful scenes. People will not
starve while goods are here, and the storekeepers who
have set up, of course, belong to the bolder sort, and
will not give up their goods without fighting for them.
If those who come have means to live on a few weeks,
or to return, I am not much afraid for the consequences,
but, if not, I very decidedly am so. However, when I
return from Canoona I may, perhaps, be able to write
more hopefully upon this subject than I can now.
The New South Wales authorities have, as yet, taken
no adequate steps for maintaining law and order here,
or for discharging any of the other functions of Govern


ment. We have, indeed, some Government establish-
ments, —a Post Office, a Custom House, a Gold Office,,
a Police Department, &c. The first of these is at
Palmer’s store—one of the two original wooden build-
ings of which Rockhampton consisted before the
Canoona gold-fields broke out. The others are under
canvas. The police force is quite insufficient to be of
any service. There is no hospital, and there certainly
should be some provision for sickness in a place where
thousands of people are crowding together without
experience of the climate or due provision for health
and comfort. I hear that Captain O’Connell is a good
man for his position, but I have not yet seen him, as he
is up the country encouraging prospecting, I believe ;
generally, however, an air of langor seems to characterise
the small officialism of Rockhampton, whereas energy,
ability, and decision of character are much needed to
face the very remarkable circumstances which have to
be faced here. However, I need not remind you, that
what I write to-day is the result of so short an oppor-
tunity for observation, that I may find many things to
alter or retract in my next.
October 15.
lam just starting for Canoona. We go in a boat for
about thirty miles, and then walk about twelve miles.
Some six or eight men, who were out on a shooting
excursion about twelve miles down the river, were
yesterday chased, I hear, by a large party of blacks, and
three of the white men have not yet reached Rock-


hampton. Two of the party, however, only got in a
little while ago, and very probably the missing men are
not far behind. They seem to have been a craven set,
and to have made no stand, though they had guns in
their hands.
I was told this morning that many men at Canoona
are still making good wages, and that most of them are
getting something ; even if not more than a pennyweight
a day, this would stave off absolute want, at all events.
But I hope soon to know more.


CHAPTER IV.
As I should have had to wait a couple of days for the
steam-clipper Canoona, of which I have made mention,
I very readily agreed to accompany Mr. C., the newly-
appointed Commissioner for “these diggings,” in a sailing-
boat as far as the landing-place. I was given to understand
that we should reach the diggings in one day, and that,
as a long walk was involved, it would be more prudent
to travel in very light order. Accordingly, with an
equipment consisting of a note-book, a tooth-brush, and
a revolver, at about eleven of the clock on the 15th inst.,
we went on board the gallant craft that was to bear us
towards El Dorado. She was a flat-bottomed nondescript
of a vessel, of about five tons burden, drawing twenty
inches of water, and called the Pancake. Her enter


prising skipper had, it seemed, sailed her round from
Wide Bay, prayers having been publicly offered up for
the safety of himself and his associates. She had a
half-deck, but no cabin, except a little hole, now choked
up with lumber of various kinds, while lumber, in the
technical and American sense, filled up the hold. We
had about half a dozen passengers, including one so
bulky and important that he took one-third of the vessel
to himself, and had a body-servant to wait upon him.
This pompous and exacting traveller was the Commis-
sioner’s horse, an unhappy quadruped that had just
arrived from Sydney by sea, and now stood in a kind of
well among the lumber, with his puzzled head sticking
out over the starboard side of the boat, and his tail
drooping listlessly over the port gunwale. Poor beast!
His reason seemed to have given way to a considerable
extent, amid the accumulation of recent trials. His
faith in all things had evidently been shaken to its
foundations, and I doubt if he would have trusted his
own mother with a feed of oats. Had he been addicted
to quoting poetry, he would have probably described
himself —
“ Asa weed
Flung from the rock on ocean’s foam to sail
Where’er the surge might sweep, or tempest’s breath prevail
but being of a more prosaic nature, he had given up the
riddle of the earth altogether, and, I suspect, had become
a confirmed fatalist.
We had a fair light wind as we left Rockhampton,
and an extra and propitious puff carried us quickly


through the only difficult piece of navigation in this part
of the river. Just above Rockhampton is a bar of soft
slaty-looking rock, which, in a series of islands, nearly
spans the river, leaving only two or three narrow chan-
nels, through which the confined stream or tide pours
with considerable velocity. This barrier, for some good
Australian lucus a non lucendo reason, is known as “ the
Falls,” but as vessels drawing four feet of water can
sail over them either way, there is nothing very
Niagarian in the spectacle they present. Above the
Rockhampton “Falls” the river increases in beauty,
though its utility is much diminished by frequent sand-
bars, which necessitate careful steering, and which, I was
told, forbid the ascent of any vessel drawing more than
about four feet; nor can vessels of this size reach as far
as the present landing-place, near the diggings; steam
vessels like the Canoona and clippers like the Pancake
being best adapted to this trade.
For ten or twelve miles we sailed placidly up the
broad stream of the Fitzroy, the little wind there was
being in our favor, and the tide having begun to flow,
although with no great force at this distance from the
sea. The weather was beautiful, and not unpleasantly
warm. The banks were green and fertile on both sides,
the size of the occasional mangrove patches rapidly
diminishing as we ascended the river. The immediate
margin of both banks was fringed for miles after miles
with almost unbroken lines of large and fragrant white
lilies (crinum is the learned name of the kind, I under-


stand), and the park-like levels and slopes rising from
the river were lightly wooded with various kinds of
gum, swamp oak, and other trees and shrubs, among
which from time to time shone out the large glossy
laurel green leaves of the Moreton Bay fig. I am
inclined to think, by the way, that this must have been
the kind of fig that supplied Adam with his primeval
“ pants,” for, thick, flexible, and indiarubber-like in tex-
ture, twice the size of an ordinary fig-leaf, and free from
those snips and slashes in the sides that, surely leave the
orthodox fig-leaf ill-adapted for clothiery, that of the
Moreton Bay kind is just the leaf one would be apt to
select, if driven to extremity for “ dry goods.” The tree
grows to considerable height—some I saw were forty or
fifty feet high, I suppose—and bears a small fruit some-
thing like a fig, and said to be not bad when you can
get nothing better. I could not get any ripe ones, how-
ever, so I was unable to judge for myself.
At about ten or twelve miles from Rockhampton the
wind died away, and the tide nearly lost its influence.
We accordingly had to resort to a pair of sweeps, with
which we made but slow progress; and at this time I
first heard, by no means to my satisfaction, that there
was no chance of our reaching the landing-place that
evening. As I mentioned in my former communication,
Canoona seemed to recede as we advanced, and the
measurements given at this point were forty-five miles
by river from Rockhampton to the landing-place, an
thence about fourteen miles by land to the diggings. On
r


receiving this information, I confess I felt rather indig-
nant at having been deluded into coming without so
much as a rug or a great-coat, but there was no use in
grumbling, and fortunately the weather was fine.
Shortly before sunset, we met the little steamer Ca-
noona returning, and her commander told us we had
only accomplished one-third of the voyage. The sweeps
were kept steadily going, however, the passengers occa'
sionally relieving the skipper and his mates in the tedious
labors of the barge. Several times we stuck upon sand-
banks, and on these occasions it was amusing to observe
the nonchalance with which the captain of the Pancake
tumbled overboard into the water, and, putting his
shoulder to the stern of his gallant bark, fairly shoved
her over her difficulties. He seemed to go upon the
principle that every man should be his own sounding
plummet, for he never paused to ascertain the depth of
the water before tumbling into it, and several times,
when only the boat’s head had touched, found himself
nearly chest-deep under her stern. However, it seemed
to be all the same thing to him provided he got the boat
on, although on one or two occasions the novel auxiliary
propeller proved insufficient, and we had to back off and
find another channel.
As the evening closed in we saw flocks of ducks in
increasing numbers, but they were too shy to get within
shot of—at least, that was the self-satisfactory explanation
given by myself and one or two others who fired, for not
being able to hit any. We also saw a considerable number


of fine fish, at least eighteen inches in length, and which
leaped a foot or two into the air, showing beautifully
rounded silvery forms, that seemed to need nothing but
a little anchovy-sauce to set off their charms to perfec-
tion. The boatmen called the fish mullet, but what
they really were I cannot say. We noticed most of them
in a magnificent reach of the river that we entered as the
sun was setting. The stream here was of an even width, of
300 or 400 yards, and for not less than three miles was
perfectly straight—a grand watery avenue. As it grew
darker the apparent height of the tree-fringed banks
was doubled by their depth of shadow, the moon was
exactly over our heads (so exactly that it seemed as if,
were she to have fallen out of the sky, she would have
fallen into the boat), and the presence of the comet
stranger among the constellations increased the novelty
and beauty of our surroundings. An hour of this beau-
tiful tropical night was worth the voyage to Port Curtis.
Let any one with a love for river scenery sail by moon-
light up the long reaches of the Fitzroy, and deny beauty
to Australian landscape if he dare.
But the carnal wants of our fallen nature are sadly
imperious, and, though my heart may have been full of
“the beautiful,” my stomach was empty of “the solid;”
and as the weary, monotonous exercise of the sweeps
went on hour after hour, my mind turned victualwards
with an exceeding yearning. It was nearly ten o’clock,
however, before we drew in to the bank, intending to
light a fire and camp ashore. We found, however, that


here the mosquitoes were indeed formidable, both as to
size and number, so we pulled out again, and dropped
anchor in mid-stream. Let me not pretend to describe
the next hour. It was one of biscuits and sardines,
bottled porter and tobacco-smoke, and serene joy. I
then raised by loan a couple of coats and a bit of sail-
cloth, and —not altogether unenvious of Mr. C.’s cork
mattress and rugs—made myself as comfortable as I
could under the circumstances. I “weathered out” the
night very well, though it grew somewhat cold towards
the morning.
By daylight the labor of the sweeps was resumed.
If the horse had not been too far gone intellectually, he
would have derived some satisfaction from the con-
sideration that for once horse was being pulled by man,
instead of man by horse ; but he was lost to all sense
of triumph, and dead to the honor of his race.-/.
There was scarcely any wind, the current wj(s against
us, and we made very slow way. We overcame the
difficulty of breakfast as we went on—an old nail-can
serving for a fire grate, wherein quart pots were placed
and water boiled for tea. The fare consisted of biscuits
and sardines again, with which provender Mr. C. was
fortunately well provided.
The country was still beautiful and fertile, and the
river broad, and generally deep. Here and there the
channel was contracted by islands, some of which were
so covered with masses of tangled vegetation that not
an inch of earth or stone was to be seen. Oc


easionally, as on the previous day, we stuck upon
sand-banks, and, as. on the previous day also, the
commander of the Pancake took soundings with
his proper person, and put his strong shoulders to his
clipper’s stern with general success. During the fore-
noon we went ashore* Mr. C. and I intending to walk
along the bank, and; join the boat higher up; but, owing
to some misunderstanding, the boat remained where it
landed us, and seeing no signs of an intention to follow
we returned to it, and went on board again. While we
were away opportunity had been taken to, cut a good
feed of grass, which in many places was more than waist
high, for the horse. After that his spirits revived a
little, and he looked less convinced that Chaos was come
again. On shore we saw a path indicating the presence
of many natives, but none made their appearance.
In, the middle of the day, finding the current so
strong that we were making scarcely any progress with
the sweeps, we moored alongside of a sandy bank, where,
were evidences of previous encampment. Here we
strolled about for some time. The foliage was of the
same character I have already described. The Moreton
Bay fig trees were large and numerous, and there was a
species of gum tree with long pendulous branches hang-
ing down over, and even into, the water, like the
English willow. These trees, by the way, were very
numerous along the upper part of the river, and
added materially to its beauty. While we were
at the camping-place several boats, returning from


Canoona to Rockhampton, passed us. The accounts
of the diggings which the boatmen gave us were rather
more favorable than those we had latterly heard, and
there were no passengers returning. The distance we
had yet to go was variously estimated at from fifteen to
eighteen miles.
So soon as the current had somewhat slackened—
thus confessing itself to be still somewhat under tidal
influence—we got off again, and, sometimes under sail
and sometimes with the sweeps, slowly forced our way
against the stream. As .we got higher the stream greAV
stronger, and the channel narrower and more impeded
with islands and banks. In many places the only way
of making progress at all was by getting a line ashore
and warping from tree to tree. Most boats, however,
it should be said, have, in ascending the Fitzroy to the
Canoona landing-place, no occasion to resort to this
method, however unavoidable in the ungainly tub on
which I was unfortunately embarked. In the
course of the evening, the hopes we had based
upon the accounts and emptiness of the returning
boats that passed us at the camping-place were damped
by the sight of a whale-boat bound towards Rockhamp-
ton, with twenty-eight people on board. They gave us
no information, however, being more inclined to the
utterance of facetious observations than to answer the
questions we put to them, as they shot by with the full-
force of oars and current, while we were laboring upon
the warp.


Our progress was now so slow that it soon became
evident that we were “ in” for another night on deck,
and accordingly, though not till eleven o’clock, we came
to anchor again in mid-stream. Encore bsicuits, sar-
dines, and bottled porter. A light boat, pulling four
oars, overtook and passed us as we were coming to
anchor, and from the rowers we learned that we were
still eight miles from the landing-place. This boat had
left Rockhampton in the afternoon of the same day.
The stars were still shining the following morning,
when we were again under weigh. It had rained a little,
and there had been a very heavy dew during the night,
so that I was not sorry, for once, to get up early.
Rubbing one’s eyes completed one’s first toilette, the
luxury of a wash in a bucket and a wipe on a bit of sail-
cloth being deferred to satisfy the demands of a later
and more fashionable hour.
The current was so strong that, though the sweeps
were “ double-banked” with two rowers to each oar, we
made scarcely any progress, and before we had gone above
a mile or so had to resort to the old expedient of warp-
ing. Our energetic skipper was, of course, overboard
with the warp as soon as we were within soundings of
the bank —soundings taken according to his ordinary
method—and I could not sufficiently admire the courage
and activity with which he tore barefooted through the
vegetation and over the stumps and logs of the river’s
margin, regardless of alligators and snakes, and all things
animal and vegetable, that bite and sting according to
the custom of the tropics.


The tedious work of warping had gone on for some
hours, once again had we exerted ourselves among the
biscuits and sardines, and we were having “ a spell” for
a short time alongside of the bank, when we perceived a
column of smoke advancing round an elbow of the river,
and presently the little Canoona came puffing up against
the stream. May Ibe forgiven for having, in my
former letter, scoffed at that masterpiece of steam naval
architecture. I was glad enough now to jump on board
of her, and be borne along at the rate of three miles
an hour on the wings of swiftness, as it seemed, after
the life we had been leading for a couple of days. Her
commander gave me the latest Admella gossip. He told
how Captain M'Ewan had engaged divers of the pas-
sengers to make two tons of damper to stand in lieu of
his exhausted biscuits; how tents were pitched alongside,
and the bulk of the passengers waiting in them to return ;
how two enterprising free and enlightened citizens of
the United States, who had promised wonderful things
in the coaching way between Rockampton and the dig-
gings, had altogether subsided, and were taking their
coaches back again ; and, in short, placed me on a level
with all the important movements of the age. He had
left Rockhampton-—that centre of civilisation —only the
previous day, and was of course replete with information
welcome to a bargee of the wilderness.
Once, as we proceeded, all the passengers had to go
ashore and walk for a few hundred yards, while the
Canoona struggled up certain rapids of the paw


greatly contracted stream, but after that we had no fur-
ther stoppage, and at about ten o’clock reached the
long-looked-for landing-place.
A very pretty and picturesque spot it was. A large
willow gum overhung the stream for thirty or forty feet,
and around the green and pendulous boughs a great
bunch of drift-wood had become entangled ; it again
having intercepted a mass of sedge and weed that formed
a kind of breakwater to the force of the stream, and
enabled the little steamer to moor in still water. The
banks rose boldly, and were lightly timbered on the one
hand; on the other was a long tea-tree bank, run-
ning down the centre of the river, which turned sharply
to the left a few hundred yards higher up, at a spot
where a bank of sand and gravel marked the confluence
of a tributary stream called “ Pheasant Creek.” Con-
trary to what a general knowledge of Australian nomen-
clature would lead one to expect, Pheasant Creek is not
so called because destitute of pheasants, but because
they exist here in considerable numbers. I examined
one that had been shot by a French gentleman, and it was
certainly a good deal like an English pheasant, although
duller in plumage, and rather more hawk-like about
the head. I had no opportunity of tasting the bird, but
heard it highly praised by those who had. Monsieur T.
had taken a pheasant’s tail, and fastened it on a board
bearing the inscription “Pheasant-place,” and had nailed
this board to one of the trees at the landing-place.
The scene was rendered animated by the encampment


of a dozen or two of people under the trees. These tra-
vellers were divided into several sedate gipsying parties,
each of which was established with its own rugs and
blankets. At one fire, maintained on communistic prin-
ciples, boiled the various quart pots and “ billies ” of
each party, and at the camp of certain “ Admellas” I was
hospitably entertained with coffee and damper. The
arrival of the Canoona was the signal for breaking up
the camp, however. Captain Purcell caused his
whistle to set up a diabolical screaming, and in half an
hour he was off down the river again with almost all
the late campers on board, while their places and fire
were speedily taken possession of by the up-travellers.
A new generation of quart pots and “ billies” took the
place of that that had passed away. Few of your readers
need be told that to make a pot of tea is something
which your Australian traveller does at all possible junc-
tures. Wherever you stop you make a pot of tea directly
you arrive, and to drink a pot of tea is about the last act
performed before you start again. I verily believe that,
in the extremely improbable event of a thorough-going
old Australian bushman being suddenly translated into
Paradise, he would camp at the first water-hole, and make
a pot of tea before going farther.
While loitering about, intending to attach myself to
one of the parties of Canoona-bound pedestrians, I fell
in with Monsieur T., above mentioned. He was waiting
for drays to take up certain goods to the diggings, where
he proposed practising as an unlicensed victualler,


and, in the meantime, had spent his time in collecting
specimens of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms
about Pheasant Creek. I found that he was professionally
a botanist, an amateur in other branches of science, and
a cultivated and well-informed gentleman. He had evi-
dently no relish for his new pursuit, but under the
pressure of
“ That incessant want of peace
That vexes public men,”
he had taken to it, as many people do in Australia take
to strange callings. % As he put it, “ I must have some-
thing for my brute; Ibe ready to go back then to the
other part of me.” As he expected his cart shortly, and
to get up to the diggings that afternoon, I gladly agreed
to travel with him, and become the first inmate of his
canvas hotel.
Talking of hotels and unlicensed victuallers, by the
way, I should mention that there are no licensed ones,
while bottles and glasses stand openly on almost every
store counter in the place. The law does not wink
at this sly-grog selling. It looks at it with calm,
unaverted eyes, and it is generally understood that until
due notice had been given, and the machinery for issuing
licences is complete, there is to be no restriction upon the
sale of alcoholic drinks. Ido not think there was any
consequent increase—although there was a good deal—
of drunkenness. In a community of men, the vast
majority of whom are mere dawdlers waiting for some-
thing “to turn up,” drunkenness is sure to be supera


bundant, if drink be accessible at all; but I think the
evil would have been augmented if all the drinkers
had been concentrated in one or two crowded places.
There then would certainly have been incessant fighting
and rows, and the pernicious bibulous rivalry that the
practice of “ shouting ” engenders would have obtained
its full force. The grog-selling storekeepers, generally,
only satisfied a more moderate and unstimulated demand
for grog among customers for other things, and certainly
would not have permitted their tents to be filled with
that horrible drunken clamor which pervades most bush-
drinking houses, as by law established, from morning
till night.


CHAPTER V.
While awaiting at Pheasant Place the arrival of Monsieur
T.’s cart, I borrowed a gun and walked up the river, in
hopes of seeing an alligator, as I was told that one had
been seen just above the junction of the creek that morn-
ing. But I was disappointed, and I may as well at once
confess that I have not seen a single alligator upon the
Fitzroy, though I have frequently been on the watch for
them. There is no doubt that they exist, but they are
certainly not numerous. I have seen people that have
seen alligators, but that has been as near as I could get
to the reptiles.
On returning to M. T.’s tent I found that his horse and
cart had just come in in charge of a strapping Cornstalk,
who, hearing that I was from Melbourne, questioned me
G


concerning one Hills, a butcher, who had gone thither
eighteen months ago. Not to know Hills, Cornstalk
seemed to think, argued myself unknown; but I gave him
to understand that Melbourne was a place so far exceed-
ing Sydney in size and beauty as to afford coyer, no
doubt, to many eminent butchers, whose names might
not be recorded in song or story outside their own im-
mediate districts. Indeed, I drew a little upon my
imagination as to the splendors of the Victorian metro-
polis, and tried to humiliate Cornstalk by placing Sydney
in a most insignificant comparative place. But I could
not shake his faith in Sydney. He could believe that
our parvenu town might be larger and the richer, “ Still
Sydney will always keep the sway, like, as the capital,
he said. “ Decorum est pro patria ” —to bounce.
Finding, after some delay, that it was exceedingly
doubtful whether my French friend would reach the
diggings that night, I resolved not to wait for him, the
more especially as a spring-cart was about leaving for
Canoona, and with the driver I negotiated for a passage.
Without much delay we set out. The driver was a young
gentleman who had been sent into the North country to
acquire C( colonial experience ] but the experiment did
not appear to have been very successful, and he seemed
hardly up to the duties of his new speculation —that of
plying a spring-cart between the river and the diggings.
There were two other passengers, and some luggage.
The horse was sufficiently feeble and the road sufficiently
bad for some distance, to necessitate walking over


the greater part of the way, although, had we taken
the best road, we should have encountered scarcely any
difficulties. After travelling about seven miles, having
made a slight detour to pick up some luggage, we reached
Ramsay’s head station, consisting of a few scattered slab
buildings, and a stockyard erected near a fresh water
lagoon. Several parties, upward and downward bound,
were halting here, but we only stayed for a few minutes,
while one of our passengers had a word with the over-
«
seer, and “ got a pot of tea.”
At Ramsay’s I first saw some of the aborigines of the
Fitzroy district, a considerable number of them, chiefly
young boys, being about the place. They were favor-
able specimens of the Australian black-fellow, and indeed
belong to a far finer and more warlike race than the un-
fortunate people now rapidly becoming extinct in the
south. Those that I saw were, I believe, to some extent
attached to the station. Indeed, otherwise, they would
hardly have ventured near it; for without knowing any-
thing of the system pursued by Mr. Ramsay and his
men, I am unfortunately safe in saying that the ordinary
relation between the black and white races in this part of
Australia is that of war to the knife.
The atrocities of this warfare on both sides are
perfectly horrible, and I do not believe the Govern-
ment makes any effort to stop the slaughter of the
aborigines. A native police force is, indeed, actively
engaged, but exclusively against the blacks, who are
shot down by their bloodthirsty brethren at every


opportunity. I believe the blacks retaliate whenever
they can, and never lose a chance of murdering
white man, woman, or child, insomuch that I learned
upon very good authority, that of the first settlers of
this district, about one-fifth fell in two years. The num-
ber of blacks killed it is impossible to estimate. They
are being killed officially by police, and unofficially by
settlers and diggers every day, nor are women and
children by any means universally spared when murders
are being revenged by the whites. One case of peculiar
atrocity on both sides occurred not long since, if I may
believe the facts as they were told to me at different
times by credible persons. The owner of a station on
the Dawson was away from home, when the blacks at-
tacked his house and killed everyone in it, except one
young boy, who managed to conceal himself. There were
women in the family, and their murder was preceded by
other horrors. That the head of the family should have
been driven half mad by these things is not to be won-
dered at; but I was shocked to find many apparently
humane men more or less palliating the vow he took,
and kept, to shoot every black he encountered in the
district. How many dozens of lives he has to answer
for he knows best. On one occasion he came upon
a small party, consisting almost exclusively of
women with children in their arms —of women
so far civilized as to be able to appeal to him in
broken English against the deed he was about to do.
He had two revolvers with him, and kept his vow to


the letter. Of course, I tell all this upon hearsay, and,
therefore, I have forborne to mention names, but the
circumstance seemed to be perfectly well-known in the
district. One gentleman, to whom I was subsequently
speaking upon the subject—a gentleman deservedly en-
joying a large measure of public respect, and who, I am
sure, would be much more scrupulous than the majority
of white men here—had no more to say upon the sub-
ject than, “ Well, of course, it’s impossible to justify
what did, and it is a very good thing that he
has left the district.” This same gentleman told me
that if he fell in with a strange party of blacks in the
bush he would ride straight at them with his revolver,
and shoot right and left; and this is not in any venge-
ful or bloodthirsty spirit, but because the state of war-
fare between the races is so virulent that if he showed
hesitation about attacking them, they would be sure to
attack him, and thus it would become a mere point of
tactics to strike the first blow. I have here heard other
men, kindly and good-natured in ordinary relations,
make use of such expressions as u I should think no
more of shooting a black than a crow.” I have travelled
over a large part of Australia, and have in another
colony spent months on, and beyond, the extreme verge
of white settlement; I have also heard a good deal of
what has been done on the Darling, and during the
early overlanding days; but I believe the border warfare
about the Fitzroy, the Dawson, and the adjacent districts,
to be as savage to this day as any war with the aborigines


that in any part of Australia ever darkened with dis-
graceful incidents the history of our progress.
Let me get back, however, from this sad subject to
the spring-cart and my travelling companions. One of
them turned out to have been a mate of• the drivers
at the first outbreak of the Canoona diggings, and was
a very intelligent, energetic kind of man —and with him
I walked ahead the greater part of the way, leaving podr
G. to toil after us with his spring-cart, in the acquisition
of colonial experience, and a little not unwelcome “ready.”
My artilleryman —I don’t suppose he’s shy, so I may as
well call him by his name, Hall, at once, and spare the
multiplication of initials,—Hall, I say, gave me some
information about the diggings, as to the ultimate pro-
spects of which he was very hopeful, although just then all
the ground that was known to be good had been altogether
worked out. He and his party had, he said, done very
well; but when I came to figures it certainly did not
appear that what he had done would have been con-
sidered at all remarkably fortunate on the Victorian side
of the country. He estimated the total yield at Canoona
at 2,500 ounces. Several prespecting parties were out,
and all finding gold, though not in remunerative quanti-
ties. He was kind enough to ask me to pass the night
in his tent, an invitation which I was glad to accept, as
I should not have known where else to go, except to the
Government camp, whereto, indeed, I had a kind of
demi-semi invitation, but one I scarcely cared to act
upon.


After travelling together about thirteen or fourteen
miles, we reached Canoona at about half-past seven
o’clock. Though we had been gradually approaching
hilly country, we had made scarcely any perceptible as-
cent, the Canoona diggings being at the base of some
of the outer spurs of the great range. It was already
dark, but by the light of the moon we saw the tents of
the diggers standing in considerable numbers, and pre-
senting all the outward appearance of a Victorian gold-
field ; nothing but the'gold was wanting to make the
illusion complete. Mr. Hall’s tent was at the far end
of the diggings, so that we had a fair view of the transi-
tory canvas town as we went along. Everything looked
cheerful enough—the fires were burning brightly, and
the men were moving about, talking and laughing, and
enjoying their after-Sunday-supper pipes. There were a
good many women to be seen too, but I cannot say that
they added much to the pleasant appearance of the scene.
A diggings rush is certainly not “ woman’s sphere,” as
Mrs. Ellis, of the “ Mothers of England,” would
say. So I thought, more particularly when, being
ushered into one of the two tents that formed the
encampment of Hall’s party, my eye fell on the figure
of a poor woman, the wife of one of his “mates,”
lying sick in bed. Her husband was evidently anxious
about her safety, though not very clear as to what was
the matter. With mutual apologies we quitted the tent
and went into the other, where we recruited ourselves
after our walk with beef and tea and damper. Our


circle was speedily joined by G., the driver of the spring-
cart, by John, the sick woman’s husband, and subse-
quently by Mr. Chapel, a celebrity of these days, he
having been the discoverer of the Canoona gold-fields.
He was a short, thick, Hebraic looking man, with long
black ringlets, a very “loud” waistcoat, and a yet
“ louder” chain festooning over its embroidery. It was
very evident that he conceived the eyes of the world to
be, rather than otherwise, upon him. I afterwards
learned that he possessed some practical experience in
mining in England as well as in gojd-digging in Hew
South Wales, and he had been employed by Captain
O’Connell, the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the
district, to “prospect” it during some months. I be-
lieve he was very indefatigable in this work ; but, un-
fortunately, since greatness has been thrust upon him
by the Canoona discoveries, he has deemed it incumbent
upon him to aspire to be a kind of Fitzroy River Lyell,
and is for ever
“ Chattering stony names—
Hornblend, and shale, and rag, and trap, and tuff, ”
in a way that would make Mr. Selwyn’s hair stand on
end. However, he declares that he knows where plenty
more gold is to be found, and only waits assurance that
he will be paid for pointing it out to do so. His
prominent position has not been without its attendant
dangers, as divers of the disappointed diggers chose to
resent against Chapel their own precipitate folly,
and had threatened to take his life for leading


them astray. From him I learned that a new discovery
had been made public that day of a supposed
new gold-field some fifteen miles off, in a northerly
direction, where it was said that about half-a-dozen
miners had been quietly doing well for a week or so. A
considerable number of diggers proposed starting in the
morning to test the truth of the rumor. Having amongst
us disposed of a bottle of “old tom,” which I was
permitted to furnish towards the general entertainment,
we turned in. Of course I was again a pauper as to
blankets, but I had fallen among Good Samaritans, and
was well cared for. The only hindrance to sleep which
I experienced arose from a neighboring tent, where a
party of revellers, Shaksperian, or rather G. V. Brookian,
as to taste, and exceedingly drunk as to condition, were
shouting and guzzling through the greater part of the
night If I fell asleep I was sure soon to be awakened
by some peculiarly impassioned passage, interrupted by
occasional notes and parentheses not to be found in the
authorised copies, as thus :
“ Before my body I throw my warlike shield. Lay
hon Macduff, and damned be he that fust cries ’old
enough. ’And us the pannikin, old man.”
This defiance to Macduff was a special favorite, perhaps
as being nearly as good as swearing on one’s own account.
At all events, Macbeth made the still night air ring with
it, at least half-a-dozen times before I began thankfully
to perceive that speech was failing the inebriated varlets,
and presently afterwards I judged by the sounds that


reached my ear that they were disposing of themselves
for the night by tumbling among the tent-ropes. As
they fell so I suppose they lay; at all events, they let
us go to sleep in peace, and they troubled us no more.
The next morning (Monday, the 18th,) I was out early
among the tents and washing-places. The Canoona flat,
where the diggers were, covers some forty or fifty acres,
I suppose, and round it on three sides lightly timbered
slopes rise towards hills of no great elevation, but which
screen far higher mountains, especially towards the north
and west. A small creek runs down the middle of the
flat, and into it again run smaller tributaries, though the
word run, indeed, is hardly applicable, except in rainy
weather. There was at the time of my visit no water in
the creek, except what was poured into it from the
washing wells, of which I will speak presently. The
covering of soil over the greater part of the flat was very
thin, with a good deal of burnt quartz cropping up here
and there among the stunted herbage. A number of
small palm trees, interspersed with grass trees, gave a
somewhat tropical appearance to the scene, which was
otherwise very Victorian in appearance. The palms
did not look very flourishing, their broad fan-like
leaves spreading but a little way from the parent
stem, and presenting a very poor appearance in com-
parison with the fern trees of the gully in the Dan-
denong ranges, which M. Guerrard has so beauti-
fully painted, though to those plants they bore some
superficial resemblance. Among the leaves, which sprout


out exclusively from the tops of the stems, grow clusters
of green fruit, the kernel of which is a round white nut,
about the size of a large cherry, and very eatable when
cooked.
In the subsidiary creeks there were occasional small
groups of languid prospectors, rather than diggers,
scratching about the surface, and all getting the “ color
of gold,” but in homoeopathic doses. The chief scene of
activity was the main creek, and the adjacent flat for a
little distance on either side. Here there were many
wells, whips, and windlasses, and cradles and washing-
dishes were being actively worked. The wells of which
I spoke, and the heaps of dirt alongside of them, made
me at first suppose that this place was where the gold
was being got. I soon found, however, that the wells
were merely sunk to furnish supplies of water, which was
procurable in good quantity and quality, both for domestic
use and cradling, at a depth of about twenty to twenty-five
feet. The washing-stuff was carted down to those wells
from a distance of half a mile to a mile on an average,
and at a cost, when I was there, of about 4s. per load.
The first tin dish I saw washed yielded about a penny-
weight and a half, the produce of about eight buckets of
washing-stuff puddled and cradled. The stuff was got
on the surface, and the man who was washing it said
that any man could make his rations, and some made a
good deal more. He was very civil, and ready to show
me what he was doing, as indeed, both at Canoona and
elsewhere, I have generally found diggers to be, if civilly


and rationally questioned. Occasionally, one meets with
more or less insulting rebuffs in pursuing knowledge in
this way, but of course one must expect this now and
then, and it does not occur sufficiently often to be a
serious impediment to one’s inquiries. In the course of
my walk I spoke to a good many diggers, and the
general accounts given me corroborated those I first
received.
After breakfast I went on to the Government Camp,
where I found my fellow-voyager on board the Pancake
in much trouble about the non-arrival of his goods.
Here, also, I was glad to make the acquaintance of
Captain O’Connell, the Commissioner of Crown Lands,
who had just come in from a tour of inspection, and
who was about returning via Rockhampton to his head-
quarters at Gladstone. His own view of the auriferous
prospects of the district was very hopeful, although he
was somewhat alarmed for the immediate consequences
of so absurdly extensive a rush as had occurred, and was
still in progress —a rush for which the old residents in
the district were, naturally, altogether unprepared, and
utterly unable to account. Captain O’Connell estimated
the quantity of gold that had been procured at about
2,000 ounces. He showed me a parcel of about 20
ounces, which had been placed in his charge that morn-
ing, and which presented the peculiar black and granular
appearance characteristic of almost all the gold that has
yet been dug upon the Fitzroy.
As a proof of the very general dissemination of gold,


although in small quantities, throughout the district,
Captain O’Connell showed me a paper containing nearly
half a pennyweight that had been got by an aboriginal
boy, who was a hanger-on of Captain O’Connell’s party,
and who was persuaded to go off and imitate the white
men’s proceedings with a tin dish. In the evening the
boy brought back his little packet; but he was not to be
induced to go again by any proposals to barter clothes
and tobacco for what he got. He preferred the follow-
ing occupation, in which I saw him engaged :—Whether
accidentally or designedly procured, he had a small raw
place upon his left knee ; and on this place, as “ Pick-
wick” sat upon the ground, very nearly “in the simple
majesty of nature,” the flies continually clustered.
Pickwick had furnished himself with a quantity of the
sharp-pointed blades of the grass tree, and his sport was
to fillip these along his thigh, among the flies. When-
ever he succeeded in impaling one, he put the blade of
grass, with the fly upon it, carefully on one side, and
when I saw him he had by him about a dozen of these
evidences of his skill. This occupation was one that
suited his genius much better than gold digging, and I
dare say he continued for hours, contentedly sporting
over the curious game preserve he had established upon
his leg.
Captain O’Connell’s account of the climate of the dis-
trict was very favorable, and he said it was rarely dis-
tressingly hot. He spoke particularly of Gladstone,
where he had long been resident, but he had been at
H


Canoona as late in the season as the end of November,
when it was not materially hotter than at present. It
is, of course, characteristic of a tropical climate that the
annual range of the thermometer should be much less
than in higher latitudes. I may mention here that,
during my stay on the Fitzroy, the thermometer
never rose above eighty-five degrees in the shade, in
the hottest part of the day, while the nights were
invariably cool and pleasant. A great advantage
which this part of Australia enjoys is, that it is
almost entirely out of the range of the hot winds.
What traces of them are felt come from the south-
ward, and the fires of the central deserts have not
the power much more than to take the chill off the
cool breezes that c ome up across the Southern Ocean;
while airs that have been already heated in the
tropics before being exposed to the action of the
sands of the interior, are soon raised to the blast-
furnace pitch with which dwellers in the south are
so uncomfortably familiar.
Having seen all I could of doings on the Canoona
flat, I walked with Mr. Hall a little way “up the
gully” to Chinaman’s Gully and Golden Point, and
the other small but famous spots of Canoona’s brief
and departed days of golden glory. There were a
good many diggers at work here, indeed, as well as
higher up the gully- But they were but gleaners
after the harvest. The great yield of gold was in a
thin stratum of soil, rarely above a foot deep, over


lying the bed rock, of what Mr. Chapel and the
diggers generally called serpertine, but which I under-
stand not to be true serpertine, but slate resembling it.
The almost perpendicular dip of this slate appears to
render all search for a second bottom at the place where
gold was found so abundantly within a few inches of the
surface, hopeless. Here and there in fissures in
the bed rock there have been attempts at deeper
sinking, but I could not learn that these were successful.
But a good many gleaners were at work scraping away
the remaining earth from the surface of the rock where
most gold had been got, and a living was apparently to
be secured in this way, while others preferred devoting
themselves to places where the soil, if less rich, could
be more readily secured. The man who gave the best
account of what he was earning on new ground, said he
was getting half an ounce to the load. Hall’s claim,
upon which, however, at this time only one of his party
was at work, was yielding about six pennyweights, he
told me. This was, however, decidedly better than the
average. The general impression left upon my mind by
all I could gather was, as I have said before, that a man
was very exceptionably unlucky if he could not make
his rations, and exceptionably lucky if he made 10s.
per day, though some were doing better. Of course,
what I say only applies to those who actually work, and
they constitute a very small per centage of those who
come. Perhaps up to this time* half of those who have
* 19th October.


come have turned back in Keppel Bay, and half of the
remainder at Rockhampton ; while of those who have
reached Canoona, I should doubt if one in five has
really dug in earnest. Of course such figures pretend
to no accuracy; but I mean that there has been very
little real digging in the Fitzroy district as yet—so
little, that it would be quite rash to base an opinion
upon it. We must await the discoveries of the numer-
ous prospecting parties now out, and about to go oiit;
but it certainly seems to me improbable that in a
country where gold is found in minute quantities almost
wherever sought, over a large area, it should turn out
that the little patch near Canoona was the only rich
spot extant.


CHAPTER VI.
Having seen all that I could of the diggers’ operations,
I sought M. T.’s “ Hotel.” It was a fine large tent,
susceptible of some internal divisions, but these were
not as yet completed. One might have guessed it to be
a Frenchman’s, by sundry little attempts at adornment
with pink calico, whereby it was distinguished from the
other tents. M. T. had surrounded himself with com-
patriots and Italians, who were all evidently quite new
to the business of grog-selling, and who seemed un-
profitably numerous. A considerable force of retainers
is highly desirable, however, in an establishment where
drinking is the occupation of morning, noon, and night,
and in a place where every man has to defend his own
castle, and has no more substantial castle to defend
H 1


than one whereof the walls can be made to “ topple
on their warders” heads with a pair of scissors or s
penknife.
M. T.’s tent was erected for commercial purposes, iE
the most thickly-tented portion of the diggings, and,
therefore, in a favorable place whence to study “life” at
Canoona. Just after dark some one passed close by the
tent palling out, “ Oh, dearest Emma,” at the top of his
voice, and immediately the cry “ Oh, dearest Emma,”
was taken up in every varying tone of mock admiration.
At first I assumed Emma to be some actual flesh-and-
blood person from Stephen-street or Castlereagh-street,
now probably under the influence of drink, and running
the gauntlet of playful pleasantries from all the gay
youth of Canoona ; but Emma proved to be purely
mythical. It is simply an inexplicable but an established
rite of the Canoona diggings to shout, “ Oh, dearest
Emma,” from time to time, as loud as the words can be
shouted. Occasionally this may be heard in the day
time, but the practice is essentially a nocturnal one,
lasting from about seven o’clock till midnight, and
reaching its height between nine and ten. Occasionally
some one would vary the entertainment by adding to
“ Oh, dearest Emma,” “’Ow my ’art aches but the
majority contented themselves with merely apostro-
phising Emma. Sometimes, if tolerable quiet had
reigned for half-an-hour, she would suddenly be ad-
dressed with a startling vehemence, and the cry would
then be passed on from voice to voice, till you could


barely hear the farthest passionate appeal. Just as one
dog beginning to bark, or one cock beginning to crow,
rouses all the dogs or cocks within hearing, and sends
the watch-cry along a line of sentries, perhaps for
hundreds of miles, and, at all events, so far that the last
answering crow seems but a faint and distant echo,
even so it was with the shouts of “ Oh, dearest Emma!”
and “ ’Ow my ’art aches !” What the cry means, and
whence it came, are speculations wrapped up in dark-
ness as impenetrable as that surrounding the “ Asian
Mystery.”
For several hours during the evening drinking and
wrangling went on almost uninterruptedly. The fact
that M. T.’s establishment was exclusively devoted to
the sale of liquor made it the scene of drunkenness such
as I did not witness in any of the ordinary stores, al-
though unlicensed grog-selling was equally undisguisedly
carried on in them. Out of the number of drinkers,
one, and only one, produced any gold to sell. He had
a bag containing eight or ten ounces, of which he sold
one ounce for £3 Bs., but could have carried very little
change back with him out of this sum, as he indulged
a good deal in the expensive luxury of “ shouting
round.” The great subject of conversation all through
the evening was that of fighting, and the oaths and lan-
guage with which the various speakers expressed their
ideas were of the most revolting kind. At length the
moderately sober members of the company betook them-
selves to their tents, and th% others reeled away, mutter-


iiig horrible curses and vows of vengeance at the landlord
for his refusal to serve them with more liquor. I went
to bed luxuriously upon a sofa—the conveyance of
which upon a cart to M. T.’s had in the morning excited
a good deal of attention—and was soon alike forgetful
of “ Dearest Emma” and of the warlike enthusiasts
who had so persistently published the ardor of their
passion for that mysterious enslaver.
Grog-selling began again before daylight. A man
came to the entrance of the tent with a tale to the effect
that his mate had been suffering some excruciating in-
ternal pains, and that gin was immediately necessary for
his relief. The medical comfort was delivered; but I
strongly suspect the purchaser had no sick mate to
trouble him, and consumed it himself. As soon as it
was light, a good many of the previous night’s topers
began to drop in for hairs of the dog that had bitten
them. One huge ruffian, whose style had been particu-
larly inflammatory, came thrice for rum before* seven
o’clock. About an hour afterwards there was a general
rush to the other side of the creek, to witness a fight
between one Waterhouse (who had volunteered to fight
any one on the diggings) and some one else, ambitious
of contesting the championship. There was some diffi-
culty about the arrangement of preliminaries, however,
and, much to the disgust of the crowd, the battle did
not take place.
In the course of the morning I went over to the
Commissioner’s, and found Mr. C. already engaged with


his judicial work, and endeavoring to unravel some in-
explicable row between a party of Chinamen and a party
of European diggers. The case arose out of disputed
ownership of a cradle which a Chinaman sought to
defend, with a pickaxe for a weapon, whereupon he got
knocked down. Little subsidiary rows had sprouted out
from this central one, and the difficulty of understanding
the case was enhanced by the fact that the interpreter
would be witness too, and gave all sorts of hearsay evi-
dence as the results of personal observation. The case
was finally dismissed.
Mr. C. had not been at all prepossessed by the appear-
ance of things on the Canoona gold-field, and a good
many men had been to him with tales of distress. Some
better accounts had, however, been brought in from a
place eleven or twelve miles off
As I left Mr. C. I saw two or three men driving
before them a considerable mob of horses, many of them
bearing packs. The drivers were armed with guns and
revolvers, and otherwise equipped in such a manner as to
indicate that they were on a long journey. They had so
thoroughly the appearance of an exploring party that I
went up to them to ascertain who they were. They
turned out to be the party of a Mr. Landsborough, a
neighboring squatter, who had been out seeking fresh
country for pastoral purposes. He told me that they
had been out about four months, traversing the country
about the “ Peak Downs, ”*and the sources of the Mac-
kenzie and the Isaacs.


Mr. Landsborough, who was a good specimen, 1
thought, of the outside settler—vigorous, energetic, and
intelligent—seemed very well satisfied with the results of
his trip, and I passed an agreeable half-hour with him
while he took a little snack, in the shape of a pound or
so of beef and pickles, on a storekeeper’s counter, ex-
changing such news as I had brought with me from the
settled districts for his narrative of the wilds. Much of
the country he had seen he described as of first-rate
quality for pasturage. They had had some trouble with
the blacks, he said, but he evidently did not care to be
communicative as to the details of this “ trouble.” I
knew too well what “ trouble with the blacks” meant in
this part of the country to press for particulars, nor
would it have been of any use to do so, for almost at the
first mention of the subject he put a “ chunk” of beef
and a pickled onion between his strong teeth, with an
action so manifestly indicative of an intention to do
nothing with his mouth but eat with it while the subject
of the blacks was on the tapis, that I at once got as
far away from the ticklish topic as possible —to Cher-
bourg, and the Queen’s visit thither.
Mr. Landsborough’s party had consisted of five white
and two black men, and about thirty horses ; from
which it may be judged that those who in the far bush
procure runs without purchase, and by right of discovery,
have nevertheless to risk a good deal of capital, and
expend no inconsiderable sum before they get possession
of their pastoral territory.


At about three o’clock in the afternoon I started with
Hall, M‘Crae, and others, for Pheasant Place, which we
reached shortly after dark : a large encampment now
stood there, both of upward and downward travellers.
With a tree, a tarpaulin, and a cart, we extemporised a
house for the night, and in the morning I took my pas-
sage back to Rockhampton in the Admella, waterman’s
boat. The rapidity of the return passage contrasted
most exhiliratingly with the weary drag against the
current which we had suffered in the Pancake. The
wind, too, was with us during a good part of the way,
and then,
“ Sail, stream, and oars, tending to one endeavor,”
we flew down the broad reaches of the Fitzroy with
delightful speed, reaching Rockhampton early in the
afternoon.
No great event had marked the history of that mighty
city since I had left it, but on the day of my return
there were two trifling disturbances that partook rather
too much of the character of Lynch-law to be satis-
factory.
Captain Moodie had, received instructions to
charge £3 10s. for steerage passages from Rock-
hampton to Sydney, in the vessels belonging to the
company he represented. It seemed, however, to have
been expected that the passage would not have cost more
than £3, and for about two hours the question was de-
bated between an angry mob, some hundreds strong, on
one side, and Captain Moodie on the other. At length,


one of the advocates of the lower rate stepped forward,
and said he would not hold out any longer, but would
make a beginning by paying his 70s. He had hardly
suited the action to the word when he and his money
were at once pounced upon, and both thrown out of the
tent, while the proposal of casting him into the river
was actively debated. That suggestion was not, how-
ever, carried out. In the end, the advocates of the <£3
passage were successful, and Captain Moodie issued
tickets at that rate for the Wonga Wonga, which sails
this morning. *
The second instance of Lynch-law occurred last night.
A man was detected in the act of stealing blankets from
a tent, and immediate preparations were made for hang-
ing him. The rope was already round his neck, and his
situation was certainly most precarious, when Judge
Lynch relented, and, though amid some ill-usage, the
thief was dragged away to the official quarter of the
township, and delivered over to the proper authorities.
On going to Captain Moodie’s tent with my packet of
letters half an hour before the steamer was to start down
the river with passengers for the Wonga Wonga—she
herself had not come beyond Kepple Bay—l found that
some unexpected delay would occur in the departure of
the next steamer for Sydney—the Yarra Yarra, by which
I had intended to return. Accordingly, I suddenly re-
solved to go by the Wonga myself. Hastly gathering
together a few things, and leaving the rest of my chattels
* October 21st.


in a friend’s charge, I was soon on board the Tamar
along with about three hundred members of a class
suddenly numerous—unlucky diggers from Port Curtis.
The Rockhampton bank of the river was well lined
with spectators to see us off, and wonderful was the con-
trast between that silent and dejected farewell and the
shrieking and cheering, and flourishes of music, amid
which a few weeks before the Admella had cast off her
moorings from Sandridge Jetty. The failure of hope—
disappointment in all kinds of shapes—is common
enough, and there is nothing new about embarking
in an enterprise in high spirits and cheered on by nu-
merous friends, and sometime after struggling out of the
fray somewhat torn and battered and cast down. But
the contrast between hope and disappointment was cer-
tainly unusually conspicuous in the present case. The
expectations of those who started in the ill-fated rush
were wildly high. The failure of those hopes was ab-
solute and complete. Among the three hundred people
on board the Tamar, the greater part, as we left Rock-
hampton, were probably mingling with calculations of
what they had lost, self-reproaches for their folly in
having come, and probably scarcely less annoying anti-
cipations of the ridiculous figure they would cut as
prodigals returning amid the merriment of their good-
natured friends. This latter feeling indeed seemed to
predominate in a good many of those with whom I got
into conversation upon the subject of the rush. A
young gentleman, whose friends resided in Melbourne,
i


contemplated passing through, that town with his hat
drawn over his eyes, without stopping, and first notifying
his return from Port Curtis in a letter dated from the
Ovens, or Indigo Creek. “ I hope we shan’t get into
Melbourne by daylight,” one man said to me; “ I know
I shall feel the same as if I’d stole something. I’d like
to slink away home in the dark.” And so it was with
many more. A sense of shame at having been so taken
in was the most prominent feeling in scores of minds.
The Tamar got into Keppel Bay soon after nightfall,
having been detained at a shoal near the mouth of the
river for about an hour, owing to the state of the tide —
and during which time a select party, of about a dozen,
chiefly consisting of ships’ captains, but including one
or two others —and the present writer among them—im-
proved the occasion upon preserved oysters and a lately
discovered case of champagne, the conventionalities as to
what goes well with what, not, being observed on such
occasions, so closely as the principle that a good thing
should be eaten or drunk when and where it is un-
earthed.
Towards nine o’clock in the evening, we got along-
side of the Wonga Wonga. After the extreme crowding
on board the Tamar, the Wonga’s decks seemed splendidly
spacious, and her poop looked ample and white in the
moonlight. Her saloon and saloon accommodation
seemed wonderfully well ordered and luxurious after
recent experiences, and indeed were very good and com-
fortable. The anchor was got up almost immediately,


and we were soon at sea. The passengers, though suffi-
ciently numerous to crowd every part of the decks so
as to render walking impossible, were very quiet and
orderly, and I heard no complaints either of scarcity
from them or of waste from the captain. The wind had,
however, obstinately shifted, and was now blowing hard
and dead a-head as we went to the southward. We
met a whole fleet of ships bound for Port Curtis, several
of which had been out a month or six weeks, and in
which, while perhaps somewhat short of other supplies,
the poor fellows on board had no doubt during all their
tossing about among head seas and baffling winds, been
nourishing themselves abundantly on the unsubstantial
fare of false hopes.
No special incidents marked the homeward voyage.
At Sydney I found the Telegraph about to sail for Mel-
bourne in a few hours, and in her I took my passage,
having for fellow-passengers several of the adventurers
by the Admella who had returned as far as Sydney by
that vessel, which had there been taken upon the patent
slip to be cleaned. Two days afterwards we reached
Sandridge Jetty ; those who desired to “ slink” home in
sheltering darkness having their wish, for it was ten
o’clock at night when our disconsolate force was
absorbed into the crowd of Melbourne. The next day
I was at home, and, in the presence of familiar faces,
things, and occupations, soon felt as if the daily course
had not been interrupted by more than a night, of which
this Port Curtis episode had been only a vivid dream.


CHAPTER VII.
A brief resume of a few events that succeeded my de-
parture, will suffice to bring down the history of the
memorable Port Curtis bubble to the time of its burst-
ing. The last accounts indeed state, that a few hundred
persons are still distributed about the district, awaiting
chances of return at Rockhampton, “ prospecting” the
country, or still contriving to extract the means of sub-
sistence from the ground of the old workings. But the
fleet of vessels that within a few weeks carried the po-
pulation of a new colony to those waste regions have
returned to the older settlements that sent them
forth, and have restored their thousands of adventurers
to their old places and occupations. Rockhampton, the
city of a day, has relapsed into a desolation almost as
complete as that of “ Baker-street, or Tadmor in the
wilderness,” as Thackery has it.


No doubt, hereafter, both Rockhampton and the sur-
rounding country will be steadily and permanently po-
pulated, but the Port Curtis rush is already a closed
chapter in Australian history. The comet became visible
at the right time, to typify what was going on upon this
part of the earth’s surface. Who knows what draws
that vast luminous traveller of the sky from the distant
places of the universe to the neighborhood of the sun,
and then suddenly sends it darting off again as fast as
it came—as if it rushed to a new gold-field, found it a
delusion, and made all haste back again to some well-
established celestial Ballaarat or Bendigo, far away
in the solar system. To the natives who watched
from their coverts the strange progress of the Port Curtis
rush, its phenomena must have been quite as inexpli-
cable as those of the comet that appeared simultaneously.
Very likely the scientific theory has been regularly ac-
cepted by the learned aboriginal societies, that a star with
a tail to it causes an extraordinary influx of white men,
who happily disappear with what occasioned them.
As I expected, I found on returning to Melbourne that
the people of Victoria had become as unreasonably ap-
prehensive about Port Curtis as they had been unrea-
sonably hopeful at first. Wild and extravagant stories
about the sufferings and destitution of the adventurers
there, had succeeded the previous wild and extrava-
gant stories about their enormous gains. A day or two
before the return of the Telegraph to Melbourne, ac-
cordingly, the Government had hurried off the colonial
i 1


war steamer Victoria, laden with stores, to put an end
to the imaginary starvation on the Fitzroy. At the
same time, the New South Wales Government dispatched
Her Majesty’s ship Iris to Keppel Bay, to render as-
sistance either in preserving order or otherwise.
The Victoria was accompanied on her cruise
by a gentleman engaged by the Argus as a special
reporter, and his letters to that journal bring down the
tale of the Port Curtis gold-fields to the 20th of
November. His general account of the country and
climate corroborated my own observations, although
the flies and mosquitos appeared to have got far more
numerous after I left than during the period of my
stay. The expected distress was of course not encoun-
tered. On the day of his arrival at Rockhampton,
November 4th, he wrote as follows :
“At present there are about a thousand people on
Rockhampton, this number diminishing every day. On
landing and taking a walk through this mushroom
township, I was agreeably surprised to see no symptom
of distress, and to hear no clamorous appeal for relief.
Most of those who are here, I imagine, possess some
small means, and the Government are employing the
most needy in constructing a wharf. The place pre-
sented more the aspect of a fair than anything I can
liken it to. Vociferous “ Cheap Johns” seemed to be
doing all the business. There were drinking booths
and bagatelle booths, and sundry exhibitions, and the
population strolling listlessly up and down, apparently


in Mr. Micawber’s favorite mental attitude of expecta-
tion. A flat-nosed gentleman, ringing a big bell, invited
me into a tent to see some prize wrestling, admission
6d., with the privilege of competing for the 10s. pre-
mium. The intelligence, however, of the Victoria’s
arrival soon enlivened the scene. Captain O’Connell,
the Resident appointed by the New South Wales
Government, having anticipated to some extent the
measure of assistance resolved on by the Victorian
Government, had naturally created an expectation of
further help, that accounted for the unanxious de-
meanor of the miners. Diggers from Canoona are
continually coming in, and after collating and com-
paring their different accounts, the conclusion arrived
at is, that there cannot be above 500 men remaining
on this gold-field.”
The institution of the public dinner is one to which
John Bull clings with a resolution worthy of a better
cause, into whatsoever climates or scenes he may be
thrown. On the sth of November, Captain Moodie,
in honor of the Victoria’s arrival, gave a dinner, at
which it appears “ about four-and-twenty guests were
assembled in a large tent, and the feast and flow and
that sort of thing continued till nearly midnight. A
multitude of diggers assembled round, appearing to be
cheerfully interested in our proceedings. The banquet-
hall was tastefully decorated with ship’s colors and a
neat array of glass-candlesticks ; and the expedient for
ventilation was at once simple and efficacious—viz., a


few bold punctures in the canvas with a carving-knife.
We could not but feel that the excessive hilarity perva-
ding the company was most ludicrously inconsistent with
the ideas of hard suffering and tribulation previously
associated with Rockhampton.”
A “ return match” of course took place after this, and
Captain Moodie was entertained in due form, but this
time the weather was not favorable, and before the
serious drinking of the evening had fairly set in, the
rain came through the tent in torrents. The diners all
got drenched to the skin ; but they manfully stood to
their guns, and the affair was pronounced to be a
complete success.
In the meantime Captain Norman took active steps
for engaging passages for adventurers from Victoria.
Captain O’Connell had indeed previously anticipated
him to some extent, for, prior to the 29th October, he
had taken the steps mentioned in the following letter
of that date to the Sydney Government: —
“ H.M.S. Iris, Keppel Bay, October 29, 1858.
“ Sir, —After concluding my letter to you yesterday
morning, I proceeded into Rockhampton from Mount
Athelstane, Mr. Wiseman’s quarters, where I had been
staying since my return from Canoona.
“2. On my way in, the distance being, I suppose,
between two and three miles, I was met by a messenger
with a note from the Police Magistrate, Captain Vyner,
who had only that morning entered on his functions, ex-


pressing an anxious wish to confer with me, and stating
that an attempt had been made that morning to ‘ rough-
handle’ Captain Moodie, the agent of the Australasian
Steam Navigation Company, and also the captain of the
Eagle steamer.
“ 3. On reaching the encampment at Rockhampton, I
was immediately surrounded by an excited crowd, all
clamorous for food, employment, or the means of getting
back again to the places from whence they came.
“ 4. After addressing this crowd, and not without
some little difficulty pacifying the tumult, chiefly I think
by an assurance that no person would be allowed to
starve, I was enabled, comparatively free from inter-
ruption, to inquire into the causes of discontent, and con-
sider the remedies within my power.
“5. I found that within the last three days from
1,500 to 2,000 people had arrived, chiefly from Mel-
bourne, and that considerable numbers of these were,
according to their own accounts, without means of sub-
sistence, even for a week, after landing ; in fact, they
had thrown themselves as paupers upon these shores, in
the anticipation of getting gold immediately on their
arrival.
“6. Discouraging accounts from people returning
from the diggings prevented their attempting even to
proceed to the gold-fields, and a mass of discontent was
collected in Rockhampton, which, under the dread of
starvation, was fast ripening into sedition and outrage.
“ 7. I saw that around me on all sides there was much


difficulty, and yet a necessity for immediate and vigorous
action.
“8. Having assured myself of the concurrent opinion
of those officers of the Government who surrounded me,
as to the imminence of the crisis, I determined on au-
thorising Mr. Moore, of the Colonial Architect’s Depart-
ment, to employ about 125 men on different works,
which I detail to you in another communication, at the
rate of £1 per week and their rations; and I made
public my intention of entering into communication
with the masters of Melbourne vessels, and endea-
voring to induce them, by such guarantees as I
could give, to ship back the passengers they had
brought here.
“9. I then, in pursuance of your instructions to that
effect, proceeded to Keppel Bay to see Captain Loving,
and got on board the Iris about half-past nine last
evening.
“10. This morning, Captain Loring has been good
enough to send round an officer to the different vessels
bound for Melbourne, requesting the masters to repair
on board the Iris for the purpose of hearing what I had
to propose to them, and already the masters or other
officers of nine vessels have waited upon me.
“11. These nine vessels have brought here 1,660
passengers from Melbourne, and I have agreed with the
masters that they shall reship their own or an equal
number of passengers—should that number require it —
on my guaranteeing them against loss in the case of


persons absolutely destitute, or of those who are able to
pay a portion of their passage-money only.
“12. I have represented to them that it appeared to
me these persons have no just claim to the assistance of
the Government of New South Wales, inasmuch as they
land as paupers on her shores, and, not being contributors
to her revenue, have no right to become burdens on her
resources, and that, therefore, in the first instance I shall
appeal to the Government of Victoria, but that in the
event of failing in obtaining assistance for them in that
quarter, I am prepared to pledge the Government of New
South Wales to protect them against eventual loss, and
I have met with a unanimous promise of concurrence in
my endeavors.
“ 13. The departure of the mail this evening prevents
my laying before you anything beyond the outline of my
project; but perhaps you would be good enough to enter
into communication with the Government of Victoria to
ascertain if any aid, and, if any, what assistance will be
afforded to persons absolutely destitute and anxious to
return to their homes.
“14. I beg to state also that I have arranged with
the agent of the Joint-Stock Bank at Rockhampton, to
credit Mr. Moore’s cheques to the amount of L4OO, to
enable > him, should he require it, to pay the wages of
the men he is about to employ ; and I beg you will
move the Hon. the Colonial Treasurer to credit Mr.
Moore’s account with that amount.


“15. I purpose returning to-morrow to Rockhamp-
ton.
“I have, &c.,
(Signed) “M. C. O’Connell,
Government Resident.
“The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, &c., Sydney.”
The steps that Captain O’Connell had thus, with
characteristic energy and promptitude, taken to meet the
circumstances with which he found himself surrounded,
were continued more efficiently after the arrival of
Captain Norman, and passages were provided for a
large number of diggers—some to Melbourne direct,
and others to Sydney, either to remain there, or en
route for Melbourne.
Writing from on board the Victoria, in Keppel Bay,
on the 20th of November, the cruising correspondent of
the Argus states, “ The Victoria has just embarked the
remnant of the distressed diggers, ninety in number, and
all wearing a subdued and penitent demeanor, befitting
those who have wandered from their homes like wayward
little children, involving the employment of a beadle to
bring them back. The Eliza Goddard, Notion, Miami,
Kate, Fanny a’Garriques, and Flying Cloud, have taken
together 535, making a total of 625 shipped off by Cap-
tain Norman and the Government agent.* The Victo-
* Our Colonial Treasurer, Mr. Harker, last month brought in
his “ little bill ” for the Port Curtis relief expedition. He de-
manded of Parliament no less a sum than £15,000, which it


ria’s passengers it is intended to tranship for Melbourne
at Sydney, as there is merely deck room for them in
this ship. Not more than about 800, judging by the
experienced computation of the Gold Commissioner, can
be remaining on Rockhampton and Canoona at present,
and these include a considerable number of those patient
gleaners of the gold-fields, the Chinamen.”
The week before the Victoria sailed from Keppel
Bay the New South Wales Government sold a quantity
of land at Rockhampton, which had been recently laid
out as a township. Considering that this sale took place
after the reported gold discoveries had turned out almost
worthless, and while there was no immediate expecta-
tion of the development of new diggings in this part of
Australia, the prices realised were surprisingly high.
The Argus correspondent thus records the fact, and
accounts for it :
“ The event of the week has been the Government
was alleged would pay for miscellaneous expenses of the expe-
dition and the passage of 5,000 diggers. This I doubt, but I
doubt much more that that number received assistance. Those
for whom passages were engaged by Captain Norman, or were
brought home in the Victoria, numbered 625. Previously about
1,400 were said to have been forwarded, or to have had aid to-
wards their passages provided by Captain O’Connell, so that in
reality the number would amount to about 2,000. A reliable
authority states that the cost to the Victorian Government of
those for whom Captain O’Connell arranged was about £4,000 ;
so that to make Mr. Harker’s little bill correct, Captain Nor-
man’s 625 must have cost £ll,OOO.
K


land sale, at which allotments realising £4,000 were
disposed of on the usual terms of ten per cent, deposit,
and the balance in one month. There was great com-
petition for the land nearest the river, of which but a
limited quantity was brought forward, and it sold at
about £3OO per acre. Such prices would be highly in-
consistent with the intrinsic value of the land were such
value considered dependent upon the prospects of the
neighboring gold-fields ; but the new proprietors ignore
being influenced in their purchases by the ephemeral
glories of Canoona, and aver that the natural advantages
of Rockhampton as a shipping port for such a fertile
and promising district have alone induced the specula-
tion. The River Styx, in Broad Sound, has been re-
cently visited, to examine its capabilities as a site for a
township, and the Government report will appear in due
course ; but there is little probability of any rivalry
with Rockhampton in that quarter. The Fitzroy, with
its confluent tributaries, the Mackenzie and the Daw-
son, flow for hundreds of miles through a magnificent
pastoral country, and a region promising one day to be
eminently productive.
“ About forty miles to the southward of Keppel Bay is
the township of Gladstone, a quiet little settlement of 200
or 300 inhabitants. A small cotton plantation in the
neighborhood is the principal feature of the place, and the
cotton appears to be of excellent quality and the crops
abundant. I have made frequent explorations into the
interior, and have been charmed with the luxuriant rich-


ness of the forest scenery. Imagine a botanic garden run
wild amidst the most lovely solitudes conceivable, with
patches of open green sward, clear cool lagoons, and now
and then masses of thick tangled vegetation, bound toge-
ther with wild vines and festooned with flowering creepers
—imagine this, and throw in a few cockatoos and gaudy-
tinted parrots, with the glowing sky and hothouse tempe-
rature of the tropics, and the reader will have as correct an
idea of the thing as a mere silhouette sketch can furnish.”
Since the return of the Victoria little has been heard of
what, a few months since, was, for a brief season, the all
engrossing subject of conversation in these colonies.
Every now and then the arrival in Sydney of one of the
small coasters, upon which the trade to the Fitzroy has
relapsed, brings us news, from which it may be gathered
that the desertion of Canoona and the abandonment of
gold-digging in the district has not been so complete as
is generally supposed, and that at least two or three
hundred diggers are still at work. They appear to be
doing no more, however, than eking out a living, nor
have any new discoveries rewarded the prospectors.
One very interesting account has, however, been recently
received, and was published in the Melbourne papers on
the 4th of January. It details a canoe voyage made by
four prospectors from the upper waters of the Dawson to
Rockhampton. It possesses so much interest that I
shall transcribe it here. The adventurers were Donald
M'Leod, William Enmons, John Dinneny, and Alexan-
der M'Kinley. They say:—


“ Having come to the conclusion to leave for Rock-
hampton by way of the Fitzroy River, our first consider-
ation was to provide ourselves with the means of convey-
ance. For this the bottle-tree offered itself in unusual
abundance. This tree is one that we have never seen
resembled anywhere. In shape it is like a lemonade
bottle —small at the bottom, then bulging out as it rises
towards the centre, then gradually contracting until it
runs up like the neck of the bottle. The bark is very
hard, with a rough exterior, somewhat resembling the
outer covering of the mountain oak. When the outer
covering is removed, the inner bark is harder than the
hardest ironbark, and will turn anything but the best
tempered axe. Once through this, however, to a depth
of an inch, and then the remainder of the bulk of the
tree is as soft as a cabbage stalk. The interior portion
of the tree is used as food by the natives when very
hard up, and sometimes for a change ; eaten raw, it
somewhat resembles cocoa nut, being rich and unctuous )
and when boiled it forms itself into a jelly that in flavor
is more than equal to arrowroot. The leafy top that
crowns the stalk, for it is hardly to be called a trunk, is
erect and slightly spreading, having something of the
character of the top of the fern tree, but with leaves
more resembling those of the oak on a large scale. The
tree itself grows to a height of from 18 to 2 5 feet j and,
from the ease with which they are cleared out, form ex-
' cellent canoes. Some of them are so large that from
them canoes to carry fifty men could be made.


“On the 3rd December, then, shortly after making up
our minds, we picked out a tree, and made the canoe, in
which we had determined to risk our fortunes as far as
Rockhampton. The length of the vessel was 16 feet, with
a breadth of beam 3J feet, and a depth of 1| feet. We
left the bottom round, bark on and all, exactly as nature
formed it, and luckily for ourselves the same great
artificer had formed the native tree forward with such a
bend as well suited for running our frail bark over the
logs and snags, and sawyers, that we were sure to meet
on our road. With the same view we left her very
strong forward, so as to be prepared against any actual
collision with these or with rocks, such as we might ex-
pect in the unexplored water we were about to des-
cend.
“On the 4th December we launched onr dug-out
upon the waters of the Dawson, and occupied ourselves
for the remainder of the day by chopping out paddles
for when we might require them ; and we were prepared
to start at four p.m. We may mention here that the
nountains on the Dawson, all throughout where we have
been, are very high and heavy, seeming to ascend one
over the other, tier above tier, and that they are com-
posed of a compact sandstone, cropping up here and
there through the light and shallow soil that covers it.
The valleys, however, are exceedingly rich; the grass
grows shoulder high, and a person travelling through it
can barely be seen at six feet distance. The soil also ap-
peared to us to be very good, and to be adapted to agri-
culture. In the evening we took stock, and found our


provisions to consist of 40 lbs. of flour, a quarter of
mutton, 8 lb. of sugar, and 1 lb. of tea ; and with this
we had to perform what was then to us an unknown
distance.
“ On the sth December, at five a.m., having loaded
old dug-out, we shoved him boldly out into the current,
which, from the rapids that here occurred, was running
at the rate of seven knots. This was the rate, according
to the calculation of Mr. Mackenzie, who came out to see
its start, and accompanied us some distance on the way.
We imagine we must have gone about the same rate
whenever rapids occurred, but there were places where
the stream widened out or became deeper, and where the
current had consequently less effect; in fact, so much
so, that we were obliged to pull to hasten our progress.
The rapid we now speak of extended for a distance of
about eight miles ; rather a long stretch for a fall of the
kind. In this way we proceeded, sometimes pulling
hard, at others whirled off by the current, until at
six in the evening we reached the junction of the
Dawson and the Mackenzie, and where the united
waters became the Fitzroy.
“ This junction is supposed to be, as the crow flies,
about thirty-eight miles nearly due north from the Rio
Station, and the confluence of these streams forms a very
beautiful sheet of water, about a quarter of a mile in
width, and extending away far as the eye could reach,
until lost in the magnificent trees that border it. We
have reason to believe that we were the first white men
that ever floated canoe or boat over the confluence of


these two rivers. It appeared to us, by pocket compass,
that the Mackenzie ran in from nearly due west, whilst
the Dawson ran in from the northward, perhaps N.N.W.
At seven in the evening we went ashore, and camped on
the banks of the Fitzroy, about six miles below the junc-
tion of the Mackenzie and Dawson.
“ On the 6th, at daylight, we again manned our canoe
and travelled down the Fitzroy —no pleasant road—over
snags, and logs, and rocks, down falls, and along rapids.
During this day we met more than the ordinary number
of bars across the river. These were composed of a blue
rock, much harder than the ordinary slaty bars of aurife-
rous rivers, and also closer in the grain and much smoother
than the trap-rock that we have to go through in many
deep sinkings. These struck us as likely spots, but our
provisions were low, and we had to push on in spite of
anything. The rapids here —and in fact all up the river
—are marked by a thick tea-tree scrub, that grows right
across and in the bed of the river—so closely that at
times the passage through is scarcely perceptible. At
seven p.m. we camped for the night on a bank of the
river, a sheet of calico our only covering, and the uncer-
tainty of our position causing us to husband our pro-
visions by partaking only of a light supper.
“On the 7th we passed through a very heavy range
of mountains, in the midst of which the river has cut
itself a sinuous course, flowing through the wildest and
most magnificent country.
“On the Bth December we came early in the day to
a white mountain, which we at first took to be a quartz


hill We therefore landed and examined, but on closer
inspection found it to be of white marble, that was
everywhere broken and scattered about on the surface,
until the hill looked, at a short distance, as if covered
with snow. The marble was exceedingly white and de-
licate, without veins of any kind through it, so far as
we could see from the surface indications. We had no
time to make further examinations, for our provisions
were all but gone, and we had to hurry on to some
quarter where a fresh supply was obtainable. We, how-
ever, ascended to the top of the hill, and there, stretch-
ing away to the westward, we could see the mountains to
a distance of forty miles, lifting up their heads into the
clouds, and clad in a robe as white as that worn by the
Alps in winter time. We imagined these mountains to
be about 140 miles from Rockhampton.
« On the 9th we again passed over many rapids and
falls, without inconvenience; and on the 10 th, just as
the last of our provisions had gone, we met with Cap-
tain M‘Coy’s party, who very generously gave us flour
and sugar enough to carry us down to Rockhampton.
“ On the 11th we came to, a heavy fall over a granite
bar, down which we had to lower our canoe a depth of
some twenty feet. This spot is about thirtymiles from
Canoona.
“ On the 12th we arrived safely in our canoe at
Rockhampton, and at once took our passages for Sydney.
We imagine that the whole distance we went by water
was about 250 miles.”


Here, then, I may bring to a conclusion this brief
history of the Port Curtis rush. In after years, when
populous towns and thriving farms shall exist along
the Fitzroy, some curious student may be amused to
read in the splendid public library at Rockhampton
how we pitched our tents there in 18-58—how we came,
and saw, and went away again.
RA V AND RICHTER, PRINTERS, MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG.






