

Slg'Dg
JOURNAL OF SCIENCE.
Art. I. —Account of a Voyage to Madeira , Brazil , Juan Fer-
nandez, awd the Gallapagos Islands , performed in 1824 and
1825, a aim of examining their Natural History, dfc.
By Mr Scouler. Communicated by the Author.
Although the public are already in possession of many voy-
ages to the Pacific Ocean, yet, as the places I had an oppor-
tunity of visiting are seldom frequented by Europeans, and
as the natural history of the North West Coast of America
is still but imperfectly known, the remarks contained in the fol-
lowing Journal may perhaps be interesting.
The voyage of Captain Vancouver, and the journeys of Sir
A. M‘Kenzie, and of Captains Lewis and Clarke, have laid open
the geography of these remote regions, and added some valuable
contributions to our knowledge of their natural productions. The
botanical investigation of the North West Coast by Mr Menzies
was as complete and extensive as its survey by Captain Van-
couver, and it is only to be regretted that some equally active
zoologist had not accompanied this expedition. The overland
journey of Captains Lewis and Clarke enriched the American
Flora with many new and curious plants, whose descriptions
form the most interesting part of Pursh’s work on North
American plants. Little need be said recommendatory of the
zoological riches of a country which possesses such a variety
of animals of the tribe Rodentia or Gnawers, from the Beaver
down to the Marmot and Squirrel, and which contains the Vultur
VOL. V. NO. 11. OCTOBER 1826- O


196 Mr Scouler’s Voyage to the Pacific Ocean.
\
Calif or nianus, with many other rare or nondescript species of
the Eagle tribe.
The Hudson’s Bay Company, with an honourable zeal to ad-
vance the knowledge of those extensive regions which are with-
in the sphere of their commercial exertions, were anxious to
have a surgeon, (in their vessel about to undertake a voyage
to the Columbia River,) who, in addition to his professional ac-
quirements, was qualified to make collections in the various
branches of natural history. Through the kind recommenda-
tions of Dr Hooker and Dr Richardson, I had the good fortune
to meet with the company’s approbation, and was appointed to
visit the North West Coast of America. To the encouragement
of the company, and the cheerful assistance I obtained from
their servants, I am entirely indebted for the numerous excur-
sions and extensive collection I was enabled to make. As it
is to the Hudson’s Bay Company I am indebted for the means
of making my collection, so, on my return, the objects I had
procured would have been of very little use to the public, un-
less I had enjoyed the assistance of Dr Hooker, and the free
use of his extensive library. The following paper, containing
an account of our voyage from London to the Gallapagos, &c.
will be continued in a future number, when some papers of a
more scientific nature may also be communicated.*
On the 25th July 1824 we left Gravesend, with every thing
necessary for the preservation of plants and animals. In a me-
dical point of view we were also excellently supplied. Every
article, either of medicine or food, which could in any degree
• While in London I received much important information from Dr
Richardson and Mr Menzies with respect to the countries I was about to
examine. The knowledge acquired from Mr Menzies was peculiarly inte-
resting, as he had already explored the very coast I had to visit, and cheer-
fully allowed me at all times to examine the plants he had collected on the
North West Coast, and to direct my attention to those which were most like-
ly to be useful when cultivated in this country. Through his advice I was
induced to pay particular attention to the seeds of Guallheria Shallon,
which have already produced young plants in the Botanic Garden at Glas-
gow. Dr Richardson also gave me much instruction with regard to the best
means of preserving animals, a subject on which his advice was of the ut-
most value ; and I was farther indebted to him for specimens of many of
those interesting plants he had collected while engaged in the Arctic expe-
dition.


contribute to our comfort, or assist in preventing scurvy, was
liberally provided. But the best evidence of the prudence of
the means employed is their success; and it may be stated
that, during a long voyage of twenty-two months, we never
once could detect a symptom of scurvy on any individual in
the vessel. In the prospect of a long voyage, I esteemed my-
self fortunate in having for a companion Mr Douglas, a zea-
lous botanist, who was engaged by the Horticultural Society of
London to explore the vegetable treasures of the North West
Coast of America.
During our voyage from London to Madeira nothing occur-
red to attract the attention of the naturalist, and, as the wea-
ther was agreeable, we employed ourselves in making those ar-
rangements which our new mode of living required. Since
leaving England, the only animal we saw was the Procellaria
pelagica (Petrel,) which became more numerous as we ap-
proached the land. On the 9th August we saw the island of
Porto Santo, and afterwards that of Madeira, which, to use
the expression of Spix and Martius, “ appeared to float like a
pleasant garden on the bosom of the ocean but we were so
detained by the calmness of the weather that it was the even-
ing of the 10th before we came to anchor off Funchal. Next
morning, impatient to make the most of our limited time, we
proceeded to the interior of the island. On leaving the coast
wefound ourselves among the vallies of this fertile island, which
present the appearance of one continued vineyard, interspersed
with fields of the esculent Ai’um, and groves of Sugar-canes;
at a greater elevation these vegetables disappear, and are re-
placed by the Chesnut-tree and the Myrtle ; and the steep sides
of the Pica da Cruz are only supplied with the heath and a few
grasses and ferns common to alpine regions. Although we
collected a considerable variety of plants and insects, the re-
sults of our journey were far from satisfying our too sanguine
expectations. The phenogamous plants were sufficiently
known to us, and the alpine regions afforded but a poor sup-
ply of Lichens and Mosses.
To give any detailed description of an island so well known
as Madeira would be superfluous, and to acquire a knowledge
of its productions during our short visit was impossible. The


island consists of steep hills, intersected by numerous deep val-
lies, which are generally watered by some small rivulet, whose
supplies are obtained from the melting of the mountain snows.
The rocks are of a blackish colour, inclining to blue, and the
decomposition of the basalt affords a favourable soil for the
growth of the grape.
The fortunate situation of Madeira, placed between the
limits of the temperate and torrid zones, enables the inha-
bitants of this favoured clime to cultivate the plants of two
climates. The common potato grows in company with the
esculent Arum , and the Date of the east with the Banana, and
the Fuschia coccinea is seen in company with the Vinca and
Lonicera. In the course of our excursion we visited the mo-
nastery of Nossa Senhora del Monte, surrounded by groves of
chesnut-trees, and the cultivation of its garden seemed to
form the chief amusement of its inhabitants, who have adorn-
ed their retired abode with some of the finest plants of Eu-
rope and America. At sunset the chiming of the bells re-
minded us that it was time to return to the vessel, while our
strange pursuits had attracted the notice of the islanders, and
seemed to have excited their contempt. Next morning we
left Madeira, and by the 15th August our proximity to the tro-
pic was indicated by the abundance of flying-fish we now saw;
and, in the dull monotony of a long voyage, it was no small
pleasure to preserve and dissect even these well-known ani-
mals.
On entering the tropical regions, the marine Zoophytes be-
come more abundant, and we had now every opportunity of wit-
nessing that beautiful though still obscure phenomenon, the
luminous appearance of the ocean. We fortunately were suc-
cessful in procuring one of the most interesting of the phos-
phorescent inhabitants of the Atlantic. Since we had left the
temperate zone, we were delighted by the brilliancy of a tropi-
cal sun, and the clear and serene sky, where a cloud or a shower
are regarded as an agreeable novelty, and where, in the even-
ing, the deep azure colour of the waves is replaced by flashes of
vivid phosphorescence; but as we approached the equator, the
weather became squally and cloudy, attended by frequent
though moderate thunder storms, which generally prevail in


the vicinity of the line. On the evening of the 3d Septem-
ber, during one of these squalls, the sea became so uncom-
monly luminous as to attract even the attention of the sailors;
and on bringing up a bucket of water, we found it contained
some beautiful specimens of th e‘Pyrosoma atlanticum of Pe-
ron. It was probably from the phosphorescence of this animal
that the sea acquired its uncommon brilliancy. This animal,
or rather aggregation of animals, is about two inches long, and
as thick as the finger, somewhat cylindrical and diaphanous.
On its surface are numerous scattered tubercles; at one ex-
tremity is a circular orifice, which opens into a central cavity;
the other extremity has a globular form, and has no vestige
of an aperture. The central cavity extends through the body.
On its surface are little yellowish papillae which appear to
communicate with the external tubercles. At first sight the
Pyrosoma might be mistaken for a solitary individual of the
zoophyte class, but the researches of Cuvier prove that it is an
assemblage of smaller animals united organically together. This
animal we never found in any other part of the ocean, —a cir-
cumstance in accordance with the observations of Peron, who
remarks that these oceanic Mollusca and Zoophytes are by no
means scattered indiscriminately over the ocean, but generally
confined within definite geographical limits. See Peron, Voy-
ages, t. i. p. 488. For a figure of the Pyrosoma , see Plate 30,
Fig. 1 and 2 of the same work.
On the 11th September we crossed the equator, but were
detained for some time among the variable winds and heavy
tropical showers. The sea-birds of the torrid zone, the tropi-
cal bird (Phaeton aethereus,) and the man-of-war-bird ( Tachy-
petes aquilus,) were frequently to be seen, and seemed to be in
alliance with the JBonito, (Scomber Pelamis,) for maintaining
a perpetual war with the flying-fish. As we advanced to the
south, the Procellaria Capensis, a beautiful species of Petrel,
became very abundant, but though they greedily devour any
fatty substance we throw overboard, all our endeavours to pro*
cure one of them have as yet been unsuccessful.
25th September.—The abundance of land-birds around us,
and the number of butterflies which fluttered among the rig r
ging, indicated the vicinity of land, and in the afternoon our


expectations were realized by the sight of Cape Frio, the first
land in the new world we had an opportunity of seeing.
27th.—While sailing into the harbour of llio de Janeiro, we
were entirely occupied in preparing to add to our collections a
rich variety of specimens in fevery department of natural his-
tory. From the deck of our vessel, the hills of Brazil, co-
vered to their summits with the richest verdure, promised to
satisfy the ardour of the most zealous botanist.
28th.—To-day we landed near the Palace, which is utterly un-
worthy of being a royal residence; and in our progress through
the town, although some of the streets had a good appearance,
no public edifice of any merit attracted our attention. The
streets are narrow, and the houses are built of granite, with
which the streets are also paved. The churches are numerous,
but none of them are very remarkable for the beauty of their
architecture, and the interior is distinguished only by a taste-
less profusion of gilding. The city is supplied with water by
fountains, which draw their supplies from the neighbouring hills
by means of an aqueduct, which is certainly the most splendid
and useful public edifice in South America. Ilio also pos-
sesses several useful institutions, which, however, are still in
their infancy. There is a museum of natural history, which we
had no opportunity of seeing during our stay in Brazil, as it
was undergoing some repairs. In the town there is a sort of
public garden, which contains some curious plants; but there is
a much more extensive establishment at Botafogo, where are
several interesting oriental trees and shrubs. In this garden the
tea-plant, the bread-fruit, and the nutmeg-tree are cultivated.
After visiting the town, we set out to examine the natural
history of its environs. The coast attracted my chief attention,
that I might have an opportunity of collecting some marine
animals, —and my expectations were not disappointed. The
number of crustaceous animals with which the shore abounds
is astonishing, and the rocks are everywhere covered with fine
species of Holothuria, sea-stars ( Asteriae ,) and sea-anemones
( Actinece ,) &c. In this profusion of interesting objects, one
is more perplexed in making a selection than in procuring
specimens. In the afternoon I returned to the ship with a
collection only limited by ability to carry it.


29th. —The heavy showers prevented us from collecting
many plants, as one is exposed in the woods to the double in-
convenience of the wet and the mosquitoes. I was, however,
fortunate in finding a friend, whose hospitality and knowledge
of the country enabled me to spend my time to more advan-
tage than a stranger could otherwise have done. To Mr
Boag I was further indebted for considerable additions to my
collection of reptiles and insects, and in directing me to those
places where the most interesting plants were to be found.
30th. —The few days I had now to spend at Rio were occu-
pied in making excursions to the neighbouring woods and
hills. But although plants were easily collected, they were
rendered so moist by the frequent rains as to render the task
of drying them extremely difficult. In these excursions, it is
with intense curiosity one newly arrived from Europe visits the
woods of a tropical country, and sees growing, in their native
wildness, those plants which are cultivated with so much trouble
and expence in more northern regions ! Here one sees the Mela-
stomae and Bauhiniae unregarded, except by the curious fo-
reigner, and the trees of Europe rivalled in height by the ferns
of the tropics.
The most abundant rock in the neighbourhood of Rio is
granite. Near the sea this rock is interesting, from the large
size of the crystals of felspar and mica which enter into its
composition ; some of the crystals of felspar were from two to
three inches in length. In the vicinity of the coast this rock
is protected from the influence of the weather by the dense
vegetation which covers the soil. In ascending one of the
neighbouring hills, the rocks are quite exposed, and destitute
of vegetables; these rocks are of a white bleached appearance,
and consist of decomposing granite, so altered, that its com-
ponent minerals can scarcely be recognised. The summit of
this hill is also composed of granite, but not in a decomposing
state, like that lower down; nor is it of so coarse a texture as
the granite of the coast.
The crystals of mica and felspar are smaller, and the for-
mer is of a deeper colour than it is near the sea. On this hill
(Corcovado) the Brazilian government have a telegraph ; and
no place could be better adapted for such a purpose, as it com-
mands a beautiful and extensive view of the coast. To the


north, Cape Frio is distinctly seen, while the city of Rio and
the bay of Botafoga appear like a magnificent chart spread at
the feet of the spectator. The fatigue of this journey is
amply repaid by the beauty of the view; and the descent
under a meridian sun is one of the most cheerful scenes a
naturalist can witness. The numberless variety of insects, dis-
playing the most brilliant colours to advantage in the rays of
the sun—the serpents and lizards issuing from their holes in
quest of their prey,—exhibit an appearance of life and activity
that cannot fail to please.
No excursion in the vicinity of Rio can be more agreeable
than exploring the Corcovado, in the vicinity of the aqueduct,
where the traveller enjoys its cooling streams, and, for the
same reason, finds animals more frequent in such a situation.
Here one may procure an endless variety of insects,* and of the
most curious reptiles, while the strange appearance of toucans,
humming-birds, and parrots, pleases the ornithologist. In pro-
ceeding further up the hill, the streams which supply the aque-
duct spread over a large surface of granite rocks, in the form of
gentle cascades. After leaving the cascades of Caryoca, the as-
cent became more steep; but one had little reason to complain,
as there was always a supply of cooling water at command, and
curiosity was always kept awake by the variety of new objects
which attract attention. In this situation the Bignonia Cham-
helaini grows in great abundance. During this excursion, I
was often interrupted by the unfortunate slaves, who seemed
to be aware of the nature of my occupations, and brought me
many fine insects for a small pecuniary reward ; one of them
brought me a fine living specimen of a beautiful snake, Coluber
venustissimus .
On the 13th October we left Rio, and proceeded on our
voyage to Cape Horn, our progress southward was soon in-
dicated by a corresponding change of climate. The absence
of the tropic bird and man-of-war-bird, (Tachypetes,) and
other inhabitants of the torrid zone, was now compensated by
the appearance of the petrels and albatrosses of the southern
hemisphere. We succeeded in procuring plenty of specimens
of the Cape petrel, ( Procellaria Capensis ,) by means of a fish-
* Papilio Torquatus, Pandrosus, Evahder, Colias, Statira, Thecoa, Ga-
lathca.


hook hated with a little suet; while off the Patagonian coast
we caught about 200 individuals, which, notwithstanding their
fishy flavour, were not disliked by the sailors. The Petrel,
when caught, never fails to vomit a considerable quantity of
yellowish oily fluid on his enemy, and on dissection the source
of this supply is easily detected. The first stomach is large
and membranous, and thickly set with numerous glandular
follicles, which appear to be the organs which secrete this oily
fluid, the only defensive weapon this animal possesses. The
Petrel lives chiefly on the minute Crustacea, as we found no
other kind of animals in the numerous stomachs we examined.
29th.—For several dayspast great quantities of sea-weed have
floated past us, and we at last succeeded in procuring a mass of
this fucus, which, on examination, proved to be the F.pyriferus.
The roots of this plant abounded in marine animals, forming
a little floating menagerie of Crustacea and zoophytes. We
obtained five species of sertularia, two species of testaceous
mollusca, two sea-stars, (Asterice,) two fine species of Cancer ,
an Echinus , and a Hirudo.
4th November.—We have now got round Cape Horn with-
out experiencing any of those dreadful storms which are far
more alarming in the journals of travellers than off the coast
of Terra del Fuego. The chief difficulty arises from the con-
stant westerly winds; but in the summer season probably
little danger is to be apprehended.
Bth. —This morning we were nearly becalmed, and had abun-
dance of albatrosses in the vicinity of the ship. In the course
of an hour we succeeded in procuring forty specimens, all of
the dark-coloured variety, D.fuligmosa. Some of these birds
measured seven feet between the tips of the wings. Their
weight did not correspond well with their size, as they generally
weighed about five pounds. This was owing to the very thick
plumage with which they were provided. The physiognomy of
the albatross is very remarkable ; its flat head and crooked bill
give it some resemblance to the owl, which is much heighten-
ed by its large eyes and very convex cornea, —a structure
which renders it probable that this animal seeks its food chiefly
during twilight. The oesophagus of this bird is furnished at
its upper part with an apparatus similar to what we find in the


gullets of the marine turtles, and probably for a similar use,
as the albatross lives principally on molluscous animals of the
genus Sepia.
As we advanced to the north, the D.fvliginosa became more
scarce, while the larger species, the D. exulans , appeared more
abundant; and, as far as our experience goes, we always found
that the dark leaden-coloured species was more plentiful in high
latitudes, and that the D. exulans always approached nearer
the confines of the tropics. The last named species is by far
the largest of aquatic birds; one of them we examined mea-
sured twelve feet between the extremities of the wings, and
weighed eighteen pounds. The feathers of this species
abounded in a large species of Ricinus , and in their intestinal
canal we found two intestinal worms, —the one was an Ascaris ,
which inhabited the oesophagus, and the other was a Taenia ,
which abounded in the great intestines.
14th December.—This forenoon we saw the island of Mas-
safuero, bearing N.N.E.; and the appearance of land, how-
ever inaccessible, is always agreeable, especially during a te-
dious voyage. This island had a rugged appearance, termi-
nating in steep, almost perpendicular, rocks, which render
it of very difficult access. The highest land might be about
200 feet above the level of the sea. The only inhabi-
tants of this rock are the goats and seals; and on account
of the latter it was frequently visited by vessels occupied in
killing seals, and carrying their skins to China. The master
of one of these vessels, alike destitute of every principle of ho-
nour and humanity, formed the design of taking away a num-
ber of the Inhabitants of Easter Island, and leaving them to
kill seals for him on this desolate spot. With this intention he
proceeded to Easter Island, and after seizing a number of the
unsuspecting natives who had visited the ship, and secured
his unhappy victims, he resumed his voyage to finish his
scheme. After being three days at sea, they were allowed to
come on deck, under the idea that distance from land would
have rendered them tractable, as all hopes of again seeing their
native island must now be at an end. In this, however, he was
disappointed, for they all leaped overboard, expecting to swim
to Easter Island. The boat was sent to pick them up, but


they preferred death to slavery, and, by their dexterous div-
ing, successfully eluded the pursuit of the sailors. They were
seen to swim away in different directions, as each thought was
most direct to their native island, which they were never to re-
visit.
At a distance Juan Fernandez brings to recollection the
appearance of Madeira, only its superior verdure is rendered
doubly charming by the vast extent of ocean one traverses be-
fore he can visit its fertile valleys. The island was approached
with equal interest by every one in the vessel, but with differ-
ent feelings; the seamen regarded it as classic ground, from
the romance connected with its history, and the naturalists ex-
pected many additions to their collections, in a land as yet un-
touched by the botanist.
15th.—We landed in a small bay at the northern extre-
mity of Juan Fernandez, and hastened to explore the hills
whose verdure promised us abundance of plants. The level
land near the coast had more resemblance to a European corn-
field than to a desolate valley of the Pacific Ocean, being en-
tirely overgrown with oats, interspersed in different places with
wild carrots. On penetrating through the corn-fields, we dis-
covered a small cavern excavated from the decomposing rock,
and bearing evident traces of having been recently inhabited.
A kind of substitute for a lamp was suspended from the roof,
and the quantity of bones scattered about showed there was
no scarcity of provisions on the island. A little to the eastward
of this strange abode, our curiosity was amply gratified by a
beautiful example of romantic scenery. A natural arch, about
seven feet in height, admitted us to a small bay, bounded on
all sides by steep perpendicular rocks, continually washed by
the waves. The almost inaccessible crags afforded a secure
retreat to the sea-birds, which resort thither to deposit their
eggs. These rocks are of a more volcanic appearance than
those of Madeira, and contain many small crystals of a green-
coloured mineral. This bay abounded in sponges, which had
been washed ashore, and many of them in a very fine state.
We succeeded, though with much difficulty, in detaching some
specimens of a species of Cerastium , which grew on the surface
of the rocks.


Having satisfied our curiosity respecting the shore, we pro-
ceeded up the valley, in expectation of finding more plants.
Here we found a little stream of excellent water, which was
first detected by its rippling, as its surface was entirely con-
cealed from our notice by the immense quantities of mint
{Mentha piperita) and balm {Melissa officinalis) which grow
on its margins. In the afternoon we returned to the ship, well
satisfied with our excursion ; but the boat’s crew had procured
very little water, as the stream lost itself in the sand about a
mile and a half from the beach.
]7th. —This morning we landed in Cumberland Bay, which
we found far better than the place we had visited yesterday,
for procuring water and vegetables. On approaching the land-
ing-place, we were surprised by the appearance of smoke aris-
ing among the trees, and by seeing goats feeding near the
shore. When we got ashore, we were much pleased by find-
ing an Englishman, who welcomed us to the island, and offer-
ed us all the assistance in his power. He told us, that, when
ourboat first made its appearance, he was afraid we had belonged
to some Spanish privateers, and had concealed himself in the
woods, as his little establishment had been formerly destroyed
by these unwelcome visitors. Our new friend’s name was Wil-
liam Clark; he had sailed from Liverpool several years ago,
and visited most places in the South Pacific. At present
he belongs to a party of English and Chilians, employed in
killing the goats and bullocks, which are plentiful here, and in
remitting their flesh and skins to different parts of the Chilian
coast. The rest of the party had gone to the other side of the
island, and would not return for a week. We were highly de-
lighted with the beautiful situation where they had fixed their
abode. A fine stream of water ran into the bay, a few yards
from the landing-place, and the house was situated amidst a
shrubbery of Fuschia , mixed with peach and apple-trees. The
sea abounded in fishes, and the fruits of Europe grew in the
greatest profusion. In the vicinity of Cumberland Bay we saw
the following foreign vegetables, chiefly European : oats, pears,
apples, strawberries, peaches, vines, rue, mint, balm, radish,
Indian cress, and figs.
Our guide had very little European furniture in his house,


but we were much surprised at the extent of his library, as he
possessed upwards of twenty English books on different sub-
jects. The most curious article he had was an iron pot with the
bottom knocked out. It was, however, too valuable an article
to be thrown away, and he had fitted a wooden one to it; when
he had occasion to boil any thing, he immersed it in the earth
and kindled a fire round its sides.
During our short excursion to the interior we had no occasion
to complain of the poverty of the country, as it abounded in
the most beautiful plants and shrubs. The dry soil was co-
vered by an evergreen Arbutus and a shrubby Campanula ,
(bell-flower,) and almost every sheltered rock afforded a differ-
ent species of fern. During this excursion we w r ere tempted to
stop in the vicinity of the old fort by the abundance of ripe
strawberries which grew on the sides of the hill; these straw-
berries were of small size and pale colour, but of a very agree-
able flavour. One curious circumstance is the redness of the
soil in this situation, which is, however, much exaggerated by
Lord Anson, when he says it equals vermilion in brightness;
but the redness of the ground was so inconsiderable that it
would not have attracted our attention had we not been di-
rected to it by Lord Anson’s statements.*
Cumberland Bay used to be the favourite resort of the Eng-
lish privateers and whalers; and in time of war its utility to
them was so great as to excite the jealousy of the Spaniards,
who, in 1765, constructed a battery mounting fifty guns, to
command the harbour, and at the same time formed a set-
tlement on the island ; but in a few years this colony was
abandoned. In 1811 the island was resettled and used as a
place of banishment for convicts from Chili. This attempt,
however, like the preceding, was given up after a short trial.
At present the island is seldom visited by ships, but is still
the occasional residence of the adventurers employed in pro-
curing cattle and fishing. The battery, which still remains
* These two statements may be reconciled by supposing that Lord An-
son saw the soil when the sun was near the western horizon. We have seen
the same soil exhibit the same discrepancy of colour under different cir-
cumstances. — Ed.


almost uninjured, is situated on an eminence about 500
yards from the beach, and effectually commands the landing-
place. Most of the guns remained till a few years ago, when
they were removed by the Chilians to prevent their falling in-
to the hands of the Spanish royalists. The ground on which
the fort stands consists of a red-coloured earth, formed by the
decomposition of the basaltic rocks, and is plentifully covered
by strawberries, now in a state of ripeness, and very abundant.
To the west of the battery a church, and an excellent oven,
still remain. The church is built in the form of the Latin
cross, and bears the following inscription. “La caza de Dios
overtodel cielo y saccolacaesta, 24 de Septiembre 1811.” Al-
though the doors and windows of this building had been re-
moved, it still possessed the font, and the walls still retained
their whitewashed appearance. To the north east of the
church this beautiful valley is quite covered by corn-fields,
which are still divided from each other by their former land-
marks. As the valley approaches the mountains, the clus-
ters of ferns raising their green fronds on the margins of the
stream, have a most pleasing appearance, and, in my opinion,
forms the most beautiful vegetable ornament of the island.
Such is the present state of that island which afforded to
Lord Anson’s ships so much refreshment after his voyage round
Cape Horn, and fully merits all the praises he bestows on
it. With a climate similar to Madeira, and a similar geolo-
gical structure, it is probable that Juan Fernandez should af-
ford equal advantages for the cultivation of the vine ; and those
plants which we saw appeared to grow luxuriantly, and were
loaded with plenty of grapes, but still in an early state.
Land animals are by no means numerous, nor, with the
exception of the seal, can Juan Fernandez boast of a single
indigenous mammiferous animal. The bullock, the goat,
and the rat, are the only other animals of this class, and all of
them have been introduced. The cattle are now driven from
the north side of the island, since the hunters have fixed
their residence there; but they are still abundant on the south-
ern extremity, which is more inaccessible. The hunters in
killing the bullocks drive them into a small plain, bounded


by steep hills, and then shoot them. In killing the goats, a
different method is adopted. The people employed in this
difficult business lie down in those rocky situations which the
goats frequent, and when they approach the hunters, their ham-
strings are cut with a sharp knife.
Juan Fernandez is entirely destitute of lizards and ser-
pents, at least we never saw any.
The rocky shores afford a safe retreat to the Cape petrels and
other sea-fowls which abound near the island, so that it was in
vain we attempted to reach their nests. The only land-birds we
saw were pigeons and owls. The former are exceedingly abun-
dant, especially in the vicinity of the corn-fields, from which
they probably obtain their chief support. The owls are of small
size, and by no means abundant; they appear to be confined
to the more secluded places, at a distance from the shore.
The bay abounds in fishes, which are to be procured with
very little trouble, so that, if the visitor fails in procuring
cattle, he may at all events depend on a plentiful supply of
fresh provisions. Our limited time did not allow us to examine
the different fish we caught with sufficient care; but the most
common, and by far the best, is the cod (Gadus morhua;)
the next in frequency is the lump-fish (Cyclopterus lumpus,)
which is seen adhering to almost every stone; and this help-
less animal becomes a ready prey to the seal and the sea-fowls.
The articulated animals are the most plentiful on this island;
and although we saw few insects, I have every reason to
believe they are exceedingly numerous at a more advanced
period of the year, for almost every vegetable had its pecu-
liar caterpillar feeding on it. Near the shore we found seve-
ral kinds of crab, and the deep water abounded in a beautiful
species of lobster, which may be described in a future paper.
The antennae were as long as the body, which is of a fine
red colour, and thickly set with strong sharp spines. The
difficulty of obtaining this animal, from the quickness with
which it swims, and the trouble of laying hold of it from its
sharp spines, rendered it an interesting specimen.
At low water we found some species of corallines and spon-
ges, and a sea-star (. Asterias ,) furnished with from twenty-five
to thirty-eight rays.


19th December.—This morning we left Juan Fernandez,
and directed our course to the Gallapagos. The island of Juan
Fernandez, for beauty of scenery and richness of verdure, ex-
exceeds any place we visited during our voyage. Independent
of its natural beauty, the deserted houses and ruined gardens
give variety to the landscape, and add an interest to the sce-
nery which the unsettled desert cannot possess. Previous to
going on board the ship, our countryman, whose exhausted
wardrobe we had in some degree replenished, gave us the ac-
ceptable present of a goat which he had feeding near the
house, and would gladly have added more to our fresh stock,
had it been in his power.
7th January.—Our passage to the Gallapagos was the most
pleasant part of our voyage. We enjoyed the serene weather
and cloudless sky of the tropical regions. During this wea-
ther the Noddy (Sterna stolida ) for the first time alighted on
our vessel, a bird which we only saw in the tropical climates.
This bird is remarkable for the stupidity with which it al-
lows itself to be taken; it would perch on the rigging, and,
regardless of our presence, quietly allow itself to be laid hold of.
9th. —We saw Chatham Island, one of the Gallapagos.
The appearance of this island at a distance indicates but little
fertility. The land consisted of low conical hills rising gra-
dually from the ocean, and bounded by a flat sandy beach,
against which the sea beat with some violence. On the hills
many dark patches of land appeared entirely deprived of ve-
getable covering.
10th.—To-day the boat was sent to land on Jameses island,
to ascertain what was to be found in the way of fresh provi-
sions. The land is in some places very abundant in trees and
shrubs, while other situations presented a bare and exposed
surface, consisting of masses of lava. Such at least was the
appearance from the ship. In the afternoon the boat return-
ed, bringing two very large turtles (T. viridis,) Iguanas, and
plenty of fish. Those who had been in the boat assured us
that the shore abounded in turtles, and that tortoises were to be
got in the woods. They had not however seen any fresh water.
11th.—Next day we went ashore in the long-boat, and
found considerable difficulty in landing, on account of the


heavy surf which beat against the beach. The place where
we now were consisted of a low sandy bank which separated
a small salt water lake from the sea. Here we found traces of
previous visitors, but the most unequivocal and most affecting
was the tomb of an American officer. This unassuming grave
was only accidentally discovered, as it is concealed from no-
tice by a thick bush-wood, cotton trees, and Tournefortias. At
the head of the grave was a board painted black, and bearing
the following inscription, so honourable to the deceased. “ Sa-
cred to the memory of John Cowan, lieutenant of the U. S,
frigate Essex, who died here September 1813. His memory
is lamented by his friends and country, and honoured by his
brother officers.” *
On penetrating into the country, we found very few plants,
at least few in comparison to what we might expect in such a
climate. The abundance and interesting nature of the ani-
mals well compensated for the scarcity of plants; but the
heat was so intense, and the moisture of the country so great,
that we were unable to preserve many birds and fishes which
we thought new or curious. The rocks were covered by
pelicans and other web-footed birds watching the fish, and,
near the coast, various species of heron were very common.
The pelican belonged to the common species, (P. onocrotalus,)
but most of them were young individuals.
In this excursion we trode, for the first time, on volcanic
ground, and made our way, with difficulty, through the loose
lava, which readily gave way under us, and reminded us of the
slag and melted matter in the vicinity of a smelting furnace.
Near this place we saw a large column of volcanic matter, si-
tuated amidst a stream of lava; its surface was rough and un-
even, and in many places deeply excavated—it reached to the
height of sixty or seventy feet. During my excursion, I had
not the good fortune to see any vestiges of a crater ; but Mr
Douglas, who had taken a different route, informed me he
• This unfortunate gentleman was killed in a duel with one of his fel-
low-officers. In another part of the island we saw the remains of a small
hut, or rather cave, which had been occupied by a Spaniard, who spent
two years on this wretched place, where he had been left by his com-
panions.
VOL. V. NO. 11. OCTOBER 1826. P


had seen one, a circumstance which we had expected, as we
saw one of the conical hills of Albemarle island burning
every night we were in the vicinity of this group of islands.
In the woods, where the grass is abundant, we found the tor-
toises grazing, and many of them of large size, weighing pro-
bably 200 pounds.
The tortoise, ( T. Indica ,) we found to be much more agree-
able food than the green turtle, as it is quite free from the fishy
flavour which the other possesses. We found much difficulty
in taking them to the shore, on account of the excessive heat,
and the roughness of the ground.
The birds were so tame, as to be easily knocked from the
branches on which they were perched, and frequently alight-
ed on the sticks we happened to have in our hand. In re-
turning to the beach, we killed plenty of Iguanas, an animal
of the lizard tribe, and esteemed a most delicate kind of food
in tropical countries. Although our Iguanas differed very
much from the West Indian species, both in size and appear-
ance, being larger and of a yellowish colour, we found them
much more palatable food than turtle.
The following is an account of the most frequent animals
we saw during our short visit to James’s island. The only
mammiferous animal is a species of seal, with very short ears
and short brown hair. We killed one individual, but it soon
became so putrid, that we were unable to make a descrip-
tion, a circumstance which prevented us from examining,
in a detailed manner, many other animals. In addition to
the birds already alluded to, we saw a beautiful bird of
the genus Sula, nearly allied to the soland goose; its co-
lours are very fine, and, what is most remarkable, the feet
and legs are of a beautiful azure colour. On the elevated
rocks, we frequently saw a small though handsome species of
eagle, of a golden yellow colour. A small species of pigeon
was very common in the woods, distinguished by the beauty
of its plumage, and the bright metallic hue of the feathers of
its neck.
The reptiles, which are very numerous and interesting, are
different kinds of turtles and lizards. The tortoise frequents
the shady places in the interior of the island, where grass is


plentiful, which they consume in large quantities. As the
tortoise is destitute of all offensive weapons, he draws his head
and limbs within his shell on the approach of danger, making
at the same time a hissing noise. These animals are capable
of enduring very long fasts, and in cold weather they remain
quite torpid. I kept one of these tortoises for eight months,
and, during that time, it did not consume above an ounce of
food.
The green turtle is very plentiful, and attains a great size,
often weighing 300 pounds; and, in the course of two days,
we caught about thirty of these animals. We had two me-
thods of taking the turtle ; we either surprised them while
they came on shore, or caught them while asleep on the wa-
ter. In this case we approached them in the boat, making as
little noise as possible, while a man stood ready to fix a toma-
hawk into the shell, and to hold him till he could be lifted in-
to the boat. This last method was attended by an inconve-
nience, that the turtle was often so injured, as to die in a few
days.
The woods abound in a species of Iguana, which I think
is new, but, unfortunately, the specimen I attempted to pre-
serve became so putrid, that I was obliged to throw it away.
It is almost twenty-nine inches long ; the back and sides are
of a brown colour, and the belly is yellow; the whole skin
was covered by small scaly tubercles, and had a ridge of very
large pointed ones extending along the back, from the occi-
put to the extremity of the tail. There was a dilatation under
the throat, but no large tubercles in that situation. The
tongue was fleshy, inextensible, and slightly bifurcated at the
point. The Iguana lives entirely upon leaves and fruits, and
burrows deeply into the ground. * It is a timid inoffensive
creature, and always runs from the pursuer, unless when
wounded, when it turns upon its enemy. We killed great
numbers of them, and used them as food. There is a smaller
aquatic species, belonging to the genus Monitor , with a flat
perpendicular tail, but it is much rarer than the other.
* The sandy ground near the coast is quite ploughed up by these ani„
mals, so as to render walking in the vicinity of their abodes very trouble-
some.


Although snakes are said to abound on the Gallapagos, yet
in all our excursions we never saw a single species.
Shells and molluscous animals were not very plentiful. Crabs
of different species were very numerous, and some of them
very beautiful. The land-crab was common near the shore, and
appeared to be more gregarious than the other species ; they
were seen running about in small families of twenty or thirty
individuals, and when pursued covered themselves in the sand.
On the 19th we left these islands and proceeded to the
north-west coast.
All the islands of this group have a similar appearance. In
some places the coast rises into perpendicular rugged cliffs,
attaining the height of 200 feet, and in other situations it as-
sumes the form of a low sandy beach, separating some salt-
water lakes from the sea. The mountains are generally of a
conical shape, very gradual ascent, and moderate elevation.
The country, in most places, is pretty well furnished with
trees, except where the lava has run down, and in these situa-
tions very few vegetables grow.
Art. ll.— lllustration of some Facts connected with the De-
velopement of Magnetism by Rotation. By Peter Bar-
low, Esq. F.R.S. Mem. Imp. Ac. Petrop. &c. In a Letter
to the Editor.
Dear Sir,
As I feel interested on some of the subjects alluded to in Mr
Christie’s letter in your last number, I must beg to be allowed
to make a few observations, with a view to correcting any er-
rors which may have been committed in the reports of our
experiments. Neither Mr Christie nor myself can wish to
have any thing recorded but what we believe to be correct,
and therefore the plainer the facts connected with these ques-
tions are stated, the better.
Mr Christie objects first, to that part of the historical no-
tice, in which it is said that “ in repeating some of my expe-
riments,” he was led to observe that property of iron which


which are sometimes placed outside, I should suggest, that be-
tween the frame and the painted glass there should be a screen
of ground-glass. In this case the form of the stud would re-
quire to be as in Fig. 7, by which the panes of ground-glass
would be fixed in the same manner as the painted ones, and
the effect of the shadows so much dispersed as to be nearly
invisible to an eye inside of the building.
9, Atholl Crescent ,
%oth November 1826.
Art. Vlll. — Account qf‘ a Voyage to Madeira , Brazil , Juan
Fernandez , and the Gallipagos Islands , performed in 1824
and 1825, with a view of examining their Natural History.
By Mr Scoulk.r. Communicated by the Author. (Con-
tinued from vol. v. p. 214.)
Since leaving England we enjoyed an almost uninterrupted
course of fine weather, but from the beginning of February,
when we left the northern tropic, till our arrival in the Colum-
bia River on the Bth of April, we were exposed to the
N.W. gales, which at this season render the approach to the
shores of New Albion extremely dangerous. During the
stormy weather many albatrosses were seen near the vessel;
and on the 17th February we succeeded in procuring several
individuals. It is a remarkable circumstance, that in works
on Zoology this bird is always mentioned as peculiar to the
southern hemisphere. Although the occurrence of the bird
in the N. Pacific has attracted but little attention, it was ascer-
tained long ago by Mr Menzies, and is recorded in Vancou-
ver’s Voyage. It is also worthy of notice, that though the al-
batross is so common in both sides of the tropics in the
Pacific, no one, as far as I am acquainted, has ever detected
it in the Northern Atlantic Ocean. After repeated examina-
tions and dissections, we could detect no difference either in
its external appearance or internal structure, from that of the
D.fuliginosa , taken off the coast of Tierra del Fuego.
sth March.—While off this coast, we had a further confirma-
tion of the opinion of Peron, formerly mentioned, with regard to


the distribution of marine Zoophytes. While in lat. 43 N. E.
the sea was covered with immense fleets of the Medusa velella
of Gmelin, extending in every direction around us, a circum-
stance which did not occur during any other period of our
voyage; and the obstinacy with which these little animals
continue in the same situation, is well illustrated by the fact,
that they were seen by Captain Vancouver in the same latitude,
more than thirty years since.*
3d April.—The sight of Cape Disappointment cheered us
with the anticipation that our voyage would speedily be at
an end, and the probability of coming to anchor before sunset
threw an air of cheerfulness over every individual. But the
object of our wishes was not yet to be gratified, and the gentle
breeze which had carried us on, soon augmented into a severe
gale, and we were obliged to give up the attempt, and wait for
a more favourable opportunity. After experiencing another
storm, in addition to the many we had already encountered,
our next attempt was more fortunate, and on the Bth April
we were securely anchored in Baker’s Bay. On approaching
the coast, Cape Disappointment is the most remarkable ob-
ject, and its steep sides are seen at a great distance. On ad-
vancing nearer the shore, similar rocks are seen to line the
coast for a great way to the northward. The southern side of
the coast consists of the low sandy beach of Point Adams, and
is the usual residence of a tribe of Indians, distinguished for
their hostility to all visitors.
9th. —Impatient to acquire some knowledge of the vegetable
productions of the country, which was for some months to be
the field of our labours, we proceeded to make a short ex-
cursion along the banks of the river, but as we had as yet
seen none of 1 the natives* prudence required that we should
not wander too far. On leaping from the boat, the first ob-
ject which attracted our notice, was the Gualtheria shallon
growing in abundance among the rocks, and covered with its
beautiful roseate flowers. We then entered a forest of gigan-
tic pine trees, among a brushwood of Menziesia Jerruginea and
• Vancouver saw these Zoophytes about the same period of the year, in
lat. 35° 25' N., and we found them in the same parallel, but they extended
as far north as latj'43°.


different species of American currant, and the beautiful Tril-
liams and Smilacinae were beginning to expand their blossoms,
and the Mosses and J linger manniae, nourished by thd winter
rains, were covered with capsules. On our return we collect-
ed a few specimens of a small Polypodium , which is probably
new to the American Flora.
The appearance of vegetation differed considerably from that
to which we had been previously accustomed. The whole country
appeared one continued pine forest; but on a closer examina-
tion, we found many places, which, from their marshy nature,
refused support to the larger trees. These were covered by
various grasses, and abounded in willows, and various kinds
of currant. In more open places, as along the banks of the
river, different kinds of brambles abound, many of them pe-
culiar to this part of America, and equally distinguished for
the beauty of their flowers, and the flavour of their fruit. But
nothing is more worthy of notice than the verdure which is
found throughout the year under the shade of the pine trees.
This appearance arises from the sallal (Gualtheria shallon)
whose evergreen leaves ornament these otherwise sterile situa-
tions, while they form the important article of support to the
natives. At the time of our arrival there was no snow on the
ground, and it is rarely seen even in winter. Vegetation at this
time (April) was little more forward than in England at the
same season, but it soon advanced with a rapidity unknown in
England.
10th.—This morning we were called on deck by the agree-
able intelligence that several canoes were approaching, and in
a short time we had five of them around the vessel, containing
several families of Indians. Our interesting visitors were of a
light olive complexion, and small stature, seldom exceeding-
five feet six inches. Their long straight dark hair extending
down their shoulders, and careful extirpation of their beards,
made them appear much younger than they really were. Their
foreheads were remarkably flat, and their cheek-bones rather
prominent. Several of them were clothed in articles of Euro-
pean manufacture, as shirts, blankets and stockings, which
they wore without shoes ; others had only their native dresses.
The individuals of this last class had only a robe made of the


skins of a species of marmot, ( Arctomys) ill adapted either
for the purposes of comfort or decency, and a broad sugar-loaf
shaped hat, which protected their shoulders from the rain. In
addition to the skin robe, the women had petticoats made and
plaited, which reached to their knees. An old Indian, clothed
in a large blanket, and his wife, were permitted to come on
board. They were at much pains to give us some idea of
their consequence, and for this purpose, they had a few En-
glish words, which with them denoted every thing. They
were well provided with arms of different kinds; and in addi-
tion to bows and arrows, every canoe possessed several fowl-
ing-pieces and daggers of different shapes. We regaled these
people with bread and molasses, with which they were highly
delighted; and after remaining three hours, during which they
behaved in the most peaceable manner, they left us, and pro-
ceeded up the river.
11th.—We landed this morning in Baker’s Bay, with the in-
tention of travelling across Cape Disappointment to the ocean,
that we might have an opportunity of studying the marine
productions of the N. Pacific.
In this journey, we experienced much difficulty, not only
from the steepness of the rocks, but also from the numerous
pools of fresh water, which, being too deep, obliged us to take
a most circuitous route. On arriving at the ocean, we found the
primary object of our enterprise defeated, as the coast con-
sisted of almost perpendicular rocks, against which the waves
beat with great violence, and scarcely afforded a sea-weed or shell.
In these rocks we saw many deep caverns, most of them filled by
the tide at high water. Here the eagle (Falco leucocephahis,)
takes up his retreat; and the frequent appearance of these ani-
mals devouring their prey augments the wildness of this dreary
scene. Our excursion was not altogether useless, as we made
a very considerable collection of acotyledonous plants, and ob-
tained some curious species of land shells in the woods. From
the great abundance of Musci and Jungermannice on the
north-west coast, we had been led to expect a corresponding
variety of new species, but in this we were disappointed, and
most of the species we found were common to Europe; but,
from the moisture and mildness of the climate, they acquired


their full developement; and we found many of them in a
state of fructification, whose capsules are but rarely seen in
Europe.
12th.—To-day we landed at Fort-George, which is situated
on the south side of the river about eight miles from the ocean,
and werereceived with much kindness by the company’s ser-
vants who remained there; but we were informed, that most
of the people are at present employed in building another fort
in a more convenient situation at Point Vancouver, about eighty
miles farther up the river. At the same time we learned, that
the different tribes that inhabit the banks of the Columbia
were at present engaged in war, a circumstance which would
oblige us to confine our excursions to the neighbourhood of
the fort. The history of this commotion may be interesting,
as it unfolds a very frequent cause of war among the Indians
of the N. W. coast. The chief of the Chunooks, whose vil-
lage is situated in the vicinity of the fort, had acquired much
wealth and influence from his invariable kindness towards the
settlers, was the leader of this war. This old chief, Comcom-
by, had two sons, who, from their amiable conduct, and their
desire to acquire such knowledge as would enable them to
improve their countrymen, were much esteemed by the Euro-
peans, and possessed in a high degree the affection of the In-
dians. The youngest of them, named Schalachun, was the
destined heir of his father, who had bestowed on him his own
name, was affected with a pulmonary disease, and his brother
was soon after seized with the same complaint. These young
men he committed to the care of a neighbouring chief, who
was thought to possess great skill in medicine, but in spite of
all his knowledge, both the chiefs fell victims of an incurable
disorder, and the ignorant natives thought the medical chief
had procured their deaths by enchantments. Another son of
Comcomby’s resolved to punish the medical chief, and caused
him to be assassinated as he was going to visit the fort; and
in consequence of this cruel deed, the different tribes took up
arms, some to punish, and some to protect the murderers.
The day on which we landed at the fort, friends of Comcom-
by were preparing to attack the other party; but in spite of
their superior numbers, they were repulsed with disgrace.


Although the people of the Company never interfere in the
quarrels of the natives, except to recommend peaceful mea-
sures, we did not like to venture much into the woods, as it
would not be prudent to meet the Indians in their present ir-
ritated state.
Fort-G-corge is a square building, consisting entirely of
wood, and situated about 300 yards from the river. It is sur-
rounded by palisades, and furnished with bastions. The prin-
cipal gate looks towards the river, and opens into a large
court. On the west side are the stores and warehouses, and
opposite to them the houses of the people, and the shops
of the merchants. On the south side, is the mess-room, and
the apartments of the gentlemen. They have cleared about
eighty acres of land around the fort, on which they raise fine
crops of potatoes, and the banks of the river afford plenty of
pasture for their cattle. The hogs, which thrive remark-
ably well, were brought from the Sandwich Islands, and the
horned cattle from California. The Indian village is situated
a little to the west of the fort, on a sandy beach, and may
contain about twelve houses, each of them holding from fif-
teen to thirty inmates.
14th.—While at the fort, we had an opportunity of seeing the
war-dance of the Indians. About fifty of them paraded from
a small hill in the vicinity of the fort, to the house of their
chief. They were dressed and painted in a most hideous man-
ner, and had many different kinds of arms, as fowling-pieces,
pistols, bows, arrows, and daggers. Some had their faces
painted black, and their hair powdered with the down of fowls;
others were painted with alternate lines of blue, red, and black.
Their war-dress consisted of tanned elk skins, resembling a shirt
without sleeves. The leader of the procession carried a stick, to
which was suspended a number of large shells, (Pecten maxi-
mus,) which he incessantly rattled. They moved one abreast,
and in a most tortuous manner, occasionally firing a fowling-
piece, and giving one of their war shouts. As they are by no
means careful in what direction they fire, accidents frequently
happen, and before this dance was finished, one of their own
number was killed in consequence of their thoughtlessness


On reaching the shore, they formed a circle round their chief,
and continued the dance for some time longer.
15th.—In this day’s excursion, we met a number of Indians
in the wood, chiefly women and children, who were employed
in collecting vegetables, as the young shoots of different species
of Rubus and Rosa , and, above all, the tender shoots of the
horse-tail, ( Equisetum arvense,) which attains a large size,
and is much esteemed by the Indians. We saw plenty of
Menziesia ferruginea , but not yet in flower; we found various
species of Trillium and Smilacina ; but no plant we found
gave us more pleasure than the Hookeria lucens , not only on
account of its beauty, but as it brought to mind our distin-
guished botanical preceptor, to whose instructions we had been
so much indebted.
16th.—We had the pleasure of being introduced to Mr Mac-
loughlin the chief factor of the Hudson’s Bay Company, in
the west side of the rocky mountains; a gentleman who,
during our stay in the Columbia, rendered us every assist-
ance, and took a friendly interest in all our researches. As
Mr Douglas was to set out next day for Fort Vancouver, in
company with Mr Macloughlin, we agreed to make an excur-
sion to Tongue Point (six miles from the fort) before we part-
ed. In this journey we had to penetrate through dense brush-
wood, and climb over steep rocks, but we succeeded in ac-
quiring many interesting plants and animals. We filled our
boxes with various species of Claytonia and liliaceous plants;
our pockets and handkerchiefs were filled with mosses and
land shells; the number of ravens on the banks of the river
showed there were specimens to be got there, and on examin-
ing the pools we found fresh water Crustacea and shells.
The appearance of the rocks we saw gave us some idea of
the structure of the surrounding country. As our time was
chiefly occupied with botany and zoology, we could only de-
vote a short portion of our time to the other branch of natu-
ral history ; but I may here mention the few geological facts
we detected. There are no high mountains in the vicinity of
Fort George ; and the country consists of sloping hills, of gra-
dual ascent, and regular outlines. From the soft nature of
the rocks of the Columbia, which are rapidly disintegrated by


the winter rains, and the great rise of the river during the
summer months, great quantities of sand are deposited in dif-
ferent situations. In this manner the islands of the Columbia
are formed, and the numerous sand banks and shoals which
render the navigation of this river exceedingly disagreeable.
Some of the islands are from two to three miles in extent, and
would afford the most favourable soil the Columbia possesses
for agricultural purposes, if this were not inundated for two
months every year. It is probable that all the mud and sand
of the Columbia is not employed in forming islands and shoals,
but that part of it is carried to the ocean, and by the efforts
of the westerly winds, is deposited to the north of Cape Dis-
appointment, there helping to protect the rocks from the fur-
ther encroachment of the sea. The nature of the rocks in the
vicinity of Fort George and Fort Vancouver appears to be
calcareous, and rocks of this character seem to prevail from
the cascades to the ocean. I have never been nearer than
sixty miles to the cascades, but from the specimens of the
rocks brought down by Mr Douglas, it is easy to ascertain
that many of them are calcareous. In addition to the calca-
reous rocks brought from the cascades, he also procured many
beautiful specimens of petrified wood, retaining their fibrous
texture in a very evident manner. The rocks in the vicinity
of Fort George were more within the sphere of my observa-
tion, and from that station I obtained a complete series of spe-
cimens. They are generally of a dark bluish colour, and in
some places, particularly to the north of Cape Disappoint-
ment, very soft, and contain many caverns. Those between
Tongue Point and the ocean are more hard, and consist of
limestone, containing many masses of a spherical form and
much harder consistence than the rock in which they are im-
bedded. They vary in size, from that of a hazel nut, to the
magnitude of a cannon-ball, and when broken do not exhibit
any traces of a crystalline structure. The quantity of fossil
shells was very great, although the species were not very nu-
merous. The shells I obtained were all bivalves. The lar-
gest was a species of Pecten in a good state of preservation,
and by no means uncommon. Two other shells were very
frequent, but it was difficult to ascertain to what genus they


belonged. The occurrence of saline springs is not rare, and
they are the favourite resort of the wild animals of the coun-
try. Several of the rivulets which run through this limestone
deposit a small portion of ferruginous matter, indicating that
iron enters into the composition rocks. Numerous sandstone
veins traverse the limestone, and it is of a coarse granular tex-
ture, and very friable. The breadth of these veins is about
three feet, and they resist the action of weather longer than
the limestone, which is often worn away, while the veins re-
main, having the appearance of small dikes.
29th. —Since the 16th I have been employed in exploring
the vegetable and animal productions of the country in every
direction ; but as the progress of spring did not keep pace with
my wishes, I set out for Fort Vancouver, where the differ-
ence of soil would produce a corresponding variety of plants.
Our pcirty consisted of about thirty Canadians and Iriquois,
furnished with five canoes. As the wind was favourable, our
little fleet made a prosperous voyage, and when we landed
in camp for the evening, we found ourselves at Cook Point,
about thirty miles from Fort George.
Next morning we were detained to gum our canoes, which
gave some leisure for collecting plants, which was the more to
be prized, as the marshy place where we were detained abound-
ed in grasses and Cyperaceae. One of the men was so fortu-
nate as to kill a beautiful species of water snake, which had
wandered too far from the river, and had the pleasure of ad-
ding this rare animal to my collection. On dissecting him,
after preparing the skin, I found a large bull frog, and many
elytra of Dytiseus marginalis in his stomach. During our
first day’s voyage the scenery was of little interest, consisting
of low alluvial land, covered with willows and rushes, but as
we advanced, the banks of the river became more steep, and
were covered on both sides with gigantic pines and cedars,
and on many of the most verdant spots the Indians had fixed
their summer abodes, and were busily employed in the stur-
geon and salmon fishery. As the sun was now set in the val-
ley of the Columbia, and his last rays served to show us the
snowy summits of Mount Saint Helens, we prepared our en-
campment in the stillness of this immense forest, only enlivened


by one of those beautiful and plaintive Canadian songs, of
which the various dangers of a voyager’s life affords so many
interesting subjects. While in this situation, we were sur-
prised at the arrival of a canoe from Fort Vancouver. It be-
longed to a Canadian who was carrying his child to Fort
George, where he heard there was a surgeon, to obtain some
medicines. As the poor child was in the last stage of an in-
flammation in the bowels, medical aid was of little advantage,
and after giving him what assistance our circumstances would
admit of, he continued his journey to the fort, where the child
died a few hours after his arrival.
2d May.—On rejoining my botanical associate, we spent se-
veral days in making excursions around the new fort. This
establishment is constructed on the same plan as that of Fort
George, already described, but the situation is much more de-
lightful. The fort is built in the centre of a large and very
level prairie, already covered with fields of potatoes and peas,
and the produce of the farm would have been more varied, if
the seeds which were sent from Canada had arrived in time.
The margins of this prairie abounded in the beautiful Pha-
lang'km esculcntum , whose roots are so much used by the In-
dians as a substitute for bread, while the tubers of a species
of Sagittaria, which grows on the marshy banks of the river,
affords an agreeable substitute for potatoes. In the neigh-
bouring woods we found some of the choicest plants the N.
W. coast can boast of.
The lAnnaca borealis , a plant always agreeable to the bo-
tanist, grew here in great profusion, and I afterwards found
it equally common in the woods of Observatory Inlet, the
northern limit of our voyage. The subjoined list of the plants
that were known to us may give the botanist some idea of one
day’s excursion, not above four miles from the fort.* In such
a situation my time passed rapidly away with a constant,
though pleasing uniformity. We usually spent the forenoon
in botanising, and during the remainder of the day our time
Calypso borealis
Corallorhiza innata
Berberis aquifolia
Collin sia verna
Phlox linearis
Myosotis, Nov. Sp.
Sanicula, Nov. Sp.
nervosa


was fully occupied in arranging and drying the plants we had
already obtained.
On the 11th May, we set out on our return to the coast, as
the ship was to sail in a few days to visit some of the islands
to the north of Nootka. During our voyage down the river,
we landed at a village where the inhabitants were employed
in the salmon-fishery, and here I detected a curious custom,
which I afterwards learned prevailed among all the Colum-
bian tribes. In order to have some employment during our
day’s journey, I selected a few salmon and carp for dissec-
tion, but of these the Indians quickly dispossessed me ; and,
after extracting the hearts of all the fish they had caught, I
was allowed to select as many as I pleased. Their reason for
this practice was, that if their hearts were not extracted and
laid aside, the other salmon would take offence, and leave the
river. We encamped this evening on a fine dry beach, and
while supper was preparing, we collected a few plants; Dali-
harda repens , Pyrola umhellata, and a species of Heuchera.
12th.—We arrived at Tongue Point early this afternoon,
so that we Avere only about six miles from the place of our
destination. The few minutes we spent here Were not use-
less, for we had scarce leaped ashore, Avhen a beautiful and
new species of Mimulus attracted our attention, growlngamong
mosses from the moist rock. This beautiful plant, perhaps
the smallest of the genus, is not more than an inch and a half
in height, and one solitary flower rises from the slender scape.
On arriving at the fort, avc heard of an accident of a melan-
choly nature. Two Indians, who were crossing the river in a
canoe, expired within a few minutes of each other, probably
from apoplexy, and from the circumstance of all exertion in
the canoe suddenly ceasing, the natives set out to ascertain,
the reason, and brought the bodies of their unfortunate coun-
trymen ashore. Although it was an hour since the accident
had happened, I was anxious to ascertain if medical interfer-
ence could be of any service, but the diminished temperature
of the bodies, and the absence of any indication of remaining
life, soon convinced me that all attempts would be useless.
The frequency of such occurrences among the Indians is very
remarkable, but it will be unnecessary to say more on this


subject at present, as I have reserved every thing relating to
the history of the Indians as the subject of a future paper.
From this period till the first of June, when we embarked
on our voyage to the more northern parts of this coast, our
botanical labours suffered little intermission; and, as a good
understanding had at last been restored among the Indian
tribes, our excursions were more extensive, and we traversed
the forests with little apprehension. Thus the time passed
away amid constant occupation till the vessel sailed for the
more northern parts of the coast, and Mr Douglas set out on
a journey of several hundred miles to the interior.
Previous to our leaving the Columbia, we hired an Indian,
who, although at present residing near the fort, was a native
of some place in the Gulf of Georgia, to act as an inter-
preter among the natives of that part of the coast. He was
proud of his office, and for several days before we sailed
he was constantly on board the ship, as he was afraid he
should be left behind, and lose so favourable an occasion of
raising his consequence among the people with whom he re-
sided.
On the Ist of June we set out on this part of our voyage,
and on the Bth we saw the mountains of Nootka about ten
leagues distant; but as we did not at present intend to visit
that harbour, we continued our voyage for Queen Charlotte’s
Island, where, after a tedious passage, we arrived on the 23d.
The well-known ferocity of the natives of this part of the coast
required us to be much more cautious in landing than among
the more timid natives of the Columbia. Off this part of the
coast we caught great quantities of sea-weed, (Fucus pyrifor-
mis,) which was continually floating past us, and a careful ex-
amination of it afforded numerous specimens of corallines and
other marine animals.
24th. —A canoe was seen paddling towards us from a small
village, and they came on board with no signs of apprehen-
sion or surprise. We learned that the name of the village
was Skeedans. The contrast between these people and the
Columbian Indians was astonishing; they were-tall, handsome,
and of a much lighter complexion, and had strong mustaches.
The superior size and weight of the paddles of their canoes


was alone sufficient to convince any one how superior they
were to the southern Indians in muscular power. Every ar-
ticle they had with them indicated a high degree of ingenuity,
and the number and distinctness of the figures carved on their
clay pipes was admired by every one. Conscious of their su-
periority, they treated our interpreter with the most decided
contempt. None of their heads appeared to have been com-
pressed, from which we inferred that that custom was un-
known here. Their conduct was, on all occasions, bold and
decided, often approaching to quarrelsome. Their language
appeared to have no resemblance to that of the Columbian or
Nootka Indians, at least our interpreter did not understand
them.
26th.—We are off Skittegass, a harbour much frequented
by the American traders, and where we saw many Indians,
all of them clothed in European blankets, and well provided
with fire arms. Many of them knew a number of English
words, and a young man among them could carry on a con-
versation in broken English with tolerable facility. This
acute Indian cheerfully agreed to continue with us while we
remained in this part of the country, and from him we derived
much information. The chief of Skittegass, he told us, was
called Eastacanna, and was by no means friendly to white peo-
ple, and embraced every occasion of plundering them he could
obtain. This hostile disposition is probably encouraged by
the unreserved trade in spirituous liquors, which the private
adventurers who visit this island carry on, and cannot fail to
be productive of the worst effects. At the trading posts of the
Hudson’s Bay Company, a very different system is pursued.
No rum is ever sold, the Indians are peaceable and friendly,
and the traders traverse the country with safety. When
they commence trading with the Indians, the demand is not
for rum, but for that innocent luxury tobacco. At Queen
Charlotte’s Island, not only rum, but even wine was demand-
ed, and they were offended when we refused to give them
either.
On the 29th we were becalmed off Dundas Island, which
we took this opportunity of visiting. It was surrounded by
steep rocks, which rendered landing rather difficult. We


were accompanied by our new friend, proud of the European
clothes with which we had equipped him, and anxiousto show
his gratitude by rendering himself useful. The island appeared
to be uninhabited, and abounded in pine trees, and our progress
was disagreeable from the abundance of Aralia erinacea , *
whose spines tore our hands. Among the rocks we found
numbers of curious sea animals, particularly a Chiton of very
large size, measuring six inches in length. I also found some
curious species of Saxifraga and Pote'ntilla. We had also
the good fortune to kill a fine white-headed eagle, one of the
most abundant of the accipltrine tribe on the north-west coast.
After returning to the ship, a favourable breeze soon sprung
up, and we continued our progress towards Observatory In-
let. During our passage up the inlet, several canoes at-
tempted to come to us; but, as the wind was favourable, we
did not wait for them, and they showed their displeasure by
many angry and menacing gestures. On the approach of
night, we had much difficulty in selecting a proper anchoring-
place, on account of the excessive depth of the water, and were
at last obliged to anchor in thirty fathoms water, and to secure
ourselves still farther by a line fixed to one of the trees on
shore.
30th.—At sunrise, we landed to take a view of the country,
which we expected to do without much hazard, as the news
of our arrival would not yet be sufficiently spread among the
Indians. On penetrating across a little point of land, we
found a stream of excellent water descending from the moun-
tains, and forming a little cascade, where it fell into the sea.
We wandered about with little apprehension, as no traces
of Indians could be detected. Under the shade of the pines,
we found Corallorhiza odontorhiza , and the beautiful Pyrola
unifiora in great abundance. On the coast we found many
marine plants, and among them the Glanx maritima , a plant
• Aralia erinacea, Hooker's MSS.—A. caule spinosissimo, foliis subpal-
matis acutissimis, lobis incisis, petiolis nervisque spinosis, umbellis glo-
bis in racemis dispositis. This curious but undescribed plant was disco-
vered by Mr Menzies, and there are fine specimens of it collected by him
in Dr Hooker’s herbarium, under the above-mentioned name. It is dis-
agreeably plentiful in the woods about Queen Charlotte’s Island, and those
of Observatory Inlet.


which appears to be very universally spread through the north-
ern regions of Europe and America. Our dream of security
was, however, speedily dissipated, and botanical researches
were interrupted by the news, that several canoes were making
for the ship, and, of course, prudence required that we should
return. These people, our interpreter informed us, belonged
to a powerful tribe called the Nass Indians, and were governed
by five smokets or chiefs. Their language, manners, and
dress were the same as those of Queen Charlotte islanders,
with this limitation, that they were far from being so cleanly
in their dress and persons. We saw here that strange method
of deforming the women, long ago noticed by the early navi-
gators. All the women above fourteen years had a large
oval piece of wood introduced into a transverse incision made
in their lower lip. At first the incision appears to be small, and
is gradually enlarged, using larger pieces of wood, till, in
many of the old people, the lower lip projected beyond the
nose, and gave them a most ridiculous appearance when eat-
ing. They readily sold us these pieces of wood, and when
they saw the interest we took in examining them, they offered
to supply us with any quantity we might require. These lip
ornaments, as we called them, were of a somewhat oval shape,
rounded and smooth at the extremities, and slightly hollow on
their upper and lower surfaces. A specimen which I procured
was two inches and a quarter in length, and three quar-
ters of an inch in breadth, and was not above the average
size. *
Ist July.—We proceeded up Observatory Inlet, with
the intention of anchoring in Salmon Cove, which Captain
Vancouver formerly occupied, while his boats surveyed the
neighbouring coast. Both sides of Observatory Inlet were
bounded by mountains of remarkable steepness, and entirely of
primitive formation. The valleys, or rather ravines, were often
the channel of some mountain-torrent, which, after passing a
number of cataracts, descended to the ocean. In most situa-
tions, these mountains were covered by fir-trees of small size
* Some tribes to the north of Queen Charlotte’s fsland are said to have
a more disgusting modification of the custom, by introducing the lip orna-
ment into the upper lip.
VOL. VI. NO. I, JAN. 1827. E


and stunted growth, in others, the durable nature of the gra-
nite refused support to the smallest vegetable. The little
valley around Salmon Cove has a beautiful verdant appear-
ance, and a small brook supplies it with abundance of excel-
lent water. The channel of this stream is everywhere covered
by aquatic mosses, particularly Fontinalis antipyretica and
F. squamosa , and among them I found one of the rarest and
most beautiful of the musci of America, which, from the re-
markable structure of its capsule and operculum, will doubt-
less form a new genus. *
2d.—Our excursions were very limited in this fine situa-
tion, as our Skittegass interpreter, Tom, was at great pains to
dissuade us from venturing too far; and he assured us that
we would soon be visited by all the canoes of the Nass In-
dians, who were a treacherous people, and had killed many of
the Americans who had incautiously ventured ashore on this
coast. These circumstances, we afterwards learned from an
American trader, were strictly correct, and that the natives of
Queen Charlotte’s Island and the neighbouring continent uni-
formly attacked the ships which visited them whenever it was
in their power. Next morning, the assertions of our friend
Tom were verified, and about thirty canoes, containing about
200 Indians, visited the vessel. Being amply prepared against
any attack, we endeavoured to gain their good will by treat-
ing them kindly ; we purchased what goods they had to dispose
off; permitted the chiefs to come on board, and gave them
presents of tobacco, and feasted them on bread and molasses,
of all things the most delicious to an Indian palate. In re-
turn for this usage, they behaved with great propriety, and
even with some honesty, for some of the tin dishes in which we
had given them molasses were returned next day, when we
thought they had been stolen. However, with all this seem-
ing good will on their part, they gave us a specimen of their
dexterity, by stealing a heavy sounding-lead, and a few other
articles of little importance. These Indians were remarkably
acute traders, and extremely selfish, and never, in one instance,
did they give any present in return for those we presented
them ; while the natives of the Gulf of Georgia never vi-
• Scouleria, Hooker’s MSS.


sited us without bringing a present of salmon or berries.
As they had their families in their canoes, we had some op-
portunity of examining their mode of living. They appear-
ed to have a great predilection for all kinds of oily food, and
to live principally on fish and marine animals. Seals are very
common, and they were very fond of the fat of that animal.
In their canoes we observed a kind of square cake which they
eat after soaking it in oil. On procuring a few specimens, I
found there were two distinct kinds. The one consisted of
various species of dulse ( Halymenia ,) compressed into a cake,
and probably used as a substitute for salt. The other cake was
of a more firm consistence, and was made from the inner bark
of some tree, beaten very fine and then dried. This cake
was eaten after soaking it in oil. As this kind of bread is pro-
bably similar to that used in times of scarcity in the northern
parts of Europe, and prepared from the pine, it may serve to
allay hunger without affording much nourishment, like the earth
eaten by the Indians of the Orinoco, mentioned by Humboldt.
It seems to be very generally used among these tribes, as it is
mentioned by Mackenzie ip his journey to the Pacific Ocean.
sth.—To-day we removed to a small harbour about five
miles farther up the inlet than Salmon Cove, but the inces-
sant rain and the presence of the Nass Indians detained us
on board. As the weather improved, we made a boat excur-
sion a few miles farther up the inlet. The country was more
verdant and the land less precipitous* and afforded many cu-
rious plants. I was particularly anxious to procure a species
of lily, which must be very abundant in the woods, as the In-
dians eat great quantities of its roots. After some search, I
found a few specimens, but unfortunately the season of flower-
ing was past, so that we had to rest satisfied with the capsules.
From the time of this excursion till the 12th, the constant
heavy rains and dense foggy weather confined us in our pre-
sent situation, and prevented my wandering far into the woods.
On the 12th, the weather became more settled, and on follow-
ing the tract of an Indian path for half a mile, we arrived at a
spacious bay, bounded on one side by granite rocks, on the
other by a sandy beach, and abounding in aquatic fowls. I
never was in a situation where more Acotykdnnous plants were


to be collected with less trouble. The rocks, even to the wa-
ter’s edge, were covered with various species of lichens and
mosses, and the scutoe of the Peltidceas had a beautiful ap-
pearance when contrasted with the dark colours of the tripe
de roche (Gyraphoros ,) and without rising from the rock on
which I was seated, I collected upwards of twenty species of
cryptogamic plants. I quitted with regret this favoured
cradle of cryptogamic vegetation, but found the phenogamous
plants equally curious, though less abundant. On our return,
we observed the remains of an Indian lodge, which consisted
of a few poles, supporting a covering of dried branches, while
the sides were open. There remained also a number of fish-
hooks of a curious construction, which will be afterwards men-
tioned.
18th.—We now returned to Salmon Cove, which well me-
rits its name. The quantity of salmon around us was asto-
nishing, so that it was not possible to let a stone fall from the
vessel without it touching some of them. On landing, I pro-
ceeded about three miles into the country, along the margins
of the rivulet. Every pool was filled with salmon, and many
of them were continuing their progress up the shallow water.
On my return I killed a number, which I brought to the ship.
Encouraged by my success, a party of the men were sent to
procure more fish, which they easily did, and I availed my-
self of the opportunity of going farther into the country, which
abounded in marsh plants; but the most interesting specimen
was two plants belonging to the natural order of Saxifrages,
and on returning to the ship I found my prize was the Ro-
manzowiaUnaloschensis of Chamisso. The salmon which we
found on this coast were those named hunch-backed by Captain
Vancouver. At the spawning season the difference of confi-
guration between the male and female fish is so great, that at
first sight they could scarcely be suspected to belong to the
same species. The female had little remarkable in its appear-
ance, being the usual shape of salmon. The body of the male
was remarkably compressed, and the back very sharp, from
the arched appearance of his dorsal swelling ; when cut into, it
was found to be composed entirely of cellular matter. The
snout was very long, and furnished with long teeth, the upper


jaw curved down, and projected more than an inch beyond the
lower. In almost every individual the colour was paler on one
side than on the other.
We remained in Observatory Inlet till the 24th; and it is re-
markable, that as soon as the Indians had disposed of the goods,
they seldom returned to the vessel, and showed but little curi-
osity, no doubt arising from the frequent opportunities they
have of trading with other vessels. The natives of other parts
of the coast were constant in their attendance on us, and much
more tractable. On the afternoon of the 26th, we landed our
interpreter near his native village, although this interesting
Indian would cheerfully have accompanied us to England, and
had often spoken to us about taking him there. From his
friendly and ingenuous conduct, we had formed a high opinion of
him, and in his manners we probably witnessed those of most
of his countrymen, as there must be far less variety in the ha-
bits of savage than of civilized life. He was remarkably clean-
ly, and expressed on all occasions an unequivocal contempt for
our Columbian Indian, and often wished us to punish him for
being so inattentive to cleanliness. He eagerly adopted every
thing civilized in the dress and manners of those about him;
and unlike his countrymen, he would never use tobacco, and
had a happy aversion to rum. With all his good qualities,
poor Tom had an unfortunate propensity for pilfering, a crime
of which we have many extenuating circumstances, when an
Indian is the culprit. No circumstance shows the superiority
of those islanders over the Columbian and Nootkan Indians,
than the facility with which they adopt the improvements of
civilized life. Around Skittegass, the potato is now pretty ex-
tensively cultivated, and they brought us plenty to sell. One
cannot but rejoice at this symptom of commencing civilization,
which, if persevered in, will limit their wanderings, and give
them better ideas of property, and teach them that more is to
be gained by cultivating their fertile soil, than in following sal-
mon up every creek, or spending days in the uncertain support
of the chase. The Indians of the Columbia, who enjoy far
greater opportunities for improvement than those of Skittegass,
have as yet steadily refused to cultivate the ground, in spite of
the example and encouragement of the settlers, and have re-


fused to grow the seeds that were offered them, while their pride
urged, as an apology for their indolence, that it was the work of
slaves to cultivate the ground.
We now continued our voyage to the south, intending to visit
Nootka and De Fuca’s Straits previous to our return to the Co-
lumbia. And, on the evening of the 30th, a Nootkan canoe came
off’ to us, entreating us to visit their harbour ; but, as the night
was approaching, we gave them some presents, informing them
we would return next morning. Although the merit of making
this part of the north-west coast known to Europeans undoubt-
edly belongs to Captain Cook, it had been visited before his
time by a Spanish navigator named Juan Perez; but as this
circumstance was unknown to Captain Cook and to the public,
he is entitled to all the honour of the discovery. Perez, after leav-
ing the coast of California, discovered Queen Charlotte’s Island ;
and, on the 9th August 1774, he landed at Nootka, which he
called Port San Lorenzo. The name of Nootka, imposed by
Captain Cook, has no affinity to any word employed by the na-
tives ; and the Spanish naturalist Mozino, who remained a con-
siderable time at this place along with Quadra, says, that the
native name is Yucualt, which, I think, is in all probability
the true name; for the natives of the eastern side of Quadra and
Vancouver’s Island gave their part of the island the name of
Yucualtatch. We had scarcely come to anchor in Friendly
Cove when old Macuinna came on board with two of his sons,
and we received with pleasure perhaps the only chief alive who
remembers Captain Cook. He behaved in a friendly manner,
and gave us a present of those beautiful shells which the north-
west Indians value so much as an ornament. The natives call
them hyaquass, and they are not only the jewels, but the cur-
rency of the country ; and with a sufficient supply of these
shells we may purchase any thing the country affords. The
method of ascertaining their value is to string forty of them on
a thread, and to measure off a fathom, and the number of shells
that remain over this measurement fixes the value of the hya-
quass. Macuinna was a stout old man, clothed in a robe made
of racoon skins, and his hair had lost none of its original black-
ness. His sons were young men of much more pleasing fea-
tures than himself. The oldest, about twenty years of age, bore


his father’s name, a practice which seems to be general among
these tribes, as the chief of the Cheenooks on the Columbia had
also bestowed his name and authority on his favourite son.
The second son of Macuinna was about eighteen, was called
Soodoo, and was the most cheerful and amiable of the family.
Notwithstanding all the apparent friendship of Macuinna, we
could not but look with disgust on this wily savage, whose subjects
murdered the crew of a merchant vessel not many years ago, in
the place where we now were. He affected to speak with re-
spect and gratitude of Quadra, Vancouver, and Mr Mears,
and readily recognized the portrait of the last-named gentle-
man. But all the kindness these enlightened men had shown
him, has failed in taming his savage temper, and allowing the
question of his anthropophagism to remain unsettled, enough
remains to render his character disagreeable. I have seen the
narrative of an unfortunate seaman, who spent several years of
a dangerous captivity among the Indians of Yucualt. The ship
to which this man belonged was captured by Macuinna, through
the culpable negligence of the captain, and only two of the crew
were spared, who afterwards made their escape on board another
vessel which visited this harbour.
From the narrative of these men, which contains many in-
teresting facts, it appears that very little provocation was given
on the part of the captain, and that the cause of the disaster
was the desire of the Indians to possess the property of the
vessel, encouraged by the success a neighbouring tribe had ex-
perienced in cutting off the numerous crew of the Tonquin
of Boston- The capture of two vessels within the space of
ten years, has no doubt augmented the boldness of the In-
dians, but, with a moderate degree of caution on the part of
commanders of ships, no such catastrophe could possibly hap-
pen. Although, during the earlier periods of the fur trade
on the north-west coast, Nootka was much frequented by trad-
ing vessels, it is at present but seldom visited. It produces
but few beaver-skins, and the sea-otter is more plentiful far-
ther north, so that there is but little inducement to visit it.
Macuinna is not the miniature Montezuma that Humboldt sup-
poses ; his authority, like that of every other tyee or chief, is
confined to his own tribe, and his influence among his heigh-


hours depends solely on his wealth, and the number of his
people. The ascendancy he formerly possessed, arose from the
almost complete monopoly of European trade, which the fortu-
nate situation of his tribe enabled him to maintain; and even
at present the canoes of strangers were allowed to visit us with
much suspicion, and sometimes they were driven away. The
only other people we saw at Nootka, were the Wickananish, the
Cleyoquats, and Nittinats, who differed in nothing from Noot-
kans.
31st.—To-day the whole village of Macuinna seemed in
motion, preparing to visit the vessel, and we soon had upwards
of twenty-five canoes around the ship, or, as they called it,
tyee mamatly , and the chief and his sons remained on board
the whole day. With the exception of old Macuinna, the
Nootkans were in a state of happy ignorance with regard to
rum and tobacco. The chief was perpetually teasing us in
our turn for rum, an article which we were determined not to
give him, believing such conduct one of the best ways of
maintaining a good understanding between us. While in this
situation, we obtained all the good fare Nootka could afford,
salmon, flat-fish, venison, chamass, and sallal. *
Ist August.—We landed near the ship, and as it was not
safe to travel far among Indians of so suspicious a character,
I contented myself with amassing such plants as the neigh-
bouring rocks afforded. A short time after our return to the
vessel, some hooks were stolen from the boat; but on inform-
ing Macuinna that we were resolved to procure the articles
which were carried off, a canoe was dispatched, which quickly
returned with the property
My herborizing yesterday had attracted the notice of the
natives, and several of them brought plants to sell in their ca-
noes. To encourage this disposition, I bought them all, and,
by this means, ascertained that some of the vegetables brought
by the Spaniards still existed in a degenerate state. In this
situation, I also obtained specimens of the Fucus pyriformis ,
a plant much more plentiful in the southern hemisphere. This
• Chamass is the root of a plant resembling the wood hyacinth, and sal-
lal is the berries of the Gualtheria shallon, which are of the size of black
currants, but have a much sweeter taste.


plant, which had attracted the notice of the illustrious Cook,
is probably the longest vegetable known, and is often many
hundred feet in length. It is remarkable, that a slender sea-
weed should exceed in length the tallest of the giants of the
forest, —the pines of the north, and the palms of the tropics.
All the Indians of Nootka have flat heads, rather more coni-
cal in their shape than the sculls of the Columbians. They
are extremely fond of painting, and draw lines of various co-
lours over their eyebrows and cheeks, and then lay on a layer
of powdered mica, which gives them a fearful appearance.
Their heads are powdered with the down of fowls. When
unpainted, the higher ranks are very cleanly, and seem to be
frequent in their ablutions.
Our stay at Nootka was too short to enable us to acquire
much knowledge of the customs of its inhabitants, and much
of what we learned has been long known to the public. It is,
however, interesting to know that their language is merely a
dialect of that spoken on the Columbia, so that our interpre-
ter could easily make himself understood. Their manners
differ very little from those of the Columbians, and it is high-
ly probable that they are the ramifications of a single nation.
Although the knowledge of uncivilized tribes acquired by the
short visits of navigators is highly curious, there are many
facts which can only be acquired by a closer view, and a longer
residence among them. In this manner, Mozino, the botanist
who accompanied Quadra, obtained much interesting matter;
but my acquaintance with his researches is confined to a few
extracts in different works.
{To he continued.)


principle, to ascertain which is essentially concerned in that
process. The researches of Dr C. have led him to the opi-
nion, that the fermentation in dough, so far as it is useful to
the baker, is solely owing to the resolution of the saccharine
principle of the flour into carbonic acid and alcohol, in conse-
quence of its being brought into a situation predisposing it to
pass into the vinous fermentation.
If the saccharine fermentation be suffered to exhaust itself
in any dough, a new fermentation of a different kind (the
acetous) will succeed it; but it is the latter which is injurious
to the bread, while the former is the source of all the benefits
which the best fermentation can confer.
Dr Colquhoun proves, in the first instance, that the starch
and gluten are not concerned in the fermentation. Starch, he
observes, “ evinces no tendency to undergo any decomposition
by mere exposure for a few l&mrs to the moderate temperature
used in the preparation of dough ; and even moist gluten, in
the short period necessary to commence and complete the fer-
mentation of dough, would sustain no change in its appearance
or chemical properties, though exposed either per se, or mixed
with yeast, to the temperature just mentioned; yet the fer-
mentative process in dough is strong under these very circum-
stances. Besides, it is certain, that if spontaneous decomposi-
tion, either of the starch or the gluten, always of compara-
tively tardy excitement, were once commenced and left un-
checked in circumstances so favourable to decomposition as
in the baking process, with respect both to moisture and tem-
perature, it would of necessity continue with regular and un-
abated energy, so long as a particle of either substance remained
unaltered. But in dough, though the fermentation commences


Art. IX. —Account of a Voyage to Madeira , Brazil , Juan
Fernandez , and the Gallipagos Islands, performed in 1824
and 1825, with a view of examining their Natural History.
By Mr Scoulee. Communicated by the Author. (Con-
tinued from Number xi. p, 73.)
On the 6th August we left Nootka, and directed our course
for the Straits of Juan de Fuca, concerning whose existence
there has been so much discussion. On the southern side of
the straits, we saw the village of Tatoach, and many canoes
came off to the vessel. Some of these people had been at
Fort George, and seen some of the people we had on board.


April 4.
12.
May 3.
8.
June 22.
July 9.


so that friendship was soon established between us. They
were, however, very uneasy, as they did not wish to venture
far from their own coast, on account of the Clayoquats and
Nithnats of the opposite coast, with whom they were at war, for
the purpose of obtaining slaves. One remarkable circumstance,
with regard to these Nichases, is, that many of them were cloth-
ed in blankets of their own manufacture. The wool they em-
ployed was obtained from their dogs, but we could not learn
by what method they succeeded in weaving them. They
seemed sufficiently comfortable in their dog’s-wool blankets,
and had dyed them of various colours. They said they kept
all their white dogs in a small island about two miles from
the main land, and fed them regularly every morning; and
by this means they preserved their breed of dogs producing
white wool. Their dogs differed much in their appearance
from those of the other Indian tribes; the ears were more pen-
dulous, and they had more the appearance of spaniels than of
the native dogs of America.
9th. —The country, on both sides of the straits, had the
most beautiful appearance of any part of the coast we had
ever seen. It abounded in beautiful towns, interspersed with
trees, and in some of the finest shrubs of American growth; and
the numerous villages we saw, showed that the country abound-
ed in the necessaries of life. In the afternoon, we anchored
in Port Discovery, where we were visited by many canoes from
the Indian village. This tribe was named the Klallums, and
were superintended by an old chief called Squastin; and be-
cause some of his people had been kindly received at Fort
George, he behaved in the most friendly manner. During the
five days we remained here, the old chief visited us every morn-
ing, bringing with him a present of berries of the Gualtheria
shallon, salmon, and shell-fish. In return for his hospitality,
he was very anxious we should assist him in making war on
the tribes farther up the straits, and was at great pains to per-
suade us, that we would meet with a people who would prove
extremely hostile, and would poison all the provisions they
sold us. To these representations of the chief we paid little at-
tention. In the neighbourhood of their village, we saw many
of those poles, so well described by Captain Vancouver. They


were about eighteen or twenty feet in height, and were sup-
ported by three shorter ones. We were at a loss to conjecture
the use of these sticks, and our inquiries among the Indians
produced but little information on this subject. The most
probable opinion is, that they expose the heads of their van-
quished enemies on them. This opinion is supported by Cap-
tain Vancouver, who saw human heads affixed to them near
Port Townshend ; and I think it is probable, that these people,
notwithstanding their peaceable and friendly conduct towards
us, are extremely revengeful. In most of the canoes, we saw
spears about ten feet long, furnished with iron points, and or-
namented with the hairs of their enemies. If these poles be
the monuments of savage vengeance, it is at least pleasant to
know, that the practice is confined to a very limited district,
and that a motive of avarice will generally prevent these tribes
from using their prisoners cruelly, as slaves constitute their
principal source of wealth. The Klallums of Port Discovery
were much less covetous than the people of Nootka, and the
numerous presents of provisions they gave us, supported the
ship’s crew, and they were grateful for every thing we chose to
give them in return. When we consider the abundance of
provisions this beautiful country affords, we shall not be sur-
prised at the great population it maintains ; and, probably, no
Indians in North America have less difficulty in procuring
their food than the tribes from the Gulf of Georgia to the
Columbia River. The sea yields an abundant supply of fish-
es of the most delicious kinds, as various species of mullet,
turbot, and cod; every rivulet teems with myriads of salmon;
and the meadows and forests produce an endless variety of
berries and esculent roots. The collection of the latter forms
the occupation of the women and children, while the men are
occupied in procuring the former, and both are carefully dried
for winter stores. About the end of September, they quit their
summer residence on the coast, and retreat into the interior of
the country, where, in addition to their winter stock, they kill
abundance of otters, beavers, and elks, whose skins afford them
clothing, or the means of obtaining European articles. They
return to the coast again in the beginning of April.
14th.—We left the friendly Klallums of Port Discovery, and


coasted along this fine country. As we approached the Noot-
ka side, two canoes came off to us belonging to a famous chief
named Wascalatchy, who, from his propensity to travelling,
was well known over a great extent of country. He often
travelled from his residence on De Fucas Straits to visit the
fort, as he did not wish to sell his skins through any of his
countrymen, in whose honesty he placed little confidence. His
journeys did not always terminate when his buisness was con-
cluded ; but he had ascended the Columbia as far as the falls,
and visited tribes whose language and manners differed entire-
ly from those of his own people. Probably no Indian inha-
biting De Fucas Straits, had ever been nearer the Rocky Moun-
tains.
15th.—We anchored in Strawberry cove of Vancouver, and,
as the country here was uninhabited, employed the time in
wandering through the woods and collecting plants. Next day
we proceeded down the Gulf of Georgia, and remained two
days near an Indian village. As the people were on terms of
friendship with the natives of Port Discovery, we were kind-
ly received, and they presented us with two newly killed bea-
vers, which afforded us an agreable repast after living so long
on salmon. These poor people received our presents so thank-
fully, and a good understanding was so well established, that
we resolved to venture ashore among them. On landing, some
children which had been amusing themselves scampered away
on our approach. I hastened to a saline marsh near the vil-
lage which afforded some interesting plants ; and in dry situa-
tions we found plenty of the yellow-flowered myosotis which
grows so sparingly on the Columbia. During the time we
were ashore the Indians examined our conduct with the most
eager curiosity; but the astronomical instruments surprised
them most, and they inquired if we gained information in the
sun of the friendly or hostile dispositions of the tribes we were
next to visit, or performed these enchantments to cure some
sick person.
On leaving this peaceable tribe, (the Summus) we proceeded
to Point Roberts. In this situation the coast is low and marshy,
and covered with rushes and willows, but we had been inform-
ed that there was a very numerous clan in this place. Before wo


saw any of them a canoe arrived from Squastin and his allies
to warn us against the insidious Indians we would soon see.
This only convinced us of the inveterate enmity that subsisted
between the different tribes, and of course the advice was little
regarded, and the plausible story they invented, that these In-
dians were preparingto attack the vessel, wasequally unsuccessful.
20th.—These Indians arrived to day, and we were on friend-
ly terms with them, notwithstanding the tales which had been
told us to their disadvantage. They belonged to the allied
tribes of the Cowitchen and Yucualtah. The name last mention-
ed bears a strong affinity to the Indian name of Nootka. The
chief Chassia came on board ; he behaved in a very friendly
manner, and informed us that he had once seen white men in
the interior, and in the canoe of this chief we saw a man deep-
ly marked with the small pox, the only Indian we had seen on
the north-west coast with marks of this disease. The rarity
of such an occurrence proves how fatal this disease must have
been among them. This disorder broke out among the
tribes in the vicinity of Hudson’s Bay, and spread in every di-
rection among the Indians, depopulating the country in its
progress. Even the Indians behind the rocky mountains were
not secure from its entrance; and its ravages were only ar-
rested at the shores of the Pacific. The natives of the Colum-
bia remember it with terror ; and the name of the disease has
been sufficient to deter hostile tribes from plundering the
traders. The disease must have been extremely fatal among
the Indians ; and it accounts for the depopulated state of the
coast, which did not escape the acuteness of Captain Vancouver.
Jde found in several places great quantities of bones, and many
canoes containing five or six skeletons, which were no doubt in-
terred at that unfortunate period.
26th.—While near Point Roberts, I made several excur-
sions, and as we were under no apprehension from the Indians,
we did not hesitate to venture among them, and to employ
one of them in carrying my box, an office which they were eag-
er to do, as they always expected some little present to reward
their diligence. As our business in the Gulf of Georgia was
now completed, we left the Yucualthas and anchored in the
afternoon near the village of our old friends the Summus. We


then landed at their village but found the chief was absent; his
people however received us with much kindness. The village
is finely situated on a small dry plain, surrounded on the north
and east by a forest of pine and cedar trees, and exposed to the
genial influence of the westerly breezes. The number of
houses amounted to twenty, but they were very large. The vil-
lage might contain about 250 inhabitants. The houses had
sloping roofs of fir and cedar planks, and thatched with mats
of Typha latifolia. Nearer the shore there were several large
shades for drying fish, and from the immense quantities of dried
salmon we saw, there was little probability they would have to
encounter the horrors of famine the ensuing winter. The
method of preparing the salmon was very simple. The ver-
tebrae and intestines are taken out, and the fish is split into four
thin slices, which are dried in the sun. To preserve the salmon
roe they make bags of the fish’s skin, and then fill it with roe
and preserve it for winter use. When opened the smell is
most disgusting, but this species of caviar is keenly relished by
the Indians. After satisfying our curiosity, I wandered through
the woods, attended by the little children. It was with satisfac-
tion we reflected, that through mild treatment we had gained
the good-will of every tribe we had visited. On embarking we
found the Indians busy in removing the planks of their houses
to their winter abode. While continuing our voyage through
the straits, canoes came off from every quarter, bringing plenty
of salmon and holibut, and eager to obtain in return, needles,
fish-hooks, and small knives.
The different tribes who inhabit De Fucas Straits, and the
Gulf of Georgia differ very little in their habits from the Co-
lumbian aborigines. The practice of flattening the heads of
their children is universal. They are much addicted to paint-
ing themselves, and the paints they use are red ochre, charcoal,
and pulverized mica. They make regular lines on their faces
with these articles, which gives them a most disagreeable ap-
pearance. They apply great quantities of grease to their hair.
Their dresses are very various. Some had blankets of dog’s-
wool, others had robes made of raccoons and elk skins, and very
few had English blankets. The women, as in all other places,
wore petticoats of straw, or of the prepared bark of the cedar.


As iron is very scarce among them, their arrows are generally
pointed with bone or with pieces of muscle shells.
On the 3d September we crossed the bar of the Columbia,
and again anchored in Baker’s Bay. Next morning I set out
for Fort Vancouver to join my old associate Mr Douglas.
As we passed Cheenook Point we saw the burying ground of
Comcomly, where, within two years, this unfortunate old chief
has deposited the bodies of eight individuals of his once nu-
merous family.
The canoes in which the bodies were deposited were cover-
ed with the laced coats, silks, blankets, and other articles the
deceased possessed, and had a remarkably melancholy appear-
ance, The Indians, like the ancient inhabitants of Britain, de-
posited the arms of the dead along with their body. Each of
Comcomly’s sons had a fowling piece by his side, and a loaded
pistol in each hand. The bodies are annually uncovered by
the old chief, and if necessary, wrapped in new blankets. For-
merly the Cheenooks used to live in this place, but since it be-
came a burying-place, it has been abandoned by the Indians,
As it was sunset before we left the ship, we had to travel all
night, and in the morning we breakfasted on a small alluvial
island, about twenty miles from the ship. At this place I had
a few minutes to botanize, and, although the season was far ad-
vanced, we found some curious plants. The wapito or Indian
potato grew in abundance. Valisneria grew in the mud of
the river, and I also found a beautiful Sisyrinchium with yel-
low flowers. On arriving at Fort Vancouver we were kindly
received by all the gentlemen. Mr Douglas was just return-
ed from a short excursion he had made to the interior. While
I had botanized along the coast, from the Columbia in lat. 45.
N. to Queen Charlotte’s island in 52, Mr Douglas had taken
a most extensive range in a different direction, and through a
very different country, so that our respective herbariums
contained entirely different sets of plants. His first excursion
had been up the Multuoma or Wilhamut river, which takes a
southerly course from the Columbia. He followed this river
for about fifty miles in a country abounding in salt springs, and
where the Indians cultivate the Nicotiana rustica. His next
journey was to the falls of the Columbia, where he found a


rich country for the botanist, and saw a race of Indians who
differ entirely in language and habits from the Indians of this
coast. They inhabit the immense plains of the interior, and
their principal wealth consists in their numerous herds of horses,
so that, in some respects, they may be called a pastoral people,
analogous to the inhabitants of the plains of northern Asia,
though inferior in civilization.
D uring my stay at the fort, our time past pleasantly away
in making excursions, arranging our collections, and procur-
ing specimens of the animals of the country. While thus em-
ployed, one of the most respectable of the Indian chiefs re-
quested our medical aid to his brother who was sick. The
sick chief was named Tutilliham, and had the reputation of
being the greatest warrior on the Columbia ; he was unfortu-
nately in the last stage of an enteritic affection, and, after ex-
plaining this to his friends, we gave such medicines as might
palliate his complaint; but he died in a few days. One of
the symptoms he had, was a small tumour situated on the right
side, below the liver. This circumstance afterwards led to se-
rious 'consequences, for it was recollected that three months
ago he had eaten at the house of a neighbouring chief, who
pretended to great knowledge of medicine, a quantity of cha-
mass roots, * which they now blamed as the cause of his death.
In consequence of this opinion, the unfortunate chief was as-
sassinated by the friends of the deceased chief.
20th September.—l left Fort Vancouver to return to the
ship, which was soon to sail, and on this occasion I cannot but
mention the kind reception I had ever experienced there from
Mr M‘Loughlin, and the other gentlemen of the establishment.
I saw with pleasure that the canoe I was to sail in was man-
ned by Sandwich Islanders in the Company’s service, and as
they were less superstitious than the Canadians, I could exa-
mine Mount Coffin with more freedom. Our arrival at this
famous Indian cemetery, called by the Canadians Rocher des
Marts , was under favourable circumstances ; the day was stor-
my, so that there was less risk of being interrupted by canoes.
This hill is about 150 feet above the level of the river, and
only covered by a few shrubs in some places. On its steep
Bulbs of Phalavgium csculentum.


•and naked summit no canoes were deposited, but they were
all placed on the side towards the river, and in such a manner,
that I suspect it was intended they should fall into the water
when they became decayed. Near some canoes there were
large boards painted with various figures, but generally that
of the human face ; to the boards were affixed little bunches
of feathers, and in some cases narrow slips of red cloth. On
the top of many of the canoes they had placed wooden dishes
such as they use in cooking their fish, and other domestic uten-
sils. The bodies with their ornaments were enveloped in
mats of Typha latifolia , and the canoes covered with boards,
and secured by having stones placed on them. On opening
one of these canoes of the dead, a large snake issued out as if
to repel all intruders on these melancholy abodes, and many of
these reptiles were seen around the other canoes. The occur-
rence of serpents around the abodes of the dead is known in
all countries, and sometimes attracted the attention of the poets.
This method of depositing the dead is peculiarly affecting.
Every exertion of Indian ingenuity is exerted to show their re-
spect to deceased friends. Their most valuable property is
deposited along with them, and the solitude and wildness of the
places they select, add much to these impressions. When once
the body is placed in the place of the dead, the name of the
deceased is never mentioned on any occasion, but they allude
to him as the relation of some surviving friend. The feeling
that makes them refuse to pronounce the name of their dead
friends, prevents them from visiting their cemeteries unless on
some very important occasion. The stormy weather that fa-
voured my purpose of examining this curious spot continued
without interruption till we left the Columbia, where we ex-
changed its dense fogs and constant showers for a brighter sky
and a more pleasing climate.
Art. X. —On the separation of JEpistilbite from Heulandite ,
as demonstrated hy optical characters. By David Brews-
ter, LL. D. F. R. S. Lond. and Sec. R. S. Edin.
In the eighth Number of this Journal we had the satisfaction
256
Dr Brewster on the separation of
