

TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION
WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES




THE ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
Account of Dinner
HELD AT THE
CANNON STREET HOTEL,
ON FRIDAY, 15th NOVEMBER, 1872,
TO CELEBRATE THE COMPLETION
OP
TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.




TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
Telegraphic communication with the great Australian Colonies
haying been established in October, 1872, by the completion of the
land line connecting Port Darwin with Adelaide, it appeared to
some of the Members of the Eoyal Colonial Institute, that so
important an event should not be allowed to pass without com-
memoration.
Accordingly a meeting was summoned at the rooms of the Insti-
tute, at which it was agreed that the commemoration should take
the form of a dinner, and a committee was formed for carrying this
resolution into effect, with power to add to their number.
The following is the Advertisement and final list of this com-
mittee, as it appeared in the Times of 13th November, 1872 :
AUSTRALIAN TELEGRAPH CELEBRATION DINNER.
A Dinner, to celebrate the Opening of Telegraphic Communication with
Australia, will take place at the Cannon Street Hotel, on Friday, the 15th
November, at 6 o’clock. The Right Honourable the Earl of Kimberley, in
the chair. The following noblemen and gentlemen have consented to act on
the Committee:—
Augustus B. Abraham, Esq.
A. G. Anderson, Esq.
G. A. Anstey, Esq.
A. Archer, Esq.
George Armytage, Esq.
Patrick Auld, Esq.
Rev. G. R. Badenoch
B. Herschel Babbage, Esq.
Julius Beer, Esq.
Rt. Hon. Viscount Bury, K.C.M.G.,
M.P.
The Rev. Thomas Binney
Arthur N. Birch, Esq.
Henry Blaine, Esq.
E. Carton Booth, Esq.
E. Lennox Boyd, Esq.
Sir Antonio Brady
The V enerable Archdeacon Braim, D. D.
The Rev. E. J. Brewster
Thomas Briggs, Esq.
J. B. Brown, Esq.
J. Harris Browne, Esq.
Robert Brooks, Esq.
E. J. Burges, Esq.
Sir James Carmichael, Bart.
Rt. Hon. H. C. E. Childers, M.P.
Lord Alfred S. Churchill
Colonel A. Clarke, R.E.,C.8.
Sir Charles Clifford
Baillie Cochrane, Esq., M.P.
Sir Daniel Cooper, Bart.
Nathaniel Cork, Esq.
Sedgwick Cowper, Esq.
Angus Croll, Esq.
R. Daintree, Esq.
Charles Dalyrmple, Esq., M.P.
J. B. Darvall, Esq., C.M.G.
W. Fane de Salis, Esq,
W. W. De La Rue, Esq.
P. A. Derbishire, Esq.
T. L. Devitt, Esq.
G. Duddell, Esq.
James A. Dunn, Esq.
Frederick H. Dutton, Esq.
Fredk. A. Du Croz, Esq.
E. B. Eastwick, Esq., M.P,


C. W. Eddy, Esq.
Alex. L. Elder, Esq.
D. Morier Evans, Esq.
Thomas Fairbaim, Esq.
Dr. I, E. Featherston
0. Fraser, Esq.
Sir H. Freeling, Bart., R.E.
William Gardner, Esq,
James F. Garrick, Esq.
Colonel J. C. Gawler.
F. Gisborne, Esq.
Thomas Graves, Esq.
Edward Greaves, Esq., M.P.
George Green, Esq.
E. J. Halsey, Esq.
Captain Hamber.
Archibald Hamilton, Esq.
Colonel Hamley, 50th (Queen’s Own)
T. M. Harrington, Esq.
George 0. Hawker, Esq.
J. F. Hayward, Esq.
Cashel Hoey, Esq.
Sir Henry Holland, Bart., M.D., F.R.S.
R. G. W. Herbert, Esq.
Rt. Hon. Lord Houghton
H. Jamieson, Esq.
Edward Jenkins, Esq.
Penrose G. Julyan, Esq., C.B.
F. O. Karuth, Esq.
Hon. Arthur Kinnaird, M.P.
E. H. Knatchbull-Hugessen, Esq. ,M. P.
F. P. Labillitire, Esq.
Alex. Lawrence, Esq.
J. Evelyn Liardet, Esq.
B. S. Lloyd, Esq.
J. R. Longden, Esq.
A. McArthur, Esq.
W. McArthur, Esq., M.P.
D. Painter McEwan, Esq.
William McDonnell, Esq.
Lauchlan MacKinnon, Esq.
George Macleay, Esq., C.M.G.
John W. McLaren, Esq.
Wm, Maitland, Esq.
Hon. G. Manners-Sutton
W. H. Marsh, Esq.
Controller Maturin, C.B.
Price Maurice, Esq.
W. R. Mewbum, Esq.
Dr. J. Milligan
W. Millikin, Esq.
Arthur Mills, Esq.
Gisborne Molineux, Esq.
Jacob Montefiore, Esq.
Joseph B. Montefiore, Esq.
Septimus Y. Morgan, Esq.
Wm. Mort, Esq.
Hugh E, Montgomerie, Esq.
Fredk. J. Mouat, Esq., M.D.
Henry Monies, Esq.
W. J. Munro, Esq.
David Murray, Esq.
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart., D.C.L,
J. S. O’Halloran, Esq.
Arthur Otway, Esq., M.P.
Colonel George Palmer
Wm. Paxton, Esq.
R. 0. Paxton, Esq.
Edwin Pears, Esq.
Hon. H. Petre
Captain Bedford Pim, R.N.
James Rae, Esq.
Richard Ramsden, Esq.
J. Reeve, Esq.
A, R. Roche, Esq.
Colonel J. H. Rocke
Sir John Rose, Bart., K.C.M.G.
Hon. P. de Roubaix
Thomas Royall, Esq.
Deputy-Inspector-Gen. Sail, M.D.
H. J. Sargood, Esq.
R. D. Sassoon, Esq., C.B.
Frank I. Scudamore, Esq., C.B.
W. 0. Sargeaunt, Esq.
"Walter Severn, Esq.
Henry B. Sheridan, Esq., M.P,
Fleetwood K. Shrapnell, Esq.
Sir Francis Smith
E. Apps Smith, Esq.
James Spicer, Esq.
Allan Spowers, Esq.
G. M. Sproat, Esq.
H. B. T. Strangways, Esq.
Captain Napier G. Sturt, R.E.
Colonel Synge, R.E.
D. Tallerman, Esq.
Hugh Taylor, Esq.
Sirß. R. Torrens, M.P., K.C.M.G.
Edmund Trimmer, Esq.
Major Vereker
Peter Watson, Esq.
H. E. Watts, Esq.
William Walker, Esq.
A, Webster, Esq.
William Westgarth, Esq.
Edward Wilson, Esq.
James Wheeler, Esq.
Augustus Wolfen, Esq.
J. Dennistoun Wood, Esq.
H- R- Wotton, Esq., M.D,
Captain Wyatt
Leonard Wray, Esq.
J. A. Foul, Esq,
Adolphus Young, Esq., M.P.
Frederick Young, Esq.
Arrangements have been made for bringing the telegraph wire into the
banquet hall. Telegrams will be sent by Lord Kimberley to the Governors of


all the Australian Colonies immediately on sitting down to dinner, and answers
thereto may be expected in the course of the evening.
Tickets, price 305., for which immediate application is necessary, may be
obtained from Mr. Miller, at the Jerusalem Coffee-house, Comhill; and from
C. W. EDDY,
SEDGWICK COWPER,
J. S. O’HALLORAN,
Honorary
Secretaries.
Royal Colonial Institute, 15, Strand, W.C,
The dinner was fixed to take place on 15th November, in con-
sequence of a telegraphic despatch from Adelaide having announced
that a similar dinner had been arranged to take place there on that
day in honour of the return of Mr. Todd and his companions from
Port Darwin, after successfully laying the line across the Con-
tinent of Australia, and also that a banquet in honour of the
event would simultaneously be held at Sydney.
It is due to the Directors, Managers, and Secretaries of the
Eastern Telegraph Company of the British Indian Extension, and
British Australian Telegraph Companies, and of the Telegraph
Construction and Maintenance Company, as well as to the Post-
master-general and the Manager of the Telegraphic Department of
the Post-office, and to Mr. Cyrus Field, and the American Embassy,
to say here that every possible assistance was most freely and
gratuitously rendered by them to promote the success of the cele-
bration. Without their cordial assistance and co-operation the
event must have fallen far short of the success which it attained.
By their kindness and liberality the lines were “joined up ” from
Australia to England on the one hand, and from San Francisco to
England on the other, and were brought into contact within the
Hall itself, so that an unbroken electric girdle was for the first
time put round the world, from the Pacific on the west to the
same ocean, where it washes the eastern shores of Australia;
and the Secretary for the Colonies was for the first time enabled
not only to speak instantaneously to the remotest possessions of
the Crown, but to place the Governor-General of the Dominion of
Canada in almost instantaneous communication with the Governor
of the Australian Colonies, their reciprocal messages being repeated
in the Hall in transit.
This was an achievement involving very considerable expense to
the above-mentioned Companies and gentlemen, and deserving of
the best acknowledgment.
The Cannon Street Hotel was fixed on for the banquet, in
consequence of its comparative proximity to the General Post-office
whence the wires were to be led into the Hall. This was profusely


and tastefully decorated with flags, amongst which the Union
Jack was conspicuous, and two large maps, lent by the Telegraph
Construction Company, showing the telegraph route to Australia,
hung opposite the high table.
A gallery overlooking the dining hall was filled with ladies ;
and another gallery by the band of the Honourable Artillery
Company, under the direction of Signor Tamplini, which played
during the dinner a selection of music, including a galop,
“ Greetings by Telegraph,” composed by the Band-master for the
occasion.
The following is a list of the gentlemen present, including
guests:—
The Eight Hon. the Earl of Kimbekley, Secretary of State for the
Colonies, in the Chair.
Wm. Abbott, Esq.
♦A. B. Abraham, Esq.
C. Aitkin, Esq.
W. M. Alderson, Esq.
Sir James Anderson
♦A. G. Anderson, Esq.
Ansell, Esq.
♦G. A. Anstey, Esq.
♦A. Archer, Esq.
♦G. Armytage, Esq.
W. H. Atthill, Esq.
♦Patrick Auld, Esq.
A. F. Austin, Esq.
♦B.Herschelßabbage,Esq.
♦The Rev. G. R. Badenoch
Col. Bancroft
Bannerman, Esq.
H. C. Beeton, Esq.
Phillips Bevan, Esq.
♦The Rev. Thomas Binney
Binney, Esq.
Henry Bollen, Esq.
C. W. Bourne, Esq.
♦E. Lennox Boyd, Esq.
♦Sir Antonio Brady
♦The Yen. Arch. Braim,
D.D., F.R.G.S.
♦The Rev. E. J. Brewster
♦Thomas Briggs, Esq.
R. Broadwater, Esq.
Brooker, Esq.
Thomas Brown, Esq.
♦J. H. Brown, Esq.
W. Bryden, Esq.
John Buckley, Esq.
♦E. J. Burges, Esq.
W. H. Burton, Esq.
E. Carton Booth, Esq.
♦Sir. James Carmichael,
Bart.
General Cavanagh
C. E. Challis, Esq.
A. G. Chard, Esq.
♦The Rt. Hon. H. C. E.
Childers, M.P.
E. T. Christie, Esq.
♦Col. Clarke, C. 8., R.E.
D. Clarkson, Esq.
William Clarkson, Esq.
Alfred Collier, Esq.
Frederick Collier, Esq.
T. W. Corbin, Esq., M.D.
♦Nathaniel Cork, Esq.
♦Sedgwick Cowper, Esq.
♦Col. A. Angus Croll
Lewis J. Crossley, Esq.
Sudham Crowe, Esq.
J. Currie, Esq.
♦Richard Daintree, Esq.,
Agent-Gen. for Queens-
land.
♦Charles Dalrymple, Esq.,
M.P.
H. Danver, Esq.
■ ♦J.B.Darvall,Esq.,C.M.G.
Davis, Esq.
T. L. Devitt, Esq.
J. W. Dixon, Esq.
The Prince Dolgerouky
John Draper, Esq.
♦George Duddell, Esq.
♦J. A. Dunn, Esq.
♦Frederick Dutton, jun.,
Esq.
♦F. S. Dutton, Esq.,
C.M.G.
C. W. Earle, Esq.
♦E. B. Eastwick, Esq.,
M.P.
*O. W. Eddy, Esq.
William. Elder, Esq.
Hon. J. A. Ersldne, Esq.
Ewen, Esq,
J. Young Ehlers, Esq.
♦Dr. I. E. Featherston
Cyrus Field, Esq.
W. Ford, Esq.
H. C. Forde, Esq.
♦Sir Henry Freeling,Bart.
G. Foggo,Esq., and friend
♦C. Fraser, Esq.
M. Gardiner, Esq.
♦W. Gardiner, Esq.
♦James F. Garrick, Esq.
♦Col. J. C. Gawler
Captain Gilmore
♦Francis Gisborne, Esq.
Col. Glover, R.E.
C. Goode, Esq.
George Green, Esq.
Graham, Esq.
R. Graham, Esq.
John Grant, Esq.
James Graves, Esq.
♦Thomas Graves, Esq.
R. J. Gray, Esq.
Geard, Esq.
E. A. Hall, Esq.
John Hall, Esq.
♦E. J. Halsey, Esq.
♦Captain Hamher
# Those marked with an asterisk served on the Committee.


♦ArchibaldHamilton,Esq.
James A. Hardy, Esq.
♦T. M. Harrington, Esq.
J ohn Harris, Esq.
J. Harrold, Esq.
♦George C. Hawker, Esq.
♦J. F. Hayward, Esq.
Captain J. Henry
♦R. G. W. Herbert, Esq.
W. H. Hewslowe, Esq.
John S; Hill, Esq.
♦Cashel Hoey, Esq.
♦Sir Henry Holland, Bart.,
M.D., F.R.S., &c.
S. 0. Homersham, Esq.
Dr. Hood
♦The Right Hon. Lord
Houghton
♦E. H, Knatchbull-Hu-
gessen, Esq., M.P.
Henry Hughes, Esq.
James Hughes, Esq.
Huttula, Esq.
Captain Hyde
E. R. Hett, Esq.
W. A. Hogg, Esq.
Col. Macleod Innes, V.O.
♦H. Jamieson, Esq.
♦Edward Jenkins, Esq.
W. Job, Esq.
John Johnston, Esq.
R. J. S. Joyce, Esq.
♦Penrose G. Julyan, Esq.
C B
♦F. O. Karuth, Esq.
J. B. Kelly, Esq.
C. Kilburn, Esq.
♦The Hon. Arthur Kin-
naird, M.P.
Knight, Esq.
C. M. Keir, Esq.
♦F. P. Labilliere, Esq.
Timothy Lark, Esq.
G. Larkins, Esq.
F. Lasseter, Esq.
♦A. Lawrence, Esq.
A. M. Lawrence, Esq.
♦B. S. Lloyd, Esq.
J. R. Longden, Esq.
George Lyons, Esq.
A. H. Lister, Esq.
Lowell, Esq.
♦Alexander MacArthur,
Esq.
♦William MacArthur, Esq.
M.P.
AlexanderMacfarlane,Esq.
♦Lauchlan Mackinnon,
Esq.
♦J. W. Maclaren, Esq.
Henry Maclean, Esq.
♦George Macleay, Esq.,
C.M.G.
S. M. S. Macleay, Esq.
Robert McCheaner, Esq.
♦D. P. McEwen, Esq.
♦William Maitland, Esq.
A. J. Malcolm, Esq.
♦Hon. Graham Manners-
Sutton
J. J. Marshall, Esq.
W. Martindale, Esq.
Rt. Hon. W. N. Massey,
M.P.
James Matthews, Esq.
♦Price Maurice, Esq.
Capt. R. C. Mayne, R.N.,
C B
O. S. Mian, Esq.
♦Dr. Milligan
♦W. Milliken, Esq.
♦Gisborne Molineux, Esq.
♦Jacob Montefiore, Esq.
♦H. E. Montgomerie, Esq.
W. F. Moore, Esq.
B. Moran, Esq., U.S. Sec.
of Legation.
♦Septimus V. Morgan, Esq.
♦William Mort, Esq.
♦Dr. Mouat
♦Henry Moules, Esq.
♦David Murray, Esq.
W. C. Maughan, Esq.
♦Sir Charles Nicholson
E. B. Neill, Esq.
C. J. Nunn, Esq.
Henry Nicholson, Esq.
H. Ormerod, Esq.
♦J. S. O’Halloran, Esq.
♦Arthur Otway, Esq.,
M.P.
♦Colonel Palmer
W. Pattison, Esq.
♦R. C. Paxton, Esq.
♦W. Paxton, Esq.
Dr. Pearson
John Pender, Esq., M.P.
John Plummer, Esq.
J, Prickett, Esq.
Win. Purdy, Esq.
J. Paterson, Esq.
Thomas Quin, Esq.
J. A. Quinton, Esq.
♦James Rae, Esq.
♦Richard Ramsden, Esq.
♦John Reeve, Esq.
J. H. S. Reeve,
John Richardson, Esq.
W. Ridley, Esq.
N. E. Robarts, Esq.
, # A. R. Roche, Esq.
John Rosa, Esq.
♦Sir John Rose, Bart.,
K.C.M.G.
♦Hon. P. de Roubaix
W. W. de la Rue, Esq.
J. Ross, Esq.
♦W. Pane de Salis, Esq.
♦Deputy Inspector-Gen.
Sail, M.D.
♦W. C. Sargeaunt, Esq.
♦F. J. Sargood, Esq.
H. W. Saunders, Esq.
Scales, Esq.
♦Frank I. Scudamore,Esq.,
C B
H. Sewell, Esq.
♦Walter Severn, Esq.
M. Sheridan, Esq., M.P.
♦Fleetwood K. Shrapnell,
Esq.
David Smith, Esq.
♦E. Apps Smith, Esq.
Harry F. Smith, Esq.
. S. Wagstaff Smith, Esq.
T. F. Smith, Esq.
Turbeville Smith, Esq.
♦J. Spicer, Esq.
Albert Spicer, Esq.
Rev. Edward Spooner,
M.A.
W. Stevens, Esq.
A. C. Stevenson, Esq.
♦H. B. T. Strangways,
Esq.
♦Oapt. Napier G. Sturt,
H E
♦Col. M. Synge, R.E.
L. Stevenson, Esq.
J. S. Stopford, Esq.
F. Tallack, Esq.
R. H. Taunton, Esq.
♦II. L. Taylor, bEsq.
M. Thioblin
L. C. Thompson, Esq.
A. Todd, Esq.
♦Edmund Trimmer, Esq.
Robert Tucker, Esq.
F. J. Walker, Esq.
John Walker, Esq.
John Watt, Esq.
♦H. E. Watts, Esq.
C. D. Watson, Esq.
♦Peter Watson, Esq.
Robert Watson, Esq.
♦A. Webster, Esq.
Lewis Wells, Esq.
♦ Those marked with an asterisk served on the Committee.


Wells, Esq.
♦William Westgarth,Esq.
S. White, Esq.
W. B. Whitmore, Esq.,
M.D.
0. Eardley-Wilmot, Esq.
♦Edward Wilson, Esq.
Henry Wilson, Esq.
T. W. Woodgate, Esq.
•Augustus Wolfen, Esq.
Woollaston, Esq.
T, Woolner, Esq.
♦H. W. Wootton, Esq.,
M.D.
•Leonard Wray, Esq.
Wright, Esq.
♦Captain Wyatt
Harvey WyUie, Esq.
Samuel Yardley, Esq.
Charles Youl, Esq.
♦James A. Youl, Esq.
A. Young, Esq.
♦Adolphus W. Young,
Esq., M.P.
♦Frederick Young, Esq.
W. A. G-. Young, Esq.
Amongst the gentlemen who were expected, but were unable to
be present, were :—Count Bylandt, Minister Plenipotentiary of
Holland; Sir Sills John Gibbons, the late Lord Mayor; Sir Francis
Smith, Chief Justice of Tasmania ; Sir Daniel Cooper ; and the
Hon. John Dunn, of Tasmania.
The Chairman said he proposed, before sitting down to dinner,
to send the following telegram to the Australian Colonies :—“ The
company at the Australian Telegraph Dinner joins me in drinking
prosperity to the Colonies, and in rejoicing at this fresh bond of
union between the different members of the Empire.” The an-
nouncement was received by the company with great cheering.
The telegram was dispatched, and dinner over, the Chairman, in
proposing the first toast, said that this was one which every as-
sembly of Englishmen drank with enthusiasm, and in an assembly
called together to celebrate so great a success as the completion of
telegraphic communication with one great group of her Colonies, he
was sure the toast would be received with the utmost loyalty. The
toast was “ The health of Her Majesty the Queen.” He was confident
that the Colonies would yield to no part of Her Majesty’s dominions
in loyalty to her person and throne.
The toast was drunk with all the honours, and followed by the
National Anthem.
The Chairman, in giving the next toast, “ The health of His
Eoyal Highness, the Prince of Wales, her Eoyal Highness the
Princess of Wales, and the other members of the Eoyal Family,”
said no one could forget that last year, about this time, the
whole country felt the greatest anxiety about the health of his
Eoyal Highness the Prince of Wales, and he thought it would not
be inappropriate if he mentioned on this occasion that from every
colony in the wide Empire addresses of congratulation on his Eoyal
Highness’s restoration to health had poured in upon him, all
expressing the greatest affection for his Eoyal Highness, and the
greatest interest in his welfare. He gave them “ The health of
♦ Those marked with an asterisk served on the Committee.


their Eoyal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales, and the
rest of the Eoyal Family.”
The toast was drunk with loud cheers.
The Chairman next gave the toast of the evening. It was
“ Telegraphic Enterprise,” coupled with the names of the repre-
sentatives of South Australia and Queensland, and of his honour-
able and worthy friend, Mr. J. Pender, M.P., the Chairman of the
Eastern Telegraphs Company. The noble Chairman said, on an
occasion of this kind the great difficulty was to find words to ex-
press the magnitude of the event they had met to celebrate, and
the importance which should be attached to it. Such an occa-
sion was a rare one, for though he had observed no lack of high-
sounding words often employed to celebrate some very small affair,
it was very seldom that a man found himself, really and truly—
and not in the mere rhetorical sense of the word—in a position
that made any language which he could employ necessarily fall
far short of what the event deserved. (Cheers.) If he felt his
own incompetence to do justice to his topic, he felt still more
oppressed by that feeling when he remembered that at one time
he had the hope that there would have been present to-night a re-
presentative of her Majesty’s Government, who, he thought they
would agree with him, would have been able, if there was any
one in the Empire able, to express by appropriate language the
greatness of the occasion they were celebrating—he meant Mr.
Gladstone. (Cheers.) He was sorry to say that Mr. Gladstone
was unable to be present, but he was happy to read the following
letter that he had received from his right honourable friend:—
“10, Downing Street, Whitehall, November 13.
“My dear Kimberley,—l write you a line to say how sincerely
sorry I am that I am unable to attend the dinner to be given on
Friday, November 15, to celebrate the opening of telegraphic
communication with Australia. I should have been very glad,
had it been possible, to be present on this occasion, when the
strong attachment which now binds, as it has ever bound, the
Australian Colonies to the mother-country, is cemented by the
completion of so important and so useful a work. Well remem-
bering the time when I had the honour of holding the office
which you now so worthily fill, and when I was, as I could hardly
fail to be, specially interested in the Australian Colonies, I need
hardly say how agreeable it would have been to me to meet
some of those whose names are still fresh in my memory.
“Believe me sincerely yours,
“W. E. Gladstone.”


(Loud cheers.) The noble Chairman went on to state that he had
alsoto offer an excuse for the absence of Lord Monck,who had written
to say that, but for urgent business connected with an official in-
quiry which he had undertaken on behalf of the Government, it
would have given him the greatest pleasure to have been present,
and he begged to express his warm thanks to all with whom he had
been associated in that portion of the enterprise in which he had
been engaged, and his congratulations on the success that had
attended the exertions of all. They had met there to-night to
celebrate the opening of telegraphic communication with Australia,
and he had to read to them one or two telegrams which he had
received on the occasion of this banquet. In the first place
he would read to them the telegram he had received from
South Australia, which was to this effect:—“ The grand work
of the completion of telegraphic communication between Adelaide
and Europe has been celebrated by a national demonstration
here to-day. There have been popular festivities during the day, and
a banquet in the Town Hall in the evening, under the presidency of the
Governor, Sir James Ferguson,who announced the honours whichhad
been conferred by her Majesty.” This referred to honours which the
Queen had been pleased to confer on those specially interested in the
success of this enterprise. HerMajestyhadbeen pleasedtoconferon
Mr. Ayres, First Minister of South Australia, the appointment of the
second class of the Order of St. Michael and St. George; on Mr. Dutton,
Agent-General for South Australia, the appointment of the third
class of the same Order; and the same on Mr. Todd, Superinten-
dent of Telegraphs in South Australia. He was confident that the
announcement of these honours would be received by this company
as they had been by the South Australian company. Mr. Ayres
was justly entitled to the distinction, as the head of the Govern-
ment which had carried through the most important portion of the
enterprise, and for the long services which he had rendered to that
Colony. Mr. Dutton, by the energy he had shown in the conduct
of the negotiations in this country, by the interest always displayed
by him where business was concerned, and by his services to the
Colony on other occasions, well deserved the honour; while Mr.
Todd had signalised himself in the enterprise by the extraordinary
perseverance he had shown in carrying the great work to a com-
pletion. (Cheers.) The telegram he had just read concluded thus:—
“ Weather extremely hot, but great joy manifested.” Perhaps the
reply he ought to have returned was “ Extremely cold,” as it really
appeared now that in more senses than one extremes had met.
(Laughter.) He should like to read one other telegram from a


kindred Colony, to show how great was the interest of the Aus-
tralian Colonies in the enterprise: “New South Wales sends
cordial congratulations on the completion of the telegraphic com-
munication with England, and rejoices in the establishment of an
additional bond of unity with the mother country.” (Cheers.)
There was one also from Victoria, which said:—“The Colony of
Victoria joins heartily in congratulations on the triumphant estab-
lishment of a permanent bond of union with the mother country
and distant parts of the British Empire.” The congratulations
were not confined to those under the sway of Her Majesty, for the
United States joined in good wishes. He held in his hand a
telegram from the Mayor of San Francisco to the Mayor of Adelaide
conveying congratulations. (Cheers.) But the company could judge
the tone of this and other telegrams he had received by those he
had already read. The toast he had to propose was that of “ Tele-
graphic Enterprise,” and standing as he did in the City of London
he thought he might fairly congratulate them all, as Englishmen,
on the leading part that this nation had taken in the development
especially of ocean telegraphs. (Loud cheers.) They were some-
times told that England had lost her “ spring forward,” and was
no longer the nation she used to be. He ventured to deny that.
(Cheers.) In the latest of all human inventions England had been,
to say the least, among the most forward to take advantage of all
the opportunities that it opened up. (Cheers.) He must repeat
that he found it difficult to discover expressions suitable to describe
the extraordinary change that had taken place in the relations of
the peoples of the world in consequence of this invention. No one
could estimate, for instance, the immense wealth it has brought to
the world —wealth in the sense of saving of labour; for, as the
origin of wealth was labour, so, whatever saved labour was in itself
the greatest cause of wealth. He was certain that no invention had
ever been brought to perfection in this world which had caused a
larger saving of labour than the telegraph. (Cheers.) It was so
because its operations were so large. Mechanical inventions in
particular instances had caused an extraordinary saving of labour,
but in the case of the telegraph thousands of people might be pre-
vented from engaging in useless labour by one single word telling
them their labour was not required. Suppose the Government had
to move a body of troops from some distant province of the Empire,
but some intelligence had been received, or some change had oc-
curred in their own plans, which made the movement unnecessary,
that was communicated in one single word, and all the labour and
expense of the movement of perhaps 2,000 men would be saved.


Then there were the great social changes which the telegraph had
effected—bringing man and man together, cementing the bonds of
empire, and annihilating those provincial and separate feelings
which had been the cause of so much dissension and unhappiness
throughout the world. (Cheers.) Distance it was which made men
not friends; closeness made them friends; and although they could
not be close in an actual bodily sense with their fellow-subjects on
the other side of Australia, yet when they could communicate with
them in a few minutes by telegraph they could not but feel that
they were allied to them through a medium more important than
that of bodily sense. (Cheers.) They could scarcely hope that any
invention could be made which should bridge over the ocean more
completely than the system of telegraphs. Crossing over only from
Dover to Calais, they could not but feel how great was the gulf
that separated them from some parts of the world. That very
morning he happened to be reading in the Times a letter referring
to what was called the “ Bessemer Channel-boat,” by which it was
proposed, through some skilful mechanism, to “ eliminate the dire
and dreaded mat de mer.” The writer spoke of the different move-
ments of a ship at sea in a way to illustrate most strongly the
difference between communication by steamer and by telegraph.
He did not think even Mr. Dickens himself could have more
picturesquely described the horrors of the movements aboard ship.
Those movements were “ the athwart ship pendulous, the fore and
aft pendulous—the onward, the lateral, the vertical, the vibratory,”
and so on. (A laugh.) But there were no such difficulties in com-
municating with the different parts of the Empire by telegraph.
(Hear, hear.) It would be difficult, and, indeed, invidious in him
to attempt to apportion the merit of those who had taken part in
this great enterprise. He should* however, first mention the South
Australian Government. (Cheers.) When he considered how small
the population of that Colony was, with not more than 200,000
inhabitants, how recently it had been settled—it being only 37
years since its establishment—and when he considered that they
had undertaken to carry the telegraph 2,000 miles, from north to
south, over a continent which was almost a pathless desert, he
could not help saying such an achievement was proof of the greatest
energy, perseverence, and pluck he had ever read of. (Cheers.)
He would say that there was no man in England who did not feel
proud of being fellow-subjects with those South Australians who
had done so marvellous a work. (Cheers.) Only a very short time
ago South Australia was almost a terra incognita, thought to be
little more than a desert; yet that vast tract had now been threaded


with the telegraph wire. (Cheers.) He was sure that the other
Australian Colonies would not be jealous of South Australia, for
they had many advantages—and had nobly used them—which
South Australia did not possess. The noble earl was referring with
praise to the energy shown in telegraphic enterprise by Queens-
land, when an answer was put into his hands from South Australia
to the telegram despatched about two and a half hours before
sitting down to dinner. It was as follows:—“ Sir James Fergusson,
Governor of Adelaide, to Earl Kimberley.—Your message received.
All passed off happily.” (Cheers.) The Chairman said he did not
know exactly the difference of time but the message was dated
5 a.m. He then proceeded to say that it was only two years since
this scheme of connecting the Australian Colonies had been put
into operation, and to have done so great a work in so short a
time was truly a proof of energy that showed that the English
people had lost none of its ancient energy (cheers), and he was
also glad to know, from Sir J. Fergusson, that nothing could work
more admirably than the laid wire had done since it was opened.
He had the greatest satisfaction in mentioning that Sir J. Fer-
gusson had thoroughly assisted and co-operated in the undertaking,
and it had given him the most sincere pleasure to promote him to
the Governorship of New Zealand. In conclusion, the Chairman
said that he doubted whether it would ever fall within the life of
any one now present to again assist at the celebration of a feat so
remarkable as this—of establishing telegraphic communication
from one end of the world to the other almost. Indeed, England
was now in telegraphic communication with nearly all her Colonies,
though New Zealand and the Cape of Good Hope were still cut
off from the benefit of that communication. From his own per-
sonal experience as a Minister of the Colonies, he knew how great
was the inconvenience that resulted from the want, of telegraphic
connection, and he hoped that before long the want would be
supplied. (Hear, hear.) It was with feelings of the greatest pleasure
that he gave them the toast of “ Telegraphic Enterprise.”
The toast was drunk with three times three, the band playing in
allusion to the telegram just received—the air, “ See the Conquer-
ing Hero comes.”
Mr. F. S. Dutton, who on rising to respond was received with
loud and prolonged cheers, said on behalf of the Colony of South
Australia, he begged to offer to the noble Chairman his thanks for
the flattering manner in which his Lordship had been pleased to
speak of South Australian enterprise in connection with the toast
he had just proposed; he desired at the same time to thank this


great and distinguished assembly for the generous warmth with
which that toast had been received. South Australia was justly
proud of her handiwork; and well might she be so. The page of
history, which would outlive them all, would permanently record
for the information of generations still unborn, how South Australia
undertook single-handed, and without assistance, and successfully
completed, the great work of carrying the telegraph wire 2,200
miles through the centre of an all but unknown Continent, and
joined it on to the cable, thereby forming another link for per-
manently connecting the mother-country with her loyal offspring
at the Antipodes. They would readily believe that whilst the work
was in progress it was a time of much anxiety to all concerned or
interested in it, not alone in Adelaide but also in Old Broad Street,
in the City, and in Great George Street, Westminster (a laugh);
although they never doubted of ultimate success (cheers), unex-
pected difficulties, caused by tropical climate influences, interposed
vexatious delays in finishing the undertaking for a few months
beyond the stipulated time. The science of making and laying
submarine cables was in the present day brought to such a state
of perfection that one could calculate to a day when a cable could
be laid between two points, let those points be one, two, or even
three thousand miles distant. Thus, the submarine cable from
Java to Port Darwin was laid with the most perfect success towards
the end of last year; but they were not ready with their land-line
to meet it. Unusually heavy and long-continued tropical rains in
North Australia put an entire stop to all possibility of transport
for three of four months; everybody’s patience was sorely tried by
the delay, and their working parties could do nothing but wait for
the cessation of the monsoon rains. Then, when they had so far
progressed with the land-line as to be able to bridge over the un-
finished gap by means of horse-expresses, another totally unlooked-
for disappointment occurred. The Java-Darwin cable, which had
up to that time worked splendidly, suddenly became afflicted with
an attack of submarine influenza and completely lost its voice.
(Laughter.) Their land-line was meanwhile completed and in per-
fect order some weeks before the cable could be repaired ; South
Australia and the British Australian Telegraph Company were in
fact, at that time, placed in regard to each other very mu6h in the
same position as is described in the well-known epigram about Sir
Richard Strachan and the Earl of Chatham; they were both
alternately waiting for each other, eager to commence work and to
earn money. At length, on October 21st, that red-letter day in the
history of South Australia, the cable was again in working order


and the first telegrams flashed through to their noble Chairman
and to the Lord Mayor of London, speedily followed by numbers
of other messages. Since that date both cable and land-line had
continued to perform their work in a most satisfactory manner.
He was in a position to assure the company, that, having triumph-
antly finished the land-line, South Australia would for the future
maintain the line in the most perfect working order, no matter
what the cost might be (loud cheers), and he believed the result
would prove, that the cost of maintenance, anticipated in some
quarters, would be found to be greatly exaggerated. What recom-
mended the work done by South Australia especially to their
favourable opinion was the fact, that this land-line was essentially
an international one ; many years must elapse before the country
which they had opened up could be so thickly settled as to produce
a local revenue from using the wires, which would be more than a
fraction of the great outlay incurred. Of the national importance
of this event it was impossible to speak in too high terms, as was
so well pointed out by Lord Kimberley; what was thought of it
here was proved that evening by the great assemblage of dis-
tinguished gentlemen presided over by Her Majesty’s Secretary of
State for the Colonies ; he firmly believed that the political effects
as regards the relations of this country with her Australian
Colonies would be incalculable, and that we were now bound to
the mother-country in bonds which would never be dissolved.
(Cheers.) They had heard at different times during the last few
years, whispers and insinuations, that there was one or other body
of politicians in this country who advocated the separation of the
great Colonies from the mother-country. He believed he would
have the ready assent of the numerous Australians.present when
he said that, so far as Australia was concerned, they did not intend
to allow themselves to be separated from the mother-country
(cheers), but that, on the contrary, they would stick to the grand
old ship as long as two of her timbers held together. (Great cheer-
ing, which completely drowned Mr. Dutton’s voice for a minute.)
If South Australia was proud of what she had so well done,
England also might be proud when she glanced towards the whole
of the Australian Colonies. The toast was composed of only two
words; take the one word “ enterprise ” alone, and see what it
meant as applied to Australia generally ; the whole of Australia
was one mass of enterprise ; pastoral, mining, agricultural, bank-
ing, and mercantile enterprise, never sleeping, ever advancing!
No one could doubt that telegraphic communication between Aus-
tralia and England, now so happily completed, would give to that


enterprise further and greater development. (Cheers.) It only now
remained for him to add a very few words personal to himself.
They had heard from Lord Kimberley that his Lordship had felt
himself justified on this auspicious occasion to recommend the
names of his friends, Mr. Ayers and Mr. Todd, in the Colony, as
well as his own name, to the Queen, for a mark of Her Majesty’s
royal and most gracious favour. He asked leave to express to his
Lordship, on behalf of his two friends and himself, their profound
gratitude for the honour done them, and he would add for himsell
that he hoped in his future career to be able to prove that Her
Majesty’s gracious favour had not been bestowed on an unworthy
subject. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Dainteee, in responding on behalf of Queensland to the
compliment paid that Colony, in including her name in the toast
devoted to “ Telegraphic Enterprise,” said he must believe that
she was credited not only with what had been already accom-
plished, but also with her good intentions in that direction.
(Hear, hear.) What had been accomplished was a land-line
extending from New South Whies to a point on the Gulf of
Carpentaria at the mouth of the Norman River, a work in nowise
inferior to that executed in the other Australian Colonies. Hei
intention, however, in the completion of these land-lines to the
gulf was that she might thus be brought into direct communication
with Europe by means of a submarine cable to be landed at the
Norman, and so complete a similar purpose to that we are called
together to-night to celebrate. For a variety of reasons which it
was not his intention to bring forward now, that project had not
yet been carried out. Her rival, South Australia, offered to con-
struct a land-line across the entire continent, provided the British-
Australian Telegraph Company completed the communication to
Port Darwin, and with this project the company closed. It was
pointed out by New South Wales and Queensland that the time
and money said to be required for the completion of this land-line
were quite inadequate to the task, whilst the Queensland telegraphic
system could with certainty be completed to the Norman, as soon
as a cable could be laid to the same point. These prophecies had
been fulfilled. They were, however, reminiscences of the past, and
he felt he should ill represent Queensland if he did not, in speak-
ing of the present, speak with the greatest admiration of the pluck
and perseverance with which, having once put their hands to the
work, the South Australians had carried it through. (Cheers.) The
constructive staff had been indefatigable. The spirit of M‘Dougal
Stuart seems to have diffused itself through all the workers on the


line, and a determination to be beaten by no obstacle seemed to
have animated all. If, then, in consequence of South Australia’s
“ Telegraphic Enterprise,” the coast ranges of her northern terri-
tory became (at an earlier period than they otherwise would)
attractive to the miner for the gold and other metals discovered,
and that pastoral and agricultural settlement was likewise ex-
pedited, no one would congratulate her more heartily than Queens-
land. He said we dare hardly hope much for the settlement of the
interior through which the land-line passes, considering that in-
termittent belts of marly plain, and sandstone ridges, and table-
lands, nearly destitute of permanent water during the dry season,
were its marked featoes. With stations 200 miles apart, and the
knowledge that in the rainy season and in periods of excessive
drought the country was almost impassable, it was evident there
still remained a work to complete before telegraphic communication
between Europe and Australia could be considered permanent, and
that was the duplication of the line. (Hear, hear.) To this task
Queensland had now set herself in earnest. In the last session of
the Queensland Legislature a resolution of both Houses authorised
the Executive to negotiate with a company for the purpose of lay-
ing and working a cable from East Java to Norman Mouth, on a
guarantee of 5 per cent, on the capital, and tenders for this route
had already reached the Colony. When this cable was laid, the
public might feel certain of uninterrupted telegraphic communi-
cation between England and Australia, and Queensland might then
have more reason to show for the compliment now paid her in in-
cluding her name with that of South Australia and the British
Australian Telegraphic Company in the toast devoted to “ Tele-
graphic Enterprise.”
Mr. Pender, M.P., returned thanks for the Eastern Telegraph
Company, and read a telegram which said, “ The grand work of
the completion of telegraphic communication between Adelaide
and Europe has been celebrated by a national demonstration here
(Adelaide) to-day, by popular festivities and a banquet in the Town
Hall,” with a list of the guests and toasts. This telegram, he said,
showed that the Colonies expected Lord Monck to be present at the
banquet over which Lord Kimberley presided; but as he was un-
avoidably absent, he (Mr. Pender) would endeavour to reply on his
behalf. He spoke at some length of the admirable manner in which
the enterprise had been carried out by the officers and staff of the
Telegraph Construction Company in the face of difficulties under
which men of less courage and skill would have inevitably failed,
and congratulated the shareholders and the public on the pecuniary,
B
f


social, and moral benefits which the completion of the work had
secured. The Australian Telegraph Companies had also done their
part of the work well, and he hoped that it would be worked with
feelings of mutual friendship. He strongly advised the Australian
Colonies to unite for the purpose of completing their telegraphic
system; and then, referring to the progress of ocean telegraphy,
he wished the company to testify their respect for Mr. Cyrus Field,
Sir James Anderson, and Captain Sherard Osborn for what had
been achieved. He gave a graphic sketch of the work that had
been done since the first inception of the Atlantic Cable in 1866,
until now. When the cable between Ireland and America broke
they picked it up in twelve fathoms of water, and it was now as
strong as ever ; not only so, but ten men connected with the Con-
struction Company, of whom he was one, subscribed £I,OOO apiece
to enable the ’65 cable to be recovered, and to another
cable, which they called the 1866 cable. (Cheers.) There were now
in round figures 38,000 miles of submarine cables at work, and the
capital invested in respect of them was, also in round figures, ten
millions and a quarter sterling. The exact figures were: sub-
marine cable, mileage laid and in work, 37,790 miles; capital
invested in respect of submarine cables, £10,230,370. He believed
that in the course of a few years there would be no part of
the world without its cable when it could be shown that one could
be laid with a probability of its paying a profit of 5 per cent.
(Hear, hear.)
The Chairman next gave the toast of the “ Integrity of the
British Empire,” which was received with immense enthusiasm
and cries of “ Hurrah ” that lasted for several minutes. He said that
the only objection he could conceive to that toast was, that it might
be taken to imply that there was some party in England in favour
of the disintegration of the British Empire. He believed that no
such party existed, and certainly not in that room. (Loud cheers.)
He supposed that the Ministry of which he was a humble member
was in some quarters suspected of holding such views. Now, he
drew from that a very consolatory reflection in favour of the
toast he was proposing. Every Ministry must have a Colonial
as well as a foreign policy, and the business of the Opposition
being to find fault with the Government, they found it advisable
to give their Colonial policy a name which they thought would bo
unpopular. It was the old story of giving a dog a bad name. There-
fore he might point out that the very imputations cast upon the
policy of the Government proved that the vast majority of English-
men were opposed to any idea of disintegrating the Empire,


(Cheers.) He altogether denied the truth of the accusation.
(Cheers.) He never heard that any member of the Government
had any plan for disintegrating the Empire. For his own part
he rejected these accusations with scorn. (Cheers.) Of course
there might be differences of opinion as to what might be the
results of the policy they pursued. They might err, as all men
might err, in their policy; but they believed that the measures
they brought forward would lead not to the disintegration, but to
the consolidation of the Empire. (Cheers.) Take the subject which
had been most sedulously brought as an article of charge against
the present Government—he meant the withdrawal of troops from
the Colonies. He said boldly and sincerely nothing could more
unequivocally disprove the assertion. It used to be said in certain
quarters that the Colonies cast an unfair burden on the mother-
country, and didnot bear their proper share of the expenses of their own
defence; and if that feeling had been allowed to grow and to gather
strength, the good relations between England and her dependencies
could not but have been imperilled. That had now been altered; all
that we expected of the Colonies was that they should show them-
selves ready to bear a fair share of such expenses, and no one ever
supposed that this country would not lend the weight of her assis-
tance to them also if the necessity should arise. The Colonies had
manfully responded to the appeal that had been made to them—
(cheers) —and had not shrunk from any responsibility that had
been cast upon them. (Loud cheers.) Look at New Zealand.
He did not believe that in the whole history of England could be
found an example of Englishmen who had met the difficulties that
stood in their way more manfully, or had settled them with greater
success ; nothing could have been attended with happier results than
the policy of the New Zealand Ministry towards the native chiefs
during the last year. (Cheers.) The Government of that Colony had
fully understood their situation ; they had manfully dealt with their
difficulties, and the way in which they had surmounted them was
a proof that we had laid the foundation of their lasting prosperity
and progress. He honoured the spirit they had shown—(hear,
hear) —and more so because they pursued their course without
murmuring, and he hoped they now acknowledged that their
position was superior to anything in the past—was more con-
solidated, and was hopefully encouraging with respect to the
future. He had made this reference to New Zealand, feeling
assured that no Colony had shown a greater spirit and deter-
mination to overcome its difficulties ; and he could furnish other
instances of the same results attending the Colonial policy of
b 2


Her Majesty’s Government. (Hear.) In considering this question
did we ever fairly realise in our minds what the British Empire
was ? It encircled the whole world. When we considered that
the telegraph wire from this room extended to one part of our
Empire, distant about 12,000 miles ; that a new railway was pro-
jected in Canada whose termini would be about 3,000 miles apart;
that in the great valley of the Saskatchewan, which that railway
would open up, support might be foundfor 10,000,000 to 15,000,000
inhabitants, we then began to realise what was the extent and
greatness of our Empire. In speaking of this great Empire, we not
only spoke of our Colonies and dependencies, but also of our vast In-
dian dominions, the extent of which might be measured when we
remembered that in one province alone, that of Bengal, there were no
less than 68,000,000 inhabitants. With these facts in mind we
might well think that those men who held places of trust,-and were
at the head of affairs, ought to be men who, whilst anxious to
aid the prosperity of each part of the Empire, should be sedulously
careful not to impair or destroy so great a fabric, which, under
the providence of the Almighty, we had so successfully reared, and
which was destined to bear so important an influence on the world.
(Cheers.) He felt that the toast was an unusual one, but well
chosen for the great banquet which they were now holding, because
the construction of telegraphic communication with Australia was
perhaps the best step that could be taken to maintain the integrity
of the Empire. But let us remember that something else would
be wanted to preserve the unity of the Empire. We require mutual
forbearance as well as physical ties, and it would be the duty of
the Imperial Government at all times to foster and encourage the
good relations which happily prevailed between the Colonies and
England. But this was not the place to defend the policy of the
Colonial Office. In this country we had ever asserted the right of
Englishmen to govern themselves, and this principle of self-govern-
ment was being carried out in the Colonies. The time had been
when the greatest offence that an English Government could be
accused of towards a Colony was that of interfering too much in
its affairs ; but—
“ Tempora mutantur nos et mutamur in illis,”
for of late he had been chiefly accused, in the case of the Cape of
Good Hope, of the crime of forcing on the Colonies the privilege of
self-government. (A laugh.) Nothing could show more strongly
how the times had altered when the only complaint was that they
did not interfere with the Colonies enough. (Cheers.) If that was


the worst thing which could he said against the Government,
they would be perfectly willing to abide the verdict of the
country on their Colonial policy. Upon the toast that he had
to propose he could only add that to deal with what the whole sub-
ject involved far exceeded both his ability and the time at his
command; but he was confident that the establishment of tele-
graphic communication with every part of our vast Empire was one
of the surest and best means of consolidating it, and of strength-
ening, with commercial and social bonds, those ties of sentiment
and tradition that already united England and her dependencies.
(Loud cheers.)
The toast was drunk with the same remarkable enthusiasm
which had characterised its proposal.
Lord Houghton cordially endorsed the sentiments of the noble
Chairman. He said that during the many years he had the honour
of a seat in the House of Commons he took the greatest interest
in all Colonial affairs. He remembered what might be called the
birthday of this Colonial question some thirty years ago. Her
Majesty’s Ministers at that time saw how things were drifting, and
gave much of their time towards the solution of the “ difficulty.”
He was certain that the policy which the Government had pursued
had been a wise and beneficial one, not only to the Colonies but to
the whole Empire. At one time it was said that the mother-country
interfered too much with Colonial affairs, now the cry was that she
interfered too little. It was all very well for gentlemen to give
vent to their different opinions and ideas on this subject, but, as
he said before, he believed Her Majesty’s Government had acted
in a fair and proper spirit in relation to this matter, and therefore
it gave him much pleasure to endorse fully the sentiments of
the noble Chairman. There could be no doubt that the great
power which would hold the Empire together in the future
would be the power of electricity, and this being so he was glad
to be present at the celebration dinner of the opening of tele-
graphic communication with Australia. (Cheers.)
Sir John Eose, Bart., K.C.M.G., thought it would be very
gratifying to all Colonists that the toast of “ The integrity of the
Empire ” had been proposed. It would be doubly gratifying to
them to learn the terms in which it had been given, and the great
enthusiasm with which it had been received, and equally gratifying
to find that it should have been proposed by one holding the dis-
tinguished position in connection with our Colonies which the noble
Earl occupied. (Cheers.) He believed that there never was a time
in the history of the Colonies when their sentiments of attachment


to England were stronger, or when there was a more general con-
viction, both on their part and in England, that it was to the
interests of the Empire that the connection of the Colonies with the
mother-country should be indissoluble, and more strongly cemented
as time went on. (Much cheering.) The enterprise, the com-
pletion of which they were now celebrating, had done much to
bring Colonists together, and they, as well as the Empire at large,
owed a debt of gratitude to those who had planned and carried it out.
Though important in a material point of view, it was pre-emin-
ently so in a national and political aspect. The obstacles of time
and space, which might by some be supposed to interfere with the
connection between England and her Colonies, were every day
being removed ; a fact of which we had practical evidence this
night in the transmission and receipt of communications with
Australia. He thought Colonists might congratulate themselves
on the disappearance of any party or set of men who would advo-
cate the disintegration of the Empire—(hear, hear) —and if the
feeling of this great meeting—composed of men of all parties—was
any indication of what existed throughout the country, he must
indeed be a bold man who would hint at any measure tending to
such a result. (Loud cheers.) Before sitting down he would pre-
sume on their kindness to say a word with reference to the recent
negociations between England and the United States. (Hear,
hear.) There seemed some ground to fear that an opinion might
go forth that Colonial interests had been overlooked or disregarded.
He should greatly deplore to see any such impression acquire con-
sistency, for we Colonists ought, on the contrary, to find in these
negociations an assurance that, next to the supreme considerations
of Imperial concern, the wellbeing of the Colonies would ever have
the highest place. He was violating no confidence when he said
that next to what affected the honour and dignity of the Empire,
the special interests of Canada, both in the inception and prosecu-
tion of these negociations, were the subject of unremitting solicitude
and concern. They began in a desire to free Canada from those
disturbing dangers whose existence could not do otherwise than
retard her progress—prevent the inflow of population and capital,
and so check that rapid development of her resources which the
energy and enterprise of her people would otherwise effect. They
had not been able to get full justice in reference to some of the
points in dispute; but as one who had spent thirty years of his
life in Canada, and whose interests and affections would always
largely be centred there, he believed it was, on the whole, greatly
to the advantage of Canada that the irritating subjects of difference


with the United States had been removed. The Dominion might
now look forward to many years of uninterrupted tranquillity
One-third of her whole trade was with the United States, and it
was for their mutual interest that there should be no questions
kept alive calculated to produce national ill-will. He thought the
importance of San Juan as a strategic position had been greatly
exaggerated. He would rather lose twenty San Juans than see any
feeling of distrust arise on the part of Canada as to the measure of
watchfulness exercised by the Imperial Government in the pro-
tection of her interests. (Hear, hear.) He believed the result
would lead to a juster view of the mutual relations between Canada
and England, give ground for a firmer feeling of confidence towards
one another, and, above all, would tend to prove that they were
now and should continue to be one in interest, in affection, and in
national aspirations. (Cheers.)
Mr. J. B. Daevall, C.M.G., in responding to the same toast, said
—My lords, ladies, and gentlemen—for lam glad to see that now,
as always, the fair sex are ready to grace by their presence every
great and good undertaking—l rise with much pleasure to say a
few words upon this question, particularly referring to the Colony
of which I can never speak but in terms of gratitude for the many
happy years I have spent there—l mean New South Wales.
Nothing can delight me more than to see the bond of connection
more closely drawn between Great Britain and the country which
I may almost call my second home, by this great and important
enterprise so successfully carried to a conclusion. Allow me also
to express the feelings of my fellow-colonists, who, lam sure, would
one and all unite with me in expressing admiration at the enter-
prise, and their earnest hope that their reward may not be honour
only, but substantial commercial recompense bearing a just pro-
portion to the magnitude of the work. It is not many years ago
when the course between England and Australia was nine weary
months, when parents were separated from children, lovers from
lovers, friends from friends, by that weary time and an enormous
distance of space. That was bridged over by a magnificent fleet
of P. & 0. steamers; and now, as a last triumph of science,
ingenuity, and skill, we can converse with our most distant fellow-
subjects in the course of a few moments, as we have seen this
evening. (Hear, hear.) I come now more particularly to the
toast which I have the honour to respond to, namely, “ The closer
connection between the Colonies and the mother-country and the
integrity of the Empire.” I have been very much pleased to hear
from his lordship, who has presided so well over this assemblage,


assertions which make it impossible for me to believe that which
has been a current report, and which has given very great pain in
many quarters. It has been stated, and repeated by portions of the
Press not the least influential—especially by that portion of
the Press which never loses an opportunity of sneering at the
Colonists—that portion of the Press which is so valuable to Her
Majesty’s Government so long as they have a majority in the House
of Commons and no longer—(laughter)—that the Government of
this country was only waiting for an opportunity, not to bid us
good-bye, but to give us every encouragement to go if we liked—
(hear, hear) —that Her Majesty’s Prime Minister was congenially
employed by keeping his hand constantly on the bell-rope to ring
for Robert to show the Colonies the door. (Laughter.) My lord,
I cannot believe that after the assertions that we have heard from
you to-night, and I am certain that, so far as they relate do your-
self individually, no effort will be spared on your part to cement
and perpetuate the tie between the mother-country and her Colo-
nies, which ought to last for ever, (Hear, hear, and cheers.)
What has been the persistent conduct of the Colonies ? When
have they failed to show to England the deepest sympathy in all
the troubles brought upon her by the Indian mutiny, by the
Crimean war, by the cotton famine, by the potato disease ? I say
that in proportion to their numbers their contributions were mag-
nificent, and in no part of England was the sympathy so sincere,
so deeply felt, so warmly evinced as in the Colonies. Let it be
remembered than an enmeshed lion was once relieved from toil,
trouble, and danger, by a feeble but faithful and staunch friend ;
and so it may be years hence, and if ever England is placed in
difficulties she may thank the day when a minister like yourself
did all in his power to maintain cordial relations with the Colonies.
(Cheers.) My lord, we have not among us any sedition which
could win for us sympathy from a particular party in England.
(Bravo.) We have been loyal, and shall continue to be so, and we
trust that the mother-country will not be led astray from those
greater and nobler aspirations which should guide a nation, but
remember that to keep faith and honour is better as a national
possession and a greater security for the future than the sort of
peace-at-any-price which will make a nation the contempt of her
neighbours and the scorn of mankind. (Loud cheers.) It would
be a poor compensation to give up our possessions that a Liberal
Ministry may remain in power, and that the cotton mills in Man-
chester may be in full work. I throw aside all sinister suppositions
that I had entertained, and I feel that your words will not only be


heard here, but will be felt in the Colonies, and find an echo there,
so that nobody for the future will believe that there is any party
of any magnitude or importance who would be base enough to
desire that the Colonies should sever their connection with England
—(loud cheers) —because possibly at some future time there might
be some slight entanglement with a foreign power in which
England would have the duty cast upon her of defending her
distant possessions. This telegraphic communication will put
England not only in a position of direct communication with her
Colonies, but will add to their strength as well as to that of England.
You will have refuges for your fleets, and you will command your
armies in all parts of the world, as you have mentioned to-night,
at a moment’s notice. You will have the aid and support, and the
constant, faithful and unswerving loyalty of the Colonies so long as
you do not meddle too much—not leave them alone too much—but
simply give them the power, the honour, and the happiness of
remaining an integral portion of the British empire, without
having it constantly suggested that they may go, and that the
sooner they go the better. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Dutton proposed the next toast, “ The officers and men
engaged in erecting the Overland Line of Telegraph,” coupled with
the name of Mr. Todd. He said he esteemed it a privilege to have
this toast entrusted to him, which he felt sure would be received
with favour by the company. It was one thing for a country to
plan great works, it was another thing to be certain of having
sturdy and courageous men to carry them out, and intelligent
brains to organise details. South Australia was fortunate enough
to possess plenty of energetic men ready to incur the great labour,
not unmixed with danger, of proceeding into the far interior of
Australia to perform the work, and in Mr. Todd—(cheers) —they
had a man of admirable judgment and great ability, under whose
supervising care all difficulties were surmounted, and success
ensured. Mr. Todd was formerly Assistant-Astronomer at Cam-
bridge, then Assistant-Astronomer at Greenwich, and for the last
sixteen years he had filled the offices of Superintendent of the
Observatory at Adelaide, Director of Telegraph Department, and
at present also Postmaster-General. Mr. Todd was the originator
of the whole scheme for carrying the wire through the centre of
Australia, which he advocated ever since MacDougall Stuart’s
memorable exploration. To him alone belonged the credit of
having convinced the Government of South Australia of the feasi-
bility of this grand work; and to no man more than himself was
due the credit of having so thoroughly organised the details as to


make ultimate success a certainty, lie liimself proceeding to the
northern territory to superintend the work, and returning thence
overland to Adelaide. (Cheers.) They had the advantage that
evening of the presence of Mr. B. Herschell Babbage, one of the
officers engaged on the work, who would respond to the toast.
The toast was drunk with all the honours, uj)standing, and “ one
cheer more.”
Mr. B. H. Babbage, in responding, said it was to Mr. Todd that
the general public and the country owed the completion of the
Australian telegraph—(hear)—not only for advocating the estab-
lishment of the line, but also for the judicious way in which he
organised the various parties for its construction. Mr. Todd did
not content himself by staying at home in Adelaide and giving out
instructions, but he went himself into the interior in order to see
that the work which he had contracted for was properly and
efficiently carried out. (Cheers.) The hour being very late, he
was sure the company would excuse him, and also be very thank-
ful if he did not detain them any longer except to return them
thanks, on behalf of Mr. Todd and the other gentlemen who assisted
him in this great undertaking, for the way in which their healths
had been drunk. (Cheers.)
Mr. Knatchbull-Hugessen said he had been asked, upon some-
what short notice, to propose a toast which was second in import-
ance to none upon their list this evening, and yet, short as this
notice had been, he hailed with alacrity the opportunity of inviting
them to join in a toast which none would drink more cordially
than its proposer—namely, “ Prosperity to the Colonies.” (Cheers.)
To-night they were assembled to celebrate an event which in itself
demonstrated the great and growing prosperity of one magnificent
portion of our Colonial Empire. The practical annihilation of
time and space which they commemorated to-night was a signifi-
cant fact, showing at once the growing importance to each other
of Great Britain and her Australasian Colonies, and the enormous
progress which had been made and was still making by the latter.
(Cheers.) It was impossible for him to propose this toast without
remembering that during the last two years of an official life,
which had now been of some duration, he had been and still was
intimately connected with that department of the British Govern-
ment which was more directly interested in the prosperity of the
Colonies. They had been the happiest years of his official life.
Working under and in full accord with a chief of whom he could
not speak in his presence as warmly as he should have done if he
were absent, he had the opportunity and the privilege of becoming


acquainted with many men of Colonial —and of more than Colonial
—reputation, of making himself conversant with many interesting
details of Colonial affairs, and of striving to promote—so far as
the efforts of any individual could promote—that interchange of
kindly feeling and friendly intercourse between Colonists and home
residents which were so desirable among those who were fellow-
subjects of the same Sovereign, (Hear.) He thought there were
three mistakes regarding our Colonies which were not unfrequently
made in this country. In the first place, there were many persons
who talked and wrote as if some continuous action on the part of
the Government of Great Britain was necessary to insure the
prosperity of each and all of our Colonies. But, speaking in the
presence of those who knew the subject well, he, would venture to
say that the real prosperity of a Colony must be worked out in
itself, and that, with regard, at least, to our larger Colonies, all
that they really desired from us was the assurance of friendly sym-
pathy and as little interference as possible. (Cheers.) Then,
again, he thought it was a mistake to be always telling our
Colonies that we did not want to part with them. His noble
friend sometimes —and he very often —had occasion to do this,
because they had to defend themselves from accusations upon the
subject; but the case presented itself to him rather in this
light—if a man was always earnestly begging his wife to believe
that he was faithful to her, the chances were that after a while the
vehement and continued reiteration of the assertion would beget a
doubt of its truth. (A laugh.) There were some things which
were better taken for granted, and after the speech of his noble
friend to-night and of the First Lord of the Admiralty at Bristol,
he did not think any one could doubt the desire of all parties in
this country to cherish the Colonial connection. For himself, he
hailed those speeches with the liveliest satisfaction. During the
last two years he had lost no opportunity, in and out of the House
of Commons, of strongly urging the value of the Colonies to this
country. It had been sometimes said that he spoke too boldly for
an Under-Secretary, but his triumphant justification was to be
found in the words spoken to-night by his noble friend (Lord
Kimberley); and henceforth no one would venture to say that any
party in this country desired to weaken that bond of union which
was so advantageous to both Colonies and mother-country. The
third mistake, to his mind, was on the part of those amateur
friends of the Colonies who were continually bringing forward
propositions to improve the relations between Great Britain and
the Colonies. With all due respect to those gentlemen, he always


felt in the presence of such proposals very like a father who saw
his children pressed against their will to take the physic of an
irregular practitioner, when he knew very well that, had they been
really ill, they would have cried out themselves at once for the
family doctor. (A laugh.) If our Colonies thought that their
prosperity would be promoted by an alteration in the Colonial
Office—if they fancied that any change would conduce to their
advantage, they were old enough and intelligent enough to make
the demand themselves, and, although he treated with respect the
opinions of every one who interested himself in Colonial affairs
(especially if he was a Member of the House of Commons) —
(a laugh)—he deprecated the disturbance of our own or of Colonial
tranquillity by proposals which did not reach us as emanating
from the well-ascertained wishes of the Colonists themselves.
(Hear.) It would be impertinent in him to detain thorn by en-
larging upon the prosperity of any individual Colony. He believed,
as a whole, our Colonies were never more prosperous and never
more contented, and he was sure that the people of Great Britain
cordially rejoiced in that prosperity, which was, in fact, interwoven
with their own. (Cheers.) He had never addressed a meeting in
this country without finding that kind and cordial words towards
the Colonies elicited a prompt and sympathetic cheer, and, for his
own part, he should always consider it a matter of pride and plea-
sure to have been associated with Colonial affairs. (Cheers.)
When, then, he gave “ Prosperity to our Colonies,” he would say,
May that prosperity be evinced by the development of internal
resources, the increase of Colonial commerce, the extension of
Colonial trade, and the continual, progressive improvement of the
different races which own, and are proud to own the British flag !
(Cheers.) And may it be accompanied by a steady and unswerving
affection between Colonies and mother-country, so that they may
remain one united and mighty Empire—(cheers)—bound together
by bonds of a texture too soft to gall, but too strong to be broken
—(cheers) —an Empire based upon the strong foundation of mutual
sympathy as well as mutual interest, and having for the main end
and object of its policy—aye, and its very existence—the gradual
development of the resources of the world and the peaceful, pro-
gressive improvement of mankind!
Mr. Strangways, in responding, said that of the greater part of
the Colonies he had no knowledge whatever. All he could say
was that they had not relied upon the sublime instinct of an
ancient people. (Laughter and “ Hear, hear.”) He was glad to see
the improved position South Australia had placed herself in by the


completion of this noble and mighty work. The telegraph between
Great Britain and the Australian Colonies would undoubtedly tend
to strengthen those cordial bonds of union which already exist,
and in the future he believed that no man either in or out of Par-
liament would have the pluck to stand up and advocate the disin-
tegration of the Empire. (Cheers.)
Mr. M‘ Arthur said at the late hour of the evening to which
they had arrived he was sure the company would be best satisfied
with a very few words from him. Like his hon. friend who pro-
posed the toast, he had only within the last few minutes been
requested to respond. He did so, however, most cordially ; but in
the first place he would express the regret which he felt at the
absence of the representative of New South Wales. (Hear, hear.)
Sir Charles Cowper, although much better in health, felt himself
unable to be present on this auspicious occasion. Had he been
amongst the company he, perhaps, would have responded to the
toast to which he (the speaker) was now about to reply. He could
only say that the sentiments expressed by the noble Chairman,
and by his hon. friend Mr. Knatchbull-Hugessen, would be hailed
with very great pleasure and delight when they went forth to
the world, and nowhere would they be more loyally received than
in New South Wales. (Cheers.) In no part of Her Majesty’s
dominions was the Crown more revered than in that Colony. He
believed that the inhabitants of New South Wales would be greatly
encouraged and pleased at the tone and manner in which the toast
had been received. He might also say in conclusion, with refer-
ence to the prosperity of the Australian Colonies, that during the
thirty years he had known and been connected with them he never
knew them to be in so prosperous a condition as they were at the
present time. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Hamilton, in responding for the South African Colonies,
remarked that when the report of this evening’s proceedings
reached those Colonies there would be kindled a feeling of emula-
tion for the great work just completed by our fellow-countrymen in
South Australia. South Africa, indeed, by its geographical posi-
tion was not so favourably circumstanced for telegraphic commu-
nication as Australia; but he believed there was something good in
store for those Colonies at no distant date, and when the electric
cable shall have united the Cape of Good Hope and Natal to our
telegraphic system, a more wonderful feat will have been accom-
plished even than that which they were this evening met to cele-
brate. He had every confidence in the energy and enterprise of
the South African Colonists, of which they had in so many ways


given proof. Telegraphic communication was a good thing, but
steam communication was another, and as an example to their
Australian friends, he might state that the great bulk of the com-
merce with South Africa was now carried by steamers. The
Colonists were constantly pushing northwards into the interior, so
that the bullock wagon was now a familiar object on the shores of
Lake Ngami, the scene of Livingstone’s earliest discoveries. But
still greater things would shortly be accomplished. It had recently
been announced that the Government had granted subsidies for the
establishment of steam communication monthly from the Cape of
Good Hope along the Eastern Coast of Africa to Mozambique,
Zanzibar, and Aden; and when the South African Colonies were
called upon to contribute their quota to this great object, he be-
lieved he was correct in stating, and he spoke in the presence of
the noble Lord, the Secretary for the Colonies, that the answer
from the Governor at Cape Town was a ready acquiescence, while
the reply sent from Natal was that the Colonists would contribute
double the amount asked of them, rather than allow the proposal
to fail. The Colonists were thus preparing to turn the flank of
the great African Continent, and he hoped that ere long good fruit
would be borne by the geographical explorations of the Zambese
and other districts which of late years had been so justly an
object of national pride.
The Hon, Arthur Kinnaird, M.P., in proposing the next toast,
said the duty devolving upon him was one which he felt it both an
honour and a pleasure to discharge. It seemed to him highly
honourable to them as Englishmen to be able to assemble together
so many representatives of different lands, but of one nationality,
from the most distant parts of the earth. (Cheers.) Never, he
believed, was there collected in a single room a party of men who
had done harder, more varied, or more useful work. (Hear, hear.)
He had now in their name to bid welcome to guests whose home
continued to be our own seagirt island. He rejoiced that among
those guests was numbered the Colonial Minister—(cheers) and
he was sure he should faithfully express the sentiment of those in
whose name he spoke when he said what pleasure the presence of
that noble lord had afforded them, being as he was the representa-
tive of Her Majesty’s Government on this occasion. (Cheers.)
Perhaps he might be pardoned for saying that he wished his noble
friend had been accompanied by the Premier. (Cheers.) But none
the less did they appreciate Lord Kimberley’s kindness in coming
to preside ; and he felt certain, though they could not offer him
civic hospitality, yet he would leave them to-night with a fresh con


viction that there would he no response in the Canada Dominion
to the advice of the chief journal of England to “ take up her free-
dom” —(hear, hear) —and to regard her past days as days of ap-
prenticeship for coming independence. (Hear, hear.) He believed
all present were agreed on one point—namely, on the maintenance
of the integrity of the Empire. (Cheers.) Were that integrity
broken up, with what different feelings and views would emigration
be carried on! (Cheers.) At present, if any man desired a Colonial
career he left England with every privilege of a citizen intact. Ho,
had no choice of nationality to make. He remained a free subject'
of the British Crown—a free citizen of the British empire ; and at
any moment of his career he could return to the exercise of all his
rights in England. (Hear.) But how different would it be if the
moment he set foot on board ship as a Colonist he became an alien!
The whole of his political and civil relations would be altered. He :
would become a stranger to his own kindred. Now, they were not j
prepared for that, and he hoped they never would be. (Cheers.) j
They were one Empire, united under a beloved and constitutional j
Sovereign. (Cheers.) It remained in the future to be seen whether j
it would not be possible to create some federal bonds of union j
between the Colonies and England whether, as all the Canadian'
provinces had become one Dominion, Canada itself could not be ini
some sort of union with Australia, and both Canada and Australia/
with New Zealand and the Cape, all united still more closely to tho
mother-country with some power of legislative action. (Cheers.)
This might be at some future time, but meanwhile they would all
strive to strengthen, not to weaken, their present bonds of union;
and, with the blessing of God, they would leave to their children’s
children the heritage they had received from their fathers. (Cheers.)
He proposed “ The Health of the Guests and the Ladies.” (Cheers.)
Sir James Anderson, in responding, said he hoped the cheers
which followed the toast just proposed were meant for the ladies.
(Hear, hear.) He thought their presence ought to have been
recognised before, as a great many of them had left; however, tho
remaining few would, no doubt, appreciate the toast. He had no in-
tention of making a long speech or going into any details whatever.
Atthat late hour (11.15 p.m.) a veryfewwords would suffice. (Cheers.)
Upwards of twenty years ago, Mr. Pender and Mr. Cyrus W. Field,
amidst struggling and uncertainty, began the game of winding the
telegraphic cord around the world; and although the first ten years
were conspicuous for failures and disappointments, the last ten
were equally conspicuous for successful progress; and this last
year had completed the most wonderful feature of all by uniting


the Antipodes, not only with the mother-country, but with the
whole commercial world. (Cheers.) He hoped that this accom-
plished feat was the beginning of a grand era in commercial pros-
perity. (Cheers.) He was one of those who foresaw a very great
change in the commercial relations of the Empire—a change such
as none of our forefathers contemplated. Already we have seen
railways tunnelling under and climbing over the Alps, besides
crossing the great continent of America; and at no distant period
we were likely to see the railway extended to India and China.
(Cheers.) In future, he believed the Great Eastern, which he had
had the honour to command, would be looked upon as a vessel
of no unusual size, and that free trade with America would mean
many Great Easterns, and that in a very short time. (Hear, hear.)
At no distant future the telegraph would become the principal
medium of all international as well as commercial intercourse; and
we might well regard this fact, and the others to which he had
referred, as pointing to a new epoch in the history of the world.
He had often been present at Colonial banquets, and upon this
occasion, when Telegraphy was the prominent feature, he had great
pleasure in thanking them for the honour they had done him in
calling upon him to reply to the toast of “ The Guests.”
Sir Charles Nicholson, in a few words, proposed the last toast,
“ The Health of the Chairman.” He said we were greatly indebted
to the noble lord for taking the chair on the present occasion. He
had shown much patience throughout the evening, and had effi-
ciently discharged the duties of chairman. (Hear, hear.)
Lord Kimberley, in acknowledging the toast, said, if he deserved
any compliment for his patience, he was sure the company deserved
one too; for they had shown an extraordinary amount of patience
throughout the whole of the proceedings. He thought it was at
least creditable on an occasion of this kind, at so late an hour, to
see present more than forty members. (Hear, hear.) He was
greatly obliged for the kind manner in which he had been received
by them. Of all duties, none which he had to perform was so
genial to him as to preside at a banquet of this kind, and he trusted
upon all occasions when anything that interested the Colonies was
discussed the same good feeling, the same enthusiasm, and the
same harmony would prevail as had characterised the proceedings
on the present occasion. (Cheers.) He thanked the company for
the kind manner in which they had drunk his health.
The company then separated.


The following Telegraphic Messages were sent, received, and
transmitted by the Chairman during the Banquet. It will be
observed from some of them that the festivities in South Aus-
tralia were being brought to a close just as those in London were
commencing, owing to the difference of longitude, which makes
Adelaide time about ten hours in advance of Greenwich time :
COPIRS OF TELEGRAMS.
(Precisely as handed in.)
Prom Earl Kimberley, at banquet, to the Governors of South Australia, Victoria,
New South Wales, Queensland, and Van Diemen’s Land.
“ Company at Australian Telegraph Dinner joins me in drinking prosperity
to the Colonies, and in rejoicing at this fresh bond of union between the different
members of the Empire.”
From Sir James Fergusson to Earl Kimberley.
“ Your message received. All passed off happily.”
From the Governor of Adelaide to Earl Kimberley.
“Telegraph Banquet Company highly gratified at the announcement of
honours conferred to-day. Intensely hot, hut great joy manifested.”
From Viscount Canterbury, Melbourne, to Earl Kimberley, London.
“ We heartily appreciate your good wishes for our prosperity with other
Colonies, and heartily concur in rejoicing at fresh bond of union with country,
established by successful completion of direct telegraphic communication. ’ ’
From J. G. Francis, Chief Secretary, Victoria, to the Chairman of the Banquet
Committee.
“Colony of Victoria joins heartily in congratulations on this finish and
triumph of science, and of permanent union with the Mother Country and other
distant parts of the British Empire.”
From Marquis of Normanhy, Queensland, to Earl Kimberley.
“ Telegram received 8.10 a.m. ; rejoice with you on completion of tele-
graph, and trust it will strengthen bond of union between England and
Australia.”
From the Governor of New South Wales to Earl Kimberley.
“New South Wales sends her cordial congratulations on successful completion
of telegraphic communication with England, and rejoices in the establishment
of this additional bond of union with the Mother Country.”
C


From 0. Duncan, Tasmania, to the Eight Honourable Lord Kimberley.
“ Your Lordship’s message is received. Tasmania heartily reciprocates con-
gratulations.”
From the Governor of Adelaide to the Governor-General of Canada, Ottawa.
“ Telegraph Banquet held, desired health of Queen and union of Empire.”
From the Governor-General of Canada, Ottawa, to the Governor of Adelaide.
“ Canada re-echoes Australian toast—the Queen and United Empire.”
From J. M. Smith, U.S. Consular Agent, to President, United States,
Washington.
« At a banquet, Adelaide, this day, celebrating the establishment- of tele-
graphic communication between Australia and United the people of
South Australia desire to congratulate you on your re-election, and trust that
the extended facilities for intercourse between the two countries may advance
their commercial interests.”
From the Mayor of Adelaide to the Mayor of San Francisco.
“ The Mayor of Adelaide congratulates the Mayor of San Francisco on the
occasion of the Banquet at Adelaide, in celebration of the completion of tele-
graphic communication with the world.”
From the Mayor of San Francisco to the Mayor of Adelaide.
“The Mayor of San Francisco congratulates the Mayor of Adelaide^ on an
event so interesting and important to the social and commercial relations of
Australia and California.”
From the Mayor of Adelaide to the Mayor of New York.
“The Mayor of Adelaide congratulates the Mayor of New York on the oc-
casion of the Banquet at Adelaide, celebrating the completion of telegraphic
communication with the world.”
From the Mayor of New York to the Mayor of Adelaide.
“ This metropolis of the Western Hemisphere congratulates a new metropolis
of the Eastern upon this full riveting of Anglo Saxon-bonds of brotherhood.”
From th« Mayor of Ballarat to President of Telegraphic Banquet, London.
“ The Colonists of Ballarat offer their congratulations; hope cable binds in-
divisibly Colonies to England.”
From J. Pender, M.P., to Sir James Fergusson, Adelaide.
“Our banquet here is a great success; we all congratulate you on your
appointment to New Zealand; glad to find you are coming home. Hope to
arrange with you a cable for New Zealand.”,


From Chairman of Banquet, Adelaide, to Lord Monck.
“ The Adelaide Telegraph Banquet drinks the health of Lord Monck, Mr.
John Pender, and their co-Directors, with success to the Company.”
From the British Australian Telegraph Company to Chairman of Banquet,
Adelaide.
“ Viscount Monck, Mr. Pender, and Directors of the Company cordially gre
you. May God speed Australia.
From Viscount Monck to Adelaide.
“ We cordially reciprocate your sentiments.”
From Sir James Anderson to Charles Todd, Adelaide.
“We fully appreciate your grand achievement of the completion of the
Telegraph through your great continent. I hope we shall understand each
other as men interested in the great enterprise of universal Telegraphy.”
From Charles Todd, Adelaide, to Sir James Anderson.
“ Accept my thanks for the manner in which you expressed your appreciation
of the share South Australia has taken in the electrical union of the British
Empire. May telegraphs unite all the kingdoms of the World, and propagate
peace and goodwill amongst you. God save the Queen.”
From Charles Todd, Adelaide, to 0. W. Earle.
“ 15th November, 7.40 p.m'.—Accept my hearty congratulations on establish-
ment of telegraphic communication between Australia and England, effected as
it has been by the joint enterprise of the British Australian Telegraph Company
with Australia.”
From Cyrus Field to Charles Todd.
“ Cyrus W. Field from the Banquet in London shakes hands with Mr. Todd
in admiration of his energy and ability in piercing the great continent of
Australia, uniting the far East with the far West by the electric bonds of
commercial intercourse and loving unity.”
From Charles Todd to Cyrus Field, London.
«Charles Todd most cordially shakes hands with Mr. Cyrus Field, and
reciprocates his good wishes; may the work completed so successfully cement
the union of England and Australia, and advance the interests of both.


Tlie principal organs of the Press had leading articles.on the
event, from which the following passages are extracted :
“ TIMES,” Saturday, November 16, 1872,
The completion of the Australian Telegraph is an event well worthy of the
honour with which it was yesterday celebrated. Having been accomplished by
degrees, it may not strike the imagination so much as the stretching of a single
cable by one effort over a vast ocean like the Atlantic; but it is not less remark-
able as the final result of long and patient labours, of scientific skill, and of
political development. The Atlantic Cable annihilates about two thousand
miles of space; the Australian Telegraph annuls no less than twelve thousand
miles. In fact, we are at length able to converse almost immediately with the
Antipodes. The Chairman opened yesterday’s proceedings by sending a tele-
gram to the Mayor of Adelaide, and an answer was received before he had got
far in the speech-making after dinner. Lord Kimberley said, with reason, that
the telegraph was ,the greatest of human inventions. We are still separated by
three months from Australia in respect of personal communication, and we still
feel that our kinsmen there are “ divided from us by the whole globe.” Yet a
few wires and a little instrument introduced into any room in London enable us
to hold converse with them as rapidly as with Paris. By the gentlest and least
perceptible of axl agencies, we have now in effect brought the whole world to-
gether for purposes of mutual understanding. Throughout the British Empire,
Lord Kimberley observes, New Zealand and the Cape of Good Hope alone
remain destitute of telegraphic communication with England, and the extension
of the wires to Australia gives assurance that no civilized country need any
longer be isolated from the magic circle which now girdles the world. Of the
enterprise which has achieved this result, the greatest part, we may presume to
say, may be ascribed to the British Empire itself. The list of the various lengths
into which the whole wire is divided is a list of the successive advances made by
British political and commercial'energy. From Falmouth to Gibraltar, from Gib-
raltar to Malta,through Suez to Aden, from’Aden to Bombay, Madras, and Sin-
gapore, we follow the English flag and English commerce ; and when the cable is
landed at Port Darwin a continent as broad as the Atlantic is bridged by a
British dependency. Lord Kimberley, however, did no more than justice to the
part which has been sustained by the Australian Colonists themselves in this
undertaking. The inhabitants of South Australia, as he reminded his hearers,
do not number 200,000, and from their capital in the South to the point of con-
tact of the cable in the North the country is almost a pathless desert. Yet, for
the sake of bringing Adelaide into immediate communication with London, they
have of their own impulse carried the telegraph over nearly two thousand miles.
It is a fine example of the spirit which has given English and American
Colonists the command of the waste places of the earth, and which everywhere
developes their settlements with such extraordinary rapidity. The telegraph
has been the last achievement of the Old World; it is considered the first neces-
sity of the New. The Colonists are young, but they refuse to be debarred from
the most mature instruments of civilization.
The chief hope, however, expressed at the banquet was that the telegraph
might tend to cement the union already subsisting between England and her
Colonies. It affords strong evidence of the value placed on that union by the
Colonists that South Australia should have gone to such expense and trouble to
bring the wires across the Continent, and it may fairly be supposed that the
sentiment of the attachment to the mother-country was a useful stimulus to the
enterprise. The telegraph, again, may often be the means of dissipating mis-
understandings before they become irremediable. It gives, in short, both to the
Colonies and to the mother-country better means of maintaining a good under-
standing between them ; but that understanding itself must depend upon
stronger supports than a few wires. Lord Kimberley, in giving the toast of
“ The Integrity of the British Empire,” justly denied that any party desired its
disintegration. What, however, is desired is that the just conditions of Impe-
rial integrity shall be fully understood, and that all parties to the existing state
of things shall uphold it with free consent, and upon equal terms. It is simply


felt that it would not be worth the while of this country to resist by strenuous
efforts, of whatever kind, the wish of any Colony to assume its independence.
So long as the Colonists desire our connexion and do not shrink from its atten-
dant obligations, we shall be proud to retain them as an integral part of the
Empire. They do us honour, and we do them no discredit; and the congratu-
lations of yesterday evening express, undoubtedly, the general feeling of Great
Britain.
“MORNING POST.”
It was unavoidable that the Colonial question, as it is called, should be dis-
cussed in the speeches at the dinner. Nothing could be more to the purpose
than Lord Kimberley’s observations upon the subject. There is all the
difference in the world between a policy of military concentration and that of the
disintegration of the Empire. In a military point of view it is self-evident that
concentration is strength and dispersion weakness, and the question of our
military strength or weakness is important to the Colonies as well as to ourselves.
While as to the political effects of the withdrawal of the troops from the Colonies,
what has taken place is the best answer to the gloomy prophecies that were so
freely offered. Canada, left to develop her own resources, has organised a very
adequate and efficient system of defence. Australia, happily, is not threatened
from without, and has no internal enemies to guard against. New Zealand has
found that she is perfectly able to deal with the aborigines, and she has—it may
be under the necessities of the case, but still very wisely and effectively—adopted
a policy with the natives that promises to obviate the difficulties that have here-
tofore retarded the progress of the Colony. If the Colonies at any time objected
to the policy pursued—and of this there has been no evidence at all—they must
ere this have felt that the best policy for all concerned has been adopted.
“ DAILY NEWS.”
The chief interest and importance of the event are, of course, derived from
the fact that it is not a mere foreign country, but an , English Colony which is
thus brought into close and immediate communication with us. A telegraph to
the Antipodes, which puts a girdle half way round the earth, though it is a new
triumph of science and energy, might have but little social and political signi-
ficance. We have linked together almost all the shores of all the seas, and to
carry a telegraph across another Continent is only a further development of a
system which is clearly destined to girdle all the globe. But the people who are
thus put into direct electric communication with us are men to whom the Old
Country is still “ home ” ; who not only speak the same language, and have as
inheritance the same history and literature, but share the same Government,
and are part and parcel of the British Empire and the English nation.
The most southerly and distant of our Colonies is brought more closely home ;
separated from us by the whole diameter of the planet on which we live, it is
now brought within a few minutes of actual time. The real meaning of the
congratulations indulged in last night is that another step has been taken in
the moral consolidation of the British Empire. Adam Smith writing a hun-
dred years ago, said that for more than a century the rulers of Great Britain
had amused the people with the idea that they had an Empire on the west of
the Atlantic. He added: ‘ The Empire, however, has hitherto existed in ima-
gination only. It has hitherto been, not an Empire, but the project of an
Empire.” The “ project of an Empire ” soon after became a great Republic; but
by all these steps of consolidation the project of an Empire in the far South, as it
exists to-day, it fast becoming a reality. Indeed, not only in the Southern
Seas, but on the Western Continent, we have a real Empire larger in actual
territorial extent that Adam Smith knew of. These self-governing communities,
which thus girdle the globe with English institutions and the English tongue,
are at this moment more than ever loyal to the old flag. It is their boast that
they are Englishmen, They are nowhere foreigners on British soil. Where-
ever they go, the diplomatic and consular service of the Empire is for their
use. They have the privilege of appealing from the decision of any Colonial
c 2


court to the highest courts In this country, and all the advantage an old-estab-
lished system of judicature can give them. They are, in fact, outlying exten-
sions of England herself, other Englands beyond the sea ; and anything which
brings them nearer home, which links them closer to us, or breaks down any
barrier of time and space between us, is a new source of strength both to them
and to us,”
“DAILY TELEGRAPH.”
No unimportant event is that which will be celebrated at the Cannon-street
Hotel with the customary English honour of a big dinner. South Australia
our richest and most important colony—is now in direct communication with
London. A message written out in Eleet-street is, in a few minutes only, writ-
ten down in Victoria. The far Antipodes are in instant communicationwith the
Old World : from London the words shoot to Madras, from Madras to Java ;
from Java they fly by deep-sea line to the Gulf of Carpentaria, and thence they
are carried, or, as Americans say, “wired,” across some two thousand miles of
desert straight to those Southern Australian ports to which the most direct
route would be by a perpendicular shaft sunk in the very centre of Trafalgar-
square. It surely is no small matter upon which to reflect, that every part of
the earth should be in instantaneous communication with other part;
that New York, London, San Francisco, St. Petersburg, Berlin, Paris, Vienna,
should all receive the same news each at the same moment. And if we look at
the question as one of pure practice, it opens issues so vast that we can hardly
measure them. What was the real cause of the terrible famines which so lately
swept over all Orissa and Persia ? Want of prompt and ready.news. Or, to
take another instance, is it nothing that our London insurance companies should
have learned their losses even while the ashes of Boston were still red-hot ?
From that sad city the agent of one London company telegraphed to Cheapside,
“ What am I to do ?” and th<s answer was flashed back to him with the speed
of the lightning itself, “ Draw upon us here at sight.” Who can over-estimate
the importance of those six words ? And—to take another case is it
nothing that we should know that, were a second Indian insurrection to break
out at noon to-day, the India Office would hear of it before one o clock, and
troops would be on their way before the day had closed.
« MORNING ADVERTISER.”
On Friday evening the completion of the Anglo-Australian Telegraph is to
be commemorated by a banquet at the Terminus Hotel, Cannon-street, under
the auspices of the Royal Colonial Institute. The Earl of Kimberley will
occupy the chair, and will be supported by most of the leading Australian Colo-
nists at present in this country. The occasion is one of some importance, for by
the completion of the telegraph England and Australia are placed in almost in-
stantaneous communication with each other. The cable connecting Australia
with the gigantic chain of cables extending from America at the one extreme to
China at the other belongs to the British-Australian Telegraph Company, which
made its appearance in January, 1870, in connexion with the various submarine
telegraph companies between England and India. The object of the company
was to establish telegraphic communication with the colonies of Australia, Tas-
mania, and New Zealand by means of two cables, from Singapore to Batavia,
and from the south-eastern part of Java to Port Darwin, on the north-western
coast of Australia, the communication being carried through Java by means of
the lines belonging to the Dutch Government. Soon after the company was
formed the South Australian Government entered into arrangements with the
company for erecting, at the Colonial Government’s expense, a land-line across
the continent direct from Port Darwin to Port Augusta, near Adelaide, a total
length of 1,400 miles, of which the estimated cost was £lOB,OOO.


The Standard, in criticising the choice of Lord Kimberley for
Chairman (a choice obviously made in deference to his position as
Secretary of State for the Colonies), observed:
It was not directly intimated, but one might reasonably have concluded that
just as Mr. Pender, by his material art, had brought Australia within speaking
distance of England, so Lord Kimberley and his friends had, by their moral
influence, knit the southern hemisphere to the northern. That which the one
had done by wire the others might be supposed to have done by wit, and both to
the honour and glory of the great Liberal party. By the double force of Mr.
Pender’s fell approach and Lord Kimberley’s secret might, lands the most
divided have become one. The Colonial Secretary, in his modesty, did indeed
refrain from claiming a positive share in the undertaking. He did not make
the union—he only blessed it when concluded. In this kind of consolidating
effort the Ministry are always profuse, but it was never used with greater
unction than by Lord Kimberley, when he found himself, by some strange
destiny, presiding at a dinner to celebrate the junction of one of the groups of
English Colonies to the mother-country. To do the Colonial Secretary all justice,
he bore himself with admirable gravity on the occasion. No one could have
suspected from his speeches but that he and his friends had made it the foremost
object of their policy to cement the union with the Colonies. Just now, at
least, it is quite extraordinary to witness how enthusiastic we all are to promote
the integrity of the Empire. On the platform, as on the stage, “ when we do
agree our unanimity is wonderful.” If there is one party more than another
which is impressed with the value of the Colonial connexion, which has right
ideas about the world-wide British dominion and the Imperial unity, that party
is found to be the one represented by Lord Kimberley. It must be so, for the
fact is repeated just now at least once a week in public meetings and dinners.
It is a cue with official orators of the Liberal persuasion almost as popular as
the praise of arbitration. In fact, the very energy and frequency of these dis-
claimers as to disintegration from the members of the Government are, perhaps,
calculated to engender the very suspicion which they are intended to allay. A
virtue which is so very profuse of defences proves itself to be of a not very
robust constitution. It can hardly believe itself to be sound in its own con-
science. The public may reasonably think that these gentlemen do protest too
much. They will not fail to mark, however, that the protestations are all of a
negative kind. Lord Kimberley, on Friday night, averred that he has no inten-
tion of disintegrating the Empire—that he has never heard that any member of
the Government had such intention. Does not the very form of his denial sug-
gest that the suspicion has not been baseless ?
The Bullionist wrote :
The dinner and the speechifying in Cannon-street, to celebrate the completion
of the telegraphic communication which unites Adelaide with nearly all the
world, were matters of necessity. Whatever we may do that is good, we take
care to let the world know it. To join in this almost instantaneous correspond-
ence of Australia with England involves much that is of advantage to the
mother-country, more, undoubtedly, to the Colonies themselves ; and a celebra-
tion is a conspicuous announcement. We have already expressed opinions upon
the enormous advantages, political, social, and commercial, which the comple-
tion of this enterprise brings with it; nor did Lord Kimberley and the other
speakers at the banquet utter a single word too much or too emphatic in this
respect. It is, indeed, a victory of science and persevering energy over great
natural obstacles, of which all who shared in achieving it may justly be proud.
The nature and extent of those advantages must be obvious to every mind. As
respects political relationship, the wire over land and under sea may have an
indirect binding effect, and to this point we shall presently advert, because it
is problematical; but of the commercial gains no doubt whatever can be even
conceived. The operations over the telegraph, by bringing the state of the
Australian markets and those of England under daily consideration, must serve


to discourage ventures in the shape of exports sent out in the necessary absence
of recent information, and many of which have hitherto miscarried. It is
lon--- since that a large consignment of English pale ale was made to one of the
Australian ports, and, when it arrived there, was found to be a drug in the
market which was too much stocked already. The liquor had to be sacrificed,
is it could not be reshipped to England except at a loss exceeding its value.
This is a fact, and an illustration of the inestimable value of a means of com-
munication which places the Colonial and the English markets, within the
course of a few hours, in a knowledge of each other s condition, wants, an
prices Upon this, as a fact of the matter, it is superfluous to dilate, except so
far asobserving, which indeed is a truism, that the drawing closer of the bonds
of commerce, although not always ensuring a permanency of amicable relatio ~
totes a stronsr tie of good will between communities.
The social advantage which must result from the completion of the telegrap
is ecmallv obvious. The Australian Colonists are emphatically our own flesh
whereas the population of the United States is a mixture, and hete-
roaeneous' The compamtive proximity to the shores of the States is the
oSal and enduring cause why the stream of emigration flows in larger me -
fSr tkm to Australia. In those Antipodean Colonies, however, a more
favourable prospect of independence and position awaits the unmigrant who is
able and wiLlin| to put his hand to the plough not looking backwards, than he
i/i £r>/l in America and he is there distinctly among his own kith and kin.
The lono- sea passage ’is doubtless an enormous drawback, which turns the scale
in the minds of many persons against Australia who contemplate emigrating.
It not; 11 easy to conjecture how this difficulty can be overcome; how for
It is not; ea ,V J - tf and w jth short purses, and who must not land
the Zee be superseded. The time may come
* i,(vn progress of science will discover means to make the journey shorter
when the Progress ot science say that the telegraph
Families are divided: some mem-
£ Aii str ali a remaining at home; but their hearts yearn towards
i , i n ii q! e rviore perhaps because they are divided by oceans rolling
each ail fhe mo Pb p iait J coinimm ication would not draw
Certainty it is a high and a wholesome object
of English policy to do what legitimately can be done to turn a portion at lea._
of the tide of emigration from the United Kingdom to possessions which still
acknowledge our sovereignty, and away from a nation which, whatever may be
* id of present healed-up sores, is always, as a result of its own interests and
■illi'inces 1 under the necessity of opposing the interests of England. In beha
S+W interests our country must do right to encourage the closest material
:fiS TwiS A ha/py family in which the elder, and the
and . h an d pull together, presents a sight than which pro-
youngsters barmonyag P 0 l WO rld. But the young ones
bably none more : for themselves. So it is in this case. What,
up, become stro e , ? . g at hand . the over land Australian
it may eas > unspeakable difficulties, been completed; and by whom?
EW?he Government of South Australia. Not without encouragement, not
7 , , , +y ia f ijre eve of the civilised world was fixed upon the progress
material aid from any quarter, and by its
oii resSs Se indomitable energies of the engineers and pioneers who
devoted themselves to the labour, the great result has been attame .
The following notice of the dinner appeared in the Australasian,
of February 1, 1873 :
The speech of the Earl of Kimberley at the banquet given to celebrate the


opening of telegraphic communication with Australia must be accepted, and
was no doubt intended, as a counterblast against the extraordinary and offensive
article on the relations of the Colonies with the mother-country which appeared
in The Times of the 30th of October last. No time could have been more inop-
portune for the use of such irritating and insulting language by the leading
journal of England than that at which the whole of British North America was
smarting under the sense of a betrayal of its interests in the San Juan boundary
question by the blunderings of Imperial diplomacy. On the other hand, no
occasion could have been better chosen for the emphatic assurances by the Earl
of Kimberley of the determination of his colleagues and himself to uphold tne
integrity of the Empire than the banquet above referred to. When the remotest
dependencies of Great Britain have thus been brought within speaking distance
of the seat of the Imperial Government, it would have been as uncongenial ana
unnatural to adopt the style and temper of the article in The Times newspaper
as for a bride and bridegroom to discuss the possibilities of separation, and tne
amount of the allowance which the former should receive in such a contingency.
Every advance of science, every improvement in the construction of steam
vessels, every additional line of railway constructed or projected between
England and India, and every extension of the telegraphic wire from the heart
of the Empire to its extremities, may be looked upon as circumstances contri-
buting to the unity and to the consolidation of that Empire. Even if we were
to leave sentiment out of the question, the progressive increase and multiplica-
tion of our social and commercial ties with the mother-country must tend to
strengthen and deepen the connection. Every year witnesses an augmentation
of the number of Englishmen who “ run out ” to Australia to see what it is like,
and of Australians who take a trip “home,” make the discovery that England
is a dear country to live in, besides being afflicted with a,n execrable ciima e,
and come back with pleasant recollections of the hospitalities they have enjoyed
and the acquaintances they have made or renewed, and feeling more than ever
averse to any political severance of Australia from a country which has so
venerable and illustrious a history, and has played so important a part in the
European drama. Possibly there are Colonists sanguine enough to anticipate
the arrival of a time when the population of Canada and Australia respectively
will be far in excess of that of the British islands, and when men will be lound
debating the propriety of transferring the seat of Imperial Government to newer
centres of political life and of intellectual and industrial activity. Be this as it
may, the tumultuous reception which was given by the guests assembled at the
telegraph banquet in London to the toast of “The Integrity of the British
Empire” was a significant sign of the fervour with which all present have
espoused the principle that that Empire shall continue to be one and indivisible,
and that maintenance is a matter of transcendent importance. In proposing
this toast, the Earl of Kimberley spoke with a frankness and sincerity, a vigour
of tone and a directness of language, with respect to the Colonial policy ot
Mr. Gladstone’s Administration, which were calculated to dissipate any mis-
o-ivings inspired by The Times' article. He declared that the imputation ot a
desire for the disintegration of the Empire was an invention of their political
opponents, who knew that nothing would be so unpopular with the country as a
policy of dismemberment. On behalf both of his colleagues and himself he re-
pudiated the imputation with scorn. No member of the Government would listen
to such a plan for a moment, as they were all bent upon consolidating the Empire.
Looking at the whole of the proceeding at this banquet, we feel justified in
reo-ardino- it as what the Spaniards would call a pronunciamiento in favour ot the
integrity 6 of the Empire by Her Majesty’s Administration in England, and by
the numerous representatives of the Australian and other Colonies who were
present on the occasion, and as such it will prove highly gratifying to the
Queen’s loyal subjects in all parts of the world. We have only to add the hope
that the friendly sentiments expressed will, when opportunity serves, bear trait
in cordial actions, and that in the future we shall never have to remark a con-
trast between the amicable professions of the Imperial Government towards the
Colonies, and a cold indifference shown in the policy of the Colonial Office, com-
bined with a readiness to sacrifice the deepest interests of the Colonies to the
convenience or profit of the Empire.


The London Correspondent of the Argus again wrote :
There was one incident in the proceedings which deserves notice. I refer to the
tremendous enthusiasm with which the toast of “ The Integrity of the Empire
was greeted. The sudden and spontaneous outburst was quite startling in its
vehemence, the cheering being repeated again and again, and the demonstration
culminating by the whole company rising to their feet and waving their hand-
kerchiefs. It was a manifestation of feeling in regard to the Colonial question
which Lord Kimberley is never likely to forget. The remarks of the Colonial
Secretary in proposing the toast were eminently satisfactory, and elicited fre-
quent applause. Indeed, were it not for the inimical influence of some other
members of the Cabinet, we should have little to fear in respect to the dxsinte*
grating policy from the present functionaries of the Colonial Office.
Tlie European Mail , of December 29th, said:
The opening of telegraphic communication with Australia was made the occa-
sion of a banquet, which took place at the Cannon-street Hotel, on November 10.
The Colonial Institute took the demonstration in hand, and it turned out be
one of the most successful Colonial gatherings we have ever had. Lord Kim-
berley, as the head of the Colonial Office, was the chairman, more appro-
priate selection could not have been made. His lordship spoke with niuch
enthusiasm on the subject of maintaining our Colonial connection, and added
that the strong attachment which has ever bound the mother-country to her
Australian Colonies is now strengthened by this useful work. Several gentlemen
interested in the West Indies, South America, and South Africa, were present.
During the evening, congratulatory telegrams were exchanged between the
chairman and the several governors of the Australian Colonies. This demon-
stration cannot fail of having an important effect for good upon the whole
of our Colonial Empire.
• The Home News gave a full report of the dinner, accompanied
with comments to the same effect.
The London Colonial News, in concluding a leading article on
the subject, said:
“The Integrity of the British Empire” roused such a spirit of enthusiasm
amongst the company —many of whom were Colonists —as might be taken to
cancel many former shortcomings of the Colonial Office. If the Colonial Office
has traditions of policy adverse to the Colonies, as many Colonists believe,
certainly Earl Kimberley has not inherited them. He was not there, of course,
to vindicate his predecessors, whose acts and policy have often been injudicious,
and in many instances unjust to the Colonies. His frank avowal in favour of
consolidation of the Empire, met with the heartiest approval from the company
present; and we accept this expression on each side as the best guarantee that
could exist of confidence on the one hand, and of faithfulness on the other. The
Colonies, as an integral part of the Empire, claim protection and support. They
also demand the right of self-government, with control of revenues. The com-
promise involved to secure these benefits must be mutual, and, as a compromise,
must always be subject to negociation with the Home Government. Errors on
the one side and dissatisfaction on the other must sometimes be inevitable.
Yet in spite of this, we believe that throughout the British Colonies there exists
a fervent feeling of loyalty to the Old Country, which has never found such full
expression as during the past few years. A closer intercourse, such as tele-
graphic communication affords, cannot fail to encourage this disposition; and
we trust it may not be long ere every British Colony may be closer bound to the
mother-country by the opportunity of daily intercourse.
And to this paper we are indebted for the following table of
distances traversed by the different sections of the telegraphic


Miles.
Falmouth to Gibraltar, vid Lisbon (cable) ..
.. .. 1,250
Gibraltar to Malta (cable)
.. .. 981
Malta to Alexandria (cable)
.. .. 819
Alexandria to Suez (overland line)
.... 224
Suez to Aden (cable)
.. .. 1,308
Aden to Bombay
.. .. 1,664
Bombay to Madras (overland)
.. .. '600
Madras to Penang (cable)
.. .. 1,213
Penang to Singapore (cable)
.. .. 301
Singapore to Batavia (cable)
.... 660
Batavia to Bangoewangi (wire)
.. .. 480
Bangoewangi to Port Darwin (cable)
.. .. 970
Port Darwin to Port Augusta (wire)
.. .. 1,800
Port Augusta to Adelaide
.. .. 212
Total
.. .. 12,382
London to Falmouth
.. .. 268
Total
.. .. 12,650
wire. The telegraphic route from Falmouth to Port Augusta, in
South Australia, is as follows :
In concluding this Report of the proceedings of the Banquet in
commemoration of the completion of the Australian Line of Tele-
graph, it is satisfactory to be able to say that its commercial
success in the first half-year has been such as to have placed its
shares at a premium, and to have gained it admission to the
Association of Eastern Telegraph Companies, with which it is
henceforth to be amalgamated, at an advance of 10 per cent, on
the nominal value of its stock.
C. W. EDDY,
Honorary Secretary,
Eoyal Colonial Institute.






