

Across Australia by Motor






ACROSS AUSTRALIA
BY MOTOR.




Distant view of Central Mount Stuart (in middle of photograph), the approximate centre of Australia.




Car stuck in sandy creek near Hergott.


Crossing the Neales at Algebuckina; matting laid up bank and over bushes in soft mud.


View of portion of town of Oodnadatta, the terminus of the Northern Railway, 688 miles by rail
from Adelaide.


A duststorm in the main street of Oodnadatta, taken from the hotel window.


Car stopped in the Alberga after traversing about 30 yards from the bank.
This was one of the worst obstacles we met with during the entire journey, as the sandy bed of the
creek is exceptionally heavy, and nearly one quarter of a mile broad. Temperature when above
photograph was taken—113° in the shade.


“Gibber” Country (Ironstone pebbles), near Charlotte Waters. Transcontinental Telegraph Line, a
camel pad or track, and top of radiator of car showing. This was perhaps the best going we
enjoyed during the trip.


A camel train near Blood’s Creek.


Car bogged some miles north of Charlotte Waters. We were forced to remain here all night in
heavy rain and eventually extricated the motor by means of a Spanish Windlass next morning
(first trip).


“Crown Point” on the Finke River


His Majesty’s Mail on the way from Alice Springs to Horse Shoe Bend.


Descending one of the Depot Sandhills on the first trip. Four Stepney wheels attached to the
ordinary wheels.


The top of one of the Depot Sandhills (first trip).


Descending another Sandhill (second trip).


The east face of the gorge (Heavitree Gap) by which one enters the Macdonnell Ranges. The
township and Telegraph Station are respectively about three and six miles from the Gap.


The west side of Heavitree Gap; the opposing cliffs are about 200 yards apart.


Alice Springs Telegraph Station.


A rocky gorge in the Macdonnell Ranges a few miles north of Alice Springs.


On the way to the Alice Springs Telegraph Station from the Township. Granite boulders in every
direction.


Leaving Alice Springs Telegraph Station for Barrow Creek (first trip). Aunger at the wheel.


Barrow Creek Telegraph Station from a hill at the back. The whites stationed here in 1874 were
attacked by the natives, and the stationmaster and a linesman were speared to death.


A black gin in her wurlie at Barrow Creek.


A Barrow Creek black throwing a boomerang.


A “Set” of a Corroborree at Barrow Creek.


Long grass In a dry swamp between Barrow Creek and Tennant’s Creek.


Anthills near the spot where we had to abandon the car on our first trip. Aunger standing on right
of photograph.


“Angelina” as we found her on the second trip.


A rock split by frost, near Tennant’s Creek.


Another pile of rocks in the same locality.


Tennant’s Creek Telegraph Station.


A Warramunga black (Tennant’s Creek).


Gins (native women) in mourning at Tennant’s Creek. They have daubed themselves with pipe clay.


A sandy creek crossing, typical of many others, north of Tennant’s Creek.


Another awkward crossing near Attack Creek.


A typical swamp (dry at the time) with anthills, north of Tennant’s Creek.


High grass at the Elsey.


An anthill near Newcastle Waters.


Another anthill near Daly Waters. Allchurch and Aunger in centre.


Daly Waters Telegraph Station.


A lily pond near Daly Waters.


The Katherine River.


Another view of the Katherine.


Crossing the Edith between the Katherine and Pine Creek. This was a deep crossing, and both cars
charged it “all out.” The above car got through comparatively easily.


“Angelina” got to within 6 feet of the opposite bank, Edith River.


Crossing the Adelaide between Pine Creek and Port Darwin in “474.” This crossing necessitated a
sharp turn to the right and a very sharp turn to the left immediately after leaving the stream.
Railway Bridge showing above.


Anthills (with car amongst them) between Pine Creek and Port Darwin.


An anthill at Pine Creek.


Allchurch tapping Overland Telegraph Line to communicate with Port
Darwin. Aunger to the left.


Grass and reeds along the Railway, 30 miles from Port Darwin.


Track running through timber near Port Darwin.


Five miles from Port Darwin.




J. L. BONYTHON A CO., PRINTER#,
ADELAIDE
