

ACT OF INCORPORATION
AND
BY-LAW S
OF THE
SYDNEY
Mechanics' School of Arts.
ESTABLISHED - - MARCH 22, 1833.
SYDNEY:
TROEDEL & CO., PRINTERS, 100 & 102 LIVERPOOL ST.
1886.




VICTORIA REGINE.
|teto South ©Lies.
ANNO QUINQUAGESIMO.
An Act to repeal the “ Sydney Mechanics School of Art
Incorporation Act of 1874 ” and to re-incorporate the
said Institution and to enable the Committee to
borrow money and with the sanction of the members
of the said Institution to sell demise or otherwise
dispose of either absolutely or by way of mortgage
the real or personal property of the said Institution
and for other purposes therein mentioned.
[Assented to, 23rd October, 1886.]
WHEREAS a certain Literary Society or Institution was
established in Sydney in the year one thousand eight
hundred and thirty-three under the name or style of the “ Sydney
Mechanics School of Arts ” the objects of the said Institution
being the intellectual improvement of its members and the
cultivation of literature science and art And whereas bv
an Act passed in the thirty-seventh year of the reign of Her
present Majesty the members of the said Institution were
incorporated And whereas it having been found difficult to
manage the said Institution under the provisions of the said Act
it is expedient to repeal the same and to re-incorporate the said
Institution by an Act containing simple provisions Be it
therefore enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly of New South Wales in Parliament
assembled and by the authority of the same That the said Act
shall be and is hereby repealed but such repeal shall not affect
the past operation of any enactment in the said Act contained or
any proceeding act matter or thing instituted done or commenced
thereunder And be it further enacted as follows :
Preamble


Short title of Act.
Objects of Insti
tution and pro-
motion thereof.
Incorporation of
members of
Sydney Mechan-
ics’ School of
Arts.
Transfer of real
and personal pro-
perty to corpora-
tion.
Power to hold
and deal with
property.
Management of
Institution by
Committee.
Dis inalification
Offices in com-
mittee forfeited.
1. This Act may be cited for all purposes as the “Sydney
Mechanics School of Arts Incorporation Act of 1886.”
2. —The objects of the said Institution namely the
intellectual improvement of its members and the cultivation of
literature science and art shall be promoted by the maintenance
of a library and reading-room the delivery of lectures the
encouragement of social intellectual and physical recreation and
by such other means as the Committee of management may from
time to time deem advisable.
3. All persons who have already become or who may
hereafter become members of the Sydney Mechanics’ School of
Arts (hereinafter termed the Institution) shall be and they are
hereby constituted into a body corporate by the name of the
“ Sydney Mechanics’ School of Arts ” and by that name shall have
perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue and be sued
implead and be impleaded answer and be answered proceed and
be proceeded against in all Courts whatsoever.
4. All real and personal property of what nature or kind
soever vested in or held by any person or persons whether as
trustees or otherwise in trust for the said Institution shall on the
passing of this Act be and the same is hereby transferred to and
vested in the said body corporate.
5. The said body corporate are hereby empowered to take
purchase hold and enjoy to them and their successors for ever all
the said real and personal property hereby transferred to and
vested in them and also may take purchase hold enjoy and
receive any other real or chattel property whatsoever necessary
or proper for the purpose of the Institution and may sell grant
convey assure demise or otherwise dispose of either absolutely or
by way of mortgage any such real or personal property hereby
vested in or hereafter to be acquired by such body corporate
Provided always that no sale mortgage demise encumbrance or
other disposition whatsoever of any such real or personal
property shall be lawful unless the same shall have been
previously sanctioned by resolution of a general or special
meeting of the Members of the Institution.
6. The management and control of the Instition shall be en-
trusted to a Committee to be elected as provided by the By-laws
and such Committee shall consist of a President, four Vice-
Presidents a Treasurer and twelve Committee-men.
7. Any person deriving pecuniary advantages or emolument
from the Institution or contracting or agreeing therewith for the
supply of any goods materials or work thereto shall be disqualified
from holding office or acting as a member of the Committee whilst
so deriving such advantage or emolument or contracting or
agreeing as aforesaid.
o o
8. If any member of the Committee shall resign or absent
himself from the meetings thereof for three consecutive months


without sufficient cause in the opinion of the Committee or
become otherwise disqualified his seat shall be declared vacant at
the next meeting of the Committee.
9. The said Committee shall have power to make repeal
amend or alter by-laws for the general regulation of the affairs
of the Institution and the good conduct thereof and shall also have
power to fine suspend or expel any. member thereof subject to
such member’s right to appeal to a general meeting to receive
expend and manage the funds of the Institution and subject to
the proviso contained in section five hereof may borrow money
for the purposes of the Institution on mortgages of the real and
chattel property of the Institution or any part thereof or may
borrow money without security provided that the amount so
borrowed without security shall never exceed in the aggregate
the income of the Institution for the last preceding year and the
Committee may also settle and agree to the covenants powers and
authorities to be contained in the securities aforesaid to let any
room or part of the said Institution for any period to regulate
the admission of persons not being members thereof to engage
and dismiss the paid officers to dispose of by public auction or
private contract any of the old damaged or worn-out books papers
apparatus or other effects belonging to the said body corporate to
institute conduct and defend all legal proceedings and to transact
generally all the business of the Institution Provided that no
by-laws alterations or amendments shall have effect until they
shall have been approved by a special general meeting of the
members.
10. A general meeting of the members of the Institution of
which seven days notice shall be given by advertisement in two
daily papers shall be held annually for the transaction of the
general business of the Institution and at such meeting the report
of the preceding year shall be presented for adoption.
11. A special general meeting of the said members may at
any time be called by a majority of the Committee or by fifty
members of the Institution on a requisition in writing to the
Secretary signed by them and notice of such meeting stating its
objects shall be published in two daily newspapers in Sydney at
least ten days prior to the day of meeting.
12. No motion for winding up the Institution or for
repealing altering adding to or amending any of its by-laws or for
any other purpose except formal motions shall be proposed at any
general meeting unless seven days previous notice thereof in
writing be given to the Secretary and a duplicate of such notice
be at the same time posted in the vestibule of the Institution.
13. The said Committee shall have the custody and use of
the common seal of the said body corporate and the form thereof
and all other matters relating thereto shall from time to time be 1
determined by the said Committee and a majority of the members
Power of Com
mittee.
Annual meeting.
Special general
meetings.
Matters to be
entertained at
meeting's.
Custody and use
of the corporate
seal.


Existing by-laws
Evidence l of by-
laws.
Auditors.
President Vice-
Presidents Trea-
surer or Secretary
may represent
Institution for
certain purposes.
thereof present at any meeting shall have power to use or direct the
use of such seal for all purposes whatsoever requiring to be evidenced
by the corporate seal of the said body corporate Provided
always that it shall not be necessary to require such seal to be
affixed as evidence of the appointment of an attorney or solicitor
by the said body corporate in or for the prosecution of any action
suit or other proceeding.
14. The rules and by-laws of the Institution in force at the
time of the passing of this Act are hereby confirmed and shall
except so far as repealed altered or amended in pursuance of the
provisions of this Act be and continue binding on the members of
the Institution and all other persons as fully and effectually as if
the same had been made under this Act and a printed copy of
such by-laws or of any by-laws made under the authority of this
Act sealed with the seal of the said body corporate and purporting
to be certified by the Secretary of the Institution for the time
being as correct shall be received in all Courts as conclusive
evidence of such by-laAvs and of the same having been duly made
under the authority of this Act.
15. There shall be three auditors of the Institution to be
elected at each annual meeting who shall be paid such sum for
their services as the Committee may from time to time
determine.
16. The President or any one of the Vice-Presidents or the
Treasurer or the Secretary may make such affidavits and do such
acts and sign such documents as are or may be required to be
done by the plaintiff or complainant or defendant respectively in
any proceeding to which the corporation may be parties.


BY-LAWS
OF THE
Sydney Mechanics' School of Arts.
Approved on the Bth November, 1886, at a Special General
Meeting of Members held in conformity with 9th Section
of the “ Sydney Mechanics’ School of Arts Incorporation
Act of 1886.”
JAMES DALGARNO, President,
Members.
1. —The Institution shall consist of all persons who have been or
shall hereafter be duly admitted as members and who comply with the
Rules for the time being of the Institution.
Admission.
2. Any person, desirous of becoming a member, shall be admitted
upon the payment of the requisite subscription to the Secretary or
officer ; subject however to subsequent confirmation or disallowance
bv the Committee of Management.
Subscriptions.
3. —The subscription payable by each member shall be as follows,
namely,
Life Members £8 0 0
Yearly 10 0
Half-Yearly 0 10 0
Quarterly 0 5 0
Wives of Life, Yearly, or half-yeaidy
Members per annum 0 10 0
All subscriptions shall be payable in advance, and any member
failing to pay Lis subscription within fourteen days after the same
shall have become due, shall thereby forfeit his membership. Subscrip-
tions shall be payable on the first of January April July and October
respectively in each year. Membership may however commence at
any time upon payment of the amount due for the fraction of the
current and the whole of the following quarter.


Cards of Membership.
4. —Every member, on paying his subscription, shall receive a Card
of Membership, which shall not be transferable. The Secretary or
other officer may require the production of such Card, and any person fail-
ing to. comply with such request may be excluded from the Institution.
Honorary Members.
5. Any person who has rendered valuable services to the Institu-
tion, or who is eminent for his attainments in Literature, Science or
Art, may, upon the recommendation of the Committee, be elected as an
Honorary Life Member by any general meeting of the members.
Complaints against Members.
6. —Upon receipt of a complaint in writing, signed by any three
members of the Institution, the conduct of any member as such shall
be taken cognizance of by the Committee who shall investigate and
decide upon the same, and if necessary, award such punishment by tine,
suspension or expulsion, as they see fit, subject however to such
member’s right of appeal to a general meeting.
Eligibility to take part in Elections or Public Meetings.
7. —All members of the Institution of at least six months’ standing,
who shall not be subject to the disqualification mentioned in the seventh
section of the Incorporation Act shall be eligible as members of
Committee. No member of the Institution shall be entitled to vote
at any election or meeting of the members who has not been a member
thereof for at least three months immediately preceding the election or
meeting in respect of which his right to vote may be exercised.
Elections how conducted.
8. —(i.) The election of the committee of management and the audi-
tors shall be by ballot and shall be conducted in the following manner:
(ii.) An alphabetical roll of all the members eligible for election
(distinguishing those in office) and an alphabetical roll of all the
members qualified to vote, shall be prepared by the secretary and
placed in the reading room or vestibule of the institution at least
fourteen days prior to the annual meeting.
(iii.) Any member qualified to vote may nominate as a candidate
for election any member whose name is on the Roll of Members
eligible for election by giving notice thereof, in writing to the Secre-
tary, accompanied by the written consent of such candidate, at least
seven days prior to the annual meeting, and the Secretary shall prepare
a list setting forth the names of the candidates and their proposers
together with the offices for which they are nominated. Such list
when complete shall be exposed in the vestibule or Reading Room, and
the names of the candidates shall be advertised on the day before and
on the day of the election in two daily newspapers in Sydney,
(iv.) The said election shall take place on the seventh day after
the day of holding the annual meeting, and the polling shall begin at
twelve o’clock noon, and shall close at 8 o’clock in the evening.
The said election shall be presided over by a person to be


appointed for that purpose by the committee and to be paid at a
rate to be fixed by the committee, provided that such presiding officer
may be a member of the Institution but shall not be a member of
the committee, a servant of the Institution, nor a candidate at
the election, over which he may be appointed to preside. The ballot
papers used at such election shall be initialled by the presiding
-officer.
(v.) The presiding officer shall have the power to appoint a deputy,
and a sufficient number of scrutineers, not being candidates for election,
at such rate of payment as the committee shall from time to time
determine, and the said Presiding Officer, or his deputy, shall furnish a
signed report of the result of the election to the president or chairman
of the annual meeting by whom it shall be immediately announced by
advertisement in two daily newspapers published in Sydney.
(vi.) No payment shall be made to any presiding officer or scru-
tineer until it shall be determined by the committee that the business
of the election has been satisfactorily performed.
Insufficient dumber of Nominations-
9. —ln the event of there not being a sufficient number of nominations
in accordance with the last rule, the committee shall previously to the
annual meeting, supply the omission ; and if there be only sufficient can-
didates for any office no ballot will be held with respect to such office.
Vacancies to be Filled.
10. —ln the event of any vacancy occuring during the year in the
offices of president, vice-presidents, treasurer, committee or auditors,
the same shall be filled up by election by the members under the same
rules as are in force at the annual election, and such election shall take
place not later than one month after the declaration of such vacancy.
Committee of Management.
Monthly Meetings.
11. —The committee shall meet at least once in every month for
the transaction of business. Five members shall form a quorum, the
chairman being entitled to a casting in addition to a deliberative vote.
Special Meetings.
12. —lt shall be competent for the President, for two Vice-Presi-
dents or for any three members of the committee to call a special
meeting of the committee, provided twenty-four hours previous notice
of such meeting be given by the Secretary to every member of com
mittee.


Annual Report.
13. —The committee shall prior to each annual meeting, prepare
a report for the preceding year; which report shall be exhibited for
inspection in the reading room or vestibule, at least ten days prior
to such Annual General Meeting. The report shall amongst other
particulars contain :
(i.) The number of members during the year compared with that
of each of the previous four years.
(ii.) A statement of the funds of the Institution with items of
receipt and expenditure.
(iii.) A record of the number of committee meetings attended by
each member of the committee during the year.
Treasurer and Auditors-
-14. All money received by the Treasurer, Secretary or any
other person on behalf of the Institution, shall be forthwith paid into*
the banking account of the Institution which shall be kept at such
Bank as may be approved by the committee; no payment shall be made
on behalf of the Institution until authorised by the committee, and all
payments shall be made by cheques signed by the Treasurer and
countersigned by the Secretary.
Treasurer’s Report.
15. The Treasurer shall, fifteen days at least before the Annual
General Meeting balance the accounts for the preceding year, and
submit them, with all vouchers to the auditors ; and the auditors shall
thereupon audit the same and report the result to the Committee.
Books and Records.
16. The Books of the Treasurer shall be produced with all
entries duly made at every monthly meeting of the Committee, and all
Books and Records shall be open at all times for inspection by any two
members of the Institution, who shall give to the Secretary twenty-four
hours notice in writing, stating their w ish for such inspection.
General Meetings.
Annual Meeting 1 .
17. A general meeting cf the members, commencing at 8 p.m.,
shall be held annually during the first week in February for the transac-
tion of the general business of the Institution, and at this meeting the
report for the preceding year shall be presented for adoption.


Chairman.
18. —At every General Meeting, the President or, in his absence,
one of the Vice-Presidents shall preside ; and in the absence of the
President and all the Vice-Presidents, the Chairman shall be elected
from the members of the Committee present Should no Member of
Committee be present, the Members assembled shall have power to
elect a Chairman from among their number.
Voting'.
19. —At every General Meeting the voting, except as otherwise
provided in the Buies, shall be by show of hands in the first instance,
but it shall be competent for the Chairman or any six members to
require a division.
Library.
20. —The Library shall be opened daily from 8.45 a.m. till 8 p.m.
Sundays and Public Holidays excepted.
21. —No member shall be entitled to take from the Library at the
same time more than one complete work or more than three volumes of
the same work except such plans, maps and references as are bound
separately, and are connected with the contents of the work (By-law,
No. 27 excepted), and no member shall be entitled to more than three
issues in one week. Provided that the Librarian may allow any
person preparing Lectures for or acting specially in the interests of
the Institution such books as they may require for that purpose.
22. —Any member taking a book from the Institution, except in
the ordinary course of issue shall be liable to be expelled, and may be
proceeded against, as the Committee may determine.
23. —The periods allowed for keeping books shall be as follows :
For Ordinary Works ... ... ... 7 days
~ Periodicals Bound ... ... ... 14 „
~ ~ in Parts ... ... 4 ~
„ Works labelled “ New ” ... ... 4 ~
If any member detain a work longer than the specified period he shall
be liable to a fine of one penny per day during such detention, and if
ordered by the Committee, shall not receive any further issue of books
until such fine be paid.
24. —lf any member lose, mutilate or deface any book, such
member shall either replace a perfect copy of the same or pay the value
thereof, such value to be determined by the Librarian, and if ordered
by the Committee, he shall not receive any further issue of books until
the same be replaced, or the value thereof paid, and if due compensa-
tion be not made within one month, the Committee shall take such
steps as they may think necessary for the recovery of such compensa-
tion.


25. —Only officers of the Institution and members of Committee
shall be admitted behind the Librarian’s counter.
26. —Members shall have the privilege of reading books in the
Library but if any book be taken away from its case to be read at a
table, it shall be left to be replaced by the Librarian. Provided
always that the Committee shall at any time have power to suspend this
By-Law.
27. Life Members and Yearly Subscribers shall have the privilege
of receiving one volume or number of any periodical in addition to the
books allowed by By-Law No. 21.
28. —Any member may propose books for addition to the Library
on entering the titles, prices and other particulars in the book kept in
the Library for that purpose.
29. —The Library shall be closed for stocktaking for such period
as may from time to time be determined by the Committee, and all
books must be returned to the Library on or before the date announced
for such Stocktaking. Any member not duly returning all books lie
has in his possession belonging to the Library shall be liable to a fine
of two-pence per day for each volume retained after such date, and, if
ordered by the Committee, such fine shall be added to the next ensuing
subscription, and no books shall be issued to the defaulting member
until such fine be paid.
30. The Librarian, or his assistants, will at the request of
members, supply such books as they require, but members
must first furnish a written list of such books, together with their
Library folio, and must wait until the Librarian or his assistants are
disengaged. Provided always that the Committee shall have power to
suspend this By-Law.
Reading Room.
31. The Reading Room shall be opened at half-past 8 a.m., and
shall remain open till 10 p.m. every day, except Sunday, Christmas
Day and Good Friday, when it shall be open from 2 to 6 p.m.
32. Visitors may, upon application to the Secretary and on the
recommendation of a member, be furnished with cards admitting them
to the Reading Room for one month.
33 The monthly and quarterly periodicals shall lie on the tables
of the Reading-room until the arrival of the succeeding numbers. Files
of the newspapers for the current and previous months shall also be kept
on the tables. Members attending the Reading-room shall return each
newspaper and book after perusal, to the file or shelf from which it was
taken.


34. —Should any member desire to borrow a work of reference,
magazine or newspaper, such member must apply to the Librarian, who
shall grant or refuse such application according to his judgment, but
if granted such applicant shall deposit with the Librarian a sum of
money equal to the value of such work as a security for the due return
of the work (such value and time of loan to be determined by the
Librarian); but no work shall be lent for a longer period than three
days. If such work be detained beyond the time specified, the Librar-
ian may deduct ten per cent of the value from the deposit for every day
the work is detained beyond the specified time. But this shall in no way
interfere with the right of the committee to take such steps as they
may consider necessary for the recovery of such work or its value.
35. —JSTo Book, Magazine, Newspaper, Plan or Drawing belonging
to the Heading-room shall be taken out of it by anyone except an
officer of the Institution who will deliver such as may be lent to mem-
bers in the Library down stairs. Any member violating this rule or
mutilating or defacing any newspaper, periodical or book may be
expelled from the Institution or otherwise proceeded against as the
committee may determine,
36. No conversation or other conduct tending to disturb the
order of the Reading Room will be permitted. Any member offending
against this rule may be forthwith removed by any officer of the Institu-
tion.
TlioiiDEL & Co,, Printers, 100 $ 102 Liverpool St„ Sydney,






