





i‘?.4
F&>794
ACT OF INCORPORATION,
BY-LAWS,
RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
FOUNDED A.D. 1836.
INCORPORATED BY ACT OF COUNCIL, A.D. 1853.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
5c 58—91 (b)




INDEX.
Act of Incorporation ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
By-Laws ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
Finance Committee... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
General Rules ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Regulations for the Museum Staff—
A. General ... ... ... ... ... 14
B. Curator ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
C. Secretary ... ... ... ... ... 16
D. Scientific Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
E. Skilled Workmen 18
F. Attendants ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
G. Collectors 19
Library Rules ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Fire Brigade Regulations ... ... ... ... 21




AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.
An Act to Incorporate and endow the Aus- 27 Victoeu,
. 1 No. 2.
tralian. Museum. [4th July, 1853.]
WIIEIiEAS tlie specimens of natural history and other
public property deposited in the Australian Museum
have now become of considerable value And whereas it is
deemed expedient for public convenience and the promotion
of literature and science that the books pictures manuscripts
statutes specimens of natural history and other objects which
this Colony now possesses or may hereafter acquire by gift
bequest purchase or exchange should bo deposited in the
custody of trustworthy persons And whereas His Excel-
lency the Governor General has already appointed a Com-
mittee for the management and guardianship of the said
Museum and of the collections therein and it is now deemed
necessary that the members of the aforesaid Committee
together with certain other persons hereinafter designated
should be incorporated as a Board of Trustees Be it
therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of New
South Wales with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council thereof as follows :
1. A Board of Trustees composed as hereinafter men- the
tioned shall be and is hereby constituted a Body Politic and MuUumhicor-
Corporate by the name of “ The Trustees of the Australian P° rated -
Museum ” by which name such Body Corporate shall have
perpetual succession and shall have a common seal and shall
by the same name from time to time sue and be sued implead
and be impleaded answer and be answered unto in all
Courts of the said Colony and shall be able and capable in
law to take purchase and hold to them and their successors
all goods chattels and personal property whatever either
now deposited within the precincts of the Australian Museum
or hereafter to be acquired by gift bequest purchase or
exchange and shall also be able and capable in law to take
purchase and hold to them and their successors not only
such lands buildings hereditaments and possessions as may
from time to time be exclusively used and occupied for the
immediate requirements of the said “Australian Museum”
but also any other lands buildings hereditaments and pos-
sessions whatsoever situate in the said Colony or elsewhere


and they and their successors shall be able and capable in
law to grant demise alienate and otherwise dispose of all or
any of the property real or personal belonging to the said
Museum and also to do all other matters and things inci-
dental to or appertaining to a Body Politic and Corporate.
Restrictions on 2. Provided always that it shall not be lawful for the
ating I lands 1 of said Trustees to alienate mortgage charge or demise any
the Corporation. j anc [ s tenements or hereditaments to which they may
become entitled by grant purchase or otherwise unless with
the approval of the Governor and Executive Council of
the said Colony for the time being except by way of lease
for any term not exceeding thirty-one yeais from the time
when such lease shall be made in and by which there shall
be reserved and made payable for the uses of the said
Museum during the whole of the term thereby granted the
best yearly rent that can be reasonably gotten for the same
without any fine or foregift.
Permanent 3. By way of permanent endowment for the said “ Aus-
Museumf 14 0f tralian Museum” the Governor shall be and is hereby
Museum. iraiian museum me vxuveiiiui mail uc auu
empowered by warrant under his hand to direct to be issued
and paid out of the Genera,! or Ordinary Revenues of the
said Colony by four equal quarterly payments on the first
day of January the first day of April the first day of July
and the first day of October in every year as a fund for
defraying the several stipends which shall be appointed to
be paid to such necessary officers and servants as shall be
from time to time appointed by the said Board of Trustees
and for discharging all incidental and necessary charges
connected with the current expenditure thereof or otherwise
the sum of one thousand pounds in each and every year
the first instalment thereof to become due and payable on
the first day of January one thousand eight hundred and
fifty-four.
Corporation to 4. J'he said Body Corporate shall consist of twenty-four
offidai* 1 and WC * ve Trustees twelve of wdiom shall be called Official Trustees
twelve elective anc [ B h a n consist of the following Public Officers for the
time being that is to say —The Chief Justice The Colonial
Secretary The Attorney General The Colonial Treasurer
The Auditor General The Speaker of the Legislative Council
The Solicitor General The Collector of Customs The Sur-
veyor General The Colonial Architect The President of the
Colonial Medical Board or should any such office cease to
exist then such other Officer as the Governor may name for
the purpose and a Trustee to be named by the Governor
and to be called the Crown Trustee and the other twelve
Trustees who shall be called Elective Trustees shall consist


at first of the following persons being the Members of the
present Committee for the management of the said Museum
that is to say —Arthur A’Beckett Esquire George Bennett
Esquire William Branthwaite Clarke Clerk Frederick Orme
Darvall Esquire Phillip Parker King Captain Royal Navy
Robert Lethbridge King Clerk William Macarthur Esquire
William Sharp Macleay Esquire George Macleay Esquire
John Smith Esquire Doctor of Medicine George Edward
Turner Clerk and George Witt Esquire Doctor of Medicine.
5. All vacancies which shall occur by death resignation How vacancies
or otherwise among the aforesaid twelve “Elective Trustees” memlfers electl ' e
shall be filled up as they may occur by the election of such supplied,
other fit and proper persons as the remaining Members of
the aforesaid Corporate Body shall at meetings duly to be
convened for that purpose elect to fill up such vacancies
Provided always that no such vacancy unless created by
death or resignation shall occur for any cause whatsoever
unless such cause shall have been previously specified by
some by-law of the said Body Politic and Corporate duly
passed as hereinafter mentioned.
6. At every meeting of the said Trustees five Trustees Five trustees to
shall form a quorum and all questions shall be decided by Majority u to rum
the majority of votes of the Trustees present and in all cases
when the votes on each side shall be equal the Chairman nia „. iau
who may be chosen to act on the occasion shall have an
additional or casting vote.
7. The said Trustees shall have full power to appoint all
officers and servants of the said Museum and shall have the the management
entire management and superintendence of the affairs con- ofthcMuseum '
cerns and property of the said Museum in all cases not
provided for by this Act it shall be law r ful for the said
Trustees to act in such manner as shall appear to them best
calculated to advance the objects of the said institution.
8. The said Trustees shall have power and authority to byjavrenSet^ 9 '
make and also to repeal and alter all such by-laws rules and and orders,
orders touching and concerning the management and good
government of the said Museum and the income and
property thereof and any other matter or thing relative to
the same as to them may seem fit for the effectual attain-
ment of the objects of the institution the security of its
property and the administration of its concerns and all such
by-laws rules and orders shall be presented to the Governor
and on confirmation and allowance thereof by His Excellency
with the advice of the Executive Council shall come into
force and be binding in law and all such by-laws rules and
orders shall within one month from the date thereof be


published in the New South Wales Government Gazette and
shall be laid before the Legislative Council within one
month after the same shall have been made if such Council
be then sitting or if not then within one month after the
commencement of the next ensuing Session thereof.
Annuafßeports 6 T^e Trustees shall once at least in every year and
and special also whenever the pleasure of the Governor shall be signified
required'of’ their i* l that behalf report their proceedings and the progress of
proceedings. the said institution to the said Governor and Executive
Council and a copy of every such report shall be laid before
the Legislative Council within one month after the same
shall have been received if the said Council be then sitting
or if not then within one month after the commencement
of the next Session thereof.
furnished 18 Accounts of the expenditure of the Museum shall be
for audit and furnished annually by the Trustees to the Government for
publication. examination and audit and in order that an abstract thereof
may be published in the Government Gazette.
8
AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.


BY-LAWS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.
Meeting of the Trustees.
The ordinary meetings of the Trustees shall be held at least
once in each month, on such day of the week, and at such hour,
as shall be agreed upon by the Board.
Special meetings may be called on a requisition to the Secretary,
signed by three Trustees, stating the object of the meeting; and
at such meeting no other business than that specified in the notice
shall be transacted.
Every meeting may be adjourned from time to time, at the
pleasure of the majority of members present.
In the month of December in each year, one of the Trustees
shall be elected President for the ensuing year, and shall, when
present, preside at all meetings of the Trustees ; but if he shall
be absent, or shall vacate the chair at any meeting, one of the
Trustees present may be elected Chairman of that meeting. If
the office of President shall become vacant, another President
may be elected for the residue of the current year.
Office of Elective Trustee.
The office of any Elective Trustee shall become vacant by his
absence from the meetings of the Board without leave during six
consecutive months.
Whenever the office of an Elective Trustee shall have been
declared vacant by the President or Chairman, any two Trustees
may nominate in writing some other person to fill the vacancy,
and at the next ordinary meeting after such nomination a ballot
for the election of a new Trustee shall be held.


Honorary Correspondents.
YII.
Persons who have rendered any service to the Museum or to
the general cause of Science, may, at any ordinary meeting, be
proposed in writing by two Trustees as Honorary Correspondents,
and may be elected by ballot at the next or any subsequent
ordinary meeting, and, if elected, shall be entitled to receive a
Diploma under the Common Seal of the Museum.
Administration of Finance.
VIII.
All moneys of the Museum shall be kept at such bank or banks
in Sydney as the Board may from time to time direct.
A Finance Committee shall be appointed, consisting of three
Trustees, of whom two shall form a quorum. One member of
such Committee shall retire in turn at the end of each year, and
shall not be eligible for re-election for twelve months ; his suc-
cessor shall be appointed at the first ordinary meeting of the
Board in December, or as soon thereafter as may bo possible;
and every vacancy during a current year may be filled up by the
Board by appointment of another Trustee, to hold office until the
end of that year.
The Common Seal.
The Common Seal of the Museum, the Deed of Grant of the
property, the By-laws approved by the Governor, and such
other' things as the Board shall direct, shall be kept in a safe
having three locks with duplicate keys, of which two shall be
in the custody of each of two Trustees appointed by the Board
and the other two shall be kept by the Secretary, so that any
two possessors of keys may open the box.
Every document to which fhe Common Seal is affixed shall be
signed by the President and countersigned by the Secretary, and
such seal shall not be used except at a Board meeting or by
order of the Board.
10


RULES FOR THE FINANCE COMMITTEE.
1. Previously to the first ordinary meeting of the Board in
each month the Finance Committee shall audit the accounts for
the past month, and shall examine all claims to be submitted for
payment.
2. The accounts, when audited by the Finance Committee,
shall be reported to the Board, and (with the cash-book, cheque-
book, petty cash-book, and bankers’ pass-books) laid on the
table. The list of claims, when approved by the Board, shall be
signed by the President or Chairman, after which cheques for
the same shall be signed by two Trustees.
8. Cheques for salaries, wages, and other urgent claims
required to be paid before the next ordinary meeting may, on
the requisition of the Curator, be signed by two members of the
Finance Committee; but otherwise all cheques shall be signed
only at the ordinary meetings of the Board.
1. All cheques signed between the ordinary meetings shall be
reported to the Board at the next meeting.
5. Unless otherwise requested all cheques shall be crossed,
and, when signed by the Trustees, shall be handed to the Secre-
tary, who shall countersign the same on paying them away, but
not sooner ; and at the next ordinary meeting of the Board
vouchers for all payments made shall be produced after having
been submitted to the Finance Committee, and all cheques not
handed over to the persons entitled to them shall be also pro-
duced.
0. The Finance Committee shall audit the annual balance-
sheet, and report the result of their examination to the Board.


GENERAL RULES.
1. The Museum shall be closed to the public on Christmas Day
and Good Friday, and on all Mondays, except when a public
holiday falls on a Monday, but shall be opened on all other days
as follows: —From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. during the six calendar
months commencing on April Ist; from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
during the six calendar months commencing on October Ist;
and on Sundays from 2 to 5 p.m. during the whole year.
2. The Curator, the Secretary, or one of the Scientific Assistants
on the permanent staff, shall be in attendance in the Museum
during the whole time it is open to the public, including Sundays
and holidays.
3. Children under 12 years of age shall not be admitted to
the Museum unless accompanied by a responsible person.
4. No strangers shall be allowed to enter any portion of the
premises not open to the public, without authority from the
Curator, or other Officer in charge.
5. All specimens acquired whether by donation, exchange,
purchase, collection, or otherwise, shall be submitted to the
Board without unnecessary delay.
0. All specimens kept in drawers or cases shall be kept under
lock and key ; the keys shall be in charge of the Curator, and no
such specimen shall be sent away or destroyed without the
sanction of the Board.
7. All specimens set up or prepared in each month shall be
exhibited to the Board at the first ordinary meeting in the fol-
lowing month.
8. All photographs taken for the Museum by the staff shall
be submitted to the Board, and each Trustee shall be entitled to
a copy on application.
9. Letters addressed to members of the staff relating to
specimens or to business of the Museum shall be considered
official, and shall be handed to the Curator. All letters sent
out shall be upon paper bearing the words “All communica-
tions on official matters should be addressed to the Trustees,
and on scientific matters to the Curator.” Letters or packets
from members of the staff to be posted “On Service,” shall
be initialled by the Curator before being handed to the
Secretary to have stamps affixed.


10. The engagement of every person employed by the Trustees
shall be terminable by a month’s notice on either side, unless
otherwise agreed upon.
11. No person employed on the staff of the Museum shall be
allowed to form any collection of objects of Natural History,
except for the Museum, nor shall he in any way deal with any
collection of that character.
12. No stores shall be obtained, nor liabilities incurred, except
on requisition approved by the Board,
13. The keys of the offices, workshops, and cases shall not
be taken off the Museum premises, but they shall be hung up
in a case provided for the purpose.
14. A publication, to be called “Records of the Australian
Museum,” containing special reports on collecting trips, papers
by the Staff of the Museum, &c., shall be issued periodically under
the direction of a committee of the Board r and the publication
shall be edited by the Curator.
15. No communications or papers relating to Museum work
or specimens shall be allowed to appear in any other publication
without the sanction of the Board, nor shall any specimen be
taken out of the Museum for exhibition or otherwise without
the sanction of the Curator.
IG. All holidays under the Bank Holidays Act will be allowed
as far as possible to the officers and servants of the Museum,
provided the observance thereof shall not in any way interfere
with the routine work of the Museum, or render it necessary to
close any portion of the buildings ordinarily open to the public;
but except Christmas Day and (rood Friday no general holiday
will be allowed unless notice thereof, signed by the Curator, be
posted in the Museum
13


REGULATIONS FOR THE MUSEUM STAFF.
General 'Regulations.
1. The following shall be the regular hours of attendance, but
Officers and others, when necessary, shall attend as much earlier
or later as required : —One member of the permanent Scientific
Staff shall, however, in turn, according to seniority of appoint-
ment, take charge of the Museum during the absence of the
Curator on Saturday afternoons and public holidays, and on
week-days from 4 30 p.m. to closing time.
Officers —From 930 a.m. to 4‘30 p.m. on every working
day except Saturdays ; and from 9 30 a.m. to 12 30 p.m.
on Saturdays.
Skilled Workmen —From 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on every working
day except Saturdays ; and from 9 a.m. to 12 30 p.m. on
Saturdays.
Labourers and Unskilled Workmen —From 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
on every working day except Saturdays; and from 8
a.m. to I p.m. on Saturdays.
Attendants —From 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. on every working
day except Mondays, from Ist April to 30th September,
and from 8 a.m. to G p.m. from Ist October to 31st
March, and from 8 a.m. to noon on Mondays.
One hour daily, at times arranged by the Curator, will be
allowed for lunch.
2. Every Officer and Servant of the Trustees shall sign his name
in an Attendance Book, to be kept in the entrance hall, and record
the time of his arrival and departure; and a monthly abstract
of the attendances shall be prepared and laid before the Board at
every ordinary meeting, such book to be removed to the
Curator’s office at 9T5 a.m. and 9 45 a.m.
3. No Officer or Servant shall be absent during working hours
without the permission of the Curator, and all absences shall
be recorded in the attendance book. Should an officer have
occasion to leave his room, he shall leave a memorandum stating
the fact, and when he will return.
4. No Officer or Servant of the Trustees shall lend money to
any other employe, nor shall the Secretary make any advances on
account of salary or wages, nor recognise any order to pay money
on account of any employe, nor accept any receipt for salary or
wages except from the person to whom the money is actually
due, without the authority of the Board.


5. Leave of absence on full pay may be granted yearly to the
members of tbe Staff, as follows :
Officers, three weeks, or such other time as may be agreed
to by the Board.
ci -ii i -nr i j ( On the recommendation of
Skilled W orkmen and ) „ , j ■,
... , , , i - the Curator and approval
Attendants, two weeks. j „f the Board.
But no claim for accumulation of leave from year to year will be
recognised.
6. The Officers and Servants of the Museum shall receive
instructions as to their respective duties from the Curator,
and they shall be responsible to him for the due performance
of the same. Any communication they may wish to make to
the Trustees shall be forwarded through the Curator. The
Secretary shall receive his instructions in all matters pertaining
to his Department from the Trustees, and shall be responsible
to them for the due performance of his duties.
Dufies of the Curator.
1. To attend at the Museum on Sundays as w r ell as on other
days when it is open, unless specially exempted by resolution of
the Board or relieved by one of the Officers of the Museum.
2. To direct the general working of the establishment, to
superintend the staff, and to make the best use of the collections
as a source of interest and information to the public.
3. To report in writing to the Board upon all specimens offered
to the Trustees for purchase or exchange.
4. To be responsible for the naming, labelling, classification,
safe custody, and preservation of the collections, books, and
other property of the Trustees.
5. To sign all letters on scientific subjects, and in connection
with the acquisition and disposal of specimens.
6. To cause Lists of Specimens acquired by donation up to the
last day of each month to be prepared and laid before the Board
at the next monthly meeting, and to forward monthly lists of
donations to the press.
7. To report monthly on the state of the Museum and collec-
tions, and the nature and particulars of the work done by each
assistant, taxidermist, and collector during the month; and to
submit such statement to the Board at its first ordinary meeting
in the following month.


8. To be responsible for the preparation of Letters of Thanks to
donors of specimens.
9. To be responsible for the preparation of a Register of Speci-
mens received, embodying —
Number in consecutive arrangement.
Name and habitat of specimen as nearly as possible.
Name of donor or vendor.
Date of acquisition.
Disposal of same.
Remarks in relation to the same.
10. To superintend the packing of all cases despatched from
the Museum, and the preparation of lists of contents.
11. To be responsible for the preparation of an Exchange
Register according to forms approved of by the Board.
12. To certify to the correctness of all accounts submitted to
the Board for payment.
13. To deliver to the Secretary all reports and requisitions on
the day before the meeting at which they are to be considered.
14. To act as editor of all publications issued by the Trustees,
except when they shall otherwise determine. «
15. To see that the precautions against fire are strictly carried
out.
16. To sign all requisitions laid before the Board.
17. To have charge of the keys of all cases, offices, and doors
of workrooms and other rooms.
Duties of the Secretary.
]. To prepare and issue notices of all meetings of the Trustees,
and whenever any elective Trustee has been absent from the
meetings of the Board, without leave, for four consecutive
months, to send him notice to that effect.
2. To prepare business papers for all Board meetings, to attend
such meetings, and to prepare minutes of the proceedings at the
same.
3. To take charge of all correspondence ; to register all official
letters ;to write and sign all letters according to instructions; to
prepare monthly returns of the number of persons visiting the
Museum; to make lists of all publications acquired by purchase,
exchange, or donation ; to prepare such other returns and reports
as may be required ; to keep copies of all letters and returns
written or made by the Board or by its authority ; and to perform
all clerical work appertaining to the business of the Museum.


4. To commence all communications which he may have occa-
sion to make w r ith the words “on behalf of the Trustees,” and to
use the words “by direction of the Trustees ” only when so
instructed.
5. To keep all necessary books of account; to countersign and
pay away all cheques, and to prepare monthly and yearly balance
sheets for submission to the Board, and half-yearly statements
for the Auditor-General.
6. To keep separate accounts of the expenditure of the
different grants of money voted by Parliament.
7. To compare all accounts with the Order Book, initial them if
correct, and submit the same to the Board, on Government forms,
in duplicate.
8. To act as Librarian, and keep a Register of all books in the
Library, and enter them in the Library Catalogue.
9. To stamp all books in the Library on the title page, at
intervals of about 100 pages, and on the fronts of the plates
and other illustrations.
10. To keep in the Library a Register in which every book
removed from the shelves shall be entered, with the date of such
removal.
11. To attend in the Library at stated times for the pur-
pose of issuing and receiving books, to examine once a month or
oftener the register of books issued and the cards left in the
Library by borrowers, and to obtain the return of all books at the
expiration of the time for which they were borrowed.
12. To attend to the shipment of all goods sent abroad, and
obtain delivery of all goods consigned to the Museum.
13. To furnish each Trustee prior to the meeting at which any
Estimates intended to be submitted to Parliament are to be con-
sidered with a copy of such Estimates.
14. To have charge of the keys of the office safes and strong
room.
15. To prepare and sign Letters of Thanks to donors of books
to the Museum Library.
IG. To take charge of all stores and equipments, and to issue
the same only on requisitions signed by the Curator.
17. To keep a Store Book showing the receipt, issue, and con-
dition of all stores, and to produce the same to the Einance
Committee whenever required by them.
18, To receive all stores and equipments arriving for the
Museum, and to enter the same in the Store Book.
19. To take charge of the Museum during the temporary
absence of the Curator in office hours.


Duties of the Scientific Assistants.
1. To assist the Curator in the work of their respective depart-
ments; to name, classify, register, and take charge of such
sjjecimens as he may hand to them for that purpose; to prepare
for publication descriptions of specimens ; also to prepare official
catalogues and guides ; and to perform such other duties, as the
Curator may require.
2. To enter daily in a diary particulars of all work done by
them, and to hand such diary to the Curator once a week, or
oftener if required, for inspection by himself or production to
the Board.
3. To take charge of the Museum in turn, according to
seniority of appointment, during the absence of the Curator on
Saturday afternoons and public holidays, and on week days from
4.30 p.m., to closing time.
4. To proceed on collecting tours if required by the Board, and
to furnish reports on the same.
Duties of Skilled Workmen.
1. To preserve or deal with such specimens as may be supplied
to them by the Curator in such manner as he may direct.
2. To carry out the instructions of the Curator for the care of
the collections, and to obey all such other orders as he may at
any time give them.
3. To enter daily in a diary particulars of all work done by
them, and hand such diary to the Curator once a week, or
oftener if required, for inspection by himself or production to
the Board.
Duties of Attendants.
1. To clean and dust the Museum and its contents ; attend to
the doors and maintain order among visitors ; to assist the
Scientific Assistants and the Taxidermists when required by the
Curator, and to act generally under the instructions of the
Curator.
2. All Attendants shall be sworn in as special constables for
duty in the Museum.
3. To clean and attend to the closets and lavatories for visitors.


Duties of Collectors.
1. During the period of their engagement Collectors shall he
under the superintendence of the Curator, and shall devote their
time entirely to collecting for the Museum, and shall not collect
for themselves or any other institution or individual. All speci-
mens of which they may become possessed during any collecting
trip shall immediately become the property of the Trustees
2. They shall, on the last Friday of every month, and at such
other times as the Curator may require, forward to him a report of
their movements, with a statement showing the number and nature
of specimens collected, and particulars of all expenses incurred.
8. These regulations shall apply to any members of the Staff
while collecting, as well as to specially engaged Collectors.
19


LIBRARY RULES.
1. Excepting as hereinafter provided for, every Trustee shall
be entitled from time to time to borrow four volumes at a time
for a period not exceeding fourteen days.
2. Any member of the Scientific Staff maybe allowed to take from
the Library to his workroom such books as he may require in con-
nection with the work upon which he is engaged in the Museum;
but the Librarian shall at all times have access to the books in the
work-rooms and shall be responsible for their return without un-
necessary delay.
3. Members of the Museum staff, with the approval of the
Curator, may borrow books to be taken out of the Museum, in
which case they shall also enter the books in the Register, with
their signatures attached, and the date of removal. Books must
be returned to the Library at the expiration of fourteen days,
but may be re-issued.
4. Visitors will not be permitted to take books out of the
Library ; but upon the approval of a Trustee or the Curator
may be allowed to consult any book between the hours of 10
a.m. and 3 p.m.
5. No book shall be removed from the shelves in the Library
except in the presence of the Librarian.
6. Every borrower on obtaining a book shall leave in its place
a card with the title of the book thereon signed with his name,
and he shall be responsible for such book so long as his card
remains in the Library.
7. Books returned to the Library must bo left on the table for
the inspection of the officer in charge, who will replace them on
the shelves.
8. Books difficult to replace shall be specially marked, and shall
not be permitted to go out of the Museum without the sanction of
the Board. Any breach of this rule must be reported to the Board.
20


FIRE BRIGADE REGULATIONS.
Fire Buckets.
Fire Buckets are stationed at the following places :
1. One Bucket in each Workroom or Office.
2. Two buckets in Library.
3. One bucket in Board Room.
4. Two buckets in Vestibule.
5. Two buckets in Storeroom.
6. Eight buckets in Cellars and Passages in Basement.
7. Two buckets in Spirit Room.
They are to be kept full of water, which is to be changed once
a week, and are not to be used for ordinary purposes under any
consideration whatever.
Hose and Hydrants.
Hydrants and Hose are stationed at the following places :
Inside Building.
1. Geological Hall.
2. Central Hall, Ground Ploor.
3. Staircase, First Landing.
4. Staircase, Upper Landing.
Outside Building.
1. East side Main Building.
2. Cellar Door.
3. On Lawn, opposite Private Door,
All hose to be kept coupled to the hydrants. In each case where
there are two or more lengths of hose supplied to any one hydrant
the whole is to be kept coupled together, and the branch nozzle
is to be kept attached. In case any hose has to be uncoupled
that the hydrant may be used for other purposes, it must be
replaced as soon as the other work is finished.
All hydrants are to be kept closed down tight, to prevent the
hose coupled on from getting wet.
Each hydrant will be tried quarterly, to test whether the water
supply is correct, by the Foreman of Public Buildings,
All rubbish of any kind liable to spontaneous ignition must
be taken outside the workshops each day before closing. Smoking
is not allowed in the Workshops, the Spirit Room, or the
Cellars, nor in any part of the Museum Buildings.


In Case op Eire.
Eing up the Telephone Exchange, get on with No. 211 Metro-
politan Eire Brigade, and report fire either in the Museum or in
the immediate vicinity. Engines will promptly attend.
Any person discovering a fire in the Museum is to give the
alarm, and immediately run out the hose to as near the seat of
fire as possible. After the hose has been run out the wheel of
the hydrant is to be turned to the left until it cannot he turned
any more. If this is done quickly there will be time to get back
to the nozzle again and direct it before the water reaches it.
When the alarm is heard do not rush indiscriminately to the
seat of the fire—but first pass the signal on to others—then get
your own hose out and ready for use in case it should be needed,
await instructions, and be ready to act as may be required. If
visitors are in the building attendants must not leave their posts
unnecessarily, as extra vigilance will be required to prevent panic
or damage to the specimens by frightened and mischievous
people.
Any person using the hydrants must be very careful not to do
unnecessary damage by water.
Directly the Metropolitan Eire Brigade arrives all directions
must be taken from officers in charge of same.
22


The preceding By-Laws and General Buies and Begulations
having been passed by the Trustees of the Australian Museum,
the Common Seal of the Corporation is hereto affixed by me, as
Crown Trustee and Chairman, this twelfth day of November,
1891.
(1.5.) JAMES C. COX,
S. Sinclair, Crown Trustee and Chairman.
Secretary.
Extract from Government Gazette of 30 th December, 1891.
Department of Public Instruction,
Sydney, 30th December, 1891.
Australian Museum —By-Laws and General Eules.
The preceding By-Laws, made by the Trustees of the Australian
Museum, for the management of that Institution, having been
confirmed by His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of
the Executive Council, are published in accordance with the Bth
section of the Act 17 Victoria No. 2.
E. B. SUTTOR.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer, Phillip-street.—lB92.




o. n. f
S 6 9.
Bui
T <Mm |0 F Ajft
4 2 qA,
1508
02231209


