

VUMPS
Voll., No. 1
One
Penny.
Pure Australian Fun.
Saturday, august 15, 1908.


Selling like Ripe Okerries
AUSTRALIAN BOOKS
Printed, Written and Illustrated in Australia. Published at a ©heap
Rate to enable the Multitude to buy them.
Steele Rudd’s The Poor Parson, cloth 3/6, post free
Sandy’s Selection, „ 3/6, „ „
For Life, paper 1/-, „ „
„ „ Dad in Politics, „ 1/-, „ „
De Boos’s Settler and Savage, cloth 3/6, „ „
H. K. Bloxhams, On the Fringe of
the Never-Never „ 2/6, „ „
James Green’s The Selector „ 2/6, „ „
Edward Dyson’s In the Roaring
Fifties „ 2/-, „ „
Edward Dyson’s Missing Link, paper !/-, „ „
C. D, t Websdale’s Seafarers, „ 1/-, „ „
» » cloth, 2/-, ~ ~
Ambrose Pratt’s Three Years with
Thunderbolt „ 2/-, „ „
Ambrose Pratt’s Three Years with
Thunderbolt paper 1/-, „ „
3/11
3/11
1/3
1/3
3/11
2/10
2/10
2/5
1/3
1/3
2/5
2/5
1/3
J.
Steve Brown’s
V-,
V;
L. B. Porter’s Riverfall,
The Bulletin Reciter (complete)
A. Adam’s The New Chum,
Chas White’s John Vane, Bush-
ranger
Harbor Guide, with Colored Maps,
Guide to Sydney
V-,
V-,
1/-,
1/-,
6d.
V-,
1/3
A. Barry’s
Bunyip, cloth 1/6, post free 1/11
J. A. Barry’s Luck of the Native
Born, paper 1/-,
T. E. Spencer’s How McDougall
Topped the Score „
T. E. Spencer’s The Spring Cleaning „
T. E. Spencer’s The Surprising Ad-
ventures of Mrs. McSweeney, paper 1/-,
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
And other equally good books to follow.
1/3
9d.
1/3
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL GO., 476 George Street, Sydney.
And nil Branched and Booksellers.
FREE
CARDEN SEEDS
Ew*
MO
MONEY
WANTED
Tk order to introduce our HIGH-GRADE TESTED SEEDS
1 into eyery home, we are giving away prizes such as
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, SILVER WATCHES and
CHAINS, CAMERAS, RABBIT RIFLES. LADIES' MUFF
CHAINS, SOLID GOLD RINGS, JEWELLERY, etc., FREE
to the value of ONE THOUSAND POUNDS. All iou have
to do is to SEND US YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS and
we will forward you 24 assorted packets of our reliable
vegetable and flower seeds, such as TURNIP, LETTUCE,
CABBAGE. TOMATO, WALLFLOWER, SWEET WILLIAM
MIGNONETTE, GAILLARDIA, etc.: Sell the packets at 3d.
per packet, send us our money (6/-) and we will send you by
return mall any present you mav select from our grand list
WE TRUST YOU—THE RISK IS OURS. You may return
the seeds if not sold, though you will find the task of selling
them ridiculously easy, for they are splendid value. Don’t
d f lay, SEND AT ONCE before our offer is withdrawn.
r LORSSTS SEED SUPPLY Co, 104 BONO ST SYDNEY, N
•a
S.W
dfsd
E
E.
Colored and Artistic
Post Cards.
NO MONEY WANTED.
Send us your name and address and we will forward you 12 packets each
containing 6 of our colored and high art Post Cards to sell for us at 6d.
per packet. W hen you have sold the cards, return us our Bs., and we will
send you for your trouble any present you may choose from the list of
jewellery which we forward. By continuing the sale of our cards von
can earn a Ladies’ op Gent's Silver Watch and Chain.
Remember, we want to do business with von again, ml to do this
we must give you full satisfaction. Wo take ail the risk, y<. u
can returnithe cards if notsold. We have no connection with
any other Firm. We are the largest dealers in post cards in Wralia ■■■•,! imnnri
m li,)eral otfer - *«“ first *
REGAL POST CARD CO. 129 O’Connell Street, Sydney,
R


DOWN
ANOTHER
HOLE
"Left the pub early—about two o’clock."
“He reached the top."
It was Larry Church—an improbable-sounding
name, belonging to a very probable man—who was
in the habit of falling down abandoned diggers’
holes on his way home—mostly towards early mass
on Sunday mornings. Fortunately, it was a field
where the sinkings were shallow, with steps cut in
the sides of the holes, and help usually within hail.
But this Sunday morning he left the pub. early—
about two o’clock—and, overcome, he blundered
into a newly-deserted 44 married couple’s ” hut,
stumbled into the fireplace, and promptly went to
sleep curled up in the ashes. Later on he woke,
cold, and looking up he saw a star or two.
‘ 4 Down another hole !” he said.
And, being thirsty, he started to climb out. It
was a bark chimney, with a clay, or mud-lined, fire-
place, about twenty feet high and as wide as the
hut—and about as bulky. Half-seasoned bushmen
built ’em that way in those days.
Larry got up by the help of the cross-bar for the
pots : he stood on it and felt round.
“ Phwhat sort of timberin’ is this f.” he muttered.
44 False driver—V they're bin workin’ up.”
He climbed a bit, by the help of the sapling and
batten frame, and rested, with his long limbs spread-
eagled.
“ Phwhat sort of a crimson sundowner’s shaft is
it ?” he said. 44 Feels as if they’ve shlabbed it wid
barrk, begob, an’ it’s shaped like a square funnel
upside down. But here goes ! If it was the divil’s
own sharrft I’d git out of it. ’ ’
He reached the top, scrambled over, and fell the
twenty feet—fortunately on a rubbish-heap on top of
which a discarded straw mattress had been thrown.
It was sodden with recent rain.
44 Down another lurid sharrft !” he groaned re-
signedly. 4 ‘ It’s muddy, but it’s soft, an’ I’m
knocked up ; so here goes till daylight.” And he
curled himself up on the rubbish and went to sleep
again.
The sun woke him, and he got up and bleered
round. He saw two, shallow shafts close at hand.
He went over to them, and, kneeling down, peered
down each in turn until the bottoms became distinct.
’ 44 Forrty feet an’ thirrty feet, if they’re a fut !”
he exclaimed. 44 I remimber gifting out of the deep
one, but how I got out of the other I don’t know.
Muster done it in me sleep. Luk at that, now!
Talk about the luck o’ drunks after that ! Oi might
’a’ broken me lurid nick.”
HENRY LAWSON.
"Down another lurid shaft!” he said.
“Peered down each in turn."


VUMPS i
The Australian Comic Paper.
Printed and published for the Proprietors, by
Hector Lamond, of “ Morley,” Peat s Perry Road,
Hornsby, at “The Worker” Office, 129 Bathurst
Street, Sydney.
Business Address—Box 1459, G.P.0., Sydney.
SYDNEY, AUGUST 15, 1908.
Drawings and manuscripts should be addressed
to The Editor, Box 1459, G.P.0., Sydney; busi-
ness communications to The Manager.
The contents of this paper are copyright.
The next issue of Tumps will be ready on
September 15,
Tumps is the first Australian comic paper. It
is written and illustrated and made by Austra-
lians. W© are not filling a long-felt want
at least, not with this issue; we’ve got a lot more
to come. We want you to want us, and to teli
your newsagent your wants.
So interesting a personality as the Australian
boy should not be allowed to live his lile in
obscurity, therefore this paper will chronicle his
doings. He will henceforth be known as Tumps
—Joe Tumps—and his ways will be recorded by
eome of the most capable of Australia s artists
and writers. He’s a mischievous person, is
Tumps,, but he’s as decent a lad as ever you met
with a catapult in his pocket. And he’s got good
pals—Terror Timson, for instance, and Johnno
Goodie, and Jelly McCon of Dandaloo, and many
another. Tumps knows a big crowd, but when
this paper gets going he’ll know more people than
the pass-in man at the dress circle entrance.
Vumps’s friends are as decent as he is, and there
will be, no indecency in his paper—we do not want
your immoral support.
To Contributors.
Literary contributions to Tumps should be like
shots from a catapult. If you don’t know what a
shot from a catapult is like write to Tumps and
he’ll tell you. The shorter the shot the better
chance it has of hitting the mark.
Tumps is an expert with the catapult, and he
uses a lot of Pebbles.
Tumps is fond of drawings, particularly small
ones. To facilitate engraving artists should draw
for a reduction of one-third. This is specially
desirable in single-column sketches. Pictures for
Tumps will thus be drawn — Single column, 4in.
wide; double. Sin.
All accepted contributions, literary or artistic,
will be paid for.
Victorian Agent.
In Victoria the distribution of Tumps to the
trade is in the hands of Mr. W. T, Burbury,
354 Flinders Street.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS. *
Trooyarn (Vic.), —Not enough bite about your
false-teeth narrative.
M. (Lightning Ridge).—Time the policeman’s
feet had a rest.
P.E.T.—After three had been selected the avail-
able supply P.E.T.ered out.
S. —Anecdotes that have already been printed
are no good to Tumps.
A.A. (Sydney).—Your hero is so perfect that it
seems a pity to spoil him by the rough, rude pro-
cess of publication.
A.M. (Melb.). —Kaffir anecdotes right enough in
their way, but most Australian readers wouldn’t
care about them. Some of the others seem aged.
J.T.—Prefer new Australian items to old Scotch.
C.C.N.—Too political.
Ivy.—Too cJin^soina,
OPEN CONFESSION.
It was the last tram for Toorak. A man made
a rush for the crowded front seat', but in clamber-
ing in lie very badly crushed a bunch of flowers
held by a boy. The man squeezed into the
already packed* seat, half sat on the flowers, then
said in a conciliatory manner: “ Rather tight, eh
lad?” “Humph,” said the boy, “ I thought
you’d had more than one!”
The kangaroo silhouette on Page 5 was cut
from paper by Paul Bleeck, without any pre-
liminary drawing, in thirty seconds.
PRIZES FOR SCHOOLBOYS.
A prize of ten shillings will be given to the
schoolboy forwarding the best 100-word essay on
“THE BEST THING IN ‘TUMPS.’ AND WHY.”
A second prize of ss. and a third of 2s. 6d. will be
given. Essays must bear the writer’s name, age,
address, and name of school, and must be endorsed
by the school teacher. Each essay must bear
attached a Tumps coupon as below. Payment in
addition to prizes will be made for all essays pub-
lished.
Address Essay, Box 1459, G.P.0., Sydney,
Essays must be in by September 1. Result-will
be announced in the issue of September 15.
VUMPS COUPON—ESSAY.
AUGUST 15, 1906.
AN AUSTRALIAN IN ENGLAND.
Sftt r was the old man’s first trip to
B England. The long sea voyage
JB . was bad enough, out matters
were but little better when he
k landed in London. The sense of
cramp in the big city oppressed
him, and he sighed for the great
open spaces of his own Australia.
Though he sighed long and,frequently he did not
seem to be able to got enough air.'to breathe, and
it was with feelings of relief that he at length'
reached a park. After getting clear of the
crowded streets, he could not ; resist the tempta-
tion to run, in order to properly stretch his lanky
legs. He had lived for years in a country where
one might run for half a day without meeting &
soul, and the old man might well'have been ex-
cused if he thought he might run - for half an
hour in Regent’s Park. But the English people
were not used to that sort of thing. Men were
startled, children screamed, and ladies fainted at
the awful 1 sight of an old man bounding down the
path, clearing all obstacles in fine style and rac-
ing across a bridge into the outer circle reserved
for vehicles. Pearing the old man might dp some
injury, a. mo tor car gave chase, but was easily
eluded. A glorious reaction had arisen—the
broad green park after the crowded city streets!
Several pedestrians made as if to stop .him, but
as he headed straight for them, .they,, ran . for
shelter. He at length left the park and made
for the streets. Women scattered in all direc-
tions, and shopkeepers doors. No
bolting horse ever-created such a stir as he did
when he raced up the streets of Suburbia. -At last
his great effort was spent; in short, he * was
winded. Hot and panting, he. retired to the road-
side for a spell, and was still spelling when he was
pounced upon by a number of uniformed men
with ropes and other tackle. The indignity,was
great, but the Australian was too exhausted to
resist. They led him, securely bound, to a great
box with iron bars to it, and tried to push him
through an open door. His protests were of no
avail, for the combined weight of half a dozen
men sent him sprawling to the floor.
“By Ghost,” said one of the men, wiping the
sweat* from his forehead, “ these kangaroos take
some boldin’, don’t they?”
M.
SETTLED.
The moon peeped over the Moonby range;
The lovers walked arm in arm;
She said, “ I love a country'life,
And I dearly love a farm!”
She said, “ What is it you most love?” ■
(He knew what a boiling kettle meant!)
He squeezed her tight; the moon shone bright;
“ I believe in Closer Settlement!”
P.E.T.
SWEET CONTENT.
SW AGGIE (to Tommy the Ferryman at
Meuindie) : Goin’ to Sydney to see tli’ American
Fleet?
TOMMY: Wot’s th’ good? I’ve saw all th’
steamers on th’ Darling for th’ larst twenty year
—that’s fleet enough fa me.
MORE ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.:
Inquirer.—No, Yumps’s dog Bronson was not
entered for the sheep-dog trials you mention. If
he had been—well, you know !
Marie C-r-elli.—The last was better than the
first—at least we liked-it better, didn’t you? —
but your work is not yet up to publication
standard. Yes, we would like your photo, to
sanctify our editorium.
All Cane.—We gave your unreadable screed'to
our Manx cat to play with.
Charles Gregory Weighed. — Yes, that Bill wai
a good;joke, but it is too obvious for Tumps.
Sir Hector.—Thanks for cable. Ytthps going
well. Will wire you result of the scrap.
Nicholas (St. Petersburg).—Your congratula-
tions burst upon us with the unexpectedness of a
■bombshell.
Viceroy.—Must you go?
Ad, Sperry.—'Same to you.
Sir Thomas B. (Melbourne).— Vumps com-
miserates with you on the infliction. Whatever
made them think you were en-titled to it. Yes,
send along your “ Ode to a Cabbage,”
W. Shakespeare (no address). —Don’t yori thjnk
your stuff U raUier aatinuated for V'cmu-s?-


THOSE DECEITFUL HEADS (1).
SHORTY: Well, ez yer skitin’ ’bout yer height I'll
betcher drinks I’m ez tall ez you.
LONGLEY: Oh, this is pickin’ up beer. Done!
THOSE DECEITFUL HEADS (2).
LONGLEY: Well, I’m blanky well dashed!
SHORTY: Won by a head.
KEPT IN. [Cut by Paul Bleeck.]
WILLIE MONK: Mrs. Kangaroo, can little Joey
come out to play?
MRS. KANGAROO: Not to night. Bedtime for
Joey.
Mrs. Hennessey dries her washing and welcomes the Fleet at the same time.
READING BETWEEN THE LINES.
A TURN-DOWN.
HE: Oh, well, you needn’t turn your nose up,
anyhow!
WATER WAS SCARCE.
PARSON: Why don’t you wash your face, my
little man?
LITTLE MAN: ’Cause d’ corn’ beef ain’t boiled yet.
A FOOL STATEMENT.
PRIGGS: Yes, I can safely say I’ve never made a
fool of myself.
GRIGGS: More fool you.


Pebbles
All’s fair in love and wood-weighing.
® © ©
Chaae me! as the locket observed to the jeweller.
® © ©
American Tar’s Motto. “ Ex-Sperry-entia
docet.” _
© © ® ,
A Merry Widowism: Fine feathers make nne
hats. „
® ® ©
I’m in this, as the mouse remarked when the
spring snapped.
© © ®
The opponents of two-up evidently believe in a
Why toss 'Stralia.
© © ®
Motto of the Vumps artiste: It’s a poor art
that never rejoices.
'© © ©
"She’s killing,” as the young man said when
he saw the lady doctor.
® © ©
Waiting at the church isn’t half as pleasant as
waiting at the back gate.
® © ©
The weather promises to be "Dewey” for the
visit of the American Fleet.
® © ©
“This ‘ is * sharp practice!” said the balloonist
as he fell on to a barb-wire fence.
© © ®;
To hand:—3l7 statements that Australia is
eagle-ly awaiting the American Fleet.
BJ © © ©
Better late than never, as Methuselah said when
he started to learn his letters at the age of 903.
© © ©
It costs .£lO,OOO to paint Guv’ment ’Ouse. W©
could paint SYDNEY red on a lot less than that.
© © ©
A drowning man will catch at a straw. So
would we, if there was a milk shake at the end
of it.
® © ©
A good way to prevent bleeding at the nose is
not to barrack for blacklegs in the presence of
Unionists.
® © ©
Is the American Fleet and docs the American
Flag at the same time? Give it up? I New York
(cVouldn’t answer it.
© © ©
Some Melbourne people have been complaining
about a ring in butter. It’s bad enough to find
them in plum puddings.
© © ©
“Sex is the dynamo of the world,” says Mr. W.
T. Stead. Our dynamo electrocutes us when we
see her out with another bloke.
© © ©
Our Serial Conundrum. —What’s the difference
between
(To be Continued in Our Next.)
© © ©
Two heads are better than one, as the .sight-
seers said when they stood on the North and
South Heads to view the American fleet.
© © , ©
Oh, what is friendship but a name—
A hollow bit of “kid” —
Which gives one’s pale a good excuse
To borrow half a quid!
© © ©
.Toy-bells are to be rung in Sydney in honor of
the visit of the American Fleet. Any attempt to
ring the changes on our American visitors should
be eternlv (suppressed.
© © ©
Said she. “If you but (nok a turn
And quitted city bars,
I would he yours, my love would burn
More brilliantly titan stars.”
Said he, “I have a three-star thirst.
Am forty gallons dry;
I’ll drink as since I knew you first.
And love until 1 die.”
And yet when with a lifted chin
She shed a sudden tear,
Said he. ” YOU are the rum, the gin,
Thai makes me drunk, my dear!”
It’« a nil wind that blows nobody good.
© ® ®
We have no reason for saying that the Kilties
love tartin’.
© © ©
" Lapsus linguae,” as the waiter said when he
dropped the ox tongue.
© © ©
Many hands make limelight work, as the stage
manager said while gazing upward,
® ® ©
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown. But
its uneasiness is a mere circumstance to that of
the head that wears only half a crown, and has
no other change, and is accompanied by a sole
holy with walking, and, when it lies, does so in
the parks.
© ® ©
Of adversity I’ve seen a lot.
And tho’ sweet its uses be,
I’m hanged if I could ever see
The use it was to me!
© © ©
“How I would .like a Merry Widow hat!” said
Aunt Victoria Vumps the other day. “ Ho, would
you,” growled Uncle George. “Y’ ain't goin’ to
git rid of me yet, old girl—don’t you think it.”
(Poor man! he’s never up in the fashions.)
SHOCKING ACCIDENT.
At Potts Point last night Miss Amelia Vumps
was the unfortunate victim of a fire by which her
beautiful hair, for which she has been so justly
renowned in Society, was completely destroyed.
Miss Vumps lias since been suffering severely
from shock. It appears that the young lady had
unluckily placed her candle on a chair while she
went out to see if Fido had been put to bed.
TOO BAD.
The sorrows of the minor ]>oet arc not limited
to these he tells of in his verse. One Perth paper
used to keep a space following its Poet’s Corner
for advertisements. In the issue containing
“Aubrey Q.’s ” declaration —
“ I ne’er can capture my adored
(Ah me ! her twinkling feet!)
a medicine man heavily inquired “ Have You a
Bad Leg?” Poems about broken hearts quite
often appeared above an assertion that some-
body’s cement was just the thing for breakages.
And there were a number of other striking
coincidences before tho “,1. Oholmondeley
S wobble ” affair. J. Oholmondeley Swobble had
to be forcibly removed from the office, whither
lie had gone to vent his indignation. It was no
wonder he was indignant. His pathetic poem, in
which ho remarked every fourth lino “ No more
1 gazed upon her face,” was followed by a soap-
vendor’s allegation that “ Her Skin Was Like
'law Beef!”
FIRST CLASS IN JOGRAPHY.
V ictoria, Queensland, New South Wales,
XI nited with others what ain’t no chumps,
M ake one Commonwealth large an’ line,
P reducin' mutton, wheat, wool, wine
is ugar, butter, coal, an’ Vumps.
THE LAYING OF O’HOOLIGAN.
They were rivals in everything. When Pat
O’Hooligan bought a new double-furrow plough
to be drawn by six horses, Tim Murphy sent to
Sydney for the latest patent with subsoilers and
driving gear, which nothing less than twelve
bullocks or a traction engine could shift. Murphy
possessed neither, and the plough never turned a
sod after the famous trial on. that memorable oc-
casion when, under the eyes of his approving
partisans, he harnessed the horses of half the
country-side to it and drove it thrice up and
down his wheat paddock, to the death of his
prize pig that, scared by the unwonted crowd,
waddled stupidly in front of .the machine and its
half-ton of iron. But O’Hooligan witnessed that
trial, and retired from it bursting with envy, so
Murphy was satisfied. Satisfied, that is, until
next year, when O’Hooligan invited everyone
to see his new mowing-machine that chopped off
the legs of a fine clutch of turkeys that were
hiding in the lucerne before it came to a full
stop against a stump.
So when O’Hooligan died of a sunstroke no one
was surprised to hear that Murphy had. sustained
a fatal fall from his horse the same evening
while going home with a drop of drink in him.
Indeed, everyone expected him to try and
go one better than O’Hooligan. To be sure,
the O’Hooligans held that their leader had won
by some hours, but then, as the Murphys pointed
out, their man had done it in more elegant
fashion. “ Shure,” they said, "anyone could get
a touch of the sun, but it’s Tim Murphy knew
one better than that.”
The funerals were to take place on the same
day at the local cemetery. The Murphys had
bespoken the district hearse, so the O’Hooligane
sent to Golambool, twenty miles away, for the
best turnout with fixings it could raise.
As Murphy came along the road to the cemetery,
with his attendant following of vehicles and riders,
every individual wearing a yard of black crape
fastened to the hat, O’Hooligan, with his follow-
ing, debouched into it from the track leading to
his farm. Murphy had the road, but when did a
Murphy go before an O’Hooligan?
“ Kape back there,” roared O’Hooligan’s chief
mourner from his seat on the front of the hearse.
“ Would yez be afther going in front av the
corpse av a dacint man?” And he seized th,e
reins and drove against Murphy so dexterously
as to gain a like position, and for a time the
heads of the two processions proceeded in digni-
fied equality.
But the tails were not eo quiet: they got
tangled and twisted. Was it likely that Mike
Flanagan would resist such an opportunity for a
friendly debate with Shane Grady about the old
wire fence dividing their farms, or Pat Callaghan
of finding out if Teddy McCasky still kept “hie
old hold on a bit of stick”? The excitement of
the tails grew gradually to the heads. Murphy
getting a few yards ahead, O’Hooligan whipped
his horse to regain his lost position. But Murphy
wouldn’t wait, and the jog grew to a trot—
canter—gallop—of heads and tails; the heads
neck and neck, the tails swinging and banging
behind. First Murphy led, then O’Hooligan,
then Murphy. But O’Hooligan was never left;
bringing up his horses with a rush, ha cannoned
violently into Murphy, shooting him through tho
glass windows into the drain, and turning his
hearse and horses on the top of him. Victory wag
to the O’Hooligan—and his opponents picked
themselves-up to see his tail disappearing over the
hill.
“Share for ye. me bhoy, it’s O’Hooligan was
laid first,” said Mike Flanagan, “but, bedad, it's
Murphy that has the rale jewel av a stone on the
top av him !”
\ erence Desmond.
HELPING HIM ON.
Aunt Victoria Vumps is awfully particular, you
know. Site’ll never use an improper word.
Before Uncle George Vumps began courting her
('her name was Twigsby then) she was talking one
day about a lady friend of hers who lived in
another part of Sydney.
“Oh, really, Mr. Vamps,” she littered, “1
can’t mention the name of (lie suburb. It’s so -
so - Tte-hec-liee ! Well, it ends in * hurst.’
There now ! 1 wonder if you can guess any
more.”
“Darling!” guessed Uncle brightly.
“ Oli, George,” she gurgled, as she fell on his
manly shoulder,. “ this is so sudden !”
And what could poor Uncle do?
The wooer who wins by the aid of costly pre-
sents takes the- tradesmen’s entrance to the
a I feet urne.


FLEET DECORATIONS.
Our Scheme— Which Wasn’t Adopted, but Should Have Been
DROUGHT-STRICKEN.
THIRSTY ONE (to telegraph operator en Western
Line); Say, mate, y might report "two
emptles coin West."
A BOSHTER NIGHT.
NO. 1 : What sort er time did Ginger 'ave larst
night?
NO. 2 : A boshter. 'E's got one eye orl cut about,
'arf ’is lug gorn, and 'e swallered six teeth.
Yer orter see him-’o’s orl tied up in bandages.
My [?]ath 'e did 'ave a night!
HOME-MADE.


£aid Vump* unto tbe Ad-mir-al:
“I welcome* you, be crjpes.!
A*’ gusts the Fhinijf* froa* wi|l pal
Beside the Star# au stupes.
An’ so I offers you me ban’
An’ bids you welcome to
'J’hfl eucalyptus, bunyip, an’
ibti good olii kangaroo!
“ Your eagle is a noble bird—
An’, course, be ougbtenbe—
But, just in ’<uima you never ’»ard
Of my good fr 'sa * •ku' me,
I takes tb©' chance to iuterdooce
Tou round to one an’ all,
to true’ you’ll take it as
To orfea writ* or call.
1 reckon, guess, an’ calker late,
I ’opes, an’ I suppose,., ~ , .
"hat in ths fields of far-off fate
Well never meet & Jo**.
i
. Our boast should be a mutual boast,
■ Our loss a.faipTy loa«, i
An' so I makes a ’Strailyen toast;
"lie liiigle an’ tbs Cxoas.’
“So ’ore’s good luck to:Uncle"
I’m glad to ’are tbe chance 1
To dcmminstraU I really am
▲ friendly cuciaosUno*.
JL-n’ no I 'ope* you’ll f
I bid* you welcome to ,’ t, .
The •acalyptu*, bunyip, as* , J
Tfc« L tood.-sk kMBtfWl* 4 w


ROMANCE
[fell CM dovrrv der sLlreeTyler oder day
A yoarund maiden velkedso dke>
Vonld pass eack oder on. der vey
(If dhey don't sLlbp).
Dot maiden sWeet "Lad dreamy eye,
Und juicy mout; und sknde so sWy-
Der yono man said P/ e)kimin\
IB spoken Ker.
lour.e lady, may 1 valk mit you?
It is alofely day, I do
Belief veil dial some ran, don’t* you? 1
(Der maiden frowndlr).
I like you cK so denderly,
I visk you'd do der do me
lid gif dwo lager Leers do Le
Your Lestcsf toy.’
<5Le lookt aJt Lim mit sKfare of scorn
Yrg men.* sLe s&id, "vare I vos Lorn,
Don't yong ladies all forlorn
To valk mit demJ
Tjnd I vould like To Kaf you know
_ I vouldnt like to Lai you <so'
Okoost sLlmg your Llootnin Look.rmd go’ ’
(fie took der Linn),
Tom Huron.
VUMPS WELCOMES THE AMERICAN
ADMIRAL.
4
(From Our Special Reporter.)
(Sec Drawing on Pages 8 and 9.)
I tell you we gave Admirable Sperry a grate
time. There was me an Yumps, see, an Yumpses
adoptid uncle George an Terror Timson an
Yumpses dog Bronson. Yumpses adoptid uncle
was all drest up as Uncle Sam, see, an he eat in
Lady Mackworry’s Chair lookin reel majestickle.
An I saw Mister George Reed an Mr. Deekin an
Mr. Ward an Sir Henery Rorson an a lot of other
people lookin reel envius of him. An one of the
riporters in the press tree was takin notes, see,
an he had a camera man with him. So Yumpses
adoptid uncle waived his hand majestickly an sed
Never mind, my good man (he sez), we have our
own speshl riporter here (that was me you know).
An what’s more (he sez to the other) you.needent
photergraff me, my honest frend, because our owjt
speshl artist is drorin a pitcher of the gorjus
seen. So then the riporter an the camera man
laught an sed Dont wurry, old Stars-an-Stripes.
So then Admirable Sperry landid, see, so I played
See the Conkring Heero conies but I forgot it
after a few notes an all I coulri hivik; of was
Wating at the Church. So I played that, see. So
evrybody laught at the Admirable or something.
An while all this was happnir.g Yumps slept for-
ward most graceful an maid a neet speech, see.
So the Admirable lookd at something throo his
telluscope an sed Is it a mikerobe? I epose. he
miist a seen a mike-robe on the ground or some-
thing, see. So Terror was chippin to Yumps all
the time telling him what to say, see. Spose he
thought h© conld reccp Admirable Sperry better
than Yumps, see, but I defy anyone to give a
foetier_ reoepshun than Vumps did—Terror an ten
tike him, jjth JeTy S&'Ckli.ftAffli Daardaluo ciauckt
in, see. Who’s Terror anyway to talk about me
forgetiug the Conkring Heero—he carnt spel
werth tuppence—a« if he could speshl riport—him
an a dozen like him. An his reel name aint
Terror it’s only Tom, see. So as I was saying
Mr. Deekin an Mister George Reed, and Mister
Waid an Sir Henery Roreon an the other people
got reel red in the face—l spoee they was blush-
ing with delight at Yumpses grate speech an
Yumpses adoptid uncle George saying Here here
iu his; silvery tenner voice every second word, see.
An Bronson barking now an then, see. So them
emmernent persons I menshund rusht forwid—to
congratshlate Vumps I epose—but a crowd of
others had got in between Yumps an the
Admirable by the time they arrived. But I know
they must have liked hie speech because I heard
Mr. George Reed talking to the Admirable an
every word I could distiugwish was Grate—grate
—grate, see. Witch must have ment the mag-
nifsent funckshun couductid by Vumps, see.
Well, we dident see much more of the Admirable
that day, but we will before he goes, see. I know
he wants us to tell him all about Australia an
show him round—l could see it by the way he
smiled at us before Mr. Deekin hurried him off,
flee. No more at present from
JOHNNO GOODLE,
Speshl Riporter.
A MINER’S MOAN,
Cornish paety piping hot;
Praise of it, once offered gaily.
Pleased my landladie a lot—
Gave her ground to serve it daily:
Daily, hourly, till I wish.
In the name of ail things nasty.
Fiends would seize that eavory dish,
Cornish pasty.
Terence O’Fipp.
“This is a very cold snap,” said the young
man at the Glaciarutn when tus swe-ft&jjWaSAt'broke
u££ their «.ua , a.erc meat.
IN SCHOOL OUT BACK.
“ Which would you sooner hare, forty
eighty threepences, eight half-crowns, ten florins,
or 480 halfpence?” I asked a second cLasslet at
Devil’s Elbow. One reply was: “I’d sooner have
the lot, because it’s a fiver.” The teacher in-
formed me that the pupil’s name was David Ross
McLure Auchterlome—which explained, many
things.
0 0®
We were having a picture-talk at Grass Hut
school. Pointing to a line picture of a lighthouse,
I said, “ What does this picture represent?”
“ It is a picture of a lighthouse.”
“What’s the good of a lighthouse?”
rf The lighthouse shines, and shines, and keeps
on shining on the darkest night, to make the
ships gee-off when they go near the rocks.”
There spoke the bullock-driver’s son.
0 0 0
Nature Study. " Are there auy other birds in
our own country that have wings but cannot fly?”
“There are lots of them, sir.” “Lots of them,
indeed? Pray what are they?” “All eorts of
birds with broken wings.”
0 ® 0
Watched an assistant in Silver City testing his
class in Nursery Rhymes. They bad done well,
but still he wanted more. “Come along, now.
You know more. Give me another nursery
rhyme or two to finish with.” There was silence
for a few seconds. Then up shot a new boy’s
hand. “Well, eon, say it.” And son gabbled;
" Giddy Giddy Gout, j
Ya shirt’s bangin’ nout.
Five miles in an’ six miles out.
Giddy Giddy Gout!”
I went outside and wopt till I ached.
0 0 0
A provisional school on a Back-o’-Beyond
homestead lease showed weakness in word-build-
ing. “ You should teach your pupils word-
building steadily,” I said. “You see they can-
not tell me what 'a tiller of the soil’ is. Now,
boys and girls, what is a man who drives?” “ A
driver, sir.” “Right—and a man who droves?”
“A drover, sir,” “That’s it—and a man who
fences?” “He ie a fencer, sir.” “Very good
(here I looked triumphantly at the teacher) —
“and a man who cultivates the garden?” “Oh,
a Chinaman, sir!” Jimmy Pannikjn.
CIGARETTE CARDS.
An eager-eyed boy dropt his charge on the kerb.
And trod on the dog, and sent sprawling his
sister.
As I shielded the flickering flame of a match;
And he cried, “ Have you got any cards to give,
Mister?”
I gave all my ©tore of the valuable things
To this pushing son of our promising nation;
And he waved them about as he screamed to his
friend
“The bloke gave me these!” in a frenzied
elation.
Then I garnered this moral (from every act
A moral of some sort can safely be riven);
A man is a Mister with something to give,
But only a bloke when the thing has be§B
given. Hamer.
A “ FLEET” YARN.
“Aw,” said the new jackeroo on a station in
the Never-Never—“ aw—l observe that the sheep
are very fleet on their feet.”
“What?” demanded the rouse about.
“ Aw —I say the sheep here are able to wun
pwetty fast.”
“Oh, I thought yer said the sheep had fleeces
on their feet. Run ! The sheep here can run like
racehorses. Yer see they’ve got to, so’s t’ get
from one blade of grass to another afore it dies.”
“Bai Jove!” yawned the new chum.
AN INVENTION WANTED.
Phonographs and radium.
X-rays and motor-cars,
And shortly we expect there’ll come
The week-end trip to Mars;
But thousands ’neath these Southern skies
Who've tired of seeing stars
Just want a toy to analyse
The whisky sold in bars. J.F.H,
A SHORT HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA.
As space is limited, only the most important
facts iu Austral history can here be recorded.
In 1770 Captain Ctwk axrivmA Iu 1908 Vpairs
arrived,


BILLIARD TERM.
OVER THE GARDEN WALL.—I.
MICKY: Say, Nipper, give us a leg up and let’s
see what the old bloke’s laughin’ at on the next
page.
NO BUSHMAN.
"Call yerself a bushman, an’ y’ can’t find th’
Traveller's Arms ’I"
ENGLISH, YOU KNOW!
MISS GUSHBY: What a beautiful work that
"Moonlight Sonata” is! Do you know, I
weally think it is the fainest piece of music in
the English language
A PENALTY OF ART.
THE POET: Yes, I always write my most brilliant
odes immediately after bathing.-
THE BEAT: y Hevvings ! What a price to gay !
WHICH?
PUGNACIOUS GIANT (catching remark): Which
wuz you talking to—’im or me?
[Drawn by Hugh Maclea...
MONEY HIS OBJECT.
DARKIE: Wot’s up, Snowy? Heard y’ chucked
y’ Job.
SNOWY: Yairs. Dollar a week ain't anuff fer me.
I c’n make five an’ a buck ’awkln’.
THE TEST OF MATESHIP.
GRUMPY GREGORY : Nice sorter mate you arm
won’t 'ave a row with a-man!


OVER THE GARDEN WALL.—II.
What he was laughin’ at!
[See previous page.]
THE INTELLIGENT DAWG.
Our scientific correspondent vouches for the fact
that Beyond-Further-Out the station sheep-dogs
have almost human intelligence. On Goatand-
galah Station (he says) I saw a kelpie whoso
cleverness was colossal. When he ,yas working
sheep he used to grab with his mouth a stick
about a foot long. Then he would race, up to the
stragglers and belt them with the stick. It was
comical to see him wag his head, left; right, left
right, when belaboring the sheep. If he could
not get a stick short enough for his purpose, he
[would take a too-long stick to his : owner, drop it
on the ground, point with his left paw to the
place where he wanted it broken off, bark a
■Thank you” when the stick was made to suit, and
race back to work. He had a very bad temper,
and was inclined to bite the sheep, so lie hit upon
the happy idea of biting the sticks instead, when
pn duty. He was a cute kelpie. Indeed he was.
[f UNCLE VUMPS ON SMOKING.
" No,” said Uncle George Vnmps, growing
(reminiscent (after looking round to sec that
young Yuxnps and his pal Terror were not within
■hearing)—“no, Goodie, me father never giv me
but one ’idin’, but that wuz a daisy of a
grandaddy of a doin’. _’E smoked ’ard fr’m th’
time ’e wuz ten year old; but ’© wouldn’t ’ear of
any of us boys learnin’ ta puff till we wuz twenty-
one. Nice time ta wait—l don’t think ! I started
Buckin’ an old pipe nfe Uncle Frederick give me
when I wuz fourteen. Me father euspicioned me
f’r a lorng time, but ’e couldn’t ketch me in th’
Bet, and 'e never could get no baccy or pipe in me
pockits. I need t’ ’ide me smokin’ gear in a
’oiler tree. I ’ad two years of a run before I got
copped. One fine mornin’ I wuz bringin’ in
some stray sheep, an’ w’en I got about five miles
fr’m ’omc I found a pair o’ good strong ’obbles.
F’r a lark I puts ’em on me. They fitted tight.
X WUZ ’ebbliu’ along, puffin’ away like a good
’un, when me father comes on me all of a sudden
out of a patch o’ briars.’ I thought ’e wuz miles
an’ miles away. ’E picks up a waddy an’ rushes
at me. I started to lep like a kang’roo. O’
course it wuz orkard fa me. Ev’ry time I fell
down I got a sockdologer that made all me bones
rattle. I tried ta git rid o’ th’ ’obbles. At la«st
I got one orf, then I made good time till the
loose ’obble got tangled up in about seven miles
o’ barbed WTre. That stuff’s a curse. Me father
woodened me all over. Then he picks me up an’
gives me two cracks across th’ face. They wuz th’
cause o’ them two brands on me dial. Them
cuts made me fer a time so that when I smiled
people ’oo could on’y see one side o’ me face used
ter think I wuz cryin’. Yes, I still smoke. I
reckon I oughter!”
Don’t stand on ceremony, as Jones murmured
;when Jobson jumped on his new belltopper.
0 0 0
“ lYhat’s this se-dition iu India?” said Yumps
the other day. “ 'Spose they’ll be havin’ it at
ichooi nextj ftd-aiiifin.
MUSIC AT THE ZOO.
The question of adding a brass band to
the Sydney Zoo is being considered.
\UAJ7 HAT toon is that they’re playin’?”
ikW Inquired the Kangaroo,
p As harmonies came strayin’
Around the Sydney Zoo.
“ a t are the Wild Waves
* Replied the one who Gnu.
“It strikes me,” said the Lion,
“ I’ve beard that thing before
In happy days gone by on
Some far Liberian shore,
But still we ought to try on
The band a brave encore.”
So then the Lion thundered
Yo-cif-er-ous-ly, and
The din that followed sundered
The air on ev’ry hand
Till all the people wondered—
And never heard the band !
lyles Innison.
BLUCHER WAS A PEACE PARTY.
“ By gollies, dis American battlement fleet will
open my eyes for you,” said Sourgrapee.
“I don’t like dis vor pisness,” emphatically
said Blucher. “ You look at mine ear und I dold
you sometiugs. Did you meet dot Franco-Prussian
vor ve had mit der frogcaters? No? Yell I vos
in charch of a batch of cavalries at der time,
und ”
“Vot you say? A gavalry gommander?”
“I said vot you heard. Don’d interrupd. I for
der spare horses responsible vos ”
“ Huh ! Der gove vot mindst dcr spare horses
is der hosier.”
“ Great Moses! Don’t you agen call me boss
liar. I take it und crack your hot in !”
“Be qviet. You couldn’t my het crack in mit
a shteam roller.”
“ Oh, I could exasperate you !”
“Go avay, you ognomonous swashbuckler.”
“By dam, I don’d like dis insultedment.”
“You can put it in your pocket und smoke it
den.”
“ Ob, take dat, you votnot!”
“Hah, I return der gombliment. Take dot —
and dot —und dot! Now my bind is rose! I gif
you some death! I knock you to forgetfulness.
Take dot, you seriousness mistake. Now den.—
Had enough, is it? —Yell, vot you say now, uh?”
Poor Blucher picked himself out of the gutter.
“ Oh, donlt I sed it a vile ago I didn’t like dis
vor pisness!” Tom M.
What ho sire'Tumps!
0 © 0
What is home without a mother? as Eve re-
marked when she arrjyed U a fegding-bgitlelese
world
VUMPS’S LECTURES. 1.
DORGS.
«ISTER CHAIRMAN, Ladies an'
Gentlemen, —Dorgs cover a large
porsbun oi' the earth's surtis.
Not that it matters much, I
s’spose, for if they dideut some-
thin’ else would. Dorgs are
found everrywhere - - espesbilly
where cats is, but cats is scldim
found in, the \eecinuity of dorgs. Only their fur
is to be found as a root. Dorgs are full of tricks,
an’ fleas, an’ kindness; but it is a fallersee to
say that,they ■will lick your ’and if you feed ’em.
They won’t. They’ll lick some other feller’s and,
namely, the ’and of the feller that nips ’em when
you ain't, lookin’. Nex’ to dorgs as space
monopolisers the owners of dorgs loom big on the
landscape. Owever, I don’t object to that, for if
they dident own dorgs they’d probbibly own some,
thin' more expensive an ’arder to keep —such as
a girl or a motor car—or p’r’aps both. The
vanity of the owners of dorgs is a large an’
peeculyer thing, insomuch as every owner ’as the,
best dorg in the world. Therefor© I calkerlate
that there is seventeen millyun bos’ dorgs in the
world-excludin’ me own. 'E makes seventeen
millynns an’ one, an’ is the odd number, which , o’
course, makes ’im orl the more valyerbil. But
it’s dead easy to tell a good dorg from a mongrel
—that in if you ketch them young. You jest (’old
each of the pups up by his tail, an’ if Vs »
mungril ’is eyes will drop out imeejutly. But
their eves never fall out, which proores con-
klusively that there is no mungrile. It would be
much better in sum cases if their teeth was to
fall out—but, as Terror Timson would say, that is
aunther story. Dorgs are verry noble annermile.
They are also verry useful. They gobble up orl
the "bones in the backyards, which would other-
wise be collected an’ ground into fowl feed,
causin’ the ’ens to lay in large which
(as eggs produce inderjestyen an’ inderjestyen
leads to bad temper) would mean grate trubbl© to
the nayshun. So you’ll see that 1 dorgs a-rs
neseysetty to mantan© good humor. Terror s©*
they are also found verry useful for rankin’ into
soshages—although in this case they are very care-
ful to conceal their identy tee—bein’ anonnermu*
contribbeters, as the grate writers to the nooa-
papers would say. Dorgs ’ave menny ether naeH
which X carnt reckillect jest at present; but Xl*
let you know as soon as I do.
THE NERVE-WRECKER.
A Sydney tram-car goes with a “ whizz,’’
Starts with a moan, and stops with a ft**»
Runs from a shriek to a long-drawn xi zz
Sydney tram-car,
Jar-cat, jam-car.
Crush-car, cram-car.
Shock-car, sham-car —
Oh, what a dam car that car is!
Narranghi Boori.
HER LOVE-LETTER-
Dearest Alfie,—Just a few lines in answer to
your very nice letter which I received yesterday
morning at five minutes past nine just as I was
going out of the door when I almost fell over the
postman.
Pew lines:
' , ... .... 4 .
4t
Tours ever,
ALICE. X X X X
SOCIETY GOSSIP.
MRS. BIGGS; I ’card that Mrs, Gribson gave
’er ’usband a terrible doin’ ’cause ’e committed
bigamy. That true?
MRS. BAGGS: No; Margaret ’ad a word to say
with a flat-iron before it went that far. Gribson
wasn’t a twicer —’e was only a double inteuder.
A WATTLE POET.
Oh, vent no blame on the bard I name.
Nor feel inclined to throttle
Great Brown, who rhymes at all possible time©
About the beauteous wattle.
“The subject’s old,” I know I’ll be told—
But this wattle’s no yellow charmer:
It is seen by the “ pote ” ’neath the turkey’s
throat.
For Brown is a poultry Tanner!
Norman Lil!*y.


CAN HE PERSUADE THEM?
THE VICTIM (waxing wily): See that fist? Well,
there’s apples that size th’ other side o’ me
gardin. Come an’ git some. (To himself: An’
git a good lambastin’ from me five big sons!)
THE BURNING QUESTION.
"My boy Ikey has got a commission in the
Highlanters.”
“ Goot! How much commission?"
FOR COMPANY’S SAKE.
"What yer doin’ with the pick and crib can on
Sunday, Bill?”
“Oh, me mate’s sick, me, dorg’s dead, and a
bloke looks such a fool going About by himself!"
INSULTING BEHAVIOUR.
INDIGNANT YOUNG SAUSAGE OF IRRE-
PROACHABLE CHARACTER: How dare you
look at me like that—l’ll get up and walk right
away!
UP TO HIM.
LANDLORD: I’m sorry to trouble you, Mr. Briggs,
but all the improvements I’ve carried out lately
make it absolutely necessary for me to raise
the rent.
BRIGGS: It’s about time you took a turn; I've
had to raise it long enough.
OBSERVING TIMES AND SEASONS.
MRS. SMARTSET: It’s quite warm to-day. I’ll
wear my new light dress and carry my summer
hymn-book—not this one.
“WHERE THERE’S A NOSE THERE’S A WAY.”
MOSEY: Ikey, mine
brother, I climbed
up dis dree and
now I can’t get
down.
IKEY: Vell, just
turn round and
keep your nose
stlff—
IKEY: Now, Mosey,
don’t struggle and
you’ll soon be al-
right.
IKEY and MOSEY!
Mine gracious! but
it was a lucky
thing we had dot
forked stick [?]mit
US.


OBESITY
Can be Safely
and Permanently
A FAIR EXAMPLE OF WHAT
GAN BE DONE.
Every woman who is overfat is an
object of public ridicule. Not only your
friends, but strangers also make fun of
you. Aside from your ludicrous aspect,
however, is a far more important consi-
deration-—your health! Although to-day
it may appear perfect, to-morrow —if your
heart is imperilled by the fat surrounding
it—you may be a fit subject for the un-
dertaker. Cases of heart failure from ex-
cess fat are common; avoid the possi-
bility.
“FAX CURE”
requires no drastic dieting or execise to
assist it. and will reduce your weight by
as much as 51bs. a week. It is non-
poisonous and pleasant to take, and while
effectually curing you of Obesity, leaves
no ill or unpleasant after-effects. One
of the most troublesome results of Obesity
is the dreadful effort necessary to breathe
if the sufferer happens to undergo the
least exertion. “ Fatcure ” overcomes
this difficulty and allows free and com-
fortable breathing. The relief from ex-
tion in breathing makes “Fatcure” a
great and glorious boon to obese sub-
jects.
MRS. LOCKYER, of Yetman, N.S.W.,
writes: —“l am very well satisfied with
your glorious treatment. I am only a
very short person, and 11 stone was a
great burden to me. My weight now—
after less than two months’ treatment —-
is 6st. 101 b., and I feel much better in
every way. I am now quite as thin as I
could wish to be.”
Send Us a 2d. Stamp and We will Post
You a FREE TRIAL SAMPLE.
Write to us, enclosing 2d. stamp, and
we will send you—under sealed cover and
free from prying eyes—a FREE SAMPLE
of “ FATCURE ” and our Free Booklet,
which freely explains our method. All
literature and treatments are forwarded
free from the eyes of the curious, so that
no one knows the contents of our pack-
ages until the owner opens them. If
convenient, CALL for free sample and
consultation. Lady in attendance, .*»
Hours : 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
THE WATWORTH CO.,
1 LINDEN COURT, SYDNEY.
Entrance, Market or Castlereaqh Street.
CURED
p con Eire
FROM ~
oruc.PHOTOS
SUITE 97,
THE
FOURTEENTH MATE
I.
’Twas the steamer Cooanbilling
(Funnels, of the “ house ” are brown)
Holds and decks and cabins filling
By the wharves of Sydney town.
’Twas a wealthy social maiden—
Amarillis Lee by name—
Who, with rug and cushion laden.
Up the forrard gangway came.
’Twas a mariner most gallant
Who at table by her sate—
Just promoted, for his talent.
To be gilded fourteenth mate.
Now, the vessel of onr story
Was a fav’rite on the coast;
She held records to her glory.
But the fact that tended most
To the frequent over-filling
(As the pious owners knew)
Of the steamer Cooanbilling
Was the beauty of her crew!
For her skipper, it was hinted,
Yankee corsets used to wear,
And his nails the “ second ” tinted.
And the purser dyed his hair.
E’en the firemen washed their faces!
And the "butcher cleaned his boots.
And the cooks wore fancy braces, ‘
And the stewards full dress suits.
11.
Here the Storm is liberated!
Now black Night obscures the skies ! !
See! the Waves are elevated!!!
Hark ! the bowling Winds uprise ! i ! !
Ha! Crunch! Bang! Bump! Grate! Fizz
Whizzle!
Sob! Scream! Yell, Boar, Shout, and Cry !
Wet blue lights spit, rockets fizzle.
Bed distress illumes the sky.
111.
The Skipper tore his scented hair;
Four ladies round his neck
Clung, tight in their extreme despair.
Exclaiming loud—“A wreck!”
’Twas evident; for as Miss Lee
Upon the fourteenth threw
Her loveliness, a howling sea
Just clove the ship in two!
So went that coaster to her grave
Beneath the cruel sea;
With naught to guide the divers, save
A smell of patchouli.
IV.
The Storm is sped, the waves subside,
The Sun comes up in state,
And on a floating hencoop glide
The Lady and the Mate.
No sail in sight, no pub, no land.
No morning gown to dou.
No early social column—and
What's worse, no chaperon !
“ It was ” (Miss Lee on looking round.
Observed, with eyebrows bent)
“In every sense outside the bound
social precedent,”
A coop upon Ihc bounding blue
No Cupid's bark appears;
But One and One will total two
Forever through the years.
Some students of the subject say—
And very wise they be—
That Love is merely chance and may-
be opportunity.
The Sun towards zenith swiftly sped;
Propinquity plus Fate,
■The ma n proposed ; she was “ bcthread ”
Unto the fourteenth' mate.
One long «ali: kiss! All readers know
A sail must now appear.
And pick them up to music slow !
Twas thus. They’ll wed this year.
E. J. Brady.
SERIOUS SOLILOQUIES.
Should Midnight Lovers Wear Bulldogs ?
S. tV\J7 E think not. And for various
W reasons. In tho first place, dogs
weren’t intended to be worn;
indeed, the wearing of them is
an acquired habit—and a most
undignified one it is, too, as we
* remarked one night to the
animal we were wearing. But,
unfortunately, he had no sense of dignity; he
must have worn it out standing on it while wait-
ing for us at the gate. In the second place, it is
difficult to get a pair of trousers to match one’s
coat and vest. And just here we are seized with
a shrewd suspicion (which, we’d like to remark,
isn’t quite the same as being seized by a large
mouth filled with teeth) that bulldogs were in-
vented by tailors, although we’ll admit we used
to have an idea that tailors were invented by
bulldogs. But we think differently now. In
fact, we scarcely know what to think. And if we
did know what to think we don’t think wed be
able to think in a way to lead other people to think
that we were really thinking after all. Thirdly
and lastly, we are opposed to the wearing of bull-
dogs on economic grounds—or on any other
grounds, for the matter of that. It might be-
come a craze, or develop into a fashion—and in
that case, of course, there wouldn’t be enough
bulldogs to go round. We’d gladly sell the bull-
dog we have in mind as we write this, and wed
let him go at greatly reduced prices. But we’li
be perfectly honest, and point out that he is
secondhand, and has lost his teeth. We found
them next morning—when we sat down. The
buyer of the dog will be welcome to the teeth. As
we remarked at the beginning of this article, we
think the wearing of bulldogs should be dis-
couraged. We may be prejudiced—as a matter of
fact we believe we" are—but that makes no differ-
ence to our opinion.
Gilrooney,
A LONELY SPOT.
Three footpads held me up last night—
I know not time nor where,
Bui this I know—that I was tight.
Though not too tight to care;
So loud I yelled “Police! Police!”—
But to my great dismay
They only chuckled “Hold yer peace —
The pub’s a mile away!”
Noorong.
EXCLUSIVE OWNERSHIP,
One old Bondi dame who doesn’t move about
much got rather tired of hearing visitors from
other parts of Sydney enthusing about “our
beautiful Harbor.”
“Pooh!” she remarked, waving an indicative
arm at the Pacific—“ don’t talk about harbors to
ns at Bondi. Just, look at our beautiful ocean !”
The attempted assassination of the Turkish
monarch was a most inSnltan affair.
® ® 0
Tommy Burns’s real front name is Noah, but
his fighting methods didn’t come out of the Ark.
0 0®
Just as we were going to press, a wild-eyed
citizen, evidently suffering from acute American-
itis, rushed into the office and got off these
conundrums before we could reach the axe:—
(a) What’s the difference between Australia’s
floral emblem and a sailor of the U.S.A. Fleet?—
One’s a waratah, and the other’s a tar-o'-war.
(b) What’s the difference between a sad dog
and Uncle Sam’s country?—The former is not a
merry car


GREAT FLEET WEEK ATTRACTION.
PROTESTANT HALL, CASTLEREAGH ST.,
(Near Bathurst Street.)
OPENING AUGUST 20.
THE GREAT
Ltion
Pictures
the latest Scenic, Dramatic, and
s absolutely without flicker,
wish to state that in addition
the following first-class
tch Humorist),
f Illustrated Songs).
£3ong & Dance Artists)
orist).
nee Clubswinger).
I
THE DIFFERENCE
between Having, and not Having, an abundant supply of electricity in your
syatem is tbe difference between good health and bad health; it is the difference
between having a lively, vigorous, healthy body and a magnetic personality, and
being weak, sickly, nervous and afraid to venture. If you are one of those who
are weak, nervous and timid ; if you suffer from Nervousness, Indices*
tion, Constipation, Rheumatism, Sciatica, Varicocele, or any
ailment caused by a weakened and deranged organic system, and have doctored
and dosed yourself with drugs until your stomach turns from them in disgust; if
you are such, you will find the cure you have been seeking in Nature’s remedy
—Electricity—as applied with the world-famous
dr. McLaughlin s electric belt
The most eminent scientists of the present day—Prof. O. S. Fowler, Prof. E.
S. Larkin, Prof. Jacques Loeb, and many others who have spent their lives in the
cause of ailing humanity—all proclaim electricity as the medicine of the future,
because, unlike drugs—with which the “cure” is often worse than the disease—it can
do no harm, and because, as Prof. Loeb says: “ It is the basis of all human vitality.”
Here are some proofs of what it will do when properly used:
THE DR. McLAUGHLIN CO.
I have worn your Belt since the 12th October, 1906, up to 1st January, 1907, and I have
received a wonderful amount of good from it for what I might call a broken-down system,
having been a sufferer from Debility, Indigestion and General Weakness. 1 now feel <juite a
different man in every way; work is no trouble to me. I advise anyone suffering from any
of the above complaints to use a Dr. McLaughlin Electric Belt, as 1 am sure it will bring
about a certain cure —WILLIAM E. ALDER,
Manning Road, via Gloucester, N.S.W.
the dr. McLaughlin go.
I have given your Belt a two months’ trial, and find It to be the best
Investment I have made for a long time. When I first got it I could not do a
lair day’s work. I felt tired and sluggish and sometimes had sharp pains in
my back, and I felt old. After using your Belt I feel years younger, work is no
trouble to me, and I have no more pains in my back. I enjoy life once more.
I had no trouble to follow your directions, and I am recommending your Belt to
my friends every chance I have.—C. RIETHMULLBR, Wellcamp, Q’land,
the dr. mclaughlin co.
For some years I suffered from Womb Trouble, Aching Back, sud Constipation. I tried
many doctors but got no relief, and hearing of your valuable Belt I uecided to try it. I received
your Belt eleven months ago, wore it, and now I am perfectly cured. I sincerely sdviss any
suffering woman to get your valuable Belt, for I am certain it will cur* her. Wishing y*ur
Belt every success.—Mrs. EMMA HARDING,
Springdale, Temora, N.S.W,
The Dr. McLaughlin Improved Electric Belt is the atandard electric body
battery of the world. We have branch offices in all the principal cities of Europe,
Asia, Africa, Canada and the United States. Our appliances have many imitators,
but no equals , Beware of Cheap Imitations. Write us for
our exposure Of the free belt fraud. Our Belts are guaranteed not
to burn, blister or shock the most sensitive person and are guaranteed
to give a powerful current which is instantly felt.
FREE
BOOK
ADVICE
We have published an illustrated book which
every man and woman should read. It shows
how and why our Belts cure after the failure
of all other treatments. We will send it free
to all who write to us, and our Specialists will
give you a full diagnosis of your ease—free. All communications are treated with
strict confidence. Office Hours: 9 a.m. to 5.30 p.m.
the McLaughlin co.. Dept. 5
CastlereagTi and Market Streets, Sydney.
“THE TERROR” ON TOMMY BURNS.
(Being a Copy of a Better from Sydney to
Dandaloo.)
Dear Jelly,—While I was on me way to
Vumpsea plaice ter-day I seen Tommy Burns. As
ther country cadetts ar not ter be aloud down
ter Sydney fur fear they mite storm the Stajium
I thaut yer mite like ter here wot ther Champium
of ther World is like. So here goes ter tell yer
how I seed Nor© Broozo, whitch is his real name.
Yer see X wua goin along George street when I sees
a huj croud outside er Baitmans pub. There
wus a lot er plecsmen too, ackshally outside er
the pub., mine yer, and i arsked one who wua
hurt. “No one,” sez he, “but run away or it
unit© be you; Tommy Burns is inside,” sez he.
Well, Jelly, I stans and stairs fur a minnit or
too, and then, thinks i, i av Bucklies chance er
seein him jammed her© in a crowd, so ile go in
and arks me way or sxxmthink. I squeezes out
and inter ther pub. No one taiks any notis, and
i darts upstairs where i heres cheerin'. Jelly, it
rexnined m© er how you an me an Vumpsie used
ter git inter ther circuses rite in frunt fur nix.
Thats where i got, under er tabl in a big room,
no pay box, no tickits or queschuns arsked. Well,
Jelly, i got tired er bein under ther tabl and so i
lets em cheer agen and then slips up and stans
behine a very fat blokes chair jes as if I blonged
ter him. Nex i climes on ter ther back er ther
eeet and then i sees Tommy Burns.
Jelly, it wus a fross. He was buttoned up to
his neck in a thick gray cote with a dark ve’Jvit
collar and it congealed his legs and had buttons
behine. He has a profeel like a yung parson wots
never bin kissed, an er sweet smile, but he doan
gammon The Terror tho he is a naterlies Ameri-
can cityeen. Jelly, as I sez ter Yumps, he wurks
that smile by pressin a button. Yer can tell it
by his eyes whitch is dead grey like ther warships
yer saw in ther Arbor wen yer wus down at
Crismus. Ther profeel and ther smile is assits
to fetch then goods. Jelly. But he aint harf
cute ernuff. Wy, he sed in Melbun how he as
never hurt an upponent in a fite, and he sez in er
Sydney paper as how all his good punches ar delt
at short range and how them short jabs I can tell
yer, sez he, hurt wen they land propply. Wy, I
arks him, doant he take orf his cote and say wot
he meens. Bill Squires sat beside him in a wite
weskit and other nice clobber looking orful
solium and responsbl orl ther time. Ther wus a
M.P, in ther chair and another M.P. in unerform
and them 2 and about ten more maid speetches,
and they orl sez May ther best man win, whitch
farver sez wus bad grammer and they shud av sed
better man, espeehly ther M.Ps. And Tommy
Burns spoke his littel bit in short jabs with a grey
etarin paws between em, and Squires spoke his iu
wun strait punch without trimmins. Then I gits
downstares and sees Bill go out warin a dolly
brown boxer with Terry little rim on ther side uv
his hed, not a bit like his ole black slouch. Then
Burns comes out and is bueseled inter a red moter
and his hat was dolly too, only green plush, not
cloth like the town dolly men ware. Jelly, but
plush, with thick nap on it, jes to show he can
put you and me to sleep.
Yumps sez wisht e’d bin there, but I dunno. I
ope the rest er the festivvitys 'll be more feativ.
Yours TOM TIMSON,
Alias The Terror.
AN ULTIMATUM,
From a dear little damsel a fickle young swain
To a far-distant township had flitted.
So she “ wrote ” to advise him to “ write ” and
explain
Unless ha desired to be “writted.'' Noorong.
Now we shan’t be long! as the kiddies wailed
when they lost their stilts.


BORROWED PLUMES.
1. “Our resources are bally low,,really,” said Marmyduke Miffles to his brother
in adversity. Snoofter McSnickle. "I have but one small coin of the realm left, eh,
what, what?" “Something must be did." said Snoofter. “We'll wait till it turns
up.” said the optimistic Marmyduke.
2. Just then two American Jackies hove in sight, somewhat shikkered. “See
here guess we’ve got a banquet on to-night. Kin y’ get us a sleepin[?] compart-
ment. We want to get good for th' feed.” “Sure,” said Snoofter, giving Marmy
the wink, “our private doss is at your commarnd—the best accommodation in th'
Domain." (Watch Snoofter’s brain brain working.)
3. "Pray accept our hospitality.” said Marmyduke. politely. But the brothers
in adversity played a bold bad trick on the Yanks. "We'll go to that bankwit
instead of them." said Snoofter. ”Don't you know, I never did draw the color line."
said Marmaduke, as he slipped into the nigger’s pants.
4. Our heroes' plan worked admirably. They broke all banquet records. "Necksh
o' bottlesh not wide enough.” gurgled Snoofter. " Best food I've had since the
Lord Mayor’s show at home last season,” said Marmy, “when the Lady Ermyn[?]
trude, of whom, my dear McSnickle. I have spoken-" “When yer done with
that knife,” growled the chickenless Yankee sailors..
5. When they returned to their Domain domicile, there was no sign of the im-
[?]ted Yankees. “Th’ birdsh ish flownsh without thanking ush for accommo-
[?] bubbled Snoofter “Just (hic) so. Come, fill (hic) cup, and in fires [?]
[?]ng, old (hic) garments repentance fling. Bird (hic) time little way to fly and
[?] hally wall (hic) flown.” misquoted Marmyduke.
6. “I arrested these vagrant in a cave in the Domain." [?]
"They've got the delusions, and think they're American sa[?]
must keep disputable characters out of sight while the [?]
sentenced to one month’s jail," said the magistrate, [?]
were hustled off to the boob.
